---
reference_id: PMID:23733654
title: Endothelial and smooth muscle cell ion channels in pulmonary vasoconstriction and vascular remodeling.
authors:
- Makino A
- Firth AL
- Yuan JX
journal: Compr Physiol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/cphy.c100023
keywords:
- Animals
- Endothelial Cells/metabolism
- "Endothelium, Vascular/physiology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Ion Channels/metabolism
- "Lung/pathology, physiology, physiopathology"
- "Myocytes, Smooth Muscle/metabolism"
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic/metabolism"
- Pulmonary Circulation
- Vasoconstriction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endothelial and smooth muscle cell ion channels in pulmonary vasoconstriction and vascular remodeling.
**Authors:** Makino A, Firth AL, Yuan JX
**Journal:** Compr Physiol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cphy.c100023](https://doi.org/10.1002/cphy.c100023)

## Content

1. Compr Physiol. 2011 Jul;1(3):1555-602. doi: 10.1002/cphy.c100023.

Endothelial and smooth muscle cell ion channels in pulmonary vasoconstriction 
and vascular remodeling.

Makino A(1), Firth AL, Yuan JX.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois, USA.

The pulmonary circulation is a low resistance and low pressure system. Sustained 
pulmonary vasoconstriction and excessive vascular remodeling often occur under 
pathophysiological conditions such as in patients with pulmonary hypertension. 
Pulmonary vasoconstriction is a consequence of smooth muscle contraction. Many 
factors released from the endothelium contribute to regulating pulmonary 
vascular tone, while the extracellular matrix in the adventitia is the major 
determinant of vascular wall compliance. Pulmonary vascular remodeling is 
characterized by adventitial and medial hypertrophy due to fibroblast and smooth 
muscle cell proliferation, neointimal proliferation, intimal, and plexiform 
lesions that obliterate the lumen, muscularization of precapillary arterioles, 
and in situ thrombosis. A rise in cytosolic free Ca(2+) concentration 
([Ca(2+)]cyt) in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (PASMC) is a major trigger 
for pulmonary vasoconstriction, while increased release of mitogenic factors, 
upregulation (or downregulation) of ion channels and transporters, and 
abnormalities in intracellular signaling cascades are key to the remodeling of 
the pulmonary vasculature. Changes in the expression, function, and regulation 
of ion channels in PASMC and pulmonary arterial endothelial cells play an 
important role in the regulation of vascular tone and development of vascular 
remodeling. This article will focus on describing the ion channels and 
transporters that are involved in the regulation of pulmonary vascular function 
and structure and illustrating the potential pathogenic role of ion channels and 
transporters in the development of pulmonary vascular disease.

© 2011 American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cphy.c100023
PMCID: PMC5524522
PMID: 23733654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]