---
reference_id: "PMID:39587691"
title: Mechanism of efficacy of trabectedin against myxoid liposarcoma entails detachment of the FUS-DDIT3 transcription factor from its DNA binding sites.
authors:
- Craparotta I
- Mannarino L
- Zadro R
- Ballabio S
- Marchini S
- Pavesi G
- Russo M
- Renne SL
- Meroni M
- Ponzo M
- Bello E
- Sanfilippo R
- Casali PG
- "D'Incalci M"
- Frapolli R
journal: J Exp Clin Cancer Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13046-024-03228-z
keywords:
- "Trabectedin/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Liposarcoma, Myxoid/drug therapy, pathology, metabolism, genetics"
- Humans
- Mice
- Animals
- Binding Sites
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
- "RNA-Binding Protein FUS/genetics, metabolism"
- "Antineoplastic Agents, Alkylating/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanism of efficacy of trabectedin against myxoid liposarcoma entails detachment of the FUS-DDIT3 transcription factor from its DNA binding sites.
**Authors:** Craparotta I, Mannarino L, Zadro R, Ballabio S, Marchini S, Pavesi G, Russo M, Renne SL, Meroni M, Ponzo M, Bello E, Sanfilippo R, Casali PG, D'Incalci M, Frapolli R
**Journal:** J Exp Clin Cancer Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13046-024-03228-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13046-024-03228-z)

## Content

1. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2024 Nov 26;43(1):309. doi: 10.1186/s13046-024-03228-z.

Mechanism of efficacy of trabectedin against myxoid liposarcoma entails 
detachment of the FUS-DDIT3 transcription factor from its DNA binding sites.

Craparotta I(#)(1), Mannarino L(#)(2)(3), Zadro R(#)(2)(3), Ballabio S(4), 
Marchini S(3), Pavesi G(5), Russo M(6), Renne SL(2)(7), Meroni M(1), Ponzo M(1), 
Bello E(1), Sanfilippo R(8), Casali PG(8), D'Incalci M(9)(10), Frapolli R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche 
Mario Negri IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Via Rita Levi 
Montalcini 4, Milan, Pieve Emanuele, 20072, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Cancer Pharmacology, IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Via 
Manzoni 56, Milan, Rozzano, 20089, Italy.
(4)SC Patologia Clinica, SS Laboratorio Genetica Medica, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' 
Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(5)Dipartimento Di Bioscienze, Università Degli Studi Di Milano, Milan, 20133, 
Italy.
(6)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology (IEO) 
IRCCS, Milan, 20139, Italy.
(7)Anatomic Pathology Unit, IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Via Manzoni 56, 
Milan, Rozzano, 20089, Italy.
(8)Adult Mesenchymal Tumour Medical Oncology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto 
Nazionale Dei Tumori, Via Venezian 1, Milan, 20133, Italy.
(9)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Via Rita Levi 
Montalcini 4, Milan, Pieve Emanuele, 20072, Italy. maurizio.dincalci@hunimed.eu.
(10)Laboratory of Cancer Pharmacology, IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Via 
Manzoni 56, Milan, Rozzano, 20089, Italy. maurizio.dincalci@hunimed.eu.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The marine drug trabectedin has shown unusual effectiveness in the 
treatment of myxoid liposarcoma (MLPS), a liposarcoma characterized by the 
expression of the FUS-DDIT3 chimera. Trabectedin elicits a significant 
transcriptional response in MLPS resulting in cellular depletion and 
reactivation of adipogenesis. However, the role of the chimeric protein in the 
mechanism of action of the drug is not entirely understood.
METHODS: FUS-DDIT3-specific binding sites were assessed through Chromatin 
Immunoprecipitation Sequencing (ChIP-Seq). Trabectedin-induced effects were 
studied on pre-established patient-derived xenograft models of MLPS, one 
sensitive to (ML017) and one resistant against (ML017ET) trabectedin at 
different time points (24 and 72 h, 15 days). Data were integrated with RNA-Seq 
from the same models.
RESULTS: Through ChIP-Seq, here we demonstrate that trabectedin inhibits the 
binding of FUS-DDIT3 to its target genes, restoring adipocyte differentiation in 
a patient-derived xenograft model of MLPS sensitive to trabectedin. In addition, 
complementary RNA-Seq data on the same model demonstrates a two-phase effect of 
trabectedin, characterized by an initial FUS-DDIT3-independent cytotoxicity, 
followed by a transcriptionally active pro-differentiation phase due to the 
long-lasting detachment of the chimera from the DNA. Interestingly, in a 
trabectedin-resistant MLPS model, the effect of trabectedin on FUS-DDIT3 rapidly 
decreased over time, and prolonged treatment was no longer able to induce any 
transcription or post-transcriptional modifications.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings explain the unusual mechanism underlying 
trabectedin's effectiveness against MLPS by pinpointing the chimera's role in 
inducing the differentiation block responsible for MLPS pathogenesis. 
Additionally, the findings hint at a potential mechanism of resistance acquired 
in vivo.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13046-024-03228-z
PMCID: PMC11590625
PMID: 39587691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Procedures involving animals and their care were conducted in 
conformity with the Italian Governing Law (D.lgs 26/2014; Authorization 
n.19/2008-A issued March 6, 2008, by the Ministry of Health), Mario Negri 
Institutional Regulations and Policies providing internal authorization for 
persons conducting animal experiments (Quality Management System Certificate—UNI 
EN ISO 9001:2008—Reg. No. 6121), the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of 
Laboratory Animals (2011 edition) and EU directives and guidelines (EEC Council 
Directive 2010/63/UE) and guidelines for the welfare and use of animals in 
cancer research. Consent for publication: All authors read this manuscript and 
approve for publication. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have 
no competing interests.