---
reference_id: "PMID:28882382"
title: Soil-transmitted helminth infections.
authors:
- Jourdan PM
- Lamberton PHL
- Fenwick A
- Addiss DG
journal: Lancet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31930-X
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Soil-transmitted helminth infections.
**Authors:** Jourdan PM, Lamberton PHL, Fenwick A, Addiss DG
**Journal:** Lancet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31930-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31930-X)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2018 Jan 20;391(10117):252-265. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31930-X.
Epub  2017 Sep 4.

Soil-transmitted helminth infections.

Jourdan PM(1), Lamberton PHL(2), Fenwick A(3), Addiss DG(4).

Author information:
(1)Schistosomiasis Control Initiative, Imperial College London, St Mary's 
Campus, London, UK; DEWORM3, Natural History Museum, London, UK; Norwegian 
Centre for Imported and Tropical Diseases, Department of Infectious Diseases, 
Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College London, St 
Mary's Campus, London, UK; Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health and 
Comparative Medicine, The University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK; Wellcome Centre 
for Molecular Parasitology, The University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK. Electronic 
address: poppy.lamberton@glasgow.ac.uk.
(3)Schistosomiasis Control Initiative, Imperial College London, St Mary's 
Campus, London, UK.
(4)The Task Force for Global Health, Decatur, GA, USA; Eck Institute for Global 
Health, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2018 Jun 9;391(10137):2322-2323. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30864-X.
    Lancet. 2018 Jun 9;391(10137):2323. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30858-4.

More than a quarter of the world's population is at risk of infection with the 
soil-transmitted helminths Ascaris lumbricoides, hookworm (Ancylostoma duodenale 
and Necator americanus), Trichuris trichiura, and Strongyloides stercoralis. 
Infected children and adults present with a range of medical and surgical 
conditions, and clinicians should consider the possibility of infection in 
individuals living in, or returning from, endemic regions. Although safe and 
effective drugs are donated free to endemic countries, only half of at-risk 
children received treatment in 2016. This Seminar describes the epidemiology, 
lifecycles, pathophysiology, clinical diagnosis, management, and public health 
control of soil-transmitted helminths. Previous work has questioned the effect 
of population-level deworming; however, it remains beyond doubt that treatment 
reduces the severe consequences of soil-transmitted helminthiasis. We highlight 
the need for refined diagnostic tools and effective control options to scale up 
public health interventions and improve clinical detection and management of 
these infections.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31930-X
PMID: 28882382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]