---
reference_id: "PMID:34031796"
title: "Small-expanded allele spinocerebellar ataxia 17: imaging and phenotypic variability."
authors:
- Paolini Paoletti F
- Prontera P
- Nigro P
- Simoni S
- Cappelletti G
- Filidei M
- Calabresi P
- Parnetti L
- Tambasco N
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-021-05313-z
keywords:
- Alleles
- "Biological Variation, Population"
- Humans
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- TATA-Box Binding Protein/genetics
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Small-expanded allele spinocerebellar ataxia 17: imaging and phenotypic variability.
**Authors:** Paolini Paoletti F, Prontera P, Nigro P, Simoni S, Cappelletti G, Filidei M, Calabresi P, Parnetti L, Tambasco N
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-021-05313-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-021-05313-z)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2021 Oct;42(10):4309-4315. doi: 10.1007/s10072-021-05313-z. Epub
2021 May 24.

Small-expanded allele spinocerebellar ataxia 17: imaging and phenotypic
variability.

Paolini Paoletti F(1), Prontera P(2), Nigro P(3), Simoni S(1)(3), Cappelletti
G(1), Filidei M(1), Calabresi P(4)(5), Parnetti L(1), Tambasco N(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department, Perugia General Hospital and Perugia University,
Perugia, Italy.
(2)Medical Genetics Unit, Perugia General Hospital and University of Perugia,
Perugia, Italy.
(3)Movement Disorder Center, Perugia General Hospital and Perugia University,
Perugia, Italy.
(4)Neurology Department, Policlinico Gemelli, Rome, Italy.
(5)IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy.
(6)Neurology Department, Perugia General Hospital and Perugia University,
Perugia, Italy. n.tambasco@libero.it.
(7)Movement Disorder Center, Perugia General Hospital and Perugia University,
Perugia, Italy. n.tambasco@libero.it.

Spinocerebellar ataxia 17 (SCA17) is a rare genetic cause of adult-onset ataxia
caused by an abnormal expansion of the CAG/CAA sequence in the TATA-box Binding
Protein (TBP) gene. A number of repeats higher than 49 are full
penetrance-expanded. The range between 41 and 49 repeats is characterized by
decreased penetrance, and it is usually referred to as "small." Here, we
describe two patients with the SCA17 phenotype and with 43 and 44 CAG repeats in
the TBP gene, and review all the previously reported cases of SCA17 with a small
range of expansions. We focus on both clinical features and imaging findings,
which, in the case of small-expanded alleles, can resemble those of atypical
parkinsonisms. Thus, we suggest to consider the small-expanded allele SCA17 as a
possible diagnosis in patients with adult-onset ataxia, even when both clinical
and imaging characteristics are suggestive for other non-genetic
neurodegenerative diseases.

© 2021. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-021-05313-z
PMID: 34031796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
