---
reference_id: "PMID:19701229"
title: Inherited cerebrorenal syndromes.
authors:
- Schurman SJ
- Scheinman SJ
journal: Nat Rev Nephrol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2009.124
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inherited cerebrorenal syndromes.
**Authors:** Schurman SJ, Scheinman SJ
**Journal:** Nat Rev Nephrol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrneph.2009.124](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrneph.2009.124)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2009 Sep;5(9):529-38. doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2009.124.

Inherited cerebrorenal syndromes.

Schurman SJ(1), Scheinman SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY 
13210, USA.

Abnormalities in the central nervous system and renal function are seen together 
in a variety of congenital syndromes. This Review examines the clinical 
presentation and the genetic basis of several such syndromes. The X-linked 
oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe is characterized by developmental delay, 
blindness, renal tubular dysfunction, and progressive renal failure. This 
syndrome results from mutations in the OCRL gene, which encodes a phosphatase 
involved in endosomal trafficking. Mutations in OCRL also occur in Dent disease, 
which has a milder disease phenotype than Lowe syndrome. Patients with Joubert 
syndrome have cerebellar ataxia, pigmentary retinopathy, and nephronophthisis. 
Joubert syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous condition associated with 
mutations in at least five genes that encode ciliary proteins. Bardet-Biedl 
syndrome is a clinically variable condition associated with learning 
disabilities, progressive visual loss, obesity, polydactyly, hypogonadism, and 
cystic and fibrotic renal changes that can lead to renal failure. Most of the 12 
genes mutated in Bardet-Biedl syndrome are also involved in ciliary function, as 
are the genes implicated in other 'ciliopathies' with similar phenotypes, 
including Meckel syndrome.

DOI: 10.1038/nrneph.2009.124
PMID: 19701229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]