---
reference_id: "PMID:25947161"
title: Dysregulation of astrocyte extracellular signaling in Costello syndrome.
authors:
- Krencik R
- Hokanson KC
- Narayan AR
- Dvornik J
- Rooney GE
- Rauen KA
- Weiss LA
- Rowitch DH
- Ullian EM
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaa5645
keywords:
- Animals
- "Astrocytes/cytology, metabolism"
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Line
- Costello Syndrome/metabolism
- Extracellular Matrix/metabolism
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Genes, ras"
- Genotype
- Hippocampus/metabolism
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/cytology
- Mass Spectrometry
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation
- Neuronal Plasticity
- "Neurons/cytology, metabolism"
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Phenotype
- Proteoglycans/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- Snail Family Transcription Factors
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- ras Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dysregulation of astrocyte extracellular signaling in Costello syndrome.
**Authors:** Krencik R, Hokanson KC, Narayan AR, Dvornik J, Rooney GE, Rauen KA, Weiss LA, Rowitch DH, Ullian EM
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.aaa5645](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aaa5645)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2015 May 6;7(286):286ra66. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaa5645.

Dysregulation of astrocyte extracellular signaling in Costello syndrome.

Krencik R(1), Hokanson KC(2), Narayan AR(1), Dvornik J(1), Rooney GE(1), Rauen 
KA(3), Weiss LA(4), Rowitch DH(5), Ullian EM(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(2)Neuroscience Program, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA 94143, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA 
95817, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Institute for Human Genetics, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Eli and Edythe Broad Institute for Regenerative 
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University 
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. Department of Physiology, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. UllianE@vision.ucsf.edu.

Comment in
    Science. 2015 May 8;348(6235):636-7. doi: 10.1126/science.aab3738.

Astrocytes produce an assortment of signals that promote neuronal maturation 
according to a precise developmental timeline. Is this orchestrated timing and 
signaling altered in human neurodevelopmental disorders? To address this 
question, the astroglial lineage was investigated in two model systems of a 
developmental disorder with intellectual disability caused by mutant Harvey rat 
sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (HRAS) termed Costello syndrome: mutant HRAS 
human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and transgenic mice. Human iPSCs 
derived from patients with Costello syndrome differentiated to astroglia more 
rapidly in vitro than those derived from wild-type cell lines with normal HRAS, 
exhibited hyperplasia, and also generated an abundance of extracellular matrix 
remodeling factors and proteoglycans. Acute treatment with a farnesyl 
transferase inhibitor and knockdown of the transcription factor SNAI2 reduced 
expression of several proteoglycans in Costello syndrome iPSC-derived 
astrocytes. Similarly, mice in which mutant HRAS was expressed selectively in 
astrocytes exhibited experience-independent increased accumulation of 
perineuronal net proteoglycans in cortex, as well as increased parvalbumin 
expression in interneurons, when compared to wild-type mice. Our data indicate 
that astrocytes expressing mutant HRAS dysregulate cortical maturation during 
development as shown by abnormal extracellular matrix remodeling and implicate 
excessive astrocyte-to-neuron signaling as a possible drug target for treating 
mental impairment and enhancing neuroplasticity.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaa5645
PMCID: PMC4474402
PMID: 25947161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.