---
reference_id: "PMID:38801662"
title: Therapeutic effects of oral benzoic acid application during acute murine campylobacteriosis.
authors:
- Du K
- Mousavi S
- Foote MS
- Bereswill S
- Heimesaat MM
journal: Eur J Microbiol Immunol (Bp)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1556/1886.2024.00059
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic effects of oral benzoic acid application during acute murine campylobacteriosis.
**Authors:** Du K, Mousavi S, Foote MS, Bereswill S, Heimesaat MM
**Journal:** Eur J Microbiol Immunol (Bp) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1556/1886.2024.00059](https://doi.org/10.1556/1886.2024.00059)

## Content

1. Eur J Microbiol Immunol (Bp). 2024 May 27;14(3):243-260. doi: 
10.1556/1886.2024.00059. Print 2024 Sep 11.

Therapeutic effects of oral benzoic acid application during acute murine 
campylobacteriosis.

Du K(1), Mousavi S(1), Foote MS(1), Bereswill S(1), Heimesaat MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Gastrointestinal Microbiology Research Group, Institute of Microbiology, 
Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 
and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.

Serious risks to human health are posed by acute campylobacteriosis, an 
enteritis syndrome caused by oral infection with the food-borne bacterial 
enteropathogen Campylobacter jejuni. Since the risk for developing 
post-infectious autoimmune complications is intertwined with the severity of 
enteritis, the search of disease-mitigating compounds is highly demanded. Given 
that benzoic acid is an organic acid with well-studied health-promoting 
including anti-inflammatory effects we tested in our present study whether the 
compound might be a therapeutic option to alleviate acute murine 
campylobacteriosis. Therefore, microbiota-depleted IL-10-/- mice were perorally 
infected with C. jejuni and received benzoic acid through the drinking water 
from day 2 until day 6 post-infection. The results revealed that benzoic acid 
treatment did not affect C. jejuni colonization in the gastrointestinal tract, 
but alleviated clinical signs of acute campylobacteriosis, particularly 
diarrheal and wasting symptoms. In addition, benzoic acid mitigated apoptotic 
cell responses in the colonic epithelia and led to reduced pro-inflammatory 
immune reactions in intestinal, extra-intestinal, and systemic compartments 
tested on day 6 post-infection. Hence, our preclinical placebo-controlled 
intervention trial revealed that benzoic acid constitutes a promising 
therapeutic option for treating acute campylobacteriosis in an 
antibiotic-independent fashion and in consequence, also for reducing the risk of 
post-infectious autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.1556/1886.2024.00059
PMCID: PMC11393648
PMID: 38801662

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests: SB and MMH are members of 
the Editorial Board of the journal. Therefore, they did not take part in the 
review process in any capacity and the submission was handled by a different 
member of the editorial board. Funding: This work was supported by grants from 
the German Federal Ministries of Education and Research (BMBF) in frame of the 
zoonoses research consortium PAC-Campylobacter to MMH and SB (IP7/01KI2007D) and 
from the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy following a resolution 
of the German National Parliament, Deutscher Bundestag to MMH and SB (ZIM, 
ZF4117908 AJ8). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and 
analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript. Authors' 
contributions: KD: Performed experiments, analyzed data, critically discussed 
results, co-wrote the paper. SM: Performed experiments, analyzed data, 
critically discussed results, co-wrote the paper. MSF: Performed experiments. 
SB: Provided advice in experimental design, critically discussed results, 
co-wrote the paper. MMH: Designed and performed experiments, analyzed data, 
critically discussed results, wrote the paper.