---
reference_id: "PMID:19167641"
title: Beneficial effects of beta-blockers and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
authors:
- Ogata H
- Ishikawa Y
- Ishikawa Y
- Minami R
journal: J Cardiol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2008.08.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Beneficial effects of beta-blockers and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
**Authors:** Ogata H, Ishikawa Y, Ishikawa Y, Minami R
**Journal:** J Cardiol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jjcc.2008.08.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jjcc.2008.08.013)

## Content

1. J Cardiol. 2009 Feb;53(1):72-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2008.08.013. Epub 2008 Oct
 23.

Beneficial effects of beta-blockers and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors 
in Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

Ogata H(1), Ishikawa Y, Ishikawa Y, Minami R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, National Yakumo Hospital, Yakumo, Hokkaido, Japan. 
hogata@seagreen.ocn.ne.jp

Erratum in
    J Cardiol. 2009 Apr;53(2):316.

BACKGROUND: Patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) often have severe 
heart failure with a high mortality rate. Most DMD patients with cardiomyopathy 
became symptomatic in their early to middle teens and usually die of congestive 
heart failure within 2-3 years from the onset of symptoms. It has been reported 
that the combination of an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor and a 
beta-blocker has additive benefits in patients with heart failure. The aim of 
this study was to assess whether the combination of an ACE inhibitor and a 
beta-blocker is associated with long-term survival of DMD patients with left 
ventricular (LV) dysfunction.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the outcomes of 52 DMD patients who had 
begun treatment for heart failure with an ACE inhibitor and a beta-blocker at 
National Yakumo Hospital during the period from 1992 to 2005. All patients used 
wheelchairs in their daily lives. Patients were classified as symptomatic or 
asymptomatic at the initiation of treatment with these two drugs. Twelve 
patients who had already had apparent symptoms due to heart failure were 
enrolled in a treatment group. Forty patients who had no symptoms with reduced 
LV ejection fraction (≤ 45% in echocardiography) were enrolled in a prevention 
group.
RESULTS: Five-year and 7-year survival rates of all patients were 93 and 84%, 
respectively. In the treatment group, 5-year and 7-year survival rate were 81 
and 71%, respectively. Survival rate became zero at 10.9 years. In the 
prevention group, 5-year and 7-year survival rates were 97 and 84%, 
respectively, and 10-year survival rate was 72%. Nine patients in the prevention 
group remained event-free over 10 years.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, the combination of an ACE inhibitor and a 
beta-blocker had a beneficial effect on long-term survival of DMD patients with 
heart failure. The treatment was particularly effective for asymptomatic 
patients with LV dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2008.08.013
PMID: 19167641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]