---
reference_id: "PMID:37542162"
title: Methylome-wide association study of anxiety disorders.
authors:
- Hettema JM
- van den Oord EJCG
- Zhao M
- Xie LY
- Copeland WE
- Penninx BWJH
- Aberg KA
- Clark SL
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-02205-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Methylome-wide association study of anxiety disorders.
**Authors:** Hettema JM, van den Oord EJCG, Zhao M, Xie LY, Copeland WE, Penninx BWJH, Aberg KA, Clark SL
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41380-023-02205-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-023-02205-w)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2023 Aug;28(8):3484-3492. doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-02205-w.
Epub  2023 Aug 4.

Methylome-wide association study of anxiety disorders.

Hettema JM(1), van den Oord EJCG(2), Zhao M(2), Xie LY(2), Copeland WE(3), 
Penninx BWJH(4), Aberg KA(2), Clark SL(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Texas A&M University, College 
Station, TX, USA.
(2)Center for Biomarker Research and Precision Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth 
University, Richmond, VA, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Vermont, Burlington, VA, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, VU University Medical Center / GGZ inGeest, 
Amsterdam, 1081 HV, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Texas A&M University, College 
Station, TX, USA. slclark@tamu.edu.

Anxiety Disorders (ANX) such as panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, 
and phobias, are highly prevalent conditions that are moderately heritable. 
Evidence suggests that DNA methylation may play a role, as it is involved in 
critical adaptations to changing environments. Applying an enrichment-based 
sequencing approach covering nearly 28 million autosomal CpG sites, we conducted 
a methylome-wide association study (MWAS) of lifetime ANX in 1132 participants 
(618 cases/514 controls) from the Netherlands Study of Depression and Anxiety. 
Using epigenomic deconvolution, we performed MWAS for the main cell types in 
blood: granulocytes, T-cells, B-cells and monocytes. Cell-type specific analyses 
identified 280 and 82 methylome-wide significant associations (q-value < 0.1) in 
monocytes and granulocytes, respectively. Our top finding in monocytes was 
located in ZNF823 on chromosome 19 (p = 1.38 × 10-10) previously associated with 
schizophrenia. We observed significant overlap (p < 1 × 10-06) with the same 
direction of effect in monocytes (210 sites), T-cells (135 sites), and B-cells 
(727 sites) between this Discovery MWAS signal and a comparable replication 
dataset from the Great Smoky Mountains Study (N = 433). Overlapping 
Discovery-Replication MWAS signal was enriched for findings from published GWAS 
of ANX, major depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder. In monocytes, two 
specific sites in the FZR1 gene showed significant replication after Bonferroni 
correction with an additional 15 nominally replicated sites in monocytes and 4 
in T-cells. FZR1 regulates neurogenesis in the hippocampus, and its knockout 
leads to impairments in associative fear memory and long-term potentiation in 
mice. In the largest and most extensive methylome-wide study of ANX, we 
identified replicable methylation sites located in genes of potential relevance 
for brain mechanisms of psychiatric conditions.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-023-02205-w
PMCID: PMC10838347
PMID: 37542162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures The authors reported no biomedical 
financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.