---
reference_id: "PMID:3329446"
title: The response of state agencies to AIDS, addiction, and alcoholism.
authors:
- Veatch CL 3rd
journal: Adv Alcohol Subst Abuse
year: '1987'
doi: 10.1300/j251v07n02_11
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The response of state agencies to AIDS, addiction, and alcoholism.
**Authors:** Veatch CL 3rd
**Journal:** Adv Alcohol Subst Abuse (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1300/j251v07n02_11](https://doi.org/10.1300/j251v07n02_11)

## Content

1. Adv Alcohol Subst Abuse. 1987;7(2):117-42. doi: 10.1300/j251v07n02_11.

The response of state agencies to AIDS, addiction, and alcoholism.

Veatch CL 3rd(1).

Author information:
(1)California Department of Alcohol and Drug Programs, Sacramento 95814.

State agencies have been profoundly impacted by the AIDS epidemic. In the 
absence of a vaccine that would prevent AIDS or of medicines that would cure it, 
the primary strategies of such agencies have focused on reducing the spread of 
AIDS by promoting cessation of high risk behaviors and thus preventing or 
slowing its transmission. Recent research indicates that the primary route of 
AIDS transmission into the general heterosexual population is by intravenous 
(IV) drug abusers, who directly account for about 17% of AIDS cases nationwide. 
Reducing the spread of AIDS within this group would not only reduce the overall 
toll of the disease but should limit its spread to the population at large. 
Infection by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) can be minimized by reducing 
or eliminating certain high-risk activities. In the IV drug using community, the 
primary intervention strategies include: educating IV drug users about the 
hazards of AIDS and sharing of needles; enrolling them in treatment programs to 
reduce drug use; promoting the use of new or sterilized syringes and needles 
among those who will not abstain from drug use; and discouraging high-risk 
sexual activity among those who are already infected by HIV. The State of 
California has already increased the number of treatment slots for IV drug users 
and, through the Department of Alcohol and Drug Programs, is scaling up its 
educational, prevention, and intervention activities, particularly those related 
to safe sex, promoting the cessation of IV drug use, and improving equipment 
hygiene by those who continue use.

DOI: 10.1300/j251v07n02_11
PMID: 3329446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]