---
reference_id: "PMID:27355533"
title: Efficacy and Safety of Midostaurin in Advanced Systemic Mastocytosis.
authors:
- Gotlib J
- Kluin-Nelemans HC
- George TI
- Akin C
- Sotlar K
- Hermine O
- Awan FT
- Hexner E
- Mauro MJ
- Sternberg DW
- Villeneuve M
- Huntsman Labed A
- Stanek EJ
- Hartmann K
- Horny HP
- Valent P
- Reiter A
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1513098
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Female
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Mast-Cell/drug therapy, mortality"
- Male
- "Mastocytosis, Systemic/drug therapy, mortality"
- Middle Aged
- Multivariate Analysis
- "Staurosporine/adverse effects, analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- Survival Analysis
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and Safety of Midostaurin in Advanced Systemic Mastocytosis.
**Authors:** Gotlib J, Kluin-Nelemans HC, George TI, Akin C, Sotlar K, Hermine O, Awan FT, Hexner E, Mauro MJ, Sternberg DW, Villeneuve M, Huntsman Labed A, Stanek EJ, Hartmann K, Horny HP, Valent P, Reiter A
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1513098](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1513098)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2016 Jun 30;374(26):2530-41. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1513098.

Efficacy and Safety of Midostaurin in Advanced Systemic Mastocytosis.

Gotlib J(1), Kluin-Nelemans HC(1), George TI(1), Akin C(1), Sotlar K(1), Hermine 
O(1), Awan FT(1), Hexner E(1), Mauro MJ(1), Sternberg DW(1), Villeneuve M(1), 
Huntsman Labed A(1), Stanek EJ(1), Hartmann K(1), Horny HP(1), Valent P(1), 
Reiter A(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Hematology Division, Stanford University School of Medicine-Stanford 
Cancer Institute, Stanford, CA (J.G.); Faculty of Medical Sciences, University 
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands 
(H.C.K.-N.); Department of Pathology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque 
(T.I.G.); Mastocytosis Center, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston (C.A.); 
Institute of Pathology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich (K.S., 
H.-P.H.), Department of Dermatology and Venereology, University of Cologne, 
Cologne, and University of Luebeck, Luebeck (K.H.), and Department of Hematology 
and Oncology, University Hospital Mannheim of the University of Heidelberg, 
Mannheim (A.R.) - all in Germany; University of Paris Descartes, Institut 
Imagine INSERM Unité 1163 and Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 
ERL8654, Centre de Reference des Mastocytoses, Paris (O.H.); Division of 
Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Ohio State University Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, Columbus (F.T.A.); Division of Hematology/Oncology, Abramson 
Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (E.H.); 
Myeloproliferative Neoplasms Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York (M.J.M.); Novartis Pharmaceuticals, East Hanover, NJ (D.W.S., E.J.S.); 
Novartis Pharma, Basel, Switzerland (M.V., A.H.L.); and the Department of 
Internal Medicine I, Division of Hematology and Hemostaseology, and Ludwig 
Boltzmann Cluster Oncology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna (P.V.).

BACKGROUND: Advanced systemic mastocytosis comprises rare hematologic neoplasms 
that are associated with a poor prognosis and lack effective treatment options. 
The multikinase inhibitor midostaurin inhibits KIT D816V, a primary driver of 
disease pathogenesis.
METHODS: We conducted an open-label study of oral midostaurin at a dose of 100 
mg twice daily in 116 patients, of whom 89 with mastocytosis-related organ 
damage were eligible for inclusion in the primary efficacy population; 16 had 
aggressive systemic mastocytosis, 57 had systemic mastocytosis with an 
associated hematologic neoplasm, and 16 had mast-cell leukemia. The primary 
outcome was the best overall response.
RESULTS: The overall response rate was 60% (95% confidence interval [CI], 49 to 
70); 45% of the patients had a major response, which was defined as complete 
resolution of at least one type of mastocytosis-related organ damage. Response 
rates were similar regardless of the subtype of advanced systemic mastocytosis, 
KIT mutation status, or exposure to previous therapy. The median best percentage 
changes in bone marrow mast-cell burden and serum tryptase level were -59% and 
-58%, respectively. The median overall survival was 28.7 months, and the median 
progression-free survival was 14.1 months. Among the 16 patients with mast-cell 
leukemia, the median overall survival was 9.4 months (95% CI, 7.5 to not 
estimated). Dose reduction owing to toxic effects occurred in 56% of the 
patients; re-escalation to the starting dose was feasible in 32% of those 
patients. The most frequent adverse events were low-grade nausea, vomiting, and 
diarrhea. New or worsening grade 3 or 4 neutropenia, anemia, and 
thrombocytopenia occurred in 24%, 41%, and 29% of the patients, respectively, 
mostly in those with preexisting cytopenias.
CONCLUSIONS: In this open-label study, midostaurin showed efficacy in patients 
with advanced systemic mastocytosis, including the highly fatal variant 
mast-cell leukemia. (Funded by Novartis Pharmaceuticals and others; 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00782067.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1513098
PMID: 27355533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]