---
reference_id: "PMID:39274425"
title: Evidence on Hidradenitis Suppurativa as an Autoinflammatory Skin Disease.
authors:
- "D'Onghia M"
- Malvaso D
- Galluccio G
- Antonelli F
- Coscarella G
- Rubegni P
- Peris K
- Calabrese L
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13175211
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence on Hidradenitis Suppurativa as an Autoinflammatory Skin Disease.
**Authors:** D'Onghia M, Malvaso D, Galluccio G, Antonelli F, Coscarella G, Rubegni P, Peris K, Calabrese L
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13175211](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13175211)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Sep 2;13(17):5211. doi: 10.3390/jcm13175211.

Evidence on Hidradenitis Suppurativa as an Autoinflammatory Skin Disease.

D'Onghia M(1), Malvaso D(2)(3), Galluccio G(1), Antonelli F(2)(3), Coscarella 
G(2)(3), Rubegni P(1), Peris K(2)(3), Calabrese L(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Unit, Department of Medical, Surgical and Neurological Sciences, 
University of Siena, 53100 Siena, Italy.
(2)UOC di Dermatologia, Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche, 
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli - IRCCS, 00168 Rome, Italy.
(3)Dermatologia, Dipartimento di Medicina e Chirurgia Traslazionale, Università 
Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, 00168 Rome, Italy.

Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a chronic and debilitating inflammatory skin 
disease that often exhibits heterogeneity in its clinical presentation, 
especially in the context of its rare syndromic forms. The pathogenesis of HS 
results from a complex interplay of genetic predisposition, innate and adaptive 
immunity dysregulation, smoking, obesity and environmental factors. In the early 
phase of the disease, the innate immune system is hyperactivated, contributing 
to tissue damage and triggering the activation and amplification of the adaptive 
immune response, which plays a pivotal role in the chronic stages of the 
disease. Recent studies focused on elucidating the importance of innate immunity 
impairment and autoinflammation in HS and increasing evidence has emerged on the 
occurrence of the disease in the context of well-known monogenic and polygenic 
autoinflammatory syndromes (AIDs). This review provides a comprehensive 
examination of the current scientific background supporting the contribution of 
autoinflammation to HS etiology, including genetic data, molecular studies and 
clinical evidence, as well as the association between HS and AIDs. However, 
further research is needed to shed light on the pathogenic mechanism of this 
challenging condition and to identify potential perspectives for future 
therapeutic approaches.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13175211
PMCID: PMC11396593
PMID: 39274425

Conflict of interest statement: K.P. received grants to the institution from 
Sanofi, Novartis, AbbVie and Almirall and participated in advisory board 
meetings with AbbVie, Almirall, Leo Pharma, Lilly, Janssen, Sanofi, Pierre 
Fabre, Sun Pharma, Biogen, Galderma, Philogen and Regeneron outside the 
submitted work. L.C., M.D., G.G., G.C., F.A., P.R. and D.M. declare no conflicts 
of interest.