---
reference_id: "PMID:33029534"
title: "Recompensation of Decompensated Hepatitis B Cirrhosis: Current Status and Challenges."
authors:
- Zhao H
- Wang Q
- Luo C
- Liu L
- Xie W
journal: Biomed Res Int
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1155/2020/9609731
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recompensation of Decompensated Hepatitis B Cirrhosis: Current Status and Challenges.
**Authors:** Zhao H, Wang Q, Luo C, Liu L, Xie W
**Journal:** Biomed Res Int (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2020/9609731](https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/9609731)

## Content

1. Biomed Res Int. 2020 Sep 21;2020:9609731. doi: 10.1155/2020/9609731.
eCollection  2020.

Recompensation of Decompensated Hepatitis B Cirrhosis: Current Status and 
Challenges.

Zhao H(1), Wang Q(1), Luo C(1), Liu L(1), Xie W(1).

Author information:
(1)Liver Diseases Center, Beijing Ditan Hospital, Capital Medical University, 8 
East Jingshun Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing, China.

Liver-function decompensation or hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) gradually 
appears after chronic hepatitis B progresses to cirrhosis. Effective antiviral 
treatment can significantly improve the long-term prognosis of decompensated 
patients, and some patients present recompensation of decompensated hepatitis B 
cirrhosis. At present, there are limited research data on the recompensation of 
decompensated hepatitis B cirrhosis. There is still controversy regarding the 
evaluation time, evaluation indicators, influencing factors, and long-term 
prognosis of recompensation.

Copyright © 2020 Hong Zhao et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/9609731
PMCID: PMC7527887
PMID: 33029534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no any 
conflict of interests.