---
reference_id: "PMID:38680261"
title: Pain management in chronic pancreatitis.
authors:
- Nag DS
- Swain BP
- Anand R
- Barman TK
- Vatsala
journal: World J Clin Cases
year: '2024'
doi: 10.12998/wjcc.v12.i12.2016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pain management in chronic pancreatitis.
**Authors:** Nag DS, Swain BP, Anand R, Barman TK, Vatsala
**Journal:** World J Clin Cases (2024)
**DOI:** [10.12998/wjcc.v12.i12.2016](https://doi.org/10.12998/wjcc.v12.i12.2016)

## Content

1. World J Clin Cases. 2024 Apr 26;12(12):2016-2022. doi: 
10.12998/wjcc.v12.i12.2016.

Pain management in chronic pancreatitis.

Nag DS(1), Swain BP(2), Anand R(2), Barman TK(2), Vatsala(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology, Tata Main Hospital, Jamshedpur 831001, India. 
ds.nag@tatasteel.com.
(2)Department of Anaesthesiology, Tata Main Hospital, Jamshedpur 831001, India.

Pain in chronic pancreatitis (CP) is difficult to manage. Many patients suffer 
from inadequate pain relief, completely incapacitating them in their daily 
activities. Historically, despite their well-known adverse effects, opioids have 
been the pillar of treatment regimens in painful CP. The management is now 
gradually evolving with a better understanding of the underlying pathophysiology 
of CP-related pain. Clinicians should follow a holistic approach to the 
management of CP-associated pain, which must involve lifestyle changes that are 
coupled with analgesic medications and other pain-relieving interventions. 
Furthermore, there is no easy cure for vanquishing CP-associated pain. Each 
patient must be evaluated on a case-by-case basis by a multidisciplinary team to 
decide which treatment option is best suited for that individual.

©The Author(s) 2024. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v12.i12.2016
PMCID: PMC11045512
PMID: 38680261

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.