---
reference_id: "PMID:26062020"
title: "Liver Transplantation for Acute Intermittent Porphyria: Biochemical and Pathologic Studies of the Explanted Liver."
authors:
- Yasuda M
- Erwin AL
- Liu LU
- Balwani M
- Chen B
- Kadirvel S
- Gan L
- Fiel MI
- Gordon RE
- Yu C
- Clavero S
- Arvelakis A
- Naik H
- Martin LD
- Phillips JD
- Anderson KE
- Sadagoparamanujam VM
- Florman SS
- Desnick RJ
journal: Mol Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.2119/molmed.2015.00099
keywords:
- "5-Aminolevulinate Synthetase/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Adult
- "Aminolevulinic Acid/blood, urine"
- Female
- Heme/metabolism
- Humans
- "Hydroxymethylbilane Synthase/antagonists & inhibitors, biosynthesis"
- "Liver/metabolism, pathology"
- Liver Transplantation
- "Porphobilinogen/blood, urine"
- "Porphyria, Acute Intermittent/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- "RNA, Messenger/biosynthesis"
- Uroporphyrins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver Transplantation for Acute Intermittent Porphyria: Biochemical and Pathologic Studies of the Explanted Liver.
**Authors:** Yasuda M, Erwin AL, Liu LU, Balwani M, Chen B, Kadirvel S, Gan L, Fiel MI, Gordon RE, Yu C, Clavero S, Arvelakis A, Naik H, Martin LD, Phillips JD, Anderson KE, Sadagoparamanujam VM, Florman SS, Desnick RJ
**Journal:** Mol Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.2119/molmed.2015.00099](https://doi.org/10.2119/molmed.2015.00099)

## Content

1. Mol Med. 2015 Jun 5;21(1):487-95. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2015.00099.

Liver Transplantation for Acute Intermittent Porphyria: Biochemical and
Pathologic Studies of the Explanted Liver.

Yasuda M(1), Erwin AL(1), Liu LU(2), Balwani M(1)(2), Chen B(1), Kadirvel S(1),
Gan L(1), Fiel MI(3), Gordon RE(3), Yu C(1), Clavero S(1), Arvelakis A(4), Naik
H(1), Martin LD(5), Phillips JD(6), Anderson KE(7), Sadagoparamanujam VM(7),
Florman SS(2)(4), Desnick RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, New York, United States of America.
(2)Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York, United States of America.
(3)Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York, United States of America.
(4)Department of Surgery, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New
York, United States of America.
(5)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(7)Department of Preventive Medicine and Community Health, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas.

Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is an autosomal-dominant hepatic disorder
caused by the half-normal activity of hydroxymethylbilane (HMB) synthase.
Symptomatic individuals experience life-threatening acute neurovisceral attacks
that are precipitated by factors that induce the hepatic expression of
5-aminolevulinic acid synthase 1 (ALAS1), resulting in the marked accumulation
of the putative neurotoxic porphyrin precursors 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and
porphobilinogen (PBG). Here, we provide the first detailed description of the
biochemical and pathologic alterations in the explanted liver of an AIP patient
who underwent orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) due to untreatable and
debilitating chronic attacks. After OLT, the recipient's plasma and urinary ALA
and PBG rapidly normalized, and her attacks immediately stopped. In the
explanted liver, (a) ALAS1 mRNA and activity were elevated approximately ~3- and
5-fold, and ALA and PBG concentrations were increased ~3- and 1,760-fold,
respectively; (b) uroporphyrin III concentration was elevated; (c) microsomal
heme content was sufficient, and representative cytochrome P450 activities were
essentially normal; (d) HMB synthase activity was approximately half-normal
(~42%); (e) iron concentration was slightly elevated; and (f) heme oxygenase I
mRNA was increased approximately three-fold. Notable pathologic findings
included nodular regenerative hyperplasia, previously not reported in AIP
livers, and minimal iron deposition, despite the large number of hemin infusions
received before OLT. These findings suggest that the neurovisceral symptoms of
AIP are not associated with generalized hepatic heme deficiency and support the
neurotoxicity of ALA and/or PBG. Additionally, they indicate that substrate
inhibition of hepatic HMB synthase activity by PBG is not a pathogenic mechanism
in acute attacks.

DOI: 10.2119/molmed.2015.00099
PMCID: PMC4607616
PMID: 26062020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
