---
reference_id: "PMID:22294732"
title: The phenotype of human STK4 deficiency.
authors:
- Abdollahpour H
- Appaswamy G
- Kotlarz D
- Diestelhorst J
- Beier R
- Schäffer AA
- Gertz EM
- Schambach A
- Kreipe HH
- Pfeifer D
- Engelhardt KR
- Rezaei N
- Grimbacher B
- Lohrmann S
- Sherkat R
- Klein C
journal: Blood
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-09-378158
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Case-Control Studies
- "Child, Preschool"
- Consanguinity
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Humans
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/blood, complications, genetics, immunology"
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Iran/epidemiology
- Male
- "Neutropenia/blood, etiology, genetics, immunology"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/deficiency, genetics"
- Hippo Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The phenotype of human STK4 deficiency.
**Authors:** Abdollahpour H, Appaswamy G, Kotlarz D, Diestelhorst J, Beier R, Schäffer AA, Gertz EM, Schambach A, Kreipe HH, Pfeifer D, Engelhardt KR, Rezaei N, Grimbacher B, Lohrmann S, Sherkat R, Klein C
**Journal:** Blood (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2011-09-378158](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2011-09-378158)

## Content

1. Blood. 2012 Apr 12;119(15):3450-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-09-378158. Epub
2012  Jan 31.

The phenotype of human STK4 deficiency.

Abdollahpour H(1), Appaswamy G, Kotlarz D, Diestelhorst J, Beier R, Schäffer AA, 
Gertz EM, Schambach A, Kreipe HH, Pfeifer D, Engelhardt KR, Rezaei N, Grimbacher 
B, Lohrmann S, Sherkat R, Klein C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Hannover Medical School, 
Hannover, Germany.

Comment in
    Blood. 2012 Apr 12;119(15):3371-2. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-02-410399.

We describe a novel clinical phenotype associating T- and B-cell lymphopenia, 
intermittent neutropenia, and atrial septal defects in 3 members of a 
consanguineous kindred. Their clinical histories included recurrent bacterial 
infections, viral infections, mucocutaneous candidiasis, cutaneous warts, and 
skin abscesses. Homozygosity mapping and candidate gene sequencing revealed a 
homozygous premature termination mutation in the gene STK4 (serine threonine 
kinase 4, formerly having the symbol MST1). STK4 is the human ortholog of 
Drosophila Hippo, the central constituent of a highly conserved pathway 
controlling cell growth and apoptosis. STK4-deficient lymphocytes and 
neutrophils exhibit enhanced loss of mitochondrial membrane potential and 
increased susceptibility to apoptosis. STK4 deficiency is a novel human primary 
immunodeficiency syndrome.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2011-09-378158
PMCID: PMC3325036
PMID: 22294732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]