---
reference_id: "PMID:39143526"
title: Systematic review and meta-analysis of the diagnostic value of computed tomography angiography for severe internal carotid artery stenosis.
authors:
- Zeng HL
- Shao FQ
- Peng XF
- Lei CY
journal: BMC Med Imaging
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12880-024-01390-6
keywords:
- Humans
- Carotid Stenosis/diagnostic imaging
- Computed Tomography Angiography/methods
- "Carotid Artery, Internal/diagnostic imaging"
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- ROC Curve
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic review and meta-analysis of the diagnostic value of computed tomography angiography for severe internal carotid artery stenosis.
**Authors:** Zeng HL, Shao FQ, Peng XF, Lei CY
**Journal:** BMC Med Imaging (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12880-024-01390-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12880-024-01390-6)

## Content

1. BMC Med Imaging. 2024 Aug 14;24(1):215. doi: 10.1186/s12880-024-01390-6.

Systematic review and meta-analysis of the diagnostic value of computed 
tomography angiography for severe internal carotid artery stenosis.

Zeng HL(1), Shao FQ(2), Peng XF(1), Lei CY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Zigong First People's Hospital, Zigong 
Academy of Medical Sciences, 42 Haoyi Road, Shangyi District, Zigong, Sichuan, 
643000, P. R. China.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Zigong First People's Hospital, Zigong 
Academy of Medical Sciences, 42 Haoyi Road, Shangyi District, Zigong, Sichuan, 
643000, P. R. China. Puwaiedu@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Due to the increasing incidence of ischaemic cerebrovascular 
diseases, the accurate assessment of internal carotid artery (ICA) stenosis is 
crucial for the development of treatment plans. This systematic review and 
meta-analysis aimed to evaluate the diagnostic value of computed tomography 
angiography (CTA) for severe ICAstenosis, thereby providing support for clinical 
decision-making and promoting diagnostic updates.
METHODS: The PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Library, China National Knowledge 
Infrastructure (CNKI), Wanfang Database, VIP Database for Chinese Technical 
Periodicals (VIP), and Chinese Biomedical Literature (CBM) electronic databases 
were searched from inception to March 21, 2024, to identify publicly available 
research literature on the use of CTA to diagnose severe ICA stenosis. 
Literature screening, data extraction, and quality assessment were conducted 
based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria as well as the Quality Assessment 
of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies (QUADAS) standards. Data analysis was performed 
using Stata 17.0 and Meta-Disc 1.4 software. The sensitivity, specificity, 
positive likelihood ratio, negative likelihood ratio, and diagnostic odds ratio 
of the included studies were calculated using Stata 17.0 software, and forest 
plots and summary receiver operating characteristic (SROC) curves were 
generated. The area under the curve (AUC) was calculated, and funnel plots were 
constructed to assess publication bias.
RESULTS: A total of 16 studies with 2368 vascular segments were included. The 
meta-analysis revealed that the combined sensitivity and specificity of CTA for 
severe ICA stenosis were 0.93 (95% CI: 0.88 ~ 0.96) and 0.99 (95% CI: 
0.96 ~ 1.00), respectively. The combined positive likelihood ratio and negative 
likelihood ratio were 92.0 (95% CI: 24.2 ~ 349.6) and 0.07 (95% CI: 
0.04 ~ 0.13), respectively. The diagnostic odds ratio was 1302 (95% CI: 
257 ~ 6606), and the AUC of the SROC curve was 0.98. The Deeks funnel plot 
suggested no publication bias among the included studies.
CONCLUSION: CTA demonstrated high sensitivity and specificity for diagnosing 
severe ICA stenosis. Therefore, this study provided important evidence for the 
accurate diagnosis and treatment of severe ICA stenosis. However, there was 
considerable heterogeneity among the included studies, thus indicating the need 
for additional high-quality prospective studies to confirm the clinical 
applicability of CTA.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12880-024-01390-6
PMCID: PMC11325575
PMID: 39143526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.