---
reference_id: "PMID:36148553"
title: Inhibition of YAP/TAZ-driven TEAD activity prevents growth of NF2-null schwannoma and meningioma.
authors:
- Laraba L
- Hillson L
- de Guibert JG
- Hewitt A
- Jaques MR
- Tang TT
- Post L
- Ercolano E
- Rai G
- Yang SM
- Jagger DJ
- Woznica W
- Edwards P
- Shivane AG
- Hanemann CO
- Parkinson DB
journal: Brain
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awac342
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Mice
- Cell Proliferation
- Meningeal Neoplasms
- Meningioma
- "Neurilemmoma/genetics, pathology"
- "Neurofibromin 2/genetics, metabolism"
- YAP-Signaling Proteins/metabolism
- Transcriptional Coactivator with PDZ-Binding Motif Proteins/metabolism
- TEA Domain Transcription Factors/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhibition of YAP/TAZ-driven TEAD activity prevents growth of NF2-null schwannoma and meningioma.
**Authors:** Laraba L, Hillson L, de Guibert JG, Hewitt A, Jaques MR, Tang TT, Post L, Ercolano E, Rai G, Yang SM, Jagger DJ, Woznica W, Edwards P, Shivane AG, Hanemann CO, Parkinson DB
**Journal:** Brain (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awac342](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awac342)

## Content

1. Brain. 2023 Apr 19;146(4):1697-1713. doi: 10.1093/brain/awac342.

Inhibition of YAP/TAZ-driven TEAD activity prevents growth of NF2-null 
schwannoma and meningioma.

Laraba L(1), Hillson L(1), de Guibert JG(1), Hewitt A(1), Jaques MR(2), Tang 
TT(3), Post L(3), Ercolano E(1), Rai G(4), Yang SM(4), Jagger DJ(5), Woznica 
W(1), Edwards P(6), Shivane AG(6), Hanemann CO(1), Parkinson DB(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Heath: Medicine, Dentistry and Human Sciences, Derriford Research 
Facility, University of Plymouth, Plymouth, Devon PL6 8BU, UK.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, University of Bath, Bath, Somerset BA2 7AY, UK.
(3)Vivace Therapeutics Inc., San Mateo, CA 94403, USA.
(4)National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of 
Health, 9800 Medical Center Drive, Rockville, MD 20850, USA.
(5)UCL Ear Institute, University College London, London WC1X 8EE, UK.
(6)Department of Cellular and Anatomical Pathology, University Hospitals 
Plymouth NHS Trust, Derriford, Plymouth, Devon PL6 8DH, UK.

Erratum in
    Brain. 2025 Mar 6;148(3):e16-e20. doi: 10.1093/brain/awae353.

Schwannoma tumours typically arise on the eighth cranial nerve and are mostly 
caused by loss of the tumour suppressor Merlin (NF2). There are no approved 
chemotherapies for these tumours and the surgical removal of the tumour carries 
a high risk of damage to the eighth or other close cranial nerve tissue. New 
treatments for schwannoma and other NF2-null tumours such as meningioma are 
urgently required. Using a combination of human primary tumour cells and mouse 
models of schwannoma, we have examined the role of the Hippo signalling pathway 
in driving tumour cell growth. Using both genetic ablation of the Hippo 
effectors YAP and TAZ as well as novel TEAD palmitoylation inhibitors, we show 
that Hippo signalling may be successfully targeted in vitro and in vivo to both 
block and, remarkably, regress schwannoma tumour growth. In particular, 
successful use of TEAD palmitoylation inhibitors in a preclinical mouse model of 
schwannoma points to their potential future clinical use. We also identify the 
cancer stem cell marker aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A1 (ALDH1A1) as a Hippo 
signalling target, driven by the TAZ protein in human and mouse NF2-null 
schwannoma cells, as well as in NF2-null meningioma cells, and examine the 
potential future role of this new target in halting schwannoma and meningioma 
tumour growth.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awac342
PMCID: PMC10115179
PMID: 36148553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: T.T.T. and L.P. are employees of Vivace 
Therapeutics and have equity interest in Vivace Therapeutics.