---
reference_id: "PMID:21669507"
title: Abnormal brain MRI signal in 18q-syndrome not due to dysmyelination.
authors:
- Tanaka R
- Iwasaki N
- Hayashi M
- Nakayama J
- Ohto T
- Takahashi M
- Numano T
- Homma K
- Hamano K
- Sumazaki R
journal: Brain Dev
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2011.05.008
keywords:
- Brain/pathology
- Child
- Chromosome Deletion
- Chromosome Disorders/pathology
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 18"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Microscopy, Electron, Transmission"
- Myelin Sheath/ultrastructure
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal brain MRI signal in 18q-syndrome not due to dysmyelination.
**Authors:** Tanaka R, Iwasaki N, Hayashi M, Nakayama J, Ohto T, Takahashi M, Numano T, Homma K, Hamano K, Sumazaki R
**Journal:** Brain Dev (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.braindev.2011.05.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.braindev.2011.05.008)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 2012 Mar;34(3):234-7. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2011.05.008. Epub
2011  Jun 12.

Abnormal brain MRI signal in 18q-syndrome not due to dysmyelination.

Tanaka R(1), Iwasaki N, Hayashi M, Nakayama J, Ohto T, Takahashi M, Numano T, 
Homma K, Hamano K, Sumazaki R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Health, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of 
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. r-tanaka@md.tsukuba.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: 18q-Syndrome is a chromosomal disorder exhibiting various symptoms 
arising from the central nervous system. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
of patients with this syndrome usually demonstrates abnormal white matter 
intensities. This is widely believed to be due to impaired myelin formation 
because this syndrome involves the deletion of the myelin basic protein (MBP) 
gene in 18q23. However, this hypothesis has not been confirmed by actual 
pathology because early death is unusual and autopsy rarely performed.
PATIENT: A 6-year-old boy with ring chromosome 18 syndrome was examined by 
genetic analysis for the MBP gene, brain MRI, and autopsy.
RESULTS: Haploinsufficiency of the MBP gene was confirmed. T(2)-weighted MRI 
revealed diffuse high intensities throughout the cerebral white matter. 
Pathological examination showed the cerebral white matter to be uniformly 
stained by Klüver-Barrera and MBP immunohistochemical staining. Oligodendrocytes 
were immunoreactive for proteolipid protein and ferritin but not MBP. Electron 
microscopy revealed clusters of axons wrapped in compact myelin sheaths with 
distinct major dense lines. Holzer and immunohistochemical staining for glial 
fibrillary acidic protein showed extensive staining of the white matter and an 
increased number of glial filaments.
CONCLUSIONS: This pathological study demonstrated that in this disorder, the 
brain was well myelinated, contrary to established hypotheses about this 
disorder. The MRI signal abnormalities in 18q-syndrome could be attributed to 
gliosis and not to dysmyelination.

Copyright Â© 2011 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2011.05.008
PMID: 21669507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]