---
reference_id: "PMID:38792835"
title: Exploring the Toxin-Mediated Mechanisms in Clostridioides difficile Infection.
authors:
- Pourliotopoulou E
- Karampatakis T
- Kachrimanidou M
journal: Microorganisms
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12051004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exploring the Toxin-Mediated Mechanisms in Clostridioides difficile Infection.
**Authors:** Pourliotopoulou E, Karampatakis T, Kachrimanidou M
**Journal:** Microorganisms (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/microorganisms12051004](https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms12051004)

## Content

1. Microorganisms. 2024 May 16;12(5):1004. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12051004.

Exploring the Toxin-Mediated Mechanisms in Clostridioides difficile Infection.

Pourliotopoulou E(1), Karampatakis T(2), Kachrimanidou M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Medical School, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, 541 24 Thessaloniki, Greece.
(2)Microbiology Department, Papanikolaou General Hospital, 570 10 Thessaloniki, 
Greece.

Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) is the leading cause of nosocomial 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea, and colitis, with increasing incidence and 
healthcare costs. Its pathogenesis is primarily driven by toxins produced by the 
bacterium C. difficile, Toxin A (TcdA) and Toxin B (TcdB). Certain strains 
produce an additional toxin, the C. difficile transferase (CDT), which further 
enhances the virulence and pathogenicity of C. difficile. These toxins disrupt 
colonic epithelial barrier integrity, and induce inflammation and cellular 
damage, leading to CDI symptoms. Significant progress has been made in the past 
decade in elucidating the molecular mechanisms of TcdA, TcdB, and CDT, which 
provide insights into the management of CDI and the future development of novel 
treatment strategies based on anti-toxin therapies. While antibiotics are common 
treatments, high recurrence rates necessitate alternative therapies. 
Bezlotoxumab, targeting TcdB, is the only available anti-toxin, yet limitations 
persist, prompting ongoing research. This review highlights the current 
knowledge of the structure and mechanism of action of C. difficile toxins and 
their role in disease. By comprehensively describing the toxin-mediated 
mechanisms, this review provides insights for the future development of novel 
treatment strategies and the management of CDI.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms12051004
PMCID: PMC11124097
PMID: 38792835

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.