---
reference_id: "PMID:35302653"
title: Ultrastructure abnormalities of collagen and elastin in Arab patients with arterial tortuosity syndrome.
authors:
- Faiyaz-Ul-Haque M
- Mubarak M
- AbdulWahab A
- AlRikabi AC
- Alsaeed AH
- Al-Otaiby M
- Nawaz Z
- Zaidi SHE
- Basit S
journal: J Cutan Pathol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/cup.14228
keywords:
- Arabs
- "Arteries/abnormalities, pathology"
- Collagen/ultrastructure
- "Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Elastin/ultrastructure
- Humans
- Joint Instability
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic"
- Vascular Malformations
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ultrastructure abnormalities of collagen and elastin in Arab patients with arterial tortuosity syndrome.
**Authors:** Faiyaz-Ul-Haque M, Mubarak M, AbdulWahab A, AlRikabi AC, Alsaeed AH, Al-Otaiby M, Nawaz Z, Zaidi SHE, Basit S
**Journal:** J Cutan Pathol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cup.14228](https://doi.org/10.1111/cup.14228)

## Content

1. J Cutan Pathol. 2022 Jul;49(7):618-622. doi: 10.1111/cup.14228. Epub 2022 Apr
10.

Ultrastructure abnormalities of collagen and elastin in Arab patients with
arterial tortuosity syndrome.

Faiyaz-Ul-Haque M(1)(2), Mubarak M(1), AbdulWahab A(3), AlRikabi AC(1), Alsaeed
AH(4), Al-Otaiby M(1), Nawaz Z(2), Zaidi SHE(5), Basit S(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hamad Medical Corporation,
Doha, Qatar.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, College of Applied Medical
Sciences, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Genomics, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Canada.
(6)Center for Genetics and Inherited Diseases, Taibah University Almadinah
Almunawwarah, Medina, Saudi Arabia.

Arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS) is a rare autosomal recessive disease
characterized by elongation and tortuosity of the large- and medium-sized
arteries. ATS patients display features that are also found in Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome (EDS) patients. ATS is caused by pathogenic mutations in the SLC2A10
gene, which encodes for the glucose transporter, GLUT10. This study aimed at
examining the ultrastructure of skin for abnormalities that can explain the
loose skin and arterial phenotypes of Arab patients with the p.S81R mutation in
SLC2A10. Forty-eight patients with SLC2A10 mutation were recruited for this
study. Skin biopsy specimens from three children with ATS and a healthy child
were examined by electron microscopy to determine the ultrastructure of collagen
and elastin. Histopathologic staining of sections from tissue biopsy specimens
was also performed. Large spaces were observed among the collagen fibrils in the
skin biopsy specimens obtained from ATS patients, suggesting disorganization of
the collagen structures. Furthermore, elastin fiber contents and their thickness
are reduced in the skin. In small muscular arteries in the skin from ATS
patients, discontinuous internal elastic lamina, lack of myofilaments, and
disorganized medial smooth muscle cells with vacuolated cytoplasm are present.
The disorganization of collagen fibrils and reduced elastin contents in the skin
may explain the loose skin phenotype of ATS patients similar to the EDS
patients. The lack of elastin in small muscular arteries may have contributed to
the development of arterial tortuosity in these patients.

© 2022 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cup.14228
PMID: 35302653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
