---
reference_id: "PMID:31341655"
title: Novel PITX2 Mutations including a Mutation Causing an Unusual Ophthalmic Phenotype of Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome.
authors:
- Huang L
- Meng Y
- Guo X
journal: J Ophthalmol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1155/2019/5642126
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel PITX2 Mutations including a Mutation Causing an Unusual Ophthalmic Phenotype of Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome.
**Authors:** Huang L, Meng Y, Guo X
**Journal:** J Ophthalmol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2019/5642126](https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/5642126)

## Content

1. J Ophthalmol. 2019 Jul 1;2019:5642126. doi: 10.1155/2019/5642126. eCollection 
2019.

Novel PITX2 Mutations including a Mutation Causing an Unusual Ophthalmic 
Phenotype of Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome.

Huang L(1), Meng Y(2), Guo X(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Changzhou No. 2 People's Hospital, Changzhou 
213000, Jiangsu Province, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Changzhou No. 3 People's Hospital, Changzhou 
213000, Jiangsu Province, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510060, China.

PURPOSE: The aims of this study were to examine novel mutations in PITX2 and 
FOXC1 in Chinese patients with anterior segment dysgenesis (ASD) and to compare 
the clinical presentations of these mutations with previously reported 
associated phenotypes.
METHODS: Twenty-six unrelated patients with different forms of ASD were enrolled 
from our paediatric and genetic eye clinic. The ocular manifestations of both 
eyes of each patient were recorded. Genomic DNA was prepared from venous 
leukocytes. All coding exons of PITX2 and FOXC1 were amplified by polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) from genomic DNA and subjected to direct DNA sequencing. 
Analysis of mutations in control subjects was performed by heteroduplex 
single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis.
RESULTS: Sequence analysis of the PITX2 gene revealed four mutations, including 
c.475_476delCT (P.L159VfsX39), c.64C > T (P.Q22X), c.296delG (P.R99PfsX56), and 
c.206G > A (P.R69H). The first three mutations were found to be novel. The 
c.475_476delCT (P.L159VfsX39) mutation, located at the 3' end of the 
PITX2-coding region, was identified in a Chinese Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) 
patient who presented with an unusual severe phenotype of bilateral aniridia. 
The clinical characteristics, including the severity and manifestations of the 
patient's phenotype, were compared with reported PITX2-associated aniridia 
phenotypes of ARS in the literature.
CONCLUSIONS: These results expand the mutation spectrum of the PITX2 gene in 
patients with ARS. The PITX2 gene may be responsible for a significant portion 
of ARS with additional systemic defects in the Chinese population. This is the 
first reported case of a mutation at the 3' end of the PITX2-coding region 
extending the phenotypic consequences to bilateral aniridia. The traits of ARS 
could display tremendous variability in severity and manifestations due to the 
dominant-negative effect of PITX2. Our results further emphasize the importance 
of careful clinical and genetic analysis in determining mutation-disease 
associations and may lead to a better understanding of the role of PITX2 in 
ocular development.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/5642126
PMCID: PMC6636469
PMID: 31341655