---
reference_id: "PMID:28053051"
title: Rom1 converts Y141C-Prph2-associated pattern dystrophy to retinitis pigmentosa.
authors:
- Conley SM
- Stuck MW
- Watson JN
- Naash MI
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw408
keywords:
- Animals
- "Endoplasmic Reticulum/genetics, pathology"
- Eye Proteins
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Gene Knock-In Techniques
- Humans
- "Macular Degeneration/genetics, pathology"
- Mice
- "Multiprotein Complexes/biosynthesis, chemistry, genetics"
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Peripherins/biosynthesis, chemistry, genetics"
- Phenotype
- "Photoreceptor Cells, Vertebrate/chemistry, metabolism"
- Protein Multimerization
- "Retinal Degeneration/genetics, pathology"
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics, pathology"
- "Tetraspanins/biosynthesis, chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rom1 converts Y141C-Prph2-associated pattern dystrophy to retinitis pigmentosa.
**Authors:** Conley SM, Stuck MW, Watson JN, Naash MI
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddw408](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddw408)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2017 Feb 1;26(3):509-518. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw408.

Rom1 converts Y141C-Prph2-associated pattern dystrophy to retinitis pigmentosa.

Conley SM(1), Stuck MW(1), Watson JN(1), Naash MI(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Houston, Houston, TX,
USA.

Mutations in peripherin 2 (PRPH2), also known as retinal degeneration slow/RDS,
lead to various retinal degenerations including retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and
macular/pattern dystrophy (MD/PD). PRPH2-associated disease is often
characterized by a phenotypic variability even within families carrying the same
mutation, raising interest in potential modifiers. PRPH2 oligomerizes with its
homologue rod outer segment (OS) membrane protein 1 (ROM1), and non-pathogenic
PRPH2/ROM1 mutations, when present together, lead to digenic RP. We asked
whether ROM1 could modify the phenotype of a PRPH2 mutation associated with a
high degree of intrafamilial phenotypic heterogeneity: Y141C. In vitro,
Y141C-Prph2 showed signs of retention in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), however
co-expression with Rom1 rescued this phenotype. In the heterozygous Y141C
knockin mouse model (Prph2Y/+), Y141C-Prph2 and Rom1 formed abnormal complexes
but were present at normal levels. Abnormal complexes were eliminated in the
absence of Rom1 (Prph2Y/+/Rom1-/-) and total Prph2 levels were reduced to those
found in the haploinsufficient Prph2+/- RP model. The biochemical changes had
functional and structural consequences; while Prph2Y/+ animals exhibited a
cone-rod electroretinogram defect, Prph2Y/+/Rom1-/- animals displayed a
rod-dominant phenotype and OSs similar to those seen in the Prph2+/-. These data
show that ablation of Rom1 results in the conversion of an MD/PD phenotype
characterized by cone functional defects and the formation of abnormal
Prph2/Rom1 complexes to an RP phenotype characterized by rod-dominant functional
defects and reductions in total Prph2 protein. Thus one method by which ROM1 may
act as a disease modifier is by contributing to the large variability in
PRPH2-associated disease phenotypes.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddw408
PMCID: PMC6075606
PMID: 28053051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
