---
reference_id: "PMID:29157612"
title: TAFRO Syndrome.
authors:
- Igawa T
- Sato Y
journal: Hematol Oncol Clin North Am
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.hoc.2017.09.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TAFRO Syndrome.
**Authors:** Igawa T, Sato Y
**Journal:** Hematol Oncol Clin North Am (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hoc.2017.09.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hoc.2017.09.009)

## Content

1. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2018 Feb;32(1):107-118. doi: 
10.1016/j.hoc.2017.09.009.

TAFRO Syndrome.

Igawa T(1), Sato Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kita-ku, Okayama 
700-8558, Japan.
(2)Department of Pathology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kita-ku, Okayama 
700-8558, Japan; Division of Pathophysiology, Okayama University Graduate School 
of Health Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kita-ku, Okayama 700-8558, Japan. 
Electronic address: satou-y@okayama-u.ac.jp.

TAFRO syndrome is a newly recognized variant of idiopathic multicentric 
Castleman disease (iMCD) that involves a constellation of syndromes: 
thrombocytopenia (T), anasarca (A), fever (F), reticulin fibrosis (R), and 
organomegaly (O). Thrombocytopenia and severe anasarca accompanied by relatively 
low serum immunoglobulin levels are characteristic clinical findings of TAFRO 
syndrome that are not present in iMCD-not otherwise specified (iMCD-NOS). Lymph 
node biopsy is recommended to exclude other diseases and to diagnose TAFRO 
syndrome, which reveals characteristic histopathological findings similar to 
hyaline vascular-type CD. TAFRO syndrome follows a more aggressive course, 
compared with iMCD-NOS, and there is no standard treatment.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hoc.2017.09.009
PMID: 29157612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]