---
reference_id: "PMID:30855338"
title: "CADASIL: new advances in basic science and clinical perspectives."
authors:
- Ferrante EA
- Cudrici CD
- Boehm M
journal: Curr Opin Hematol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000497
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CADASIL: new advances in basic science and clinical perspectives.
**Authors:** Ferrante EA, Cudrici CD, Boehm M
**Journal:** Curr Opin Hematol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOH.0000000000000497](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOH.0000000000000497)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Hematol. 2019 May;26(3):193-198. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000497.

CADASIL: new advances in basic science and clinical perspectives.

Ferrante EA(1), Cudrici CD, Boehm M.

Author information:
(1)National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Recent advances in genetic evaluation improved the 
identification of several variants in the NOTCH3 gene causing Cerebral Autosomal 
Dominant Arteriopathy with Subcortical Infarcts and Leukoencephalopathy 
(CADASIL). Despite improved diagnosis, the disease mechanism remains an elusive 
target and an increasing number of scientific/clinical groups are investigating 
CADASIL to better understand it. The purpose of this review is to summarize the 
current knowledge in CADASIL.
RECENT FINDINGS: CADASIL is a genotypically and phenotypically diverse condition 
involving multiple molecular systems affecting small blood vessels. Cerebral 
white matter changes observed by MRI are a key CADASIL characteristic in young 
adult patients often before severe symptoms and trigger NOTCH3 genetic testing. 
NOTCH3 mutation locations are highly variable, correlate to disease severity and 
consistently affect the cysteine balance within extracellular Notch3. Granular 
osmiophilic material deposits around blood vessels are also a unique CADASIL 
feature and appear to have a role in sequestering proteins that are essential 
for blood vessel homeostasis. As potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets 
are being actively investigated, neurofilament light chain can be detected in 
patient serum and may be a promising circulating biomarker.
SUMMARY: CADASIL is a complex, devastating disease with unknown mechanism and no 
treatment options. As we increase our understanding of CADASIL, translational 
research bridging basic science and clinical findings needs to drive biomarker 
and therapeutic target discovery.

DOI: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000497
PMCID: PMC7672534
PMID: 30855338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts of 
interest.