---
reference_id: "PMID:37461299"
title: "Prodromal dementia with Lewy bodies in REM sleep behavior disorder: A multicenter study."
authors:
- Joza S
- Hu MT
- Jung KY
- Kunz D
- Arnaldi D
- Lee JY
- Ferini-Strambi L
- Antelmi E
- Sixel-Döring F
- De Cock VC
- Montplaisir JY
- Welch J
- Kim HJ
- Bes F
- Mattioli P
- Woo KA
- Marelli S
- Plazzi G
- Mollenhauer B
- Pelletier A
- Razzaque J
- Sunwoo JS
- Girtler N
- Trenkwalder C
- Gagnon JF
- Postuma RB
- International REM Sleep Behavior Disorder Study Group
journal: Alzheimers Dement
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/alz.13386
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prodromal dementia with Lewy bodies in REM sleep behavior disorder: A multicenter study.
**Authors:** Joza S, Hu MT, Jung KY, Kunz D, Arnaldi D, Lee JY, Ferini-Strambi L, Antelmi E, Sixel-Döring F, De Cock VC, Montplaisir JY, Welch J, Kim HJ, Bes F, Mattioli P, Woo KA, Marelli S, Plazzi G, Mollenhauer B, Pelletier A, Razzaque J, Sunwoo JS, Girtler N, Trenkwalder C, Gagnon JF, Postuma RB, International REM Sleep Behavior Disorder Study Group
**Journal:** Alzheimers Dement (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/alz.13386](https://doi.org/10.1002/alz.13386)

## Content

1. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Jan;20(1):91-102. doi: 10.1002/alz.13386. Epub 2023
Jul  17.

Prodromal dementia with Lewy bodies in REM sleep behavior disorder: A 
multicenter study.

Joza S(1), Hu MT(2), Jung KY(3), Kunz D(4), Arnaldi D(5)(6), Lee JY(7), 
Ferini-Strambi L(8), Antelmi E(9), Sixel-Döring F(10)(11), De Cock VC(12)(13), 
Montplaisir JY(14)(15), Welch J(2), Kim HJ(3), Bes F(4), Mattioli P(5), Woo 
KA(7), Marelli S(8), Plazzi G(16)(17), Mollenhauer B(10)(11), Pelletier 
A(1)(14), Razzaque J(2), Sunwoo JS(18), Girtler N(5)(6), Trenkwalder C(11)(19), 
Gagnon JF(14)(15), Postuma RB(1)(14); International REM Sleep Behavior Disorder 
Study Group(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Montreal Neurological Institute, Montreal, Canada.
(2)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Division of Neurology and 
Oxford Parkinson's Disease Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)Department of Neurology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 
National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Clinic for Sleep & Chronomedicine, St. Hedwig-Krankenhaus, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal 
and Child Health (DINOGMI), Clinical Neurology, University of Genoa, Genoa, 
Italy.
(6)IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy.
(7)Department of Neurology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 
Metropolitan Government-Seoul National University Boramae Medical Center, Seoul, 
South Korea.
(8)Sleep Disorders Center, Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.
(9)DIMI Department of Engineering and Medicine of Innovation, University of 
Verona, Verona, Italy.
(10)Department of Neurology and Section on Clinical Neuroscience, Philipps 
University Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(11)Paracelsus Elena Klinik, Centre for Movement Disorders, Kassel, Germany.
(12)EuroMov Digital Health in Motion, University of Montpellier, IMT Mines Ales, 
Montpellier, France.
(13)Department of Neurology and Sleep, Beau Soleil Clinic, Montpellier, France.
(14)Centre d'Études Avancées en Médecine du Sommeil, Hôpital du Sacré-Cœur de 
Montréal, Montréal, Quebec, Canada.
(15)Department of Psychology, Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, Quebec, 
Canada.
(16)IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(17)Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural Sciences, University of 
Modena and Reggio-Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(18)Department of Neurology, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(19)Department of Neurosurgery, University Medical Center Goettingen, Göttingen, 
Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Isolated/idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder 
(iRBD) is a powerful early predictor of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and 
Parkinson's disease (PD). This provides an opportunity to directly observe the 
evolution of prodromal DLB and to identify which cognitive variables are the 
strongest predictors of evolving dementia.
METHODS: IRBD participants (n = 754) from 10 centers of the International RBD 
Study Group underwent annual neuropsychological assessment. Competing risk 
regression analysis determined optimal predictors of dementia. Linear 
mixed-effect models determined the annual progression of neuropsychological 
testing.
RESULTS: Reduced attention and executive function, particularly performance on 
the Trail Making Test Part B, were the strongest identifiers of early DLB. In 
phenoconverters, the onset of cognitive decline began up to 10 years prior to 
phenoconversion. Changes in verbal memory best differentiated between DLB and PD 
subtypes.
DISCUSSION: In iRBD, attention and executive dysfunction strongly predict 
dementia and begin declining several years prior to phenoconversion.
HIGHLIGHTS: Cognitive decline in iRBD begins up to 10 years prior to 
phenoconversion. Attention and executive dysfunction are the strongest 
predictors of dementia in iRBD. Decline in episodic memory best distinguished 
dementia-first from parkinsonism-first phenoconversion.

© 2023 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.13386
PMCID: PMC10917000
PMID: 37461299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
Author disclosures are available in the supporting information.