---
reference_id: "PMID:28676141"
title: "HLA-DRB1*15 association with multiple sclerosis is confirmed in a multigenerational Italian family."
authors:
- Mosca L
- Mantero V
- Penco S
- La Mantia L
- De Benedetti S
- Marazzi MR
- Spreafico C
- Erminio C
- Grassi L
- Lando G
- Zagaria M
- Agostoni E
- Protti A
journal: Funct Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.11138/fneur/2017.32.2.083
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HLA-DRB1*15 association with multiple sclerosis is confirmed in a multigenerational Italian family.
**Authors:** Mosca L, Mantero V, Penco S, La Mantia L, De Benedetti S, Marazzi MR, Spreafico C, Erminio C, Grassi L, Lando G, Zagaria M, Agostoni E, Protti A
**Journal:** Funct Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.11138/fneur/2017.32.2.083](https://doi.org/10.11138/fneur/2017.32.2.083)

## Content

1. Funct Neurol. 2017 Apr/Jun;32(2):83-88. doi: 10.11138/fneur/2017.32.2.083.

HLA-DRB1*15 association with multiple sclerosis is confirmed in a 
multigenerational Italian family.

Mosca L, Mantero V, Penco S, La Mantia L, De Benedetti S, Marazzi MR, Spreafico 
C, Erminio C, Grassi L, Lando G, Zagaria M, Agostoni E, Protti A.

Environmental and genetic factors seem to play a pathogenetic role in multiple 
sclerosis (MS). The genetic component is partly suggested by familial 
aggregation of cases; however, MS families with affected subjects over different 
generations have rarely been described. The aim of this study was to report 
clinical and genetic features of a multigenerational MS family and to perform a 
review of the literature on this topic. We describe a multigenerational Italian 
family with six individuals affected by MS, showing different clinical and 
neuroradiological findings. HLA-DRB1* typing revealed the presence of the 
DRB1*15:01 allele in all the MS cases and in 4/5 non-affected subjects. Reports 
on six multigenerational MS families have previously been published, giving 
similar results. The HLA-DRB1*15:01 allele was confirmed to be linked to MS 
disease in this family; moreover, its presence in non-affected subjects suggests 
the involvement of other susceptibility factors in the development and 
expression of the disease, in accordance with the complex disease model now 
attributed to MS.

DOI: 10.11138/fneur/2017.32.2.083
PMCID: PMC5507157
PMID: 28676141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]