---
reference_id: "PMID:32027476"
title: Aymé-Gripp Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Amudhavalli SM
- Gadea R
- Gripp K
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aymé-Gripp Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Amudhavalli SM, Gadea R, Gripp K

## Content

1. Aymé-Gripp Syndrome.

Amudhavalli SM(1), Gadea R(1), Gripp K(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2020 Feb 6.

Author information:
(1)Children's Mercy Hospitals and Clinics, Kansas City, Missouri
(2)AI duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, Delaware

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Aymé-Gripp syndrome is classically defined as the 
triad of bilateral early cataracts, sensorineural hearing loss, and 
characteristic facial features in combination with neurodevelopmental 
abnormalities. The facial features are often described as "Down syndrome-like" 
and include brachycephaly, flat facial appearance, short nose, long philtrum, 
narrow mouth, and low-set and posteriorly rotated ears. Hearing loss is often 
congenital. Other features may include postnatal short stature, seizure 
disorder, nonspecific brain abnormalities on head imaging, skeletal 
abnormalities, and joint limitations. A subset of individuals have been found to 
have pericarditis or pericardial effusion during the neonatal or infantile 
period. All affected individuals have had developmental delay, but the degree of 
cognitive impairment is extremely variable. Other features including 
gastrointestinal and endocrine abnormalities, ectodermal dysplasia (i.e., nail 
dystrophy and mammary gland hypoplasia), dental anomalies, and chronic 
glomerulopathy with proteinuria have been reported in rare affected individuals.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Aymé-Gripp syndrome is established in a 
proband with cataracts, sensorineural hearing loss, and suggestive facial 
features and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in a specific region of MAF 
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is symptomatic and ideally 
involves multidisciplinary care. Hearing aids or cochlear implant for 
sensorineural hearing loss; surgical intervention and eye glasses for cataracts 
and refractive errors, respectively; physical therapy for milder joint 
limitations; hip replacement for those with chondrolysis; standard therapy for 
developmental delay / cognitive impairment, seizure disorder, scoliosis, 
congenital heart defects / pericardial issues, oligodontia, and hypothyroidism. 
Surveillance: Dental evaluation every six months; assessment for new neurologic 
manifestations, progressive joint restriction in major joints, and developmental 
and educational needs at each visit; clinical examination for scoliosis at each 
visit until skeletal maturity; at least annual audiology and ophthalmology 
evaluations; assessment of thyroid function as clinically indicated.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Aymé-Gripp syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant 
manner. Almost all individuals reported to date have been simplex cases (i.e., a 
single occurrence in a family) resulting from a de novo pathogenic variant. Once 
the causative genetic alteration has been identified in the proband, parental 
testing may be offered. Each child of an individual with Aymé-Gripp syndrome has 
a 50% chance of inheriting the MAF pathogenic variant. Prenatal diagnosis for 
pregnancies at increased risk is possible if the pathogenic variant in an 
affected family member is known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 32027476