---
reference_id: "PMID:37547537"
title: Effect of Immunosuppressive Treatments on Kidney Outcomes After Gross Hematuria-Related Acute Kidney Injury in Older Patients With IgA Nephropathy.
authors:
- Sevillano AM
- Caravaca-Fontán F
- Cordero Garcia-Galan L
- Fernandez-Juarez G
- Lopez-Revuelta K
- Guzmán DA
- Martín-Reyes G
- Quintana LF
- Rodas LM
- Sanchez de la Nieta MD
- Rabasco C
- Espinosa M
- Diaz-Encarnación M
- San Miguel L
- Barrios C
- Rodriguez E
- Garcia P
- Valera A
- Peña JK
- Shabaka A
- Velo M
- Sierra M
- Gonzalez F
- Fernandez-Reyes MJ
- Heras M
- Delgado P
- Gutierrez E
- Moreno JA
- Praga M
- Spanish Group for the Study of Glomerular Diseases (GLOSEN)
journal: Kidney Int Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ekir.2023.05.027
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of Immunosuppressive Treatments on Kidney Outcomes After Gross Hematuria-Related Acute Kidney Injury in Older Patients With IgA Nephropathy.
**Authors:** Sevillano AM, Caravaca-Fontán F, Cordero Garcia-Galan L, Fernandez-Juarez G, Lopez-Revuelta K, Guzmán DA, Martín-Reyes G, Quintana LF, Rodas LM, Sanchez de la Nieta MD, Rabasco C, Espinosa M, Diaz-Encarnación M, San Miguel L, Barrios C, Rodriguez E, Garcia P, Valera A, Peña JK, Shabaka A, Velo M, Sierra M, Gonzalez F, Fernandez-Reyes MJ, Heras M, Delgado P, Gutierrez E, Moreno JA, Praga M, Spanish Group for the Study of Glomerular Diseases (GLOSEN)
**Journal:** Kidney Int Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ekir.2023.05.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ekir.2023.05.027)

## Content

1. Kidney Int Rep. 2023 Jun 5;8(8):1596-1604. doi: 10.1016/j.ekir.2023.05.027. 
eCollection 2023 Aug.

Effect of Immunosuppressive Treatments on Kidney Outcomes After Gross 
Hematuria-Related Acute Kidney Injury in Older Patients With IgA Nephropathy.

Sevillano AM(1), Caravaca-Fontán F(2), Cordero Garcia-Galan L(1), 
Fernandez-Juarez G(3), Lopez-Revuelta K(3), Guzmán DA(4), Martín-Reyes G(4), 
Quintana LF(5), Rodas LM(5), Sanchez de la Nieta MD(6), Rabasco C(7), Espinosa 
M(7), Diaz-Encarnación M(8), San Miguel L(8), Barrios C(9), Rodriguez E(9), 
Garcia P(10), Valera A(10), Peña JK(11), Shabaka A(3), Velo M(12), Sierra M(13), 
Gonzalez F(14), Fernandez-Reyes MJ(15), Heras M(15), Delgado P(16), Gutierrez 
E(1), Moreno JA(17), Praga M(2)(18); Spanish Group for the Study of Glomerular 
Diseases (GLOSEN).

Collaborators: Sevillano AM, Caravaca-Fontán F, Garcia-Galan LC, 
Fernandez-Juarez G, Lopez-Revuelta K, Guzmán DA, Martín-Reyes G, Quintana LF, 
Rodas LM, Sanchez de la Nieta MD, Rabasco C, Espinosa M, Diaz-Encarnación M, San 
Miguel L, Barrios C, Rodriguez E, Garcia P, Valera A, Peña JK, Shabaka A, Velo 
M, Sierra M, Gonzalez F, Fernandez-Reyes MJ, Heras M, Delgado P, Gutierrez E, 
Moreno JA, Praga M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, 
Spain.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Instituto de Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre 
(imas12), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Hospital Universitario Fundación Alcorcón, 
Alcorcón, Spain.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Hospital Regional Universitario de Málaga, Malaga, 
Spain.
(5)Department of Nephrology, Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Department of Nephrology, Hospital General Universitario de Ciudad Real, 
Ciudad Real, Spain.
(7)Department of Nephrology, Hospital Universitario Reina Sofia, Cordoba, Spain.
(8)Department of Nephrology, Fundación Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Department of Nephrology, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Department of Nephrology, Hospital Virgen de la Victoria, Malaga, Spain.
(11)Department of Nephrology, Hospital Universitario Príncipe de Asturias, 
Alcalá de Henares, Spain.
(12)Department of Nephrology, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
(13)Department of Nephrology, Hospital San Pedro, Logroño, Spain.
(14)Department of Nephrology, Hospital Universitario Dr. Negrin, Gran Canaria, 
Spain.
(15)Department of Nephrology, Hospital General de Segovia, Segovia, Spain.
(16)Department of Nephrology, Hospital Universitario de Canarias, Santa Cruz de 
Tenerife, Spain.
(17)Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, University of 
Cordoba, Maimonides Biomedical Research Institute of Cordoba (IMIBIC), UGC 
Nefrología, Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía, Córdoba, Spain.
(18)Medicine Department, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Macroscopic hematuria (MH) bouts, frequently accompanied by acute 
kidney injury (AKI-MH) are one of the most common presentations of IgA 
nephropathy (IgAN) in the elderly. Immunosuppressive therapies are used in 
clinical practice; however, no studies have analyzed their efficacy on kidney 
outcomes.
METHODS: This is a retrospective, multicenter study of a cohort of patients 
aged ≥50 years with biopsy-proven IgAN presenting with AKI-MH. Outcomes were 
complete, partial, or no recovery of kidney function at 1 year after AKI-MH, and 
kidney survival at 1, 2, and 5 years. Propensity score matching (PSM) analysis 
was applied to balance baseline differences between patients treated with 
immunosuppression and those not treated with immunosuppression.
RESULTS: The study group consisted of 91 patients with a mean age of 65 ± 15 
years, with a mean follow-up of 59 ± 36 months. Intratubular red blood cell 
(RBC) casts and acute tubular necrosis were found in all kidney biopsies. The 
frequency of endocapillary hypercellularity and crescents were low. 
Immunosuppressive therapies (corticosteroids alone or combined with 
mycophenolate mofetil or cyclophosphamide) were prescribed in 52 (57%) patients, 
whereas 39 (43%) received conservative treatment. There were no significant 
differences in the proportion of patients with complete, partial, or no recovery 
of kidney function at 1 year between patients treated with immunosuppression and 
those not treated with immunosuppression (29% vs. 36%, 30.8% vs. 20.5% and 40.4 
% vs. 43.6%, respectively). Kidney survival at 1, 3, and 5 years was similar 
among treated and untreated patients (85% vs. 81%, 77% vs. 76% and 72% vs. 66%, 
respectively). Despite the PSM analysis, no significant differences were 
observed in kidney survival between the two groups. Fourteen patients (27%) 
treated with immunosuppression had serious adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: Immunosuppressive treatments do not modify the unfavorable 
prognosis of patients with IgAN who are aged ≥50 years presenting with AKI-MH, 
and are frequently associated with severe complications.

© 2023 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ekir.2023.05.027
PMCID: PMC10403672
PMID: 37547537