---
reference_id: "PMID:25733580"
title: Correction of the sickle cell disease mutation in human hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells.
authors:
- Hoban MD
- Cost GJ
- Mendel MC
- Romero Z
- Kaufman ML
- Joglekar AV
- Ho M
- Lumaquin D
- Gray D
- Lill GR
- Cooper AR
- Urbinati F
- Senadheera S
- Zhu A
- Liu PQ
- Paschon DE
- Zhang L
- Rebar EJ
- Wilber A
- Wang X
- Gregory PD
- Holmes MC
- Reik A
- Hollis RP
- Kohn DB
journal: Blood
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-12-615948
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Correction of the sickle cell disease mutation in human hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells.
**Authors:** Hoban MD, Cost GJ, Mendel MC, Romero Z, Kaufman ML, Joglekar AV, Ho M, Lumaquin D, Gray D, Lill GR, Cooper AR, Urbinati F, Senadheera S, Zhu A, Liu PQ, Paschon DE, Zhang L, Rebar EJ, Wilber A, Wang X, Gregory PD, Holmes MC, Reik A, Hollis RP, Kohn DB
**Journal:** Blood (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2014-12-615948](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2014-12-615948)

## Content

1. Blood. 2015 Apr 23;125(17):2597-604. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-12-615948. Epub 
2015 Mar 2.

Correction of the sickle cell disease mutation in human hematopoietic 
stem/progenitor cells.

Hoban MD(1), Cost GJ(2), Mendel MC(2), Romero Z(1), Kaufman ML(1), Joglekar 
AV(1), Ho M(1), Lumaquin D(1), Gray D(1), Lill GR(1), Cooper AR(3), Urbinati 
F(1), Senadheera S(1), Zhu A(2), Liu PQ(2), Paschon DE(2), Zhang L(2), Rebar 
EJ(2), Wilber A(4), Wang X(5), Gregory PD(2), Holmes MC(2), Reik A(2), Hollis 
RP(1), Kohn DB(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA;
(2)Sangamo BioSciences Inc., Richmond, CA;
(3)Molecular Biology Interdepartmental PhD Program, University of California, 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA;
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, Southern 
Illinois University School of Medicine, Springfield, IL;
(5)Department of General Internal Medicine and Health Services Research, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA; and.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA; Eli & Edythe Broad Center of 
Regenerative Medicine & Stem Cell Research, University of California, Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Apr 23;125(17):2589-90. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-03-633933.

Sickle cell disease (SCD) is characterized by a single point mutation in the 
seventh codon of the β-globin gene. Site-specific correction of the sickle 
mutation in hematopoietic stem cells would allow for permanent production of 
normal red blood cells. Using zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs) designed to flank the 
sickle mutation, we demonstrate efficient targeted cleavage at the β-globin 
locus with minimal off-target modification. By co-delivering a homologous donor 
template (either an integrase-defective lentiviral vector or a DNA 
oligonucleotide), high levels of gene modification were achieved in CD34(+) 
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Modified cells maintained their ability 
to engraft NOD/SCID/IL2rγ(null) mice and to produce cells from multiple 
lineages, although with a reduction in the modification levels relative to the 
in vitro samples. Importantly, ZFN-driven gene correction in CD34(+) cells from 
the bone marrow of patients with SCD resulted in the production of wild-type 
hemoglobin tetramers.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2014-12-615948
PMCID: PMC4408287
PMID: 25733580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]