---
reference_id: "PMID:19327613"
title: Plasma porphobilinogen as a sensitive biomarker to monitor the clinical and therapeutic course of acute intermittent porphyria attacks.
authors:
- Sardh E
- Harper P
- Andersson DE
- Floderus Y
journal: Eur J Intern Med
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2008.06.012
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adult
- Aminolevulinic Acid/blood
- "Arginine/administration & dosage"
- "Biomarkers/blood, urine"
- "Chromatography, Ion Exchange"
- Drug Monitoring/methods
- Female
- "Glucose/administration & dosage"
- "Heme/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- Male
- "Porphobilinogen/blood, urine"
- "Porphyria, Acute Intermittent/blood, drug therapy, urine"
- Sensitivity and Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Plasma porphobilinogen as a sensitive biomarker to monitor the clinical and therapeutic course of acute intermittent porphyria attacks.
**Authors:** Sardh E, Harper P, Andersson DE, Floderus Y
**Journal:** Eur J Intern Med (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejim.2008.06.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejim.2008.06.012)

## Content

1. Eur J Intern Med. 2009 Mar;20(2):201-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2008.06.012. Epub
2008 Aug 8.

Plasma porphobilinogen as a sensitive biomarker to monitor the clinical and
therapeutic course of acute intermittent porphyria attacks.

Sardh E(1), Harper P, Andersson DE, Floderus Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm Söder
Hospital, Sweden. eliane.sardh@ki.se

BACKGROUND: Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is a metabolic disease affecting
hepatic heme biosynthesis. The clinical course in overt disease is characterized
by acute attacks of neurovisceral symptoms. Treatment is based on symptomatic
relief together with carbohydrate loading and in more severe attacks heme
therapy. During an acute attack the heme precursors porphobilinogen (PBG) and
5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) are produced in high amounts by the liver and are
found in high concentrations in plasma and urine. These metabolites represent
the acute phase reactants confirming an ongoing attack and are used to evaluate
therapeutic measures. The aim of this study was to measure PBG and ALA in plasma
and urine during an acute attack and to match the biochemical pattern with the
clinical and therapeutical course.
METHODS: Three consecutive AIP patients were included during four acute attacks.
Plasma PBG and ALA were measured by a LC-MS method and in urine by ion-exchange
chromatography. The patients received symptomatic and glucose treatment at
admission to hospital, and four days later, if necessary, heme therapy.
RESULTS: In the three attacks that required heme therapy, plasma PBG
concentrations had further increased after admission (p=0.01). In the patient
that did not require heme therapy, plasma PBG had decreased after admission.
CONCLUSIONS: Biochemical monitoring of an acute attack was more accurately
reflected by plasma PBG than plasma ALA or urinary PBG and ALA. Glucose
administration, in contrast to heme therapy, was not sufficient to achieve
clinical and biochemical remission in the more serious attacks.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejim.2008.06.012
PMID: 19327613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
