---
reference_id: "PMID:24677493"
title: "Autosomal dominant brachyolmia in a large Swedish family: phenotypic spectrum and natural course."
authors:
- Grigelioniene G
- Geiberger S
- Horemuzova E
- Moström E
- Jäntti N
- Neumeyer L
- Åström E
- Nordenskjöld M
- Nordgren A
- Mäkitie O
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36502
keywords:
- Adult
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnosis, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Radiography
- "Spine/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- TRPV Cation Channels/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal dominant brachyolmia in a large Swedish family: phenotypic spectrum and natural course.
**Authors:** Grigelioniene G, Geiberger S, Horemuzova E, Moström E, Jäntti N, Neumeyer L, Åström E, Nordenskjöld M, Nordgren A, Mäkitie O
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36502](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36502)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Jul;164A(7):1635-41. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36502. Epub
2014  Mar 26.

Autosomal dominant brachyolmia in a large Swedish family: phenotypic spectrum 
and natural course.

Grigelioniene G(1), Geiberger S, Horemuzova E, Moström E, Jäntti N, Neumeyer L, 
Åström E, Nordenskjöld M, Nordgren A, Mäkitie O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden; Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University 
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

Autosomal dominant brachyolmia (Type 3, OMIM #113500) belongs to a group of 
skeletal dysplasias caused by mutations in the transient receptor potential 
cation channel, subfamily V, member 4 (TRPV4) gene, encoding a Ca++-permeable, 
non-selective cation channel. The disorder is characterized by disproportionate 
short stature with short trunk, scoliosis and platyspondyly. The phenotypic 
variability and long-term natural course remain inadequately characterized. The 
purpose of this study was to describe a large Swedish family with brachyolmia 
type 3 due to a heterozygous TRPV4 mutation c.1847G>A (p.R616Q) in 11 
individuals. The mutation has previously been detected in another family with 
autosomal dominant brachyolmia [Rock et al., 2008]. Review of hospital records 
and patient assessments indicated that clinical symptoms of brachyolmia became 
evident by school age with chronic pain in the spine and hips; radiographic 
changes were evident earlier. Growth was not affected during early childhood but 
deteriorated with age in some patients due to increasing spinal involvement. 
Affected individuals had a wide range of subjective symptoms with chronic pain 
in the extremities and the spine, and paresthesias. Our findings indicate that 
autosomal dominant brachyolmia may be associated with significant long-term 
morbidity, as seen in this family.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36502
PMID: 24677493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]