---
reference_id: "PMID:34597532"
title: "Etiology, Early Diagnosis and Proper Treatment of Silent Sinus Syndrome Based on Review of the Literature and Own Experience."
authors:
- Stryjewska-Makuch G
- Goroszkiewicz K
- Szymocha J
- Lisowska G
- Misiołek M
journal: J Oral Maxillofac Surg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.joms.2021.08.166
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Early Diagnosis
- "Enophthalmos/diagnosis, etiology, surgery"
- Humans
- "Maxillary Sinus/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- "Paranasal Sinus Diseases/diagnosis, etiology, surgery"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Etiology, Early Diagnosis and Proper Treatment of Silent Sinus Syndrome Based on Review of the Literature and Own Experience.
**Authors:** Stryjewska-Makuch G, Goroszkiewicz K, Szymocha J, Lisowska G, Misiołek M
**Journal:** J Oral Maxillofac Surg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.joms.2021.08.166](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joms.2021.08.166)

## Content

1. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2022 Jan;80(1):113.e1-113.e8. doi: 
10.1016/j.joms.2021.08.166. Epub 2021 Sep 3.

Etiology, Early Diagnosis and Proper Treatment of Silent Sinus Syndrome Based on 
Review of the Literature and Own Experience.

Stryjewska-Makuch G(1), Goroszkiewicz K(2), Szymocha J(3), Lisowska G(4), 
Misiołek M(5).

Author information:
(1)ENT and Allergology Specialist, Department of Laryngology and Laryngological 
Oncology, Upper Silesian Medical Centre, Independent Public Research Hospital N° 
7 of Silesian Medical University, Katowice, Poland.
(2)Resident, Department of Laryngology and Laryngological Oncology, Upper 
Silesian Medical Centre, Independent Public Research Hospital N° 7 of Silesian 
Medical University, Katowice, Poland; Resident, Department of 
Otorhinolaryngology and Oncological Laryngology in Zabrze, Medical University of 
Silesia, Katowice, Poland. Electronic address: karolina.goroszkiewicz@gmail.com.
(3)Resident, Department of Laryngology and Laryngological Oncology, Upper 
Silesian Medical Centre, Independent Public Research Hospital N° 7 of Silesian 
Medical University, Katowice, Poland.
(4)Professor, Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Oncological Laryngology in 
Zabrze, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
(5)Professor, Department Head, Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Oncological 
Laryngology in Zabrze, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.

PURPOSE: The authors' aim was to review the literature in terms of the etiology 
of the syndrome, the frequency of Silent Sinus Syndrome (SSS) and surgical 
procedure, as well as to present their own experience.
METHODS: The authors used PubMed, Medline, and Science Direct websites to find 
and review the most significant papers related to SSS. The case reports of SSS 
published between 2010 and 2020 were reviewed. A retrospective case review of 8 
patients with SSS treated at the authors' departments was done.
RESULTS: The silent sinus syndrome has been reported in both children and 
adults. It is relatively rare and should be differentiated from congenital sinus 
hypoplasia or atelectasis. It most often affects the maxillary sinus. SSS is 
usually diagnosed when facial asymmetry or vision problems occur. Late diagnosis 
requires endoscopic sinus surgery, involving orbital wall reconstruction. The 
etiology of the syndrome, including the role of bacterial flora found in the 
sinuses, is unclear.
CONCLUSION: Early diagnosis of SSS enables avoiding orbital complications and 
limits surgical intervention to endoscopic surgery. Further research into 
bacteriology may help to understand the pathophysiology of the silent sinus 
syndrome.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joms.2021.08.166
PMID: 34597532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]