---
reference_id: "PMID:27466185"
title: Acadian variant of Fanconi syndrome is caused by mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I deficiency due to a non-coding mutation in complex I assembly factor NDUFAF6.
authors:
- Hartmannová H
- Piherová L
- Tauchmannová K
- Kidd K
- Acott PD
- Crocker JF
- Oussedik Y
- Mallet M
- Hodaňová K
- Stránecký V
- Přistoupilová A
- Barešová V
- Jedličková I
- Živná M
- Sovová J
- Hůlková H
- Robins V
- Vrbacký M
- Pecina P
- Kaplanová V
- Houštěk J
- Mráček T
- Thibeault Y
- Bleyer AJ
- Kmoch S
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw245
keywords:
- Adult
- Alleles
- Canada
- Chromosome Mapping
- Electron Transport Complex I/genetics
- Exome/genetics
- "Fanconi Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Kidney/metabolism, pathology"
- "Lung/metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mitochondria/metabolism, pathology"
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acadian variant of Fanconi syndrome is caused by mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I deficiency due to a non-coding mutation in complex I assembly factor NDUFAF6.
**Authors:** Hartmannová H, Piherová L, Tauchmannová K, Kidd K, Acott PD, Crocker JF, Oussedik Y, Mallet M, Hodaňová K, Stránecký V, Přistoupilová A, Barešová V, Jedličková I, Živná M, Sovová J, Hůlková H, Robins V, Vrbacký M, Pecina P, Kaplanová V, Houštěk J, Mráček T, Thibeault Y, Bleyer AJ, Kmoch S
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddw245](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddw245)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Sep 15;25(18):4062-4079. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw245. Epub
2016  Jul 27.

Acadian variant of Fanconi syndrome is caused by mitochondrial respiratory chain 
complex I deficiency due to a non-coding mutation in complex I assembly factor 
NDUFAF6.

Hartmannová H(1), Piherová L(1), Tauchmannová K(2), Kidd K(3), Acott PD(4)(5), 
Crocker JF(4)(5), Oussedik Y(6), Mallet M(6), Hodaňová K(1), Stránecký V(1), 
Přistoupilová A(1), Barešová V(1), Jedličková I(1), Živná M(1), Sovová J(1), 
Hůlková H(1), Robins V(3), Vrbacký M(2), Pecina P(2), Kaplanová V(2), Houštěk 
J(2), Mráček T(2), Thibeault Y(7), Bleyer AJ(3), Kmoch S(8)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, 
Charles University in Prague, 120 00 Prague 2, Czech Republic.
(2)Institute of Physiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Vídeňská 1083, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Section on Nephrology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Medical Center Blvd, 
Winston-Salem, NC, USA.
(4)Section of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Dalhousie 
University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(5)IWK Health Center, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(6)Department of Pathology.
(7)Section of Pulmonology.
(8)Institute for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, 
Charles University in Prague, 120 00 Prague 2, Czech Republic 
skmoch@lf1.cuni.cz.

The Acadian variant of Fanconi Syndrome refers to a specific condition 
characterized by generalized proximal tubular dysfunction from birth, slowly 
progressive chronic kidney disease and pulmonary interstitial fibrosis. This 
condition occurs only in Acadians, a founder population in Nova Scotia, Canada. 
The genetic and molecular basis of this disease is unknown. We carried out whole 
exome and genome sequencing and found that nine affected individuals were 
homozygous for the ultra-rare non-coding variant chr8:96046914 T > C; 
rs575462405, whereas 13 healthy siblings were either heterozygotes or lacked the 
mutant allele. This variant is located in intron 2 of NDUFAF6 (NM_152416.3; 
c.298-768 T > C), 37 base pairs upstream from an alternative splicing variant in 
NDUFAF6 chr8:96046951 A > G; rs74395342 (c.298-731 A > G). NDUFAF6 encodes 
NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase complex assembly factor 6, also known as C8ORF38. 
We found that rs575462405-either alone or in combination with rs74395342-affects 
splicing and synthesis of NDUFAF6 isoforms. Affected kidney and lung showed 
specific loss of the mitochondria-located NDUFAF6 isoform and ultrastructural 
characteristics of mitochondrial dysfunction. Accordingly, affected tissues had 
defects in mitochondrial respiration and complex I biogenesis that were 
corrected with NDUFAF6 cDNA transfection. Our results demonstrate that the 
Acadian variant of Fanconi Syndrome results from mitochondrial respiratory chain 
complex I deficiency. This information may be used in the diagnosis and 
prevention of this disease in individuals and families of Acadian descent and 
broadens the spectrum of the clinical presentation of mitochondrial diseases, 
respiratory chain defects and defects of complex I specifically.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddw245
PMID: 27466185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]