---
reference_id: "PMID:3113717"
title: "Small round blue cell sarcoma of bone mimicking atypical Ewing's sarcoma with neuroectodermal features. An analysis of five cases with immunohistochemical and electron microscopic support."
authors:
- Llombart-Bosch A
- Lacombe MJ
- Contesso G
- Peydro-Olaya A
journal: Cancer
year: '1987'
doi: "10.1002/1097-0142(19871001)60:7<1570::aid-cncr2820600727>3.0.co;2-r"
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal"
- "Antigens, Differentiation, T-Lymphocyte"
- "Antigens, Surface/analysis"
- Bone Neoplasms/pathology
- Glycogen/analysis
- Histocytochemistry
- Immunologic Techniques
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- "Microscopy, Electron, Scanning"
- Neuroblastoma/pathology
- "Neuroectodermal Tumors, Primitive, Peripheral/pathology"
- Peripheral Nervous System Neoplasms/pathology
- Phosphopyruvate Hydratase/analysis
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Small round blue cell sarcoma of bone mimicking atypical Ewing's sarcoma with neuroectodermal features. An analysis of five cases with immunohistochemical and electron microscopic support.
**Authors:** Llombart-Bosch A, Lacombe MJ, Contesso G, Peydro-Olaya A
**Journal:** Cancer (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1097-0142(19871001)60:7<1570::aid-cncr2820600727>3.0.co;2-r](https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-0142(19871001)60:7<1570::aid-cncr2820600727>3.0.co;2-r)

## Content

1. Cancer. 1987 Oct 1;60(7):1570-82. doi:
10.1002/1097-0142(19871001)60:7<1570::aid-cncr2820600727>3.0.co;2-r.

Small round blue cell sarcoma of bone mimicking atypical Ewing's sarcoma with
neuroectodermal features. An analysis of five cases with immunohistochemical and
electron microscopic support.

Llombart-Bosch A, Lacombe MJ, Contesso G, Peydro-Olaya A.

Ewing's sarcoma (ES) of bone may occasionally display rosette-like textures
mimicking Homer-Wright ones, as seen in neuroectodermic neoplasms
(neuroblastoma, peripheral neuroepithelioma). Of a group of 39 cases of ES,
reviewed with electron microscopic study, the authors have isolated five
atypical ES, which histologically also possessed neuroectodermic traces. These
tumors were composed of small round blue cells with rosette-like figures and
cytoplasmic glycogen. The immunohistochemical analysis showed positivity for
neuron-specific enolase (NSE) as well as for HNK-1 (leu-7) monoclonal antibody.
Electron microscopic examination confirmed the tumor cell as being of small
round type, with a dense chromatine pattern and the presence of isolated
dendritic processes, as well as synaptic-like buttons; intermediate filaments,
neurotubuli, and dense-core neurosecretory granules also were seen. Moreover, in
two cases basement-like condensations surrounded some cells. Scanning electron
microscopic study in one case confirmed the presence of rosette-like figures and
cell elongations with short dendritic projections of the cytoplasm. Clinically
and radiologically these cases showed features similar to ES of bone; one case,
located in the chest wall, had a local relapse after treatment, with the
histologic features of a pleomorphic neuroblastoma. The authors conclude that
these tumors resemble closely immature neuroepithelioma of soft tissue but,
being primary to bone, are superimposable on those described as "neuroectodermal
tumors of bone."

DOI: 10.1002/1097-0142(19871001)60:7<1570::aid-cncr2820600727>3.0.co;2-r
PMID: 3113717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
