---
reference_id: "PMID:28945198"
title: Mutations in the netrin-1 gene cause congenital mirror movements.
authors:
- Méneret A
- Franz EA
- Trouillard O
- Oliver TC
- Zagar Y
- Robertson SP
- Welniarz Q
- Gardner RJM
- Gallea C
- Srour M
- Depienne C
- Jasoni CL
- Dubacq C
- Riant F
- Lamy JC
- Morel MP
- Guérois R
- Andreani J
- Fouquet C
- Doulazmi M
- Vidailhet M
- Rouleau GA
- Brice A
- Chédotal A
- Dusart I
- Roze E
- Markie D
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1172/JCI95442
keywords:
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Conserved Sequence
- Female
- Gene Frequency
- Genetic Association Studies
- HEK293 Cells
- HeLa Cells
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Movement Disorders/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Netrin-1/genetics
- Pedigree
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the netrin-1 gene cause congenital mirror movements.
**Authors:** Méneret A, Franz EA, Trouillard O, Oliver TC, Zagar Y, Robertson SP, Welniarz Q, Gardner RJM, Gallea C, Srour M, Depienne C, Jasoni CL, Dubacq C, Riant F, Lamy JC, Morel MP, Guérois R, Andreani J, Fouquet C, Doulazmi M, Vidailhet M, Rouleau GA, Brice A, Chédotal A, Dusart I, Roze E, Markie D
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI95442](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI95442)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2017 Nov 1;127(11):3923-3936. doi: 10.1172/JCI95442. Epub 2017 
Sep 25.

Mutations in the netrin-1 gene cause congenital mirror movements.

Méneret A(1)(2), Franz EA(3), Trouillard O(1), Oliver TC(4), Zagar Y(5), 
Robertson SP(6), Welniarz Q(1)(7), Gardner RJM(6), Gallea C(1), Srour M(8)(9), 
Depienne C(1)(10)(11), Jasoni CL(12), Dubacq C(7), Riant F(13)(14), Lamy JC(1), 
Morel MP(7), Guérois R(15), Andreani J(15), Fouquet C(7), Doulazmi M(16), 
Vidailhet M(1)(2), Rouleau GA(8)(17)(18), Brice A(1)(19), Chédotal A(5), Dusart 
I(7), Roze E(1)(2), Markie D(4).

Author information:
(1)INSERM U1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Université Paris 06, 
UMR S1127, CIC-1422, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (ICM), Paris, 
France.
(2)AP-HP, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département de Neurologie, Paris, 
France.
(3)Department of Psychology and fMRIotago, , University of Otago, Dunedin, New 
Zealand.
(4)Pathology Department, Dunedin School of Medicine, University of Otago, 
Dunedin, New Zealand.
(5)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Université Paris 06, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de la 
Vision, Paris, France.
(6)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Dunedin School of Medicine, 
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(7)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Université Paris 06, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de 
Biologie Paris Seine, Neuroscience Paris Seine, Paris, France.
(8)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, and.
(9)Department of Paediatrics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(10)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie moléculaire et cellulaire (IGBMC), CNRS 
UMR 7104, INSERM U964, Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.
(11)Laboratoires de génétique, Institut de génétique médicale d'Alsace, Hôpitaux 
Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
(12)Department of Anatomy, School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Otago, 
Dunedin, New Zealand.
(13)AP-HP, Groupe hospitalier Lariboisière-Fernand Widal, Laboratoire de 
Génétique, Paris, France.
(14)INSERM, UMR S740, Université Paris 7 Denis Diderot, Paris, France.
(15)Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Université 
Paris Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, Gif sur Yvette, France.
(16)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Université Paris 06, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de 
Biologie Paris Seine, Adaptation Biologique et Vieillissement, Paris, France.
(17)Montreal Neurological Institute, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(18)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(19)AP-HP, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Fédération de Génétique, Département 
de Génétique et de Cytogénétique, Paris, France.

Netrin-1 is a secreted protein that was first identified 20 years ago as an axon 
guidance molecule that regulates midline crossing in the CNS. It plays critical 
roles in various tissues throughout development and is implicated in 
tumorigenesis and inflammation in adulthood. Despite extensive studies, no 
inherited human disease has been directly associated with mutations in NTN1, the 
gene coding for netrin-1. Here, we have identified 3 mutations in exon 7 of NTN1 
in 2 unrelated families and 1 sporadic case with isolated congenital mirror 
movements (CMM), a disorder characterized by involuntary movements of one hand 
that mirror intentional movements of the opposite hand. Given the diverse roles 
of netrin-1, the absence of manifestations other than CMM in NTN1 mutation 
carriers was unexpected. Using multimodal approaches, we discovered that the 
anatomy of the corticospinal tract (CST) is abnormal in patients with 
NTN1-mutant CMM. When expressed in HEK293 or stable HeLa cells, the 3 mutated 
netrin-1 proteins were almost exclusively detected in the intracellular 
compartment, contrary to WT netrin-1, which is detected in both intracellular 
and extracellular compartments. Since netrin-1 is a diffusible extracellular 
cue, the pathophysiology likely involves its loss of function and subsequent 
disruption of axon guidance, resulting in abnormal decussation of the CST.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI95442
PMCID: PMC5663368
PMID: 28945198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.