---
reference_id: "PMID:40528805"
title: "Pseudomembranous Colitis: Unveiling an Infrequent Culprit Beyond Clostridium difficile-A Case Report."
authors:
- Ginjupalli M
- Jayakumar J
- Bandaru P
- Kumar V
- Forlemu A
- Isaac Coss G
- Etienne D
- Reddy M
journal: J Investig Med High Impact Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1177/23247096251347401
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pseudomembranous Colitis: Unveiling an Infrequent Culprit Beyond Clostridium difficile-A Case Report.
**Authors:** Ginjupalli M, Jayakumar J, Bandaru P, Kumar V, Forlemu A, Isaac Coss G, Etienne D, Reddy M
**Journal:** J Investig Med High Impact Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1177/23247096251347401](https://doi.org/10.1177/23247096251347401)

## Content

1. J Investig Med High Impact Case Rep. 2025 Jan-Dec;13:23247096251347401. doi: 
10.1177/23247096251347401. Epub 2025 Jun 18.

Pseudomembranous Colitis: Unveiling an Infrequent Culprit Beyond Clostridium 
difficile-A Case Report.

Ginjupalli M(1), Jayakumar J(1), Bandaru P(2), Kumar V(3), Forlemu A(2), Isaac 
Coss G(4), Etienne D(2), Reddy M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The Brooklyn Hospital Centre, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, The Brooklyn Hospital Centre, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Creighton University, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Rush University Medical Centre, Chicago, IL, 
USA.

Immunotherapy-induced pseudomembranous colitis (PMC) is an uncommon but 
increasingly recognized adverse effect of immune checkpoint inhibitors, 
particularly in patients with advanced malignancies. We present a case of a 
68-year-old male with gastric adenocarcinoma undergoing treatment with 
immunotherapy and chemotherapy, who developed symptoms of PMC. Workup for 
Clostridium difficile and other common etiologies was negative. Colonoscopy 
revealed severe mucosal congestion and yellowish-green exudates, consistent with 
PMC. Based on the biopsy results and clinical presentation, after excluding 
common etiologies, immunotherapy-induced PMC was suspected. The patient 
responded to steroid therapy, with gradual improvement and a tapering regimen 
upon discharge. This case underscores the diagnostic challenges in identifying 
the etiology of PMC, particularly when it presents with diffuse involvement of 
the colon, which is an uncommon presentation for immunotherapy-related colitis. 
The overlap in clinical, endoscopic, and histopathological findings with other 
forms of colitis, such as Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) and inflammatory 
bowel disease, highlights the need for heightened awareness among clinicians. 
This case highlights the diagnostic challenges in recognizing 
immunotherapy-induced PMC, particularly with atypical, diffuse colonic 
involvement. The overlapping features with other colitis make timely diagnosis 
difficult. Further research is needed to refine diagnostic criteria and 
management strategies for immunotherapy induced colitis (IMC).

DOI: 10.1177/23247096251347401
PMCID: PMC12177235
PMID: 40528805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.