---
reference_id: "PMID:36727596"
title: Pathogenic variants in CLXN encoding the outer dynein arm docking-associated calcium-binding protein calaxin cause primary ciliary dyskinesia.
authors:
- Hjeij R
- Aprea I
- Poeta M
- Nöthe-Menchen T
- Bracht D
- Raidt J
- Honecker BI
- Dougherty GW
- Olbrich H
- Schwartz O
- Keller U
- Nüsse H
- Diderich KEM
- Vogelberg C
- Santamaria F
- Omran H
journal: Genet Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2023.100798
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenic variants in CLXN encoding the outer dynein arm docking-associated calcium-binding protein calaxin cause primary ciliary dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Hjeij R, Aprea I, Poeta M, Nöthe-Menchen T, Bracht D, Raidt J, Honecker BI, Dougherty GW, Olbrich H, Schwartz O, Keller U, Nüsse H, Diderich KEM, Vogelberg C, Santamaria F, Omran H
**Journal:** Genet Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gim.2023.100798](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gim.2023.100798)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2023 May;25(5):100798. doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2023.100798. Epub 2023
Jan  31.

Pathogenic variants in CLXN encoding the outer dynein arm docking-associated 
calcium-binding protein calaxin cause primary ciliary dyskinesia.

Hjeij R(1), Aprea I(1), Poeta M(2), Nöthe-Menchen T(1), Bracht D(1), Raidt J(1), 
Honecker BI(1), Dougherty GW(1), Olbrich H(1), Schwartz O(1), Keller U(3), Nüsse 
H(3), Diderich KEM(4), Vogelberg C(5), Santamaria F(2), Omran H(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, University Hospital Muenster, Muenster, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, University of Naples Federico 
II, Naples, Italy.
(3)Institute of Medical Physics and Biophysics, University of Muenster, 
Muenster, Germany.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Pediatric Department, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus Dresden, 
Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(6)Department of General Pediatrics, University Hospital Muenster, Muenster, 
Germany. Electronic address: Heymut.Omran@ukmuenster.de.

PURPOSE: Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a heterogeneous disorder that 
includes respiratory symptoms, laterality defects, and infertility caused by 
dysfunction of motile cilia. Most PCD-causing variants result in abnormal outer 
dynein arms (ODAs), which provide the generative force for respiratory ciliary 
beating and proper mucociliary clearance.
METHODS: In addition to studies in mouse and planaria, clinical exome sequencing 
and functional analyses in human were performed.
RESULTS: In this study, we identified homozygous pathogenic variants in CLXN 
(EFCAB1/ODAD5) in 3 individuals with laterality defects and respiratory 
symptoms. Consistently, we found that Clxn is expressed in mice left-right 
organizer. Transmission electron microscopy depicted ODA defects in distal 
ciliary axonemes. Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed absence of CLXN from 
the ciliary axonemes, absence of the ODA components DNAH5, DNAI1, and DNAI2 from 
the distal axonemes, and mislocalization or absence of DNAH9. In addition, CLXN 
was undetectable in ciliary axonemes of individuals with defects in the 
ODA-docking machinery: ODAD1, ODAD2, ODAD3, and ODAD4. Furthermore, 
SMED-EFCAB1-deficient planaria displayed ciliary dysmotility.
CONCLUSION: Our results revealed that pathogenic variants in CLXN cause PCD with 
defects in the assembly of distal ODAs in the respiratory cilia. CLXN should be 
referred to as ODA-docking complex-associated protein ODAD5.

Copyright © 2023 American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gim.2023.100798
PMID: 36727596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.