---
reference_id: "PMID:17655920"
title: "Risk of developing asthma in young children with atopic eczema: a systematic review."
authors:
- van der Hulst AE
- Klip H
- Brand PL
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2007.05.042
keywords:
- "Asthma/epidemiology, etiology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Dermatitis, Atopic/complications"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Prevalence
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk of developing asthma in young children with atopic eczema: a systematic review.
**Authors:** van der Hulst AE, Klip H, Brand PL
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2007.05.042](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2007.05.042)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007 Sep;120(3):565-9. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2007.05.042.  Epub 2007 Jul 26.

Risk of developing asthma in young children with atopic eczema: a systematic 
review.

van der Hulst AE(1), Klip H, Brand PL.

Author information:
(1)Princess Amalia Children's Clinic, Isala Klinieken, Zwolle, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: It is commonly believed that the majority of infants and young 
children with early atopic eczema will develop asthma in later childhood. This 
belief is mainly based on cross-sectional population studies. Recent evidence 
suggests a more complex relationship between early eczema and asthma.
OBJECTIVE: This systematic review was conducted to assess the risk of developing 
asthma in children with atopic eczema during the first 4 years of life.
METHODS: A sensitive search was performed to identify all prospective cohort 
studies on the topic. By pooling the eligible reports, we calculated the risk of 
developing asthma at 6 years of age or older in children with atopic eczema in 
the first 4 years of life.
RESULTS: Thirteen prospective cohort studies were included, with 4 representing 
birth cohort studies and 9 representing eczema cohort studies. The pooled odds 
ratio for the risk of asthma after eczema, compared with children without 
eczema, in birth cohort studies was 2.14 (95% CI, 1.67-2.75). The prevalence of 
asthma at the age of 6 years in eczema cohort studies was 35.8% (95% CI, 32.2% 
to 39.9%) for inpatients and 29.5% (95% CI, 28.2% to 32.7%) for a combined group 
of inpatients and outpatients.
CONCLUSION: Although there is an increased risk of developing asthma after 
eczema in early childhood, only 1 in every 3 children with eczema develops 
asthma during later childhood. This is lower than previously assumed.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Our results may have important consequences for 
counseling patients with atopic eczema and their parents.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2007.05.042
PMID: 17655920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]