---
reference_id: "PMID:29230162"
title: A Novel de novo FZD2 Mutation in a Patient with Autosomal Dominant Omodysplasia.
authors:
- Türkmen S
- Spielmann M
- Güneş N
- Knaus A
- Flöttmann R
- Mundlos S
- Tüysüz B
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1159/000479721
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Novel de novo FZD2 Mutation in a Patient with Autosomal Dominant Omodysplasia.
**Authors:** Türkmen S, Spielmann M, Güneş N, Knaus A, Flöttmann R, Mundlos S, Tüysüz B
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000479721](https://doi.org/10.1159/000479721)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2017 Nov;8(6):318-324. doi: 10.1159/000479721. Epub 2017 Sep 8.

A Novel de novo FZD2 Mutation in a Patient with Autosomal Dominant Omodysplasia.

Türkmen S(1)(2), Spielmann M(1)(3), Güneş N(4), Knaus A(1)(3)(5), Flöttmann 
R(1), Mundlos S(1)(3), Tüysüz B(4).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Medizinische Genetik, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(2)Labor Berlin Charité Vivantes Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Cerrahpaşa Medical School, Istanbul 
University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Berlin-Brandenburg School for Regenerative Therapies (BSRT), Charité Campus, 
Berlin, Germany.

We described a heterozygous de novo mutation (G434V) in the frizzled class 
receptor 2 (FZD2) gene in a patient with distinct facial features including 
hypertelorism, bilateral cleft lip/palate, short nose with a broad nasal bridge, 
microretrognathia, and bilateral shortness of the upper limbs, first metacarpal 
bones, and middle phalanges of the 5th digits. The findings of our patient were 
compared to an autosomal dominant omodysplasia (OMOD2) family with FZD2 mutation 
reported in the literature. OMOD2 is a rare skeletal dysplasia and characterized 
by facial dysmorphism and shortness of the upper extremities and first 
metacarpal bones. This is the second report which supports the findings of the 
first family described and points out that heterozygous FZD2 mutations may be 
disease-causing for OMOD2.

DOI: 10.1159/000479721
PMCID: PMC5701278
PMID: 29230162