---
reference_id: PMID:36535904
title: Three-tiered EGFr domain risk stratification for individualized NOTCH3-small vessel disease prediction.
authors:
- Hack RJ
- Gravesteijn G
- Cerfontaine MN
- Santcroos MA
- Gatti L
- Kopczak A
- Bersano A
- Duering M
- Rutten JW
- Lesnik Oberstein SAJ
journal: Brain
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awac486
keywords:
- Humans
- "Receptor, Notch3/genetics"
- "CADASIL/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Epidermal Growth Factor/genetics
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Stroke/genetics
- Risk Assessment
- "Receptors, Notch/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Three-tiered EGFr domain risk stratification for individualized NOTCH3-small vessel disease prediction.
**Authors:** Hack RJ, Gravesteijn G, Cerfontaine MN, Santcroos MA, Gatti L, Kopczak A, Bersano A, Duering M, Rutten JW, Lesnik Oberstein SAJ
**Journal:** Brain (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awac486](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awac486)

## Content

1. Brain. 2023 Jul 3;146(7):2913-2927. doi: 10.1093/brain/awac486.

Three-tiered EGFr domain risk stratification for individualized NOTCH3-small 
vessel disease prediction.

Hack RJ(1), Gravesteijn G(1), Cerfontaine MN(1), Santcroos MA(2), Gatti L(3), 
Kopczak A(4), Bersano A(5), Duering M(4)(6), Rutten JW(1), Lesnik Oberstein 
SAJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, 2333 ZA 
Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, 2333 ZA 
Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)Laboratory of Neurobiology, Fondazione IRCSS Istituto Neurologico Carlo 
Besta, 20133 Milan, Italy.
(4)Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, LMU University Hospital Munich, 
81377 Munich, Germany.
(5)Cerebrovascular Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, 
20133 Milan, Italy.
(6)Medical Image Analysis Center (MIAC) and Department of Biomedical 
Engineering, University of Basel, 4051 Basel, Switzerland.

Cysteine-altering missense variants (NOTCH3cys) in one of the 34 epidermal 
growth-factor-like repeat (EGFr) domains of the NOTCH3 protein are the cause of 
NOTCH3-associated small vessel disease (NOTCH3-SVD). NOTCH3-SVD is highly 
variable, ranging from cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical 
infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) at the severe end of the spectrum to 
non-penetrance. The strongest known NOTCH3-SVD modifier is NOTCH3cys variant 
position: NOTCH3cys variants located in EGFr domains 1-6 are associated with a 
more severe phenotype than NOTCH3cys variants located in EGFr domains 7-34. The 
objective of this study was to further improve NOTCH3-SVD genotype-based risk 
prediction by using relative differences in NOTCH3cys variant frequencies 
between large CADASIL and population cohorts as a starting point. Scientific 
CADASIL literature, cohorts and population databases were queried for NOTCH3cys 
variants. For each EGFr domain, the relative difference in NOTCH3cys variant 
frequency (NVFOR) was calculated using genotypes of 2574 CADASIL patients and 
1647 individuals from population databases. Based on NVFOR cut-off values, EGFr 
domains were classified as either low (LR-EGFr), medium (MR-EGFr) or high risk 
(HR-EGFr). The clinical relevance of this new three-tiered EGFr risk 
classification was cross-sectionally validated by comparing SVD imaging markers 
and clinical outcomes between EGFr risk categories using a genotype-phenotype 
data set of 434 CADASIL patients and 1003 NOTCH3cys positive community-dwelling 
individuals. CADASIL patients and community-dwelling individuals harboured 379 
unique NOTCH3cys variants. Nine EGFr domains were classified as an HR-EGFr, 
which included EGFr domains 1-6, but additionally also EGFr domains 8, 11 and 
26. Ten EGFr domains were classified as MR-EGFr and 11 as LR-EGFr. In the 
population genotype-phenotype data set, HR-EGFr individuals had the highest risk 
of stroke [odds ratio (OR) = 10.81, 95% confidence interval (CI): 5.46-21.37], 
followed by MR-EGFr individuals (OR = 1.81, 95% CI: 0.84-3.88) and LR-EGFr 
individuals (OR = 1 [reference]). MR-EGFr individuals had a significantly higher 
normalized white matter hyperintensity volume (nWMHv; P = 0.005) and peak width 
of skeletonized mean diffusivity (PSMD; P = 0.035) than LR-EGFr individuals. In 
the CADASIL genotype-phenotype data set, HR-EGFr domains 8, 11 and 26 patients 
had a significantly higher risk of stroke (P = 0.002), disability (P = 0.041), 
nWMHv (P = 1.8 × 10-8), PSMD (P = 2.6 × 10-8) and lacune volume (P = 0.006) than 
MR-EGFr patients. SVD imaging marker load and clinical outcomes were similar 
between HR-EGFr 1-6 patients and HR-EGFr 8, 11 and 26 patients. NVFOR was 
significantly associated with vascular NOTCH3 aggregation load (P = 0.006), but 
not with NOTCH3 signalling activity (P = 0.88). In conclusion, we identified 
three clinically distinct NOTCH3-SVD EGFr risk categories based on NFVOR cut-off 
values, and identified three additional HR-EGFr domains located outside of EGFr 
domains 1-6. This EGFr risk classification will provide an important key to 
individualized NOTCH3-SVD disease prediction.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awac486
PMCID: PMC10316769
PMID: 36535904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Remco J. Hack is funded by the Netherlands 
Organisation for Health Research and Development (ZonMW 91717325). Minne N. 
Cerfontaine is funded by the Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and 
Development (ZonMW 91717325). Julie W. Rutten received financial research 
support from the Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development 
(ZonMW 91717325) and the Netherlands Brain Foundation (HA2016–02-03). Saskia 
A.J. Lesnik Oberstein has financial research support from the Netherlands 
Organisation for Health Research and Development (ZonMW 91717325) and the 
Netherlands Brain Foundation (HA2016-02-03). The other authors report no 
competing interests.