---
reference_id: "PMID:21900192"
title: "Chemoimmunotherapy for hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis: long-term results of the HLH-94 treatment protocol."
authors:
- Trottestam H
- Horne A
- Aricò M
- Egeler RM
- Filipovich AH
- Gadner H
- Imashuku S
- Ladisch S
- Webb D
- Janka G
- Henter JI
- Histiocyte Society
journal: Blood
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-06-356261
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Clinical Protocols
- Combined Modality Therapy
- "Cytotoxins/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Drug Combinations
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Immunotherapy/adverse effects, methods"
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Lymphohistiocytosis, Hemophagocytic/diagnosis, drug therapy, mortality, therapy"
- Maintenance Chemotherapy
- Male
- Survival Analysis
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chemoimmunotherapy for hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis: long-term results of the HLH-94 treatment protocol.
**Authors:** Trottestam H, Horne A, Aricò M, Egeler RM, Filipovich AH, Gadner H, Imashuku S, Ladisch S, Webb D, Janka G, Henter JI, Histiocyte Society
**Journal:** Blood (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2011-06-356261](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2011-06-356261)

## Content

1. Blood. 2011 Oct 27;118(17):4577-84. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-06-356261. Epub
2011  Sep 6.

Chemoimmunotherapy for hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis: long-term results of 
the HLH-94 treatment protocol.

Trottestam H(1), Horne A, Aricò M, Egeler RM, Filipovich AH, Gadner H, Imashuku 
S, Ladisch S, Webb D, Janka G, Henter JI; Histiocyte Society.

Collaborators: Henter JI, Aricò M, Egeler RM, Elinder G, Gadner H, Imashuku S, 
Janka G, Komp D, Ladisch S, Webb D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden. Helena.Trottestam@ki.se

Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) used to have a dismal prognosis. We 
report the final results of HLH-94, the largest prospective 
diagnostic/therapeutic HLH study so far. The treatment includes 
immunosuppressive and cytotoxic therapy aiming at clinical remission, followed 
by HSCT in patients with familial, persistent, or recurrent disease. Altogether, 
249 patients fulfilled inclusion criteria and started HLH-94 therapy (July 
1994-December 2003); 227 (91%) were followed-up for ≥ 5 years. At 6.2 years 
median follow-up, estimated 5-year probability of survival was 54% ± 6%. 
Seventy-two patients (29%) died before HSCT, 64 within 1 year, 97% of whom had 
active disease. In 124 patients who underwent HSCT, 5-year survival was 66 ± 8%; 
tendency to increased survival (P = .064) in patients with nonactive disease at 
HSCT. Patients with familial disease had a 5-year survival of 50% ± 13%; none 
survived without HSCT. Patients deceased during the first 2 months more often 
had jaundice, edema, and elevated creatinine. Forty-nine patients (20%) were 
alive without signs of HLH activity and off-therapy > 1-year without HSCT; they 
presented at older age (P < .001), were more often female (P = .011), and less 
often had CNS disease (P < .001) or hepatomegaly (P = .007). To conclude, HLH-94 
chemoimmunotherapy has considerably improved outcome in HLH. Collaborative 
efforts are needed to further reduce early mortality, HSCT-related mortality, 
and neurologic late effects.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2011-06-356261
PMCID: PMC3208276
PMID: 21900192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]