---
reference_id: "PMID:40062480"
title: "Human genetics of Whipple's disease."
authors:
- Rosain J
- Casanova JL
- Bustamante J
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000001088
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human genetics of Whipple's disease.
**Authors:** Rosain J, Casanova JL, Bustamante J
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0000000000001088](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0000000000001088)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2025 Sep 1;37(5):316-320. doi: 
10.1097/BOR.0000000000001088. Epub 2025 Mar 12.

Human genetics of Whipple's disease.

Rosain J(1)(2)(3)(4), Casanova JL(1)(2)(4)(5)(6), Bustamante J(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, Inserm 
U1163, Necker Hospital for Sick Children.
(2)University of Paris Cité, Imagine Institute.
(3)Study Center for Primary Immunodeficiencies, Necker Hospital for Sick 
Children, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France, EU.
(4)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
Branch, Rockefeller University.
(5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, New York, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, AP-HP, Paris, 
France, EU.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Whipple's disease (WD), triggered by Tropheryma whipplei ( T. 
whipplei ), is a rare, chronic, inflammatory, systemic infectious disease that 
typically manifests in adults. The most frequent initial manifestations include 
arthritis, followed by diarrhea, abdominal pain, and weight loss. Half the 
world's population is exposed to T. whipplei , but only one in a million develop 
WD. This suggests that acquired or inborn errors of immunity (IEI) may underlie 
WD. Anti-TNF treatment is a well established risk factor for flare-ups of WD.
RECENT FINDINGS: We have also reported two rare IEI in patients with WD. Six WD 
patients from two unrelated kindreds were found to have autosomal dominant IRF4 
deficiency acting via a mechanism of haploinsufficiency. These patients were 
otherwise healthy. In addition, a single patient with a history of WD and other 
infections was found to have autosomal recessive CD4 deficiency.
SUMMARY: Rare IEI can underlie WD. Human genetic studies of patients with WD are 
warranted for the development of precision medicine for affected kindreds and to 
improve our understanding of the pathogenesis of this rare infectious disease.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000001088
PMCID: PMC12303769
PMID: 40062480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.