---
reference_id: "PMID:10583959"
title: Perforin gene defects in familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.
authors:
- Stepp SE
- Dufourcq-Lagelouse R
- Le Deist F
- Bhawan S
- Certain S
- Mathew PA
- Henter JI
- Bennett M
- Fischer A
- de Saint Basile G
- Kumar V
journal: Science
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1126/science.286.5446.1957
keywords:
- Antigen-Presenting Cells/immunology
- Cell Death
- Cell Line
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 10/genetics"
- "Codon, Terminator"
- Cytoplasmic Granules/chemistry
- "Cytotoxicity, Immunologic"
- Frameshift Mutation
- Genetic Linkage
- Granzymes
- Heterozygote
- "Histiocytosis, Non-Langerhans-Cell/genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- Lymphocyte Activation
- "Membrane Glycoproteins/analysis, genetics, physiology"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Perforin
- Point Mutation
- Pore Forming Cytotoxic Proteins
- Serine Endopeptidases/analysis
- "T-Lymphocytes, Cytotoxic/chemistry, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Perforin gene defects in familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.
**Authors:** Stepp SE, Dufourcq-Lagelouse R, Le Deist F, Bhawan S, Certain S, Mathew PA, Henter JI, Bennett M, Fischer A, de Saint Basile G, Kumar V
**Journal:** Science (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.286.5446.1957](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.286.5446.1957)

## Content

1. Science. 1999 Dec 3;286(5446):1957-9. doi: 10.1126/science.286.5446.1957.

Perforin gene defects in familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.

Stepp SE(1), Dufourcq-Lagelouse R, Le Deist F, Bhawan S, Certain S, Mathew PA, 
Henter JI, Bennett M, Fischer A, de Saint Basile G, Kumar V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and the Graduate Program in Immunology, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, TX 75235, USA.

Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) is a rare, rapidly fatal, 
autosomal recessive immune disorder characterized by uncontrolled activation of 
T cells and macrophages and overproduction of inflammatory cytokines. Linkage 
analyses indicate that FHL is genetically heterogeneous and linked to 9q21.3-22, 
10q21-22, or another as yet undefined locus. Sequencing of the coding regions of 
the perforin gene of eight unrelated 10q21-22-linked FHL patients revealed 
homozygous nonsense mutations in four patients and missense mutations in the 
other four patients. Cultured lymphocytes from patients had defective cytotoxic 
activity, and immunostaining revealed little or no perforin in the granules. 
Thus, defects in perforin are responsible for 10q21-22-linked FHL. 
Perforin-based effector systems are, therefore, involved not only in the lysis 
of abnormal cells but also in the down-regulation of cellular immune activation.

DOI: 10.1126/science.286.5446.1957
PMID: 10583959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]