---
reference_id: "PMID:37343533"
title: Practical Utilization of Prediction Equations in Chronic Kidney Disease.
authors:
- Tangri N
- Ferguson TW
journal: Blood Purif
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1159/000530380
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Practical Utilization of Prediction Equations in Chronic Kidney Disease.
**Authors:** Tangri N, Ferguson TW
**Journal:** Blood Purif (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000530380](https://doi.org/10.1159/000530380)

## Content

1. Blood Purif. 2023 Jun 21:1-7. doi: 10.1159/000530380. Online ahead of print.

Practical Utilization of Prediction Equations in Chronic Kidney Disease.

Tangri N(1)(2), Ferguson TW(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Max Rady College of Medicine, University of 
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(2)Seven Oaks Hospital Chronic Disease Innovation Centre, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 
Canada.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is common and can lead to kidney failure, 
cardiovascular complications, and early mortality. While nephrologists can 
provide valuable insights for patients at all stages of CKD, these scarce 
resources should be targeted at patients with the highest risk of progression 
and adverse outcomes. Prediction models are tools that can help providers risk 
stratify patients if they are effectively implemented into the clinical 
workflow. We believe these equations should demonstrate (1) clinical utility: 
where they can provide useful information to the physician and patients; and (2) 
clinical usability: where they are able to be easily integrated into clinical 
workflow and do not result in unnecessary costs or visits. CKD often remains 
unrecognized until later stages when a large window of opportunity to delay 
progression has already passed. Models to determine progression of CKD using 
thresholds such as a 40% decline in eGFR can provide clinical utility in risk 
stratifying patients at all stages of CKD, an endpoint that has been recommended 
by the FDA for the evaluation of drug approvals for disease-modifying therapies. 
For patients at more advanced stages of CKD with a greater risk of kidney 
failure, tools such as the kidney failure risk equation can be implemented to 
help guide most costly decisions, such as referral to multidisciplinary care, 
commencing dialysis modality education, or planning for vascular access 
placement surgery. In addition, models focused on determining outcomes following 
dialysis initiation can help inform shared decision-making between patient and 
provider to better inform decisions around conservative care. To ensure 
widespread adoption of these tools, it is important to ensure that they are 
broadly generalizable to many health settings and easily implemented into 
existing clinic workflows with minimum disruption.

© 2023 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000530380
PMID: 37343533