---
reference_id: "PMID:38819039"
title: "Aquaporin-4-IgG-seropositive neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders: progress of experimental models based on disease pathogenesis."
authors:
- Xu L
- Xu H
- Tang C
journal: Neural Regen Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.4103/NRR.NRR-D-23-01325
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aquaporin-4-IgG-seropositive neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders: progress of experimental models based on disease pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Xu L, Xu H, Tang C
**Journal:** Neural Regen Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.4103/NRR.NRR-D-23-01325](https://doi.org/10.4103/NRR.NRR-D-23-01325)

## Content

1. Neural Regen Res. 2025 Feb 1;20(2):354-365. doi: 10.4103/NRR.NRR-D-23-01325. 
Epub 2024 Jan 31.

Aquaporin-4-IgG-seropositive neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders: progress 
of experimental models based on disease pathogenesis.

Xu L(1), Xu H, Tang C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China.

Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders are neuroinflammatory demyelinating 
disorders that lead to permanent visual loss and motor dysfunction. To date, no 
effective treatment exists as the exact causative mechanism remains unknown. 
Therefore, experimental models of neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders are 
essential for exploring its pathogenesis and in screening for therapeutic 
targets. Since most patients with neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders are 
seropositive for IgG autoantibodies against aquaporin-4, which is highly 
expressed on the membrane of astrocyte endfeet, most current experimental models 
are based on aquaporin-4-IgG that initially targets astrocytes. These 
experimental models have successfully simulated many pathological features of 
neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders, such as aquaporin-4 loss, 
astrocytopathy, granulocyte and macrophage infiltration, complement activation, 
demyelination, and neuronal loss; however, they do not fully capture the 
pathological process of human neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders. In this 
review, we summarize the currently known pathogenic mechanisms and the 
development of associated experimental models in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo for 
neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders, suggest potential pathogenic mechanisms 
for further investigation, and provide guidance on experimental model choices. 
In addition, this review summarizes the latest information on pathologies and 
therapies for neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders based on experimental 
models of aquaporin-4-IgG-seropositive neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders, 
offering further therapeutic targets and a theoretical basis for clinical 
trials.

Copyright © 2025 Copyright: © 2025 Neural Regeneration Research.

DOI: 10.4103/NRR.NRR-D-23-01325
PMCID: PMC11317952
PMID: 38819039

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: The authors declare no 
competing interests.