---
reference_id: "PMID:37452714"
title: "Neutrophil extracellular traps contributing to atherosclerosis: From pathophysiology to clinical implications."
authors:
- Gu C
- Pang B
- Sun S
- An C
- Wu M
- Wang N
- Yuan Y
- Liu G
journal: Exp Biol Med (Maywood)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/15353702231184217
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neutrophil extracellular traps contributing to atherosclerosis: From pathophysiology to clinical implications.
**Authors:** Gu C, Pang B, Sun S, An C, Wu M, Wang N, Yuan Y, Liu G
**Journal:** Exp Biol Med (Maywood) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/15353702231184217](https://doi.org/10.1177/15353702231184217)

## Content

1. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2023 Aug;248(15):1302-1312. doi: 
10.1177/15353702231184217. Epub 2023 Jul 15.

Neutrophil extracellular traps contributing to atherosclerosis: From 
pathophysiology to clinical implications.

Gu C(1), Pang B(1), Sun S(1), An C(1), Wu M(1), Wang N(2), Yuan Y(2), Liu G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory, Guang'anmen Hospital, China Academy of Chinese 
Medical Sciences, Beijing 100053, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory, Southern District of Guang'anmen Hospital, China 
Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 102618, China.

Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) are network-like structures of chromatin 
filaments decorated by histones, granules, and cytoplasmic-derived proteins 
expelled by activated neutrophils under multiple pathogenic conditions. NETs not 
only capture pathogens in innate immunity but also respond to sterile 
inflammatory stimuli in atherosclerosis, such as lipoproteins and inflammatory 
cytokines. Atherosclerosis is a lipid-driven chronic inflammatory disease 
characterized by the accumulation and transformation of inflammatory cells, and 
smooth muscle cells in the intimal space. NETs-derived extracellular components 
possess toxic and proinflammatory properties leading to cellular dysfunction and 
tissue damage, which may establish a link among lipid metabolism, inflammatory 
immunity, and atherosclerosis. In this review, we discuss recent advances 
regarding the role of NETs engaged in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, 
particularly focusing on the interaction with lipids and inflammasomes, 
crosstalk with smooth muscle cells and inflammatory cells, and the association 
with aging. We also evaluate the current knowledge on the potential of NETs as 
biomarkers and therapeutic targets for atherosclerosis and its related diseases 
in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1177/15353702231184217
PMCID: PMC10625340
PMID: 37452714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.