---
reference_id: "PMID:37940365"
title: Stargardt macular dystrophy and therapeutic approaches.
authors:
- Fujinami K
- Waheed N
- Laich Y
- Yang P
- Fujinami-Yokokawa Y
- Higgins JJ
- Lu JT
- Curtiss D
- Clary C
- Michaelides M
journal: Br J Ophthalmol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1136/bjo-2022-323071
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stargardt macular dystrophy and therapeutic approaches.
**Authors:** Fujinami K, Waheed N, Laich Y, Yang P, Fujinami-Yokokawa Y, Higgins JJ, Lu JT, Curtiss D, Clary C, Michaelides M
**Journal:** Br J Ophthalmol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bjo-2022-323071](https://doi.org/10.1136/bjo-2022-323071)

## Content

1. Br J Ophthalmol. 2024 Mar 20;108(4):495-505. doi: 10.1136/bjo-2022-323071.

Stargardt macular dystrophy and therapeutic approaches.

Fujinami K(1)(2)(3), Waheed N(4), Laich Y(3)(5), Yang P(6), Fujinami-Yokokawa 
Y(7)(2)(8), Higgins JJ(9), Lu JT(9), Curtiss D(10), Clary C(9), Michaelides 
M(11)(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Visual Physiology, Division of Vision Research, National 
Institute of Sensory Organs, NHO Tokyo Medical Center, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan 
k.fujinami@ucl.ac.uk michel.michaelides@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London, UK.
(3)Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Eye Center, Medical Center, University of Freiburg Faculty of Medicine, 
Freiburg, Germany.
(6)Oregon Health and Science University Casey Eye Institute, Portland, Oregon, 
USA.
(7)Laboratory of Visual Physiology, Division of Vision Research, National 
Institute of Sensory Organs, NHO Tokyo Medical Center, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Department of Health Policy and Management, Keio University School of 
Medicine Graduate School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)SalioGen Therapeutics Inc, Lexington, Massachusetts, USA.
(10)Applied Genetic Technologies Corporation, Alachua, Florida, USA.
(11)Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London, UK 
k.fujinami@ucl.ac.uk michel.michaelides@ucl.ac.uk.

Stargardt macular dystrophy (Stargardt disease; STGD1; OMIM 248200) is the most 
prevalent inherited macular dystrophy. STGD1 is an autosomal recessive disorder 
caused by multiple pathogenic sequence variants in the large ABCA4 gene (OMIM 
601691). Major advances in understanding both the clinical and molecular 
features, as well as the underlying pathophysiology, have culminated in many 
completed, ongoing and planned human clinical trials of novel therapies.The aims 
of this concise review are to describe (1) the detailed phenotypic and genotypic 
characteristics of the disease, multimodal imaging findings, natural history of 
the disease, and pathogenesis, (2) the multiple avenues of research and 
therapeutic intervention, including pharmacological, cellular therapies and 
diverse types of genetic therapies that have either been investigated or are 
under investigation and (3) the exciting novel therapeutic approaches on the 
translational horizon that aim to treat STGD1 by replacing the entire 6.8 kb 
ABCA4 open reading frame.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bjo-2022-323071
PMCID: PMC10958310
PMID: 37940365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Disclosures/Conflicts of 
Interest: KF: Consultant (category C): Astellas Pharma, Kubota Pharmaceutical, 
Acucela, Novartis, Janssen, Sanofi, NightstaRx, Stargazer, SalioGen 
Therapeutics, Belite Bio, Alnylam, Restore Vision, FRESTKF: Clinical 
trial/Research support (category F): National Institute for Health and Care 
Research, Foundation Fighting Blindness, Janssen, Novartis, Janssen, AstellasPY: 
Consultant (category C): 4D Molecular Therapeutics, Adverum, AGTC, Annexon Bio, 
EcoR1, Exegenesis Bio, ExpertConnect, Foundation Fighting Blindness (SAB), 
Guidepoint, Iveric Bio, Janssen, MeiraGTx, Nanoscope Therapeutics (SAB), 
Otonomy, ProQR, Saliogen Therapeutics, TeamedOn, VederePY: Clinical 
trial/Research support (category F): 4D Molecular Therapeutics, Acucela, Atsena, 
AGTC, Biogen, Editas, Foundation Fighting Blindness, Iveric bio, Ocugen, ProQR, 
Reneuron, Sanofi, SparkNW: Consultant (category C): Complement Therapeutics, 
Nidek, SalioGen Therapeutics, Stealth, Syncona, TopconNW: Clinical 
trial/Research support (category F): Carl Zeiss Meditec, Heidelberg, NidekNW: N 
Waheed is a board member of Iolyx Therapeutics, a shareholder in Ocudyne, and a 
previous shareholder of Gyroscope Therapeutics. JH, JTL and CC: JH and JTL are 
currently full-time employees and stock option holders of SalioGen Therapeutics. 
C Clary is a former employee of SalioGen Therapeutics.DC: D Curtiss is a 
full-time employee and stock option holder of AGTC. YL, YF-Y: YL and YF-Y have 
no conflicts of interest to disclose. MM: Consultant (category C): Acucela, 
MeiraGTx, Janssen, Stargazer, Claris Bio, SalioGen Therapeutics, Belite Bio and 
Alnylam. MM holds equity in MeiraGTx.