---
reference_id: "PMID:39051773"
title: Suppression of the host antiviral response by non-infectious varicella zoster virus extracellular vesicles.
authors:
- Niemeyer CS
- Frietze S
- Coughlan C
- Lewis SWR
- Bustos Lopez S
- Saviola AJ
- Hansen KC
- Medina EM
- Hassell JE Jr
- Kogut S
- Traina-Dorge V
- Nagel MA
- Bruce KD
- Restrepo D
- Mahalingam R
- Bubak AN
journal: J Virol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1128/jvi.00848-24
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Suppression of the host antiviral response by non-infectious varicella zoster virus extracellular vesicles.
**Authors:** Niemeyer CS, Frietze S, Coughlan C, Lewis SWR, Bustos Lopez S, Saviola AJ, Hansen KC, Medina EM, Hassell JE Jr, Kogut S, Traina-Dorge V, Nagel MA, Bruce KD, Restrepo D, Mahalingam R, Bubak AN
**Journal:** J Virol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jvi.00848-24](https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.00848-24)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2024 Aug 20;98(8):e0084824. doi: 10.1128/jvi.00848-24. Epub 2024 Jul 
25.

Suppression of the host antiviral response by non-infectious varicella zoster 
virus extracellular vesicles.

Niemeyer CS(1), Frietze S(2), Coughlan C(1), Lewis SWR(1), Bustos Lopez S(1), 
Saviola AJ(3), Hansen KC(3), Medina EM(1), Hassell JE Jr(1), Kogut S(2), 
Traina-Dorge V(4), Nagel MA(1)(5), Bruce KD(6), Restrepo D(7), Mahalingam R(1), 
Bubak AN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Health Sciences, University of Vermont, 
Burlington, Vermont, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(4)Division of Microbiology, Tulane National Primate Research Center, Tulane 
University, Covington, Louisiana, USA.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(6)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes, Department of Medicine, 
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(7)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

Varicella zoster virus (VZV) reactivates from ganglionic sensory neurons to 
produce herpes zoster (shingles) in a unilateral dermatomal distribution, 
typically in the thoracic region. Reactivation not only heightens the risk of 
stroke and other neurological complications but also increases susceptibility to 
co-infections with various viral and bacterial pathogens at sites distant from 
the original infection. The mechanism by which VZV results in complications 
remote from the initial foci remains unclear. Small extracellular vesicles 
(sEVs) are membranous signaling structures that can deliver proteins and nucleic 
acids to modify the function of distal cells and tissues during normal 
physiological conditions. Although viruses have been documented to exploit the 
sEV machinery to propagate infection, the role of non-infectious sEVs released 
from VZV-infected neurons in viral spread and disease has not been studied. 
Using multi-omic approaches, we characterized the content of sEVs released from 
VZV-infected human sensory neurons (VZV sEVs). One viral protein was detected 
(immediate-early 62), as well as numerous immunosuppressive and vascular 
disease-associated host proteins and miRNAs that were absent in sEVs from 
uninfected neurons. Notably, VZV sEVs are non-infectious yet transcriptionally 
altered primary human cells, suppressing the antiviral type 1 interferon 
response and promoting neuroinvasion of a secondary pathogen in vivo. These 
results challenge our understanding of VZV infection, proposing that the virus 
may contribute to distant pathologies through non-infectious sEVs beyond the 
primary infection site. Furthermore, this study provides a previously 
undescribed immune-evasion mechanism induced by VZV that highlights the 
significance of non-infectious sEVs in early VZV pathogenesis.
IMPORTANCE: Varicella zoster virus (VZV) is a ubiquitous human virus that 
predominantly spreads by direct cell-cell contact and requires efficient and 
immediate host immune evasion strategies to spread. The mechanisms of immune 
evasion prior to virion entry have not been fully elucidated and represent a 
critical gap in our complete understanding of VZV pathogenesis. This study 
describes a previously unreported antiviral evasion strategy employed by VZV 
through the exploitation of the infected host cell's small extracellular vesicle 
(sEV) machinery. These findings suggest that non-infectious VZV sEVs could 
travel throughout the body, affecting cells remote from the site of infection 
and challenging the current understanding of VZV clinical disease, which has 
focused on local effects and direct infection. The significance of these sEVs in 
early VZV pathogenesis highlights the importance of further investigating their 
role in viral spread and secondary disease development to reduce systemic 
complications following VZV infections.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.00848-24
PMCID: PMC11334484
PMID: 39051773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.