---
reference_id: "PMID:34072194"
title: BRAF Inhibitors Induce Feedback Activation of RAS Pathway in Thyroid Cancer Cells.
authors:
- Bonaldi E
- Gargiuli C
- De Cecco L
- Micali A
- Rizzetti MG
- Greco A
- Borrello MG
- Minna E
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms22115744
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Computational Biology/methods
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/drug therapy, etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- Transcriptome
- ras Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BRAF Inhibitors Induce Feedback Activation of RAS Pathway in Thyroid Cancer Cells.
**Authors:** Bonaldi E, Gargiuli C, De Cecco L, Micali A, Rizzetti MG, Greco A, Borrello MG, Minna E
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms22115744](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22115744)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 May 27;22(11):5744. doi: 10.3390/ijms22115744.

BRAF Inhibitors Induce Feedback Activation of RAS Pathway in Thyroid Cancer
Cells.

Bonaldi E(1), Gargiuli C(2), De Cecco L(2), Micali A(2), Rizzetti MG(1), Greco
A(1), Borrello MG(1), Minna E(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Mechanisms Unit, Department of Research, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Nazionale dei Tumori, 20133 Milan, Italy.
(2)Platform of Integrated Biology, Department of Applied Research and Technology
Development, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, 20133 Milan, Italy.

BRAFV600E is the most frequent oncogenic mutation identified in papillary
thyroid cancer (PTC). In PTC patients who do not respond to standard treatment,
BRAF inhibitors are currently tested as alternative strategies. However, as
observed for other targeted therapies, patients eventually develop drug
resistance. The mechanisms of BRAF inhibitors response are still poorly
understood in a thyroid cancer (TC) context. In this study, we investigated in
BRAFV600E mutated TC cell lines the effects of Vemurafenib and Dabrafenib, two
BRAF inhibitors currently used in a clinical setting. We assessed cell
proliferation, and the expression and activity of the thyroid function related
transporter NIS following the treatment with BRAF inhibitors. In addition, we
investigated the global gene expression by microarray, the relevant modulated
biological processes by gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), and TC specific
gene signatures related to MAPK pathway activation, thyroid differentiation, and
transcriptional profile associated with BRAFV600E or RAS mutation. We found that
both inhibitors induce antiproliferative and redifferentiative effects on TC
cells, as well as a rewiring of the MAPK pathway related to RAS signaling. Our
results suggest a possible mechanism of drug response to the BRAF inhibitors
Vemurafenib or Dabrafenib, supporting very recent findings in TC patients
treated with targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22115744
PMCID: PMC8198461
PMID: 34072194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
