---
reference_id: "PMID:1987448"
title: Graves' disease. Current concepts.
authors:
- McDougall IR
journal: Med Clin North Am
year: '1991'
doi: 10.1016/s0025-7125(16)30473-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Graves' disease. Current concepts.
**Authors:** McDougall IR
**Journal:** Med Clin North Am (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0025-7125(16)30473-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0025-7125(16)30473-4)

## Content

1. Med Clin North Am. 1991 Jan;75(1):79-95. doi: 10.1016/s0025-7125(16)30473-4.

Graves' disease. Current concepts.

McDougall IR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
California.

Graves' disease is an organ-specific autoimmune disorder. There is no universal 
agreement on the mechanism of Graves' disease, but the over-activity of the 
thyroid is due to an antibody capable of attaching to and activating the TSH 
receptor of follicular cells. There are other extrathyroidal features that are 
not caused either by this antibody or by hyperthyroidism. The clinical diagnosis 
is generally straightforward and can be confirmed by in vitro measurement of 
thyroid hormones and TSH. A measurement of radioiodine uptake is also valuable. 
Treatment is not specific for the immunologic defect, but its purpose is to 
lower the thyroid hormone levels to normal. This can be achieved with 
antithyroid medication, radioiodine iodine-131, or thyroidectomy. In most 
clinical situations, a strong argument can be made for iodine-131 therapy, which 
is safe and definitive, although posttreatment hypothyroidism and the need for 
lifelong thyroxine are to be expected.

DOI: 10.1016/s0025-7125(16)30473-4
PMID: 1987448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]