---
reference_id: "PMID:33169484"
title: "A novel variant in COX16 causes cytochrome c oxidase deficiency, severe fatal neonatal lactic acidosis, encephalopathy, cardiomyopathy, and liver dysfunction."
authors:
- Wintjes LTM
- Kava M
- van den Brandt FA
- van den Brand MAM
- Lapina O
- Bliksrud YT
- Kulseth MA
- Amundsen SS
- Selberg TR
- Ybema-Antoine M
- Tutakhel OAZ
- Greed L
- Thorburn DR
- Tangeraas T
- Balasubramaniam S
- Rodenburg RJT
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/humu.24137
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Lactic/genetics"
- Brain Diseases
- Cardiomyopathies/genetics
- Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/genetics
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Liver Diseases
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- "Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel variant in COX16 causes cytochrome c oxidase deficiency, severe fatal neonatal lactic acidosis, encephalopathy, cardiomyopathy, and liver dysfunction.
**Authors:** Wintjes LTM, Kava M, van den Brandt FA, van den Brand MAM, Lapina O, Bliksrud YT, Kulseth MA, Amundsen SS, Selberg TR, Ybema-Antoine M, Tutakhel OAZ, Greed L, Thorburn DR, Tangeraas T, Balasubramaniam S, Rodenburg RJT
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.24137](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.24137)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2021 Feb;42(2):135-141. doi: 10.1002/humu.24137. Epub 2020 Nov 30.

A novel variant in COX16 causes cytochrome c oxidase deficiency, severe fatal 
neonatal lactic acidosis, encephalopathy, cardiomyopathy, and liver dysfunction.

Wintjes LTM(1), Kava M(2)(3), van den Brandt FA(1), van den Brand MAM(4), Lapina 
O(5), Bliksrud YT(6), Kulseth MA(7), Amundsen SS(7), Selberg TR(8), 
Ybema-Antoine M(4), Tutakhel OAZ(1), Greed L(9), Thorburn DR(10)(11), Tangeraas 
T(12), Balasubramaniam S(13), Rodenburg RJT(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Translational Metabolic Laboratory, 
Radboud Centre for Mitochondrial Medicine, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neurology, Perth Children's Hospital, Perth, Western Australia, 
Australia.
(3)School of Pediatrics and Child Health, University of Western Australia, 
Perth, Western Australia, Australia.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Radboud Centre for Mitochondrial Medicine, 
Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department for Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway.
(6)Norwegian National Unit for Diagnostics of Congenital Metabolic Disorders, 
Department of Medical Biochemistry, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Ostfold Hospital Trust, Kalnes, Norway.
(9)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, PathWest, Perth, Western Australia, 
Australia.
(10)Murdoch Children's Research Institute and Victorian Clinical Genetics 
Services, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.
(12)Norwegian National Unit for Newborn Screening, Division of Pediatric and 
Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(13)Western Sydney Genetics Program, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, 
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

COX16 is involved in the biogenesis of cytochrome-c-oxidase (complex IV), the 
terminal complex of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. We present the first 
report of two unrelated patients with the homozygous nonsense variant 
c.244C>T(p. Arg82*) in COX16 with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, encephalopathy 
and severe fatal lactic acidosis, and isolated complex IV deficiency. The 
absence of COX16 protein expression leads to a complete loss of the holo-complex 
IV, as detected by Western blot in patient fibroblasts. Lentiviral transduction 
of patient fibroblasts with wild-type COX16 complementary DNA rescued complex IV 
biosynthesis. We hypothesize that COX16 could play a role in the copper delivery 
route of the COX2 module as part of the complex IV assembly. Our data provide 
clear evidence for the pathogenicity of the COX16 variant as a cause for the 
observed clinical features and the isolated complex IV deficiency in these two 
patients and that COX16 deficiency is a cause for mitochondrial disease.

© 2020 The Authors. Human Mutation published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.24137
PMCID: PMC7898715
PMID: 33169484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflict 
of interests.