---
reference_id: "PMID:31072403"
title: "Alzheimer's disease: risk factors and potentially protective measures."
authors:
- Silva MVF
- Loures CMG
- Alves LCV
- de Souza LC
- Borges KBG
- Carvalho MDG
journal: J Biomed Sci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12929-019-0524-y
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Alzheimer Disease/epidemiology, therapy"
- Cognitive Reserve
- Diet
- Exercise
- Humans
- Incidence
- Middle Aged
- Protective Factors
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alzheimer's disease: risk factors and potentially protective measures.
**Authors:** Silva MVF, Loures CMG, Alves LCV, de Souza LC, Borges KBG, Carvalho MDG
**Journal:** J Biomed Sci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12929-019-0524-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12929-019-0524-y)

## Content

1. J Biomed Sci. 2019 May 9;26(1):33. doi: 10.1186/s12929-019-0524-y.

Alzheimer's disease: risk factors and potentially protective measures.

Silva MVF(1), Loures CMG(2), Alves LCV(2), de Souza LC(3), Borges KBG(2), 
Carvalho MDG(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Avenida 
Presidente Antônio Carlos, 6627 - Pampulha, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, 
31270-901, Brazil. marcosvfs02@yahoo.com.br.
(2)Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Avenida 
Presidente Antônio Carlos, 6627 - Pampulha, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, 
31270-901, Brazil.
(3)Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Prof. 
Alfredo Balena, 190 - Santa Efigênia, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, 30130-100, 
Brazil.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common type of dementia and typically 
manifests through a progressive loss of episodic memory and cognitive function, 
subsequently causing language and visuospatial skills deficiencies, which are 
often accompanied by behavioral disorders such as apathy, aggressiveness and 
depression. The presence of extracellular plaques of insoluble β-amyloid peptide 
(Aβ) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) containing hyperphosphorylated tau 
protein (P-tau) in the neuronal cytoplasm is a remarkable pathophysiological 
cause in patients' brains. Approximately 70% of the risk of developing AD can be 
attributed to genetics. However, acquired factors such as cerebrovascular 
diseases, diabetes, hypertension, obesity and dyslipidemia increase the risk of 
AD development. The aim of the present minireview was to summarize the 
pathophysiological mechanism and the main risk factors for AD. As a complement, 
some protective factors associated with a lower risk of disease incidence, such 
as cognitive reserve, physical activity and diet will also be addressed.

DOI: 10.1186/s12929-019-0524-y
PMCID: PMC6507104
PMID: 31072403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.