---
reference_id: "PMID:23651092"
title: "Cholera: pathophysiology and emerging therapeutic targets."
authors:
- Muanprasat C
- Chatsudthipong V
journal: Future Med Chem
year: '2013'
doi: 10.4155/fmc.13.42
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholera: pathophysiology and emerging therapeutic targets.
**Authors:** Muanprasat C, Chatsudthipong V
**Journal:** Future Med Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.4155/fmc.13.42](https://doi.org/10.4155/fmc.13.42)

## Content

1. Future Med Chem. 2013 May;5(7):781-98. doi: 10.4155/fmc.13.42.

Cholera: pathophysiology and emerging therapeutic targets.

Muanprasat C(1), Chatsudthipong V.

Author information:
(1)Research Center of Transport Protein for Medical Innovation & Department of 
Physiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Rama 6 Rd, Rajathevi, 
Bangkok 10400, Thailand. chatchai.mua@mahidol.ac.th

Cholera is a diarrheal disease that remains an important global health problem 
with several hundreds of thousands of reported cases each year. This disease is 
caused by intestinal infection with Vibrio cholerae, which is a highly motile 
gram-negative bacterium with a single-sheathed flagellum. In the course of 
cholera pathogenesis, V. cholerae expresses a transcriptional activator ToxT, 
which subsequently transactivates expressions of two crucial virulence factors: 
toxin-coregulated pilus and cholera toxin (CT). These factors are responsible 
for intestinal colonization of V. cholerae and induction of fluid secretion, 
respectively. In intestinal epithelial cells, CT binds to GM1 ganglioside 
receptors on the apical membrane and undergoes retrograde vesicular trafficking 
to endoplasmic reticulum, where it exploits endoplasmic reticulum-associated 
protein degradation systems to release a catalytic A1 subunit of CT (CT A1) into 
cytoplasm. CT A1, in turn, catalyzes ADP ribosylation of α subunits of 
stimulatory G proteins, leading to a persistent activation of adenylate cyclase 
and an elevation of intracellular cAMP. Increased intracellular cAMP in human 
intestinal epithelial cells accounts for pathogenesis of profuse diarrhea and 
severe fluid loss in cholera. This review provides an overview of the 
pathophysiology of cholera diarrhea and discusses emerging drug targets for 
cholera, which include V. cholerae virulence factors, V. cholerae motility, CT 
binding to GM1 receptor, CT internalization and intoxication, as well as cAMP 
metabolism and transport proteins involved in cAMP-activated Cl(-) secretion. 
Future directions and perspectives of research on drug discovery and development 
for cholera are discussed.

DOI: 10.4155/fmc.13.42
PMID: 23651092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]