---
reference_id: "PMID:39492254"
title: "Tungsten contamination, behavior and remediation in complex environmental settings."
authors:
- Bolan S
- Wijesekara H
- Ireshika A
- Zhang T
- Pu M
- Petruzzelli G
- Pedron F
- Hou D
- Wang L
- Zhou S
- Zhao H
- Siddique KHM
- Wang H
- Rinklebe J
- Kirkham MB
- Bolan N
journal: Environ Int
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2023.108276
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tungsten contamination, behavior and remediation in complex environmental settings.
**Authors:** Bolan S, Wijesekara H, Ireshika A, Zhang T, Pu M, Petruzzelli G, Pedron F, Hou D, Wang L, Zhou S, Zhao H, Siddique KHM, Wang H, Rinklebe J, Kirkham MB, Bolan N
**Journal:** Environ Int (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.envint.2023.108276](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2023.108276)

## Content

1. Environ Int. 2023 Oct 19;181:108276. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2023.108276. Online
 ahead of print.

Tungsten contamination, behavior and remediation in complex environmental 
settings.

Bolan S(1), Wijesekara H(2), Ireshika A(2), Zhang T(3), Pu M(3), Petruzzelli 
G(4), Pedron F(4), Hou D(5), Wang L(5), Zhou S(6), Zhao H(6), Siddique KHM(7), 
Wang H(8), Rinklebe J(9), Kirkham MB(10), Bolan N(11).

Author information:
(1)UWA School of Agriculture and Environment, The University of Western 
Australia, Perth, Western Australia 6009, Australia; The UWA Institute of 
Agriculture, The University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia 6009, 
Australia; Healthy Environments And Lives (HEAL) National Research Network, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Natural Resources, Faculty of Applied Sciences, Sabaragamuwa 
University of Sri Lanka, Belihuloya 70140, Sri Lanka.
(3)Beijing Key Laboratory of Farmland Soil Pollution Prevention-control and 
Remediation, College of Resources and Environmental Sciences, China Agricultural 
University, Beijing 100193, People's Republic of China.
(4)Institute of Research on Terrestrial Ecosystem, National Council of Research, 
Via Moruzzi 1, 56124 Pisa, Italy.
(5)School of Environment, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, People's Republic 
of China.
(6)UWA School of Agriculture and Environment, The University of Western 
Australia, Perth, Western Australia 6009, Australia.
(7)UWA School of Agriculture and Environment, The University of Western 
Australia, Perth, Western Australia 6009, Australia; The UWA Institute of 
Agriculture, The University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia 6009, 
Australia.
(8)Biochar Engineering Technology Research Center of Guangdong Province, School 
of Environmental and Chemical Engineering, Foshan University, Foshan, Guangdong 
528000, People's Republic of China; Key Laboratory of Soil Contamination 
Bioremediation of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang A&F University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 
311300, People's Republic of China.
(9)University of Wuppertal, School of Architecture and Civil Engineering, 
Institute of Foundation Engineering, Water- and Waste-Management, Laboratory of 
Soil- and Groundwater-Management, Pauluskirchstraße 7, 42285 Wuppertal, Germany. 
Electronic address: rinklebe@uni-wuppertal.de.
(10)Department of Agronomy, Throckmorton Plant Sciences Center, Kansas State 
University, Manhattan, KS, United States.
(11)UWA School of Agriculture and Environment, The University of Western 
Australia, Perth, Western Australia 6009, Australia; The UWA Institute of 
Agriculture, The University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia 6009, 
Australia; Healthy Environments And Lives (HEAL) National Research Network, 
Australia. Electronic address: Nanthi.Bolan@uwa.edu.au.

Tungsten (W) is a rare element and present in the earth's crust mainly as iron, 
aluminium, and calcium minerals including wolframite and scheelite. This review 
aims to offer an overview on the current knowledge on W pollution in complex 
environmental settlings, including terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, linking 
to its natural and anthropogenic sources, behavior in soil and water, 
environmental and human health hazards, and remediation strategies. Tungsten is 
used in many alloys mainly as wafers, which have wide industrial applications, 
such as incandescent light bulb filaments, X-ray tubes, arc welding electrodes, 
radiation shielding, and industrial catalysts. The rigidity and high density of 
W enable it to be suitable for defence applications replacing lead. In soil, W 
metal is oxidised to the tungstate anion and occurs in oxidation states from - 2 
to + 6, with the most prevalent oxidation state of + 6. However, recently, 
people have been alerted to the risk posed by W alloys and its particulates, 
which can cause cancer and have other detrimental health effects in animals and 
humans. The population is subject to W pollution in the workplace by breathing, 
ingestion, and dermal contact. Remediation of W-polluted soil and aquatic 
environments can be accomplished via stabilization or solubilization. 
Stabilization of W in soil and groundwater using immobilizing agents inhibits 
the bioavailability of W, thereby preventing the contaminant from reaching the 
food chain, while solubilization of W in soil involving mobilizing materials 
accelerates the elimination of W via soil washing and root absorption. Future 
research opportunities covering risk-based remediation of W pollution in these 
complex settings are presented.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2023.108276
PMID: 39492254

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.