---
reference_id: "PMID:36907221"
title: "The effect of GLP-1RA exenatide on idiopathic intracranial hypertension: a randomized clinical trial."
authors:
- Mitchell JL
- Lyons HS
- Walker JK
- Yiangou A
- Grech O
- Alimajstorovic Z
- Greig NH
- Li Y
- Tsermoulas G
- Brock K
- Mollan SP
- Sinclair AJ
journal: Brain
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awad003
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Female
- Young Adult
- Exenatide
- Pseudotumor Cerebri/drug therapy
- Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 Receptor/therapeutic use
- Peptides
- Venoms/therapeutic use
- Hypoglycemic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/drug therapy"
- Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 Receptor Agonists
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The effect of GLP-1RA exenatide on idiopathic intracranial hypertension: a randomized clinical trial.
**Authors:** Mitchell JL, Lyons HS, Walker JK, Yiangou A, Grech O, Alimajstorovic Z, Greig NH, Li Y, Tsermoulas G, Brock K, Mollan SP, Sinclair AJ
**Journal:** Brain (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awad003](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awad003)

## Content

1. Brain. 2023 May 2;146(5):1821-1830. doi: 10.1093/brain/awad003.

The effect of GLP-1RA exenatide on idiopathic intracranial hypertension: a 
randomized clinical trial.

Mitchell JL(1)(2)(3), Lyons HS(1)(2), Walker JK(1), Yiangou A(1)(2), Grech O(1), 
Alimajstorovic Z(1), Greig NH(4), Li Y(4), Tsermoulas G(1)(5), Brock K(6), 
Mollan SP(1)(7), Sinclair AJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Birmingham, Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, 
Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.
(2)Department of Neurology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation 
Trust, Birmingham, B15 2GW, UK.
(3)Academic Department of Military Rehabilitation, Defence Medical 
Rehabilitation Centre, Stanford Hall, LE12 5QD, UK.
(4)Drug Design & Development Section, Translational Gerontology Branch, National 
Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospitals Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 
2GW, UK.
(6)Cancer Research UK Clinical Trials Unit, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.
(7)Department of Neuro-ophthalmology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS 
Foundation Trust, Birmingham, B15 2GW, UK.

Therapeutics to reduce intracranial pressure are an unmet need. Preclinical data 
have demonstrated a novel strategy to lower intracranial pressure using 
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor signalling. Here, we translate these 
findings into patients by conducting a randomized, placebo-controlled, 
double-blind trial to assess the effect of exenatide, a GLP-1 receptor agonist, 
on intracranial pressure in idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Telemetric 
intracranial pressure catheters enabled long-term intracranial pressure 
monitoring. The trial enrolled adult women with active idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension (intracranial pressure >25 cmCSF and papilloedema) who receive 
subcutaneous exenatide or placebo. The three primary outcome measures were 
intracranial pressure at 2.5 h, 24 h and 12 weeks and alpha set a priori at less 
than 0.1. Among the 16 women recruited, 15 completed the study (mean age 28 ± 9, 
body mass index 38.1 ± 6.2 kg/m2, intracranial pressure 30.6 ± 5.1 cmCSF). 
Exenatide significantly and meaningfully lowered intracranial pressure at 2.5 h 
-5.7 ± 2.9 cmCSF (P = 0.048); 24 h -6.4 ± 2.9 cmCSF (P = 0.030); and 12 weeks 
-5.6 ± 3.0 cmCSF (P = 0.058). No serious safety signals were noted. These data 
provide confidence to proceed to a phase 3 trial in idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension and highlight the potential to utilize GLP-1 receptor agonist in 
other conditions characterized by raised intracranial pressure.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awad003
PMCID: PMC10151178
PMID: 36907221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.L.M. was funded by the UK Ministry of Defence 
for the duration of the study. O.G. reports scientific consultancy fees from 
Invex therapeutics (2020). A.Y. reports receiving speaker fees from Teva, UK, 
outside the submitted work. K.B. works for UCB. Professor Mollan reports other 
Invex Therapeutics, other Heidelberg engineering during the conduct of the 
study; other from Chugai-Roche Ltd, other from Janssen, other from Allergan, 
other from Santen, other from Roche, other from Neurodiem, outside the submitted 
work. Professor Sinclair reports personal fees from Invex therapeutics in her 
role as Director with stock holdings, during the conduct of the study (since 
28.06.2019); other from Allergan, Novartis, Cheisi and Amgen outside the 
submitted work. All other authors declare no competing interests.