---
reference_id: "PMID:32805423"
title: "Hashimoto's thyroiditis: An update on pathogenic mechanisms, diagnostic protocols, therapeutic strategies, and potential malignant transformation."
authors:
- Ralli M
- Angeletti D
- Fiore M
- "D'Aguanno V"
- Lambiase A
- Artico M
- de Vincentiis M
- Greco A
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102649
keywords:
- "Hashimoto Disease/immunology, pathology"
- Humans
- Hypothyroidism
- Prospective Studies
- Thyroglobulin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hashimoto's thyroiditis: An update on pathogenic mechanisms, diagnostic protocols, therapeutic strategies, and potential malignant transformation.
**Authors:** Ralli M, Angeletti D, Fiore M, D'Aguanno V, Lambiase A, Artico M, de Vincentiis M, Greco A
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102649](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102649)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2020 Oct;19(10):102649. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102649. Epub
 2020 Aug 15.

Hashimoto's thyroiditis: An update on pathogenic mechanisms, diagnostic 
protocols, therapeutic strategies, and potential malignant transformation.

Ralli M(1), Angeletti D(2), Fiore M(3), D'Aguanno V(4), Lambiase A(5), Artico 
M(6), de Vincentiis M(7), Greco A(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy. Electronic 
address: massimo.ralli@uniroma1.it.
(2)Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy. Electronic 
address: diletta.angeletti@uniroma1.it.
(3)CNR, Institute of Cell Biology and Neurobiology, Italy. Electronic address: 
marco.fiore@cnr.it.
(4)Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy. Electronic 
address: alessandro.lambiase@uniroma1.it.
(6)Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy. Electronic 
address: marco.artico@uniroma1.it.
(7)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, 
Italy. Electronic address: marco.devincentiis@uniroma1.it.
(8)Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy. Electronic 
address: antonio.greco@uniroma1.it.

Hashimoto's thyroiditis, characterized by thyroid-specific autoantibodies, is 
one of the commonest autoimmune disorders. Although the exact etiology has not 
been fully elucidated, Hashimoto's thyroiditis is related to an interaction 
among genetic elements, environmental factors and epigenetic influences. 
Cellular and humoral immunity play a key role in the development of the disease; 
thus, a T and B cells inflammatory infiltration is frequently found. 
Histopathologic features of the disease include lymphoplasmacytic infiltration, 
lymphoid follicle formation with germinal centers, and parenchymal atrophy. 
Moreover, the occurrence of large follicular cells and oxyphilic or Askanazy 
cells is frequently associated to Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Clinically, 
Hashimoto's thyroiditis is characterized mainly by systemic manifestations due 
to the damage of the thyroid gland, developing a primary hypothyroidism. 
Diagnosis of Hashimoto's thyroiditis is clinical and based on clinical 
characteristics, positivity to serum antibodies against thyroid antigens 
(thyroid peroxidase and thyroglobulin), and lymphocytic infiltration on 
cytological examination. The mainstream of treatment is based on the management 
of the hypothyroidism with a substitution therapy. A relationship between 
Hashimoto's thyroiditis and a possible malignant transformation has been 
proposed in several studies and involves immunological/hormonal pathogenic links 
although specific correlation is still debated and needs to be further 
investigated with prospective studies.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102649
PMID: 32805423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest the authors 
report no conflict of interest.