---
reference_id: "PMID:25684537"
title: Administration of CoQ10 analogue ameliorates dysfunction of the mitochondrial respiratory chain in a mouse model of Angelman syndrome.
authors:
- Llewellyn KJ
- Nalbandian A
- Gomez A
- Wei D
- Walker N
- Kimonis VE
journal: Neurobiol Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.01.005
keywords:
- "Angelman Syndrome/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Antioxidants/administration & dosage"
- "Cerebellum/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Electron Transport/drug effects
- "Hippocampus/drug effects, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mitochondria/drug effects, metabolism"
- Motor Activity/drug effects
- Oxidative Stress/drug effects
- "Ubiquinone/administration & dosage, analogs & derivatives"
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Administration of CoQ10 analogue ameliorates dysfunction of the mitochondrial respiratory chain in a mouse model of Angelman syndrome.
**Authors:** Llewellyn KJ, Nalbandian A, Gomez A, Wei D, Walker N, Kimonis VE
**Journal:** Neurobiol Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nbd.2015.01.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2015.01.005)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Dis. 2015 Apr;76:77-86. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.01.005. Epub 2015
Feb  12.

Administration of CoQ10 analogue ameliorates dysfunction of the mitochondrial
respiratory chain in a mouse model of Angelman syndrome.

Llewellyn KJ(1), Nalbandian A(2), Gomez A(2), Wei D(3), Walker N(2), Kimonis
VE(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Genomics, 2501 Hewitt
Hall, University of California-Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. Electronic
address: kllewell@uci.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Genomics, 2501 Hewitt
Hall, University of California-Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.
(3)Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology, Gillespie Hall, University of
California-Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Genomics, 2501 Hewitt
Hall, University of California-Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. Electronic
address: vkimonis@uci.edu.

Erratum in
    Neurobiol Dis. 2015 Jun;78():56.

Genetic defects in the UBE3A gene, which encodes for the imprinted E6-AP
ubiquitin E3 ligase (UBE3A), is responsible for the occurrence of Angelman
syndrome (AS), a neurodegenerative disorder which arises in 1 out of every
12,000-20,000 births. Classical symptoms of AS include delayed development,
impaired speech, and epileptic seizures with characteristic
electroencephalography (EEG) readings. We have previously reported impaired
mitochondrial structure and reduced complex III in the hippocampus and
cerebellum in the Ube3a(m-/p+) mice. CoQ10 supplementation restores the electron
flow to the mitochondrial respiratory chain (MRC) to ultimately increase
mitochondrial antioxidant capacity. A number of recent studies with CoQ10
analogues seem promising in providing therapeutic benefit to patients with a
variety of disorders. CoQ10 therapy has been reported to be safe and relatively
well-tolerated at doses as high as 3000mg/day in patients with disorders of
CoQ10 biosynthesis and MRC disorders. Herein, we report administration of
idebenone, a potent CoQ10 analogue, to the Ube3a(m-/p+) mouse model corrects
motor coordination and anxiety levels, and also improves the expression of
complexes III and IV in hippocampus CA1 and CA2 neurons and cerebellum in these
Ube3a(m-/p+) mice. However, treatment with idebenone illustrated no beneficial
effects in the reduction of oxidative stress. To our knowledge, this is the
first study to suggest an improvement in mitochondrial respiratory chain
dysfunction via bioenergetics modulation with a CoQ10 analogue. These findings
may further elucidate possible cellular and molecular mechanism(s) and
ultimately a clinical therapeutic approach/benefit for patients with Angelman
syndrome.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.01.005
PMID: 25684537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
