---
reference_id: "PMID:35757742"
title: "Clinical Presentation and Outcomes of Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis in Adults Worldwide: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Li K
- Li M
- Wen L
- Wang Q
- Ding X
- Wang J
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.870867
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Disease Progression
- "Encephalomyelitis, Acute Disseminated/diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Presentation and Outcomes of Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis in Adults Worldwide: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Li K, Li M, Wen L, Wang Q, Ding X, Wang J
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2022.870867](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.870867)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2022 Jun 9;13:870867. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.870867.
eCollection  2022.

Clinical Presentation and Outcomes of Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis in 
Adults Worldwide: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Li K(1), Li M(2), Wen L(3), Wang Q(4), Ding X(1), Wang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, the Second People's Hospital of Chengdu, Chengdu, 
China.
(2)Department of Neurology, People's Hospital of Deyang City, Deyang, China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Chongqing North-Kuanren General Hospital, ChongQing, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) is a rare demyelinating 
disorder that is often misdiagnosed. To improve early diagnosis, we performed a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical features, outcomes for ADEM in 
adults.
METHODS: The PubMed, Embase, Web of Science and Cochrane Library databases were 
searched for studies reporting the clinical features of adults with ADEM between 
January 1990 and May 2021. A random-effects meta-analysis model was used to pool 
data on clinical features and functional outcomes.
RESULTS: Twelve studies examining 437 adults with ADEM met the inclusion 
criteria. Overall, the clinical features and diagnostic findings observed in 
more than two-thirds of the patients were white matter lesions [87.1%, 95% 
confidence interval (CI)=75-95.6], polyfocal onset (80.5%, 95% CI=50.5-98.9) and 
pyramidal signs (68.7%, 95% CI =40.0-91.9). The mortality rate was 7.8% (95% CI 
= 3.3-13.5), and the risk of residual deficits was 47.5% (95% CI = 31.8-63.4).
CONCLUSIONS: Adults with ADEM had worse outcomes than children. Clinicians 
should maintain high clinical suspicion for patients presenting with certain 
clinical features and diagnostic findings.

Copyright © 2022 Li, Li, Wen, Wang, Ding and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.870867
PMCID: PMC9218070
PMID: 35757742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.