---
reference_id: "PMID:6496568"
title: "Opsismodysplasia: a new type of chondrodysplasia with predominant involvement of the bones of the hand and the vertebrae."
authors:
- Maroteaux P
- Stanescu V
- Stanescu R
- Le Marec B
- Moraine C
- Lejarraga H
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1984'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320190117
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis"
- Cartilage/pathology
- "Enchondromatosis/congenital, diagnosis, pathology"
- Female
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Osteochondrodysplasias/congenital
- Spine/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Opsismodysplasia: a new type of chondrodysplasia with predominant involvement of the bones of the hand and the vertebrae.
**Authors:** Maroteaux P, Stanescu V, Stanescu R, Le Marec B, Moraine C, Lejarraga H
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1984)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.1320190117](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.1320190117)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1984 Sep;19(1):171-82. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320190117.

Opsismodysplasia: a new type of chondrodysplasia with predominant involvement of 
the bones of the hand and the vertebrae.

Maroteaux P, Stanescu V, Stanescu R, Le Marec B, Moraine C, Lejarraga H.

The name opsismodysplasia is proposed for a new chondrodysplasia, which was 
studied in three patients. Clinically, the condition is recognized at birth on 
the basis of shortness, short hands, and facial abnormalities with a short nose 
and a depressed bridge of nose. The most characteristic radiographic signs are: 
very retarded bone maturation; marked shortness of the bones of the hands and of 
the feet with concave metaphyses; and thin, lamellar vertebral bodies. The 
growth cartilage studied in one case showed a wide hypertrophic area containing 
thick connective tissue septa, irregular provisional calcification, and vascular 
invasion. Type I collagen was detected in the hypertrophic area by 
immunohistochemical and microchemical tests. The transmission of 
opsismodysplasia is probably autosomal recessive.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320190117
PMID: 6496568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]