---
reference_id: "PMID:30722027"
title: "Low mutation burden and frequent loss of CDKN2A/B and SMARCA2, but not PRC2, define premalignant neurofibromatosis type 1-associated atypical neurofibromas."
authors:
- Pemov A
- Hansen NF
- Sindiri S
- Patidar R
- Higham CS
- Dombi E
- Miettinen MM
- Fetsch P
- Brems H
- Chandrasekharappa SC
- Jones K
- Zhu B
- Wei JS
- National Intramural Sequencing Center (NISC) Comparative Sequencing Program
- National Cancer Institute (NCI) Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics (DCEG) Cancer Genomics Research Laboratory
- Mullikin JC
- Wallace MR
- Khan J
- Legius E
- Widemann BC
- Stewart DR
journal: Neuro Oncol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noz028
keywords:
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p15/genetics
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p16/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- Nerve Sheath Neoplasms
- Neurofibroma
- "Neurofibroma, Plexiform"
- Neurofibromatosis 1/genetics
- Neurofibrosarcoma
- Transcription Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Low mutation burden and frequent loss of CDKN2A/B and SMARCA2, but not PRC2, define premalignant neurofibromatosis type 1-associated atypical neurofibromas.
**Authors:** Pemov A, Hansen NF, Sindiri S, Patidar R, Higham CS, Dombi E, Miettinen MM, Fetsch P, Brems H, Chandrasekharappa SC, Jones K, Zhu B, Wei JS, National Intramural Sequencing Center (NISC) Comparative Sequencing Program, National Cancer Institute (NCI) Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics (DCEG) Cancer Genomics Research Laboratory, Mullikin JC, Wallace MR, Khan J, Legius E, Widemann BC, Stewart DR
**Journal:** Neuro Oncol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/neuonc/noz028](https://doi.org/10.1093/neuonc/noz028)

## Content

1. Neuro Oncol. 2019 Aug 5;21(8):981-992. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noz028.

Low mutation burden and frequent loss of CDKN2A/B and SMARCA2, but not PRC2,
define premalignant neurofibromatosis type 1-associated atypical neurofibromas.

Pemov A(1), Hansen NF(2), Sindiri S(3), Patidar R(3)(4), Higham CS(5)(6), Dombi
E(6), Miettinen MM(7), Fetsch P(7), Brems H(8), Chandrasekharappa SC(2), Jones
K(9), Zhu B(9), Wei JS(3); National Intramural Sequencing Center (NISC)
Comparative Sequencing Program; National Cancer Institute (NCI) Division of
Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics (DCEG) Cancer Genomics Research Laboratory;
Mullikin JC(2)(10), Wallace MR(11), Khan J(3), Legius E(8), Widemann BC(6),
Stewart DR(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Genetics Branch, DCEG, NCI, National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(2)Cancer Genetics and Comparative Genomics Branch, National Human Genome
Research Institute, NIH, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(3)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland,
USA.
(4)Molecular Characterization & Clinical Assay Development Laboratory, Frederick
National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc,
Frederick, Maryland, USA.
(5)Children's National Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA.
(6)Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.
(7)Laboratory of Pathology, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(8)Department of Human Genetics, Catholic University Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(9)Cancer Genomics Research Laboratory, DCEG, NIH, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(10)NISC, National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Rockville, Maryland,
USA.
(11)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, UF Genetics Institute, UF
Health Cancer Center, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

Comment in
    Neuro Oncol. 2019 Aug 5;21(8):961-962. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noz086.

BACKGROUND: Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a tumor-predisposition disorder
caused by germline mutations in NF1. NF1 patients have an 8-16% lifetime risk of
developing a malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST), a highly
aggressive soft-tissue sarcoma, often arising from preexisting benign plexiform
neurofibromas (PNs) and atypical neurofibromas (ANFs). ANFs are distinct from
both PN and MPNST, representing an intermediate step in malignant
transformation.
METHODS: In the first comprehensive genomic analysis of ANF originating from
multiple patients, we performed tumor/normal whole-exome sequencing (WES) of 16
ANFs. In addition, we conducted WES of 3 MPNSTs, copy-number meta-analysis of 26
ANFs and 28 MPNSTs, and whole transcriptome sequencing analysis of 5 ANFs and 5
MPNSTs.
RESULTS: We identified a low number of mutations (median 1, range 0-5) in the
exomes of ANFs (only NF1 somatic mutations were recurrent), and frequent
deletions of CDKN2A/B (69%) and SMARCA2 (42%). We determined that polycomb
repressor complex 2 (PRC2) genes EED and SUZ12 were frequently mutated, deleted,
or downregulated in MPNSTs but not in ANFs. Our pilot gene expression study
revealed upregulated NRAS, MDM2, CCND1/2/3, and CDK4/6 in ANFs and MPNSTs, and
overexpression of EZH2 in MPNSTs only.
CONCLUSIONS: The PN-ANF transition is primarily driven by the deletion of
CDKN2A/B. Further progression from ANF to MPNST likely involves broad
chromosomal rearrangements and frequent inactivation of the PRC2 genes, loss of
the DNA repair genes, and copy-number increase of signal transduction and
cell-cycle and pluripotency self-renewal genes.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for Neuro-Oncology
2019.

DOI: 10.1093/neuonc/noz028
PMCID: PMC6682216
PMID: 30722027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
