---
reference_id: "PMID:30145637"
title: The benchmark dose estimation of reference levels of serum urate for gout.
authors:
- Chen X
- Wang Z
- Duan N
- Cui W
- Ding X
- Jin T
journal: Clin Rheumatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s10067-018-4273-1
keywords:
- Adult
- Benchmarking
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Gout/blood, classification"
- Gout Suppressants
- Humans
- Hyperuricemia/blood
- Male
- Reference Values
- Time Factors
- Uric Acid/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The benchmark dose estimation of reference levels of serum urate for gout.
**Authors:** Chen X, Wang Z, Duan N, Cui W, Ding X, Jin T
**Journal:** Clin Rheumatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10067-018-4273-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10067-018-4273-1)

## Content

1. Clin Rheumatol. 2018 Oct;37(10):2887-2891. doi: 10.1007/s10067-018-4273-1.
Epub  2018 Aug 25.

The benchmark dose estimation of reference levels of serum urate for gout.

Chen X(1), Wang Z(2), Duan N(2), Cui W(2), Ding X(3), Jin T(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University of Chinese 
Medicine, Nanjing, 210029, China. chxwin@163.com.
(2)Department of Radiology, Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University of Chinese 
Medicine, Nanjing, 210029, China.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, 180 Fenglin 
Road, Shanghai, 200032, China.
(4)Department of Occupational Medicine, School of Public Health, Shanghai 
Medical College of Fudan University, 150 Dongan Road, Shanghai, 200032, China.

Hyperuricemia is the main risk factor for gout. Although the threshold of 
hyperuricemia has been recommended, the reference levels of serum urate for gout 
have not been clarified. In the present study, we estimated the reference levels 
of serum urate for gout. A study has shown the association between serum urate 
and incidence of gout during 5-15 years of follow-up. We calculated the 
reference levels of serum urate for gout based on the previous published data by 
using the benchmark dose (BMD) method. The subjects were divided into six groups 
according to serum urate levels (6.0, 6.5, 7.5, 8.5, 9.5, and 10 mg/dL). Gamma, 
LogLogistic, and LogProbit models were used in BMD calculation. If the benchmark 
response (BMR) was set at 5%, the 95% lower confidence bounds of BMD (BMDL) of 
serum urate for the total population were 8.09-8.14 mg/dL during 5 years of 
follow-up, 7.27-7.30 mg/dL during 10 years of follow-up, and 6.73-6.99 mg/dL 
during 15 years of follow-up. If the BMR was set at 1%, the BMDL further 
decreased by 1.4 mg/dL. They were 6.68-6.85 mg/dL, 5.97-6.03 mg/dL, and 
5.25-5.36 mg/dL, respectively. Similar results were observed in men and women. A 
threshold of 7.0 mg/dL of serum urate may be not a sufficient goal for 
protection against gout. A stricter threshold of serum urate (< 6.0 mg/dL) 
should be made.

DOI: 10.1007/s10067-018-4273-1
PMID: 30145637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]