---
reference_id: "PMID:30851228"
title: "Cholangiocarcinoma: Epidemiology and risk factors."
authors:
- Khan SA
- Tavolari S
- Brandi G
journal: Liver Int
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/liv.14095
keywords:
- "Bile Duct Neoplasms/classification, epidemiology"
- "Bile Ducts, Intrahepatic/pathology"
- "Cholangiocarcinoma/classification, epidemiology"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholangiocarcinoma: Epidemiology and risk factors.
**Authors:** Khan SA, Tavolari S, Brandi G
**Journal:** Liver Int (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/liv.14095](https://doi.org/10.1111/liv.14095)

## Content

1. Liver Int. 2019 May;39 Suppl 1:19-31. doi: 10.1111/liv.14095. Epub 2019 Mar
24.

Cholangiocarcinoma: Epidemiology and risk factors.

Khan SA(1), Tavolari S(2), Brandi G(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatology, St Mary's Hospital, Imperial College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(2)Center of Applied Biomedical Research, S. Orsola-Malpighi University 
Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, S. 
Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
(4)G.I.CO. (Italian Group of Cholangiocarcinoma), Bologna, Italy.

Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a heterogeneous disease arising from a complex 
interaction between host-specific genetic background and multiple risk factors. 
Globally, CCA incidence rates exhibit geographical variation, with much higher 
incidence in parts of the Eastern world compared to the West. These differences 
are likely to reflect differences in geographical risk factors as well as 
genetic determinants. Of note, over the past few decades, the incidence rates of 
CCA appear to change and subtypes of CCA appear to show distinct epidemiological 
trends. These trends need to be interpreted with caution given the issues of 
diagnosis, recording and coding of subtypes of CCA. Epidemiological evidences 
suggest that in general population some risk factors are less frequent but 
associated with a higher CCA risk, while others are more common but associated 
with a lower risk. Moreover, while some risk factors are shared by intrahepatic 
and both extrahepatic forms, others seem more specific for one of the two forms. 
Currently some pathological conditions have been clearly associated with CCA 
development, and other conditions are emerging; however, while their impact in 
increasing CCA risk as single etiological factors has been provided in many 
studies, less is known when two or more risk factors co-occur in the same 
patient. Moreover, despite the advancements in the knowledge of CCA aetiology, 
in Western countries about 50% of cases are still diagnosed without any 
identifiable risk factor. It is therefore conceivable that other still undefined 
etiologic factors are responsible for the recent increase of CCA (especially 
iCCA) incidence worldwide.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/liv.14095
PMID: 30851228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]