---
reference_id: "PMID:26715396"
title: Treatment of Susac Syndrome.
authors:
- Vodopivec I
- Prasad S
journal: Curr Treat Options Neurol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s11940-015-0386-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of Susac Syndrome.
**Authors:** Vodopivec I, Prasad S
**Journal:** Curr Treat Options Neurol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11940-015-0386-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11940-015-0386-x)

## Content

1. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2016 Jan;18(1):3. doi: 10.1007/s11940-015-0386-x.

Treatment of Susac Syndrome.

Vodopivec I(1)(2)(3), Prasad S(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Neuro-ophthalmology Service, 243 Charles 
Street, Boston, MA, USA. ivodopivec@partners.org.
(2)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis Street, 
Boston, MA, USA. ivodopivec@partners.org.
(3)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. ivodopivec@partners.org.
(4)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis Street, 
Boston, MA, USA. sprasad2@partners.org.
(5)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. sprasad2@partners.org.

Susac syndrome is a microangiopathy of the brain, retina, and cochlea. Several 
lines of evidence support the concept that this disease is an acquired 
autoimmune disorder. Prospective, randomized, controlled studies of treatments 
are not available because the disease is rare. Furthermore, the average period 
of follow-up in reported cases is short, limiting a complete understanding of 
the natural history of the disease. Empirical treatment strategies are therefore 
based upon expert recommendations and anecdotal reports of response to various 
immunomodulators, and the appropriate duration of therapy is not known. In our 
opinion, the encephalopathic form of Susac syndrome should be treated early and 
aggressively to avoid cognitive dysfunction and disability. Induction therapy 
with pulse methylprednisolone frequently proves to be inadequate. Additional 
agents, including intravenous immunoglobulins, intravenous cyclophosphamide, or 
rituximab are often necessary to induce a sustained remission. Maintenance 
therapy with oral glucocorticoids combined with intravenous immunoglobulins, 
mycophenolate mofetil, methotrexate, azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, or 
rituximab is typically necessary to achieve a sustained remission. Aspirin may 
be used as an adjunctive agent, although evidence showing efficacy is scant. The 
response to treatment should be closely monitored by frequent clinical 
examinations, brain MRI, and fluorescein angiography. Once disease remission has 
been established, it appears prudent to continue maintenance treatment for at 
least two additional years, although the real long-term risk of future relapses 
remains unknown. Establishing a multicenter patient registry and biorepository 
is essential to study the pathogenesis of the disease, further define the 
duration of disease, identify reliable biomarkers that aid early diagnosis and 
assess risk of relapse, and develop effective disease-specific therapies.

DOI: 10.1007/s11940-015-0386-x
PMID: 26715396