---
reference_id: "PMID:25800827"
title: Mycophenolate mofetil in primary central nervous system vasculitis.
authors:
- Salvarani C
- Brown RD Jr
- Christianson TJ
- Huston J 3rd
- Giannini C
- Miller DV
- Muratore F
- Hunder GG
journal: Semin Arthritis Rheum
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2015.02.008
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Cyclophosphamide/therapeutic use
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Female
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mycophenolic Acid/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- Remission Induction
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/drug therapy"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mycophenolate mofetil in primary central nervous system vasculitis.
**Authors:** Salvarani C, Brown RD Jr, Christianson TJ, Huston J 3rd, Giannini C, Miller DV, Muratore F, Hunder GG
**Journal:** Semin Arthritis Rheum (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semarthrit.2015.02.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2015.02.008)

## Content

1. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2015 Aug;45(1):55-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2015.02.008. Epub 2015 Feb 20.

Mycophenolate mofetil in primary central nervous system vasculitis.

Salvarani C(1), Brown RD Jr(2), Christianson TJ(3), Huston J 3rd(4), Giannini 
C(5), Miller DV(5), Muratore F(6), Hunder GG(7).

Author information:
(1)Unitá Operativa di Reumatologia, Azienda Ospedaliera-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, 
Reggio Emilia, Italy. Electronic address: salvarani.carlo@asmn.re.it.
(2)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(3)Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
MN.
(4)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(5)Division of Anatomic Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(6)Unitá Operativa di Reumatologia, Azienda Ospedaliera-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, 
Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(7)Division of Rheumatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) in 
adult primary central nervous system vasculitis (PCNSV).
METHODS: We studied a cohort of 163 patients with PCNSV who were seen at the 
Mayo Clinic from 1983 to 2011. We compared patients treated with MMF and those 
receiving other therapies.
RESULTS: We identified 16 patients treated with MMF. MMF in combination with GCs 
achieved a favorable response in most patients. A significant proportion of 
patients treated with MMF had a less severe disability at last follow-up 
compared to those receiving other therapies (p = 0.023) and cyclophosphamide and 
prednisone (p = 0.017). No statistically significant differences were observed 
regarding relapses and ability to discontinue therapy at last follow-up. A trend 
to a more favorable treatment response was observed in patients treated with MMF 
compared to those treated with other therapies (p = 0.075). Only 1 patient 
suspended MMF for severe leukopenia.
CONCLUSION: MMF seems to be an effective and safe therapy for adult PCNSV.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2015.02.008
PMID: 25800827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]