---
reference_id: "PMID:37591292"
title: "Efficacy and safety of a targeted-release formulation of budesonide in patients with primary IgA nephropathy (NefIgArd): 2-year results from a randomised phase 3 trial."
authors:
- Lafayette R
- Kristensen J
- Stone A
- Floege J
- Tesař V
- Trimarchi H
- Zhang H
- Eren N
- Paliege A
- Reich HN
- Rovin BH
- Barratt J
- NefIgArd trial investigators
journal: Lancet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01554-4
keywords:
- Adult
- Male
- Humans
- Female
- Adolescent
- "Glomerulonephritis, IGA/drug therapy"
- Asia
- Budesonide/adverse effects
- Europe
- "Proteinuria/drug therapy, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of a targeted-release formulation of budesonide in patients with primary IgA nephropathy (NefIgArd): 2-year results from a randomised phase 3 trial.
**Authors:** Lafayette R, Kristensen J, Stone A, Floege J, Tesař V, Trimarchi H, Zhang H, Eren N, Paliege A, Reich HN, Rovin BH, Barratt J, NefIgArd trial investigators
**Journal:** Lancet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01554-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01554-4)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2023 Sep 9;402(10405):859-870. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01554-4.
Epub  2023 Aug 14.

Efficacy and safety of a targeted-release formulation of budesonide in patients 
with primary IgA nephropathy (NefIgArd): 2-year results from a randomised phase 
3 trial.

Lafayette R(1), Kristensen J(2), Stone A(3), Floege J(4), Tesař V(5), Trimarchi 
H(6), Zhang H(7), Eren N(8), Paliege A(9), Reich HN(10), Rovin BH(11), Barratt 
J(12); NefIgArd trial investigators.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA, USA. Electronic address: czar@stanford.edu.
(2)Calliditas Therapeutics, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Stone Biostatistics, Crewe, UK.
(4)Department of Nephrology and Clinical Immunology, Rheinisch-Westfälische 
Technische Hochschule Aachen University Hospital, Aachen, Germany.
(5)Department of Nephrology, First Faculty of Medicine and General University 
Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(6)Nephrology Service, Hospital Británico de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(7)Renal Division, Peking University First Hospital, Peking University Institute 
of Nephrology, Beijing, China.
(8)Department of Nephrology, Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey.
(9)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine III, University 
Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(10)Division of Nephrology, University Health Network, Department of Medicine, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(11)Division of Nephrology, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 
Columbus, OH, USA.
(12)College of Medicine Biological Sciences and Psychology, University of 
Leicester, Leicester, UK.

Erratum in
    Lancet. 2023 Sep 9;402(10405):850. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01851-2.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2023 Sep 9;402(10405):827-829. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01633-1.
    Lancet. 2024 Jun 29;403(10446):2785. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)00794-3.
    Lancet. 2024 Jun 29;403(10446):2785-2786. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(24)00795-5.

BACKGROUND: IgA nephropathy is a chronic immune-mediated kidney disease and a 
major cause of kidney failure worldwide. The gut mucosal immune system is 
implicated in its pathogenesis, and Nefecon is a novel, oral, targeted-release 
formulation of budesonide designed to act at the gut mucosal level. We present 
findings from the 2-year, phase 3 NefIgArd trial of Nefecon in patients with IgA 
nephropathy.
METHODS: In this phase 3, multicentre, randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial, adult patients (aged ≥18 years) with primary IgA 
nephropathy, estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) 35-90 mL/min per 1·73 
m2, and persistent proteinuria (urine protein-creatinine ratio ≥0·8 g/g or 
proteinuria ≥1 g/24 h) despite optimised renin-angiotensin system blockade were 
enrolled at 132 hospital-based clinical sites in 20 countries worldwide. 
Patients were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive 16 mg/day oral capsules of 
Nefecon or matching placebo for 9 months, followed by a 15-month observational 
follow-up period off study drug. Randomisation via an interactive response 
technology system was stratified according to baseline proteinuria (<2 or ≥2 
g/24 h), baseline eGFR (<60 or ≥60 mL/min per 1·73 m2), and region 
(Asia-Pacific, Europe, North America, or South America). Patients, 
investigators, and site staff were masked to treatment assignment throughout the 
2-year trial. Optimised supportive care was also continued throughout the trial. 
The primary efficacy endpoint was time-weighted average of eGFR over 2 years. 
Efficacy and safety analyses were done in the full analysis set (ie, all 
randomly assigned patients). The trial was registered on ClinicalTrials.gov, 
NCT03643965, and is completed.
FINDINGS: Patients were recruited to the NefIgArd trial between Sept 5, 2018, 
and Jan 20, 2021, with 364 patients (182 per treatment group) randomly assigned 
in the full analysis set. 240 (66%) patients were men and 124 (34%) were women, 
and 275 (76%) identified as White. The time-weighted average of eGFR over 2 
years showed a statistically significant treatment benefit with Nefecon versus 
placebo (difference 5·05 mL/min per 1·73 m2 [95% CI 3·24 to 7·38], p<0·0001), 
with a time-weighted average change of -2·47 mL/min per 1·73 m2 (95% CI -3·88 to 
-1·02) reported with Nefecon and -7·52 mL/min per 1·73 m2 (-8·83 to -6·18) 
reported with placebo. The most commonly reported treatment-emergent adverse 
events during treatment with Nefecon were peripheral oedema (31 [17%] patients, 
vs placebo, seven [4%] patients), hypertension (22 [12%] vs six [3%]), muscle 
spasms (22 [12%] vs seven [4%]), acne (20 [11%] vs two [1%]), and headache (19 
[10%] vs 14 [8%]). No treatment-related deaths were reported.
INTERPRETATION: A 9-month treatment period with Nefecon provided a clinically 
relevant reduction in eGFR decline and a durable reduction in proteinuria versus 
placebo, providing support for a disease-modifying effect in patients with IgA 
nephropathy. Nefecon was also well tolerated, with a safety profile as expected 
for a locally acting oral budesonide product.
FUNDING: Calliditas Therapeutics.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01554-4
PMID: 37591292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests RL received support for 
the present manuscript from Calliditas Therapeutics; reports institutional 
grants from Calliditas Therapeutics, ChemoCentryx, Omeros, Otsuka, Pfizer, 
Roche, Travere Therapeutics, Vera Therapeutics, and Visterra; and has served on 
advisory boards for Cara Therapeutics. JK is a consultant for Calliditas 
Therapeutics. AS received support for the present manuscript from Calliditas 
Therapeutics and reports consulting fees from AstraZeneca and Calliditas 
Therapeutics outside the submitted work. JF has received consultancy fees or 
honoraria from AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Calliditas 
Therapeutics, Chinook, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Omeros, Otsuka, and Travere 
Therapeutics; and serves on data safety monitoring boards for Novo Nordisk and 
Visterra. VT reports consultancy fees or honoraria from Calliditas Therapeutics, 
Novartis, Omeros, Otsuka, and Travere Therapeutics. HT has served on advisory 
boards for Calliditas Therapeutics; and has received grants, honoraria, 
consultancy fees, or travel support from AstraZeneca, Calliditas Therapeutics, 
Chinook, George Clinical, Novartis, Omeros, Otsuka, and Travere Therapeutics. HZ 
has received consulting fees or honoraria from Calliditas Therapeutics, Chinook, 
Novartis, Omeros, and Otsuka. AP has received honoraria and travel grants from 
Alexion, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Otsuka, 
STADA Arzneimittel, and Vifor Pharma. HNR received support to serve as a member 
of the steering committee of the present study and funding for the execution of 
the present study from Calliditas Therapeutics; has received grant support from 
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, and the Kidney Foundation of Canada 
via John and Leslie Pearson; has received fellowship support from the Louise 
Fast Foundation; reports consulting fees, honoraria, or travel support from 
Calliditas Therapeutics, Chinook, Novartis, Omeros, Pfizer, and Travere 
Therapeutics; has served on advisory boards and steering committees for Chinook, 
Novartis, Omeros, Pfizer, and Travere Therapeutics; has been an investigator for 
Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Calliditas Therapeutics, ChemoCentryx, Chinook, Omeros, 
and Pfizer; and is director of the Glomerulonephritis Fellowship, funded by the 
Louise Fast Foundation. BHR received support for the present manuscript from 
Calliditas Therapeutics; reports consulting fees from Alpine Immune Sciences, 
Alexion, Calliditas Therapeutics, Novartis, Omeros, Visterra (owned by Otsuka), 
Q32 Bio, Travere Therapeutics, and Vera Therapeutics; and is currently co-chair 
of the Glomerular Diseases Guidelines for the Kidney Disease: Improving Global 
Outcomes organisation. JB is a consultant to Calliditas Therapeutics and reports 
grants and consultancy and personal fees from STADA Arzneimittel, Everest 
Medicines, and Calliditas Therapeutics. NE declares no competing interests.