---
reference_id: "PMID:39394465"
title: Pathogenic cryptic variants detectable through exome data reanalysis significantly increase the diagnostic yield in Joubert syndrome.
authors:
- "D'Abrusco F"
- Serpieri V
- Taccagni CM
- Garau J
- Cattaneo L
- Boggioni M
- Gana S
- Battini R
- Bertini E
- Zanni G
- Boltshauser E
- Borgatti R
- Romaniello R
- Signorini S
- Leuzzi V
- Caputi C
- Manti F
- "D'Arrigo S"
- De Laurentiis A
- Graziano C
- Lemke JR
- Morelli F
- Petković Ramadža D
- Sirchia F
- Giorgio E
- Valente EM
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-024-01703-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenic cryptic variants detectable through exome data reanalysis significantly increase the diagnostic yield in Joubert syndrome.
**Authors:** D'Abrusco F, Serpieri V, Taccagni CM, Garau J, Cattaneo L, Boggioni M, Gana S, Battini R, Bertini E, Zanni G, Boltshauser E, Borgatti R, Romaniello R, Signorini S, Leuzzi V, Caputi C, Manti F, D'Arrigo S, De Laurentiis A, Graziano C, Lemke JR, Morelli F, Petković Ramadža D, Sirchia F, Giorgio E, Valente EM
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-024-01703-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-024-01703-x)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2025 Jan;33(1):72-79. doi: 10.1038/s41431-024-01703-x. Epub 
2024 Oct 11.

Pathogenic cryptic variants detectable through exome data reanalysis 
significantly increase the diagnostic yield in Joubert syndrome.

D'Abrusco F(1), Serpieri V(1), Taccagni CM(1), Garau J(2), Cattaneo L(1), 
Boggioni M(1), Gana S(2), Battini R(3)(4), Bertini E(5), Zanni G(5), Boltshauser 
E(6), Borgatti R(7)(8), Romaniello R(8), Signorini S(8), Leuzzi V(9), Caputi 
C(10), Manti F(9), D'Arrigo S(11), De Laurentiis A(11), Graziano C(12), Lemke 
JR(13), Morelli F(14)(7), Petković Ramadža D(15), Sirchia F(1)(16), Giorgio 
E(1)(2), Valente EM(17)(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(2)Neurogenetics Research Centre, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(3)IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation, Pisa, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical ad Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy.
(5)Research Unit of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Disorders, IRCCS Bambino 
Gesù Pediatric Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(6)University Children's Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy.
(8)Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(9)Department of Human Neuroscience, Unit of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, 
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(10)Developmental Age Rehabilitation Service, Trasimeno District, Magione (PG), 
Italy.
(11)Department of Developmental Neurology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico 
Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy.
(12)Medical Genetics Unit, MeLabeT Department, AUSL Romagna, Cesena, Italy.
(13)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(14)Department of Psychiatry, Autism Spectrum Disorders and Related Conditions 
Service, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Centre Zagreb and University 
of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia.
(16)Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS San Matteo Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(17)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. 
enzamaria.valente@unipv.it.
(18)Neurogenetics Research Centre, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy. 
enzamaria.valente@unipv.it.

Joubert syndrome (JS) is a genetically heterogeneous neurodevelopmental 
ciliopathy. Despite exome sequencing (ES), several patients remain undiagnosed. 
This study aims to increase the diagnostic yield by uncovering cryptic variants 
through targeted ES reanalysis. We first focused on 26 patients in whom ES only 
disclosed heterozygous pathogenic coding variants in a JS gene. We reanalyzed 
raw ES data searching for copy number variants (CNVs) and intronic variants 
affecting splicing. We validated CNVs through real-time PCR or chromosomal 
microarray, and splicing variants through RT-PCR or minigenes. Cryptic variants 
were then searched in additional 44 ES-negative JS individuals. We identified 
cryptic "second hits" in 14 of 26 children (54%) and biallelic cryptic variants 
in 3 of 44 (7%), reaching a definite diagnosis in 17 of 70 (overall diagnostic 
gain 24%). We show that CNVs and intronic splicing variants are a common 
mutational mechanism in JS; more importantly, we demonstrate that a significant 
proportion of such variants can be disclosed simply through a focused reanalysis 
of available ES data, with a significantly increase of the diagnostic yield 
especially among patients previously found to carry heterozygous coding variants 
in the KIAA0586, CC2D2A and CPLANE1 genes.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-024-01703-x
PMCID: PMC11711660
PMID: 39394465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests. Ethical approval: This research study adheres to the 
principles in the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the medical 
ethical committee of the University of Pavia (Nr. 20210017314 dated 13/05/2021). 
Written informed consent was obtained from parents or legal representatives of 
all the enrolled patients for clinical testing and publication of genetic and 
clinical data.