---
reference_id: "PMID:39172673"
title: Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Adults.
authors:
- Olagunju AE
- Ghoddusi F
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2024'
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/diagnosis, therapy"
- Central Nervous System Stimulants/therapeutic use
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Methylphenidate/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Adults.
**Authors:** Olagunju AE, Ghoddusi F
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2024)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2024 Aug;110(2):157-166.

Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Adults.

Olagunju AE(1), Ghoddusi F(2).

Author information:
(1)JenCare Senior Medical Center, Newport News, Va.; 113th Air National Guard,
Andrews Air Force Base, Md.
(2)Oregon Health and Science University, Portland.

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder
involving functionally disruptive inattentive and/or hyperactive/impulsive
behaviors, such as being easily distracted, regularly failing to follow through
on tasks, being restless, or often interrupting others. ADHD diagnosed in
childhood often persists into adulthood, with 14.6% of U.S. adults meeting the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed., criteria for
ADHD. When evaluating for adult ADHD, other mental disorders should be included
in the differential diagnosis due to the substantial overlap of symptoms and
ADHD concurrence with anxiety/stress, mood, personality, impulse control, and
substance use disorders. An ADHD diagnosis requires a comprehensive clinical
history and evaluation, patient symptom and function assessment (e.g., Adult
ADHD Self-Report Scale, Conners Adult ADHD Rating Scales), and gathering of
collateral information. Clinical guidelines recommend a subset of amphetamine
and methylphenidate stimulants as first-line pharmacotherapy, which may be more
effective when combined with psychotherapy. For adults unable to take stimulants
or with concurrent anxiety/depression, options include atomoxetine, viloxazine,
and bupropion. To monitor for patient misuse or diversion of stimulants,
physicians should consider employing controlled substance agreements and
prescription drug monitoring programs.

PMID: 39172673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
