---
reference_id: "PMID:38776392"
title: Gain-of-function mutations of TRPV4 acting in endothelial cells drive blood-CNS barrier breakdown and motor neuron degeneration in mice.
authors:
- Sullivan JM
- Bagnell AM
- Alevy J
- Avila EM
- Mihaljević L
- Saavedra-Rivera PC
- Kong L
- Huh JS
- McCray BA
- Aisenberg WH
- Zuberi AR
- Bogdanik L
- Lutz CM
- Qiu Z
- Quinlan KA
- Searson PC
- Sumner CJ
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.adk1358
keywords:
- Animals
- "TRPV Cation Channels/metabolism, genetics"
- "Motor Neurons/pathology, metabolism"
- "Endothelial Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Blood-Brain Barrier/metabolism, pathology"
- Gain of Function Mutation
- Mice
- "Nerve Degeneration/pathology, genetics"
- Phenotype
- "Spinal Cord/pathology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gain-of-function mutations of TRPV4 acting in endothelial cells drive blood-CNS barrier breakdown and motor neuron degeneration in mice.
**Authors:** Sullivan JM, Bagnell AM, Alevy J, Avila EM, Mihaljević L, Saavedra-Rivera PC, Kong L, Huh JS, McCray BA, Aisenberg WH, Zuberi AR, Bogdanik L, Lutz CM, Qiu Z, Quinlan KA, Searson PC, Sumner CJ
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.adk1358](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.adk1358)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2024 May 22;16(748):eadk1358. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.adk1358.  Epub 2024 May 22.

Gain-of-function mutations of TRPV4 acting in endothelial cells drive blood-CNS 
barrier breakdown and motor neuron degeneration in mice.

Sullivan JM(1), Bagnell AM(1), Alevy J(2), Avila EM(3)(4), Mihaljević L(5), 
Saavedra-Rivera PC(1), Kong L(1), Huh JS(1), McCray BA(1), Aisenberg WH(1), 
Zuberi AR(6), Bogdanik L(6), Lutz CM(6), Qiu Z(2)(5), Quinlan KA(3)(4), Searson 
PC(7)(8)(9), Sumner CJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(2)Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(3)George and Anne Ryan Institute for Neuroscience, University of Rhode Island, 
Kingston, RI 02881, USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, 
University of Rhode Island, Kingston, RI 02881, USA.
(5)Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(6)Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA.
(7)Institute for Nanobiotechnology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 
21218, USA.
(8)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 
21218, USA.
(9)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.

Blood-CNS barrier disruption is a hallmark of numerous neurological disorders, 
yet whether barrier breakdown is sufficient to trigger neurodegenerative disease 
remains unresolved. Therapeutic strategies to mitigate barrier hyperpermeability 
are also limited. Dominant missense mutations of the cation channel transient 
receptor potential vanilloid 4 (TRPV4) cause forms of hereditary motor neuron 
disease. To gain insights into the cellular basis of these disorders, we 
generated knock-in mouse models of TRPV4 channelopathy by introducing two 
disease-causing mutations (R269C and R232C) into the endogenous mouse Trpv4 
gene. TRPV4 mutant mice exhibited weakness, early lethality, and regional motor 
neuron loss. Genetic deletion of the mutant Trpv4 allele from endothelial cells 
(but not neurons, glia, or muscle) rescued these phenotypes. Symptomatic mutant 
mice exhibited focal disruptions of blood-spinal cord barrier (BSCB) integrity, 
associated with a gain of function of mutant TRPV4 channel activity in neural 
vascular endothelial cells (NVECs) and alterations of NVEC tight junction 
structure. Systemic administration of a TRPV4-specific antagonist abrogated 
channel-mediated BSCB impairments and provided a marked phenotypic rescue of 
symptomatic mutant mice. Together, our findings show that mutant TRPV4 channels 
can drive motor neuron degeneration in a non-cell autonomous manner by 
precipitating focal breakdown of the BSCB. Further, these data highlight the 
reversibility of TRPV4-mediated BSCB impairments and identify a potential 
therapeutic strategy for patients with TRPV4 mutations.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.adk1358
PMCID: PMC11316273
PMID: 38776392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]