---
reference_id: "PMID:28317529"
title: Repigmentation through Melanocyte Regeneration in Vitiligo.
authors:
- Birlea SA
- Goldstein NB
- Norris DA
journal: Dermatol Clin
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.det.2016.11.015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Repigmentation through Melanocyte Regeneration in Vitiligo.
**Authors:** Birlea SA, Goldstein NB, Norris DA
**Journal:** Dermatol Clin (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.det.2016.11.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.det.2016.11.015)

## Content

1. Dermatol Clin. 2017 Apr;35(2):205-218. doi: 10.1016/j.det.2016.11.015.

Repigmentation through Melanocyte Regeneration in Vitiligo.

Birlea SA(1), Goldstein NB(2), Norris DA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
12801 17th Avenue, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Electronic address: 
Stanca.Birlea@ucdenver.edu.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
12801 17th Avenue, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
12801 17th Avenue, Aurora, CO 80045, USA; Department of Dermatology, Denver 
Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 1055 Clermont Street, Denver, CO 
80220, USA.

Repigmentation in vitiligo is the process that replaces, in the epidermal basal 
layer of vitiligo skin, the mature melanocytes that have been killed by 
cytotoxic T cells specific for melanocyte antigens. It consists of mobilization 
of melanocyte precursors in the hair follicle bulge and infundibulum to 
proliferate, migrate, and differentiate into mature melanocytes, moving from the 
hair follicle bulge to the interfollicular epidermis. The most common clinical 
presentation of repigmentation in vitiligo is the perifollicular pattern. The 
most potent stimulus for repigmentation is the UV light.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.det.2016.11.015
PMID: 28317529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]