---
reference_id: "PMID:37545366"
title: A novel colorimetric biosensor for rapid detection of dengue virus upon acid-induced aggregation of colloidal gold.
authors:
- Cam Duyen VT
- Van Toi V
- Van Hoi T
- Truong PL
journal: Anal Methods
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1039/d3ay00756a
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel colorimetric biosensor for rapid detection of dengue virus upon acid-induced aggregation of colloidal gold.
**Authors:** Cam Duyen VT, Van Toi V, Van Hoi T, Truong PL
**Journal:** Anal Methods (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1039/d3ay00756a](https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ay00756a)

## Content

1. Anal Methods. 2023 Aug 17;15(32):3991-3999. doi: 10.1039/d3ay00756a.

A novel colorimetric biosensor for rapid detection of dengue virus upon 
acid-induced aggregation of colloidal gold.

Cam Duyen VT(1)(2), Van Toi V(1)(2), Van Hoi T(3), Truong PL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Engineering, International University, Ho Chi Minh City 
700000, Vietnam. tplong@hcmiu.edu.vn.
(2)Vietnam National University, Ho Chi Minh City 700000, Vietnam.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ninh Thuan Hospital, Phan 
Rang-Thap Cham City 59100, Vietnam.

The dengue virus, once transmitted to people through a mosquito bite, causes an 
infectious disease called dengue fever. Dengue fever can develop into two fatal 
syndromes, namely dengue shock syndrome and dengue hemorrhagic fever. The 
existing strategies for detecting dengue infection mainly employ serological 
immunoassays and a real time PCR technique. Along with the positive features of 
efficiency, accuracy, and reproducibility, these procedures are limited by being 
time-consuming, costly, requiring special equipment for analysis, and unable to 
be carried out at the point-of-care level. Herein, we developed a colorimetric 
nanosensor for detecting dengue virus in clinical samples that is rapid, 
accurate, sensitive, and less expensive. The sensing platform relies on the 
specific binding between the DNA-conjugated AuNPs and genomic RNA of dengue, 
which results in the DNA-RNA heteroduplex structure formation that turns the 
gold colloid's ruby red color to blue due to the nano-aggregation in an acidic 
environment, which can be detected by the naked eye or measuring the absorbance. 
The DNA probe was designed to bind to a genomic RNA conserved region recognized 
in all four dengue serotypes. Dengue virus serotype 1 was utilized as a 
framework for virus detection; the designed nanosensor exhibited great 
specificity and selectivity, with the detection limit of ∼1 pg μL-1 (∼1.66 × 106 
RNA copies per reaction) and time of analysis of about 1 h including the RNA 
extraction step. The proposed colorimetric nanosensor offers an alternative tool 
for specific and highly sensitive detection of dengue that eliminates the 
requirement for thermal cycling and primer sets in PCR-based assays.

DOI: 10.1039/d3ay00756a
PMID: 37545366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]