---
reference_id: "PMID:40280427"
title: "Eating disorders, psychiatric comorbidities, and suicide."
authors:
- Chen LC
- Bai YM
- Tsai SJ
- Cheng CM
- Chen MH
journal: J Affect Disord
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2025.04.090
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Taiwan/epidemiology
- Adult
- Male
- Comorbidity
- "Suicide/statistics & numerical data, psychology"
- "Feeding and Eating Disorders/epidemiology, psychology"
- Middle Aged
- "Bulimia Nervosa/epidemiology, psychology"
- "Anorexia Nervosa/epidemiology, psychology"
- "Mental Disorders/epidemiology, psychology"
- Young Adult
- Risk Factors
- Suicidal Ideation
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Adolescent
- "Suicide, Attempted/statistics & numerical data"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eating disorders, psychiatric comorbidities, and suicide.
**Authors:** Chen LC, Bai YM, Tsai SJ, Cheng CM, Chen MH
**Journal:** J Affect Disord (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jad.2025.04.090](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2025.04.090)

## Content

1. J Affect Disord. 2025 Aug 1;382:290-295. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2025.04.090. Epub
2025 Apr 23.

Eating disorders, psychiatric comorbidities, and suicide.

Chen LC(1), Bai YM(2), Tsai SJ(2), Cheng CM(2), Chen MH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan;
Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Psychiatry, General Cheng Hsin
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan;
Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan;
Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung
University, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: kremer7119@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests a strong association between eating disorders and
suicidality, including suicidal ideation and suicide attempts. However, whether
eating disorders independently increase the risk of suicide remains unclear.
METHODS: From Taiwan's National Health Insurance Research Database, we collected
the data (2003-2017) of 18,284 patients with eating disorders (case group).
Among these patients, 2035 (11.13 %) had anorexia nervosa, 10,658 (58.29 %) had
bulimia nervosa, and 5591 (30.58 %) had other eating disorders. These patients
were matched (1:4; by age [birth year] and sex) with 73,136 individuals without
eating disorders (control group). For both groups, the rates of suicide over the
same period were estimated using data from the Database of All-Cause Mortality.
RESULTS: A time-dependent Cox regression model, which was adjusted for
demographic characteristics, psychiatric comorbidities, and Charlson Comorbidity
Index scores, indicated that the risk of suicide was higher in the case group
(hazard ratio [HR]: 2.51), particularly among patients with bulimia nervosa (HR:
2.59) or other eating disorders (HR: 2.31), than in the control group. After
adjustments for psychiatric comorbidities, the association between anorexia
nervosa and suicide became nonsignificant. Eating disorder-related psychiatric
comorbidities, particularly depressive disorder (HR: 15.89), further increased
the risk of suicide in the case group.
CONCLUSION: Eating disorders, particularly bulimia nervosa and other eating
disorders, serve as independent risk factors for suicide, regardless of
psychiatric comorbidities. Thus, clinicians and mental health providers should
develop suicide prevention strategies targeting eating disorders.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2025.04.090
PMID: 40280427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest No conflict of
interest.
