---
reference_id: "PMID:32206631"
title: Successful Treatment of a Korean Infant with Giant Cell Hepatitis with Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia Using Rituximab.
authors:
- Kim YH
- Kim JW
- Lee EJ
- Kang GH
- Kang HJ
- Moon JS
- Ko JS
journal: Pediatr Gastroenterol Hepatol Nutr
year: '2020'
doi: 10.5223/pghn.2020.23.2.180
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Successful Treatment of a Korean Infant with Giant Cell Hepatitis with Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia Using Rituximab.
**Authors:** Kim YH, Kim JW, Lee EJ, Kang GH, Kang HJ, Moon JS, Ko JS
**Journal:** Pediatr Gastroenterol Hepatol Nutr (2020)
**DOI:** [10.5223/pghn.2020.23.2.180](https://doi.org/10.5223/pghn.2020.23.2.180)

## Content

1. Pediatr Gastroenterol Hepatol Nutr. 2020 Mar;23(2):180-187. doi: 
10.5223/pghn.2020.23.2.180. Epub 2020 Mar 4.

Successful Treatment of a Korean Infant with Giant Cell Hepatitis with 
Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia Using Rituximab.

Kim YH(1), Kim JW(1), Lee EJ(1), Kang GH(2), Kang HJ(3), Moon JS(1), Ko JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul National University Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University 
Children's Hospital, Seoul, Korea.

Giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AHA) is a rare disease of 
infancy characterized by the presence of both Coombs-positive hemolytic anemia 
and progressive liver disease with giant cell transformation of hepatocytes. 
Here, we report a case involving a seven-month-old male infant who presented 
with AHA followed by cholestatic hepatitis. The clinical features included 
jaundice, pallor, and red urine. Physical examination showed generalized icterus 
and splenomegaly. The laboratory findings suggested warm-type AHA with 
cholestatic hepatitis. Liver biopsy revealed giant cell transformation of 
hepatocytes and moderate lobular inflammation. The patient was successfully 
treated with four doses of rituximab. Early relapse of hemolytic anemia and 
hepatitis was observed, which prompted the use of an additional salvage dose of 
rituximab. He is currently in clinical remission.

Copyright © 2020 by The Korean Society of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology 
and Nutrition.

DOI: 10.5223/pghn.2020.23.2.180
PMCID: PMC7073370
PMID: 32206631

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors have no 
financial conflicts of interest.