---
reference_id: "PMID:33843468"
title: Effect of innate and adaptive immune mechanisms on treatment regimens in an AIDS-related Kaposi's Sarcoma model.
authors:
- Chimbola OM
- Lungu EM
- Szomolay B
journal: J Biol Dyn
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/17513758.2021.1912420
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of innate and adaptive immune mechanisms on treatment regimens in an AIDS-related Kaposi's Sarcoma model.
**Authors:** Chimbola OM, Lungu EM, Szomolay B
**Journal:** J Biol Dyn (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17513758.2021.1912420](https://doi.org/10.1080/17513758.2021.1912420)

## Content

1. J Biol Dyn. 2021 Dec;15(1):213-249. doi: 10.1080/17513758.2021.1912420.

Effect of innate and adaptive immune mechanisms on treatment regimens in an 
AIDS-related Kaposi's Sarcoma model.

Chimbola OM(1)(2), Lungu EM(1), Szomolay B(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistical Sciences, Faculty of Science, 
Botswana International University of Science and Technology, Palapye, Botswana.
(2)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, School of Science, Engineering and 
Technology (SSET), Mulungushi University, Kabwe, Zambia.
(3)Division of Infection and Immunity, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, 
Cardiff, UK.

Kaposi Sarcoma (KS) is the most common AIDS-defining cancer, even as 
HIV-positive people live longer. Like other herpesviruses, human herpesvirus-8 
(HHV-8) establishes a lifelong infection of the host that in association with 
HIV infection may develop at any time during the illness. With the increasing 
global incidence of KS, there is an urgent need of designing optimal therapeutic 
strategies for HHV-8-related infections. Here we formulate two models with 
innate and adaptive immune mechanisms, relevant for non-AIDS KS (NAKS) and 
AIDS-KS, where the initial condition of the second model is given by the 
equilibrium state of the first one. For the model with innate mechanism (MIM), 
we define an infectivity resistance threshold that will determine whether the 
primary HHV-8 infection of B-cells will progress to secondary infection of 
progenitor cells, a concept relevant for viral carriers in the asymptomatic 
phase. The optimal control strategy has been employed to obtain treatment 
efficacy in case of a combined antiretroviral therapy (cART). For the MIM we 
have shown that KS therapy alone is capable of reducing the HHV-8 load. In the 
model with adaptive mechanism (MAM), we show that if cART is administered at 
optimal levels, that is, 0.48 for protease inhibitors, 0.79 for reverse 
transcriptase inhibitors and 0.25 for KS therapy, both HIV-1 and HHV-8 can be 
reduced. The predictions of these mathematical models have the potential to 
offer more effective therapeutic interventions in the treatment of NAKS and 
AIDS-KS.

DOI: 10.1080/17513758.2021.1912420
PMID: 33843468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]