---
reference_id: "PMID:31401790"
title: "Genetic and Environmental Interaction in Type 1 Diabetes: a Relationship Between Genetic Risk Alleles and Molecular Traits of Enterovirus Infection?"
authors:
- Blanter M
- Sork H
- Tuomela S
- Flodström-Tullberg M
journal: Curr Diab Rep
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s11892-019-1192-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic and Environmental Interaction in Type 1 Diabetes: a Relationship Between Genetic Risk Alleles and Molecular Traits of Enterovirus Infection?
**Authors:** Blanter M, Sork H, Tuomela S, Flodström-Tullberg M
**Journal:** Curr Diab Rep (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11892-019-1192-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11892-019-1192-8)

## Content

1. Curr Diab Rep. 2019 Aug 10;19(9):82. doi: 10.1007/s11892-019-1192-8.

Genetic and Environmental Interaction in Type 1 Diabetes: a Relationship Between 
Genetic Risk Alleles and Molecular Traits of Enterovirus Infection?

Blanter M(1)(2), Sork H(1), Tuomela S(1), Flodström-Tullberg M(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine Huddinge, Karolinska 
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Rega Institute for Medical Research, University of Leuven, Leuven, 
EU, Belgium.
(3)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine Huddinge, Karolinska 
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. 
malin.flodstrom-tullberg@ki.se.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: We provide an overview of the current knowledge regarding the 
natural history of human type 1 diabetes (T1D) and the documented associations 
between virus infections (in particular the enteroviruses) and disease 
development. We review studies that examine whether T1D-specific risk alleles in 
genes involved in the function of the immune system can alter susceptibility to 
virus infections or affect the magnitude of the host antiviral response. We also 
highlight where the major gaps in our knowledge exist and consider possible 
implications that new insights gained from the discussed gene-environment 
interaction studies may bring.
RECENT FINDINGS: A commonality between several of the studied T1D risk variants 
studied is their role in modulating the host immune response to viral infection. 
Generally, little support exists indicating that the risk variants increase 
susceptibility to infection and moreover, they usually appear to predispose the 
immune system towards a hyper-reactive state, decrease the risk of infection, 
and/or favor the establishment of viral persistence. In conclusion, although the 
current number of studies is limited, this type of research can provide 
important insights into the mechanisms that are central to disease pathogenesis 
and further describe how genetic and environmental factors jointly influence the 
risk of T1D development. The latter may provide genetic markers that could be 
used for patient stratification and for the selection of method(s) for disease 
prevention.

DOI: 10.1007/s11892-019-1192-8
PMCID: PMC6689284
PMID: 31401790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Marfa Blanter and Helena Sork declare that they 
have no conflict of interest. Soile Tuomela reports a Novo Nordisk Postdoctoral 
Research Fellowship and is an inventor on the patent WO/2014/207312. Malin 
Flodström-Tullberg reports grants from Janssen, and personal fees from 
Provention Bio Inc. (which is developing an enterovirus vaccine) where she 
serves on the scientific advisory board.