---
reference_id: "PMID:33715053"
title: "Brain Health in Children with Type 1 Diabetes: Risk and Protective Factors."
authors:
- Jaser SS
- Jordan LC
journal: Curr Diab Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s11892-021-01380-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain Health in Children with Type 1 Diabetes: Risk and Protective Factors.
**Authors:** Jaser SS, Jordan LC
**Journal:** Curr Diab Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11892-021-01380-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11892-021-01380-w)

## Content

1. Curr Diab Rep. 2021 Mar 14;21(4):12. doi: 10.1007/s11892-021-01380-w.

Brain Health in Children with Type 1 Diabetes: Risk and Protective Factors.

Jaser SS(1), Jordan LC(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 2525 West End 
Ave., Suite 1200, Nashville, TN, 37203, USA. sarah.jaser@vumc.org.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 2525 West End 
Ave., Suite 1200, Nashville, TN, 37203, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, 
USA.
(4)Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To synthesize findings from studies of neurocognitive 
complications in children with type 1 diabetes (T1D) and highlight potential 
risk and protective factors.
RECENT FINDINGS: Emerging evidence suggests that hyperglycemia and time in range 
may be more important for brain development than episodes of hypoglycemia. 
Further, diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) at the time of T1D diagnosis appears to be 
a particular risk factor for neurocognitive complications, particularly deficits 
in executive function skills and memory, with differences in cerebral white 
matter microstructure seen via advanced magnetic resonance imaging methods, and 
lower scores on measures of attention and memory observed among children who 
were diagnosed in DKA. Other factors that may influence neurocognitive 
development include child sleep, caregiver distress, and diabetes device use, 
presumably due to improved glycemic control. We highlight neurocognitive risk 
and protective factors for children with T1D and priorities for future research 
in this high-risk population.

DOI: 10.1007/s11892-021-01380-w
PMCID: PMC8647620
PMID: 33715053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
competing interests.