---
reference_id: "PMID:30256205"
title: "European Position Statement on Diagnosis, and Treatment of Meniere's Disease."
authors:
- Magnan J
- Özgirgin ON
- Trabalzini F
- Lacour M
- Escamez AL
- Magnusson M
- Güneri EA
- Guyot JP
- Nuti D
- Mandalà M
journal: J Int Adv Otol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.5152/iao.2018.140818
content_type: abstract_only
---

# European Position Statement on Diagnosis, and Treatment of Meniere's Disease.
**Authors:** Magnan J, Özgirgin ON, Trabalzini F, Lacour M, Escamez AL, Magnusson M, Güneri EA, Guyot JP, Nuti D, Mandalà M
**Journal:** J Int Adv Otol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.5152/iao.2018.140818](https://doi.org/10.5152/iao.2018.140818)

## Content

1. J Int Adv Otol. 2018 Aug;14(2):317-321. doi: 10.5152/iao.2018.140818.

European Position Statement on Diagnosis, and Treatment of Meniere's Disease.

Magnan J(1), Özgirgin ON(2), Trabalzini F(3), Lacour M(4), Escamez AL(5), 
Magnusson M(6), Güneri EA(7), Guyot JP(8), Nuti D(6), Mandalà M(6).

Author information:
(1)Past Head of ORL and Head and Neck Surgery Hopital Nord, Aix Marseille 
University, Marseille, France.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Bayındır Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Ospedale Pediatrico Meyer, Firenze, Italy.
(4)Aix-Marseille Université, Fédération de recherche 3C: Cerveau, Comportement, 
Cognition de Marseille St Charles, Marseille, France.
(5)Otology and Neurotology Group CTS495, Granada, Spain.
(6)Universita degli Studi di Siena, Siena, Italy.
(7)Department of Otolaryngology, Dokuz Eylul University School of Medicine, 
İzmir, Turkey.
(8)Department of Neurosciences, Hopitaux Universitaires Geneve, Geneve, 
Switzerland.

Meniere Disease keeps challenges in its diagnosis and treatment since was 
defined by Prosper Meniere at the beginning of 19th Century. Several 
classifications and definition were made until now and speculations still exist 
on its etiology. As the etiology remains speculative the treatment models remain 
in discussion also. The European Academy of Otology and Neurotology Vertigo 
Guidelines Study Group intended to work on the diagnosis and treatment of 
Meniere's disease and created the European Positional Statement Document also by 
resuming the consensus studies on it. The new techniques on diagnosis are 
emphasized as well as the treatment models for each stage of the disease are 
clarified by disregarding the dilemmas on its treatment. The conservative, 
noninvasive and invasive therapeutic models are highlighted.

DOI: 10.5152/iao.2018.140818
PMCID: PMC6354459
PMID: 30256205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors have no 
conflict of interest to declare.