---
reference_id: "PMID:23219235"
title: The role of sex differences in the prevalence and transmission of tuberculosis.
authors:
- Rhines AS
journal: Tuberculosis (Edinb)
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2012.10.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of sex differences in the prevalence and transmission of tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Rhines AS
**Journal:** Tuberculosis (Edinb) (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tube.2012.10.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tube.2012.10.012)

## Content

1. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2013 Jan;93(1):104-7. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2012.10.012. 
Epub 2012 Dec 5.

The role of sex differences in the prevalence and transmission of tuberculosis.

Rhines AS.

Tuberculosis (TB) epidemiology is characterized by significant differences in 
prevalence between men and women worldwide, with cases among men exceeding those 
found in women by a ratio of 2:1 in some regions. In this paper, we review the 
literature concerning differences in TB prevalence by sex, as well as arguments 
that have been offered to explain these differences. We conclude that, while 
underreporting and latent variables undoubtedly bias the observed differences in 
prevalence between males and females to some degree, there is also strong 
evidence that sex-based differences in TB prevalence represent real 
epidemiological differences. Such differences have implications for models of TB 
dynamics in countries with skewed population sex ratios such as China and India, 
and should be incorporated into models for TB control and forecasting.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tube.2012.10.012
PMID: 23219235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]