---
reference_id: "PMID:23239615"
title: A case of cerebral hypomyelination with spondylo-epi-metaphyseal dysplasia.
authors:
- Kimura-Ohba S
- Kagitani-Shimono K
- Hashimoto N
- Nabatame S
- Okinaga T
- Murakami A
- Miyake N
- Matsumoto N
- Osaka H
- Hojo K
- Tomita R
- Taniike M
- Ozono K
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35686
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Transport Systems, Acidic/deficiency, genetics"
- "Antiporters/deficiency, genetics"
- "Brain Stem/abnormalities, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- Discoidin Domain Receptors
- "Hereditary Central Nervous System Demyelinating Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- "Image Processing, Computer-Assisted"
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Microarray Analysis
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation
- Myelin Proteolipid Protein/genetics
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Psychomotor Disorders/diagnosis, genetics"
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- "Receptors, Mitogen/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of cerebral hypomyelination with spondylo-epi-metaphyseal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Kimura-Ohba S, Kagitani-Shimono K, Hashimoto N, Nabatame S, Okinaga T, Murakami A, Miyake N, Matsumoto N, Osaka H, Hojo K, Tomita R, Taniike M, Ozono K
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.35686](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.35686)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Jan;161A(1):203-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35686. Epub 2012
 Dec 13.

A case of cerebral hypomyelination with spondylo-epi-metaphyseal dysplasia.

Kimura-Ohba S(1), Kagitani-Shimono K, Hashimoto N, Nabatame S, Okinaga T, 
Murakami A, Miyake N, Matsumoto N, Osaka H, Hojo K, Tomita R, Taniike M, Ozono 
K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Osaka, Japan. skimura@ped.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

We reported on a male patient with rare leukoencephalopathy and skeletal 
abnormalities. The condition was first noticed as a developmental delay, 
nystagmus and ataxia at 1 year of age. At 4 years of age, he was diagnosed as 
hypomyelination with skeletal abnormalities from clinical features, brain 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and skeletal X-rays. His brain MRI revealed 
diffuse hypomyelination. These findings suggested the classical type of 
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) caused by proteolipid protein (PLP)-1 gene or 
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease (PMLD). However, we found neither mutation nor 
duplication of PLP-1. The patient had severe growth retardation and general 
skeletal dysplasia compatible with spondylo-epi-metaphyseal dysplasia; however 
the mutation of discoidin domain receptor (DDR) 2 gene was absent. The 
co-morbidity of hypomyelination with skeletal abnormalities is rare. We 
performed array CGH and no causal copy number variation was recognized. 
Alternatively, this condition may have been caused by a mutation of the gene 
encoding a molecule that functions in both cerebral myelination and skeletal 
development.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35686
PMID: 23239615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]