---
reference_id: "PMID:29540830"
title: "Classifying BRAF alterations in cancer: new rational therapeutic strategies for actionable mutations."
authors:
- Dankner M
- Rose AAN
- Rajkumar S
- Siegel PM
- Watson IR
journal: Oncogene
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41388-018-0171-x
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, mortality"
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, mortality"
- MAP Kinase Signaling System/drug effects
- "Melanoma/genetics, mortality"
- Molecular Targeted Therapy/methods
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Protein Domains
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/antagonists & inhibitors, chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Classifying BRAF alterations in cancer: new rational therapeutic strategies for actionable mutations.
**Authors:** Dankner M, Rose AAN, Rajkumar S, Siegel PM, Watson IR
**Journal:** Oncogene (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41388-018-0171-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41388-018-0171-x)

## Content

1. Oncogene. 2018 Jun;37(24):3183-3199. doi: 10.1038/s41388-018-0171-x. Epub 2018
 Mar 15.

Classifying BRAF alterations in cancer: new rational therapeutic strategies for
actionable mutations.

Dankner M(1)(2), Rose AAN(3), Rajkumar S(1)(4), Siegel PM(1)(2), Watson
IR(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(5)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
ian.watson2@mcgill.ca.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
ian.watson2@mcgill.ca.

The RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK signaling cascade is among the most frequently mutated
pathways in human cancer. Approximately 50% of melanoma patients possess a
druggable hotspot V600E/K mutation in the BRAF protein kinase. FDA-approved
combination therapies of BRAF and MEK inhibitors are available that provide
survival benefits to patients with a BRAF V600 mutation. Non-V600 BRAF mutants
are found in many cancers, and are more prevalent than V600 mutations in certain
tumor types. For example, between 50-80% of BRAF mutations in non-small cell
lung cancer and 22-30% in colorectal cancer encode for non-V600 mutants. As next
generation sequencing becomes increasingly used in clinical practice,
oncologists are frequently identifying non-V600 BRAF mutations in their
patient's tumors, but are uncertain of viable therapeutic options that could be
employed for optimal treatment. From recent studies, a new classification system
is emerging for BRAF mutations based on biochemical and signaling mechanisms
associated with these mutants. Class I BRAF mutations affect amino acid V600 and
signal as RAS-independent active monomers, class II mutations function as
RAS-independent activated dimers, and class III mutations are kinase impaired
but increase signaling through the MAPK pathway due to enhanced RAS binding and
subsequent CRAF activation. These distinct classes of BRAF mutations predict
response to targeted therapies and have important implications for future drug
development. Herein, we discuss pre-clinical and clinical findings that may lead
to improved treatments for all classes of BRAF mutant cancers.

DOI: 10.1038/s41388-018-0171-x
PMID: 29540830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
