---
reference_id: "PMID:22558223"
title: "Neuropathology in mouse models of mucopolysaccharidosis type I, IIIA and IIIB."
authors:
- Wilkinson FL
- Holley RJ
- Langford-Smith KJ
- Badrinath S
- Liao A
- Langford-Smith A
- Cooper JD
- Jones SA
- Wraith JE
- Wynn RF
- Merry CL
- Bigger BW
journal: PLoS One
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035787
keywords:
- Animals
- Carrier Proteins/biosynthesis
- Cytokines/biosynthesis
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- G(M2) Ganglioside/biosynthesis
- Glycosaminoglycans/biosynthesis
- Heparan Sulfate/metabolism
- Homer Scaffolding Proteins
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Lysosomes/metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis I/metabolism, pathology"
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis III/metabolism, pathology"
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- "Parietal Lobe/metabolism, pathology"
- "Somatosensory Cortex/metabolism, pathology"
- Vesicle-Associated Membrane Protein 2/biosynthesis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropathology in mouse models of mucopolysaccharidosis type I, IIIA and IIIB.
**Authors:** Wilkinson FL, Holley RJ, Langford-Smith KJ, Badrinath S, Liao A, Langford-Smith A, Cooper JD, Jones SA, Wraith JE, Wynn RF, Merry CL, Bigger BW
**Journal:** PLoS One (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0035787](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0035787)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35787. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035787. Epub 2012 Apr
27.

Neuropathology in mouse models of mucopolysaccharidosis type I, IIIA and IIIB.

Wilkinson FL(1), Holley RJ, Langford-Smith KJ, Badrinath S, Liao A,
Langford-Smith A, Cooper JD, Jones SA, Wraith JE, Wynn RF, Merry CL, Bigger BW.

Author information:
(1)Stem Cell & Neurotherapies, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, University
of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Mucopolysaccharide diseases (MPS) are caused by deficiency of glycosaminoglycan
(GAG) degrading enzymes, leading to GAG accumulation. Neurodegenerative MPS
diseases exhibit cognitive decline, behavioural problems and shortened lifespan.
We have characterised neuropathological changes in mouse models of MPSI, IIIA
and IIIB to provide a better understanding of these events.Wild-type (WT), MPSI,
IIIA and IIIB mouse brains were analysed at 4 and 9 months of age. Quantitative
immunohistochemistry showed significantly increased lysosomal compartment, GM2
ganglioside storage, neuroinflammation, decreased and mislocalised synaptic
vesicle associated membrane protein, (VAMP2), and decreased post-synaptic
protein, Homer-1, in layers II/III-VI of the primary motor, somatosensory and
parietal cortex. Total heparan sulphate (HS), was significantly elevated, and
abnormally N-, 6-O and 2-O sulphated compared to WT, potentially altering
HS-dependent cellular functions. Neuroinflammation was confirmed by
significantly increased MCP-1, MIP-1α, IL-1α, using cytometric bead arrays. An
overall genotype effect was seen in all parameters tested except for
synaptophysin staining, neuronal cell number and cortical thickness which were
not significantly different from WT. MPSIIIA and IIIB showed significantly more
pronounced pathology than MPSI in lysosomal storage, astrocytosis, microgliosis
and the percentage of 2-O sulphation of HS. We also observed significant time
progression of all genotypes from 4-9 months in lysosomal storage, astrocytosis,
microgliosis and synaptic disorganisation but not GM2 gangliosidosis. Individual
genotype*time differences were disparate, with significant progression from 4 to
9 months only seen for MPSIIIB with lysosomal storage, MPSI with astrocytocis
and MPSIIIA with microgliosis as well as neuronal loss. Transmission electron
microscopy of MPS brains revealed dystrophic axons, axonal storage, and
extensive lipid and lysosomal storage. These data lend novel insight to MPS
neuropathology, suggesting that MPSIIIA and IIIB have more pronounced
neuropathology than MPSI, yet all are still progressive, at least in some
aspects of neuropathology, from 4-9 months.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035787
PMCID: PMC3338781
PMID: 22558223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
