---
reference_id: "PMID:28079913"
title: Intravenous Immunoglobulin in the Treatment of Hematologic Disorders in Pediatrics.
authors:
- Villanueva G
- de Jong JL
- McNeer JL
journal: Pediatr Ann
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3928/19382359-20161213-01
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intravenous Immunoglobulin in the Treatment of Hematologic Disorders in Pediatrics.
**Authors:** Villanueva G, de Jong JL, McNeer JL
**Journal:** Pediatr Ann (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3928/19382359-20161213-01](https://doi.org/10.3928/19382359-20161213-01)

## Content

1. Pediatr Ann. 2017 Jan 1;46(1):e13-e18. doi: 10.3928/19382359-20161213-01.

Intravenous Immunoglobulin in the Treatment of Hematologic Disorders in 
Pediatrics.

Villanueva G, de Jong JL, McNeer JL.

Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) is pooled immunoglobulin G derived from human 
blood donors. It was introduced in the early 1980s to treat immunodeficiency 
disorders. Since then, its use has expanded to other fields such as neurology, 
rheumatology, and hematology. IVIG has been used to provide passive immunity in 
qualitative and quantitative immunoglobulin disorders, to neutralize antibodies 
in immune-mediated diseases, and as an immune modulatory agent. The difficulty 
of producing IVIG in high quantities, in addition to a growing list of 
"off-label" indications, has resulted in a worldwide shortage and increase in 
cost. From a pediatric hematology perspective, IVIG is considered an appropriate 
therapeutic option in autoimmune cytopenias, sometimes coadministrated with 
steroids. Its use in other hematologic disorders is questionable, and there is 
not sufficient evidence to recommend it. This article provides clear information 
to the general pediatrician about indications for IVIG therapy in children with 
hematologic disorders. [Pediatr Ann. 2017;46(1):e13-e18.].

Copyright 2017, SLACK Incorporated.

DOI: 10.3928/19382359-20161213-01
PMID: 28079913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]