---
reference_id: "PMID:20301690"
title: Brugada Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Brugada R
- Campuzano O
- Sarquella-Brugada G
- Brugada P
- Brugada J
- Hong K
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brugada Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Brugada R, Campuzano O, Sarquella-Brugada G, Brugada P, Brugada J, Hong K

## Content

1. Brugada Syndrome.

Brugada R(1), Campuzano O(2), Sarquella-Brugada G(3), Brugada P(4), Brugada 
J(5), Hong K(6).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2005 Mar 31 [updated 2022 Aug 25].

Author information:
(1)Girona Institute of Biomedical Research (IDIBGI), CIBERCV, and School of 
Medicine, University of Girona, Girona, Spain
(2)Girona Institute of Biomedical Research (IDIBGI) and School of Medicine, 
University of Girona, Girona, Spain
(3)Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain
(4)Free University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium
(5)Cardiovascular Institute, Hospital Clinic and University of Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain
(6)Heart Institute of Nanchang University, Jiangxi, China

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Brugada syndrome is characterized by cardiac 
conduction abnormalities (ST segment abnormalities in leads V1-V3 on EKG and a 
high risk for ventricular arrhythmias) that can result in sudden death. Brugada 
syndrome presents primarily during adulthood, although age at diagnosis may 
range from infancy to late adulthood. The mean age of sudden death is 
approximately 40 years. Clinical presentations may also include sudden infant 
death syndrome (SIDS; death of a child during the first year of life without an 
identifiable cause) and sudden unexpected nocturnal death syndrome (SUNDS), a 
typical presentation in individuals from Southeast Asia. Other conduction 
defects can include first-degree AV block, intraventricular conduction delay, 
right bundle branch block, and sick sinus syndrome.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Brugada syndrome is established clinically 
in an individual with characteristic EKG findings and suggestive clinical 
history and/or family history. A molecular diagnosis can be established in an 
individual with characteristic features and identification of a heterozygous 
pathogenic variant in SCN5A or one of the additional 42 genes associated with 
Brugada syndrome.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Implantable cardioverter defibrillator 
(ICD) in individuals with a history of syncope or cardiac arrest; isoproterenol 
for electrical storms. During surgery and in the postsurgical recovery period 
persons with Brugada syndrome should be monitored by EKG. Prevention of primary 
manifestations: Quinidine (1-2 g daily). Treatment of asymptomatic individuals 
is controversial. Surveillance: EKG monitoring every one to two years for 
at-risk individuals with a family history of Brugada syndrome or who have a 
known pathogenic variant that can lead to Brugada syndrome. Agents/circumstances 
to avoid: High fever, vagotonic agents, alpha-adrenergic agonists, 
beta-adrenergic antagonists, tricyclic antidepressants; first-generation 
antihistamines (dimenhydrinate); cocaine; class 1C antiarrhythmic drugs 
(flecainide, propafenone) and class 1A agents (procainamide, disopyramide). 
Evaluation of relatives at risk: Identification of relatives at risk using EKG 
or (if the pathogenic variant in the family is known) molecular genetic testing 
enables use of preventive measures and avoidance of medications that can induce 
ventricular arrhythmias.
GENETIC COUNSELING: In most instances Brugada syndrome is inherited in an 
autosomal dominant manner; the exception is KCNE5-related Brugada syndrome, 
which is inherited in an X-linked manner. Most individuals diagnosed with 
Brugada syndrome have an affected parent or another affected close relative. The 
proportion of individuals with Brugada syndrome caused by a de novo pathogenic 
variant is very low (~1%). Each child of an individual with autosomal dominant 
Brugada syndrome has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. The risk 
that a child will inherit the familial pathogenic variant and develop Brugada 
syndrome may be less than 50% because of reduced penetrance and the possibility 
of other genetic and environmental factors. Reduced penetrance and variable 
expressivity are hallmarks of Brugada syndrome. Once the Brugada 
syndrome-related pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family 
member, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk and preimplantation 
genetic testing for Brugada syndrome are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301690