---
reference_id: "PMID:33900645"
title: INZ-701 Prevents Ectopic Tissue Calcification and Restores Bone Architecture and Growth in ENPP1-Deficient Mice.
authors:
- Cheng Z
- "O'Brien K"
- Howe J
- Sullivan C
- Schrier D
- Lynch A
- Jungles S
- Sabbagh Y
- Thompson D
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4315
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- Child
- Choristoma
- Familial Hypophosphatemic Rickets
- Fibroblast Growth Factor-23
- Humans
- Mice
- Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics
- Pyrophosphatases/genetics
- "Vascular Calcification/drug therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# INZ-701 Prevents Ectopic Tissue Calcification and Restores Bone Architecture and Growth in ENPP1-Deficient Mice.
**Authors:** Cheng Z, O'Brien K, Howe J, Sullivan C, Schrier D, Lynch A, Jungles S, Sabbagh Y, Thompson D
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.4315](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.4315)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2021 Aug;36(8):1594-1604. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4315. Epub 2021
May 5.

INZ-701 Prevents Ectopic Tissue Calcification and Restores Bone Architecture and
Growth in ENPP1-Deficient Mice.

Cheng Z(1), O'Brien K(1), Howe J(1), Sullivan C(1), Schrier D(1), Lynch A(1),
Jungles S(1), Sabbagh Y(1), Thompson D(1).

Author information:
(1)Inozyme Pharma, Boston, MA, USA.

Ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 1 (ENPP1) is the major enzyme
that cleaves extracellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to generate
pyrophosphate (PPi), an inorganic metabolite with potent anticalcification
activity. Loss-of-function mutations cause hypopyrophosphatemia and lead to a
state of ENPP1 deficiency, which has an acute infantile phase known as
generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) and a pediatric to adult
phase known as autosomal-recessive hypophosphatemic rickets type 2 (ARHR2).
ENPP1 deficiency manifests as ectopic calcification of multiple tissues,
neointimal proliferation, premature mortality, impaired growth, and bone
deformities. INZ-701, a human ENPP1-Fc protein, is in clinical development as an
enzyme replacement therapy for the treatment of ENPP1 deficiency. The
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profile and therapeutic effect of INZ-701
were investigated in Enpp1asj/asj mice, a murine model of ENPP1 deficiency.
Enpp1asj/asj mice have undetectable plasma PPi, lower plasma phosphate, and
higher FGF23 levels compared with wild-type (WT) mice. Enpp1asj/asj mice on the
acceleration diet, containing high phosphate and low magnesium, quickly develop
clinical signs, including dehydration, rough hair coat, pinned ears, stiffed
legs, and hunched back. Enpp1asj/asj mice treated with vehicle had
aforementioned clinical signs plus severe ectopic calcification in multiple
tissues and bone defects, characteristics of the clinical phenotype observed in
GACI and ARHR2 patients. Our results showed a durable PPi response for more than
3 days after a single dose of INZ-701. Treatment of ENPP1-deficient mice every
other day with INZ-701 for 8 weeks restored circulating levels of PPi, prevented
pathological calcification in all the tested organs, restored growth parameters,
corrected bone defects, improved clinical signs, and decreased mortality in
Enpp1asj/asj mice, demonstrating the potential of INZ-701 to treat ENPP1
deficiency. © 2021 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR).

© 2021 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR).

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.4315
PMID: 33900645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
