---
reference_id: "PMID:8229525"
title: "Major histocompatibility complex class II deficiency: clinical manifestations, immunologic features, and outcome."
authors:
- Klein C
- Lisowska-Grospierre B
- LeDeist F
- Fischer A
- Griscelli C
journal: J Pediatr
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(05)80388-9
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Gene Expression
- "Genes, MHC Class I/genetics"
- "Genes, MHC Class II/genetics"
- "Histocompatibility Antigens Class II/genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- Immunophenotyping
- Infant
- "Major Histocompatibility Complex/genetics, immunology"
- Male
- "Severe Combined Immunodeficiency/genetics, immunology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Major histocompatibility complex class II deficiency: clinical manifestations, immunologic features, and outcome.
**Authors:** Klein C, Lisowska-Grospierre B, LeDeist F, Fischer A, Griscelli C
**Journal:** J Pediatr (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0022-3476(05)80388-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-3476(05)80388-9)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 1993 Dec;123(6):921-8. doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(05)80388-9.

Major histocompatibility complex class II deficiency: clinical manifestations,
immunologic features, and outcome.

Klein C(1), Lisowska-Grospierre B, LeDeist F, Fischer A, Griscelli C.

Author information:
(1)Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Unité d'Immunologie et d'Hématologie, Paris,
France.

Major histocompatibility complex class II deficiency (bare lymphocyte syndrome)
is a rare primary immunodeficiency disorder characterized by profound defects in
human leukocyte antigen class II expression, inconsistent and incomplete
expression of human leukocyte antigen class I molecules, and a complete lack of
cellular and humoral immune responses to foreign antigens. To define the
clinical and immunologic characteristics, outcome, and natural history of major
histocompatibility complex class II deficiency, we retrospectively analyzed 30
consecutive patients. Clinical onset occurred in the first year of life, usually
involving recurrent bronchopulmonary infections and chronic diarrhea. The
clinical course was complicated by viral meningoencephalitis, hepatitis,
cholangitis, and various autoimmune phenomena. Prognosis was very poor: the mean
age at the time of death was 4 years. The main cause of death was overwhelming
viral infection. Recent advances in bone marrow transplantation have raised
hopes of curative treatment: 6 of 14 patients who underwent bone marrow
transplantation were cured. Long-term survival after human leukocyte
antigen-identical and haploidentical bone marrow transplantation seemed to
depend primarily on the presence of preexisting viral infections.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-3476(05)80388-9
PMID: 8229525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
