---
reference_id: "PMID:32441155"
title: Cardiac sympathetic denervation in wild-type transthyretin amyloidosis.
authors:
- Gimelli A
- Aimo A
- Vergaro G
- Genovesi D
- Santonato V
- Kusch A
- Emdin M
- Marzullo P
journal: Amyloid
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/13506129.2020.1769059
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac sympathetic denervation in wild-type transthyretin amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Gimelli A, Aimo A, Vergaro G, Genovesi D, Santonato V, Kusch A, Emdin M, Marzullo P
**Journal:** Amyloid (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13506129.2020.1769059](https://doi.org/10.1080/13506129.2020.1769059)

## Content

1. Amyloid. 2020 Dec;27(4):237-243. doi: 10.1080/13506129.2020.1769059. Epub 2020
 May 22.

Cardiac sympathetic denervation in wild-type transthyretin amyloidosis.

Gimelli A(1), Aimo A(2), Vergaro G(1)(2), Genovesi D(1), Santonato V(1), Kusch 
A(1), Emdin M(1)(2), Marzullo P(1).

Author information:
(1)Fondazione Toscana Gabriele Monasterio, Pisa, Italy.
(2)Institute of Life Sciences, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Tissue accumulation of misfolded transthyretin (TTR) may occur 
because of TTR gene mutations (variant amyloid TTR amyloidosis, ATTRv), or as an 
age-related phenomenon (wild-type ATTR, ATTRwt). Cardiac sympathetic denervation 
has been reported in ATTRv, but has never been investigated in ATTRwt.
METHODS: Fifteen consecutive patients with ATTRwt cardiomyopathy (81% men, 
median age 82 years, no one with prior myocardial infarction) underwent Cadmium 
Zinc Telluride tomographic imaging for amyloid burden (99mTc-hydroxymethylene 
diphosphonate - 99mTc-HMDP), innervation (123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine - 
123I-MIBG), and perfusion (99mTc-tetrofosmin).
RESULTS: Median summed 99mTc-HMDP score was 60 (58-62), denoting a severe and 
diffuse amyloid burden. Planar 123I-MIBG examination showed decreased early and 
late H/M ratios (late H/M ratio: 1.5 [1.3-1.6], range 1.2-1.9, reference value 
≥2.0). Summed 123I-MIBG score was 12 (6-22), with the most prominent denervation 
in the infero-septal, inferior, and infero-lateral regions; summed rest score 
was 7 (5-11), with lowest degrees of myocardial perfusion in the inferior and 
infero-septal regions. The correlation between amyloid burden (as relative 
99mTc-HMDP uptake) and innervation (as relative 123I-MIBG uptake) did not 
achieve statistical significance at both segmental (p = .252) and regional level 
(p = .251). Nevertheless, denervation tended to worsen in parallel with the 
amyloid burden, and 123I-MIBG scores increased with 99mTc-HMDP scores. Segments 
and regions with prominent hypoperfusion also showed a higher degree of 
denervation (r = 0.500 and 0.591, respectively; both p < .001).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with ATTRwt cardiomyopathy display cardiac sympathetic 
denervation, particularly in the inferior and septal myocardial wall. Myocardial 
hypoperfusion has a similar regional pattern, while the amyloid burden is more 
extensive.

DOI: 10.1080/13506129.2020.1769059
PMID: 32441155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]