---
reference_id: "PMID:29188454"
title: A narrative review of the impact of interventions in acute kidney injury.
authors:
- Sykes L
- Nipah R
- Kalra P
- Green D
journal: J Nephrol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s40620-017-0454-2
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/diagnosis, mortality, nursing, physiopathology"
- Clinical Alarms
- Disease Progression
- "Education, Medical"
- Electronic Health Records
- Humans
- Mobile Applications
- Nephrology Nursing
- Patient Care Bundles
- Sick Leave
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A narrative review of the impact of interventions in acute kidney injury.
**Authors:** Sykes L, Nipah R, Kalra P, Green D
**Journal:** J Nephrol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40620-017-0454-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40620-017-0454-2)

## Content

1. J Nephrol. 2018 Aug;31(4):523-535. doi: 10.1007/s40620-017-0454-2. Epub 2017
Nov  29.

A narrative review of the impact of interventions in acute kidney injury.

Sykes L(1)(2), Nipah R(3)(4), Kalra P(4)(5), Green D(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Emergency Assessment Unit, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, MAHSC, Stott 
Lane, Salford, M6 8HD, UK. lynne.sykes@nhs.net.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Manchester, MAHSC, 
Manchester, UK. lynne.sykes@nhs.net.
(3)Emergency Assessment Unit, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, MAHSC, Stott 
Lane, Salford, M6 8HD, UK.
(4)Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Manchester, MAHSC, 
Manchester, UK.
(5)Department of Renal Medicine, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, MAHSC, 
Salford, UK.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is independently associated with significant morbidity 
and mortality, and is thus an important challenge facing physicians in modern 
healthcare. This narrative review assesses the impact of strategies employed to 
tackle AKI following the 2009 NCEPOD report on acute kidney injury (Sterwart et 
al. Acute kidney injury: adding insult to injury, pp 1-22, 2009). There is 
scarce and heterogeneous research into hard end points such as mortality and AKI 
progression for AKI interventions. This review found that e-alerts have varying 
effects on mortality and AKI progression, but decrease the incidence of 
contrast-induced AKI. The use of AKI bundles delivers statistically significant 
improvements in mortality and AKI progression. Similarly, AKI nurses generate 
statistically significant improvements on hospital acquired AKI and mortality. 
As yet there is no evidence base for the effects of education, sick day rules 
and smart phone apps. Overall, a combination of e-alerts and AKI bundles 
supported by education yielded the most effective and statistically significant 
results. Current practice revolves around reactive rather than preventative 
behaviour. This narrative review discusses reactive interventions and their 
impact on the progression and severity of AKI, and on mortality from it. 
Preventative behaviour, such as risk stratification and early intervention in 
the deteriorating patient, may be influential in decreasing AKI incidence.

DOI: 10.1007/s40620-017-0454-2
PMCID: PMC6061256
PMID: 29188454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors declare they 
have no conflict of interest. ETHICAL APPROVAL: This article does not contain 
any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors. 
INFORMED CONSENT: This article does not contain any human participants.