---
reference_id: "PMID:27927547"
title: Prevalence of Scoliosis and Thoracolumbar Kyphosis in Patients With Achondroplasia.
authors:
- Khan BI
- Yost MT
- Badkoobehi H
- Ain MC
journal: Spine Deform
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.jspd.2015.08.003
keywords:
- Achondroplasia/complications
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Kyphosis/complications, epidemiology"
- Lumbar Vertebrae
- Male
- Prevalence
- Retrospective Studies
- "Scoliosis/complications, epidemiology"
- Spinal Fusion
- Thoracic Vertebrae
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of Scoliosis and Thoracolumbar Kyphosis in Patients With Achondroplasia.
**Authors:** Khan BI, Yost MT, Badkoobehi H, Ain MC
**Journal:** Spine Deform (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jspd.2015.08.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jspd.2015.08.003)

## Content

1. Spine Deform. 2016 Mar;4(2):145-148. doi: 10.1016/j.jspd.2015.08.003. Epub
2016  Feb 2.

Prevalence of Scoliosis and Thoracolumbar Kyphosis in Patients With 
Achondroplasia.

Khan BI(1), Yost MT(1), Badkoobehi H(1), Ain MC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 4940 
Eastern Ave., Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 4940 
Eastern Ave., Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. Electronic address: 
editorialservices@jhmi.edu.

STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective chart review, case series.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the prevalence of scoliosis and kyphosis in patients 
with achondroplasia.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: There is little published research on the prevalence 
of scoliosis and thoracolumbar kyphosis in patients with achondroplasia.
METHODS: The authors retrospectively reviewed charts of 459 patients with 
achondroplasia who were seen by the senior author, an orthopedic surgeon, from 
1999 through 2013, at a tertiary referral center. After excluding patients who 
presented after spinal surgery and those who were referred for specific 
non-spinal issues, 326 patients were included (71%). Cobb angles were measured 
on lateral and posteroanterior radiographs. Scoliosis was defined as curvature 
on posteroanterior radiographs greater than 10°; thoracolumbar kyphosis was 
defined as any kyphotic curvature with an apex between T11 and L2. These data 
were then stratified by sex, age group (0-2, 3-12, 13-19, 20-40, and >40 years), 
and severity: within normal limits (≤10°), mild (>10°-25°), moderate (26°-50°), 
and severe (>50°).
RESULTS: The study population consisted of 176 males and 150 females with a mean 
age of 18 years. Scoliosis was observed in 60%. Thoracolumbar kyphosis was 
observed in 79%, with 52% exhibiting moderate to severe curvature.
CONCLUSIONS: In these patients, the rates of scoliosis and kyphosis were 60% and 
79%, respectively, which are much higher than the rates reported in the 
literature for the general population of children.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level 3 or 4.

Copyright © 2016 Scoliosis Research Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jspd.2015.08.003
PMID: 27927547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]