---
reference_id: "PMID:11641795"
title: "Spinal cord infarction: prognosis and recovery in a series of 36 patients."
authors:
- Salvador de la Barrera S
- Barca-Buyo A
- Montoto-Marqués A
- Ferreiro-Velasco ME
- Cidoncha-Dans M
- Rodriguez-Sotillo A
journal: Spinal Cord
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/sj.sc.3101201
keywords:
- Biomarkers
- Female
- Humans
- Infarction/pathology
- Ischemia/pathology
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Regional Blood Flow/physiology
- Retrospective Studies
- Spinal Cord/blood supply
- "Spinal Cord Injuries/cerebrospinal fluid, pathology"
- Treatment Outcome
- Walking
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal cord infarction: prognosis and recovery in a series of 36 patients.
**Authors:** Salvador de la Barrera S, Barca-Buyo A, Montoto-Marqués A, Ferreiro-Velasco ME, Cidoncha-Dans M, Rodriguez-Sotillo A
**Journal:** Spinal Cord (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.sc.3101201](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.sc.3101201)

## Content

1. Spinal Cord. 2001 Oct;39(10):520-5. doi: 10.1038/sj.sc.3101201.

Spinal cord infarction: prognosis and recovery in a series of 36 patients.

Salvador de la Barrera S(1), Barca-Buyo A, Montoto-Marqués A, Ferreiro-Velasco
ME, Cidoncha-Dans M, Rodriguez-Sotillo A.

Author information:
(1)Spinal Cord Injuries Unit, Hospital Juan Canalejo, A Coruña, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinical evolution and the functional outcome of
patients suffering from spinal cord infarction who were treated at the Spinal
Cord Injuries Unit. To try to determine the factors that could have influence in
their functional outcome.
SETTING: In a Spinal Cord Injuries Unit, regionally-based, and which forms part
of a general hospital with a high level of specialization.
METHOD: Retrospective study of the medical records of patients suffering from
vascular spinal cord ischemia, as acute anterior spinal artery syndrome or
associated with aortic surgery or rupture. Cases that were due to compressive,
tumoral or inflammatory pathologies were excluded. Assessment of the
neurological syndrome followed the ASIA/IMSOP criteria. Age, sex, history and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings were analyzed. Assessment of
functional outcome was made regarding ambulatory ability or wheelchair use, and
bladder/sphincter control.
RESULTS: Thirty-six cases were selected, the commonest group being spinal cord
ischemia due to idiopathic causes (36.1%). Following these, there were cases
associated with aortic surgery (25%), systemic arteriosclerosis (19.4%) and
acute deficit of perfusion (11.1%). The average age of the patients was 59.3
years, with a mortality of 22.2% during the hospital stay. Regarding the
functional outcomes at the moment of discharge, it must be pointed out that
57.1% of the patients were wheelchair users, 25% were ambulatory, using
technical aids, and 17.9% were fully ambulatory. The group who could perform
some kind of walking was significantly younger than the group of wheelchair
users (48.17 vs 61.38 years). Additionally, it became evident that those
patients who did not show voluntary muscle contraction at the time of admission
(ASIA groups A and B) presented a higher risk of being wheelchair users.
CONCLUSION: Acute spinal cord ischemia syndrome has a severe prognosis with
permanent and disabling sequelae. Initial neurological assessment following
ASIA/IMSOP classification proves to be the best predictor of prognosis, and the
patient's advanced age constitutes a negative factor for functional recovery.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.sc.3101201
PMID: 11641795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
