---
reference_id: "PMID:7199426"
title: "Epidemiology of hepatic angiosarcoma in the United States: 1964-1974."
authors:
- Falk H
- Herbert J
- Crowley S
- Ishak KG
- Thomas LB
- Popper H
- Caldwell GG
journal: Environ Health Perspect
year: '1981'
doi: 10.1289/ehp.8141107
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Hemangiosarcoma/epidemiology, etiology, mortality"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Liver Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology, mortality"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Occupational Diseases/chemically induced, epidemiology, mortality"
- Sex Factors
- United States
- Vinyl Chloride/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of hepatic angiosarcoma in the United States: 1964-1974.
**Authors:** Falk H, Herbert J, Crowley S, Ishak KG, Thomas LB, Popper H, Caldwell GG
**Journal:** Environ Health Perspect (1981)
**DOI:** [10.1289/ehp.8141107](https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.8141107)

## Content

1. Environ Health Perspect. 1981 Oct;41:107-13. doi: 10.1289/ehp.8141107.

Epidemiology of hepatic angiosarcoma in the United States: 1964-1974.

Falk H, Herbert J, Crowley S, Ishak KG, Thomas LB, Popper H, Caldwell GG.

A nationwide survey of hepatic angiosarcoma (HAS) in the United States during
the years 1964 through 1974 identified 168 cases. Of these, 42 cases (25%) were
associated with known etiologic factors, such as vinyl chloride monomer exposure
during preparation of poly(vinyl chloride), use of Thorotrast in angiography,
exposure to inorganic arsenic, and treatment with androgenic-anabolic steroids;
126 cases (75%) are of uncertain etiology. HAS most often affects males (ratio
of approximately 3:1), peaks in the sixth and seventh decades of life (somewhat
earlier than other sarcomas of the liver) and appears to occur more often in the
industrialized Northeast and Midwest (although reporting artifact may be a
factor). There is an extraordinary relative risk for poly(vinyl chloride)
polymerization workers; there may also be other chemical-industrial associations
that require further investigation. Prospective epidemiologic studies of HAS
should be considered as a means of identifying other causative factors (e.g.,
chemicals or drugs) related to HAS.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.8141107
PMCID: PMC1568861
PMID: 7199426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
