---
reference_id: "PMID:22139371"
title: Bardet-Biedl syndrome 3 (Bbs3) knockout mouse model reveals common BBS-associated phenotypes and Bbs3 unique phenotypes.
authors:
- Zhang Q
- Nishimura D
- Seo S
- Vogel T
- Morgan DA
- Searby C
- Bugge K
- Stone EM
- Rahmouni K
- Sheffield VC
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1113220108
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bardet-Biedl syndrome 3 (Bbs3) knockout mouse model reveals common BBS-associated phenotypes and Bbs3 unique phenotypes.
**Authors:** Zhang Q, Nishimura D, Seo S, Vogel T, Morgan DA, Searby C, Bugge K, Stone EM, Rahmouni K, Sheffield VC
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1113220108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1113220108)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Dec 20;108(51):20678-83. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1113220108. Epub 2011 Dec 2.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome 3 (Bbs3) knockout mouse model reveals common 
BBS-associated phenotypes and Bbs3 unique phenotypes.

Zhang Q(1), Nishimura D, Seo S, Vogel T, Morgan DA, Searby C, Bugge K, Stone EM, 
Rahmouni K, Sheffield VC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a heterogeneous disorder characterized by 
obesity, retinopathy, polydactyly, and congenital anomalies. The incidence of 
hypertension and diabetes are also increased in BBS patients. Mutation of 16 
genes independently causes BBS, and seven BBS proteins form the BBSome that 
promotes ciliary membrane elongation. BBS3 (ARL6), an ADP ribosylation 
factor-like small GTPase, is not part of the BBSome complex. The in vivo 
function of BBS3 is largely unknown. Here we developed a Bbs3 knockout model and 
demonstrate that Bbs3(-/-) mice develop BBS-associated phenotypes, including 
retinal degeneration, male infertility, and increased body fat. Interestingly, 
Bbs3(-/-) mice develop some unique phenotypes not seen in other BBS knockout 
models: no overt obesity, severe hydrocephalus, and elevated blood pressure 
(shared by some but not all BBS gene knockout mice). We found that endogenous 
BBS3 and the BBSome physically interact and depend on each other for their 
ciliary localization. This finding explains the phenotypic similarity between 
Bbs3(-/-) mice and BBSome subunit knockout mice. Loss of Bbs3 does not affect 
BBSome formation but disrupts normal localization of melanin concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 to ciliary membranes and affects retrograde transport of 
Smoothened inside cilia. We also show that the endogenous BBSome and BBS3 
associate with membranes and the membrane association of the BBSome and BBS3 are 
not interdependent. Differences between BBS mouse models suggest nonoverlapping 
functions to individual BBS protein.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1113220108
PMCID: PMC3251145
PMID: 22139371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.