---
reference_id: "PMID:22193408"
title: "BRCA1 and BRCA2: different roles in a common pathway of genome protection."
authors:
- Roy R
- Chun J
- Powell SN
journal: Nat Rev Cancer
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/nrc3181
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BRCA1 and BRCA2: different roles in a common pathway of genome protection.
**Authors:** Roy R, Chun J, Powell SN
**Journal:** Nat Rev Cancer (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrc3181](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrc3181)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011 Dec 23;12(1):68-78. doi: 10.1038/nrc3181.

BRCA1 and BRCA2: different roles in a common pathway of genome protection.

Roy R(1), Chun J, Powell SN.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Program and Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial 
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 May 24;12(5):372-3; author reply 372. doi: 
10.1038/nrc3181-c1.
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 May 24;12(5):372; author reply 372. doi: 
10.1038/nrc3181-c2.

The proteins encoded by the two major breast cancer susceptibility genes, BRCA1 
and BRCA2, work in a common pathway of genome protection. However, the two 
proteins work at different stages in the DNA damage response (DDR) and in DNA 
repair. BRCA1 is a pleiotropic DDR protein that functions in both checkpoint 
activation and DNA repair, whereas BRCA2 is a mediator of the core mechanism of 
homologous recombination. The links between the two proteins are not well 
understood, but they must exist to explain the marked similarity of human cancer 
susceptibility that arises with germline mutations in these genes. As discussed 
here, the proteins work in concert to protect the genome from double-strand DNA 
damage during DNA replication.

DOI: 10.1038/nrc3181
PMCID: PMC4972490
PMID: 22193408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.