---
reference_id: "PMID:31595041"
title: UFMylation of RPL26 links translocation-associated quality control to endoplasmic reticulum protein homeostasis.
authors:
- Wang L
- Xu Y
- Rogers H
- Saidi L
- Noguchi CT
- Li H
- Yewdell JW
- Guydosh NR
- Ye Y
journal: Cell Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41422-019-0236-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# UFMylation of RPL26 links translocation-associated quality control to endoplasmic reticulum protein homeostasis.
**Authors:** Wang L, Xu Y, Rogers H, Saidi L, Noguchi CT, Li H, Yewdell JW, Guydosh NR, Ye Y
**Journal:** Cell Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41422-019-0236-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41422-019-0236-6)

## Content

1. Cell Res. 2020 Jan;30(1):5-20. doi: 10.1038/s41422-019-0236-6. Epub 2019 Oct
8.

UFMylation of RPL26 links translocation-associated quality control to 
endoplasmic reticulum protein homeostasis.

Wang L(1), Xu Y(1), Rogers H(2), Saidi L(1), Noguchi CT(2), Li H(3), Yewdell 
JW(4), Guydosh NR(5), Ye Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(2)Molecular Medicine Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Augusta University Medical 
Center, Augusta, GA, 30912, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Genetics, National Institute of Diabetes and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
20892, USA.
(6)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA. 
yihongy@mail.nih.gov.

Comment in
    Cell Res. 2020 Jan;30(1):1-2. doi: 10.1038/s41422-019-0249-1.

Protein biogenesis at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in eukaryotic cells is 
monitored by a protein quality control system named ER-associated protein 
degradation (ERAD). While there has been substantial progress in understanding 
how ERAD eliminates defective polypeptides generated from erroneous folding, how 
cells remove nascent chains stalled in the translocon during co-translational 
protein insertion into the ER is unclear. Here we show that ribosome stalling 
during protein translocation induces the attachment of UFM1, a ubiquitin-like 
modifier, to two conserved lysine residues near the COOH-terminus of the 60S 
ribosomal subunit RPL26 (uL24) at the ER. Strikingly, RPL26 UFMylation enables 
the degradation of stalled nascent chains, but unlike ERAD or previously 
established cytosolic ribosome-associated quality control (RQC), which uses 
proteasome to degrade their client proteins, ribosome UFMylation promotes the 
targeting of a translocation-arrested ER protein to lysosomes for degradation. 
RPL26 UFMylation is upregulated during erythroid differentiation to cope with 
increased secretory flow, and compromising UFMylation impairs protein secretion, 
and ultimately hemoglobin production. We propose that in metazoan, 
co-translational protein translocation into the ER is safeguarded by a 
UFMylation-dependent protein quality control mechanism, which when impaired 
causes anemia in mice and abnormal neuronal development in humans.

DOI: 10.1038/s41422-019-0236-6
PMCID: PMC6951344
PMID: 31595041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.