---
reference_id: "PMID:41420620"
title: "Pityriasis lichenoides: a university department long-term follow-up study."
authors:
- Popadić S
- Lalošević J
- Lekić B
- Milinković Srećković M
- Minić S
- Škiljević D
- Živanović D
- Cakić J
- Popadić J
- Nikolić M
journal: Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Pannonica Adriat
year: '2025'
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/epidemiology, therapy, diagnosis, pathology"
- Child
- Adult
- Follow-Up Studies
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Middle Aged
- "Child, Preschool"
- Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Incidence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pityriasis lichenoides: a university department long-term follow-up study.
**Authors:** Popadić S, Lalošević J, Lekić B, Milinković Srećković M, Minić S, Škiljević D, Živanović D, Cakić J, Popadić J, Nikolić M
**Journal:** Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Pannonica Adriat (2025)

## Content

1. Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Pannonica Adriat. 2025 Dec;34(4):189-191.

Pityriasis lichenoides: a university department long-term follow-up study.

Popadić S(1)(2), Lalošević J(1)(2), Lekić B(1)(2), Milinković Srećković M(1)(2),
Minić S(1)(2), Škiljević D(1)(2), Živanović D(1)(2), Cakić J(1), Popadić J(2),
Nikolić M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Clinic, University Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.

INTRODUCTION: Pityriasis lichenoides (PL) predominantly affects children and
young adults. Its etiology is unclear, and the condition ranges from a harmless
inflammatory disease to possible progression or pre-manifestation of cutaneous
T-cell lymphoma.
METHODS: A long-term cohort included 242 patients with PL of all age groups
diagnosed and treated at our department from 2009 to 2019. Follow-up lasted
until 2024. We analyzed the disease duration, demographic and clinical features,
and outcomes in our patients.
RESULTS: The cohort of PL patients studied included 107 adults and 135 children.
A total of 221/242 (91%) patients were followed for 5 to 15 years (the median
follow-up period was 9.9 years). No statistically significant difference (p >
0.05) in disease duration or lesion distribution was found between different PL
forms in children or adults. The results show a male-to-female ratio of 1.7:1
for pediatric patients and 0.6:1 for adults, with a higher incidence of male
patients among children (p < 0.01). During the follow-up period, no progression
to cutaneous T-cell lymphoma was established.
CONCLUSIONS: PL encompasses a spectrum of papulosquamous disorders with male
predominance among children and female predominance in adults. In addition, the
study results underscore the benign course of PL.

PMID: 41420620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
