---
reference_id: "PMID:36669485"
title: Virus exposure and neurodegenerative disease risk across national biobanks.
authors:
- Levine KS
- Leonard HL
- Blauwendraat C
- Iwaki H
- Johnson N
- Bandres-Ciga S
- Ferrucci L
- Faghri F
- Singleton AB
- Nalls MA
journal: Neuron
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2022.12.029
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Virus exposure and neurodegenerative disease risk across national biobanks.
**Authors:** Levine KS, Leonard HL, Blauwendraat C, Iwaki H, Johnson N, Bandres-Ciga S, Ferrucci L, Faghri F, Singleton AB, Nalls MA
**Journal:** Neuron (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2022.12.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2022.12.029)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2023 Apr 5;111(7):1086-1093.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2022.12.029.
Epub  2023 Jan 19.

Virus exposure and neurodegenerative disease risk across national biobanks.

Levine KS(1), Leonard HL(2), Blauwendraat C(3), Iwaki H(4), Johnson N(1), 
Bandres-Ciga S(5), Ferrucci L(6), Faghri F(4), Singleton AB(3), Nalls MA(7).

Author information:
(1)Center for Alzheimer's and Related Dementias (CARD), National Institute on 
Aging and National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA; Data Tecnica International LLC, 
Washington DC, USA.
(2)Center for Alzheimer's and Related Dementias (CARD), National Institute on 
Aging and National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA; Data Tecnica International LLC, 
Washington DC, USA; Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA; University of Tuebingen, 
Tuebingen, Germany.
(3)Center for Alzheimer's and Related Dementias (CARD), National Institute on 
Aging and National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA; Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National 
Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Center for Alzheimer's and Related Dementias (CARD), National Institute on 
Aging and National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA; Data Tecnica International LLC, 
Washington DC, USA; Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)Center for Alzheimer's and Related Dementias (CARD), National Institute on 
Aging and National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(6)Longitudinal Studies Section, National Institute on Aging, National 
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(7)Center for Alzheimer's and Related Dementias (CARD), National Institute on 
Aging and National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA; Data Tecnica International LLC, 
Washington DC, USA; Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. Electronic address: 
nallsm@nih.gov.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2023 May;19(5):259-260. doi: 10.1038/s41582-023-00790-6.

With recent findings connecting the Epstein-Barr virus to an increased risk of 
multiple sclerosis and growing concerns regarding the neurological impact of the 
coronavirus pandemic, we examined potential links between viral exposures and 
neurodegenerative disease risk. Using time series data from FinnGen for 
discovery and cross-sectional data from the UK Biobank for replication, we 
identified 45 viral exposures significantly associated with increased risk of 
neurodegenerative disease and replicated 22 of these associations. The largest 
effect association was between viral encephalitis exposure and Alzheimer's 
disease. Influenza with pneumonia was significantly associated with five of the 
six neurodegenerative diseases studied. We also replicated the 
Epstein-Barr/multiple sclerosis association. Some of these exposures were 
associated with an increased risk of neurodegeneration up to 15 years after 
infection. As vaccines are currently available for some of the associated 
viruses, vaccination may be a way to reduce some risk of neurodegenerative 
disease.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2022.12.029
PMCID: PMC10079561
PMID: 36669485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests K.S.L., H.L.L., H.I., 
N.J., F.F., and M.A.N.’s participation in this project was part of a competitive 
contract awarded to Data Tecnica International LLC by the National Institutes of 
Health to support open science research. M.A.N. also currently serves on the 
scientific advisory board for Clover Therapeutics and is an advisor to Neuron23 
Inc.