---
reference_id: "PMID:39982551"
title: "Identification of Oncogenic Alterations in 124 Cases of Pediatric Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma: BEND7::ALK, DLG5::RET, and CCDC30::ROS1 Fusions Induce MAPK Pathway Activation."
authors:
- Liu Y
- Bao L
- Li G
- Kong W
- Li X
- Wang J
- Pan X
- Zhang Z
- Wang J
journal: Endocr Pathol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s12022-025-09850-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Child
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Thyroid Cancer, Papillary/genetics, pathology"
- Adolescent
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- MAP Kinase Signaling System/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of Oncogenic Alterations in 124 Cases of Pediatric Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma: BEND7::ALK, DLG5::RET, and CCDC30::ROS1 Fusions Induce MAPK Pathway Activation.
**Authors:** Liu Y, Bao L, Li G, Kong W, Li X, Wang J, Pan X, Zhang Z, Wang J
**Journal:** Endocr Pathol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12022-025-09850-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12022-025-09850-7)

## Content

1. Endocr Pathol. 2025 Feb 21;36(1):5. doi: 10.1007/s12022-025-09850-7.

Identification of Oncogenic Alterations in 124 Cases of Pediatric Papillary
Thyroid Carcinoma: BEND7::ALK, DLG5::RET, and CCDC30::ROS1 Fusions Induce MAPK
Pathway Activation.

Liu Y(#)(1), Bao L(#)(2), Li G(1), Kong W(1), Li X(1), Wang J(2), Pan X(1),
Zhang Z(3), Wang J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
Qingdao, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, School of Basic Medicine, Qingdao University,
Qingdao, China.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Qingdao Central Hospital, University of
Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, Qingdao, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
Qingdao, China. wangjigang@qdu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Pediatric papillary thyroid carcinoma (PPTC; under age 18 at the time of
diagnosis) is relatively uncommon. There are few studies concerning the genetic
background of PPTC in Asian countries. In this study, we reviewed 124 cases of
PPTC from a single medical center in China. DNA-based next-generation sequencing
(NGS) was performed to identify genetic alterations, with receptor tyrosine
kinase (RTK) fusions further validated by RNA-based NGS. DICER1 mutations and
TERT promoter mutations were detected by Sanger sequencing. We also explored the
relationship between these genetic alterations and the clinicopathologic
features, as well as the prognostic factors. Three recombinant plasmids
expressing V5/HIS-tagged RTK fusion proteins (BEND7::ALK, DLG5::RET,
CCDC30::ROS1) were constructed to investigate the in vitro effects. We found
that the two most common subtypes were the classic subtype (77.4%) and the
diffuse sclerosing subtype (17.7%). Hashimoto's thyroiditis was observed in
42.3% of cases, and regional lymph node metastasis was present in 82.9% of
patients. The most frequent genetic alteration was the BRAF c.1799 T > A
(p.V600E) mutation (63 patients, 50.8%), followed by RTK fusions (31 patients,
25.0%). A DICER1 mutation was detected in two cases, and TERT promoter mutations
were not observed in any of the patients. RTK fusions were associated with the
diffuse sclerosing subtype, Hashimoto's thyroiditis, and extrathyroidal
extension. Adverse prognostic factors identified included RTK fusion, age under
14 years, and tumor size over 2 cm. Additionally, a significant proportion of
these patients had actionable molecular alterations. Three rare kinase fusions,
BEND7::ALK, DLG5::RET, and CCDC30::ROS1, were shown to induce phosphorylation of
the MAPK pathway and promote cell proliferation in vitro. The specific RTK
inhibitors could counteract the fusion-induced cell proliferation. Our data
highlights the genetic landscape of Chinese PPTC patients, with RTK fusions
being associated with aggressive clinicopathologic features. The rare fusions
BEND7::ALK, DLG5::RET, and CCDC30::ROS1 may contribute to PPTC development with
a BRAF-like effect.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12022-025-09850-7
PMID: 39982551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing Interests: The authors
declare no competing interests.
