---
reference_id: "PMID:36237549"
title: Ehlers-Danlos syndromes and their manifestations in the visual system.
authors:
- Asanad S
- Bayomi M
- Brown D
- Buzzard J
- Lai E
- Ling C
- Miglani T
- Mohammed T
- Tsai J
- Uddin O
- Singman E
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.996458
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ehlers-Danlos syndromes and their manifestations in the visual system.
**Authors:** Asanad S, Bayomi M, Brown D, Buzzard J, Lai E, Ling C, Miglani T, Mohammed T, Tsai J, Uddin O, Singman E
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2022.996458](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2022.996458)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2022 Sep 27;9:996458. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.996458. 
eCollection 2022.

Ehlers-Danlos syndromes and their manifestations in the visual system.

Asanad S(1), Bayomi M(2), Brown D(1), Buzzard J(1), Lai E(1), Ling C(1), Miglani 
T(1), Mohammed T(1), Tsai J(1), Uddin O(1), Singman E(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Maryland School of Medicine, Department of Ophthalmology & 
Visual Sciences, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(2)University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, 
United States.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a rare, genetically variable, heterogenous group 
of (currently recognized) thirteen connective tissue disorders characterized by 
skin hyperextensibility, tissue fragility, and generalized joint hypermobility. 
In addition to these commonly recognized phenotypes, recent studies have notably 
highlighted variable ophthalmic features in EDS. In this review, we 
comprehensively gather and discuss the ocular manifestations of EDS and its 
thirteen subtypes in the clinical setting.

Copyright © 2022 Asanad, Bayomi, Brown, Buzzard, Lai, Ling, Miglani, Mohammed, 
Tsai, Uddin and Singman.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2022.996458
PMCID: PMC9552959
PMID: 36237549

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.