---
reference_id: "PMID:37515444"
title: "COVID-19-induced autoimmune thyroiditis: Exploring molecular mechanisms."
authors:
- Mohammadi B
- Dua K
- Saghafi M
- Singh SK
- Heydarifard Z
- Zandi M
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.29001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COVID-19-induced autoimmune thyroiditis: Exploring molecular mechanisms.
**Authors:** Mohammadi B, Dua K, Saghafi M, Singh SK, Heydarifard Z, Zandi M
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.29001](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.29001)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2023 Aug;95(8):e29001. doi: 10.1002/jmv.29001.

COVID-19-induced autoimmune thyroiditis: Exploring molecular mechanisms.

Mohammadi B(1)(2), Dua K(3)(4)(5), Saghafi M(1)(2), Singh SK(4)(6), Heydarifard 
Z(7)(8), Zandi M(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, 
Iran.
(2)Innovated Medical Research Center, Mashhad Branch, Islamic Azad University, 
Mashhad, Iran.
(3)Discipline of Pharmacy, Graduate School of Health, University of Technology 
Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)Faculty of Health, Australian Research Center in Complementary & Integrative 
Medicine, University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW, Australia.
(5)Uttaranchal Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Uttaranchal University, 
Dehradun, India.
(6)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Lovely Professional University, Punjab, 
India.
(7)Department of Virology, School of Medicine, Lorestan University of Medical 
Sciences, Khorramabad, Iran.
(8)School of Medicine, Hepatitis Research Center, Lorestan University of Medical 
Sciences, Khorramabad, Iran.
(9)Department of Virology, School of Public Health, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) damages multiple 
organs, including the thyroid, by direct invasion and cell entry via 
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 or indirectly by promoting excessive 
inflammation in the body. The immune system is a critical factor in antiviral 
immunity and disease progression. In the context of SARS-CoV-2 infection, the 
immune system may become overly activated, resulting in a shift from regulatory 
to effector responses, which may subsequently promote the development and 
progression of autoimmune diseases. The incidence of autoimmune thyroid 
diseases, such as subacute thyroiditis, Graves' disease, and Hashimoto's 
thyroiditis, increases in individuals with COVID-19 infection. This phenomenon 
may be attributed to aberrant responses of T-cell subtypes, the presence of 
autoantibodies, impaired regulatory cell function, and excessive production of 
inflammatory cytokines, namely interleukin (IL)-6, IL-1β, interferon-γ, and 
tumor necrosis factor-α. Therefore, insights into the immune responses involved 
in the development of autoimmune thyroid disease according to COVID-19 can help 
identify potential therapeutic approaches and guide the development of effective 
interventions to alleviate patients' symptoms.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.29001
PMID: 37515444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]