---
reference_id: "PMID:9849690"
title: Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for infantile osteopetrosis.
authors:
- Eapen M
- Davies SM
- Ramsay NK
- Orchard PJ
journal: Bone Marrow Transplant
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1701474
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Graft vs Host Disease/etiology
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation/adverse effects
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Osteopetrosis/mortality, therapy"
- Survival Rate
- Transplantation Chimera
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for infantile osteopetrosis.
**Authors:** Eapen M, Davies SM, Ramsay NK, Orchard PJ
**Journal:** Bone Marrow Transplant (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.bmt.1701474](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bmt.1701474)

## Content

1. Bone Marrow Transplant. 1998 Nov;22(10):941-6. doi: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1701474.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for infantile osteopetrosis.

Eapen M(1), Davies SM, Ramsay NK, Orchard PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

Infantile osteopetrosis is a lethal disorder resulting from a severe defect in 
the ability of osteoclasts to resorb bone. The only therapy shown to be capable 
of providing lasting benefit is allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation (HCT). We report the outcome of 10 patients with infantile 
malignant osteopetrosis treated with HCT from an HLA A, B, DRB1 matched (n=6) or 
A or B locus mismatched (n=4) family member or unrelated donor at the University 
of Minnesota between 1978 and 1997. Eight of 10 patients achieved primary 
engraftment; secondary graft failure was seen in two patients. Five of 10 
patients survive; three with full or partial donor chimerism and two with 
autologous hematological recovery. Transient or partial donor chimerism can be 
sufficient to correct the hematological manifestations of osteopetrosis. We 
recommend early referral for consideration of HCT with a related or unrelated 
donor as neurosensory manifestations of osteopetrosis are generally not 
reversible. Donor engraftment may be easier to achieve early in the course of 
the disease.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1701474
PMID: 9849690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]