---
reference_id: "PMID:11254444"
title: Neuronal sodium-channel alpha1-subunit mutations in generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus.
authors:
- Wallace RH
- Scheffer IE
- Barnett S
- Richards M
- Dibbens L
- Desai RR
- Lerman-Sagie T
- Lev D
- Mazarib A
- Brand N
- Ben-Zeev B
- Goikhman I
- Singh R
- Kremmidiotis G
- Gardner A
- Sutherland GR
- George AL Jr
- Mulley JC
- Berkovic SF
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1086/319516
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amino Acid Substitution/genetics
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2/genetics"
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Epilepsy, Generalized/genetics"
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Gene Frequency/genetics
- Genetic Variation/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- NAV1.1 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- Protein Subunits
- "Seizures, Febrile/genetics"
- Sequence Alignment
- Sodium Channels/genetics
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuronal sodium-channel alpha1-subunit mutations in generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus.
**Authors:** Wallace RH, Scheffer IE, Barnett S, Richards M, Dibbens L, Desai RR, Lerman-Sagie T, Lev D, Mazarib A, Brand N, Ben-Zeev B, Goikhman I, Singh R, Kremmidiotis G, Gardner A, Sutherland GR, George AL Jr, Mulley JC, Berkovic SF
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1086/319516](https://doi.org/10.1086/319516)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Apr;68(4):859-65. doi: 10.1086/319516. Epub 2001 Mar 13.

Neuronal sodium-channel alpha1-subunit mutations in generalized epilepsy with 
febrile seizures plus.

Wallace RH(1), Scheffer IE, Barnett S, Richards M, Dibbens L, Desai RR, 
Lerman-Sagie T, Lev D, Mazarib A, Brand N, Ben-Zeev B, Goikhman I, Singh R, 
Kremmidiotis G, Gardner A, Sutherland GR, George AL Jr, Mulley JC, Berkovic SF.

Author information:
(1)The Bionomics/Women's and Children's Hospital Research Facility, Thebarton, 
South Australia, Australia, 5031. rwallace@wch.bionomics.com.au

Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) is a familial epilepsy 
syndrome characterized by the presence of febrile and afebrile seizures. The 
first gene, GEFS1, was mapped to chromosome 19q and was identified as the 
sodium-channel beta1-subunit, SCN1B. A second locus on chromosome 2q, GEFS2, was 
recently identified as the sodium-channel alpha1-subunit, SCN1A. Single-stranded 
conformation analysis (SSCA) of SCN1A was performed in 53 unrelated index cases 
to estimate the frequency of mutations in patients with GEFS+. No mutations were 
found in 17 isolated cases of GEFS+. Three novel SCN1A mutations-D188V, V1353L, 
and I1656M-were found in 36 familial cases; of the remaining 33 families, 3 had 
mutations in SCN1B. On the basis of SSCA, the combined frequency of SCN1A and 
SCN1B mutations in familial cases of GEFS+ was found to be 17%.

DOI: 10.1086/319516
PMCID: PMC1275639
PMID: 11254444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]