---
reference_id: "PMID:40487265"
title: "Ongoing epidemic of scarlet fever in Shanghai and the emergence of M1(UK) lineage group A Streptococcus: a 14-year surveillance study across the COVID-19 pandemic period."
authors:
- Cai J
- Zhou X
- Zhang C
- Jiang Y
- Lv P
- Zhou Y
- Chen M
- Zeng M
journal: Lancet Reg Health West Pac
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.lanwpc.2025.101576
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ongoing epidemic of scarlet fever in Shanghai and the emergence of M1(UK) lineage group A Streptococcus: a 14-year surveillance study across the COVID-19 pandemic period.
**Authors:** Cai J, Zhou X, Zhang C, Jiang Y, Lv P, Zhou Y, Chen M, Zeng M
**Journal:** Lancet Reg Health West Pac (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lanwpc.2025.101576](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lanwpc.2025.101576)

## Content

1. Lancet Reg Health West Pac. 2025 May 13;58:101576. doi: 
10.1016/j.lanwpc.2025.101576. eCollection 2025 May.

Ongoing epidemic of scarlet fever in Shanghai and the emergence of M1(UK) 
lineage group A Streptococcus: a 14-year surveillance study across the COVID-19 
pandemic period.

Cai J(1), Zhou X(1), Zhang C(2), Jiang Y(3), Lv P(4), Zhou Y(2), Chen M(3)(4), 
Zeng M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Minhang Center for Disease Prevention and 
Control, Shanghai, China.
(3)Research and Translational Laboratory of Acute Injury and Secondary 
Infection, Minhang Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Minhang Hospital, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: The surge of group A Streptococcus (GAS) infections in regional 
countries warranted attention in the post-COVID-19 era. The resurgence of 
notifiable scarlet fever in China has been a public health issue since 2011. We 
conducted a consecutive 14-year surveillance study to analyse dynamic 
epidemiological profiles of scarlet fever from the perspective of epidemic trend 
and molecular evolution of GAS strains.
METHODS: From 2011 to 2024, epidemiological data on notifiable cases of scarlet 
fever and 3370 GAS isolates from children with scarlet fever were analysed. 
Incidence rates were calculated as the mean rate per 100,000 population with 95% 
CIs. Whole genome sequencing was performed on 332 emm12 and 248 emm1 isolates.
FINDINGS: From 2011 to 2024, a total of 25,539 cases of scarlet fever were 
reported in Shanghai. The mean incidence declined from 17.1/100,000 population 
(95%CI 9.7-24.3, pre-COVID-19 period) to 4.8/100,000 population (2.0-10.1, 
post-COVID-19 period). Children aged 4-9 years represented 85.6% of cases. 
Sixteen emm types were identified with predominance of emm12 (66.4%) and emm1 
(29.8%). The annual proportions of emm12 and emm1 alternatively fluctuated with 
a cycle of six years. GAS isolates displayed >90% resistance rate to 
erythromycin, clindamycin, and tetracycline. The distribution of emm types, 
antimicrobial resistance rates and profiles, and differences in superantigen 
genes carried by the emm12 and emm1 isolates were similar in the pre- and 
post-COVID-19 periods. Phylogenetic analysis indicated 96.7% of emm12 isolates 
belonged to Clade II, harbouring ICE-emm12 and ΦHKU.vir. Among the emm1 
isolates, the proportions of the ST1274 isolates increased from 10.5% 
(pre-COVID-19 period) to 73.7% (post-COVID-19 period). Four novel M1UK isolates 
were found in Shanghai, with distinctive characteristics of presence of speC and 
ssa.
INTERPRETATION: Persistent and periodic predominance of emm12 and emm1 types was 
responsible for the annual epidemic of scarlet fever in Shanghai. A marked 
decline in the incidence of scarlet fever in the last 5 years in Shanghai may be 
associated with enhanced type-specific immunity among the susceptible population 
and enhanced infection control measures, awareness, and actions in child 
institutions in the post-COVID-19 era. The emergence of the M1UK isolates with 
some distinctive characteristics and ST1274 lineage warrants further attention 
and continuous surveillance in China.
FUNDING: Shanghai municipal three-year action plan for strengthening the 
construction of the public health system 2023-2025 (GWVI-2.1.2); Research 
project of Shanghai Minhang District Health Commission (2024MW45).

© 2025 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.lanwpc.2025.101576
PMCID: PMC12142341
PMID: 40487265

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no competing interests.