---
reference_id: "PMID:39168181"
title: "Diffuse Cystic Lung Disease: A Clinical Guide to Recognition and Management."
authors:
- Franciosi AN
- Gupta N
- Murphy DJ
- Wikenheiser-Brokamp KA
- McCarthy C
journal: Chest
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2024.08.008
keywords:
- Humans
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- "Lung Diseases/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Birt-Hogg-Dube Syndrome/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Lymphangioleiomyomatosis/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Histiocytosis, Langerhans-Cell/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Lung Diseases, Interstitial/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Cysts/therapy, diagnosis"
- Disease Management
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diffuse Cystic Lung Disease: A Clinical Guide to Recognition and Management.
**Authors:** Franciosi AN, Gupta N, Murphy DJ, Wikenheiser-Brokamp KA, McCarthy C
**Journal:** Chest (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.chest.2024.08.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2024.08.008)

## Content

1. Chest. 2025 Feb;167(2):529-547. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2024.08.008. Epub 2024
Aug  19.

Diffuse Cystic Lung Disease: A Clinical Guide to Recognition and Management.

Franciosi AN(1), Gupta N(2), Murphy DJ(3), Wikenheiser-Brokamp KA(4), McCarthy 
C(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, St. Vincent's University Hospital, 
Dublin, Ireland; School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, University of 
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH.
(3)School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland; Department of 
Radiology, St. Vincent's University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Division of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Medicine, 
and Perinatal Institute Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH; Department of Pathology & Laboratory 
Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, St. Vincent's University Hospital, 
Dublin, Ireland; School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. 
Electronic address: cormac.mccarthy@ucd.ie.

TOPIC IMPORTANCE: Diffuse cystic lung diseases (DCLDs) represent a group of 
pathophysiologically heterogeneous entities that share a common radiologic 
phenotype of multiple thin-walled pulmonary cysts. DCLDs differ from the typical 
fibroinflammatory interstitial lung diseases in their epidemiology, clinical 
presentation, molecular pathogenesis, and therapeutic approaches, making them 
worthy of a distinct classification. The importance of timely and accurate 
identification of DCLDs is heightened by the impact on patient management 
including recent discoveries of targeted therapeutic approaches for some 
disorders.
REVIEW FINDINGS: This article offers a practical framework for evaluating 
patients with DCLD, indicating the most appropriate and current diagnostic and 
management approaches. We focus on the DCLDs that are most likely to be 
encountered by practicing pulmonologists: lymphangioleiomyomatosis, pulmonary 
Langerhans cell histiocytosis, Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome, and lymphoid 
interstitial pneumonia. Chest CT scan is the most informative noninvasive 
diagnostic modality to identify DCLDs. Thereafter, instituting a structured 
approach to high-yield associated factors (eg, medical, social, and family 
history; renal and dermatologic findings) increases the likelihood of 
identifying DCLDs and achieving a diagnosis.
SUMMARY: Although the individual diseases that comprise the DCLD family are 
rare, taken together, DCLDs can be encountered more frequently in clinical 
practice than commonly perceived. An increased eagerness among general pulmonary 
physicians to recognize these entities, coupled with a practical and systematic 
clinical approach to examinations and investigations, is required to improve 
case findings, allow earlier intervention, and reduce morbidity and mortality.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2024.08.008
PMID: 39168181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial/Nonfinancial Disclosures None 
declared.