---
reference_id: "PMID:23308244"
title: Addison's disease symptoms--a cross sectional study in urban South Africa.
authors:
- Ross IL
- Levitt NS
journal: PLoS One
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053526
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Addison's disease symptoms--a cross sectional study in urban South Africa.
**Authors:** Ross IL, Levitt NS
**Journal:** PLoS One (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0053526](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0053526)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53526. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053526. Epub 2013 Jan
7.

Addison's disease symptoms--a cross sectional study in urban South Africa.

Ross IL(1), Levitt NS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Groote Schuur Hospital, Department of Medicine, 
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. ian.ross@uct.ac.za

BACKGROUND: Addison's disease is a potentially life-threatening disorder, and 
prompt diagnosis, and introduction of steroid replacement has resulted in near 
normal life-expectancy. There are limited data describing the clinical 
presentation of Addison's disease in South Africa. It is hypothesised that 
patients may present in advanced state of ill-health, compared to Western 
countries.
PATIENTS: A national database of patients was compiled from primary care, 
referral centres and private practices. 148 patients were enrolled (97 white, 34 
mixed ancestry, 5 Asian and 12 black).
METHODS: Demographic and clinical data were elicited using questionnaires. 
Biochemical data were obtained from folder reviews and laboratory archived 
results.
RESULTS: The majority of the cohort was women (62%). The median and 
inter-quartile age range (IQR) of patients at enrolment was 46.0 (32.0-61.0) 
years, with a wide range from 2.8-88.0 years. The median and IQR age at initial 
diagnosis was 34.0 (20.0-45.0) years (range 0.02-77.0) years, indicating that at 
the time of enrolment, the patients, on average, were diagnosed with Addison's 
disease 12 years previously. Hyperpigmentation was observed in 76%, nausea and 
vomiting occurred in more than 40%, and weight loss was noted in 25%. Loss of 
consciousness as a presenting feature was recorded in 20%. with a 95% confidence 
interval [CI] of (14-28%) and shock occurred in 5% CI (1.5-8.5%). Case-finding 
was recorded at 3.1 per million.
CONCLUSIONS: The usual constellation of hyperpigmentation, nausea, vomiting and 
weight loss suggests Addison's disease, but a significant proportion present 
with an advanced state of ill-health and Addisonian crises. A lower prevalence 
rate, compared to Western countries is suggested.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053526
PMCID: PMC3538548
PMID: 23308244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Co-author N.S. Levitt is a 
PLOS ONE Editorial Board Member. This does not alter the authors’ adherence to 
all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.