---
reference_id: "PMID:21885601"
title: How I treat autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome.
authors:
- Rao VK
- Oliveira JB
journal: Blood
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-325217
keywords:
- Animals
- "Apoptosis/genetics, physiology"
- "Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome/classification, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Autoimmunity/genetics, physiology"
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- "Lymphoma/etiology, genetics"
- "Models, Biological"
- Risk Factors
- Signal Transduction/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How I treat autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome.
**Authors:** Rao VK, Oliveira JB
**Journal:** Blood (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2011-07-325217](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2011-07-325217)

## Content

1. Blood. 2011 Nov 24;118(22):5741-51. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-325217. Epub
2011  Sep 1.

How I treat autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome.

Rao VK(1), Oliveira JB.

Author information:
(1)ALPS Unit, Laboratory of Clinical and Infectious Diseases, National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. korao@niaid.nih.gov

Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) represents a failure of apoptotic
mechanisms to maintain lymphocyte homeostasis, permitting accumulation of
lymphoid mass and persistence of autoreactive cells that often manifest in
childhood with chronic nonmalignant lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and
recurring multilineage cytopenias. Cytopenias in these patients can be the
result of splenic sequestration as well as autoimmune complications manifesting
as autoimmune hemolytic anemia, immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, and autoimmune
neutropenia. More than 300 families with hereditary ALPS have now been
described; nearly 500 patients from these families have been studied and
followed worldwide over the last 20 years by our colleagues and ourselves. Some
of these patients with FAS mutations affecting the intracellular portion of the
FAS protein also have an increased risk of B-cell lymphoma. The best approaches
to diagnosis, follow-up, and management of ALPS, its associated cytopenias, and
other complications resulting from infiltrative lymphoproliferation and
autoimmunity are presented.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-325217
PMCID: PMC3228494
PMID: 21885601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
