---
reference_id: "PMID:17631035"
title: Multi-minicore Disease.
authors:
- Jungbluth H
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-31
keywords:
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Muscle Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- "Myopathy, Central Core/genetics, pathology"
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics
- Selenoproteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multi-minicore Disease.
**Authors:** Jungbluth H
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-2-31](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-2-31)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2007 Jul 13;2:31. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-31.

Multi-minicore Disease.

Jungbluth H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Evelina Children's Hospital, St. Thomas' 
Hospital, London, UK. Heinz.Jungbluth@gstt.nhs.uk

Multi-minicore Disease (MmD) is a recessively inherited neuromuscular disorder 
characterized by multiple cores on muscle biopsy and clinical features of a 
congenital myopathy. Prevalence is unknown. Marked clinical variability 
corresponds to genetic heterogeneity: the most instantly recognizable classic 
phenotype characterized by spinal rigidity, early scoliosis and respiratory 
impairment is due to recessive mutations in the selenoprotein N (SEPN1) gene, 
whereas recessive mutations in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) 
gene have been associated with a wider range of clinical features comprising 
external ophthalmoplegia, distal weakness and wasting or predominant hip girdle 
involvement resembling central core disease (CCD). In the latter forms, there 
may also be a histopathologic continuum with CCD due to dominant RYR1 mutations, 
reflecting the common genetic background. Pathogenetic mechanisms of 
RYR1-related MmD are currently not well understood, but likely to involve 
altered excitability and/or changes in calcium homeoestasis; calcium-binding 
motifs within the selenoprotein N protein also suggest a possible role in 
calcium handling. The diagnosis of MmD is based on the presence of suggestive 
clinical features and multiple cores on muscle biopsy; muscle MRI may aid 
genetic testing as patterns of selective muscle involvement are distinct 
depending on the genetic background. Mutational analysis of the RYR1 or the 
SEPN1 gene may provide genetic confirmation of the diagnosis. Management is 
mainly supportive and has to address the risk of marked respiratory impairment 
in SEPN1-related MmD and the possibility of malignant hyperthermia 
susceptibility in RYR1-related forms. In the majority of patients, weakness is 
static or only slowly progressive, with the degree of respiratory impairment 
being the most important prognostic factor.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-31
PMCID: PMC1947955
PMID: 17631035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]