---
reference_id: "PMID:31226726"
title: "The Contribution of B Cells in Autoimmune Liver Diseases."
authors:
- Taylor SA
- Assis DN
- Mack CL
journal: Semin Liver Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1055/s-0039-1688751
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Contribution of B Cells in Autoimmune Liver Diseases.
**Authors:** Taylor SA, Assis DN, Mack CL
**Journal:** Semin Liver Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0039-1688751](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0039-1688751)

## Content

Semin Liver Dis. 2019 Nov;39(4):422-431. doi: 10.1055/s-0039-1688751. Epub 2019 Jun 21.

The Contribution of B Cells in Autoimmune Liver Diseases.

Taylor SA(1), Assis DN(2), Mack CL(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois.
(2)Section of Digestive Diseases, Department of Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
(3)Section of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics, Digestive Health Institute, Children's Hospital Colorado, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado.

Autoreactive B cells can promote autoimmunity through antigen presentation to autoreactive T cells, production of autoantibodies, generation of cytokines promoting T cell activation and differentiation, and inhibition of regulatory T cells and B cells. The authors highlight studies pertaining to B cell mechanisms associated with disease pathogenesis and outcomes in autoimmune hepatitis and the immune-mediated cholangiopathies (primary biliary cholangitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, and biliary atresia). The vast majority of investigations focus on autoantibodies and future research endeavors should include deciphering the role of the B cell in T cell activation. Targeting B cell mechanisms in the treatment of autoimmune liver diseases is also highlighted.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0039-1688751
PMID: 31226726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
