---
reference_id: "PMID:37223402"
title: "Nanocrystalline Silver for the Treatment of Otomycosis: A Retrospective Study."
authors:
- Moruskar AS
- Shinde V
- Ingale MH
- Krishna AA
- Pawar RD
journal: Iran J Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.22038/IJORL.2023.66805.3303
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nanocrystalline Silver for the Treatment of Otomycosis: A Retrospective Study.
**Authors:** Moruskar AS, Shinde V, Ingale MH, Krishna AA, Pawar RD
**Journal:** Iran J Otorhinolaryngol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.22038/IJORL.2023.66805.3303](https://doi.org/10.22038/IJORL.2023.66805.3303)

## Content

1. Iran J Otorhinolaryngol. 2023 Mar;35(127):83-89. doi: 
10.22038/IJORL.2023.66805.3303.

Nanocrystalline Silver for the Treatment of Otomycosis: A Retrospective Study.

Moruskar AS(1), Shinde V(1), Ingale MH(1), Krishna AA(1), Pawar RD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Dr. D.Y. Patil Medical College and 
Hospital, Dr. D. Y. Patil Vidyapeeth, Pimpri, Pune, India.

INTRODUCTION: Otomycosis is a common fungal ear infection usually found in 
tropical and subtropical countries where infections arise due to hot and humid 
conditions. Also, these infections have a high recurrence rate with limited 
therapeutic options, which makes their management difficult. There is a long 
history of applying various antiseptic agents consisting of silver specifically 
for these broad-spectrum infections. Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) are futuristic 
nano-size products for controlling the microbial infection. The study aimed to 
determine the antifungal properties of nanocrystalline silver in patients with 
otomycosis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study was conducted in Pune (India) in the department 
of Ear Nose Throat & Head at the Dr. D.Y. Patil Medical College, Hospital and 
research center, Pune (India) for a period of one year (2019 -2020). Our study 
included 100 patients (58 male and 42 female) with clinically diagnosed 
otomycosis, which was treated by applying nanocrystalline silver gel-soaked 
Gelfoam.
RESULTS: Our study had patients of 18 to 60 years, with the highest prevalence 
in males (58%) aged 30 to 45 years. A large number of infection cases were 
reported at the hospital, i.e., 62 cases during the wet season as compared to 38 
cases during the dry season. Commonly found fungi belonging to the genus 
Aspergillus (55%), followed by Candida (45%). Improvements in symptoms were 
observed in 89% of the patients (70% within 5 to 6 days and 19% from 7 to 14 
days).
CONCLUSION: Applying nanocrystalline silver cured most of the patients (89%) 
within 14 days. Treating otomycosis patients with nanocrystalline silver 
demonstrated beneficial results. Further studies with larger samples should be 
conducted to validate the benefits of nanocrystalline silver.

DOI: 10.22038/IJORL.2023.66805.3303
PMCID: PMC10202168
PMID: 37223402