---
reference_id: "PMID:37760440"
title: Systematic Review of the Survival Outcomes of Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy in Women with Malignant Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors.
authors:
- Sakaguchi-Mukaida H
- Matsuzaki S
- Ueda Y
- Matsuzaki S
- Kakuda M
- Lee M
- Deguchi S
- Sakata M
- Maeda M
- Kakubari R
- Hisa T
- Mabuchi S
- Kamiura S
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cancers15184470
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic Review of the Survival Outcomes of Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy in Women with Malignant Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors.
**Authors:** Sakaguchi-Mukaida H, Matsuzaki S, Ueda Y, Matsuzaki S, Kakuda M, Lee M, Deguchi S, Sakata M, Maeda M, Kakubari R, Hisa T, Mabuchi S, Kamiura S
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers15184470](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers15184470)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Sep 8;15(18):4470. doi: 10.3390/cancers15184470.

Systematic Review of the Survival Outcomes of Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy in Women 
with Malignant Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors.

Sakaguchi-Mukaida H(1)(2), Matsuzaki S(1)(2), Ueda Y(2), Matsuzaki S(3), Kakuda 
M(2), Lee M(4), Deguchi S(1), Sakata M(1), Maeda M(1), Kakubari R(1), Hisa T(1), 
Mabuchi S(1), Kamiura S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology, Osaka International Cancer Institute, Osaka 
540-0008, Japan.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Osaka General Medical Center, Osaka 
558-8558, Japan.
(4)Department of Forensic Medicine, School of Medicine, Kindai University, Osaka 
577-8502, Japan.

Randomized clinical trials assessing the efficacy of neoadjuvant chemotherapy 
(NACT) for advanced epithelial ovarian cancer have predominantly included women 
with high-grade serous carcinomas. The response rate and oncological outcomes of 
NACT for malignant ovarian germ cell tumors (MOGCT) are poorly understood. This 
study aimed to examine the effects of NACT on women with MOGCT by conducting a 
systematic review of four public search engines. Fifteen studies were 
identified, and a further descriptive analysis was performed for 10 original 
articles. In those studies, most women were treated with a bleomycin, etoposide, 
and cisplatin regimen, and one to three cycles were used in most studies. Four 
studies comparing NACT and primary debulking surgery showed similar complete 
response rates (n = 2; pooled odds ratio [OR] 0.90, 95% confidence interval [CI] 
0.15-5.27), comparable overall survival (n = 3; 87.0-100% versus 70.0-100%), 
disease-free survival (n = 3; 87.0-100% versus 70.0-100%), recurrence rate (n = 
1; OR 3.50, 95%CI 0.38-32.50), and adverse events rate from chemotherapy between 
the groups. In conclusion, NACT may be considered for the management of MOGCT; 
however, possible candidates for NACT use and an ideal number of NACT cycles 
remain unknown. Further studies are warranted to validate the efficacy of NACT 
in advanced MOGCT patients.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15184470
PMCID: PMC10526733
PMID: 37760440

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.