---
reference_id: "PMID:41177216"
title: Effects of Empagliflozin on Urine Biomarkers in EMPA-KIDNEY.
authors:
- Malijan GB
- Sardell RJ
- Staplin N
- Devuyst O
- Chapman D
- Hill M
- Nägele N
- Moffat S
- Wijayaratne D
- Donovan K
- Zhu D
- Steubl D
- Hauske SJ
- Petrini M
- Ng SYA
- Pontremoli R
- Cherney DZI
- Tuttle KR
- Landray MJ
- Wanner C
- Baigent C
- Shlipak MG
- Haynes R
- Judge PK
- Ix JH
- Herrington WG
- EMPA-KIDNEY Collaborative Group
journal: Am J Kidney Dis
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2025.10.004
keywords:
- Humans
- "Glucosides/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- "Benzhydryl Compounds/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Biomarkers/urine
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- "Sodium-Glucose Transporter 2 Inhibitors/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Aged
- Hepatitis A Virus Cellular Receptor 1
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/urine, drug therapy"
- Double-Blind Method
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/drug therapy, urine"
- Albuminuria/urine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of Empagliflozin on Urine Biomarkers in EMPA-KIDNEY.
**Authors:** Malijan GB, Sardell RJ, Staplin N, Devuyst O, Chapman D, Hill M, Nägele N, Moffat S, Wijayaratne D, Donovan K, Zhu D, Steubl D, Hauske SJ, Petrini M, Ng SYA, Pontremoli R, Cherney DZI, Tuttle KR, Landray MJ, Wanner C, Baigent C, Shlipak MG, Haynes R, Judge PK, Ix JH, Herrington WG, EMPA-KIDNEY Collaborative Group
**Journal:** Am J Kidney Dis (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.ajkd.2025.10.004](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.ajkd.2025.10.004)

## Content

1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2026 Apr;87(4):553-563.e1. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2025.10.004. 
Epub 2025 Oct 31.

Effects of Empagliflozin on Urine Biomarkers in EMPA-KIDNEY.

Malijan GB(1), Sardell RJ(1), Staplin N(1), Devuyst O(2), Chapman D(3), Hill 
M(3), Nägele N(2), Moffat S(3), Wijayaratne D(1), Donovan K(4), Zhu D(4), Steubl 
D(5), Hauske SJ(6), Petrini M(7), Ng SYA(1), Pontremoli R(8), Cherney DZI(9), 
Tuttle KR(10), Landray MJ(1), Wanner C(11), Baigent C(1), Shlipak MG(12), Haynes 
R(4), Judge PK(13), Ix JH(14), Herrington WG(15); EMPA-KIDNEY Collaborative 
Group.

Author information:
(1)Renal Studies Group, Clinical Trial Service Unit and Epidemiological Studies 
Unit, Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Physiology, Mechanisms of Inherited Kidney Disorders, 
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Wolfson Laboratory, Clinical Trial Service Unit and Epidemiological Studies 
Unit, Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Renal Studies Group, Clinical Trial Service Unit and Epidemiological Studies 
Unit, Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom; Oxford Kidney Unit, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH, Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany; 
Department of Nephrology, Hospital Rechts der Isar, Technical University of 
Munich, Munich, Germany.
(6)Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH, Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany; Fifth 
Department of Medicine, University Medical Center Mannheim, University of 
Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.
(7)Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH, Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany.
(8)Università degli Studi and IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino di Genova, 
Genoa, Italy.
(9)University of Toronto, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(10)Providence Health Care and University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(11)Renal Studies Group, Clinical Trial Service Unit and Epidemiological Studies 
Unit, Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom; University Clinic of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(12)Kidney Health Research Collaborative, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center and University of California-San Francisco, San Francisco, California.
(13)Oxford Kidney Unit, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Oxford, United Kingdom.
(14)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, University 
of California-San Diego, San Diego, California.
(15)Renal Studies Group, Clinical Trial Service Unit and Epidemiological Studies 
Unit, Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom; Oxford Kidney Unit, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
will.herrington@ndph.ox.ac.uk.

RATIONALE & OBJECTIVE: Sodium/glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors 
substantially slow progression of chronic kidney disease and reduce the risk of 
acute kidney injury, but their effects on kidney physiology are incompletely 
understood. This study assessed the effects of empagliflozin on a comprehensive 
set of urinary tubular and glomerular biomarkers.
STUDY DESIGN: Randomized controlled trial.
SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: 2,752 participants from EMPA-KIDNEY.
EXPOSURE: Empagliflozin, 10 mg daily, versus placebo.
OUTCOME: Urine biomarkers indexed to urinary creatinine and averaged across 
on-study time points. Urine biomarkers included markers of glomerular disease 
(albumin, total protein); proximal tubular reabsorption (α1-microglobulin 
[A1M]); functional tubular reserve (epidermal growth factor [EGF], uromodulin 
[UMOD]); tubular injury/inflammation (kidney injury molecule-1 [KIM-1], 
neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin [NGAL]); and tubular ischemia/stress 
(dickkopf-3 [DKK-3], monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 [MCP-1]).
ANALYTICAL APPROACH: Mixed model repeated measures.
RESULTS: Allocation to empagliflozin reduced urinary albumin by 19% (95% CI, 
-24% to -14%), total protein by 7% (-11% to -2%), and UMOD by 63% (-65% to 
-61%). It increased A1M by 29% (25%-34%), DKK-3 by 22% (16%-29%), and NGAL by 7% 
(0-13%). Overall, there were no significant effects on EGF (1% [-1% to 4%]), 
KIM-1 (2% [-1% to 6%]), and MCP-1 (0 [-4% to 3%]). The magnitude of effects on 
biomarker levels was generally similar at 2 and 18 months of follow-up. The 
large reductions in UMOD were evident regardless of baseline diabetes status, 
primary cause of kidney disease, and level of estimated glomerular filtration 
rate (eGFR) and/or albuminuria. Exploratory mediation analyses suggest that 
reductions in albuminuria and UMOD accounted for 32% (15% to 52%) of the 
beneficial effect of empagliflozin on chronic eGFR slope.
LIMITATIONS: The mediation analyses cannot be used to formally confirm that UMOD 
reduction is a causal mediator for the kidney benefits of SGLT2 inhibitors.
CONCLUSIONS: SGLT2 inhibition imparts a large and sustained reduction in urinary 
UMOD and also increases some biomarkers partially reabsorbed by proximal tubules 
without consistently affecting markers of tubular injury. These effects deserve 
further detailed experimental exploration, particularly the effect on thick 
ascending limb-derived UMOD, which could represent a novel mechanism of kidney 
protection.
PLAIN-LANGUAGE SUMMARY: Sodium/glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors or "flozins" 
are medications that prevent kidney failure and acute kidney injury in a broad 
range of patients with kidney disease. However, exactly how these drugs exert 
their kidney protective effects is incompletely understood. In a large clinical 
trial involving patients with varying causes of kidney disease, empagliflozin 
reduced excretion of 2 common proteins in the urine (albumin and uromodulin). 
The substantial reduction in uromodulin was unexpected and is of particular 
interest because uromodulin is manufactured in a later part of the kidney beyond 
the site of action of empagliflozin. New experiments are needed to understand 
these results and assess whether the effect on uromodulin can explain the 
benefits of flozins for the kidney.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2025.10.004
PMID: 41177216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]