---
reference_id: "PMID:19539549"
title: "Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome: current understanding of pathophysiology, in-utero therapy and impact for future development."
authors:
- Bebbington M
journal: Semin Fetal Neonatal Med
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.siny.2009.05.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome: current understanding of pathophysiology, in-utero therapy and impact for future development.
**Authors:** Bebbington M
**Journal:** Semin Fetal Neonatal Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.siny.2009.05.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.siny.2009.05.001)

## Content

1. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2010 Feb;15(1):15-20. doi:
10.1016/j.siny.2009.05.001.  Epub 2009 Jun 17.

Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome: current understanding of pathophysiology, 
in-utero therapy and impact for future development.

Bebbington M(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Fetal Diagnosis and Treatment, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. bebbington@email.chop.edu

Whereas monochorionic twins account for only 30% of twin gestations, they 
contribute to a disproportionate extent to the overall twin perinatal morbidity 
and mortality. Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome can occur at any point in a 
monochorionic gestation but is associated with significant increases in both 
morbidity and mortality when it develops before 26 weeks of gestation. It is 
still not possible to predict accurately those pregnancies that will be 
affected. This has resulted in the practice of routine ultrasound surveillance 
beginning at the end of the first trimester. Our understanding of the physiology 
still has many gaps but there is an increased recognition of the heterogeneity 
that exists especially in the early stages of the disease. The role of the 
cardiovascular response of the recipient twin offers the potential for further 
refining the application of our current treatment modalities and may offer 
insight into future therapies. The optimal therapy at this point in time resides 
clearly with selective laser photocoagulation, and further refinements of 
techniques and patient selection may continue to improve outcomes. Finally, the 
in-utero responses generated by the fetuses to the physiologic stress of 
twin-to-twin transfusion may influence their response or ability to respond to 
cardiovascular stress in later life. If there is in-utero programming, then the 
detection and timely treatment of conditions such as twin-twin transfusion 
syndrome may have lifelong implications for both members of the twin pair.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.siny.2009.05.001
PMID: 19539549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]