---
reference_id: "PMID:38652222"
title: Chordoma cells possess bone-dissolving activity at the bone invasion front.
authors:
- Kawaai K
- Oishi Y
- Kuroda Y
- Tamura R
- Toda M
- Matsuo K
journal: Cell Oncol (Dordr)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s13402-024-00946-6
keywords:
- Chordoma/pathology
- Humans
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Osteoclasts/metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Calcium/metabolism
- Bone and Bones/pathology
- Aged
- Adult
- RANK Ligand/metabolism
- Osteolysis/pathology
- Neoplasm Invasiveness
- Tartrate-Resistant Acid Phosphatase/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chordoma cells possess bone-dissolving activity at the bone invasion front.
**Authors:** Kawaai K, Oishi Y, Kuroda Y, Tamura R, Toda M, Matsuo K
**Journal:** Cell Oncol (Dordr) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13402-024-00946-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13402-024-00946-6)

## Content

1. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2024 Oct;47(5):1663-1677. doi: 10.1007/s13402-024-00946-6.
 Epub 2024 Apr 23.

Chordoma cells possess bone-dissolving activity at the bone invasion front.

Kawaai K(1), Oishi Y(2), Kuroda Y(1), Tamura R(2), Toda M(2), Matsuo K(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Tissue Biology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, 160-8582, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, 160-8582, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Cell and Tissue Biology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, 160-8582, Tokyo, Japan. kmatsuo@keio.jp.

PURPOSE: Chordomas are malignant tumors that destroy bones, compress surrounding 
nerve tissues and exhibit phenotypes that recapitulate notochordal 
differentiation in the axial skeleton. Chordomas recur frequently, as they 
resist radio-chemotherapy and are difficult to completely resect, leading to 
repeated bone destruction and local expansion via unknown mechanisms. Here, 
using chordoma specimens and JHC7 chordoma cells, we asked whether chordoma 
cells possess bone-dissolving activity.
METHODS: CT imaging and histological analysis were performed to evaluate the 
structure and mineral density of chordoma-invaded bone and osteolytic marker 
expression. JHC7 cells were subjected to immunocytochemistry, imaging of cell 
fusion, calcium dynamics and acidic vacuoles, and bone lysis assays.
RESULTS: In patients, we found that the skull base invaded by chordoma was 
highly porous, showed low mineral density and contained brachyury-positive 
chordoma cells and conventional osteoclasts both expressing the osteolytic 
markers tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) and collagenases. JHC7 cells 
expressed TRAP and cathepsin K, became multinucleated via cell-cell fusion, 
showed spontaneous calcium oscillation, and were partly responsive to the 
osteoclastogenic cytokine RANKL. JHC7 cells exhibited large acidic vacuoles, and 
nonregulatory bone degradation without forming actin rings. Finally, 
bone-derived factors, calcium ions, TGF-β1, and IGF-1 enhanced JHC7 cell 
proliferation.
CONCLUSION: In chordoma, we propose that in addition to conventional bone 
resorption by osteoclasts, chordoma cells possess bone-dissolving activity at 
the tumor-bone boundary. Furthermore, bone destruction and tumor expansion may 
occur in a positive feedback loop.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s13402-024-00946-6
PMCID: PMC11466907
PMID: 38652222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.