---
reference_id: "PMID:26425393"
title: "Phenylketonuria Pathophysiology: on the Role of Metabolic Alterations."
authors:
- Schuck PF
- Malgarin F
- Cararo JH
- Cardoso F
- Streck EL
- Ferreira GC
journal: Aging Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.14336/AD.2015.0827
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenylketonuria Pathophysiology: on the Role of Metabolic Alterations.
**Authors:** Schuck PF, Malgarin F, Cararo JH, Cardoso F, Streck EL, Ferreira GC
**Journal:** Aging Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.14336/AD.2015.0827](https://doi.org/10.14336/AD.2015.0827)

## Content

1. Aging Dis. 2015 Oct 1;6(5):390-9. doi: 10.14336/AD.2015.0827. eCollection 2015
 Sep.

Phenylketonuria Pathophysiology: on the Role of Metabolic Alterations.

Schuck PF(1), Malgarin F(1), Cararo JH(1), Cardoso F(2), Streck EL(3), Ferreira 
GC(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Laboratório de Erros Inatos do Metabolismo, Unidade Acadêmica de Ciências 
da Saúde, Universidade do Extremo Sul Catarinense, Criciúma, SC, Brazil.
(2)2 Instituto de Bioquímica Médica Leopoldo de Meis, Universidade Federal do 
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)3 Laboratório de Bioenergética, Unidade Acadêmica de Ciências da Saúde, 
Universidade do Extremo Sul Catarinense, Criciúma, SC, Brazil.

Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an inborn error of phenylalanine (Phe) metabolism 
caused by the deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase. This deficiency leads to 
the accumulation of Phe and its metabolites in tissues and body fluids of PKU 
patients. The main signs and symptoms are found in the brain but the 
pathophysiology of this disease is not well understood. In this context, 
metabolic alterations such as oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and 
impaired protein and neurotransmitters synthesis have been described both in 
animal models and patients. This review aims to discuss the main metabolic 
disturbances reported in PKU and relate them with the pathophysiology of this 
disease. The elucidation of the pathophysiology of brain damage found in PKU 
patients will help to develop better therapeutic strategies to improve quality 
of life of patients affected by this condition.

DOI: 10.14336/AD.2015.0827
PMCID: PMC4567221
PMID: 26425393