---
reference_id: "PMID:32463598"
title: "Personalized whole-body models integrate metabolism, physiology, and the gut microbiome."
authors:
- Thiele I
- Sahoo S
- Heinken A
- Hertel J
- Heirendt L
- Aurich MK
- Fleming RM
journal: Mol Syst Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.15252/msb.20198982
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Personalized whole-body models integrate metabolism, physiology, and the gut microbiome.
**Authors:** Thiele I, Sahoo S, Heinken A, Hertel J, Heirendt L, Aurich MK, Fleming RM
**Journal:** Mol Syst Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.15252/msb.20198982](https://doi.org/10.15252/msb.20198982)

## Content

1. Mol Syst Biol. 2020 May;16(5):e8982. doi: 10.15252/msb.20198982.

Personalized whole-body models integrate metabolism, physiology, and the gut 
microbiome.

Thiele I(1)(2)(3)(4), Sahoo S(4), Heinken A(1), Hertel J(1)(5), Heirendt L(4), 
Aurich MK(4), Fleming RM(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
(2)Discipline of Microbiology, School of Natural Sciences, National University 
of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
(3)APC Microbiome, Cork, Ireland.
(4)Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, 
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medicine Greifswald, 
Greifswald, Germany.
(6)Division of Analytical Biosciences, Leiden Academic Centre for Drug Research, 
Faculty of Science, University of Leiden, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Comprehensive molecular-level models of human metabolism have been generated on 
a cellular level. However, models of whole-body metabolism have not been 
established as they require new methodological approaches to integrate molecular 
and physiological data. We developed a new metabolic network reconstruction 
approach that used organ-specific information from literature and omics data to 
generate two sex-specific whole-body metabolic (WBM) reconstructions. These 
reconstructions capture the metabolism of 26 organs and six blood cell types. 
Each WBM reconstruction represents whole-body organ-resolved metabolism with 
over 80,000 biochemical reactions in an anatomically and physiologically 
consistent manner. We parameterized the WBM reconstructions with physiological, 
dietary, and metabolomic data. The resulting WBM models could recapitulate known 
inter-organ metabolic cycles and energy use. We also illustrate that the WBM 
models can predict known biomarkers of inherited metabolic diseases in different 
biofluids. Predictions of basal metabolic rates, by WBM models personalized with 
physiological data, outperformed current phenomenological models. Finally, 
integrating microbiome data allowed the exploration of host-microbiome 
co-metabolism. Overall, the WBM reconstructions, and their derived computational 
models, represent an important step toward virtual physiological humans.

© 2020 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/msb.20198982
PMCID: PMC7285886
PMID: 32463598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.