---
reference_id: "PMID:39154163"
title: MAPT haplotype-associated transcriptomic changes in progressive supranuclear palsy.
authors:
- Ressler HW
- Humphrey J
- Vialle RA
- Babrowicz B
- Kandoi S
- Raj T
- Dickson DW
- Ertekin-Taner N
- Crary JF
- Farrell K
journal: Acta Neuropathol Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s40478-024-01839-3
keywords:
- Humans
- "Supranuclear Palsy, Progressive/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- "tau Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Haplotypes
- Transcriptome
- Aged
- Male
- Female
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- Middle Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MAPT haplotype-associated transcriptomic changes in progressive supranuclear palsy.
**Authors:** Ressler HW, Humphrey J, Vialle RA, Babrowicz B, Kandoi S, Raj T, Dickson DW, Ertekin-Taner N, Crary JF, Farrell K
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40478-024-01839-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-024-01839-3)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2024 Aug 17;12(1):135. doi:
10.1186/s40478-024-01839-3.

MAPT haplotype-associated transcriptomic changes in progressive supranuclear 
palsy.

Ressler HW(1)(2)(3)(4), Humphrey J(2)(5)(3)(6)(7), Vialle RA(2)(5)(3)(6)(7), 
Babrowicz B(1)(2)(3)(4), Kandoi S(1)(8)(2)(3)(4), Raj T(2)(5)(3)(6)(7), Dickson 
DW(9), Ertekin-Taner N(9), Crary JF(10)(11)(12)(13)(14), Farrell 
K(15)(16)(17)(18)(19).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 1 Gustave 
L. Levy Place Box 1194, New York, NY, 10029, USA.
(2)Nash Family Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA.
(4)Neuropathology Brain Bank and Research CoRE, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Ronald M. Loeb Center for Alzheimer's Disease, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences and Icahn Institute for Data 
Science and Genomic Technology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA.
(7)Estelle and Daniel Maggin Department of Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(8)Department of Artificial Intelligence and Human Health, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(9)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(10)Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 1 Gustave 
L. Levy Place Box 1194, New York, NY, 10029, USA. john.crary@mountsinai.org.
(11)Department of Artificial Intelligence and Human Health, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. john.crary@mountsinai.org.
(12)Nash Family Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY, USA. john.crary@mountsinai.org.
(13)Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA. john.crary@mountsinai.org.
(14)Neuropathology Brain Bank and Research CoRE, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. john.crary@mountsinai.org.
(15)Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 1 Gustave 
L. Levy Place Box 1194, New York, NY, 10029, USA. kurt.farrell@mssm.edu.
(16)Department of Artificial Intelligence and Human Health, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. kurt.farrell@mssm.edu.
(17)Nash Family Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY, USA. kurt.farrell@mssm.edu.
(18)Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA. kurt.farrell@mssm.edu.
(19)Neuropathology Brain Bank and Research CoRE, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. kurt.farrell@mssm.edu.

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is a neurodegenerative movement and 
cognitive disorder characterized by abnormal accumulation of the 
microtubule-associated protein tau in the brain. Biochemically, inclusions in 
PSP are enriched for tau proteoforms with four microtubule-binding domain 
repeats (4R), an isoform that arises from alternative tau pre-mRNA splicing. 
While preferential aggregation and reduced degradation of 4R tau protein is 
thought to play a role in inclusion formation and toxicity, an alternative 
hypothesis is that altered expression of tau mRNA isoforms plays a causal role. 
This stems from the observation that PSP is associated with common variation in 
the tau gene (MAPT) at the 17q21.31 locus which contains low copy number repeats 
flanking a large recurrent genomic inversion. The complex genomic structural 
changes at the locus give rise to two dominant haplotypes, termed H1 and H2, 
that have the potential to markedly influence gene expression. Here, we explored 
haplotype-dependent differences in gene expression using a bulk RNA-seq dataset 
derived from human post-mortem brain tissue from PSP (n = 84) and controls 
(n = 77) using a rigorous computational pipeline, including alternative pre-mRNA 
splicing. We found 3579 differentially expressed genes in the temporal cortex 
and 10,011 in the cerebellum. We also found 7214 differential splicing events in 
the temporal cortex and 18,802 in the cerebellum. In the cerebellum, total tau 
mRNA levels and the proportion of transcripts encoding 4R tau were significantly 
increased in PSP compared to controls. In the temporal cortex, the proportion of 
reads that expressed 4R tau was increased in cases compared to controls. 4R tau 
mRNA levels were significantly associated with the H1 haplotype in the temporal 
cortex. Further, we observed a marked haplotype-dependent difference in KANSL1 
expression that was strongly associated with H1 in both brain regions. These 
findings support the hypothesis that sporadic PSP is associated with 
haplotype-dependent increases in 4R tau mRNA that might play a causal role in 
this disorder.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-024-01839-3
PMCID: PMC11330133
PMID: 39154163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.