---
reference_id: "PMID:1614065"
title: Does essential hypertension cause end-stage renal disease?
authors:
- Weisstuch JM
- Dworkin LD
journal: Kidney Int Suppl
year: '1992'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Does essential hypertension cause end-stage renal disease?
**Authors:** Weisstuch JM, Dworkin LD
**Journal:** Kidney Int Suppl (1992)

## Content

1. Kidney Int Suppl. 1992 May;36:S33-7.

Does essential hypertension cause end-stage renal disease?

Weisstuch JM(1), Dworkin LD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, New York University Medical Center, New York.

The number of patients developing end-stage renal disease (ESRD) as a 
consequence of hypertension is increasing and accounts for 25% of new cases of 
ESRD in the United States. However, the diagnosis of hypertensive ESRD is one of 
exclusion and no pathologic data corroborate this classification. Undoubtedly, 
these patients suffer from a variety of diseases, including accelerated 
hypertension and atherosclerotic disease of the large arteries. Also included 
are patients with an undiagnosed primary renal disease. The prevalence of these 
conditions in the hypertensive population is unknown. It is also proposed that 
mild to moderate hypertension can lead to ESRD. In support of this view, early 
investigators noted that nephrosclerosis was correlated with hypertension and/or 
left ventricular hypertrophy. More recently, in the Hypertension Detection and 
Follow-up Program, renal function was found to decline in some patients despite 
treatment. Data from the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging indicate that the 
rate at which creatinine clearance declines with aging is correlated with blood 
pressure. A recent retrospective study reported that serum creatinine increased 
significantly in approximately 15% of treated hypertensive patients. However, in 
none of these studies was the presence of intrinsic renal disease definitively 
excluded. Furthermore, although an increase in serum creatinine or decline in 
clearance has been reported, progression to end-stage renal disease has not been 
documented. Therefore, additional studies are necessary to determine the 
frequency with which essential hypertension leads to end-stage renal disease.

PMID: 1614065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]