---
reference_id: "PMID:21419447"
title: Upper urinary tract carcinoma in Lynch syndrome cases.
authors:
- Crockett DG
- Wagner DG
- Holmäng S
- Johansson SL
- Lynch HT
journal: J Urol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2010.12.102
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Upper urinary tract carcinoma in Lynch syndrome cases.
**Authors:** Crockett DG, Wagner DG, Holmäng S, Johansson SL, Lynch HT
**Journal:** J Urol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.juro.2010.12.102](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.juro.2010.12.102)

## Content

1. J Urol. 2011 May;185(5):1627-30. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2010.12.102. Epub 2011
Mar  21.

Upper urinary tract carcinoma in Lynch syndrome cases.

Crockett DG(1), Wagner DG, Holmäng S, Johansson SL, Lynch HT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, Nebraska 68198, USA. david.crockett@unmc.edu

PURPOSE: Patients with Lynch syndrome are much more likely to have generally 
rare upper urinary tract urothelial carcinoma but not bladder urothelial 
carcinoma. While the risk has been quantified, to our knowledge there is no 
description of how this population of patients with Lynch syndrome and upper 
urinary tract cancer differs from the general population with upper urinary 
tract cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We obtained retrospective data on a cohort of patients 
with Lynch syndrome from the Hereditary Cancer Center in Omaha, Nebraska and 
compared the data to those on a control general population from western Sweden. 
These data were supplemented by a new survey about exposure to known risk 
factors.
RESULTS: Of the patients with Lynch syndrome 91% had mutations in MSH2 rather 
than in MSH1 and 79% showed upper tract urothelial carcinoma a mean of 15.85 
years after prior Lynch syndrome-type cancer. Median age at diagnosis was 62 
years vs 70 in the general population (p <0.0001). Only half of our patients had 
a significant smoking history and the male-to-female ratio was 0.95. Of patients 
with Lynch syndrome 51% had urothelial carcinoma in the ureter while it occurred 
in the renal pelvis in 65% of the general population (p = 0.0013). Similar 
numbers of high grade tumors were found in the Lynch syndrome and general 
populations (88% and 74%, respectively, p = 0.1108).
CONCLUSIONS: Upper urinary tract tumors develop at a younger age and are more 
likely to be in the ureter with an almost equal gender ratio in patients with 
Lynch syndrome. It has high grade potential similar to that in the general 
population.

Copyright © 2011 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.juro.2010.12.102
PMID: 21419447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]