---
reference_id: "PMID:35544052"
title: Association of Pathogenic DNA Variants Predisposing to Cardiomyopathy With Cardiovascular Disease Outcomes and All-Cause Mortality.
authors:
- Patel AP
- Dron JS
- Wang M
- Pirruccello JP
- Ng K
- Natarajan P
- Lebo M
- Ellinor PT
- Aragam KG
- Khera AV
journal: JAMA Cardiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2022.0901
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of Pathogenic DNA Variants Predisposing to Cardiomyopathy With Cardiovascular Disease Outcomes and All-Cause Mortality.
**Authors:** Patel AP, Dron JS, Wang M, Pirruccello JP, Ng K, Natarajan P, Lebo M, Ellinor PT, Aragam KG, Khera AV
**Journal:** JAMA Cardiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamacardio.2022.0901](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamacardio.2022.0901)

## Content

1. JAMA Cardiol. 2022 Jul 1;7(7):723-732. doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2022.0901.

Association of Pathogenic DNA Variants Predisposing to Cardiomyopathy With 
Cardiovascular Disease Outcomes and All-Cause Mortality.

Patel AP(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Dron JS(2)(3), Wang M(6), Pirruccello 
JP(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Ng K(7), Natarajan P(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Lebo M(8)(9)(10), 
Ellinor PT(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Aragam KG(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Khera AV(1)(2)(3)(4)(11).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston.
(2)Center for Genomic Medicine, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston.
(3)Cardiovascular Disease Initiative, Broad Institute of MIT, Harvard, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(5)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston.
(6)Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and 
Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(7)Center for Computational Health, IBM Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(8)Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, Partners HealthCare Personalized Medicine, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(9)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(10)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(11)Verve Therapeutics, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2022.0810.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2022.0909.

IMPORTANCE: Pathogenic variants associated with inherited cardiomyopathy are 
recognized as important and clinically actionable when identified, leading some 
clinicians to recommend population-wide genomic screening.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence and clinical importance of pathogenic 
variants associated with inherited cardiomyopathy within the context of 
contemporary clinical care.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This was a genetic association study of 
participants in Atherosclerosis in Risk Communities (ARIC), recruited from 1987 
to 1989, with median follow-up of 27 years, and the UK Biobank, recruited from 
2006 to 2010, with median follow-up of 10 years. ARIC participants were 
recruited from 4 sites across the US. UK Biobank participants were recruited 
from 22 sites across the UK. Participants in the US were of African and European 
ancestry; those in the UK were of African, East Asian, South Asian, and European 
ancestry. Statistical analyses were performed between August 1, 2021, and 
February 9, 2022.
EXPOSURES: Rare genetic variants predisposing to inherited cardiomyopathy.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Pathogenicity of observed DNA sequence variants in 
sequenced exomes of 13 genes (ACTC1, FLNC, GLA, LMNA, MYBPC3, MYH7, MYL2, MYL3, 
PRKAG2, TNNI3, TNNT2, TPM1, and TTN) associated with inherited cardiomyopathies 
were classified by a blinded clinical geneticist per American College of Medical 
Genetics recommendations. Incidence of all-cause mortality, heart failure, and 
atrial fibrillation were determined. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, 
echocardiography, and electrocardiogram measures were assessed in a subset of 
participants.
RESULTS: A total of 9667 ARIC participants (mean [SD] age, 54.0 [5.7] years; 
4232 women [43.8%]; 2658 African [27.5%] and 7009 European [72.5%] ancestry) and 
49 744 UK Biobank participants (mean [SD] age, 57.1 [8.0] years; 27 142 women 
[54.5%]; 1006 African [2.0%], 173 East Asian [0.3%], 939 South Asian [1.9%], and 
46 449 European [93.4%] European ancestry) were included in the study. Of those, 
59 participants (0.61%) in ARIC and 364 participants (0.73%) in UK Biobank 
harbored an actionable pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant associated with 
dilated or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Carriers of these variants were not 
reliably identifiable by imaging. However, the presence of these variants was 
associated with increased risk of heart failure (hazard ratio [HR], 1.7; 95% CI, 
1.1-2.8), atrial fibrillation (HR, 2.9; 95% CI, 1.9-4.5), and all-cause 
mortality (HR, 1.5; 95% CI, 1.1-2.2) in ARIC. Similar risk patterns were 
observed in the UK Biobank.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Results of this genetic association study suggest 
that approximately 0.7% of study participants harbored a pathogenic variant 
associated with inherited cardiomyopathy. These variant carriers would be 
challenging to identify within clinical practice without genetic testing but are 
at increased risk for cardiovascular disease and all-cause mortality.

DOI: 10.1001/jamacardio.2022.0901
PMCID: PMC9096692
PMID: 35544052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Patel 
reported receiving grants from the National Human Genome Research Institute and 
Harvard University Catalyst during the conduct of the study. Dr Pirruccello 
reported receiving personal fees from Maze Therapeutics during the conduct of 
the study. Dr Ng reported being employed by IBM. Dr Natarajan reported receiving 
grants from Amgen, Apple, AstraZeneca, Boston Scientific, and Novartis; personal 
fees from Apple, AstraZeneca, Blackstone Life Sciences, Genentech, Novartis, 
Foresite Labs, and TenSixteen Bio; equity from TenSixteen Bio and geneXwell; and 
having spousal employment from Vertex outside the submitted work. Dr Lebo 
reported being employed at a not-for-profit clinical molecular genetics 
laboratory (Mass General Brigham Lab for Molecular Medicine) that provides 
diagnostic testing and screening for inherited cardiomyopathies. Dr Ellinor 
reported receiving grants from Bayer AG and IBM Research and personal fees from 
Bayer AG, MyoKardia, and Novartis during the conduct of the study. Dr Khera 
reported receiving grants from the National Human Genome Research Institute, IBM 
Research-Sponsored Research Agreement, and Novartis; personal fees and equity 
from Verve Therapeutics Employee; and personal fees from Amgen, Maze 
Therapeutics, Navitor Pharmaceuticals, Sarepta Therapeutics, Silence 
Therapeutics, Color Health, Korro Bio, Third Rock Ventures, and Foresite Labs 
outside the submitted work. No other disclosures were reported.