---
reference_id: "PMID:24618261"
title: "Gene profiling reveals specific molecular pathways in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease in antiphospholipid syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus and antiphospholipid syndrome with lupus."
authors:
- Perez-Sanchez C
- Barbarroja N
- Messineo S
- Ruiz-Limon P
- Rodriguez-Ariza A
- Jimenez-Gomez Y
- Khamashta MA
- Collantes-Estevez E
- Cuadrado MJ
- Aguirre MA
- Lopez-Pedrera C
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204600
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antibodies, Antiphospholipid/metabolism"
- "Antiphospholipid Syndrome/epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Atherosclerosis/epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Case-Control Studies
- Comorbidity
- Female
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Humans
- "Inflammation/genetics, metabolism"
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mitochondria/genetics, physiology"
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- "Oxidative Stress/genetics, physiology"
- "Signal Transduction/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene profiling reveals specific molecular pathways in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease in antiphospholipid syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus and antiphospholipid syndrome with lupus.
**Authors:** Perez-Sanchez C, Barbarroja N, Messineo S, Ruiz-Limon P, Rodriguez-Ariza A, Jimenez-Gomez Y, Khamashta MA, Collantes-Estevez E, Cuadrado MJ, Aguirre MA, Lopez-Pedrera C
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204600](https://doi.org/10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204600)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2015 Jul;74(7):1441-9. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204600.
Epub  2014 Mar 11.

Gene profiling reveals specific molecular pathways in the pathogenesis of 
atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease in antiphospholipid syndrome, 
systemic lupus erythematosus and antiphospholipid syndrome with lupus.

Perez-Sanchez C(1), Barbarroja N(1), Messineo S(2), Ruiz-Limon P(1), 
Rodriguez-Ariza A(1), Jimenez-Gomez Y(1), Khamashta MA(3), Collantes-Estevez 
E(1), Cuadrado MJ(3), Aguirre MA(1), Lopez-Pedrera C(1).

Author information:
(1)Maimonides Institute for Research in Biomedicine of Cordoba (IMIBIC)/Reina 
Sofia University Hospital/University of Cordoba, Cordoba, Spain.
(2)Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute, Universitá Magna Graecia di Catanzaro, 
Catanzaro, Italy.
(3)Graham Hughes Lupus Research Laboratory, The Rayne Institute, King's College 
London, London, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To identify shared and differential molecular pathways involved in 
the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis (AT) and cardiovascular disease (CVD) in 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), primary antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) and 
APS associated with SLE (APS plus SLE).
METHODS: 129 patients (42 APS, 31 APS plus SLE and 56 SLE) and 61 healthy donors 
were included. Microarray expression profiling was performed in monocytes. 
RT-PCR of selected genes and western blot were used to validate microarray data. 
Clinical and inflammatory parameters were also analysed.
RESULTS: Compared with controls, 555, 1224 and 518 genes were differentially 
expressed in monocytes from SLE, APS plus SLE and APS patients, respectively. 
Approximately 25-30% of differentially expressed genes were related to AT and 
CVD. Each disease displayed a specific AT/CVD/Inflammation-related gene 
signature. Compared with SLE, APS showed alterations in mitochondria biogenesis 
and function and oxidative stress. Besides the interferon signature, found in 
APS plus SLE and SLE patients, various genes mediating 
atherosclerotic/inflammatory signalling were also differentially expressed in 
APS plus SLE. IgG-anticardiolipin (aCL) titres independently predicted both 
atherosclerotic and thrombosis in APS plus SLE. Moreover, a significant 
correlation of IgG-aCL titres with mRNA levels of certain inflammatory molecules 
in monocytes was further noticed. In vitro treatment of monocytes with IgG-aCL 
promoted an increase in the expression of the genes most significantly changed 
in APS plus SLE versus healthy donors.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene expression profiling allows the segregation of APS, APS plus 
SLE and SLE, with specific signatures explaining the pro-atherosclerotic and 
pro-thrombotic alterations in these highly related autoimmune diseases.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204600
PMID: 24618261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]