---
reference_id: "PMID:24532309"
title: Understanding HPV vaccine uptake among Cambodian American girls.
authors:
- Taylor VM
- Burke NJ
- Ko LK
- Sos C
- Liu Q
- Do HH
- Talbot J
- Yasui Y
- Bastani R
journal: J Community Health
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s10900-014-9844-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding HPV vaccine uptake among Cambodian American girls.
**Authors:** Taylor VM, Burke NJ, Ko LK, Sos C, Liu Q, Do HH, Talbot J, Yasui Y, Bastani R
**Journal:** J Community Health (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10900-014-9844-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10900-014-9844-8)

## Content

1. J Community Health. 2014 Oct;39(5):857-62. doi: 10.1007/s10900-014-9844-8.

Understanding HPV vaccine uptake among Cambodian American girls.

Taylor VM(1), Burke NJ, Ko LK, Sos C, Liu Q, Do HH, Talbot J, Yasui Y, Bastani 
R.

Author information:
(1)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 
1100 Fairview Avenue North, (M3 - B232), Seattle, WA, 98109, USA, 
vtaylor@fhcrc.org.

Cervical cancer incidence rates vary substantially among racial/ethnic groups in 
the United States (US) with women of Southeast Asian descent having the highest 
rates. Up to 70 % of cervical cancers could be prevented by widespread use of 
the human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine. However, there is a lack of information 
about HPV vaccine uptake among Southeast Asian girls in the US. We conducted a 
telephone survey of Cambodian women with daughters who were age-eligible for HPV 
vaccination. Survey items addressed HPV vaccination barriers, facilitators and 
uptake. Our study group included 86 Cambodian mothers who lived in the Seattle 
metropolitan area. The proportions of survey participants who reported their 
daughter had initiated and completed the HPV vaccine series were only 29 and 14 
%, respectively. Higher levels of vaccine uptake were significantly associated 
with mothers having heard about the HPV vaccine from a health professional and 
having received a recent Pap test. Commonly cited barriers to HPV vaccination 
included lack of knowledge about the HPV vaccine, not having received a 
physician recommendation for HPV vaccination and thinking the HPV vaccine is 
unnecessary in the absence of health problems. Linguistically and culturally 
appropriate HPV educational programs should be developed and implemented in 
Cambodian American communities. These programs should aim to enhance 
understanding of disease prevention measures, increase knowledge about the HPV 
vaccine and empower women to ask their daughter's doctors for HPV vaccination.

DOI: 10.1007/s10900-014-9844-8
PMCID: PMC4134757
PMID: 24532309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]