---
reference_id: "PMID:6840826"
title: Hyperacute pulmonary vasculitis in rabbits receiving prolonged infusions of activated complement. A possible model for triggering events in adult respiratory distress syndrome.
authors:
- Bowers TK
- Ozolins AL
- Ratliff NB
- Jacob HS
- Hammerschmidt DE
journal: Inflammation
year: '1983'
doi: 10.1007/BF00918003
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adult
- Animals
- Complement Activation
- Complement C3/analysis
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- "Lung Diseases/complications, pathology, physiopathology"
- Neutropenia/etiology
- Pulmonary Artery/pathology
- Pulmonary Gas Exchange
- Rabbits
- Respiratory Distress Syndrome/etiology
- "Vasculitis/complications, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperacute pulmonary vasculitis in rabbits receiving prolonged infusions of activated complement. A possible model for triggering events in adult respiratory distress syndrome.
**Authors:** Bowers TK, Ozolins AL, Ratliff NB, Jacob HS, Hammerschmidt DE
**Journal:** Inflammation (1983)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00918003](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00918003)

## Content

1. Inflammation. 1983 Mar;7(1):1-13. doi: 10.1007/BF00918003.

Hyperacute pulmonary vasculitis in rabbits receiving prolonged infusions of
activated complement. A possible model for triggering events in adult
respiratory distress syndrome.

Bowers TK, Ozolins AL, Ratliff NB, Jacob HS, Hammerschmidt DE.

We have postulated a role for activated plasma complement and for stimulated
granulocytes in the triggering events of the adult respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS). Because brief periods of complement activation have proved to be pale
mimics of the clinical syndrome, we extended our earlier models by infusing
potently activated plasma complement into rabbits over a prolonged period of
time (3 h). The expected leukostasis occurred, but pulmonary dysfunction
remained modest. Nonetheless, piecemeal microvascular necrosis did develop,
rendering this current model more credible than former models as a mimic of
triggering events in ARDS; longer-term follow-up of such animals will be
necessary to determine if this is indeed the case. Perhaps of even greater
interest, the neutrophilic leukostasis was observed to progress over the 3 h to
a predominantly lymphocytic leukostasis, a dramatically more rapid progression
than is typical of such immune complex diseases as serum sickness and the Arthus
reaction; further studies are in progress to elucidate the mechanism of this
lymphostasis.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00918003
PMID: 6840826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
