---
reference_id: "PMID:37997620"
title: Unilateral Tonsillar Enlargement as Initial Presentation of Bilateral Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia/Small Lymphocytic Lymphoma.
authors:
- Ottinger AM
- Singh R
- Chen D
- Parham K
journal: Ear Nose Throat J
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1177/01455613231214634
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unilateral Tonsillar Enlargement as Initial Presentation of Bilateral Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia/Small Lymphocytic Lymphoma.
**Authors:** Ottinger AM, Singh R, Chen D, Parham K
**Journal:** Ear Nose Throat J (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1177/01455613231214634](https://doi.org/10.1177/01455613231214634)

## Content

1. Ear Nose Throat J. 2025 Nov;104(2_suppl):484S-486S. doi: 
10.1177/01455613231214634. Epub 2023 Nov 24.

Unilateral Tonsillar Enlargement as Initial Presentation of Bilateral Chronic 
Lymphocytic Leukemia/Small Lymphocytic Lymphoma.

Ottinger AM(1), Singh R(2), Chen D(3), Parham K(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, 
USA.
(2)Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Surgery, 
University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Connecticut 
School of Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA.

Unilateral tonsillar enlargement is a common indication for tonsillectomy, but 
there are varying rates of malignancy among tonsils removed for asymmetry and a 
lack of clear guidelines for management within the literature. Lymphoma of the 
palatine tonsils is among the concerns leading to tonsillectomy, but chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL/SLL) of the tonsil is rare. 
We report a case of primary CLL/SLL of the palatine tonsil in a 51-year-old 
gentleman who presented with tonsillar asymmetry and obstructive sleep apnea 
(OSA) but lacked signs and symptoms suspicious for malignancy, including 
lymphadenopathy and "B-symptoms." To our knowledge, only 7 cases of CLL/SLL of 
the palatine tonsil have been reported in the English literature, with the 
tonsil being the primary site of involvement in only 4 of those cases. Our 
unique case highlights the importance of thorough physical exam, family history, 
and tissue biopsy in patients presenting to the otolaryngologist with OSA and 
asymmetric tonsils.

DOI: 10.1177/01455613231214634
PMID: 37997620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.