---
reference_id: "PMID:20301667"
title: Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Byers PH
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Byers PH

## Content

1. Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.

Byers PH(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
1999 Sep 2 [updated 2025 Apr 10].

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology;, Department of Medicine,
Division of Medical Genetics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS) is
characterized by arterial, intestinal, and/or uterine fragility; thin,
translucent skin; easy bruising; characteristic facial appearance (thin
vermilion of the lips, micrognathia, narrow nose, prominent eyes); and an aged
appearance to the extremities, particularly the hands. Vascular dissection or
rupture, gastrointestinal perforation, or organ rupture are the presenting signs
in most adults with vEDS. Arterial rupture may be preceded by aneurysm,
arteriovenous fistulae, or dissection but also may occur spontaneously. The
majority (60%) of individuals with vEDS who are diagnosed before age 18 years
are identified because of a positive family history. Neonates may present with
clubfoot, hip dislocation, limb deficiency, and/or amniotic bands. Approximately
half of children tested for vEDS in the absence of a positive family history
present with a major complication at an average age of 11 years. Four minor
diagnostic features – distal joint hypermobility, easy bruising, thin skin, and
clubfeet – are most often present in those children ascertained without a major
complication.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of vEDS is established in a proband by
identification of a heterozygous pathogenic variant in COL3A1.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Creation of an organized care team is
one of the first tasks to complete upon the initial diagnosis. The team should
include a primary care physician, vascular surgeon, general surgeon,
cardiologist, pulmonologist, and geneticist. Affected individuals should carry
documentation of their genetic diagnosis, such as a MedicAlert® bracelet or
necklace, an emergency contact letter, or vEDS "passport." Affected individuals
are instructed to seek immediate medical attention for sudden, unexplained pain,
coordinated through the primary care physician when possible. Treatment may
include medical or surgical management for arterial complications, bowel
rupture, or uterine rupture during pregnancy. Surveillance: May include periodic
arterial screening by ultrasound examination, magnetic resonance angiogram, or
computed tomography angiogram with and without venous contrast. Blood pressure
monitoring on a regular basis is recommended to allow for early treatment if
hypertension develops. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Trauma (collision sports,
heavy lifting, and weight training with extreme lifting); arteriography should
be discouraged and used only to identify life-threatening sources of bleeding
prior to surgical intervention because of the risk of vascular injury; routine
colonoscopy in the absence of concerning symptoms or a strong family history of
colon cancer; elective surgery unless the benefit is expected to be substantial.
Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to evaluate first-degree
relatives in order to identify as early as possible those who could benefit from
surveillance, awareness of treatment for potential complications, and
appropriate restriction of high-risk physical activities; evaluation usually
starts with clinical assessment and, even in the absence of clinical signs,
progresses to molecular genetic testing for the known familial pathogenic
variant. Pregnancy management: Affected women have a 5% mortality risk with each
pregnancy. The issue of management and recommendations is complicated by the
recognition that many of the women who became pregnant, and their providers,
learn of the diagnosis at the time of delivery and the onset of complications.
In pregnant women with a known diagnosis, maternal risks should be discussed,
and these women should be followed in a high-risk obstetric program. Management
decisions about nature and timing of delivery can be stratified by the nature of
the genetic alteration.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Vascular EDS is an autosomal dominant disorder. About 50% of
individuals diagnosed with vEDS have an affected parent; about 50% of affected
individuals have the disorder as the result of a COL3A1 pathogenic variant that
occurred as a de novo event in the individual or as a de novo event in an
apparently unaffected, mosaic parent. Each child of an individual with vEDS has
a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant and developing complications
of the disorder. Once the COL3A1 pathogenic variant has been identified in an
affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing for vEDS
are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301667
