---
reference_id: "PMID:38837168"
title: "An Overview of Optic Pathway Glioma With Neurofibromatosis Type 1: Pathogenesis, Risk Factors, and Therapeutic Strategies."
authors:
- Chen Y
- Yu J
- Ge S
- Jia R
- Song X
- Wang Y
- Fan X
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.65.6.8
keywords:
- Humans
- "Neurofibromatosis 1/complications, genetics"
- "Optic Nerve Glioma/therapy, genetics"
- Risk Factors
- Animals
- Neurofibromin 1/genetics
- "Optic Nerve Neoplasms/therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An Overview of Optic Pathway Glioma With Neurofibromatosis Type 1: Pathogenesis, Risk Factors, and Therapeutic Strategies.
**Authors:** Chen Y, Yu J, Ge S, Jia R, Song X, Wang Y, Fan X
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.65.6.8](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.65.6.8)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2024 Jun 3;65(6):8. doi: 10.1167/iovs.65.6.8.

An Overview of Optic Pathway Glioma With Neurofibromatosis Type 1: Pathogenesis,
Risk Factors, and Therapeutic Strategies.

Chen Y(1), Yu J(1), Ge S(1), Jia R(1), Song X(1), Wang Y(1), Fan X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Orbital Diseases and
Ocular Oncology, Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai JiaoTong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, P.R. China.

Optic pathway gliomas (OPGs) are most predominant pilocytic astrocytomas, which
are typically diagnosed within the first decade of life. The majority of
affected children with OPGs also present with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1),
the most common tumor predisposition syndrome. OPGs in individuals with NF1
primarily affect the optic pathway and lead to visual disturbance. However, it
is challenging to assess risk in asymptomatic patients without valid biomarkers.
On the other hand, for symptomatic patients, there is still no effective
treatment to prevent or recover vision loss. Therefore, this review summarizes
current knowledge regarding the pathogenesis of NF1-associated OPGs (NF1-OPGs)
from preclinical studies to seek potential prognostic markers and therapeutic
targets. First, the loss of the NF1 gene activates 3 distinct Ras effector
pathways, including the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway, the MEK/ERK pathway, and the cAMP
pathway, which mediate glioma tumorigenesis. Meanwhile, non-neoplastic cells
from the tumor microenvironment (microglia, T cells, neurons, etc.) also
contribute to gliomagenesis via various soluble factors. Subsequently, we
investigated potential genetic risk factors, molecularly targeted therapies, and
neuroprotective strategies for tumor prevention and vision recovery. Last,
potential directions and promising preclinical models of NF1-OPGs are presented
for further research. On the whole, NF1-OPGs develop as a result of the
interaction between glioma cells and the tumor microenvironment. Developing
effective treatments require a better understanding of tumor molecular
characteristics, as well as multistage interventions targeting both neoplastic
cells and non-neoplastic cells.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.65.6.8
PMCID: PMC11160950
PMID: 38837168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Y. Chen, None; J. Yu, None; S. Ge,
None; R. Jia, None; X. Song, None; Y. Wang, None; X. Fan, None
