---
reference_id: "PMID:30803991"
title: "Management of acute promyelocytic leukemia: updated recommendations from an expert panel of the European LeukemiaNet."
authors:
- Sanz MA
- Fenaux P
- Tallman MS
- Estey EH
- Löwenberg B
- Naoe T
- Lengfelder E
- Döhner H
- Burnett AK
- Chen SJ
- Mathews V
- Iland H
- Rego E
- Kantarjian H
- Adès L
- Avvisati G
- Montesinos P
- Platzbecker U
- Ravandi F
- Russell NH
- Lo-Coco F
journal: Blood
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2019-01-894980
keywords:
- Aged
- "Arsenic Trioxide/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Disease Management
- Female
- Hemorrhagic Disorders/therapy
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- Pregnancy
- Recurrence
- Tretinoin/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of acute promyelocytic leukemia: updated recommendations from an expert panel of the European LeukemiaNet.
**Authors:** Sanz MA, Fenaux P, Tallman MS, Estey EH, Löwenberg B, Naoe T, Lengfelder E, Döhner H, Burnett AK, Chen SJ, Mathews V, Iland H, Rego E, Kantarjian H, Adès L, Avvisati G, Montesinos P, Platzbecker U, Ravandi F, Russell NH, Lo-Coco F
**Journal:** Blood (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2019-01-894980](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2019-01-894980)

## Content

1. Blood. 2019 Apr 11;133(15):1630-1643. doi: 10.1182/blood-2019-01-894980. Epub 
2019 Feb 25.

Management of acute promyelocytic leukemia: updated recommendations from an 
expert panel of the European LeukemiaNet.

Sanz MA(1)(2)(3), Fenaux P(4)(5), Tallman MS(6), Estey EH(7), Löwenberg B(8), 
Naoe T(9), Lengfelder E(10), Döhner H(11), Burnett AK(12), Chen SJ(13), Mathews 
V(14), Iland H(15), Rego E(16)(17), Kantarjian H(18), Adès L(4)(5), Avvisati 
G(19), Montesinos P(1)(3), Platzbecker U(20), Ravandi F(18), Russell NH(21), 
Lo-Coco F(22).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Hematologia, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic La Fe, 
Valencia, Spain.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer, Instituto Carlos III, 
Madrid, Spain.
(4)Hôpital Saint-Louis, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Hematology, Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France.
(6)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.
(7)Seattle Cancer Care Alliance, Seattle, WA.
(8)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(9)National Hospital Organization Nagoya Medical Center, Nagoya, Japan.
(10)Department of Haematology, University Hospital Mannheim, University of 
Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine III, Ulm University Hospital, Ulm, Germany.
(12)Department of Haematology, Glasgow University, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(13)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, 
Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 
China.
(14)Department of Hematology, Christian Medical College, Vellore, India.
(15)Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, NSW, Australia.
(16)Hematology Division and.
(17)Clinical Oncology Division, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil.
(18)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX.
(19)Hematology, Campus Bio-Medico University, Rome, Italy.
(20)Medical Clinic and Polyclinic I, Hematology and Cellular Therapy, University 
Hospital Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(21)Centre for Clinical Haematology, Department of Haematology, Nottingham 
University Hospital, Nottingham, United Kingdom; and.
(22)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Tor Vergata University of Rome, 
Rome, Italy.

Since the comprehensive recommendations for the management of acute 
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) reported in 2009, several studies have provided 
important insights, particularly regarding the role of arsenic trioxide (ATO) in 
frontline therapy. Ten years later, a European LeukemiaNet expert panel has 
reviewed the recent advances in the management of APL in both frontline and 
relapse settings in order to develop updated evidence- and expert opinion-based 
recommendations on the management of this disease. Together with providing 
current indications on genetic diagnosis, modern risk-adapted frontline therapy, 
and salvage treatment, the review contains specific recommendations for the 
identification and management of the most important complications such as the 
bleeding disorder APL differentiation syndrome, QT prolongation, and other 
all-trans retinoic acid- and ATO-related toxicities, as well as recommendations 
for molecular assessment of the response to treatment. Finally, the approach to 
special situations is also discussed, including management of APL in children, 
elderly patients, and pregnant women. The most important challenges remaining in 
APL include early death, which still occurs before and during induction therapy, 
and optimizing treatment in patients with high-risk disease.

© 2019 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2019-01-894980
PMCID: PMC6509567
PMID: 30803991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: M.A.S. received 
honoraria from Teva, Daiichi-Sankyo, Orsenix, AbbVie, Novartis, and Pfizer. 
M.S.T. received research funding from AbbVie, AROG, Cellerant, Orsenix, ADC 
Therapeutics, and Biosight, and served on advisory boards for Daiichi-Sankyo, 
Orsenix, KAHR, Rigel, AbbVie, and Nohla. E.L. received honoraria from, and 
served on advisory boards for, Teva and Novartis. H.I. received honorarium from 
Celgene, and served on an advisory board for Novartis. E.R. served on speaker’s 
bureaus for, and received honoraria from, Novartis, Janssen, Roche, and AbbVie. 
G.A. received honoraria from Takeda, Janssen, Teva, Roche, and Servier. P.M. 
served on speaker’s bureaus and/or advisory boards for AbbVie, Celgene, 
Daiichi-Sankyo, Incyte, Janssen, Karyopharm, Novartis, Pfizer, and Teva, and 
received research support from Celgene, Daiichi-Sankyo, Janssen, Karyopharm, 
Pfizer, and Teva. U.P. received honoraria from Celgene, Novartis, and Teva, and 
research support from Celgene, Janssen, Amgen, and Teva. F.L.-C. received 
honoraria from Teva, Daiichi-Sankyo, Orsenix, and Novartis. The remaining 
authors declare no competing financial interests.