---
reference_id: "PMID:20672375"
title: Molecular analysis expands the spectrum of phenotypes associated with GLI3 mutations.
authors:
- Johnston JJ
- Sapp JC
- Turner JT
- Amor D
- Aftimos S
- Aleck KA
- Bocian M
- Bodurtha JN
- Cox GF
- Curry CJ
- Day R
- Donnai D
- Field M
- Fujiwara I
- Gabbett M
- Gal M
- Graham JM
- Hedera P
- Hennekam RC
- Hersh JH
- Hopkin RJ
- Kayserili H
- Kidd AM
- Kimonis V
- Lin AE
- Lynch SA
- Maisenbacher M
- Mansour S
- McGaughran J
- Mehta L
- Murphy H
- Raygada M
- Robin NH
- Rope AF
- Rosenbaum KN
- Schaefer GB
- Shealy A
- Smith W
- Soller M
- Sommer A
- Stalker HJ
- Steiner B
- Stephan MJ
- Tilstra D
- Tomkins S
- Trapane P
- Tsai AC
- Van Allen MI
- Vasudevan PC
- Zabel B
- Zunich J
- Black GC
- Biesecker LG
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21328
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular analysis expands the spectrum of phenotypes associated with GLI3 mutations.
**Authors:** Johnston JJ, Sapp JC, Turner JT, Amor D, Aftimos S, Aleck KA, Bocian M, Bodurtha JN, Cox GF, Curry CJ, Day R, Donnai D, Field M, Fujiwara I, Gabbett M, Gal M, Graham JM, Hedera P, Hennekam RC, Hersh JH, Hopkin RJ, Kayserili H, Kidd AM, Kimonis V, Lin AE, Lynch SA, Maisenbacher M, Mansour S, McGaughran J, Mehta L, Murphy H, Raygada M, Robin NH, Rope AF, Rosenbaum KN, Schaefer GB, Shealy A, Smith W, Soller M, Sommer A, Stalker HJ, Steiner B, Stephan MJ, Tilstra D, Tomkins S, Trapane P, Tsai AC, Van Allen MI, Vasudevan PC, Zabel B, Zunich J, Black GC, Biesecker LG
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21328](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21328)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2010 Oct;31(10):1142-54. doi: 10.1002/humu.21328.

Molecular analysis expands the spectrum of phenotypes associated with GLI3 
mutations.

Johnston JJ(1), Sapp JC, Turner JT, Amor D, Aftimos S, Aleck KA, Bocian M, 
Bodurtha JN, Cox GF, Curry CJ, Day R, Donnai D, Field M, Fujiwara I, Gabbett M, 
Gal M, Graham JM, Hedera P, Hennekam RC, Hersh JH, Hopkin RJ, Kayserili H, Kidd 
AM, Kimonis V, Lin AE, Lynch SA, Maisenbacher M, Mansour S, McGaughran J, Mehta 
L, Murphy H, Raygada M, Robin NH, Rope AF, Rosenbaum KN, Schaefer GB, Shealy A, 
Smith W, Soller M, Sommer A, Stalker HJ, Steiner B, Stephan MJ, Tilstra D, 
Tomkins S, Trapane P, Tsai AC, Van Allen MI, Vasudevan PC, Zabel B, Zunich J, 
Black GC, Biesecker LG.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Disease Research Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4472, USA. 
jjohnsto@mail.nih.gov

Comment in
    Hum Mutat. 2011 Nov;32(11):1332-3. doi: 10.1002/humu.21570.

A range of phenotypes including Greig cephalopolysyndactyly and Pallister-Hall 
syndromes (GCPS, PHS) are caused by pathogenic mutation of the GLI3 gene. To 
characterize the clinical variability of GLI3 mutations, we present a subset of 
a cohort of 174 probands referred for GLI3 analysis. Eighty-one probands with 
typical GCPS or PHS were previously reported, and we report the remaining 93 
probands here. This includes 19 probands (12 mutations) who fulfilled clinical 
criteria for GCPS or PHS, 48 probands (16 mutations) with features of GCPS or 
PHS but who did not meet the clinical criteria (sub-GCPS and sub-PHS), 21 
probands (6 mutations) with features of PHS or GCPS and oral-facial-digital 
syndrome, and 5 probands (1 mutation) with nonsyndromic polydactyly. These data 
support previously identified genotype-phenotype correlations and demonstrate a 
more variable degree of severity than previously recognized. The finding of GLI3 
mutations in patients with features of oral-facial-digital syndrome supports the 
observation that GLI3 interacts with cilia. We conclude that the phenotypic 
spectrum of GLI3 mutations is broader than that encompassed by the clinical 
diagnostic criteria, but the genotype-phenotype correlation persists. 
Individuals with features of either GCPS or PHS should be screened for mutations 
in GLI3 even if they do not fulfill clinical criteria.

Hum Mutat 31:1142-1154, 2010. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21328
PMCID: PMC2947617
PMID: 20672375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]