---
reference_id: "PMID:22843016"
title: "Contamination and adulteration of herbal medicinal products (HMPs): an overview of systematic reviews."
authors:
- Posadzki P
- Watson L
- Ernst E
journal: Eur J Clin Pharmacol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s00228-012-1353-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contamination and adulteration of herbal medicinal products (HMPs): an overview of systematic reviews.
**Authors:** Posadzki P, Watson L, Ernst E
**Journal:** Eur J Clin Pharmacol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00228-012-1353-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00228-012-1353-z)

## Content

1. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2013 Mar;69(3):295-307. doi: 10.1007/s00228-012-1353-z. 
Epub 2012 Jul 29.

Contamination and adulteration of herbal medicinal products (HMPs): an overview 
of systematic reviews.

Posadzki P(1), Watson L, Ernst E.

Author information:
(1)Complementary Medicine, Peninsula Medical School, University of Exeter, 
Veysey Building, Salmon Pool Lane, Exeter EX2 4SG, UK. paul.posadzki@pcmd.ac.uk

PURPOSE: The aim of this overview of systematic reviews is to summarise and 
critically evaluate the evidence from systematic reviews of the adulteration and 
contamination of herbal medicinal products (HMPs).
METHODS: Five electronic databases were searched to identify all relevant 
systematic reviews.
RESULTS: Twenty-six systematic reviews met our inclusion criteria. The most 
commonly HMPs were adulterated or contaminated with dust, pollens, insects, 
rodents, parasites, microbes, fungi, mould, toxins, pesticides, toxic heavy 
metals and/or prescription drugs. The most severe adverse effects caused by 
these adulterations were agranulocytosis, meningitis, multi-organ failure, 
perinatal stroke, arsenic, lead or mercury poisoning, malignancies or 
carcinomas, hepatic encephalopathy, hepatorenal syndrome, nephrotoxicity, 
rhabdomyolysis, metabolic acidosis, renal or liver failure, cerebral edema, 
coma, intracerebral haemorrhage, and death. Adulteration and contamination of 
HMPs were most commonly noted for traditional Indian and Chinese remedies, 
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively these data suggest that there are reasons for concerns 
with regards to the quality of HMPs. Adulteration and contamination of HMPs can 
cause serious adverse effects. More stringent quality control and its 
enforcement seem to be necessary to avoid health risks.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-012-1353-z
PMID: 22843016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]