---
reference_id: "PMID:9269974"
title: "Hirschsprung's disease: a 20-year experience."
authors:
- Reding R
- de Ville de Goyet J
- Gosseye S
- Clapuyt P
- Sokal E
- Buts JP
- Gibbs P
- Otte JB
journal: J Pediatr Surg
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1016/s0022-3468(97)90686-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hirschsprung's disease: a 20-year experience.
**Authors:** Reding R, de Ville de Goyet J, Gosseye S, Clapuyt P, Sokal E, Buts JP, Gibbs P, Otte JB
**Journal:** J Pediatr Surg (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0022-3468(97)90686-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-3468(97)90686-2)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Surg. 1997 Aug;32(8):1221-5. doi: 10.1016/s0022-3468(97)90686-2.

Hirschsprung's disease: a 20-year experience.

Reding R(1), de Ville de Goyet J, Gosseye S, Clapuyt P, Sokal E, Buts JP, Gibbs 
P, Otte JB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, St-Luc University Clinics, University of 
Louvain Medical School, Brussels, Belgium.

During the period from 1972 to 1992, 59 children received surgical treatment at 
the University of Louvain Medical School for biopsy-proven Hirschsprung's 
disease (HD). The extent of aganglionosis was as follows: short segment 
restricted to the rectosigmoid or descending colon (n = 44, 75%); long segment 
(n = 9,15%); ultra-short segment (n = 3, 5%); unknown length because of death 
without autopsy (n = 3, 5%). The median age at operation was 7 months for 
short-segment disease compared with 14 months for those with long-segment 
disease. Surgical procedures used for short-segment disease were Swenson with 
colostomy (n = 16), Swenson-Pellerin without colostomy (n = 27), Duhamel (n = 
1), and for long-segment disease were Martin (n = 3), Swenson-Deloyers (n = 2), 
Swenson-Boley (n = 2) and ileostomy only in = 2). Lynn's sphincteromyotomy was 
performed in the three ultra-short cases. There were six deaths (10%) at a 
median age of 86 days (range, 28 to 1545 days), three had long-segment disease, 
and the others were not classified because of death before curative surgery. 
Enterocolitis (EC) was the most common cause of death (five cases) and was also 
the major source of morbidity after curative surgery (12 of 44, 27%) in 
short-segment patients, three of seven (43%) in long-segment patients. The 
functional success of the procedure was evaluated in 70% of the surviving 
patients (37 of 53; mean follow-up, 8.7 years; range, 1.2 to 21.5), using a 
novel semiquantitative scoring system, specifically designed for children who 
have HD. This system assesses normal stool evacuation, abdominal distention, 
soiling, and severe incontinence. The results were compared with those from a 
population of 39 healthy children and adolescents and demonstrated progressive 
improvement in function during childhood and adolescence (P = .04) for patients 
treated for short-segment disease. However, function was found to be 
consistently poorer in all age groups when compared with healthy controls (5 to 
10 years, P < .01; 10 to 15 years, P < .05; > 15 years, P < .01).

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-3468(97)90686-2
PMID: 9269974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]