---
reference_id: "PMID:38521003"
title: Concurrent inhibition of ALK and SRC kinases disrupts the ALK lung tumor cell proteome.
authors:
- Diaz-Jimenez A
- Ramos M
- Helm B
- Chocarro S
- Frey DL
- Agrawal S
- Somogyi K
- Klingmüller U
- Lu J
- Sotillo R
journal: Drug Resist Updat
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.drup.2024.101081
keywords:
- Animals
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "src-Family Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Mice
- Proteome/metabolism
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/drug effects"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Pyrimidines/pharmacology
- Proteomics/methods
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism, antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Adenocarcinoma of Lung/drug therapy, pathology, genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- Organophosphorus Compounds
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Concurrent inhibition of ALK and SRC kinases disrupts the ALK lung tumor cell proteome.
**Authors:** Diaz-Jimenez A, Ramos M, Helm B, Chocarro S, Frey DL, Agrawal S, Somogyi K, Klingmüller U, Lu J, Sotillo R
**Journal:** Drug Resist Updat (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.drup.2024.101081](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drup.2024.101081)

## Content

1. Drug Resist Updat. 2024 May;74:101081. doi: 10.1016/j.drup.2024.101081. Epub
2024 Mar 19.

Concurrent inhibition of ALK and SRC kinases disrupts the ALK lung tumor cell
proteome.

Diaz-Jimenez A(1), Ramos M(1), Helm B(2), Chocarro S(1), Frey DL(3), Agrawal
S(4), Somogyi K(5), Klingmüller U(2), Lu J(4), Sotillo R(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Thoracic Oncology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany; Ruprecht Karls
University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.
(2)Division of Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany; German Center
for Lung Research (DZL) and Translational Lung Research Center Heidelberg
(TLRC), Germany.
(3)Division of Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.
(4)Medical Faculty Heidelberg, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.
(5)Division of Molecular Thoracic Oncology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.
(6)Division of Molecular Thoracic Oncology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany; German Center for
Lung Research (DZL) and Translational Lung Research Center Heidelberg (TLRC),
Germany. Electronic address: r.sotillo@dkfz-heidelberg.de.

Precision oncology has revolutionized the treatment of ALK-positive lung cancer
with targeted therapies. However, an unmet clinical need still to address is the
treatment of refractory tumors that contain drug-induced resistant mutations in
the driver oncogene or exhibit resistance through the activation of diverse
mechanisms. In this study, we established mouse tumor-derived cell models
representing the two most prevalent EML4-ALK variants in human lung
adenocarcinomas and characterized their proteomic profiles to gain insights into
the underlying resistance mechanisms. We showed that Eml4-Alk variant 3 confers
a worse response to ALK inhibitors, suggesting its role in promoting resistance
to targeted therapy. In addition, proteomic analysis of brigatinib-treated cells
revealed the upregulation of SRC kinase, a protein frequently activated in
cancer. Co-targeting of ALK and SRC showed remarkable inhibitory effects in both
ALK-driven murine and ALK-patient-derived lung tumor cells. This combination
induced cell death through a multifaceted mechanism characterized by profound
perturbation of the (phospho)proteomic landscape and a synergistic suppressive
effect on the mTOR pathway. Our study demonstrates that the simultaneous
inhibition of ALK and SRC can potentially overcome resistance mechanisms and
enhance clinical outcomes in ALK-positive lung cancer patients. ONE SENTENCE
SUMMARY: Co-targeting ALK and SRC enhances ALK inhibitor response in lung cancer
by affecting the proteomic profile, offering hope for overcoming resistance and
improving clinical outcomes.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.drup.2024.101081
PMID: 38521003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
