---
reference_id: "PMID:36000988"
title: Enrichment of Patients With Ehlers Danlos Syndrome in Idiopathic Gastroparesis-A Gene Set Enrichment Analysis.
authors:
- Smieszek SP
- Carlin JL
- Fisher MA
- Madonick DS
- Kupersmith CQ
- Moszczynski PD
- Xiao C
- Polymeropoulos CM
- Birznieks G
- Polymeropoulos MH
journal: Clin Transl Gastroenterol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.14309/ctg.0000000000000521
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enrichment of Patients With Ehlers Danlos Syndrome in Idiopathic Gastroparesis-A Gene Set Enrichment Analysis.
**Authors:** Smieszek SP, Carlin JL, Fisher MA, Madonick DS, Kupersmith CQ, Moszczynski PD, Xiao C, Polymeropoulos CM, Birznieks G, Polymeropoulos MH
**Journal:** Clin Transl Gastroenterol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.14309/ctg.0000000000000521](https://doi.org/10.14309/ctg.0000000000000521)

## Content

1. Clin Transl Gastroenterol. 2023 Mar 1;14(3):e00521. doi: 
10.14309/ctg.0000000000000521.

Enrichment of Patients With Ehlers Danlos Syndrome in Idiopathic Gastroparesis-A 
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis.

Smieszek SP(1), Carlin JL, Fisher MA, Madonick DS, Kupersmith CQ, Moszczynski 
PD, Xiao C, Polymeropoulos CM, Birznieks G, Polymeropoulos MH.

Author information:
(1)Vanda Pharmaceuticals Inc., Washington, District of Columbia, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Ehlers Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a heritable disorder of the 
connective tissue usually inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. We observe 
an enrichment of EDS cases in a gastroparesis clinical study.
METHODS: We explored the frequency of EDS cases in 2 consecutive gastroparesis 
clinical studies. To explore the genetic surrogates of EDS, we have performed 
whole-genome sequencing analysis and we focused the analyses on the frequencies 
of consequential variants in core EDS genes.
RESULTS: We report a significant enrichment of EDS cases in a set of patients 
with gastroparesis (14/686 vs 1/5,000 OR 104 (confidence interval 13.7-793.3) P 
value <0.0001). We report a significant enrichment of variants in EDS genes in 
patients with idiopathic gastroparesis.
DISCUSSION: The enrichment may be suggestive of converging pathways at the heart 
of etiology or predisposing patients to EDS with gastroparesis.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of The American College of Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.14309/ctg.0000000000000521
PMCID: PMC10043590
PMID: 36000988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Guarantor of the article: Sandra P. Smieszek, 
PhD. Specific author contributions: SP Smieszek conducted genetic analysis and 
wrote the manuscript. JL Carlin led the study. MA Fisher, DS Madonick, CQ 
Kupersmith, and PD Moszczynski all contributed to the study operations and 
sample collection. C Xiao conducted the statistical analysis. CM Polymeropoulos, 
G Birznieks, and MH Polymeropoulos served as mentors. Financial support: None to 
report. Potential competing interests: Authors are employees of Vanda 
Pharmaceuticals Inc.