---
reference_id: "PMID:28722918"
title: Large Bowel Obstruction.
authors:
- Lieske B
- Marietta M
- Meseeha M
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Large Bowel Obstruction.
**Authors:** Lieske B, Marietta M, Meseeha M

## Content

1. Large Bowel Obstruction.

Lieske B(1), Marietta M(2), Meseeha M.

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2024 Nov 9.

Author information:
(1)National University Hospital Singapore
(2)University of Colorado Health Sciences

Large bowel obstruction is a clinical emergency, often accompanied by sepsis, 
dehydration, and hemodynamic compromise. The obstruction can be either 
structural or functional. Patients with a competent ileocecal valve may have a 
closed-loop obstruction and be very ill upon presentation. Depending on the 
etiology of the obstruction, an individual may show symptoms before the acute 
presentation. Recognizing the signs and symptoms of large bowel obstruction is 
critical to provide prompt resuscitation and diagnosis to limit morbidity and 
improve outcomes. In some cases, an obstruction is the first clinical sign of 
colorectal carcinoma, particularly left-sided carcinoma, and up to 25% of 
colorectal carcinomas present as large bowel obstruction. A reported 8% to 13% 
of colorectal cancer cases are obstructed at the time of diagnosis. A majority 
of emergency admissions for colorectal cancer are due to large bowel 
obstruction. The incidence of colorectal carcinoma is increasing in young 
adults, often presenting as acute obstruction.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 28722918

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Bettina Lieske declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Mia Marietta 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Marcelle Meseeha declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies.