---
reference_id: "PMID:17154097"
title: "[Childhood Graves' disease]."
authors:
- Sasaki N
- Sato K
journal: Nihon Rinsho
year: '2006'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Childhood Graves' disease].
**Authors:** Sasaki N, Sato K
**Journal:** Nihon Rinsho (2006)

## Content

1. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Dec;64(12):2308-11.

[Childhood Graves' disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Sasaki N(1), Sato K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Saitama Medical University.

Because of the low frequency of childhood Graves' disease, detailed 
evidence-based clinical studies have not been reported. Practical clinical work 
has been performed on the basis of adult clinical references. Therapeutic 
management includes antithyroid drugs, surgical thyroidectomy and radiologic 
therapy. Recently in the U.S.A. radiotherapy has become the recommended course 
of action, even for childhood Graves' disease, whereas in Japan, antithyroid 
drug therapy is the primary course of action for childhood Graves' disease. In 
some cases, thyroidectomy is performed following drug therapy. Methimazole (MMI) 
and propylthiouracil (PTU) have been used, however, MMI is the preferred drug 
treatment. Compared to PTU, MMI is administered once a day and the frequency of 
side effects is lower than that of PTU. Evaluation of the TSH receptor antibody 
value before administration of antithyroid drugs is very useful in estimating 
the duration of the treatment. No appropriate index has been established guiding 
when to quit antithyroid drug therapy.

PMID: 17154097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]