---
reference_id: "PMID:21306238"
title: Everolimus for advanced pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.
authors:
- Yao JC
- Shah MH
- Ito T
- Bohas CL
- Wolin EM
- Van Cutsem E
- Hobday TJ
- Okusaka T
- Capdevila J
- de Vries EG
- Tomassetti P
- Pavel ME
- Hoosen S
- Haas T
- Lincy J
- Lebwohl D
- Öberg K
- "RAD001 in Advanced Neuroendocrine Tumors, Third Trial (RADIANT-3) Study Group"
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1009290
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Disease Progression
- Double-Blind Method
- Everolimus
- Female
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neuroendocrine Tumors/drug therapy, mortality"
- "Pancreatic Neoplasms/drug therapy, mortality"
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Sirolimus/adverse effects, analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- "TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Everolimus for advanced pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.
**Authors:** Yao JC, Shah MH, Ito T, Bohas CL, Wolin EM, Van Cutsem E, Hobday TJ, Okusaka T, Capdevila J, de Vries EG, Tomassetti P, Pavel ME, Hoosen S, Haas T, Lincy J, Lebwohl D, Öberg K, RAD001 in Advanced Neuroendocrine Tumors, Third Trial (RADIANT-3) Study Group
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1009290](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1009290)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2011 Feb 10;364(6):514-23. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1009290.

Everolimus for advanced pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.

Yao JC(1), Shah MH, Ito T, Bohas CL, Wolin EM, Van Cutsem E, Hobday TJ, Okusaka 
T, Capdevila J, de Vries EG, Tomassetti P, Pavel ME, Hoosen S, Haas T, Lincy J, 
Lebwohl D, Öberg K; RAD001 in Advanced Neuroendocrine Tumors, Third Trial 
(RADIANT-3) Study Group.

Author information:
(1)University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. 
jyao@mdanderson.org

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Feb 10;364(6):564-5. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1013903.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2011 Mar 15;8(4):191. doi: 10.1038/nrclinonc.2011.33.
    N Engl J Med. 2011 May 12;364(19):1873; author reply 1873-5. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc1102746.
    Z Gastroenterol. 2011 Nov;49(11):1489-90. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1281595.

BACKGROUND: Everolimus, an oral inhibitor of mammalian target of rapamycin 
(mTOR), has shown antitumor activity in patients with advanced pancreatic 
neuroendocrine tumors, in two phase 2 studies. We evaluated the agent in a 
prospective, randomized, phase 3 study.
METHODS: We randomly assigned 410 patients who had advanced, low-grade or 
intermediate-grade pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors with radiologic progression 
within the previous 12 months to receive everolimus, at a dose of 10 mg once 
daily (207 patients), or placebo (203 patients), both in conjunction with best 
supportive care. The primary end point was progression-free survival in an 
intention-to-treat analysis. In the case of patients in whom radiologic 
progression occurred during the study, the treatment assignments could be 
revealed, and patients who had been randomly assigned to placebo were offered 
open-label everolimus.
RESULTS: The median progression-free survival was 11.0 months with everolimus as 
compared with 4.6 months with placebo (hazard ratio for disease progression or 
death from any cause with everolimus, 0.35; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.27 
to 0.45; P<0.001), representing a 65% reduction in the estimated risk of 
progression or death. Estimates of the proportion of patients who were alive and 
progression-free at 18 months were 34% (95% CI, 26 to 43) with everolimus as 
compared with 9% (95% CI, 4 to 16) with placebo. Drug-related adverse events 
were mostly grade 1 or 2 and included stomatitis (in 64% of patients in the 
everolimus group vs. 17% in the placebo group), rash (49% vs. 10%), diarrhea 
(34% vs. 10%), fatigue (31% vs. 14%), and infections (23% vs. 6%), which were 
primarily upper respiratory. Grade 3 or 4 events that were more frequent with 
everolimus than with placebo included anemia (6% vs. 0%) and hyperglycemia (5% 
vs. 2%). The median exposure to everolimus was longer than exposure to placebo 
by a factor of 2.3 (38 weeks vs. 16 weeks).
CONCLUSIONS: Everolimus, as compared with placebo, significantly prolonged 
progression-free survival among patients with progressive advanced pancreatic 
neuroendocrine tumors and was associated with a low rate of severe adverse 
events. (Funded by Novartis Oncology; RADIANT-3 ClinicalTrials.gov number, 
NCT00510068.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1009290
PMCID: PMC4208619
PMID: 21306238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]