---
reference_id: "PMID:17611489"
title: "Antibodies to AChR, MuSK and VGKC in a patient with myasthenia gravis and Morvan's syndrome."
authors:
- Díaz-Manera J
- Rojas-García R
- Gallardo E
- Juárez C
- Martínez-Domeño A
- Martínez-Ramírez S
- Dalmau J
- Blesa R
- Illa I
journal: Nat Clin Pract Neurol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/ncpneuro0526
keywords:
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/therapeutic use
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/therapeutic use"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived"
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Cyclosporine/therapeutic use
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
- Immunohistochemistry
- Immunologic Factors/therapeutic use
- Middle Aged
- Muscle Weakness/etiology
- Muscular Atrophy/etiology
- "Myasthenia Gravis/blood, complications, immunology"
- "Myokymia/complications, drug therapy, immunology"
- Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis
- Personality Disorders/etiology
- "Potassium Channels, Voltage-Gated/immunology"
- Prednisone/therapeutic use
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/immunology
- "Receptors, Cholinergic/immunology"
- Respiratory Insufficiency/etiology
- Rituximab
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antibodies to AChR, MuSK and VGKC in a patient with myasthenia gravis and Morvan's syndrome.
**Authors:** Díaz-Manera J, Rojas-García R, Gallardo E, Juárez C, Martínez-Domeño A, Martínez-Ramírez S, Dalmau J, Blesa R, Illa I
**Journal:** Nat Clin Pract Neurol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncpneuro0526](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncpneuro0526)

## Content

1. Nat Clin Pract Neurol. 2007 Jul;3(7):405-10. doi: 10.1038/ncpneuro0526.

Antibodies to AChR, MuSK and VGKC in a patient with myasthenia gravis and 
Morvan's syndrome.

Díaz-Manera J(1), Rojas-García R, Gallardo E, Juárez C, Martínez-Domeño A, 
Martínez-Ramírez S, Dalmau J, Blesa R, Illa I.

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Diseases Section, Department of Neurology, at Hospital de la 
Santa Creu i Sant Pau in Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: A 46-year-old woman presented to a local hospital with acute 
respiratory failure and a 2-year progressive history of fatigue, personality 
changes, increased sweating, dysphagia with substantial weight loss, dysarthria, 
and intermittent ptosis and diplopia. Neurological examination showed facial 
weakness, lingual atrophy and bulbar palsy, which necessitated the use of a 
feeding tube and ventilatory support. Mild limb weakness with severe muscle 
atrophy and diffuse muscle twitches were observed. The patient had also 
developed visual hallucinations and persecutory delusions. Her personal and 
family medical histories were unremarkable.
INVESTIGATIONS: Sensory and motor nerve conduction studies, repetitive nerve 
stimulation, electromyogram, blood-cell counts, general chemistry and metabolic 
function tests, a CT scan, an [(18)F]fluorodeoxyglucose-PET scan, and tests for 
serum antibodies to acetylcholine receptors, muscle-specific tyrosine kinase, 
voltage-gated potassium channels, P/Q-type voltage-gated calcium channels, and 
paraneoplastic antigens, were carried out.
DIAGNOSIS: Myasthenia gravis associated with antibodies to acetylcholine 
receptor and muscle-specific tyrosine kinase, and Morvan's syndrome associated 
with antibodies to voltage-gated potassium channels in the absence of thymoma.
MANAGEMENT: Combined treatment with prednisone, intravenous immunoglobulin, 
ciclosporin, and rituximab.

DOI: 10.1038/ncpneuro0526
PMID: 17611489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]