---
reference_id: "PMID:16000334"
title: "Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2: polyQ repeat variation in the CACNA1A calcium channel modifies age of onset."
authors:
- Pulst SM
- Santos N
- Wang D
- Yang H
- Huynh D
- Velazquez L
- Figueroa KP
journal: Brain
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awh586
keywords:
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Alleles
- Calcium Channels/genetics
- Cohort Studies
- DNA/genetics
- Female
- Gene Frequency/genetics
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Peptides/genetics
- "Repetitive Sequences, Nucleic Acid/genetics"
- Siblings
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2: polyQ repeat variation in the CACNA1A calcium channel modifies age of onset.
**Authors:** Pulst SM, Santos N, Wang D, Yang H, Huynh D, Velazquez L, Figueroa KP
**Journal:** Brain (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awh586](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awh586)

## Content

1. Brain. 2005 Oct;128(Pt 10):2297-303. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh586. Epub 2005 Jul
6.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2: polyQ repeat variation in the CACNA1A calcium
channel modifies age of onset.

Pulst SM(1), Santos N, Wang D, Yang H, Huynh D, Velazquez L, Figueroa KP.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine and Rose Moss Laboratory for
Parkinson and Related Diseases, Burns and Allen Research Institute, Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90048,
USA. Pulst@CSHS.org

Nine neurodegenerative diseases, collectively referred to as polyglutamine
(polyQ) diseases, are caused by expansion of a coding CAG DNA trinucleotide
repeat. PolyQ diseases show a strong inverse correlation between CAG repeat
length and age of disease onset (AO). Despite this, individuals with identical
repeat expansion alleles can have highly variable disease onset indicating that
other factors also influence AO. We examined AO in 148 individuals in 57
sibships from the SCA2 founder population in Cuba. The mutant CAG repeat allele
explained 57% of AO variance. To estimate heritability of the residual variance
after correction for SCA2 repeat length, we applied variance component analysis
and determined the coefficient of intraclass correlation. We found that 55% of
the residual AO variance was familial. To test candidate modifier alleles in
this population, we selected 64 unrelated individuals from a set of 394
individuals who were highly discordant for AO after correction for SCA2 CAG
repeat length. We hypothesized that long normal alleles in the other 8 polyQ
disease genes were associated with premature disease onset in SCA2. Of the 8
genes tested, only long normal CAG repeats in the CACNA1A gene were associated
with disease onset earlier than expected based on SCA2 CAG repeat size using
non-parametric tests for alleles (P < 0.04) and genotypes (P < 0.023) after
correction for multiple comparisons. CACNA1A variation explained 5.8% of the
residual variation in AO. The CACNA1A calcium channel subunit represents an
excellent candidate as a modifier of disease in SCA2. It is highly expressed in
Purkinje cells (PCs) and is essential for the generation of the P/Q current and
the complex spike in PCs. In contrast to other polyQ proteins, which are
nuclear, the CACNA1A and SCA2 proteins are both cytoplasmic. Furthermore, small
pathologic expansions of the polyQ domain in the CACNA1A protein lead to PC
degeneration in SCA6. Future studies are needed to determine whether the
modifier effect of CACNA1A relates to neuronal dysfunction or cell death of
Purkinje neurons.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awh586
PMID: 16000334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
