---
reference_id: "PMID:29522813"
title: Paradoxical roles of ATF6α and ATF6β in modulating disease severity caused by mutations in collagen X.
authors:
- Forouhan M
- Mori K
- Boot-Handford RP
journal: Matrix Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2018.03.004
keywords:
- "Activating Transcription Factor 6/deficiency, genetics"
- Animals
- Cell Proliferation
- "Chondrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Collagen Type X/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Growth Plate/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Primary Cell Culture
- Severity of Illness Index
- Signal Transduction
- Unfolded Protein Response
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Paradoxical roles of ATF6α and ATF6β in modulating disease severity caused by mutations in collagen X.
**Authors:** Forouhan M, Mori K, Boot-Handford RP
**Journal:** Matrix Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.matbio.2018.03.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matbio.2018.03.004)

## Content

1. Matrix Biol. 2018 Sep;70:50-71. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2018.03.004. Epub 2018
Mar  6.

Paradoxical roles of ATF6α and ATF6β in modulating disease severity caused by 
mutations in collagen X.

Forouhan M(1), Mori K(2), Boot-Handford RP(3).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Faculty of Biology, Medicine 
and Health, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK.
(2)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Faculty of Biology, Medicine 
and Health, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK. 
Electronic address: ray.boot-handford@manchester.ac.uk.

Whilst the role of ATF6α in modulating the unfolded protein response (UPR) has 
been well documented, the function of its paralogue ATF6β is less well 
understood. Using knockdown in cell culture and gene ablation in mice we have 
directly compared the roles of ATF6α & β in responding to the increased ER 
stress induced by mutant forms of type X collagen that cause the ER 
stress-associated metaphyseal chondrodysplasia type Schmid (MCDS). ATF6α more 
efficiently deals with the disease-associated ER stress in the absence of ATF6β 
and conversely, ATF6β is less effective in the absence of ATF6α. Furthermore, 
disease severity in vivo is increased by ATF6α ablation and decreased by ATF6β 
ablation. In addition, novel functions for each paralogue are described 
including an ATF6β-specific role in controlling growth plate chondrocyte 
proliferation. The clear demonstration of the intimate relationship of the two 
ATF6 isoforms and how ATF6β can moderate the activity of ATF6α and vice versa is 
of great significance for understanding the UPR mechanism. The activities of 
both ATF6 isoforms and their separate roles need consideration when deciding how 
to target increased ER stress as a means of treating MCDS and other ER 
stress-associated diseases.

Copyright © 2018 University of Manchester. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.matbio.2018.03.004
PMCID: PMC6090092
PMID: 29522813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]