---
reference_id: "PMID:25273096"
title: Histone deacetylase inhibition rescues structural and functional brain deficits in a mouse model of Kabuki syndrome.
authors:
- Bjornsson HT
- Benjamin JS
- Zhang L
- Weissman J
- Gerber EE
- Chen YC
- Vaurio RG
- Potter MC
- Hansen KD
- Dietz HC
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3009278
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Animals
- Brain/physiopathology
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Face/abnormalities, physiopathology"
- Female
- "Hematologic Diseases/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Hippocampus/physiopathology
- Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- Neurogenesis
- "Vestibular Diseases/drug therapy, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Histone deacetylase inhibition rescues structural and functional brain deficits in a mouse model of Kabuki syndrome.
**Authors:** Bjornsson HT, Benjamin JS, Zhang L, Weissman J, Gerber EE, Chen YC, Vaurio RG, Potter MC, Hansen KD, Dietz HC
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.3009278](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.3009278)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2014 Oct 1;6(256):256ra135. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3009278.

Histone deacetylase inhibition rescues structural and functional brain deficits 
in a mouse model of Kabuki syndrome.

Bjornsson HT(1), Benjamin JS(2), Zhang L(3), Weissman J(4), Gerber EE(3), Chen 
YC(3), Vaurio RG(5), Potter MC(6), Hansen KD(7), Dietz HC(8).

Author information:
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. Department of Pediatrics, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. 
hbjorns1@jhmi.edu.
(2)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. Predoctoral Training Program in 
Human Genetics, McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(3)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(4)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. Kennedy Krieger Institute, 
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(5)Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(6)Brain Science Institute, Neurology Department, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(7)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. Department of Biostatistics, 
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(8)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. Division of Pediatric Cardiology, 
Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Baltimore, MD 21205, 
USA.

Kabuki syndrome is caused by haploinsufficiency for either of two genes that 
promote the opening of chromatin. If an imbalance between open and closed 
chromatin is central to the pathogenesis of Kabuki syndrome, agents that promote 
chromatin opening might have therapeutic potential. We have characterized a 
mouse model of Kabuki syndrome with a heterozygous deletion in the gene encoding 
the lysine-specific methyltransferase 2D (Kmt2d), leading to impairment of 
methyltransferase function. In vitro reporter alleles demonstrated a reduction 
in histone 4 acetylation and histone 3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) 
activity in mouse embryonic fibroblasts from Kmt2d(+/βGeo) mice. These 
activities were normalized in response to AR-42, a histone deacetylase 
inhibitor. In vivo, deficiency of H3K4me3 in the dentate gyrus granule cell 
layer of Kmt2d(+/βGeo) mice correlated with reduced neurogenesis and hippocampal 
memory defects. These abnormalities improved upon postnatal treatment with 
AR-42. Our work suggests that a reversible deficiency in postnatal neurogenesis 
underlies intellectual disability in Kabuki syndrome.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3009278
PMCID: PMC4406328
PMID: 25273096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]