---
reference_id: "PMID:40051748"
title: "Scimitar Syndrome: Unveiling the Complexities of a rare Congenital Cardiopulmonary Anomaly."
authors:
- Mateen N
- Rezkalla A
- Orhun N
journal: Eur J Case Rep Intern Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.12890/2025_005044
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Scimitar Syndrome: Unveiling the Complexities of a rare Congenital Cardiopulmonary Anomaly.
**Authors:** Mateen N, Rezkalla A, Orhun N
**Journal:** Eur J Case Rep Intern Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.12890/2025_005044](https://doi.org/10.12890/2025_005044)

## Content

1. Eur J Case Rep Intern Med. 2025 Feb 7;12(3):005044. doi: 10.12890/2025_005044.
 eCollection 2025.

Scimitar Syndrome: Unveiling the Complexities of a rare Congenital 
Cardiopulmonary Anomaly.

Mateen N(1), Rezkalla A(1), Orhun N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, St. Josephs University Medical Center, 
Paterson, USA.

Scimitar syndrome is a rare congenital anomaly characterised by anomalous 
pulmonary venous drainage of the right lung into the inferior vena cava, often 
accompanied by right lung hypoplasia and dextroposition of the heart. Here, we 
present the case of a 24-year-old female with scimitar syndrome and a history of 
asthma who presented with acute exacerbation of asthma. A chest X-ray revealed 
opacification of the right hemithorax, and a CT angiography revealed congenital 
hypoplasia of the right lung and dextrocardia. This report provides a detailed 
description of scimitar syndrome to spread awareness of this rare diagnosis and 
highlights the unique and various constellations of anatomical abnormalities 
seen in scimitar syndrome that make diagnosis difficult.
LEARNING POINTS: Scimitar syndrome is an extremely rare congenital 
cardiopulmonary anomaly and diagnostic challenge, with key features of partial 
or complete anomalous venous drainage of the right lung into the inferior vena 
cava. It exhibits varying degrees of right lung and pulmonary artery hypoplasia, 
dextrocardia and abnormal arterial supply to the ipsilateral lung.The adult form 
of this rare syndrome may remain underdiagnosed for years due to its less severe 
clinical presentation or incidental findings, such as recurrent pulmonary 
infections or unexplained dyspnoea.

© EFIM 2025.

DOI: 10.12890/2025_005044
PMCID: PMC11882005
PMID: 40051748

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interests: The Authors declare that 
there are no competing interests.