---
reference_id: "PMID:36032477"
title: "Incidence of Dengue fever, serotypes, clinical features, and laboratory markers: a case study of 2019 outbreak at district Shangla, KP, Pakistan."
authors:
- Rehman AU
- Anwar F
- Tayyab M
- Haq I
- Haq M
- Ahmed A
- Haq H
- Khan AS
journal: Afr Health Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4314/ahs.v22i1.61
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence of Dengue fever, serotypes, clinical features, and laboratory markers: a case study of 2019 outbreak at district Shangla, KP, Pakistan.
**Authors:** Rehman AU, Anwar F, Tayyab M, Haq I, Haq M, Ahmed A, Haq H, Khan AS
**Journal:** Afr Health Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4314/ahs.v22i1.61](https://doi.org/10.4314/ahs.v22i1.61)

## Content

1. Afr Health Sci. 2022 Mar;22(1):521-531. doi: 10.4314/ahs.v22i1.61.

Incidence of Dengue fever, serotypes, clinical features, and laboratory markers: 
a case study of 2019 outbreak at district Shangla, KP, Pakistan.

Rehman AU(1), Anwar F(1), Tayyab M(2), Haq I(1), Haq M(3), Ahmed A(4), Haq H(5), 
Khan AS(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Hazara University, 
Mansehra 21300, KP, Pakistan.
(2)Institute of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, The University of 
Agriculture, Peshawar, KP Pakistan.
(3)Peshawar Medical College, Riphah International University, Warsak Road 
Peshawar KP Pakistan.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Peshawar Medical College, Riphah International 
University, Warsak Road Peshawar KP Pakistan.
(5)Haematology, Pathology Department National University of Medical Sciences 
Rawalpindi Pakistan.
(6)Peshawar Dental College, Riphah International University, Warsak Road 
Peshawar KP Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Dengue is a widely spread mosquito-borne infection in humans, which 
in recent decades declared is public health problem globally. The dengue virus 
contains 4 different serotypes (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3, and DENV-4) which belong 
to the genus Flavivirus.
AIMS: A descriptive experimental study was conducted to determine the 
epidemiology, types of Dengue serotypes, clinical features, laboratory probe, 
and markers for primary diagnosis of dengue virus infection in hospitalized 
patients.
METHODOLOGY: A total of 691 suspects were diagnosed from August to October 2019 
in district Shangla KP, Pakistan. Serological tests were used for nonstructural 
protein-1 antigen (NS1), and antibodies (immunoglobulin-M (IgM) & 
Immunoglobulin-G (IgG)) while real-time PCR was used to confirm the cases. The 
data was statistically analyzed using IBM-SPSS Statistics 20 version.
RESULTS: The dengue virus infection was more prevalent in the male group 
(68.09%) than the female group (31.1%). A large number of patients were from 
rural areas (63.5%) while from urban areas were (36.4%), whereas Besham tehsil 
was found the most affected compared to other regions. The most prevalent 
serotype observed in our study was DENV-3 (56.60%) while DENV-4 was the least 
prevalent serotype (1.88%). Among the age-wise analysis of dengue-virus-infected 
individuals, the age group of 19-37 years (64.07%) was found the most affected 
group. The month-wise analysis revealed that the highest number of infections 
(49.8%) were recorded in September. Significant differences were noticed among 
blood parameters.
CONCLUSION: The possible reasons for the dengue overwhelming in the study area 
could be less or lack of awareness particularly regarding the transmission of 
viral infections, improper sewage management, and no effective vector control 
strategies that lead the dengue outbreaks in the study population.

© 2022 Rehman AU et al.

DOI: 10.4314/ahs.v22i1.61
PMCID: PMC9382532
PMID: 36032477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]