---
reference_id: "PMID:27120771"
title: "Polyhydramnios, Transient Antenatal Bartter's Syndrome, and MAGED2 Mutations."
authors:
- Laghmani K
- Beck BB
- Yang SS
- Seaayfan E
- Wenzel A
- Reusch B
- Vitzthum H
- Priem D
- Demaretz S
- Bergmann K
- Duin LK
- Göbel H
- Mache C
- Thiele H
- Bartram MP
- Dombret C
- Altmüller J
- Nürnberg P
- Benzing T
- Levtchenko E
- Seyberth HW
- Klaus G
- Yigit G
- Lin SH
- Timmer A
- de Koning TJ
- Scherjon SA
- Schlingmann KP
- Bertrand MJ
- Rinschen MM
- de Backer O
- Konrad M
- Kömhoff M
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1507629
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics"
- "Antigens, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Bartter Syndrome/genetics
- Female
- Fetal Death
- Fetal Diseases/genetics
- Fetus/metabolism
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked"
- Humans
- Kidney/metabolism
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Polyhydramnios/genetics
- Pregnancy
- Premature Birth/genetics
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Sodium Chloride Symporters/metabolism
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 1/metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polyhydramnios, Transient Antenatal Bartter's Syndrome, and MAGED2 Mutations.
**Authors:** Laghmani K, Beck BB, Yang SS, Seaayfan E, Wenzel A, Reusch B, Vitzthum H, Priem D, Demaretz S, Bergmann K, Duin LK, Göbel H, Mache C, Thiele H, Bartram MP, Dombret C, Altmüller J, Nürnberg P, Benzing T, Levtchenko E, Seyberth HW, Klaus G, Yigit G, Lin SH, Timmer A, de Koning TJ, Scherjon SA, Schlingmann KP, Bertrand MJ, Rinschen MM, de Backer O, Konrad M, Kömhoff M
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1507629](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1507629)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2016 May 12;374(19):1853-63. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1507629. Epub
2016  Apr 27.

Polyhydramnios, Transient Antenatal Bartter's Syndrome, and MAGED2 Mutations.

Laghmani K(1), Beck BB(1), Yang SS(1), Seaayfan E(1), Wenzel A(1), Reusch B(1),
Vitzthum H(1), Priem D(1), Demaretz S(1), Bergmann K(1), Duin LK(1), Göbel H(1),
Mache C(1), Thiele H(1), Bartram MP(1), Dombret C(1), Altmüller J(1), Nürnberg
P(1), Benzing T(1), Levtchenko E(1), Seyberth HW(1), Klaus G(1), Yigit G(1), Lin
SH(1), Timmer A(1), de Koning TJ(1), Scherjon SA(1), Schlingmann KP(1), Bertrand
MJ(1), Rinschen MM(1), de Backer O(1), Konrad M(1), Kömhoff M(1).

Author information:
(1)From INSERM, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Unité 1138, Centre National
de la Recherche Scientifique, ERL8228 Université Pierre et Marie Curie and
Université Paris-Descartes, Paris (K.L., E.S., S.D.); Institute of Human
Genetics (B.B.B., A.W., B.R., J.A., G.Y.), Department of Pathology (H.G.),
Cologne Center for Genomics and Center for Molecular Medicine (H.T., J.A.,
P.N.), Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine
Cologne (M.P.B., T.B., M.M.R.), and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular
Stress Responses in Aging Associated Diseases and Systems Biology of Aging
Cologne (T.B., M.M.R.) - all at the University of Cologne, Cologne, the
Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, University Medical Center
Hamburg, Hamburg (H.V.), University Children's Hospital, Philipps University
Marburg (H.W.S.), and Kuratorium für Heimdialyse, Pediatric Kidney Center
(G.K.), Marburg, the Institute of Human Genetics, University Health Services
Göttingen, Göttingen (G.Y.), and the Department of General Pediatrics,
University Hospital Münster, Münster (K.P.S., M. Konrad) - all in Germany; the
Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Tri-Service General Hospital,
National Defense Medical Center (S.-S.Y., S.-H.L.), and Institute of BioMedical
Sciences, Academia Sinica (S.-S.Y.) - both in Taipei, Taiwan; the Department of
Biomedical Molecular Biology, Inflammation Research Center, VIB/Ghent
University, Ghent (D.P., M.J.M.B.), Unité de Recherche en Physiologie
Moléculaire, University of Namur, Namur (C.D., O.B.), and the Division of
Nephrology, University Children's Hospital Leuven (E.L.) - all in Belgium; the
Divisions of Neonatology (K.B.) and Nephrology (M. Kömhoff), Beatrix Children's
Hospital, and the Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology (L.K.D., S.A.S.),
Pathology and Medical Biology (A.T.), and Genetics (T.J.K.) - all at University
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands; and University Children's
Hospital Graz

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2016 May 12;374(19):1888-90. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1603856.
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2016 Jul;12(7):377. doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2016.72.
    Kidney Int. 2016 Oct;90(4):721-3. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2016.07.031.

BACKGROUND: Three pregnancies with male offspring in one family were complicated
by severe polyhydramnios and prematurity. One fetus died; the other two had
transient massive salt-wasting and polyuria reminiscent of antenatal Bartter's
syndrome.
METHODS: To uncover the molecular cause of this possibly X-linked disease, we
performed whole-exome sequencing of DNA from two members of the index family and
targeted gene analysis of other members of this family and of six additional
families with affected male fetuses. We also evaluated a series of women with
idiopathic polyhydramnios who were pregnant with male fetuses. We performed
immunohistochemical analysis, knockdown and overexpression experiments, and
protein-protein interaction studies.
RESULTS: We identified a mutation in MAGED2 in each of the 13 infants in our
analysis who had transient antenatal Bartter's syndrome. MAGED2 encodes
melanoma-associated antigen D2 (MAGE-D2) and maps to the X chromosome. We also
identified two different MAGED2 mutations in two families with idiopathic
polyhydramnios. Four patients died perinatally, and 11 survived. The initial
presentation was more severe than in known types of antenatal Bartter's
syndrome, as reflected by an earlier onset of polyhydramnios and labor. All
symptoms disappeared spontaneously during follow-up in the infants who survived.
We showed that MAGE-D2 affects the expression and function of the sodium
chloride cotransporters NKCC2 and NCC (key components of salt reabsorption in
the distal renal tubule), possibly through adenylate cyclase and cyclic AMP
signaling and a cytoplasmic heat-shock protein.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that MAGED2 mutations caused X-linked polyhydramnios with
prematurity and a severe but transient form of antenatal Bartter's syndrome.
MAGE-D2 is essential for fetal renal salt reabsorption, amniotic fluid
homeostasis, and the maintenance of pregnancy. (Funded by the University of
Groningen and others.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1507629
PMID: 27120771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
