---
reference_id: "PMID:9042913"
title: Mutations in the COL5A1 gene are causal in the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes I and II.
authors:
- De Paepe A
- Nuytinck L
- Hausser I
- Anton-Lamprecht I
- Naeyaert JM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1997'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the COL5A1 gene are causal in the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes I and II.
**Authors:** De Paepe A, Nuytinck L, Hausser I, Anton-Lamprecht I, Naeyaert JM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1997)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1997 Mar;60(3):547-54.

Mutations in the COL5A1 gene are causal in the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes I and II.

De Paepe A(1), Nuytinck L, Hausser I, Anton-Lamprecht I, Naeyaert JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Gent, Belgium. 
anne.depaepe@rug.ac.be

The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a heterogeneous connective-tissue disorder 
of which at least nine subtypes are recognized. Considerable clinical overlap 
exists between the EDS I and II subtypes, suggesting that both are allelic 
disorders. Recent evidence based on linkage and transgenic mice studies suggest 
that collagen V is causally involved in human EDS. Collagen V forms heterotypic 
fibrils with collagen I in many tissues and plays an important role in collagen 
I fibrillogenesis. We have identified a mutation in COL5A1, the gene encoding 
the pro(alpha)1(V) collagen chain, segregating with EDS I in a four-generation 
family. The mutation causes the substitution of the most 5' cysteine residue by 
a serine within a highly conserved sequence of the pro(alpha)1(V) C-propeptide 
domain and causes reduction of collagen V by preventing incorporation of the 
mutant pro(alpha)1(V) chains in the collagen V trimers. In addition, we have 
detected splicing defects in the COL5A1 gene in a patient with EDS I and in a 
family with EDS II. These findings confirm the causal role of collagen V in at 
least a subgroup of EDS I, prove that EDS I and II are allelic conditions, and 
represent a, so far, unique example of a human collagen disorder caused by 
substitution of a highly conserved cysteine residue in the C-propeptide domain 
of a fibrillar collagen.

PMCID: PMC1712501
PMID: 9042913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]