---
reference_id: "PMID:23996716"
title: IL-13 gene polymorphisms and their association with atopic asthma and rhinitis in Pakistani patients.
authors:
- Shazia M
- Kanza M
- Mehwish I
- Irum S
- Farida A
- Asifa A
journal: Iran J Allergy Asthma Immunol
year: '2013'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IL-13 gene polymorphisms and their association with atopic asthma and rhinitis in Pakistani patients.
**Authors:** Shazia M, Kanza M, Mehwish I, Irum S, Farida A, Asifa A
**Journal:** Iran J Allergy Asthma Immunol (2013)

## Content

1. Iran J Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2013 Aug 28;12(4):391-6.

IL-13 gene polymorphisms and their association with atopic asthma and rhinitis 
in Pakistani patients.

Shazia M(1), Kanza M, Mehwish I, Irum S, Farida A, Asifa A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, 
Islamabad-44000, Pakistan and Department of Ophthalmology, Radboud University 
Nijmegen Medical Centre; Nijmegen, Netherlands. shaziamicheal@gmail.com.

Comment in
    Iran J Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2014 Aug;13(4):298-9.

Interleukin-13 (IL-13) is known to be a key regulator in immunoglobulin E (IgE) 
synthesis, mucus hypersecretion and airway hyperresponsiveness. Single 
nucleotide polymorphisms in IL-13 are associated with allergic phenotypes in 
several ethnically diverse populations.This study was performed in 214 atopic 
patients (asthma n=108, allergic rhinitis n=106) and sex-matched healthy 
controls (n=120). Genotyping of IL-13 gene polymorphisms was performed using 
polymerase chain reaction-based restriction fragment length polymorphism 
method.A statistically significant association of the A-1512C polymorphism in 
IL13 gene was observed with atopy (p&lt;0.001; χ2=19.0). Upon stratification of 
the data into asthma and AR association was revealed with both asthma (p=0.01; 
χ2=8.80) and AR (p&lt;0.001; χ2=24.3) in Pakistani patients. Higher odds ratio 
(OR 95% CI) was observed for AR 3.42 (2.04-5.76) relative to asthma 2.40 
(1.41-4.09) for the C allele compared to controls.In conclusion the study 
provides the evidence A-1512C polymorphisms in IL-13 is a risk factor for asthma 
and AR.

PMID: 23996716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]