---
reference_id: "PMID:22942628"
title: Liver abnormalities in cardiac diseases and heart failure.
authors:
- Alvarez AM
- Mukherjee D
journal: Int J Angiol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1284434
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver abnormalities in cardiac diseases and heart failure.
**Authors:** Alvarez AM, Mukherjee D
**Journal:** Int J Angiol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0031-1284434](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0031-1284434)

## Content

1. Int J Angiol. 2011 Sep;20(3):135-42. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1284434.

Liver abnormalities in cardiac diseases and heart failure.

Alvarez AM(1), Mukherjee D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences
Center, El Paso, TX.

Heart failure (HF) is characterized by the inability of systemic perfusion to
meet the body's metabolic demands and is usually caused by cardiac pump
dysfunction and may occasionally present with symptoms of a noncardiac disorder
such as hepatic dysfunction. The primary pathophysiology involved in hepatic
dysfunction from HF is either passive congestion from increased filling
pressures or low cardiac output and the consequences of impaired perfusion.
Passive hepatic congestion due to increased central venous pressure may cause
elevations of liver enzymes and both direct and indirect serum bilirubin.
Impaired perfusion from decreased cardiac output may be associated with acute
hepatocellular necrosis with marked elevations in serum aminotransferases.
Cardiogenic ischemic hepatitis ("shock liver") may ensue following an episode of
profound hypotension in patients with acute HF. We discuss pathophysiology and
identification of liver abnormalities that are commonly seen in patients with
HF.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0031-1284434
PMCID: PMC3331650
PMID: 22942628
