---
reference_id: "PMID:15109745"
title: Mouse models of infertility due to swollen spermatozoa.
authors:
- Cooper TG
- Yeung CH
- Wagenfeld A
- Nieschlag E
- Poutanen M
- Huhtaniemi I
- Sipilä P
journal: Mol Cell Endocrinol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2003.10.076
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Size
- "Epididymis/cytology, metabolism"
- Female
- "Glutathione Peroxidase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Infertility, Male"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Osmotic Pressure
- Phenotype
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Spermatozoa/cytology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mouse models of infertility due to swollen spermatozoa.
**Authors:** Cooper TG, Yeung CH, Wagenfeld A, Nieschlag E, Poutanen M, Huhtaniemi I, Sipilä P
**Journal:** Mol Cell Endocrinol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mce.2003.10.076](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mce.2003.10.076)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 Mar 15;216(1-2):55-63. doi:
10.1016/j.mce.2003.10.076.

Mouse models of infertility due to swollen spermatozoa.

Cooper TG(1), Yeung CH, Wagenfeld A, Nieschlag E, Poutanen M, Huhtaniemi I,
Sipilä P.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Reproductive Medicine of the University, Domagkstr. 11, D-48129
Munster, Germany. cooper@uni-muenster.de

Transgenic mice with male infertility, the c-ros knockout (KO) and GPX5-Tag2
transgenic mouse models, are compared. Both exhibit severely angulated sperm
flagella explaining the infertility. As angulated spermatozoa are swollen cells,
a failure in volume regulation is indicated. Differences between genotypes were
also found: caudal spermatozoa from c-ros KO, but not GPX5-Tag2, could fertilise
eggs in vitro; flagellar angulation occurred more within the epididymis of
GPX5-Tag2 than c-ros KO mice; the osmotic pressure of cauda epididymidal fluid
was lower only in GPX5-Tag2 mice; angulation of caudal sperm from c-ros KO, but
not GPX5-Tag2 mice, decreased upon demembranation. These observations indicate
that GPX5-Tag2 mice express an earlier, more severe defect. Gene chip analyses
of the epididymides revealed decreased expression of the CRES (cystatin-related
epididymal-spermatogenic) and MEP17 (murine epididymal protein 17) genes in both
genotypes. Further analysis could pinpoint genes essential for epididymal
regulation of sperm volume, explain infertility and suggest modes of male
contraception.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mce.2003.10.076
PMID: 15109745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
