---
reference_id: "PMID:35297258"
title: "Hepatic amyloidosis: a prevalence study and clinical characterization of a rare and severe disease."
authors:
- Dias E
- Cardoso H
- Marques M
- Liberal R
- Lopes S
- Pereira P
- Santos-Antunes J
- Pinheiro J
- Lopes J
- Carneiro F
- Macedo G
journal: Rev Esp Enferm Dig
year: '2023'
doi: 10.17235/reed.2022.8622/2022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatic amyloidosis: a prevalence study and clinical characterization of a rare and severe disease.
**Authors:** Dias E, Cardoso H, Marques M, Liberal R, Lopes S, Pereira P, Santos-Antunes J, Pinheiro J, Lopes J, Carneiro F, Macedo G
**Journal:** Rev Esp Enferm Dig (2023)
**DOI:** [10.17235/reed.2022.8622/2022](https://doi.org/10.17235/reed.2022.8622/2022)

## Content

1. Rev Esp Enferm Dig. 2023 Jan;115(1):16-21. doi: 10.17235/reed.2022.8622/2022.

Hepatic amyloidosis: a prevalence study and clinical characterization of a rare 
and severe disease.

Dias E(1), Cardoso H(2), Marques M(3), Liberal R(2), Lopes S(4), Pereira P(4), 
Santos-Antunes J(4), Pinheiro J(5), Lopes J(5), Carneiro F(5), Macedo G(4).

Author information:
(1)Gastrenterology , Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João, Portugal.
(2)Gastroenterology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João.
(3)Gastrenterology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João, Portugal.
(4)Gastroenterology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João, Portugal.
(5)Pathology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Amyloidosis is a systemic disease characterized by 
extracellular deposition of amyloid protein, most commonly in the heart and 
kidney. Hepatic amyloidosis is a rare form of presentation that ranges from mild 
hepatomegaly and altered liver biochemical tests to acute liver failure. The 
aims of this study were to evaluate the prevalence of amyloidosis in patients 
undergoing liver biopsy and describe its main clinical characteristics and 
prognostic impact.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of all patients with a histological diagnosis 
of hepatic amyloidosis between January 2010 and December 2019 was performed.
MAJOR RESULTS: A total of 7 patients were identified from a total of 1773 liver 
biopsy procedures (0.4%), with a female predominance (6/7) and median age of 
diagnosis of 62 years. The most common clinical manifestations included 
hepatomegaly (4/7), jaundice (2/7) and peripheral edema (2/7), whereas 3/7 
patients were asymptomatic. Every patient presented abnormalities in liver 
biochemical tests, more commonly cholestasis (6/7), but also cytolysis (4/7) or 
hyperbilirubinemia (2/7). Abnormal imaging findings included hepatomegaly, 
steatosis or parenchymal heterogeneity. In most patients (5/7), other organs 
were involved, most commonly with nephrotic syndrome (3/7) and infiltrative 
cardiomyopathy (3/7). The most common type was AA amyloidosis (3/7) followed by 
AL amyloidosis (2/7). The 1-year mortality rate was 43% and the median survival 
was 24 months.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a low prevalence (0.4%) of amyloidosis among patients 
undergoing liver biopsy. Although rare, hepatic amyloidosis is associated with a 
dismal prognosis and a high index of suspicion is crucial to achieve an early 
diagnosis. .

DOI: 10.17235/reed.2022.8622/2022
PMID: 35297258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]