---
reference_id: "PMID:37366866"
title: "Scurvy: Rediscovering a Forgotten Disease."
authors:
- Gandhi M
- Elfeky O
- Ertugrul H
- Chela HK
- Daglilar E
journal: Diseases
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/diseases11020078
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Scurvy: Rediscovering a Forgotten Disease.
**Authors:** Gandhi M, Elfeky O, Ertugrul H, Chela HK, Daglilar E
**Journal:** Diseases (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diseases11020078](https://doi.org/10.3390/diseases11020078)

## Content

1. Diseases. 2023 May 26;11(2):78. doi: 10.3390/diseases11020078.

Scurvy: Rediscovering a Forgotten Disease.

Gandhi M(1), Elfeky O(2), Ertugrul H(3), Chela HK(3), Daglilar E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, 
USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Florida, Leesburg, FL 32611, USA.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Charleston Area Medical Center, 
West Virginia University, Charleston, WV 25304, USA.

Scurvy is a nutritional deficiency caused by low vitamin C levels that has been 
described since ancient times. It leads to a varied presentation, affecting 
multiple organ systems due to its role in the biochemical reactions of 
connective tissue synthesis. Common manifestations include gingival bleeding, 
arthralgias, skin discoloration, impaired wound healing, perifollicular 
hemorrhage, and ecchymoses. Although there has been a dramatic reduction in the 
prevalence of scurvy in modern times owing to vitamin C supplementation and 
intake, sporadic cases still occur. In developed countries, it is mainly 
diagnosed in the elderly and malnourished individuals and is associated with 
alcoholism, low socio-economic status, and poor dietary habits. Scurvy has been 
an unusual cause of gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding among other GI 
manifestations. It can be adequately treated and prevented via vitamin C 
supplementation.

DOI: 10.3390/diseases11020078
PMCID: PMC10296835
PMID: 37366866

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.