---
reference_id: "PMID:31456208"
title: "Iron Pathophysiology in Friedreich's Ataxia."
authors:
- Li K
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/978-981-13-9589-5_7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Iron Pathophysiology in Friedreich's Ataxia.
**Authors:** Li K
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-981-13-9589-5_7](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-9589-5_7)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2019;1173:125-143. doi: 10.1007/978-981-13-9589-5_7.

Iron Pathophysiology in Friedreich's Ataxia.

Li K(1).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Medical School of Nanjing 
University, Nanjing, 210093, People's Republic of China. likuanyu@nju.edu.cn.

Friedreich's ataxia (FRDA) is a degenerative disease that affects both the 
central and the peripheral nervous systems and non-neural tissues including, 
mainly, heart, and endocrine pancreas. It is an autosomal recessive disease 
caused by a GAA triplet-repeat localized within an Alu sequence element in 
intron 1 of frataxin (FXN) gene, which encodes a mitochondrial protein FXN. This 
protein is essential for mitochondrial function by the involvement of 
iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis. The effects of its deficiency also include 
disruption of cellular, particularly mitochondrial, iron homeostasis, i.e., 
relatively more iron accumulated in mitochondria and less iron presented in 
cytosol. Though iron toxicity is commonly thought to be mediated via Fenton 
reaction, oxidative stress seems not to be the main problem to result in 
detrimental effects on cell survival, particularly neuron survival. Therefore, 
the basic research on FXN function is urgently demanded to understand the 
disease. This chapter focuses on the outcome of FXN expression, regulation, and 
function in cellular or animal models of FRDA and on iron pathophysiology in the 
affected tissues. Finally, therapeutic strategies based on the control of iron 
toxicity and iron cellular redistribution are considered. The combination of 
multiple therapeutic targets including iron, oxidative stress, mitochondrial 
function, and FXN regulation is also proposed.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-13-9589-5_7
PMID: 31456208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]