---
reference_id: "PMID:16249140"
title: Management of leukocytoclastic vasculitis.
authors:
- Sunderkötter C
- Bonsmann G
- Sindrilaru A
- Luger T
journal: J Dermatolog Treat
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1080/09546630500277971
keywords:
- Humans
- "Vasculitis, Leukocytoclastic, Cutaneous/diagnosis, etiology, immunology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of leukocytoclastic vasculitis.
**Authors:** Sunderkötter C, Bonsmann G, Sindrilaru A, Luger T
**Journal:** J Dermatolog Treat (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09546630500277971](https://doi.org/10.1080/09546630500277971)

## Content

1. J Dermatolog Treat. 2005;16(4):193-206. doi: 10.1080/09546630500277971.

Management of leukocytoclastic vasculitis.

Sunderkötter C(1), Bonsmann G, Sindrilaru A, Luger T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University of Ulm, Germany.
cord.sunderkoetter@medizin.uni-ulm.de

Leukocytoclastic vasculitis (LcV) is the most common form of vasculitis of the
skin and usually results from deposition of immune complexes at the vessel wall.
It presents in different forms and in association with different diseases. When
IgA is the dominant immunoglobulin in immune complexes, systemic involvement is
likely in both children and adults (Henoch-Schönlein purpura--HSP). LcV due to
IgG- or IgM-containing immune complexes has less systemic involvement and a
better prognosis than HSP. Other forms of LcV include cryoglobulinaemic,
urticarial and ANCA-associated LcV as well as LcV associated with vasculopathy
and coagulopathy in SCLE/SLE or in bacteraemia/sepsis. The aim of diagnostic
guidelines is to determine the specific type and systemic involvement of LcV and
to identify an underlying cause. Basic work-up should encompass history of drug
intake and of preceding infections, biopsy with immunofluorescence, differential
blood count, urine analysis and throat swabs. Therapy of immune complex LcV
often does not require aggressive therapy due to a usually favourable course. It
includes avoidance or treatment of eliciting agents and use of compression
stockings to reduce purpura. There are no large prospective randomized
controlled studies. Corticosteroids are indicated when there are signs of
incipient skin necrosis. In chronic or relapsing LcV we suggest colchicine as a
first-line and dapsone as a second-line therapy. Corticosteroids may reduce the
incidence of severe renal insufficiency in children according to some studies,
but there is no study showing such an effect in adults. Severe systemic
vasculitis requires immunosuppressive strategies.

DOI: 10.1080/09546630500277971
PMID: 16249140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
