---
reference_id: "PMID:33063933"
title: "Diverse presentation and tailored treatment of infantile myofibromatosis: A single-center experience."
authors:
- Manisterski M
- Benish M
- Levin D
- Shiran SI
- Sher O
- Gortzak Y
- Elhasid R
journal: Pediatr Blood Cancer
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/pbc.28769
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Methotrexate/therapeutic use
- "Myofibromatosis/diagnosis, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Remission, Spontaneous"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Soft Tissue Neoplasms/diagnosis, drug therapy, pathology"
- Vinblastine/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diverse presentation and tailored treatment of infantile myofibromatosis: A single-center experience.
**Authors:** Manisterski M, Benish M, Levin D, Shiran SI, Sher O, Gortzak Y, Elhasid R
**Journal:** Pediatr Blood Cancer (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pbc.28769](https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.28769)

## Content

1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2021 Feb;68(2):e28769. doi: 10.1002/pbc.28769. Epub 2020
 Oct 16.

Diverse presentation and tailored treatment of infantile myofibromatosis: A 
single-center experience.

Manisterski M(1), Benish M(1), Levin D(1), Shiran SI(2), Sher O(3), Gortzak 
Y(4), Elhasid R(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Dana Children's Hospital, Tel Aviv 
Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Pediatric Radiology Unit, Tel Aviv Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Institute of Pathology, Tel Aviv Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(4)Department of Orthopedic Oncology, Tel Aviv Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(5)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Infantile myofibromatosis (IM) is a rare benign fibrous tumor with 
diverse clinical presentations and treatments, such as watchful waiting, 
surgical excision, and low-dose chemotherapy.
PROCEDURE: Clinical presentation and tailored treatment of five infants with 
solitary and generalized IM are described, together with a review of the 
literature.
RESULTS: Three patients underwent total-body magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at 
diagnosis and during follow up, which revealed disease extension that aided in 
designing treatment. Visceral involvement included central nervous system, 
cardiac, gastrointestinal, muscle, bone, and subcutaneous tissue lesions. The 
patient with the solitary form of IM was followed up without treatment and had 
spontaneous improvement. Patients with the multicentric form received 
intravenous low-dose methotrexate and vinblastine chemotherapy. One patient who 
received oral methotrexate due to cardiac involvement and unfeasible central 
line access had excellent results. Recurrence was successfully treated by the 
same methotrexate and vinblastine regimen as that administered at diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest screening all patients with one or more IM lesions by 
means of total body MRI due to its inherent superior soft tissue resolution. 
Total-body MRI may also be used for routine follow up. Oral methotrexate can be 
administered successfully in patients that lack central line access, and 
recurrent lesions can be treated with the same chemotherapeutic combination as 
that given at diagnosis. Long-term follow up is needed, since recurrence could 
appear years after initial presentation of the disease.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.28769
PMID: 33063933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]