---
reference_id: "PMID:20301485"
title: Familial Lipoprotein Lipase Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Burnett JR
- Hooper AJ
- Hegele RA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Lipoprotein Lipase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Burnett JR, Hooper AJ, Hegele RA

## Content

1. Familial Lipoprotein Lipase Deficiency.

Burnett JR(1), Hooper AJ(1), Hegele RA(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
1999 Oct 12 [updated 2017 Jun 22].

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry Royal Perth Hospital & Fiona Stanley 
Hospital Network PathWest Laboratory Medicine WA; School of Medicine Faculty of 
Health & Medical Sciences University of Western Australia Perth, Australia
(2)Departments of Medicine and Biochemistry Schulich School of Medicine and 
Robarts Research Institute Western University London, Ontario, Canada

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Familial lipoprotein lipase (LPL) deficiency usually 
presents in childhood and is characterized by very severe hypertriglyceridemia 
with episodes of abdominal pain, recurrent acute pancreatitis, eruptive 
cutaneous xanthomata, and hepatosplenomegaly. Clearance of chylomicrons from the 
plasma is impaired, causing triglycerides to accumulate in plasma and the plasma 
to have a milky (lactescent or lipemic) appearance. Symptoms usually resolve 
with restriction of total dietary fat to ≤20 g/day.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of LPL deficiency is established in a proband 
by the identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in LPL on molecular 
genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is based on medical nutrition 
therapy to maintain plasma triglyceride concentration below 1000 mg/dL. 
Maintenance of triglyceride levels below 2000 mg/dL prevents recurrent abdominal 
pain. Restriction of dietary fat to ≤20 g/day or 15% of a total energy intake is 
usually sufficient to reduce plasma triglyceride concentration and to keep the 
individual with familial LPL deficiency free of symptoms. An acute pancreatitis 
episode is treated with standard care. Prevention of secondary complications: 
Prevention of recurrent acute pancreatitis decreases the risk of developing 
diabetes mellitus. Surveillance: Monitoring of plasma triglycerides. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Agents known to increase endogenous triglyceride 
concentration such as alcohol, oral estrogens, diuretics, isotretinoin, 
glucocorticoids, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and beta-adrenergic 
blocking agents; fish oil supplements are contraindicated because they 
contribute to chylomicron levels. Pregnancy management: For pregnant women with 
LPL deficiency, extreme dietary fat restriction to <2 g/day during the second 
and third trimesters of pregnancy with close monitoring of plasma triglyceride 
concentration is recommended. Other: The lipid-lowering drugs that are used to 
treat other disorders of lipid metabolism are not effective in individuals with 
familial LPL deficiency.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Familial LPL deficiency is inherited in an autosomal 
recessive manner. Each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of 
being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and 
prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk are possible if the 
pathogenic variants in the family are known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301485