---
reference_id: "PMID:19773262"
title: "Diamond-Blackfan anemia: genotype-phenotype correlations in Italian patients with RPL5 and RPL11 mutations."
authors:
- Quarello P
- Garelli E
- Carando A
- Brusco A
- Calabrese R
- Dufour C
- Longoni D
- Misuraca A
- Vinti L
- Aspesi A
- Biondini L
- Loreni F
- Dianzani I
- Ramenghi U
journal: Haematologica
year: '2010'
doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.011783
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diamond-Blackfan anemia: genotype-phenotype correlations in Italian patients with RPL5 and RPL11 mutations.
**Authors:** Quarello P, Garelli E, Carando A, Brusco A, Calabrese R, Dufour C, Longoni D, Misuraca A, Vinti L, Aspesi A, Biondini L, Loreni F, Dianzani I, Ramenghi U
**Journal:** Haematologica (2010)
**DOI:** [10.3324/haematol.2009.011783](https://doi.org/10.3324/haematol.2009.011783)

## Content

1. Haematologica. 2010 Feb;95(2):206-13. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.011783. Epub 
2009 Sep 22.

Diamond-Blackfan anemia: genotype-phenotype correlations in Italian patients 
with RPL5 and RPL11 mutations.

Quarello P(1), Garelli E, Carando A, Brusco A, Calabrese R, Dufour C, Longoni D, 
Misuraca A, Vinti L, Aspesi A, Biondini L, Loreni F, Dianzani I, Ramenghi U.

Author information:
(1)Hematology Unit, Pediatric Department, University of Torino Piazza Polonia 
94, 10126 Torino, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Diamond-Blackfan anemia is a rare, pure red blood cell aplasia of 
childhood due to an intrinsic defect in erythropoietic progenitors. About 40% of 
patients display various malformations. Anemia is corrected by steroid treatment 
in more than 50% of cases; non-responders need chronic transfusions or stem cell 
transplantation. Defects in the RPS19 gene, encoding the ribosomal protein S19, 
are the main known cause of Diamond-Blackfan anemia and account for more than 
25% of cases. Mutations in RPS24, RPS17, and RPL35A described in a minority of 
patients show that Diamond-Blackfan anemia is a disorder of ribosome biogenesis. 
Two new genes (RPL5, RPL11), encoding for ribosomal proteins of the large 
subunit, have been reported to be involved in a considerable percentage of 
patients.
DESIGN AND METHODS: In this genotype-phenotype analysis we screened the coding 
sequence and intron-exon boundaries of RPS14, RPS16, RPS24, RPL5, RPL11, and 
RPL35A in 92 Italian patients with Diamond-Blackfan anemia who were negative for 
RPS19 mutations.
RESULTS: About 20% of the patients screened had mutations in RPL5 or RPL11, and 
only 1.6% in RPS24. All but three mutations that we report here are new 
mutations. No mutations were found in RPS14, RPS16, or RPL35A. Remarkably, we 
observed a higher percentage of somatic malformations in patients with RPL5 and 
RPL11 mutations. A close association was evident between RPL5 mutations and 
craniofacial malformations, and between hand malformations and RPL11 mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in four ribosomal proteins account for around 50% of all 
cases of Diamond-Blackfan anemia in Italian patients. Genotype-phenotype data 
suggest that mutation screening should begin with RPL5 and RPL11 in patients 
with Diamond-Blackfan anemia with malformations.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2009.011783
PMCID: PMC2817022
PMID: 19773262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]