---
reference_id: PMID:9533054
title: Current treatment options for the restoration of articular cartilage.
authors:
- Gilbert JE
journal: Am J Knee Surg
year: '1998'
keywords:
- Arthroplasty
- Arthroscopy
- "Cartilage, Articular"
- Chondrocytes/transplantation
- Debridement
- Humans
- Knee Joint
- Osteoarthritis/therapy
- Therapeutic Irrigation
- "Transplantation, Autologous"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current treatment options for the restoration of articular cartilage.
**Authors:** Gilbert JE
**Journal:** Am J Knee Surg (1998)

## Content

1. Am J Knee Surg. 1998 Winter;11(1):42-6.

Current treatment options for the restoration of articular cartilage.

Gilbert JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Dept of Orthopedic Surgery, Baylor University Medical Ctr, Dallas, TX 75246, 
USA.

Over the past several decades, much has been learned about articular cartilage 
and its physiological capacity to restore itself. While articular cartilage does 
appear to have some regenerative capabilities, it appears to lose this capacity 
over a period of time, making restoration of articular surfaces more and more 
difficult. To date, no technique has been completely successful in achieving 
exactly normal regenerative articular cartilage. Arthroscopic lavage and 
debridement provides temporary relief of symptoms. This probably works by 
removing degradative enzymes that contribute to synovitis and also to the 
further breakdown of articular cartilage. Bone marrow stimulation techniques 
such as abrasion arthroplasty, drilling, and microfracture produce only 
fibrocartilage and therefore do not offer a long-term cure. Perichondral and 
periosteal interposition grafts produce repair tissue that is similar to hyaline 
cartilage but also lack the mechanical durability. Like bone marrow stimulation 
techniques, interposition grafts introduce precursor cells, which have a 
tendency to differentiate along lines other than cartilage. This leads to an 
inferior quality of repair tissue. Currently, chondrogenic-stimulating factors 
and artificial matrices are currently being researched and developed. Much has 
been learned about the various growth factors that stimulate chondrocyte 
differentiation and extracellular matrix production, but to date, there has not 
been a clinical technique that has shown any long-term promise. Ultimately, the 
goal will be to take precursor cells from an easily accessible source such as 
the iliac crest, mix them with growth factors that have been derived genetically 
in the lab, and provide an artificial matrix that in combination can produce 
restoration of articular cartilage at minimal cost and patient morbidity. 
Autologous osteochondral transplant systems have shown encouraging results but 
there are still problems. Graft matching and contouring to the recipient 
articular surface is difficult. Donor sites can be a limiting factor. 
Furthermore, the fibrocartilaginous interface between the donor and recipient 
site may contribute to breakdown in the long run. Autologous chondrocyte 
implantation is a biological repair process that also has shown encouraging 
results. It must be remembered that this is not normal articular cartilage--it 
is only hyaline-like cartilage. The technique is expensive and is technically 
difficult to perform. There are no randomized prospective studies that compare 
the natural history of the repair tissue to that of other forms of repair 
tissue. Long-term functional outcome is still a significant question mark. In 
addition, it has not been shown that autologous chondrocyte implantation can 
prevent degenerative changes. In the future, we probably will see delivery 
systems using stimulating growth factors, chondrocytes, and synthetically 
derived matrices. When placed in combination and with the right mechanical 
stimuli, we may ultimately achieve true restoration of articular cartilage.

PMID: 9533054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]