---
reference_id: "PMID:34806278"
title: Assessment of changes in color and size of vitiligo lesions during treatment with narrow band ultraviolet B.
authors:
- Tawfik NZ
- Anbar MT
- Atwa MA
journal: J Cosmet Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/jocd.14625
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessment of changes in color and size of vitiligo lesions during treatment with narrow band ultraviolet B.
**Authors:** Tawfik NZ, Anbar MT, Atwa MA
**Journal:** J Cosmet Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jocd.14625](https://doi.org/10.1111/jocd.14625)

## Content

1. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2022 Aug;21(8):3522-3529. doi: 10.1111/jocd.14625. Epub
2021  Nov 21.

Assessment of changes in color and size of vitiligo lesions during treatment 
with narrow band ultraviolet B.

Tawfik NZ(1), Anbar MT(1), Atwa MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Suez Canal University, Ismailia, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Many treatment modalities have been used to stabilize vitiligo and 
induce repigmentation. Several methods were used to monitor the color changes 
inside the treated lesions such as spectroscopes and colorimeters that measure 
the melanin index inside the lesion.
OBJECTIVE: To study whether the colorimeter and point counting technique can be 
used as objective methods in monitoring vitiligo lesions during treatment with 
Nb-UVB.
METHODS: Twenty randomly chosen patients with non-segmental vitiligo were 
enrolled in this interventional study. Vitiligo disease activity score was 
recorded in each patient. Patients received Nb-UVB three times per week for 
6 months. Two lesions were chosen in each patient, and each lesion was assessed 
for size using point counting technique and degree of color using the 
Dermacatch® at the beginning of the treatment and evaluated for changes in color 
and size every 4 weeks till the end of the treatment.
RESULTS: After 6 months of treatment, regarding the lesion size, 90% of lesions 
showed variable degrees of repigmentation and 10% showed increase in size, 
indicating increased activity of the disease, and regarding to color changes. We 
noticed that after one month of Nb-UVB treatment, there is marked increase in MI 
measurements in many lesions before any clinical improvement appeared, while at 
the end of treatment, inside the lesion; 95% showed an increase in melanin index 
and 5% showed no elevation. While the color changes outside the lesion showed 
75% of lesions increased in melanin index, 15% remained unchanged and 10% of the 
lesions showed decrease in melanin index.
CONCLUSION: Colorimeter was able to detect change in color after only one month 
of treatment before it was clinically apparent which means that it can be used 
as a prognostic tool.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/jocd.14625
PMID: 34806278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]