---
reference_id: "PMID:25763902"
title: Genome-wide association study and meta-analysis identify ISL1 as genome-wide significant susceptibility gene for bladder exstrophy.
authors:
- Draaken M
- Knapp M
- Pennimpede T
- Schmidt JM
- Ebert AK
- Rösch W
- Stein R
- Utsch B
- Hirsch K
- Boemers TM
- Mangold E
- Heilmann S
- Ludwig KU
- Jenetzky E
- Zwink N
- Moebus S
- Herrmann BG
- Mattheisen M
- Nöthen MM
- Ludwig M
- Reutter H
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005024
keywords:
- Animals
- Bladder Exstrophy/genetics
- Case-Control Studies
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- "LIM-Homeodomain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide association study and meta-analysis identify ISL1 as genome-wide significant susceptibility gene for bladder exstrophy.
**Authors:** Draaken M, Knapp M, Pennimpede T, Schmidt JM, Ebert AK, Rösch W, Stein R, Utsch B, Hirsch K, Boemers TM, Mangold E, Heilmann S, Ludwig KU, Jenetzky E, Zwink N, Moebus S, Herrmann BG, Mattheisen M, Nöthen MM, Ludwig M, Reutter H
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1005024](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1005024)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2015 Mar 12;11(3):e1005024. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005024. 
eCollection 2015 Mar.

Genome-wide association study and meta-analysis identify ISL1 as genome-wide 
significant susceptibility gene for bladder exstrophy.

Draaken M(1), Knapp M(2), Pennimpede T(3), Schmidt JM(4), Ebert AK(5), Rösch 
W(6), Stein R(7), Utsch B(8), Hirsch K(9), Boemers TM(10), Mangold E(4), 
Heilmann S(1), Ludwig KU(1), Jenetzky E(11), Zwink N(12), Moebus S(13), Herrmann 
BG(3), Mattheisen M(14), Nöthen MM(1), Ludwig M(15), Reutter H(16).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany; Department of 
Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(2)Institute of Medical Biometry, Informatics, and Epidemiology, University of 
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Department of Developmental Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular 
Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(5)Department of Urology and Pediatric Urology, University Hospital of Ulm, 
Germany.
(6)Department of Pediatric Urology, St. Hedwig Hospital Barmherzige Brüder, 
Regensburg, Germany.
(7)Department of Urology, Division of Pediatric Urology, University of Mainz, 
Mainz, Germany.
(8)Department of General Pediatrics and Neonatology, Justus Liebig University, 
Giessen, Germany.
(9)Department of Urology, Division of Paediatric Urology, University of 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(10)Department of Pediatric Surgery and Pediatric Urology, Children's Hospital 
of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(11)Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Aging Research, German Cancer 
Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany; Department of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Johannes-Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.
(12)Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Aging Research, German Cancer 
Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany.
(13)Institute of Medical Informatics, Biometry, and Epidemiology, University 
Hospital of Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(14)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America; Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus 
University, Aarhus, Denmark; Department of Genomic Mathematics, University of 
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(15)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University of 
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(16)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany; Department 
of Neonatology, Children's Hospital, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

The bladder exstrophy-epispadias complex (BEEC) represents the severe end of the 
uro-rectal malformation spectrum, and is thought to result from aberrant 
embryonic morphogenesis of the cloacal membrane and the urorectal septum. The 
most common form of BEEC is isolated classic bladder exstrophy (CBE). To 
identify susceptibility loci for CBE, we performed a genome-wide association 
study (GWAS) of 110 CBE patients and 1,177 controls of European origin. Here, an 
association was found with a region of approximately 220kb on chromosome 5q11.1. 
This region harbors the ISL1 (ISL LIM homeobox 1) gene. Multiple markers in this 
region showed evidence for association with CBE, including 84 markers with 
genome-wide significance. We then performed a meta-analysis using data from a 
previous GWAS by our group of 98 CBE patients and 526 controls of European 
origin. This meta-analysis also implicated the 5q11.1 locus in CBE risk. A total 
of 138 markers at this locus reached genome-wide significance in the 
meta-analysis, and the most significant marker (rs9291768) achieved a P value of 
2.13 × 10-12. No other locus in the meta-analysis achieved genome-wide 
significance. We then performed murine expression analyses to follow up this 
finding. Here, Isl1 expression was detected in the genital region within the 
critical time frame for human CBE development. Genital regions with Isl1 
expression included the peri-cloacal mesenchyme and the urorectal septum. The 
present study identified the first genome-wide significant locus for CBE at 
chromosomal region 5q11.1, and provides strong evidence for the hypothesis that 
ISL1 is the responsible candidate gene in this region.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005024
PMCID: PMC4357422
PMID: 25763902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.