---
reference_id: "PMID:35127763"
title: Clinical and Inflammatory Characteristics of the Chinese APAC Cough Variant Asthma Cohort.
authors:
- Lai K
- Zhan W
- Wu F
- Zhang Y
- Lin L
- Li W
- Yi F
- Jiang Z
- Dai Y
- Li S
- Lin J
- Yuan Y
- Jiang Y
- Qiu C
- Zhao L
- Chen M
- Qiu Z
- Li H
- Chen R
- Luo W
- Xie J
- Guo C
- Jiang M
- Yang X
- Shi G
- Sun D
- Chen R
- Chung KF
- Shen H
- Zhong N
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.807385
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Inflammatory Characteristics of the Chinese APAC Cough Variant Asthma Cohort.
**Authors:** Lai K, Zhan W, Wu F, Zhang Y, Lin L, Li W, Yi F, Jiang Z, Dai Y, Li S, Lin J, Yuan Y, Jiang Y, Qiu C, Zhao L, Chen M, Qiu Z, Li H, Chen R, Luo W, Xie J, Guo C, Jiang M, Yang X, Shi G, Sun D, Chen R, Chung KF, Shen H, Zhong N
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2021.807385](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2021.807385)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2022 Jan 21;8:807385. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.807385. 
eCollection 2021.

Clinical and Inflammatory Characteristics of the Chinese APAC Cough Variant 
Asthma Cohort.

Lai K(1), Zhan W(1), Wu F(2), Zhang Y(3), Lin L(4), Li W(5), Yi F(1), Jiang 
Z(1), Dai Y(6), Li S(7), Lin J(8), Yuan Y(9), Jiang Y(10), Qiu C(11), Zhao 
L(12), Chen M(13), Qiu Z(14), Li H(1), Chen R(1), Luo W(1), Xie J(1), Guo C(1), 
Jiang M(1), Yang X(15), Shi G(16), Sun D(17), Chen R(1)(11), Chung KF(18), Shen 
H(5), Zhong N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, State Key Laboratory of 
Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Disease, 
Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Huizhou The Third 
People's Hospital, Huizhou, China.
(3)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, The First People's 
Hospital of Yunnan Province, Kunming, China.
(4)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Guangdong Provincial 
Hospital of Chinese Medicine, Guangdong Provincial Academy of Chinese Medical 
Sciences, The Second Clinical School of Guangzhou University of Chinese 
Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Key Laboratory of 
Respiratory Disease of Zhejiang Province, Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(6)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The Second Affiliated 
Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China.
(7)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Henan University of Chinese Medicine, Zhengzhou, China.
(8)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, China-Japan Friendship 
Hospital, Beijing, China.
(9)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, The Second Hospital of 
Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, China.
(10)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Shenzhen Hospital of 
Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Shenzhen, China.
(11)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Shenzhen Institute of 
Respiratory Diseases, Shenzhen People's Hospital, The First Affiliated Hospital 
of Southern University of Science and Technology, The Second Clinical Medical 
College of Jinan University, Shenzhen, China.
(12)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Henan Provincial 
People's Hospital, People's Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.
(13)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Songshan Lake Central 
Hospital of Dongguan City, The Third People's Hospital of Dongguan City, 
Dongguan, China.
(14)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, School of Medicine, 
Tongji Hospital, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(15)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Xinjiang Interstitial 
Lung Disease Clinical Medicine Research Center, People's Hospital of Xinjiang 
Uygur Autonomous Region, Urumqi, China.
(16)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, School of Medicine, 
Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Beijing, China.
(17)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, The Inner Mongolia 
Autonomous Region People's Hospital, Hohhot, China.
(18)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, Royal Brompton 
and Harefield Foundation NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: The AtyPical Asthma in China (APAC) cohort is a multi-center 
prospective, observational cohort set-up to investigate the clinical, 
pathophysiological features, prognosis, and mechanisms of cough variant asthma 
(CVA).
OBJECTIVES: To present the characteristics of newly physician-diagnosed adults 
with CVA (n = 328) compared to mild-moderate classic asthma (CA, n = 206).
METHODS AND MAIN RESULTS: CVA subjects showed a higher proportion of female 
(67.1 vs. 55.3%, P = 0.0084), abnormal laryngopharyngeal sensations (71 vs. 51%, 
p < 0.0001) than CA, but presented with near normal spirometry and higher 
methacholine PD20-FEV1 values [4.2 (1, 8.6) vs. 0.8 (0.4, 4.7), P < 0.0001]. 
Lower fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FENO) levels [38.5 (19.8, 72.5) vs. 53. 
(28.5, 92.2), P = 0.0019], blood eosinophil counts [0.2 (0.1, 0.4) vs. 0.3 (0.2, 
0.5), P = 0.0014], and sputum eosinophils [2.3 (0.3, 8.0) vs. 12.2 (2, 34.5), p 
< 0.0001] were found in CVA. Despite lower total serum IgE levels in CVA, there 
was similar proportion of atopy in both groups. The prevalence of cough in CA 
was 86.4%, while CVA reported more severe cough on Visual Analog Scale, Cough 
Evaluation Test, and Leicester Cough Questionnaire, similar anxiety and 
depression scores but better asthma control scores as reflected by Asthma 
Control Test compared to CA. No correlation was found between cough assessment 
outcomes and sputum eosinophil count, blood eosinophil count, FENO, spirometry 
variables, or PD20-FEV1.
CONCLUSION: Cough variant asthma is distinctive from classic asthma in regard to 
clinical features, lung function, and airway inflammation. Quality of life is 
badly impaired as well in spite of better asthma control scores.

Copyright © 2022 Lai, Zhan, Wu, Zhang, Lin, Li, Yi, Jiang, Dai, Li, Lin, Yuan, 
Jiang, Qiu, Zhao, Chen, Qiu, Li, Chen, Luo, Xie, Guo, Jiang, Yang, Shi, Sun, 
Chen, Chung, Shen and Zhong.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.807385
PMCID: PMC8814600
PMID: 35127763

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that this study received 
funding from AstraZeneca. The funder was not involved in the study design, 
collection, analysis, interpretation of data, the writing of this article or the 
decision to submit it for publication. The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.