---
reference_id: "PMID:26304920"
title: "Pinta: Latin America's Forgotten Disease?"
authors:
- Stamm LV
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '2015'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.15-0329
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pinta: Latin America's Forgotten Disease?
**Authors:** Stamm LV
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (2015)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.15-0329](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.15-0329)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2015 Nov;93(5):901-3. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.15-0329. Epub 2015
 Aug 24.

Pinta: Latin America's Forgotten Disease?

Stamm LV(1).

Author information:
(1)Program in Infectious Diseases, Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School 
of Global Public Health, Hooker Research Center, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina lstamm@email.unc.edu.

Pinta is a neglected, chronic skin disease that was first described in the 
sixteenth century in Mexico. The World Health Organization lists 15 countries in 
Latin America where pinta was previously endemic. However, the current 
prevalence of pinta is unknown due to the lack of surveillance data. The 
etiological agent of pinta, Treponema carateum, cannot be distinguished 
morphologically or serologically from the not-yet-cultivable Treponema pallidum 
subspecies that cause venereal syphilis, yaws, and bejel. Although genomic 
sequencing has enabled the development of molecular techniques to differentiate 
the T. pallidum subspecies, comparable information is not available for T. 
carateum. Because of the influx of migrants and refugees from Latin America, 
U.S. physicians should consider pinta in the differential diagnosis of skin 
diseases in children and adolescents who come from areas where pinta was 
previously endemic and have a positive reaction in serological tests for 
syphilis. All stages of pinta are treatable with a single intramuscular 
injection of penicillin.

© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.15-0329
PMCID: PMC4703279
PMID: 26304920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]