---
reference_id: "PMID:25572727"
title: "Vitiligo: symptoms, pathogenesis and treatment."
authors:
- Ghafourian A
- Ghafourian S
- Sadeghifard N
- Mohebi R
- Shokoohini Y
- Nezamoleslami S
- Hamat RA
journal: Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1177/039463201402700403
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vitiligo: symptoms, pathogenesis and treatment.
**Authors:** Ghafourian A, Ghafourian S, Sadeghifard N, Mohebi R, Shokoohini Y, Nezamoleslami S, Hamat RA
**Journal:** Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1177/039463201402700403](https://doi.org/10.1177/039463201402700403)

## Content

1. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2014 Oct-Dec;27(4):485-9. doi: 
10.1177/039463201402700403.

Vitiligo: symptoms, pathogenesis and treatment.

Ghafourian A(1), Ghafourian S(2), Sadeghifard N(2), Mohebi R(2), Shokoohini 
Y(3), Nezamoleslami S(1), Hamat RA(4).

Author information:
(1)Student Research Committee, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, 
Kermanshah, Iran.
(2)Clinical Microbiology Research Center, Ilam University of Medical Sciences, 
Ilam, Iran.
(3)Department of Pharmacognosy and Biotechnology, School of Pharmacy, Kermanshah 
University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Malaysia.

Vitiligo is an acquired cutaneous disorder of pigmentation, with an incidence of 
0.5&#x0025; to 2&#x0025; worldwide. There are three major hypotheses for the 
pathogenesis of vitiligo that are not exclusive of each other: 
biochemical/cytotoxic, neural and autoimmune. Recent data provide strong 
evidence supporting an autoimmune pathogenesis of vitiligo. As vitiligo can have 
a major effect on quality of life, treatment can be considered and should 
preferably begin early when then disease is active. Current treatment modalities 
are directed towards stopping progression of the disease and achieving 
repigmentation. Therapies include corticosteroids, topical immunomodulators, 
photo(chemo)therapy, surgery, combination therapies and depigmentation of 
normally pigmented skin. It seems that traditional Chinese medicine could be 
more effective than the current treatment for vitligo.

DOI: 10.1177/039463201402700403
PMID: 25572727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]