---
reference_id: "PMID:25788710"
title: "Arsenic, reactive oxygen, and endothelial dysfunction."
authors:
- Ellinsworth DC
journal: J Pharmacol Exp Ther
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1124/jpet.115.223289
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenic, reactive oxygen, and endothelial dysfunction.
**Authors:** Ellinsworth DC
**Journal:** J Pharmacol Exp Ther (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1124/jpet.115.223289](https://doi.org/10.1124/jpet.115.223289)

## Content

1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2015 Jun;353(3):458-64. doi: 10.1124/jpet.115.223289.
Epub  2015 Mar 18.

Arsenic, reactive oxygen, and endothelial dysfunction.

Ellinsworth DC(1).

Author information:
(1)Bristol Heart Institute, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom 
davidellinsworth@gmail.com.

Human exposure to drinking water contaminated with arsenic is a serious global 
health concern and predisposes to cardiovascular disease states, such as 
hypertension, atherosclerosis, and microvascular disease. The most sensitive 
target of arsenic toxicity in the vasculature is the endothelium, and incubation 
of these cells with low concentrations of arsenite, a naturally occurring and 
highly toxic inorganic form of arsenic, rapidly induces reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) formation via activation of a specific NADPH oxidase (Nox2). Arsenite also 
induces ROS accumulation in vascular smooth muscle cells, but this is relatively 
delayed because, depending on the vessel from which they originate, these cells 
often lack Nox2 and/or its essential regulatory cytosolic subunits. The net 
effect of such activity is attenuation of endothelium-dependent conduit artery 
dilation via superoxide anion-mediated scavenging of nitric oxide (NO) and 
inhibition and downregulation of endothelial NO synthase, events that are 
temporally matched to the accumulation of oxidants across the vessel wall. By 
contrast, ROS induced by the more toxic organic trivalent arsenic metabolites 
(monomethylarsonous and dimethylarsinous acids) may originate from sources other 
than Nox2. As such, the mechanisms through which vascular oxidative stress 
develops in vivo under continuous exposure to all three of these potent 
arsenicals are unknown. This review is a comprehensive analysis of the 
mechanisms that mediate arsenic effects associated with Nox2 activation, ROS 
activity, and endothelial dysfunction, and also considers future avenues of 
research into what is a relatively poorly understood topic with major 
implications for human health.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.115.223289
PMID: 25788710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]