---
reference_id: "PMID:11262556"
title: Respiratory acidosis.
authors:
- Epstein SK
- Singh N
journal: Respir Care
year: '2001'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Respiratory acidosis.
**Authors:** Epstein SK, Singh N
**Journal:** Respir Care (2001)

## Content

1. Respir Care. 2001 Apr;46(4):366-83.

Respiratory acidosis.

Epstein SK(1), Singh N.

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, New England Medical Center, Boston, MA, 
USA. SEpstein@lifespan.org

Respiratory acidosis, or primary hypercapnia, is the acid-base disorder that 
results from an increase in arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide. Acute 
respiratory acidosis occurs with acute (Type II) respiratory failure, which can 
result from any sudden respiratory parenchymal (eg, pulmonary edema), airways 
(eg, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma), pleural, chest wall, 
neuromuscular (eg, spinal cord injury), or central nervous system event (eg, 
drug overdose). Chronic respiratory acidosis can result from numerous processes 
and is typified by a sustained increase in arterial partial pressure of carbon 
dioxide, resulting in renal adaptation, and a more marked increase in plasma 
bicarbonate. Mechanisms of respiratory acidosis include increased carbon dioxide 
production, alveolar hypoventilation, abnormal respiratory drive, abnormalities 
of the chest wall and respiratory muscles, and increased dead space. Although 
the symptoms, signs, and physiologic consequences of respiratory acidosis are 
numerous, the principal effects are on the central nervous and cardiovascular 
systems. Treatment for respiratory acidosis may include invasive or noninvasive 
ventilatory support and specific medical therapies directed at the underlying 
pathophysiology.

PMID: 11262556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]