---
reference_id: "PMID:35437717"
title: Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis in the Era of Systems Medicine.
authors:
- Chen CB
- Wang CW
- Chung WH
journal: Methods Mol Biol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-2265-0_3
keywords:
- Cyclosporine/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Keratinocytes
- Skin/pathology
- "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/etiology, therapy"
- Systems Analysis
- Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis in the Era of Systems Medicine.
**Authors:** Chen CB, Wang CW, Chung WH
**Journal:** Methods Mol Biol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-1-0716-2265-0_3](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-2265-0_3)

## Content

1. Methods Mol Biol. 2022;2486:37-54. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-2265-0_3.

Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis in the Era of Systems 
Medicine.

Chen CB(1)(2)(3)(4), Wang CW(5)(6)(7), Chung WH(8)(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Drug Hypersensitivity Clinical and Research 
Center, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou, Taipei, and Keelung, Taiwan. 
chunbing.chen@gmail.com.
(2)Cancer Vaccine and Immune Cell Therapy Core Laboratory, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital, Linkou, Taiwan. chunbing.chen@gmail.com.
(3)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang 
Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. chunbing.chen@gmail.com.
(4)College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. 
chunbing.chen@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Drug Hypersensitivity Clinical and Research 
Center, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou, Taipei, and Keelung, Taiwan.
(6)Cancer Vaccine and Immune Cell Therapy Core Laboratory, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital, Linkou, Taiwan.
(7)College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Dermatology, Drug Hypersensitivity Clinical and Research 
Center, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou, Taipei, and Keelung, Taiwan. 
wenhungchung@yahoo.com.
(9)Cancer Vaccine and Immune Cell Therapy Core Laboratory, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital, Linkou, Taiwan. wenhungchung@yahoo.com.
(10)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang 
Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. wenhungchung@yahoo.com.
(11)College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. 
wenhungchung@yahoo.com.

Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN) are severe 
mucocutaneous bullous disorders characterized by widespread skin and mucosal 
necrosis and detachment, which are most commonly triggered by medications. 
Despite their rarity, these severe cutaneous adverse drug reactions will result 
in high mortality and morbidity as well as long-term sequela. The 
immunopathologic mechanisms is mainly cell-mediated cytotoxic reaction against 
keratinocytes leading to massive skin necrolysis. Subsequent studies have 
demonstrated that immune synapse composed of cytotoxic T cells with 
drug-specific human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I restriction and T cell 
receptors (TCR) repertoire is the key pathogenic for SJS/TEN. Various cytotoxic 
proteins and cytokines such as soluble granulysin, perforin, granzyme B, 
interleukin-15, Fas ligand, interferon-γ, tumor necrosis factor-α have been as 
mediators involved in the pathogenesis of SJS/TEN. Early recognition and 
immediate withdrawal of causative agents, and critical multidisciplinary 
supportive care are key management of SJS/TEN. To date, there is yet to be a 
sufficient consensus or recommendation for the immunomodulants of the treatment 
in SJS/TEN. Systemic corticosteroids remain one of the most common treatment 
options for SJS/TEN, though the efficacy remain uncertain. Currently, there is 
increasing evidence showing that cyclosporine and TNF-α inhibitors decrease the 
mortality of SJS/TEN. Further multicenter double-blinded, randomized, 
placebo-controlled trials are required to confirm the efficacy and safety.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-2265-0_3
PMID: 35437717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]