---
reference_id: "PMID:29419818"
title: "SCYL1 variants cause a syndrome with low γ-glutamyl-transferase cholestasis, acute liver failure, and neurodegeneration (CALFAN)."
authors:
- Lenz D
- McClean P
- Kansu A
- Bonnen PE
- Ranucci G
- Thiel C
- Straub BK
- Harting I
- Alhaddad B
- Dimitrov B
- Kotzaeridou U
- Wenning D
- Iorio R
- Himes RW
- Kuloğlu Z
- Blakely EL
- Taylor RW
- Meitinger T
- Kölker S
- Prokisch H
- Hoffmann GF
- Haack TB
- Staufner C
journal: Genet Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/gim.2017.260
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Vesicular Transport"
- Alleles
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cholestasis/complications, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Liver Failure, Acute/complications, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Nerve Degeneration/complications, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- gamma-Glutamyltransferase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SCYL1 variants cause a syndrome with low γ-glutamyl-transferase cholestasis, acute liver failure, and neurodegeneration (CALFAN).
**Authors:** Lenz D, McClean P, Kansu A, Bonnen PE, Ranucci G, Thiel C, Straub BK, Harting I, Alhaddad B, Dimitrov B, Kotzaeridou U, Wenning D, Iorio R, Himes RW, Kuloğlu Z, Blakely EL, Taylor RW, Meitinger T, Kölker S, Prokisch H, Hoffmann GF, Haack TB, Staufner C
**Journal:** Genet Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/gim.2017.260](https://doi.org/10.1038/gim.2017.260)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2018 Oct;20(10):1255-1265. doi: 10.1038/gim.2017.260. Epub 2018 Feb
 8.

SCYL1 variants cause a syndrome with low γ-glutamyl-transferase cholestasis, 
acute liver failure, and neurodegeneration (CALFAN).

Lenz D(1), McClean P(2), Kansu A(3), Bonnen PE(4), Ranucci G(5)(6), Thiel C(1), 
Straub BK(7)(8), Harting I(9), Alhaddad B(10), Dimitrov B(1), Kotzaeridou U(1), 
Wenning D(1), Iorio R(5), Himes RW(11), Kuloğlu Z(3), Blakely EL(12), Taylor 
RW(12), Meitinger T(10)(13), Kölker S(1), Prokisch H(10)(13), Hoffmann GF(1), 
Haack TB(10)(13)(14), Staufner C(15).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuropediatrics and Pediatric Metabolic Medicine, Department of 
General Pediatrics, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Children's Liver Unit, Leeds Children's Hospital, Leeds, UK.
(3)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Department of Pediatrics, Ankara 
University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(5)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Section of Pediatrics, Liver 
Unit, University of Naples Federico II, Italy, Italy.
(6)Division of Metabolism, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(7)Institutes of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(8)Institute of Pathology and Tissue Bank of the, University Medical Center 
Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(9)Department of Neuroradiology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(10)Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, 
Germany.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and 
Nutrition, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.
(12)Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Institute of Neuroscience, The 
Medical School, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(13)Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany.
(14)Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, 
Tübingen, Germany.
(15)Division of Neuropediatrics and Pediatric Metabolic Medicine, Department of 
General Pediatrics, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. 
Christian.Staufner@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

Comment in
    Genet Med. 2019 Jul;21(7):1665-1666. doi: 10.1038/s41436-018-0388-7.
    Genet Med. 2019 Jul;21(7):1663-1664. doi: 10.1038/s41436-018-0389-6.

PURPOSE: Biallelic mutations in SCYL1 were recently identified as causing a 
syndromal disorder characterized by peripheral neuropathy, cerebellar atrophy, 
ataxia, and recurrent episodes of liver failure. The occurrence of SCYL1 
deficiency among patients with previously undetermined infantile cholestasis or 
acute liver failure has not been studied; furthermore, little is known regarding 
the hepatic phenotype.
METHODS: We aimed to identify patients with SCYL1 variants within an 
exome-sequencing study of individuals with infantile cholestasis or acute liver 
failure of unknown etiology. Deep clinical and biochemical phenotyping plus 
analysis of liver biopsies and functional studies on fibroblasts were performed.
RESULTS: Seven patients from five families with biallelic SCYL1 variants were 
identified. The main clinical phenotype was recurrent low γ-glutamyl-transferase 
(GGT) cholestasis or acute liver failure with onset in infancy and a variable 
neurological phenotype of later onset (CALFAN syndrome). Liver crises were 
triggered by febrile infections and were transient, but fibrosis developed. 
Functional studies emphasize that SCYL1 deficiency is linked to impaired 
intracellular trafficking.
CONCLUSION: SCYL1 deficiency can cause recurrent low-GGT cholestatic liver 
dysfunction in conjunction with a variable neurological phenotype. Like NBAS 
deficiency, it is a member of the emerging group of congenital disorders of 
intracellular trafficking causing hepatopathy.

DOI: 10.1038/gim.2017.260
PMCID: PMC5989927
PMID: 29419818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]