---
reference_id: "PMID:39062136"
title: "3-Hydroxy-3-Methylglutaric Acid Disrupts Brain Bioenergetics, Redox Homeostasis, and Mitochondrial Dynamics and Affects Neurodevelopment in Neonatal Wistar Rats."
authors:
- Silveira JA
- Marcuzzo MB
- da Rosa JS
- Kist NS
- Hoffmann CIH
- Carvalho AS
- Ribeiro RT
- Quincozes-Santos A
- Netto CA
- Wajner M
- Leipnitz G
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12071563
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 3-Hydroxy-3-Methylglutaric Acid Disrupts Brain Bioenergetics, Redox Homeostasis, and Mitochondrial Dynamics and Affects Neurodevelopment in Neonatal Wistar Rats.
**Authors:** Silveira JA, Marcuzzo MB, da Rosa JS, Kist NS, Hoffmann CIH, Carvalho AS, Ribeiro RT, Quincozes-Santos A, Netto CA, Wajner M, Leipnitz G
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines12071563](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines12071563)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2024 Jul 15;12(7):1563. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12071563.

3-Hydroxy-3-Methylglutaric Acid Disrupts Brain Bioenergetics, Redox Homeostasis, 
and Mitochondrial Dynamics and Affects Neurodevelopment in Neonatal Wistar Rats.

Silveira JA(1), Marcuzzo MB(1), da Rosa JS(1), Kist NS(1), Hoffmann CIH(1), 
Carvalho AS(1), Ribeiro RT(1), Quincozes-Santos A(1)(2)(3), Netto 
CA(1)(2)(3)(4), Wajner M(1)(2)(5), Leipnitz G(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências Biológicas: Bioquímica, Universidade 
Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Rua Ramiro Barcelos, 2600-Anexo, Porto Alegre 
90035-003, RS, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Ciências Básicas da Saúde, 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Rua Ramiro Barcelos, 2600-Anexo, 
Porto Alegre 90035-003, RS, Brazil.
(3)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Neurociências, Universidade Federal do Rio 
Grande do Sul, Rua Ramiro Barcelos, 2600-Anexo, Porto Alegre 90035-003, RS, 
Brazil.
(4)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências Biológicas: Fisiologia, Universidade 
Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Rua Ramiro Barcelos, 2600-Anexo, Porto Alegre 
90035-003, RS, Brazil.
(5)Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Rua Ramiro 
Barcelos, 2350, Porto Alegre 90035-903, RS, Brazil.

3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaric acidemia (HMGA) is a neurometabolic inherited 
disorder characterized by the predominant accumulation of 
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric acid (HMG) in the brain and biological fluids of 
patients. Symptoms often appear in the first year of life and include mainly 
neurological manifestations. The neuropathophysiology is not fully elucidated, 
so we investigated the effects of intracerebroventricular administration of HMG 
on redox and bioenergetic homeostasis in the cerebral cortex and striatum of 
neonatal rats. Neurodevelopment parameters were also evaluated. HMG decreased 
the activity of glutathione reductase (GR) and increased catalase (CAT) in the 
cerebral cortex. In the striatum, HMG reduced the activities of superoxide 
dismutase, glutathione peroxidase, CAT, GR, glutathione S-transferase, and 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. Regarding bioenergetics, HMG decreased the 
activities of succinate dehydrogenase and respiratory chain complexes II-III and 
IV in the cortex. HMG also decreased the activities of citrate synthase and 
succinate dehydrogenase, as well as complex IV in the striatum. HMG further 
increased DRP1 levels in the cortex, indicating mitochondrial fission. Finally, 
we found that the HMG-injected animals showed impaired performance in all 
sensorimotor tests examined. Our findings provide evidence that HMG causes 
oxidative stress, bioenergetic dysfunction, and neurodevelopmental changes in 
neonatal rats, which may explain the neuropathophysiology of HMGA.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines12071563
PMCID: PMC11274636
PMID: 39062136

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.