---
reference_id: "PMID:38477910"
title: Expert Recommendations on Use of Topical Therapeutics for Vitiligo in Pediatric, Adolescent, and Young Adult Patients.
authors:
- Renert-Yuval Y
- Ezzedine K
- Grimes P
- Rosmarin D
- Eichenfield LF
- Castelo-Soccio L
- Huang V
- Desai SR
- Walsh S
- Silverberg JI
- Paller AS
- Rodrigues M
- Weingarten M
- Narla S
- Gardner J
- Siegel M
- Ibad S
- Silverberg NB
journal: JAMA Dermatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2024.0021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expert Recommendations on Use of Topical Therapeutics for Vitiligo in Pediatric, Adolescent, and Young Adult Patients.
**Authors:** Renert-Yuval Y, Ezzedine K, Grimes P, Rosmarin D, Eichenfield LF, Castelo-Soccio L, Huang V, Desai SR, Walsh S, Silverberg JI, Paller AS, Rodrigues M, Weingarten M, Narla S, Gardner J, Siegel M, Ibad S, Silverberg NB
**Journal:** JAMA Dermatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamadermatol.2024.0021](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamadermatol.2024.0021)

## Content

1. JAMA Dermatol. 2024 Apr 1;160(4):453-461. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2024.0021.

Expert Recommendations on Use of Topical Therapeutics for Vitiligo in Pediatric, 
Adolescent, and Young Adult Patients.

Renert-Yuval Y(1)(2), Ezzedine K(3), Grimes P(4), Rosmarin D(5), Eichenfield 
LF(6)(7), Castelo-Soccio L(8), Huang V(9), Desai SR(10)(11), Walsh S(12), 
Silverberg JI(13), Paller AS(14), Rodrigues M(15), Weingarten M(1), Narla S(16), 
Gardner J(17), Siegel M(18), Ibad S(1), Silverberg NB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, New York.
(2)Pediatric Dermatology Unit, Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel, 
Petah Tikva, Israel, and Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 
Israel.
(3)Hôpital Henri Mondor, Department of Dermatology and Université Paris Est 
Créteil, Epidemiology in Dermatology and Evaluation of Therapeutics, Créteil, 
France.
(4)Departments of Dermatology, University of California, Los Angeles.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis.
(6)Dermatology and Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego School of 
Medicine, San Diego.
(7)Pediatrics and Adolescent Dermatology, Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego, 
California.
(8)National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, US 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(9)Department of Dermatology, University of California, Davis.
(10)Department of Dermatology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas.
(11)Innovative Dermatology, Plano, Texas.
(12)Hunter College Library, New York, New York.
(13)George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Washington, DC.
(14)Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.
(15)Department of Dermatology, The Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, 
Victoria, Australia.
(16)Department of Dermatology, St Luke's University Health Network, Easton, 
Pennsylvania.
(17)Vitiligo Support International, Lynchburg, Virginia.
(18)Pediatric Dermatology Research Alliance, Portland, Oregon.

IMPORTANCE: Evidence-based recommendations for the treatment of vitiligo in 
pediatric, adolescent, and young adult patients in the US are needed.
OBJECTIVE: To develop evidence- and consensus-based expert recommendations on 
the diagnosis and treatment of vitiligo in young patients.
EVIDENCE REVIEW: A process was developed to produce consensus recommendations 
addressing questions regarding pediatric vitiligo. A librarian-conducted 
literature review was performed using articles that met the inclusion criteria: 
published in English, containing primary data (including meta-analysis) and 
pediatric-specific data, and analysis of 6 or more patients. Included articles 
were graded by the Strength of Recommendation Taxonomy criteria and Oxford 
Centre for Evidence-based Medicine's Levels of Evidence and Grades of 
Recommendation. Research questions were reviewed on May 9, 2022, through a video 
conference. One month after the conference, participants participated in an 
online survey documenting their level of agreement with the generated 
statements, using a 5-point Likert scale.
FINDINGS: Articles on topical corticosteroids and/or topical calcineurin 
inhibitors (n = 50), topical Janus kinase inhibitors (n = 5), pseudocatalase 
(n = 2), and microdermabrasion (n = 2) met inclusion criteria. Forty-two 
recommendations were made on the diagnosis of vitiligo and optimal topical 
therapeutics, with 33 recommendations obtaining a 70% or greater composite 
agreement and strong agreement. Topical calcineurin inhibitors twice daily, 
topical corticosteroids with time limitation due to atrophy risk, and topical 
ruxolitinib, 1.5%, cream-used off-label for patients younger than 12 years and 
limited to nonsegmental vitiligo-were identified as evidence-based first-line 
therapies in the management of pediatric and adolescent patients, with specific 
guidance on age-based data, minimum therapeutic trial of 6 months or greater, 
prolonged therapy to prevent recurrence, and the positive benefit of coordinated 
use of UV therapeutic sources.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Evidence supports the use of topical calcineurin 
inhibitors, topical corticosteroids, and topical Janus kinase inhibitors as 
effective therapeutics for vitiligo in pediatric, adolescent, and young adult 
patients, with specific decisions on choice of agent based on factors such as 
site location, body surface area, and age.

DOI: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2024.0021
PMID: 38477910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]