---
reference_id: "PMID:1671712"
title: "Segregation of a missense mutation in the amyloid precursor protein gene with familial Alzheimer's disease."
authors:
- Goate A
- Chartier-Harlin MC
- Mullan M
- Brown J
- Crawford F
- Fidani L
- Giuffra L
- Haynes A
- Irving N
- James L
journal: Nature
year: '1991'
doi: 10.1038/349704a0
keywords:
- Alzheimer Disease/genetics
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/genetics
- Amyloid beta-Protein Precursor
- Base Sequence
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 21"
- Exons/genetics
- Genetic Linkage
- Genetic Testing
- Genotype
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length"
- Protein Precursors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Segregation of a missense mutation in the amyloid precursor protein gene with familial Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Goate A, Chartier-Harlin MC, Mullan M, Brown J, Crawford F, Fidani L, Giuffra L, Haynes A, Irving N, James L
**Journal:** Nature (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1038/349704a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/349704a0)

## Content

1. Nature. 1991 Feb 21;349(6311):704-6. doi: 10.1038/349704a0.

Segregation of a missense mutation in the amyloid precursor protein gene with
familial Alzheimer's disease.

Goate A(1), Chartier-Harlin MC, Mullan M, Brown J, Crawford F, Fidani L, Giuffra
L, Haynes A, Irving N, James L, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St Mary's Hospital Medical School, London, UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 1991 Feb 21;349(6311):653-4. doi: 10.1038/349653a0.
    Nature. 1991 Apr 18;350(6319):564. doi: 10.1038/350564a0.

A locus segregating with familial Alzheimer's disease (AD) has been mapped to
chromosome 21, close to the amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene. Recombinants
between the APP gene and the AD locus have been reported which seemed to exclude
it as the site of the mutation causing familial AD. But recent genetic analysis
of a large number of AD families has demonstrated that the disease is
heterogeneous. Families with late-onset AD do not show linkage to chromosome 21
markers. Some families with early-onset AD show linkage to chromosome 21
markers, but some do not. This has led to the suggestion that there is
non-allelic genetic heterogeneity even within early onset familial AD. To avoid
the problems that heterogeneity poses for genetic analysis, we have examined the
cosegregation of AD and markers along the long arm of chromosome 21 in a single
family with AD confirmed by autopsy. Here we demonstrate that in this kindred,
which shows linkage to chromosome 21 markers, there is a point mutation in the
APP gene. This mutation causes an amino-acid substitution (Val----Ile) close to
the carboxy terminus of the beta-amyloid peptide. Screening other cases of
familial AD revealed a second unrelated family in which this variant occurs.
This suggests that some cases of AD could be caused by mutations in the APP
gene.

DOI: 10.1038/349704a0
PMID: 1671712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
