---
reference_id: "PMID:11686098"
title: "Biosynthesis, processing and secretion of von Willebrand factor: biological implications."
authors:
- de Wit TR
- van Mourik JA
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Haematol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1053/beha.2001.0132
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biosynthesis, processing and secretion of von Willebrand factor: biological implications.
**Authors:** de Wit TR, van Mourik JA
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Haematol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1053/beha.2001.0132](https://doi.org/10.1053/beha.2001.0132)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2001 Jun;14(2):241-55. doi: 
10.1053/beha.2001.0132.

Biosynthesis, processing and secretion of von Willebrand factor: biological 
implications.

de Wit TR(1), van Mourik JA.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Plasma Proteins and Blood Coagulation, CLB, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.

von Willebrand factor is a multimeric plasma glycoprotein that is required for 
normal haemostasis. von Willebrand factor is synthesized by endothelial cells 
and megakaryocytes, and originates from its precursor pro-von Willebrand factor. 
The endoproteolytic processing of pro-von Willebrand factor results in mature 
von Willebrand factor and von Willebrand factor propeptide (also known as von 
Willebrand Ag II). In endothelial cells, the propeptide controls the 
polymerization and subsequent targeting of von Willebrand factor to the storage 
vesicles, the so-called Weibel-Palade bodies. Upon stimulation of the 
endothelial cells, the Weibel-Palade bodies are translocated to the plasma 
membrane of the cell, and mature von Willebrand factor and its propeptide are 
co-secreted. After release, these polypeptides have divergent fates and serve 
different biological functions. Mature von Willebrand factor both controls 
platelet adhesion and aggregation at sites of vascular injury and acts as a 
chaperone protein for coagulation factor VIII. The von Willebrand factor 
propeptide may serve a role in modulating inflammatory processes. This still 
growing body of information indicates that the biological function of the von 
Willebrand factor gene product is more diverse than was previously thought.

DOI: 10.1053/beha.2001.0132
PMID: 11686098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]