---
reference_id: "PMID:35765990"
title: "Treatment of children with infantile spasms: A network meta-analysis."
authors:
- Jain P
- Sahu JK
- Horn PS
- Chau V
- Go C
- Mahood Q
- Arya R
journal: Dev Med Child Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/dmcn.15330
keywords:
- Adrenocorticotropic Hormone/therapeutic use
- Anticonvulsants/therapeutic use
- Child
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnesium Sulfate/therapeutic use
- Methylprednisolone/therapeutic use
- "Spasms, Infantile/drug therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
- Vitamins/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of children with infantile spasms: A network meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Jain P, Sahu JK, Horn PS, Chau V, Go C, Mahood Q, Arya R
**Journal:** Dev Med Child Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dmcn.15330](https://doi.org/10.1111/dmcn.15330)

## Content

1. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2022 Nov;64(11):1330-1343. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.15330. Epub
 2022 Jun 29.

Treatment of children with infantile spasms: A network meta-analysis.

Jain P(1), Sahu JK(2), Horn PS(3)(4), Chau V(5), Go C(1), Mahood Q(6), Arya
R(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Epilepsy Program, Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, The
Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Postgraduate Institute of
Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh, India.
(3)Comprehensive Epilepsy Center, Division of Neurology, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(5)Neonatal Neurology Program, Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics,
Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(6)Hospital Library and Archives, Learning Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada.

AIM: We performed a systematic review and network meta-analysis (NMA) to obtain
comparative effectiveness estimates and rankings of non-surgical interventions
used to treat infantile spasms.
METHOD: All randomized controlled trials (RCTs) including children 2 months to
3 years of age with infantile spasms (with hypsarrhythmia or hypsarrhythmia
variants on electroencephalography) receiving appropriate first-line medical
treatment were included. Electroclinical and clinical remissions within 1 month
of starting treatment were analyzed.
RESULTS: Twenty-two RCTs comparing first-line treatments for infantile spasms
were reviewed; of these, 17 were included in the NMA. Both frequentist and
Bayesian network rankings for electroclinical remission showed that high dose
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), methylprednisolone, low dose ACTH and
magnesium sulfate (MgSO4 ) combination, low dose ACTH, and high dose
prednisolone were most likely to be the 'best' interventions, although these
were not significantly different from each other. For clinical remission, low
dose ACTH/MgSO4 combination, high dose ACTH (with/without vitamin B6 ),
high dose prednisolone, and low dose ACTH were 'best'.
INTERPRETATION: Treatments including ACTH and high dose prednisolone are more
effective in achieving electroclinical and clinical remissions for infantile
spasms.
WHAT THIS PAPER ADDS: Adrenocorticotropic hormone and high dose prednisolone are
more effective than other medications for infantile spasms. Symptomatic etiology
decreases the likelihood of remission even after adjusting for treatment lag.

© 2022 Mac Keith Press.

DOI: 10.1111/dmcn.15330
PMID: 35765990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
