---
reference_id: "PMID:32642732"
title: Genetics of human malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
authors:
- Pemov A
- Li H
- Presley W
- Wallace MR
- Miller DT
journal: Neurooncol Adv
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/noajnl/vdz049
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of human malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
**Authors:** Pemov A, Li H, Presley W, Wallace MR, Miller DT
**Journal:** Neurooncol Adv (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/noajnl/vdz049](https://doi.org/10.1093/noajnl/vdz049)

## Content

1. Neurooncol Adv. 2019 Nov 28;2(Suppl 1):i50-i61. doi: 10.1093/noajnl/vdz049.
eCollection 2020 Jul.

Genetics of human malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.

Pemov A(1), Li H(2), Presley W(2), Wallace MR(2)(3), Miller DT(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida.
(3)University of Florida Health Cancer Center, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida.
(4)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts.

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) are heterogeneous, highly
aggressive tumors with no widely effective treatment other than surgery. Genomic
architecture of MPNST is similar to other soft tissue sarcomas, with a
relatively modest burden of single nucleotide variants and an elevated frequency
of copy-number alterations. Recent advances in genomic studies identified
previously unrecognized critical involvement of polycomb repressor complex 2
(PRC2) core components SUZ12 and EED in transition to malignancy. Notably,
somatic changes in NF1, CDKN2A/B, and PRC2 are found in most MPNST regardless of
their etiology (e.g. neurofibromatosis type 1-associated vs. sporadic vs.
radiation-induced), indicating that similar molecular mechanisms impact
pathogenesis in these neoplasms. The timing and specific order of genetic or
epigenetic changes may, however, explain the typically poorer prognosis of
NF1-associated MPNSTs. Studies that reveal genes and regulatory pathways
uniquely altered in malignancies are essential to development of targeted tumor
therapies. Characterization of MPNST molecular profiles may also contribute to
tools for earlier detection, and prediction of prognosis or drug response. Here
we review the genetic discoveries and their implications in understanding MPNST
biology.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press, the Society for
Neuro-Oncology and the European Association of Neuro-Oncology.

DOI: 10.1093/noajnl/vdz049
PMCID: PMC7317054
PMID: 32642732
