---
reference_id: "PMID:27572859"
title: "Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis: Updates on an inflammatory CNS syndrome."
authors:
- Pohl D
- Alper G
- Van Haren K
- Kornberg AJ
- Lucchinetti CF
- Tenembaum S
- Belman AL
journal: Neurology
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002825
keywords:
- Brain/diagnostic imaging
- "Encephalomyelitis, Acute Disseminated/cerebrospinal fluid, diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Humans
- Neuroimaging
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis: Updates on an inflammatory CNS syndrome.
**Authors:** Pohl D, Alper G, Van Haren K, Kornberg AJ, Lucchinetti CF, Tenembaum S, Belman AL
**Journal:** Neurology (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000002825](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000002825)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2016 Aug 30;87(9 Suppl 2):S38-45. doi:
10.1212/WNL.0000000000002825.

Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis: Updates on an inflammatory CNS syndrome.

Pohl D(1), Alper G(2), Van Haren K(2), Kornberg AJ(2), Lucchinetti CF(2), 
Tenembaum S(2), Belman AL(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Neurology (D.P.), Children's Hospital of Eastern 
Ontario, University of Ottawa, Canada; Department of Pediatrics (G.A.), Division 
of Child Neurology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Children's 
Hospital of Pittsburgh, PA; Department of Neurology (K.V.H.), Stanford 
University; Division of Child Neurology (K.V.H.), Lucile Packard Children's 
Hospital, Palo Alto, CA; Department of Neurology (A.J.K.), Royal Children's 
Hospital, Parkville, Australia; Department of Neurology (C.F.L.), Mayo Clinic 
College of Medicine, Rochester, MN; Department of Neurology (S.T.), National 
Pediatric Hospital Dr. Juan P. Garrahan, Ciudad de Buenos Aires, Argentina; and 
Department of Neurology (A.L.B.), School of Medicine, Stony Brook University, 
Stony Brook, NY. dpohl@cheo.on.ca.
(2)From the Division of Neurology (D.P.), Children's Hospital of Eastern 
Ontario, University of Ottawa, Canada; Department of Pediatrics (G.A.), Division 
of Child Neurology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Children's 
Hospital of Pittsburgh, PA; Department of Neurology (K.V.H.), Stanford 
University; Division of Child Neurology (K.V.H.), Lucile Packard Children's 
Hospital, Palo Alto, CA; Department of Neurology (A.J.K.), Royal Children's 
Hospital, Parkville, Australia; Department of Neurology (C.F.L.), Mayo Clinic 
College of Medicine, Rochester, MN; Department of Neurology (S.T.), National 
Pediatric Hospital Dr. Juan P. Garrahan, Ciudad de Buenos Aires, Argentina; and 
Department of Neurology (A.L.B.), School of Medicine, Stony Brook University, 
Stony Brook, NY.

Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) is an immune-mediated demyelinating 
CNS disorder with predilection to early childhood. ADEM is generally considered 
a monophasic disease. However, recurrent ADEM has been described and defined as 
multiphasic disseminated encephalomyelitis. ADEM often occurs postinfectiously, 
although a causal relationship has never been established. ADEM and multiple 
sclerosis are currently viewed as distinct entities, generally distinguishable 
even at disease onset. However, pathologic studies have demonstrated 
transitional cases of yet unclear significance. ADEM is clinically defined by 
acute polyfocal neurologic deficits including encephalopathy. MRI typically 
demonstrates reversible, ill-defined white matter lesions of the brain and often 
also the spinal cord, along with frequent involvement of thalami and basal 
ganglia. CSF analysis may reveal a mild pleocytosis and elevated protein, but is 
generally negative for intrathecal oligoclonal immunoglobulin G synthesis. In 
the absence of a specific diagnostic test, ADEM is considered a diagnosis of 
exclusion, and ADEM mimics, especially those requiring a different treatment 
approach, have to be carefully ruled out. The role of biomarkers, including 
autoantibodies like anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein, in the 
pathogenesis and diagnosis of ADEM is currently under debate. Based on the 
presumed autoimmune etiology of ADEM, the current treatment approach consists of 
early immunotherapy. Outcome of ADEM in pediatric patients is generally 
favorable, but cognitive deficits have been reported even in the absence of 
other neurologic sequelae. This review summarizes the current knowledge on 
epidemiology, pathology, clinical presentation, neuroimaging features, CSF 
findings, differential diagnosis, therapy, and outcome, with a focus on recent 
advances and controversies.

© 2016 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002825
PMID: 27572859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]