---
reference_id: "PMID:27802296"
title: A Risk Score for Predicting Multiple Sclerosis.
authors:
- Dobson R
- Ramagopalan S
- Topping J
- Smith P
- Solanky B
- Schmierer K
- Chard D
- Giovannoni G
journal: PLoS One
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0164992
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Risk Score for Predicting Multiple Sclerosis.
**Authors:** Dobson R, Ramagopalan S, Topping J, Smith P, Solanky B, Schmierer K, Chard D, Giovannoni G
**Journal:** PLoS One (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0164992](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0164992)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2016 Nov 1;11(11):e0164992. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0164992. 
eCollection 2016.

A Risk Score for Predicting Multiple Sclerosis.

Dobson R(1), Ramagopalan S(1), Topping J(1), Smith P(2), Solanky B(3), Schmierer 
K(1)(2), Chard D(3)(4), Giovannoni G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Queen Mary University London; Blizard Institute, Barts and the London School 
of Medicine and Dentistry, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Royal London Hospital, Barts Health NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(3)NMR Research Unit, Queen Square Multiple Sclerosis Centre, University College 
London (UCL) Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom.
(4)National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) University College London 
Hospitals (UCLH) Biomedical Research Centre, London, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: Multiple sclerosis (MS) develops as a result of environmental 
influences on the genetically susceptible. Siblings of people with MS have an 
increased risk of both MS and demonstrating asymptomatic changes in keeping with 
MS. We set out to develop an MS risk score integrating both genetic and 
environmental risk factors. We used this score to identify siblings at extremes 
of MS risk and attempted to validate the score using brain MRI.
METHODS: 78 probands with MS, 121 of their unaffected siblings and 103 healthy 
controls were studied. Personal history was taken, and serological and genetic 
analysis using the illumina immunochip was performed. Odds ratios for MS 
associated with each risk factor were derived from existing literature, and the 
log values of the odds ratios from each of the risk factors were combined in an 
additive model to provide an overall score. Scores were initially calculated 
using log odds ratio from the HLA-DRB1*1501 allele only, secondly using data 
from all MS-associated SNPs identified in the 2011 GWAS. Subjects with extreme 
risk scores underwent validation studies. MRI was performed on selected 
individuals.
RESULTS: There was a significant difference in the both risk scores between 
people with MS, their unaffected siblings and healthy controls (p<0.0005). 
Unaffected siblings had a risk score intermediate to people with MS and controls 
(p<0.0005). The best performing risk score generated an AUC of 0.82 (95%CI 
0.75-0.88).
INTERPRETATIONS: The risk score demonstrates an AUC on the threshold for 
clinical utility. Our score enables the identification of a high-risk sibling 
group to inform pre-symptomatic longitudinal studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0164992
PMCID: PMC5089761
PMID: 27802296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RD, SR, JT, and BS have no conflicts of interest 
to declare. KS is PI of trials sponsored by Novartis & Roche. He is involved in 
trials sponsored by Biogen, Genzyme, Teva, Merck Inc. and BIAL. Speaking 
honoraria from, and/or in an advisory role for, Novartis, Sanofi-Aventis, 
Merck-Serono and Merck Inc. DC has received research support from the MS Society 
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the National Institute for Health 
Research University College London Hospitals Biomedical Research Centre. He has 
received honoraria (paid to his employer) from Ismar Healthcare NV, Swiss MS 
Society, Excemed (previously Serono Symposia International Foundation), Merck, 
Bayer and Teva for faculty-led education work; Teva for advisory board work; 
meeting expenses from Merck, Teva, Novartis, the MS Trust and National MS 
Society; and has previously held stock in GlaxoSmithKline. He is a member of the 
MS Society of Great Britain and Northern Ireland's Biomedical Grant Review 
Panel. He is a member of the Data Safety Monitoring Committee for the PROXIMUS 
study, which is funded by National Multiple Sclerosis Society and Novartis. Both 
of these roles are unpaid. GG has received research grant support from 
Bayer-Schering Healthcare, Biogen-Idec, GW Pharma, Merck Serono, Merz, Novartis, 
Teva and Sanofi-Aventis. He has received personal compensation for participating 
on Advisory Boards in relation to clinical trial design, trial steering 
committees and data and safety monitoring committees from: Bayer-Schering 
Healthcare, Biogen-Idec, Eisai, Elan, Fiveprime, Genzyme, Genentech, GSK, GW 
Pharma, Ironwood, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Sanofi-Aventis, Synthon 
BV, Teva, UCB Pharma and Vertex Pharmaceuticals. This does not alter our 
adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.