---
reference_id: "PMID:33170478"
title: "Distinctive Clinical Characteristics and Outcome of ILD-Onset Rheumatoid Arthritis and ACPA-Positive ILD: a Longitudinal Cohort of 282 Cases."
authors:
- Chen RX
- Zhao LD
- Xiao XY
- Song L
- Du HY
- Xu ZJ
- Feng RE
- Yang HX
- Fei YY
- Zhang W
- Zhang FC
- Chen H
- Zhang X
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-020-08819-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinctive Clinical Characteristics and Outcome of ILD-Onset Rheumatoid Arthritis and ACPA-Positive ILD: a Longitudinal Cohort of 282 Cases.
**Authors:** Chen RX, Zhao LD, Xiao XY, Song L, Du HY, Xu ZJ, Feng RE, Yang HX, Fei YY, Zhang W, Zhang FC, Chen H, Zhang X
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-020-08819-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-020-08819-0)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2021 Feb;60(1):46-54. doi:
10.1007/s12016-020-08819-0.  Epub 2020 Nov 10.

Distinctive Clinical Characteristics and Outcome of ILD-Onset Rheumatoid 
Arthritis and ACPA-Positive ILD: a Longitudinal Cohort of 282 Cases.

Chen RX(#)(1), Zhao LD(#)(1)(2), Xiao XY(#)(1), Song L(3), Du HY(3), Xu ZJ(4), 
Feng RE(5), Yang HX(1), Fei YY(1), Zhang W(1), Zhang FC(1)(6), Chen H(7)(8), 
Zhang X(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Peking Union Medical 
College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical 
College, National Clinical Research Center for Dermatologic and Immunologic 
Diseases, Beijing, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Rheumatology & Clinical Immunology, Ministry of Education 
Key Laboratory, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Peking Union Medical 
College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical 
College, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Pathology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(6)Clinical Immunology Center, Medical Epigenetics Research Center, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(7)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Peking Union Medical 
College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical 
College, National Clinical Research Center for Dermatologic and Immunologic 
Diseases, Beijing, China. chenhua@pumch.cn.
(8)Key Laboratory of Rheumatology & Clinical Immunology, Ministry of Education 
Key Laboratory, Beijing, China. chenhua@pumch.cn.
(9)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Peking Union Medical 
College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical 
College, National Clinical Research Center for Dermatologic and Immunologic 
Diseases, Beijing, China. zxpumch2003@sina.com.
(10)Key Laboratory of Rheumatology & Clinical Immunology, Ministry of Education 
Key Laboratory, Beijing, China. zxpumch2003@sina.com.
(11)Clinical Immunology Center, Medical Epigenetics Research Center, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China. 
zxpumch2003@sina.com.
(#)Contributed equally

The aim of this study is to investigate the clinical features and outcome of 
interstitial lung disease (ILD)-onset rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and 
anti-citrullinated protein antibody (ACPA)-positive ILD-only patients. 
Arthritis-onset and ILD-onset RA-ILD and ACPA-positive ILD-only patients 
consecutively admitted to Peking Union Medical College Hospital from January 
2008 to December 2017 were enrolled and followed-up. Their demographic, 
clinical, and laboratory features as well as outcome were collected and 
analyzed. Compared with arthritis-onset RA-ILD (n = 166, median arthritis-to-ILD 
interval: 60 months), the ILD-onset RA-ILD (n = 75, median ILD-to-arthritis 
interval: 2 months) had less rheumatoid nodules and higher titer of ACPA, and 
manifested more stable ILD (median estimated progression-free survival: 120 vs. 
100 months, p = 0.019). Elder age (≥ 65 years) at ILD diagnosis and UIP pattern 
were associated with ILD progression by both univariate and Cox hazards modeling 
analysis (p < 0.05). In ACPA-positive ILD-only patients (n = 41), arthritis 
developed in 7 (17.1%) female patients after a median interval of 24 months. 
ACPA-positive ILD who subsequently developed arthritis exhibited higher 
frequency of rheumatoid factor (RF), higher titer of ACPA, and higher levels of 
ESR and CRP (p < 0.05). Multivariate regression analysis showed that positive RF 
(OR 12.55, 95% CI 1.31 to 120.48) was the independent risk factor for arthritis 
development in ACPA-positive ILD-only patients. ILD-onset RA-ILD had more stable 
ILD compared with arthritis-onset RA-ILD. ACPA-positive ILD patients with 
positive RF are at increased risk of developing RA.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-020-08819-0
PMID: 33170478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]