---
reference_id: "PMID:38278445"
title: "Best Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy Natural History Study Report 1: Clinical Features and Genetic Findings."
authors:
- Laich Y
- Georgiou M
- Fujinami K
- Daich Varela M
- Fujinami-Yokokawa Y
- Hashem SA
- Cabral de Guimaraes TA
- Mahroo OA
- Webster AR
- Michaelides M
journal: Ophthalmology
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2024.01.027
keywords:
- Humans
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/genetics, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Male
- Female
- Retrospective Studies
- Child
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Adult
- Bestrophins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adolescent
- Aged
- Young Adult
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Electroretinography
- Infant
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Pedigree
- Fluorescein Angiography
- "Choroidal Neovascularization/genetics, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Mutation
- Electrooculography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Best Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy Natural History Study Report 1: Clinical Features and Genetic Findings.
**Authors:** Laich Y, Georgiou M, Fujinami K, Daich Varela M, Fujinami-Yokokawa Y, Hashem SA, Cabral de Guimaraes TA, Mahroo OA, Webster AR, Michaelides M
**Journal:** Ophthalmology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ophtha.2024.01.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2024.01.027)

## Content

1. Ophthalmology. 2024 Jul;131(7):845-854. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2024.01.027.
Epub  2024 Jan 24.

Best Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy Natural History Study Report 1: Clinical
Features and Genetic Findings.

Laich Y(1), Georgiou M(2), Fujinami K(3), Daich Varela M(4), Fujinami-Yokokawa
Y(5), Hashem SA(4), Cabral de Guimaraes TA(4), Mahroo OA(4), Webster AR(4),
Michaelides M(6).

Author information:
(1)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom; Eye Center,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom; Jones Eye
Institute, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas.
(3)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom; Laboratory of
Visual Physiology, Division of Vision Research, National Institute of Sensory
Organs, NHO Tokyo Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(5)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United
Kingdom; Laboratory of Visual Physiology, Division of Vision Research, National
Institute of Sensory Organs, NHO Tokyo Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan; Department
of Health Policy and Management, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.
(6)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom. Electronic
address: michel.michaelides@ucl.ac.uk.

PURPOSE: To analyze the genetic findings, clinical spectrum, and natural history
of Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD) in a cohort of 222 children and
adults.
DESIGN: Single-center retrospective, consecutive, observational study.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients with a clinical diagnosis of BVMD from pedigrees with a
likely disease-causing monoallelic sequence variant in the BEST1 gene.
METHODS: Data were extracted from electronic and physical case notes.
Electrophysiologic assessment and molecular genetic testing were analyzed.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Molecular genetic test findings and clinical findings
including best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), choroidal neovascularization
(CNV) rates, and electrophysiologic parameters.
RESULTS: Two hundred twenty-two patients from 141 families were identified
harboring 69 BEST1 variants. Mean age at presentation was 26.8 years (range,
1.3-84.8 years) and most patients (61.5%) demonstrated deterioration of central
vision. Major funduscopic findings included 128 eyes (30.6%) with yellow
vitelliform lesions, 78 eyes (18.7%) with atrophic changes, 49 eyes (11.7%) with
fibrotic changes, 48 eyes (11.5%) with mild pigmentary changes, and 43 eyes
(10.3%) showing a vitelliruptive appearance. Mean BCVA was 0.37 logarithm of the
minimum angle of resolution (logMAR; Snellen equivalent, 20/47) for the right
eye and 0.33 logMAR (Snellen equivalent, 20/43) for the left eye at
presentation, with a mean annual loss rate of 0.013 logMAR and 0.009 logMAR,
respectively, over a mean follow-up of 9.7 years. Thirty-seven patients (17.3%)
received a diagnosis of CNV over a mean follow-up of 8.0 years. Eyes with CNV
that received treatment with an anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
agent showed better mean BCVA compared with eyes that were not treated with an
anti-VEGF agent (0.28 logMAR [Snellen equivalent, 20/38] vs. 0.62 logMAR
[Snellen equivalent, 20/83]). Most eyes exhibited a hyperopic refractive error
(78.7%), and 13 patients (6.1%) received a diagnosis of amblyopia. Among the 3
most common variants, p.(Ala243Val) was associated with a later age of onset,
better age-adjusted BCVA, and less advanced Gass stages compared with
p.(Arg218Cys) and p.(Arg218His).
CONCLUSIONS: BVMD shows a wide spectrum of phenotypic variability. The disease
is very slowly progressive, and the observed phenotype-genotype correlations
allow for more accurate prognostication and counselling.
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE(S): Proprietary or commercial disclosure may be found in
the Footnotes and Disclosures at the end of this article.

Copyright © 2024 American Academy of Ophthalmology. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2024.01.027
PMCID: PMC11932931
PMID: 38278445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
