---
reference_id: "PMID:12411287"
title: "Recurrent lymphangiomyomatosis after transplantation: genetic analyses reveal a metastatic mechanism."
authors:
- Karbowniczek M
- Astrinidis A
- Balsara BR
- Testa JR
- Lium JH
- Colby TV
- McCormack FX
- Henske EP
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1164/rccm.200208-969OC
keywords:
- Adult
- Alleles
- Base Sequence
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Biopsy
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 16/genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Y/genetics"
- "DNA, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Tumor Suppressor"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Loss of Heterozygosity/genetics
- Lung
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, secondary, surgery"
- Lung Transplantation
- Lymph Nodes
- "Lymphangioleiomyomatosis/genetics, pathology, surgery"
- Microsatellite Repeats/genetics
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/etiology, genetics, secondary"
- Postoperative Complications/etiology
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- Treatment Failure
- Tuberous Sclerosis Complex 2 Protein
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent lymphangiomyomatosis after transplantation: genetic analyses reveal a metastatic mechanism.
**Authors:** Karbowniczek M, Astrinidis A, Balsara BR, Testa JR, Lium JH, Colby TV, McCormack FX, Henske EP
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1164/rccm.200208-969OC](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.200208-969OC)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2003 Apr 1;167(7):976-82. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.200208-969OC. Epub 2002 Oct 31.

Recurrent lymphangiomyomatosis after transplantation: genetic analyses reveal a 
metastatic mechanism.

Karbowniczek M(1), Astrinidis A, Balsara BR, Testa JR, Lium JH, Colby TV, 
McCormack FX, Henske EP.

Author information:
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, 7701 Burholme Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

Lymphangiomyomatosis (LAM) is characterized by the proliferation of abnormal 
smooth muscle cells and cystic degeneration of the lung. LAM affects almost 
exclusively young women. Although lung transplantation provides effective 
therapy for end-stage LAM, there are reports of LAM recurrence after lung 
transplantation. Whether these recurrent LAM cells arise from the patient or the 
lung transplant donor is an area of controversy. We used microsatellite marker 
fingerprinting and TSC2 gene mutational analysis to study a patient with 
recurrent LAM after single-lung transplantation. The DNA microsatellite marker 
pattern indicated the presence of patient-derived LAM cells in the allograft. A 
somatic one base pair deletion in exon 18 of the TSC2 gene was identified in 
pulmonary and lymph node LAM cells before transplantation. The same mutation was 
in the recurrent LAM, demonstrating that the recurrent LAM was derived from the 
patient. Fluorescence in situ hybridization revealed that cells immunoreactive 
with the monoclonal antibody HMB-45 did not contain a Y chromosome. These data 
indicate that histologically benign LAM cells can migrate or metastasize in vivo 
to the transplanted lung. In addition, the patient had no evidence of a renal 
angiomyolipoma at autopsy and therefore demonstrated for the first time that 
somatic TSC2 mutations cause LAM in patients without angiomyolipomas.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200208-969OC
PMID: 12411287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]