---
reference_id: "PMID:20946934"
title: Mechanisms of neuronal dysfunction and degeneration in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Dutta R
- Trapp BD
journal: Prog Neurobiol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2010.09.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of neuronal dysfunction and degeneration in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Dutta R, Trapp BD
**Journal:** Prog Neurobiol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pneurobio.2010.09.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2010.09.005)

## Content

1. Prog Neurobiol. 2011 Jan;93(1):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2010.09.005.
Epub  2010 Oct 12.

Mechanisms of neuronal dysfunction and degeneration in multiple sclerosis.

Dutta R(1), Trapp BD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences/NC30, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland 
Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory demyelinating disease of the 
central nervous system. Due to its high prevalence, MS is the leading cause of 
non-traumatic neurological disability in young adults in the United States and 
Europe. The clinical disease course is variable and starts with reversible 
episodes of neurological disability in the third or fourth decade of life. This 
transforms into a disease of continuous and irreversible neurological decline by 
the sixth or seventh decade. Available therapies for MS patients have little 
benefit for patients who enter this irreversible phase of the disease. It is 
well established that irreversible loss of axons and neurons are the major cause 
of the irreversible and progressive neurological decline that most MS patients 
endure. This review discusses the etiology, mechanisms and progress made in 
determining the cause of axonal and neuronal loss in MS.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2010.09.005
PMCID: PMC3030928
PMID: 20946934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]