---
reference_id: "PMID:34746432"
title: ESO guideline for the management of extracranial and intracranial artery dissection.
authors:
- Debette S
- Mazighi M
- Bijlenga P
- Pezzini A
- Koga M
- Bersano A
- Kõrv J
- Haemmerli J
- Canavero I
- Tekiela P
- Miwa K
- J Seiffge D
- Schilling S
- Lal A
- Arnold M
- Markus HS
- Engelter ST
- Majersik JJ
journal: Eur Stroke J
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/23969873211046475
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ESO guideline for the management of extracranial and intracranial artery dissection.
**Authors:** Debette S, Mazighi M, Bijlenga P, Pezzini A, Koga M, Bersano A, Kõrv J, Haemmerli J, Canavero I, Tekiela P, Miwa K, J Seiffge D, Schilling S, Lal A, Arnold M, Markus HS, Engelter ST, Majersik JJ
**Journal:** Eur Stroke J (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/23969873211046475](https://doi.org/10.1177/23969873211046475)

## Content

1. Eur Stroke J. 2021 Sep;6(3):XXXIX-LXXXVIII. doi: 10.1177/23969873211046475.
Epub  2021 Oct 13.

ESO guideline for the management of extracranial and intracranial artery 
dissection.

Debette S(1)(2), Mazighi M(3)(4)(5)(6)(7), Bijlenga P(8), Pezzini A(9), Koga 
M(10), Bersano A(11), Kõrv J(12)(13), Haemmerli J(8), Canavero I(11), Tekiela 
P(14), Miwa K(10), J Seiffge D(15), Schilling S(16), Lal A(16), Arnold M(15), 
Markus HS(17), Engelter ST(18)(19), Majersik JJ(14).

Author information:
(1)Bordeaux Population Health research center, INSERM U1219, University of 
Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(2)Department of Neurology and Institute for Neurodegenerative Diseases, 
Bordeaux University Hospital, France.
(3)Department of Neurology, Hopital Lariboisière, Paris, France.
(4)Interventional Neuroradiology Department, Hôpital Fondation Ophtalmologique 
Adolphe de Rothschild, Paris, France.
(5)Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(6)FHU NeuroVasc, Paris, France.
(7)Laboratory of Vascular Translational Science, INSERM U1148, Paris, France.
(8)Neurosurgery, Département de Neurosciences Cliniques, Hôpitaux Universitaires 
et Faculté de Médecine de Genève, Switzerland.
(9)Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Neurology Clinic, 
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(10)Department of Cerebrovascular Medicine, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular 
Center, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(11)Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico 'Carlo Besta', Milano.
(12)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, University of Tartu, Tartu, 
Estonia.
(13)Department of Neurology, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
(14)Department of Neurology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(15)University Hospital Bern, University of Bern, Freiburgstrasse, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(16)Guidelines Methodologist, European Stroke Organization, Basel, Switzerland.
(17)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
UK.
(18)Department of Neurology and Stroke Center, University Hospital and 
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(19)Neurology and Neurorehabilitation, University Department of Geriatric 
Medicine FELIX PLATTER, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Erratum in
    Eur Stroke J. 2023 Mar;8(1):399. doi: 10.1177/23969873221133905.

Comment in
    Stroke. 2022 Feb;53(2):e53-e55. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.121.037324.

The aim of the present European Stroke Organisation guideline is to provide 
clinically useful evidence-based recommendations on the management of 
extracranial artery dissection (EAD) and intracranial artery dissection (IAD). 
EAD and IAD represent leading causes of stroke in the young, but are uncommon in 
the general population, thus making it challenging to conduct clinical trials 
and large observational studies. The guidelines were prepared following the 
Standard Operational Procedure for European Stroke Organisation guidelines and 
according to GRADE methodology. Our four recommendations result from a thorough 
analysis of the literature comprising two randomized controlled trials (RCTs) 
comparing anticoagulants to antiplatelets in the acute phase of ischemic stroke 
and twenty-six comparative observational studies. In EAD patients with acute 
ischemic stroke, we recommend using intravenous thrombolysis (IVT) with 
alteplase within 4.5 hours of onset if standard inclusion/exclusion criteria are 
met, and mechanical thrombectomy in patients with large vessel occlusion of the 
anterior circulation. We further recommend early endovascular or surgical 
intervention for IAD patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). Based on 
evidence from two phase 2 RCTs that have shown no difference between the 
benefits and risks of anticoagulants versus antiplatelets in the acute phase of 
symptomatic EAD, we strongly recommend that clinicians can prescribe either 
option. In post-acute EAD patients with residual stenosis or dissecting 
aneurysms and in symptomatic IAD patients with an intracranial dissecting 
aneurysm and isolated headache, there is insufficient data to provide a 
recommendation on the benefits and risks of endovascular/surgical treatment. 
Finally, nine expert consensus statements, adopted by 8 to 11 of the 11 experts 
involved, propose guidance for clinicians when the quality of evidence was too 
low to provide recommendations. Some of these pertain to the management of IAD 
(use of IVT, endovascular treatment, and antiplatelets versus anticoagulation in 
IAD with ischemic stroke and use of endovascular or surgical interventions for 
IAD with headache only). Other expert consensus statements address the use of 
direct anticoagulants and dual antiplatelet therapy in EAD-related cerebral 
ischemia, endovascular treatment of the EAD/IAD lesion, and multidisciplinary 
assessment of the best therapeutic approaches in specific situations.

© European Stroke Organisation 2021.

DOI: 10.1177/23969873211046475
PMCID: PMC8564160
PMID: 34746432

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.