---
reference_id: "PMID:36626183"
title: "COVID-19 and its long-term sequelae: what do we know in 2023?"
authors:
- Lippi G
- Sanchis-Gomar F
- Henry BM
journal: Pol Arch Intern Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.20452/pamw.16402
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COVID-19 and its long-term sequelae: what do we know in 2023?
**Authors:** Lippi G, Sanchis-Gomar F, Henry BM
**Journal:** Pol Arch Intern Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.20452/pamw.16402](https://doi.org/10.20452/pamw.16402)

## Content

1. Pol Arch Intern Med. 2023 Apr 19;133(4):16402. doi: 10.20452/pamw.16402. Epub 
2023 Jan 9.

COVID-19 and its long-term sequelae: what do we know in 2023?

Lippi G(#)(1), Sanchis-Gomar F(#)(2), Henry BM(3).

Author information:
(1)Section of Clinical Biochemistry and School of Medicine, University of 
Verona, Verona, Italy. giuseppe.lippi@univr.it
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, California, United States
(3)Clinical Laboratory, Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Cincinnati 
Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Pol Arch Intern Med. 2023 May 23;133(5):16506. doi: 10.20452/pamw.16506.

Post‑viral syndrome is a well‑known medical condition characterized by different 
levels of physical, cognitive, and emotional impairment that may persist with 
fluctuating severity after recovering from an acute viral infection. 
Unsurprisingly, COVID‑19 may also be accompanied by medium- and long‑term 
clinical sequelae after recovering from a SARS‑CoV‑2 infection. Although many 
clinical definitions have been provided, "long‑COVID" can be defined as a 
condition occurring in patients with a history of SARS‑CoV‑2 infection, 
developing 3 months from the symptoms onset, persisting for at least 2 months, 
and not explained by alternative diagnoses. According to recent global analyses, 
the cumulative prevalence of long‑COVID seems to range between 9% and 63%, and 
is up to 6‑fold higher than that of similar postviral infection conditions. 
Long‑COVID primarily encompasses the presence of at least 1 symptom, such as 
fatigue, dyspnea, cognitive impairment / brain fog, postexertional malaise, 
memory issues, musculoskeletal pain / spasms, cough, sleep disturbances, 
tachycardia / palpitations, altered smell / taste perception, headache, chest 
pain, and depression. The most important demographic and clinical predictors to 
date are female sex, older age, cigarette smoking, pre‑existing medical 
conditions, lack of COVID‑19 vaccination, infection with pre‑Omicron SARS‑CoV‑2 
variants, number of acute phase symptoms, viral load, severe / critical COVID‑19 
illness, as well as invasive mechanical ventilation. Concerning the care for 
long‑COVID patients, the greatest challenge is the fact that this syndrome 
cannot be considered a single clinical entity, and thus it needs an integrated 
multidisciplinary management, specifically tailored to the type and severity of 
symptoms.

DOI: 10.20452/pamw.16402
PMID: 36626183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]