---
reference_id: "PMID:17845137"
title: Therapy of Marfan syndrome.
authors:
- Judge DP
- Dietz HC
journal: Annu Rev Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1146/annurev.med.59.103106.103801
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapy of Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Judge DP, Dietz HC
**Journal:** Annu Rev Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev.med.59.103106.103801](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.med.59.103106.103801)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Med. 2008;59:43-59. doi: 10.1146/annurev.med.59.103106.103801.

Therapy of Marfan syndrome.

Judge DP(1), Dietz HC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Marfan syndrome is a common inherited disorder of connective tissue caused by 
deficiency of the matrix protein fibrillin-1. Effective surgical therapy for the 
most life-threatening manifestation, aortic root aneurysm, has led to a nearly 
normal lifespan for affected individuals who are appropriately recognized and 
treated. Traditional medical therapies, such as beta-adrenergic receptor 
blockade, are used to slow pathologic aortic growth and decrease the risk of 
aortic dissection by decreasing hemodynamic stress. New insights regarding the 
pathogenesis of Marfan syndrome have developed from investigation of murine 
models of this disorder. Fibrillin-1 deficiency is associated with excess 
signaling by transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta). TGFbeta antagonists have 
shown great success in improving or preventing several manifestations of Marfan 
syndrome in these mice, including aortic aneurysm. These results highlight the 
potential for development of targeted therapies based on discovery of disease 
genes and interrogation of pathogenesis in murine models.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.med.59.103106.103801
PMID: 17845137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]