---
reference_id: "PMID:22506045"
title: Circulating angiogenic factors in patients with thromboangiitis obliterans.
authors:
- Hewing B
- Stangl V
- Stangl K
- Enke-Melzer K
- Baumann G
- Ludwig A
journal: PLoS One
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034717
keywords:
- Adult
- Angiogenesis Inducing Agents/blood
- "Antigens, CD34/metabolism"
- Cell Cycle/physiology
- Cell Movement/physiology
- Cell Proliferation
- "Endothelial Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- "Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Leukocyte Common Antigens/metabolism
- Male
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic/blood, pathology"
- Serum/metabolism
- "Stem Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Thromboangiitis Obliterans/blood, pathology"
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor-2/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Circulating angiogenic factors in patients with thromboangiitis obliterans.
**Authors:** Hewing B, Stangl V, Stangl K, Enke-Melzer K, Baumann G, Ludwig A
**Journal:** PLoS One (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0034717](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0034717)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34717. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034717. Epub 2012 Apr
10.

Circulating angiogenic factors in patients with thromboangiitis obliterans.

Hewing B(1), Stangl V, Stangl K, Enke-Melzer K, Baumann G, Ludwig A.

Author information:
(1)Medizinische Klinik mit Schwerpunkt Kardiologie und Angiologie, Campus Mitte, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. bernd.hewing@charite.de

BACKGROUND: Thromboangiitis obliterans (TAO, also known as Buerger's disease) is 
a non-atherosclerotic inflammatory vascular disease that primarily affects 
arteries in the extremities of young adult smokers. Since the etiology of TAO is 
still unknown, therapeutic options are limited. Recent attempts in therapeutic 
angiogenesis have been promising. Therefore, the aim of our study was to 
evaluate angiogenic processes and factors including circulating progenitor cells 
in TAO.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: TAO patients with critical limb ischemia and 
age- and gender-matched nonsmokers and smokers without cardiovascular disease 
(n = 12 in each group) were enrolled in the study. Flow cytometric analysis of 
peripheral blood showed significantly decreased levels of circulating 
CD45(dim)CD34(+) progenitor cells in TAO patients and in smokers compared to 
nonsmokers. In contrast to both control groups, the proportion of 
CD45(dim)CD34(+) progenitor cells co-expressing VEGF receptor-2 (VEGFR2) was 
significantly elevated in TAO patients. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) of common angiogenic factors (such as VEGF) did not clearly point to 
pro- or antiangiogenic conditions in serum or plasma of TAO patients. Serum of 
TAO patients and controls was evaluated in proliferation, migration (scratch 
assay) and spheroid sprouting assays using human umbilical vein endothelial 
cells (HUVECs). Serum of TAO patients exhibited a diminished sprouting capacity 
of HUVECs compared to both control groups. Proliferation and migration of 
endothelial cells were impaired after treatment with serum of TAO patients.
CONCLUSION: Levels of circulating progenitor cells were altered in TAO patients 
compared to healthy nonsmokers and smokers. Furthermore, serum of TAO patients 
exhibited an antiangiogenic activity (impaired endothelial cell sprouting, 
migration and proliferation) on endothelial cells, which may contribute to 
vascular pathology in this patient population.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034717
PMCID: PMC3323572
PMID: 22506045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.