---
reference_id: "PMID:35367240"
title: Underpinning IL-6 biology and emphasizing selective JAK blockade as the potential alternate therapeutic intervention for rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Srivastava S
- Rasool M
journal: Life Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2022.120516
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Underpinning IL-6 biology and emphasizing selective JAK blockade as the potential alternate therapeutic intervention for rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Srivastava S, Rasool M
**Journal:** Life Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lfs.2022.120516](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2022.120516)

## Content

1. Life Sci. 2022 Jun 1;298:120516. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2022.120516. Epub 2022 Mar
 30.

Underpinning IL-6 biology and emphasizing selective JAK blockade as the 
potential alternate therapeutic intervention for rheumatoid arthritis.

Srivastava S(1), Rasool M(2).

Author information:
(1)Immunopathology Lab, School of Biosciences and Technology, Vellore Institute 
of Technology (VIT), Vellore 632 014, Tamilnadu, India.
(2)Immunopathology Lab, School of Biosciences and Technology, Vellore Institute 
of Technology (VIT), Vellore 632 014, Tamilnadu, India. Electronic address: 
rasool.m@vit.ac.in.

Interleukin 6 (IL-6), a pleiotropic inflammatory cytokine, is produced 
transiently due to tissue damage and infections. Nonetheless, IL-6 contributes 
to the host regenerative defense mechanism via classical signaling at the basal 
physiological level. Although tightly regulated transcriptional and 
post-transcriptional mechanism modulates its expression, dysregulated continual 
production of IL-6 during inflammatory conditions negatively affects immune 
cells. Molecular evidence has substantiated the pernicious out-turn of IL-6 
trans-signaling in developing one such autoimmune joint disorder, rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). Significantly increased levels of IL-6 in RA, along with 
multiple growth factors mainly released by synovial-like fibroblasts (FLS) and 
macrophages, is crucial for clinical disease progression. Due to its 
pathogenicity, in mediating inflammation and context-driven signaling cassette, 
blockade of IL-6 could be a potent target in the therapeutic intervention of RA. 
The clinical trials of various humanized IL-6 and anti-IL-6 receptor antibodies 
have proved their efficacy. However, severe side effects like neutropenia, 
thrombocytopenia, and abnormal liver enzymes contributed to dysfunctional 
adaptive immunity. The JAK-STAT pathway has been majorly implicated in RA 
disease progression upon IL-6 stimulation, simultaneously paving the path for 
innovative therapeutic approaches. JAK inhibitors, namely Tofacitinib, 
Baricitinib, Decernotinib, Upadacitinib, Peficitinib, and Filgotinib, have 
demonstrated clinical efficacy in recent decades as an alternative therapeutic 
strategy to abrogate IL-6 mediated aberrant activity in RA. This approach 
substitutes for the side effects incurred due to the IL-6 targeted therapies. 
This review discusses the history of research into IL-6 biology and therapies 
that target the IL-6 driven JAK/STAT pathway, including the successes, 
challenges, and drawbacks, emphasizing RA.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2022.120516
PMID: 35367240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]