---
reference_id: "PMID:26373900"
title: A novel mutation in two Hmong families broadens the range of STRA6-related malformations to include contractures and camptodactyly.
authors:
- Marcadier JL
- Mears AJ
- Woods EA
- Fisher J
- Airheart C
- Qin W
- Beaulieu CL
- Dyment DA
- Innes AM
- Curry CJ
- Care4Rare Canada Consortium
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37389
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Alternative Splicing/genetics
- "Anophthalmos/genetics, pathology"
- California
- Consanguinity
- "Contracture/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Gestational Age
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Lung/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Lung Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- "Microphthalmos/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Pregnancy
- Prognosis
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel mutation in two Hmong families broadens the range of STRA6-related malformations to include contractures and camptodactyly.
**Authors:** Marcadier JL, Mears AJ, Woods EA, Fisher J, Airheart C, Qin W, Beaulieu CL, Dyment DA, Innes AM, Curry CJ, Care4Rare Canada Consortium
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.37389](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.37389)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Jan;170A(1):11-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37389. Epub 2015 
Sep 16.

A novel mutation in two Hmong families broadens the range of STRA6-related 
malformations to include contractures and camptodactyly.

Marcadier JL(1), Mears AJ(2), Woods EA(3), Fisher J(4), Airheart C(3), Qin W(2), 
Beaulieu CL(2), Dyment DA(1), Innes AM(5), Curry CJ(4)(6); Care4Rare Canada 
Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada.
(2)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, University of 
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Community Perinatology Medical Group, Fresno, California.
(4)Genetic Medicine Central California, Fresno, California.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics and Alberta Children's Hospital Research 
Institute for Child and Maternal Health, University of Calgary, Calgary, 
Alberta, Canada.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, 
California.

PDAC (also termed Matthew Wood) syndrome is a rare, autosomal recessive disorder 
characterized by pulmonary hypoplasia/aplasia, diaphragmatic defects, bilateral 
anophthalmia, and cardiac malformations. The disorder is caused by mutations in 
STRA6, an important regulator of vitamin A and retinoic acid metabolism. We 
describe six cases from four families of Hmong ancestry, seen over a 30 years 
period in California. These include: (i) consanguineous siblings with a 
combination of bilateral anophthalmia, diaphragmatic abnormalities, truncus 
arteriosus, and/or pulmonary agenesis/hypoplasia; (ii) a singleton fetus with 
bilateral anophthalmia, pulmonary agenesis, cardiac malformation, and renal 
hypoplasia; (iii) a sibling pair with a combination of antenatal contractures, 
camptodactyly, fused palpebral fissures, pulmonary agenesis, and/or truncus 
arteriosus; (iv) a fetus with bilateral anophthalmia, bushy eyebrows, pulmonary 
agenesis, heart malformation, and abnormal hand positioning. The phenotypic 
spectrum of PDAC syndrome has until now not included contractures or 
camptodactyly. Sequencing of STRA6 in unrelated members of families three and 
four identified a novel, shared homozygous splice site alteration 
(c.113 + 3_4delAA) that is predicted to be pathogenic. We hypothesize this may 
represent a unique disease allele in the Hmong. We also provide a focused review 
of all published PDAC syndrome cases with confirmed or inferred STRA6 mutations, 
illustrating the phenotypic and molecular variability that characterizes this 
disorder.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37389
PMID: 26373900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]