---
reference_id: "PMID:23794006"
title: "As a new inflammatory marker for familial Mediterranean fever: neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio."
authors:
- Ahsen A
- Ulu MS
- Yuksel S
- Demir K
- Uysal M
- Erdogan M
- Acarturk G
journal: Inflammation
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s10753-013-9675-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# As a new inflammatory marker for familial Mediterranean fever: neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio.
**Authors:** Ahsen A, Ulu MS, Yuksel S, Demir K, Uysal M, Erdogan M, Acarturk G
**Journal:** Inflammation (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10753-013-9675-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10753-013-9675-2)

## Content

1. Inflammation. 2013 Dec;36(6):1357-62. doi: 10.1007/s10753-013-9675-2.

As a new inflammatory marker for familial Mediterranean fever: 
neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio.

Ahsen A(1), Ulu MS, Yuksel S, Demir K, Uysal M, Erdogan M, Acarturk G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Afyon Kocatepe University School of 
Medicine, Ic Hastaliklari A.D., 03200, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 
ahmetahsen@gmail.com.

Comment in
    Inflammation. 2014 Jun;37(3):833-4. doi: 10.1007/s10753-013-9803-z.

Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF), which is an autosomal recessive disease, is 
characterised by recurrent febrile episodes in association with peritonitis, 
pleuritis and arthritis and has ongoing subclinical inflammation during 
attack-free period. In this study, we aimed to investigate the relationship 
between FMF with neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR), which is determined in 
many chronic inflammations as a new potential inflammatory mediator. We included 
62 patients and 41 healthy subjects who were similar in terms of age and sex. We 
found that the NLR values of the patients were significantly higher than those 
of the control group, and C-reactive protein values were correlated with NLR. 
Another finding was the NLR values were significantly higher in the FMF patient 
with M694V mutation than with other mutations. As a result, NLR might be used in 
the FMF patient as an indicator of the subclinical inflammation, and the FMF 
patients with M694V mutation should be followed up closely because of increased 
subclinical inflammation risk.

DOI: 10.1007/s10753-013-9675-2
PMID: 23794006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]