---
reference_id: "PMID:18479681"
title: Zebrafish blowout provides genetic evidence for Patched1-mediated negative regulation of Hedgehog signaling within the proximal optic vesicle of the vertebrate eye.
authors:
- Lee J
- Willer JR
- Willer GB
- Smith K
- Gregg RG
- Gross JM
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.03.035
keywords:
- Animals
- Body Patterning
- Choroid/embryology
- "Coloboma/embryology, metabolism"
- "Embryo, Nonmammalian/metabolism"
- "Eye/embryology, metabolism"
- Hedgehog Proteins/metabolism
- Membrane Proteins/metabolism
- Patched Receptors
- Patched-1 Receptor
- "Receptors, Cell Surface/metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- Zebrafish
- Zebrafish Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Zebrafish blowout provides genetic evidence for Patched1-mediated negative regulation of Hedgehog signaling within the proximal optic vesicle of the vertebrate eye.
**Authors:** Lee J, Willer JR, Willer GB, Smith K, Gregg RG, Gross JM
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.03.035](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.03.035)

## Content

1. Dev Biol. 2008 Jul 1;319(1):10-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.03.035. Epub 2008
 Apr 4.

Zebrafish blowout provides genetic evidence for Patched1-mediated negative
regulation of Hedgehog signaling within the proximal optic vesicle of the
vertebrate eye.

Lee J(1), Willer JR, Willer GB, Smith K, Gregg RG, Gross JM.

Author information:
(1)Section of Molecular Cell and Developmental Biology and Institute for Cell
and Molecular Biology, USA.

In this study, we have characterized the ocular defects in the recessive
zebrafish mutant blowout that presents with a variably penetrant coloboma
phenotype. blowout mutants develop unilateral or bilateral colobomas and as a
result, the retina and retinal pigmented epithelium are not contained within the
optic cup. Colobomas result from defects in optic stalk morphogenesis whereby
the optic stalk extends into the retina and impedes the lateral edges of the
choroid fissure from meeting and fusing. The expression domain of the proximal
optic vesicle marker pax2a is expanded in blowout at the expense of the distal
optic vesicle marker pax6, suggesting that the initial patterning of the optic
vesicle into proximal and distal territories is disrupted in blowout. Later
aspects of distal optic cup formation (i.e. retina development) are normal in
blowout mutants, however. Positional cloning of blowout identified a nonsense
mutation in patched1, a negative regulator of the Hedgehog pathway, as the
underlying cause of the blowout phenotype. Expanded domains of expression of the
Hedgehog target genes patched1 and patched2 were observed in blowout, consistent
with a loss of Patched1 function and upregulation of Hedgehog pathway activity.
Moreover, colobomas in blowout could be suppressed by pharmacologically
inhibiting the Hedgehog pathway with cyclopamine, and maximal rescue occurred
when embryos were exposed to cyclopamine between 5.5 and 13 hours
post-fertilization. These observations highlight the critical role that Hedgehog
pathway activity plays in mediating patterning of the proximal/distal axis of
the optic vesicle during the early phases of eye development and they provide
genetic confirmation for the integral role that patched1-mediated negative
regulation of Hedgehog signaling plays during vertebrate eye development.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.03.035
PMCID: PMC2529176
PMID: 18479681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
