---
reference_id: "PMID:37595759"
title: Therapeutic modalities and clinical outcomes in a large cohort with LRBA deficiency and CTLA4 insufficiency.
authors:
- Taghizade N
- Babayeva R
- Kara A
- Karakus IS
- Catak MC
- Bulutoglu A
- Haskologlu ZS
- Akay Haci I
- Tunakan Dalgic C
- Karabiber E
- Bilgic Eltan S
- Yorgun Altunbas M
- Sefer AP
- Sezer A
- Kokcu Karadag SI
- Arik E
- Karali Z
- Ozhan Kont A
- Tuzer C
- Karaman S
- Mersin SS
- Kasap N
- Celik E
- Kocacik Uygun DF
- Aydemir S
- Kiykim A
- Aydogmus C
- Ozek Yucel E
- Celmeli F
- Karatay E
- Bozkurtlar E
- Demir S
- Metin A
- Karaca NE
- Kutukculer N
- Aksu G
- Guner SN
- Keles S
- Reisli I
- Kendir Demirkol Y
- Arikoglu T
- Gulez N
- Genel F
- Kilic SS
- Aytekin C
- Keskin O
- Yildiran A
- Ozcan D
- Altintas DU
- Ardeniz FO
- Dogu EF
- Ikinciogullari KA
- Karakoc-Aydiner E
- Ozen A
- Baris S
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2023.08.004
keywords:
- Humans
- Abatacept/therapeutic use
- CTLA-4 Antigen/genetics
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Autoimmunity
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic modalities and clinical outcomes in a large cohort with LRBA deficiency and CTLA4 insufficiency.
**Authors:** Taghizade N, Babayeva R, Kara A, Karakus IS, Catak MC, Bulutoglu A, Haskologlu ZS, Akay Haci I, Tunakan Dalgic C, Karabiber E, Bilgic Eltan S, Yorgun Altunbas M, Sefer AP, Sezer A, Kokcu Karadag SI, Arik E, Karali Z, Ozhan Kont A, Tuzer C, Karaman S, Mersin SS, Kasap N, Celik E, Kocacik Uygun DF, Aydemir S, Kiykim A, Aydogmus C, Ozek Yucel E, Celmeli F, Karatay E, Bozkurtlar E, Demir S, Metin A, Karaca NE, Kutukculer N, Aksu G, Guner SN, Keles S, Reisli I, Kendir Demirkol Y, Arikoglu T, Gulez N, Genel F, Kilic SS, Aytekin C, Keskin O, Yildiran A, Ozcan D, Altintas DU, Ardeniz FO, Dogu EF, Ikinciogullari KA, Karakoc-Aydiner E, Ozen A, Baris S
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2023.08.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2023.08.004)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2023 Dec;152(6):1634-1645. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2023.08.004. Epub 2023 Aug 16.

Therapeutic modalities and clinical outcomes in a large cohort with LRBA
deficiency and CTLA4 insufficiency.

Taghizade N(1), Babayeva R(2), Kara A(3), Karakus IS(4), Catak MC(2), Bulutoglu
A(2), Haskologlu ZS(5), Akay Haci I(6), Tunakan Dalgic C(7), Karabiber E(8),
Bilgic Eltan S(2), Yorgun Altunbas M(2), Sefer AP(2), Sezer A(9), Kokcu Karadag
SI(10), Arik E(11), Karali Z(12), Ozhan Kont A(13), Tuzer C(14), Karaman S(15),
Mersin SS(16), Kasap N(17), Celik E(18), Kocacik Uygun DF(18), Aydemir S(19),
Kiykim A(19), Aydogmus C(20), Ozek Yucel E(21), Celmeli F(22), Karatay E(23),
Bozkurtlar E(24), Demir S(25), Metin A(26), Karaca NE(27), Kutukculer N(27),
Aksu G(27), Guner SN(28), Keles S(28), Reisli I(28), Kendir Demirkol Y(29),
Arikoglu T(13), Gulez N(6), Genel F(6), Kilic SS(12), Aytekin C(30), Keskin
O(11), Yildiran A(10), Ozcan D(9), Altintas DU(9), Ardeniz FO(7), Dogu EF(5),
Ikinciogullari KA(5), Karakoc-Aydiner E(2), Ozen A(2), Baris S(31).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Marmara University, Istanbul,
Turkey.
(2)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, School of Medicine, Marmara
University, Istanbul, Turkey; Istanbul Jeffrey Modell Diagnostic and Research
Center for Primary Immunodeficiencies, Istanbul, Turkey; The Isil Berat Barlan
Center for Translational Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)TUBITAK Marmara Research Center, Gene Engineering and Biotechnology
Institute, Gebze, Turkey.
(4)School of Medicine, Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Ankara
University, Ankara, Turkey.
(6)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Dr Behcet Uz Children's
Education and Research Hospital, University of Health Sciences, Izmir, Turkey.
(7)Department of Allergy and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University,
Izmir, Turkey.
(8)Department of Allergy and Immunology, Marmara University Training and
Research Hospital, Ministry of Health, Istanbul, Turkey.
(9)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Çukurova
University, Adana, Turkey.
(10)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Ondokuz
Mayis University, Samsun, Turkey.
(11)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Gaziantep
University, Gaziantep, Turkey.
(12)Division of Pediatric Immunology and Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine,
Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey.
(13)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Mersin
University, Mersin, Turkey.
(14)Department of Allergy and Immunology, Batman Training and Research Hospital,
Ministry of Health, Batman, Turkey.
(15)Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Manisa City Hospital, University of Health
Sciences, Manisa, Turkey.
(16)Department of Allergy and Immunology, Dr Ersin Arslan Training and Research
Hospital, Ministry of Health, Gaziantep, Turkey.
(17)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul
Medeniyet University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(18)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Akdeniz
University, Antalya, Turkey.
(19)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Cerrahpasa Faculty of
Medicine, Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, Istanbul, Turkey.
(20)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Basaksehir Cam and Sakura City
Hospital, University of Health Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey.
(21)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine,
Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(22)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Antalya Training and Research
Hospital, University of Health Sciences, Antalya, Turkey.
(23)Department of Radiology, Marmara University Education and Research Hospital,
Istanbul, Turkey.
(24)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Marmara University, Istanbul
Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(25)Department of Allergy and Immunology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul
University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(26)Division of Pediatric Immunology, Ankara City Hospital, University of Health
Sciences, Ankara, Turkey.
(27)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Ege
University, Izmir, Turkey.
(28)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Necmettin
Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey.
(29)Division of Pediatric Genetics, Umraniye Education and Research Hospital,
University of Health Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey.
(30)Department of Pediatric Immunology, Dr Sami Ulus Children Health and
Diseases Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(31)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, School of Medicine, Marmara
University, Istanbul, Turkey; Istanbul Jeffrey Modell Diagnostic and Research
Center for Primary Immunodeficiencies, Istanbul, Turkey; The Isil Berat Barlan
Center for Translational Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. Electronic address:
safabaris@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: LPS-responsive beige-like anchor (LRBA) deficiency (LRBA-/-) and
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen-4 (CTLA4) insufficiency (CTLA4+/-) are
mechanistically overlapped diseases presenting with recurrent infections and
autoimmunity. The effectiveness of different treatment regimens remains unknown.
OBJECTIVE: Our aim was to determine the comparative efficacy and long-term
outcome of therapy with immunosuppressants, CTLA4-immunoglobulin (abatacept),
and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) in a single-country
multicenter cohort of 98 patients with a 5-year median follow-up.
METHODS: The 98 patients (63 LRBA-/- and 35 CTLA4+/-) were followed and
evaluated at baseline and every 6 months for clinical manifestations and
response to the respective therapies.
RESULTS: The LRBA-/- patients exhibited a more severe disease course than did
the CTLA4+/- patients, requiring more immunosuppressants, abatacept, and HSCT to
control their symptoms. Among the 58 patients who received abatacept as either a
primary or rescue therapy, sustained complete control was achieved in 46 (79.3%)
without severe side effects. In contrast, most patients who received
immunosuppressants as primary therapy (n = 61) showed either partial or no
disease control (72.1%), necessitating additional immunosuppressants, abatacept,
or transplantation. Patients with partial or no response to abatacept (n = 12)
had longer disease activity before abatacept therapy, with higher organ
involvement and poorer disease outcomes than those with a complete response.
HSCT was performed in 14 LRBA-/- patients; 9 patients (64.2%) showed complete
remission, and 3 (21.3%) continued to receive immunosuppressants after
transplantation. HSCT and abatacept therapy gave rise to similar probabilities
of survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Abatacept is superior to immunosuppressants in controlling disease
manifestations over the long term, especially when started early, and it may
provide a safe and effective therapeutic alternative to transplantation.

Copyright © 2023 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2023.08.004
PMID: 37595759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
