---
reference_id: "PMID:23434875"
title: "Pediatric celiac disease, cryptogenic hypertransaminasemia, and autoimmune hepatitis."
authors:
- Vajro P
- Paolella G
- Maggiore G
- Giordano G
journal: J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1097/MPG.0b013e31828dc5c5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Celiac Disease/blood, diet therapy, epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Comorbidity
- "Diet, Gluten-Free"
- "Hepatitis/blood, enzymology, epidemiology, physiopathology"
- "Hepatitis, Autoimmune/blood, epidemiology, immunology, physiopathology"
- "Hepatitis, Chronic/blood, enzymology, epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Liver Cirrhosis/blood, congenital, enzymology, epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Prevalence
- Severity of Illness Index
- Transaminases/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric celiac disease, cryptogenic hypertransaminasemia, and autoimmune hepatitis.
**Authors:** Vajro P, Paolella G, Maggiore G, Giordano G
**Journal:** J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MPG.0b013e31828dc5c5](https://doi.org/10.1097/MPG.0b013e31828dc5c5)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2013 Jun;56(6):663-70. doi: 
10.1097/MPG.0b013e31828dc5c5.

Pediatric celiac disease, cryptogenic hypertransaminasemia, and autoimmune 
hepatitis.

Vajro P(1), Paolella G, Maggiore G, Giordano G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine at the University of Salerno, 
Salerno, Italy. pvajro@unisa.it

OBJECTIVE: The association between celiac disease (CD) and liver disease in 
pediatrics is widely recognized, but its prevalence is unknown. This study aims 
to conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis to evaluate the prevalence of 
CD in children with cryptogenic persistent hypertransaminasemia (HTS) or 
autoimmune hepatitis (AIH), and vice versa.
METHODS: We searched MEDLINE/PubMed, the Cochrane Library, Web of Science, and 
MD Consult from 1977 to May 2012 for studies reporting either CD and HTS or AIH. 
Pooled prevalences with 95% confidence intervals (CI) and relative risk (RR) 
were calculated.
RESULTS: Nine studies (2046 patients) were identified. Pooled prevalences of CD 
in children with mild, nonspecific cryptogenic persistent HTS and vice versa 
were 12.0% (95% CI 4.17-29.96) and 36.0% (95% CI 32.15-40.11), respectively. A 
gluten-free diet normalized transaminase levels in 77% to 100% of patients with 
CD within 4 to 8 months. Pooled prevalences of CD in children with AIH and vice 
versa were 6.3% (95% CI 3.87-11.73) and 1.4% (95% CI 0.84-2.15), respectively. 
The RR of HTS in children with CD versus the general population, and of CD in 
children with HTS was 6.55 (95% CI 5.65-7.60) and 11.59 (95% CI 3.80-35.33), 
respectively. The corresponding RR of AIH in children with CD was 188.54 (95% CI 
92.23-385.43). The RR of CD in children with AIH was 6.63 (95% CI 3.86-11.40).
CONCLUSIONS: CD is associated with elevated transaminase levels in about 
one-third of newly diagnosed children. Cryptogenic persistent HTS may signal 
gluten-dependent nonspecific mild hepatitis (12.0% of cases) or more rarely 
(6.3%) severe CD-related autoimmune hepatopathy. RRs confirm these trends in the 
considered associations.

DOI: 10.1097/MPG.0b013e31828dc5c5
PMID: 23434875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]