---
reference_id: "PMID:21204207"
title: Genotype-phenotype analysis of the branchio-oculo-facial syndrome.
authors:
- Milunsky JM
- Maher TM
- Zhao G
- Wang Z
- Mulliken JB
- Chitayat D
- Clemens M
- Stalker HJ
- Bauer M
- Burch M
- Chénier S
- Cunningham ML
- Drack AV
- Janssens S
- Karlea A
- Klatt R
- Kini U
- Klein O
- Lachmeijer AM
- Megarbane A
- Mendelsohn NJ
- Meschino WS
- Mortier GR
- Parkash S
- Ray CR
- Roberts A
- Roberts A
- Reardon W
- Schnur RE
- Smith R
- Splitt M
- Tezcan K
- Whiteford ML
- Wong DA
- Zori R
- Lin AE
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33783
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Branchio-Oto-Renal Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 6/genetics"
- Genotype
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Phenotype
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Transcription Factor AP-2/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-phenotype analysis of the branchio-oculo-facial syndrome.
**Authors:** Milunsky JM, Maher TM, Zhao G, Wang Z, Mulliken JB, Chitayat D, Clemens M, Stalker HJ, Bauer M, Burch M, Chénier S, Cunningham ML, Drack AV, Janssens S, Karlea A, Klatt R, Kini U, Klein O, Lachmeijer AM, Megarbane A, Mendelsohn NJ, Meschino WS, Mortier GR, Parkash S, Ray CR, Roberts A, Roberts A, Reardon W, Schnur RE, Smith R, Splitt M, Tezcan K, Whiteford ML, Wong DA, Zori R, Lin AE
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.33783](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.33783)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Jan;155A(1):22-32. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33783.

Genotype-phenotype analysis of the branchio-oculo-facial syndrome.

Milunsky JM(1), Maher TM, Zhao G, Wang Z, Mulliken JB, Chitayat D, Clemens M, 
Stalker HJ, Bauer M, Burch M, Chénier S, Cunningham ML, Drack AV, Janssens S, 
Karlea A, Klatt R, Kini U, Klein O, Lachmeijer AM, Megarbane A, Mendelsohn NJ, 
Meschino WS, Mortier GR, Parkash S, Ray CR, Roberts A, Roberts A, Reardon W, 
Schnur RE, Smith R, Splitt M, Tezcan K, Whiteford ML, Wong DA, Zori R, Lin AE.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Massachusetts 02118, USA. jmilunsk@bu.edu

Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS; OMIM#113620) is a rare autosomal dominant 
craniofacial disorder with variable expression. Major features include cutaneous 
and ocular abnormalities, characteristic facies, renal, ectodermal, and temporal 
bone anomalies. Having determined that mutations involving TFAP2A result in 
BOFS, we studied a total of 30 families (41 affected individuals); 26/30 (87%) 
fulfilled our cardinal diagnostic criteria. The original family with the 3.2 Mb 
deletion including the TFAP2A gene remains the only BOFS family without the 
typical CL/P and the only family with a deletion. We have identified a hotspot 
region in the highly conserved exons 4 and 5 of TFAP2A that harbors missense 
mutations in 27/30 (90%) families. Several of these mutations are recurrent. 
Mosaicism was detected in one family. To date, genetic heterogeneity has not 
been observed. Although the cardinal criteria for BOFS have been based on the 
presence of each of the core defects, an affected family member or thymic 
remnant, we documented TFAP2A mutations in three (10%) probands in our series 
without a classic cervical cutaneous defect or ectopic thymus. Temporal bone 
anomalies were identified in 3/5 patients investigated. The occurrence of CL/P, 
premature graying, coloboma, heterochromia irides, and ectopic thymus, are 
evidence for BOFS as a neurocristopathy. Intrafamilial clinical variability can 
be marked. Although there does not appear to be mutation-specific 
genotype-phenotype correlations at this time, more patients need to be studied. 
Clinical testing for TFAP2A mutations is now available and will assist 
geneticists in confirming the typical cases or excluding the diagnosis in 
atypical cases.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33783
PMID: 21204207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]