---
reference_id: "PMID:25069660"
title: Skin cancer prevention campaign aimed at beachgoers on the Costa del Sol (southern Spain).
authors:
- de Troya-Martín M
- Delgado-Sánchez N
- Blázquez-Sánchez N
- Ortega-Tudela G
- Toribio-Montero JC
- Jabalera-Mesa ML
- Ríos-Almellones I
- Rivas-Ruiz F
journal: Int J Dermatol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1111/ijd.12389
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Bathing Beaches
- Basal Cell Carcinoma/diagnosis
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/diagnosis"
- Early Detection of Cancer
- Eyeglasses
- Female
- Health Education
- "Health Knowledge, Attitudes, Practice"
- Health Promotion/methods
- Humans
- Interviews as Topic
- "Keratosis, Actinic/diagnosis"
- Male
- Mass Media
- Melanoma/diagnosis
- Middle Aged
- Nevus/pathology
- Protective Clothing
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis, prevention & control"
- Spain
- "Sunburn/prevention & control"
- Sunscreening Agents
- Surveys and Questionnaires
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skin cancer prevention campaign aimed at beachgoers on the Costa del Sol (southern Spain).
**Authors:** de Troya-Martín M, Delgado-Sánchez N, Blázquez-Sánchez N, Ortega-Tudela G, Toribio-Montero JC, Jabalera-Mesa ML, Ríos-Almellones I, Rivas-Ruiz F
**Journal:** Int J Dermatol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ijd.12389](https://doi.org/10.1111/ijd.12389)

## Content

1. Int J Dermatol. 2014 Nov;53(11):e526-30. doi: 10.1111/ijd.12389. Epub 2014 Jul
 29.

Skin cancer prevention campaign aimed at beachgoers on the Costa del Sol
(southern Spain).

de Troya-Martín M(1), Delgado-Sánchez N, Blázquez-Sánchez N, Ortega-Tudela G,
Toribio-Montero JC, Jabalera-Mesa ML, Ríos-Almellones I, Rivas-Ruiz F.

Author information:
(1)Agencia Sanitaria Costa del Sol, Marbella, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Sunbathing on the beach is one of the main risks for skin cancer.
OBJECTIVE: In the summer of 2010, a skin cancer prevention campaign aimed at
beachgoers was undertaken on the western Costa del Sol (southern Spain).
METHODS: The campaign took place on beaches during July and August. A
multicomponent intervention was conducted by a dermatologist and other
healthcare professionals, including: (1) interviews about risk factors and sun
protection habits; (2) full skin examination using dermoscopy; (3) health advice
plus educational brochure; (4) sunscreen workshop plus free samples; and (5)
survey about satisfaction and behavioral intentions. A journalism and health
prize was offered to encourage mass media coverage.
RESULTS: Four hundred and seven beachgoers (56% tourists) were recruited during
the campaign, mean age 45 years. Most of the participants reported high-risk sun
exposure and revealed high rates of clinically suspicious lesions of skin cancer
(8.1%), melanoma (2.9%), actinic keratosis (10.2%), and atypical nevus (7.6%).
The campaign was highly appreciated by the participants and followed not only by
local but also regional and national media.
CONCLUSION: Beachgoers are a strategic target to prevent skin cancer. Beaches
are also suitable places to develop a skin cancer prevention campaign, allowing
direct access to the high-risk population for surveying, health behavior
education, and screening. Several keys may be useful to optimize results as the
design of a personalized intervention of proven efficacy, provision of a trained
healthcare team, and development of an attractive strategy for the mass media.

© 2014 The International Society of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.1111/ijd.12389
PMID: 25069660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
