---
reference_id: "PMID:36993994"
title: "Meta-analysis and systematic review of coronary vasospasm in ANOCA patients: Prevalence, clinical features and prognosis."
authors:
- Woudstra J
- Vink CEM
- Schipaanboord DJM
- Eringa EC
- den Ruijter HM
- Feenstra RGT
- Boerhout CKM
- Beijk MAM
- de Waard GA
- Ong P
- Seitz A
- Sechtem U
- Piek JJ
- van de Hoef TP
- Appelman Y
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1129159
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meta-analysis and systematic review of coronary vasospasm in ANOCA patients: Prevalence, clinical features and prognosis.
**Authors:** Woudstra J, Vink CEM, Schipaanboord DJM, Eringa EC, den Ruijter HM, Feenstra RGT, Boerhout CKM, Beijk MAM, de Waard GA, Ong P, Seitz A, Sechtem U, Piek JJ, van de Hoef TP, Appelman Y
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2023.1129159](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2023.1129159)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2023 Mar 13;10:1129159. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1129159. 
eCollection 2023.

Meta-analysis and systematic review of coronary vasospasm in ANOCA patients: 
Prevalence, clinical features and prognosis.

Woudstra J(1), Vink CEM(1), Schipaanboord DJM(2), Eringa EC(3)(4), den Ruijter 
HM(2), Feenstra RGT(5), Boerhout CKM(5), Beijk MAM(5), de Waard GA(1), Ong P(6), 
Seitz A(6), Sechtem U(6), Piek JJ(5), van de Hoef TP(2), Appelman Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Amsterdam UMC 
Location Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory of Experimental Cardiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Physiology, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Amsterdam UMC 
Location Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(4)Department of Physiology, Maastricht University, Cardiovascular Research 
Institute Maastricht, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(5)Department of Clinical and Experimental Cardiology, Amsterdam Cardiovascular 
Sciences, Amsterdam UMC Location University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Robert Bosch Hospital, Stuttgart, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Coronary artery spasm (CAS), encompassing epicardial and 
microvascular spasm, is increasingly recognized as cause of angina in patients 
with non-obstructive coronary artery disease (ANOCA). However, various spasm 
provocation testing protocols and diagnostic criteria are used, making diagnosis 
and characterization of these patients difficult and interpretation of study 
results cumbersome. This review provides a structured overview of the 
prevalence, characterization and prognosis of CAS worldwide in men and women.
METHODS: A systematic review identifying studies describing ANOCA patients with 
CAS was performed. Multiple outcomes (prevalence, clinical features, and 
prognosis) were assessed. Data, except for prognosis were pooled and analysed 
using random effects meta-analysis models.
RESULTS: Twenty-five publications (N = 14.554) were included (58.2 years; 44.2% 
women). Percentages of epicardial constriction to define epicardial spasm ranged 
from >50% to >90%. Epicardial spasm was prevalent in 43% (range 16-73%), with a 
higher prevalence in Asian vs. Western World population (52% vs. 33%, 
p = 0.014). Microvascular spasm was prevalent in 25% (range 7-39%). Men were 
more likely to have epicardial spasm (61%), women were more likely to have 
microvascular spasm (64%). Recurrent angina is frequently reported during 
follow-up ranging from 10 to 53%.
CONCLUSION: CAS is highly prevalent in ANOCA patients, where men more often have 
epicardial spasm, women more often have microvascular spasm. A higher prevalence 
of epicardial spasm is demonstrated in the Asian population compared to the 
Western World. The prevalence of CAS is high, emphasizing the use of unambiguous 
study protocols and diagnostic criteria and highlights the importance of routine 
evaluation of CAS in men and women with ANOCA.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: 
https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/display_record.php?RecordID=272100.

© 2023 Woudstra, Vink, Schipaanboord, Eringa, den Ruijter, Feenstra, Boerhout, 
Beijk, de Waard, Ong, Seitz, Sechtem, Piek, van de Hoef and Appelman.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1129159
PMCID: PMC10041338
PMID: 36993994

Conflict of interest statement: TH received an institutional research grant from 
Philips. JP is consultant for Philips. US and PO received honoraria from Abbott 
and Philips for speaking about coronary function testing. MB received an 
institutional research grant from Actelion B.V. The remaining authors declare 
that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.