---
reference_id: "PMID:33058840"
title: Eight novel KCNJ1 variants and parathyroid hormone overaction or resistance in 5 probands with Bartter syndrome type 2.
authors:
- Zuo J
- Guo W
- Wang S
- Lang Y
- Wang S
- Shi X
- Zhang R
- Zhao X
- Han Y
- Shao L
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2020.10.002
keywords:
- "Bartter Syndrome/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2"
- Female
- Humans
- Nephrocalcinosis
- Parathyroid Hormone
- "Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying/genetics"
- Pregnancy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eight novel KCNJ1 variants and parathyroid hormone overaction or resistance in 5 probands with Bartter syndrome type 2.
**Authors:** Zuo J, Guo W, Wang S, Lang Y, Wang S, Shi X, Zhang R, Zhao X, Han Y, Shao L
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2020.10.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2020.10.002)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2020 Dec;511:248-254. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2020.10.002. Epub
2020  Oct 12.

Eight novel KCNJ1 variants and parathyroid hormone overaction or resistance in 5
probands with Bartter syndrome type 2.

Zuo J(1), Guo W(2), Wang S(3), Lang Y(3), Wang S(2), Shi X(2), Zhang R(2), Zhao
X(4), Han Y(5), Shao L(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
Qingdao 266003, People's Republic of China; Department of Nephrology, the
Affiliated Qingdao Municipal Hospital of Qingdao University, No.5 Donghai Middle
Road, Qingdao 266071, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Nephrology, the Affiliated Qingdao Municipal Hospital of
Qingdao University, No.5 Donghai Middle Road, Qingdao 266071, People's Republic
of China; Department of Nephrology, the Affiliated Qingdao Municipal Hospital of
Shandong University, No.5 Donghai Middle Road, Qingdao 266071, People's Republic
of China; Central Laboratory, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
Qingdao 266003, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Nursing, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, Qingdao
266003, People's Republic of China.
(4)Central Laboratory, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, Qingdao
266003, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Nephrology, the Affiliated Qingdao Municipal Hospital of
Qingdao University, No.5 Donghai Middle Road, Qingdao 266071, People's Republic
of China; Department of Nephrology, the Affiliated Qingdao Municipal Hospital of
Shandong University, No.5 Donghai Middle Road, Qingdao 266071, People's Republic
of China; Central Laboratory, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
Qingdao 266003, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
zuiaiyoubai@126.com.
(6)Department of Nephrology, the Affiliated Qingdao Municipal Hospital of
Qingdao University, No.5 Donghai Middle Road, Qingdao 266071, People's Republic
of China; Department of Nephrology, the Affiliated Qingdao Municipal Hospital of
Shandong University, No.5 Donghai Middle Road, Qingdao 266071, People's Republic
of China; Central Laboratory, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
Qingdao 266003, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
lepingshao@163.com.

PURPOSE: Bartter syndrome type 2 (BS2) is an autosomal recessive renal tubular
disorder, which is caused by the mutations in KCNJ1. This study was designed to
analyze and describe the genotype and clinical features of five Chinese probands
with BS2.
METHODS: Identify KCNJ1 gene variants by the next generation sequencing and
evaluate their mutation effects according to 2015 American College of Medical
Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) standards and guidelines.
RESULTS: Ten variants including eight novel ones of KCNJ1 gene were found, the
most common type was missense variant. The common symptoms and signs from high
to low incidence were: polydipsia and polyuria (5/5), one of them (1/5)
presented with diabetes insipidus; maternal polyhydramnios and premature
delivery (4/5); growth retardation (3/5). Two patients presented with
hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia; whereas the acid-base
disturbance was absent in the others. One patient had evident parathyroid
hormone (PTH) resistance (hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia and markedly elevated
PTH levels), three presented with PTH overacting (hypercalcemia,
hypophosphatemia and mild elevated PTH levels), and one showed normal blood
calcium and phosphorus concentrations with high-normal PTH levels. All patients
had nephrocalcinosis and/or hypercalciuria, and one of them complicated with
nephrolithiasis. Indomethacin has significant therapeutic effect on the growth
retardation, polydipsia and polyuria and treatment was associated with a
decrease in urine calcium excretion, normalization of electrolyte disturbance
and PTH parameters.
CONCLUSIONS: Ten variants of KCNJ1 gene were identified in five Chinese
probands. These patients had atypical BS phenotype lacking evident metabolic
alkalosis and/or manifesting with PTH overaction/resistance, which reminds
clinicians to carefully differentiate BS2 with other parathyroid disorders. This
is the first report of BS2 from Chinese populations.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2020.10.002
PMID: 33058840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
