---
reference_id: "PMID:37593819"
title: Visual function in children with Joubert syndrome.
authors:
- Morelli F
- Toni F
- Saligari E
- "D'Abrusco F"
- Serpieri V
- Ballante E
- Ruberto G
- Borgatti R
- Valente EM
- Signorini S
- Developmental Neuro-ophthalmology Study Group
journal: Dev Med Child Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/dmcn.15732
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Visual function in children with Joubert syndrome.
**Authors:** Morelli F, Toni F, Saligari E, D'Abrusco F, Serpieri V, Ballante E, Ruberto G, Borgatti R, Valente EM, Signorini S, Developmental Neuro-ophthalmology Study Group
**Journal:** Dev Med Child Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dmcn.15732](https://doi.org/10.1111/dmcn.15732)

## Content

1. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2024 Mar;66(3):379-388. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.15732. Epub
2023  Aug 18.

Visual function in children with Joubert syndrome.

Morelli F(1)(2), Toni F(1), Saligari E(2), D'Abrusco F(3), Serpieri V(3), 
Ballante E(4)(5), Ruberto G(2), Borgatti R(1)(6), Valente EM(3)(7), Signorini 
S(2)(6); Developmental Neuro-ophthalmology Study Group.

Collaborators: Bertone C, Misefari W, Antonini M, Paini D, Perotto E, Luparia A, 
Olivier L, Ercolino E, Pichiecchio A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Behavioural Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy.
(2)Developmental Neuro-ophthalmology Unit, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(4)Department of Political and Social Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy.
(5)BioData Science Center, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(6)Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(7)Neurogenetics Research Unit, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.

AIM: To describe visual function in children with Joubert syndrome and to 
investigate its possible association with diagnostic and developmental aspects.
METHOD: This retrospective cross-sectional work included 59 patients (33 male; 
mean age 9 years 2 months, standard deviation 6 years 3 months, range 4 months 
to 23 years) diagnosed with Joubert syndrome from January 2002 to December 2020. 
Data about clinical (neurological, neuro-ophthalmological, 
developmental/cognitive) and diagnostic (e.g. genetic testing, neuroimaging, 
systemic involvement) evaluations were collected in a data set during a review 
of medical records. Clinical and diagnostic variables were described in terms of 
raw counts and percentages. A χ2 test was conducted to investigate their 
association with neuropsychological skills.
RESULTS: Ocular motor apraxia was highly represented in our cohort (75%), with a 
high prevalence of refractive defects and retinal abnormalities. Developmental 
delay/intellectual disability was frequent (in 69.5% of the sample), associated 
with retinal dystrophy (p = 0.047) and reduced visual acuity both for near 
(p = 0.014) and for far distances (p = 0.017).
INTERPRETATION: On the basis of the relevance of oculomotor and perceptual 
alterations and their impact on overall and cognitive impairment, we encourage 
early and multidisciplinary assessment and follow-up of visual function in 
children with Joubert syndrome. This would help in planning a personalized 
rehabilitation to sustain functional vision. Further studies will be important 
to explore the link between biological aspects and global functioning in 
children with Joubert syndrome.
WHAT THIS PAPER ADDS: Perceptual deficits and oculomotor impairments frequently 
coexist in Joubert syndrome. Retinal dysfunction may be present despite the 
absence of funduscopic abnormalities. Both perceptual and oculomotor impairments 
negatively affect cognitive development in Joubert syndrome.

© 2023 The Authors. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Mac Keith Press.

DOI: 10.1111/dmcn.15732
PMID: 37593819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]