---
reference_id: "PMID:37628281"
title: "Clinical Characterization of Pediatric Erythromelalgia: A Single-Center Case Series."
authors:
- Sun J
- Ocay DD
- Halpin M
- Lobo K
- Frohman DFT
- Donado C
- Brownstein CA
- Genetti CA
- Madden A
- Berde CB
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/children10081282
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Characterization of Pediatric Erythromelalgia: A Single-Center Case Series.
**Authors:** Sun J, Ocay DD, Halpin M, Lobo K, Frohman DFT, Donado C, Brownstein CA, Genetti CA, Madden A, Berde CB
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children10081282](https://doi.org/10.3390/children10081282)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2023 Jul 26;10(8):1282. doi: 10.3390/children10081282.

Clinical Characterization of Pediatric Erythromelalgia: A Single-Center Case 
Series.

Sun J(1), Ocay DD(1)(2), Halpin M(1), Lobo K(1), Frohman DFT(1), Donado C(1)(2), 
Brownstein CA(3), Genetti CA(3), Madden A(3), Berde CB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Critical Care, and Pain Medicine, Boston 
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Anaesthesia, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Division of Genetics and Genomics, 
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Erythromelalgia is a descriptive term for severe burning pain and erythema in 
the distal extremities relieved by cold and exacerbated by heat. Pediatric case 
series to date are relatively small. We extracted and analyzed medical record 
data for 42 pediatric patients to describe clinical characteristics, associated 
conditions, and responses to treatments. Informed consent was obtained according 
to an IRB-approved protocol that included gene discovery. Three patients had 
confirmed Nav1.7 sodium channelopathies, with six additional patients under 
investigation with novel gene candidates. There was a female predominance 
(2.5:1), and the median onset age was 12 years (IQR = 3-14). Patients saw a 
median of three specialists (IQR = 2-3) for a diagnosis. The majority (90%) 
reported bilateral symptoms. Cooling methods usually provided partial relief, 
while heat and exercise exacerbated pain. No medication appeared to be 
consistently effective; commonly prescribed medications included sodium channel 
blockers (n = 37), topical analgesics (n = 26), gabapentin (n = 22), and aspirin 
(n = 15). Based on the currently published literature, we believe this cohort is 
the largest pediatric study of erythromelalgia to date. Many findings are 
consistent with those of previously published case series. Work is in progress 
to establish a prospective cohort and multi-center registry.

DOI: 10.3390/children10081282
PMCID: PMC10453121
PMID: 37628281

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.