---
reference_id: "PMID:32511920"
title: Drug Induced Liver Injury (DILI). Mechanisms and Medicinal Chemistry Avoidance/Mitigation Strategies.
authors:
- Norman BH
journal: J Med Chem
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.0c00524
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Line
- Cell Survival/drug effects
- "Chemical and Drug Induced Liver Injury/prevention & control"
- Drug Discovery/methods
- "Drug Evaluation, Preclinical"
- "Hepatocytes/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Liver/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- "Mitochondria, Liver/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- "Pharmaceutical Preparations/chemistry, metabolism"
- Risk Assessment
- Tissue Distribution
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Drug Induced Liver Injury (DILI). Mechanisms and Medicinal Chemistry Avoidance/Mitigation Strategies.
**Authors:** Norman BH
**Journal:** J Med Chem (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.jmedchem.0c00524](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.0c00524)

## Content

1. J Med Chem. 2020 Oct 22;63(20):11397-11419. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.0c00524.
 Epub 2020 Jun 19.

Drug Induced Liver Injury (DILI). Mechanisms and Medicinal Chemistry 
Avoidance/Mitigation Strategies.

Norman BH(1).

Author information:
(1)Norman Drug Discovery Training and Consulting, LLC, 8540 Bluefin Circle, 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46236, United States.

Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are a common cause of attrition in drug discovery 
and development and drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is a leading cause of 
preclinical and clinical drug terminations. This perspective outlines many of 
the known DILI mechanisms and assessment methods used to evaluate and mitigate 
DILI risk. Literature assessments and retrospective analyses using verified 
DILI-associated drugs from the Liver Tox Knowledge Base (LTKB) have been used to 
derive the predictive value of each end point, along with combination approaches 
of multiple methods. In vitro assays to assess inhibition of the bile salt 
export pump (BSEP), mitotoxicity, reactive metabolite (RM) formation, and 
hepatocyte cytolethality, along with physicochemical properties and clinical 
dose provide useful DILI predictivity. This Perspective also highlights some of 
the strategies used by medicinal chemists to reduce DILI risk during the 
optimization of drug candidates.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.0c00524
PMID: 32511920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]