---
reference_id: "PMID:35000503"
title: Cardiovascular manifestations of hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and hypermobility spectrum disorders.
authors:
- Rashed ER
- Ruiz Maya T
- Black J
- Fettig V
- Kadian-Dodov D
- Olin JW
- Mehta L
- Gelb BD
- Kontorovich AR
journal: Vasc Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/1358863X211067566
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiovascular manifestations of hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and hypermobility spectrum disorders.
**Authors:** Rashed ER, Ruiz Maya T, Black J, Fettig V, Kadian-Dodov D, Olin JW, Mehta L, Gelb BD, Kontorovich AR
**Journal:** Vasc Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1358863X211067566](https://doi.org/10.1177/1358863X211067566)

## Content

1. Vasc Med. 2022 Jun;27(3):283-289. doi: 10.1177/1358863X211067566. Epub 2022
Jan  10.

Cardiovascular manifestations of hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and 
hypermobility spectrum disorders.

Rashed ER(1), Ruiz Maya T(1), Black J(2), Fettig V(1)(2)(3), Kadian-Dodov D(1), 
Olin JW(1), Mehta L(2), Gelb BD(2)(3)(4), Kontorovich AR(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)The Zena and Michael A. Wiener Cardiovascular Institute, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA.
(4)The Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Institute for Genomic Health, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA.

Introduction: Mitral valve prolapse and aortic root dilatation are reported in 
association with hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (hEDS), but the full 
phenotypic spectrum of cardiovascular complications in this condition has not 
been studied in the aftermath of updated nosology and diagnostic criteria. 
Methods: We performed a retrospective review of 258 patients (> 94% adults) 
referred to a multidisciplinary clinic for evaluation of joint hypermobility 
between January 2017 and December 2020 and diagnosed with hEDS or a 
hypermobility spectrum disorder (HSD) to determine the incidence and spectrum of 
cardiovascular involvement. Results: Mitral valve prolapse was present in 7.5% 
and thoracic aortic dilatation in 15.2%. Aortic dilatation was more frequent in 
individuals with hEDS (20.7%) than with HSD (7.7%) and similarly prevalent 
between males and females, although was mild in > 90% of females and 
moderate-to-severe in 50% of males. Five individuals (1.9%) with hEDS/HSD had 
extra-aortic arterial involvement, including cervical artery dissection (CeAD, n 
= 2), spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD, n = 2), and SCAD plus celiac 
artery pseudoaneurysm (n = 1). This is the first series to report the prevalence 
of CeAD and SCAD in hEDS/HSD. Conclusions: Cardiovascular manifestations in 
adults with hEDS/HSD, especially females, are typically mild and readily 
assessed by echocardiography. Since the risk of progression has not yet been 
defined, adults with hEDS/HSD who are found to have aortic dilatation at 
baseline should continue ongoing surveillance to monitor for progressive 
dilatation. Cardiovascular medicine specialists, neurologists, and neurosurgeons 
should consider hEDS/HSD on the differential for patients with CeAD or SCAD who 
also have joint hypermobility.

DOI: 10.1177/1358863X211067566
PMCID: PMC9677229
PMID: 35000503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests The authors 
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.