---
reference_id: "PMID:21460838"
title: Ephrin Bs are essential components of the Reelin pathway to regulate neuronal migration.
authors:
- Sentürk A
- Pfennig S
- Weiss A
- Burk K
- Acker-Palmer A
journal: Nature
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/nature09874
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cell Adhesion Molecules, Neuronal/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Movement
- "Cerebral Cortex/cytology, embryology, metabolism"
- "Ephrin-B1/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Ephrin-B2/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Ephrin-B3/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Ephrins/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Extracellular Matrix Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- LDL-Receptor Related Proteins/metabolism
- Ligands
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Neurons/cytology, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- Phosphorylation
- Protein Binding
- "Receptors, LDL/metabolism"
- Reelin Protein
- "Serine Endopeptidases/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ephrin Bs are essential components of the Reelin pathway to regulate neuronal migration.
**Authors:** Sentürk A, Pfennig S, Weiss A, Burk K, Acker-Palmer A
**Journal:** Nature (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature09874](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09874)

## Content

1. Nature. 2011 Apr 21;472(7343):356-60. doi: 10.1038/nature09874. Epub 2011 Apr
3.

Ephrin Bs are essential components of the Reelin pathway to regulate neuronal
migration.

Sentürk A(1), Pfennig S, Weiss A, Burk K, Acker-Palmer A.

Author information:
(1)Frankfurt Institute for Molecular Life Sciences and Institute of Cell Biology
and Neuroscience, Goethe University Frankfurt, Max-von-Laue-Str. 9, D-60438,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2011 Oct 13;478(7368):274.

Coordinated migration of neurons in the developing and adult brain is essential
for its proper function. The secreted glycoprotein Reelin (also known as RELN)
guides migration of neurons by binding to two lipoprotein receptors, the
very-low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR) and apolipoprotein E receptor 2
(ApoER2, also known as LRP8). Loss of Reelin function in humans results in the
severe developmental disorder lissencephaly and it has also been associated with
other neurological disorders such as epilepsy, schizophrenia and Alzheimer's
disease. The molecular mechanisms by which Reelin activates its receptors and
controls cellular functions are largely unknown. Here we show that the neuronal
guidance cues ephrin B proteins are essential for Reelin signalling during the
development of laminated structures in the brain. We show that ephrin Bs
genetically interact with Reelin. Notably, compound mouse mutants (Reln(+/-);
Efnb3(-/-) or Reln(+/-); Efnb2(-/-)) and triple ephrin B1, B2, B3 knockouts show
neuronal migration defects that recapitulate the ones observed in the neocortex,
hippocampus and cerebellum of the reeler mouse. Mechanistically, we show that
Reelin binds to the extracellular domain of ephrin Bs, which associate at the
membrane with VLDLR and ApoER2 in neurons. Clustering of ephrin Bs leads to the
recruitment and phosphorylation of Dab1 which is necessary for Reelin
signalling. Conversely, loss of function of ephrin Bs severely impairs
Reelin-induced Dab1 phosphorylation. Importantly, activation of ephrin Bs can
rescue the reeler neuronal migration defects in the absence of Reelin protein.
Together, our results identify ephrin Bs as essential components of the Reelin
receptor/signalling pathway to control neuronal migration during the development
of the nervous system.

DOI: 10.1038/nature09874
PMID: 21460838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
