---
reference_id: "PMID:37163979"
title: Depletion of WFS1 compromises mitochondrial function in hiPSC-derived neuronal models of Wolfram syndrome.
authors:
- Zatyka M
- Rosenstock TR
- Sun C
- Palhegyi AM
- Hughes GW
- Lara-Reyna S
- Astuti D
- di Maio A
- Sciauvaud A
- Korsgen ME
- Stanulovic V
- Kocak G
- Rak M
- Pourtoy-Brasselet S
- Winter K
- Varga T
- Jarrige M
- Polvèche H
- Correia J
- Frickel EM
- Hoogenkamp M
- Ward DG
- Aubry L
- Barrett T
- Sarkar S
journal: Stem Cell Reports
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2023.04.002
keywords:
- Humans
- "Wolfram Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- Neurodegenerative Diseases/metabolism
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Neurons/metabolism
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Depletion of WFS1 compromises mitochondrial function in hiPSC-derived neuronal models of Wolfram syndrome.
**Authors:** Zatyka M, Rosenstock TR, Sun C, Palhegyi AM, Hughes GW, Lara-Reyna S, Astuti D, di Maio A, Sciauvaud A, Korsgen ME, Stanulovic V, Kocak G, Rak M, Pourtoy-Brasselet S, Winter K, Varga T, Jarrige M, Polvèche H, Correia J, Frickel EM, Hoogenkamp M, Ward DG, Aubry L, Barrett T, Sarkar S
**Journal:** Stem Cell Reports (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.stemcr.2023.04.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stemcr.2023.04.002)

## Content

1. Stem Cell Reports. 2023 May 9;18(5):1090-1106. doi:
10.1016/j.stemcr.2023.04.002.

Depletion of WFS1 compromises mitochondrial function in hiPSC-derived neuronal
models of Wolfram syndrome.

Zatyka M(1), Rosenstock TR(1), Sun C(1), Palhegyi AM(1), Hughes GW(1),
Lara-Reyna S(2), Astuti D(1), di Maio A(3), Sciauvaud A(4), Korsgen ME(1),
Stanulovic V(1), Kocak G(1), Rak M(5), Pourtoy-Brasselet S(6), Winter K(1),
Varga T(1), Jarrige M(7), Polvèche H(6), Correia J(8), Frickel EM(2), Hoogenkamp
M(1), Ward DG(1), Aubry L(4), Barrett T(9), Sarkar S(10).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, Institute of Biomedical Research,
College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston,
Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.
(2)Institute of Microbiology and Infection, University of Birmingham, Birmingham
B15 2TT, UK.
(3)Tech Hub Microscopy Facility, College of Medical and Dental Sciences,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.
(4)INSERM UMR 861, I-STEM, AFM, 91100 Corbeil-Essonnes, France; Université
Paris-Saclay, INSERM, University Evry, Institut des cellules Souches pour le
Traitement et l'Etude des maladies Monogéniques, 91100 Corbeil-Essonnes, France.
(5)Université Paris Cité, INSERM, NeuroDiderot, 75019 Paris, France.
(6)CECS/AFM, I-STEM, 91100 Corbeil-Essonnes, France.
(7)INSERM UMR 861, I-STEM, AFM, 91100 Corbeil-Essonnes, France; Université
Paris-Saclay, INSERM, University Evry, Institut des cellules Souches pour le
Traitement et l'Etude des maladies Monogéniques, 91100 Corbeil-Essonnes, France;
CECS/AFM, I-STEM, 91100 Corbeil-Essonnes, France.
(8)COMPARE Advanced Imaging Facility, College of Medical and Dental Sciences,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.
(9)Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, Institute of Biomedical Research,
College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston,
Birmingham B15 2TT, UK; Department of Endocrinology, Birmingham Women's and
Children's Hospital, Steelhouse Lane, Birmingham B4 6NH, UK.
(10)Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, Institute of Biomedical Research,
College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston,
Birmingham B15 2TT, UK. Electronic address: s.sarkar@bham.ac.uk.

Mitochondrial dysfunction involving mitochondria-associated ER membrane (MAM)
dysregulation is implicated in the pathogenesis of late-onset neurodegenerative
diseases, but understanding is limited for rare early-onset conditions. Loss of
the MAM-resident protein WFS1 causes Wolfram syndrome (WS), a rare early-onset
neurodegenerative disease that has been linked to mitochondrial abnormalities.
Here we demonstrate mitochondrial dysfunction in human induced pluripotent stem
cell-derived neuronal cells of WS patients. VDAC1 is identified to interact with
WFS1, whereas loss of this interaction in WS cells could compromise
mitochondrial function. Restoring WFS1 levels in WS cells reinstates WFS1-VDAC1
interaction, which correlates with an increase in MAMs and mitochondrial network
that could positively affect mitochondrial function. Genetic rescue by WFS1
overexpression or pharmacological agents modulating mitochondrial function
improves the viability and bioenergetics of WS neurons. Our data implicate a
role of WFS1 in regulating mitochondrial functionality and highlight a
therapeutic intervention for WS and related rare diseases with mitochondrial
defects.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2023.04.002
PMCID: PMC10202695
PMID: 37163979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
