---
reference_id: PMID:21896655
title: Transcriptional regulation of xenobiotic detoxification in Drosophila.
authors:
- Misra JR
- Horner MA
- Lam G
- Thummel CS
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1101/gad.17280911
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcriptional regulation of xenobiotic detoxification in Drosophila.
**Authors:** Misra JR, Horner MA, Lam G, Thummel CS
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.17280911](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.17280911)

## Content

1. Genes Dev. 2011 Sep 1;25(17):1796-806. doi: 10.1101/gad.17280911.

Transcriptional regulation of xenobiotic detoxification in Drosophila.

Misra JR(1), Horner MA, Lam G, Thummel CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt 
Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

Living organisms, from bacteria to humans, display a coordinated transcriptional 
response to xenobiotic exposure, inducing enzymes and transporters that 
facilitate detoxification. Several transcription factors have been identified in 
vertebrates that contribute to this regulatory response. In contrast, little is 
known about this pathway in insects. Here we show that the Drosophila Nrf2 
(NF-E2-related factor 2) ortholog CncC (cap 'n' collar isoform-C) is a central 
regulator of xenobiotic detoxification responses. A binding site for CncC and 
its heterodimer partner Maf (muscle aponeurosis fibromatosis) is sufficient and 
necessary for robust transcriptional responses to three xenobiotic compounds: 
phenobarbital (PB), chlorpromazine, and caffeine. Genetic manipulations that 
alter the levels of CncC or its negative regulator, Keap1 (Kelch-like 
ECH-associated protein 1), lead to predictable changes in xenobiotic-inducible 
gene expression. Transcriptional profiling studies reveal that more than half of 
the genes regulated by PB are also controlled by CncC. Consistent with these 
effects on detoxification gene expression, activation of the CncC/Keap1 pathway 
in Drosophila is sufficient to confer resistance to the lethal effects of the 
pesticide malathion. These studies establish a molecular mechanism for the 
regulation of xenobiotic detoxification in Drosophila and have implications for 
controlling insect populations and the spread of insect-borne human diseases.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.17280911
PMCID: PMC3175716
PMID: 21896655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]