---
reference_id: "PMID:33423643"
title: "Alport Syndrome: A Comprehensive Review on Genetics, Pathophysiology, Histology, Clinical and Therapeutic Perspectives."
authors:
- Pedrosa AL
- Bitencourt L
- Paranhos RM
- Leitáo CA
- Ferreira GC
- Simões E Silva AC
journal: Curr Med Chem
year: '2021'
doi: 10.2174/0929867328666210108113500
keywords:
- Basement Membrane
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- Humans
- Kidney
- Mutation
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alport Syndrome: A Comprehensive Review on Genetics, Pathophysiology, Histology, Clinical and Therapeutic Perspectives.
**Authors:** Pedrosa AL, Bitencourt L, Paranhos RM, Leitáo CA, Ferreira GC, Simões E Silva AC
**Journal:** Curr Med Chem (2021)
**DOI:** [10.2174/0929867328666210108113500](https://doi.org/10.2174/0929867328666210108113500)

## Content

1. Curr Med Chem. 2021;28(27):5602-5624. doi: 10.2174/0929867328666210108113500.

Alport Syndrome: A Comprehensive Review on Genetics, Pathophysiology, Histology,
Clinical and Therapeutic Perspectives.

Pedrosa AL(1), Bitencourt L(1), Paranhos RM(1), Leitáo CA(1), Ferreira GC(1),
Simões E Silva AC(1).

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Medical Investigation, Faculty of Medicine,
Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG), Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Alport syndrome (AS) is a disease caused by mutations in COL4A3,
COL4A4 or COL4A5, the genes that encode distinct chains of type IV collagen. The
vast majority of cases present as an inherited disorder, although de novo
mutations are present in around 10% of the cases.
METHODS: This non-systematic review summarizes recent evidence on AS. We discuss
the genetic and pathophysiology of AS, clinical manifestations, histopathology,
diagnostic protocols, conventional treatment and prognostic markers of the
disease. In addition, we summarize experimental findings with novel therapeutic
perspectives for AS.
RESULTS: The deficient synthesis of collagen heterotrimers throughout the
organism leads to impaired basement membranes (BM) in several organs. As a
result, the disease manifests in a wide range of conditions, particularly renal,
ocular and auricular alterations. Moreover, leiomyomatosis and vascular
abnormalities may also be present as atypical presentations. In this framework,
diagnosis can be performed based on clinical evaluation, skin or renal biopsy
and genetic screening, the latter being the gold standard. There are no formally
approved treatments for AS, even though therapeutic options have been described
to delay disease progression and increase life expectancy. Novel therapeutic
targets under pre-clinical investigation included paricalcitol, sodium-glucose
co-transporter- 2 inhibitors, bardoxolone methyl, anti-microRNA-21
oligonucleotides, recombinant human pentraxin-2, lysyl oxidase-like-2 blockers,
hydroxypropyl-b-cyclodextrin, sodium 4-phenylbutyrate and stem cell therapy.
CONCLUSION: AS is still a greatly under and misdiagnosed disorder. The
pathophysiology is still not fully understood and genetics of the disease also
have some gaps. Up to know, there is no specific and effective treatment for AS.
Further studies are necessary to establish novel and effective therapeutic
protocols.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/0929867328666210108113500
PMID: 33423643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
