---
reference_id: "PMID:29147600"
title: "Osteoglophonic Dysplasia: Phenotypic and Radiological Clues."
authors:
- Kuthiroly S
- Yesodharan D
- Ghosh A
- White KE
- Nampoothiri S
journal: J Pediatr Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1055/s-0037-1602816
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteoglophonic Dysplasia: Phenotypic and Radiological Clues.
**Authors:** Kuthiroly S, Yesodharan D, Ghosh A, White KE, Nampoothiri S
**Journal:** J Pediatr Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0037-1602816](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0037-1602816)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Genet. 2017 Dec;6(4):247-251. doi: 10.1055/s-0037-1602816. Epub 2017
 May 5.

Osteoglophonic Dysplasia: Phenotypic and Radiological Clues.

Kuthiroly S(1), Yesodharan D(1), Ghosh A(2), White KE(3), Nampoothiri S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and 
Research Center, Cochin, Kerala, India.
(2)Department of Endocrinology Medicine, Ananthapuri Hospitals and Research 
Centre, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India.
(3)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States.

Osteoglophonic dysplasia (OD) is an extremely rare, skeletal dysplasia with an 
autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. Rhizomelic dwarfism, craniosynostosis, 
impacted teeth, hypodontia or anodontia, and multiple nonossifying bone lesions 
are the salient features of this condition. We report a 14-year-old girl with 
clinical and radiological features consistent with OD. She presented with 
disproportionate short stature, craniosynostosis, a prominent supraorbital 
ridge, delayed teeth eruption, hypodontia, and multiple nonossifying bone 
lesions in the femur, tibia, and fibula. She had hypophosphatemia, which is a 
known association in this dysplasia. She also had advanced bone age, which is an 
unreported feature of this dysplasia. This condition is caused by activating 
mutations in FGFR1 . A missense mutation was detected in the FGFR1 , 
NM_001174067 ( FGFR1 _v001):c.1115G > A [p.(Cys372Tyr)] confirming the 
diagnosis; this is the first mutation-proven case to be reported from India.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0037-1602816
PMCID: PMC5687321
PMID: 29147600

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None.