---
reference_id: "PMID:15525658"
title: Orexin loss in Huntington's disease.
authors:
- Petersén A
- Gil J
- Maat-Schieman ML
- Björkqvist M
- Tanila H
- Araújo IM
- Smith R
- Popovic N
- Wierup N
- Norlén P
- Li JY
- Roos RA
- Sundler F
- Mulder H
- Brundin P
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Orexin loss in Huntington's disease.
**Authors:** Petersén A, Gil J, Maat-Schieman ML, Björkqvist M, Tanila H, Araújo IM, Smith R, Popovic N, Wierup N, Norlén P, Li JY, Roos RA, Sundler F, Mulder H, Brundin P
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddi004](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddi004)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Jan 1;14(1):39-47. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi004. Epub 2004 Nov
3.

Orexin loss in Huntington's disease.

Petersén A(1), Gil J, Maat-Schieman ML, Björkqvist M, Tanila H, Araújo IM, Smith 
R, Popovic N, Wierup N, Norlén P, Li JY, Roos RA, Sundler F, Mulder H, Brundin 
P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Section for Neuronal Survival, Lund, 
Sweden. asa.petersen@mphy.lu.se

Huntington's disease (HD) is a devastating neurodegenerative disorder caused by 
an expanded CAG repeat in the gene encoding huntingtin, a protein of unknown 
function. Mutant huntingtin forms intracellular aggregates and is associated 
with neuronal death in select brain regions. The most studied mouse model (R6/2) 
of HD replicates many features of the disease, but has been reported to exhibit 
only very little neuronal death. We describe for the first time a dramatic 
atrophy and loss of orexin neurons in the lateral hypothalamus of R6/2 mice. 
Importantly, we also found a significant atrophy and loss of orexin neurons in 
Huntington patients. Like animal models and patients with impaired orexin 
function, the R6/2 mice were narcoleptic. Both the number of orexin neurons in 
the lateral hypothalamus and the levels of orexin in the cerebrospinal fluid 
were reduced by 72% in end-stage R6/2 mice compared with wild-type littermates, 
suggesting that orexin could be used as a biomarker reflecting 
neurodegeneration. Our results show that the loss of orexin is a novel and 
potentially very important pathology in HD.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddi004
PMID: 15525658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]