---
reference_id: "PMID:37930417"
title: "Nephronophthisis: a pathological and genetic perspective."
authors:
- Wolf MTF
- Bonsib SM
- Larsen CP
- Hildebrandt F
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-023-06174-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nephronophthisis: a pathological and genetic perspective.
**Authors:** Wolf MTF, Bonsib SM, Larsen CP, Hildebrandt F
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-023-06174-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-023-06174-8)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2024 Jul;39(7):1977-2000. doi: 10.1007/s00467-023-06174-8.
Epub  2023 Nov 6.

Nephronophthisis: a pathological and genetic perspective.

Wolf MTF(1)(2), Bonsib SM(3), Larsen CP(3), Hildebrandt F(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, University of Texas, Southwestern Medical 
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX, 75390, USA. 
matthias.wolf@utsouthwestern.edu.
(2)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, C.S. Mott Children's Hospital, University 
of Michigan, 1150 W. Medical Center Dr, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. 
matthias.wolf@utsouthwestern.edu.
(3)Arkana Laboratories, Little Rock, AR, USA.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, USA.

Nephronophthisis (NPHP) is an autosomal recessive cystic kidney disease and is 
one of the most frequent genetic causes for kidney failure (KF) in children and 
adolescents. Over 20 genes cause NPHP and over 90 genes contribute to renal 
ciliopathies often involving multiple organs. About 15-20% of NPHP patients have 
additional extrarenal symptoms affecting other organs than the kidneys. The 
involvement of additional organ systems in syndromic forms of NPHP is explained 
by shared expression of most NPHP gene products in centrosomes and primary 
cilia, a sensory organelle present in most mammalian cells. This finding 
resulted in the classification of NPHP as a ciliopathy. If extrarenal symptoms 
are present in addition to NPHP, these disorders are defined as NPHP-related 
ciliopathies (NPHP-RC) and can involve the retina (e.g., with Senior-Løken 
syndrome), CNS (central nervous system) (e.g., with Joubert syndrome), liver 
(e.g., Boichis and Arima syndromes), or bone (e.g., Mainzer-Saldino and 
Sensenbrenner syndromes). This review focuses on the pathological findings and 
the recent genetic advances in NPHP and NPHP-RC. Different mechanisms and 
signaling pathways are involved in NPHP ranging from planar cell polarity, sonic 
hedgehog signaling (Shh), DNA damage response pathway, Hippo, mTOR, and cAMP 
signaling. A number of therapeutic interventions appear to be promising, ranging 
from vasopressin receptor 2 antagonists such as tolvaptan, cyclin-dependent 
kinase inhibitors such as roscovitine, Hh agonists such as purmorphamine, and 
mTOR inhibitors such as rapamycin.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to International Pediatric 
Nephrology Association.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-023-06174-8
PMID: 37930417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]