---
reference_id: "PMID:26813606"
title: Col4a1 mutations cause progressive retinal neovascular defects and retinopathy.
authors:
- Alavi MV
- Mao M
- Pawlikowski BT
- Kvezereli M
- Duncan JL
- Libby RT
- John SW
- Gould DB
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/srep18602
keywords:
- Animals
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Disease Progression
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- Ophthalmoscopes
- Phenotype
- "Retina/metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Retinal Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Col4a1 mutations cause progressive retinal neovascular defects and retinopathy.
**Authors:** Alavi MV, Mao M, Pawlikowski BT, Kvezereli M, Duncan JL, Libby RT, John SW, Gould DB
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/srep18602](https://doi.org/10.1038/srep18602)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 27;6:18602. doi: 10.1038/srep18602.

Col4a1 mutations cause progressive retinal neovascular defects and retinopathy.

Alavi MV(1), Mao M(1), Pawlikowski BT(1), Kvezereli M(1), Duncan JL(1), Libby 
RT(2), John SW(3), Gould DB(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, School of Medicine, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94143.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, 14642.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME 
04609.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Institute for Human Genetics, School of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94143.

Mutations in collagen, type IV, alpha 1 (COL4A1), a major component of basement 
membranes, cause multisystem disorders in humans and mice. In the eye, these 
include anterior segment dysgenesis, optic nerve hypoplasia and retinal vascular 
tortuosity. Here we investigate the retinal pathology in mice carrying 
dominant-negative Col4a1 mutations. To this end, we examined retinas 
longitudinally in vivo using fluorescein angiography, funduscopy and optical 
coherence tomography. We assessed retinal function by electroretinography and 
studied the retinal ultrastructural pathology. Retinal examinations revealed 
serous chorioretinopathy, retinal hemorrhages, fibrosis or signs of pathogenic 
angiogenesis with chorioretinal anastomosis in up to approximately 90% of Col4a1 
mutant eyes depending on age and the specific mutation. To identify the 
cell-type responsible for pathogenesis we generated a conditional Col4a1 
mutation and determined that primary vascular defects underlie Col4a1-associated 
retinopathy. We also found focal activation of Müller cells and increased 
expression of pro-angiogenic factors in retinas from Col4a1(+/Δex41)mice. 
Together, our findings suggest that patients with COL4A1 and COL4A2 mutations 
may be at elevated risk of retinal hemorrhages and that retinal examinations may 
be useful for identifying patients with COL4A1 and COL4A2 mutations who are also 
at elevated risk of hemorrhagic strokes.

DOI: 10.1038/srep18602
PMCID: PMC4728690
PMID: 26813606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]