---
reference_id: PMID:18992590
title: Lithogenesis and bile metabolism.
authors:
- Lambou-Gianoukos S
- Heller SJ
journal: Surg Clin North Am
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.suc.2008.07.009
keywords:
- Bile/metabolism
- Bile Acids and Salts/biosynthesis
- "Gallstones/etiology, metabolism"
- Humans
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lithogenesis and bile metabolism.
**Authors:** Lambou-Gianoukos S, Heller SJ
**Journal:** Surg Clin North Am (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.suc.2008.07.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.suc.2008.07.009)

## Content

1. Surg Clin North Am. 2008 Dec;88(6):1175-94, vii. doi:
10.1016/j.suc.2008.07.009.

Lithogenesis and bile metabolism.

Lambou-Gianoukos S(1), Heller SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Tufts Medical Center, 800 Washington Street, Boston, 
MA 02111, USA.

Gallstone disease exacts a considerable financial and social burden worldwide 
leading to frequent physician visits and hospitalizations. Based on their 
composition, gallstones are categorized as cholesterol, black pigment, and brown 
pigment, with each category having a unique structural, epidemiologic, and risk 
factor profile. Cholesterol crystal formation requires the presence of one or 
more of the following: (a) cholesterol supersaturation, (b) accelerated 
nucleation, or (c) gallbladder hypomotility/bile stasis. Some risk factors for 
cholesterol stones include age, gender, genetics, obesity, rapid weight loss, 
and ileal disease. Generally, pigment stones are formed by the precipitation of 
bilirubin in bile, with black stones associated with chronic hemolytic states, 
cirrhosis, Gilbert syndrome, or cystic fibrosis, and brown stones associated 
with chronic bacterial or parasitic infections.

DOI: 10.1016/j.suc.2008.07.009
PMID: 18992590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]