---
reference_id: "PMID:40474278"
title: "Oral phenotype in SATB2-associated syndrome: cross-sectional study of the French cohort."
authors:
- Vegas N
- Rio M
- Adnot P
- Soupre V
- Petit F
- Ghoumid J
- Toutain A
- Dieterich K
- Marey I
- Gilbert-Dussardier B
- Le Guyader G
- Francannet C
- Schaefer E
- Perrin L
- Nizon M
- Beneteau C
- Genevieve D
- Willems M
- Faivre L
- Grimaldi M
- Melki J
- Stoeva R
- Putoux A
- Pons L
- Benistan K
- Amiel J
- Abadie V
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03609-3
keywords:
- Humans
- Matrix Attachment Region Binding Proteins/genetics
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Male
- "Child, Preschool"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Phenotype
- Infant
- Child
- France
- Retrospective Studies
- Cohort Studies
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Cleft Palate/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Pierre Robin Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oral phenotype in SATB2-associated syndrome: cross-sectional study of the French cohort.
**Authors:** Vegas N, Rio M, Adnot P, Soupre V, Petit F, Ghoumid J, Toutain A, Dieterich K, Marey I, Gilbert-Dussardier B, Le Guyader G, Francannet C, Schaefer E, Perrin L, Nizon M, Beneteau C, Genevieve D, Willems M, Faivre L, Grimaldi M, Melki J, Stoeva R, Putoux A, Pons L, Benistan K, Amiel J, Abadie V
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-025-03609-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-025-03609-3)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2025 Jun 5;20(1):278. doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03609-3.

Oral phenotype in SATB2-associated syndrome: cross-sectional study of the French 
cohort.

Vegas N(1)(2)(3)(4), Rio M(5), Adnot P(6)(7)(8), Soupre V(8)(9), Petit F(10), 
Ghoumid J(10), Toutain A(11), Dieterich K(12), Marey I(12), Gilbert-Dussardier 
B(13), Le Guyader G(13), Francannet C(14), Schaefer E(15), Perrin L(16), Nizon 
M(17), Beneteau C(17), Genevieve D(18), Willems M(18), Faivre L(19), Grimaldi 
M(19), Melki J(20), Stoeva R(21), Putoux A(22), Pons L(23), Benistan K(24), 
Amiel J(25)(7)(5), Abadie V(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)General Pediatrics Unit, Necker University Hospital, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 149 rue de Sèvres, 75015, Paris, France. 
nancy.vegas@aphp.fr.
(2)Malformation and Embryology Laboratory, IMAGINE Institute, Paris, France. 
nancy.vegas@aphp.fr.
(3)Université Paris Cité, Paris, France. nancy.vegas@aphp.fr.
(4)Reference Centre for Rare Diseases Centre de Référence Maladies Rares « 
Syndromes de Pierre Robin et troubles de succion-déglutition congénitaux », 
Necker University Hospital, Paris, France. nancy.vegas@aphp.fr.
(5)Medical Genetics Department, Necker University Hospital, Paris, France.
(6)General Pediatrics Unit, Necker University Hospital, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 149 rue de Sèvres, 75015, Paris, France.
(7)Université Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(8)Reference Centre for Rare Diseases Centre de Référence Maladies Rares « 
Syndromes de Pierre Robin et troubles de succion-déglutition congénitaux », 
Necker University Hospital, Paris, France.
(9)Maxillo-Facial and Plastic Surgery Unit, Necker University Hospital, Paris, 
France.
(10)Clinique de Génétique Guy Fontaine, CHU Lille, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, 
Lille, France.
(11)Service de Génétique, CHRU de Tours, Hôpital Bretonneau, Tours, France.
(12)Unité de Génétique Clinique, CHU Grenoble, Hôpital Couple-Enfant, Grenoble, 
France.
(13)Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
(14)Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Clermont-Ferrand, Hôpital d'Estaing, 
Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(15)Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Strasbourg, Hôpital de Hautepierre, 
Strasbourg, France.
(16)Unité de Génétique Clinique, CHU Paris, Hôpital Robert Debré, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(17)Unité de Génétique Clinique, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France.
(18)Département de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Montpellier, Hôpital Arnaud de 
Villeneuve, Montpellier, France.
(19)Centre de Génétique, Hôpital d'enfants, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Hôpital 
François Mitterand, Dijon, France.
(20)Unité de Génétique Médicale - Médecine néonatale, Centre Hospitalier Sud 
Francilien and INSERM, UMR-1195, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(21)Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale et Cytogénétique, Centre Hospitalier Le 
Mans, Le Mans, France.
(22)Service de Génétique, CHU de Lyon, GH Est-Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Lyon, 
France.
(23)Laboratoire de Biologie Médicale, Unité Fonctionnelle de Cytogénétique, 
Centre Hospitalier de Valence, Valence, France.
(24)Service de Génétique, Hôpital Raymond Poincaré, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux 
de Paris, Garches, France.
(25)Malformation and Embryology Laboratory, IMAGINE Institute, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: SATB2-associated syndrome (SAS) results from various mutations of 
the SATB2 gene and associates a neurodevelopmental disorder including major 
speech delay, intellectual disability, and behavioral problems with dental 
anomalies, sometimes a cleft palate, risk of osteoporosis, and facial 
dysmorphism. The principal objective of this study was to describe the oral 
phenotype of young children with SATB2-associated syndrome, especially in terms 
of orofacial malformation of Robin Sequence (RS) spectrum (bifid uvula, cleft 
palate, or RS, dental malformation, feeding and communication, with data from a 
national cohort. The secondary objective was to determine whether feeding and 
communication disorders were more severe when associated with an orofacial 
malformation of RS spectrum.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective cross-sectional study among the largest 
possible cohort of patients with a mutation of the SATB2 gene in France. A 
questionnaire completed by the referring physicians and by telephone with 
parents enabled us to collect the following clinical information: (1) orofacial 
morphology, feeding difficulties, and pharyngeal functioning from birth to 
3 years, (2) communication and language from 0 to 6 years, (3) speech 
development at the last examination.
RESULTS: The study included 40 patients. Early and persistent feeding 
difficulties were found in 55% of the children. Communication was abnormal from 
the first months of life, with poor babbling in 85% of them. A major language 
delay was described in all patients; 65% had a vocabulary of 10 words or less. 
An anomaly of RS spectrum was found in half the cases, and dental malformations 
were described in 90%. Feeding difficulties and language delay were greater in 
the group with one or more orofacial malformations than the group with none.
CONCLUSION: This study confirmed the severity of oral involvement, affecting 
feeding and speech simultaneously, in individuals with SAS. It raises the 
question of why the oral phenotype involving feeding and speech is more severe 
in the presence of cleft palate or RS. We recommend close monitoring of 
prelanguage communication in infants with apparently isolated cleft palate or RS 
and the search for SATB2 impairment when a cleft palate or RS is found, 
especially in the prenatal period.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-025-03609-3
PMCID: PMC12139113
PMID: 40474278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Not applicable. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing 
interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.