---
reference_id: "PMID:31943822"
title: DNA Vaccination With Hsp70 Protects Against Systemic Lupus Erythematosus in (NZB × NZW)F1 Mice.
authors:
- Liu A
- Ferretti C
- Shi FD
- Cohen IR
- Quintana FJ
- La Cava A
journal: Arthritis Rheumatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/art.41202
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DNA Vaccination With Hsp70 Protects Against Systemic Lupus Erythematosus in (NZB × NZW)F1 Mice.
**Authors:** Liu A, Ferretti C, Shi FD, Cohen IR, Quintana FJ, La Cava A
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheumatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.41202](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.41202)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2020 Jun;72(6):997-1002. doi: 10.1002/art.41202. Epub
2020  Apr 30.

DNA Vaccination With Hsp70 Protects Against Systemic Lupus Erythematosus in (NZB 
× NZW)F1 Mice.

Liu A(1), Ferretti C(1), Shi FD(2), Cohen IR(3), Quintana FJ(4), La Cava A(1).

Author information:
(1)University of California, Los Angeles.
(2)Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix, Arizona.
(3)The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.
(4)Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts.

OBJECTIVE: To address whether a targeted modulation of the abnormal expression 
of Hsp70 and autoantibodies against this molecule in systemic lupus 
erythematosus can influence disease.
METHODS: Lupus-prone (NZB × NZW)F1 mice that had been DNA-vaccinated with 
plasmids encoding Hsp70 and controls were monitored for lupus disease parameters 
including anti-double stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) autoantibodies and cytokines 
using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and for kidney function and pathology. 
The phenotypic and numerical changes in relevant immune cells were evaluated by 
flow cytometry, and cell function was assessed.
RESULTS: Mice that had been DNA-vaccinated with Hsp70 displayed marked 
suppression of anti-dsDNA antibody production, reduced renal disease, and 
antiinflammatory responses that are associated with a significantly extended 
survival, compared to controls. These protective effects in Hsp70-vaccinated 
mice were associated with an induction of tolerogenic immune responses and an 
expansion of functional Treg cells.
CONCLUSION: DNA vaccination with Hsp70 suppresses murine lupus by inducing 
tolerogenic immune responses and antiinflammatory immune responses associated 
with reduced disease manifestations and increased mouse survival.

© 2020, American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.41202
PMID: 31943822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]