---
reference_id: "PMID:25748038"
title: Autoimmune peripheral neuropathies.
authors:
- Bourque PR
- Chardon JW
- Massie R
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2015.02.039
keywords:
- "Autoantibodies/blood, immunology"
- "Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/blood, diagnosis, immunology"
- "Guillain-Barre Syndrome/blood, diagnosis, immunology"
- Humans
- "Miller Fisher Syndrome/blood, diagnosis, immunology"
- "Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/blood, diagnosis, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune peripheral neuropathies.
**Authors:** Bourque PR, Chardon JW, Massie R
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2015.02.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2015.02.039)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2015 Sep 20;449:37-42. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2015.02.039. Epub
2015  Mar 4.

Autoimmune peripheral neuropathies.

Bourque PR(1), Chardon JW(2), Massie R(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, The Ottawa Hospital, 1053 Carling Avenue, Ottawa, ON 
K1Y 4E9, Canada.
(2)Division of Neurology, The Ottawa Hospital, 1053 Carling Avenue, Ottawa, ON 
K1Y 4E9, Canada; Department of Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Eastern 
Ontario, 401 Smyth Road, Ottawa, ON, K1H 8L1, Canada.
(3)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute, 
McGill University, 3801 University Street, Montreal, QC H3A 2B4, Canada.

Peripheral nervous system axons and myelin have unique potential protein, 
proteolipid, and ganglioside antigenic determinants. Despite the existence of a 
blood-nerve barrier, both humoral and cellular immunity can be directed against 
peripheral axons and myelin. Molecular mimicry may be triggered at the systemic 
level, as was best demonstrated in the case of bacterial oligosaccharides. The 
classification of immune neuropathy has been expanded to take into account 
specific syndromes that share unique clinical, electrophysiological, prognostic 
and serological features. Guillain-Barré syndrome encompasses a classical 
syndrome of acute demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy and many variants: axonal 
motor and sensory, axonal motor, Miller-Fisher, autonomic, and sensory. 
Similarly, chronic immune neuropathy is composed of classic chronic inflammatory 
demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy and variants characterized as multifocal 
(motor or sensorimotor), sensory, distal symmetric, and syndromes associated 
with monoclonal gammopathy. Among putative biomarkers, myelin associated 
glycoprotein and several anti-ganglioside autoantibodies have shown 
statistically significant associations with specific neuropathic syndromes. 
Currently, the strongest biomarker associations are those linking Miller-Fisher 
syndrome with anti-GQ1b, multifocal motor neuropathy with anti-GM1, and distal 
acquired symmetric neuropathy with anti-MAG antibodies. Many other autoantibody 
associations have been proposed, but presently lack sufficient specificity and 
sensitivity to qualify as biomarkers. This field of research has contributed to 
the antigenic characterization of motor and sensory functional systems, as well 
as helping to define immune neuropathic syndromes with widely different clinical 
presentation, prognosis and response to therapy. Serologic biomarkers are likely 
to become even more relevant with the advent of new targeted forms of 
immunotherapy, such as monoclonal antibodies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2015.02.039
PMID: 25748038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]