---
reference_id: "PMID:18328979"
title: Spondylo-epi-metaphyseal dysplasia.
authors:
- Cormier-Daire V
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.berh.2007.12.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spondylo-epi-metaphyseal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Cormier-Daire V
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.berh.2007.12.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.berh.2007.12.009)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2008 Mar;22(1):33-44. doi: 
10.1016/j.berh.2007.12.009.

Spondylo-epi-metaphyseal dysplasia.

Cormier-Daire V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and INSERM U781, Université Paris V, Hopital 
Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France. cormier@necker.fr

The spondylo-epi-metaphyseal dysplasias (SEMD) are a heterogeneous group of 
disorders comprising more than 20 distinct entities with differing modes of 
inheritance, all defined by the combination of vertebral, epiphyseal and 
metaphyseal abnormalities. The presenting symptom of SEMD patients is usually 
disproportionate short stature. The diagnosis is either based on the specificity 
of the skeletal manifestations or on the presence of characteristic 
extraskeletal features which may appear during the course of the disease, 
highlighting the importance of follow-up of SEMD patients. The complications are 
variable but epiphyseal dysplasia is often a predominant feature, and the course 
of the disease is marked by premature osteoarthritis. A systematic survey of 
odontoid hypoplasia responsible for atlantoaxial instability with a risk of 
spinal cord is also required.

DOI: 10.1016/j.berh.2007.12.009
PMID: 18328979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]