---
reference_id: "PMID:33189937"
title: Low penetrance COL5A1 variants in a young patient with intracranial aneurysm and very mild signs of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Errichiello E
- Malara A
- Grimod G
- Avolio L
- Balduini A
- Zuffardi O
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2020.104099
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Low penetrance COL5A1 variants in a young patient with intracranial aneurysm and very mild signs of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Errichiello E, Malara A, Grimod G, Avolio L, Balduini A, Zuffardi O
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2020.104099](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2020.104099)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2021 Jan;64(1):104099. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2020.104099. Epub 
2020 Nov 12.

Low penetrance COL5A1 variants in a young patient with intracranial aneurysm and 
very mild signs of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Errichiello E(1), Malara A(2), Grimod G(3), Avolio L(4), Balduini A(2), Zuffardi 
O(5).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, 
Pavia, Italy. Electronic address: edoardo.errichiello@unipv.it.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy; 
Laboratory of Biochemistry, Biotechnology and Advanced Diagnostics, Istituto di 
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico San Matteo Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(3)Unit of Neurosurgery, Department of Neuroscience, Hospital A. Manzoni, Lecco, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere 
Scientifico San Matteo Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(5)Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, 
Pavia, Italy.

Spontaneous cervical artery dissection (CeAD) is a major cause of ischemic 
stroke in young adults, whose genetic susceptibility factors are still largely 
unknown. Nevertheless, subtle ultrastructural connective tissue alterations 
(especially in the collagen fibril morphology) are recognized in a large 
proportion of CeAD patients, in which recent genetic investigations reported an 
enrichment of variants in genes associated with known connective tissue 
disorders. In this regard, COL5A1 variants have been reported in a small subset 
of CeAD patients, with or without classical Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (cEDS) 
features. We investigated a 22-year-old patient with intracranial aneurysm and 
mild connective tissue manifestations reminiscent of EDS. Whole-exome sequencing 
identified two COL5A1 missense variants in trans configuration: 
NM_000093.5:c.[1588G>A];[4135C>T], NP_000084.3:p.[(Gly530Ser)];[(Pro1379Ser)]. 
Functional assays demonstrated a significant decrease of collagen α1(V) chain 
expression in both heterozygous parents compared to control cells, and an 
additive effect of these two variants in the proband. Interestingly, both 
parents manifested very subtle EDS signs, such as atrophic scars, recurrent bone 
fractures, colonic diverticulosis, varicose veins, and osteoarthritis. Our 
findings emphasize the involvement of COL5A1 in the predisposition to vascular 
phenotypes and provide novel insights on the c.1588G>A variant, whose functional 
significance has not been definitely established. In fact, it was previously 
reported as both "disease modifying", and as a biallelic causative mutation 
(with heterozygous individuals showing subtle clinical signs of cEDS). We 
speculated that the c.1588G>A variant might lead to overt phenotype in 
combination with additional genetic "hits" lowering the collagen α1(V) chain 
expression below a hypothetical disease threshold.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2020.104099
PMID: 33189937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]