---
reference_id: "PMID:21427128"
title: Defective survival of proliferating Sertoli cells and androgen receptor function in a mouse model of the ATR-X syndrome.
authors:
- Bagheri-Fam S
- Argentaro A
- Svingen T
- Combes AN
- Sinclair AH
- Koopman P
- Harley VR
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr109
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- Cell Cycle
- Cell Proliferation
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chromatin Assembly and Disassembly
- "DNA Helicases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Homeodomain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Immunoprecipitation
- Male
- X-Linked Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- "Receptors, Androgen/metabolism"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Sertoli Cells/metabolism
- Testis/abnormalities
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- X-linked Nuclear Protein
- alpha-Thalassemia/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defective survival of proliferating Sertoli cells and androgen receptor function in a mouse model of the ATR-X syndrome.
**Authors:** Bagheri-Fam S, Argentaro A, Svingen T, Combes AN, Sinclair AH, Koopman P, Harley VR
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddr109](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddr109)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Jun 1;20(11):2213-24. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr109. Epub 2011
Mar  22.

Defective survival of proliferating Sertoli cells and androgen receptor function 
in a mouse model of the ATR-X syndrome.

Bagheri-Fam S(1), Argentaro A, Svingen T, Combes AN, Sinclair AH, Koopman P, 
Harley VR.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Genetics and Development Division, Prince Henry’s Institute of 
Medical Research, Clayton, VIC 3168, Australia.

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Sep 1;20(17):3535.

X-linked ATR-X (alpha thalassemia, mental retardation, X-linked) syndrome in 
males is characterized by mental retardation, facial dysmorphism, alpha 
thalassemia and urogenital abnormalities, including small testes. It is unclear 
how mutations in the chromatin-remodeling protein ATRX cause these highly 
specific clinical features, since ATRX is widely expressed during organ 
development. To investigate the mechanisms underlying the testicular defects 
observed in ATR-X syndrome, we generated ScAtrxKO (Sertoli cell Atrx knockout) 
mice with Atrx specifically inactivated in the supporting cell lineage (Sertoli 
cells) of the mouse testis. ScAtrxKO mice developed small testes and 
discontinuous tubules, due to prolonged G2/M phase and apoptosis of 
proliferating Sertoli cells during fetal life. Apoptosis might be a consequence 
of the cell cycle defect. We also found that the onset of spermatogenesis was 
delayed in postnatal mice, with a range of spermatogenesis defects evident in 
adult ScAtrxKO mice. ATRX and the androgen receptor (AR) physically interact in 
the testis and in the Sertoli cell line TM4 and co-operatively activate the 
promoter of Rhox5, an important direct AR target. We also demonstrate that ATRX 
directly binds to the Rhox5 promoter in TM4 cells. Finally, gene expression of 
Rhox5 and of another AR-dependent gene, Spinlw1, was reduced in ScAtrxKO testes. 
These data suggest that ATRX can directly enhance the expression of 
androgen-dependent genes through physical interaction with AR. Recruitment of 
ATRX by DNA sequence-specific transcription factors could be a general mechanism 
by which ATRX achieves tissue-specific transcriptional regulation which could 
explain the highly specific clinical features of ATR-X syndrome when ATRX is 
mutated.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddr109
PMID: 21427128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]