---
reference_id: "PMID:29073101"
title: UTX-guided neural crest function underlies craniofacial features of Kabuki syndrome.
authors:
- Shpargel KB
- Starmer J
- Wang C
- Ge K
- Magnuson T
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1705011114
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/etiology"
- Animals
- Cell Survival/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Face/abnormalities
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- HEK293 Cells
- Hematologic Diseases/etiology
- "Histone Demethylases/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Lysine/metabolism
- Male
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation
- "Neural Crest/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Skull/embryology
- Vestibular Diseases/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# UTX-guided neural crest function underlies craniofacial features of Kabuki syndrome.
**Authors:** Shpargel KB, Starmer J, Wang C, Ge K, Magnuson T
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1705011114](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1705011114)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Oct 24;114(43):E9046-E9055. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1705011114. Epub 2017 Oct 9.

UTX-guided neural crest function underlies craniofacial features of Kabuki 
syndrome.

Shpargel KB(1)(2), Starmer J(1)(2), Wang C(3), Ge K(3), Magnuson T(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599-7264.
(2)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel 
Hill, NC 27599-7264.
(3)Laboratory of Endocrinology and Receptor Biology, National Institute of 
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD 20892.
(4)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599-7264; terry_magnuson@med.unc.edu.

Kabuki syndrome, a congenital craniofacial disorder, manifests from mutations in 
an X-linked histone H3 lysine 27 demethylase (UTX/KDM6A) or a H3 lysine 4 
methylase (KMT2D). However, the cellular and molecular etiology of 
histone-modifying enzymes in craniofacial disorders is unknown. We now establish 
Kabuki syndrome as a neurocristopathy, whereby the majority of clinical features 
are modeled in mice carrying neural crest (NC) deletion of UTX, including 
craniofacial dysmorphism, cardiac defects, and postnatal growth retardation. 
Female UTX NC knockout (FKO) demonstrates enhanced phenotypic severity over 
males (MKOs), due to partial redundancy with UTY, a Y-chromosome 
demethylase-dead homolog. Thus, NC cells may require demethylase-independent UTX 
activity. Consistently, Kabuki causative point mutations upstream of the JmjC 
domain do not disrupt UTX demethylation. We have isolated primary NC cells at a 
phenocritical postmigratory timepoint in both FKO and MKO mice, and genome-wide 
expression and histone profiling have revealed UTX molecular function in 
establishing appropriate chromatin structure to regulate crucial NC stem-cell 
signaling pathways. However, the majority of UTX regulated genes do not 
experience aberrations in H3K27me3 or H3K4me3, implicating alternative roles for 
UTX in transcriptional control. These findings are substantiated through 
demethylase-dead knockin mutation of UTX, which supports appropriate facial 
development.

Published under the PNAS license.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1705011114
PMCID: PMC5664495
PMID: 29073101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.