---
reference_id: "PMID:36308763"
title: Aceruloplasminemia presenting with microcytic anemia in a Turkish boy due to a novel pathogenic variant.
authors:
- Gok V
- Ozcan A
- Ozer S
- Karaman F
- Aykutlu E
- Yilmaz E
- Karakukcu M
- Bisgin A
- Unal E
journal: Pediatr Hematol Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/08880018.2022.2140235
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Ceruloplasmin/genetics, metabolism, deficiency"
- Copper/metabolism
- Iron/metabolism
- Ferritins
- Iron Metabolism Disorders
- Neurodegenerative Diseases
- "Anemia, Hypochromic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aceruloplasminemia presenting with microcytic anemia in a Turkish boy due to a novel pathogenic variant.
**Authors:** Gok V, Ozcan A, Ozer S, Karaman F, Aykutlu E, Yilmaz E, Karakukcu M, Bisgin A, Unal E
**Journal:** Pediatr Hematol Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/08880018.2022.2140235](https://doi.org/10.1080/08880018.2022.2140235)

## Content

1. Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2023;40(7):673-681. doi: 10.1080/08880018.2022.2140235.
 Epub 2022 Oct 29.

Aceruloplasminemia presenting with microcytic anemia in a Turkish boy due to a 
novel pathogenic variant.

Gok V(1), Ozcan A(1), Ozer S(2), Karaman F(3), Aykutlu E(1), Yilmaz E(1), 
Karakukcu M(1), Bisgin A(2), Unal E(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, 
Faculty of Medicine, Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Çukurova University, 
Adana, Turkey.
(3)Department of Radiology, Division of Pediatric Radiology, Faculty of 
Medicine, Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Gevher Nesibe Genome and Stem 
Cell Institution, Genome and Stem Cell Center (GENKOK), Erciyes University, 
Kayseri, Turkey.
(5)Department of Blood Banking and Transfusion Medicine, Health Science 
Institution, Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey.

Aceruloplasminemia inherited autosomal recessively in the ceruloplasmin gene is 
a progressive disease with iron accumulation in various organs such as the 
brain, liver, pancreas, and retina. Ceruloplasmin gene encodes ceruloplasmin 
protein, which has ferroxidase activity and is involved in copper and iron 
metabolism. Progressive neurotoxicity, retinopathy, and diabetes may develop in 
about 40-60 decades. In addition, microcytic anemia accompanied by high ferritin 
and low ceruloplasmin level that develop at earlier ages can be first 
manifestation. Iron chelation may be utilized in the treatment to reduce the 
toxicity. Early diagnosis and treatment may delay the onset of symptoms. A 
14-year-old male patient was followed up with microcytic anemia since an 
eight-years old. Anemia was accompanied by microcytosis, high ferritin, and low 
copper and ceruloplasmin levels. A novel homozygous c.690delG variant was 
detected in ceruloplasmin by whole exome sequencing. Clinical, laboratory and 
imaging findings of the patient demonstrated aceruloplasminemia. We present a 
boy with persistent microcytic anemia of the first manifestation at the age of 
eight, as the youngest case of aceruloplasminemia in the literature. Thereby, 
aceruloplasminemia should be kept in mind in the etiology of microcytic anemia 
whose cause couldn't found in childhood.

DOI: 10.1080/08880018.2022.2140235
PMID: 36308763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]