---
reference_id: "PMID:37046037"
title: "FDXR-associated disease: a challenging differential diagnosis with inflammatory peripheral neuropathy."
authors:
- Masnada S
- Previtali R
- Erba P
- Beretta E
- Camporesi A
- Chiapparini L
- Doneda C
- Iascone M
- Sartorio MUA
- Spaccini L
- Veggiotti P
- Osio M
- Tonduti D
- Moroni I
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-023-06790-0
keywords:
- Humans
- "Ataxia/diagnosis, genetics"
- Cerebellar Ataxia/diagnosis
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Mutation
- "Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Phenotype
- Ferredoxin-NADP Reductase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FDXR-associated disease: a challenging differential diagnosis with inflammatory peripheral neuropathy.
**Authors:** Masnada S, Previtali R, Erba P, Beretta E, Camporesi A, Chiapparini L, Doneda C, Iascone M, Sartorio MUA, Spaccini L, Veggiotti P, Osio M, Tonduti D, Moroni I
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-023-06790-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-023-06790-0)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2023 Sep;44(9):3037-3043. doi: 10.1007/s10072-023-06790-0. Epub
2023  Apr 12.

FDXR-associated disease: a challenging differential diagnosis with inflammatory 
peripheral neuropathy.

Masnada S(1), Previtali R(2)(3), Erba P(4), Beretta E(5), Camporesi A(6), 
Chiapparini L(7), Doneda C(8), Iascone M(9), Sartorio MUA(4), Spaccini L(10), 
Veggiotti P(2)(3), Osio M(11), Tonduti D(2)(3), Moroni I(12).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Buzzi Children's Hospital, Milan, Italy. 
silvia.masnada@asst-fbf-sacco.it.
(2)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Buzzi Children's Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(3)University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Buzzi Children's Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(5)Acquired Brain Injury Unit, Scientific Institute IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Lecco, 
Italy.
(6)Division of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, Buzzi Children's Hospital, Milan, 
Italy.
(7)Neuroradiology Department, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, 
Milan, Italy.
(8)Department of Pediatric Radiology and Neuroradiology, Buzzi Children's 
Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(9)Medical Genetics Laboratory, ASST Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy.
(10)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Buzzi 
Children's Hospital, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(11)Department of Neurology ASST Fatebenefratelli Sacco, Milan, Italy.
(12)Department of Pediatric Neurosciences, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico 
Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Mutations in FDXR gene, involved in mitochondrial pathway, 
cause a rare recessive neurological disorder with variable severity of 
phenotypes. The most common presentation includes optic and/or auditory 
neuropathy, variably associated to developmental delay or regression, global 
hypotonia, pyramidal, cerebellar signs, and seizures. The review of clinical 
findings in previously described cases from literature reveals also a 
significant incidence of sensorimotor peripheral polyneuropathy (22.72%) and 
ataxia (43.18%). To date, 44 patients with FDXR mutations have been reported. We 
describe here on two new patients, siblings, who presented with a quite 
different phenotype compared to previously described patients.
METHODS: Clinical, neurophysiological, and genetic features of two siblings and 
a systematic literature review focused on the clinical spectrum of the disease 
are described.
RESULTS: Both patients presented with an acute-sub-acute onset of peripheral 
neuropathy and only in later stages of the disease developed the typical 
features of FDXR-associated disease.
INTERPRETATION: The peculiar clinical presentation at onset and the evolution of 
the disease in our patients and in some cases revised from the literature shed 
lights on a new possible phenotype of FDXR-associated disease: a peripheral 
neuropathy which can mimic an acute inflammatory disease.

© 2023. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-023-06790-0
PMCID: PMC10096094
PMID: 37046037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.