---
reference_id: "PMID:16909394"
title: Mutations in the CEP290 (NPHP6) gene are a frequent cause of Leber congenital amaurosis.
authors:
- den Hollander AI
- Koenekoop RK
- Yzer S
- Lopez I
- Arends ML
- Voesenek KE
- Zonneveld MN
- Strom TM
- Meitinger T
- Brunner HG
- Hoyng CB
- van den Born LI
- Rohrschneider K
- Cremers FP
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1086/507318
keywords:
- Alleles
- Alternative Splicing
- "Antigens, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 12/genetics"
- Consanguinity
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- Exons/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- "Optic Atrophy, Hereditary, Leber/genetics, pathology"
- Pedigree
- RNA Splice Sites/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the CEP290 (NPHP6) gene are a frequent cause of Leber congenital amaurosis.
**Authors:** den Hollander AI, Koenekoop RK, Yzer S, Lopez I, Arends ML, Voesenek KE, Zonneveld MN, Strom TM, Meitinger T, Brunner HG, Hoyng CB, van den Born LI, Rohrschneider K, Cremers FP
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1086/507318](https://doi.org/10.1086/507318)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Sep;79(3):556-61. doi: 10.1086/507318. Epub 2006 Jul 11.

Mutations in the CEP290 (NPHP6) gene are a frequent cause of Leber congenital 
amaurosis.

den Hollander AI(1), Koenekoop RK, Yzer S, Lopez I, Arends ML, Voesenek KE, 
Zonneveld MN, Strom TM, Meitinger T, Brunner HG, Hoyng CB, van den Born LI, 
Rohrschneider K, Cremers FP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. a.denhollander@antrg.umcn.nl

Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is one of the main causes of childhood 
blindness. To date, mutations in eight genes have been described, which together 
account for approximately 45% of LCA cases. We localized the genetic defect in a 
consanguineous LCA-affected family from Quebec and identified a splice defect in 
a gene encoding a centrosomal protein (CEP290). The defect is caused by an 
intronic mutation (c.2991+1655A-->G) that creates a strong splice-donor site and 
inserts a cryptic exon in the CEP290 messenger RNA. This mutation was detected 
in 16 (21%) of 76 unrelated patients with LCA, either homozygously or in 
combination with a second deleterious mutation on the other allele. CEP290 
mutations therefore represent one of the most frequent causes of LCA identified 
so far.

DOI: 10.1086/507318
PMCID: PMC1559533
PMID: 16909394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]