---
reference_id: "PMID:15723289"
title: "Genotypic and phenotypic characterization of Noonan syndrome: new data and review of the literature."
authors:
- Jongmans M
- Sistermans EA
- Rikken A
- Nillesen WM
- Tamminga R
- Patton M
- Maier EM
- Tartaglia M
- Noordam K
- van der Burgt I
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30598
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- Gene Frequency
- Genotype
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Male
- Mutation
- "Noonan Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11"
- Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases/genetics
- Review Literature as Topic
- SH2 Domain-Containing Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases
- src Homology Domains/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotypic and phenotypic characterization of Noonan syndrome: new data and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Jongmans M, Sistermans EA, Rikken A, Nillesen WM, Tamminga R, Patton M, Maier EM, Tartaglia M, Noordam K, van der Burgt I
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.30598](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.30598)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Apr 15;134A(2):165-70. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30598.

Genotypic and phenotypic characterization of Noonan syndrome: new data and
review of the literature.

Jongmans M(1), Sistermans EA, Rikken A, Nillesen WM, Tamminga R, Patton M, Maier
EM, Tartaglia M, Noordam K, van der Burgt I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, The
Netherlands.

Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant disorder, characterized by short
stature, minor facial anomalies, and congenital heart defects. In approximately
50% of cases the condition is caused by missense mutations in the PTPN11 gene on
chromosome 12, resulting in a gain of function of the protein SHP-2. In this
study, PTPN11 mutation analysis was performed in 170 NS patients. In 76 (45%) of
them a mutation was identified. We report on the distribution of these
mutations, as well as on genotype-phenotype relationships. The benefit of the NS
scoring system developed by van der Burgt et al. [(1994); Am J Med Genet
53:187-191] is shown, among physicians who consequently based their diagnosis on
the NS scoring system the percentage mutation positive subjects was 54%, whereas
this percentage was only 39% among physicians who made less use of the scoring
system. In two patients with some uncommon manifestations mutations were found
in the C-SH2 domain, a region in which defects are not often identified in NS. A
trend was observed in patients carrying the 922A --> G change (Asn308Asp)
receiving normal education. In one patient with NS and mild juvenile
myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) the mutation 218C --> T (Thr73Ile) was found.
This confirms previous findings indicating that individuals with NS with
specific mutations in PTPN11 are at risk of developing JMML.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30598
PMID: 15723289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
