---
reference_id: "PMID:36867194"
title: Mitigating the Denosumab-Induced Rebound Phenomenon with Alternating Short- and Long-Acting Anti-resorptive Therapy in a Young Boy with Severe OI Type VI.
authors:
- Seale E
- Molina MO
- Carsen S
- Sheffield H
- Koujok K
- Robinson ME
- Feber J
- Smit K
- Page M
- Walker S
- Khan N
- Konji VN
- Rauch F
- Ward LM
journal: Calcif Tissue Int
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00223-023-01065-4
keywords:
- Child
- Male
- Humans
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/drug therapy, genetics"
- Denosumab
- Hypercalcemia/drug therapy
- Calcium/pharmacology
- Bone Density
- Zoledronic Acid/therapeutic use
- Bone Density Conservation Agents
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitigating the Denosumab-Induced Rebound Phenomenon with Alternating Short- and Long-Acting Anti-resorptive Therapy in a Young Boy with Severe OI Type VI.
**Authors:** Seale E, Molina MO, Carsen S, Sheffield H, Koujok K, Robinson ME, Feber J, Smit K, Page M, Walker S, Khan N, Konji VN, Rauch F, Ward LM
**Journal:** Calcif Tissue Int (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00223-023-01065-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00223-023-01065-4)

## Content

1. Calcif Tissue Int. 2023 May;112(5):613-620. doi: 10.1007/s00223-023-01065-4. 
Epub 2023 Mar 3.

Mitigating the Denosumab-Induced Rebound Phenomenon with Alternating Short- and 
Long-Acting Anti-resorptive Therapy in a Young Boy with Severe OI Type VI.

Seale E(1)(2), Molina MO(2)(3), Carsen S(2)(4), Sheffield H(5), Koujok K(2)(6), 
Robinson ME(1)(2)(7), Feber J(2)(8), Smit K(2)(4), Page M(2)(7), Walker S(2)(6), 
Khan N(2), Konji VN(2), Rauch F(9), Ward LM(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(2)The Ottawa Pediatric Bone Health Research Group, Children's Hospital of 
Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(3)Endocrinology Unit, Division of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Pontificia 
Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(4)Department of Surgery, University of Ottawa and Division of Pediatric 
Orthopedic Surgery, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, Qikiqtani General Hospital, Iqaluit, NU, Canada.
(6)Department of Medical Imaging, University of Ottawa and Division of Pediatric 
Radiology, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Ottawa and Division of Endocrinology, 
Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, The CHEO Genetic and Metabolic Bone 
Disorders Program, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, University of Ottawa, Division of Pediatric 
Nephrology, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(9)McGill University , Shriners Hospital for Children, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(10)Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada. 
Lward@cheo.on.ca.
(11)The Ottawa Pediatric Bone Health Research Group, Children's Hospital of 
Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada. Lward@cheo.on.ca.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, University of Ottawa and Division of 
Endocrinology, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, The CHEO Genetic and 
Metabolic Bone Disorders Program, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, 
Ottawa, ON, Canada. Lward@cheo.on.ca.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type VI, a recessively inherited form of OI caused 
by mutations in SERPINF1, is a severe form distinguished by osteomalacia on bone 
histomorphometry. We describe a boy with severe OI type VI who was initially 
treated with intravenous (IV) zoledronic acid (ZA) at 1.4 years of age; however, 
a year later he transitioned to denosumab 1 mg/kg sub-cutaneously every three 
months in an effort to decrease fracture rates. After two years on denosumab, he 
presented with symptomatic hypercalcemia due to the denosumab-induced, 
hyper-resorptive rebound phenomenon. Laboratory parameters at the time of the 
rebound were as follows: elevated serum ionized calcium (1.62 mmol/L, N 
1.16-1.36), elevated serum creatinine due to hypercalcemia-induced muscle 
catabolism (83 µmol/L, N 9-55), and suppressed parathyroid hormone (PTH) 
(< 0.7 pmol/L, N 1.3-5.8). The hypercalcemia was responsive to low-dose IV 
pamidronate, with a rapid decline in serum ionized calcium, and otherwise 
normalization of the aforementioned parameters within 10 days. To benefit from 
the powerful, albeit short-term, anti-resorptive effect of denosumab without 
further rebound episodes, he was treated thereafter with denosumab 1 mg/kg 
alternating every three months with IV ZA 0.025 mg/kg. Five years later, he 
remained on dual alternating anti-resorptive therapy without further rebound 
episodes, and an overall improvement in his clinical status. This novel 
pharmacological approach of alternating short- and long-term anti-resorptive 
therapy every three months has not previously been described. Our report 
suggests this strategy may be an effective method for prevention of the rebound 
phenomenon in select children for whom denosumab may be beneficial.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00223-023-01065-4
PMID: 36867194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]