---
reference_id: "PMID:11218297"
title: "[Current antiretroviral therapy]."
authors:
- Bossi P
- Martinez V
- Strady C
- Bricaire F
journal: Rev Med Interne
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1016/s0248-8663(00)00284-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Current antiretroviral therapy].
**Authors:** Bossi P, Martinez V, Strady C, Bricaire F
**Journal:** Rev Med Interne (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0248-8663(00)00284-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0248-8663(00)00284-8)

## Content

1. Rev Med Interne. 2001 Jan;22(1):42-52. doi: 10.1016/s0248-8663(00)00284-8.

[Current antiretroviral therapy].

[Article in French]

Bossi P(1), Martinez V, Strady C, Bricaire F.

Author information:
(1)Service de maladies infectieuses et tropicales, hôpital de la 
Pitié-Salpêtrière, 47-83, boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75651 Paris, France.

INTRODUCTION: Advances in HIV/AIDS therapy have been rapid and profound.
CURRENT KNOWLEDGE AND KEY POINTS: In developed countries the epidemic infection 
has stabilized and there are dramatic decreases in morbidity and mortality 
resulting from the use of intensive but expensive therapies. HIV patients who 
have detectable viral loads and/or evidence of immunologic dysfunction should be 
treated with a potent combination antiretroviral regimen. Currently, this 
consists of two nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors with at least one 
protease inhibitor, or a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor, or 
another combination with adequate potency. Current therapies do have 
limitations, including side effects, cross-resistance, adherence challenges, and 
drug interactions.
FUTURE PROSPECTS AND PROJECTS: Drug resistance is a major factor contributing to 
the failure of antiretroviral therapy: the ability to predict clinical response 
to therapy on the basis of genotype and/or phenotype depends on knowledge of 
appropriate data for defining drug resistance. Moreover, careful selection and 
monitoring of combination drug therapy along with individualized rather than 
standard dosage regimens may minimize the pharmacological problems and help 
ensure optimum antiviral activity. Further developments include new drugs, 
vaccine, cytokine-, and gene therapy-based treatment strategies.

DOI: 10.1016/s0248-8663(00)00284-8
PMID: 11218297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]