---
reference_id: "PMID:38245779"
title: "Long-term monitoring of fatty acid oxidation defects: results from a MetabERN survey."
authors:
- Schwantje M
- Grünert SC
- Fuchs SA
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03024-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term monitoring of fatty acid oxidation defects: results from a MetabERN survey.
**Authors:** Schwantje M, Grünert SC, Fuchs SA
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03024-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03024-0)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Jan 20;19(1):21. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03024-0.

Long-term monitoring of fatty acid oxidation defects: results from a MetabERN 
survey.

Schwantje M(1), Grünert SC(#)(2), Fuchs SA(#)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University 
Medical Centre Utrecht, Lundlaan 6, 3584 EA, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of General Paediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology, 
Faculty of Medicine, University Medical Centre, Mathildenstraße 1, 79106, 
Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University 
Medical Centre Utrecht, Lundlaan 6, 3584 EA, Utrecht, The Netherlands. 
s.fuchs@umcutrecht.nl.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Implementation of long-chain fatty acid oxidation defects (LCFAOD) 
in newborn screening (NBS) programs allows for pre-symptomatic diagnosis and 
treatment. The long-term natural history of NBS LCFAOD patients is largely 
unknown and may differ from clinically diagnosed pre-NBS patients. This 
complicates long-term monitoring of LCFAOD and may cause high monitoring 
variability. To gain insight in current clinical practice, we performed a 
web-based questionnaire among all metabolic members of the European Reference 
Network for Hereditary Metabolic Disorders (MetabERN).
RESULTS: Thirty-seven colleagues representing at least 35 European metabolic 
centres shared their experience and results were discussed at the European 
Metabolic Group (EMG) meeting 2022. The centres concurred in many aspects of 
long-term monitoring of LCFAOD including the frequency of clinical visits, 
determination of laboratory parameters, cardiac monitoring and retinopathy 
screening. Main discrepancies comprised hepatic imaging, glucose monitoring and 
electrophysiological investigations.
CONCLUSIONS: Discrepancies may reflect differences in local availability of 
monitoring tools, the inclusion of LCFAOD in NBS programs as well as differences 
in local genotypes and phenotypes. Because monitoring strategies are largely 
based on the natural disease course of clinically identified patients, there 
might be over-monitoring of some NBS patients. Nevertheless, we advocate 
long-term monitoring because resulting information is essential to further 
characterize the natural disease course, develop evidence-based guidelines and 
provide a basis for evaluation of future therapies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03024-0
PMCID: PMC10800038
PMID: 38245779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors have accepted 
reimbursements, fees, funds, or salaries from an organization that may in any 
way gain or lose financially from the results reported in this manuscript. 
S.A.F. and M.S. do not have any competing interests regarding relevant financial 
activities outside the submitted work, intellectual property or any other 
relationships. S.C.G. declares relevant financial activities (Ultragenyx, 
Vitaflo) outside the submitted work, not influencing the results of this study.