---
reference_id: "PMID:7590394"
title: Elevated extracellular glutamate levels increased the formation of hydroxyl radical in the striatum of anesthetized rat.
authors:
- Yang CS
- Tsai PJ
- Lin NN
- Liu L
- Kuo JS
journal: Free Radic Biol Med
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1016/0891-5849(95)00042-v
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elevated extracellular glutamate levels increased the formation of hydroxyl radical in the striatum of anesthetized rat.
**Authors:** Yang CS, Tsai PJ, Lin NN, Liu L, Kuo JS
**Journal:** Free Radic Biol Med (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0891-5849(95)00042-v](https://doi.org/10.1016/0891-5849(95)00042-v)

## Content

1. Free Radic Biol Med. 1995 Oct;19(4):453-9. doi: 10.1016/0891-5849(95)00042-v.

Elevated extracellular glutamate levels increased the formation of hydroxyl 
radical in the striatum of anesthetized rat.

Yang CS(1), Tsai PJ, Lin NN, Liu L, Kuo JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Research, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taiwan, 
Republic of China.

Results from various in vitro experiments have indicated that excitotoxicity and 
oxidative stress are two interrelated major mechanisms in causing neuronal 
damage in brain disorders such as cerebral ischemia/reperfusion. Thus, we have 
conducted experiments to investigate whether in the striatum of anesthetized 
rats the elevated brain extracellular concentrations of glutamate could increase 
the formation of hydroxyl radical. Elevation of glutamate levels and trapping of 
hydroxyl radical were accomplished by perfusing Ringer solutions containing both 
glutamate and salicylic acid through microdialysis probes implanted in rat 
striatum. The formation of hydroxyl radical was quantitated as the increased 
amounts of 2,3 and 2,5 dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHBA) which were the hydroxylative 
products of salicylic acid. Eluted microdialysates were directly injected onto 
high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with electrochemical detector via 
an on-line automatic injector. This method was authenticated by in vitro studies 
employing Fenton-type hydroxyl radicals generation system. Our results indicated 
that elevated glutamate concentrations (15 mM, 1.5 mM, and 150 microM glutamate 
in perfusing solutions) would significantly increased both the concentrations of 
2,3 and 2,5 DHBA. In conclusion, we have obtained direct evidence showing that 
the elevated glutamate concentrations in brain extracellular space would 
increase the formation of hydroxyl radical, and these results implied that 
oxidative stress occurring in brain disorders might be induced by 
excitotoxicity.

DOI: 10.1016/0891-5849(95)00042-v
PMID: 7590394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]