---
reference_id: "PMID:9641714"
title: Treatment of the acute crisis in maple syrup urine disease.
authors:
- Nyhan WL
- Rice-Kelts M
- Klein J
- Barshop BA
journal: Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1001/archpedi.152.6.593
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of the acute crisis in maple syrup urine disease.
**Authors:** Nyhan WL, Rice-Kelts M, Klein J, Barshop BA
**Journal:** Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archpedi.152.6.593](https://doi.org/10.1001/archpedi.152.6.593)

## Content

1. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 1998 Jun;152(6):593-8. doi:
10.1001/archpedi.152.6.593.

Treatment of the acute crisis in maple syrup urine disease.

Nyhan WL(1), Rice-Kelts M, Klein J, Barshop BA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Institute for Molecular Genetics, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla 92093-0830, USA.

BACKGROUND: The acute crisis of metabolic decompensation in maple syrup urine
disease is a potentially lethal medical emergency that requires reduction in
concentrations of leucine and other branched-chain amino acids in plasma.
Experience with intravenous mixtures of amino acids indicates that this can be
accomplished by the synthetic forces of protein synthesis. However, these
intravenous mixtures are not generally available.
OBJECTIVE: To develop enteral mixtures suitable for administration by
nasogastric drip in minimal volume.
DESIGN: Mixtures of amino acids were designed containing no leucine, isoleucine,
or valine for administration by nasogastric drip. Needs for water and calories
were to be met intravenously. They were designed to be used in the management of
the acute crisis.
SETTING: Inpatient pediatric service.
PATIENTS: Two patients with maple syrup urine disease. Data were collected
during the management of 3 episodes of metabolic imbalance.
INTERVENTION: Studies were carried out for 4 to 11 days, during which there was
no intake of leucine. Four different mixtures were used and a fifth was designed
on the basis of this experience.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Effects on the concentrations of leucine and the other
branched-chain amino acids. Clinical status closely mirrored the concentration
of leucine.
RESULTS: In each instance, a progressive fall in leucine concentration was
obtained. Rates of fall were comparable to those obtained with intravenous
therapy. Concentrations of isoleucine fell to levels that made this amino acid
limiting for protein synthesis and hence therapeutic effect. This led to greater
and earlier supplementation with isoleucine. Valine supplementation was also
useful.
CONCLUSIONS: The acute crisis of metabolic imbalance in maple syrup urine
disease may be effectively treated by the continuous intragastric drip of
solutions of amino acids devoid of leucine along with provision of water and
calories intravenously.

DOI: 10.1001/archpedi.152.6.593
PMID: 9641714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
