---
reference_id: "PMID:18240248"
title: "Primary central nervous system vasculitis with prominent leptomeningeal enhancement: a subset with a benign outcome."
authors:
- Salvarani C
- Brown RD Jr
- Calamia KT
- Christianson TJ
- Huston J 3rd
- Meschia JF
- Giannini C
- Miller DV
- Hunder GG
journal: Arthritis Rheum
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/art.23300
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Biopsy
- Cerebral Angiography
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Gadolinium
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Meninges/pathology
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/diagnostic imaging, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary central nervous system vasculitis with prominent leptomeningeal enhancement: a subset with a benign outcome.
**Authors:** Salvarani C, Brown RD Jr, Calamia KT, Christianson TJ, Huston J 3rd, Meschia JF, Giannini C, Miller DV, Hunder GG
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheum (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.23300](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.23300)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheum. 2008 Feb;58(2):595-603. doi: 10.1002/art.23300.

Primary central nervous system vasculitis with prominent leptomeningeal 
enhancement: a subset with a benign outcome.

Salvarani C(1), Brown RD Jr, Calamia KT, Christianson TJ, Huston J 3rd, Meschia 
JF, Giannini C, Miller DV, Hunder GG.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Primary central nervous system vasculitis (PCNSV) is an uncommon 
condition that affects the brain and spinal cord. This study was undertaken to 
evaluate the clinical features and outcomes among patients with PCNSV who 
presented with prominent gadolinium meningeal enhancement on magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI).
METHODS: Through retrospective review using the Mayo Clinic medical records 
linkage system, we identified 101 consecutive patients with PCNSV based on brain 
biopsy or conventional angiography (or both) between January 1, 1983, and 
December 31, 2003. We evaluated data on demographics, clinical findings, 
laboratory studies, imaging, biopsy of brain or spinal cord (or both), 
treatment, and neurologic outcome.
RESULTS: MRIs showed prominent leptomeningeal enhancement in 8 of 101 patients 
with PCNSV. In 6 of those 8, cerebral angiography or magnetic resonance 
angiography results were normal, but biopsy of the brain or spinal cord showed 
vasculitis in all 8. Granulomatous vascular inflammation was found in 6 
specimens and was associated in 4 cases with vascular deposits of beta-amyloid 
peptide. All 8 patients had a prompt response to therapy, with resolution of the 
MRI meningeal enhancement. Although 3 of the 8 patients had relapses during 
followup, the overall outcome was favorable. Patients with meningeal 
enhancement, compared with patients without enhancement, more commonly had 
substantial abnormalities of cerebrospinal fluid (100% versus 58%; P = 0.02) and 
amyloid angiopathy (50% versus 12%; P = 0.03).
CONCLUSION: Prominent gadolinium leptomeningeal enhancement on MRI may point to 
a distinct subtype of PCNSV with small leptomeningeal artery vasculitis and 
rapid response to therapy.

DOI: 10.1002/art.23300
PMID: 18240248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]