---
reference_id: "PMID:36882181"
title: "Transcranial direct current stimulation to reduce chronic pelvic pain in endometriosis: phase II randomized controlled clinical trial."
authors:
- Mechsner S
- Grünert J
- Wiese JJ
- Vormbäumen J
- Sehouli J
- Siegmund B
- Neeb L
- Prüß MS
journal: Pain Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/pm/pnad031
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation/methods
- "Chronic Pain/therapy, etiology"
- "Endometriosis/complications, therapy"
- Chronic Disease
- Double-Blind Method
- Pelvic Pain/therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcranial direct current stimulation to reduce chronic pelvic pain in endometriosis: phase II randomized controlled clinical trial.
**Authors:** Mechsner S, Grünert J, Wiese JJ, Vormbäumen J, Sehouli J, Siegmund B, Neeb L, Prüß MS
**Journal:** Pain Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/pm/pnad031](https://doi.org/10.1093/pm/pnad031)

## Content

1. Pain Med. 2023 Jul 5;24(7):809-817. doi: 10.1093/pm/pnad031.

Transcranial direct current stimulation to reduce chronic pelvic pain in
endometriosis: phase II randomized controlled clinical trial.

Mechsner S(1), Grünert J(1)(2), Wiese JJ(2), Vormbäumen J(1)(3), Sehouli J(1),
Siegmund B(2), Neeb L(3)(4), Prüß MS(2)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate
Member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin
Institute of Health, Berlin 13353, Germany.
(2)Medizinische Klinik m. S. Gastroenterologie, Infektiologie und Rheumatologie,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin,
Berlin 12200, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member
of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin
Institute of Health, Berlin 10117, Germany.
(4)Digital Hospital, Helios Global Health, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Berlin Institute of Health at Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, BIH
Biomedical Innovation Academy, BIH Charité Clinician Scientist Program, Berlin
10178, Germany.
(6)Department of Psychology, MSB Medical School Berlin, Berlin 14197, Germany.

BACKGROUND: It is known that various chronic pain conditions lead to maladaptive
changes in the central nervous system. Endometriosis is frequently associated
with chronic pelvic pain (CPP). Its sufficient treatment remains a clinical
challenge. Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) has been shown to be a
powerful method to reduce chronic pain. Therefore, this study aimed to
investigate pain reduction via anodal tDCS in patients with endometriosis and
CPP.
METHODS: This clinical phase II, placebo-controlled, randomized, parallel-design
study included 36 patients with endometriosis and CPP. All patients had CPP,
defined as a score of ≥3/10 on the visual analog scale for ≥3 months in the
prior 6 months. Anodal or placebo tDCS (18 patients per arm) was applied over
the primary motor cortex for 10 days. The primary outcome measure was the
pressure pain threshold (objective pain measure), and secondary outcomes were
the numerical rating scale score (subjective pain measure), Von Frey
monofilaments, and disease- and pain-related questionnaires. Data were collected
at baseline, after the 10-day stimulation, and at a follow-up session, which
took place 1 week after the tDCS had ended. Statistical analyses were performed
with analyses of variance and t tests.
RESULTS: Significant decreased pain perception in both pain measurements
(pressure pain threshold and numerical rating scale score) was found for the
active tDCS group compared with the placebo group. This proof-of-concept study
shows that tDCS is a helpful supporting pain therapy for patients with
endometriosis and CPP. Moreover, further analyses revealed that 1 week after the
stimulation had ended, pain reduction as indexed by pressure pain threshold
remained significantly decreased, which indicates possible long-term analgesic
effects.
CONCLUSION: The present study provides evidence that tDCS is an effective
therapy for pain reduction in endometriosis-associated CPP. The results support
the notion that CPP is developed and maintained in the central nervous system,
making a multimodal pain therapy necessary.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: www.ClinicalTrials.gov ID: NCT05231239.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
American Academy of Pain Medicine. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/pm/pnad031
PMID: 36882181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
