---
reference_id: "PMID:38873792"
title: "Komrower Memorial Lecture 2023. Molecular basis of phenotype expression in homocystinuria: Where are we 30 years later?"
authors:
- Kožich V
- Majtan T
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12767
keywords:
- Homocystinuria/genetics
- Humans
- Cystathionine beta-Synthase/genetics
- Animals
- Phenotype
- Mutation
- "History, 21st Century"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Komrower Memorial Lecture 2023. Molecular basis of phenotype expression in homocystinuria: Where are we 30 years later?
**Authors:** Kožich V, Majtan T
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12767](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12767)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2024 Sep;47(5):841-859. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12767. Epub
2024  Jun 14.

Komrower Memorial Lecture 2023. Molecular basis of phenotype expression in 
homocystinuria: Where are we 30 years later?

Kožich V(1), Majtan T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of 
Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, 
Czechia.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Science and Medicine, University of 
Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.

This review summarises progress in the research of homocystinuria (HCU) in the 
past three decades. HCU due to cystathionine β-synthase (CBS) was discovered in 
1962, and Prof. Jan Peter Kraus summarised developments in the field in the 
first-ever Komrower lecture in 1993. In the past three decades, significant 
advancements have been achieved in the biology of CBS, including gene 
organisation, tissue expression, 3D structures, and regulatory mechanisms. 
Renewed interest in CBS arose in the late 1990s when this enzyme was implicated 
in biogenesis of H2S. Advancements in genetic and biochemical techniques enabled 
the identification of several hundreds of pathogenic CBS variants and the 
misfolding of missense mutations as a common mechanism. Several cellular, 
invertebrate and murine HCU models allowed us to gain insights into functional 
and metabolic pathophysiology of the disease. Establishing the E-HOD consortium 
and patient networks, HCU Network Australia and HCU Network America, offered new 
possibilities for acquiring clinical data in registries and data on patients' 
quality of life. A recent analysis of data from the E-HOD registry showed that 
the clinical variability of HCU is broad, extending from severe childhood 
disease to milder (late) adulthood forms, which typically respond to pyridoxine. 
Pyridoxine responsiveness appears to be the key factor determining the clinical 
course of HCU. Increased awareness about HCU played a role in developing novel 
therapies, such as gene therapy, correction of misfolding by chaperones, removal 
of methionine from the gut and enzyme therapies that decrease homocysteine or 
methionine in the circulation.

© 2024 The Author(s). Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12767
PMID: 38873792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]