---
reference_id: "PMID:39733842"
title: "IUPHAR review: Targeted therapies of signaling pathways based on the gut microbiome in autism spectrum disorders: Mechanistic and therapeutic applications."
authors:
- Mamun AA
- Geng P
- Wang S
- Shao C
- Xiao J
journal: Pharmacol Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107559
keywords:
- Humans
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
- "Autism Spectrum Disorder/therapy, microbiology, metabolism"
- Probiotics/therapeutic use
- Animals
- Signal Transduction
- Fecal Microbiota Transplantation
- Brain-Gut Axis/physiology
- "Prebiotics/administration & dosage"
- Dysbiosis/therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IUPHAR review: Targeted therapies of signaling pathways based on the gut microbiome in autism spectrum disorders: Mechanistic and therapeutic applications.
**Authors:** Mamun AA, Geng P, Wang S, Shao C, Xiao J
**Journal:** Pharmacol Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107559](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107559)

## Content

1. Pharmacol Res. 2025 Jan;211:107559. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107559. Epub 2024
 Dec 28.

IUPHAR review: Targeted therapies of signaling pathways based on the gut 
microbiome in autism spectrum disorders: Mechanistic and therapeutic 
applications.

Mamun AA(1), Geng P(2), Wang S(2), Shao C(3), Xiao J(4).

Author information:
(1)Central Laboratory of The Lishui Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Lishui University, Lishui People's Hospital, 
Lishui, Zhejiang 323000, China; Oujiang Laboratory (Zhejiang Lab for 
Regenerative Medicine, Vision and Brain Health), School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000, China.
(2)Central Laboratory of The Lishui Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Lishui University, Lishui People's Hospital, 
Lishui, Zhejiang 323000, China.
(3)Central Laboratory of The Lishui Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Lishui University, Lishui People's Hospital, 
Lishui, Zhejiang 323000, China. Electronic address: scx1818@126.com.
(4)Central Laboratory of The Lishui Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Lishui University, Lishui People's Hospital, 
Lishui, Zhejiang 323000, China; Oujiang Laboratory (Zhejiang Lab for 
Regenerative Medicine, Vision and Brain Health), School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000, China; 
Department of Wound Healing, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical 
University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000, China. Electronic address: 
xjian@wmu.edu.cn.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are complex neurodevelopmental disorders 
characterized by impairments in social interaction, communication and repetitive 
activities. Gut microbiota significantly influences behavior and 
neurodevelopment by regulating the gut-brain axis. This review explores gut 
microbiota-influenced treatments for ASD, focusing on their therapeutic 
applications and mechanistic insights. In addition, this review discusses the 
interactions between gut microbiota and the immune, metabolic and neuroendocrine 
systems, focusing on crucial microbial metabolites including short-chain fatty 
acids (SCFAs) and several neurotransmitters. Furthermore, the review explores 
various therapy methods including fecal microbiota transplantation, dietary 
modifications, probiotics and prebiotics and evaluates their safety and efficacy 
in reducing ASD symptoms. The discussion shows the potential of customized 
microbiome-based therapeutics and the integration of multi-omics methods to 
understand the underlying mechanisms. Moreover, the review explores the 
intricate relationship between gut microbiota and ASD, aiming to develop 
innovative therapies that utilize the gut microbiome to improve the clinical 
outcomes of ASD patients. Microbial metabolites such as neurotransmitter 
precursors, tryptophan metabolites and SCFAs affect brain development and 
behavior. Symptoms of ASD are linked to changes in these metabolites. Dysbiosis 
in the gut microbiome may impact neuroinflammatory processes linked to autism, 
negatively affecting immune signaling pathways. Research indicates that 
probiotics and prebiotics can improve gut microbiota and alleviate symptoms in 
ASD patients. Fecal microbiota transplantation may also improve behavioral 
symptoms and restore gut microbiota balance. The review emphasizes the need for 
further research on gut microbiota modification as a potential therapeutic 
approach for ASD, highlighting its potential in clinical settings.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107559
PMID: 39733842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
have declared that no competing interest exists for publication.