---
reference_id: "PMID:15146185"
title: "NIPBL, encoding a homolog of fungal Scc2-type sister chromatid cohesion proteins and fly Nipped-B, is mutated in Cornelia de Lange syndrome."
authors:
- Tonkin ET
- Wang TJ
- Lisgo S
- Bamshad MJ
- Strachan T
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/ng1363
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 5/genetics"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "De Lange Syndrome/embryology, genetics, pathology"
- Drosophila Proteins/genetics
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Proteins/genetics
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins/genetics
- Species Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NIPBL, encoding a homolog of fungal Scc2-type sister chromatid cohesion proteins and fly Nipped-B, is mutated in Cornelia de Lange syndrome.
**Authors:** Tonkin ET, Wang TJ, Lisgo S, Bamshad MJ, Strachan T
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1363](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1363)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2004 Jun;36(6):636-41. doi: 10.1038/ng1363. Epub 2004 May 16.

NIPBL, encoding a homolog of fungal Scc2-type sister chromatid cohesion proteins
and fly Nipped-B, is mutated in Cornelia de Lange syndrome.

Tonkin ET(1), Wang TJ, Lisgo S, Bamshad MJ, Strachan T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Newcastle, International Centre
for Life, Central Parkway, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK.

Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a multiple malformation disorder
characterized by dysmorphic facial features, mental retardation, growth delay
and limb reduction defects. We indentified and characterized a new gene, NIPBL,
that is mutated in individuals with CdLS and determined its structure and the
structures of mouse, rat and zebrafish homologs. We named its protein product
delangin. Vertebrate delangins have substantial homology to orthologs in flies,
worms, plants and fungi, including Scc2-type sister chromatid cohesion proteins,
and D. melanogaster Nipped-B. We propose that perturbed delangin function may
inappropriately activate DLX genes, thereby contributing to the proximodistal
limb patterning defects in CdLS. Genome analyses typically identify individual
delangin or Nipped-B-like orthologs in diploid animal and plant genomes. The
evolution of an ancestral sister chromatid cohesion protein to acquire an
additional role in developmental gene regulation suggests that there are
parallels between CdLS and Roberts syndrome.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1363
PMID: 15146185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
