---
reference_id: "PMID:23692943"
title: "Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: an overview."
authors:
- Smith KM
- Squiers J
journal: Crit Care Nurs Clin North Am
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2013.02.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: an overview.
**Authors:** Smith KM, Squiers J
**Journal:** Crit Care Nurs Clin North Am (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccell.2013.02.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2013.02.011)

## Content

1. Crit Care Nurs Clin North Am. 2013 Jun;25(2):263-72. doi: 
10.1016/j.ccell.2013.02.011. Epub 2013 Apr 4.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: an overview.

Smith KM(1), Squiers J.

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt University School of Nursing, Nashville, TN 37240, USA. 
k.melissa.smith@vanderbilt.edu

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a complex cardiovascular disorder particularly 
sensitive to environmental changes and physiologic stress. Warm weather and 
strenuous activity can be a dangerous combination for people that have 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Often sudden cardiac death is the first symptom of 
the disorder. Thorough sports histories and physicals are important preventive 
measures and referrals to cardiovascular specialists should occur for any 
suspicion of cardiac abnormalities. Treatment of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is 
focused on abating the natural clinical progression that includes sudden cardiac 
death, severe heart failure symptoms, and arrhythmias. Safe, effective delivery 
of care to the patient with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy requires a deep 
understanding of the complexities surrounding this precarious cardiac condition.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2013.02.011
PMID: 23692943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]