---
reference_id: "PMID:26677511"
title: DYRK1A Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- van Bon BWM
- Coe BP
- de Vries BBA
- Eichler EE
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DYRK1A Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, van Bon BWM, Coe BP, de Vries BBA, Eichler EE

## Content

1. DYRK1A Syndrome.

van Bon BWM(1), Coe BP(2), de Vries BBA(1), Eichler EE(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2015 Dec 17 [updated 2021 Mar 18].

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
the Netherlands
(2)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, Washington

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: DYRK1A syndrome is characterized by intellectual 
disability including impaired speech development, autism spectrum disorder 
including anxious and/or stereotypic behavior problems, and microcephaly. 
Affected individuals often have a clinically recognizable phenotype including a 
typical facial gestalt, feeding problems, seizures, hypertonia, gait 
disturbances, and foot anomalies. The majority of affected individuals function 
in the moderate-to-severe range of intellectual disability; however, individuals 
with mild intellectual disability have also been reported. Other medical 
concerns relate to febrile seizures in infancy; the development of epilepsy with 
seizures of the atonic, absence, and generalized myoclonic types; short stature; 
and gastrointestinal problems. Ophthalmologic, urogenital, cardiac, and/or 
dental anomalies have been reported.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of DYRK1A syndrome is established in a proband 
with suggestive findings and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in DYRK1A 
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Educational and therapy programs to 
address the specific needs identified; routine treatment of epilepsy under the 
care of a neurologist; standard treatment for orthopedic, dental, cardiac, 
urogenital, ophthalmologic, constipation, and other medical issues. 
Surveillance: Regular monitoring and guidance for educational and behavior 
problems, growth parameters and nutritional status, and safety of oral intake; 
regular lifelong follow up as determined by specialists for issues present 
affecting heart, eyes, and teeth.
GENETIC COUNSELING: DYRK1A syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder typically 
caused by a de novo pathogenic variant. If the DYRK1A pathogenic variant 
identified in the proband is not identified in either parent, the recurrence 
risk to sibs is estimated to be 1% because of the theoretic possibility of 
parental germline mosaicism. Once the DYRK1A pathogenic variant has been 
identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic 
testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 26677511