---
reference_id: "PMID:30730677"
title: "[CT in patients suspected of bacterial meningitis? First antibiotics!]."
authors:
- Jellema K
journal: Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd
year: '2019'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [CT in patients suspected of bacterial meningitis? First antibiotics!].
**Authors:** Jellema K
**Journal:** Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd (2019)

## Content

1. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2019 Feb 7;163:D3601.

[CT in patients suspected of bacterial meningitis? First antibiotics!].

[Article in Dutch]

Jellema K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Haaglanden Medisch Centrum, afd. Neurologie, Den Haag.
(2)Contact: K. Jellema (k.jellema@haaglandenmc.nl).

A lumbar puncture (LP) is often essential for the diagnosis of bacterial 
meningitis. An LP can worsen brain displacement in case of a space-occupying 
lesion. Therefore, in selected patients a CT scan of the brain is made prior to 
performing the LP. However, the level of agreement between experts in diagnosing 
a contraindication for LP on CT scan is low. More importantly, in a substantial 
part of patients, empirical treatment with antibiotics was delayed due to the CT 
scan being performed first. The only effective treatment for patients with 
bacterial meningitis is early administration of antibiotics. Therefore, delay in 
administrating antibiotics should be prevented. Thus, should a CT scan of the 
brain be indicated, antibiotic treatment should be started before said imaging 
diagnostics and/or a potential LP procedure.

PMID: 30730677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]