---
reference_id: "PMID:35628533"
title: "Recent Insight into the Genetic Basis, Clinical Features, and Diagnostic Methods for Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis."
authors:
- Kaminiów K
- Kozak S
- Paprocka J
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms23105729
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Humans
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- "Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/diagnosis, genetics"
- Seizures
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent Insight into the Genetic Basis, Clinical Features, and Diagnostic Methods for Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis.
**Authors:** Kaminiów K, Kozak S, Paprocka J
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms23105729](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23105729)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 May 20;23(10):5729. doi: 10.3390/ijms23105729.

Recent Insight into the Genetic Basis, Clinical Features, and Diagnostic Methods 
for Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis.

Kaminiów K(1), Kozak S(1), Paprocka J(2).

Author information:
(1)Students' Scientific Society, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Faculty of 
Medical Sciences in Katowice, Medical University of Silesia, 40-752 Katowice, 
Poland.
(2)Pediatric Neurology Department, Faculty of Medical Sciences in Katowice, 
Medical University of Silesia, 40-752 Katowice, Poland.

Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) are a group of rare, inherited, 
neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disorders that affect children and adults. 
They are traditionally grouped together, based on shared clinical symptoms and 
pathological ground. To date, 13 autosomal recessive gene variants, as well as 
one autosomal dominant gene variant, of NCL have been described. These genes 
encode a variety of proteins, whose functions have not been fully defined; most 
are lysosomal enzymes, transmembrane proteins of the lysosome, or other 
organelles. Common symptoms of NCLs include the progressive loss of vision, 
mental and motor deterioration, epileptic seizures, premature death, and, in 
rare adult-onset cases, dementia. Depending on the mutation, these symptoms can 
vary, with respect to the severity and onset of symptoms by age. Currently, all 
forms of NCL are fatal, and no curative treatments are available. Herein, we 
provide an overview to summarize the current knowledge regarding the 
pathophysiology, genetics, and clinical manifestation of these conditions, as 
well as the approach to diagnosis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23105729
PMCID: PMC9145894
PMID: 35628533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.