---
reference_id: "PMID:26137553"
title: DYRK1A-mediated Cyclin D1 Degradation in Neural Stem Cells Contributes to the Neurogenic Cortical Defects in Down Syndrome.
authors:
- Najas S
- Arranz J
- Lochhead PA
- Ashford AL
- Oxley D
- Delabar JM
- Cook SJ
- Barallobre MJ
- Arbonés ML
journal: EBioMedicine
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.01.010
keywords:
- Animals
- Cerebral Cortex/pathology
- Cyclin D1/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Down Syndrome/genetics
- G1 Phase/genetics
- Gene Dosage/genetics
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Neural Stem Cells/metabolism
- Neurogenesis/genetics
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- Telencephalon/cytology
- Trisomy/genetics
- Dyrk Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DYRK1A-mediated Cyclin D1 Degradation in Neural Stem Cells Contributes to the Neurogenic Cortical Defects in Down Syndrome.
**Authors:** Najas S, Arranz J, Lochhead PA, Ashford AL, Oxley D, Delabar JM, Cook SJ, Barallobre MJ, Arbonés ML
**Journal:** EBioMedicine (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.01.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.01.010)

## Content

1. EBioMedicine. 2015 Jan 17;2(2):120-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.01.010. 
eCollection 2015.

DYRK1A-mediated Cyclin D1 Degradation in Neural Stem Cells Contributes to the 
Neurogenic Cortical Defects in Down Syndrome.

Najas S(1), Arranz J(1), Lochhead PA(2), Ashford AL(2), Oxley D(3), Delabar 
JM(4), Cook SJ(2), Barallobre MJ(1), Arbonés ML(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Instituto de Biología Molecular de 
Barcelona, CSIC, and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades 
Raras (CIBERER), 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Signalling Programme, The Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus, CB22 
3AT Cambridge, UK.
(3)Proteomics Group, The Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus, CB22 3AT 
Cambridge, UK.
(4)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Inserm, CNRS, UM 75, U 1127, UMR 
7225, ICM, 75013 Paris, France.

Alterations in cerebral cortex connectivity lead to intellectual disability and 
in Down syndrome, this is associated with a deficit in cortical neurons that 
arises during prenatal development. However, the pathogenic mechanisms that 
cause this deficit have not yet been defined. Here we show that the human DYRK1A 
kinase on chromosome 21 tightly regulates the nuclear levels of Cyclin D1 in 
embryonic cortical stem (radial glia) cells, and that a modest increase in 
DYRK1A protein in transgenic embryos lengthens the G1 phase in these 
progenitors. These alterations promote asymmetric proliferative divisions at the 
expense of neurogenic divisions, producing a deficit in cortical projection 
neurons that persists in postnatal stages. Moreover, radial glial progenitors in 
the Ts65Dn mouse model of Down syndrome have less Cyclin D1, and Dyrk1a is the 
triplicated gene that causes both early cortical neurogenic defects and 
decreased nuclear Cyclin D1 levels in this model. These data provide insights 
into the mechanisms that couple cell cycle regulation and neuron production in 
cortical neural stem cells, emphasizing that the deleterious effect of DYRK1A 
triplication in the formation of the cerebral cortex begins at the onset of 
neurogenesis, which is relevant to the search for early therapeutic 
interventions in Down syndrome.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.01.010
PMCID: PMC4484814
PMID: 26137553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]