---
reference_id: "PMID:34498693"
title: A Reference Range for Plasma Levels of Inorganic Pyrophosphate in Children Using the ATP Sulfurylase Method.
authors:
- Bernhard E
- Nitschke Y
- Khursigara G
- Sabbagh Y
- Wang Y
- Rutsch F
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgab615
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Alkaline Phosphatase/genetics, metabolism"
- Biomarkers/blood
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Enzyme Assays/methods, standards"
- "Familial Hypophosphatemic Rickets/blood, diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypophosphatasia/blood, diagnosis, genetics"
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "ATP-Binding Cassette, Sub-Family C Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Phosphates/blood, metabolism"
- "Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum/blood, diagnosis, genetics"
- "Pyrophosphatases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Rare Diseases/blood, diagnosis, genetics"
- Reference Values
- Sulfate Adenylyltransferase/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Reference Range for Plasma Levels of Inorganic Pyrophosphate in Children Using the ATP Sulfurylase Method.
**Authors:** Bernhard E, Nitschke Y, Khursigara G, Sabbagh Y, Wang Y, Rutsch F
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgab615](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgab615)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2022 Jan 1;107(1):109-118. doi:
10.1210/clinem/dgab615.

A Reference Range for Plasma Levels of Inorganic Pyrophosphate in Children Using
the ATP Sulfurylase Method.

Bernhard E(1), Nitschke Y(1), Khursigara G(2), Sabbagh Y(2), Wang Y(3), Rutsch
F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, Muenster University Children's Hospital,
Muenster, Germany.
(2)Inozyme Pharma, Boston,USA.
(3)National Jewish Health Advanced Diagnostic Laboratories, Denver, CO, USA.

PURPOSE: Generalized arterial calcification of infancy, pseudoxanthoma
elasticum, autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets type 2, and
hypophosphatasia are rare inherited disorders associated with altered plasma
levels of inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi). In this study, we aimed to establish a
reference range for plasma PPi in the pediatric population, which would be
essential to support its use as a biomarker in children with mineralization
disorders.
METHODS: Plasma samples were collected from 200 children aged 1 day to 18 years
who underwent blood testing for medical conditions not affecting plasma PPi
levels. PPi was measured in proband plasma utilizing a validated adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) sulfurylase method.
RESULTS: The analytical sensitivity of the ATP sulfurylase assay consisted of
0.15 to 10 µM PPi. Inter- and intra-assay coefficients of variability on
identical samples were below 10%. The standard range of PPi in the blood plasma
of children and adolescents aged 0 to 18 years was calculated as 2.36 to 4.44
µM, with a median of 3.17 µM, with no difference between male and female
probands. PPi plasma levels did not differ significantly in different pediatric
age groups.
MAIN CONCLUSIONS: Our results yielded no noteworthy discrepancy to the reported
standard range of plasma PPi in adults (2-5 µM). We propose the described ATP
sulfurylase method as a diagnostic tool to measure PPi levels in plasma as a
biomarker in the pediatric population.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgab615
PMCID: PMC8684482
PMID: 34498693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
