---
reference_id: "PMID:25763588"
title: "[Ebola virus disease]."
authors:
- Karwowska K
journal: Pol Merkur Lekarski
year: '2015'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Ebola virus disease].
**Authors:** Karwowska K
**Journal:** Pol Merkur Lekarski (2015)

## Content

1. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2015 Jan;38(223):42-5.

[Ebola virus disease].

[Article in Polish]

Karwowska K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Hepatology Ludwik Rydygier Collegium 
Medicum in Bydgoszcz University of Nicolaus Copernicus in Toruń, Poland.

Ebola virus disease is a zoonosis causing high mortality epidemics in both human 
and animal populations. The virus belongs to the Filoviride family. It is 
composed of a single-strand of RNA. Morbidity foci appear in sub-Saharan Africa. 
The most probable reservoir are fruit bats, which are local delicacy. The most 
common route of infection is via mucosa or damaged skin. The spread of disease 
is rapid due to dietary habits, funeral rites and the insufficient supply of 
disposable equipment in hospitals. The incubation period of the disease ranges 
from 2 to 21 days. The beginning is abrupt, dominated by influenza-like 
symptoms. The disease is staggering with the predominant multi-organ failure and 
shock. Present-day epidemic symptoms from digestive system in the form of 
vomiting and diarrhoea are dominant. Currently, the research on vaccine and 
experimental drug is in progress. The virus is damaged by standard disinfectants 
used in health care units. Epidemic, which broke out in February 2014, caused by 
the most dangerous type Zaire, is the greatest of the existing. Morbidity and 
mortality is underestimated due to numerous unreported cases.

© 2015 MEDPRESS.

PMID: 25763588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]