---
reference_id: "PMID:23555231"
title: Transcriptome profiling of Giardia intestinalis using strand-specific RNA-seq.
authors:
- Franzén O
- Jerlström-Hultqvist J
- Einarsson E
- Ankarklev J
- Ferella M
- Andersson B
- Svärd SG
journal: PLoS Comput Biol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003000
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcriptome profiling of Giardia intestinalis using strand-specific RNA-seq.
**Authors:** Franzén O, Jerlström-Hultqvist J, Einarsson E, Ankarklev J, Ferella M, Andersson B, Svärd SG
**Journal:** PLoS Comput Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003000](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003000)

## Content

1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2013;9(3):e1003000. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003000. Epub 
2013 Mar 28.

Transcriptome profiling of Giardia intestinalis using strand-specific RNA-seq.

Franzén O(1), Jerlström-Hultqvist J, Einarsson E, Ankarklev J, Ferella M, 
Andersson B, Svärd SG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.

Giardia intestinalis is a common cause of diarrheal disease and it consists of 
eight genetically distinct genotypes or assemblages (A-H). Only assemblages A 
and B infect humans and are suggested to represent two different Giardia 
species. Correlations exist between assemblage type and host-specificity and to 
some extent symptoms. Phenotypical differences have been documented between 
assemblages and genome sequences are available for A, B and E. We have 
characterized and compared the polyadenylated transcriptomes of assemblages A, B 
and E. Four genetically different isolates were studied (WB (AI), AS175 (AII), 
P15 (E) and GS (B)) using paired-end, strand-specific RNA-seq. Most of the 
genome was transcribed in trophozoites grown in vitro, but at vastly different 
levels. RNA-seq confirmed many of the present annotations and refined the 
current genome annotation. Gene expression divergence was found to recapitulate 
the known phylogeny, and uncovered lineage-specific differences in expression. 
Polyadenylation sites were mapped for over 70% of the genes and revealed many 
examples of conserved and unexpectedly long 3' UTRs. 28 open reading frames were 
found in a non-transcribed gene cluster on chromosome 5 of the WB isolate. 
Analysis of allele-specific expression revealed a correlation between 
allele-dosage and allele expression in the GS isolate. Previously reported 
cis-splicing events were confirmed and global mapping of cis-splicing identified 
only one novel intron. These observations can possibly explain differences in 
host-preference and symptoms, and it will be the basis for further studies of 
Giardia pathogenesis and biology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003000
PMCID: PMC3610916
PMID: 23555231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.