---
reference_id: "PMID:33979489"
title: Vemurafenib plus Rituximab in Refractory or Relapsed Hairy-Cell Leukemia.
authors:
- Tiacci E
- De Carolis L
- Simonetti E
- Capponi M
- Ambrosetti A
- Lucia E
- Antolino A
- Pulsoni A
- Ferrari S
- Zinzani PL
- Ascani S
- Perriello VM
- Rigacci L
- Gaidano G
- Della Seta R
- Frattarelli N
- Falcucci P
- Foà R
- Visani G
- Zaja F
- Falini B
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2031298
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Bone Marrow/pathology
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm"
- Female
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- "Leukemia, Hairy Cell/drug therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasm, Residual"
- Neutropenia/chemically induced
- Progression-Free Survival
- Recurrence
- Remission Induction
- "Rituximab/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Thrombocytopenia/chemically induced
- "Vemurafenib/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vemurafenib plus Rituximab in Refractory or Relapsed Hairy-Cell Leukemia.
**Authors:** Tiacci E, De Carolis L, Simonetti E, Capponi M, Ambrosetti A, Lucia E, Antolino A, Pulsoni A, Ferrari S, Zinzani PL, Ascani S, Perriello VM, Rigacci L, Gaidano G, Della Seta R, Frattarelli N, Falcucci P, Foà R, Visani G, Zaja F, Falini B
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2031298](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2031298)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2021 May 13;384(19):1810-1823. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2031298.

Vemurafenib plus Rituximab in Refractory or Relapsed Hairy-Cell Leukemia.

Tiacci E(1), De Carolis L(1), Simonetti E(1), Capponi M(1), Ambrosetti A(1),
Lucia E(1), Antolino A(1), Pulsoni A(1), Ferrari S(1), Zinzani PL(1), Ascani
S(1), Perriello VM(1), Rigacci L(1), Gaidano G(1), Della Seta R(1), Frattarelli
N(1), Falcucci P(1), Foà R(1), Visani G(1), Zaja F(1), Falini B(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Institute of Hematology, Ospedale S. Maria della Misericordia, and
the Department of Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia (E.T., L.D.C., E.S.,
M.C., S.A., V.M.P., B.F.), the Department of Medicine, Section of Hematology,
University of Verona, Verona (A. Ambrosetti), the Hematology Unit, Ospedale di
Cosenza, Cosenza (E.L.), the Hematology Unit, Department of Transfusional
Medicine-SIMMT, Maria Paternò-Arezzo Hospital, Ragusa (A. Antolino), the
Hematology Unit, Department of Translational and Precision Medicine, Sapienza
University of Rome (A.P., R.F.), and the Hematology and Stem Cell Transplant
Unit, A.O. San Camillo Forlanini (L.R.), Rome, the Department of Hematology,
Spedali Civili di Brescia, Brescia (S.F.), IRCCS Azienda
Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Istituto di Ematologia "Seràgnoli" and
Dipartimento di Medicina Specialistica, Diagnostica e Sperimentale, Università
di Bologna, Bologna (P.L.Z.), the Department of Translational Medicine, Division
of Hematology, Amedeo Avogadro University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara (G.G.),
the Hematology Unit, Ospedale di Carrara, Carrara (R.D.S.), the Hematology Unit,
Ospedale di Frosinone, Frosinone (N.F.), the Hematology Unit, Ospedale di
Ronciglione, Viterbo (P.F.), the Hematology Unit, Ospedale di Pesaro, Pesaro
(G.V.), and the Hematology Unit, Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria
Integrata-Ospedale Maggiore, Trieste (F.Z.) - all in Italy.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2021 Jul;18(7):399. doi: 10.1038/s41571-021-00526-9.

BACKGROUND: Hairy-cell leukemia (HCL) is a CD20+ indolent B-cell cancer in which
a BRAF V600E kinase-activating mutation plays a pathogenetic role. In clinical
trials involving patients with refractory or relapsed HCL, the targeting of BRAF
V600E with the oral BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib led to a response in 91% of the
patients; 35% of the patients had a complete response. However, the median
relapse-free survival was only 9 months after treatment was stopped.
METHODS: In a phase 2, single-center, academic trial involving patients with
refractory or relapsed HCL, we assessed the safety and efficacy of vemurafenib
(960 mg, administered twice daily for 8 weeks) plus concurrent and sequential
rituximab (375 mg per square meter of body-surface area, administered for 8
doses over a period of 18 weeks). The primary end point was a complete response
at the end of planned treatment.
RESULTS: Among the 30 enrolled patients with HCL, the median number of previous
therapies was 3. A complete response was observed in 26 patients (87%) in the
intention-to-treat population. All the patients who had HCL that had been
refractory to chemotherapy (10 patients) or rituximab (5) and all those who had
previously been treated with BRAF inhibitors (7) had a complete response.
Thrombocytopenia resolved after a median of 2 weeks, and neutropenia after a
median of 4 weeks. Of the 26 patients with a complete response, 17 (65%) were
cleared of minimal residual disease (MRD). Progression-free survival among all
30 patients was 78% at a median follow-up of 37 months; relapse-free survival
among the 26 patients with a response was 85% at a median follow-up of 34
months. In post hoc analyses, MRD negativity and no previous BRAF inhibitor
treatment correlated with longer relapse-free survival. Toxic effects, mostly of
grade 1 or 2, were those that had previously been noted for these agents.
CONCLUSIONS: In this small study, a short, chemotherapy-free, nonmyelotoxic
regimen of vemurafenib plus rituximab was associated with a durable complete
response in most patients with refractory or relapsed HCL. (Funded by the
European Research Council and others; HCL-PG03 EudraCT number, 2014-003046-27.).

Copyright © 2021 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2031298
PMID: 33979489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
