---
reference_id: "PMID:40708003"
title: "The burden of illness in Prader-Willi syndrome: a systematic literature review."
authors:
- Dempsey D
- Hall M
- Lanning B
- Barron-Millar B
- Huang M
- Cowen N
- Nagao M
- Gandhi R
- Bhatnagar A
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03787-0
keywords:
- Humans
- Cost of Illness
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/economics, mortality"
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The burden of illness in Prader-Willi syndrome: a systematic literature review.
**Authors:** Dempsey D, Hall M, Lanning B, Barron-Millar B, Huang M, Cowen N, Nagao M, Gandhi R, Bhatnagar A
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-025-03787-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-025-03787-0)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2025 Jul 24;20(1):374. doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03787-0.

The burden of illness in Prader-Willi syndrome: a systematic literature review.

Dempsey D(1), Hall M(2), Lanning B(3), Barron-Millar B(3), Huang M(4), Cowen 
N(4), Nagao M(4), Gandhi R(4), Bhatnagar A(4).

Author information:
(1)Soleno Therapeutics Europe Ltd, Dublin, Ireland. dairine@soleno.life.
(2)Maria Hall Consulting Ltd, Thame, England, UK.
(3)Kintiga, Cambridge, England, UK.
(4)Soleno Therapeutics, Inc, Redwood City, CA, 94065, USA.

BACKGROUND: Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a rare, genetic neurobehavioral and 
metabolic disorder marked by hyperphagia, behavioral challenges, and significant 
comorbidities, requiring a multidisciplinary approach for effective management. 
This systematic review aimed to comprehensively evaluate the burden of disease 
associated with PWS, focusing on mortality, healthcare resource utilization, 
economic burden, and quality of life.
METHODS: The literature search, conducted on August 13, 2024, included the 
MEDLINE, Embase, and Cochrane Library databases, as well as conference 
proceedings. Original studies published since 2014 were selected based on 
relevance to PWS patient burden, covering mortality, humanistic and economic 
impacts. Data from the selected studies were extracted, and currency conversions 
were standardized.
RESULTS: For the topics of mortality, humanistic burden and economic burden, a 
total of 11 studies, 95 studies, and 33 studies were included, respectively. 
Individuals with PWS faced significantly reduced life expectancy compared to the 
general population, with leading causes of death including respiratory failure, 
consequences of uncontrolled hyperphagia, and cardiovascular complications. 
Hyperphagia contributed substantially to the disease burden, necessitating 
constant food security measures to prevent life-threatening complications. 
Primary caregivers, predominantly parents of individuals with PWS, experienced 
significant emotional and psychological strain. The time-intensive 
responsibilities of implementing food security measures heavily impacted their 
daily lives, social and family dynamics, as well as their financial health. 
Quality of life for patients was less frequently reported but markedly impaired, 
driven by physical health challenges, behavioral issues, and social isolation. 
Wider family dynamics were also often impacted, with siblings reporting 
increased psychosocial stress and feelings of neglect. The direct costs of 
managing PWS, including frequent hospitalizations and specialized care, were 
consistently reported to exceed those of matched controls without PWS, 
highlighting the substantial economic burden associated with the condition.
CONCLUSION: This systematic literature review highlights the profound burden of 
PWS on patients, caregivers, payers of care, and healthcare systems. 
Complications of PWS reduce life expectancy, impair quality of life, and impose 
considerable financial strain. The findings underscore an urgent need for 
comprehensive support and innovative treatments that address the complex 
manifestations and consequences of PWS, particularly hyperphagia, to improve 
outcomes for patients and their families.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-025-03787-0
PMCID: PMC12291511
PMID: 40708003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Not applicable. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing 
interests: Dairine DEMPSEY is an employee of Soleno Therapeutics Europe Ltd. 
Michael HUANG, Neil COWEN, Mitch NAGAO, Raj GANDHI and Anish BHATNAGAR are 
employees of Soleno Therapeutics Inc, USA. Maria HALL is a contractor for Soleno 
Therapeutics Europe Ltd. Kintiga was commissioned to undertake the systematic 
literature review. Ben LANNING and Ben BARRON-MILLAR are employees of Kintiga.