---
reference_id: "PMID:20384825"
title: "Dentinogenesis imperfecta in children with osteogenesis imperfecta: a clinical and ultrastructural study."
authors:
- Majorana A
- Bardellini E
- Brunelli PC
- Lacaita M
- Cazzolla AP
- Favia G
journal: Int J Paediatr Dent
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-263X.2010.01033.x
keywords:
- Child
- "Dentin/pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Dentinogenesis Imperfecta/classification, complications, pathology"
- "Dentition, Permanent"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Microscopy, Confocal"
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/classification, complications, pathology"
- "Tooth, Deciduous"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dentinogenesis imperfecta in children with osteogenesis imperfecta: a clinical and ultrastructural study.
**Authors:** Majorana A, Bardellini E, Brunelli PC, Lacaita M, Cazzolla AP, Favia G
**Journal:** Int J Paediatr Dent (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-263X.2010.01033.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-263X.2010.01033.x)

## Content

1. Int J Paediatr Dent. 2010 Mar;20(2):112-8. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-263X.2010.01033.x.

Dentinogenesis imperfecta in children with osteogenesis imperfecta: a clinical 
and ultrastructural study.

Majorana A(1), Bardellini E, Brunelli PC, Lacaita M, Cazzolla AP, Favia G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Dental School, University of Brescia, 
Brescia, Italy. majorana@med.unibs.it

AIM: The aim of this study was to assess the correlation between osteogenesis 
imperfecta (OI) and dentinogenesis imperfecta (DI) from both a clinical and 
histological point of view, particularly clarifying the structural and 
ultrastructural dentine changes.
DESIGN: Sixteen children (6-12 years aged) with diagnosis of OI were examined 
for dental alterations referable to DI. For each patient, the OI type (I, III, 
or IV) was recorded. Extracted or normally exfoliated primary teeth were 
subjected to a histological examination (to both optical microscopy and confocal 
laser-scanning microscopy).
RESULTS: A total of ten patients had abnormal discolourations referable to DI: 
four patients were affected by OI type I, three patients by OI type III, and 
three patients by OI type IV. The discolourations, yellow/brown or opalescent 
grey, could not be related to the different types of OI. Histological exam of 
primary teeth showed severe pathological change in the dentin, structured into 
four different layers. A collagen defect due to odontoblast dysfunction was 
theorized to be on the base of the histological changes.
CONCLUSIONS: There is no correlation between the type of OI and the type of 
discolouration. The underlying dentinal defect seems to be related to an 
odontoblast dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-263X.2010.01033.x
PMID: 20384825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]