---
reference_id: "PMID:38254762"
title: "Genetic, Epigenetic and Transcriptome Alterations in Liposarcoma for Target Therapy Selection."
authors:
- Lesovaya EA
- Fetisov TI
- Bokhyan BY
- Maksimova VP
- Kulikov EP
- Belitsky GA
- Kirsanov KI
- Yakubovskaya MG
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cancers16020271
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic, Epigenetic and Transcriptome Alterations in Liposarcoma for Target Therapy Selection.
**Authors:** Lesovaya EA, Fetisov TI, Bokhyan BY, Maksimova VP, Kulikov EP, Belitsky GA, Kirsanov KI, Yakubovskaya MG
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers16020271](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16020271)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2024 Jan 8;16(2):271. doi: 10.3390/cancers16020271.

Genetic, Epigenetic and Transcriptome Alterations in Liposarcoma for Target 
Therapy Selection.

Lesovaya EA(1)(2)(3), Fetisov TI(1), Bokhyan BY(1), Maksimova VP(1), Kulikov 
EP(2), Belitsky GA(1), Kirsanov KI(1)(3), Yakubovskaya MG(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)N.N. Blokhin Russian Cancer Research Center, Ministry of Health of Russia, 24 
Kashirskoe Shosse, Moscow 115478, Russia.
(2)Faculty of Oncology, I.P. Pavlov Ryazan State Medical University, Ministry of 
Health of Russia, 9 Vysokovol'tnaya St., Ryazan 390026, Russia.
(3)Laboratory of Single Cell Biology, Peoples' Friendship University of Russia, 
6 Miklukho-Maklaya St., Moscow 117198, Russia.

Liposarcoma (LPS) is one of the most common adult soft-tissue sarcomas (STS), 
characterized by a high diversity of histopathological features as well as to a 
lesser extent by a spectrum of molecular abnormalities. Current targeted 
therapies for STS do not include a wide range of drugs and surgical resection is 
the mainstay of treatment for localized disease in all subtypes, while many LPS 
patients initially present with or ultimately progress to advanced disease that 
is either unresectable, metastatic or both. The understanding of the molecular 
characteristics of liposarcoma subtypes is becoming an important option for the 
detection of new potential targets and development novel, biology-driven 
therapies for this disease. Innovative therapies have been introduced and they 
are currently part of preclinical and clinical studies. In this review, we 
provide an analysis of the molecular genetics of liposarcoma followed by a 
discussion of the specific epigenetic changes in these malignancies. Then, we 
summarize the peculiarities of the key signaling cascades involved in the 
pathogenesis of the disease and possible novel therapeutic approaches based on a 
better understanding of subtype-specific disease biology. Although heterogeneity 
in liposarcoma genetics and phenotype as well as the associated development of 
resistance to therapy make difficult the introduction of novel therapeutic 
targets into the clinic, recently a number of targeted therapy drugs were 
proposed for LPS treatment. The most promising results were shown for CDK4/6 and 
MDM2 inhibitors as well as for the multi-kinase inhibitors anlotinib and 
sunitinib.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers16020271
PMCID: PMC10813500
PMID: 38254762

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.