---
reference_id: "PMID:15331316"
title: "Mechanisms and management of hypertensive heart disease: from left ventricular hypertrophy to heart failure."
authors:
- Izzo JL Jr
- Gradman AH
journal: Med Clin North Am
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2004.06.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms and management of hypertensive heart disease: from left ventricular hypertrophy to heart failure.
**Authors:** Izzo JL Jr, Gradman AH
**Journal:** Med Clin North Am (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mcna.2004.06.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcna.2004.06.002)

## Content

1. Med Clin North Am. 2004 Sep;88(5):1257-71. doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2004.06.002.

Mechanisms and management of hypertensive heart disease: from left ventricular 
hypertrophy to heart failure.

Izzo JL Jr(1), Gradman AH.

Author information:
(1)State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14215, USA. 
jizzo@buffalo.edu

Hypertensive heart disease (HHD) is a spectrum of abnormalities that represents 
the accumulation of a lifetime of functional and structural adaptations to 
increased blood pressure load. Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), increasing 
vascular and ventricular stiffness,and diastolic dysfunction are prominent 
intermediate features of this syndrome that operate in parallel with ischemic 
heart disease and ultimately cause heart failure (HF) if inadequately treated. 
Outcomes in HHD and HF are improved by antihypertensive drugs at any stage of 
the condition. This review describes an integrated model of the natural history, 
pathogenesis, and drug treatment of hypertensive heart disease that is 
consistent with the recommendations of the Seventh Report of the Joint National 
Committee on the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood 
Pressure, including an important modification to the HF guideline published by 
the American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association that 
includes LVH and diastolic dysfunction as treatable conditions within the HHD-HF 
continuum.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcna.2004.06.002
PMID: 15331316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]