---
reference_id: "PMID:28734699"
title: An update on the genetics of dementia with Lewy bodies.
authors:
- Vergouw LJM
- van Steenoven I
- van de Berg WDJ
- Teunissen CE
- van Swieten JC
- Bonifati V
- Lemstra AW
- de Jong FJ
journal: Parkinsonism Relat Disord
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2017.07.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An update on the genetics of dementia with Lewy bodies.
**Authors:** Vergouw LJM, van Steenoven I, van de Berg WDJ, Teunissen CE, van Swieten JC, Bonifati V, Lemstra AW, de Jong FJ
**Journal:** Parkinsonism Relat Disord (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.parkreldis.2017.07.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2017.07.009)

## Content

1. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2017 Oct;43:1-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2017.07.009. Epub 2017 Jul 13.

An update on the genetics of dementia with Lewy bodies.

Vergouw LJM(1), van Steenoven I(2), van de Berg WDJ(3), Teunissen CE(4), van 
Swieten JC(5), Bonifati V(6), Lemstra AW(2), de Jong FJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Alzheimercenter Zuidwest Nederland, Erasmus 
Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
l.vergouw@erasmusmc.nl.
(2)Department of Neurology and Alzheimercenter, Amsterdam Neuroscience, VU 
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Neurosciences, Section Clinical Neuroanatomy, 
Amsterdam Neuroscience, VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Amsterdam Neuroscience, VU Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Neurology and Alzheimercenter Zuidwest Nederland, Erasmus 
Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

The genetic architecture of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is increasingly 
taking shape. Initially, genetic research focused mainly on linkage and 
candidate gene studies in small series of DLB patients. More recently, 
association and exome sequencing studies in larger groups have been conducted, 
and have shown that several variants in GBA and the APOE ε4 allele are important 
genetic risk factors for DLB. However, genetic research in DLB is still in its 
infancy. So far, many genetic studies have been biased and performed in 
clinically and pathologically heterogeneous populations. Therefore, it is likely 
that multiple DLB-specific genetic determinants still have to be identified. To 
further our understanding of the role of genetics in DLB, future genetic studies 
should be unbiased and performed in large series of DLB patients, ideally with 
both a clinical diagnosis and pathological confirmation. The combination of 
genomic techniques with other research modalities, such as proteomic research, 
is a promising approach to identify novel genetic determinants. More knowledge 
about the genetics of DLB will increase our understanding of the pathophysiology 
of the disease and its relation with Parkinson's Disease and Alzheimer's 
Disease, and may eventually lead to the development of disease modifying 
treatments.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2017.07.009
PMID: 28734699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]