---
reference_id: "PMID:32029870"
title: Germline mutations of multiple breast cancer-related genes are differentially associated with triple-negative breast cancers and prognostic factors.
authors:
- Hata C
- Nakaoka H
- Xiang Y
- Wang D
- Yang A
- Liu D
- Liu F
- Zou Q
- Wei L
- Zheng K
- Inoue I
- You H
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s10038-020-0729-7
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- BRCA1 Protein/genetics
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- Cadherins/genetics
- Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group N Protein/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Testing
- Germ-Line Mutation/genetics
- Humans
- Mass Screening
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- Prognosis
- Progression-Free Survival
- Risk Factors
- "Triple Negative Breast Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Germline mutations of multiple breast cancer-related genes are differentially associated with triple-negative breast cancers and prognostic factors.
**Authors:** Hata C, Nakaoka H, Xiang Y, Wang D, Yang A, Liu D, Liu F, Zou Q, Wei L, Zheng K, Inoue I, You H
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s10038-020-0729-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s10038-020-0729-7)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2020 Jul;65(7):577-587. doi: 10.1038/s10038-020-0729-7. Epub 2020
 Feb 7.

Germline mutations of multiple breast cancer-related genes are differentially 
associated with triple-negative breast cancers and prognostic factors.

Hata C(1)(2), Nakaoka H(1), Xiang Y(3), Wang D(4), Yang A(5), Liu D(5), Liu 
F(5), Zou Q(6), Wei L(7), Zheng K(8), Inoue I(9), You H(10).

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics Laboratory, Department of Genomics and Evolutionary Biology, 
National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Japan.
(2)Bioinformation and DDBJ Center, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, 
Japan.
(3)The Department of Clinical Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(4)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Chongqing University Cancer Hospital& 
Chongqing Cancer Institute & Chongqing Cancer Hospital, Chongqing, People's 
Republic of China.
(5)School of Stomatology and Medicine, Foshan University, Foshan, Guangdong, 
China.
(6)Affiliated Cancer Hospital & Institute of Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(7)NHC Key Laboratory of Birth Defects and Reproductive Health, Chongqing 
Population and Family Planning Science and Technology Research Institute, 
Chongqing, China.
(8)Department of Endocrine and Breast Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China. kezheng81@163.com.
(9)Human Genetics Laboratory, Department of Genomics and Evolutionary Biology, 
National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Japan. itinoue@nig.ac.jp.
(10)Affiliated Cancer Hospital & Institute of Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China. youhua307@163.com.

Genetic testing for BRCA1/2 mutations has become the standard clinical practice. 
Recent findings suggest the clinical significance of multigene panel testing of 
BRCA1/2 and other cancer-related genes. However, the clinical features of 
patients with breast cancer with germline mutations identified using multigene 
panels remain unclear. In this study, DNA samples from 583 Chinese women with 
breast cancer were subjected to target sequencing for 54 cancer-related genes 
using a pre-capture pooling method followed by next-generation sequencing. We 
identified 79 pathogenic germline mutations in 21 cancer-related genes. 
Forty-five patients (7.7%) harbored BRCA1/2 mutations, and 38 patients (6.5%) 
carried pathogenic mutations in the remaining 19 genes. PALB2 was the most 
commonly (1.2%) mutated gene other than BRCA1/2. Most of the identified 
pathogenic mutations were novel, suggesting mutation screening by using 
multigene panel testing is important particularly for non-European populations. 
Mutations in BRCA1/2 and the other cancer-related genes were differentially 
associated with clinical features. BRCA1 mutation carriers were strongly 
associated with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), whereas BRCA2 mutation 
carriers were not. Tumors in BRCA1-mutation carriers had a high histological 
grade. Patients with BRCA2-mutated breast cancers were likely to develop 
E-cadherin-negative tumors with bone metastases. Furthermore, mutations in PALB2 
were strongly associated with TNBC. We demonstrated the usefulness of multigene 
panel testing and observed that a substantial proportion of patients with breast 
cancer had hereditary risk factors. Identifying differential associations 
between mutation status and clinical features will advance our understanding 
regarding the pathologies of this heterogeneous disease.

DOI: 10.1038/s10038-020-0729-7
PMID: 32029870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]