---
reference_id: "PMID:15379880"
title: Photosensitivity in lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Scheinfeld N
- Deleo VA
journal: Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0781.2004.00094.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Photosensitivity in lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Scheinfeld N, Deleo VA
**Journal:** Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0781.2004.00094.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0781.2004.00094.x)

## Content

1. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed. 2004 Oct;20(5):272-9. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0781.2004.00094.x.

Photosensitivity in lupus erythematosus.

Scheinfeld N(1), Deleo VA.

Author information:
(1)St-Lukes Roosevelt Hospital Center, 1090 Amsterdam Avenue, Suite 11D, New 
York, NY 10025, USA.

BACKGROUND: Lupus erythematosus is a systemic disease process that may manifest 
with a variety of internal and cutaneous findings. Photosensitivity is one the 
most common manifestations of lupus erythematosus. In patients with lupus 
erythematosus, there is a relationship between exposure to ultraviolet light, 
autoantibodies, genetics and other factors in the development of 
photosensitivity.
METHODS: Literature was reviewed on the topics of lupus erythematosus and 
photosensitivity discussed together and separately. The suggested mechanisms for 
their relationship were reviewed and analyzed.
RESULTS: Photosensitivity's relationship to and influence on the systemic 
manifestations of lupus remain to be defined. Mechanisms for photosensitivity 
might include: modulation of autoantibody location, cytotoxic effects, apoptosis 
induction with autoantigens in apoptotic blebs, upregulation of adhesion 
molecules and cytokines, induction of nitric oxide synthase expression and 
ultraviolet-generated antigenic DNA. Tumor necrosis factor alpha also seems to 
play a role in the development of photosensitivity.
CONCLUSION: The basis for photosensitivity in lupus has yet to be fully defined. 
It is more commonly associated with subacute and tumid lupus erythematosus than 
with other variants. Anti-Ro antibodies appear to relate to photosensitivity. 
Tumor necrosis factor alpha polymorphisms appear to be important in some 
variants of lupus with photosensitivity. There is no sine qua non antibody or 
mutation of photosensitivity in lupus. In patients with lupus, more work needs 
to be done to define the mechanisms of photosensitivity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0781.2004.00094.x
PMID: 15379880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]