---
reference_id: "PMID:30974434"
title: "Turkish Ectodermal Dysplasia Cohort: From Phenotype to Genotype in 17 Families."
authors:
- Güven Y
- Bal E
- Altunoglu U
- Yücel E
- Hadj-Rabia S
- Koruyucu M
- Bahar Tuna E
- Çıldır Ş
- Aktören O
- Bodemer C
- Uyguner ZO
- Smahi A
- Kayserili H
journal: Cytogenet Genome Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1159/000499325
keywords:
- Consanguinity
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Ectodysplasins/genetics
- Edar Receptor/genetics
- Edar-Associated Death Domain Protein/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA/methods"
- Turkey
- Wnt Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Turkish Ectodermal Dysplasia Cohort: From Phenotype to Genotype in 17 Families.
**Authors:** Güven Y, Bal E, Altunoglu U, Yücel E, Hadj-Rabia S, Koruyucu M, Bahar Tuna E, Çıldır Ş, Aktören O, Bodemer C, Uyguner ZO, Smahi A, Kayserili H
**Journal:** Cytogenet Genome Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000499325](https://doi.org/10.1159/000499325)

## Content

1. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2019;157(4):189-196. doi: 10.1159/000499325. Epub 2019
Apr  12.

Turkish Ectodermal Dysplasia Cohort: From Phenotype to Genotype in 17 Families.

Güven Y, Bal E, Altunoglu U, Yücel E, Hadj-Rabia S, Koruyucu M, Bahar Tuna E, 
Çıldır Ş, Aktören O, Bodemer C, Uyguner ZO, Smahi A, Kayserili H.

Hypohidrotic or anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED/EDA) is characterized by 
impaired development of the hair, teeth, or sweat glands. HED/EDA is inherited 
in an X-linked, autosomal dominant, or autosomal recessive pattern and caused by 
the pathogenic variants in 4 genes: EDA, EDAR, EDARADD, and WNT10A. The aim of 
the present study was to perform molecular screening of these 4 genes in a 
cohort of Turkish individuals diagnosed with HED/EDA. We screened for pathogenic 
variants of WNT10A, EDA, EDAR, and EDARADD through Sanger sequencing. We further 
assessed the clinical profiles of the affected individuals in order to establish 
phenotype-genotype correlation. In 17 (63%) out of 27 families, 17 pathogenic 
variants, 8 being novel, were detected in the 4 well-known ectodermal dysplasia 
genes. EDAR and EDA variants were identified in 6 families each, WNT10A variants 
in 4, and an EDARADD variant in 1, accounting for 35.3, 35.3, 23.5, and 5.9% of 
mutation-positive families, respectively. The low mutation detection rate of the 
cohort and the number of the EDAR pathogenic variants being as high as the EDA 
ones were the most noteworthy findings which could be attributed to the high 
consanguinity rate.

© 2019 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000499325
PMID: 30974434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]