---
reference_id: "PMID:39193252"
title: "Diagnostic value of soluble Interleukin-2 receptor in patients suffering neurosarcoidosis: A systematic review."
authors:
- Chanpura A
- Gupta RK
- Sriwastava SK
- Rahmig J
journal: J Cent Nerv Syst Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/11795735241274186
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic value of soluble Interleukin-2 receptor in patients suffering neurosarcoidosis: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Chanpura A, Gupta RK, Sriwastava SK, Rahmig J
**Journal:** J Cent Nerv Syst Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/11795735241274186](https://doi.org/10.1177/11795735241274186)

## Content

1. J Cent Nerv Syst Dis. 2024 Aug 26;16:11795735241274186. doi:
10.1177/11795735241274186. eCollection 2024.

Diagnostic value of soluble Interleukin-2 receptor in patients suffering
neurosarcoidosis: A systematic review.

Chanpura A(1), Gupta RK(2), Sriwastava SK(2), Rahmig J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, State University of New York Downstate Health
Sciences University, Brooklyn, NY, USA.
(2)Division of Multiple Sclerosis and Neuroimmunology, Department of Neurology,
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, TUD Dresden
University of Technology, Dresden, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Neurosarcoidosis is an inflammatory granulomatous disease. Up to 25%
of occult sarcoidosis affecting the nervous system are only detected by autopsy.
In addition, in recent years the suspicion arose that the soluble Interleukin-2
Receptor (sIL-2R) might be useful in differentiating between neurosarcoidosis
and neurosarcoidosis-like diseases such as neurotuberculosis, multiple
sclerosis, or cerebral lymphoma.
OBJECTIVES: Therefore, we aimed to systematically review randomized controlled
trials (RCT), observational studies, and case-control studies evaluating sIL-2R
levels in neurosarcoidosis patients.
DESIGN: For this systematic review, a comprehensive literature search of
electronic databases including EMBASE, The Web Of Science, The Cochrane Library,
MEDLINE, and Google Scholar was conducted. The search was limited to the English
language and publication date up to January 08th, 2024.
DATA SOURCES AND METHODS: As part of the search strategy conducted, 6 articles
met the inclusion criteria. Two independent reviewers extracted the relevant
data from each article. In addition, 2 independent reviewers assessed the
quality of each study using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS).
RESULTS: We included 6 studies comprising 98 patients suffering from
neurosarcoidosis, 525 non-sarcoidosis patients, and 118 healthy controls.
Included studies were published between 2010 and 2023. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
sIL-2R levels differed significantly between neurosarcoidosis patients and
multiple sclerosis, vasculitis, and healthy controls whereas serum sIL-2R levels
did not reveal sufficient discriminative power. sIL-2R index was able to
discriminate neurosarcoidosis from neurotuberculosis, bacterial/viral
meningitis, and healthy controls.
CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review, we found indications that sIL-2R may be
a useful biomarker for the diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis. To determine an
additional diagnostic value of sIL-2R, large prospective studies are needed that
not only examine absolute sIL-2R levels in serum or CSF but also the dynamic
changes as well as the implications of renal function on sIL-2R levels.

© The Author(s) 2024.

DOI: 10.1177/11795735241274186
PMCID: PMC11348353
PMID: 39193252

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
