---
reference_id: "PMID:25887408"
title: Genome-wide expression analysis suggests a crucial role of dysregulation of matrix metalloproteinases pathway in undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma.
authors:
- Espinal-Enríquez J
- Muñoz-Montero S
- Imaz-Rosshandler I
- Huerta-Verde A
- Mejía C
- Hernández-Lemus E
journal: BMC Genomics
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1372-0
keywords:
- Biomarkers
- Cell Communication
- Cell Survival/genetics
- Computational Biology
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- "Matrix Metalloproteinases/genetics, metabolism"
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
- Neoplasm Grading
- ROC Curve
- Reproducibility of Results
- Signal Transduction
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide expression analysis suggests a crucial role of dysregulation of matrix metalloproteinases pathway in undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma.
**Authors:** Espinal-Enríquez J, Muñoz-Montero S, Imaz-Rosshandler I, Huerta-Verde A, Mejía C, Hernández-Lemus E
**Journal:** BMC Genomics (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12864-015-1372-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-015-1372-0)

## Content

1. BMC Genomics. 2015 Mar 18;16(1):207. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1372-0.

Genome-wide expression analysis suggests a crucial role of dysregulation of
matrix metalloproteinases pathway in undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma.

Espinal-Enríquez J(1)(2), Muñoz-Montero S(3), Imaz-Rosshandler I(4),
Huerta-Verde A(5), Mejía C(6), Hernández-Lemus E(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Genomic Medicine, Periférico Sur 4809, Arenal Tepepan,
TlalpanMéxico City, 14610, México. jespinal@inmegen.gob.mx.
(2)Center for Sciences of Complexity (C3), UNAM, Ciudad Universitaria, México
City, 01010, México. jespinal@inmegen.gob.mx.
(3)National Institute of Genomic Medicine, Periférico Sur 4809, Arenal Tepepan,
TlalpanMéxico City, 14610, México. smunoz@grupoabraxas.com.
(4)National Institute of Genomic Medicine, Periférico Sur 4809, Arenal Tepepan,
TlalpanMéxico City, 14610, México. iimaz@inmegen.gob.mx.
(5)National Institute of Genomic Medicine, Periférico Sur 4809, Arenal Tepepan,
TlalpanMéxico City, 14610, México. ajosuehv@gmail.com.
(6)Faculty of Natural Sciences, Autonomous University of Querétaro, P.O. Box
184, Querétaro, 76230, México. Maria.C.Mejia@uv.es.
(7)National Institute of Genomic Medicine, Periférico Sur 4809, Arenal Tepepan,
TlalpanMéxico City, 14610, México. ehernandez@inmegen.gob.mx.
(8)Center for Sciences of Complexity (C3), UNAM, Ciudad Universitaria, México
City, 01010, México. ehernandez@inmegen.gob.mx.

BACKGROUND: Thyroid cancer (TC) is the most common malignant cancer of the
Endocrine System. Histologically, there are three main subtypes of TC:
follicular, papillary and anaplastic. Diagnosing a thyroid tumor subtype with a
high level of accuracy and confidence is still a difficult task because genetic,
molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying the transition from differentiated
to undifferentiated thyroid tumors are not well understood. A genome-wide
analysis of these three subtypes of thyroid carcinoma was carried out in order
to identify significant differences in expression levels as well as enriched
pathways for non-shared molecular and cellular features between subtypes.
RESULTS: Inhibition of matrix metalloproteinases pathway is a major event
involved in thyroid cancer progression and its dysregulation may result crucial
for invasiveness, migration and metastasis. This pathway is drastically altered
in ATC while in FTC and PTC, the most important pathways are related to
DNA-repair activation or cell to cell signaling events.
CONCLUSION: A progression from FTC to PTC and then to ATC was detected and
validated on two independent datasets. Moreover, PTX3, COLEC12 and PDGFRA genes
were found as possible candidates for biomarkers of ATC while GPR110 could be
tested to distinguish PTC over other tumor subtypes. The genome-wide analysis
emphasizes the preponderance of pathway-dysregulation mechanisms over simple
gene-malfunction as the main mechanism involved in the development of a cancer
phenotype.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-015-1372-0
PMCID: PMC4377021
PMID: 25887408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
