---
reference_id: "PMID:38521060"
title: Single-cell dissection of the human motor and prefrontal cortices in ALS and FTLD.
authors:
- Pineda SS
- Lee H
- Ulloa-Navas MJ
- Linville RM
- Garcia FJ
- Galani K
- Engelberg-Cook E
- Castanedes MC
- Fitzwalter BE
- Pregent LJ
- Gardashli ME
- DeTure M
- Vera-Garcia DV
- Hucke ATS
- Oskarsson BE
- Murray ME
- Dickson DW
- Heiman M
- Belzil VV
- Kellis M
journal: Cell
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.02.031
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell dissection of the human motor and prefrontal cortices in ALS and FTLD.
**Authors:** Pineda SS, Lee H, Ulloa-Navas MJ, Linville RM, Garcia FJ, Galani K, Engelberg-Cook E, Castanedes MC, Fitzwalter BE, Pregent LJ, Gardashli ME, DeTure M, Vera-Garcia DV, Hucke ATS, Oskarsson BE, Murray ME, Dickson DW, Heiman M, Belzil VV, Kellis M
**Journal:** Cell (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2024.02.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2024.02.031)

## Content

1. Cell. 2024 Apr 11;187(8):1971-1989.e16. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.02.031. Epub 
2024 Mar 22.

Single-cell dissection of the human motor and prefrontal cortices in ALS and 
FTLD.

Pineda SS(1), Lee H(2), Ulloa-Navas MJ(3), Linville RM(4), Garcia FJ(5), Galani 
K(6), Engelberg-Cook E(3), Castanedes MC(3), Fitzwalter BE(2), Pregent LJ(3), 
Gardashli ME(3), DeTure M(3), Vera-Garcia DV(3), Hucke ATS(3), Oskarsson BE(7), 
Murray ME(3), Dickson DW(3), Heiman M(8), Belzil VV(9), Kellis M(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Computer Science and 
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Broad Institute 
of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02141, USA.
(2)Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.
(4)Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 
Cambridge, MA 02141, USA.
(5)Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Department of Brain and Cognitive 
Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(6)Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Broad Institute of MIT and 
Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02141, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.
(8)Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Department of Brain and Cognitive 
Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 
Electronic address: mheiman@mit.edu.
(9)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA. 
Electronic address: veronique.belzil@vumc.org.
(10)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Computer Science and 
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 
02141, USA. Electronic address: manoli@mit.edu.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) 
share many clinical, pathological, and genetic features, but a detailed 
understanding of their associated transcriptional alterations across vulnerable 
cortical cell types is lacking. Here, we report a high-resolution, comparative 
single-cell molecular atlas of the human primary motor and dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortices and their transcriptional alterations in sporadic and 
familial ALS and FTLD. By integrating transcriptional and genetic information, 
we identify known and previously unidentified vulnerable populations in cortical 
layer 5 and show that ALS- and FTLD-implicated motor and spindle neurons possess 
a virtually indistinguishable molecular identity. We implicate potential disease 
mechanisms affecting these cell types as well as non-neuronal drivers of 
pathogenesis. Finally, we show that neuron loss in cortical layer 5 tracks more 
closely with transcriptional identity rather than cellular morphology and 
extends beyond previously reported vulnerable cell types.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.02.031
PMCID: PMC11086986
PMID: 38521060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.