---
reference_id: "PMID:28192633"
title: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, classical type.
authors:
- Bowen JM
- Sobey GJ
- Burrows NP
- Colombi M
- Lavallee ME
- Malfait F
- Francomano CA
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31548
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, classical type.
**Authors:** Bowen JM, Sobey GJ, Burrows NP, Colombi M, Lavallee ME, Malfait F, Francomano CA
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31548](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31548)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2017 Mar;175(1):27-39. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31548. Epub 2017 Feb 13.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, classical type.

Bowen JM, Sobey GJ, Burrows NP, Colombi M, Lavallee ME, Malfait F, Francomano 
CA.

Classical EDS is a heritable disorder of connective tissue. Patients are 
affected with joint hypermobility, skin hyperextensibilty, and skin fragility 
leading to atrophic scarring and significant bruising. These clinical features 
suggest consideration of the diagnosis which then needs to be confirmed, 
preferably by genetic testing. The most recent criteria for the diagnosis of EDS 
were devised in Villefranche in 1997. [Beighton et al. (1998); Am J Med Genet 
77:31-37]. The aims set out in the Villefranche Criteria were: to enable 
diagnostic uniformity for clinical and research purposes, to understand the 
natural history of each subtype of EDS, to inform management and genetic 
counselling, and to identify potential areas of research. The authors recognized 
that the criteria would need updating, but viewed the Villefranche nosology as a 
good starting point. Since 1997, there have been major advances in the molecular 
understanding of classical EDS. Previous question marks over genetic 
heterogeneity have been largely surpassed by evidence that abnormalities in type 
V collagen are the cause. Advances in molecular testing have made it possible to 
identify the causative mutation in the majority of patients. This has aided the 
further clarification of this diagnosis. The aim of this literature review is to 
summarize the current knowledge and highlight areas for future research. © 2017 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31548
PMID: 28192633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]