---
reference_id: "PMID:37541846"
title: Skewed X-inactivation is associated with retinal dystrophy in female carriers of RPGR mutations.
authors:
- Usman M
- Jüschke C
- Song F
- Kastrati D
- Owczarek-Lipska M
- Eilers J
- Pauleikhoff L
- Lange C
- Neidhardt J
journal: Life Sci Alliance
year: '2023'
doi: 10.26508/lsa.202201814
keywords:
- Male
- Female
- Humans
- X Chromosome Inactivation/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics
- Heterozygote
- Retinal Cone Photoreceptor Cells
- Eye Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skewed X-inactivation is associated with retinal dystrophy in female carriers of RPGR mutations.
**Authors:** Usman M, Jüschke C, Song F, Kastrati D, Owczarek-Lipska M, Eilers J, Pauleikhoff L, Lange C, Neidhardt J
**Journal:** Life Sci Alliance (2023)
**DOI:** [10.26508/lsa.202201814](https://doi.org/10.26508/lsa.202201814)

## Content

1. Life Sci Alliance. 2023 Aug 4;6(10):e202201814. doi: 10.26508/lsa.202201814. 
Print 2023 Oct.

Skewed X-inactivation is associated with retinal dystrophy in female carriers of 
RPGR mutations.

Usman M(1), Jüschke C(1), Song F(1), Kastrati D(1), Owczarek-Lipska M(1)(2), 
Eilers J(1), Pauleikhoff L(3), Lange C(3)(4), Neidhardt J(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Carl 
von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.
(2)Junior Research Group, Genetics of Childhood Brain Malformations, School of 
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.
(3)Eye Center, Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.
(4)Ophtha-Lab, Department of Ophthalmology at St. Franziskus Hospital, Muenster, 
Germany.
(5)Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Carl 
von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany 
john.neidhardt@uni-oldenburg.de.
(6)Research Center Neurosensory Science, Carl von Ossietzky University 
Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.

Progressive degeneration of rod and cone photoreceptors frequently is caused by 
mutations in the X-chromosomal gene Retinitis Pigmentosa GTPase Regulator 
(RPGR). Males hemizygous for a RPGR mutation often are affected by Retinitis 
Pigmentosa (RP), whereas female mutation carriers only occasionally present with 
severe RP phenotypes. The underlying pathomechanism leading to RP in female 
carriers is not well understood. Here, we analyzed a three-generation family in 
which two of three female carriers of a nonsense RPGR mutation presented with 
RP. Among two cell lines derived from the same female family members, 
differences were detected in RPGR transcript expression, in localization of RPGR 
along cilia, as well as in primary cilium length. Significantly, these 
differences correlated with alterations in X-chromosomal inactivation patterns 
found in the patient-derived cell lines from females. In summary, our data 
suggest that skewed X-chromosomal inactivation is an important factor that 
determines the disease manifestation of RP among female carriers of pathogenic 
sequence alterations in the RPGR gene.

© 2023 Usman et al.

DOI: 10.26508/lsa.202201814
PMCID: PMC10403639
PMID: 37541846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.