---
reference_id: "PMID:37354892"
title: Sengers syndrome and AGK-related disorders - Minireview of phenotypic variability and clinical outcomes in molecularly confirmed cases.
authors:
- Wu CW
- Caha M
- Smoot L
- Harris DJ
- Roberts AE
- Sacharow S
- Bodamer O
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107626
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sengers syndrome and AGK-related disorders - Minireview of phenotypic variability and clinical outcomes in molecularly confirmed cases.
**Authors:** Wu CW, Caha M, Smoot L, Harris DJ, Roberts AE, Sacharow S, Bodamer O
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107626](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107626)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2023 Jul;139(3):107626. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107626.
Epub  2023 Jun 10.

Sengers syndrome and AGK-related disorders - Minireview of phenotypic 
variability and clinical outcomes in molecularly confirmed cases.

Wu CW(1), Caha M(2), Smoot L(3), Harris DJ(4), Roberts AE(5), Sacharow S(4), 
Bodamer O(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of Medicine, Boston Children's 
Hospital/Harvard Medical School, United States; Department of Genetics and 
Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University and University Hospitals, 
United States; Department of Urology, Case Western Reserve University and 
University Hospitals, United States. Electronic address: 
wilfred.wu@childrens.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, SUNY Downstate Health Sciences University, United 
States.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital/Harvard Medical School, 
United States.
(4)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of Medicine, Boston Children's 
Hospital/Harvard Medical School, United States.
(5)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of Medicine, Boston Children's 
Hospital/Harvard Medical School, United States; Department of Cardiology, Boston 
Children's Hospital/Harvard Medical School, United States.

Sengers syndrome (OMIM# 212350) is a rare autosomal recessive mitochondrial 
disease caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in the AGK gene, which encodes 
the acylglycerol kinase enzyme. The syndrome was originally defined as a "triad" 
of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, cataracts, and lactic acidosis, with or without 
skeletal myopathy. The clinical manifestation of Sengers Syndrome exhibits 
substantial heterogeneity, with mild and severe/infantile forms reported. 
Further, biallelic AGK pathogenic variants have also been identified in a 
familial case of non-syndromic isolated cataract (OMIM# 614691), expanding our 
understanding of the gene's influence beyond the originally defined syndrome. In 
this study, we provide a systematic review of molecularly confirmed cases with 
biallelic AGK pathogenic variants (Supplementary Table 1). Our analysis 
demonstrates the variable expressivity and penetrance of the central features of 
Sengers syndrome, as follows: cataracts (98%), cardiomyopathy (88%), lactic 
acidosis (adjusted 88%), and skeletal myopathy (adjusted 74%) (Table 1). 
Furthermore, we investigate the associations between genotype, biochemical 
profiles, and clinical outcomes, with a particular focus on infantile mortality. 
Our findings reveal that patients carrying homozygous nonsense variants have a 
higher incidence of infant mortality and a lower median age of death (p = 0.005 
and p = 0.02, Table 2a). However, the location of pathogenic variants within the 
AGK domains was not significantly associated with infantile death (p = 0.62, 
Table 2b). Additionally, we observe a borderline association between the absence 
of lactic acidosis and longer survival (p = 0.053, Table 2c). Overall, our 
systematic review sheds light on the diverse clinical manifestations of 
AGK-related disorders and highlights potential factors that influence its 
prognosis. These provide important implications for the diagnosis, treatment, 
and counseling of affected individuals and families.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107626
PMID: 37354892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
report no conflicts of interest.