---
reference_id: "PMID:24993898"
title: "The early detection of Salla disease through second-tier tests in newborn screening: how to face incidental findings."
authors:
- Couce ML
- Macías-Vidal J
- Castiñeiras DE
- Bóveda MD
- Fraga JM
- Fernández-Marmiesse A
- Coll MJ
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.06.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The early detection of Salla disease through second-tier tests in newborn screening: how to face incidental findings.
**Authors:** Couce ML, Macías-Vidal J, Castiñeiras DE, Bóveda MD, Fraga JM, Fernández-Marmiesse A, Coll MJ
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.06.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.06.005)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2014 Sep;57(9):527-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.06.005. Epub 
2014 Jun 30.

The early detection of Salla disease through second-tier tests in newborn 
screening: how to face incidental findings.

Couce ML(1), Macías-Vidal J(2), Castiñeiras DE(3), Bóveda MD(3), Fraga JM(4), 
Fernández-Marmiesse A(3), Coll MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Diagnosis and Treatment of Congenital Metabolic Diseases, Department 
of Pediatrics, Hospital Clinico Universitario de Santiago, Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain; CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain; 
IDIS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. Electronic address: 
maria.luz.couce.pico@sergas.es.
(2)CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain; Secció d'Errors 
Congènits del Metabolisme (IBC), Servei de Bioquímica i Genètica Molecular, 
Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain; IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Unit of Diagnosis and Treatment of Congenital Metabolic Diseases, Department 
of Pediatrics, Hospital Clinico Universitario de Santiago, Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain; IDIS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(4)Unit of Diagnosis and Treatment of Congenital Metabolic Diseases, Department 
of Pediatrics, Hospital Clinico Universitario de Santiago, Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain; CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain; 
IDIS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

We describe here a 34 months child, practically asymptomatic which presented 
with high levels of free sialic acid in urine by biochemical detection in 
second-tier tests newborn screening and with two disease causing mutations in 
SLC17A5 gene. SLC17A5 mutation analysis showed p.Tyr306* previously described 
and the novel mutation p.Leu167Pro. This early onset diagnosis allowed us to 
perform a fast and accurate genetic counseling to the family, helped to better 
understanding the natural history of this rare disease and probably it could 
promote cost reduction in future diagnostic tests in the hypothetic case of 
starting symptoms without diagnosis established. Moreover, an early diagnosis 
could save family from a long period of time until achieving a definitive 
diagnostic and to develop an early symptomatic and supportive management of 
patient to attenuate, as much as possible, disease complications. But, above 
all, this case illustrates the huge ethical dilemma which arises from any 
secondary finding (second tier) in newborn screening.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.06.005
PMID: 24993898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]