---
reference_id: "PMID:33096491"
title: Retrospective Analysis of 28 Cases Confirmed for Primary Angiitis of the Central Nervous System by Biopsy.
authors:
- Chang HB
- Gao M
- Zhang JN
- Cao WD
- Guo SL
- Wang P
- Cheng G
- Zhao HL
journal: J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2020.105400
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Biopsy
- Central Nervous System/pathology
- Craniotomy
- Early Diagnosis
- Female
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Time Factors
- Time-to-Treatment
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/etiology, pathology, therapy"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retrospective Analysis of 28 Cases Confirmed for Primary Angiitis of the Central Nervous System by Biopsy.
**Authors:** Chang HB, Gao M, Zhang JN, Cao WD, Guo SL, Wang P, Cheng G, Zhao HL
**Journal:** J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2020.105400](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2020.105400)

## Content

1. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2020 Dec;29(12):105400. doi: 
10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2020.105400. Epub 2020 Oct 20.

Retrospective Analysis of 28 Cases Confirmed for Primary Angiitis of the Central 
Nervous System by Biopsy.

Chang HB(1), Gao M(2), Zhang JN(3), Cao WD(4), Guo SL(5), Wang P(6), Cheng G(7), 
Zhao HL(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, 
Beijing 100853,China. Electronic address: changhongbo@163.com.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, The seventh medical center of PLA general hospital, 
Beijing 100010, China. Electronic address: ruoshuilanlan@163.com.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, 
Beijing 100853,China. Electronic address: jnzhang2005@163.com.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, 
Beijing 100853,China. Electronic address: weidcao@fmmu.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, 
Beijing 100853,China. Electronic address: guovictor@163.com.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, 
Beijing 100853,China. Electronic address: 986257010@qq.com.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, 
Beijing 100853,China. Electronic address: yjscg2003@126.com.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, 
Beijing 100853,China. Electronic address: zhaohulin-90@sohu.com.

OBJECTIVE: The present study aimed to summarize the clinical characteristics, 
therapeutic effects, and long-term prognosis of cases confirmed with primary 
angiitis of the central nervous system (PACNS) by biopsy, analyze the risk 
factors, and provide clinical guidance for the diagnosis and treatment of the 
disease.
METHODS: Retrospective analysis was performed on 28 cases of PACNS confirmed by 
biopsy, and the age, gender, pathological results, course of the disease, 
imaging manifestations, treatment, and prognosis of the patients were analyzed 
and summarized.
RESULTS: The cohort (age 16-60 years) comprised of 16 males. The average time 
from the visit to diagnosis was 6 months. The first symptom was chronic headache 
in 18 patients. The pathological results were accompanied by demyelination in 10 
cases and glial hyperplasia in 6 cases. A total of 27 patients received 
treatments including glucocorticoid+cyclophosphamide; of these, 3 cases of 
craniotomy were improved. Among the 28 patients, 15 patients improved after the 
treatment, 12 patients had no significant improvement, and 1 patient was 
deceased. Patients with a long course of the disease before diagnosis, a 
Karnofsky performance status (KPS) score <60 at the time of diagnosis, a 
behavioral, cognitive abnormality before treatment, and a short-term relapse 
(0.3-1 month) have a poor outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: PACNS patients are prone to misdiagnosis and mistreatment, with 
unknown etiology and poor prognosis due to delayed treatment. Therefore, early 
biopsy, pathological diagnosis, and timely treatment with glucocorticoid shock 
are recommended, and patients with obvious mass effect should be treated by 
surgical resection.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2020.105400
PMID: 33096491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no competing interest.