---
reference_id: "PMID:38164552"
title: "Gordon Holmes Syndrome Model Mice Exhibit Alterations in Microglia, Age, and Sex-Specific Disruptions in Cognitive and Proprioceptive Function."
authors:
- George AJ
- Wei W
- Pyaram DN
- Gomez M
- Shree N
- Kadirvelu J
- Lail H
- Wanders D
- Murphy AZ
- Mabb AM
journal: eNeuro
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0074-23.2023
keywords:
- Male
- Female
- Mice
- Animals
- Microglia
- Cerebellar Ataxia
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Cognition
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
- Hypogonadism
- Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone/deficiency
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gordon Holmes Syndrome Model Mice Exhibit Alterations in Microglia, Age, and Sex-Specific Disruptions in Cognitive and Proprioceptive Function.
**Authors:** George AJ, Wei W, Pyaram DN, Gomez M, Shree N, Kadirvelu J, Lail H, Wanders D, Murphy AZ, Mabb AM
**Journal:** eNeuro (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1523/ENEURO.0074-23.2023](https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0074-23.2023)

## Content

1. eNeuro. 2024 Jan 25;11(1):ENEURO.0074-23.2023. doi:
10.1523/ENEURO.0074-23.2023.  Print 2024 Jan.

Gordon Holmes Syndrome Model Mice Exhibit Alterations in Microglia, Age, and 
Sex-Specific Disruptions in Cognitive and Proprioceptive Function.

George AJ(1)(2), Wei W(1)(2), Pyaram DN(1)(2), Gomez M(1), Shree N(1), Kadirvelu 
J(1), Lail H(3), Wanders D(3), Murphy AZ(1), Mabb AM(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Institute, Georgia State University, Atlanta 30302, Georgia.
(2)Center for Behavioral Neuroscience, Georgia State University, Atlanta 30303, 
Georgia.
(3)Department of Nutrition, Georgia State University, Atlanta 30303, Georgia.
(4)Neuroscience Institute, Georgia State University, Atlanta 30302, Georgia 
amabb@gsu.edu.

Gordon Holmes syndrome (GHS) is a neurological disorder associated with 
neuroendocrine, cognitive, and motor impairments with corresponding 
neurodegeneration. Mutations in the E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF216 are strongly 
linked to GHS. Previous studies show that deletion of Rnf216 in mice led to 
sex-specific neuroendocrine dysfunction due to disruptions in the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. To address RNF216 action in cognitive and 
motor functions, we tested Rnf216 knock-out (KO) mice in a battery of motor and 
learning tasks for a duration of 1 year. Although male and female KO mice did 
not demonstrate prominent motor phenotypes, KO females displayed abnormal limb 
clasping. KO mice also showed age-dependent strategy and associative learning 
impairments with sex-dependent alterations of microglia in the hippocampus and 
cortex. Additionally, KO males but not females had more negative resting 
membrane potentials in the CA1 hippocampus without any changes in miniature 
excitatory postsynaptic current (mEPSC) frequencies or amplitudes. Our findings 
show that constitutive deletion of Rnf216 alters microglia and neuronal 
excitability, which may provide insights into the etiology of sex-specific 
impairments in GHS.

Copyright © 2024 George et al.

DOI: 10.1523/ENEURO.0074-23.2023
PMCID: PMC10849025
PMID: 38164552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]