---
reference_id: PMID:28729727
title: "Senescent cells: an emerging target for diseases of ageing."
authors:
- Childs BG
- Gluscevic M
- Baker DJ
- Laberge RM
- Marquess D
- Dananberg J
- van Deursen JM
journal: Nat Rev Drug Discov
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/nrd.2017.116
keywords:
- "Aging/pathology, physiology"
- Animals
- "Atherosclerosis/metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Cycle Checkpoints/physiology
- Cell Proliferation/physiology
- Cellular Senescence/physiology
- Humans
- "Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Senescent cells: an emerging target for diseases of ageing.
**Authors:** Childs BG, Gluscevic M, Baker DJ, Laberge RM, Marquess D, Dananberg J, van Deursen JM
**Journal:** Nat Rev Drug Discov (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrd.2017.116](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrd.2017.116)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2017 Oct;16(10):718-735. doi: 10.1038/nrd.2017.116. Epub 
2017 Jul 21.

Senescent cells: an emerging target for diseases of ageing.

Childs BG(1), Gluscevic M(1), Baker DJ(1)(2), Laberge RM(3), Marquess D(3), 
Dananberg J(3), van Deursen JM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic.
(2)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 200 1st St. SW, 
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.
(3)Unity Biotechnology, 3280 Bayshore Boulevard Suite 100, Brisbane, California 
94005, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2018 May;17(5):377. doi: 10.1038/nrd.2018.44.

Chronological age represents the single greatest risk factor for human disease. 
One plausible explanation for this correlation is that mechanisms that drive 
ageing might also promote age-related diseases. Cellular senescence, which is a 
permanent state of cell cycle arrest induced by cellular stress, has recently 
emerged as a fundamental ageing mechanism that also contributes to diseases of 
late life, including cancer, atherosclerosis and osteoarthritis. Therapeutic 
strategies that safely interfere with the detrimental effects of cellular 
senescence, such as the selective elimination of senescent cells (SNCs) or the 
disruption of the SNC secretome, are gaining significant attention, with several 
programmes now nearing human clinical studies.

DOI: 10.1038/nrd.2017.116
PMCID: PMC5942225
PMID: 28729727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement J.M.v.D. is a 
cofounder of Unity Biotechnology, which is a company developing senolytic 
medicines, including small molecules that selectively eliminate senescent cells. 
R.M.L., J.M.v.D., D.J.B. and B.G.C. are co-inventors on patent applications 
licensed to or filed by Unity Biotechnology. R.M.L., J.D. and D.M. are employed 
by Unity Biotechnology.