---
reference_id: "PMID:34029143"
title: Synaptopodin deficiency exacerbates kidney disease in a mouse model of Alport syndrome.
authors:
- Ning L
- Suleiman HY
- Miner JH
journal: Am J Physiol Renal Physiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.00035.2021
keywords:
- "Actin Cytoskeleton/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Glomerular Basement Membrane/metabolism
- Kidney Diseases/genetics
- Mice
- "Microfilament Proteins/deficiency, metabolism"
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics, metabolism"
- Podocytes/metabolism
- Proteinuria/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Synaptopodin deficiency exacerbates kidney disease in a mouse model of Alport syndrome.
**Authors:** Ning L, Suleiman HY, Miner JH
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Renal Physiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajprenal.00035.2021](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajprenal.00035.2021)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2021 Jul 1;321(1):F12-F25. doi: 
10.1152/ajprenal.00035.2021. Epub 2021 May 24.

Synaptopodin deficiency exacerbates kidney disease in a mouse model of Alport 
syndrome.

Ning L(1), Suleiman HY(1), Miner JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.

Synaptopodin (Synpo) is an actin-associated protein in podocyte foot processes. 
By generating mice that completely lack Synpo, we previously showed that Synpo 
is dispensable for normal kidney function. However, lack of Synpo worsened 
adriamycin-induced nephropathy, indicating a protective role for Synpo in 
injured podocytes. Here, we investigated whether lack of Synpo directly impacts 
a genetic disease, Alport syndrome (AS), because Synpo is reduced in podocytes 
of affected humans and mice; whether this is merely an association or pathogenic 
is unknown. We used collagen type IV-α5 (Col4a5) mutant mice, which model 
X-linked AS, showing glomerular basement membrane (GBM) abnormalities, eventual 
foot process effacement, and progression to end-stage kidney disease. We 
intercrossed mice carrying mutations in Synpo and Col4a5 to produce 
double-mutant mice. Urine and tissue were taken at select time points to 
evaluate albuminuria, histopathology, and glomerular capillary wall composition 
and ultrastructure. Lack of Synpo in Col4a5-/Y, Col4a5-/-, or Col4a5+/- Alport 
mice led to the acceleration of disease progression, including more severe 
proteinuria and glomerulosclerosis. Absence of Synpo attenuated the shift of 
myosin IIA from the podocyte cell body and major processes to actin cables near 
the GBM in the areas of effacement. We speculate that this is mechanistically 
associated with enhanced loss of podocytes due to easier detachment from the 
GBM. We conclude that Synpo deletion exacerbates the disease phenotype in Alport 
mice, revealing the podocyte actin cytoskeleton as a target for therapy in 
patients with AS.NEW & NOTEWORTHY Alport syndrome (AS) is a hereditary disease 
of the glomerular basement with hematuria and proteinuria. Podocytes eventually 
exhibit foot process effacement, indicating actin cytoskeletal changes. To 
investigate how cytoskeletal changes impact podocytes, we generated Alport mice 
lacking synaptopodin, an actin-binding protein in foot processes. Analysis 
showed a more rapid disease progression, demonstrating that synaptopodin is 
protective. This suggests that the actin cytoskeleton is a target for therapy in 
AS and perhaps other glomerular diseases.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.00035.2021
PMCID: PMC8321802
PMID: 34029143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J. H. Miner has received consulting income 
related to Alport syndrome from Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Deerfield Management, 
Retrophin, BridgeBio Pharma, and Mantra Bio and has received research support 
related to Alport syndrome from Reneo Pharmaceuticals and Chinook Therapeutics 
and has received licensing income related to Alport syndrome from Angion 
Biomedica.