---
reference_id: "PMID:20177397"
title: Genomic instability--an evolving hallmark of cancer.
authors:
- Negrini S
- Gorgoulis VG
- Halazonetis TD
journal: Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1038/nrm2858
keywords:
- Animals
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins
- Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p16/genetics
- DNA Damage
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Genomic Instability
- Humans
- "Models, Biological"
- Mutation
- Neoplasms/genetics
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic instability--an evolving hallmark of cancer.
**Authors:** Negrini S, Gorgoulis VG, Halazonetis TD
**Journal:** Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrm2858](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm2858)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Mar;11(3):220-8. doi: 10.1038/nrm2858.

Genomic instability--an evolving hallmark of cancer.

Negrini S(1), Gorgoulis VG, Halazonetis TD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, CH-1205 Geneva, Switzerland.

Genomic instability is a characteristic of most cancers. In hereditary cancers, 
genomic instability results from mutations in DNA repair genes and drives cancer 
development, as predicted by the mutator hypothesis. In sporadic 
(non-hereditary) cancers the molecular basis of genomic instability remains 
unclear, but recent high-throughput sequencing studies suggest that mutations in 
DNA repair genes are infrequent before therapy, arguing against the mutator 
hypothesis for these cancers. Instead, the mutation patterns of the tumour 
suppressor TP53 (which encodes p53), ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and 
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A; which encodes p16INK4A and p14ARF) 
support the oncogene-induced DNA replication stress model, which attributes 
genomic instability and TP53 and ATM mutations to oncogene-induced DNA damage.

DOI: 10.1038/nrm2858
PMID: 20177397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]