---
reference_id: "PMID:37728516"
title: Methylated DNA Markers for Sporadic Colorectal and Endometrial Cancer Are Strongly Associated with Lynch Syndrome Cancers.
authors:
- Bramblet RM
- Bakkum-Gamez JN
- Slettedahl SW
- Foote PH
- Taylor WR
- Berger CK
- Gysbers BJ
- Arndt J
- Chen L
- Doering KA
- Burger KN
- Mahoney DW
- Sherman ME
- Kisiel JB
- Samadder NJ
journal: Cancer Prev Res (Phila)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-23-0107
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Methylated DNA Markers for Sporadic Colorectal and Endometrial Cancer Are Strongly Associated with Lynch Syndrome Cancers.
**Authors:** Bramblet RM, Bakkum-Gamez JN, Slettedahl SW, Foote PH, Taylor WR, Berger CK, Gysbers BJ, Arndt J, Chen L, Doering KA, Burger KN, Mahoney DW, Sherman ME, Kisiel JB, Samadder NJ
**Journal:** Cancer Prev Res (Phila) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-23-0107](https://doi.org/10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-23-0107)

## Content

1. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2023 Nov 1;16(11):611-620. doi: 
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-23-0107.

Methylated DNA Markers for Sporadic Colorectal and Endometrial Cancer Are 
Strongly Associated with Lynch Syndrome Cancers.

Bramblet RM(1), Bakkum-Gamez JN(1), Slettedahl SW(2), Foote PH(3), Taylor WR(3), 
Berger CK(3), Gysbers BJ(3), Arndt J(3), Chen L(4), Doering KA(3), Burger KN(2), 
Mahoney DW(2), Sherman ME(5), Kisiel JB(#)(3), Samadder NJ(#)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(2)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Minnesota.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota.
(4)Division of Anatomic Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona.
(5)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, 
Florida.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, 
Arizona.
(#)Contributed equally

Lynch syndrome (LS) markedly increases risks of colorectal and endometrial 
cancers. Early detection biomarkers for LS cancers could reduce the needs for 
invasive screening and surgical prophylaxis.To validate a panel of methylated 
DNA markers (MDM) previously identified in sporadic colorectal cancer and 
endometrial cancer for discrimination of these cancers in LS.In a case-control 
design, previously identified MDMs for the detection of colorectal cancer and 
endometrial cancer were assayed by qMSP on tissue-extracted DNA. Results were 
normalized to ACTB values within each sample. Least absolute shrinkage and 
selection operator models to classify colorectal cancer and endometrial cancer 
were trained on sporadic cases and controls and then applied to classify 
colorectal cancer and endometrial cancer, in those with LS, and 
cross-validated.We identified colorectal cancer cases (23 with LS, 48 sporadic), 
colorectal controls (32 LS, 48 sporadic), endometrial cancer cases (30 LS, 48 
sporadic), and endometrial controls (29 LS, 37 sporadic). A 3-MDM panel (LASS4, 
LRRC4, and PPP2R5C) classified LS-CRC from LS controls with an AUC of 0.92 
(0.84-0.99); results were similar for sporadic colorectal cancer. A 6-MDM panel 
(SFMBT2, MPZ, CYTH2, DIDO1, chr10.4479, and EMX2OS) discriminated LS-EC from LS 
controls with an AUC of 0.92 (0.83-1.0); the AUC for sporadic endometrial cancer 
versus sporadic controls was nominally higher, 0.99 (0.96-1.0).MDMs previously 
identified in sporadic endometrial cancer and colorectal cancer discriminate 
between endometrial cancer and benign endometrium and colorectal cancer and 
benign colorectum in LS. This supports the inclusion of patients with LS within 
future prospective clinical trials evaluating endometrial cancer and colorectal 
cancer MDMs and may provide a new avenue for cancer screening or surveillance in 
this high-risk population.
PREVENTION RELEVANCE: Lynch syndrome (LS) markedly increases risks of colorectal 
and endometrial cancers. Early detection biomarkers for LS cancers could reduce 
the needs for invasive screening and surgery. Methylated DNA markers previously 
identified in sporadic endometrial cancer and colorectal cancer discriminate 
between benign and cancer tissue in LS.

©2023 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-23-0107
PMCID: PMC10870731
PMID: 37728516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: Jamie N. 
Bakkum-Gamez, William R. Taylor, Doulas W. Mahoney, and John B. Kisiel 
contributed to Mayo Clinic intellectual property which is licensed to Exact 
Sciences (Madison WI) and may receive royalties, paid to Mayo Clinic.