---
reference_id: "PMID:40074868"
title: Endometrium-derived organoids from cystic fibrosis patients and mice as new models to study disease-associated endometrial pathobiology.
authors:
- De Pauw E
- Gommers B
- Ensinck MM
- Timmerman S
- De Vriendt S
- Bueds C
- Wei M
- Hermans F
- Arnauts K
- Ramalho AS
- Vermeulen F
- Dupont L
- Lambrechts D
- Carlon MS
- Vankelecom H
journal: Cell Mol Life Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00018-025-05627-7
keywords:
- Female
- "Organoids/pathology, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Cystic Fibrosis/pathology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Endometrium/pathology, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator/metabolism, genetics"
- Menstrual Cycle
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endometrium-derived organoids from cystic fibrosis patients and mice as new models to study disease-associated endometrial pathobiology.
**Authors:** De Pauw E, Gommers B, Ensinck MM, Timmerman S, De Vriendt S, Bueds C, Wei M, Hermans F, Arnauts K, Ramalho AS, Vermeulen F, Dupont L, Lambrechts D, Carlon MS, Vankelecom H
**Journal:** Cell Mol Life Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00018-025-05627-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-025-05627-7)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2025 Mar 13;82(1):109. doi: 10.1007/s00018-025-05627-7.

Endometrium-derived organoids from cystic fibrosis patients and mice as new 
models to study disease-associated endometrial pathobiology.

De Pauw E(1), Gommers B(1), Ensinck MM(2), Timmerman S(3), De Vriendt S(1), 
Bueds C(1), Wei M(1), Hermans F(4), Arnauts K(5), Ramalho AS(6), Vermeulen 
F(6)(7), Dupont L(2)(8), Lambrechts D(9)(10), Carlon MS(2), Vankelecom H(11).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Tissue Plasticity in Health and Disease, Cluster of Stem Cell 
and Developmental Biology, Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven 
(University of Leuven), Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases and Thoracic Surgery (BREATHE), Department 
of Chronic Diseases and Metabolism, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospitals Leuven (UZ 
Leuven), Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Department of Cardiology and Organ Systems, Biomedical Research Institute 
(BIOMED), Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences, Hasselt University, Diepenbeek, 
Belgium.
(5)Department of Chronic Diseases and Metabolism (CHROMETA), Translational 
Research Center for Gastrointestinal Disorders (TARGID), KU Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(6)CF Centre, Woman and Child Unit, Department of Development and Regeneration, 
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Pulmonology, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(8)Department of Respiratory Diseases, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(9)VIB- Center for Cancer Biology, Leuven, Belgium.
(10)Laboratory for Translational Genetics, Department of Human Genetics, KU 
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(11)Laboratory of Tissue Plasticity in Health and Disease, Cluster of Stem Cell 
and Developmental Biology, Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven 
(University of Leuven), Leuven, Belgium. hugo.vankelecom@kuleuven.be.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a life-shortening genetic disorder, caused by mutations 
in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein that regulates ion 
and fluid transport in epithelial tissue. Female CF patients face considerable 
fertility challenges, with higher prevalence of deficient fertility compared to 
healthy women. Not much is known about the underlying causes. In particular, the 
pathobiology of the endometrium, the uterus' inner lining essential for 
pregnancy and expressing fluctuating CFTR levels during the menstrual cycle, is 
unexplored in CF. To address this gap, we developed organoid models from CF 
patient endometrium. The organoids recapitulated CF characteristics and revealed 
molecular and pathway differences in cycle-recapitulating hormone responses 
compared to healthy endometrial organoids. Furthermore, specific functional 
aberrations were restored by CFTR modulator treatment. To further complement 
human organoid models for unraveling endometrial pathobiology in CF, we also 
developed organoids from a genetic CF mouse model that were also found to 
recapitulate CF characteristics. Moreover, single-cell RNA-sequencing analysis 
of the CF mouse uterus revealed molecular traits in the endometrium similar to 
the human CF endometrium (as evidenced by its organoid model). Our study 
provides new endometrium models to advance our understanding of CF-associated 
endometrial pathobiology, particularly regarding menstrual cycle aberrations 
that impact fertility. This research is timely since improved CF therapeutics 
result in increased life expectancy, allowing more CF patients to consider 
starting a family.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-025-05627-7
PMCID: PMC11904040
PMID: 40074868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical approval: The study was 
approved by the Ethical Research Committee UZ/KU Leuven (endometrial biopsies; 
S66294, S59006, S65570, rectal biopsies; S56329) and is compliant with all 
relevant ethical regulations regarding research involving human participants. 
All animal experiments were approved by the KU Leuven Ethical Committee for 
Animal Experimentation (P072/2024). Consent to participate: Informed consent was 
obtained from all individual participants included in the study. Consent to 
publish: All human participants provided written informed consent for use of 
their data for publication after study information was given. Conflict of 
interest: The authors declare no competing financial interests.