---
reference_id: "PMID:39402859"
title: "Repotrectinib: Redefining the therapeutic landscape for patients with ROS1 fusion-driven non-small cell lung cancer."
authors:
- Desilets A
- Repetto M
- Drilon A
journal: Clin Transl Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ctm2.70017
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- "Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Proto-Oncogene Mas
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- "Pyrazoles/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- "Pyrimidines/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Macrocyclic Compounds
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Repotrectinib: Redefining the therapeutic landscape for patients with ROS1 fusion-driven non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Desilets A, Repetto M, Drilon A
**Journal:** Clin Transl Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ctm2.70017](https://doi.org/10.1002/ctm2.70017)

## Content

1. Clin Transl Med. 2024 Oct;14(10):e70017. doi: 10.1002/ctm2.70017.

Repotrectinib: Redefining the therapeutic landscape for patients with ROS1
fusion-driven non-small cell lung cancer.

Desilets A(1), Repetto M(1)(2), Drilon A(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Early Drug Development Service, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Oncology and Hemato-Oncology, University of Milan, Milan,
Italy.
(3)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine and New York Presbyterian
Hospital, New York, New York, USA.

The ROS1 proto-oncogene encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase with structural
homology to other oncogenic drivers, including ALK and TRKA-B-C. The
FDA-approved tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) crizotinib and entrectinib have
demonstrated efficacy in treating ROS1 fusion-positive NSCLC. However,
limitations such as poor blood-brain barrier penetration and acquired
resistance, particularly the ROS1 G2032R solvent-front mutation, hinder
treatment durability. Repotrectinib, a next-generation macrocyclic TKI, was
rationally designed to overcome on-target resistance mutations and improve brain
distribution through its low molecular weight. In the TRIDENT-1 clinical trial,
repotrectinib demonstrated significant efficacy in both TKI-naïve and
TKI-pretreated patients with ROS1-rearranged NSCLC, including those with CNS
metastases and G2032R resistance mutations. In the TKI-naïve cohort (n = 71),
79% of patients achieved an objective response, with a median progression-free
survival (PFS) of 35.7 months, surpassing all previously approved ROS1 TKIs. In
patients who had received one prior ROS1 TKI but were chemotherapy-naïve (n =
56), objective responses were observed in 38%, and median PFS was 9.0 months.
The safety profile of repotrectinib was consistent with earlier-generation ROS1
TKIs and common adverse events included anemia, neurotoxicity, increased
creatine kinase levels, and weight gain. These findings underscore the potential
of repotrectinib to address unmet needs in ROS1-rearranged NSCLC, offering
durable responses and improved intracranial activity. Future research should
prioritize developing next-generation, selective ROS1 inhibitors to reduce
Trk-mediated toxicities and improve treatment tolerance.

© 2024 The Author(s). Clinical and Translational Medicine published by John
Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Shanghai Institute of Clinical
Bioinformatics.

DOI: 10.1002/ctm2.70017
PMCID: PMC11473655
PMID: 39402859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Antoine Desilets has received travel
reimbursement from Astra Zeneca, Regeneron and Exelixis. Matteo Repetto has
received travel reimbursement from Sanofi. Alexander Drilon has received
honoraria and participated in advisory boards for 14ner/Elevation Oncology,
Amgen, Abbvie, ArcherDX, AstraZeneca, Beigene, BergenBio, Blueprint Medicines,
Chugai Pharmaceutical, EcoR1, EMD Serono, Entos, Exelixis, Helsinn, Hengrui
Therapeutics, Ignyta/Genentech/Roche, Janssen, Loxo/Bayer/Lilly, Merus,
Monopteros, MonteRosa, Novartis, Nuvalent, Pfizer, Prelude, Repare RX,
Takeda/Ariad/Millenium, Treeline Bio, TP Therapeutics, Tyra Biosciences and
Verastem; has declared associated research paid to institution by Pfizer,
Exelixis, GlaxoSmithKlein, Teva, Taiho and PharmaMar; has received royalties by
Wolters Kluwer; has declared food/beverage from Merck, Puma, Merus and
Boehringer Ingelheim; and has received CME honoraria by Answers in CME, Applied
Pharmaceutical Science, Inc., AXIS, Clinical Care Options, EPG Health,
Harborside Nexus, I3 Health, Imedex, Liberum, Medendi, Medscape, Med Learning,
MJH Life Sciences, MORE Health, Ology, OncLive, Paradigm, Peerview Institute,
PeerVoice, Physicians Education Resources, Remedica Ltd., Research to Practice,
RV More, Targeted Oncology, TouchIME and WebMD.
