---
reference_id: "PMID:1372469"
title: "Xeroderma pigmentosum and Cockayne syndrome: overlapping clinical and biochemical phenotypes."
authors:
- Greenhaw GA
- Hebert A
- Duke-Woodside ME
- Butler IJ
- Hecht JT
- Cleaver JE
- Thomas GH
- Horton WA
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1992'
keywords:
- Child
- "Cockayne Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- "DNA/biosynthesis, radiation effects"
- DNA Repair
- DNA Replication
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Phenotype
- Photosensitivity Disorders/genetics
- "RNA/biosynthesis, radiation effects"
- "Xeroderma Pigmentosum/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Xeroderma pigmentosum and Cockayne syndrome: overlapping clinical and biochemical phenotypes.
**Authors:** Greenhaw GA, Hebert A, Duke-Woodside ME, Butler IJ, Hecht JT, Cleaver JE, Thomas GH, Horton WA
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1992)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1992 Apr;50(4):677-89.

Xeroderma pigmentosum and Cockayne syndrome: overlapping clinical and 
biochemical phenotypes.

Greenhaw GA(1), Hebert A, Duke-Woodside ME, Butler IJ, Hecht JT, Cleaver JE, 
Thomas GH, Horton WA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical School, Houston 77225.

Two siblings are described whose clinical presentation of cutaneous 
photosensitivity and central nervous system dysfunction is strongly reminiscent 
of the DeSanctis-Cacchione syndrome (DCS) variant of xeroderma pigmentosum. An 
extensive clinical evaluation supported a diagnosis of DCS and documented 
previously unreported findings. In vitro fibroblast studies showed UV 
sensitivity that was two to three times that of normal controls. However, 
neither a post-UV-irradiation DNA excision-repair defect indicative of XP nor a 
semiconservative DNA replication defect indicative of XP variant was found. 
Rather, a failure of RNA synthesis to recover to normal levels after UV exposure 
was observed, a biochemical abnormality seen in Cockayne syndrome (CS), one of 
the premature-aging syndromes with clinical UV sensitivity. These patients, 
therefore, clinically have XP, but their biochemical characteristics suggest CS. 
The reason(s) for the severe neurologic disease, in light of the relatively mild 
cutaneous abnormalities, is unclear. Other cases with unusual fibroblast 
responses to irradiation have been noted in the literature and, along with the 
data from our patients, reinforce the notion of the complexity of DNA 
maintenance and repair.

PMCID: PMC1682634
PMID: 1372469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]