---
reference_id: "PMID:20301508"
title: Spinal and Bulbar Muscular Atrophy.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- La Spada A
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal and Bulbar Muscular Atrophy.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, La Spada A

## Content

1. Spinal and Bulbar Muscular Atrophy.

La Spada A(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
1999 Feb 26 [updated 2026 Jan 8].

Author information:
(1)University of California Irvine School of Medicine, Irvine, California

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA) is a 
gradually progressive neuromuscular disorder in which degeneration of lower 
motor neurons results in muscle weakness, muscle atrophy, and fasciculations in 
affected males. Affected individuals often show gynecomastia, testicular 
atrophy, and reduced fertility as a result of mild androgen insensitivity.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SBMA is established in a male proband by the 
identification of a hemizygous expansion of a CAG trinucleotide repeat (>35 
CAGs) in AR by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Use of braces and walkers for 
ambulation as needed as the disease progresses; standard treatments for 
dysarthria and dysphagia; breast reduction surgery for gynecomastia as needed; 
standard treatment per cardiologist and/or endocrinologist for cardiac 
manifestations and metabolic syndrome; psychosocial support and education to 
decrease stress and burden on caregivers. Surveillance: Annual assessment of 
strength, mobility, activities of daily living, speech, and feeding issues; 
annual assessment of pulmonary function in those with advanced disease; annual 
assessment of cholesterol and triglycerides, with hepatic function testing if 
elevated; annual assessment of cardiovascular health per cardiologist; 
assessment of need for family and caregiver support. Agents/circumstances to 
avoid: Individuals with a tendency to fall should avoid slippery or rough 
walking surfaces. Individuals with bulbar weakness should avoid foods that are 
difficult to chew and swallow, as these may pose a risk of choking or 
aspiration. Other: Clinical trials of anti-androgen drugs (e.g., leuprorelin) 
did not consistently reveal significant efficacy, but leuprorelin was 
efficacious as a treatment for dysphagia in a follow-up clinical trial in Japan, 
leading to its approval in Japan but not elsewhere. Based on animal studies, 
administration of testosterone and its analogs may worsen motor neuron disease.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SBMA is inherited in an X-linked manner. Affected males who 
are fertile pass the expanded CAG repeat to each daughter. Carrier females have 
a 50% chance of transmitting the CAG trinucleotide expansion to each child; 
males who inherit it will be affected; females who inherit it will be carriers 
and will usually not be affected. Carrier testing for at-risk female relatives 
and prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk are possible if the 
expanded CAG repeat has been identified in an affected family member.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301508