---
reference_id: "PMID:15016298"
title: Autocrine and paracrine regulation of melanocytes in human skin and in pigmentary disorders.
authors:
- Imokawa G
journal: Pigment Cell Res
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0749.2003.00126.x
keywords:
- Down-Regulation
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Humans
- Keratinocytes/metabolism
- "Melanocytes/cytology, metabolism, physiology"
- "Models, Biological"
- Pigmentation
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit/metabolism
- Skin/cytology
- Stem Cell Factor/metabolism
- Ultraviolet Rays
- Up-Regulation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autocrine and paracrine regulation of melanocytes in human skin and in pigmentary disorders.
**Authors:** Imokawa G
**Journal:** Pigment Cell Res (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0749.2003.00126.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0749.2003.00126.x)

## Content

1. Pigment Cell Res. 2004 Apr;17(2):96-110. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-0749.2003.00126.x.

Autocrine and paracrine regulation of melanocytes in human skin and in
pigmentary disorders.

Imokawa G(1).

Author information:
(1)Kao Biological Science Laboratories, Akabane Ichikai, Haga, Tochigi, Japan.
imokawag@dream.ocn.ne.jp

Recently melanogenic paracrine or autocrine cytokine networks have been
discovered in vitro between melanocytes and other types of skin cells. These
include endothelin (ET)-1, granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor,
membrane-type stem cell factor (SCF) and growth-related oncogene-alpha for
interactions between keratinocytes and melanocytes, and hepatocyte growth factor
and soluble type SCF for interactions between fibroblasts and melanocytes. These
networks are also associated with corresponding receptors expressed on
melanocytes, including ET B receptor and the SCF receptor, c-KIT. Consistent
with in vitro findings on the melanogenic paracrine or autocrine cytokine
networks, we have found that the up- or down-regulation of such networks is
intrinsically involved in vivo in the stimulation of melanocyte functions in
several epidermal hyper- or hypo-pigmentary disorders. These are ET-1/ET B
receptor as well as membrane type SCF/c-KIT for ultraviolet B-melanosis,
granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor for ultraviolet A-melanosis,
ET-1/ET B receptor as well as membrane type SCF for lentigo senilis, growth
related oncogene-alpha for Riehl's melanosis, sphingosylphosphorylcholine for
hyperpigmentation in atopic dermatitis, ET-1 for seborrhoeic keratosis, soluble
type SCF as well as hepatocyte growth factor for dermatofibroma and café-au-lait
macules, and c-KIT for vitiligo vulgaris. These unveiled regulatory mechanisms
involved in the abnormal up- or down-regulated levels of lesional melanocyte
function provide new insights into therapeutic tools utilizing blockage of
responsible cytokine networks.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0749.2003.00126.x
PMID: 15016298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
