---
reference_id: "PMID:31914832"
title: The role of corticosteroids in the treatment of Kawasaki disease.
authors:
- Chang LS
- Kuo HC
journal: Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/14787210.2020.1713752
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of corticosteroids in the treatment of Kawasaki disease.
**Authors:** Chang LS, Kuo HC
**Journal:** Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14787210.2020.1713752](https://doi.org/10.1080/14787210.2020.1713752)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther. 2020 Feb;18(2):155-164. doi: 
10.1080/14787210.2020.1713752. Epub 2020 Jan 15.

The role of corticosteroids in the treatment of Kawasaki disease.

Chang LS(1), Kuo HC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Kawasaki Disease Center, Kaohsiung Chang Gung 
Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung City, 
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Respiratory Therapy, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, 
Kaohsiung City, Taiwan.

Introduction: Kawasaki disease (KD) is a form of systemic vasculitis that can 
lead to complications of coronary artery lesions (CAL). Diagnosis without delay 
and treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) are vital for a better 
prognosis. Anti-inflammatory drugs are generally used empirically in pediatric 
patients as off label. Corticosteroids are effective with anti-inflammatory 
effects applied in vasculitis.Areas covered: The timing of corticosteroid 
treatment in KD has been widely discussed by scholars. Some corticosteroids may 
still be effective which could be useful for such specific populations as 
high-risk patients. In this narrative review, we searched clinical studies, 
meta-analyzes, and systemic reviews using the PubMed database to summarize the 
available evidence on corticosteroid usage in KD through October 2019 and then 
discussed the relevant issues.Expert opinion: Today, the available evidence is 
more powerful to recommend corticosteroids for KD, moving from an unproven 
therapy to an effective adjunctive treatment. We suggest using 
methylprednisolone pulse therapy as an alternative rescue therapy for 
immunoglobulin-resistant KD, as well as identifying high-risk patients who need 
initial corticosteroid with IVIG treatment with an adequate route, dose, and 
duration. In the future, studies that evaluate the precision role of 
corticosteroids for individualized KD patients with CAL are warranted.

DOI: 10.1080/14787210.2020.1713752
PMID: 31914832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]