---
reference_id: "PMID:28652113"
title: "Early versus late diagnosis in community-acquired bacterial meningitis: a retrospective cohort study."
authors:
- Bodilsen J
- Brandt CT
- Sharew A
- Dalager-Pedersen M
- Benfield T
- Schønheyder HC
- Nielsen H
journal: Clin Microbiol Infect
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2017.06.021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early versus late diagnosis in community-acquired bacterial meningitis: a retrospective cohort study.
**Authors:** Bodilsen J, Brandt CT, Sharew A, Dalager-Pedersen M, Benfield T, Schønheyder HC, Nielsen H
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Infect (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cmi.2017.06.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmi.2017.06.021)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2018 Feb;24(2):166-170. doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2017.06.021.
 Epub 2017 Jun 24.

Early versus late diagnosis in community-acquired bacterial meningitis: a 
retrospective cohort study.

Bodilsen J(1), Brandt CT(2), Sharew A(3), Dalager-Pedersen M(4), Benfield T(5), 
Schønheyder HC(6), Nielsen H(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, 
Denmark. Electronic address: Jacob.bodilsen@rn.dk.
(2)Department of Pulmonary and Infectious Diseases, Nordsjællands Hospital, 
University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, 
Denmark.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Hvidovre Hospital, University of 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, 
Denmark; Department of Clinical Medicine, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark.
(7)Department of Infectious Diseases, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, 
Denmark; Department of Clinical Medicine, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark.

OBJECTIVES: To examine clinical characteristics and outcome of patients with 
late diagnosis of community-acquired bacterial meningitis (CABM).
METHODS: We conducted a chart review of all adults with proven CABM in three 
centres in Denmark from 1998 through to 2014. Patients were categorized as early 
diagnosis of CABM immediately on admission, or late diagnosis if CABM was not 
listed in referral or admission records and neither lumbar puncture nor 
antibiotic therapy for meningitis was considered immediately on admission. We 
used modified Poisson regression analysis to compute adjusted relative risks 
with 95% CIs for predictors of late diagnosis and in-hospital mortality.
RESULTS: A total of 113/358 (32%) patients were categorized as late diagnosis 
demonstrating a variety of tentative diagnoses of which 81/113 (72%) were 
non-infectious. We observed several statistically significant baseline 
differences (p <0.05) in patients with late versus early diagnosis including age 
>65 years (56/113, 50% versus 67/245, 27%), neck stiffness (35/97, 36% versus 
183/234, 78%), concomitant pneumonia (26/113, 23% versus 26/245, 11%), and 
meningococcal meningitis (6/113, 5% versus 52/245, 21%). These variables 
remained statistically significant in multivariate analysis. Moreover, late 
diagnosis was associated with increased in-hospital mortality (41/113, 36% 
versus 43/245, 18%; adjusted relative risk 1.7, 95% CI 1.2-2.5).
CONCLUSIONS: Late diagnosis of CABM was common and patients were admitted with 
mostly non-infectious diagnoses. Absence of neck stiffness did not rule out CABM 
and special attention should be given to patients with pneumonia and the 
elderly. Late diagnosis was associated with incorrect patient management and 
increased mortality.

Copyright © 2017 European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious 
Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmi.2017.06.021
PMID: 28652113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]