---
reference_id: "PMID:38517799"
title: "Treatment Approaches for Altered Facial Expression: A Systematic Review in Facioscapulohumeral Muscular Dystrophy and Other Neurological Diseases."
authors:
- Rasing NB
- van de Geest-Buit WA
- Chan OYA
- Mul K
- Lanser A
- van Engelen BGM
- Erasmus CE
- Fischer AH
- Ingels KJAO
- Post B
- Siemann I
- Groothuis JT
- Voermans NC
journal: J Neuromuscul Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3233/JND-230213
keywords:
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Facioscapulohumeral/therapy"
- Humans
- Facial Expression
- Facial Muscles/physiopathology
- Bell Palsy/therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment Approaches for Altered Facial Expression: A Systematic Review in Facioscapulohumeral Muscular Dystrophy and Other Neurological Diseases.
**Authors:** Rasing NB, van de Geest-Buit WA, Chan OYA, Mul K, Lanser A, van Engelen BGM, Erasmus CE, Fischer AH, Ingels KJAO, Post B, Siemann I, Groothuis JT, Voermans NC
**Journal:** J Neuromuscul Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JND-230213](https://doi.org/10.3233/JND-230213)

## Content

1. J Neuromuscul Dis. 2024;11(3):535-565. doi: 10.3233/JND-230213.

Treatment Approaches for Altered Facial Expression: A Systematic Review in 
Facioscapulohumeral Muscular Dystrophy and Other Neurological Diseases.

Rasing NB(1), van de Geest-Buit WA(1), Chan OYA(2), Mul K(1), Lanser A(3), van 
Engelen BGM(1), Erasmus CE(4), Fischer AH(5), Ingels KJAO(6), Post B(1), Siemann 
I(7), Groothuis JT(8), Voermans NC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Information Specialist, Medical Library, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Patient Representative and Chairman FSHD Advocacy Group, Patient Organization 
for Muscular Disease Spierziekten Nederland, Baarn, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 
and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Amalia Children's Hospital, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Psychology, Social Psychology, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Medical Psychology, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Rehabilitation, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Facial weakness is a key feature of facioscapulohumeral muscular 
dystrophy (FSHD) and may lead to altered facial expression and subsequent 
psychosocial impairment. There is no cure and supportive treatments focus on 
optimizing physical fitness and compensation of functional disabilities.
OBJECTIVE: We hypothesize that symptomatic treatment options and psychosocial 
interventions for other neurological diseases with altered facial expression 
could be applicable to FSHD. Therefore, the aim of this review is to collect 
symptomatic treatment approaches that target facial muscle function and 
psychosocial interventions in various neurological diseases with altered facial 
expression in order to discuss the applicability to FSHD.
METHODS: A systematic search was performed. Selected studies had to include 
FSHD, Bell's palsy, Moebius syndrome, myotonic dystrophy type 1, or Parkinson's 
disease and treatment options which target altered facial expression. Data was 
extracted for study and patients' characteristics, outcome assessment tools, 
treatment, outcome of facial expression and or psychosocial functioning.
RESULTS: Forty studies met the inclusion criteria, of which only three studies 
included FSHD patients exclusively. Most, twenty-one, studies were performed in 
patients with Bell's palsy. Studies included twelve different therapy categories 
and results were assessed with different outcomes measures.
CONCLUSIONS: Five therapy categories were considered applicable to FSHD: 
training of (non-verbal) communication compensation strategies, speech training, 
physical therapy, conference attendance, and smile restoration surgery. Further 
research is needed to establish the effect of these therapies in FSHD. We 
recommend to include outcome measures in these studies that cover at least 
cosmetic, functional, communication, and quality of life domains.

DOI: 10.3233/JND-230213
PMCID: PMC11091602
PMID: 38517799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
report.