---
reference_id: "PMID:37482098"
title: Pathophysiological mechanisms of complications associated with propionic acidemia.
authors:
- Marchuk H
- Wang Y
- Ladd ZA
- Chen X
- Zhang GF
journal: Pharmacol Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2023.108501
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiological mechanisms of complications associated with propionic acidemia.
**Authors:** Marchuk H, Wang Y, Ladd ZA, Chen X, Zhang GF
**Journal:** Pharmacol Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pharmthera.2023.108501](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2023.108501)

## Content

1. Pharmacol Ther. 2023 Sep;249:108501. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2023.108501.
Epub  2023 Jul 22.

Pathophysiological mechanisms of complications associated with propionic 
acidemia.

Marchuk H(1), Wang Y(2), Ladd ZA(3), Chen X(4), Zhang GF(5).

Author information:
(1)Sarah W. Stedman Nutrition and Metabolism Center & Duke Molecular Physiology 
Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC 27701, USA.
(2)Jining Key Laboratory of Pharmacology, Jining Medical University, Shandong 
272067, China.; School of Basic Medicine, Jining Medical University, Shandong 
272067, China.
(3)Surgical Research Lab, Department of Surgery, Cooper University Healthcare 
and Cooper Medical School of Rowan University, Camden, NJ 08103, USA.
(4)Surgical Research Lab, Department of Surgery, Cooper University Healthcare 
and Cooper Medical School of Rowan University, Camden, NJ 08103, USA; Coriell 
Institute for Medical Research, Camden, NJ 08103, USA; MD Anderson Cancer Center 
at Cooper, Camden, NJ 08103, USA. Electronic address: lchen@coriell.org.
(5)Sarah W. Stedman Nutrition and Metabolism Center & Duke Molecular Physiology 
Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC 27701, USA; Department of Medicine, 
Division of Endocrinology, and Metabolism Nutrition, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA. Electronic address: Guofang.zhang@duke.edu.

Propionic acidemia (PA) is a genetic metabolic disorder caused by mutations in 
the mitochondrial enzyme, propionyl-CoA carboxylase (PCC), which is responsible 
for converting propionyl-CoA to methylmalonyl-CoA for further metabolism in the 
tricarboxylic acid cycle. When this process is disrupted, propionyl-CoA and its 
metabolites accumulate, leading to a variety of complications including 
life-threatening cardiac diseases and other metabolic strokes. While the 
clinical symptoms and diagnosis of PA are well established, the underlying 
pathophysiological mechanisms of PA-induced diseases are not fully understood. 
As a result, there are currently few effective therapies for PA beyond dietary 
restriction. This review focuses on the pathophysiological mechanisms of the 
various complications associated with PA, drawing on extensive research and 
clinical reports. Most research suggests that propionyl-CoA and its metabolites 
can impair mitochondrial energy metabolism and cause cellular damage by inducing 
oxidative stress. However, direct evidence from in vivo studies is still 
lacking. Additionally, elevated levels of ammonia can be toxic, although not all 
PA patients develop hyperammonemia. The discovery of pathophysiological 
mechanisms underlying various complications associated with PA can aid in the 
development of more effective therapeutic treatments. The consequences of 
elevated odd-chain fatty acids in lipid metabolism and potential gene expression 
changes mediated by histone propionylation also warrant further investigation.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2023.108501
PMCID: PMC10529999
PMID: 37482098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that there are no conflicts of interest.