---
reference_id: "PMID:35792991"
title: Mechanism of Cone Degeneration in Retinitis Pigmentosa.
authors:
- Song DJ
- Bao XL
- Fan B
- Li GY
journal: Cell Mol Neurobiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10571-022-01243-2
keywords:
- Humans
- Retinal Cone Photoreceptor Cells/metabolism
- Retinal Rod Photoreceptor Cells/metabolism
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- Blindness/metabolism
- Oxidative Stress
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanism of Cone Degeneration in Retinitis Pigmentosa.
**Authors:** Song DJ, Bao XL, Fan B, Li GY
**Journal:** Cell Mol Neurobiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10571-022-01243-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10571-022-01243-2)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2023 Apr;43(3):1037-1048. doi: 10.1007/s10571-022-01243-2.
 Epub 2022 Jul 6.

Mechanism of Cone Degeneration in Retinitis Pigmentosa.

Song DJ(1), Bao XL(1), Fan B(1), Li GY(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The Second Hospital of Jilin University, 
Changchun, 130000, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, The Second Hospital of Jilin University, 
Changchun, 130000, China. l_gy@mails.jlu.edu.cn.

Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a group of genetic disorders resulting in inherited 
blindness due to the degeneration of rod and cone photoreceptors. The various 
mechanisms underlying rod degeneration primarily rely on genetic mutations, 
leading to night blindness initially. Cones gradually degenerate after rods are 
almost eliminated, resulting in varying degrees of visual disability and 
blindness. The mechanism of cone degeneration remains unclear. An understanding 
of the mechanisms underlying cone degeneration in RP, a highly heterogeneous 
disease, is essential to develop novel treatments of RP. Herein, we review 
recent advancements in the five hypotheses of cone degeneration, including 
oxidative stress, trophic factors, metabolic stress, light damage, and 
inflammation activation. We also discuss the connection among these theories to 
provide a better understanding of secondary cone degeneration in RP. Five 
current mechanisms of cone degenerations in RP Interactions among different 
pathways are involved in RP.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10571-022-01243-2
PMCID: PMC11414453
PMID: 35792991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial or 
non-financial interests to disclose.