---
reference_id: "PMID:29427989"
title: Diagnosis and Management of Severe Asthma.
authors:
- Chung KF
journal: Semin Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1055/s-0037-1607391
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and Management of Severe Asthma.
**Authors:** Chung KF
**Journal:** Semin Respir Crit Care Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0037-1607391](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0037-1607391)

## Content

1. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2018 Feb;39(1):91-99. doi: 10.1055/s-0037-1607391.
 Epub 2018 Feb 10.

Diagnosis and Management of Severe Asthma.

Chung KF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Airways Disease, National Heart & Lung 
Institute, Imperial College London, United Kingdom.
(2)Biomedical Research Unit, Royal Brompton & Harefield NHS Trust, London, 
United Kingdom.

Severe therapy-resistant asthma has been defined as "asthma which requires 
treatment with high dose inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) plus a second controller 
(and/or systemic corticosteroids) to prevent it from becoming 'uncontrolled' or 
which remains 'uncontrolled' despite this therapy". Patients who usually present 
with 'difficult-to-treat asthma' should first be assessed to determine whether 
he/she has asthma with the exclusion of other diagnoses and if so, whether the 
asthma can be classified as severe therapy-resistant. This necessitates an 
assessment of adherence to medications, confounding factors, and comorbidities. 
Increasingly, management of severe therapy-resistant asthma will be helped by 
the determination of phenotypes to optimize responses to existing and new 
therapies. Severe asthma patients are usually on a combination of high dose ICS 
and long-acting β-agonist (LABA) and, in addition, are often on a maintenance 
dose of oral corticosteroids. Phenotyping can be informed by measuring blood 
eosinophil counts and the level of nitric oxide in exhaled breath, and the use 
of sputum granulocytic counts. Severe allergic asthma and severe eosinophilic 
asthma are two defined phenotypes for which there are efficacious targeted 
biologic therapies currently available, namely anti-immunoglobulin E (IgE) and 
anti-interleukin (IL)-5 antibodies, respectively. Further progress will be 
realized with the definition of noneosinophilic or non-T2 phenotypes. It will be 
important for patients with severe asthma to be ultimately investigated and 
managed in specialized severe asthma centers.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0037-1607391
PMID: 29427989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: K.F.C. reports personal fees from Advisory Board 
membership with GSK, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Astra-Zeneca and Teva, 
personal fees from payments for lectures from Astra-Zeneca, Novartis and Merck, 
and grants for research to his institution from Merck and GSK, all in relation 
to asthma, COPD and cough.