---
reference_id: "PMID:26976885"
title: "Persistent Symptoms of Dengue: Estimates of the Incremental Disease and Economic Burden in Mexico."
authors:
- Tiga DC
- Undurraga EA
- Ramos-Castañeda J
- Martínez-Vega RA
- Tschampl CA
- Shepard DS
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '2016'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.15-0896
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Persistent Symptoms of Dengue: Estimates of the Incremental Disease and Economic Burden in Mexico.
**Authors:** Tiga DC, Undurraga EA, Ramos-Castañeda J, Martínez-Vega RA, Tschampl CA, Shepard DS
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (2016)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.15-0896](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.15-0896)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2016 May 4;94(5):1085-1089. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.15-0896.
Epub  2016 Mar 14.

Persistent Symptoms of Dengue: Estimates of the Incremental Disease and Economic 
Burden in Mexico.

Tiga DC, Undurraga EA, Ramos-Castañeda J, Martínez-Vega RA, Tschampl CA, Shepard 
DS.

Dengue is mostly considered an acute illness with three phases: febrile, 
critical with possible hemorrhagic manifestations, and recovery. But some 
patients present persistent symptoms, including fatigue and depression, as 
acknowledged by the World Health Organization. If persistent symptoms affect a 
non-negligible share of patients, the burden of dengue will be underestimated. 
On the basis of a systematic literature review and econometric modeling, we 
found a significant relationship between the share of patients reporting 
persisting symptoms and time. We updated estimates of the economic burden of 
dengue in Mexico, addressing uncertainty in productivity loss and incremental 
expenses using Monte Carlo simulations. Persistent symptoms represent annually 
about US$22.6 (95% certainty level [CL]: US$13-US$29) million in incremental 
costs and 28.2 (95% CL: 21.6-36.2) additional disability-adjusted life years per 
million population, or 13% and 43% increases over previous estimates, 
respectively. Although our estimates have uncertainty from limited data, they 
show a substantial, unmeasured burden. Similar patterns likely extend to other 
dengue-endemic countries.

© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.15-0896
PMCID: PMC4856607
PMID: 26976885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]