---
reference_id: "PMID:39312412"
title: Use of the Novel Site-Directed Enzyme Enhancement Therapy (SEE-Tx) Drug Discovery Platform to Identify Pharmacological Chaperones for Glutaric Acidemia Type 1.
authors:
- Barroso M
- Puchwein-Schwepcke A
- Buettner L
- Goebel I
- Küchler K
- Muntau AC
- Delgado A
- Garcia-Collazo AM
- Martinell M
- Barril X
- Cubero E
- Gersting SW
journal: J Med Chem
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.4c00292
keywords:
- "Glutaryl-CoA Dehydrogenase/deficiency, chemistry, metabolism"
- Drug Discovery
- Humans
- "Brain Diseases, Metabolic/drug therapy, metabolism"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Allosteric Regulation/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Use of the Novel Site-Directed Enzyme Enhancement Therapy (SEE-Tx) Drug Discovery Platform to Identify Pharmacological Chaperones for Glutaric Acidemia Type 1.
**Authors:** Barroso M, Puchwein-Schwepcke A, Buettner L, Goebel I, Küchler K, Muntau AC, Delgado A, Garcia-Collazo AM, Martinell M, Barril X, Cubero E, Gersting SW
**Journal:** J Med Chem (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.jmedchem.4c00292](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.4c00292)

## Content

1. J Med Chem. 2024 Oct 10;67(19):17087-17100. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.4c00292.
 Epub 2024 Sep 23.

Use of the Novel Site-Directed Enzyme Enhancement Therapy (SEE-Tx) Drug
Discovery Platform to Identify Pharmacological Chaperones for Glutaric Acidemia
Type 1.

Barroso M(1), Puchwein-Schwepcke A(2)(3), Buettner L(4), Goebel I(1), Küchler
K(1), Muntau AC(5)(6), Delgado A(7), Garcia-Collazo AM(7), Martinell M(8),
Barril X(7), Cubero E(7), Gersting SW(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)University Children's Research, UCR@Kinder-UKE, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg 20246, Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular Pediatrics, Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich 80337, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatric Neurology and Developmental Medicine, University
Children's Hospital Basel, UKBB, Basel 4031, Switzerland.
(4)Pharmaceutical Development Biologicals, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH &
Co. KG, Biberach an der Riss 88397, Germany.
(5)University Children's Hospital, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg 20246, Germany.
(6)German Center for Child and Adolescent Health (DZKJ), Partner Site Hamburg,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg 20246, Germany.
(7)Gain Therapeutics Sucursal en España, Parc Científic de Barcelona, Barcelona
08028, Spain.
(8)Minoryx Therapeutics S.L., Tecno Campus Mataró-Maresme, Mataró, Barcelona
08302, Spain.

Allosteric regulators acting as pharmacological chaperones hold promise for
innovative therapeutics since they target noncatalytic sites and stabilize the
folded protein without competing with the natural substrate, resulting in a net
gain of function. Exogenous allosteric regulators are typically more selective
than active site inhibitors and can be more potent than competitive inhibitors
when the natural substrate levels are high. To identify novel structure-targeted
allosteric regulators (STARs) that bind to and stabilize the mitochondrial
enzyme glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase (GCDH), the computational site-directed enzyme
enhancement therapy (SEE-Tx) technology was applied. SEE-Tx is an innovative
drug discovery platform with the potential to identify drugs for treating
protein misfolding disorders, such as glutaric acidemia type 1 (GA1) disease.
Putative allosteric regulators were discovered using structure- and ligand-based
virtual screening methods and validated using orthogonal biophysical and
biochemical assays. The computational approach presented here could be used to
discover allosteric regulators of other protein misfolding disorders.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.4c00292
PMCID: PMC11472340
PMID: 39312412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following competing
financial interest(s): EC, AD, AMG, MM, and XB completed the research and the
authorship of this article within the scope of their employ-ment. EC, AD, AMG,
and XB are employees of Gain Therapeu-tics Sucursal en Espaa and MM is an
employee and sharehold-er of Minoryx Therapeutics. ACM and SWG are co-founders
and shareholders of iniuva GmbH.
