---
reference_id: "PMID:16935925"
title: Effect of chronic Giardia lamblia infection on epithelial transport and barrier function in human duodenum.
authors:
- Troeger H
- Epple HJ
- Schneider T
- Wahnschaffe U
- Ullrich R
- Burchard GD
- Jelinek T
- Zeitz M
- Fromm M
- Schulzke JD
journal: Gut
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1136/gut.2006.100198
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of chronic Giardia lamblia infection on epithelial transport and barrier function in human duodenum.
**Authors:** Troeger H, Epple HJ, Schneider T, Wahnschaffe U, Ullrich R, Burchard GD, Jelinek T, Zeitz M, Fromm M, Schulzke JD
**Journal:** Gut (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1136/gut.2006.100198](https://doi.org/10.1136/gut.2006.100198)

## Content

1. Gut. 2007 Mar;56(3):328-35. doi: 10.1136/gut.2006.100198. Epub 2006 Aug 25.

Effect of chronic Giardia lamblia infection on epithelial transport and barrier 
function in human duodenum.

Troeger H(1), Epple HJ, Schneider T, Wahnschaffe U, Ullrich R, Burchard GD, 
Jelinek T, Zeitz M, Fromm M, Schulzke JD.

Author information:
(1)Campus Benjamin Franklin, Charité, Medizinische Klinik I, Gastroenterology, 
Infectious Diseases and Rheumatology, 12200 Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    Gut. 2007 Mar;56(3):316-7. doi: 10.1136/gut.2006.107771.
    Gut. 2007 Nov;56(11):1639-40.

BACKGROUND: Giardia lamblia causes infection of the small intestine, which leads 
to malabsorption and chronic diarrhoea.
AIM: To characterise the inherent pathomechanisms of G lamblia infection.
METHODS: Duodenal biopsy specimens from 13 patients with chronic giardiasis and 
from controls were obtained endoscopically. Short-circuit current (I(SC)) and 
mannitol fluxes were measured in miniaturised Ussing chambers. Epithelial and 
subepithelial resistances were determined by impedance spectroscopy. Mucosal 
morphometry was performed and tight junction proteins were characterised by 
immunoblotting. Apoptotic ratio was determined by terminal deoxynucleotidyl 
transferase-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick-end labelling staining.
RESULTS: In giardiasis, mucosal surface area per unit serosa area was decreased 
to 75% (3%) of control, as a result of which epithelial resistance should 
increase. Instead, epithelial resistance of giardiasis biopsy specimens was 
decreased (19 (2) vs 25 (2) Omega cm(2); p<0.05) whereas mannitol flux was not 
significantly altered (140 (27) vs 105 (16) nmol/h/cm(2)). As structural 
correlate, reduced claudin 1 expression and increased epithelial apoptosis were 
detected. Furthermore, basal I(SC) increased from 191 (20) in control to 261 
(12) microA/h/cm(2) in giardiasis. The bumetanide-sensitive portion of I(SC) in 
giardiasis was also increased (51 (5) vs 20 (9) microA/h/cm(2) in control; 
p<0.05). Finally, phlorizin-sensitive Na(+)-glucose symport was reduced in 
patients with giardiasis (121 (9) vs 83 (14) microA/h/cm(2)).
CONCLUSIONS: G lamblia infection causes epithelial barrier dysfunction owing to 
down regulation of the tight junction protein claudin 1 and increased epithelial 
apoptoses. Na(+)-dependent d-glucose absorption is impaired and active 
electrogenic anion secretion is activated. Thus, the mechanisms of diarrhoea in 
human chronic giardiasis comprise leak flux, malabsorptive and secretory 
components.

DOI: 10.1136/gut.2006.100198
PMCID: PMC1856804
PMID: 16935925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.