---
reference_id: "PMID:23999580"
title: Longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis with and without aquaporin 4 antibodies.
authors:
- Kitley J
- Leite MI
- Küker W
- Quaghebeur G
- George J
- Waters P
- Woodhall M
- Vincent A
- Palace J
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.3890
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis with and without aquaporin 4 antibodies.
**Authors:** Kitley J, Leite MI, Küker W, Quaghebeur G, George J, Waters P, Woodhall M, Vincent A, Palace J
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.3890](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.3890)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2013 Nov;70(11):1375-81. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.3890.

Longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis with and without aquaporin 4 
antibodies.

Kitley J(1), Leite MI, Küker W, Quaghebeur G, George J, Waters P, Woodhall M, 
Vincent A, Palace J.

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Oxford University Hospitals 
NHS Trust, University of Oxford, Oxford, England.

IMPORTANCE: Aquaporin 4 antibody (AQP4-Ab)-negative patients with longitudinally 
extensive transverse myelitis (LETM) behave differently from those with AQP4-Ab. 
Aquaporin 4 antibody-negative neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is rare when good 
assays are used.
OBJECTIVE: To assess if AQP4-Ab-negative patients with LETM share similar 
disease characteristics with AQP4-Ab-positive patients or whether they have 
distinct features and alternative diagnoses. DESIGN We collated clinical and 
paraclinical data on patients with LETM identified through the Oxford NMO 
clinical database. Aquaporin 4 antibodies were tested using 2 sensitive assays. 
We describe the features of patients with LETM, compare findings between 
patients with and without AQP4-Ab, and describe alternative diagnoses in 
AQP4-Ab-negative patients.
SETTING: Single specialist UK center for NMO.
PARTICIPANTS: Seventy-six adult patients with LETM.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Comparison of clinical and paraclinical data.
RESULTS: Fifty-eight percent of patients were AQP4-Ab positive. Alternative 
diagnoses could usually be identified in AQP4-Ab-negative patients, including 
those fulfilling NMO diagnostic criteria. Only 6.5% of patients had "true" 
seronegative NMO and 6.5% had idiopathic LETM. There were some important 
differences between AQP4-Ab-positive and -negative cases, including older onset 
age, higher proportion of females, lower incidence of simultaneous optic 
neuritis, lower frequency of conus involvement, and higher prevalence of 
coexisting autoimmune disorders in AQP4-Ab-positive cases. Attack severity and 
degree of recovery were similar in the 2 groups.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Patients with LETM without AQP4-Ab include a number 
of different diagnostic categories and it is not surprising therefore that they 
show important differences compared with AQP4-Ab-positive patients, even when 
considering only those fulfilling current NMO diagnostic criteria. Thus, we 
suggest that diagnoses such as myelin-oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody 
disease, multiple sclerosis, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, and 
postinfectious disorders should be exclusions in the NMO diagnostic criteria and 
AQP4-Ab-positive and antibody-negative NMO/NMO spectrum disorder cohorts should 
be analyzed separately.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.3890
PMID: 23999580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]