---
reference_id: "PMID:21569104"
title: "Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids: photoprotective macronutrients."
authors:
- Pilkington SM
- Watson RE
- Nicolaou A
- Rhodes LE
journal: Exp Dermatol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2011.01294.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids: photoprotective macronutrients.
**Authors:** Pilkington SM, Watson RE, Nicolaou A, Rhodes LE
**Journal:** Exp Dermatol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0625.2011.01294.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0625.2011.01294.x)

## Content

1. Exp Dermatol. 2011 Jul;20(7):537-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2011.01294.x.
Epub  2011 May 16.

Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids: photoprotective macronutrients.

Pilkington SM(1), Watson RE, Nicolaou A, Rhodes LE.

Author information:
(1)Dermatological Sciences, Inflammation Sciences Research Group, School of 
Translational Medicine, University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health 
Science Centre, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Hospital, Manchester, UK.

Ultraviolet radiation (UVR) in sunlight has deleterious effects on skin, while 
behavioural changes have resulted in people gaining more sun exposure. The 
clinical impact includes a year-on-year increase in skin cancer incidence, and 
topical sunscreens alone provide an inadequate measure to combat overexposure to 
UVR. Novel methods of photoprotection are being targeted as additional measures, 
with growing interest in the potential for systemic photoprotection through 
naturally sourced nutrients. Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (n-3 PUFA) are 
promising candidates, showing potential to protect the skin from UVR injury 
through a range of mechanisms. In this review, we discuss the biological actions 
of n-3 PUFA in the context of skin protection from acute and chronic UVR 
overexposure and describe how emerging new technologies such as nutrigenomics 
and lipidomics assist our understanding of the contribution of such nutrients to 
skin health.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2011.01294.x
PMID: 21569104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]