---
reference_id: "PMID:40494617"
title: "Biopsy-proven PACNS: results from the large, multicentre cohort of cerebral vasculitis patients."
authors:
- Deb-Chatterji M
- Aghel P
- Pinnschmidt H
- Krüger C
- Herm J
- Layer J
- Erdur H
- Bode FJ
- Nolte CH
- Magnus T
journal: J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2025-335764
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/pathology, drug therapy"
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Adult
- Biopsy
- Cohort Studies
- Brain/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biopsy-proven PACNS: results from the large, multicentre cohort of cerebral vasculitis patients.
**Authors:** Deb-Chatterji M, Aghel P, Pinnschmidt H, Krüger C, Herm J, Layer J, Erdur H, Bode FJ, Nolte CH, Magnus T
**Journal:** J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jnnp-2025-335764](https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp-2025-335764)

## Content

1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2025 Aug 14;96(9):825-831. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2025-335764.

Biopsy-proven PACNS: results from the large, multicentre cohort of cerebral 
vasculitis patients.

Deb-Chatterji M(1), Aghel P(2), Pinnschmidt H(3), Krüger C(2), Herm J(4)(5), 
Layer J(6), Erdur H(7), Bode FJ(6), Nolte CH(4)(8), Magnus T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurovascular Center, University Hospital 
Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany milani.deb-chatterji@uksh.de.
(2)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Institute for Medical Biometry and Epidemiology, University Hospital Hamburg 
Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology and experimental Neurology, and Center for Stroke 
Research (CSB), Berlin, Germany.
(5)Department of Neurology, Martin Gropius Krankenhaus, Eberswalde, Germany.
(6)Department of Vascular Neurology, Center of Neurology, University Hospital 
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(7)Department of Neurology, Asklepios Fachklinikum Teupitz, Teupitz, Germany.
(8)Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2025-336655.

BACKGROUND: Reports of primary angiitis of the central nervous system (PACNS) 
are mainly restricted to clinically suspected cases, but biopsy-proven ones are 
rare. Here, we present results from a large multicentre cohort of patients with 
biopsy-proven PACNS (BP-PACNS). In particular, we provide insights into 
characteristics and treatment responses of PACNS subtypes.
METHODS: BP-PACNS patients treated between 1999 and 2021 were analysed. The 
outcome was assessed by the modified Rankin Scale (mRS). Between-group 
comparisons were performed by Kruskal-Wallis, χ2 or Fisher's exact tests.
RESULTS: In total, 57 patients were analysed (52% male). Of these, n=37 (65%) 
had a lymphocytic (L-PACNS), n=9 (16%) an amyloid-beta-related angiitis (ABRA), 
n=8 (14%) a granulomatous (G-PACNS) and n=3 (5%) a necrotising (N-PACNS) PACNS 
subtype. At the time of diagnosis, age differed significantly between groups 
(median age (years) L-PACNS 47, ABRA 64.5, G-PACNS 37, N-PACNS 65; p=0.008). The 
clinical course was mostly monophasic in L-PACNS and ABRA (65% and 75%, 
respectively), while relapsing-remitting in G-PACNS (63%). Median mRS at last 
follow up was 2 (IQR 1.25-4) in the study group. Worst outcome (median mRS 4) 
and highest mortality (25%) were seen in G-PACNS. Good induction treatment 
response was achieved in 77% of all BP-PACNS patients but was low in those with 
G-PACNS (29%).
CONCLUSIONS: In this large, multicentre series of BP-PACNS patients, G-PACNS had 
a worse functional outcome, a predominant relapsing-remitting disease and a 
poorer response to the induction therapy. An optimal first-line treatment 
regimen for G-PACNS patients should be further examined and established in 
larger studies to improve the outcome of G-PACNS patients.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2025. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2025-335764
PMCID: PMC12421100
PMID: 40494617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: MD-C has received research 
grants from the Werner Otto Foundation, speakers honoraria from AstraZeneca and 
was funded by the Faculty of Medicine, University of Kiel, Germany through its 
Advanced Clinician Scientist Programme, all outside the submitted work. PA, HP, 
CK, JH, JL and HE: none. FJB received speakers honoraria from AstraZeneca, 
outside the submitted work. CHN received speaker honoraria for lectors from 
Alexion, Astra Zeneca, BMS, Novartis and Pfizer, all outside the submitted work. 
TM has received personal fees from Merck-Serono, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb/ Pfizer, Novartis, Biogen, Grifols, CSL-Behring, grants 
from the European Union (FP-7, ERA-NET), German Research Foundation, Herrmann 
and Lilly Schilling Foundation, and Werner-Otto Foundation, all outside the 
submitted work.