---
reference_id: "PMID:39497734"
title: Gastrointestinal manifestations and pathogenesis in childhood immunoglobulin A vasculitis.
authors:
- Kato S
- Gold BD
- Kato A
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1459394
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gastrointestinal manifestations and pathogenesis in childhood immunoglobulin A vasculitis.
**Authors:** Kato S, Gold BD, Kato A
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2024.1459394](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2024.1459394)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2024 Oct 21;12:1459394. doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1459394. 
eCollection 2024.

Gastrointestinal manifestations and pathogenesis in childhood immunoglobulin A 
vasculitis.

Kato S(1), Gold BD(2), Kato A(3).

Author information:
(1)Kato Children's Clinic, Natori, Japan.
(2)GI Care for Kids, Children's Center for Digestive Healthcare, LLC, Atlanta, 
GA, United States.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Sendai City Hospital, Sendai, Japan.

Immunoglobulin A vasculitis (IgAV), previously known as Henoch-Schönlein 
purpura, is the most common form of systemic vasculitis in childhood. The 
primary organs involved are the skin, gastrointestinal (GI) tract, joints, and 
kidneys. The spectrum of GI involvement in IgAV ranges from being mild and 
self-limited to severe manifestations often requiring surgical intervention. 
Galactose-deficient IgA1 on the immunoglobulin hinge region and its immune 
complexes are thought to play a central pathogenetic role in IgAV, however, an 
association between such molecules and specific GI mucosal damage remains 
unclear. GI endoscopy (both upper and lower) shows a variety of mucosal 
findings, many of which are not specific for IgAV. In upper GI endoscopy, 
however, the mucosal features can be diagnostic when found localized in the more 
distal part of upper GI tract (second and/or third parts of the duodenum). 
Abdominal computed tomography and capsule endoscopy have demonstrated that the 
small intestine is most commonly involved in IgAV. The GI mucosal involvement 
when evaluated microscopically shows IgA deposition which is histologically 
diagnostic. Conversely, leukocytoclastic vasculitis is less useful. Since the 
1960s, cases of duodenojejunitis, in which IgAV was suspected but evident 
purpura was not dermatologically present, have often been labeled as 
"idiopathic". In a pediatric case series, IgA enteropathy, without 
dermatological manifestations (i.e., purpura), was reported to have similar 
symptoms, as well as endoscopic characteristics and immunohistological findings 
as in IgAV. Subsequently, several case reports provide additional supportive 
evidence that IgA enteropathy must be a variant of IgAV. Thus, the 
immunologically driven auto-immune vasculitis results in the symptom complex 
dependent on the organ system involved, and the subsequent clinical features 
which are manifested. Present classification criteria are useful and universally 
available for diagnosing IgAV. However, based upon current knowledge including 
IgA enteropathy, minor modification of the IgAV criteria is proposed in the 
review.

© 2024 Kato, Gold and Kato.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2024.1459394
PMCID: PMC11532042
PMID: 39497734

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.