---
reference_id: "PMID:32185794"
title: A nonsense variant in NME5 causes human primary ciliary dyskinesia with radial spoke defects.
authors:
- Cho EH
- Huh HJ
- Jeong I
- Lee NY
- Koh WJ
- Park HC
- Ki CS
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/cge.13742
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A nonsense variant in NME5 causes human primary ciliary dyskinesia with radial spoke defects.
**Authors:** Cho EH, Huh HJ, Jeong I, Lee NY, Koh WJ, Park HC, Ki CS
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.13742](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.13742)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2020 Jul;98(1):64-68. doi: 10.1111/cge.13742. Epub 2020 Mar 25.

A nonsense variant in NME5 causes human primary ciliary dyskinesia with radial 
spoke defects.

Cho EH(1), Huh HJ(1), Jeong I(2), Lee NY(1), Koh WJ(3), Park HC(2), Ki CS(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Genetics, Samsung Medical Center, 
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Korea University, 
Ansan, South Korea.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, South 
Korea.
(4)GC Genome, Yongin, South Korea.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder 
characterized by defects in the function or structure of motitle cilia. In most 
cases, causative variants result in axonemal dynein arm anomalies, however, PCD 
due to radial spoke (RS) and central pair (CP) of microtubules has been rarely 
reported. To identify the molecular basis of PCD characterized by RS/CP defects, 
we performed whole exome sequencing in PCD patients with RS/CP defects. We 
identified a homozygous nonsense variant (c.572G>A; p.Trp191*) in NME5, which 
encodes a protein component of the RS neck, in one PCD patient with situs 
solitus. Morpholino knockdown of nme5 in zebrafish embryos resulted in motile 
cilia defects with phenotypes compatible with ciliopathy. This is the first 
study to show NME5 as a PCD-causative gene in humans. Our findings indicate that 
NME5 screening should be considered for PCD patients with RS/CP defects.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13742
PMID: 32185794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]