---
reference_id: "PMID:21057379"
title: Case-case genome-wide association analysis shows markers differentially associated with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and implicates calcium channel genes.
authors:
- Curtis D
- Vine AE
- McQuillin A
- Bass NJ
- Pereira A
- Kandaswamy R
- Lawrence J
- Anjorin A
- Choudhury K
- Datta SR
- Puri V
- Krasucki R
- Pimm J
- Thirumalai S
- Quested D
- Gurling HM
journal: Psychiatr Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e3283413382
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case-case genome-wide association analysis shows markers differentially associated with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and implicates calcium channel genes.
**Authors:** Curtis D, Vine AE, McQuillin A, Bass NJ, Pereira A, Kandaswamy R, Lawrence J, Anjorin A, Choudhury K, Datta SR, Puri V, Krasucki R, Pimm J, Thirumalai S, Quested D, Gurling HM
**Journal:** Psychiatr Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/YPG.0b013e3283413382](https://doi.org/10.1097/YPG.0b013e3283413382)

## Content

1. Psychiatr Genet. 2011 Feb;21(1):1-4. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e3283413382.

Case-case genome-wide association analysis shows markers differentially 
associated with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and implicates calcium 
channel genes.

Curtis D(1), Vine AE, McQuillin A, Bass NJ, Pereira A, Kandaswamy R, Lawrence J, 
Anjorin A, Choudhury K, Datta SR, Puri V, Krasucki R, Pimm J, Thirumalai S, 
Quested D, Gurling HM.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Psychiatry, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
London, UK. david.curtis@qmul.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: There are theoretical reasons why comparing marker allele frequencies 
between cases of different diseases, rather than with controls, may offer 
benefits. The samples may be better matched, especially for background risk 
factors common to both diseases. Genetic loci may also be detected which 
influence which of the two diseases occurs if common risk factors are present.
METHOD: We used samples of UK bipolar and schizophrenic cases that had earlier 
been subject to genome-wide association studies and compared marker allele 
frequencies between the two samples. When these differed for a marker, we 
compared the case sample allele frequencies with those of a control sample.
RESULTS: Eight markers were significant at P value of less than 10(-5). Of 
these, the most interesting finding was for rs17645023, which was significant at 
P value of less than 10(-6) and which lies 36 kb from CACNG5. Control allele 
frequencies for this marker were intermediate between those for bipolar and 
schizophrenic cases.
CONCLUSION: The application of this approach suggests that it does have some 
merits. The finding for CACNG5, taken together with the earlier implication of 
CACNA1C and CACNA1B, strongly suggests a key role for voltage-dependent calcium 
channel genes in the susceptibility to bipolar disorder and/or schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e3283413382
PMCID: PMC3024533
PMID: 21057379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]