---
reference_id: "PMID:27512769"
title: Wilms’ Tumour – Histology and Differential Diagnosis.
authors:
- van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM
- Popov SD
- Sebire NJ
- Vujanic GM
year: '2016'
doi: 10.15586/codon.wt.2016.ch1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wilms’ Tumour – Histology and Differential Diagnosis.
**Authors:** van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM, Popov SD, Sebire NJ, Vujanic GM
**DOI:** [10.15586/codon.wt.2016.ch1](https://doi.org/10.15586/codon.wt.2016.ch1)

## Content

1. Wilms’ Tumour – Histology and Differential Diagnosis.

Popov SD(1), Sebire NJ(1), Vujanic GM(1).

In: van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM(2), editor. Wilms Tumor [Internet]. Brisbane (AU): 
Codon Publications; 2016 Mar. Chapter 1.

Author information:
(1)(1)Department of Cellular Pathology, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, 
UK; (2)Department of Histopathology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK
(2)Princess Maxima Center for Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Lundlaan 6, 3584 EA 
Utrecht, The Netherlands

Wilms’ tumour (WT) is the most common paediatric renal tumour, which can present 
as a single nodule, as multifocal unilateral lesions or as bilateral tumours. 
Typically, WT comprises three histological components namely blastemal, 
epithelial and stromal. The proportion and the degree of maturation of these 
components vary significantly, making the histological appearance of each tumour 
unique. Classical triphasic WT rarely presents diagnostic difficulty for 
pathologists, but when only one component is present, especially in a small 
biopsy specimen, the differential diagnosis may include renal cell carcinoma, 
metanephric adenoma and hyperplastic nephrogenic rest for epithelial elements 
and clear cell sarcoma of the kidney, mesoblastic nephroma and synovial sarcoma 
for stromal elements. Pure blastemal-type WT may be difficult to distinguish 
from other embryonal ‘small round blue cell tumours’, including neuroblastoma, 
primitive neuroectodermal tumour/Ewing sarcoma, desmoplastic small round cell 
tumour and lymphoma. All the three components, though usually blastema, can 
become anaplastic, leading to the diagnosis of either focal or diffuse 
anaplasia. WT with diffuse anaplasia and WT with blastemal predominance (after 
preoperative chemotherapy) are regarded as high-risk tumours and require more 
aggressive treatment. Careful assessment of the tumour and the normal kidney is 
critical for accurate subtyping and staging of WT, which is the basis for 
post-operative treatment. In addition, the identification and correct 
interpretation of nephrogenic rests may affect prognosis and management. 
Histological distinction between WT and nephrogenic rest is not always possible 
based on morphology alone, and implementation of new molecular genetic tools may 
aid in this regard. Other molecular genetic signatures of WT, such as P53 
mutation and MYCN dysregulation, may provide future additional prognostic and 
therapeutic information.

Copyright: The Authors.

DOI: 10.15586/codon.wt.2016.ch1
PMID: 27512769