---
reference_id: "PMID:38686385"
title: "IL-23 past, present, and future: a roadmap to advancing IL-23 science and therapy."
authors:
- Krueger JG
- Eyerich K
- Kuchroo VK
- Ritchlin CT
- Abreu MT
- Elloso MM
- Fourie A
- Fakharzadeh S
- Sherlock JP
- Yang YW
- Cua DJ
- McInnes IB
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1331217
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IL-23 past, present, and future: a roadmap to advancing IL-23 science and therapy.
**Authors:** Krueger JG, Eyerich K, Kuchroo VK, Ritchlin CT, Abreu MT, Elloso MM, Fourie A, Fakharzadeh S, Sherlock JP, Yang YW, Cua DJ, McInnes IB
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1331217](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1331217)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Apr 15;15:1331217. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1331217. 
eCollection 2024.

IL-23 past, present, and future: a roadmap to advancing IL-23 science and 
therapy.

Krueger JG(1), Eyerich K(2)(3), Kuchroo VK(4), Ritchlin CT(5), Abreu MT(6), 
Elloso MM(7), Fourie A(8), Fakharzadeh S(9), Sherlock JP(10)(11), Yang YW(9), 
Cua DJ(10), McInnes IB(12).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Investigative Dermatology, The Rockefeller University, New 
York, NY, United States.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Dermatology and Venereology, Karolinska 
Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Medical Center, University of 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Evergrande Center for Immunologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(5)Allergy, Immunology & Rheumatology Division, Center for Musculoskeletal 
Research, University of Rochester Medical School, Rochester, NY, United States.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of Miami 
Leonard Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, United States.
(7)Janssen Scientific Affairs, LLC, Horsham, PA, United States.
(8)Janssen Research & Development, LLC, San Diego, CA, United States.
(9)Immunology Global Medical Affairs, Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies of 
Johnson & Johnson, Horsham, PA, United States.
(10)Janssen Research & Development, LLC, Spring House, PA, United States.
(11)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
(12)College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, United Kingdom.

Interleukin (IL)-23, an IL-12 cytokine family member, is a hierarchically 
dominant regulatory cytokine in a cluster of immune-mediated inflammatory 
diseases (IMIDs), including psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, and inflammatory 
bowel disease. We review IL-23 biology, IL-23 signaling in IMIDs, and the effect 
of IL-23 inhibition in treating these diseases. We propose studies to advance 
IL-23 biology and unravel differences in response to anti-IL-23 therapy. 
Experimental evidence generated from these investigations could establish a 
novel molecular ontology centered around IL-23-driven diseases, improve upon 
current approaches to treating IMIDs with IL-23 inhibition, and ultimately 
facilitate optimal identification of patients and, thereby, outcomes.

Copyright © 2024 Krueger, Eyerich, Kuchroo, Ritchlin, Abreu, Elloso, Fourie, 
Fakharzadeh, Sherlock, Yang, Cua and McInnes.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1331217
PMCID: PMC11056518
PMID: 38686385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JK served as a consultant for and/or received 
honoraria from AbbVie, Allergan, Almirall, Amgen, Arena, Aristea, Asana, 
Aurigene, Biogen Idec, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Escalier, 
Galapagos, Janssen, Eli Lilly, MoonLake Immunotherapeutics, Nimbus, Novartis, 
Pfizer, Sanofi, Sienna Biopharmaceuticals, Sun Pharmaceutical Industries, 
Target-Derm, UCB, Valeant, and Ventyx. KE received speaker fees from and/or 
served on an advisory board for AbbVie, Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol 
Myers Squibb, Galapagos, Eli Lilly, Janssen, Pfizer, Novartis, Sanofi, and UCB. 
VK served as a consultant for iTeos; has an ownership interest in and is a 
member of the scientific advisory board for Tizona Therapeutics; is a cofounder 
of and has an ownership interest in Celsius Therapeutics; and is a cofounder of 
Bicara Therapeutics. CR received grant/research support and consulting fees from 
UCB, AbbVie, and Amgen; and received consulting fees from Eli Lilly, Pfizer, 
Novartis, Gilead, and Janssen. MA is a consultant or served on advisory boards 
for AbbVie Inc, Arena Pharmaceuticals Inc now Pfizer, Bristol Myers Squibb, 
Celsius Therapeutics, Eli Lilly and Company, Gilead Sciences Inc, Janssen 
Pharmaceuticals, Janssen Global Services, Pfizer Pharmaceutical, Prometheus 
Biosciences, UCB Biopharma SRL. She has received fees for lecturing from 
Alimentiv, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Prime CME and WebMD Global LLC. IM received 
consulting fees and grant/research support from AstraZeneca, Bristol Myers 
Squibb, Amgen, Eli Lilly, GSK, Janssen, Novartis, Roche, and UCB; received 
consulting fees from AbbVie, Cabaletta, Compugen, Gilead, Pfizer, and Sanofi; 
serves as a shareholder of Compugen and Causeway Therapeutics, and as a board 
member for National Health Service Greater Glasgow and Clyde; and is a trustee 
for Versus Arthritis. ME, AF, SF, JS, Y-WY, and DC are employees of Janssen and 
hold stock in Johnson & Johnson. Box 1Questions to consider for future 
investigation to advance the science of IL-23 and approaches to IL-23 inhibitor 
therapy.A multiomics approach to advancing the science of IL-23 Are there any 
trends in the literature that identify how the IL-23/IL-17 axis may function and 
drive nuanced effects in different cell types or tissues?Does the impact of this 
pathway change over time or with progression of disease, identifying an ideal 
timeframe or context in the course of disease to initiate IL-23 inhibitor 
treatment?Are there any differences in biomarker profiles between inadequate 
responders and responders to therapy that may be used to predict clinical 
outcomes?What is the epigenetic profile of IL-23 signaling in various immune and 
non-immune cell types and how may this impact disease pathogenesis, disease 
progression, or response to treatment?What post-translational modifications of 
downstream cytokines/effector molecules are associated with IL-23 signaling?What 
are the functional consequences of changes in multiomics profiles and associated 
changes in immune cell populations over the course of disease and in response to 
treatment?“Broad sweep” of IL-23 receptor–expressing cells Which cells express 
the IL-23 receptor in healthy and inflamed tissues in humans?What is the role of 
IL-23 receptor signaling in diverse T-cell targets?How may a comprehensive 
assessment of IL-23 receptor expression across cell types and tissues identify 
new disease states that may be treatable through targeted intervention with 
IL-23 inhibition?How does IL-23 receptor expression change at various timepoints 
and tissue types across IMIDs and in response to treatment with IL-23 
blockade?Is the IL-23 receptor coexpressed with other molecules of interest (ie, 
other cytokines or receptors) that may help to explain differences between 
currently available therapies and help design future treatments?Gaps in 
understanding IL-23 signaling and cellular activity Are there different nuances 
to IL-23 signaling in different cell types or tissues that may have functional 
consequences impacting disease pathogenesis or response to treatment?Do these 
signaling nuances change over the course of disease progression, and normalize 
with treatment with an IL-23 inhibitor?What is the role of STAT3 and STAT4 
signaling in the context of IL-23 receptor signaling in Treg cells?What is the 
relationship between tissue-specific microbiota and IL-23 receptor 
signaling?Durability of response What is the effect of targeting IL-23p19 on TRM 
cells and the ratio of TRM/Treg cells across IMIDs?What are the mechanisms 
underlying the long-lasting effects of targeting IL-23p19?Can early intervention 
with IL-23 blockade after recent onset of disease modify the course of disease 
progression by suppressing TRM cells?Future IL-23 inhibitor molecules What 
molecular attributes of IL-23 inhibitors may be relevant for optimizing 
inhibition of IL-23 across IMIDs?Are there therapeutic advantages in targeting 
the IL-23 receptor versus IL-23p19 subunit directly in treating 
IMIDs?Combination therapy What potential therapeutic benefits may derive from 
combining IL-23 inhibition with blockade of another complementary inflammatory 
disease-driving pathway in treating IMIDs?What complementary pathway(s) would be 
optimal for blockade in combination with IL-23 inhibition for treatment of given 
IMIDs?IL, interleukin; STAT, signal transducer and activator of transcription; 
Treg, regulatory T.