---
reference_id: "PMID:37688493"
title: The usefulness of the genetic panel in the classification and refinement of diagnostic accuracy of Mexican patients with Marfan syndrome and other connective tissue disorders.
authors:
- Fuentevilla-Álvarez G
- Soto ME
- Torres-Paz YE
- Meza-Toledo SE
- Vargas-Alarcón G
- González-Moyotl N
- Pérez-Torres I
- Manzano-Pech L
- Mejia AM
- Huesca-Gómez C
- Gamboa R
journal: Biomol Biomed
year: '2024'
doi: 10.17305/bb.2023.9578
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The usefulness of the genetic panel in the classification and refinement of diagnostic accuracy of Mexican patients with Marfan syndrome and other connective tissue disorders.
**Authors:** Fuentevilla-Álvarez G, Soto ME, Torres-Paz YE, Meza-Toledo SE, Vargas-Alarcón G, González-Moyotl N, Pérez-Torres I, Manzano-Pech L, Mejia AM, Huesca-Gómez C, Gamboa R
**Journal:** Biomol Biomed (2024)
**DOI:** [10.17305/bb.2023.9578](https://doi.org/10.17305/bb.2023.9578)

## Content

1. Biomol Biomed. 2024 Mar 11;24(2):302-314. doi: 10.17305/bb.2023.9578.

The usefulness of the genetic panel in the classification and refinement of 
diagnostic accuracy of Mexican patients with Marfan syndrome and other 
connective tissue disorders.

Fuentevilla-Álvarez G(1), Soto ME(2), Torres-Paz YE(3), Meza-Toledo SE(4), 
Vargas-Alarcón G(5), González-Moyotl N(3), Pérez-Torres I(6), Manzano-Pech L(6), 
Mejia AM(7), Huesca-Gómez C(3), Gamboa R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, 
México City, Mexico; Department of Biochemistry, Escuela Nacional de Ciencias 
Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional (IPN), México City, Mexico.
(2)Department of Immunology, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, 
México City, Mexico; Cardiovascular Line in American British Cowdray (ABC) 
Medical Center, México City, Mexico; Research Direction, Instituto Nacional de 
Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, México City, Mexico.
(3)Department of Physiology, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, 
México City, Mexico.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Escuela Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas, 
Instituto Politécnico Nacional (IPN), México City, Mexico.
(5)Research Direction, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, México 
City, Mexico.
(6)Department of Cardiovascular Biomedicine, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología 
Ignacio Chávez, México City, Mexico.
(7)Department of Blood Bank, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, 
México City, Mexico.

Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a multisystem genetic disorder with over 3000 mutations 
described in the fibrillin 1 (FBN1) gene. Like MFS, other connective tissue 
disorders also require a deeper understanding of the phenotype-genotype 
relationship due to the complexity of the clinical presentation, where 
diagnostic criteria often overlap. Our objective was to identify mutations in 
patients with connective tissue disorders using a genetic multipanel and to 
analyze the genotype-phenotype associations in a cohort of Mexican patients. We 
recruited 136 patients with MFS and related syndromes from the National 
Institute of Cardiology. Mutations were identified using next-generation 
sequencing (NGS). To examine the correlation between mutation severity and 
severe cardiovascular conditions, we focused on patients who had undergone 
Bentall-de Bono surgery or aortic valve repair. The genetic data obtained 
allowed us to reclassify the initial clinical diagnosis across various types of 
connective tissue disorders. The transforming growth factor beta receptor 2 
(TGFBR2) rs79375991 mutation was found in 10 out of 16 (63%) Loeys-Dietz 
patients. We observed a high prevalence (65%) of more severe mutations, such as 
frameshift indels and stop codons, among patients requiring invasive treatments 
like aortic valve-sparing surgery, Bentall and de Bono procedures, or aortic 
valve replacement due to severe cardiovascular injury. Although our study did 
not achieve precise phenotype-genotype correlations, it underscores the 
importance of a multigenetic panel evaluation. This could pave the way for a 
more comprehensive diagnostic approach and inform medical and surgical treatment 
decision-making.

DOI: 10.17305/bb.2023.9578
PMCID: PMC10950338
PMID: 37688493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: Authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.