---
reference_id: "PMID:38690871"
title: An updated list of eumycetoma causative agents and their differences in grain formation and treatment response.
authors:
- van de Sande WWJ
- Fahal AH
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1128/cmr.00034-23
keywords:
- "Mycetoma/microbiology, drug therapy, diagnosis"
- Humans
- "Antifungal Agents/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Madurella/drug effects
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An updated list of eumycetoma causative agents and their differences in grain formation and treatment response.
**Authors:** van de Sande WWJ, Fahal AH
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1128/cmr.00034-23](https://doi.org/10.1128/cmr.00034-23)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2024 Jun 13;37(2):e0003423. doi: 10.1128/cmr.00034-23.
Epub  2024 May 1.

An updated list of eumycetoma causative agents and their differences in grain
formation and treatment response.

van de Sande WWJ(1), Fahal AH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Erasmus MC,
University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)The Mycetoma Research Centre, University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan.

SUMMARYIn 2023, the World Health Organization designated eumycetoma causative
agents as high-priority pathogens on its list of fungal priority pathogens.
Despite this recognition, a comprehensive understanding of these causative
agents is lacking, and potential variations in clinical manifestations or
therapeutic responses remain unclear. In this review, 12,379 eumycetoma cases
were reviewed. In total, 69 different fungal species were identified as
causative agents. However, some were only identified once, and there was no
supporting evidence that they were indeed present in the grain. Madurella
mycetomatis was by far the most commonly reported fungal causative agent. In
most studies, identification of the fungus at the species level was based on
culture or histology, which was prone to misidentifications. The newly used
molecular identification tools identified new causative agents. Clinically, no
differences were reported in the appearance of the lesion, but variations in
mycetoma grain formation and antifungal susceptibility were observed. Although
attempts were made to explore the differences in clinical outcomes based on
antifungal susceptibility, the lack of large clinical trials and the inclusion
of surgery as standard treatment posed challenges in drawing definitive
conclusions. Limited case series suggested that eumycetoma cases caused by
Fusarium species were less responsive to treatment than those caused by
Madurella mycetomatis. However, further research is imperative for a
comprehensive understanding.

DOI: 10.1128/cmr.00034-23
PMCID: PMC11237709
PMID: 38690871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
