---
reference_id: "PMID:16878065"
title: The rôle of saliva in maintaining oral health and as an aid to diagnosis.
authors:
- Llena-Puy C
journal: Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal
year: '2006'
keywords:
- Biomarkers/analysis
- "Dental Caries/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Dental Plaque/diagnosis, etiology"
- Humans
- Oral Health
- Risk Factors
- "Saliva/metabolism, physiology"
- Salivary Glands
- Salivary Proteins and Peptides
- Salivation
- Sialorrhea/etiology
- Xerostomia/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The rôle of saliva in maintaining oral health and as an aid to diagnosis.
**Authors:** Llena-Puy C
**Journal:** Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal (2006)

## Content

1. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal. 2006 Aug;11(5):E449-55.

The rôle of saliva in maintaining oral health and as an aid to diagnosis.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Llena-Puy C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department 9, Valencian Health Service, CEU Cardenal Herrera University.
llena@uv.es

Saliva is a complex secretion. 93% by volume is secreted by the major salivary
glands and the remaining 7% by the minor glands. 99% of saliva is water and the
other 1% is composed of organic and inorganic molecules. While the quantity of
saliva is important, so is its quality. The components of saliva, its functions
in maintaining oral health and the main factors that cause alterations in
salivary secretion will be reviewed, the importance of saliva in caries
development and bacterial plaque formation will be discussed and its role as an
aid to diagnosing certain pathologies will be examined. Variations in salivary
flow can be affected, reversibly or irreversibly, by numerous physiological and
pathological factors. Saliva plays an essential role in maintaining the
integrity of the oral structures, in personal relationships, in the digestion
and in controlling oral infection. The part that saliva plays in protecting
teeth from caries can be summarised under four aspects: diluting and eliminating
sugars and other substances, buffer capacity, balancing
demineralisation/remineralisation and antimicrobial action. Saliva is a
promising option for diagnosing certain disorders and monitoring the evolution
of certain pathologies or the dosage of medicines or drugs. Its advantages as a
diagnostic tool include its being easy to obtain and the positive correlation
between many parameters in serum and saliva.

PMID: 16878065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
