---
reference_id: "PMID:15136966"
title: Hypergonadotropic ovarian failure associated with an inherited mutation of human bone morphogenetic protein-15 (BMP15) gene.
authors:
- Di Pasquale E
- Beck-Peccoz P
- Persani L
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1086/422103
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Alleles
- Amenorrhea/genetics
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Bone Morphogenetic Protein 15
- Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/genetics
- "Chromosomes, Human, X/genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Granulosa Cells/pathology
- Growth Differentiation Factor 9
- Humans
- Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- Karyotyping
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Ovary/abnormalities
- Pedigree
- Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/genetics
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypergonadotropic ovarian failure associated with an inherited mutation of human bone morphogenetic protein-15 (BMP15) gene.
**Authors:** Di Pasquale E, Beck-Peccoz P, Persani L
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1086/422103](https://doi.org/10.1086/422103)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2004 Jul;75(1):106-11. doi: 10.1086/422103. Epub 2004 May 10.

Hypergonadotropic ovarian failure associated with an inherited mutation of human 
bone morphogenetic protein-15 (BMP15) gene.

Di Pasquale E(1), Beck-Peccoz P, Persani L.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Endocrine Sciences, University of Milan, and Istituto Auxologico 
Italiano IRCCS, Milan, Italy.

Hypergonadotropic ovarian failure is a common cause of female infertility. It is 
a heterogeneous disorder that, in the most severe forms, is a result of ovarian 
dysgenesis (OD). Most OD cases are associated with major X-chromosome 
abnormalities, but the pathogenesis of this disorder is still largely undefined 
in patients with a normal karyotype. Animal models showed the important role in 
female reproduction played by the product of a gene located at Xp11.2 in humans 
(BMP15). BMP15 is an oocyte-specific growth/differentiation factor that 
stimulates folliculogenesis and granulosa cell (GC) growth. We report two 
sisters with a normal karyotype who are affected with hypergonadotropic ovarian 
failure due to OD. The familial presentation suggested a genetic origin, and 
candidate genes were screened for mutations. A heterozygous nonconservative 
substitution in the pro region of BMP15 (Y235C) was identified in both sisters 
but not in 210 control alleles. This mutation was inherited from the father. 
Mutant BMP15 appears to be processed abnormally, is associated with reduced GC 
growth, and antagonizes the stimulatory activity of wild-type protein on GC 
proliferation. In conclusion, the first natural mutation in human BMP15 is 
associated with familial OD, indicating that the action of BMP15 is required for 
the progression of human folliculogenesis. This condition represents an 
exceptional example of X-linked human disease exclusively affecting heterozygous 
females who inherited the genetic alteration from the unaffected father. BMP15 
defects are involved in the pathogenesis of hypergonadotropic ovarian failure in 
humans.

DOI: 10.1086/422103
PMCID: PMC1181993
PMID: 15136966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]