---
reference_id: "PMID:16039272"
title: "Modulation of I(Kr) inactivation by mutation N588K in KCNH2: a link to arrhythmogenesis in short QT syndrome."
authors:
- Cordeiro JM
- Brugada R
- Wu YS
- Hong K
- Dumaine R
journal: Cardiovasc Res
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.cardiores.2005.02.018
keywords:
- Action Potentials
- Cell Line
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/etiology"
- ERG1 Potassium Channel
- "Ether-A-Go-Go Potassium Channels/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Ion Channel Gating
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- Mutation
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism"
- Patch-Clamp Techniques
- "Potassium Channels, Voltage-Gated/genetics, metabolism"
- Purkinje Fibers/metabolism
- Transfection/methods
- "Ventricular Fibrillation/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modulation of I(Kr) inactivation by mutation N588K in KCNH2: a link to arrhythmogenesis in short QT syndrome.
**Authors:** Cordeiro JM, Brugada R, Wu YS, Hong K, Dumaine R
**Journal:** Cardiovasc Res (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cardiores.2005.02.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cardiores.2005.02.018)

## Content

1. Cardiovasc Res. 2005 Aug 15;67(3):498-509. doi:
10.1016/j.cardiores.2005.02.018.  Epub 2005 Mar 28.

Modulation of I(Kr) inactivation by mutation N588K in KCNH2: a link to
arrhythmogenesis in short QT syndrome.

Cordeiro JM(1), Brugada R, Wu YS, Hong K, Dumaine R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Cardiology, Masonic Medical Research Laboratory,
2150 Bleecker Street, Utica, NY 13501, USA. jcordeiro@mmrl.edu

OBJECTIVE: Short QT syndrome (SQTS) is characterized by ventricular arrhythmias
and sudden death. One form of SQTS is caused by mutation N588K in human
ether-a-go-go-related gene (HERG). In this study we sought to determine the
potential role of N588K in arrhythmias.
METHODS: We measured the characteristics of HERG current generated by wild-type
(WT) KCNH2 and the N588K mutant channel expressed in mammalian TSA201 cells.
RESULTS: Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings of WT HERG currents showed the usual
rapid onset of inactivation (rectification) at potentials more positive than +10
mV. In contrast, N588K currents rectified at potentials over +80 mV. Over the
physiological range of potentials, N588K currents do not inactivate. During an
action potential clamp, WT currents displayed a "hump" like waveform with slow
activation kinetics and a rapid increase during phase 3 repolarization. In
contrast, N588K currents were proportional to the amplitude of the action
potential and displayed a dome-like configuration and a much larger current
during the initial phases in the ventricle. Purkinje cell action potentials
display a more negative phase 2 repolarization than the ventricle and elicited
much smaller WT and N588K currents of similar amplitudes.
CONCLUSIONS: Physiologically the N588K mutation abolishes rectification of HERG
currents and specifically increases I(Kr) in the ventricle with minimal effects
on the Purkinje fiber action potential duration. Such preferential prolongation
may explain the separation of the T and U waves observed in the ECG of SQTS
patients and lead to re-excitation of the ventricle endocardium.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cardiores.2005.02.018
PMID: 16039272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
