---
reference_id: "PMID:27825160"
title: Pathophysiology of Volumetric Muscle Loss Injury.
authors:
- Corona BT
- Wenke JC
- Ward CL
journal: Cells Tissues Organs
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1159/000443925
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Muscle Strength
- "Muscle, Skeletal/injuries, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Muscular Diseases/pathology, physiopathology"
- Organ Size
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of Volumetric Muscle Loss Injury.
**Authors:** Corona BT, Wenke JC, Ward CL
**Journal:** Cells Tissues Organs (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000443925](https://doi.org/10.1159/000443925)

## Content

1. Cells Tissues Organs. 2016;202(3-4):180-188. doi: 10.1159/000443925. Epub 2016
 Nov 9.

Pathophysiology of Volumetric Muscle Loss Injury.

Corona BT, Wenke JC, Ward CL.

Volumetric muscle loss (VML) injuries are prevalent in civilian and military 
trauma patients and are known to impart chronic functional deficits. The frank 
loss of muscle tissue that defines VML injuries is beyond the robust reparative 
and regenerative capacities of mammalian skeletal muscle. Given the nature of 
VML injuries, there is a clear need to develop therapies that promote de novo 
regeneration of skeletal muscle fibers, which can integrate with the remaining 
musculature and restore muscle strength. However, the pathophysiology of VML 
injuries is not completely defined, and, therefore, there may be other 
opportunities to improve functional outcomes other than de novo regeneration. 
Herein, clinical and preclinical studies of VML were reviewed to ascertain 
salient manifestations of VML injury that can impair limb function and muscle 
strength. The limited clinical data available highlighted proliferative fibrosis 
secondary to VML injury as a viable target to improve limb range of motion. 
Selected preclinical studies that used standardized neuromuscular functional 
assessments broadly identified that the muscle mass remaining after VML injury 
is performing suboptimally, and, therefore, percent VML strength deficits are 
significantly worse than can be explained by the initial frank loss of 
contractile machinery. Potential mechanisms of suboptimal strength of the 
remaining muscle mass suggested within the literature include intramuscular 
nerve damage, muscle architectural perturbations, and diminished transmission of 
force. Collectively, both clinical and preclinical data indicate a complex 
pathophysiology after VML that presents multiple therapeutic targets. This is a 
work of the US Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the USA. 
Foreign copyrights may apply. Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000443925
PMID: 27825160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]