---
reference_id: "PMID:20806047"
title: Identification of dominant FOXE3 and PAX6 mutations in patients with congenital cataract and aniridia.
authors:
- Brémond-Gignac D
- Bitoun P
- Reis LM
- Copin H
- Murray JC
- Semina EV
journal: Mol Vis
year: '2010'
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Aniridia/complications, genetics"
- Base Sequence
- "Cataract/complications, congenital, genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Eye Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- "Forkhead Transcription Factors/chemistry, genetics"
- "Genes, Dominant/genetics"
- "Homeodomain Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- PAX6 Transcription Factor
- "Paired Box Transcription Factors/chemistry, genetics"
- "Repressor Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Sequence Alignment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of dominant FOXE3 and PAX6 mutations in patients with congenital cataract and aniridia.
**Authors:** Brémond-Gignac D, Bitoun P, Reis LM, Copin H, Murray JC, Semina EV
**Journal:** Mol Vis (2010)

## Content

1. Mol Vis. 2010 Aug 22;16:1705-11.

Identification of dominant FOXE3 and PAX6 mutations in patients with congenital 
cataract and aniridia.

Brémond-Gignac D(1), Bitoun P, Reis LM, Copin H, Murray JC, Semina EV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Ophthalmology, St Victor University Hospital of 
Amiens, INSERM UMRS968, Vision Institute, Paris VI University, Amiens, France.

PURPOSE: Aniridia and congenital cataract represent rare but severe 
developmental ocular conditions. We examined 33 probands from France for 
mutations in several transcription factors associated with these phenotypes, the 
forkhead box E3 (FOXE3), paired box gene 6 (PAX6), paired-like homeodomain 
transcription factor 2 (PITX2), and paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 
3 (PITX3) genes.
METHODS: Out of 33 probands, 27 were affected with congenital cataract while the 
remaining six were affected with aniridia (with or without cataract). The coding 
regions of FOXE3, PAX6, PITX2, and PITX3 were examined by direct DNA sequencing 
of gene-specific PCR products.
RESULTS: A novel dominant mutation at the stop codon of FOXE3, c.959G>C 
(p.X320SerextX72), was identified in a patient with congenital cataract. Another 
novel FOXE3 sequence change, c.571-579dup (p.Tyr191_Pro193dup), was identified 
in a patient with aniridia, mild lens opacities, and some additional ocular 
defects; this patient was also found to carry a nonsense mutation in PAX6. PAX6 
mutations were identified in two additional probands with aniridia and 
cataracts. None of the observed sequence alterations were found in normal 
controls. No mutations were identified in PITX2 or PITX3.
CONCLUSIONS: The p.X320SerextX72 mutation is only the fourth FOXE3 allele 
associated with a dominant phenotype since the majority of FOXE3 mutations 
appear to be recessive with no phenotype observed in heterozygous carriers. The 
encoded protein is predicted to contain a complete normal sequence followed by 
seventy-two erroneous amino acids; the position and effect of this mutation are 
similar to two of the previously reported dominant changes, suggesting a common 
mechanism for dominant alleles. The p.Tyr191_Pro193dup is predicted to result in 
an in-frame duplication of three amino acids; however, the contribution of this 
mutation to the phenotype is unclear since the affected patient also carries a 
nonsense mutation in PAX6 which acts upstream of FOXE3 in the molecular pathway. 
The identified PAX6 mutations correspond to the two most commonly observed 
mutant alleles and demonstrate phenotypes that are consistent with the 
previously reported spectrum.

PMCID: PMC2927439
PMID: 20806047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]