---
reference_id: "PMID:23855095"
title: Dermatological manifestations of dengue fever.
authors:
- Mahboob A
- Iqbal Z
- Javed R
- Taj A
- Munir A
- Saleemi MA
- Yaqub F
journal: J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad
year: '2012'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dermatological manifestations of dengue fever.
**Authors:** Mahboob A, Iqbal Z, Javed R, Taj A, Munir A, Saleemi MA, Yaqub F
**Journal:** J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad (2012)

## Content

1. J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad. 2012 Jan-Mar;24(1):52-4.

Dermatological manifestations of dengue fever.

Mahboob A(1), Iqbal Z, Javed R, Taj A, Munir A, Saleemi MA, Yaqub F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Shaikh Zayed Federal Postgraduate Medical 
Institute, Pakistan. Saleemimunir@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Each year dengue related infections are rising in tropical 
countries. There is not enough data available on dermatological manifestations 
of dengue fever. This study was conducted to investigate prevalence and type of 
dermatological manifestations of dengue fever (DF). Dengue Haemorrhagic Fever 
(DHF), and Dengue Shock Syndrome (DSS).
METHODS: A Prospective study was contacted in Department of Medicine, Shaikh 
Zayed Hospital, Lahore, from 3rd Oct to 20th Nov 2010. Specific serological 
tests for DF were done in all 60 patients admitted with suspected diagnosis of 
DF, DHF or DSS. Forty-eight confirmed cases were evaluated for age, gender, 
mucocutaneous features and outcome of the disease.
RESULTS: Forty-eight out of 60 patients had positive serology for dengue fever. 
Male to female ratio was 1.09:1. Their ages ranged 5-68 years with a mean of 
31.5 +/- 15.2. DF, DHF and DSS were found in 71%, 19% and 10% respectively. 
Common dermatological presentations were oral mucous membrane congestion 
(66.67%), generalised morbiliform rash (64.58%) and eye congestion (64.58%). 
Purpuric spots along with mucous membrane congestion, generalised morbiliform 
rash and eyes congestion was observed in 20.83%, 12.5% and 6.25% patients 
respectively. All except one patient improved clinically. One patient died of 
respiratory distress and haemorrhage on second day of admission.
CONCLUSION: Dermatological features are significantly noticeable in dengue fever 
patients. These may help us in early diagnosis and better management of 
patients.

PMID: 23855095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]