---
reference_id: "PMID:31731233"
title: Wild-type ATTR amyloidosis may be associated with unexpected death among the elderly.
authors:
- Shiozaki T
- Sato N
- Hayashi T
- Kobayashi K
- Asamura H
journal: Leg Med (Tokyo)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.legalmed.2019.101634
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wild-type ATTR amyloidosis may be associated with unexpected death among the elderly.
**Authors:** Shiozaki T, Sato N, Hayashi T, Kobayashi K, Asamura H
**Journal:** Leg Med (Tokyo) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.legalmed.2019.101634](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.legalmed.2019.101634)

## Content

1. Leg Med (Tokyo). 2019 Nov;41:101634. doi: 10.1016/j.legalmed.2019.101634. Epub
 2019 Oct 31.

Wild-type ATTR amyloidosis may be associated with unexpected death among the 
elderly.

Shiozaki T(1), Sato N(1), Hayashi T(1), Kobayashi K(1), Asamura H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Legal Medicine, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 
Matsumoto, Nagano 390-8621, Japan.
(2)Department of Legal Medicine, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 
Matsumoto, Nagano 390-8621, Japan. Electronic address: asamura@shinshu-u.ac.jp.

Wild-type ATTR amyloidosis (ATTR-wt) is characterized by the accumulation of 
amyloid in the heart, leading to fatal heart failure and arrhythmia. In this 
study, we investigated the amyloid deposits in the heart from 556 forensic 
autopsy cases over 60 years of age. The prevalence of ATTR-wt was 5.8% (32 of 
the 556), with the prevalence increasing as a function of age. We identified an 
ATTR-wt-specific morbidity rate of 12.3% for patients over 80 years of age, 
while the prevalence among individuals over 90 years of age was 34.9%. In none 
of these 32 cases had a clinical diagnosis of ATTR-wt been made. In 29 of the 32 
cases found to be ATTR-wt positive, an obvious extraneous cause of death was 
identified and included burning, drowning, hypothermia, suicide, and traffic 
accident. On the other hand, heart failure due to ATTR-wt was confirmed as the 
cause of death in 3 of the 32 cases. It is suggested that ATTR-wt may be 
associated with unexpected death among the elderly.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.legalmed.2019.101634
PMID: 31731233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]