---
reference_id: "PMID:33935037"
title: Recent advances in the understanding of the molecular pathogenesis and targeted therapy options in Langerhans cell histiocytosis.
authors:
- Suh JK
- Kang S
- Kim H
- Im HJ
- Koh KN
journal: Blood Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.5045/br.2021.2021013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent advances in the understanding of the molecular pathogenesis and targeted therapy options in Langerhans cell histiocytosis.
**Authors:** Suh JK, Kang S, Kim H, Im HJ, Koh KN
**Journal:** Blood Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.5045/br.2021.2021013](https://doi.org/10.5045/br.2021.2021013)

## Content

1. Blood Res. 2021 Apr 30;56(S1):S65-S69. doi: 10.5045/br.2021.2021013.

Recent advances in the understanding of the molecular pathogenesis and targeted 
therapy options in Langerhans cell histiocytosis.

Suh JK(1), Kang S(1), Kim H(1), Im HJ(1), Koh KN(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Asan 
Medical Center Children's Hospital, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.

Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is the most common histiocytic disorder 
caused by the clonal expansion of myeloid precursors that differentiate into 
CD1a+/CD207+ cells in the lesion. Advances in genomic sequencing techniques have 
improved our understanding of the pathophysiology of LCH. Activation of the 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is a key molecular mechanism 
involved in the development of LCH. Recurrent BRAF mutations and MAP2K1 
mutations are the major molecular alterations involved in the activation of the 
MAPK pathway. Recent studies have supported the "misguided myeloid 
differentiation model" of LCH, where the extent of disease is defined by the 
differentiation stage of the cell in which the activating somatic MAPK mutation 
occurs, suggesting LCH. Several studies have advocated the efficacy of targeted 
therapy using BRAF inhibitors with a high response rate, especially in patients 
with high-risk or refractory LCH. However, the optimal treatment scheme for 
children remains unclear. This review outlines recent advances in LCH, focusing 
on understanding the molecular pathophysiology, emerging targeted therapy 
options, and their clinical implications.

DOI: 10.5045/br.2021.2021013
PMCID: PMC8093998
PMID: 33935037

Conflict of interest statement: Authors’ Disclosures of Potential Conflicts of 
Interest No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were 
reported.