---
reference_id: "PMID:19691586"
title: "Increasing patient safety in veterinary transfusion medicine: an overview of pretransfusion testing."
authors:
- Tocci LJ
- Ewing PJ
journal: J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1111/j.1476-4431.2009.00387.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increasing patient safety in veterinary transfusion medicine: an overview of pretransfusion testing.
**Authors:** Tocci LJ, Ewing PJ
**Journal:** J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1476-4431.2009.00387.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1476-4431.2009.00387.x)

## Content

1. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio). 2009 Feb;19(1):66-73. doi: 
10.1111/j.1476-4431.2009.00387.x.

Increasing patient safety in veterinary transfusion medicine: an overview of 
pretransfusion testing.

Tocci LJ(1), Ewing PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Emergency and Specialty Center of New England, 
Waltham, MA 02454, USA. ltocci@vescone.com

OBJECTIVES: To review the principles and available technology for pretransfusion 
testing in veterinary medicine and discuss the indications and importance of 
test performance before RBC transfusion.
DATA SOURCES: Current human and veterinary medical literature: original research 
articles and scientific reviews.
SUMMARY: Indications for RBC transfusion in veterinary medicine include severe 
anemia or tissue hypoxia resulting from blood loss, decreased erythrocyte 
production, and hemolyzing conditions such as immune-mediated anemia and 
neonatal isoerythrolysis. Proper blood sample collection, handling, and 
identification are imperative for high-quality pretransfusion testing. 
Point-of-care blood typing methods including both typing cards and rapid gel 
agglutination are readily available for some species. Following blood typing, 
crossmatching is performed on one or more donor units of appropriate blood type. 
As an alternative to technically demanding tube crossmatching methods, a 
point-of-care gel agglutination method has recently become available for use in 
dogs and cats. Crossmatching reduces the risk of hemolytic transfusion reactions 
but does not completely eliminate the risk of other types of transfusion 
reactions in veterinary patients, and for this reason, all transfusion reactions 
should be appropriately documented and investigated.
CONCLUSION: The administration of blood products is a resource-intensive 
function of veterinary medicine and optimizing patient safety in transfusion 
medicine is multifaceted. Adverse reactions can be life threatening. Appropriate 
donor screening and collection combined with pretransfusion testing decreases 
the occurrence of incompatible transfusion reactions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1476-4431.2009.00387.x
PMID: 19691586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]