---
reference_id: "PMID:39220945"
title: A preliminary retrospective evaluation of screening and diagnosis of ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency in high-risk patients at a referral center in Vietnam.
authors:
- Tran DM
- Tran TTT
- Luong QH
- Tran MTC
journal: Heliyon
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e36003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A preliminary retrospective evaluation of screening and diagnosis of ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency in high-risk patients at a referral center in Vietnam.
**Authors:** Tran DM, Tran TTT, Luong QH, Tran MTC
**Journal:** Heliyon (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e36003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e36003)

## Content

1. Heliyon. 2024 Aug 8;10(16):e36003. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e36003. 
eCollection 2024 Aug 30.

A preliminary retrospective evaluation of screening and diagnosis of ornithine 
transcarbamylase deficiency in high-risk patients at a referral center in 
Vietnam.

Tran DM(1), Tran TTT(1), Luong QH(1), Tran MTC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Children's Hospital, Hanoi, Viet Nam.
(2)Hanoi Medical University, Hanoi, Viet Nam.

INTRODUCTION: To date, newborn screening (NBS) for proximal urea cycle 
disorders, including Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (OTCD), was not 
recommended due to the lack of appropriate tests and insufficient evidence of 
the benefits. This study aimed to investigate the potential of tandem mass 
spectrometry (MS/MS) for OTCD screening and its value in guiding further 
investigation to obtain a final diagnosis in high-risk patients.
METHODS: The study included patients with OTCD referred to the National 
Children's Hospital between April 2020 and November 2023. A retrospective 
evaluation of amino acid concentrations measured by MS/MS and their ratios in 
patients with early-onset and late-onset OTCD was conducted.
RESULTS: While all ten early-onset cases had glutamine concentrations above the 
upper limit, only five of them had citrulline concentrations below the lower 
limit of the reference interval. Only two late-onset cases had elevated 
glutamine levels, while all had citrulline within reference intervals. The 
Cit/Phe ratio was decreased, and the Gln/Cit and Met/Cit ratios were increased 
in all early-onset OTCD cases, while they were abnormal in only one late-onset 
case.
CONCLUSIONS: The preliminary results suggest that hyperglutaminemia, in 
combination with low or normal citrulline concentrations and specific ratios 
(Gln/Cit, Met/Cit, and Cit/Phe), can serve as reliable markers for screening 
early-onset OTCD in high-risk patients. However, these markers proved less 
sensitive for detecting the late-onset form, even in symptomatic patients.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e36003
PMCID: PMC11365392
PMID: 39220945

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.