---
reference_id: "PMID:33341301"
title: "Arterial thrombosis in antiphospholipid syndrome (APS): Clinical approach and treatment. A systematic review."
authors:
- Cheng C
- Cheng GY
- Denas G
- Pengo V
journal: Blood Rev
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.blre.2020.100788
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arterial thrombosis in antiphospholipid syndrome (APS): Clinical approach and treatment. A systematic review.
**Authors:** Cheng C, Cheng GY, Denas G, Pengo V
**Journal:** Blood Rev (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.blre.2020.100788](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.blre.2020.100788)

## Content

1. Blood Rev. 2021 Jul;48:100788. doi: 10.1016/j.blre.2020.100788. Epub 2020 Dec 
13.

Arterial thrombosis in antiphospholipid syndrome (APS): Clinical approach and 
treatment. A systematic review.

Cheng C(1), Cheng GY(2), Denas G(1), Pengo V(3).

Author information:
(1)Thrombosis Research Laboratory, Department of Cardiac-Thoracic-Vascular 
Sciences and Public Health, University of Padova, Padua, Italy.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xiamen 
University, Xiamen, China.
(3)Thrombosis Research Laboratory, Department of Cardiac-Thoracic-Vascular 
Sciences and Public Health, University of Padova, Padua, Italy; Arianna 
Foundation on Anticoagulation, Bologna, Italy. Electronic address: 
vittorio.pengo@unipd.it.

Thrombotic Antiphospholipid Syndrome (APS) is a condition affecting young 
individuals in whom a thromboembolic event occurs in the presence of circulating 
antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL). An extensive body of literature has covered 
the most common clinical presentation of the syndrome, venous thromboembolism. 
Arterial thrombosis in APS, a lesser clinical expression, is less studied. This 
review will concentrate on the body of literature concerning pathogenesis, 
clinical presentation and management of arterial thrombosis in APS.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.blre.2020.100788
PMID: 33341301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]