---
reference_id: "PMID:38599244"
title: Pulmonary manifestations of alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency.
authors:
- Mulkareddy V
- Roman J
journal: Am J Med Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.amjms.2024.04.002
keywords:
- Humans
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/diagnosis, genetics, complications"
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin/genetics
- "Pulmonary Emphysema/etiology, genetics"
- Smoking/adverse effects
- "Lung Diseases/etiology, diagnosis"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary manifestations of alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency.
**Authors:** Mulkareddy V, Roman J
**Journal:** Am J Med Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjms.2024.04.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjms.2024.04.002)

## Content

1. Am J Med Sci. 2024 Jul;368(1):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.amjms.2024.04.002. Epub 2024
 Apr 9.

Pulmonary manifestations of alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency.

Mulkareddy V(1), Roman J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care
Medicine and The Jane & Leonard Korman Respiratory Institute, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care
Medicine and The Jane & Leonard Korman Respiratory Institute, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address:
Jesse.roman@jefferson.edu.

Alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency is a widely under recognized autosomal codominant
condition caused by genetic mutations in the SERPINA 1 gene, which encodes for
alpha 1 antitrypsin (AAT), a serine protease inhibitor. The SERPINA 1 gene
contains 120 variants and mutations in the gene may decrease AAT protein levels
or result in dysfunctional proteins. This deficiency leads to unopposed protease
activity in tissues, thereby promoting pulmonary and hepatic disease. The most
common genotype associated with pulmonary disease is the ZZ genotype, and the
most frequent pulmonary manifestation is emphysema. Although its pathophysiology
may differ from cigarette smoking related chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
smoking itself can hasten lung decline in alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD).
The diagnosis of AATD is made through AAT protein testing along with genotyping.
AATD patients with obstructive airflow limitation may qualify for intravenous
augmentation with AAT. However, there is ongoing research to allow for earlier
detection and treatment. This review describes in general terms the genetic
mechanisms of AATD; its pathogenesis and the impact of cigarette smoke; and its
clinical manifestations, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis. We hope to
stimulate research in the field, but mostly we wish to enhance awareness to
promote early diagnosis and treatment in those eligible for intervention.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjms.2024.04.002
PMID: 38599244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest None.
