---
reference_id: "PMID:38817655"
title: "Clinical manifestations, diagnosis and long-term prognosis of adult autoimmune enteropathy: Experience from Peking Union Medical College Hospital."
authors:
- Li MH
- Ruan GC
- Zhou WX
- Li XQ
- Zhang SY
- Chen Y
- Bai XY
- Yang H
- Zhang YJ
- Zhao PY
- Li J
- Li JN
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v30.i19.2523
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Biopsy
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- "Polyendocrinopathies, Autoimmune/diagnosis, immunology, pathology, drug therapy, therapy"
- "Ileum/pathology, immunology"
- "Duodenum/pathology, immunology"
- "Diarrhea/etiology, diagnosis, immunology"
- "Intestinal Mucosa/pathology, immunology"
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Aged
- Young Adult
- "Endoscopy, Gastrointestinal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical manifestations, diagnosis and long-term prognosis of adult autoimmune enteropathy: Experience from Peking Union Medical College Hospital.
**Authors:** Li MH, Ruan GC, Zhou WX, Li XQ, Zhang SY, Chen Y, Bai XY, Yang H, Zhang YJ, Zhao PY, Li J, Li JN
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v30.i19.2523](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v30.i19.2523)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2024 May 21;30(19):2523-2537. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v30.i19.2523.

Clinical manifestations, diagnosis and long-term prognosis of adult autoimmune 
enteropathy: Experience from Peking Union Medical College Hospital.

Li MH(1), Ruan GC(1), Zhou WX(2), Li XQ(1), Zhang SY(1), Chen Y(1), Bai XY(1), 
Yang H(1), Zhang YJ(3), Zhao PY(4), Li J(5), Li JN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking 
Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing 100730, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Chinese Academy of Medical Scinences & Peking Union 
Medical College Hospital, Beijing 100730, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Tianjin First Central Hospital, Nankai University, 
Tianjin 300192, China.
(4)Affairs Office, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical 
College Hospital (West campus), Beijing 100032, China.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking 
Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing 100730, China. liji0235@pumch.cn.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune enteropathy (AIE) is a rare disease whose diagnosis and 
long-term prognosis remain challenging, especially for adult AIE patients.
AIM: To improve overall understanding of this disease's diagnosis and prognosis.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the clinical, endoscopic and 
histopathological characteristics and prognoses of 16 adult AIE patients in our 
tertiary medical center between 2011 and 2023, whose diagnosis was based on the 
2007 diagnostic criteria.
RESULTS: Diarrhea in AIE patients was characterized by secretory diarrhea. The 
common endoscopic manifestations were edema, villous blunting and mucosal 
hyperemia in the duodenum and ileum. Villous blunting (100%), deep crypt 
lymphocytic infiltration (67%), apoptotic bodies (50%), and mild intraepithelial 
lymphocytosis (69%) were observed in the duodenal biopsies. Moreover, there were 
other remarkable abnormalities, including reduced or absent goblet cells 
(duodenum 94%, ileum 62%), reduced or absent Paneth cells (duodenum 94%, ileum 
69%) and neutrophil infiltration (duodenum 100%, ileum 69%). Our patients also 
fulfilled the 2018 diagnostic criteria but did not match the 2022 diagnostic 
criteria due to undetectable anti-enterocyte antibodies. All patients received 
glucocorticoid therapy as the initial medication, of which 14/16 patients 
achieved a clinical response in 5 (IQR: 3-20) days. Immunosuppressants were 
administered to 9 patients with indications of steroid dependence (6/9), steroid 
refractory status (2/9), or intensified maintenance medication (1/9). During the 
median of 20.5 months of follow-up, 2 patients died from multiple organ failure, 
and 1 was diagnosed with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. The cumulative relapse-free 
survival rates were 62.5%, 55.6% and 37.0% at 6 months, 12 months and 48 months, 
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Certain histopathological findings, including a decrease or 
disappearance of goblet and Paneth cells in intestinal biopsies, might be 
potential diagnostic criteria for adult AIE. The long-term prognosis is still 
unsatisfactory despite corticosteroid and immunosuppressant medications, which 
highlights the need for early diagnosis and novel medications.

©The Author(s) 2024. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v30.i19.2523
PMCID: PMC11135415
PMID: 38817655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as potential conflicts of 
interest.