---
reference_id: "PMID:29150126"
title: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Santos Mateo JJ
- Sabater Molina M
- Gimeno Blanes JR
journal: Med Clin (Barc)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2017.09.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Santos Mateo JJ, Sabater Molina M, Gimeno Blanes JR
**Journal:** Med Clin (Barc) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.medcli.2017.09.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medcli.2017.09.013)

## Content

1. Med Clin (Barc). 2018 Jun 8;150(11):434-442. doi:
10.1016/j.medcli.2017.09.013.  Epub 2017 Nov 14.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Santos Mateo JJ(1), Sabater Molina M(2), Gimeno Blanes JR(3).

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Cardiopatías Familiares, Servicio de Cardiología, Hospital Clínico 
Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, El Palmar, Murcia, España.
(2)Laboratorio de Cardiogenética, Instituto Murciano de Investigación 
Biosanitaria, Murcia, España; Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, España.
(3)Unidad de Cardiopatías Familiares, Servicio de Cardiología, Hospital Clínico 
Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, El Palmar, Murcia, España; Universidad de 
Murcia, Murcia, España. Electronic address: jgimeno@secardiologia.es.

Comment in
    Med Clin (Barc). 2019 Feb 1;152(3):e15. doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2018.05.023.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the most common inherited cardiovascular disease. 
It is characterized by increased ventricular wall thickness and is highly 
complex due to its heterogeneous clinical presentation, several phenotypes, 
large number of associated causal mutations and broad spectrum of complications. 
It is caused by mutations in sarcomeric proteins, which are identified in up to 
60% of cases of the disease. Clinical manifestations of Hypertrophic 
Cardiomyopathy include shortness of breath, chest pain, palpitations and 
syncope, which are related to the onset of diastolic dysfunction, left 
ventricular outflow tract obstruction, ischemia, atrial fibrillation and 
abnormal vascular responses. It is associated with an increased risk of sudden 
cardiac death, heart failure and thromboembolic events. In this article, we 
discuss the diagnostic and therapeutic aspects of this disease.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medcli.2017.09.013
PMID: 29150126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]