---
reference_id: "PMID:35689405"
title: New Ameloblastoma Cell Lines Enable Preclinical Study of Targeted Therapies.
authors:
- Nguyen J
- Saffari PS
- Pollack AS
- Vennam S
- Gong X
- West RB
- Pollack JR
journal: J Dent Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/00220345221100773
keywords:
- Humans
- "Ameloblastoma/drug therapy, genetics"
- Hedgehog Proteins
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local"
- Odontogenic Tumors/genetics
- Class I Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/therapeutic use
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Kinases/therapeutic use
- Cell Line
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New Ameloblastoma Cell Lines Enable Preclinical Study of Targeted Therapies.
**Authors:** Nguyen J, Saffari PS, Pollack AS, Vennam S, Gong X, West RB, Pollack JR
**Journal:** J Dent Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/00220345221100773](https://doi.org/10.1177/00220345221100773)

## Content

1. J Dent Res. 2022 Nov;101(12):1517-1525. doi: 10.1177/00220345221100773. Epub 
2022 Jun 10.

New Ameloblastoma Cell Lines Enable Preclinical Study of Targeted Therapies.

Nguyen J(1), Saffari PS(1), Pollack AS(1), Vennam S(1), Gong X(1), West RB(1), 
Pollack JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA, USA.

Ameloblastoma (AB) is an odontogenic tumor that arises from ameloblast-lineage 
cells. Although relatively uncommon and rarely metastatic, AB tumors are locally 
invasive and destructive to the jawbone and surrounding structures. 
Standard-of-care surgical resection often leads to disfigurement, and many 
tumors will locally recur, necessitating increasingly challenging surgeries. 
Recent genomic studies of AB have uncovered oncogenic driver mutations, 
including in the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and Hedgehog signaling 
pathways. Medical therapies targeting those drivers would be a highly desirable 
alternative or addition to surgery; however, a paucity of existing AB cell lines 
has stymied clinical translation. To bridge this gap, here we report the 
establishment of 6 new AB cell lines-generated by "conditional 
reprogramming"-and their genomic characterization that reveals driver mutations 
in FGFR2, KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA, and SMO. Furthermore, in proof-of-principle 
studies, we use the new cell lines to investigate AB oncogene dependency and 
drug sensitivity. Among our findings, AB cells with KRAS or NRAS mutation (MAPK 
pathway) are exquisitely sensitive to MEK inhibition, which propels ameloblast 
differentiation. AB cells with activating SMO-L412F mutation (Hedgehog pathway) 
are insensitive to vismodegib; however, a distinct small-molecule SMO inhibitor, 
BMS-833923, significantly reduces both downstream Hedgehog signaling and tumor 
cell viability. The novel cell line resource enables preclinical studies and 
promises to speed the translation of new molecularly targeted therapies for the 
management of ameloblastoma and related odontogenic neoplasms.

DOI: 10.1177/00220345221100773
PMCID: PMC9608093
PMID: 35689405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.