---
reference_id: "PMID:19130075"
title: Functional assembly and purinergic activation of bestrophins.
authors:
- Milenkovic VM
- Soria RB
- Aldehni F
- Schreiber R
- Kunzelmann K
journal: Pflugers Arch
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s00424-008-0626-y
keywords:
- Bestrophins
- Calcium Signaling/physiology
- Cell Line
- Chloride Channels/physiology
- Chlorides/metabolism
- Epithelial Cells/metabolism
- Eye Proteins/physiology
- Humans
- Kidney/cytology
- Patch-Clamp Techniques
- Protein Multimerization
- Retinal Pigment Epithelium/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional assembly and purinergic activation of bestrophins.
**Authors:** Milenkovic VM, Soria RB, Aldehni F, Schreiber R, Kunzelmann K
**Journal:** Pflugers Arch (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00424-008-0626-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00424-008-0626-y)

## Content

1. Pflugers Arch. 2009 Jun;458(2):431-41. doi: 10.1007/s00424-008-0626-y. Epub
2009  Jan 8.

Functional assembly and purinergic activation of bestrophins.

Milenkovic VM(1), Soria RB, Aldehni F, Schreiber R, Kunzelmann K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Physiologie, Universität Regensburg, Universitätsstrasse 31,
93053 Regensburg, Germany.

Proteins of the bestrophin family produce Ca(2+)-activated Cl(-) currents and
regulate voltage-gated Ca(2+) channels. Bestrophin 1 was first identified in the
retinal pigment epithelium. Four human paralogs (hBest1-hBest4) exist, and for
some bestrophins, dimeric and heterotetrameric structures have been proposed.
Here, we demonstrate that hBest1-hBest4 induce Cl(-) conductances of different
amplitudes when expressed in HEK293 cells and when activated through purinergic
stimulation. hBest1 mutants that are known to cause autosomal dominant macular
dystrophy (Best disease) did not produce a Cl(-) current. Bestrophins were
colocalized and showed molecular and functional interaction in HEK293 cells,
overexpressing hBest1 and hBest2 or hBest4. Interaction was confirmed in airway
epithelial cells coexpressing endogenous bestrophins. A fraction of hBest2 and
hBest4 was expressed in the membrane, while most of hBest1 was found in the
endoplasmic reticulum. Nevertheless, hBest1 has a clear role for the adenosine
triphosphate (ATP; or uridine triphosphate)-induced Cl(-) current in both HEK293
and Calu-3 cells. Since native epithelial tissues typically express several
bestrophin paralogs, these proteins may exist as heterooligomeric structures.

DOI: 10.1007/s00424-008-0626-y
PMID: 19130075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
