---
reference_id: "PMID:35791106"
title: Homocystinuria and ocular complications - A review.
authors:
- Rahman M
- Sharma M
- Aggarwal P
- Singla S
- Jain N
journal: Indian J Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_309_22
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homocystinuria and ocular complications - A review.
**Authors:** Rahman M, Sharma M, Aggarwal P, Singla S, Jain N
**Journal:** Indian J Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4103/ijo.IJO_309_22](https://doi.org/10.4103/ijo.IJO_309_22)

## Content

1. Indian J Ophthalmol. 2022 Jul;70(7):2272-2278. doi: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_309_22.

Homocystinuria and ocular complications - A review.

Rahman M(1), Sharma M(1), Aggarwal P(1), Singla S(1), Jain N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Tirupati Eye Center, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, 
India.

Comment in
    Indian J Ophthalmol. 2022 Jul;70(7):2278-2279. doi: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_1301_22.

Homocystinuria is a rare metabolic inborn disorder caused due to dysfunctional 
cystathionine β-synthase (CBS) enzyme activity, thus resulting in elevated 
levels of methionine and homocysteine in the blood and urine. The timely 
recognition of this rare metabolic disorder and prompt methionine-restricted 
diet are crucial in lessening the systemic consequences. The recalcitrant cases 
have a higher risk for cardiovascular diseases, neurodegenerative diseases, 
neural tube defects, and other severe clinical complications. This review aims 
to present the ophthalmic spectrum of homocystinuria and its molecular basis, 
the disease management, as well as the current and potential treatment 
approaches with a greater emphasis on preventive strategies.

DOI: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_309_22
PMCID: PMC9426183
PMID: 35791106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None