---
reference_id: "PMID:28339400"
title: A Systematic Review of the Huntington Disease-Like 2 Phenotype.
authors:
- Anderson DG
- Walker RH
- Connor M
- Carr J
- Margolis RL
- Krause A
journal: J Huntingtons Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3233/JHD-160232
keywords:
- "Chorea/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Cognition Disorders/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Dementia/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Heredodegenerative Disorders, Nervous System/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Huntington Disease/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Systematic Review of the Huntington Disease-Like 2 Phenotype.
**Authors:** Anderson DG, Walker RH, Connor M, Carr J, Margolis RL, Krause A
**Journal:** J Huntingtons Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JHD-160232](https://doi.org/10.3233/JHD-160232)

## Content

1. J Huntingtons Dis. 2017;6(1):37-46. doi: 10.3233/JHD-160232.

A Systematic Review of the Huntington Disease-Like 2 Phenotype.

Anderson DG(1)(2), Walker RH(3)(4), Connor M(5)(6), Carr J(7), Margolis RL(8),
Krause A(2).

Author information:
(1)The University of the Witwatersrand Donald Gordon Medical Centre, Neurology,
Johannesburg, South Africa.
(2)Division of Human Genetics, National Health Laboratory Service & School of
Pathology, The University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(3)Department of Neurology, James J. Peters Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Bronx, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York City, NY,
USA.
(5)NHS Borders, United Kingdom; Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, University
of Edinburgh, UK.
(6)School of Public Health, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South
Africa.
(7)Department of Neurology, University of Stellenbosch, Cape Town, South Africa.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, Division of Neurobiology, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Huntington Disease-like 2 (HDL2) is a neurodegenerative disorder
similar to Huntington Disease (HD) in its clinical phenotype, genetic
characteristics, neuropathology and longitudinal progression. Proposed specific
differences include an exclusive African ancestry, lack of eye movement
abnormalities, increased Parkinsonism, and acanthocytes in HDL2.
OBJECTIVE: The objective was to determine the similarities and differences
between HD and HDL2 by establishing the clinical phenotype of HDL2 with the
published cases.
METHODS: A literature review of all clinically described cases of HDL2 until the
end of 2016 was performed and a descriptive analysis was carried out.
RESULTS: Sixty-nine new cases were described between 2001 and 2016. All cases
had likely African ancestry, and most were found in South Africa and the USA.
Many features were found to be similar to HD, including a strong negative
correlation between repeat length and age of onset. Chorea was noted in 48/57
cases (84%). Dementia was reported in 74% patients, and Parkinsonism in 37%.
Psychiatric features were reported in 44 out of 47 cases. Patients with chorea
had lower expanded repeat lengths compared to patients without chorea. Eye
movements were described in 19 cases, 8 were abnormal. Acanthocytes were
detected in 4 of the 13 patients tested. Nineteen out of 20 MRIs were reported
as abnormal with findings similar to HD.
CONCLUSION: This review clarifies some aspects of the HDL2 phenotype and
highlights others which require further investigation. Features that are unique
to HDL2 have been documented in a minority of subjects and require prospective
validation.

DOI: 10.3233/JHD-160232
PMID: 28339400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
