---
reference_id: "PMID:37952953"
title: Pathogenesis and Management of Citrin Deficiency.
authors:
- Hayasaka K
journal: Intern Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.2595-23
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis and Management of Citrin Deficiency.
**Authors:** Hayasaka K
**Journal:** Intern Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2169/internalmedicine.2595-23](https://doi.org/10.2169/internalmedicine.2595-23)

## Content

1. Intern Med. 2024 Jul 15;63(14):1977-1986. doi:
10.2169/internalmedicine.2595-23.  Epub 2023 Nov 13.

Pathogenesis and Management of Citrin Deficiency.

Hayasaka K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Japan.

Citrin deficiency (CD) is a hereditary disorder caused by SLC25A13 mutations 
that manifests as neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by CD (NICCD), 
failure to thrive and dyslipidemia caused by CD (FTTDCD), and adult-onset type 2 
citrullinemia (CTLN2). Citrin, an aspartate-glutamate carrier primarily 
expressed in the liver, is a component of the malate-aspartate shuttle, which is 
essential for glycolysis. Citrin-deficient hepatocytes have primary defects in 
glycolysis and de novo lipogenesis and exhibit secondarily downregulated PPARα, 
leading to impaired β-oxidation. They are unable to utilize glucose and free 
fatty acids as energy sources, resulting in energy deficiencies. Medium-chain 
triglyceride (MCT) supplements are effective for treating CD by providing energy 
to hepatocytes, increasing lipogenesis, and activating the malate-citrate 
shuttle. However, patients with CD often exhibit growth impairment and 
irreversible brain and/or liver damage. To improve the quality of life and 
prevent irreversible damage, MCT supplementation with a diet containing minimal 
carbohydrates is recommended promptly after the diagnosis.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.2595-23
PMCID: PMC11309867
PMID: 37952953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author states that he has no Conflict of 
Interest (COI).