---
reference_id: "PMID:36944600"
title: Nasal Construction in Congenital Arhinia Due to Novel SMCHD1 Gene Variant.
authors:
- Bargiela M
- Kueper J
- Serebrakian AT
- Browne MR
- Brogna S
- Peacock ZS
- Bojovic B
- Shaw ND
- Liao EC
journal: J Craniofac Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000009261
keywords:
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/genetics"
- Plastic Surgery Procedures
- Pedigree
- Anosmia
- Humans
- "Nose/surgery, abnormalities"
- Child
- Congenital Abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nasal Construction in Congenital Arhinia Due to Novel SMCHD1 Gene Variant.
**Authors:** Bargiela M, Kueper J, Serebrakian AT, Browne MR, Brogna S, Peacock ZS, Bojovic B, Shaw ND, Liao EC
**Journal:** J Craniofac Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/SCS.0000000000009261](https://doi.org/10.1097/SCS.0000000000009261)

## Content

1. J Craniofac Surg. 2023 May 1;34(3):849-854. doi: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000009261.
 Epub 2023 Mar 22.

Nasal Construction in Congenital Arhinia Due to Novel SMCHD1 Gene Variant.

Bargiela M(1)(2)(3), Kueper J(1)(2)(3), Serebrakian AT(1)(2)(4), Browne MR(5),
Brogna S(2), Peacock ZS(2)(4), Bojovic B(1)(2), Shaw ND(5), Liao EC(1)(2)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School.
(2)Shriners Hospital for Children, Boston, MA.
(3)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(4)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(5)Pediatric Neuroendocrinology Group, Clinical Research Branch, National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC.
(6)Center for Craniofacial Innovation, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA.

Arhinia, or congenital absence of the nose, is an exceedingly rare anomaly
caused by pathogenic variants in the gene SMCHD1 . Arhinia exhibits unique
reconstructive challenges, as the midface is deficient in skeletal and soft
tissue structures. The authors present 2 related patients with arhinia who
harbor a novel SMCHD1 gene variant and illustrate their surgical midface and
nasal construction. Targeted sequencing was carried out on DNA samples from the
2 affected patients, 1 anosmic and 1 healthy parent, to identify variants in
exons 3 to 13 of SMCHD1 . The affected patients and anosmic parent were found to
have a novel SMCHD1 gene variant p.E473V. A staged surgical approach was
applied. First, both patients underwent a LeFort II osteotomy and distraction
osteogenesis to improve the projection of the midfacial segment, followed by
tissue expansion of the forehead, and nasal construction with a forehead flap
that was placed over a costochondral framework derived from rib cartilage. The
novel gene variant could guide future investigations on genetic pathways and
molecular processes that underly the physiological and pathologic development of
the nose. Further investigations on the variable expressivity ranging from
anosmia to arhinia could improve clinical genetic screens for risk
stratification of individuals with anosmia on passing on arhinia to their
children. Due to the exceptional rarity and complexity of congenital arhinia,
most surgical approaches are developed on a single-case basis. This case series,
albeit limited to 2 cases, is the largest pedigree of such cases in the
literature. It highlights key principles of a staged approach to nasal
construction in arhinia and discusses nuances and improvements learned between
both patients. It subsequently offers an optimized guide to this surgical
strategy.

Copyright © 2023 by Mutaz B. Habal, MD.

DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000009261
PMCID: PMC10802859
PMID: 36944600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.B. is a recipient of the Shiners Hospital
Research Fellowship. E.C.L. is a recipient of the Massachusetts General Laurie
and Mason Tenaglia Research Scholar award. N.D.S. is also supported as a Lasker
Clinical Research Scholar (1SI2ES025429-01). The remaining authors report no
conflicts of interest.
