---
reference_id: "PMID:15959366"
title: "Developmental anomalies of the cervical spine in patients with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva are distinctly different from those in patients with Klippel-Feil syndrome: clues from the BMP signaling pathway."
authors:
- Schaffer AA
- Kaplan FS
- Tracy MR
- "O'Brien ML"
- Dormans JP
- Shore EM
- Harland RM
- Kusumi K
journal: Spine (Phila Pa 1976)
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1097/01.brs.0000166619.22832.2c
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Animals
- "Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Cervical Vertebrae/abnormalities
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Klippel-Feil Syndrome/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Male
- Mice
- Middle Aged
- "Muscle Rigidity/etiology, physiopathology"
- "Myositis Ossificans/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Range of Motion, Articular"
- Signal Transduction
- Noggin Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Developmental anomalies of the cervical spine in patients with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva are distinctly different from those in patients with Klippel-Feil syndrome: clues from the BMP signaling pathway.
**Authors:** Schaffer AA, Kaplan FS, Tracy MR, O'Brien ML, Dormans JP, Shore EM, Harland RM, Kusumi K
**Journal:** Spine (Phila Pa 1976) (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.brs.0000166619.22832.2c](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.brs.0000166619.22832.2c)

## Content

1. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2005 Jun 15;30(12):1379-85. doi:
10.1097/01.brs.0000166619.22832.2c.

Developmental anomalies of the cervical spine in patients with fibrodysplasia
ossificans progressiva are distinctly different from those in patients with
Klippel-Feil syndrome: clues from the BMP signaling pathway.

Schaffer AA(1), Kaplan FS, Tracy MR, O'Brien ML, Dormans JP, Shore EM, Harland
RM, Kusumi K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Orthopaedic Surgery, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Institution B, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

STUDY DESIGN: A radiographic analysis of the cervical spine of 70 patients
diagnosed with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) and 33 diagnosed with
Klippel-Feil (KF) syndrome was conducted.
OBJECTIVES: The objectives of this study were to describe cervical spine
abnormalities in patients with FOP, to compare and contrast those findings with
the malformations in patients with KF syndrome, and to examine the possible
etiology of these abnormalities.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Congenital features of diseases often provide
seminal clues to underlying etiology and developmental pathways. While
progressive metamorphosis of connective tissue to heterotopic bone is the most
dramatic and disabling feature of FOP, less severe congenital anomalies of the
skeleton are also present. Vertebral fusions observed in KF are consistent with
defects in embryonic segmentation.
METHODS: The cervical spine plain films of 70 FOP patients and 33 KF patients
with documented congenital abnormalities were reviewed.
RESULTS: Generalized neck stiffness and decreased range of motion were noted in
most children with FOP. In the FOP patient group, characteristic anomalies,
including large posterior elements, tall narrow vertebral bodies,and fusion of
the facet joints between C2 and C7, were observed. Most notably, these
characteristic anomalies of the cervical spine in patients with FOP were
distinctly different from those of 33 patients with KF that were examined but
were strikingly similar to those seen in mice with homozygous deletions of the
gene-encoding noggin, a bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) antagonist.
CONCLUSIONS: FOP patients exhibit a characteristic set of congenital spine
malformations. While the noggin gene (NOG) is not mutated in patients who have
FOP, these findings extend a growing body of evidence implicating overactivity
of the BMP signaling pathway in the molecular pathogenesis of FOP.

DOI: 10.1097/01.brs.0000166619.22832.2c
PMID: 15959366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
