---
reference_id: "PMID:28160487"
title: "Incidence and prevalence of idiopathic inflammatory myopathies in Sweden: a nationwide population-based study."
authors:
- Svensson J
- Arkema EV
- Lundberg IE
- Holmqvist M
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kew503
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Distribution
- Aged
- Educational Status
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Myositis/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Registries
- "Residence Characteristics/statistics & numerical data"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Rural Health/statistics & numerical data"
- Sex Distribution
- Sweden/epidemiology
- "Urban Health/statistics & numerical data"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence and prevalence of idiopathic inflammatory myopathies in Sweden: a nationwide population-based study.
**Authors:** Svensson J, Arkema EV, Lundberg IE, Holmqvist M
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/kew503](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/kew503)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2017 May 1;56(5):802-810. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/kew503.

Incidence and prevalence of idiopathic inflammatory myopathies in Sweden: a 
nationwide population-based study.

Svensson J(1)(2), Arkema EV(2), Lundberg IE(1)(3), Holmqvist M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology Unit.
(2)Unit of Clinical Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm.
(3)Rheumatology Unit, Karolinska University Hospital, Solna, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: To estimate the incidence rate and prevalence of idiopathic 
inflammatory myopathies (IIMs) in Sweden across clinical subgroups, age, sex, 
educational level and place of residence and to assess the robustness of 
register-based case definitions.
METHODS: IIM was identified from the Swedish National Patient Register and the 
Swedish Rheumatology Quality Register. The base case definition required ⩾2 
visits indicating IIM (first ever with a consecutive visit within 1-12 months 
for incident cases) and the robustness was tested by applying a more liberal and 
a stricter definition.
RESULTS: Using the base case definition, 558 incident IIM patients were 
identified between 2007 and 2011. The incidence was estimated to 11 (13 for 
women and 9.7 for men) per 1 000 000 person years and was stable across case 
definitions. Incidence increased with age and peaked at the 50-79 years age 
groups. No differences were observed between different levels of education and 
place of residence. We identified 1267 IIM patients on 1 January 2012 
corresponding to a prevalence of 14 per 100 000.
CONCLUSION: We present nationwide register-based incidence and prevalence 
estimates for IIM, robust across three different case definitions. In contrast 
to many other reports, we did not find incidence by age to be bimodal and we 
found no explanation of incidence variation across education and residency. 
These register-based case definitions can be included in future population-based 
studies to better understand disease aetiology, risk factors and comorbidities.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/kew503
PMID: 28160487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]