---
reference_id: "PMID:37068269"
title: "Sex Difference in Primary Sjögren Syndrome: A Medical Records Review Study."
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Chen JQ
- Yang JY
- Liao JH
- Wu TH
- Yu XB
- Huang ZW
- He Q
- Wang Q
- Song WJ
- Luo J
- Tao QW
journal: J Clin Rheumatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001962
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Sex Characteristics
- Dental Caries/complications
- "Sjogren's Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, complications"
- "Lung Diseases, Interstitial/diagnosis"
- Medical Records
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sex Difference in Primary Sjögren Syndrome: A Medical Records Review Study.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Chen JQ, Yang JY, Liao JH, Wu TH, Yu XB, Huang ZW, He Q, Wang Q, Song WJ, Luo J, Tao QW
**Journal:** J Clin Rheumatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/RHU.0000000000001962](https://doi.org/10.1097/RHU.0000000000001962)

## Content

1. J Clin Rheumatol. 2023 Aug 1;29(5):e78-e85. doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001962.
 Epub 2023 Apr 17.

Sex Difference in Primary Sjögren Syndrome: A Medical Records Review Study.

Zhang Y(1), Chen JQ(1), Yang JY(1), Liao JH(1), Wu TH(1), Yu XB(1), Huang ZW(1), 
He Q(1), Wang Q(1), Song WJ(2), Luo J, Tao QW.

Author information:
(1)From the Graduate School, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine.
(2)Traditional Chinese Medicine Department, Peking University Third Hospital.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to study clinical and biological 
differences between men and women with primary Sjögren syndrome (pSS) in China 
and perform a literature review to confirm if the clinical phenotypes are 
affected by sex in patients with pSS.
METHODS: Data from 961 patients with pSS treated at a tertiary hospital in China 
between January 2013 and March 2022 were analyzed based on medical records. 
Clinical characteristics, including disease manifestations and serological 
parameters of the disease, were compared between men and women with pSS using 
the Mann-Whitney U test and χ 2 test.
RESULTS: This study included 140 (14.6%) men and 821 (85.4%) women with pSS. 
Women with pSS demonstrated a higher prevalence of dry mouth, dry eyes, 
arthralgia, and dental caries ( p < 0.05); higher erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
and immunoglobulin M levels ( p < 0.05); higher prevalence of leukopenia, 
neutropenia, anemia, low complement 3, and low complement 4 ( p < 0.05); and 
higher titers of antinuclear antibody, anti-Sjögren syndrome A, anti-Ro52, and 
rheumatoid factor positivity ( p < 0.05) than men, whereas men with pSS had a 
higher prevalence of parotid enlargement and interstitial lung disease ( p < 
0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Women with pSS are associated with more dryness, cytopenia, 
hypocomplementemia, and autoantibody positivity. Although men with pSS probably 
have lighter sicca symptoms and lower immunoactivity and serologic responses, 
regular monitoring of interstitial lung disease in men is vital.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001962
PMCID: PMC10368225
PMID: 37068269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.