---
reference_id: "PMID:25698835"
title: "Transmission of Ebola viruses: what we know and what we do not know."
authors:
- Osterholm MT
- Moore KA
- Kelley NS
- Brosseau LM
- Wong G
- Murphy FA
- Peters CJ
- LeDuc JW
- Russell PK
- Van Herp M
- Kapetshi J
- Muyembe JJ
- Ilunga BK
- Strong JE
- Grolla A
- Wolz A
- Kargbo B
- Kargbo DK
- Sanders DA
- Kobinger GP
journal: mBio
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1128/mBio.00137-15
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transmission of Ebola viruses: what we know and what we do not know.
**Authors:** Osterholm MT, Moore KA, Kelley NS, Brosseau LM, Wong G, Murphy FA, Peters CJ, LeDuc JW, Russell PK, Van Herp M, Kapetshi J, Muyembe JJ, Ilunga BK, Strong JE, Grolla A, Wolz A, Kargbo B, Kargbo DK, Sanders DA, Kobinger GP
**Journal:** mBio (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1128/mBio.00137-15](https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.00137-15)

## Content

1. mBio. 2015 Feb 19;6(2):e00137. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00137-15.

Transmission of Ebola viruses: what we know and what we do not know.

Osterholm MT(1), Moore KA(2), Kelley NS(2), Brosseau LM(3), Wong G(4), Murphy 
FA(5), Peters CJ(5), LeDuc JW(5), Russell PK(6), Van Herp M(7), Kapetshi J(8), 
Muyembe JJ(8), Ilunga BK(9), Strong JE(4), Grolla A(4), Wolz A(7), Kargbo B(10), 
Kargbo DK(10), Sanders DA(11), Kobinger GP(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA mto@umn.edu.
(2)Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(3)Division of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, University of 
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(4)National Laboratory for Zoonotic Diseases and Special Pathogens, Public 
Health Agency of Canada, Winnipeg, Canada.
(5)The Galveston National Laboratory, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas, USA.
(6)Sabin Vaccine Institute, Washington, DC, USA.
(7)Medical Department Unit, Médecins sans Frontières, Brussels, Belgium.
(8)Institut National de Recherche Biomédicale, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of 
the Congo.
(9)Ministry of Health, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(10)Ministry of Health and Sanitation, Freetown, Sierra Leone.
(11)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, Lafayette, Indiana, 
USA.

Erratum in
    mBio. 2015 Jul 21;6(4):e01154. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01154-15.. Formenty, Pierre 
[Deleted].

Available evidence demonstrates that direct patient contact and contact with 
infectious body fluids are the primary modes for Ebola virus transmission, but 
this is based on a limited number of studies. Key areas requiring further study 
include (i) the role of aerosol transmission (either via large droplets or small 
particles in the vicinity of source patients), (ii) the role of environmental 
contamination and fomite transmission, (iii) the degree to which minimally or 
mildly ill persons transmit infection, (iv) how long clinically relevant 
infectiousness persists, (v) the role that "superspreading events" may play in 
driving transmission dynamics, (vi) whether strain differences or repeated 
serial passage in outbreak settings can impact virus transmission, and (vii) 
what role sylvatic or domestic animals could play in outbreak propagation, 
particularly during major epidemics such as the 2013-2015 West Africa situation. 
In this review, we address what we know and what we do not know about Ebola 
virus transmission. We also hypothesize that Ebola viruses have the potential to 
be respiratory pathogens with primary respiratory spread.

Copyright © 2015 Osterholm et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00137-15
PMCID: PMC4358015
PMID: 25698835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]