---
reference_id: "PMID:9843209"
title: Mutations in the human connexin gene GJB3 cause erythrokeratodermia variabilis.
authors:
- Richard G
- Smith LE
- Bailey RA
- Itin P
- Hohl D
- Epstein EH Jr
- DiGiovanna JJ
- Compton JG
- Bale SJ
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1038/3840
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 1"
- Connexins/genetics
- Erythema/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the human connexin gene GJB3 cause erythrokeratodermia variabilis.
**Authors:** Richard G, Smith LE, Bailey RA, Itin P, Hohl D, Epstein EH Jr, DiGiovanna JJ, Compton JG, Bale SJ
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/3840](https://doi.org/10.1038/3840)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1998 Dec;20(4):366-9. doi: 10.1038/3840.

Mutations in the human connexin gene GJB3 cause erythrokeratodermia variabilis.

Richard G(1), Smith LE, Bailey RA, Itin P, Hohl D, Epstein EH Jr, DiGiovanna JJ, 
Compton JG, Bale SJ.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Studies Section, Laboratory of Skin Biology, National Institute of 
Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland, USA. Gabriele.Richard@mail.tju.edu

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1998 Dec;20(4):319-20. doi: 10.1038/3781.

Erythrokeratodermia variabilis (EKV, OMIM 133200) is an autosomal dominant 
genodermatosis with considerable intra- and interfamilial variability. It has a 
disfiguring phenotype characterized by the independent occurrence of two 
morphologic features: transient figurate red patches and localized or 
generalized hyperkeratosis. Both features can be triggered by external factors 
such as trauma to the skin. After initial linkage to the RH locus on 1p, EKV was 
mapped to an interval of 2.6 cM on 1p34-p35, and a candidate gene (GJA4) 
encoding the gap junction protein alpha-4 (connexin 31, Cx31) was excluded by 
sequence analysis. Evidence in mouse suggesting that the EKV region harbours a 
cluster of epidermally expressed connexin genes led us to characterize the human 
homologues of GJB3 (encoding Cx31) and GJB5 (encoding Cx31.1). GJB3, GJB5 and 
GJA4 were localized to a 1.1-Mb YAC in the candidate interval. We detected 
heterozygous missense mutations in GJB3 in four EKV families leading to 
substitution of a conserved glycine by charged residues (G12R and G12D), or 
change of a cysteine (C86S). These mutations are predicted to interfere with 
normal Cx31 structure and function, possibly due to a dominant inhibitory 
effect. Our results implicate Cx31 in the pathogenesis of EKV, and provide 
evidence that intercellular communication mediated by Cx31 is crucial for 
epidermal differentiation and response to external factors.

DOI: 10.1038/3840
PMID: 9843209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]