---
reference_id: "PMID:39033374"
title: "Characteristics and prognosis of elderly-onset antiphospholipid syndrome: An observational cohort study."
authors:
- Luo L
- Cai Q
- Liu X
- Yun Z
- Li X
- Yan R
- Li C
journal: Lupus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/09612033241266875
keywords:
- Humans
- "Antiphospholipid Syndrome/complications, diagnosis, mortality"
- Female
- Male
- Aged
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Age of Onset
- "Antibodies, Antiphospholipid/blood"
- "Thrombosis/epidemiology, etiology"
- Cohort Studies
- Adult
- Risk Factors
- Retrospective Studies
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Stroke/epidemiology, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characteristics and prognosis of elderly-onset antiphospholipid syndrome: An observational cohort study.
**Authors:** Luo L, Cai Q, Liu X, Yun Z, Li X, Yan R, Li C
**Journal:** Lupus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/09612033241266875](https://doi.org/10.1177/09612033241266875)

## Content

1. Lupus. 2024 Sep;33(10):1034-1042. doi: 10.1177/09612033241266875. Epub 2024
Jul  21.

Characteristics and prognosis of elderly-onset antiphospholipid syndrome: An 
observational cohort study.

Luo L(1)(2), Cai Q(2), Liu X(2), Yun Z(2), Li X(3), Yan R(4), Li C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chinese Medicine, The People's Hospital of Yubei District of 
Chongqing City, Chongqing, China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Peking University People's 
Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Chongqing University Three Gorges 
Hospital, Chongqing, China.
(4)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Beijing Shunyi Hospital, Beijing, 
China.

OBJECTIVE: Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is an autoimmune disease mainly 
affecting young individuals. Testing for antiphospholipid antibodies is 
recommended for young patients who are suspected to have APS. Yet, it is hard to 
differentiate APS from other acquired thrombophilia disorders in elderly-onset 
APS patients. This study aim to investigate the characteristics and prognosis of 
elderly-onset APS.
METHODS: This is an observational cohort study. Thrombotic APS patients who 
underwent follow-ups between 2009 and 2022 were included. Elderly-onset APS 
patients (onset age ≥60 years) were compared to non-elderly-onset APS patients 
(onset age <60 years) and matched cases of elderly non-APS patients (age 
≥60 years with thrombosis).
RESULTS: A total of 161 APS patients were included in this study, 45 (28.0%) 
were elderly-onset APS. Stroke (35.6% vs. 18.1%, p = .018) was more common at 
disease onset in elderly-onset APS patients. Compared to non-elderly-onset 
patients, elderly-onset APS patients were associated with a higher number of 
cardiovascular risk factors. Elderly-onset APS patients showed significantly 
lower positive rate (51.1% vs. 71.6%, p = .014) and ratios [1.24 (1.01-1.38) vs. 
1.37 (1.16-1.77), p = .004] of lupus anticoagulant. Elderly-onset APS patients 
had a significantly higher 10-years cumulative all-cause mortality (p < .001) 
and APS-related mortality than non-elderly-onset patients (p = .002) and elderly 
non-APS patients (p = .040).
CONCLUSIONS: Elderly-onset APS patients have unique disease characteristics with 
higher 10-years cumulative all-cause mortality and APS-related mortality. Early 
recognition and control of comorbidities may reduce the recurrence of thrombosis 
and mortality in elderly-onset APS patients.

DOI: 10.1177/09612033241266875
PMID: 39033374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.