---
reference_id: "PMID:16160919"
title: Mutational analysis of human BAFF receptor TNFRSF13C (BAFF-R) in patients with common variable immunodeficiency.
authors:
- Losi CG
- Silini A
- Fiorini C
- Soresina A
- Meini A
- Ferrari S
- Notarangelo LD
- Lougaris V
- Plebani A
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-005-5637-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutational analysis of human BAFF receptor TNFRSF13C (BAFF-R) in patients with common variable immunodeficiency.
**Authors:** Losi CG, Silini A, Fiorini C, Soresina A, Meini A, Ferrari S, Notarangelo LD, Lougaris V, Plebani A
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-005-5637-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-005-5637-2)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2005 Sep;25(5):496-502. doi: 10.1007/s10875-005-5637-2.

Mutational analysis of human BAFF receptor TNFRSF13C (BAFF-R) in patients with 
common variable immunodeficiency.

Losi CG(1), Silini A, Fiorini C, Soresina A, Meini A, Ferrari S, Notarangelo LD, 
Lougaris V, Plebani A.

Author information:
(1)Clinica Pediatrica and Istituto di Medicina Molecolare Angelo Nocivelli, 
Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy. gioia_losi@yahoo.it

BAFF receptor (BAFF-R/BR3/TNFRSF13C) is a recently identified molecule that 
specifically binds BLyS, a protein belonging to the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) 
family, and is involved in survival and maturation of B cells. Recent studies 
have demonstrated that mice defective in BAFF-R gene exhibit an altered profile 
of the B cell pool, a phenotype observed in BLyS knockout mice as well. These 
features suggest that mutations in this gene may result in humoral 
immunodeficiency. To test this hypothesis, we sequenced the BAFF-R gene in 48 
patients with common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) along with 57 healthy 
controls. We have identified three novel variants present at the heterozygous 
state leading to amino acid substitutions, and have also confirmed the existence 
of a previously reported intronic variant. The hereby described novel variants 
were also present in healthy controls and in the healthy patients' parents. 
These variants do not affect the expression of BAFF-R neither at the mRNA nor at 
the protein level, suggesting that these variants represent novel polymorphic 
variants of the BAFF-R gene.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-005-5637-2
PMID: 16160919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]