---
reference_id: "PMID:31199090"
title: A Phase 3 Randomized Trial of Voxelotor in Sickle Cell Disease.
authors:
- Vichinsky E
- Hoppe CC
- Ataga KI
- Ware RE
- Nduba V
- El-Beshlawy A
- Hassab H
- Achebe MM
- Alkindi S
- Brown RC
- Diuguid DL
- Telfer P
- Tsitsikas DA
- Elghandour A
- Gordeuk VR
- Kanter J
- Abboud MR
- Lehrer-Graiwer J
- Tonda M
- Intondi A
- Tong B
- Howard J
- HOPE Trial Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1903212
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Anemia, Sickle Cell/blood, drug therapy"
- "Antisickling Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Benzaldehydes/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Biomarkers/blood
- Child
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Double-Blind Method
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Female
- "Hemoglobin, Sickle/drug effects, metabolism"
- Hemoglobins/metabolism
- Hemolysis/drug effects
- Humans
- Hydroxyurea/therapeutic use
- Intention to Treat Analysis
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Polymerization/drug effects
- "Pyrazines/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Pyrazoles/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Phase 3 Randomized Trial of Voxelotor in Sickle Cell Disease.
**Authors:** Vichinsky E, Hoppe CC, Ataga KI, Ware RE, Nduba V, El-Beshlawy A, Hassab H, Achebe MM, Alkindi S, Brown RC, Diuguid DL, Telfer P, Tsitsikas DA, Elghandour A, Gordeuk VR, Kanter J, Abboud MR, Lehrer-Graiwer J, Tonda M, Intondi A, Tong B, Howard J, HOPE Trial Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1903212](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1903212)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2019 Aug 8;381(6):509-519. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1903212. Epub 2019
 Jun 14.

A Phase 3 Randomized Trial of Voxelotor in Sickle Cell Disease.

Vichinsky E(1), Hoppe CC(1), Ataga KI(1), Ware RE(1), Nduba V(1), El-Beshlawy
A(1), Hassab H(1), Achebe MM(1), Alkindi S(1), Brown RC(1), Diuguid DL(1),
Telfer P(1), Tsitsikas DA(1), Elghandour A(1), Gordeuk VR(1), Kanter J(1),
Abboud MR(1), Lehrer-Graiwer J(1), Tonda M(1), Intondi A(1), Tong B(1), Howard
J(1); HOPE Trial Investigators.

Collaborators: Kuo K, Badr M, Hassab H, El-Beshlawy A, Elghandour A, Tantawy A,
Arlet JB, de Montalembert M, Colombatti R, Knight-Madden J, Githanga J, Nduba V,
Abboud M, Inati A, Biemond B, Rijneveld A, Alkindi S, Antmen AB, Kupesiz OA,
Patiroglu T, Unal S, Awogbade M, Eleftheriou P, Howard J, Layton M, Ryan K,
Telfer P, Tsitsikas D, Achebe M, Alvarez O, Ataga K, Blinder M, Blyden G, Brown
RC, Callaghan M, Cohen A, DeCastro L, Diuguid D, Fuloria J, George A, Griffin C,
Gordeuk V, Hoppe C, Key N, Hankins J, Hardesty B, Harpel J, Haynes J, Lanzkron
S, Lewis D, Liles D, Lipato T, Marsh A, McMahon L, Minniti C, Priego V, Rizk S,
Shah N, Shows JR, Smith W, Tubman V, Vance K, Volanakis E, Kanter Washko J.

Author information:
(1)From the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) Benioff Children's
Hospital Oakland, Oakland (E.V.), and Global Blood Therapeutics, South San
Francisco (C.C.H., J.L.-G., M.T., A.I., B.T.) - both in California; the
University of Tennessee Health Science Center at Memphis, Memphis (K.I.A.);
Cincinnati Children's Hospital and University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati
(R.E.W.); Kenya Medical Research Institute, Kisumu, Kenya (V.N.); Cairo
University, Cairo (A.E.-B.), and the Pediatric Department and Clinical Research
Center, Faculty of Medicine (H.H.), and the Faculty of Medicine (A.E.),
Alexandria University, Alexandria - all in Egypt; Brigham and Women's Hospital
and Harvard Medical School, Boston (M.M.A.); Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat,
Oman (S.A.); Emory University and Aflac Cancer and Blood Disorders Center,
Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta (R.C.B.); New
York-Presbyterian/Columbia University Medical Center, New York (D.L.D.); Barts
Health NHS Trust (P.T.), Homerton University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust
(D.A.T.), and Guy's and St. Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust and King's College
(J.H.) - all in London; the University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago (V.R.G.);
the University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham (J.K.); and the American
University of Beirut Medical Center, Beirut, Lebanon (M.R.A.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2019 Aug 8;381(6):579-580. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1906771.

BACKGROUND: Deoxygenated sickle hemoglobin (HbS) polymerization drives the
pathophysiology of sickle cell disease. Therefore, direct inhibition of HbS
polymerization has potential to favorably modify disease outcomes. Voxelotor is
an HbS polymerization inhibitor.
METHODS: In a multicenter, phase 3, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled
trial, we compared the efficacy and safety of two dose levels of voxelotor (1500
mg and 900 mg, administered orally once daily) with placebo in persons with
sickle cell disease. The primary end point was the percentage of participants
who had a hemoglobin response, which was defined as an increase of more than 1.0
g per deciliter from baseline at week 24 in the intention-to-treat analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 274 participants were randomly assigned in a 1:1:1 ratio to
receive a once-daily oral dose of 1500 mg of voxelotor, 900 mg of voxelotor, or
placebo. Most participants had sickle cell anemia (homozygous hemoglobin S or
hemoglobin Sβ0-thalassemia), and approximately two thirds were receiving
hydroxyurea at baseline. In the intention-to-treat analysis, a significantly
higher percentage of participants had a hemoglobin response in the 1500-mg
voxelotor group (51%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 41 to 61) than in the
placebo group (7%; 95% CI, 1 to 12). Anemia worsened between baseline and week
24 in fewer participants in each voxelotor dose group than in those receiving
placebo. At week 24, the 1500-mg voxelotor group had significantly greater
reductions from baseline in the indirect bilirubin level and percentage of
reticulocytes than the placebo group. The percentage of participants with an
adverse event that occurred or worsened during the treatment period was similar
across the trial groups. Adverse events of at least grade 3 occurred in 26% of
the participants in the 1500-mg voxelotor group, 23% in the 900-mg voxelotor
group, and 26% in the placebo group. Most adverse events were not related to the
trial drug or placebo, as determined by the investigators.
CONCLUSIONS: In this phase 3 randomized, placebo-controlled trial involving
participants with sickle cell disease, voxelotor significantly increased
hemoglobin levels and reduced markers of hemolysis. These findings are
consistent with inhibition of HbS polymerization and indicate a
disease-modifying potential. (Funded by Global Blood Therapeutics; HOPE
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03036813.).

Copyright © 2019 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1903212
PMID: 31199090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
