---
reference_id: "PMID:38557491"
title: Increasing histone acetylation improves sociability and restores learning and memory in KAT6B-haploinsufficient mice.
authors:
- Bergamasco MI
- Vanyai HK
- Garnham AL
- Geoghegan ND
- Vogel AP
- Eccles S
- Rogers KL
- Smyth GK
- Blewitt ME
- Hannan AJ
- Thomas T
- Voss AK
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/JCI167672
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Mice
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/drug therapy, genetics"
- Acetylation
- "Acetylcarnitine/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Blepharophimosis
- Chromatin
- Congenital Hypothyroidism
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/drug therapy, genetics"
- Exons
- Facies
- "Heart Defects, Congenital"
- "Histone Acetyltransferases/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Histones/genetics
- "Intellectual Disability/drug therapy, genetics"
- Joint Instability
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increasing histone acetylation improves sociability and restores learning and memory in KAT6B-haploinsufficient mice.
**Authors:** Bergamasco MI, Vanyai HK, Garnham AL, Geoghegan ND, Vogel AP, Eccles S, Rogers KL, Smyth GK, Blewitt ME, Hannan AJ, Thomas T, Voss AK
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI167672](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI167672)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2024 Apr 1;134(7):e167672. doi: 10.1172/JCI167672.

Increasing histone acetylation improves sociability and restores learning and 
memory in KAT6B-haploinsufficient mice.

Bergamasco MI(1)(2), Vanyai HK(1)(2), Garnham AL(1)(2), Geoghegan ND(1)(2), 
Vogel AP(3)(4), Eccles S(1)(2), Rogers KL(1)(2), Smyth GK(1)(5), Blewitt 
ME(1)(2), Hannan AJ(6)(7), Thomas T(1)(2), Voss AK(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Medical Biology and.
(3)Centre for Neurosciences of Speech, University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
Victoria, Australia.
(4)Redenlab Inc., Melbourne, Australia.
(5)School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
Victoria, Australia.
(6)Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.
(7)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
Victoria, Australia.

Mutations in genes encoding chromatin modifiers are enriched among mutations 
causing intellectual disability. The continuing development of the brain 
postnatally, coupled with the inherent reversibility of chromatin modifications, 
may afford an opportunity for therapeutic intervention following a genetic 
diagnosis. Development of treatments requires an understanding of protein 
function and models of the disease. Here, we provide a mouse model of 
Say-Barber-Biesecker-Young-Simpson syndrome (SBBYSS) (OMIM 603736) and 
demonstrate proof-of-principle efficacy of postnatal treatment. SBBYSS results 
from heterozygous mutations in the KAT6B (MYST4/MORF/QFK) gene and is 
characterized by intellectual disability and autism-like behaviors. Using human 
cells carrying SBBYSS-specific KAT6B mutations and Kat6b heterozygous mice 
(Kat6b+/-), we showed that KAT6B deficiency caused a reduction in histone H3 
lysine 9 acetylation. Kat6b+/- mice displayed learning, memory, and social 
deficits, mirroring SBBYSS individuals. Treatment with a histone deacetylase 
inhibitor, valproic acid, or an acetyl donor, acetyl-carnitine (ALCAR), elevated 
histone acetylation levels in the human cells with SBBYSS mutations and in brain 
and blood cells of Kat6b+/- mice and partially reversed gene expression changes 
in Kat6b+/- cortical neurons. Both compounds improved sociability in Kat6b+/- 
mice, and ALCAR treatment restored learning and memory. These data suggest that 
a subset of SBBYSS individuals may benefit from postnatal therapeutic 
interventions.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI167672
PMCID: PMC10977983
PMID: 38557491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]