---
reference_id: "PMID:35526313"
title: Exhaled Breath Condensate (EBC) analysis of circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA) using a lung cancer specific UltraSEEK oncogene panel.
authors:
- Ryan DJ
- Toomey S
- Smyth R
- Madden SF
- Workman J
- Cummins R
- Sheehan K
- Fay J
- Naidoo J
- Breathnach OS
- Morris PG
- Grogan L
- "O'Brien ME"
- Sulaiman I
- Hennessy BT
- Morgan RK
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2022.04.013
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Circulating Tumor DNA/genetics
- Class I Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing/methods
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Oncogenes
- Prospective Studies
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exhaled Breath Condensate (EBC) analysis of circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA) using a lung cancer specific UltraSEEK oncogene panel.
**Authors:** Ryan DJ, Toomey S, Smyth R, Madden SF, Workman J, Cummins R, Sheehan K, Fay J, Naidoo J, Breathnach OS, Morris PG, Grogan L, O'Brien ME, Sulaiman I, Hennessy BT, Morgan RK
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2022.04.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2022.04.013)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2022 Jun;168:67-73. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2022.04.013. Epub 2022
 May 4.

Exhaled Breath Condensate (EBC) analysis of circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA) using
a lung cancer specific UltraSEEK oncogene panel.

Ryan DJ(1), Toomey S(2), Smyth R(3), Madden SF(4), Workman J(2), Cummins R(5),
Sheehan K(5), Fay J(6), Naidoo J(7), Breathnach OS(7), Morris PG(7), Grogan
L(7), O'Brien ME(8), Sulaiman I(8), Hennessy BT(9), Morgan RK(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland,
Dublin, Ireland; Department of Respiratory Medicine, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin,
Ireland. Electronic address: danieljohnryan@beaumont.ie.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland,
Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland,
Dublin, Ireland; Department of Pulmonary and Critical care Medicine, section of
Computational Biomedicine, Boston University, Boston, MA, United States.
(4)Data Science Centre, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.
(5)Department of Pathology, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin,
Ireland.
(6)Biobank Service, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.
(7)Department of Oncology, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(9)Department of Molecular Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland,
Dublin, Ireland; Department of Oncology, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.

INTRODUCTION: Small diagnostic tissue samples can be inadequate in testing an
expanding list of validated oncogenic driver alterations and fail to reflect
intratumour heterogeneity (ITGH) in lung cancer. Liquid biopsies are
non-invasive and may better reflect ITGH. Most liquid biopsies are performed in
the context of circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA) in plasma but Exhaled Breath
Condensate (EBC) shows promise as a lung-specific liquid biopsy.
METHODS: In this prospective, proof-of-concept study we carried out targeted
Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) on diagnostic tissue samples from 125 patients
with lung cancer and compared results to plasma and EBC for 5 oncogenic driver
mutations (EGFR, KRAS, PIK3CA, ERBB2, BRAF) using an ultrasensitive PCR
technique (UltraSEEK™ Lung Panel on the MassARRAY® System, Agena Bioscience, San
Diego, CA, USA).
RESULTS: There was a significantly higher failure rate due to unamplifiable DNA
in tissue NGS (57/125, 45.6%) compared to plasma (27/125, 21.6%, p < 0.001 and
EBC (26/125,20.8%, p ≤ 0.001. Consequently, both plasma and EBC identified
higher number of mutations compared to tissue NGS. Specifically, there were
significantly higher numbers of mutations detected in EGFR, KRAS and PIK3CA in
plasma (p = 9.82 × 10-3, p = 3.14 × 10-5, p = 1.95 × 10-3) and EBC
(p = 2.18 × 10-3, p = 2.28 × 10-4,p = 0.016) compared to tissue NGS. There was
considerable divergence in mutation profiles between plasma and EBC with 34/76
(44%) mutations detected in plasma and 37/74 (41.89%) in EBC unique to their
respective liquid biopsy.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that EBC is effective in identifying clinically
relevant alterations in patients with lung cancer using UltraSEEK™ and has a
potential role as an adjunct to plasma testing.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2022.04.013
PMID: 35526313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
