---
reference_id: "PMID:35545226"
title: "Uremic pruritus: pathophysiology, clinical presentation, and treatments."
authors:
- Ko MJ
- Peng YS
- Wu HY
journal: Kidney Res Clin Pract
year: '2023'
doi: 10.23876/j.krcp.21.189
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Uremic pruritus: pathophysiology, clinical presentation, and treatments.
**Authors:** Ko MJ, Peng YS, Wu HY
**Journal:** Kidney Res Clin Pract (2023)
**DOI:** [10.23876/j.krcp.21.189](https://doi.org/10.23876/j.krcp.21.189)

## Content

1. Kidney Res Clin Pract. 2023 Jan;42(1):39-52. doi: 10.23876/j.krcp.21.189. Epub
 2022 May 4.

Uremic pruritus: pathophysiology, clinical presentation, and treatments.

Ko MJ(1)(2), Peng YS(3)(4)(5), Wu HY(3)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Taipei City Hospital, Taipei City, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Dermatology, National Taiwan University Hospital and College of 
Medicine, Taipei City, Taiwan.
(3)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Far Eastern Memorial 
Hospital, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Applied Cosmetology, Lee-Ming Institute of Technology, New 
Taipei City, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Healthcare Administration, Asia Eastern University of Science 
and Technology, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(6)School of Medicine, College of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung 
University, Taipei City, Taiwan.
(7)Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, College of Public Health, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei City, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital and 
College of Medicine, Taipei City, Taiwan.

Uremic pruritus is one of the most common and bothersome symptoms in patients 
with end-stage renal disease. Most patients with uremic pruritus experience a 
prolonged and relapsing course and significant impairments of quality of life. 
The pathophysiology of uremic pruritus is not completely understood. A complex 
interplay among cutaneous biology and the nervous and immune systems has been 
implicated, with the involvement of various inflammatory mediators, 
neurotransmitters, and opioids. Uremic pruritus treatment outcomes are often 
unsatisfactory. Clinical trials have mostly been small in scale and have 
reported inconsistent results. Recent evidence shows that gabapentinoids, 
nalfurafine, and difelikefalin are effective for relieving uremic pruritus in 
hemodialysis patients. This review provides an overview of the epidemiology and 
proposed mechanisms of uremic pruritus, then highlights the manifestations of 
and clinical approach to uremic pruritus. Current evidence regarding treatment 
options, including topical treatments, treatment of underlying disease, 
phototherapy, and systemic treatments, is also outlined. With a better 
understanding of uremic pruritus, more therapeutic options can be expected in 
the near future.

DOI: 10.23876/j.krcp.21.189
PMCID: PMC9902728
PMID: 35545226

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest All authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.