---
reference_id: "PMID:37816542"
title: Airway Clearance Strategies and Secretion Management in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
authors:
- McHenry KL
journal: Respir Care
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4187/respcare.11215
keywords:
- Humans
- "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/complications, therapy"
- Respiratory Therapy/methods
- Chest Wall Oscillation
- Bodily Secretions
- Insufflation/methods
- Cough/etiology
- Respiratory Insufficiency/therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Airway Clearance Strategies and Secretion Management in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
**Authors:** McHenry KL
**Journal:** Respir Care (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4187/respcare.11215](https://doi.org/10.4187/respcare.11215)

## Content

1. Respir Care. 2024 Jan 24;69(2):227-237. doi: 10.4187/respcare.11215.

Airway Clearance Strategies and Secretion Management in Amyotrophic Lateral 
Sclerosis.

McHenry KL(1).

Author information:
(1)Boise State University, Department of Respiratory Care, Boise, Idaho. 
kristenmchenry@boisestate.edu.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a rare, neurodegenerative motor neuron 
disease that affects voluntary muscle movement. Often, difficulty in coughing, 
breathing, and swallowing are sequela associated with the condition, and the 
presence of bulbar muscle predominant weakness results in deleterious effects on 
airway clearance and secretion management. This narrative review will provide 
practical guidance for clinicians treating this population. Cough insufficiency 
in this population typically manifests as a prolonged, slow, weak cough effort 
that impedes the clearability of secretions and airway protection. Dystussia and 
dysphagia frequently occur simultaneously in bulbar dysfunction, subsequently 
impacting respiratory health. Measures of respiratory strength should be 
obtained and monitored every 3-6 months, preferably in a multidisciplinary 
clinic setting. Cough augmentation, whether manual or mechanical techniques, 
should be sought as early in the disease progression as possible to adequately 
control secretions in the proximal airways. This airway clearance strategy can 
aid in the prevention and treatment of respiratory tract infections (RTIs), 
which can pose a significant clinical hurdle to those with ALS. The use of 
mechanical insufflation-exsufflation may be complicated by severe bulbar 
dysfunction rendering this technique ineffective. Though peripheral airway 
clearance strategies, such as high-frequency chest-wall compression, have the 
advantage of being less impacted by bulbar dysfunction, it is only recommended 
this modality be used in conjunction with, versus in lieu of, proximal 
strategies. Salivary secretion management includes the use of anticholinergics, 
botulinum toxin, and radiation therapy depending on severity and desire for 
relief.

Copyright © 2024 by Daedalus Enterprises.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.11215
PMCID: PMC10898456
PMID: 37816542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]