---
reference_id: "PMID:22072986"
title: A novel protein LZTFL1 regulates ciliary trafficking of the BBSome and Smoothened.
authors:
- Seo S
- Zhang Q
- Bugge K
- Breslow DK
- Searby CC
- Nachury MV
- Sheffield VC
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002358
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cilia/genetics, metabolism"
- HEK293 Cells
- Hedgehog Proteins/metabolism
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Transport/genetics
- "RNA, Small Interfering/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- Smoothened Receptor
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel protein LZTFL1 regulates ciliary trafficking of the BBSome and Smoothened.
**Authors:** Seo S, Zhang Q, Bugge K, Breslow DK, Searby CC, Nachury MV, Sheffield VC
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1002358](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1002358)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2011 Nov;7(11):e1002358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002358. Epub 
2011 Nov 3.

A novel protein LZTFL1 regulates ciliary trafficking of the BBSome and 
Smoothened.

Seo S(1), Zhang Q, Bugge K, Breslow DK, Searby CC, Nachury MV, Sheffield VC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City, 
Iowa, USA.

Many signaling proteins including G protein-coupled receptors localize to 
primary cilia, regulating cellular processes including differentiation, 
proliferation, organogenesis, and tumorigenesis. Bardet-Biedl Syndrome (BBS) 
proteins are involved in maintaining ciliary function by mediating protein 
trafficking to the cilia. However, the mechanisms governing ciliary trafficking 
by BBS proteins are not well understood. Here, we show that a novel protein, 
Leucine-zipper transcription factor-like 1 (LZTFL1), interacts with a BBS 
protein complex known as the BBSome and regulates ciliary trafficking of this 
complex. We also show that all BBSome subunits and BBS3 (also known as ARL6) are 
required for BBSome ciliary entry and that reduction of LZTFL1 restores BBSome 
trafficking to cilia in BBS3 and BBS5 depleted cells. Finally, we found that BBS 
proteins and LZTFL1 regulate ciliary trafficking of hedgehog signal transducer, 
Smoothened. Our findings suggest that LZTFL1 is an important regulator of BBSome 
ciliary trafficking and hedgehog signaling.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002358
PMCID: PMC3207910
PMID: 22072986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.