---
reference_id: "PMID:26718155"
title: "Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease: A Path Forward."
authors:
- Rangan GK
- Lopez-Vargas P
- Nankivell BJ
- Tchan M
- Tong A
- Tunnicliffe DJ
- Savige J
journal: Semin Nephrol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2015.10.002
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Humans
- "Polycystic Kidney, Autosomal Dominant/complications, diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- Renal Insufficiency/etiology
- Signal Transduction
- "TRPP Cation Channels/chemistry, metabolism"
- Vasopressins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease: A Path Forward.
**Authors:** Rangan GK, Lopez-Vargas P, Nankivell BJ, Tchan M, Tong A, Tunnicliffe DJ, Savige J
**Journal:** Semin Nephrol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semnephrol.2015.10.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semnephrol.2015.10.002)

## Content

1. Semin Nephrol. 2015 Nov;35(6):524-37. doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2015.10.002.

Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease: A Path Forward.

Rangan GK(1), Lopez-Vargas P(2), Nankivell BJ(3), Tchan M(4), Tong A(2),
Tunnicliffe DJ(2), Savige J(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Renal Medicine, Westmead Hospital, Western Sydney Local Health
District, Westmead, Sydney, Australia; Centre for Transplant and Renal Research,
Westmead Institute for Medical Research, University of Sydney, Westmead, Sydney,
Australia. Electronic address: g.rangan@sydney.edu.au.
(2)Sydney School of Public Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia;
Centre for Kidney Research, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney,
Australia.
(3)Department of Renal Medicine, Westmead Hospital, Western Sydney Local Health
District, Westmead, Sydney, Australia; Centre for Transplant and Renal Research,
Westmead Institute for Medical Research, University of Sydney, Westmead, Sydney,
Australia.
(4)Department of Genetic Medicine, Westmead Hospital, Western Sydney Local
Health District, Sydney, Australia.
(5)The University of Melbourne, Department of Medicine, Melbourne Health and
Northern Health, Melbourne, Australia; Department of Nephrology, The Royal
Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the commonest inherited
cause of renal failure in adults, and is due to loss-of-function mutations in
either the PKD1 or PKD2 genes, which encode polycystin-1 and polycystin-2,
respectively. These proteins have an essential role in maintaining the geometric
structure of the distal collecting duct in the kidney in adult life, and their
dysfunction predisposes to renal cyst formation. The typical renal phenotype of
ADPKD is the insidious development of hundreds of renal cysts, which form in
childhood and grow progressively through life, causing end-stage kidney failure
in the fifth decade in about half affected by the mutation. Over the past 2
decades, major advances in genetics and disease pathogenesis have led to
well-conducted randomized controlled trials, and observational studies that have
resulted in an accumulation of evidence-based data, and raise hope that the
lifetime risk of kidney failure due to ADPKD will be progressively curtailed
during this century. This review will provide a contemporary summary of the
current state of the field in disease pathogenesis and therapeutics, and also
briefly highlights the importance of clinical practice guidelines, patient
perspectives, patient-reported outcomes, uniform trial reporting, and
health-economics in ADPKD.

Crown Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2015.10.002
PMID: 26718155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
