---
reference_id: "PMID:9790573"
title: Epithelial transport in polycystic kidney disease.
authors:
- Sullivan LP
- Wallace DP
- Grantham JJ
journal: Physiol Rev
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1152/physrev.1998.78.4.1165
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epithelial transport in polycystic kidney disease.
**Authors:** Sullivan LP, Wallace DP, Grantham JJ
**Journal:** Physiol Rev (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1152/physrev.1998.78.4.1165](https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.1998.78.4.1165)

## Content

1. Physiol Rev. 1998 Oct;78(4):1165-91. doi: 10.1152/physrev.1998.78.4.1165.

Epithelial transport in polycystic kidney disease.

Sullivan LP(1), Wallace DP, Grantham JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas 
Medical Center, Kansas City 66160, USA.

In autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), the genetic defect 
results in the slow growth of a multitude of epithelial cysts within the renal 
parenchyma. Cysts originate within the glomeruli and all tubular structures, and 
their growth is the result of proliferation of incompletely differentiated 
epithelial cells and the accumulation of fluid within the cysts. The majority of 
cysts disconnect from tubular structures as they grow but still accumulate fluid 
within the lumen. The fluid accumulation is the result of secretion of fluid 
driven by active transepithelial Cl- secretion. Proliferation of the cells and 
fluid secretion are activated by agonists of the cAMP signaling pathway. The 
transport mechanisms involved include the cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
conductance regulator (CFTR) present in the apical membrane of the cystic cells 
and a bumetanide-sensitive transporter located in the basolateral membrane. A 
lipid factor, called cyst activating factor, has been found in the cystic fluid. 
Cyst activating factor stimulates cAMP production, proliferation, and fluid 
secretion by cultured renal epithelial cells and also is a chemotactic agent. 
Cysts also appear in the intrahepatic biliary tree in ADPKD. Normal ductal cells 
secrete Cl- and HCO3-. The cystic ductal cell also secretes Cl-, but HCO3- 
secretion is diminished, probably as the result of a lower population of 
Cl-/HCO3- exchangers in the apical membrane as compared with the normal cells. 
Some segments of the normal renal tubule are also capable of utilizing CFTR to 
secrete Cl-, particularly the inner medullary collecting duct. The ability of 
Madin-Darby canine kidney cells and normal human kidney cortex cells to form 
cysts in culture and to secrete fluid and the functional similarities between 
these incompletely differentiated, proliferative cells and developing cells in 
the intestinal crypt and in the fetal lung have led us to suggest that Cl- and 
fluid secretion may be a common property of at least some renal epithelial cells 
in an intermediate stage of development. The genetic defect in ADPKD may not 
directly affect membrane transport mechanisms but rather may arrest the 
development of certain renal epithelial cells in an incompletely differentiated, 
proliferative stage.

DOI: 10.1152/physrev.1998.78.4.1165
PMID: 9790573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]