---
reference_id: "PMID:39953747"
title: Clinical Features of Seven COL2A1 Variations in Chinese Children With Type II Collagen Disorders.
authors:
- Zhan S
- He Q
- Yuan J
- Xu X
- Huang K
- Dong G
- Fu J
- Wu D
- Wu W
journal: Acta Paediatr
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/apa.70029
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- China
- Collagen Type II/genetics
- Human Growth Hormone/therapeutic use
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, drug therapy, congenital"
- East Asian People/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Features of Seven COL2A1 Variations in Chinese Children With Type II Collagen Disorders.
**Authors:** Zhan S, He Q, Yuan J, Xu X, Huang K, Dong G, Fu J, Wu D, Wu W
**Journal:** Acta Paediatr (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/apa.70029](https://doi.org/10.1111/apa.70029)

## Content

1. Acta Paediatr. 2025 Jul;114(7):1720-1730. doi: 10.1111/apa.70029. Epub 2025
Feb  14.

Clinical Features of Seven COL2A1 Variations in Chinese Children With Type II 
Collagen Disorders.

Zhan S(1), He Q(1)(2), Yuan J(1), Xu X(1), Huang K(1), Dong G(1), Fu J(1), Wu 
D(3), Wu W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University School 
of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child Health, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China.
(2)Department of Pediatric, The General Hospital of Shaoxing Second Hospital 
Medical Community, Shaoxing, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Department of Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child 
Health, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

AIM: Type II collagen, encoded by the collagen type II alpha 1 (COL2A1) gene, is 
crucial for the structure of cartilage. This study aims to improve our 
understanding of Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia Congenita (SEDC) caused by 
mutations in COL2A1. We also aim to evaluate the safety and efficacy of growth 
hormone (GH) therapy in two SEDC patients.
METHODS: We performed genetic analyses of seven paediatric patients from 
unrelated Chinese families. Two patients received GH therapy, and their growth 
trajectories were monitored over 3.5 and 3 years.
RESULTS: Genetic screening identified six missense mutations (Gly1110Ser, 
Gly1107Glu, Gly873Arg, Gly456Ala, Gly1062Ser and Gly1182Arg) and one intron 
variant in COL2A1. All patients (five girls and two boys, ranging from 2 years 
and 7 months to 12 years) were diagnosed with SEDC, exhibiting disproportionate 
short stature and skeletal abnormalities. GH therapy resulted in height 
increases of 0.76 and 0.27 standard deviation scores over 3.5 and 3 years, 
respectively, with no significant side effects.
CONCLUSION: This study expands the mutation spectrum of COL2A1 and supports the 
efficacy and safety of GH therapy in SEDC patients, highlighting the need for 
multi-center studies to further investigate GH's therapeutic potential.

© 2025 The Author(s). Acta Paediatrica published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of Foundation Acta Paediatrica.

DOI: 10.1111/apa.70029
PMCID: PMC12147410
PMID: 39953747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.