---
reference_id: "PMID:22541332"
title: Recent advances in the genetics and immunology of Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrosis.
authors:
- Chung WH
- Hung SI
journal: J Dermatol Sci
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2012.04.002
keywords:
- Cytokines/physiology
- Drug Hypersensitivity/immunology
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Signal Transduction
- Skin/immunology
- "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/ethnology, genetics, immunology"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Cytotoxic/physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent advances in the genetics and immunology of Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrosis.
**Authors:** Chung WH, Hung SI
**Journal:** J Dermatol Sci (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jdermsci.2012.04.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdermsci.2012.04.002)

## Content

1. J Dermatol Sci. 2012 Jun;66(3):190-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2012.04.002.
Epub  2012 Apr 11.

Recent advances in the genetics and immunology of Stevens-Johnson syndrome and 
toxic epidermal necrosis.

Chung WH(1), Hung SI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Drug Hypersensitivity Clinical and Research 
Center, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Keelung and Linkou Branches, College of 
Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taiwan. chung1@cgmh.org.tw

Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrosis (TEN) are rare but 
life-threatening severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARs), which are majorly 
(65-75%) induced by a variety of drugs. SJS/TEN could be recognized as SCARs or 
drug immune reactions, if the reactions are elicited by drugs. The recent 
studies suggested that SJS/TEN is a specific immune reaction initiated by the 
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) via human leukocyte antigens (HLAs)-restricted 
pathway. The patho-mechanism involving HLA-restricted presentation of a drug or 
its metabolites for T-cell activation is supported by the findings of strong 
genetic associations with HLA alleles (e.g. HLA-B*15:02 and 
carbamazepine-SJS/TEN, and HLA-B*58:01 and allopurinol-SJS/TEN). However, the 
genetic associations of SJS/TEN or drug induced cutaneous immune reactions are 
complex, which are drug specific and ethnicity specific. The genetic 
polymorphisms and diversity of HLA alleles may provide different binding 
affinities for drug antigens to launch the activation of specific CTLs 
responses, further leading to the unique clinical manifestations in SJS/TEN. 
Fas-FasL and perforin/granzyme B have been advocated mediating the epidermal 
necrosis in SJS/TEN. Our recent study showed that granulysin, a cytotoxic 
protein produced by CTLs or natural killer (NK) cells, is the key mediator for 
disseminated keratinocyte death in SJS/TEN. From the point of view of a 
physician, the profounder understanding of the genetic predisposition and 
patho-mechanism we discover, the better strategies for prevention, clinical 
management, and therapeutic methods of SJS/TEN we can develop in the near 
future.

Copyright © 2012 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by 
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2012.04.002
PMID: 22541332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]