---
reference_id: "PMID:37959271"
title: "Therapeutic Potential of Rituximab in Managing Hepatitis C-Associated Cryoglobulinemic Vasculitis: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Covic A
- Caruntu ID
- Burlacu A
- Giusca SE
- Covic A
- Stefan AE
- Brinza C
- Ismail G
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/jcm12216806
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic Potential of Rituximab in Managing Hepatitis C-Associated Cryoglobulinemic Vasculitis: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Covic A, Caruntu ID, Burlacu A, Giusca SE, Covic A, Stefan AE, Brinza C, Ismail G
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm12216806](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12216806)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2023 Oct 27;12(21):6806. doi: 10.3390/jcm12216806.

Therapeutic Potential of Rituximab in Managing Hepatitis C-Associated 
Cryoglobulinemic Vasculitis: A Systematic Review.

Covic A(1)(2), Caruntu ID(2)(3), Burlacu A(2)(4), Giusca SE(2)(3), Covic 
A(1)(2), Stefan AE(1), Brinza C(2)(4), Ismail G(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Nephrology Department, Dialysis and Renal Transplant Center, "Dr. C.I. 
Parhon" University Hospital, 700503 Iasi, Romania.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, 'Grigore T. Popa' University of Medicine, 700115 Iasi, 
Romania.
(3)Department of Morpho-Functional Sciences I-Histology, Pathology, "Grigore T. 
Popa" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 700115 Iasi, Romania.
(4)Department of Interventional Cardiology, Cardiovascular Diseases Institute 
"Prof. Dr. George I.M. Georgescu", 700503 Iasi, Romania.
(5)Department of Nephrology, "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
020021 Bucharest, Romania.
(6)Department of Nephrology, Fundeni Clinical Institute, 022328 Bucharest, 
Romania.

(1) Background. Hepatitis C infection often leads to extrahepatic 
manifestations, including cryoglobulinemic vasculitis. This systematic review 
aimed to assess the efficacy and safety of rituximab in treating hepatitis 
C-associated cryoglobulinemic vasculitis. (2) Methods. Following PRISMA 
guidelines, databases were searched for relevant studies. Eligibility criteria 
included studies on hepatitis C-associated cryoglobulinemic vasculitis treated 
with rituximab. (3) Results. Nine studies met the eligibility criteria and were 
included in this analysis. Rituximab was commonly administered at 375 mg/m2 
weekly for one month. The results consistently demonstrated the efficacy of 
rituximab, whether as a standalone treatment or as part of a therapeutic 
regimen. The combination of rituximab with Peg-IFN-α and ribavirin significantly 
increased the complete response rate compared to Peg-IFN-α and ribavirin alone 
(54.5% vs. 33.3%, p < 0.05). The 3-year sustained response rate was notably 
higher in the rituximab combination group (83.3% vs. 40%). In another trial, 
rituximab achieved remission in 83.3% of patients at 6 months, compared to only 
8.3% in the control group. The efficacy of rituximab was supported by long-term 
experience, with clinical benefits in patients with severe cryoglobulinemic 
vasculitis, including those resistant to standard therapies. Mild adverse events 
were generally reported, with rare severe reactions in some studies. (4) 
Conclusions: In conclusion, rituximab appeared to be effective and safe in 
managing hepatitis C-associated cryoglobulinemic vasculitis, either alone or 
with antiviral therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12216806
PMCID: PMC10648453
PMID: 37959271

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.