---
reference_id: "PMID:16532500"
title: "Decitabine improves patient outcomes in myelodysplastic syndromes: results of a phase III randomized study."
authors:
- Kantarjian H
- Issa JP
- Rosenfeld CS
- Bennett JM
- Albitar M
- DiPersio J
- Klimek V
- Slack J
- de Castro C
- Ravandi F
- Helmer R 3rd
- Shen L
- Nimer SD
- Leavitt R
- Raza A
- Saba H
journal: Cancer
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.21792
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Aged
- "Antimetabolites, Antineoplastic/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Azacitidine/administration & dosage, adverse effects, analogs & derivatives"
- DNA Methylation/drug effects
- Decitabine
- Disease Progression
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myeloid/etiology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Myelodysplastic Syndromes/drug therapy, mortality"
- Palliative Care
- Quality of Life
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Decitabine improves patient outcomes in myelodysplastic syndromes: results of a phase III randomized study.
**Authors:** Kantarjian H, Issa JP, Rosenfeld CS, Bennett JM, Albitar M, DiPersio J, Klimek V, Slack J, de Castro C, Ravandi F, Helmer R 3rd, Shen L, Nimer SD, Leavitt R, Raza A, Saba H
**Journal:** Cancer (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.21792](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.21792)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2006 Apr 15;106(8):1794-803. doi: 10.1002/cncr.21792.

Decitabine improves patient outcomes in myelodysplastic syndromes: results of a 
phase III randomized study.

Kantarjian H(1), Issa JP, Rosenfeld CS, Bennett JM, Albitar M, DiPersio J, 
Klimek V, Slack J, de Castro C, Ravandi F, Helmer R 3rd, Shen L, Nimer SD, 
Leavitt R, Raza A, Saba H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Leukemia, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. hkantarj@mdanderson.org

Comment in
    Cancer. 2006 Apr 15;106(8):1650-2. doi: 10.1002/cncr.21793.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA methylation, which results in leukemogenesis, is 
frequent in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and is a potential 
target for pharmacologic therapy. Decitabine indirectly depletes methylcytosine 
and causes hypomethylation of target gene promoters.
METHODS: A total of 170 patients with MDS were randomized to receive either 
decitabine at a dose of 15 mg/m2 given intravenously over 3 hours every 8 hours 
for 3 days (at a dose of 135 mg/m2 per course) and repeated every 6 weeks, or 
best supportive care. Response was assessed using the International Working 
Group criteria and required that response criteria be met for at least 8 weeks.
RESULTS: Patients who were treated with decitabine achieved a significantly 
higher overall response rate (17%), including 9% complete responses, compared 
with supportive care (0%) (P < .001). An additional 12 patients who were treated 
with decitabine (13%) achieved hematologic improvement. Responses were durable 
(median, 10.3 mos) and were associated with transfusion independence. Patients 
treated with decitabine had a trend toward a longer median time to acute 
myelogenous leukemia (AML) progression or death compared with patients who 
received supportive care alone (all patients, 12.1 mos vs. 7.8 mos [P = 0.16]; 
those with International Prognostic Scoring System intermediate-2/high-risk 
disease, 12.0 mos vs. 6.8 mos [P = 0.03]; those with de novo disease, 12.6 mos 
vs. 9.4 mos [P = 0.04]; and treatment-naive patients, 12.3 mos vs. 7.3 mos [P = 
0.08]).
CONCLUSIONS: Decitabine was found to be clinically effective in the treatment of 
patients with MDS, provided durable responses, and improved time to AML 
transformation or death. The duration of decitabine therapy may improve these 
results further.

2006 American Cancer Society

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.21792
PMID: 16532500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]