---
reference_id: "PMID:23829907"
title: Human African trypanosomiasis.
authors:
- Lejon V
- Bentivoglio M
- Franco JR
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-53490-3.00011-X
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human African trypanosomiasis.
**Authors:** Lejon V, Bentivoglio M, Franco JR
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-444-53490-3.00011-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-53490-3.00011-X)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2013;114:169-81. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-53490-3.00011-X.

Human African trypanosomiasis.

Lejon V(1), Bentivoglio M, Franco JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, 
Belgium and Institut de Recherche pour le Développement, UMR 177 IRD-CIRAD 
INTERTRYP, Campus International de Baillarguet, Montpellier, France. Electronic 
address: veerle.lejon@ird.fr.

Human African trypanosomiasis or sleeping sickness is a neglected tropical 
disease that affects populations in sub-Saharan Africa. The disease is caused by 
infection with the gambiense and rhodesiense subspecies of the extracellular 
parasite Trypanosoma brucei, and is transmitted to humans by bites of infected 
tsetse flies. The disease evolves in two stages, the hemolymphatic and 
meningoencephalitic stages, the latter being defined by central nervous system 
infection after trypanosomal traversal of the blood-brain barrier. African 
trypanosomiasis, which leads to severe neuroinflammation, is fatal without 
treatment, but the available drugs are toxic and complicated to administer. The 
choice of medication is determined by the infecting parasite subspecies and 
disease stage. Clinical features include a constellation of nonspecific symptoms 
and signs with evolving neurological and psychiatric alterations and 
characteristic sleep-wake disturbances. Because of the clinical profile 
variability and insidiously progressive central nervous system involvement, 
disease staging is currently based on cerebrospinal fluid examination, which is 
usually performed after the finding of trypanosomes in blood or other body 
fluids. No vaccine being available, control of human African trypanosomiasis 
relies on diagnosis and treatment of infected patients, assisted by vector 
control. Better diagnostic tools and safer, easy to use drugs are needed to 
facilitate elimination of the disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-53490-3.00011-X
PMID: 23829907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]