---
reference_id: PMID:24568568
title: Mutations in RSPH1 cause primary ciliary dyskinesia with a unique clinical and ciliary phenotype.
authors:
- Knowles MR
- Ostrowski LE
- Leigh MW
- Sears PR
- Davis SD
- Wolf WE
- Hazucha MJ
- Carson JL
- Olivier KN
- Sagel SD
- Rosenfeld M
- Ferkol TW
- Dell SD
- Milla CE
- Randell SH
- Yin W
- Sannuti A
- Metjian HM
- Noone PG
- Noone PJ
- Olson CA
- Patrone MV
- Dang H
- Lee HS
- Hurd TW
- Gee HY
- Otto EA
- Halbritter J
- Kohl S
- Kircher M
- Krischer J
- Bamshad MJ
- Nickerson DA
- Hildebrandt F
- Shendure J
- Zariwala MA
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1164/rccm.201311-2047OC
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Cilia/physiology
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Exome
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Markers
- Genetic Testing
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Kartagener Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
- Linear Models
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Nasal Mucosa/physiology
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in RSPH1 cause primary ciliary dyskinesia with a unique clinical and ciliary phenotype.
**Authors:** Knowles MR, Ostrowski LE, Leigh MW, Sears PR, Davis SD, Wolf WE, Hazucha MJ, Carson JL, Olivier KN, Sagel SD, Rosenfeld M, Ferkol TW, Dell SD, Milla CE, Randell SH, Yin W, Sannuti A, Metjian HM, Noone PG, Noone PJ, Olson CA, Patrone MV, Dang H, Lee HS, Hurd TW, Gee HY, Otto EA, Halbritter J, Kohl S, Kircher M, Krischer J, Bamshad MJ, Nickerson DA, Hildebrandt F, Shendure J, Zariwala MA
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1164/rccm.201311-2047OC](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.201311-2047OC)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014 Mar 15;189(6):707-17. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201311-2047OC.

Mutations in RSPH1 cause primary ciliary dyskinesia with a unique clinical and 
ciliary phenotype.

Knowles MR(1), Ostrowski LE, Leigh MW, Sears PR, Davis SD, Wolf WE, Hazucha MJ, 
Carson JL, Olivier KN, Sagel SD, Rosenfeld M, Ferkol TW, Dell SD, Milla CE, 
Randell SH, Yin W, Sannuti A, Metjian HM, Noone PG, Noone PJ, Olson CA, Patrone 
MV, Dang H, Lee HS, Hurd TW, Gee HY, Otto EA, Halbritter J, Kohl S, Kircher M, 
Krischer J, Bamshad MJ, Nickerson DA, Hildebrandt F, Shendure J, Zariwala MA.

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Medicine.

RATIONALE: Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a genetically heterogeneous 
recessive disorder of motile cilia, but the genetic cause is not defined for all 
patients with PCD.
OBJECTIVES: To identify disease-causing mutations in novel genes, we performed 
exome sequencing, follow-up characterization, mutation scanning, and 
genotype-phenotype studies in patients with PCD.
METHODS: Whole-exome sequencing was performed using NimbleGen capture and 
Illumina HiSeq sequencing. Sanger-based sequencing was used for mutation 
scanning, validation, and segregation analysis.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: We performed exome sequencing on an affected 
sib-pair with normal ultrastructure in more than 85% of cilia. A homozygous 
splice-site mutation was detected in RSPH1 in both siblings; parents were 
carriers. Screening RSPH1 in 413 unrelated probands, including 325 with PCD and 
88 with idiopathic bronchiectasis, revealed biallelic loss-of-function mutations 
in nine additional probands. Five affected siblings of probands in RSPH1 
families harbored the familial mutations. The 16 individuals with RSPH1 
mutations had some features of PCD; however, nasal nitric oxide levels were 
higher than in patients with PCD with other gene mutations (98.3 vs. 20.7 
nl/min; P < 0.0003). Additionally, individuals with RSPH1 mutations had a lower 
prevalence (8 of 16) of neonatal respiratory distress, and later onset of daily 
wet cough than typical for PCD, and better lung function (FEV1), compared with 
75 age- and sex-matched PCD cases (73.0 vs. 61.8, FEV1 % predicted; P = 0.043). 
Cilia from individuals with RSPH1 mutations had normal beat frequency (6.1 ± Hz 
at 25°C), but an abnormal, circular beat pattern.
CONCLUSIONS: The milder clinical disease and higher nasal nitric oxide in 
individuals with biallelic mutations in RSPH1 provides evidence of a unique 
genotype-phenotype relationship in PCD, and suggests that mutations in RSPH1 may 
be associated with residual ciliary function.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201311-2047OC
PMCID: PMC3983840
PMID: 24568568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]