---
reference_id: "PMID:36755238"
title: Diagnosis delay a family of Galloway-Mowat Syndrome caused by a classical splicing mutation of Lage3.
authors:
- Chen Y
- Yang Y
- Yang Y
- Rao J
- Bai H
journal: BMC Nephrol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12882-022-03000-5
keywords:
- Male
- "Nephrotic Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Hernia, Hiatal"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- GTP-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Nephrosis
- "Microcephaly/diagnosis, genetics"
- Delayed Diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis delay a family of Galloway-Mowat Syndrome caused by a classical splicing mutation of Lage3.
**Authors:** Chen Y, Yang Y, Yang Y, Rao J, Bai H
**Journal:** BMC Nephrol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12882-022-03000-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12882-022-03000-5)

## Content

1. BMC Nephrol. 2023 Feb 8;24(1):29. doi: 10.1186/s12882-022-03000-5.

Diagnosis delay a family of Galloway-Mowat Syndrome caused by a classical
splicing mutation of Lage3.

Chen Y(1)(2)(3), Yang Y(1)(2)(3), Yang Y(1)(2)(3), Rao J(4), Bai H(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xiamen University,
Xiamen, Fujian, 361000, China.
(2)Pediatric Key Laboratory of Xiamen, Xiamen, Fujian, 361000, China.
(3)Institute of Pediatrics School of Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen,
Fujian, 361000, China.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai,
201100, China.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xiamen University,
Xiamen, Fujian, 361000, China. baihaitao@163.com.
(6)Pediatric Key Laboratory of Xiamen, Xiamen, Fujian, 361000, China.
baihaitao@163.com.
(7)Institute of Pediatrics School of Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen,
Fujian, 361000, China. baihaitao@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Galloway-Mowat syndrome (GAMOS) is a group of rare hereditary
diseases by the combination of early onset steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome
(SRNS) and microcephaly with brain anomalies caused by WDR73, LAGE3, OSGEP,
TP53RK, TPRKB, GON7, WDR4 or NUP133 mutations.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present the clinical and genetic features of a
two-year-old boy with early nephrotic syndrome, microcephaly, growth retardation
hypotonia and hypothyroidism. Genetic testing showed the presence of a
canonical-splice mutation in the LAGE3 gene (NM_006014: c.188 + 1C > T). A total
of nine female members of the family carried the variant. Seven male members
died prematurely, and three of them suffered from nephrotic syndrome, which is
consistent with the x-linked gene map of the disease. The overall symptoms of
the disease due to the LAGE3 mutation were mild compared to other pathogenic
genes.
CONCLUSION: As far as we know, this is the largest family case of GAMOS2 caused
by LAGE3 mutation found so far. We also compared other subtypes of GAMOS. Due to
the heterogeneity of the renal phenotype, regular proteinuria screening is
recommended for all patients diagnosed with GAMOS.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-022-03000-5
PMCID: PMC9909869
PMID: 36755238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
