---
reference_id: "PMID:38832153"
title: "Role of Antioxidant Vitamins in Oral Submucous Fibrosis: A Narrative Review."
authors:
- Sune RV
- Bhowate RR
- Lohe VK
- Dangore-Khasbage SB
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.59596
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of Antioxidant Vitamins in Oral Submucous Fibrosis: A Narrative Review.
**Authors:** Sune RV, Bhowate RR, Lohe VK, Dangore-Khasbage SB
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.59596](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.59596)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 May 3;16(5):e59596. doi: 10.7759/cureus.59596. eCollection 2024 
May.

Role of Antioxidant Vitamins in Oral Submucous Fibrosis: A Narrative Review.

Sune RV(1), Bhowate RR(1), Lohe VK(1), Dangore-Khasbage SB(1).

Author information:
(1)Oral Medicine and Radiology, Sharad Pawar Dental College and Hospital, Datta 
Meghe Institute of Higher Education and Research, Wardha, IND.

Oral submucous fibrosis (OSMF) has a high rate of malignant transformation and 
is an insidious chronic inflammatory disease. Though this disorder seems to be 
multifactorial in origin, betel quid chewing appears to be the main etiologic 
factor. Various treatment strategies have been attempted but none proven to cure 
the disorder because of its multimodal pathogenesis. Reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) appear to have a role in cancer formation. As OSMF is an oral premalignant 
disorder and found to be associated with carcinogens like areca nut and tobacco, 
it is believed to have some relationship with ROS. Tissue damage due to ROS 
along with other mechanisms may result in the complex pathophysiology of OSMF. 
The antioxidant system in the body helps to prevent damage caused by highly 
reactive ROS and helps in the repair of tissues. To study the levels of 
oxidative stress and antioxidant vitamins in OSMF condition, the present review 
was done. We carried out a thorough literature search to identify original 
reports and studies determining the status of oxidative stress and antioxidant 
vitamins in OSMF condition using several databases including Google Scholar, 
PubMed, and Scopus. Our review observed that the oxidative stress increased in 
the condition of OSMF as shown by an increase in malonaldehyde (MDA) and a 
decrease in antioxidant vitamins like vitamin A, vitamin C, and vitamin E. Also, 
after the intake of antioxidant vitamins, there was symptomatic improvement in 
OSMF patients. With the help of identifying oxidative stress and antioxidant 
status, we can assess the clinical stage of OSMF and can develop a comprehensive 
treatment plan.

Copyright © 2024, Sune et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.59596
PMCID: PMC11144576
PMID: 38832153

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.