---
reference_id: "PMID:15654125"
title: "Retina expresses microsomal triglyceride transfer protein: implications for age-related maculopathy."
authors:
- Li CM
- Presley JB
- Zhang X
- Dashti N
- Chung BH
- Medeiros NE
- Guidry C
- Curcio CA
journal: J Lipid Res
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1194/jlr.M400428-JLR200
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Aging/physiology
- Animals
- "Apolipoproteins B/genetics, metabolism"
- Base Sequence
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- "Macular Degeneration/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- Middle Aged
- Pigment Epithelium of Eye/metabolism
- "Retina/metabolism, pathology"
- Swine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retina expresses microsomal triglyceride transfer protein: implications for age-related maculopathy.
**Authors:** Li CM, Presley JB, Zhang X, Dashti N, Chung BH, Medeiros NE, Guidry C, Curcio CA
**Journal:** J Lipid Res (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1194/jlr.M400428-JLR200](https://doi.org/10.1194/jlr.M400428-JLR200)

## Content

1. J Lipid Res. 2005 Apr;46(4):628-40. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M400428-JLR200. Epub 2005
 Jan 16.

Retina expresses microsomal triglyceride transfer protein: implications for
age-related maculopathy.

Li CM(1), Presley JB, Zhang X, Dashti N, Chung BH, Medeiros NE, Guidry C, Curcio
CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alabama School of Medicine,
Birmingham, AL, USA.

The principal extracellular lesions of age-related maculopathy (ARM), the
leading cause of vision loss in the elderly, involve Bruch's membrane (BrM), a
thin vascular intima between the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and its blood
supply. With age, 80-100 nm solid particles containing esterified cholesterol
(EC) accumulate in normal BrM, and apolipoprotein B (apoB) immunoreactivity is
detectable in BrM- and ARM-associated lesions. Yet little evidence indicates
that increased plasma cholesterol is a risk factor for ARM. To determine if RPE
is capable of assembling its own apoB-containing lipoprotein, we examined RPE
for the expression of microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP), which is
required for this process. Consistent with previous evidence for apoB
expression, MTP is expressed in RPE, the ARPE-19 cell line, and, unexpectedly,
retinal ganglion cells, which are neurons of the central nervous system. De novo
synthesis and secretion of neutral lipid by ARPE-19 was supported by high levels
of radiolabeled EC and triglyceride in medium after supplementation with oleate.
Lipoprotein assembly and secretion is implicated as a constitutive retinal
function and a plausible candidate mechanism involved in forming extracellular
cholesterol-containing lesions in ARM. The pigmentary retinopathy and neuropathy
of abetalipoproteinemia (Mendelian Inheritance of Man 200100; Bassen-Kornzwieg
disease), which is caused by mutations in the MTP gene, may involve loss of
function at the retina.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.M400428-JLR200
PMID: 15654125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
