---
reference_id: "PMID:35289477"
title: Human cerebral organoids reveal progenitor pathology in EML1-linked cortical malformation.
authors:
- Jabali A
- Hoffrichter A
- Uzquiano A
- Marsoner F
- Wilkens R
- Siekmann M
- Bohl B
- Rossetti AC
- Horschitz S
- Koch P
- Francis F
- Ladewig J
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.15252/embr.202154027
keywords:
- Cerebral Cortex/metabolism
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- "Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Neurons/metabolism
- Organoids/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human cerebral organoids reveal progenitor pathology in EML1-linked cortical malformation.
**Authors:** Jabali A, Hoffrichter A, Uzquiano A, Marsoner F, Wilkens R, Siekmann M, Bohl B, Rossetti AC, Horschitz S, Koch P, Francis F, Ladewig J
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embr.202154027](https://doi.org/10.15252/embr.202154027)

## Content

1. EMBO Rep. 2022 May 4;23(5):e54027. doi: 10.15252/embr.202154027. Epub 2022 Mar
 15.

Human cerebral organoids reveal progenitor pathology in EML1-linked cortical
malformation.

Jabali A(1)(2)(3)(4), Hoffrichter A(1)(2)(3), Uzquiano A(5)(6)(7), Marsoner
F(1)(2)(3), Wilkens R(1)(2)(3), Siekmann M(1)(2)(3), Bohl B(1)(2)(3), Rossetti
AC(1)(2)(3), Horschitz S(1)(2)(3), Koch P(1)(2)(3), Francis F(5)(6)(7), Ladewig
J(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Medical Faculty Mannheim, Central Institute of Mental Health, Heidelberg
University, Mannheim, Germany.
(2)Hector Institute for Translational Brain Research, Mannheim, Germany.
(3)German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Reconstructive Neurobiology, School of Medicine & University
Hospital Bonn, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(5)INSERM U 1270, Paris, France.
(6)Sorbonne Université, UMR-S 1270, Paris, France.
(7)Institut du Fer à Moulin, Paris, France.

Malformations of human cortical development (MCD) can cause severe disabilities.
The lack of human-specific models hampers our understanding of the molecular
underpinnings of the intricate processes leading to MCD. Here, we use cerebral
organoids derived from patients and genome edited-induced pluripotent stem cells
to address pathophysiological changes associated with a complex MCD caused by
mutations in the echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like 1 (EML1) gene.
EML1-deficient organoids display ectopic neural rosettes at the basal side of
the ventricular zone areas and clusters of heterotopic neurons. Single-cell RNA
sequencing shows an upregulation of basal radial glial (RG) markers and
human-specific extracellular matrix components in the ectopic cell population.
Gene ontology and molecular analyses suggest that ectopic progenitor cells
originate from perturbed apical RG cell behavior and yes-associated protein 1
(YAP1)-triggered expansion. Our data highlight a progenitor origin of EML1
mutation-induced MCD and provide new mechanistic insight into the human disease
pathology.

© 2022 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY NC ND 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/embr.202154027
PMCID: PMC9066063
PMID: 35289477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
