---
reference_id: "PMID:34828280"
title: "Greig Cephalopolysyndactyly Contiguous Gene Syndrome: Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Kozma K
- Bembea M
- Jurca CM
- Ioana M
- Streață I
- Şoşoi SŞ
- Pirvu A
- Petchesi CD
- Szilágyi A
- Sava CN
- Jurca A
- Ujfalusi A
- Szűcs Z
- Szakszon K
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/genes12111674
keywords:
- Acrocephalosyndactylia/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 7/genetics"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Humans
- Karyotype
- Male
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Zinc Finger Protein Gli3/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Greig Cephalopolysyndactyly Contiguous Gene Syndrome: Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Kozma K, Bembea M, Jurca CM, Ioana M, Streață I, Şoşoi SŞ, Pirvu A, Petchesi CD, Szilágyi A, Sava CN, Jurca A, Ujfalusi A, Szűcs Z, Szakszon K
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes12111674](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12111674)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Oct 23;12(11):1674. doi: 10.3390/genes12111674.

Greig Cephalopolysyndactyly Contiguous Gene Syndrome: Case Report and Literature 
Review.

Kozma K(1)(2)(3), Bembea M(1)(2)(3), Jurca CM(1)(2)(3), Ioana M(4)(5), Streață 
I(4)(5), Şoşoi SŞ(4)(5), Pirvu A(4)(5), Petchesi CD(1), Szilágyi A(1)(3), Sava 
CN(1)(3), Jurca A(1), Ujfalusi A(6), Szűcs Z(6), Szakszon K(7).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, University of Oradea, 410073 Oradea, 
Romania.
(2)Regional Center of Medical Genetics Bihor, 410445 Oradea, Romania.
(3)Municipal Clinical Hospital "Dr. Gavril Curteanu", 410469 Oradea, Romania.
(4)Regional Center of Medical Genetics Dolj, 200349 Craiova, Romania.
(5)Human Genomics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy Craiova, 200642 Craiova, Romania.
(6)Division of Clinical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Departament of Laboratory 
Medicine, University of Debrecen, 4032 Debrecen, Hungary.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, Departament of Pediatrics, University of Debrecen, 4032 
Debrecen, Hungary.

Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) is a rare genetic disorder (about 
200 cases reported), characterized by macrocephaly, hypertelorism, and 
polysyndactyly. Most of the reported GCPS cases are the results of heterozygous 
loss of function mutations affecting the GLI3 gene (OMIM# 175700), while a small 
proportion of cases arise from large deletions on chromosome 7p14 encompassing 
the GLI3 gene. To our knowledge, only 6 patients have been reported to have a 
deletion with an exact size (given by genomic coordinates) and a gene content 
larger than 1 Mb involving the GLI3 gene. This report presents a patient with 
Greig cephalopolysyndactyly contiguous gene syndrome (GCP-CGS) diagnosed with a 
large, 18 Mb deletion on chromosome 7p14.2-p11.2. Similar cases are reviewed in 
the literature for a more accurate comparison between genotype and phenotype.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12111674
PMCID: PMC8623992
PMID: 34828280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.