---
reference_id: "PMID:23986440"
title: "Arylsulfatase K, a novel lysosomal sulfatase."
authors:
- Wiegmann EM
- Westendorf E
- Kalus I
- Pringle TH
- Lübke T
- Dierks T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.499541
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arylsulfatase K, a novel lysosomal sulfatase.
**Authors:** Wiegmann EM, Westendorf E, Kalus I, Pringle TH, Lübke T, Dierks T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.499541](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.499541)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 18;288(42):30019-30028. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.499541.
Epub  2013 Aug 28.

Arylsulfatase K, a novel lysosomal sulfatase.

Wiegmann EM(1), Westendorf E(1), Kalus I(1), Pringle TH(2), Lübke T(1), Dierks 
T(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Chemistry, Biochemistry I, Bielefeld University, 33615 
Bielefeld, Germany and.
(2)the Sperling Foundation, Eugene, Oregon 97405.
(3)From the Department of Chemistry, Biochemistry I, Bielefeld University, 33615 
Bielefeld, Germany and. Electronic address: thomas.dierks@uni-bielefeld.de.

The human sulfatase family has 17 members, 13 of which have been characterized 
biochemically. These enzymes specifically hydrolyze sulfate esters in 
glycosaminoglycans, sulfolipids, or steroid sulfates, thereby playing key roles 
in cellular degradation, cell signaling, and hormone regulation. The loss of 
sulfatase activity has been linked to severe pathophysiological conditions such 
as lysosomal storage disorders, developmental abnormalities, or cancer. A novel 
member of this family, arylsulfatase K (ARSK), was identified bioinformatically 
through its conserved sulfatase signature sequence directing posttranslational 
generation of the catalytic formylglycine residue in sulfatases. However, 
overall sequence identity of ARSK with other human sulfatases is low (18-22%). 
Here we demonstrate that ARSK indeed shows desulfation activity toward 
arylsulfate pseudosubstrates. When expressed in human cells, ARSK was detected 
as a 68-kDa glycoprotein carrying at least four N-glycans of both the complex 
and high-mannose type. Purified ARSK turned over p-nitrocatechol and 
p-nitrophenyl sulfate. This activity was dependent on cysteine 80, which was 
verified to undergo conversion to formylglycine. Kinetic parameters were similar 
to those of several lysosomal sulfatases involved in degradation of sulfated 
glycosaminoglycans. An acidic pH optimum (~4.6) and colocalization with LAMP1 
verified lysosomal functioning of ARSK. Further, it carries mannose 6-phosphate, 
indicating lysosomal sorting via mannose 6-phosphate receptors. ARSK mRNA 
expression was found in all tissues tested, suggesting a ubiquitous 
physiological substrate and a so far non-classified lysosomal storage disorder 
in the case of ARSK deficiency, as shown before for all other lysosomal 
sulfatases.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.499541
PMCID: PMC3798471
PMID: 23986440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]