---
reference_id: "PMID:29538225"
title: "Interventional vitamin C: A strategy for attenuation of coagulopathy and inflammation in a swine multiple injuries model."
authors:
- Reynolds PS
- Fisher BJ
- McCarter J
- Sweeney C
- Martin EJ
- Middleton P
- Ellenberg M
- Fowler E
- Brophy DF
- Fowler AA 3rd
- Spiess BD
- Natarajan R
journal: J Trauma Acute Care Surg
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/TA.0000000000001844
keywords:
- Animals
- Male
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Anticoagulants/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Ascorbic Acid/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Blood Coagulation Disorders/drug therapy, etiology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Inflammation/drug therapy, etiology"
- "Multiple Trauma/complications, therapy"
- Random Allocation
- Resuscitation/methods
- "Shock, Hemorrhagic/etiology, therapy"
- Swine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interventional vitamin C: A strategy for attenuation of coagulopathy and inflammation in a swine multiple injuries model.
**Authors:** Reynolds PS, Fisher BJ, McCarter J, Sweeney C, Martin EJ, Middleton P, Ellenberg M, Fowler E, Brophy DF, Fowler AA 3rd, Spiess BD, Natarajan R
**Journal:** J Trauma Acute Care Surg (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/TA.0000000000001844](https://doi.org/10.1097/TA.0000000000001844)

## Content

1. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2018 Jul;85(1S Suppl 2):S57-S67. doi:
10.1097/TA.0000000000001844.

Interventional vitamin C: A strategy for attenuation of coagulopathy and
inflammation in a swine multiple injuries model.

Reynolds PS(1), Fisher BJ, McCarter J, Sweeney C, Martin EJ, Middleton P,
Ellenberg M, Fowler E, Brophy DF, Fowler AA 3rd, Spiess BD, Natarajan R.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Anesthesiology (P.S.R., B.D.S.), Department of
Internal Medicine (B.J.F., J.M., C.S., P.M., M.E., E.F., A.A.F., R.N.),
Department of Pharmacotherapy and Outcomes Science (E.J.M., D.F.B.), Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia; Department of Anesthesiology
(P.S.R., B.D.S.), University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; and Naval Medical
Center Portsmouth (R.N.), Portsmouth, Virginia.

BACKGROUND: Coagulopathy and inflammation induced by hemorrhagic shock and
traumatic injury are associated with increased mortality and morbidity. Vitamin
C (VitC) is an antioxidant with potential protective effects on the
proinflammatory and procoagulant pathways. We hypothesized that high-dose VitC
administered as a supplement to fluid resuscitation would attenuate
inflammation, coagulation dysfunction, and end-organ tissue damage in a swine
model of multiple injuries and hemorrhage.
METHODS: Male Sinclair swine (n = 24; mean body weight, 27 kg) were
anesthetized, intubated, mechanically ventilated, and instrumented for
physiologic monitoring. Following stabilization, swine were subjected to
shock/traumatic injury (hypothermia, liver ischemia and reperfusion, comminuted
femur fracture, hemorrhagic hypotension), resuscitated with 500 mL of
hydroxyethyl starch, and randomized to receive either intravenous normal saline
(NS), low-dose VitC (50 mg/kg; LO), or high-dose VitC (200 mg/kg; HI).
Hemodynamics, blood chemistry, hematology, and coagulation function (ROTEM) were
monitored to 4 hours postresuscitation. Histological and molecular analyses were
obtained for liver, kidney, and lung.
RESULTS: Compared with VitC animals, NS swine showed significant histological
end-organ damage, elevated acute lung injury scores, and increased mRNA
expression of tissue proinflammatory mediators (IL-1β, IL-8, TNFα), plasminogen
activation inhibitor-1 and tissue factor. There were no statistically
significant differences between treatment groups on mean arterial pressure or
univariate measures of coagulation function; however, NS showed impaired
multivariate clotting function at 4 hours.
CONCLUSION: Although correction of coagulation dysfunction was modest,
intravenous high-dose VitC may mitigate the proinflammatory/procoagulant
response that contributes to multiple organ failure following acute severe
multiple injuries.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Prospective randomized controlled blinded trial study,
Preclinical (animal-based).

DOI: 10.1097/TA.0000000000001844
PMID: 29538225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
