---
reference_id: "PMID:30711487"
title: Complement Factor H Mutation W1206R Causes Retinal Thrombosis and Ischemic Retinopathy in Mice.
authors:
- Song D
- Ueda Y
- Bhuyan R
- Mohammed I
- Miwa T
- Gullipali D
- Kim H
- Zhou L
- Song Y
- Schultz H
- Bargoud A
- Dunaief JL
- Song WC
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2019.01.009
keywords:
- Animals
- "Complement Factor H/genetics, physiology"
- "Ischemia/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Retinal Diseases/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Retinal Pigment Epithelium/metabolism, pathology"
- "Thrombosis/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complement Factor H Mutation W1206R Causes Retinal Thrombosis and Ischemic Retinopathy in Mice.
**Authors:** Song D, Ueda Y, Bhuyan R, Mohammed I, Miwa T, Gullipali D, Kim H, Zhou L, Song Y, Schultz H, Bargoud A, Dunaief JL, Song WC
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajpath.2019.01.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2019.01.009)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 2019 Apr;189(4):826-838. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2019.01.009. Epub
2019 Feb 1.

Complement Factor H Mutation W1206R Causes Retinal Thrombosis and Ischemic
Retinopathy in Mice.

Song D(1), Ueda Y(2), Bhuyan R(1), Mohammed I(2), Miwa T(2), Gullipali D(2), Kim
H(2), Zhou L(2), Song Y(1), Schultz H(1), Bargoud A(1), Dunaief JL(3), Song
WC(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Scheie Eye Institute, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Scheie Eye Institute, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Electronic
address: jdunaief@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(4)Department of Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Electronic address: songwe@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

Single-nucleotide polymorphisms and rare mutations in factor H (FH; official
name, CFH) are associated with age-related macular degeneration and atypical
hemolytic uremic syndrome, a form of thrombotic microangiopathy. Mice with the
FH W1206R mutation (FHR/R) share features with human atypical hemolytic uremic
syndrome. Herein, we report that FHR/R mice exhibited retinal vascular occlusion
and ischemia. Retinal fluorescein angiography demonstrated delayed perfusion and
vascular leakage in FHR/R mice. Optical coherence tomography imaging of FHR/R
mice showed retinal degeneration, edema, and detachment. Histologic analysis of
FHR/R mice revealed retinal thinning, vessel occlusion, as well as degeneration
of photoreceptors and retinal pigment epithelium. Immunofluorescence showed
albumin leakage from blood vessels into the neural retina, and electron
microscopy demonstrated vascular endothelial cell irregularity with narrowing of
retinal and choroidal vessels. Knockout of C6, a component of the membrane
attack complex, prevented the aforementioned retinal phenotype in FHR/R mice,
consistent with membrane attack complex-mediated pathogenesis. Pharmacologic
blockade of C5 also rescued retinas of FHR/R mice. This FHR/R mouse strain
represents a model for retinal vascular occlusive disorders and ischemic
retinopathy. The results suggest complement dysregulation can contribute to
retinal vascular occlusion and that an anti-C5 antibody might be helpful for
C5-mediated thrombotic retinal diseases.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2019.01.009
PMCID: PMC6458521
PMID: 30711487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
