---
reference_id: "PMID:17062749"
title: Characterization of fibroblasts with Son of Sevenless-1 mutation.
authors:
- Lee EJ
- Jang SI
- Pallos D
- Kather J
- Hart TC
journal: J Dent Res
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1177/154405910608501115
keywords:
- Adult
- Case-Control Studies
- Cell Adhesion
- Cell Proliferation
- Collagen/chemistry
- Extracellular Matrix/pathology
- Fibroblasts/pathology
- "Fibromatosis, Gingival/genetics, pathology"
- Frameshift Mutation
- G2 Phase
- "Gingiva/cytology, pathology"
- Humans
- S Phase
- SOS1 Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of fibroblasts with Son of Sevenless-1 mutation.
**Authors:** Lee EJ, Jang SI, Pallos D, Kather J, Hart TC
**Journal:** J Dent Res (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1177/154405910608501115](https://doi.org/10.1177/154405910608501115)

## Content

1. J Dent Res. 2006 Nov;85(11):1050-5. doi: 10.1177/154405910608501115.

Characterization of fibroblasts with Son of Sevenless-1 mutation.

Lee EJ(1), Jang SI, Pallos D, Kather J, Hart TC.

Author information:
(1)Human Craniofacial Genetics Section, NIDCR, National Institutes of Health, 
DHHS, Building 10, Room 5-2523, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Although non-syndromic hereditary gingival fibromatosis (HGF) is genetically 
heterogeneous, etiologic mutations have been identified only in the Son of 
Sevenless-1 gene (SOS1). To test evidence of increased cell proliferation, we 
studied histological, morphological, and proliferation characteristics in 
monolayer and three-dimensional cultures of fibroblasts with the SOS1 
g.126,142-126,143insC mutation. Histological assessment of HGF gingiva indicated 
increased numbers of fibroblasts (30%) and increased collagen (10%). Cell 
proliferation studies demonstrated increased growth rates and 
5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine incorporation for HGF fibroblasts. Flow cytometry showed 
greater proportions of HGF fibroblasts in the G2/M phase. Attachment of HGF 
fibroblasts to different extracellular matrix surfaces demonstrated increased 
formation of protrusions with lamellipodia. HGF fibroblasts in three-dimensional 
culture showed greater cell proliferation, higher cell density, and alteration 
of surrounding collagen matrix. These findings revealed that increased 
fibroblast numbers and collagen matrix changes are associated with mutation of 
the SOS1 gene in vitro and in vivo.

DOI: 10.1177/154405910608501115
PMCID: PMC2248237
PMID: 17062749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]