---
reference_id: "PMID:38401035"
title: "Neutrophil extracellular traps: a catalyst for atherosclerosis."
authors:
- Wang Y
- Wang C
- Li J
journal: Mol Cell Biochem
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11010-024-04931-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neutrophil extracellular traps: a catalyst for atherosclerosis.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Wang C, Li J
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biochem (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11010-024-04931-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11010-024-04931-3)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Biochem. 2024 Dec;479(12):3213-3227. doi: 10.1007/s11010-024-04931-3.
 Epub 2024 Feb 24.

Neutrophil extracellular traps: a catalyst for atherosclerosis.

Wang Y(1), Wang C(2), Li J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University, 
Zhenjiang, China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University, 
Zhenjiang, China. wangcuipingpeople@hotmail.com.

Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) are network-like structures released by 
activated neutrophils. They consist mainly of double-stranded DNA, histones, and 
neutrophil granule proteins. Continuous release of NETs in response to external 
stimuli leads to activation of surrounding platelets and monocytes/macrophages, 
resulting in damage to endothelial cells (EC) and vascular smooth muscle cells 
(VSMC). Some clinical trials have demonstrated the association between NETs and 
the severity and prognosis of atherosclerosis. Furthermore, experimental 
findings have shed light on the molecular mechanisms by which NETs contribute to 
atherogenesis. NETs play a significant role in the formation of atherosclerotic 
plaques. This review focuses on recent advancements in the understanding of the 
relationship between NETs and atherosclerosis. It explores various aspects, 
including the formation of NETs in atherosclerosis, clinical trials 
investigating NET-induced atherosclerosis, the mechanisms by which NETs promote 
atherogenesis, and the translational implications of NETs. Ultimately, we aim to 
propose new research directions for the diagnosis and treatment of 
atherosclerosis.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11010-024-04931-3
PMID: 38401035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]