---
reference_id: "PMID:29101553"
title: Treatment Options for Resistant Kawasaki Disease.
authors:
- Phuong LK
- Curtis N
- Gowdie P
- Akikusa J
- Burgner D
journal: Paediatr Drugs
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s40272-017-0269-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment Options for Resistant Kawasaki Disease.
**Authors:** Phuong LK, Curtis N, Gowdie P, Akikusa J, Burgner D
**Journal:** Paediatr Drugs (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40272-017-0269-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40272-017-0269-6)

## Content

1. Paediatr Drugs. 2018 Feb;20(1):59-80. doi: 10.1007/s40272-017-0269-6.

Treatment Options for Resistant Kawasaki Disease.

Phuong LK(1), Curtis N(1)(2), Gowdie P(3)(4)(5), Akikusa J(3)(6), Burgner 
D(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Diseases Unit, Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne, Parkville, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.
(3)Rheumatology Service, Department of General Medicine, Royal Children's 
Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.
(4)Department of Paediatrics and Department of Paediatric Rheumatology, Monash 
Children's Hospital, Clayton, Australia.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
(6)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne, 
Flemington Road, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia.
(7)Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia. 
david.burgner@mcri.edu.au.
(8)Department of Paediatrics, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia. 
david.burgner@mcri.edu.au.
(9)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne, 
Flemington Road, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia. david.burgner@mcri.edu.au.

"Resistant" Kawasaki disease is defined by the American Heart Association as 
failure to respond within 36 h following the first dose of intravenous 
immunoglobulin. The optimal management of resistant Kawasaki disease remains 
uncertain, the outcomes are potentially serious, and the cost of some treatments 
is considerable. We review the current evidence to guide treatment of resistant 
Kawasaki disease. Given the relative rarity, there are few trial data, and 
studies tend to be small and methodologically heterogeneous, making 
interpretation difficult and limiting generalisability. The literature on 
resistant Kawasaki disease should be interpreted with reference to current 
expert consensus guidelines.

DOI: 10.1007/s40272-017-0269-6
PMID: 29101553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]