---
reference_id: "PMID:28506760"
title: "Patients double-seropositive for ANCA and anti-GBM antibodies have varied renal survival, frequency of relapse, and outcomes compared to single-seropositive patients."
authors:
- McAdoo SP
- Tanna A
- Hrušková Z
- Holm L
- Weiner M
- Arulkumaran N
- Kang A
- Satrapová V
- Levy J
- Ohlsson S
- Tesar V
- Segelmark M
- Pusey CD
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2017.03.014
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Anti-Glomerular Basement Membrane Disease/blood, immunology, mortality, therapy"
- "Anti-Neutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibody-Associated Vasculitis/blood, immunology, mortality, therapy"
- "Antibodies, Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic/blood"
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Child
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Hemorrhage/immunology
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- "Kidney/immunology, pathology"
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/blood, immunology, mortality, therapy"
- Lung Diseases/immunology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Recurrence
- Renal Dialysis
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patients double-seropositive for ANCA and anti-GBM antibodies have varied renal survival, frequency of relapse, and outcomes compared to single-seropositive patients.
**Authors:** McAdoo SP, Tanna A, Hrušková Z, Holm L, Weiner M, Arulkumaran N, Kang A, Satrapová V, Levy J, Ohlsson S, Tesar V, Segelmark M, Pusey CD
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.kint.2017.03.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2017.03.014)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2017 Sep;92(3):693-702. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2017.03.014. Epub 2017
 May 12.

Patients double-seropositive for ANCA and anti-GBM antibodies have varied renal 
survival, frequency of relapse, and outcomes compared to single-seropositive 
patients.

McAdoo SP(1), Tanna A(2), Hrušková Z(3), Holm L(4), Weiner M(5), Arulkumaran 
N(2), Kang A(2), Satrapová V(3), Levy J(2), Ohlsson S(4), Tesar V(3), Segelmark 
M(5), Pusey CD(2).

Author information:
(1)Renal and Vascular Inflammation Section, Department of Medicine, Imperial 
College London, London, UK. Electronic address: s.mcadoo@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Renal and Vascular Inflammation Section, Department of Medicine, Imperial 
College London, London, UK.
(3)Department of Nephrology, General University Hospital, Prague and First 
Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Nephrology and Transplantation, Skånes University Hospital, 
Lund, Sweden.
(5)Department of Nephrology and Department of Medical and Health Sciences, 
Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2017 Sep;92(3):544-546. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2017.04.024.

Co-presentation with both ANCA and anti-GBM antibodies is thought to be 
relatively rare. Current studies of such 'double-positive' cases report small 
numbers and variable outcomes. To study this further we retrospectively analyzed 
clinical features and long-term outcomes of a large cohort of 568 contemporary 
patients with ANCA-associated vasculitis, 41 patients with anti-GBM disease, and 
37 double-positive patients with ANCA and anti-GBM disease from four European 
centers. Double-positive patients shared characteristics of ANCA-associated 
vasculitis (AAV), such as older age distribution and longer symptom duration 
before diagnosis, and features of anti-GBM disease, such as severe renal disease 
and high frequency of lung hemorrhage at presentation. Despite having more 
evidence of chronic injury on renal biopsy compared to patients with anti-GBM 
disease, double-positive patients had a greater tendency to recover from being 
dialysis-dependent after treatment and had intermediate long-term renal survival 
compared to the single-positive patients. However, overall patient survival was 
similar in all three groups. Predictors of poor patient survival included 
advanced age, severe renal failure, and lung hemorrhage at presentation. No 
single-positive anti-GBM patients experienced disease relapse, whereas 
approximately half of surviving patients with AAV and double-positive patients 
had recurrent disease during a median follow-up of 4.8 years. Thus, 
double-positive patients have a truly hybrid disease phenotype, requiring 
aggressive early treatment for anti-GBM disease, and careful long-term follow-up 
and consideration for maintenance immunosuppression for AAV. Since 
double-positivity appears common, further work is required to define the 
underlying mechanisms of this association and define optimum treatment 
strategies.

Copyright © 2017 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2017.03.014
PMCID: PMC5567410
PMID: 28506760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]