---
reference_id: "PMID:39996743"
title: "Fibromyalgia and Inflammation: Unrevealing the Connection."
authors:
- García-Domínguez M
journal: Cells
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/cells14040271
keywords:
- Humans
- "Fibromyalgia/pathology, physiopathology, immunology, complications"
- "Inflammation/complications, pathology"
- Animals
- Cytokines/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibromyalgia and Inflammation: Unrevealing the Connection.
**Authors:** García-Domínguez M
**Journal:** Cells (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells14040271](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells14040271)

## Content

1. Cells. 2025 Feb 13;14(4):271. doi: 10.3390/cells14040271.

Fibromyalgia and Inflammation: Unrevealing the Connection.

García-Domínguez M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Program of Immunology and Immunotherapy, CIMA-Universidad de Navarra, 31008 
Pamplona, Spain.
(2)Department of Immunology and Immunotherapy, Clínica Universidad de Navarra, 
31008 Pamplona, Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), 28029 Madrid, 
Spain.

Fibromyalgia represents a chronic pain pathology characterized by severe 
musculoskeletal pain, fatigue, disturbances in sleep, and cognitive issues. 
Despite its presence, the underlying mechanisms of fibromyalgia remain 
inadequately understood; however, recent investigations have suggested that 
inflammation could play a fundamental role in the pathophysiology of this 
condition. Several studies highlight elevated concentrations of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines, dysregulation of immune responses, and neuroinflammation in 
fibromyalgia patients. Furthermore, chronic low-grade inflammation has been 
proposed as a potential catalyst for the sensitization of pain pathways, which 
exacerbates the symptoms of fibromyalgia. Understanding the role of inflammation 
in this disease might open new avenues for therapeutic interventions while 
providing a more profound insight into the complex nature of this debilitating 
disorder. Although progress has been made, further research is needed to uncover 
the complexities involved. This review investigates the intricate relationship 
between inflammation and fibromyalgia, analyzing the evidence that supports the 
involvement of both peripheral and central inflammatory processes in the onset 
and persistence of the disorder.

DOI: 10.3390/cells14040271
PMCID: PMC11853252
PMID: 39996743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflicts of interest.