---
reference_id: "PMID:21030674"
title: High responders to resistance exercise training demonstrate differential regulation of skeletal muscle microRNA expression.
authors:
- Davidsen PK
- Gallagher IJ
- Hartman JW
- Tarnopolsky MA
- Dela F
- Helge JW
- Timmons JA
- Phillips SM
journal: J Appl Physiol (1985)
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00901.2010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High responders to resistance exercise training demonstrate differential regulation of skeletal muscle microRNA expression.
**Authors:** Davidsen PK, Gallagher IJ, Hartman JW, Tarnopolsky MA, Dela F, Helge JW, Timmons JA, Phillips SM
**Journal:** J Appl Physiol (1985) (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1152/japplphysiol.00901.2010](https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.00901.2010)

## Content

1. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2011 Feb;110(2):309-17. doi: 
10.1152/japplphysiol.00901.2010. Epub 2010 Oct 28.

High responders to resistance exercise training demonstrate differential 
regulation of skeletal muscle microRNA expression.

Davidsen PK(1), Gallagher IJ, Hartman JW, Tarnopolsky MA, Dela F, Helge JW, 
Timmons JA, Phillips SM.

Author information:
(1)The Royal Veterinary College, 4 Royal College St., Univ. of London, London 
NW1 0TU, UK. Jamie.Timmons@gmail.com.

Comment in
    J Appl Physiol (1985). 2011 Feb;110(2):301-2. doi: 
10.1152/japplphysiol.01330.2010.

MicroRNAs (miRNA), small noncoding RNA molecules, may regulate protein 
synthesis, while resistance exercise training (RT) is an efficient strategy for 
stimulating muscle protein synthesis in vivo. However, RT increases muscle mass, 
with a very wide range of effectiveness in humans. We therefore determined the 
expression level of 21 abundant miRNAs to determine whether variation in these 
miRNAs was able to explain the variation in RT-induced gains in muscle mass. 
Vastus lateralis biopsies were obtained from the top and bottom ∼20% of 
responders from 56 young men who undertook a 5 day/wk RT program for 12 wk. 
Training-induced muscle mass gain was determined by dual-energy X-ray 
absorptiometry, and fiber size was evaluated by histochemistry. The expression 
level of each miRNA was quantified using TaqMan-based quantitative PCR, with the 
analysis carried out in a blinded manner. Gene ontology and target gene 
profiling were used to predict the potential biological implications. Of the 21 
mature miRNAs examined, 17 were stable during RT in both groups. However, 
miR-378, miR-29a, miR-26a, and miR-451 were differentially expressed between low 
and high responders. miR-378, miR-29a, and miR-26a were downregulated in low 
responders and unchanged in high responders, while miR-451 was upregulated only 
in low responders. Interestingly, the training-induced change in miR-378 
abundance was positively correlated with muscle mass gains in vivo. Gene 
ontology analysis of the target gene list of miR-378, miR-29a, miR-26a, and 
miR-451, from the weighted cumulative context ranking methodology, indicated 
that miRNA changes in the low responders may be compensatory, reflecting a 
failure to "activate" growth and remodeling genes. We report, for the first 
time, that RT-induced hypertrophy in human skeletal muscle is associated with 
selected changes in miRNA abundance. Our analysis indicates that miRNAs may play 
a role in the phenotypic change and pronounced intergroup variation in the RT 
response.

DOI: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00901.2010
PMID: 21030674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]