---
reference_id: "PMID:19399811"
title: "Hepatitis B: the virus and disease."
authors:
- Liang TJ
journal: Hepatology
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/hep.22881
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B: the virus and disease.
**Authors:** Liang TJ
**Journal:** Hepatology (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/hep.22881](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.22881)

## Content

1. Hepatology. 2009 May;49(5 Suppl):S13-21. doi: 10.1002/hep.22881.

Hepatitis B: the virus and disease.

Liang TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Liver Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infects more than 300 million people worldwide and is a 
common cause of liver disease and liver cancer. HBV, a member of the 
Hepadnaviridae family, is a small DNA virus with unusual features similar to 
retroviruses. HBV replicates through an RNA intermediate and can integrate into 
the host genome. The unique features of the HBV replication cycle confer a 
distinct ability of the virus to persist in infected cells. Virological and 
serological assays have been developed for diagnosis of various forms of 
HBV-associated disease and for treatment of chronic hepatitis B infection. HBV 
infection leads to a wide spectrum of liver disease ranging from acute 
(including fulminant hepatic failure) to chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis, and 
hepatocellular carcinoma. Acute HBV infection can be either asymptomatic or 
present with symptomatic acute hepatitis. Most adults infected with the virus 
recover, but 5%-10% are unable to clear the virus and become chronically 
infected. Many chronically infected persons have mild liver disease with little 
or no long-term morbidity or mortality. Other individuals with chronic HBV 
infection develop active disease, which can progress to cirrhosis and liver 
cancer. These patients require careful monitoring and warrant therapeutic 
intervention. Extrahepatic manifestations of HBV infection are rare but can be 
difficult to diagnose and manage. The challenges in the area of HBV-associated 
disease are the lack of knowledge in predicting outcome and progression of HBV 
infection and an unmet need to understand the molecular, cellular, 
immunological, and genetic basis of various disease manifestations associated 
with HBV infection.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.22881
PMCID: PMC2809016
PMID: 19399811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflict of interest: Nothing to 
report.