---
reference_id: "PMID:18599376"
title: "The genetic basis of inherited anomalies of the teeth. Part 2: syndromes with significant dental involvement."
authors:
- Bailleul-Forestier I
- Berdal A
- Vinckier F
- de Ravel T
- Fryns JP
- Verloes A
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2008.05.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The genetic basis of inherited anomalies of the teeth. Part 2: syndromes with significant dental involvement.
**Authors:** Bailleul-Forestier I, Berdal A, Vinckier F, de Ravel T, Fryns JP, Verloes A
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2008.05.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2008.05.003)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2008 Sep-Oct;51(5):383-408. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2008.05.003. 
Epub 2008 May 23.

The genetic basis of inherited anomalies of the teeth. Part 2: syndromes with 
significant dental involvement.

Bailleul-Forestier I(1), Berdal A, Vinckier F, de Ravel T, Fryns JP, Verloes A.

Author information:
(1)Paediatric Dentistry Department, Paris 7 University; AP-HP, Hôtel-Dieu, 
Garancière, Paris, France. isabelle.bailleul@univ-paris-diderot.fr

Teeth are specialized structural components of the craniofacial skeleton. 
Developmental defects occur either alone or in combination with other birth 
defects. In this paper, we review the dental anomalies in several multiple 
congenital anomaly (MCA) syndromes, in which the dental component is pivotal in 
the recognition of the phenotype and/or the molecular basis of the disorder is 
known. We will consider successively syndromic forms of amelogenesis imperfecta 
or enamel defects, dentinogenesis imperfecta (i.e. osteogenesis imperfecta) and 
other dentine anomalies. Focusing on dental aspects, we will review a selection 
of MCA syndromes associated with teeth number and/or shape anomalies. A better 
knowledge of the dental phenotype may contribute to an earlier diagnosis of some 
MCA syndromes involving teeth anomalies. They may serve as a diagnostic 
indicator or help confirm a syndrome diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2008.05.003
PMID: 18599376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]