---
reference_id: "PMID:21146417"
title: Antley-Bixler-syndrome--staged management of craniofacial malformations from birth to adolescence--a case report.
authors:
- Adolphs N
- Klein M
- Haberl EJ
- Graul-Neumann L
- Menneking H
- Hoffmeister B
journal: J Craniomaxillofac Surg
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcms.2010.10.026
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Antley-Bixler Syndrome Phenotype/pathology, surgery"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Orthognathic Surgical Procedures
- "Osteogenesis, Distraction"
- Patient Care Team
- Radiography
- "Skull/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- "Surgery, Computer-Assisted"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antley-Bixler-syndrome--staged management of craniofacial malformations from birth to adolescence--a case report.
**Authors:** Adolphs N, Klein M, Haberl EJ, Graul-Neumann L, Menneking H, Hoffmeister B
**Journal:** J Craniomaxillofac Surg (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcms.2010.10.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcms.2010.10.026)

## Content

1. J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2011 Oct;39(7):487-95. doi:
10.1016/j.jcms.2010.10.026.  Epub 2010 Dec 10.

Antley-Bixler-syndrome--staged management of craniofacial malformations from 
birth to adolescence--a case report.

Adolphs N(1), Klein M, Haberl EJ, Graul-Neumann L, Menneking H, Hoffmeister B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Surgical Robotics and 
Navigation, Universitätsmedizin Berlin Charité, Campus Virchow-Klinikum, 
Augustenburger Platz 1, Berlin, Germany. nicolai.adolphs@charite.de

In 1975 Antley and Bixler described an unusual syndromal disorder consisting of 
complex craniosynostosis with midfacial hypoplasia, dysplasia of ears and nose, 
radiohumeral synostosis, congenital fractures of the femur and upper airway 
impairment in a newborn. Additional urogenital and cardiac malformations can be 
associated however diagnosis is based on a characteristic craniofacial deformity 
in association with humeroradial synostosis. Complex disturbance of craniofacial 
growth due to premature synostoses of the cranial base and vault results in a 
characteristic phenotype. Steroidogenesis due to intrinsic or extrinsic 
disturbance by maternal fluconazole ingestion during early pregnancy may be 
impaired. The mode of inheritance is supposed to be autosomal recessive. 
Mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) as well as 
mutations in the cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase (OR) gene have been verified. 
Like in other craniofacial dysostosis syndromes malformation of neuro- and 
viscerocranium is complex and requires a staged age- and growth-related 
interdisciplinary management with respect to the individual situation. This case 
report of a female patient born in 1994 suffering from that rare syndrome 
describes the interdisciplinary long-term management in one craniofacial centre 
over 16 years from birth to adolescence.

Copyright © 2010 European Association for Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery. 
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcms.2010.10.026
PMID: 21146417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]