---
reference_id: "PMID:32493403"
title: "Fetal goiter identified in a pregnant woman with triiodothyronine-predominant graves' disease: a case report."
authors:
- Fujishima A
- Sato A
- Miura H
- Shimoda Y
- Kameyama S
- Ariake C
- Adachi H
- Fukuoka Y
- Terada Y
journal: BMC Pregnancy Childbirth
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s12884-020-03035-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fetal goiter identified in a pregnant woman with triiodothyronine-predominant graves' disease: a case report.
**Authors:** Fujishima A, Sato A, Miura H, Shimoda Y, Kameyama S, Ariake C, Adachi H, Fukuoka Y, Terada Y
**Journal:** BMC Pregnancy Childbirth (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12884-020-03035-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-020-03035-2)

## Content

1. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2020 Jun 3;20(1):344. doi:
10.1186/s12884-020-03035-2.

Fetal goiter identified in a pregnant woman with triiodothyronine-predominant 
graves' disease: a case report.

Fujishima A(1), Sato A(2)(3), Miura H(2), Shimoda Y(2), Kameyama S(2), Ariake 
C(2), Adachi H(4), Fukuoka Y(5), Terada Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Akita University Hospital, 1-1-1 
Hondo, Akita, 010-8543, Japan. fujishimaa@med.akita-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Akita University Hospital, 1-1-1 
Hondo, Akita, 010-8543, Japan.
(3)Perinatal Medical Center, Japanese Red Cross Akita Hospital, Akita, Japan.
(4)Department of Neonatal Medicine, Akita University Hospital, Akita, Japan.
(5)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Akita University Hospital, Akita, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Approximately 10% of all Graves' disease cases are triiodothyronine 
(T3)-predominant. T3-predominance is characterized by higher T3 levels than 
thyroxine (T4) levels. Thyroid stimulating hormone receptor autoantibody (TRAb) 
levels are higher in T3-predominant Graves' disease cases than in 
non-T3-predominant Graves' disease cases. Treatment with oral drugs is 
difficult. Here, we report a case of fetal goiter in a pregnant woman with 
T3-predominant Graves' disease.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 31-year-old woman had unstable thyroid function during the 
third trimester of pregnancy, making it impossible to reduce her dosage of 
antithyroid medication. She was admitted to our hospital at 34 weeks of 
gestation owing to hydramnios and signs of threatened premature labor, and fetal 
goiter (thyromegaly) was detected. The dose of her antithyroid medication was 
reduced, based on the assumption that it had migrated to the fetus. 
Subsequently, the fetal goiter decreased in size, and the hydramnios improved. 
The patient underwent elective cesarean delivery at 36 weeks and 5 days of 
gestation. The infant presented with temporary symptoms of hyperthyroidism that 
improved over time.
CONCLUSIONS: The recommended perinatal management of Graves' disease is to 
adjust free T4 within a range from the upper limit of normal to a slightly 
elevated level in order to maintain the thyroid function of the fetus. However, 
in T3-predominant cases, free T4 levels may drop during the long-term course of 
the pregnancy owing to attempts to control the mother's symptoms of 
thyrotoxicosis. Little is known about the perinatal management and appropriate 
therapeutic strategy for T3-predominant cases and fetal goiter. Therefore, 
further investigation is necessary.

DOI: 10.1186/s12884-020-03035-2
PMCID: PMC7268772
PMID: 32493403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.