---
reference_id: "PMID:12639997"
title: Immunization with neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor induces neurological autoimmune disease.
authors:
- Lennon VA
- Ermilov LG
- Szurszewski JH
- Vernino S
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1172/JCI17429
keywords:
- Animals
- Autoantibodies/blood
- "Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/complications, etiology"
- "Autonomic Nervous System Diseases/complications, etiology"
- "Carcinoma, Small Cell/complications"
- Eye Diseases/etiology
- Female
- "Ganglia, Autonomic/physiopathology"
- Humans
- Immunization
- Lung Neoplasms/complications
- Rabbits
- "Receptors, Nicotinic/analysis, classification, immunology"
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
- Urinary Bladder Diseases/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunization with neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor induces neurological autoimmune disease.
**Authors:** Lennon VA, Ermilov LG, Szurszewski JH, Vernino S
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI17429](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI17429)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2003 Mar;111(6):907-13. doi: 10.1172/JCI17429.

Immunization with neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor induces neurological 
autoimmune disease.

Lennon VA(1), Ermilov LG, Szurszewski JH, Vernino S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Mayo Graduate and Medical Schools and Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA. lennon.vanda@mayo.edu

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2003 Mar;111(6):797-9. doi: 10.1172/JCI18180.

Neuronal nicotinic AChRs (nAChRs) are implicated in the pathogenesis of diverse 
neurological disorders and in the regulation of small-cell lung carcinoma 
growth. Twelve subunits have been identified in vertebrates, and mutations of 
one are recognized in a rare form of human epilepsy. Mice with genetically 
manipulated neuronal nAChR subunits exhibit behavioral or autonomic phenotypes. 
Here, we report the first model of an acquired neuronal nAChR disorder and 
evidence for its pertinence to paraneoplastic neurological autoimmunity. Rabbits 
immunized once with recombinant alpha3 subunit (residues 1-205) develop profound 
gastrointestinal hypomotility, dilated pupils with impaired light response, and 
grossly distended bladders. As in patients with idiopathic and paraneoplastic 
autoimmune autonomic neuropathy, the severity parallels serum levels of 
ganglionic nAChR autoantibody. Failure of neurotransmission through abdominal 
sympathetic ganglia, with retention of neuronal viability, confirms that the 
disorder is a postsynaptic channelopathy. In addition, we found ganglionic nAChR 
protein in small-cell carcinoma lines, identifying this cancer as a potential 
initiator of ganglionic nAChR autoimmunity. The data support our hypothesis that 
immune responses driven by distinct neuronal nAChR subtypes expressed in 
small-cell carcinomas account for several lung cancer-related paraneoplastic 
disorders affecting cholinergic systems, including autoimmune autonomic 
neuropathy, seizures, dementia, and movement disorders.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI17429
PMCID: PMC153771
PMID: 12639997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]