---
reference_id: "PMID:27151711"
title: Rheumatoid nodules and quality of life in rheumatoid arthritis females - complex assessment.
authors:
- Trăistaru MR
- Kamal D
- Traşcă DM
- Foarfă MC
- Gruia CL
- Rogoveanu OC
journal: Rom J Morphol Embryol
year: '2016'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rheumatoid nodules and quality of life in rheumatoid arthritis females - complex assessment.
**Authors:** Trăistaru MR, Kamal D, Traşcă DM, Foarfă MC, Gruia CL, Rogoveanu OC
**Journal:** Rom J Morphol Embryol (2016)

## Content

1. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2016;57(1):215-25.

Rheumatoid nodules and quality of life in rheumatoid arthritis females - complex 
assessment.

Trăistaru MR(1), Kamal D, Traşcă DM, Foarfă MC, Gruia CL, Rogoveanu OC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, University of Medicine 
and Pharmacy of Craiova, Romania; rodicatraistru@hotmail.com.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) represents the most commonly diagnosed arthropathy 
that affect many tissue types and organs, characterized by a clinical, 
functional and therapeutic pathogenic complexity and it affects especially 
diarthroidal joints. Rheumatoid nodules (RNs) are one of the most frequent 
extra-articular manifestations of RA, and usually reflect an advanced stage of 
the disease and a poor prognosis. The complexity of histological, clinical and 
functional aspects in RA has a real impact on the quality of life in all 
patients diagnosed with this disorder. Our prospective study presents the RNs 
involvement in the rehabilitation program performed in order to enhance the 
quality of life in the 25 RA female patients. We made a complex assessment and 
realized a correlation between pain, disability and histological aspect of RN, 
before and after the rehabilitation program. Also, we evaluated the clinical and 
functional effectiveness of a complex rehabilitation program and changes in 
impairment and activity limitation in women with RA and RNs. The 
immunohistological complexity of RNs reflects the intensity of the 
inflammatory-immune process and completes the assessment of RA patients with 
RNs. It allows for medical assistance quantification, even for patients that 
have a poor evolution prognosis.

PMID: 27151711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]