---
reference_id: "PMID:31961828"
title: MAPK mutations and cigarette smoke promote the pathogenesis of pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis.
authors:
- Liu H
- Osterburg AR
- Flury J
- Swank Z
- McGraw DW
- Gupta N
- Wikenheiser-Brokamp KA
- Kumar A
- Tazi A
- Inoue Y
- Hirose M
- McCormack FX
- Borchers MT
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.132048
keywords:
- Animals
- CD11c Antigen/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Histiocytosis, Langerhans-Cell/etiology"
- Lung Diseases/etiology
- Mice
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases/genetics
- Mutation
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Smoke/adverse effects
- Tobacco Products
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MAPK mutations and cigarette smoke promote the pathogenesis of pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis.
**Authors:** Liu H, Osterburg AR, Flury J, Swank Z, McGraw DW, Gupta N, Wikenheiser-Brokamp KA, Kumar A, Tazi A, Inoue Y, Hirose M, McCormack FX, Borchers MT
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.132048](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.132048)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2020 Feb 27;5(4):e132048. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.132048.

MAPK mutations and cigarette smoke promote the pathogenesis of pulmonary 
Langerhans cell histiocytosis.

Liu H(1), Osterburg AR(1), Flury J(1), Swank Z(1), McGraw DW(1)(2), Gupta 
N(1)(2), Wikenheiser-Brokamp KA(3)(4)(5), Kumar A(6), Tazi A(7), Inoue Y(8), 
Hirose M(8), McCormack FX(1)(2), Borchers MT(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(2)Cincinnati Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(3)Division of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and.
(4)Perinatal Institute, Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Cincinnati, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(6)Division of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Immune Deficiency, Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(7)INSERM UMR-S 976, University Paris-Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, 
France.
(8)National Hospital Organization Kinki-Chuo Chest Medical Center, Osaka, Japan.

Pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis (PLCH) is a rare smoking-related lung 
disease characterized by dendritic cell (DC) accumulation, bronchiolocentric 
nodule formation, and cystic lung remodeling. Approximately 50% of patients with 
PLCH harbor somatic BRAF-V600E mutations in cells of the myeloid/monocyte 
lineage. However, the rarity of the disease and lack of animal models have 
impeded the study of PLCH pathogenesis. Here, we establish a cigarette 
smoke-exposed (CS-exposed) BRAF-V600E-mutant mouse model that recapitulates many 
hallmark characteristics of PLCH. We show that CD11c-targeted expression of 
BRAF-V600E increases DC responsiveness to stimuli, including the chemokine 
CCL20, and that mutant cell accumulation in the lungs of CS-exposed mice is due 
to both increased cellular viability and enhanced recruitment. Moreover, we 
report that the chemokine CCL7 is secreted from DCs and human peripheral blood 
monocytes in a BRAF-V600E-dependent manner, suggesting a possible mechanism for 
recruitment of cells known to dominate PLCH lesions. Inflammatory lesions and 
airspace dilation in BRAF-V600E mice in response to CS are attenuated by 
transitioning animals to filtered air and treatment with a BRAF-V600E inhibitor, 
PLX4720. Collectively, this model provides mechanistic insights into the role of 
myelomonocytic cells and the BRAF-V600E mutation and CS exposure in PLCH 
pathogenesis and provides a platform to develop biomarkers and therapeutic 
targets.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.132048
PMCID: PMC7101136
PMID: 31961828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.