---
reference_id: PMID:34358489
title: "Extraintestinal Manifestations of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Current Concepts, Treatment, and Implications for Disease Management."
authors:
- Rogler G
- Singh A
- Kavanaugh A
- Rubin DT
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2021.07.042
keywords:
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- "Immunomodulating Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Inflammatory Bowel Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Quality of Life
- Remission Induction
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- Symptom Assessment
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extraintestinal Manifestations of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Current Concepts, Treatment, and Implications for Disease Management.
**Authors:** Rogler G, Singh A, Kavanaugh A, Rubin DT
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2021.07.042](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2021.07.042)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2021 Oct;161(4):1118-1132. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2021.07.042.  Epub 2021 Aug 3.

Extraintestinal Manifestations of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Current Concepts, 
Treatment, and Implications for Disease Management.

Rogler G(1), Singh A(2), Kavanaugh A(2), Rubin DT(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Zurich 
University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California.
(3)University of Chicago Medicine Inflammatory Bowel Disease Center, Chicago, 
Illinois. Electronic address: drubin@uchicago.edu.

Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs) are systemic diseases that manifest not only 
in the gut and gastrointestinal tract, but also in the extraintestinal organs in 
many patients. The quality of life for patients with IBD can be substantially 
affected by these extraintestinal manifestations (EIMs). It is important to have 
knowledge of the prevalence, pathophysiology, and clinical presentation of EIMs 
in order to adapt therapeutic options to cover all aspects of IBD. EIMs can 
occur in up to 24% of patients with IBD before the onset of intestinal symptoms, 
and need to be recognized to initiate appropriate diagnostic procedures. EIMs 
most frequently affect joints, skin, or eyes, but can also affect other organs, 
such as the liver, lung, and pancreas. It is a frequent misconception that a 
successful therapy of the intestinal inflammation will be sufficient to treat 
EIMs satisfactorily in most patients with IBD. In general, peripheral arthritis, 
oral aphthous ulcers, episcleritis, or erythema nodosum can be associated with 
active intestinal inflammation and can improve on standard treatment of the 
intestinal inflammation. However, anterior uveitis, ankylosing spondylitis, and 
primary sclerosing cholangitis usually occur independent of disease flares. This 
review provides a comprehensive overview of epidemiology, pathophysiology, 
clinical presentation, and treatment of EIMs in IBD.

Copyright © 2021 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2021.07.042
PMCID: PMC8564770
PMID: 34358489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]