---
reference_id: "PMID:33186983"
title: Reference-frame-independent measurement-device-independent quantum key distribution with mismatched-basis statistics.
authors:
- Li Z
- Liu H
- Wang J
- Yang S
- Dou T
- Qu W
- Zhou F
- Huang Y
- Sun Z
- Han Y
- Miao G
- Ma H
journal: Opt Lett
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1364/OL.403481
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reference-frame-independent measurement-device-independent quantum key distribution with mismatched-basis statistics.
**Authors:** Li Z, Liu H, Wang J, Yang S, Dou T, Qu W, Zhou F, Huang Y, Sun Z, Han Y, Miao G, Ma H
**Journal:** Opt Lett (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1364/OL.403481](https://doi.org/10.1364/OL.403481)

## Content

1. Opt Lett. 2020 Nov 15;45(22):6334-6337. doi: 10.1364/OL.403481.

Reference-frame-independent measurement-device-independent quantum key 
distribution with mismatched-basis statistics.

Li Z, Liu H, Wang J, Yang S, Dou T, Qu W, Zhou F, Huang Y, Sun Z, Han Y, Miao G, 
Ma H.

The source flaw associated with the basis vector in the 
reference-frame-independent measurement-device-independent quantum key 
distribution (RFI-MDI-QKD) has not been systematically studied. As a result, it 
is often assumed that bit error is equal to phase error, which is not 
theoretically rigorous. Here, we propose a postprocessing method to estimate the 
phase error rate from the discarded mismatched-basis statistics, where the qubit 
source does not need to be characterized in detail. The source flaw in the basis 
vector of the RFI-MDI-QKD protocol can thus be corrected using this method. The 
numerical simulation results clearly demonstrate that the RFI-MDI-QKD protocol 
with uncharacterized sources is also insensitive to the misalignment of the 
reference frame.

DOI: 10.1364/OL.403481
PMID: 33186983