---
reference_id: "PMID:28284781"
title: "Diagnosis, Course, and Management of Angioedema in Patients With Acquired C1-Inhibitor Deficiency."
authors:
- Zanichelli A
- Azin GM
- Wu MA
- Suffritti C
- Maggioni L
- Caccia S
- Perego F
- Vacchini R
- Cicardi M
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaip.2016.12.032
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- Androgens/therapeutic use
- "Angioedema/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality"
- "Angioedemas, Hereditary/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality"
- Autoantibodies/blood
- "Bradykinin/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- "Complement C1 Inhibitor Protein/genetics, therapeutic use"
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Italy/epidemiology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Survival Analysis
- Tranexamic Acid/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis, Course, and Management of Angioedema in Patients With Acquired C1-Inhibitor Deficiency.
**Authors:** Zanichelli A, Azin GM, Wu MA, Suffritti C, Maggioni L, Caccia S, Perego F, Vacchini R, Cicardi M
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaip.2016.12.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2016.12.032)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2017 Sep-Oct;5(5):1307-1313. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2016.12.032. Epub 2017 Mar 9.

Diagnosis, Course, and Management of Angioedema in Patients With Acquired 
C1-Inhibitor Deficiency.

Zanichelli A(1), Azin GM(2), Wu MA(2), Suffritti C(2), Maggioni L(2), Caccia 
S(2), Perego F(2), Vacchini R(2), Cicardi M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Luigi Sacco Hospital, 
University of Milan, Milan, Italy. Electronic address: 
andrea.zanichelli@unimi.it.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Luigi Sacco Hospital, 
University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Luigi Sacco Hospital, 
University of Milan, Milan, Italy; ASST Fatebenefratelli Sacco, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Acquired angioedema due to C1-inhibitor deficiency (C1-INH-AAE) is a 
rare disease with no prevalence data or approved therapies.
OBJECTIVE: To report data on patients with C1-INH-AAE followed at Angioedema 
Center, Milan (from 1976 to 2015).
METHODS: Diagnostic criteria included history of recurrent angioedema without 
wheals; decreased C1-INH antigen levels and/or functional activity of C1-INH and 
C4 antigen less than 50% of normal; late symptom onset (>40 years); no family 
history of angioedema and C1-INH deficiency.
RESULTS: In total, 77 patients (58% females; median age, 70 years) were 
diagnosed with C1-INH-AAE and 675 patients with hereditary angioedema due to 
C1-INH deficiency (C1-INH-HAE) (1 patient with C1-INH-AAE/8.8 patients with 
C1-INH-HAE). Median age at diagnosis was 64 years. Median time between symptom 
onset and diagnosis was 2 years. Sixteen patients (21%) died since diagnosis, 
including 1 because of laryngeal edema. Angioedema of the face was most common 
(N = 63 [82%]), followed by abdomen (N = 51 [66%]), peripheries (N = 50 [65%]), 
and oral mucosa and/or glottis (N = 42 [55%]). Forty-eight of 71 patients (68%) 
had autoantibodies to C1-INH. In total, 56 patients (70%) used on-demand 
treatment for angioedema including intravenous pdC1-INH 2000 U (Berinert, CSL 
Behring, Marburg, Germany) (N = 49) and/or subcutaneous icatibant 30 mg 
(Firazyr, Shire; Milano, Italy) (N = 27). Eventually, 8 of 49 patients receiving 
pdC1-INH became nonresponsive; all had autoantibodies. Thirty-four patients 
received long-term prophylaxis with tranexamic acid (effective in 29) and 20 
with androgens (effective in 8).
CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of C1-INH-AAE was 1 for every 8.8 patients with 
C1-INH-HAE. Thirty percent of the deaths were related to the disease. Treatments 
approved for C1-INH-HAE are effective in C1-INH-AAE, although with minimal 
differences.

Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2016.12.032
PMID: 28284781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]