---
reference_id: "PMID:32143233"
title: "Acute Flaccid Myelitis: A Clinical Review."
authors:
- Murphy OC
- Pardo CA
journal: Semin Neurol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1055/s-0040-1705123
keywords:
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/diagnosis, etiology, pathology, physiopathology"
- Child
- Humans
- "Myelitis/diagnosis, etiology, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/diagnosis, etiology, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Flaccid Myelitis: A Clinical Review.
**Authors:** Murphy OC, Pardo CA
**Journal:** Semin Neurol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0040-1705123](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0040-1705123)

## Content

1. Semin Neurol. 2020 Apr;40(2):211-218. doi: 10.1055/s-0040-1705123. Epub 2020
Mar  6.

Acute Flaccid Myelitis: A Clinical Review.

Murphy OC(1), Pardo CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Johns Hopkins Myelitis and Myelopathy Center, Division of Neuroimmunology and
Neurological Infections, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland.

Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is an emerging disorder primarily affecting
children that is characterized by acute flaccid paralysis accompanied by
abnormalities of the spinal cord gray matter on magnetic resonance imaging. In
most cases, prodromal fever or respiratory symptoms occur, followed by
acute-onset flaccid limb weakness. Respiratory, axial, bulbar, facial, and
extraocular muscles may also be affected. The clinical manifestations have been
described as "polio-like," due to striking similarities to cases of
poliomyelitis. The primary site of injury in AFM is the anterior horn cells of
the spinal cord, resulting in a motor neuronopathy. Seasonal peaks of cases have
occurred in the United States every 2 years since 2012. However, AFM remains a
rare disease, which can make it challenging for physicians to recognize and
differentiate from other causes of acute flaccid paralysis such as
Guillain-Barre syndrome, spinal cord stroke, and transverse myelitis.
Epidemiological evidence suggests that AFM is linked to a viral etiology, with
nonpolio enteroviruses (in particular enterovirus D68) demonstrating a plausible
association. The epidemiology, possible etiological factors, clinical features,
differential diagnosis, treatment, and outcomes of AFM are discussed in this
review.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0040-1705123
PMID: 32143233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.
