---
reference_id: "PMID:16151902"
title: "Clinical and biochemical presentation of siblings with COG-7 deficiency, a lethal multiple O- and N-glycosylation disorder."
authors:
- Spaapen LJ
- Bakker JA
- van der Meer SB
- Sijstermans HJ
- Steet RA
- Wevers RA
- Jaeken J
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-005-0015-z
keywords:
- Apolipoprotein C-III
- Apolipoproteins C/metabolism
- "Carbohydrate Metabolism, Inborn Errors/blood, diagnosis, metabolism"
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/blood, diagnosis, metabolism"
- Family Health
- Female
- Fibroblasts/enzymology
- "Glycoproteins/biosynthesis, blood, chemistry"
- Glycosylation
- Golgi Apparatus/metabolism
- Humans
- Isoelectric Focusing
- Leukocytes/enzymology
- Liver/metabolism
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Male
- N-Acetylneuraminic Acid/chemistry
- Protein Isoforms
- Siblings
- Transferrin/biosynthesis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and biochemical presentation of siblings with COG-7 deficiency, a lethal multiple O- and N-glycosylation disorder.
**Authors:** Spaapen LJ, Bakker JA, van der Meer SB, Sijstermans HJ, Steet RA, Wevers RA, Jaeken J
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-005-0015-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-005-0015-z)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2005;28(5):707-14. doi: 10.1007/s10545-005-0015-z.

Clinical and biochemical presentation of siblings with COG-7 deficiency, a 
lethal multiple O- and N-glycosylation disorder.

Spaapen LJ(1), Bakker JA, van der Meer SB, Sijstermans HJ, Steet RA, Wevers RA, 
Jaeken J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Academic Hospital Maastricht, The 
Netherlands. leo.spaapen@gen.unimaas.nl

Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) represent a group of inherited 
multiorgan diseases caused by defects in the biosynthesis of glycoproteins. We 
report on two dysmorphic siblings with severe liver disease who died at the age 
of a few weeks. Increased activities of lysosomal enzymes in plasma were found, 
though total sialic acid in plasma was strongly decreased. Isoelectric focusing 
of serum sialotransferrins showed a type 2-like CDG pattern. Some of the known 
CDG subtypes were excluded. O-Glycosylation was investigated by isoelectric 
focusing of apolipoprotein C-III, which showed increased fractions of 
hyposialylated isoforms. In a consecutive study a defect in the conserved 
oligomeric Golgi complex was established at the level of subunit COG-7, leading 
to disruption of multiple glycosylation functions of the Golgi. This report on 
patients with a new variant of CDG, due to a multiple Golgi defect, emphasizes 
in addition to sialotransferrins the importance of analysis of a serum O-linked 
glycoprotein, e.g. apolipoprotein C-III, in unclassified CDG-X cases.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-005-0015-z
PMID: 16151902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]