---
reference_id: "PMID:39194177"
title: Dramatic Clinical Improvement With Biotin Mega-Dose Therapy in a Neonate With Holocarboxylase Synthetase Deficiency.
authors:
- Kim SW
- Lee HJ
- Choi N
- Kim EK
- Ko JM
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.70002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dramatic Clinical Improvement With Biotin Mega-Dose Therapy in a Neonate With Holocarboxylase Synthetase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Kim SW, Lee HJ, Choi N, Kim EK, Ko JM
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.70002](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.70002)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2024 Aug;12(8):e70002. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.70002.

Dramatic Clinical Improvement With Biotin Mega-Dose Therapy in a Neonate With 
Holocarboxylase Synthetase Deficiency.

Kim SW(1), Lee HJ(1), Choi N(1), Kim EK(1)(2)(3), Ko JM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University Children's Hospital, 
Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Rare Disease Center, Seoul National University Children's Hospital, Seoul, 
South Korea.

INTRODUCTION: Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency (HLCS deficiency, OMIM 
#253270) is an exceedingly rare metabolic disorder resulting in multiple 
carboxylase deficiencies owing to impaired biotin cycle. Clinical manifestations 
include severe metabolic acidosis, hyperammonemia, tachypnea, skin rash, 
alopecia, feeding problems, hypotonia, developmental delay, seizures, and, in 
severe cases, death.
METHODS AND RESULTS: An 8-day-old female neonate presented with severe lactic 
acidosis, necessitating sedation and mechanical ventilation. Despite receiving 
supportive care, no evident clinical improvement was observed, accompanied by 
the onset of generalized ichthyosis. Genetic analysis of actionable metabolic 
disorders revealed compound heterozygous variants of HLCS (NM_000411.8), 
specifically c.[710T>C (p.Leu237Pro)]; [1544G>A (p.Ser515Asn)], prompting the 
initiation of biotin mega-dose therapy (10 mg/day). Remarkably, dramatic 
clinical improvement in lactic acidosis was observed the day after initiating 
biotin administration, leading to the discontinuation of mechanical ventilation 
within 6 days. The patient remained in stable condition during follow-up, 
exhibiting normal growth and development along with consistently stable 
laboratory findings up to 18 months of age.
CONCLUSION: Our case highlights the significance of early genetic testing in 
neonates with unexplained metabolic disorders to enable timely diagnosis and 
therapy initiation. Biotin therapy has demonstrated remarkable efficacy in 
improving the clinical condition of patients with HLCS deficiency, leading to 
favorable outcomes.

© 2024 The Author(s). Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.70002
PMCID: PMC11350837
PMID: 39194177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.