---
reference_id: "PMID:24321868"
title: "[L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria: report on two cases]."
authors:
- Wagner S
- Vianey-Saban C
- Salomons GS
- Schmitt E
- Feillet F
journal: Arch Pediatr
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.arcped.2013.10.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria: report on two cases].
**Authors:** Wagner S, Vianey-Saban C, Salomons GS, Schmitt E, Feillet F
**Journal:** Arch Pediatr (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.arcped.2013.10.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcped.2013.10.017)

## Content

1. Arch Pediatr. 2014 Jan;21(1):78-85. doi: 10.1016/j.arcped.2013.10.017. Epub
2013  Dec 8.

[L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria: report on two cases].

[Article in French]

Wagner S(1), Vianey-Saban C(2), Salomons GS(3), Schmitt E(4), Feillet F(5).

Author information:
(1)Service de pédiatrie, centre hospitalier de Belfort-Montbéliard, 14, rue de 
Mulhouse, 90016 Belfort, France. Electronic address: swagner@chbm.fr.
(2)Unité CarMeN, centre de référence des maladies héréditaires du métabolisme, 
centre de biologie et pathologie Est, CHU de Lyon, 69677 Bron, France.
(3)Metabolic unit of the department of clinical chemistry, VU university medical 
center, 1081 HV Amsterdam, Pays-Bas.
(4)Service de neuroradiologie diagnostique et thérapeutique, CHU de Nancy 
hôpital central, 54035 Nancy, France.
(5)Service de médecine infantile 1, centre de référence des maladies 
héréditaires du métabolisme, CHU Brabois-Enfants, 54511 Vandœuvre-lès-Nancy, 
France.

L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria is a rare genetic neurometabolic disease. It occurs 
in childhood with mental retardation, cerebellar ataxia, and epilepsy. 
Macrocephaly is present in half of the cases. Diagnosis is based on clinical 
symptoms, biological and radiological findings, and molecular testing. Specific 
treatments can improve the spontaneous progression of the disease. We examined 
two independent patients who presented with L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria. 
Clinical presentation led to cerebral MRI and urinary organic acid 
chromatography. The genetic analysis confirmed the diagnosis. Under specific 
treatment, the progression of the disease was subsequently stopped. 
L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria shares common symptoms with other genetic and 
metabolic diseases. However, the association of a distinct phenotype and typical 
MRI abnormalities (such as a high signal in the subcortical white matter, 
pallidum, and dentate nuclei) should draw the clinician's attention to this 
diagnosis. It can easily be suspected with a simple urinary analysis and can 
then be confirmed by genetic testing. With this case report, we show the 
importance of genetic identification to begin treatment with riboflavin. Early 
detection of L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria based on MRI abnormalities can enable 
rapid initiation of treatment and prevent disease progression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arcped.2013.10.017
PMID: 24321868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]