---
reference_id: "PMID:29603387"
title: "Genotype-phenotype correlations, dystonia and disease progression in spinocerebellar ataxia type 14."
authors:
- Chelban V
- Wiethoff S
- Fabian-Jessing BK
- Haridy NA
- Khan A
- Efthymiou S
- Becker EBE
- "O'Connor E"
- Hersheson J
- Newland K
- Hojland AT
- Gregersen PA
- Lindquist SG
- Petersen MB
- Nielsen JE
- Nielsen M
- Wood NW
- Giunti P
- Houlden H
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/mds.27334
keywords:
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Cysteine/genetics
- Disease Progression
- Dystonia/etiology
- Family Health
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Peptides/genetics
- Phenotype
- Protein Kinase C/genetics
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/complications, diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-phenotype correlations, dystonia and disease progression in spinocerebellar ataxia type 14.
**Authors:** Chelban V, Wiethoff S, Fabian-Jessing BK, Haridy NA, Khan A, Efthymiou S, Becker EBE, O'Connor E, Hersheson J, Newland K, Hojland AT, Gregersen PA, Lindquist SG, Petersen MB, Nielsen JE, Nielsen M, Wood NW, Giunti P, Houlden H
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.27334](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.27334)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2018 Jul;33(7):1119-1129. doi: 10.1002/mds.27334. Epub 2018 Mar
30.

Genotype-phenotype correlations, dystonia and disease progression in
spinocerebellar ataxia type 14.

Chelban V(1)(2)(3), Wiethoff S(1)(4), Fabian-Jessing BK(5), Haridy NA(1)(6),
Khan A(1), Efthymiou S(1), Becker EBE(7), O'Connor E(1), Hersheson J(1), Newland
K(1), Hojland AT(5), Gregersen PA(8), Lindquist SG(9)(10), Petersen MB(5),
Nielsen JE(9), Nielsen M(11), Wood NW(1)(2), Giunti P(12), Houlden H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, University College London, Institute of
Neurology, London, UK.
(2)National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, UK.
(3)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Institute of Emergency Medicine,
Chisinau, Republic of Moldova.
(4)Center for Neurology and Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research,
Eberhard-Karls-University, Tübingen, Germany.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg,
Denmark.
(6)Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, Assiut University Hospital, Faculty
of Medicine, Assiut, Egypt.
(7)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
UK.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(9)Danish Dementia Research Centre, Neurogenetics Clinic, Department of
Neurology, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(10)Department of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(11)Department of Neurology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark.
(12)Deparmtent of Molecular Neuroscience, Ataxia Centre UCL, Institute of
Neurology, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 14 is a rare form of autosomal dominant
cerebellar ataxia caused by mutations in protein kinase Cγ gene. Clinically, it
presents with a slowly progressive, mainly pure cerebellar ataxia.
METHODS: Using next generation sequencing, we screened 194 families with
autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia and normal polyglutamine repeats. In-depth
phenotyping was performed using validated clinical rating scales neuroimaging
and electrophysiological investigations.
RESULTS: We identified 25 individuals from 13 families carrying pathogenic
mutations in protein kinase Cγ gene. A total of 10 unique protein kinase Cγ gene
mutations have been confirmed of which 5 are novel and 5 were previously
described. Our data suggest that the age at onset is highly variable; disease
course is slowly progressive and rarely associated with severe disability.
However, one third of patients presented with a complex ataxia comprising severe
focal and/or task-induced dystonia, peripheral neuropathy, parkinsonism,
myoclonus, and pyramidal syndrome. The most complex phenotype is related to a
missense mutation in the catalytic domain in exon 11.
CONCLUSION: We present one of the largest genetically confirmed spinocerebellar
ataxia type 14 cohorts contributing novel variants and clinical
characterisation. We show that although protein kinase Cγ gene mutations present
mainly as slowly progressive pure ataxia, more than a third of cases had a
complex phenotype. Overall, our case series extends the phenotype and suggests
that protein kinase Cγ gene mutations should be considered in patients with
slowly progressive autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia, particularly when
myoclonus, dystonia, or mild cognitive impairment are present in the absence of
polyglutamine expansion. © 2018 The Authors. Movement Disorders published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of International Parkinson and Movement
Disorder Society.

© 2018 The Authors. Movement Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on
behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.27334
PMCID: PMC6175136
PMID: 29603387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
