---
reference_id: PMID:26942670
title: The Mitochondrial Basis of Aging.
authors:
- Sun N
- Youle RJ
- Finkel T
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2016.01.028
keywords:
- Age Factors
- "Aging/metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- Cellular Senescence
- Humans
- "Inflammation/metabolism, pathology"
- Longevity
- "Mitochondria/metabolism, pathology"
- Mitophagy
- Signal Transduction
- "Stem Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Unfolded Protein Response
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# The Mitochondrial Basis of Aging.
**Authors:** Sun N, Youle RJ, Finkel T
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2016.01.028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2016.01.028)

## Content

1. Mol Cell. 2016 Mar 3;61(5):654-666. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2016.01.028.

The Mitochondrial Basis of Aging.

Sun N(1), Youle RJ(2), Finkel T(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, NIH, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Biochemistry Section, Surgical Neurology Branch, National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic 
address: richard.youle@nih.gov.
(3)Center for Molecular Medicine, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, NIH, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: finkelt@nih.gov.

A decline in mitochondrial quality and activity has been associated with normal 
aging and correlated with the development of a wide range of age-related 
diseases. Here, we review the evidence that a decline in mitochondria function 
contributes to aging. In particular, we discuss how mitochondria contribute to 
specific aspects of the aging process, including cellular senescence, chronic 
inflammation, and the age-dependent decline in stem cell activity. Signaling 
pathways regulating the mitochondrial unfolded protein response and mitophagy 
are also reviewed, with particular emphasis placed on how these pathways might, 
in turn, regulate longevity. Taken together, these observations suggest that 
mitochondria influence or regulate a number of key aspects of aging and suggest 
that strategies directed at improving mitochondrial quality and function might 
have far-reaching beneficial effects.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2016.01.028
PMCID: PMC4779179
PMID: 26942670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]