---
reference_id: "PMID:40036381"
title: "Yaws - A Review of Clinical Features, Diagnosis and Treatment."
authors:
- Handley BL
- Tchatchouang S
- Marks M
journal: Clin Exp Dermatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/ced/llaf100
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Yaws - A Review of Clinical Features, Diagnosis and Treatment.
**Authors:** Handley BL, Tchatchouang S, Marks M
**Journal:** Clin Exp Dermatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ced/llaf100](https://doi.org/10.1093/ced/llaf100)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2025 Feb 27:llaf100. doi: 10.1093/ced/llaf100. Online ahead
 of print.

Yaws - A Review of Clinical Features, Diagnosis and Treatment.

Handley BL(1), Tchatchouang S(2), Marks M(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Department, Faculty of Infectious diseases, London School 
of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(2)Centre Pasteur du Cameroun, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(3)Hospital for Tropical Diseases, London, UK.
(4)Division of Infection and Immunity, University College London, London, UK.

Yaws, a neglected tropical disease caused by Treponema pallidum subsp. pertenue, 
primarily affects children in impoverished rural areas. It is spread through 
direct skin contact. The disease progresses through clinical stages. In the 
primary stage, patients develop a, usually painless, papilloma or ulcer, often 
on the lower extremities, which is highly contagious. If untreated, this lesion 
heals spontaneously but may progress to secondary yaws, characterised by 
disseminated skin lesions, scaly papules and painful hyperkeratotic plaques on 
the palms and soles. Tertiary cases occur in 10% of untreated individuals and 
can cause severe disfigurement, but with the wider availability of treatment 
this is rare today. Though yaws can be treated with benzathine penicillin, oral 
azithromycin has become the preferred treatment due to its ease of 
administration. Currently, it is known to be endemic in 16 countries, with the 
majority of cases found in the Western Pacific, followed by West Africa and 
parts of South East Asia. The World Health Organization has renewed eradication 
efforts, targeting global eradication by 2030 through mass drug administration 
(MDA) campaigns and enhanced diagnostics. However, challenges such as emerging 
azithromycin resistance, difficulties in achieving high MDA coverage, and 
potential zoonotic transmission from nonhuman primates threaten progress. 
Accurate diagnosis is critical, especially in distinguishing yaws from similar 
skin conditions and ensuring all endemic communities are identified and offered 
treatment. Strengthening surveillance and enhancing laboratory capacity for 
molecular diagnostics is essential for the success of the eradication campaign. 
With sustained effort and innovation, the global eradication of yaws by 2030 
remains achievable.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of British 
Association of Dermatologists. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, 
please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for 
reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service 
via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information 
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ced/llaf100
PMID: 40036381