---
reference_id: "PMID:29151090"
title: De Clérambault Syndrome, Othello Syndrome, Folie à Deux and Variants.
authors:
- Delgado MG
- Bogousslavsky J
journal: Front Neurol Neurosci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1159/000475685
content_type: abstract_only
---

# De Clérambault Syndrome, Othello Syndrome, Folie à Deux and Variants.
**Authors:** Delgado MG, Bogousslavsky J
**Journal:** Front Neurol Neurosci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000475685](https://doi.org/10.1159/000475685)

## Content

1. Front Neurol Neurosci. 2018;42:44-50. doi: 10.1159/000475685. Epub 2017 Nov
17.

De Clérambault Syndrome, Othello Syndrome, Folie à Deux and Variants.

Delgado MG, Bogousslavsky J.

Non-bizarre delusion, defined as a false belief possible although highly 
unlikely, is the main manifestation of delusional disorders, previously known as 
paranoia. Based on the predominant delusional themes, 5 main subtypes may be 
described - erotomanic, grandiose, jealous, persecutory, and somatic. We present 
here 2 main delusional disorders, the De Clérambault syndrome and the Othello 
syndrome, and another closely related to the previous ones - Folie à deux. In 
the De Clérambault syndrome, the main delusional theme is erotomanic type, 
related to passional delirium where the patient has strong sexual feelings 
towards another person and has the belief that this other person is deeply in 
love with him or her. Patients with the Othello syndrome present a delusional 
disorder of jealous type, a pathological delusion that the partner is 
unfaithful. In Folie à deux, 2 individuals shared the same psychiatric symptom. 
However it may be variable, describing variants such as folie imposée or folie 
simultenée. The risk of aggressive behavior exists in these patients. Knowledge 
of these syndromes is essential to allow an accurate diagnosis and prompt 
treatment.

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000475685
PMID: 29151090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]