---
reference_id: "PMID:37572851"
title: Quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics of PP2A-PPP2R5D variants reveal deregulation of RPS6 phosphorylation via converging signaling cascades.
authors:
- Smolen KA
- Papke CM
- Swingle MR
- Musiyenko A
- Li C
- Salter EA
- Camp AD
- Honkanen RE
- Kettenbach AN
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105154
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics of PP2A-PPP2R5D variants reveal deregulation of RPS6 phosphorylation via converging signaling cascades.
**Authors:** Smolen KA, Papke CM, Swingle MR, Musiyenko A, Li C, Salter EA, Camp AD, Honkanen RE, Kettenbach AN
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105154](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105154)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Sep;299(9):105154. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105154. Epub 2023
 Aug 10.

Quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics of PP2A-PPP2R5D variants reveal 
deregulation of RPS6 phosphorylation via converging signaling cascades.

Smolen KA(1), Papke CM(2), Swingle MR(2), Musiyenko A(2), Li C(2), Salter EA(2), 
Camp AD(2), Honkanen RE(3), Kettenbach AN(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Hanover, New Hampshire, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of South 
Alabama, Mobile, Alabama, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of South 
Alabama, Mobile, Alabama, USA. Electronic address: rhonkanen@southalabama.edu.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Hanover, New Hampshire, USA; Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Geisel 
School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, New Hampshire, USA. Electronic 
address: Arminja.N.Kettenbach@dartmouth.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Mar 27:2023.03.27.534397. doi: 10.1101/2023.03.27.534397.

Genetic germline variants of PPP2R5D (encoding: phosphoprotein phosphatase 2 
regulatory protein 5D) result in PPP2R5D-related disorder (Jordan's Syndrome), 
which is characterized by intellectual disability, hypotonia, seizures, 
macrocephaly, autism spectrum disorder, and delayed motor skill development. The 
disorder originates from de novo single nucleotide mutations, generating 
missense variants that act in a dominant manner. Pathogenic mutations altering 
13 different amino acids have been identified, with the E198K variant accounting 
for ∼40% of reported cases. However, the generation of a heterozygous E198K 
variant cell line to study the molecular effects of the pathogenic mutation has 
been challenging. Here, we use CRISPR-PRIME genomic editing to introduce a 
transition (c.592G>A) in a single PPP2R5D allele in HEK293 cells, generating 
E198K-heterozygous lines to complement existing E420K variant lines. We generate 
global protein and phosphorylation profiles of WT, E198K, and E420K cell lines 
and find unique and shared changes between variants and WT cells in kinase- and 
phosphatase-controlled signaling cascades. We observed ribosomal protein S6 
(RPS6) hyperphosphorylation as a shared signaling alteration, indicative of 
increased ribosomal protein S6-kinase activity. Treatment with rapamycin or an 
RPS6-kinase inhibitor (LY2584702) suppressed RPS6 phosphorylation in both, 
suggesting upstream activation of mTORC1/p70S6K. Intriguingly, our data suggests 
ERK-dependent activation of mTORC1 in both E198K and E420K variant cells, with 
additional AKT-mediated mTORC1 activation in the E420K variant. Thus, although 
upstream activation of mTORC1 differs between PPP2R5D-related disorder 
genotypes, inhibition of mTORC1 or RPS6 kinases warrants further investigation 
as potential therapeutic strategies for patients.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105154
PMCID: PMC10485637
PMID: 37572851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.