---
reference_id: "PMID:26934690"
title: A Model for Integrating Ambulatory Surgery Centers Into an Academic Health System Using a Novel Ambulatory Surgery Coordinating Council.
authors:
- Ishii L
- Pronovost PJ
- Demski R
- Wylie G
- Zenilman M
- Ambulatory Surgery Coordinating Council
journal: Acad Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1097/ACM.0000000000001135
keywords:
- "Academic Medical Centers/organization & administration"
- Humans
- Maryland
- "Models, Organizational"
- Patient Safety
- "Quality of Health Care/organization & administration"
- "Surgicenters/organization & administration"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Model for Integrating Ambulatory Surgery Centers Into an Academic Health System Using a Novel Ambulatory Surgery Coordinating Council.
**Authors:** Ishii L, Pronovost PJ, Demski R, Wylie G, Zenilman M, Ambulatory Surgery Coordinating Council
**Journal:** Acad Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1097/ACM.0000000000001135](https://doi.org/10.1097/ACM.0000000000001135)

## Content

1. Acad Med. 2016 Jun;91(6):803-6. doi: 10.1097/ACM.0000000000001135.

A Model for Integrating Ambulatory Surgery Centers Into an Academic Health
System Using a Novel Ambulatory Surgery Coordinating Council.

Ishii L(1), Pronovost PJ, Demski R, Wylie G, Zenilman M; Ambulatory Surgery
Coordinating Council.

Author information:
(1)L. Ishii is chief quality officer for clinical best practices, Johns Hopkins
Health System, medical director for clinical integration, Office of Johns
Hopkins Physicians, and associate professor, Department of Otolaryngology-Head
and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland. P.J. Pronovost is senior vice president for patient safety and quality
and director, Armstrong Institute for Patient Safety and Quality, Johns Hopkins
Medicine, and professor of anesthesiology and critical care medicine, surgery,
and health policy and management, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland. R. Demski is vice president of quality, Johns Hopkins
Health System and Armstrong Institute for Patient Safety and Quality, Johns
Hopkins Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. G. Wylie is executive director, Johns
Hopkins Medical Management, Johns Hopkins Health System, Baltimore, Maryland. M.
Zenilman is chief quality officer for ambulatory surgery and professor,
Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland.

PROBLEM: An increasing volume of ambulatory surgeries has led to an increase in
the number of ambulatory surgery centers (ASCs). Some academic health systems
have aligned with ASCs to create a more integrated care delivery system. Yet,
these centers are diverse in many areas, including specialty types, ownership
models, management, physician employment, and regulatory oversight. Academic
health systems then face challenges in integrating these ASCs into their
organizations.
APPROACH: Johns Hopkins Medicine created the Ambulatory Surgery Coordinating
Council in 2014 to manage, standardize, and promote peer learning among its
eight ASCs. The Armstrong Institute for Patient Safety and Quality provided
support and a model for this organization through its quality management
infrastructure. The physician-led council defined a mission and created goals to
identify best practices, uniformly provide the highest-quality patient-centered
care, and continuously improve patient outcomes and experience across ASCs.
OUTCOMES: Council members built trust and agreed on a standardized patient
safety and quality dashboard to report measures that include regulatory, care
process, patient experience, and outcomes data. The council addressed
unintentional outcomes and process variation across the system and agreed to
standard approaches to optimize quality. Council members also developed a
process for identifying future goals, standardizing care practices and
electronic medical record documentation, and creating quality and safety
policies.
NEXT STEPS: The early success of the council supports the continuation of the
Armstrong Institute model for physician-led quality management. Other academic
health systems can learn from this model as they integrate ASCs into their
complex organizations.

DOI: 10.1097/ACM.0000000000001135
PMID: 26934690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
