---
reference_id: "PMID:32234640"
title: "Eating disorders: Do PET and SPECT have a role? A systematic review of the literature."
authors:
- Gianni AD
- De Donatis D
- Valente S
- De Ronchi D
- Atti AR
journal: Psychiatry Res Neuroimaging
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2020.111065
keywords:
- Anorexia Nervosa/diagnostic imaging
- Binge-Eating Disorder/diagnostic imaging
- Bulimia Nervosa/diagnostic imaging
- Cerebrovascular Circulation
- Humans
- Parietal Lobe/diagnostic imaging
- Positron-Emission Tomography
- Prefrontal Cortex/diagnostic imaging
- "Tomography, Emission-Computed, Single-Photon"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eating disorders: Do PET and SPECT have a role? A systematic review of the literature.
**Authors:** Gianni AD, De Donatis D, Valente S, De Ronchi D, Atti AR
**Journal:** Psychiatry Res Neuroimaging (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pscychresns.2020.111065](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pscychresns.2020.111065)

## Content

1. Psychiatry Res Neuroimaging. 2020 Jun 30;300:111065. doi:
10.1016/j.pscychresns.2020.111065. Epub 2020 Mar 12.

Eating disorders: Do PET and SPECT have a role? A systematic review of the
literature.

Gianni AD(1), De Donatis D(2), Valente S(3), De Ronchi D(4), Atti AR(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna,
Italy. Electronic address: angela.digianni@studio.unibo.it.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna,
Italy. Electronic address: domenico.dedonatis@studio.unibo.it.
(3)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna,
Italy. Electronic address: stefano.valente7@studio.unibo.it.
(4)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna,
Italy. Electronic address: diana.deronchi@unibo.it.
(5)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna,
Italy. Electronic address: annarita.atti@unibo.it.

A systematic review was implemented according to PRISMA guidelines on Pubmed,
Psychinfo, Medline, Embase to fill the existing literature gap on the
effectiveness of using Positron Emission Tomography (PET) and Single Photon
Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) in Anorexia Nervosa (AN), Bulimia Nervosa
(BN) and Binge Eating Disorder (BED). Twenty-two articles were included. Four
studies reported an increased density in 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor (5-HT1A)
in fronto-temporo-parietal regions in both affected and recovered AN as well as
in BN. The 5-HT transporter (5-HTT) binding was increased or diminished in
different specific cortical areas and in relation to Eating Disorder (ED)
subtypes. Some evidences of blunted Dopamine (DA) release in the putamen in BN
patients suggest that their DA function might be impaired as in addictive
behaviours. Studies estimating the regional Cerebral Blood Flow (rCBF) with
SPECT demonstrated that temporal areas seem to play a key role in ED
corroborating the hypothesis of a cingulate-temporal cortical dysfunction in AN.
In addition, alterations of both parietal and prefrontal cortex provide a
possible common neural substrate in AN. Studies included in this review are
heterogeneous preventing robust conclusions, however, our findings add knowledge
on some of the neurotransmitters involved in ED.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2020.111065
PMID: 32234640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.
