---
reference_id: "PMID:23125284"
title: "A mutation in the FAM36A gene, the human ortholog of COX20, impairs cytochrome c oxidase assembly and is associated with ataxia and muscle hypotonia."
authors:
- Szklarczyk R
- Wanschers BF
- Nijtmans LG
- Rodenburg RJ
- Zschocke J
- Dikow N
- van den Brand MA
- Hendriks-Franssen MG
- Gilissen C
- Veltman JA
- Nooteboom M
- Koopman WJ
- Willems PH
- Smeitink JA
- Huynen MA
- van den Heuvel LP
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds473
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, metabolism"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Ataxia/genetics, metabolism"
- Base Sequence
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- Consanguinity
- "Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electron Transport Complex IV/metabolism
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- "Ion Channels/genetics, metabolism"
- "Lactic Acid/blood, cerebrospinal fluid"
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mice
- Mitochondria/enzymology
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Muscle Hypotonia/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Protein Multimerization
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mutation in the FAM36A gene, the human ortholog of COX20, impairs cytochrome c oxidase assembly and is associated with ataxia and muscle hypotonia.
**Authors:** Szklarczyk R, Wanschers BF, Nijtmans LG, Rodenburg RJ, Zschocke J, Dikow N, van den Brand MA, Hendriks-Franssen MG, Gilissen C, Veltman JA, Nooteboom M, Koopman WJ, Willems PH, Smeitink JA, Huynen MA, van den Heuvel LP
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/dds473](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/dds473)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Feb 15;22(4):656-67. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds473. Epub 2012
Nov  2.

A mutation in the FAM36A gene, the human ortholog of COX20, impairs cytochrome c 
oxidase assembly and is associated with ataxia and muscle hypotonia.

Szklarczyk R(1), Wanschers BF, Nijtmans LG, Rodenburg RJ, Zschocke J, Dikow N, 
van den Brand MA, Hendriks-Franssen MG, Gilissen C, Veltman JA, Nooteboom M, 
Koopman WJ, Willems PH, Smeitink JA, Huynen MA, van den Heuvel LP.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Nijmegen Centre for 
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen 6500HB, The 
Netherlands.

The mitochondrial respiratory chain complex IV (cytochrome c oxidase) is a 
multi-subunit enzyme that transfers electrons from cytochrome c to molecular 
oxygen, yielding water. Its biogenesis requires concerted expression of 
mitochondria- and nuclear-encoded subunits and assembly factors. In this report, 
we describe a homozygous missense mutation in FAM36A from a patient who displays 
ataxia and muscle hypotonia. The FAM36A gene is a remote, putative ortholog of 
the fungal complex IV assembly factor COX20. Messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein 
co-expression analyses support the involvement of FAM36A in complex IV function 
in mammals. The c.154A>C mutation in the FAM36A gene, a mutation that is absent 
in sequenced exomes, leads to a reduced activity and lower levels of complex IV 
and its protein subunits. The FAM36A protein is nearly absent in patient's 
fibroblasts. Cells affected by the mutation accumulate subassemblies of complex 
IV that contain COX1 but are almost devoid of COX2 protein. We observe 
co-purification of FAM36A and COX2 proteins, supporting that the FAM36A defect 
hampers the early step of complex IV assembly at the incorporation of the COX2 
subunit. Lentiviral complementation of patient's fibroblasts with wild-type 
FAM36A increases the complex IV activity as well as the amount of holocomplex IV 
and of individual subunits. These results establish the function of the human 
gene FAM36A/COX20 in complex IV assembly and support a causal role of the gene 
in complex IV deficiency.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/dds473
PMID: 23125284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]