---
reference_id: "PMID:10702374"
title: Cellular and molecular basis of beta-amyloid precursor protein metabolism.
authors:
- Greenfield JP
- Gross RS
- Gouras GK
- Xu H
journal: Front Biosci
year: '2000'
doi: 10.2741/greenfield
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cellular and molecular basis of beta-amyloid precursor protein metabolism.
**Authors:** Greenfield JP, Gross RS, Gouras GK, Xu H
**Journal:** Front Biosci (2000)
**DOI:** [10.2741/greenfield](https://doi.org/10.2741/greenfield)

## Content

1. Front Biosci. 2000 Jan 1;5:D72-83. doi: 10.2741/greenfield.

Cellular and molecular basis of beta-amyloid precursor protein metabolism.

Greenfield JP(1), Gross RS, Gouras GK, Xu H.

Author information:
(1)Fisher Center for Alzheimer Research and Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular 
Neuroscience, The Rockefeller University, New York NY 10021, USA.

In molecular neurobiology, perhaps no molecule has been as thoroughly examined 
as Alzheimer's beta-amyloid precursor protein (beta-APP). In the years since the 
cDNA encoding beta-APP was cloned, the protein has been the subject of 
unparalleled scrutiny on all levels. From molecular genetics and cellular 
biology to neuroanatomy and epidemiology, no scientific discipline has been left 
unexplored - and with good reason. beta-amyloid (Abeta) is the main constituent 
of the amyloidogenic plaques which are a primary pathological hallmark of 
Alzheimer's disease, and bta-APP is the protein from which Abeta is cleaved and 
released. Unraveling the molecular events underlying Abeta generation has been, 
and remains, of paramount importance to scientists in our field. In this review 
we will trace the progress that has been made in understanding the molecular and 
cellular basis of beta-APP trafficking and processing, or alternatively stated, 
the molecular basis for Abeta generation. Imperative to a complete understanding 
of Abeta generation is the delineation of its subcellular localization and the 
identification of proteins that play either direct or accessory roles in Abeta 
generation. We will focus on the regulation of beta-APP cleavage through diverse 
signal transduction mechanisms and discuss possible points of therapeutic 
intercession in what has been postulated to be a seminal molecular step in the 
cascade of events terminating in the onset of dementia, loss of neurons, and 
eventual death from Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.2741/greenfield
PMID: 10702374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]