---
reference_id: "PMID:37478813"
title: "Trends in Blood Lead Levels Quantified by ICP-MS: A Reference Laboratory Retrospective Study."
authors:
- Okoye NC
- Zuromski LM
- Johnson-Davis KL
journal: J Appl Lab Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/jalm/jfad051
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Child
- Infant
- "Child, Preschool"
- Lead
- Retrospective Studies
- Heme
- Reference Values
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trends in Blood Lead Levels Quantified by ICP-MS: A Reference Laboratory Retrospective Study.
**Authors:** Okoye NC, Zuromski LM, Johnson-Davis KL
**Journal:** J Appl Lab Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jalm/jfad051](https://doi.org/10.1093/jalm/jfad051)

## Content

1. J Appl Lab Med. 2023 Sep 7;8(5):909-916. doi: 10.1093/jalm/jfad051.

Trends in Blood Lead Levels Quantified by ICP-MS: A Reference Laboratory 
Retrospective Study.

Okoye NC(1)(2), Zuromski LM(3), Johnson-Davis KL(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Northwell Health Laboratories, Lake Success, NY, United States.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Donald and Barbara Zucker 
School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, Hempstead, NY, United States.
(3)ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, Salt Lake City, UT, 
United States.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Utah Health, Salt Lake City, UT, 
United States.

BACKGROUND: Exposure to lead may cause severe adverse effects such as anemia, 
neurologic damage, developmental disorders, and reproductive disorders. 
Consequently, in 2021, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
reduced its blood lead reference value from 5 µg/dL to 3.5 µg/dL in pediatric 
patients, 1 to 5 years old. The objective of this study was to perform a 
retrospective analysis of patient blood lead concentrations reported by ARUP 
Laboratories to evaluate the frequency of blood lead concentrations greater than 
3.5 µg/dL.
METHODS: The analysis of blood lead concentration was performed in venous whole 
blood specimens using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). In 
addition, retrospective data analysis was performed to evaluate zinc 
protoporphyrin (ZPP) concentrations in adult patients with corresponding lead 
results, using the lead industrial exposure panel. The analysis for ZPP was 
performed using quantitative hematofluorometry.
RESULTS: Retrospective data analysis identified a decline in blood lead 
concentrations from 2012 to 2021 for pediatric and adult patients. The 
calculated nonparametric 95% range for ZPP blood was 15 to 43 μg/dL and the ZPP 
heme ratio 26 to 74 μmol ZPP/mol heme.
CONCLUSIONS: Lowering the blood lead reference value (BLRV) to 3.5 μg/dL 
presents an opportunity for healthcare providers and public health agencies to 
extend medical or environmental interventions for lead exposure in pediatric 
patients.

© American Association for Clinical Chemistry 2023. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jalm/jfad051
PMID: 37478813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]