---
reference_id: "PMID:37871209"
title: "Crowdsourcing as a tool for creating effective nudges: An example for financial oversubscription."
authors:
- Paley A
- van de Ven N
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2308129120
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crowdsourcing as a tool for creating effective nudges: An example for financial oversubscription.
**Authors:** Paley A, van de Ven N
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2308129120](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2308129120)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 Oct 31;120(44):e2308129120. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2308129120. Epub 2023 Oct 23.

Crowdsourcing as a tool for creating effective nudges: An example for financial 
oversubscription.

Paley A(1), van de Ven N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Marketing, Tilburg University, 5037AB Tilburg, the Netherlands.

Creating effective nudges, or interventions that encourage people to make 
choices that increase their welfare, is difficult to execute well. Recent work 
on megastudies, massive field experiments that test many interventions 
simultaneously, reveals that nudge effectiveness both varies widely and is 
difficult for experts to predict. We propose an Iterative Crowdsourcing 
Procedure, which uses insights from members of the target population to generate 
and preselect nudges prior to testing them in a field experiment. This technique 
can supplement existing methods or stand alone as a way to generate conditions 
for testing in a high-quality field experiment. We test the effectiveness of 
this method in addressing a challenge to effective financial management: 
consumer oversubscription. We first document that people have more subscriptions 
than they think they have and that enhancing subscription awareness makes people 
want to cancel some subscriptions. We then use our crowdsourcing procedure to 
motivate people toward subscription awareness in a field experiment (N = 
4,412,113) with a large bank. We find that the crowdsourced nudges outperform 
those generated by the bank, demonstrating that the Iterative Crowdsourcing 
Procedure is a useful way to generate effective nudges.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2308129120
PMCID: PMC10622905
PMID: 37871209

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.