---
reference_id: "PMID:37703311"
title: Glial reactivity and T cell infiltration in frontotemporal lobar degeneration with tau pathology.
authors:
- Hartnell IJ
- Woodhouse D
- Jasper W
- Mason L
- Marwaha P
- Graffeuil M
- Lau LC
- Norman JL
- Chatelet DS
- Buee L
- Nicoll JAR
- Blum D
- Dorothee G
- Boche D
journal: Brain
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awad309
keywords:
- Humans
- Epitopes
- Frontotemporal Dementia/pathology
- Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration/pathology
- Glutamates
- Pick Disease of the Brain/pathology
- "Supranuclear Palsy, Progressive/pathology"
- tau Proteins/metabolism
- Tauopathies/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glial reactivity and T cell infiltration in frontotemporal lobar degeneration with tau pathology.
**Authors:** Hartnell IJ, Woodhouse D, Jasper W, Mason L, Marwaha P, Graffeuil M, Lau LC, Norman JL, Chatelet DS, Buee L, Nicoll JAR, Blum D, Dorothee G, Boche D
**Journal:** Brain (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awad309](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awad309)

## Content

1. Brain. 2024 Feb 1;147(2):590-606. doi: 10.1093/brain/awad309.

Glial reactivity and T cell infiltration in frontotemporal lobar degeneration 
with tau pathology.

Hartnell IJ(1), Woodhouse D(1), Jasper W(1), Mason L(1), Marwaha P(1), Graffeuil 
M(1), Lau LC(2), Norman JL(3), Chatelet DS(4), Buee L(5)(6), Nicoll JAR(1)(7), 
Blum D(5)(6), Dorothee G(1)(8), Boche D(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Southampton, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK.
(2)Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Sir Henry Wellcome 
Laboratories, University of Southampton, Southampton O16 6YD, UK.
(3)Histochemistry Research Unit, Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine University of Southampton, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK.
(4)Biomedical Imaging Unit, University Hospital Southampton NHS Trust, 
Southampton SO16 6YD, UK.
(5)University of Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, UMR-S1172-Lille Neurosciences and 
Cognition, Lille 59045, France.
(6)Alzheimer and Tauopathies, LabEX DISTALZ, Lille 59000, France.
(7)Department of Cellular Pathology, University Hospital Southampton NHS Trust, 
Southampton SO16 6YD, UK.
(8)Sorbonne Université, Inserm, Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine, CRSA, Immune 
System and Neuroinflammation Laboratory, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris 75012, 
France.

Frontotemporal lobar degeneration with tau (FTLD-tau) is a group of tauopathies 
that underlie ∼50% of FTLD cases. Identification of genetic risk variants 
related to innate/adaptive immunity have highlighted a role for 
neuroinflammation and neuroimmune interactions in FTLD. Studies have shown 
microglial and astrocyte activation together with T cell infiltration in the 
brain of THY-Tau22 tauopathy mice. However, this remains to be confirmed in 
FTLD-tau patients. We conducted a detailed post-mortem study of FTLD-tau cases 
including 45 progressive supranuclear palsy with clinical frontotemporal 
dementia, 33 Pick's disease, 12 FTLD-MAPT and 52 control brains to characterize 
the link between phosphorylated tau (pTau) epitopes and the innate and adaptive 
immunity. Tau pathology was assessed in the cerebral cortex using antibodies 
directed against: Tau-2 (phosphorylated and unphosphorylated tau), AT8 
(pSer202/pThr205), AT100 (pThr212/pSer214), CP13 (pSer202), PHF1 
(pSer396/pSer404), pThr181 and pSer356. The immunophenotypes of microglia and 
astrocytes were assessed with phenotypic markers (Iba1, CD68, HLA-DR, CD64, 
CD32a, CD16 for microglia and GFAP, EAAT2, glutamine synthetase and ALDH1L1 for 
astrocytes). The adaptive immune response was explored via CD4+ and CD8+ T cell 
quantification and the neuroinflammatory environment was investigated via the 
expression of 30 inflammatory-related proteins using V-Plex Meso Scale 
Discovery. As expected, all pTau markers were increased in FTLD-tau cases 
compared to controls. pSer356 expression was greatest in FTLD-MAPT cases versus 
controls (P < 0.0001), whereas the expression of other markers was highest in 
Pick's disease. Progressive supranuclear palsy with frontotemporal dementia 
consistently had a lower pTau protein load compared to Pick's disease across tau 
epitopes. The only microglial marker increased in FTLD-tau was CD16 (P = 0.0292) 
and specifically in FTLD-MAPT cases (P = 0.0150). However, several associations 
were detected between pTau epitopes and microglia, supporting an interplay 
between them. GFAP expression was increased in FTLD-tau (P = 0.0345) with the 
highest expression in Pick's disease (P = 0.0019), while ALDH1L1 was unchanged. 
Markers of astrocyte glutamate cycling function were reduced in FTLD-tau (P = 
0.0075; Pick's disease: P < 0.0400) implying astrocyte reactivity associated 
with a decreased glutamate cycling activity, which was further associated with 
pTau expression. Of the inflammatory proteins assessed in the brain, five 
chemokines were upregulated in Pick's disease cases (P < 0.0400), consistent 
with the recruitment of CD4+ (P = 0.0109) and CD8+ (P = 0.0014) T cells. Of 
note, the CD8+ T cell infiltration was associated with pTau epitopes and 
microglial and astrocytic markers. Our results highlight that FTLD-tau is 
associated with astrocyte reactivity, remarkably little activation of microglia, 
but involvement of adaptive immunity in the form of chemokine-driven recruitment 
of T lymphocytes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awad309
PMCID: PMC10834257
PMID: 37703311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no competing interests.