---
reference_id: "PMID:35697328"
title: "Two novel CACNA1F gene mutations cause two different phenotypes: Aland Eye Disease and incomplete Congenital Stationary Night Blindness."
authors:
- Mihalich A
- Cammarata G
- Tremolada G
- Pollazzon M
- Di Blasio AM
- Marzoli SB
journal: Exp Eye Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2022.109143
keywords:
- "Albinism, Ocular"
- "Calcium Channels, L-Type/genetics"
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary"
- Finland
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Myopia/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Night Blindness/diagnosis, genetics"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two novel CACNA1F gene mutations cause two different phenotypes: Aland Eye Disease and incomplete Congenital Stationary Night Blindness.
**Authors:** Mihalich A, Cammarata G, Tremolada G, Pollazzon M, Di Blasio AM, Marzoli SB
**Journal:** Exp Eye Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.exer.2022.109143](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exer.2022.109143)

## Content

1. Exp Eye Res. 2022 Aug;221:109143. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2022.109143. Epub 2022
Jun  11.

Two novel CACNA1F gene mutations cause two different phenotypes: Aland Eye
Disease and incomplete Congenital Stationary Night Blindness.

Mihalich A(1), Cammarata G(2), Tremolada G(2), Pollazzon M(3), Di Blasio AM(4),
Marzoli SB(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Istituto Auxologico Italiano IRCCS, Milan,
Italy. Electronic address: a.mihalich@auxologico.it.
(2)Neuro-Ophthalmology Center and Electrophysiology Laboratory, Department of
Ophthalmology, Istituto Auxologico Italiano IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(3)SOC di Genetica Medica Azienda USL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia,
Italy.
(4)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Istituto Auxologico Italiano IRCCS, Milan,
Italy.

Congenital Stationary Night Blindness type 2 (CSNB2) and Aland island Eye
Disease (AIED) associated with CACNA1F mutation demonstrate a significant
phenotype overlapping. We report two cases with different clinical presentation
carrying two novel mutations in CACNA1F gene. Subjects underwent a complete
neurophtahlmological examination associated with structural and
electrofunctional insight. Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) analysis of 31 genes
previously associated with retinal dystrophy (RD) was performed. Messenger RNAs
derived from probands 'peripheral blood samples were analyzed by RT-PCR and cDNA
sequencing. The neuro-ophthalmological examinations revealed different clinical,
structural and morphological presentations, more severe in patient 1 compared
with patient 2. Molecular analysis revealed, that both patients had the
hemizygous form of two novel mutations in CACNA1F gene. Patient 1 presented a
duplication (c.425dupC) in exon 4, resulting in shifting of the reading frame
with the insertion of a premature Stop codon. In Patient 2 variant c.5156G > C
localized in the donor's splicing site of exon 43 was identified. Complementary
DNA sequencing demonstrated skipping of exon 43 with a deletion of 55 amino
acids that causes a frame shift with insertion of a Stop codon. These findings
suggest that the effect and the localization of the mutations in the CACNA1F
gene can explain different clinical phenotypes. Clinical spectrum is more severe
and resembles the AIED phenotype when the mutation affects the first part of the
protein, while it is more similar to CSNB2 if the mutation is localized at the
end of the protein. Genetic testing results to be an essential tool to provide
more accurate diagnosis and prognosis in patients with inherited retinal
degenerative disorders and could help, in the future, to develop more specific
therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2022.109143
PMID: 35697328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
