---
reference_id: "PMID:29094314"
title: Volumetric Changes in Hippocampal Subregions and Memory Performance in Mesial Temporal Lobe Epilepsy with Hippocampal Sclerosis.
authors:
- Ji C
- Zhu L
- Chen C
- Wang S
- Zheng L
- Li H
journal: Neurosci Bull
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s12264-017-0186-2
keywords:
- Adult
- Asian People
- Atrophy/pathology
- "Epilepsy, Temporal Lobe/complications, pathology"
- Female
- Functional Laterality
- Hippocampus/pathology
- Humans
- Male
- "Memory Disorders/etiology, pathology"
- Sclerosis/pathology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Volumetric Changes in Hippocampal Subregions and Memory Performance in Mesial Temporal Lobe Epilepsy with Hippocampal Sclerosis.
**Authors:** Ji C, Zhu L, Chen C, Wang S, Zheng L, Li H
**Journal:** Neurosci Bull (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12264-017-0186-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12264-017-0186-2)

## Content

1. Neurosci Bull. 2018 Apr;34(2):389-396. doi: 10.1007/s12264-017-0186-2. Epub
2017  Nov 1.

Volumetric Changes in Hippocampal Subregions and Memory Performance in Mesial
Temporal Lobe Epilepsy with Hippocampal Sclerosis.

Ji C(1), Zhu L(1), Chen C(1), Wang S(1), Zheng L(2), Li H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Epilepsy Center, Second Affiliated Hospital, School
of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310009, China.
(2)Department of Psychology, Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310009, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310009, China. 2513087@zju.edu.cn.

In the present study we explored the different patterns of volumetric atrophy in
hippocampal subregions of patients with left and right mesial temporal lobe
epilepsy with hippocampal sclerosis (TLE-HS). Meanwhile, the memory impairment
patterns in Chinese-speaking TLE-HS patients and potential influencing factors
were also determined. TLE-HS patients (21 left and 17 right) and 21 healthy
controls were recruited to complete T2-weighted imaging and verbal/nonverbal
memory assessment. The results showed that both left and right TLE-HS patients
had overall reduced hippocampal subregion volumes on the sclerotic side, and
cornu ammonis sectors (CA1) exhibited maximum atrophy. The verbal memory of left
TLE-HS patients was significantly impaired (P < 0.001) and was not associated
with the volumes of the left hippocampal subregions. Verbal or nonverbal memory
impairment was not found in the patients with right TLE-HS. These results
suggested that the atrophy of hippocampal subregion volumes cannot account for
the verbal memory impairment, which might be related to the functional network.

DOI: 10.1007/s12264-017-0186-2
PMCID: PMC5856714
PMID: 29094314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
