---
reference_id: "PMID:11799365"
title: "Release of allergens as respirable aerosols: A link between grass pollen and asthma."
authors:
- Taylor PE
- Flagan RC
- Valenta R
- Glovsky MM
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1067/mai.2002.120759
keywords:
- Aerosols
- Allergens/analysis
- Asthma/etiology
- Humans
- Particle Size
- Poaceae/immunology
- Pollen/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Release of allergens as respirable aerosols: A link between grass pollen and asthma.
**Authors:** Taylor PE, Flagan RC, Valenta R, Glovsky MM
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1067/mai.2002.120759](https://doi.org/10.1067/mai.2002.120759)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2002 Jan;109(1):51-6. doi: 10.1067/mai.2002.120759.

Release of allergens as respirable aerosols: A link between grass pollen and 
asthma.

Taylor PE(1), Flagan RC, Valenta R, Glovsky MM.

Author information:
(1)Asthma and Allergy Center, Huntington Medical Research Institute, Huntington 
Memorial Hospital, Pasadena, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Asthma incidence has long been linked to pollen, even though pollen 
grains are too large to penetrate into the airways where asthmatic responses 
originate. Pollen allergens found in small, respirable particles have been 
implicated in a number of asthma epidemics, particularly ones following rainfall 
or thunderstorms.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine how pollen allergens form the 
respirable aerosols necessary for triggering asthma.
METHODS: Flowering grasses were humidified and then dried in a 
controlled-environment chamber connected to a cascade impactor and an aerosol 
particle counter. Particles shed from the flowers were analyzed with 
high-resolution microscopy and immunolabeled with rabbit anti-Phl p 1 antibody, 
which is specific for group 1 pollen allergens.
RESULTS: Contrary to what has been reported in other published accounts, most of 
the pollen in this investigation remained on the open anthers of wind pollinated 
plants unless disturbed-eg, by wind. Increasing humidity caused anthers to 
close. After a cycle of wetting and drying followed by wind disturbance, grasses 
flowering within a chamber produced an aerosol of particles that were collected 
in a cascade impactor. These particles consisted of fragmented pollen cytoplasm 
in the size range 0.12 to 4.67 microm; they were loaded with group 1 allergens.
CONCLUSION: Here we provide the first direct observations of the release of 
grass pollen allergens as respirable aerosols. They can emanate directly from 
the flower after a moisture-drying cycle. This could explain asthmatic responses 
associated with grass pollination, particularly after moist weather conditions.

DOI: 10.1067/mai.2002.120759
PMID: 11799365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]