---
reference_id: "PMID:18630721"
title: New insights in the pathogenesis of aortic aneurysms.
authors:
- Loeys B
- De Paepe A
journal: Verh K Acad Geneeskd Belg
year: '2008'
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Animals, Genetically Modified"
- "Aortic Aneurysm/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "Aortic Aneurysm, Thoracic/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- "Marfan Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Mice
- "Models, Genetic"
- "Transforming Growth Factor beta/genetics, metabolism"
- Up-Regulation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New insights in the pathogenesis of aortic aneurysms.
**Authors:** Loeys B, De Paepe A
**Journal:** Verh K Acad Geneeskd Belg (2008)

## Content

1. Verh K Acad Geneeskd Belg. 2008;70(2):69-84.

New insights in the pathogenesis of aortic aneurysms.

Loeys B(1), De Paepe A.

Author information:
(1)Department Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent
University, University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, B 9000 Gent.

Aortic aneurysms are an important cause of mortality in the western world.
Monogenic disorders such as the Marfan syndrome (MFS) are good genetic models
for the pathogenesis of aortic aneurysm. In the MFS, progressive dilatation of
the aortic root leads to aortic aneurysm and dissection, often associated with
precocious death. Early pathogenetic models for MFS focused upon structural
weakness of the tissues imposed by microfibrillar deficiency. However, recent
studies of transgenic mouse models have challenged this model and demonstrated a
central role for the upregulation of the TGFbeta signaling pathway. The
discovery of a new aortic aneurysm syndrome, the Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS),
confirmed the importance of the cytokine TGFbeta in aneurysm pathogenesis. The
main distinguishing features between LDS and MFS include the presence of
hypertelorism, cleft palate/bifid uvula and arterial tortuosity. LDS is caused
by mutations in the genes encoding the receptors for TGFbeta (TGFBR1/2). This
insight helped to elucidate the pathogenesis of another rare autosomal recessive
connective tissue disorder, arterial tortuosity syndrome. This disease is caused
by mutations in the SLC2A10 gene, coding for GLUT10, a member of the glucose
transporter family. In analogy to LDS, we demonstrated an upregulation of
TGFbeta in ATS. Finally, all these insights have also lead to new therapeutic
insights. In transgenic mouse models it was shown that losartan, an angiotensin
II type 1 receptor with known inhibiting effects on TGFbeta, rescues the aortic
phenotype. If these promising results are confirmed in human trials, losartan
might have beneficial effects in the treatment of more common nonhereditary
aortic aneurysms.

PMID: 18630721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
