---
reference_id: "PMID:37507235"
title: Cancer detection after a 9-year course of Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome complicated by anti-Hu associated limbic encephalitis.
authors:
- Falso S
- Spagni G
- Iorio R
- Evoli A
journal: Neuromuscul Disord
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2023.06.011
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- "Lambert-Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome/complications, diagnosis"
- "Limbic Encephalitis/complications, diagnosis"
- Fluorodeoxyglucose F18
- Positron Emission Tomography Computed Tomography/adverse effects
- Autoantibodies
- Calcium Channels
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cancer detection after a 9-year course of Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome complicated by anti-Hu associated limbic encephalitis.
**Authors:** Falso S, Spagni G, Iorio R, Evoli A
**Journal:** Neuromuscul Disord (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nmd.2023.06.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nmd.2023.06.011)

## Content

1. Neuromuscul Disord. 2023 Sep;33(9):90-92. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2023.06.011. Epub
 2023 Jun 30.

Cancer detection after a 9-year course of Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome 
complicated by anti-Hu associated limbic encephalitis.

Falso S(1), Spagni G(2), Iorio R(3), Evoli A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome 
00168, Italy. Electronic address: falsosilvia@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome 
00168, Italy.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome 
00168, Italy; Neurology Unit, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino 
Gemelli IRCCS, Rome 00168, Italy.

Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) is an autoimmune neuromuscular junction 
disorder, paraneoplastic in 55% of cases and commonly associated with small-cell 
lung cancer (SCLC). We report the case of a 61-year-old man presented who with a 
3-month history of lower limb proximal weakness, progressing to upper limbs, 
associated with dysphagia, xerostomia and erectile dysfunction. 
Electrodiagnostic studies and anti voltage-gated calcium channel (VGCC) 
antibodies (Abs) detection confirmed LEMS diagnosis. Contrast-enhanced thorax 
computed tomography (CT) scan and subsequently [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) 
positron emission tomography (PET) showed no malignancy. Two years after the 
onset of LEMS, he was diagnosed with anti-Hu limbic encephalitis (LE). 
FDG-PET/CT scan remained negative for the following seven years. Nine years 
after LEMS onset, a hypermetabolic lesion of the left lung hilus was detected. 
This is a case of a paraneoplastic LEMS where the interval between the onset of 
neurological disease and tumour detection was as long as nine years.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nmd.2023.06.011
PMID: 37507235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.