---
reference_id: "PMID:27464020"
title: "Decreased Glutathione S-transferase Level and Neonatal Hyperbilirubinemia Associated with Glucose-6-phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency: A Perspective Review."
authors:
- Al-Abdi SY
journal: Am J Perinatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1055/s-0036-1585465
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Decreased Glutathione S-transferase Level and Neonatal Hyperbilirubinemia Associated with Glucose-6-phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency: A Perspective Review.
**Authors:** Al-Abdi SY
**Journal:** Am J Perinatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0036-1585465](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0036-1585465)

## Content

1. Am J Perinatol. 2017 Feb;34(3):305-314. doi: 10.1055/s-0036-1585465. Epub 2016
 Jul 27.

Decreased Glutathione S-transferase Level and Neonatal Hyperbilirubinemia 
Associated with Glucose-6-phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency: A Perspective 
Review.

Al-Abdi SY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, King Abdulaziz Hospital, Ministry of National 
Guard, Al-Ahsa, Saudi Arabia.

Classically, genetically decreased bilirubin conjugation and/or hemolysis 
account for the mechanisms contributing to neonatal hyperbilirubinemia 
associated with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. However, 
these mechanisms are not involved in most cases of this hyperbilirubinemia. 
Additional plausible mechanisms for G6PD deficiency-associated 
hyperbilirubinemia need to be considered. Glutathione S-transferases (GST) 
activity depends on a steady quantity of reduced form of glutathione (GSH). If 
GSH is oxidized, it is reduced back by glutathione reductase, which requires the 
reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH). The main 
source of NADPH is the pentose phosphate pathway, in which G6PD is the first 
enzyme. Rat kidney GSH, rat liver GST, and human red blood cell GST levels have 
been found to positively correlate with G6PD levels in their respective tissues. 
As G6PD is expressed in hepatocytes, it is expected that GST levels would be 
significantly decreased in hepatocytes of G6PD-deficient neonates. As hepatic 
GST binds bilirubin and prevents their reflux into circulation, hypothesis that 
decreased GST levels in hepatocytes is an additional mechanism contributing to 
G6PD deficiency-associated hyperbilirubinemia seems plausible. Evidence for and 
against this hypothesis are discussed in this article hoping to stimulate 
further research on the role of GST in G6PD deficiency-associated 
hyperbilirubinemia.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0036-1585465
PMID: 27464020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]