---
reference_id: "PMID:39379650"
title: "Phenotyping vestibulocochlear manifestations in Susac syndrome: a cohort study."
authors:
- Roelens A
- Vandekerckhove M
- Maes L
- Dekeyser C
- Hemelsoet D
- Van Driessche V
- Miatton M
- Van Hijfte L
- De Zaeytijd J
- Van Vrekhem T
- Laureys G
- Van Hoecke H
journal: Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00405-024-09011-2
keywords:
- Humans
- "Susac Syndrome/complications, physiopathology, diagnosis"
- Female
- Male
- Adult
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/etiology, physiopathology, diagnosis"
- Phenotype
- Adolescent
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- Vestibular Evoked Myogenic Potentials
- Child
- Cohort Studies
- Vestibular Function Tests
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotyping vestibulocochlear manifestations in Susac syndrome: a cohort study.
**Authors:** Roelens A, Vandekerckhove M, Maes L, Dekeyser C, Hemelsoet D, Van Driessche V, Miatton M, Van Hijfte L, De Zaeytijd J, Van Vrekhem T, Laureys G, Van Hoecke H
**Journal:** Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00405-024-09011-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00405-024-09011-2)

## Content

1. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2025 Mar;282(3):1189-1200. doi:
10.1007/s00405-024-09011-2. Epub 2024 Oct 8.

Phenotyping vestibulocochlear manifestations in Susac syndrome: a cohort study.

Roelens A(#)(1), Vandekerckhove M(#)(2), Maes L(3), Dekeyser C(4), Hemelsoet
D(4), Van Driessche V(5), Miatton M(3), Van Hijfte L(3), De Zaeytijd J(6), Van
Vrekhem T(3), Laureys G(4), Van Hoecke H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Department of Head and Skin, Ghent
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. astrid.roelens@ugent.be.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Department of Head and Skin, Ghent
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent,
Belgium.
(4)Department of Neurology, Department of Head and Skin, Ghent University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Department of Radiology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Department of Head and Skin, Ghent University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: To characterize vestibulocochlear involvement in patients with Susac
syndrome (SuS), a rare immune-mediated endotheliopathy of cerebral, retinal and
inner ear microvasculature causing a triad of encephalopathy, branch retinal
artery occlusions and sensorineural hearing loss.
METHODS: The electronic patient files of 21 patients with SuS are reviewed for
data on demography, clinical presentation, disease course and audiovestibular
testing.
RESULTS: All 21 patients experienced some form of audiovestibular complaints
during the disease course, with vertigo and instability being most frequently
reported, followed by hearing loss, tinnitus and aural fullness. These
audiovestibular symptoms did not always coincide. Fifteen patients had
objectified predominant low- to midfrequency sensorineural hearing loss and 8
out of 18 patients showed abnormalities on vestibular testing, most frequently
vestibular evoked myogenic potential-abnormalities, indicating otolith
dysfunction. Treatment protocols consisted of uniformly extensive
immunosuppressive therapy and hearing loss remained mostly mild.
CONCLUSION: Audiovestibular involvement is very common in patients with SuS.
Characteristic findings include a "reverse-slope" configuration on audiological
testing and otolith dysfunction on vestibular testing. Aggressive
immunosuppression may prevent severe audiovestibular dysfunction. Symptoms as
aural fullness and otolith dysfunction may indicate an underlying hydrops.
Further investigations are necessary to elucidate the histopathological
mechanisms underlying these preferentially involved cochleovestibular areas.
Early recognition and treatment of SuS are important to stabilize or decrease
disease activity and might also have beneficial effects on inner ear outcome.
THE SUBMITTED MANUSCRIPT REPORTS DATA DERIVED FROM CLINICAL OBSERVATIONS IN
HUMANS: Consent for the research was provided by the Ethics Committee of Ghent
University hospital (application number 2019/1443, registration date 31/12/2021,
principal investigator Guy Laureys).

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-024-09011-2
PMID: 39379650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. No funding was received for
conducting this study. The authors have no interests to declare that are
relevant to the content of this article.
