---
reference_id: "PMID:36123095"
title: "Epidemiology, diagnostics and factors associated with mortality during a cholera epidemic in Nigeria, October 2020-October 2021: a retrospective analysis of national surveillance data."
authors:
- Elimian K
- Yennan S
- Musah A
- Cheshi ID
- King C
- Dunkwu L
- Mohammed AL
- Ekeng E
- Akande OW
- Ayres S
- Gandi B
- Pembi E
- Saleh F
- Omar AN
- Crawford E
- Olopha OO
- Nnaji R
- Muhammad B
- Luka-Lawal R
- Ihueze AC
- Olatunji D
- Ojukwu C
- Akinpelu AM
- Adaga E
- Abubakar Y
- Nwadiuto I
- Ngishe S
- Alowooye AB
- Nwogwugwu PC
- Kamaldeen K
- Abah HN
- Chukwuebuka EH
- Yusuff HA
- Mamadu I
- Mohammed AA
- Peter S
- Abbah OC
- Oladotun PM
- Oifoh S
- Olugbile M
- Agogo E
- Ndodo N
- Babatunde O
- Mba N
- Oladejo J
- Ilori E
- Alfvén T
- Myles P
- Ochu CL
- Ihekweazu C
- Adetifa I
journal: BMJ Open
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-063703
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology, diagnostics and factors associated with mortality during a cholera epidemic in Nigeria, October 2020-October 2021: a retrospective analysis of national surveillance data.
**Authors:** Elimian K, Yennan S, Musah A, Cheshi ID, King C, Dunkwu L, Mohammed AL, Ekeng E, Akande OW, Ayres S, Gandi B, Pembi E, Saleh F, Omar AN, Crawford E, Olopha OO, Nnaji R, Muhammad B, Luka-Lawal R, Ihueze AC, Olatunji D, Ojukwu C, Akinpelu AM, Adaga E, Abubakar Y, Nwadiuto I, Ngishe S, Alowooye AB, Nwogwugwu PC, Kamaldeen K, Abah HN, Chukwuebuka EH, Yusuff HA, Mamadu I, Mohammed AA, Peter S, Abbah OC, Oladotun PM, Oifoh S, Olugbile M, Agogo E, Ndodo N, Babatunde O, Mba N, Oladejo J, Ilori E, Alfvén T, Myles P, Ochu CL, Ihekweazu C, Adetifa I
**Journal:** BMJ Open (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmjopen-2022-063703](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2022-063703)

## Content

1. BMJ Open. 2022 Sep 19;12(9):e063703. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-063703.

Epidemiology, diagnostics and factors associated with mortality during a cholera 
epidemic in Nigeria, October 2020-October 2021: a retrospective analysis of 
national surveillance data.

Elimian K(1)(2), Yennan S(3), Musah A(4), Cheshi ID(3), King C(2), Dunkwu L(5), 
Mohammed AL(3), Ekeng E(3), Akande OW(6), Ayres S(2), Gandi B(7), Pembi E(8), 
Saleh F(3), Omar AN(3), Crawford E(3), Olopha OO(3), Nnaji R(3), Muhammad B(9), 
Luka-Lawal R(3), Ihueze AC(10), Olatunji D(3), Ojukwu C(3), Akinpelu AM(3), 
Adaga E(3), Abubakar Y(11), Nwadiuto I(12), Ngishe S(13), Alowooye AB(14), 
Nwogwugwu PC(15), Kamaldeen K(16), Abah HN(3), Chukwuebuka EH(17), Yusuff 
HA(18), Mamadu I(19), Mohammed AA(20), Peter S(3), Abbah OC(3), Oladotun PM(3), 
Oifoh S(3), Olugbile M(21), Agogo E(22), Ndodo N(3), Babatunde O(3), Mba N(3), 
Oladejo J(3), Ilori E(3), Alfvén T(2), Myles P(23), Ochu CL(3), Ihekweazu C(3), 
Adetifa I(3).

Author information:
(1)Nigeria Centre for Disease Control, Abuja, Nigeria kelly.elimian@ki.se.
(2)Department of Global Public Health, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Nigeria Centre for Disease Control, Abuja, Nigeria.
(4)Department of Risk and Disaster Reduction, University College London, London, 
UK.
(5)Tony Blair Institute for Global Change, London, UK.
(6)Department of Epidemiology and Community Health, University of Ilorin 
Teaching Hospital, Ilorin, Nigeria.
(7)Bauchi State Ministry of Health, Bauchi, Nigeria.
(8)Adamawa State Ministry of Health, Yola, Nigeria.
(9)Kano State Ministry of Health, Kano, Nigeria.
(10)Georgetown University, Abuja, Nigeria.
(11)Zamfara State Ministry of Health, Zamfara State, Nigeria.
(12)Rivers State Ministry of Health, Port Harcourt, Nigeria.
(13)Public Health, Ministry of Health, Benue State, Makurdi, Nigeria.
(14)Ekitit State Ministry of Health and Human Services, Ado-Ekiti, Nigeria.
(15)Abia State Ministry of Health, Umuanhia, Nigeria.
(16)Kwara State Ministry of Health, Ilorin, Nigeria.
(17)Imo State Ministry of Health, Owerri, Nigeria.
(18)Ogun State Ministry of Health, Abeokuta, Nigeria.
(19)World Health Organization Country Office for Nigeria, Abuja, Nigeria.
(20)Ministry of Health, Sokoto State, Sokoto, Nigeria.
(21)World Bank Nigeria Office, Abuja, Nigeria.
(22)Resolve to Saves Lives, Abuja, Nigeria.
(23)Clinical Practice Research Datalink, London, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Nigeria reported an upsurge in cholera cases in October 2020, which 
then transitioned into a large, disseminated epidemic for most of 2021. This 
study aimed to describe the epidemiology, diagnostic performance of rapid 
diagnostic test (RDT) kits and the factors associated with mortality during the 
epidemic.
DESIGN: A retrospective analysis of national surveillance data.
SETTING: 33 of 37 states (including the Federal Capital Territory) in Nigeria.
PARTICIPANTS: Persons who met cholera case definition (a person of any age with 
acute watery diarrhoea, with or without vomiting) between October 2020 and 
October 2021 within the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control surveillance data.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Attack rate (AR; per 100 000 persons), case fatality rate 
(CFR; %) and accuracy of RDT performance compared with culture using area under 
the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC). Additionally, individual 
factors associated with cholera deaths and hospitalisation were presented as 
adjusted OR with 95% CIs.
RESULTS: Overall, 93 598 cholera cases and 3298 deaths (CFR: 3.5%) were reported 
across 33 of 37 states in Nigeria within the study period. The proportions of 
cholera cases were higher in men aged 5-14 years and women aged 25-44 years. The 
overall AR was 46.5 per 100 000 persons. The North-West region recorded the 
highest AR with 102 per 100 000. Older age, male gender, residency in the 
North-Central region and severe dehydration significantly increased the odds of 
cholera deaths. The cholera RDT had excellent diagnostic accuracy (AUROC=0.91; 
95% CI 0.87 to 0.96).
CONCLUSIONS: Cholera remains a serious public health threat in Nigeria with a 
high mortality rate. Thus, we recommend making RDT kits more widely accessible 
for improved surveillance and prompt case management across the country.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-063703
PMCID: PMC9486350
PMID: 36123095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.