---
reference_id: "PMID:28035485"
title: Action and function of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in the progression from chronic hepatitis C to hepatocellular carcinoma.
authors:
- Wang W
- Pan Q
- Fuhler GM
- Smits R
- Peppelenbosch MP
journal: J Gastroenterol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s00535-016-1299-5
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/genetics, physiopathology, virology"
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic"
- Disease Progression
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/complications, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Liver Cirrhosis/complications, virology"
- "Liver Neoplasms/genetics, physiopathology, virology"
- Mutation
- Viral Structural Proteins/physiology
- "Wnt Signaling Pathway/genetics, physiology"
- beta Catenin/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Action and function of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in the progression from chronic hepatitis C to hepatocellular carcinoma.
**Authors:** Wang W, Pan Q, Fuhler GM, Smits R, Peppelenbosch MP
**Journal:** J Gastroenterol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00535-016-1299-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00535-016-1299-5)

## Content

1. J Gastroenterol. 2017 Apr;52(4):419-431. doi: 10.1007/s00535-016-1299-5. Epub
2016 Dec 29.

Action and function of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in the progression from chronic
hepatitis C to hepatocellular carcinoma.

Wang W(1), Pan Q(2), Fuhler GM(2), Smits R(2), Peppelenbosch MP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus University Medical
Center, 's Gravendijkwal 230, 3015 CE, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
w.wang.1@erasmusmc.nl.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus University Medical
Center, 's Gravendijkwal 230, 3015 CE, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Erratum in
    J Gastroenterol. 2018 Apr;53(4):576-577. doi: 10.1007/s00535-017-1392-4.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is one of the leading causes of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) worldwide but the mechanistic basis as to how chronic HCV
infection furthers the HCC process remains only poorly understood. Accumulating
evidence indicates that HCV core and nonstructural proteins provoke activation
of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway, and the evidence supporting a role of
Wnt/β-catenin signaling in the onset and progression of HCC is compelling.
Convincing molecular explanations as to how expression of viral effectors
translates into increased activity of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling machinery are
still largely lacking, hampering the design of rational strategies aimed at
preventing HCC. Furthermore, how such increased signaling is especially
associated with HCC oncogenesis in the context of HCV infection remains obscure
as well. Here we review the body of contemporary biomedical knowledge on the
role of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway in the progression from chronic hepatitis C to
cirrhosis and HCC and explore potential hypotheses as to the mechanisms
involved.

DOI: 10.1007/s00535-016-1299-5
PMCID: PMC5357489
PMID: 28035485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.
