---
reference_id: "PMID:17924545"
title: "Primary central nervous system vasculitis: analysis of 101 patients."
authors:
- Salvarani C
- Brown RD Jr
- Calamia KT
- Christianson TJ
- Weigand SD
- Miller DV
- Giannini C
- Meschia JF
- Huston J 3rd
- Hunder GG
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/ana.21226
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Clinical Trials as Topic/methods
- Cohort Studies
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, mortality, therapy"
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Rate/trends
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/diagnosis, mortality, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary central nervous system vasculitis: analysis of 101 patients.
**Authors:** Salvarani C, Brown RD Jr, Calamia KT, Christianson TJ, Weigand SD, Miller DV, Giannini C, Meschia JF, Huston J 3rd, Hunder GG
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.21226](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.21226)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2007 Nov;62(5):442-51. doi: 10.1002/ana.21226.

Primary central nervous system vasculitis: analysis of 101 patients.

Salvarani C(1), Brown RD Jr, Calamia KT, Christianson TJ, Weigand SD, Miller DV, 
Giannini C, Meschia JF, Huston J 3rd, Hunder GG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 2007 Nov;62(5):430-2. doi: 10.1002/ana.21283.
    Ann Neurol. 2008 Aug;64(2):228; author reply 229. doi: 10.1002/ana.21347.
    Ann Neurol. 2008 Aug;64(2):228; author reply 229. doi: 10.1002/ana.21349.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the clinical findings, response to therapy, outcome, and 
incidence of primary central nervous system vasculitis (PCNSV) in a large cohort 
from a single center.
METHODS: We retrospectively studied 101 patients with PCNSV, selected by 
predetermined diagnostic criteria, who were seen during a 21-year period. This 
was a collaborative study by five departments at a large multispecialty clinic. 
Clinical findings and outcomes were compared among patients categorized by 
method of diagnosis, response to therapy, survival, and degree of disability. An 
annual incidence rate was calculated.
RESULTS: Seventy patients were diagnosed by angiography and 31 by central 
nervous system biopsy. Three histological patterns were observed during biopsy. 
Although most patients responded to therapy, an increased mortality rate was 
observed. Relapses occurred in one fourth of patients. Mortality rate and 
disability at last follow-up were greater in those who presented with a focal 
neurological deficit, cognitive impairment, cerebral infarctions, and 
angiographic large-vessel involvement but were lower in those with prominent 
gadolinium-enhanced lesions when evaluated by magnetic resonance imaging. The 
annual incidence rate of PCNSV was 2.4 cases per 1,000,000 person-years.
INTERPRETATION: PCNSV is a rare disease that may result in serious neurological 
outcomes or death. Angiography and brain biopsy may complement each other when 
determining the diagnosis. Early recognition and treatment may reduce poor 
outcomes. PCNSV is a variable syndrome that appears to consist of several 
subsets of heterogeneous diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.21226
PMID: 17924545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]