---
reference_id: "PMID:23815264"
title: "Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in transfusion medicine: the unknown risks."
authors:
- Francis RO
- Jhang JS
- Pham HP
- Hod EA
- Zimring JC
- Spitalnik SL
journal: Vox Sang
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/vox.12068
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in transfusion medicine: the unknown risks.
**Authors:** Francis RO, Jhang JS, Pham HP, Hod EA, Zimring JC, Spitalnik SL
**Journal:** Vox Sang (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/vox.12068](https://doi.org/10.1111/vox.12068)

## Content

1. Vox Sang. 2013 Nov;105(4):271-82. doi: 10.1111/vox.12068. Epub 2013 Jul 2.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in transfusion medicine: the 
unknown risks.

Francis RO(1), Jhang JS, Pham HP, Hod EA, Zimring JC, Spitalnik SL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Laboratory of Transfusion Biology, 
Columbia University Medical Center-New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, 
USA.

The hallmark of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is red blood 
cell (RBC) destruction in response to oxidative stress. Patients requiring RBC 
transfusions may simultaneously receive oxidative medications or have concurrent 
infections, both of which can induce haemolysis in G6PD-deficient RBCs. Although 
it is not routine practice to screen healthy blood donors for G6PD deficiency, 
case reports identified transfusion of G6PD-deficient RBCs as causing haemolysis 
and other adverse events. In addition, some patient populations may be more at 
risk for complications associated with transfusions of G6PD-deficient RBCs 
because they receive RBCs from donors who are more likely to have G6PD 
deficiency. This review discusses G6PD deficiency, its importance in transfusion 
medicine, changes in the RBC antioxidant system (of which G6PD is essential) 
during refrigerated storage and mechanisms of haemolysis. In addition, as yet 
unanswered questions that could be addressed by translational and clinical 
studies are identified and discussed.

© 2013 International Society of Blood Transfusion.

DOI: 10.1111/vox.12068
PMCID: PMC3797222
PMID: 23815264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors have no 
competing interests relevant to the manuscript submitted to VOX SANGUINIS.