---
reference_id: "PMID:26048034"
title: "Alpha-mannosidosis: correlation between phenotype, genotype and mutant MAN2B1 subcellular localisation."
authors:
- Borgwardt L
- Stensland HM
- Olsen KJ
- Wibrand F
- Klenow HB
- Beck M
- Amraoui Y
- Arash L
- Fogh J
- Nilssen Ø
- Dali CI
- Lund AM
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0286-x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- "Mannosidases/genetics, metabolism"
- Oligosaccharides/cerebrospinal fluid
- Phenotype
- Young Adult
- "alpha-Mannosidosis/enzymology, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-mannosidosis: correlation between phenotype, genotype and mutant MAN2B1 subcellular localisation.
**Authors:** Borgwardt L, Stensland HM, Olsen KJ, Wibrand F, Klenow HB, Beck M, Amraoui Y, Arash L, Fogh J, Nilssen Ø, Dali CI, Lund AM
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-015-0286-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-015-0286-x)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2015 Jun 6;10:70. doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0286-x.

Alpha-mannosidosis: correlation between phenotype, genotype and mutant MAN2B1
subcellular localisation.

Borgwardt L(1), Stensland HM(2), Olsen KJ(3), Wibrand F(4), Klenow HB(5), Beck
M(6), Amraoui Y(7), Arash L(8), Fogh J(9), Nilssen Ø(10)(11), Dali CI(12), Lund
AM(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases,
Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet, 9 Blegdamsvej, 2100, Copenhagen,
Denmark. line.gutte.borgwardt@regionh.dk.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Division of Child and Adolescent Health,
University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
hilde.monica.stensland@unn.no.
(3)Larix, CRO, Ballerup, Denmark. kjo@larix.dk.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases,
Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet, 9 Blegdamsvej, 2100, Copenhagen,
Denmark. Flemming.Wibrand@regionh.dk.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Division of Child and Adolescent Health,
University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway. helle.klenow@unn.no.
(6)Zentrum für Kinder - und Jugendmedizin, Villa Metabolica, Mainz, Germany.
Dr.M.Beck@t-online.de.
(7)Zentrum für Kinder - und Jugendmedizin, Villa Metabolica, Mainz, Germany.
Yasmin.Amraoui@unimedizin-mainz.de.
(8)Zentrum für Kinder - und Jugendmedizin, Villa Metabolica, Mainz, Germany.
Laila.Arash-Kaps@unimedizin-mainz.de.
(9)Zymenex A/S (Chiesi Group), Hilleroed, Denmark. jf@zymenex.com.
(10)Department of Medical Genetics, Division of Child and Adolescent Health,
University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway. oivind.nilssen@uit.no.
(11)Department of Clinical Medicine, Medical Genetics, University of North
Norway, Tromsø, Norway. oivind.nilssen@uit.no.
(12)Department of Clinical Genetics, Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases,
Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet, 9 Blegdamsvej, 2100, Copenhagen,
Denmark. christine.I.dali@regionh.dk.
(13)Department of Clinical Genetics, Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases,
Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet, 9 Blegdamsvej, 2100, Copenhagen,
Denmark. allan.meldgaard.lund@regionh.dk.

BACKGROUND: Alpha-mannosidosis is caused by mutations in MAN2B1, leading to loss
of lysosomal alpha-mannosidase activity. Symptoms include intellectual
disabilities, hearing impairment, motor function disturbances, facial coarsening
and musculoskeletal abnormalities.
METHODS: To study the genotype-phenotype relationship for alpha-mannosidosis 66
patients were included. Based on the predicted effect of the mutations and the
subcellular localisation of mutant MAN2B1 in cultured cells, the patients were
divided into three subgroups. Clinical and biochemical data were collected.
Correlation analyses between each of the three subgroups of genotype/subcellular
localisation and the clinical and biochemical data were done to investigate the
potential relationship between genotype and phenotype in alpha-mannosidosis.
Statistical analyses were performed using the SPSS software. Analyses of
covariance were performed to describe the genotype-phenotype correlations. The
phenotype parameters were modelled by the mutation group and age as a covariate.
P values of <0.05 were considered as statistically significant.
RESULTS: Complete MAN2B1 genotypes were established for all patients. We found
significantly higher scores in the Leiter-R test, lower concentrations of
CSF-oligosaccharides, higher point scores in the Bruininks-Oseretsky Test of
Motor Proficiency subtests (BOT-2); Upper limb coordination and Balance, and a
higher FVC% in patients in subgroup 3, harbouring at least one variant that
allows localisation of the mutant MAN2B1 protein to the lysosomes compared to
subgrou 2 and/or subgroup 1 with no lysosomal localization of the mutant MAN2B1
protein.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate a correlation between the MAN2B1 genotypes and
the cognitive function, upper limb coordination, balance, FVC% and the storage
of oligosaccharides in CSF. This correlation depends on the subcellular
localisation of the mutant MAN2B1 protein.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-015-0286-x
PMCID: PMC4465300
PMID: 26048034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
