---
reference_id: "PMID:35438025"
title: Adherence and blood pressure control in patients with primary aldosteronism.
authors:
- Nikrýnová Nguyen TMP
- Štrauch B
- Petrák O
- Krátká Z
- Holaj R
- Kurcová I
- Marešová V
- Pilková A
- Hartinger J
- Waldauf P
- Zelinka T
- Widimský J
journal: Blood Press
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/08037051.2022.2061416
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adherence and blood pressure control in patients with primary aldosteronism.
**Authors:** Nikrýnová Nguyen TMP, Štrauch B, Petrák O, Krátká Z, Holaj R, Kurcová I, Marešová V, Pilková A, Hartinger J, Waldauf P, Zelinka T, Widimský J
**Journal:** Blood Press (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/08037051.2022.2061416](https://doi.org/10.1080/08037051.2022.2061416)

## Content

1. Blood Press. 2022 Dec;31(1):58-63. doi: 10.1080/08037051.2022.2061416.

Adherence and blood pressure control in patients with primary aldosteronism.

Nikrýnová Nguyen TMP(1), Štrauch B(2), Petrák O(1), Krátká Z(1), Holaj R(1), 
Kurcová I(3), Marešová V(3), Pilková A(4), Hartinger J(4), Waldauf P(5), Zelinka 
T(1), Widimský J(1).

Author information:
(1)Third Internal Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, General University 
Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Medica JM s.r.o, Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Institute of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology, Toxicology Laboratory, General 
University Hospital, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, 
Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacy, First Faculty of Medicine, 
Institute of Pharmacology, Charles University and General University Hospital, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, Third Faculty of 
Medicine and FNKV University Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic.

PURPOSE: The aim of our study was to evaluate the adherence to mineralocorticoid 
receptor (MR) antagonists and other antihypertensive therapy and blood pressure 
control in conservatively treated patients with primary aldosteronism (PA).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Conservatively treated subjects with previously confirmed 
PA (n-50, 64.5 ± 9 years of age, 24% women) were investigated via our outpatient 
hypertension clinic. All subjects underwent regular examinations in our clinic. 
In addition to basic laboratory and clinical parameters, 24 h ambulatory blood 
pressure monitoring (ABPM) (Spacelabs) was evaluated. Unplanned blood sampling 
for assessment of serum antihypertensive drug concentrations by the means of 
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry was performed in all patients. In case 
of spironolactone, its active metabolite canrenone was also evaluated. Total 
non-compliance was then defined as the absence of all measured antihypertensive 
drugs. Partial non-compliance was calculated as the absence of serum levels of 
at least one, but not all antihypertensive drugs prescribed.
RESULTS: Good blood pressure control was detected (mean 24 h systolic/diastolic 
BP 130 ± 12/77 ± 9 mmHg). The average number of antihypertensive drugs was 
3.9 ± 1.5. All subjects were treated by MR antagonists. 44% of patients received 
spironolactone (average daily dose 45 ± 20 mg) and in the remaining 56% of 
subjects eplerenone was administered (average daily dose 80 ± 30 mg) due to 
spironolactone side effects. Assessment of antihypertensive drug concentrations 
revealed full adherence in 80% of all subjects, partial nonadherence was noted 
in the remaining 20% of subjects. MR antagonist levels were detected in almost 
all subjects (49 out of 50).
CONCLUSIONS: Good blood pressure control and adherence to therapy were detected 
in conservatively treated patients with PA. Eplerenone had to be used quite 
often as male subjects did not tolerate dose escalation due to spironolactone 
side effects.

DOI: 10.1080/08037051.2022.2061416
PMID: 35438025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]