---
reference_id: "PMID:22318985"
title: Congenital heart defects in a novel recurrent 22q11.2 deletion harboring the genes CRKL and MAPK1.
authors:
- Breckpot J
- Thienpont B
- Bauters M
- Tranchevent LC
- Gewillig M
- Allegaert K
- Vermeesch JR
- Moreau Y
- Devriendt K
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35217
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital heart defects in a novel recurrent 22q11.2 deletion harboring the genes CRKL and MAPK1.
**Authors:** Breckpot J, Thienpont B, Bauters M, Tranchevent LC, Gewillig M, Allegaert K, Vermeesch JR, Moreau Y, Devriendt K
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.35217](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.35217)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Mar;158A(3):574-80. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35217. Epub
2012  Feb 8.

Congenital heart defects in a novel recurrent 22q11.2 deletion harboring the 
genes CRKL and MAPK1.

Breckpot J(1), Thienpont B, Bauters M, Tranchevent LC, Gewillig M, Allegaert K, 
Vermeesch JR, Moreau Y, Devriendt K.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Herestraat, Leuven, 
Belgium.

The proximal region of the long arm of chromosome 22 is rich in low copy repeats 
(LCR). Non-allelic homologous recombination (NAHR) between these substrates 
explains the high prevalence of recurrent rearrangements within this region. We 
have performed array comparative genomic hybridization in a normally developing 
girl with growth delay, microcephaly, and truncus arteriosus, and have 
identified a novel recurrent 22q11 deletion that spans LCR22-4 and partially 
affects the common 22q11.2 deletion syndrome and the distal 22q11 deletion 
syndrome. This deletion is atypical as it did not occur by NAHR between any of 
the major LCRs found on 22q11.2. However, the breakpoint containing regions 
coincide with highly homologous regions. An identical imbalance was reported 
previously in a patient with striking phenotypic similarity. Computational gene 
prioritization methods and biological evidence denote the genes CRKL and MAPK1 
as the highest ranking candidates for causing congenital heart disease within 
the deleted region.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35217
PMID: 22318985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]