---
reference_id: "PMID:36938642"
title: "World Trade Center-related asthma: clinical care essentials."
authors:
- Harrison D
- Reibman J
journal: Arch Environ Occup Health
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/19338244.2023.2185191
content_type: abstract_only
---

# World Trade Center-related asthma: clinical care essentials.
**Authors:** Harrison D, Reibman J
**Journal:** Arch Environ Occup Health (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/19338244.2023.2185191](https://doi.org/10.1080/19338244.2023.2185191)

## Content

1. Arch Environ Occup Health. 2023;78(4):206-211. doi: 
10.1080/19338244.2023.2185191. Epub 2023 Mar 20.

World Trade Center-related asthma: clinical care essentials.

Harrison D(1), Reibman J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, New York University Grossman School of Medicine, New 
York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Environmental Medicine, New York University Grossman School of 
Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Asthma is defined as a heterogeneous disease with respiratory symptoms (wheeze, 
shortness of breath, chest tightness and cough) that vary over time and 
intensity, and variable expiratory airflow limitation. Environmental and 
occupational exposures contribute to its causation. WTC-related or aggravated 
asthma is considered a World Trace Center (WTC) Health Program certifiable 
disease. Criteria include defined exposures to the WTC dust and fumes, the 
presence of symptoms, or aggravated symptoms that are present within 5 years 
after the last potential for WTC dust/fume exposures (the last 9/11 exposures 
occurred on July 31, 2002), and a WTC-provider diagnosis of asthma. Asthma is 
the 3rd most common non-cancer certification among WTC responders and survivors. 
In this review we provide evidence-based information on the evaluation, 
diagnosis, and treatment of patients with WTC-related or aggravated asthma and 
include peer-reviewed research findings in WTC-exposed populations.

DOI: 10.1080/19338244.2023.2185191
PMID: 36938642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]