---
reference_id: "PMID:37248298"
title: Enasidenib treatment in two individuals with D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria carrying a germline IDH2 mutation.
authors:
- Geoerger B
- Schiff M
- Penard-Lacronique V
- Darin N
- Saad SM
- Duchon C
- Lamazière A
- Desmons A
- Pontoizeau C
- Berlanga P
- Ducassou S
- Yen K
- Su M
- Schenkein D
- Ottolenghi C
- De Botton S
journal: Nat Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-023-02382-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enasidenib treatment in two individuals with D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria carrying a germline IDH2 mutation.
**Authors:** Geoerger B, Schiff M, Penard-Lacronique V, Darin N, Saad SM, Duchon C, Lamazière A, Desmons A, Pontoizeau C, Berlanga P, Ducassou S, Yen K, Su M, Schenkein D, Ottolenghi C, De Botton S
**Journal:** Nat Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-023-02382-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-023-02382-9)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2023 Jun;29(6):1358-1363. doi: 10.1038/s41591-023-02382-9. Epub 2023 
May 29.

Enasidenib treatment in two individuals with D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria 
carrying a germline IDH2 mutation.

Geoerger B(1)(2), Schiff M(3)(4), Penard-Lacronique V(5), Darin N(6), Saad 
SM(7), Duchon C(3), Lamazière A(8), Desmons A(8), Pontoizeau C(3)(4)(9), 
Berlanga P(10), Ducassou S(11), Yen K(12)(13), Su M(12)(13), Schenkein 
D(12)(14), Ottolenghi C(#)(3)(4)(9), De Botton S(#)(5)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Oncology, Gustave Roussy Cancer 
Campus, Université Paris-Saclay, Villejuif, France. 
birgit.geoerger@gustaveroussy.fr.
(2)INSERM U1015, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Université Paris-Saclay, 
Villejuif, France. birgit.geoerger@gustaveroussy.fr.
(3)Reference Center for Inborn Errors of Metabolism, Necker University Hospital, 
APHP and University of Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(4)INSERM UMRS 1163, Institut Imagine, Paris, France.
(5)INSERM 1170, Université Paris-Saclay, Equipe Labellisée Ligue Nationale 
Contre le Cancer, member of OPALE Carnot Institute The Organization for 
Partnerships in Leukemia, Villejuif, France.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Clinical Sciences, University of 
Gothenburg and Queen Silvia Children's Hospital at Sahlgrenska University 
Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(7)Department of Cardiology, Clinique du Diaconat, Mulhouse, France.
(8)Clinical Metabolomic Department, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Saint 
Antoine Hospital, Saint-Antoine Research Center, Sorbonne University, Paris, 
France.
(9)Metabolomics Unit of the Department of Biology, Physiology and Genetics, 
Necker University Hospital, APHP and University of Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(10)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Oncology, Gustave Roussy Cancer 
Campus, Université Paris-Saclay, Villejuif, France.
(11)Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(12)Agios Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(13)Auron Therapeutics, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(14)GV, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(15)Department of Hematology, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Université 
Paris-Saclay, Villejuif, France.
(#)Contributed equally

D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria type II (D2HGA2) is a severe inborn disorder of 
metabolism caused by heterozygous R140 mutations in the IDH2 (isocitrate 
dehydrogenase 2) gene. Here we report the results of treatment of two children 
with D2HGA2, one of whom exhibited severe dilated cardiomyopathy, with the 
selective mutant IDH2 enzyme inhibitor enasidenib. In both children, enasidenib 
treatment led to normalization of D-2-hydroxyglutarate (D-2-HG) concentrations 
in body fluids. At doses of 50 mg and 60 mg per day, no side effects were 
observed, except for asymptomatic hyperbilirubinemia. For the child with 
cardiomyopathy, chronic D-2-HG inhibition was associated with improved cardiac 
function, and for both children, therapy was associated with improved daily 
functioning, global motility and social interactions. Treatment of the child 
with cardiomyopathy led to therapy-coordinated changes in serum phospholipid 
levels, which were partly recapitulated in cultured fibroblasts, associated with 
complex effects on lipid and redox-related gene pathways. These findings 
indicate that targeted inhibition of a mutant enzyme can partly reverse the 
pathology of a chronic neurometabolic genetic disorder.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-023-02382-9
PMID: 37248298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]