---
reference_id: "PMID:35136641"
title: "Hirayama disease: the importance of flexion imaging."
authors:
- Kusel K
- Warne R
- Lakshmanan R
- Mason M
- Bynevelt M
- Shah S
journal: BJR Case Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1259/bjrcr.20210105
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hirayama disease: the importance of flexion imaging.
**Authors:** Kusel K, Warne R, Lakshmanan R, Mason M, Bynevelt M, Shah S
**Journal:** BJR Case Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1259/bjrcr.20210105](https://doi.org/10.1259/bjrcr.20210105)

## Content

1. BJR Case Rep. 2021 Sep 10;8(1):20210105. doi: 10.1259/bjrcr.20210105. 
eCollection 2022 Jan 1.

Hirayama disease: the importance of flexion imaging.

Kusel K(1), Warne R(1), Lakshmanan R(1), Mason M(1), Bynevelt M(2), Shah S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Perth Children's Hospital, Nedlands, WA, Australia.
(2)Neurological Intervention and Imaging Service of Western Australia, Perth 
Children's Hospital, Nedlands, WA, Australia.
(3)Department of Neurology, Perth Children's Hospital, Nedlands, WA, Australia.

Hirayama disease is a rare cervical myelopathy characterised by asymmetrical 
upper limb weakness and muscle atrophy in the forearm and hand. MRI of the 
cervical spine plays an essential role in diagnosis, however, the characteristic 
findings are often only seen when the patient is imaged with the neck in 
flexion. We present a case of a 15-year-old male who presented with left forearm 
and hand weakness with muscle wasting. An MRI of the cervical spine with the 
neck in a neutral position demonstrated atrophy of the spinal cord with 
intrinsic signal abnormality between C5 and C7. Further imaging with the 
patient's neck in flexion demonstrated the hallmark features of Hirayama 
disease. There was anterior displacement of the thecal sac and spinal cord, and 
an enlarged, crescent-shaped dorsal epidural space which enhanced following i.v. 
gadolinium administration. The atrophic segment of cord contacted the posterior 
vertebral bodies when the neck was in full flexion. This case highlights the 
importance of imaging patients suspected of having this entity with the neck in 
full flexion in order to make a diagnosis.

© 2022 The Authors. Published by the British Institute of Radiology.

DOI: 10.1259/bjrcr.20210105
PMCID: PMC8803229
PMID: 35136641