---
reference_id: "PMID:31536314"
title: Keratosis Pilaris.
authors:
- Pennycook KB
- McCready TA
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Keratosis Pilaris.
**Authors:** Pennycook KB, McCready TA

## Content

1. Keratosis Pilaris.

Pennycook KB, McCready TA(1).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026 
Jan–.
2023 Jun 26.

Author information:
(1)Wayne St./Ascension Providence Rochester

Keratosis pilaris is among the most common dermatologic conditions and can be 
considered a normal variant. It is the most common follicular keratosis. The 
condition is multifactorial and innocuous, affecting the extensor surfaces of 
the proximal extremities. Keratosis pilaris first appears in early childhood and 
progresses, becoming most extensive during the second decade of life. Keratosis 
pilaris is associated with many other conditions, including atopic dermatitis, 
ichthyosis vulgaris, obesity, diabetes mellitus, and malnutrition. It can also 
present in conjunction with syndromes such as Down syndrome and Noonan syndrome. 
The condition often improves over time, but several treatment options are 
available. Emollients, exfoliants, antiinflammatory medications, phototherapy, 
and various laser therapies can treat keratosis pilaris.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 31536314

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Keith Pennycook declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Tess McCready 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.