---
reference_id: "PMID:39816134"
title: "Revealing the dance of NLRP3: spatiotemporal patterns in inflammasome activation."
authors:
- Spector L
- Subramanian N
journal: Immunometabolism (Cobham)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/IN9.0000000000000053
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Revealing the dance of NLRP3: spatiotemporal patterns in inflammasome activation.
**Authors:** Spector L, Subramanian N
**Journal:** Immunometabolism (Cobham) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IN9.0000000000000053](https://doi.org/10.1097/IN9.0000000000000053)

## Content

1. Immunometabolism (Cobham). 2025 Jan 10;7(1):e00053. doi: 
10.1097/IN9.0000000000000053. eCollection 2025 Jan.

Revealing the dance of NLRP3: spatiotemporal patterns in inflammasome 
activation.

Spector L(1)(2), Subramanian N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

The nucleotide-binding domain, leucine-rich repeat, and pyrin domain 
containing-protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome is a multiprotein complex that plays a 
critical role in the innate immune response to both infections and sterile 
stressors. Dysregulated NLRP3 activation has been implicated in a variety of 
autoimmune and inflammatory diseases, including cryopyrin-associated periodic 
fever syndromes, diabetes, atherosclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, inflammatory 
bowel disease, and cancer. Consequently, fine-tuning NLRP3 activity holds 
significant therapeutic potential. Studies have implicated several organelles, 
including mitochondria, lysosomes, the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the Golgi 
apparatus, endosomes, and the centrosome, in NLRP3 localization and inflammasome 
assembly. However, reports of conflict and many factors regulating interactions 
between NLRP3 and subcellular organelles remain unknown. This review synthesizes 
the current understanding of NLRP3 spatiotemporal dynamics, focusing on recent 
literature that elucidates the roles of subcellular localization and organelle 
stress in NLRP3 signaling and its crosstalk with other innate immune pathways 
converging at these organelles.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s), Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/IN9.0000000000000053
PMCID: PMC11731036
PMID: 39816134

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.