---
reference_id: "PMID:39738554"
title: Theoretical modeling of hepatitis C acute infection in liver-humanized mice support pre-clinical assessment of candidate viruses for controlled-human-infection studies.
authors:
- Shi Z
- Mhlanga A
- Ishida Y
- Josephson A
- Collier NT
- Abe-Chayama H
- Tateno-Mukaidani C
- Cotler SJ
- Ozik J
- Major M
- Feld JJ
- Chayama K
- Dahari H
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-83104-0
keywords:
- Animals
- "Hepatitis C/virology, immunology"
- Mice
- Hepacivirus/physiology
- Humans
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Liver/virology
- Pan troglodytes/virology
- "Models, Theoretical"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Theoretical modeling of hepatitis C acute infection in liver-humanized mice support pre-clinical assessment of candidate viruses for controlled-human-infection studies.
**Authors:** Shi Z, Mhlanga A, Ishida Y, Josephson A, Collier NT, Abe-Chayama H, Tateno-Mukaidani C, Cotler SJ, Ozik J, Major M, Feld JJ, Chayama K, Dahari H
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-83104-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-83104-0)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Dec 30;14(1):31826. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-83104-0.

Theoretical modeling of hepatitis C acute infection in liver-humanized mice
support pre-clinical assessment of candidate viruses for
controlled-human-infection studies.

Shi Z(#)(1), Mhlanga A(#)(1), Ishida Y(#)(2), Josephson A(1), Collier NT(3)(4),
Abe-Chayama H(5), Tateno-Mukaidani C(2), Cotler SJ(1), Ozik J(3)(4), Major M(6),
Feld JJ(7), Chayama K(8)(9), Dahari H(10).

Author information:
(1)The Program for Experimental and Theoretical Modeling, Division of
Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola
University Chicago, 2160 S. First Ave., Maywood, IL, 60153, USA.
(2)PhoenixBio Co., Ltd., Higashi-Hiroshima, Japan.
(3)Decision and Infrastructure Sciences Division, Argonne National Laboratory,
Lemont, IL, USA.
(4)Consortium for Advanced Science and Engineering, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Center for Medical Specialist Graduate Education and Research, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan.
(6)Division of Viral Products, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research,
Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD, USA.
(7)Toronto Centre for Liver Disease, Toronto General Hospital, University Health
Network, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(8)Hiroshima Institute of Life Sciences, 7-21, Nishi Asahi-Machi, Minami-ku,
Hiroshima-shi, Hiroshima, 734-0002, Japan. chayama@mba.ocn.ne.jp.
(9)RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
chayama@mba.ocn.ne.jp.
(10)The Program for Experimental and Theoretical Modeling, Division of
Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola
University Chicago, 2160 S. First Ave., Maywood, IL, 60153, USA.
hdahari@luc.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Designing and carrying out a controlled human infection (CHI) model for
hepatitis C virus (HCV) is critical for vaccine development. However, key
considerations for a CHI model protocol include understanding of the earliest
viral-host kinetic events during the acute phase and susceptibility of the viral
isolate under consideration for use in the CHI model to antiviral treatment
before any infections in human volunteers can take place. Humanized mouse models
lack adaptive immune responses but provide a unique opportunity to obtain
quantitative understanding of early HCV kinetics and develop mathematical models
to further understand viral and innate immune response dynamics during acute HCV
infection. We show that the models reproduce the measured HCV kinetics in
humanized mice, which are consistent with early acute HCV-host dynamics in
immunocompetent chimpanzees. Our findings suggest that humanized mice are
well-suited to support development of a CHI model. In-silico and in-vivo
modeling estimates provide a starting point to characterize candidate viruses
for testing in CHI model studies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-83104-0
PMCID: PMC11686243
PMID: 39738554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: YI and CTM
are PhoenixBio employees. KC has received honoraria from Bristol-Myers Squibb
and MSD K.K., AbbVie, Gilead Science, Dainippon Sumitomo Pharma and Mitsubishi
Tanabe Pharma and research funding from Gilead Science, Dainippon Sumitomo
Pharma, MSD K.K., AbbVie, Eisai, TORAY, Otsuka Pharma, Chugai Pharma, Takeda
Pharma and Roche. JJF reports research funding and consulting fees from AbbVie
and Gilead. All other authors have nothing to disclose.
