---
reference_id: "PMID:8220429"
title: A type X collagen mutation causes Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia.
authors:
- Warman ML
- Abbott M
- Apte SS
- Hefferon T
- McIntosh I
- Cohn DH
- Hecht JT
- Olsen BR
- Francomano CA
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1038/ng0993-79
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A type X collagen mutation causes Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia.
**Authors:** Warman ML, Abbott M, Apte SS, Hefferon T, McIntosh I, Cohn DH, Hecht JT, Olsen BR, Francomano CA
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0993-79](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0993-79)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1993 Sep;5(1):79-82. doi: 10.1038/ng0993-79.

A type X collagen mutation causes Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia.

Warman ML(1), Abbott M, Apte SS, Hefferon T, McIntosh I, Cohn DH, Hecht JT, 
Olsen BR, Francomano CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115.

The expression of type X collagen is restricted to hypertrophic chondrocytes in 
regions undergoing endochondral ossification, such as growth plates. The precise 
function of type X collagen is unknown but the tissue-specific expression 
prompted us to examine the gene in hereditary disorders of cartilage and bone 
growth (osteochondrodysplasias). We have identified a 13 base pair deletion in 
one type X collagen allele segregating with autosomal dominant Schmid 
metaphyseal chondrodysplasia in a large Mormon kindred (lod score = 18.2 at 
theta = 0). The mutation produces a frameshift which alters the highly conserved 
C-terminal domain of the alpha 1(X) chain and reduces the length of the 
polypeptide by nine residues. This mutation may prevent association of the 
mutant polypeptide during trimer formation, resulting in a decreased amount of 
normal protein.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0993-79
PMID: 8220429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]