---
reference_id: "PMID:24187446"
title: Hepatitis C and pregnancy.
authors:
- Floreani A
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i40.6714
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- Biomarkers/blood
- Coinfection
- Disease Progression
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Female
- HIV Infections/epidemiology
- "Hepacivirus/genetics, pathogenicity"
- "Hepatitis C/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology, transmission, virology"
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology, transmission, virology"
- Humans
- "Infectious Disease Transmission, Vertical"
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Complications, Infectious/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology, virology"
- "RNA, Viral/blood"
- Risk Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- Viral Load
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis C and pregnancy.
**Authors:** Floreani A
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v19.i40.6714](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v19.i40.6714)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Oct 28;19(40):6714-20. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v19.i40.6714.

Hepatitis C and pregnancy.

Floreani A(1).

Author information:
(1)Annarosa Floreani, Department of Surgery, Oncology and Gastroenterology,
University of Padova, 35128 Padova, Italy.

Acute hepatitis C is a rare event in pregnancy. The most common scenario is
chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in pregnancy. During pregnancy in
women with chronic HCV infection a significant reduction in mean alanine
aminotransferase levels has been reported, with a rebound during the postpartum
period. In few cases exacerbation of chronic hepatitis C has been reported in
pregnancy. A cofactor that might play a role in the reduction of liver damage is
the release of endogenous interferon from the placenta. Observations regarding
serum HCV-RNA concentration have been variable. In some women HCV-RNA levels
rise toward the end of pregnancy. In general, pregnancy does not have a negative
effect on HCV infection. Conversely, chronic hepatitis does not appear to have
an adverse effect on the course of pregnancy, or the birth weight of the newborn
infant. The role of spontaneous abortion is approximately the same as in the
general population. The overall rate of mother-to-child transmission for HCV is
3%-5% if the mother is known to be anti-HCV positive. Co-infection with human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) increases the rate of mother-to-child transmission
up to 19.4%. Numerous risk factors for vertical transmission have been studied.
In general, high viral load defined as at least 2.5 × 10(6) viral RNA copies/mL,
HIV co-infection, and invasive procedures are the most important factors. Both
interferon and ribavirin are contraindicated during pregnancy. Viral clearance
prior to pregnancy increases the likelihood that a woman remains non-viremic in
pregnancy with a consequent reduced risk of vertical transmission.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i40.6714
PMCID: PMC3812470
PMID: 24187446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
