---
reference_id: "PMID:41146927"
title: "Safety, pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, and efficacy properties of orally administered APG-2449 in patients with advanced ALK (+) and ROS1 (+) non-small-cell lung cancer: a multicentre, open-label, single-arm phase 1 trial."
authors:
- Ma Y
- Song Z
- Chen J
- Zhao Y
- Fang W
- Guo Y
- Dong Y
- Yang Y
- Wu G
- Fang J
- Lin X
- Li J
- Huang Y
- Zhao Y
- Hong S
- Xue J
- Zhang Y
- Liu Q
- Yang C
- Xu L
- Yang Y
- Xiong D
- Yang D
- Zhai Y
- Zhang L
- Zhao H
journal: EClinicalMedicine
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2025.103556
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety, pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, and efficacy properties of orally administered APG-2449 in patients with advanced ALK (+) and ROS1 (+) non-small-cell lung cancer: a multicentre, open-label, single-arm phase 1 trial.
**Authors:** Ma Y, Song Z, Chen J, Zhao Y, Fang W, Guo Y, Dong Y, Yang Y, Wu G, Fang J, Lin X, Li J, Huang Y, Zhao Y, Hong S, Xue J, Zhang Y, Liu Q, Yang C, Xu L, Yang Y, Xiong D, Yang D, Zhai Y, Zhang L, Zhao H
**Journal:** EClinicalMedicine (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eclinm.2025.103556](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2025.103556)

## Content

1. EClinicalMedicine. 2025 Oct 16;89:103556. doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2025.103556.
eCollection 2025 Nov.

Safety, pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, and efficacy properties of orally
administered APG-2449 in patients with advanced ALK (+) and ROS1 (+)
non-small-cell lung cancer: a multicentre, open-label, single-arm phase 1 trial.

Ma Y(1), Song Z(2), Chen J(3), Zhao Y(4), Fang W(5), Guo Y(6), Dong Y(6), Yang
Y(5), Wu G(7), Fang J(8), Lin X(9), Li J(10), Huang Y(5), Zhao Y(5), Hong S(5),
Xue J(1), Zhang Y(1), Liu Q(1), Yang C(11), Xu L(11), Yang Y(11), Xiong D(11),
Yang D(11)(12), Zhai Y(11)(13), Zhang L(5), Zhao H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Research, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State
Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Centre for
Cancer Medicine, Guangdong Provincial Clinical Research Center for Cancer,
Guangzhou, China.
(2)Phase I Clinical Trial Ward, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Hunan Cancer Hospital, Changsha, China.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou
University and Henan Cancer Hospital, Zhengzhou, China.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State
Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Centre for
Cancer Medicine, Guangdong Provincial Clinical Research Center for Cancer,
Guangzhou, China.
(6)The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(7)Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China.
(8)Peking University Cancer Hospital, Beijing, China.
(9)Fujian Medical University Union Hospital, Fuzhou, China.
(10)Department of Gynecology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Centre for
Cancer Medicine, Guangdong Provincial Clinical Research Center for Cancer,
Guangzhou, China.
(11)Ascentage Pharma (Suzhou) Co., Ltd., Suzhou, China.
(12)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation
Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou,
China.
(13)Ascentage Pharma Group Inc., Rockville, MD, United States.

BACKGROUND: APG-2449 is a focal adhesion kinase (FAK) inhibitor and a
third-generation anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-proto-oncogene receptor
tyrosine kinase ROS (ROS1) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI). The aim of this
first-in-human study was to evaluate safety and efficacy of APG-2449 in patients
with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: This single-arm, multicentre, phase 1 clinical trial included a dose
escalation to determine maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and recommended phase 2
dose (RP2D), followed by a dose-expansion stage at RP2D to evaluate safety.
Secondary endpoints included pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and preliminary
efficacy. APG-2449 was administered once daily in 28-day cycles through a 3 + 3
dose escalation. Eligible patients were aged 18 years or older and had advanced
ALK or ROS1 fusion gene-positive NSCLC and other solid tumours (during the dose
escalation). Patients with ALK-positive or ROS1-positive NSCLC regardless of
previous TKI treatment were enrolled during the dose escalation. After RP2D was
determined, patients with second-generation TKI-treated ALK + NSCLC, TKI-naïve
ALK + , and TKI-naïve or TKI-treated ROS1 + NSCLC were enrolled in dose
expansion. Eligible patients also had: (1) an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
performance status (ECOG PS) score of 1 or less; (2) adequate bone marrow
reserve and organ function; and (3) no or stable brain metastases. This study
was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03917043). Recruitment is ongoing.
FINDINGS: 144 patients were enrolled from May 27, 2019, to April 2, 2024, and
received APG-2449 (150-1500 mg/day). MTD was not reached, and RP2D was 1200 mg.
The most common grade ≥3 treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAE) were anaemia
[6 (4.2%)], alanine aminotransferase (ALT) increased [6 (4.2%)],
electrocardiogram QT prolonged [5 (3.5%)], and pneumonia [5 (3.5%)]. The most
common grade ≥3 treatment-related adverse events (TRAEs) were ALT increased [5
(3.5%)], QT prolonged [5 (3.5%)], and vomiting [2 (1.4%)]. There were no
treatment-related deaths. Pharmacokinetic analyses indicated a dose-proportional
increase in plasma exposure, and that APG-2449 penetrated the blood-brain
barrier (cerebrospinal fluid [CSF]-to-free plasma ratio 0.65-1.66). Of patients
with ALK-positive, TKI-naïve NSCLC (n = 14) treated at RP2D, the objective
response rate (ORR) was 78.6% (11/14), and median progression-free survival
(mPFS) was not reached. Of 22 patients with NSCLC resistant to second-generation
ALK inhibitors (without ALK compound mutations or activation of bypass or
downstream signalling pathways), 10 (45.5%) achieved partial response, with a
mPFS of 13.6 months. Intracranial partial response occurred in 9/12 patients at
the RP2D (intracranial ORR: 75.0%).
INTERPRETATION: APG-2449 demonstrated favourable preliminary safety,
pharmacokinetics, and efficacy in TKI-untreated or second-generation
ALK-resistant NSCLC. Higher baseline tumour phosphorylated FAK levels were
associated with greater APG-2449 treatment benefit. Targeting FAK signalling may
provide a feasible strategy for overcoming second-generation ALK TKI resistance.
FUNDING: Ascentage Pharma Group Corp Ltd. (Hong Kong).

© 2025 Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2025.103556
PMCID: PMC12554205
PMID: 41146927

Conflict of interest statement: Drs. C. Yang, L. Xu, Y. Yang, and D. Xiong are
employed by Ascentage Pharma (Suzhou) Co., Ltd and are stockholders of its
parent company, Ascentage Pharma Group International. Dr. Y. Zhai is employed by
Ascentage Pharma (Suzhou) Co., Ltd. and Ascentage Pharma Group Inc. and holds a
leadership position in these companies. Dr D. Yang is employed by Ascentage
Pharma (Suzhou) Co., Ltd. and Ascentage Pharma Group International and holds a
leadership position in these companies. Drs Y. Zhai and D. Yang are stockholders
in Ascentage Pharma Group International. Dr. L. Zhang reports institutional and
personal research grants from AstraZeneca PLC and F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd.;
payments for speaking engagements from Akeso Biopharma, Inc. and Sichuan Biokin
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.; and paid board positions as Trial Chair for Akeso
Biopharma, Inc., CSPC Pharmaceutical Group Ltd., Jiangsu Hengrui Medicine Co.,
Ltd., Sichuan Kelun Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Novartis AG, Pierre Fabre S.A.,
Pfizer Inc., and Qilu Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. All other authors have no
conflicts of interest to declare.
