---
reference_id: "PMID:37448902"
title: Rare Case of Hemolytic Anemia and Distal Renal Tubular Acidosis in an adult due to Homozygous SLC4A1 Mutation.
authors:
- Shaikh W
- Suratkal L
- Bhave A
journal: Indian J Nephrol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4103/ijn.ijn_210_21
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rare Case of Hemolytic Anemia and Distal Renal Tubular Acidosis in an adult due to Homozygous SLC4A1 Mutation.
**Authors:** Shaikh W, Suratkal L, Bhave A
**Journal:** Indian J Nephrol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4103/ijn.ijn_210_21](https://doi.org/10.4103/ijn.ijn_210_21)

## Content

1. Indian J Nephrol. 2023 May-Jun;33(3):209-212. doi: 10.4103/ijn.ijn_210_21.
Epub  2023 Feb 21.

Rare Case of Hemolytic Anemia and Distal Renal Tubular Acidosis in an adult due 
to Homozygous SLC4A1 Mutation.

Shaikh W(1), Suratkal L(1), Bhave A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Lilavati Hospital and Research Center, Mumbai, 
Maharashtra, India.
(2)Department of Hematology, Lilavati Hospital and Research Center, Mumbai, 
Maharashtra, India.

In this case study, we report an adult patient presenting with generalized 
weakness, marked anemia, spherocytosis, and no features of thalassemia. The 
patient was treated for suspicion of autoimmune hemolytic anemia but was 
recalcitrant to treatment. Genetic analysis revealed the patient to be 
homozygous for SLC4A1 c.2573C>A (p.Ala858Asp). Distal renal tubular acidosis 
(dRTA) can be caused by mutations in SLC4A1, which encodes the Cl-/HCO3- 
exchanger of the renal type A intercalated cell, kidney AE1. SLC4A1 variants 
have been reported in dRTA patients from North America, Europe, and Southeast 
Asia. In some rare instances, SLC4A1 dRTA can present with hemolytic anemia 
resulting in marked anemia that is not responsive to standard interventions. 
This report identifies an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern for SLC4A1 
variants in a patient presenting with dRTA and hemolytic anemia.

Copyright: © 2023 Indian Journal of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.4103/ijn.ijn_210_21
PMCID: PMC10337233
PMID: 37448902

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.