---
reference_id: "PMID:38156946"
title: Novel homozygous mutations in TXNDC15 causing Meckel syndrome.
authors:
- Deng T
- Xie Y
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2343
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel homozygous mutations in TXNDC15 causing Meckel syndrome.
**Authors:** Deng T, Xie Y
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.2343](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.2343)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2024 Mar;12(3):e2343. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2343. Epub 2023
 Dec 29.

Novel homozygous mutations in TXNDC15 causing Meckel syndrome.

Deng T(1), Xie Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Reproductive Medical Center, Shenzhen Maternity & Child Healthcare Hospital, 
Shenzhen, People's Republic of China.
(2)Neonatal Screening Center, Shenzhen Maternity & Child Healthcare Hospital, 
Shenzhen, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Meckel syndrome (MKS) is the most severe form of an autosomal 
recessive ciliopathy and is clinically characterized by occipital encephalocele, 
severely polycystic kidneys, and postaxial polydactyly (toes). The association 
of TXNDC15-related MKS has been reported. We report the case of a homozygous 
mutation in the TXNDC15 gene, causing MKS14 in the Chinese population.
METHODS: The fetal skin tissue and parental peripheral blood were retained for 
whole-exome sequencing and Sanger sequencing, which investigated the potential 
pathogenic variants associated with MKS.
RESULTS: The fetus was homozygous for a mutation in the TXNDC15 gene 
(NM_024715.3), specifically c.560delA (p.Asn187llefsTer4), and both parents were 
heterozygous for this mutation.
CONCLUSION: Our study identified a new mutation that adds to the mutational 
landscape of MKS, which provide a basis for genetic counseling and the selection 
of reproductive options.

© 2023 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.2343
PMCID: PMC10958169
PMID: 38156946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.