---
reference_id: "PMID:15914600"
title: Identification of novel RPGR ORF15 mutations in X-linked progressive cone-rod dystrophy (XLCORD) families.
authors:
- Ebenezer ND
- Michaelides M
- Jenkins SA
- Audo I
- Webster AR
- Cheetham ME
- Stockman A
- Maher ER
- Ainsworth JR
- Yates JR
- Bradshaw K
- Holder GE
- Moore AT
- Hardcastle AJ
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.04-1482
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Color Vision Defects/genetics
- Electroretinography
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics, physiopathology"
- Genotype
- Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factors/genetics
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Open Reading Frames/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Photoreceptor Cells, Vertebrate/pathology, physiology"
- "Retinal Degeneration/genetics, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of novel RPGR ORF15 mutations in X-linked progressive cone-rod dystrophy (XLCORD) families.
**Authors:** Ebenezer ND, Michaelides M, Jenkins SA, Audo I, Webster AR, Cheetham ME, Stockman A, Maher ER, Ainsworth JR, Yates JR, Bradshaw K, Holder GE, Moore AT, Hardcastle AJ
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.04-1482](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.04-1482)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2005 Jun;46(6):1891-8. doi: 10.1167/iovs.04-1482.

Identification of novel RPGR ORF15 mutations in X-linked progressive cone-rod
dystrophy (XLCORD) families.

Ebenezer ND(1), Michaelides M, Jenkins SA, Audo I, Webster AR, Cheetham ME,
Stockman A, Maher ER, Ainsworth JR, Yates JR, Bradshaw K, Holder GE, Moore AT,
Hardcastle AJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, University College London, UK.

PURPOSE: To test the incidence of mutations in RPGR ORF15 in six families with
X-linked progressive retinal degeneration (cone-rod dystrophy [XLCORD], macular
or cone dystrophy) and to undertake a detailed phenotypic assessment of families
in whom ORF15 mutations were identified.
METHODS: To amplify and sequence ORF15 in its entirety, a cloning strategy was
developed. Families with mutations in ORF15 underwent electrophysiological
testing, color vision assessment, color fundus photography, and fundus
autofluorescence (AF) imaging.
RESULTS: Novel protein truncation mutations were identified in two families. In
family A, a 2-bp mutation was identified in ORF15+A1094C G1095T, predicted to
result in a truncated protein (E364D/E365X). In family B, a G-to-T transversion
(ORF15+1176G>T) resulted in a nonsense mutation (G392X). Characteristics of
phenotype in both families included progressive deterioration of central vision
and subsequently night vision, mild photophobia, and moderate to high myopia.
Ophthalmoscopic abnormalities were generally confined to the macula. A
parafoveal ring of increased AF was observed, and electrophysiological evidence
of a greater generalized abnormality in cone than rod responses were consistent
with a cone-rod dystrophy phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: The cloning strategy for ORF15 facilitated comprehensive sequence
analysis in patients. Two families were identified with nonsense mutations, and
clinical evaluation revealed them both to have a similar phenotype. The presence
of a parafoveal ring of increased AF was an early indicator of affected status
in these families. No disease-causing mutations in ORF15 were detected in four
other families, suggesting that ORF15 mutations may not be the most common cause
of XLCORD.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.04-1482
PMID: 15914600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
