---
reference_id: "PMID:20072731"
title: "The value of anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies in rheumatoid arthritis: do they imply new risk factors?"
authors:
- López-Longo FJ
- Sánchez-Ramón S
- Carreño L
journal: Drug News Perspect
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1358/dnp.2009.22.9.1416992
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The value of anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies in rheumatoid arthritis: do they imply new risk factors?
**Authors:** López-Longo FJ, Sánchez-Ramón S, Carreño L
**Journal:** Drug News Perspect (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1358/dnp.2009.22.9.1416992](https://doi.org/10.1358/dnp.2009.22.9.1416992)

## Content

1. Drug News Perspect. 2009 Nov;22(9):543-8. doi: 10.1358/dnp.2009.22.9.1416992.

The value of anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies in rheumatoid 
arthritis: do they imply new risk factors?

López-Longo FJ(1), Sánchez-Ramón S, Carreño L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, University Hospital Gregorio Maranon, Madrid, 
Spain.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease that causes chronic 
inflammation of the joints and several extra-articular manifestations that 
account for increased morbimortality of these patients. The involvement of B 
cells in RA pathophysiology was recognized early, with the discovery of 
rheumatoid factor antibody. Recently, a number of autoantibodies against 
citrullinated proteins have been described, of which anti-cyclic citrullinated 
peptide (anti-CCP) is the most specific for RA. A cohort of 937 patients with RA 
was studied to determine the clinical correlates of anti-CCP antibodies. The 
presence of anti-CCP antibodies correlated with worse joint involvement and 
several extra-articular manifestations, i.e., higher incidence of ischemic heart 
disease independent of classic cardiovascular factors and higher mortality rate. 
A multivariate logistic regression model showed that only anti-CCP antibodies 
were independently associated with the development of ischemic heart disease in 
patients with RA. The clinical value of anti-citrullinated protein antibodies 
and the relevance of anti-CCP antibodies in daily clinical practice are 
reviewed.

Copyright 2009 Prous Science, S.A.U. or its licensors. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1358/dnp.2009.22.9.1416992
PMID: 20072731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]