---
reference_id: "PMID:35154277"
title: "Case Report: Novel MFSD8 Variants in a Chinese Family With Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinoses 7."
authors:
- Qiao Y
- Gu Y
- Cheng Y
- Su Y
- Lv N
- Shang Q
- Xing Q
journal: Front Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.807515
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case Report: Novel MFSD8 Variants in a Chinese Family With Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinoses 7.
**Authors:** Qiao Y, Gu Y, Cheng Y, Su Y, Lv N, Shang Q, Xing Q
**Journal:** Front Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2022.807515](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2022.807515)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2022 Jan 26;13:807515. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.807515.
eCollection  2022.

Case Report: Novel MFSD8 Variants in a Chinese Family With Neuronal Ceroid
Lipofuscinoses 7.

Qiao Y(1), Gu Y(2), Cheng Y(1), Su Y(1), Lv N(2), Shang Q(2), Xing Q(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institutes of Biomedical Sciences and Children's Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China.
(2)Children's Hospital of Zhengzhou University and Henan Children's Hospital,
Zhengzhou, China.
(3)Shanghai Center for Women and Children's Health, Shanghai, China.

Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) are among the most common progressive
encephalopathies of childhood. Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 7 (CLN7), one of
the late infantile-onset NCLs, is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by
mutations in the MFSD8 gene on chromosome 4q28. Almost all reported mutations of
MFSD8 in CLN7 patients were SNVs. However, we report a 4-year-old boy with CLN7
harboring compound heterozygous mutations in the MFSD8 gene, including one novel
two-nucleotide deletion c.136_137delAT (p. M46Vfs*22) and one whole gene
deletion of MFSD8 confirmed by Sanger sequencing, genomic quantitative PCR and
CNV-seq. Therefore, for nonconsanguineous CLN7 patients with homozygous
mutations in the MFSD8 gene, genetic counseling staff should focus on the
possibility of whole gene deletion. This is one case report describing a whole
gene deletion in a Chinese patient with CLN7, suggesting the diagnosis of CLN7
should be based on clinical suspicion and genetic testing.

Copyright © 2022 Qiao, Gu, Cheng, Su, Lv, Shang and Xing.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.807515
PMCID: PMC8826235
PMID: 35154277

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.