---
reference_id: "PMID:23266638"
title: The modifier effect of the BDNF gene in the phenotype of the WAGRO syndrome.
authors:
- Rodríguez-López R
- Pérez JM
- Balsera AM
- Rodríguez GG
- Moreno TH
- García de Cáceres M
- Serrano MG
- Freijo FC
- Ruiz JR
- Angueira FB
- Pérez PM
- Estévez MN
- Gómez EG
journal: Gene
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.11.073
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Body Mass Index
- "Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor/genetics, physiology"
- Case-Control Studies
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Genes, Modifier/physiology"
- Humans
- Karyotype
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Obesity/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/physiology"
- "WAGR Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The modifier effect of the BDNF gene in the phenotype of the WAGRO syndrome.
**Authors:** Rodríguez-López R, Pérez JM, Balsera AM, Rodríguez GG, Moreno TH, García de Cáceres M, Serrano MG, Freijo FC, Ruiz JR, Angueira FB, Pérez PM, Estévez MN, Gómez EG
**Journal:** Gene (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gene.2012.11.073](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2012.11.073)

## Content

1. Gene. 2013 Mar 10;516(2):285-90. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.11.073. Epub 2012
Dec  21.

The modifier effect of the BDNF gene in the phenotype of the WAGRO syndrome.

Rodríguez-López R(1), Pérez JM, Balsera AM, Rodríguez GG, Moreno TH, García de 
Cáceres M, Serrano MG, Freijo FC, Ruiz JR, Angueira FB, Pérez PM, Estévez MN, 
Gómez EG.

Author information:
(1)Genetics Unit, Infanta Cristina Hospital, Badajoz, Spain. 
raquel.rodriguezl@ses.juntaextremadura.net

Individuals who are carriers of deletions of various sizes that cause 
haploinsufficiency in the contiguous WT1 and PAX6 genes, located on chromosome 
11p13 approximately 4 Mb centromeric to the BDNF gene, are susceptible to Wilms 
tumor, aniridia, mental retardation, genitourinary anomalies and obesity (WAGRO 
syndrome). The molecular characterization of the wide deletion 11p15.1p12 arr 
(18676926-36576388) x1 dn in a child with 3 years and 4 months of age only 
affected by aniridia, predicts not only other serious associated diseases, but 
also allows us to hypothesize a specific phenotype of mental impairment, conduct 
alterations and childhood obesity, possibly added to the onset of metabolic 
alterations. The variable appearance and/or description of haploinsufficiency 
for obesity susceptibility in the WAGR syndrome mainly depends on the critical 
region located within 80 kb of exon 1 of BDNF. The relationship between genetic 
variation based on the genotype combinations of the 4 gene SNPs tagging the BDNF 
gene and the body mass index (BMI) was studied. The polymorphic variability was 
similarly distributed in 218 children suffering a severe and non-syndromic 
obesity from families at high risk for obesity, as compared with 198 controls. 
The corroborated role of the BDNF gene as highly susceptible to severe syndromic 
obesity has not already been evidenced in the molecular basis of overweight 
attributed to the common polygenic principles. Its potential role as risk 
modifier variant to provoke more severe phenotype has not yet been demonstrated. 
Some genetic variants of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) have resulted 
in important disorders of energy balance, but it is essential to know exactly 
their deleterious human capacity because they play a fundamental role in the 
development and plasticity of the central nervous system in regulating food 
intake. The existence of polymorphic amino acid changes of unknown functional 
significance in patients carrying the haploinsufficiency of the BDNF gene could 
constitute an adequate model to study in depth their effects.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.11.073
PMID: 23266638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]