---
reference_id: PMID:21705419
title: Neuronal expression of TATA box-binding protein containing expanded polyglutamine in knock-in mice reduces chaperone protein response by impairing the function of nuclear factor-Y transcription factor.
authors:
- Huang S
- Ling JJ
- Yang S
- Li XJ
- Li S
journal: Brain
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awr146
keywords:
- Age Factors
- Animals
- Body Weight/genetics
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- "CCAAT-Binding Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cell Line, Transformed"
- Chromatin Immunoprecipitation/methods
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Chaperone BiP
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation/genetics
- Humans
- Intermediate Filament Proteins/deficiency
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Molecular Chaperones/genetics, metabolism"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/deficiency
- Nestin
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- "Peptides/genetics, metabolism"
- "TATA-Box Binding Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuronal expression of TATA box-binding protein containing expanded polyglutamine in knock-in mice reduces chaperone protein response by impairing the function of nuclear factor-Y transcription factor.
**Authors:** Huang S, Ling JJ, Yang S, Li XJ, Li S
**Journal:** Brain (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awr146](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awr146)

## Content

1. Brain. 2011 Jul;134(Pt 7):1943-58. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr146.

Neuronal expression of TATA box-binding protein containing expanded 
polyglutamine in knock-in mice reduces chaperone protein response by impairing 
the function of nuclear factor-Y transcription factor.

Huang S(1), Ling JJ, Yang S, Li XJ, Li S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

The polyglutamine diseases consist of nine neurodegenerative disorders including 
spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 that is caused by a polyglutamine tract expansion 
in the TATA box-binding protein. In all polyglutamine diseases, 
polyglutamine-expanded proteins are ubiquitously expressed throughout the body 
but cause selective neurodegeneration. Understanding the specific effects of 
polyglutamine-expanded proteins, when expressed at the endogenous levels, in 
neurons is important for unravelling the pathogenesis of polyglutamine diseases. 
However, addressing this important issue using mouse models that either overly 
or ubiquitously express mutant polyglutamine proteins in the brain and body has 
proved difficult. To investigate the pathogenesis of spinocerebellar ataxia 17, 
we generated a conditional knock-in mouse model that expresses one copy of the 
mutant TATA box-binding protein gene, which encodes a 105-glutamine repeat, 
selectively in neuronal cells at the endogenous level. Neuronal expression of 
mutant TATA box-binding protein causes age-dependent neurological symptoms in 
mice and the degeneration of cerebellar Purkinje cells. Mutant TATA box-binding 
protein binds more tightly to the transcription factor nuclear factor-Y, 
inhibits its association with the chaperone protein promoter, as well as the 
promoter activity and reduces the expression of the chaperones Hsp70, Hsp25 and 
HspA5, and their response to stress. These findings demonstrate how mutant TATA 
box-binding protein at the endogenous level affects neuronal function, with 
important implications for the pathogenesis and treatment of polyglutamine 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awr146
PMCID: PMC3122377
PMID: 21705419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]