---
reference_id: "PMID:21205148"
title: Impact of hepatitis B therapy on the long-term outcome of liver disease.
authors:
- Liaw YF
journal: Liver Int
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2010.02388.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of hepatitis B therapy on the long-term outcome of liver disease.
**Authors:** Liaw YF
**Journal:** Liver Int (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1478-3231.2010.02388.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1478-3231.2010.02388.x)

## Content

1. Liver Int. 2011 Jan;31 Suppl 1:117-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2010.02388.x.

Impact of hepatitis B therapy on the long-term outcome of liver disease.

Liaw YF(1).

Author information:
(1)Liver Research Unit, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University 
College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. liveryfl@gmail.com

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a dynamic series of interactions 
between HBV, hepatocytes and the patient's immune system. HBV replication is the 
key motor of disease progression, including the development of cirrhosis and 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). HBV elimination or suppression can reduce the 
risk of or slow the progression of liver disease. Studies have shown that a 
finite course of conventional interferon-α (IFN) therapy provides long-term 
benefit for achieving a cumulative response as well as reducing the progression 
of fibrosis and the development of cirrhosis and/or HCC. Long-term therapy with 
nucleos(t)ide analogues (NUCs) may also improve fibrosis or reverse advanced 
fibrosis as well as reduce disease progression and the development of HCC. The 
problems associated with drug resistance can be overcome by the timely use of 
rescue NUCs without cross-resistance. The outcome with pegylated IFN (PEG-IFN) 
and newer NUCs may be even better because of more effective treatment and/or a 
low risk of resistance. However, the treatment outcomes still need to be 
improved, and more effective, safe and affordable anti-HBV agents/strategies are 
needed.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2010.02388.x
PMID: 21205148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]