---
reference_id: "PMID:38438966"
title: Validation of IgA nephropathy diagnosis in the Swedish Renal Registry.
authors:
- Rehnberg J
- Segelmark M
- Ludvigsson JF
- Emilsson L
journal: BMC Nephrol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12882-024-03512-2
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Glomerulonephritis, IGA/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Immunoglobulin A
- Sweden/epidemiology
- Kidney
- Registries
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Validation of IgA nephropathy diagnosis in the Swedish Renal Registry.
**Authors:** Rehnberg J, Segelmark M, Ludvigsson JF, Emilsson L
**Journal:** BMC Nephrol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12882-024-03512-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12882-024-03512-2)

## Content

1. BMC Nephrol. 2024 Mar 4;25(1):78. doi: 10.1186/s12882-024-03512-2.

Validation of IgA nephropathy diagnosis in the Swedish Renal Registry.

Rehnberg J(1)(2), Segelmark M(3)(4), Ludvigsson JF(5)(6)(7)(8), Emilsson
L(9)(5)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology and Centre for Clinical Research, County Council of
Värmland, Central Hospital Karlstad, Karlstad, Sweden.
Johanna.rehnberg@regionvarmland.se.
(2)School of Medical Science, University of Örebro, Örebro, Sweden.
Johanna.rehnberg@regionvarmland.se.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Nephrology and Rheumatology, Skåne University
Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(5)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Örebro University Hospital, Örebro, Sweden.
(7)Division of Digestive and Liver Disease, Department of Medicine, Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(8)Division of Epidemiology and Public Health, School of Medicine, University of
Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(9)School of Medical Science, University of Örebro, Örebro, Sweden.
(10)Nysäter Health Care Center, Centre for Clinical Research, County Council of
Värmland, Nysäter, Sweden.
(11)Department of General Practice and General Practice Research Unit (AFE),
Institute of Health and Society, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

AIM: The Swedish Renal Registry (SRR) is a unique national quality registry that
monitors the clinical trajectory of patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD).
We have validated the biopsy data registered in the SRR for IgA Nephropathy
(IgAN) diagnosis.
METHODS: In total 25% of all patients (n = 142), registered with IgAN in the SRR
after having performed a kidney biopsy during 2015-2019, were randomly selected.
We obtained original biopsy and medical records for 139 (98%) patients. We
evaluated the IgAN diagnosis using a standardized template, calculated its
positive predictive value (PPV) with 95% confidence interval (CI) and reported
clinical features at the time of diagnosis.
RESULTS: A histological and clinical diagnosis of IgAN was confirmed in 132 of
the 139 patients, yielding a PPV of 95% (95% CI 90-98%). Median age was 46 years
(range: 18-85) and the male:female ratio was 2.1:1. The median creatinine level
was 123 µmol/L, with a corresponding estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR)
level of 51 mL/min/1.73m2. Histological features of IgA deposits were seen in
all patients, hypercellularity in 102/132 (77.2%), C3 deposits in 98/132 (72.4%)
and C1q deposits in 27/132 (20.5%) of the cases.
CONCLUSION: Validating data is not research per se, but continuous validation of
medical registries is an important feature necessary to ensure reliable data and
the foundation of good epidemiological data for future research. Our validation
showed a high PPV (95%) for IgAN diagnosis registered in the SRR. Clinical
characteristics were consistent with previous reports. The biopsy data in the
SRR will be a valuable resource in future IgAN research.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-024-03512-2
PMCID: PMC10910707
PMID: 38438966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Rehnberg has obtained reinbursements for
lectures from Astra Zeneca and Bayer. Dr Segelmark is a board member of the
Swedish Renal Registry, he has received consultancy fees from Hansa Biopharma
AB, Vifor Pharma and Astra Zeneca. Dr Ludvigsson coordinates a study on behalf
of the Swedish IBD quality register (SWIBERG) and that study has received
funding from Janssen Corporation. Dr Ludvigsson has also received finacial
support from MSD developing a paper reviewing national healthcare registers in
China. Dr Ludvigsson is currently discussing potential research collaboration
with Takeda. Dr Emilsson has no conflicts of interests.
