---
reference_id: "PMID:8601050"
title: Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs. Potential effects in older patients.
authors:
- Gardner G
- Furst DE
journal: Drugs Aging
year: '1995'
doi: 10.2165/00002512-199507060-00003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs. Potential effects in older patients.
**Authors:** Gardner G, Furst DE
**Journal:** Drugs Aging (1995)
**DOI:** [10.2165/00002512-199507060-00003](https://doi.org/10.2165/00002512-199507060-00003)

## Content

1. Drugs Aging. 1995 Dec;7(6):420-37. doi: 10.2165/00002512-199507060-00003.

Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs. Potential effects in older patients.

Gardner G(1), Furst DE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington, Seattle, USA.

Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) are frequently used in rheumatoid 
arthritis. A number of physiological changes occur in the elderly which may 
modify the use of these medications. The most commonly used DMARDs are 
antimalarial drugs (particularly hydroxychloroquine), sulfasalazine and 
methotrexate. The principal mechanism of action of the antimalarials relates to 
the fact that they change intracellular pH, which downregulates numerous immune 
functions. Hydroxychloroquine is metabolised to 3 metabolites and has a very low 
clearance. It is moderately effective in dosages up to 6.4 mg/kg/day. While it 
is not the most effective of the DMARDs, it is the least toxic. Sulfasalazine is 
a prodrug which is enzymatically split in the bowel to form sulfapyridine (the 
principal active metabolite) and 5-aminosalicylic acid. The metabolism of 
sulfasalazine is complex and, to some extent, genetically determined. The 
mechanism of action of the drug is not well understood, but involves decreased 
production of cytokines and decreased proliferative response of lymphocytes. It 
may slow the rate of bony damage associated with rheumatoid arthritis. Nearly 
50% of the patients who are prescribed sulfasalazine continue to receive the 
drug for up to 4 years. Sulfasalazine is not as well tolerated as 
hydroxychloroquine. Gastrointestinal toxicity, in particular, seems to be a 
problem in elderly patients taking this medication. Methotrexate is presently 
the most popular of the DMARDs for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. 
Methotrexate inhibits dihydrofolate reductase and adenosine release and has a 
secondary effect on cytokines and polymorphonuclear chemotaxis. It is highly 
metabolised within cells and remains there for prolonged periods. Up to 70% of 
patients who are prescribed methotrexate continue treatment for 5 years. 
Methotrexate treatment is associated with gastrointestinal, hepatic, cutaneous 
and, possibly, pulmonary adverse effects. The use of azathioprine, penicillamine 
and gold compounds is briefly reviewed in this article. Elderly patients have an 
increased incidence of rashes when using penicillamine, relative to young 
patients. There are no age-related differences in the efficacy and tolerability 
of azathioprine or gold therapy. The poor absorption and renal toxicity 
associated with cyclosporin, the new 'salvage' therapy in rheumatoid arthritis, 
make it generally unsuitable for use in the elderly, except under specialists' 
supervision.

DOI: 10.2165/00002512-199507060-00003
PMID: 8601050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]