---
reference_id: "PMID:21031137"
title: Two mouse models for recoverin-associated autoimmune retinopathy.
authors:
- Lu Y
- He S
- Jia L
- Khan NW
- Heckenlively JR
journal: Mol Vis
year: '2010'
keywords:
- Animals
- Antibodies/immunology
- "Autoimmune Diseases/complications, metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Electroretinography
- Female
- Flow Cytometry
- Humans
- Hybridomas/metabolism
- Immunization
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Inflammation/complications, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Recombinant Proteins/isolation & purification, metabolism"
- "Recoverin/immunology, isolation & purification, metabolism"
- Retina/pathology
- "Retinal Diseases/complications, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two mouse models for recoverin-associated autoimmune retinopathy.
**Authors:** Lu Y, He S, Jia L, Khan NW, Heckenlively JR
**Journal:** Mol Vis (2010)

## Content

1. Mol Vis. 2010 Oct 2;16:1936-48.

Two mouse models for recoverin-associated autoimmune retinopathy.

Lu Y(1), He S, Jia L, Khan NW, Heckenlively JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences Kellogg Eye Center,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48105, USA.

PURPOSE: Recoverin has been demonstrated to be one of the main causative
antigenic retinal proteins common in many cases of autoimmune retinopathy (AIR).
Strategies for producing two different AIR mouse models associated with
anti-recoverin antibodies were tested.
METHODS: (1) Six-week-old female B6.MRL-Fal(lpr)/J mice (LPR) mice were
immunized with recombinant recoverin three times at 2-4 week intervals. (2)
Five-month-old Balb/cJ mice were injected with hybridoma cells designed to
produce recoverin monoclonal antibodies. Anti-recoverin antibodies were analyzed
by immunoblot and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Electroretinograms
(ERG), histopathologic examination, and flow cytometric analysis were assessed.
RESULTS: High anti-recoverin antibody levels were achieved in both models,
accompanied by significantly reduced scotopic and photopic responses on the
ERGs. Retinal histology showed swollen cell bodies in the inner nuclear layer in
recoverin-immunized LPR mice, while photoreceptor and outer nuclear layer
swelling was observed in recoverin hybridoma cells injected into balb/cJ mice.
Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) staining detected a marked increase of
Müller cells and astrocyte reactive gliosis in both mouse models. Rhodopsin and
S-opsin staining was similar to controls, while decreased numbers of bipolar
cells were observed in both models. Complement component C1q and C3 deposits
increased upon immunohistopathologic retinal staining in both models, while
increased numbers of CD4+ and CD68+ cells from retinas were found upon flow
cytometric analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: These two models had similar pathology in the retina, indicating
the retinal antigens to recoverin antibody set off pathologic events that
include leukocyte invasion, complement deposition, reactive gliosis in the
retina, and selective retinal degeneration of inner nuclear layer neurons. These
two AIR mouse models will allow for detailed pathologic investigation and
testing of protein antigens associated with human AIR and can be used to test
treatments. It is important to note that, since most AIR patients have multiple
anti-retinal antibodies, it will be possible to study which antibodies are
pathologic and which have no retinal pathologic effects. These models can also
serve as an important research resource for studying the pathophysiology of
specific retinal proteins by creating autoantibodies, which potentially will
give a better understanding of retinal protein interactions.

PMCID: PMC2957304
PMID: 21031137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
