---
reference_id: "PMID:34562816"
title: "c-Kit inhibitors for unresectable or metastatic mucosal, acral or chronically sun-damaged melanoma: a systematic review and one-arm meta-analysis."
authors:
- Steeb T
- Wessely A
- Petzold A
- Kohl C
- Erdmann M
- Berking C
- Heppt MV
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2021.08.015
keywords:
- "Dasatinib/administration & dosage"
- Exons/genetics
- Humans
- "Imatinib Mesylate/administration & dosage"
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Mucous Membrane/pathology
- Mutation
- Progression-Free Survival
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/administration & dosage"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- "Pyrimidines/administration & dosage"
- "Skin/pathology, radiation effects"
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, mortality, pathology"
- "Sunitinib/administration & dosage"
- Sunlight/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# c-Kit inhibitors for unresectable or metastatic mucosal, acral or chronically sun-damaged melanoma: a systematic review and one-arm meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Steeb T, Wessely A, Petzold A, Kohl C, Erdmann M, Berking C, Heppt MV
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2021.08.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2021.08.015)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2021 Nov;157:348-357. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2021.08.015. Epub 2021
 Sep 22.

c-Kit inhibitors for unresectable or metastatic mucosal, acral or chronically
sun-damaged melanoma: a systematic review and one-arm meta-analysis.

Steeb T(1), Wessely A(1), Petzold A(1), Kohl C(2), Erdmann M(1), Berking C(1),
Heppt MV(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen,
Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany;
Comprehensive Cancer Center Erlangen - European Metropolitan Region of
Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, University Hospital, Ludwig Maximilian
University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen,
Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany;
Comprehensive Cancer Center Erlangen - European Metropolitan Region of
Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany. Electronic address: markus.heppt@uk-erlangen.de.

BACKGROUND: Activating genomic alterations of the receptor tyrosine kinase KIT
are found preferentially in certain melanoma subtypes such as acral and mucosal
melanoma or melanoma arising in chronically sun-damaged skin. However, the
therapeutic value of c-Kit inhibitors for these subtypes currently remains
unclear.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to summarise the efficacy and safety
of c-Kit inhibitors for unresectable or metastatic mucosal, acral or chronically
sun-damaged melanoma.
METHODS: We performed a systematic literature research in MEDLINE, Embase and
CENTRAL and hand searched pertinent trial registers and conference abstracts for
eligible trials until 23rd June 2020. Results were pooled using a random-effects
model to calculate pooled proportions of objective response rates (ORRs) and
severe adverse events (sAEs) from unselected KIT mutant or amplified cohorts.
RESULTS: Nineteen single-arm studies with an overall sample size of 601 patients
were included. The studies investigated imatinib (n = 8), nilotinib (n = 7),
dasatinib (n = 3) and sunitinib (n = 1). The pooled ORR for all inhibitors was
15% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 12-18%). Subgroup analysis revealed the
highest ORR (20%; 95% CI: 14-26%) for nilotinib. The ORR for mucosal melanoma
was 14% (95% CI: 6-24%) and 22% for acral lentiginous melanoma (95% CI: 14-30%).
At least one sAE was reported in 42% of patients (95% CI: 34-50%).
CONCLUSIONS: c-Kit inhibitors represent a valuable treatment option for patients
with KIT-mutant melanoma, in particular for mutations of exons 11 and 13.
Furthermore, high-quality trials are urgently needed to investigate putative
combinations of specific targeted therapies with immunotherapy.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2021.08.015
PMID: 34562816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement None.
