---
reference_id: "PMID:28088326"
title: "Acute kidney injury due to tropical infectious diseases and animal venoms: a tale of 2 continents."
authors:
- Burdmann EA
- Jha V
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2016.09.051
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute kidney injury due to tropical infectious diseases and animal venoms: a tale of 2 continents.
**Authors:** Burdmann EA, Jha V
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.kint.2016.09.051](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2016.09.051)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2017 May;91(5):1033-1046. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2016.09.051. Epub
2017  Jan 11.

Acute kidney injury due to tropical infectious diseases and animal venoms: a 
tale of 2 continents.

Burdmann EA(1), Jha V(2).

Author information:
(1)LIM 12, Division of Nephrology, University of São Paulo Medical School, São 
Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: burdmann@usp.br.
(2)George Institute for Global Health, New Delhi, India, and University of 
Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2017 Nov;92(5):1288. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2017.05.035.

South and Southeast Asia and Latin American together comprise 46 countries and 
are home to approximately 40% of the world population. The sociopolitical and 
economic heterogeneity, tropical climate, and malady transitions characteristic 
of the region strongly influence disease behavior and health care delivery. 
Acute kidney injury epidemiology mirrors these inequalities. In addition to 
hospital-acquired acute kidney injury in tertiary care centers, these countries 
face a large preventable burden of community-acquired acute kidney injury 
secondary to tropical infectious diseases or animal venoms, affecting previously 
healthy young individuals. This article reviews the epidemiology, clinical 
picture, prevention, risk factors, and pathophysiology of acute kidney injury 
associated with tropical diseases (malaria, dengue, leptospirosis, scrub typhus, 
and yellow fever) and animal venom (snakes, bees, caterpillars, spiders, and 
scorpions) in tropical regions of Asia and Latin America, and discusses the 
potential future challenges due to emerging issues.

Copyright © 2016 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2016.09.051
PMID: 28088326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]