---
reference_id: "PMID:40478163"
title: Orbital Causes of Ostiomeatal Complex Occlusion.
authors:
- Shoji MK
- Al-Sharif E
- Dib El Jalbout N
- Legala AR
- Yan CH
- Liu CY
- Korn BS
- Kikkawa DO
journal: Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000002965
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Maxillary Sinus/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Orbit
- "Orbital Diseases/complications, surgery, diagnostic imaging, diagnosis"
- Orbital Implants/adverse effects
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Orbital Causes of Ostiomeatal Complex Occlusion.
**Authors:** Shoji MK, Al-Sharif E, Dib El Jalbout N, Legala AR, Yan CH, Liu CY, Korn BS, Kikkawa DO
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IOP.0000000000002965](https://doi.org/10.1097/IOP.0000000000002965)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg. 2026 Jan-Feb 01;42(1):28-34. doi: 
10.1097/IOP.0000000000002965. Epub 2025 Jun 6.

Orbital Causes of Ostiomeatal Complex Occlusion.

Shoji MK(1), Al-Sharif E(2), Dib El Jalbout N(1), Legala AR(3), Yan CH(4), Liu 
CY(1), Korn BS(1), Kikkawa DO(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Oculofacial Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Shiley Eye 
Institute, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, U.S.A.
(2)Surgery Department, College of Medicine, Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)University of California San Diego School of Medicine.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, U.S.A.

PURPOSE: This study aimed to describe uncommon cases of ostiomeatal complex 
(OMC) occlusion and maxillary atelectasis secondary to orbital pathology.
METHODS: A retrospective chart review of cases of ostiomeatal occlusion and 
maxillary atelectasis at a single institution was performed. Patients with an 
identifiable orbital cause were included, whereas patients with idiopathic 
occlusion (silent sinus syndrome) were excluded. Data collected included patient 
age, sex, clinical presentation, and measurements including exophthalmolmetry, 
radiographic features, interventions, and outcomes.
RESULTS: Eight patients were identified with mechanical causes of ostiomeatal 
occlusion arising from the orbit. Five cases had malpositioned orbital floor 
implants in the setting of remote orbital reconstruction, including after 
trauma. Two cases had previous orbital decompression for thyroid eye disease 
with subsequent orbital mucocele and fat prolapse into the OMC. One case had 
distensible venous malformation of the inferior orbit resulting in occlusion of 
the OMC. The majority of patients required both endoscopic sinus surgery and 
treatment of the orbital pathology causing the OMC occlusion.
CONCLUSIONS: While rare, orbital pathology may cause OMC occlusion, which may 
lead to maxillary sinus atelectasis. Orbital surgeons should be aware of these 
associations and have a high index of suspicion when subclinical maxillary 
atelectasis is seen in conjunction with orbital pathology. Treatment may require 
addressing the underlying cause as well as multidisciplinary management of both 
sinus surgery to restore maxillary sinus ventilation and possible orbital 
reconstruction.

Copyright © 2025 The American Society of Ophthalmic Plastic and Reconstructive 
Surgery, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000002965
PMID: 40478163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial or conflicts of 
interest to disclose relevant to this paper; other: D.O.K.—consultant for Amgen, 
Immunovant, Genentech, Acelyrin, and Lassen Therapeutics; Royalties: Elsevier. 
B.K.—Consultant: Amgen; Advisory Board: Acelyrin, Argenx, Immunovant, Viridian; 
Royalties: Elsevier. C.L.—Principal investigator for Lassen 
Therapeutics-sponsored clinical trial; Wolters Kluwers Health Royalties.