---
reference_id: "PMID:19788068"
title: Serum biochemical markers in rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Pallinti V
- Ganesan N
- Anbazhagan M
- Rajasekhar G
journal: Indian J Biochem Biophys
year: '2009'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serum biochemical markers in rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Pallinti V, Ganesan N, Anbazhagan M, Rajasekhar G
**Journal:** Indian J Biochem Biophys (2009)

## Content

1. Indian J Biochem Biophys. 2009 Aug;46(4):342-4.

Serum biochemical markers in rheumatoid arthritis.

Pallinti V(1), Ganesan N, Anbazhagan M, Rajasekhar G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Sri Ramachandra Medical College and Research 
Institute, Sri Ramachandra University, Porur, Chennai 600116.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) characterized by local and systemic effects of 
inflammation has a wide range of biochemical markers implicated directly or 
indirectly to its pathogenesis. In the present study, homocysteine, cortisol, 
adenosine deaminase (ADA), ferritin, malondialdehyde (MDA) and alpha-tocopherol 
in serum of RA patients and healthy individuals were estimated to assess if they 
contribute to the disease process. The markers of disease activity such as 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and rheumatoid factor (RF) were also 
measured. The study group included a total of 45 subjects, including 30 RA 
patients and the rest being healthy individuals. RA group showed a significant 
increase in the levels of homocysteine, ADA and MDA, and a significant decrease 
in alpha-tocopherol compared to the healthy individuals. However, cortisol and 
ferritin levels did not show any significant change. Also, there was no 
significant correlation between the studied serum markers and markers of disease 
activity. Our results indicate that these biochemical markers contribute 
independently to the pathogenesis of RA.

PMID: 19788068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]