---
reference_id: "PMID:39606817"
title: "Late-Onset Vitiligo: Epidemiology, Clinical Characteristics, and Management Strategies."
authors:
- Hasan Z
- Pathania YS
journal: J Cosmet Dermatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/jocd.16705
keywords:
- Humans
- "Vitiligo/epidemiology, therapy, diagnosis"
- Age of Onset
- Prevalence
- Phototherapy/methods
- Adult
- Treatment Outcome
- Middle Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Late-Onset Vitiligo: Epidemiology, Clinical Characteristics, and Management Strategies.
**Authors:** Hasan Z, Pathania YS
**Journal:** J Cosmet Dermatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jocd.16705](https://doi.org/10.1111/jocd.16705)

## Content

1. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2025 Feb;24(2):e16705. doi: 10.1111/jocd.16705. Epub 2024
Nov  28.

Late-Onset Vitiligo: Epidemiology, Clinical Characteristics, and Management 
Strategies.

Hasan Z(1), Pathania YS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Leprology, All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Rajkot, Gujarat, India.

BACKGROUND: Late-onset vitiligo (LOV), generally defined as vitiligo that starts 
at age 30 or older, presents unique diagnostic and management challenges, 
reflecting an intricate interplay of genetic, environmental, and societal 
factors.
OBJECTIVES: This review aims to elucidate the distinct aspects of LOV such as 
epidemiology, clinical characteristics, and treatment outcomes thereby enhancing 
diagnostic precision and planning management strategies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A comprehensive literature search was conducted across 
multiple databases including PubMed and EMBASE, adhering to PRISMA guidelines. 
Studies focused on adults (age 30 or older at the time of diagnosis) with LOV 
were included. Data on demographics, clinical features, and comorbidities were 
extracted.
RESULTS: The literature search yielded five eligible articles with a total 
sample size of 1099 patients. LOV prevalence ranged from 6.5% to 14.7%, with a 
mean age of onset in the mid to late 50s. Vitiligo vulgaris was the most common 
form, with increased leukotrichia and the Koebner phenomenon. Associated 
autoimmune/endocrine disorders, including diabetes mellitus and thyroid 
diseases, were prevalent, suggesting systemic links. Treatment outcomes varied, 
with combination therapy and phototherapy showing promise.
CONCLUSION: Late-onset vitiligo differs significantly from early-onset vitiligo 
in its clinical traits, epidemiology, and treatment response, necessitating 
personalized care and targeted management strategies.

© 2024 The Author(s). Journal of Cosmetic Dermatology published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/jocd.16705
PMCID: PMC11845919
PMID: 39606817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.