---
reference_id: "PMID:21938826"
title: Short-Chain Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Wolfe L
- Jethva R
- Oglesbee D
- Vockley J
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Short-Chain Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Wolfe L, Jethva R, Oglesbee D, Vockley J

## Content

1. Short-Chain Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency.

Wolfe L(1), Jethva R(2), Oglesbee D(3), Vockley J(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2011 Sep 22 [updated 2025 Sep 11].

Author information:
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland
(2)Hackensack University Medical Center, Hackensack, New Jersey
(3)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota
(4)University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (SCADD) 
is a biochemical phenotype without clinical manifestations. Biochemical findings 
in individuals with SCADD include increased butyrylcarnitine (C4 acylcarnitine) 
concentration in plasma and/or increased ethylmalonic acid concentration in 
urine. As with other fatty acid oxidation deficiencies, characteristic 
biochemical findings of SCADD may be absent except during times of physiologic 
stress such as fasting and illness. SCADD is not predicted to cause clinical 
findings based on long-term evaluation of individuals following identification 
on newborn screening.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SCADD is established in an individual with 
characteristic increased butyrylcarnitine (C4 acylcarnitine) concentration in 
plasma and/or increased ethylmalonic acid concentration in urine under 
non-stressed conditions (on at least two occasions) and biallelic SCADD-related 
variants in ACADS identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: As SCADD is a biochemical phenotype 
without clinical manifestations, no treatment is recommended and there are no 
dietary or supplement recommendations. Surveillance: No surveillance is 
recommended. Longitudinal follow up on a research basis, including annual visits 
to a metabolic clinic to assess growth, development, and nutritional status 
(protein and iron stores, concentration of red blood cell or plasma essential 
fatty acids, and plasma carnitine concentration), could be helpful to more 
clearly define unrecognized phenotypes as individuals age.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SCADD is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for a SCADD-related variant, each sib of an 
individual with SCADD has at conception a 25% chance of inheriting biallelic 
ACADS variants leading to the biochemical findings of SCADD, a 50% chance of 
inheriting one SCADD-related variant and being a carrier, and a 25% chance of 
inheriting neither of the familial SCADD-related variants. Because SCADD is not 
thought to be clinically significant, prenatal and preimplantation genetic 
testing for SCADD are considered medically unnecessary.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 21938826