---
reference_id: "PMID:36749450"
title: Growth patterns and outcomes of growth hormone therapy in patients with acrodysostosis.
authors:
- Ertl DA
- Mantovani G
- de Nanclares GP
- Elli FM
- Pereda A
- Pagnano A
- Sanchis A
- Cueto-Gonzalez AM
- Berrade S
- León MC
- Rothenbuhler A
- Audrain C
- Berkenou J
- Knight N
- Dolman K
- Gleiss A
- Argente J
- Linglart A
journal: J Endocrinol Invest
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s40618-023-02026-2
keywords:
- Recombinant Proteins/therapeutic use
- Retrospective Studies
- "Growth Disorders/drug therapy, etiology"
- "Human Growth Hormone/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Cohort Studies
- Body Height
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability
- Growth Hormone/therapeutic use
- Dysostoses
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Osteochondrodysplasias
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Growth patterns and outcomes of growth hormone therapy in patients with acrodysostosis.
**Authors:** Ertl DA, Mantovani G, de Nanclares GP, Elli FM, Pereda A, Pagnano A, Sanchis A, Cueto-Gonzalez AM, Berrade S, León MC, Rothenbuhler A, Audrain C, Berkenou J, Knight N, Dolman K, Gleiss A, Argente J, Linglart A
**Journal:** J Endocrinol Invest (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40618-023-02026-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40618-023-02026-2)

## Content

1. J Endocrinol Invest. 2023 Aug;46(8):1673-1684. doi:
10.1007/s40618-023-02026-2.  Epub 2023 Feb 7.

Growth patterns and outcomes of growth hormone therapy in patients with 
acrodysostosis.

Ertl DA(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Mantovani G(6), de Nanclares GP(7), Elli FM(6), Pereda 
A(7), Pagnano A(6), Sanchis A(8), Cueto-Gonzalez AM(9)(10)(11), Berrade S(12), 
León MC(13), Rothenbuhler A(14)(15)(16), Audrain C(14)(15), Berkenou J(14)(15), 
Knight N(17), Dolman K(17), Gleiss A(18), Argente J(19)(20)(21)(22), Linglart 
A(14)(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)AP-HP, Department of Endocrinology and Diabetology for Children and 
Department of Adolescent Medicine, Bicêtre Paris-Saclay University Hospital, 78 
Rue du Général Leclerc, 94270, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. 
diana-alexandra.ertl@meduniwien.ac.at.
(2)AP-HP, Reference Center for Rare Disorders of the Calcium and Phosphate 
Metabolism, Filière OSCAR and Platform of Expertise for Rare Diseases 
Paris-Saclay, Bicêtre Paris-Saclay Hospital, 78 Rue du Général Leclerc, 94270, 
Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. diana-alexandra.ertl@meduniwien.ac.at.
(3)University Paris Saclay, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. 
diana-alexandra.ertl@meduniwien.ac.at.
(4)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria. diana-alexandra.ertl@meduniwien.ac.at.
(5)Reference Center for Rare Bone and Growth Disorders: Vienna Bone and Growth 
Center (ERN-BOND), Vienna, Austria. diana-alexandra.ertl@meduniwien.ac.at.
(6)Endocrinology Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, 
Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico di Milano, University 
of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(7)Molecular (Epi) Genetics Laboratory, Bioaraba Health Research Institute, 
Araba University Hospital, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain.
(8)Pediatrics Service, Dysmorphology Consultation, Dr Peset University Hospital, 
Valencia, Spain.
(9)Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, Vall d'Hebron Barcelona Campus 
Hospital, Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Medicine Genetics Group, Vall d'Hebron Barcelona Campus Hospital, Vall 
d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR), Autonomous University of Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(11)European Reference Network Craniofacial Anomalies and ENT Disorders (ERN 
CRANIO and ERN ITHACA), Barcelona, Spain.
(12)Section of Pediatric Endocrinology, Navarra Hospital Complex, Pamplona, 
Navarra, Spain.
(13)Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, CIBERER, Vall d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital 
Campus, Barcelona, Spain.
(14)AP-HP, Department of Endocrinology and Diabetology for Children and 
Department of Adolescent Medicine, Bicêtre Paris-Saclay University Hospital, 78 
Rue du Général Leclerc, 94270, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(15)AP-HP, Reference Center for Rare Disorders of the Calcium and Phosphate 
Metabolism, Filière OSCAR and Platform of Expertise for Rare Diseases 
Paris-Saclay, Bicêtre Paris-Saclay Hospital, 78 Rue du Général Leclerc, 94270, 
Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(16)University Paris Saclay, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(17)Acrodysostosis Support and Research, Reg 1182818, London, UK.
(18)Center for Medical Statistics, Informatics, and Intelligent Systems, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(19)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Endocrinology, Hospital Infantil 
Universitario Niño Jesús, Instituto de Investigación la Princesa, Madrid, Spain.
(20)Department of Pediatrics, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(21)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y 
Nutrición (CIBEROBN), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(22)IMDEA Food Institute, Madrid, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Severe short stature is a feature of acrodysostosis, but data on 
growth are sparse. Treatment with recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) is 
used in some centers to increase final height, but no studies have been 
published so far. Our objective was to conduct a multicenter, retrospective, 
cohort study to investigate growth in individuals with both types of 
acrodysostosis, treated with rhGH or not; we used the new nomenclature to 
describe acrodysostosis, as this disease belongs to the large group of 
inactivating PTH/PTHrP signaling disorders (iPPSD); acrodysostosis refers to 
iPPSD4 (acrodysostosis type 1 due to PRKAR1A mutations) and iPPSD5 
(acrodysostosis type 2, due to PDE4D mutations).
METHODS: We present auxological data from individuals with genetically 
characterized iPPSD4, and participants with clinical features of iPPSD5.
RESULTS: We included 20 and 17 individuals with iPPSD4 and iPPSD5, respectively. 
The rhGH-treated iPPSD4 patients (n = 9) were smaller at birth than those who 
did not receive rhGH (median - 2.2 SDS vs. - 1.7 SDS); they showed a trend to 
catch-up growth during rhGH therapy (median 0.5 SDS in the first year). The 
rhGH-treated patients (n = 5) reached a better final height compared to those 
who did not receive rhGH (n = 4) (median - 2.8 SDS vs. - 3.9 SDS), suggesting 
that rhGH is efficient to increase height in those patients. The difference in 
target height to final height ranged between 1.6 and 3.0 SDS for iPPSD4 not 
treated with rhGH (n = 4), 2.1-2.8 SDS for rhGH-treated iPPSD4 (n = 5), 0.6-5.5 
SDS for iPPSD5 not treated with rhGH (n = 5) and 2.5-3.1 for rhGH-treated iPPSD5 
(n = 2).
CONCLUSION: Final height may be positively influenced by rhGH in patients with 
acrodysostosis/iPPSD. Our rhGH-treated cohort started therapy relatively late, 
which might explain, at least in part, the limited effect of rhGH on height.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Italian Society of 
Endocrinology (SIE).

DOI: 10.1007/s40618-023-02026-2
PMID: 36749450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]