---
reference_id: "PMID:12491066"
title: "[Neuropsychiatric involvement in systemic lupus erythematosus. Part 1: clinical presentation and pathogenesis]."
authors:
- Weiner SM
- Peter HH
journal: Med Klin (Munich)
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1007/s00063-002-1217-x
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/diagnosis"
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/diagnosis"
- Neurologic Examination
- Neuropsychological Tests
- Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Neuropsychiatric involvement in systemic lupus erythematosus. Part 1: clinical presentation and pathogenesis].
**Authors:** Weiner SM, Peter HH
**Journal:** Med Klin (Munich) (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00063-002-1217-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00063-002-1217-x)

## Content

1. Med Klin (Munich). 2002 Dec 15;97(12):730-7. doi: 10.1007/s00063-002-1217-x.

[Neuropsychiatric involvement in systemic lupus erythematosus. Part 1: clinical
presentation and pathogenesis].

[Article in German]

Weiner SM(1), Peter HH.

Author information:
(1)Abteilung für Rheumatologie und Klinische Immunologie, Medizinische Klinik
der Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg. stefan.weiner@ruhr-uni-bochum.de

BACKGROUND: Central nervous system (CNS) involvement is a frequent complication
of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) ranging from a subclinical to a severe
disabling disease. Neuropsychiatric manifestations have been described in 18-67%
of cases depending on the diagnostic criteria. The cerebral involvement may
precede the full-blown picture of SLE or may develop in the course of disease,
most frequently within the first 3 years.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION: Neuropsychiatric manifestations in SLE comprise diffuse
psychiatric symptoms, focal neurologic symptoms, and the involvement of the
peripheral nervous system. Numerous CNS syndroms have been described: migraine,
seizure, stroke, chorea, transverse myelopathy, psychosis, mood disorders, acute
confusional state, and cognitive dysfunction. The diagnosis of cerebral
involvement can be difficult and has to be differentiated from neurologic
complications which may be, for instance, due to uremia, hypertension, drug
toxicity, and infection.
PATHOGENESIS: A large number of etiopathophysiologic processes are involved:
antineuronal antibodies, antibodies against ribosimal P-protein, and cytokines
have been implicated in the pathogenesis of diffuse neuropsychiatric symptoms.
Focal neurologic symptoms are the consequence of vascular injury induced by
circulating immune complex, occlusive vasculopathy as a result of endothelial
cell activation induced by cytokines and complement activation, or macro- and
microvascular thrombosis induced by antiphospholipid antibodies. In the later
stages of disease, cerebrovascular manifestations are often related to
accelerated atherosclerosis, which is entertained by increased intravascular
complement turnover and antiphospholipid antibodies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00063-002-1217-x
PMID: 12491066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
