---
reference_id: "PMID:35217310"
title: "Diagnostic and management strategies for Myeloproliferative Neoplasm-Unclassifiable (MPN-U): An international survey of contemporary practice."
authors:
- Hargreaves R
- Harrison CN
- McLornan DP
journal: Curr Res Transl Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.retram.2022.103338
keywords:
- Humans
- Incidence
- "Myeloproliferative Disorders/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Neoplasms
- "Splenomegaly/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- Surveys and Questionnaires
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic and management strategies for Myeloproliferative Neoplasm-Unclassifiable (MPN-U): An international survey of contemporary practice.
**Authors:** Hargreaves R, Harrison CN, McLornan DP
**Journal:** Curr Res Transl Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.retram.2022.103338](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.retram.2022.103338)

## Content

1. Curr Res Transl Med. 2022 Jul;70(3):103338. doi: 10.1016/j.retram.2022.103338.
 Epub 2022 Feb 23.

Diagnostic and management strategies for Myeloproliferative 
Neoplasm-Unclassifiable (MPN-U): An international survey of contemporary 
practice.

Hargreaves R(1), Harrison CN(2), McLornan DP(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology, University College Hospitals, London, UK.
(2)Department of Haematology, Guy's and St.Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, 
UK.
(3)Department of Haematology, University College Hospitals, London, UK; 
Department of Haematology, Guy's and St.Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, 
UK. Electronic address: donal.mclornan@nhs.net.

Myeloproliferative Neoplasm-Unclassifiable (MPN-U) is defined as an MPN that 
fails to meet the diagnostic criteria for any of the other defined classical or 
'non-classical' MPNs. The reported incidence is variable, dependent on 
appropriate recognition, and the clinical course can be highly variable ranging 
from an indolent disorder through to an aggressive disease course with a 
significant risk of thrombosis, bulky splenomegaly, and debilitating symptom 
burden. Clinicians frequently manage these conditions according to the clinical 
concerns e.g. splenomegaly akin to the phenotype, but no evidence base exists. 
Currently, there are no widely accepted guidelines to deal with both the 
diagnostic work up and subsequent clinical management of this entity. We hence 
surveyed major International MPN centres to gain an understanding of common 
challenges in MPN-U management in 2021 and aid identification of considerable 
practice variations where harmonisation would be desirable. Such information is 
vital to support future consensus guidelines in addition to informing further 
collaborative studies.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.retram.2022.103338
PMID: 35217310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]