---
reference_id: "PMID:37059468"
title: "Therapies in Stiff-Person Syndrome: Advances and Future Prospects Based on Disease Pathophysiology."
authors:
- Dalakas MC
journal: Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000200109
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapies in Stiff-Person Syndrome: Advances and Future Prospects Based on Disease Pathophysiology.
**Authors:** Dalakas MC
**Journal:** Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXI.0000000000200109](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXI.0000000000200109)

## Content

1. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2023 Apr 14;10(3):e200109. doi: 
10.1212/NXI.0000000000200109. Print 2023 May.

Therapies in Stiff-Person Syndrome: Advances and Future Prospects Based on 
Disease Pathophysiology.

Dalakas MC(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
PA; and the Neuroimmunology Unit, National and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens, Greece. marinos.dalakas@jefferson.edu.

Among the glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD)-antibody-spectrum disorders, the 
most common phenotypic subset is the stiff-person syndrome (SPS), caused by 
impaired GABAergic inhibitory neurotransmission and autoimmunity characterized 
by very high titers of GAD antibodies and increased GAD-IgG intrathecal 
synthesis. If not properly treated or untreated because of delayed diagnosis, 
SPS progresses leading to disability; it is therefore fundamental to apply the 
best therapeutic schemes from the outset. This article is focused on the 
rationale of specific therapeutic strategies based on the SPS pathophysiology 
targeting both the impaired reciprocal GABAergic inhibition to symptomatically 
improve the main clinical manifestations of stiffness in the truncal and 
proximal limb muscles, gait dysfunction, and episodic painful muscle spasms and 
the autoimmunity to enhance improvement and slow down disease progression. A 
practical, step-by-step therapeutic approach is provided, highlighting the 
importance of combination therapies with the preferred gamma-aminobutyric 
acid-enhancing antispasmodic drugs, such as baclofen, tizanidine, 
benzodiazepines, and gabapentin, that provide the first-line symptomatic 
therapy, while detailing the application of current immunotherapies with 
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) plasmapheresis, and rituximab. The pitfalls 
and concerns of long-term therapies in different age groups, including children, 
women planning pregnancy, and especially the elderly considering their 
comorbidities are emphasized, also highlighting the challenges in distinguishing 
the conditioning effects or expectations of chronically applied therapies from 
objective meaningful clinical benefits. Finally, the need for future targeted 
immunotherapeutic options based on disease immunopathogenesis and the biologic 
basis of autoimmune hyperexcitability are discussed, pointing out the unique 
challenges in the design of future controlled clinical trials especially in 
quantifying the extend and severity of stiffness, episodic or startle-triggered 
muscle spasms, task-specific phobias, and excitability.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000200109
PMCID: PMC10119813
PMID: 37059468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no relevant disclosures. Go 
to Neurology.org/NN for full disclosures.