---
reference_id: "PMID:36518043"
title: Ivabradine for Uncontrolled Sinus Tachycardia in Thyrotoxic Cardiomyopathy - Case Report.
authors:
- Frenkel A
- Bichovsky Y
- Arotsker N
- Besser L
- Joshua BZ
- Fraenkel M
- Zahger D
- Klein M
journal: Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2174/1871530323666221214141205
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ivabradine for Uncontrolled Sinus Tachycardia in Thyrotoxic Cardiomyopathy - Case Report.
**Authors:** Frenkel A, Bichovsky Y, Arotsker N, Besser L, Joshua BZ, Fraenkel M, Zahger D, Klein M
**Journal:** Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1871530323666221214141205](https://doi.org/10.2174/1871530323666221214141205)

## Content

1. Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets. 2023;23(7):992-995. doi: 
10.2174/1871530323666221214141205.

Ivabradine for Uncontrolled Sinus Tachycardia in Thyrotoxic Cardiomyopathy - 
Case Report.

Frenkel A(1)(2), Bichovsky Y(1)(2), Arotsker N(1)(2), Besser L(1), Joshua 
BZ(2)(3), Fraenkel M(2)(4), Zahger D(2)(5), Klein M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)General Intensive Care Unit, Soroka University Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, 
Israel.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben- Gurion, University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, 
Israel.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Soroka 
University Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel.
(4)Endocrine Unit, Soroka University Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Soroka University Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, 
Israel.

BACKGROUND: Beta-blockers, mainly propranalol, are usually administered to 
control heart rate in patients with thyrotoxicosis, especially when congestive 
heart failure presents. However, when thyrotoxicosis is not controlled, heart 
rate may be difficult to control even with maximal doses of propranolol. This 
presentation alerts physicians to the possibility of using ivabradine, a 
selective inhibitor of the sinoatrial pacemaker, for the control of heart rate.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present a 37-year-old woman with thyrotoxicosis and 
congestive heart failure whose heart rate was not controlled with a maximal dose 
of beta blockers during a thyroid storm. The addition of ivabradine, a selective 
inhibitor of the sinoatrial pacemaker, controlled her heart rate within 48 
hours.
CONCLUSION: Ivabradine should be considered in patients with thyrotoxicosis, 
including those with heart failure, in whom beta blockers are insufficient to 
control heart rate.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1871530323666221214141205
PMID: 36518043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]