---
reference_id: "PMID:19934351"
title: "The aging lung and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: similarity and difference."
authors:
- Fukuchi Y
journal: Proc Am Thorac Soc
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1513/pats.200909-099RM
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The aging lung and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: similarity and difference.
**Authors:** Fukuchi Y
**Journal:** Proc Am Thorac Soc (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1513/pats.200909-099RM](https://doi.org/10.1513/pats.200909-099RM)

## Content

1. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2009 Dec 1;6(7):570-2. doi: 10.1513/pats.200909-099RM.

The aging lung and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: similarity and 
difference.

Fukuchi Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, CRD Research Institute, Juntendo 
University, Bunkyo-ku Hongo 2-9-8, Tokyo, Japan. yfukuchi@tea.ocn.ne.jp

There is growing evidence of higher prevalence of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) in the elderly. Age-associated changes in the structure and 
function of the lung may increase a pathogenetic susceptibility to COPD. The 
lung may directly develop COPD in old age. Suitable animal models are required 
to test this hypothesis. Senescence-accelerated mice (SAM), Klotho gene depleted 
mice, and SMP-30 knockout mice were investigated with their short lifespan 
associated with premature aging in systemic organs. The structural and 
physiological changes demonstrated senile lung, not emphysema, without alveolar 
wall destruction. Tobacco smoke exposure resulted in the development of 
emphysema. These findings support the hypothesis that premature aging is not the 
direct cause of emphysema, but that premature aging enhances the susceptibility 
of the lung to extrinsic insults including tobacco smoke in these animal models. 
The mechanism of this enhancement needs further investigation and its 
elucidation should advance COPD management.

DOI: 10.1513/pats.200909-099RM
PMID: 19934351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]