---
reference_id: "PMID:2665014"
title: Hemostatic defects in dengue hemorrhagic fever.
authors:
- Bhamarapravati N
journal: Rev Infect Dis
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1093/clinids/11.supplement_4.s826
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hemostatic defects in dengue hemorrhagic fever.
**Authors:** Bhamarapravati N
**Journal:** Rev Infect Dis (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1093/clinids/11.supplement_4.s826](https://doi.org/10.1093/clinids/11.supplement_4.s826)

## Content

1. Rev Infect Dis. 1989 May-Jun;11 Suppl 4:S826-9. doi: 
10.1093/clinids/11.supplement_4.s826.

Hemostatic defects in dengue hemorrhagic fever.

Bhamarapravati N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Dengue hemorrhagic fever is characterized by a sudden onset of fever that lasts 
for 2-7 days and then subsides, at which time hemorrhagic manifestations become 
evident. Sometimes there is an associated form of hypovolemic shock known as 
dengue shock syndrome. There are usually significant changes in the liver, the 
reticuloendothelial system, and the vascular system (e.g., necrosis of liver 
cells and focal hemorrhage, increase in turnover of lymphocytes, and diapedesis 
of erythrocytes through vessel walls). Because of the lack of pathologic 
findings in major organs and the rapid recovery (without sequelae) of survivors, 
physiologic dysfunction is thought to be secondary to the action of biologic 
mediators that are capable of producing severe illness with minimal structural 
injury.

DOI: 10.1093/clinids/11.supplement_4.s826
PMID: 2665014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]