---
reference_id: "PMID:25066259"
title: Retinitis pigmentosa and macular degeneration in a patient with ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency with a novel c.717 del C mutation in the TTPA gene.
authors:
- Iwasa K
- Shima K
- Komai K
- Nishida Y
- Yokota T
- Yamada M
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2014.07.001
keywords:
- "Ataxia/complications, genetics"
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- Macular Degeneration/etiology
- Middle Aged
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/etiology
- "Vitamin E Deficiency/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retinitis pigmentosa and macular degeneration in a patient with ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency with a novel c.717 del C mutation in the TTPA gene.
**Authors:** Iwasa K, Shima K, Komai K, Nishida Y, Yokota T, Yamada M
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jns.2014.07.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2014.07.001)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 2014 Oct 15;345(1-2):228-30. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2014.07.001.
Epub  2014 Jul 9.

Retinitis pigmentosa and macular degeneration in a patient with ataxia with 
isolated vitamin E deficiency with a novel c.717 del C mutation in the TTPA 
gene.

Iwasa K(1), Shima K(2), Komai K(3), Nishida Y(4), Yokota T(5), Yamada M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University 
Graduate School of Medical Science, Japan. Electronic address: 
neuiwasa@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University 
Graduate School of Medical Science, Japan. Electronic address: 
k-shima@solid.ocn.ne.jp.
(3)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Iou National 
Hospital, Japan. Electronic address: komai@ioudom.hosp.go.jp.
(4)Department of Neurology and Neurological Science, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University, Japan. Electronic address: y-nishica.nuro@tmd.ac.jp.
(5)Department of Neurology and Neurological Science, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University, Japan. Electronic address: tak-yokota.nuro@tmd.ac.jp.
(6)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University 
Graduate School of Medical Science, Japan. Electronic address: 
yamada@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

Ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency (AVED) is a neurodegenerative disease 
caused by a mutation in the α-tocopherol transfer protein gene (TTPA). The 
clinical features of the disease resemble Friedreich's ataxia. However, AVED is 
associated with low plasma vitamin E levels, which results in compromised 
antioxidant function. Dysregulation of this lipid-soluble antioxidant vitamin 
plays a major role in the neurodegeneration observed in AVED. Some AVED patients 
experience decreased visual acuity. Retinitis pigmentosa is thought to be the 
main cause of this visual impairment. Although antioxidant levels are important 
for the prevention of macular degeneration, there have been no reports of 
macular degeneration in AVED. Here, we describe a patient with AVED with 
progressive macular degeneration, who carried a novel truncating mutation-c.717 
del C (p.D239EfsX25)-in exon 5 of the TTPA gene. These findings suggest that 
this newly identified mutation results in severely low serum vitamin E levels, 
which may be associated with the development of retinitis pigmentosa and macular 
degeneration.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2014.07.001
PMID: 25066259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]