---
reference_id: "PMID:36226004"
title: "Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease: A Single Centre Retrospective Study of 403 New Cases and Brief Review of Relevant Indian Literature to Understand Clinical, Epidemiological, and Virological Attributes of a Long-Lasting Indian Epidemic."
authors:
- Sharma A
- Mahajan VK
- Mehta KS
- Chauhan PS
- Manvi S
- Chauhan A
journal: Indian Dermatol Online J
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4103/idoj.idoj_701_21
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease: A Single Centre Retrospective Study of 403 New Cases and Brief Review of Relevant Indian Literature to Understand Clinical, Epidemiological, and Virological Attributes of a Long-Lasting Indian Epidemic.
**Authors:** Sharma A, Mahajan VK, Mehta KS, Chauhan PS, Manvi S, Chauhan A
**Journal:** Indian Dermatol Online J (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4103/idoj.idoj_701_21](https://doi.org/10.4103/idoj.idoj_701_21)

## Content

1. Indian Dermatol Online J. 2022 May 5;13(3):310-320. doi: 
10.4103/idoj.idoj_701_21. eCollection 2022 May-Jun.

Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease: A Single Centre Retrospective Study of 403 New 
Cases and Brief Review of Relevant Indian Literature to Understand Clinical, 
Epidemiological, and Virological Attributes of a Long-Lasting Indian Epidemic.

Sharma A(1), Mahajan VK(1), Mehta KS(1), Chauhan PS(1), Manvi S(1), Chauhan 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Leprosy, Dr. Rajendra Prasad 
Government Medical College, Kangra (Tanda), Himachal Pradesh, India.

BACKGROUND: There have been sporadic and periodic large-scale epidemics of hand, 
foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) with cases at risk for significant morbidity and 
mortality particularly in Southeast Asia since 1997 and in India since early 
2003.
METHOD: We retrospectively studied 403 cases recorded from 2009 to 2019 and 
reviewed relevant Indian literature published between 2004 and 2019 to 
understand clinical, epidemiological, and virological attributes of this 
long-lasting Indian epidemic.
RESULT: There were 96.8% children and adolescents (M:F 1.6:1) aged 2 months to 
18 years and 84% were aged <5 years. Adult family contacts comprised 3.2%. Only 
12 sporadic cases occurred during 2009-2011 followed by increased number from 
2012 to 2015 peaking with 30.8% cases in 2013 and declining slowly until the 
year 2019 with small resurge in 2018. The major peaks occurred during summers 
with small peaks in autumns. Literature review showed 3332 cases presenting 
between 2004 and 2019 across Indian states with similar epidemiological trends 
whereas serotyping identified Coxsackievirus A16 (CV A16) in 83%, Coxsackievirus 
A6 (CV A6) in 17%, Enterovirus 71 in 4.1%, and multiple strains in 11.7% 
samples, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The overall features of this long-lasting HFMD epidemic; affecting 
children aged <5 years more often than adults, none or minimum neurological or 
pulmonary complications in few patients, peaks occurring during summer and 
autumn months, and identity of the pathogenic virus coincide with global trends. 
However, the continuous spread of the disease across the country appears in sync 
with pre-epidemic periods of China and Taiwan. It calls for a continuous 
surveillance and making HFMD a notifiable disease in India.

Copyright: © 2022 Indian Dermatology Online Journal.

DOI: 10.4103/idoj.idoj_701_21
PMCID: PMC9549533
PMID: 36226004

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.