---
reference_id: "PMID:22243965"
title: "Mutations in SLC33A1 cause a lethal autosomal-recessive disorder with congenital cataracts, hearing loss, and low serum copper and ceruloplasmin."
authors:
- Huppke P
- Brendel C
- Kalscheuer V
- Korenke GC
- Marquardt I
- Freisinger P
- Christodoulou J
- Hillebrand M
- Pitelet G
- Wilson C
- Gruber-Sedlmayr U
- Ullmann R
- Haas S
- Elpeleg O
- Nürnberg G
- Nürnberg P
- Dad S
- Møller LB
- Kaler SG
- Gärtner J
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.030
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "Cataract/congenital, genetics"
- "Cerebellum/abnormalities, growth & development"
- "Ceruloplasmin/analysis, metabolism"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 3/genetics"
- Copper/blood
- Female
- "Hearing Loss/congenital, genetics"
- Hep G2 Cells
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Membrane Transport Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in SLC33A1 cause a lethal autosomal-recessive disorder with congenital cataracts, hearing loss, and low serum copper and ceruloplasmin.
**Authors:** Huppke P, Brendel C, Kalscheuer V, Korenke GC, Marquardt I, Freisinger P, Christodoulou J, Hillebrand M, Pitelet G, Wilson C, Gruber-Sedlmayr U, Ullmann R, Haas S, Elpeleg O, Nürnberg G, Nürnberg P, Dad S, Møller LB, Kaler SG, Gärtner J
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.030)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Jan 13;90(1):61-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.030.

Mutations in SLC33A1 cause a lethal autosomal-recessive disorder with congenital 
cataracts, hearing loss, and low serum copper and ceruloplasmin.

Huppke P(1), Brendel C, Kalscheuer V, Korenke GC, Marquardt I, Freisinger P, 
Christodoulou J, Hillebrand M, Pitelet G, Wilson C, Gruber-Sedlmayr U, Ullmann 
R, Haas S, Elpeleg O, Nürnberg G, Nürnberg P, Dad S, Møller LB, Kaler SG, 
Gärtner J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Neurology, Georg August University, 
Göttingen, Germany. phuppke@med.uni-goettingen.de

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Feb 10;90(2):378.

Low copper and ceruloplasmin in serum are the diagnostic hallmarks for Menkes 
disease, Wilson disease, and aceruloplasminemia. We report on five patients from 
four unrelated families with these biochemical findings who presented with a 
lethal autosomal-recessive syndrome of congenital cataracts, hearing loss, and 
severe developmental delay. Cerebral MRI showed pronounced cerebellar hypoplasia 
and hypomyelination. Homozygosity mapping was performed and displayed a region 
of commonality among three families at chromosome 3q25. Deep sequencing and 
conventional sequencing disclosed homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations 
for all affected subjects in SLC33A1 encoding a highly conserved acetylCoA 
transporter (AT-1) required for acetylation of multiple gangliosides and 
glycoproteins. The mutations were found to cause reduced or absent AT-1 
expression and abnormal intracellular localization of the protein. We also 
showed that AT-1 knockdown in HepG2 cells leads to reduced ceruloplasmin 
secretion, indicating that the low copper in serum is due to reduced 
ceruloplasmin levels and is not a sign of copper deficiency. The severity of the 
phenotype implies an essential role of AT-1 in proper posttranslational 
modification of numerous proteins, without which normal lens and brain 
development is interrupted. Furthermore, AT-1 defects are a new and important 
differential diagnosis in patients with low copper and ceruloplasmin in serum.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.030
PMCID: PMC3257879
PMID: 22243965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]