---
reference_id: "PMID:28739864"
title: Late-onset Tay-Sachs disease.
authors:
- Barritt AW
- Anderson SJ
- Leigh PN
- Ridha BH
journal: Pract Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1136/practneurol-2017-001665
keywords:
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- "Cerebellum/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Creatine Kinase/blood
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Electrocardiography
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Tay-Sachs Disease/blood, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Late-onset Tay-Sachs disease.
**Authors:** Barritt AW, Anderson SJ, Leigh PN, Ridha BH
**Journal:** Pract Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1136/practneurol-2017-001665](https://doi.org/10.1136/practneurol-2017-001665)

## Content

1. Pract Neurol. 2017 Oct;17(5):396-399. doi: 10.1136/practneurol-2017-001665.
Epub  2017 Jul 24.

Late-onset Tay-Sachs disease.

Barritt AW(1)(2), Anderson SJ(1), Leigh PN(1)(3), Ridha BH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hurstwood Park Neurosciences Centre, Haywards Heath,
UK.
(2)Clinical Imaging Sciences Centre, Brighton and Sussex Medical School, Falmer,
UK.
(3)Trafford Centre for Biomedical Research, Brighton and Sussex Medical School,
University of Sussex, Falmer, UK.

We discuss the assessment and differential diagnoses of a young adult Hungarian
man with a 1-year history of a progressive and symmetric amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis-like syndrome, along with irregular action tremor and
stimulus-sensitive myoclonus of the arms. MR scan of the brain showed isolated
cerebellar atrophy and formal neuropsychometric testing identified significant
subclinical deficits in attention, processing speed and memory. We suspected a
form of GM2 gangliosidosis, and white cell enzyme analysis showed markedly
reduced enzymatic activity of β-hexosaminidase A. Genetic testing subsequently
revealed two heterozygous pathogenic mutations in the HEXA gene (c.1499delT
p.(Leu500fs) and c.805G>A p.(Gly269Ser)), confirming the very rare diagnosis of
adult-onset Tay-Sachs disease.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of
the article) 2017. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/practneurol-2017-001665
PMID: 28739864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
