---
reference_id: "PMID:17048055"
title: "Fecal pancreatic elastase: a reproducible marker for severe exocrine pancreatic insufficiency."
authors:
- Naruse S
- Ishiguro H
- Ko SB
- Yoshikawa T
- Yamamoto T
- Yamamoto A
- Futakuchi S
- Goto H
- Saito Y
- Takahashi S
journal: J Gastroenterol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1007/s00535-006-1884-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fecal pancreatic elastase: a reproducible marker for severe exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
**Authors:** Naruse S, Ishiguro H, Ko SB, Yoshikawa T, Yamamoto T, Yamamoto A, Futakuchi S, Goto H, Saito Y, Takahashi S
**Journal:** J Gastroenterol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00535-006-1884-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00535-006-1884-0)

## Content

1. J Gastroenterol. 2006 Sep;41(9):901-8. doi: 10.1007/s00535-006-1884-0.

Fecal pancreatic elastase: a reproducible marker for severe exocrine pancreatic 
insufficiency.

Naruse S(1), Ishiguro H, Ko SB, Yoshikawa T, Yamamoto T, Yamamoto A, Futakuchi 
S, Goto H, Saito Y, Takahashi S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In order to apply fecal pancreatic elastase for follow-up of 
exocrine pancreatic function in chronic pancreatitis and cystic fibrosis, we 
examined the sensitivity, specificity, and long-term variability of a new 
polyclonal antibody-based enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
METHODS: Patients with definite chronic pancreatitis (n = 23), probable or 
possible chronic pancreatitis (n = 14), autoimmune pancreatitis (n = 7), or 
acute pancreatitis (n = 11), and 51 healthy subjects and 11 healthy infants 
participated in this study. Pancreatic function was graded as normal (n = 3), 
mild (n = 18), moderate (n = 9), or severe (n = 18) exocrine insufficiency on 
the basis of secretin tests. Fecal pancreatic elastase was measured by a new 
ELISA.
RESULTS: Fecal pancreatic elastase concentration in control subjects varied 
widely, with a median of 478 microg/g. The specificity of this test was 90.2% 
with a cutoff value of >200 microg/g. The sensitivities were 60.9% for detecting 
definite chronic pancreatitis, 76.5% for calcifying pancreatitis, 71.4% for 
autoimmune pancreatitis, and 7.1% for probable or possible chronic pancreatitis. 
The sensitivities were 16.7% for mild, 12.5% for moderate, and 72.2% for severe 
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. Forty patients were reexamined after a median 
interval of 347 days. The fecal pancreatic elastase levels between the first and 
second tests were not significantly different. Two infants, 4.5 and 5 months 
old, had abnormally low values, but after a median of 304 days all infants 
showed normal levels (median, 444 microg/g).
CONCLUSIONS: Fecal pancreatic elastase is a reproducible marker for severe 
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. This test is valuable for longitudinal 
follow-up of exocrine pancreatic function.

DOI: 10.1007/s00535-006-1884-0
PMID: 17048055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]