---
reference_id: "PMID:24125570"
title: "New insights into pediatric idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis: the French RespiRare(®) cohort."
authors:
- Taytard J
- Nathan N
- de Blic J
- Fayon M
- Epaud R
- Deschildre A
- Troussier F
- Lubrano M
- Chiron R
- Reix P
- Cros P
- Mahloul M
- Michon D
- Clement A
- Corvol H
- French RespiRare® group
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-161
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Hemosiderosis/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Infant
- "Lung Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Male
- "Hemosiderosis, Pulmonary"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New insights into pediatric idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis: the French RespiRare(®) cohort.
**Authors:** Taytard J, Nathan N, de Blic J, Fayon M, Epaud R, Deschildre A, Troussier F, Lubrano M, Chiron R, Reix P, Cros P, Mahloul M, Michon D, Clement A, Corvol H, French RespiRare® group
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-8-161](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-8-161)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013 Oct 14;8:161. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-161.

New insights into pediatric idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis: the French
RespiRare(®) cohort.

Taytard J(1), Nathan N, de Blic J, Fayon M, Epaud R, Deschildre A, Troussier F,
Lubrano M, Chiron R, Reix P, Cros P, Mahloul M, Michon D, Clement A, Corvol H;
French RespiRare® group.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Pulmonary Department, AP-HP, Hôpital Trousseau, Université Pierre
et Marie Curie-Paris6, Inserm U938, 26, avenue du Docteur Arnold-Netter, 75012
Paris, France. harriet.corvol@trs.aphp.fr.

BACKGROUND: Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis (IPH) is a rare cause of alveolar
hemorrhage in children and its pathophysiology remains obscure. Classically,
diagnosis is based on a triad including hemoptysis, diffuse parenchymal
infiltrates on chest X-rays, and iron-deficiency anemia. We present the French
pediatric cohort of IPH collected through the French Reference Center for Rare
Lung Diseases (RespiRare®, http://www.respirare.fr).
METHODS: Since 2008, a national network/web-linked RespiRare® database has been
set up in 12 French pediatric respiratory centres. It is structured as a medical
recording tool with extended disease-specific datasets containing clinical
information relevant to all forms of rare lung diseases including IPH.
RESULTS: We identified 25 reported cases of IPH in children from the database
(20 females and 5 males). Among them, 5 presented with Down syndrome. Upon
diagnosis, median age was 4.3 [0.8-14.0] yrs, and the main manifestations were:
dyspnea (n = 17, 68%), anemia (n = 16, 64%), cough (n = 12, 48%), febrile
pneumonia (n = 11, 44%) and hemoptysis (n = 11, 44%). Half of the patients
demonstrated diffuse parenchymal infiltrates on chest imaging, and diagnosis was
ascertained either by broncho-alveolar lavage indicating the presence of
hemosiderin-laden macrophages (19/25 cases), or lung biopsy (6/25). In screened
patients, initial auto-immune screening revealed positive antineutrophilic
cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) (n = 6, 40%), antinuclear antibodies (ANA) (n = 5,
45%) and specific coeliac disease antibodies (n = 4, 28%). All the patients were
initially treated by corticosteroids. In 13 cases, immunosuppressants were
introduced due to corticoresistance and/or major side effects. Median length of
follow-up was 5.5 yrs, with a satisfactory respiratory outcome in 23/25
patients. One patient developed severe pulmonary fibrosis, and another with Down
syndrome died as a result of severe pulmonary hemorrhage.
CONCLUSION: The present cohort provides substantial information on clinical
expression and outcomes of pediatric IPH. Analysis of potential contributors
supports a role of auto-immunity in disease development and highlights the
importance of genetic factors.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-161
PMCID: PMC3852822
PMID: 24125570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
