---
reference_id: "PMID:38538326"
title: "Myelin lesion in the aspartoacylase (Aspa) knockout rat, an animal model for Canavan disease."
authors:
- Takeda S
- Hoshiai R
- Tanaka M
- Izawa T
- Yamate J
- Kuramoto T
- Kuwamura M
journal: Exp Anim
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1538/expanim.23-0089
keywords:
- Animals
- Canavan Disease/genetics
- "Amidohydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Myelin Sheath/pathology, metabolism"
- Spinal Cord/pathology
- Brain/pathology
- Rats
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- Male
- "Astrocytes/pathology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myelin lesion in the aspartoacylase (Aspa) knockout rat, an animal model for Canavan disease.
**Authors:** Takeda S, Hoshiai R, Tanaka M, Izawa T, Yamate J, Kuramoto T, Kuwamura M
**Journal:** Exp Anim (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1538/expanim.23-0089](https://doi.org/10.1538/expanim.23-0089)

## Content

1. Exp Anim. 2024 Jul 9;73(3):347-356. doi: 10.1538/expanim.23-0089. Epub 2024
Mar  28.

Myelin lesion in the aspartoacylase (Aspa) knockout rat, an animal model for
Canavan disease.

Takeda S(1), Hoshiai R(1), Tanaka M(1), Izawa T(1), Yamate J(1), Kuramoto T(2),
Kuwamura M(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Osaka Metropolitan University, Izumisano,
Osaka 598-8531, Japan.
(2)Institute of Laboratory Animals, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, 9 Yoshida-konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Canavan disease (CD) is a fatal hereditary neurological disorder caused by a
mutation in the aspartoacylase (ASPA) gene and characterized by neurological
signs and vacuolation in the central nervous system (CNS). The mutation inhibits
the hydrolysis of N-acetyl-aspartate (NAA) resulting in accumulation of NAA in
the CNS. A new Aspa-knockout rat was generated by transcription activator-like
effector nuclease (TALEN) technology. Herein we describe the pathological and
morphometrical findings in the brain and spinal cords of Aspa-knockout rats.
Although Aspa-knockout rats did not show any neurological signs, vacuolation
with swollen axons, hypomyelination, and activated swollen astrocytes were
observed mainly in the brainstem reticular formation, ascending and descending
motor neuron pathway, and in the olfactory tract. Morphometrical analysis
revealed no obvious change in the number of neurons. These changes in the CNS
are similar to human CD, suggesting that this animal model would be useful for
further study of treatment and understanding the pathophysiology of human CD.

DOI: 10.1538/expanim.23-0089
PMCID: PMC11254489
PMID: 38538326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
