---
reference_id: "PMID:37748496"
title: "Effect of primaquine dose on the risk of recurrence in patients with uncomplicated Plasmodium vivax: a systematic review and individual patient data meta-analysis."
authors:
- Commons RJ
- Rajasekhar M
- Edler P
- Abreha T
- Awab GR
- Baird JK
- Barber BE
- Chu CS
- Cui L
- Daher A
- Gonzalez-Ceron L
- Grigg MJ
- Hwang J
- Karunajeewa H
- Lacerda MVG
- Ladeia-Andrade S
- Lidia K
- Llanos-Cuentas A
- Longley RJ
- Pereira DB
- Pasaribu AP
- Pukrittayakamee S
- Rijal KR
- Sutanto I
- Taylor WRJ
- Thanh PV
- Thriemer K
- Vieira JLF
- Watson JA
- Zuluaga-Idarraga LM
- White NJ
- Guerin PJ
- Simpson JA
- Price RN
- "WorldWide Antimalarial Resistance Network (WWARN) Vivax Primaquine Dosing Efficacy, Tolerability and Safety Study Group"
journal: Lancet Infect Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(23)00430-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of primaquine dose on the risk of recurrence in patients with uncomplicated Plasmodium vivax: a systematic review and individual patient data meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Commons RJ, Rajasekhar M, Edler P, Abreha T, Awab GR, Baird JK, Barber BE, Chu CS, Cui L, Daher A, Gonzalez-Ceron L, Grigg MJ, Hwang J, Karunajeewa H, Lacerda MVG, Ladeia-Andrade S, Lidia K, Llanos-Cuentas A, Longley RJ, Pereira DB, Pasaribu AP, Pukrittayakamee S, Rijal KR, Sutanto I, Taylor WRJ, Thanh PV, Thriemer K, Vieira JLF, Watson JA, Zuluaga-Idarraga LM, White NJ, Guerin PJ, Simpson JA, Price RN, WorldWide Antimalarial Resistance Network (WWARN) Vivax Primaquine Dosing Efficacy, Tolerability and Safety Study Group
**Journal:** Lancet Infect Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1473-3099(23)00430-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(23)00430-9)

## Content

1. Lancet Infect Dis. 2024 Feb;24(2):172-183. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(23)00430-9.
 Epub 2023 Sep 22.

Effect of primaquine dose on the risk of recurrence in patients with 
uncomplicated Plasmodium vivax: a systematic review and individual patient data 
meta-analysis.

Commons RJ(1), Rajasekhar M(2), Edler P(3), Abreha T(4), Awab GR(5), Baird 
JK(6), Barber BE(7), Chu CS(8), Cui L(9), Daher A(10), Gonzalez-Ceron L(11), 
Grigg MJ(12), Hwang J(13), Karunajeewa H(14), Lacerda MVG(15), Ladeia-Andrade 
S(16), Lidia K(17), Llanos-Cuentas A(18), Longley RJ(19), Pereira DB(20), 
Pasaribu AP(21), Pukrittayakamee S(22), Rijal KR(23), Sutanto I(24), Taylor 
WRJ(25), Thanh PV(26), Thriemer K(27), Vieira JLF(28), Watson JA(29), 
Zuluaga-Idarraga LM(30), White NJ(25), Guerin PJ(31), Simpson JA(32), Price 
RN(33); WorldWide Antimalarial Resistance Network (WWARN) Vivax Primaquine 
Dosing Efficacy, Tolerability and Safety Study Group.

Collaborators: Adhikari B, Anstey NM, Assefa A, Boyd SC, Chau NH, Day NP, Degaga 
TS, Dondorp AM, Erhart A, Ferreira MU, Ghimire P, Green JA, Koh GC, Mekuria AH, 
Mueller I, Naadim MN, Nelwan EJ, Nosten F, Price DJ, Sattabongkot J, Stepniewska 
K, von Seidlein L, William T, Woodrow CJ, Woyessa A.

Author information:
(1)Global Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research and Charles Darwin 
University, Darwin, NT, Australia; WorldWide Antimalarial Resistance Network 
(WWARN), Asia-Pacific Regional Centre, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; General and 
Subspecialty Medicine, Grampians Health-Ballarat, Ballarat, VIC, Australia. 
Electronic address: robert.commons@gmail.com.
(2)Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Melbourne School of Population and 
Global Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(3)Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Melbourne School of Population and 
Global Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; 
Department of Infectious Diseases, The University of Melbourne at the Peter 
Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(4)ICAP, Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, Addis Ababa, 
Ethiopia.
(5)Mahidol Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical 
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand; Nangarhar Medical Faculty, 
Nangarhar University, Jalalabad, Afghanistan.
(6)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit Indonesia, Faculty of Medicine 
Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia; Centre for Tropical Medicine and 
Global Health, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK.
(7)Global Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research and Charles Darwin 
University, Darwin, NT, Australia; QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, 
Brisbane, QLD, Australia; Infectious Diseases Society Sabah-Menzies School of 
Health Research Clinical Research Unit, Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia.
(8)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of 
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, MORU, 
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Mae Sot, Thailand.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA.
(10)Fiocruz Clinical Research Platform and Vice‑presidency of Research and 
Biological Collections, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz), Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
(11)Regional Centre for Public Health Research, National Institute for Public 
Health, Tapachula, Mexico.
(12)Global Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research and Charles Darwin 
University, Darwin, NT, Australia; Infectious Diseases Society Sabah-Menzies 
School of Health Research Clinical Research Unit, Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia.
(13)US President's Malaria Initiative, Malaria Branch, US Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA; Institute for Global Health Sciences, 
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(14)Department of Medicine-Western Health, Melbourne Medical School, The 
University of Melbourne, St Albans, VIC, Australia.
(15)Fundação de Medicina Tropical Dr Heitor Vieira Dourado, Manaus, Brazil; 
Instituto Leônidas e Maria Deane, Fiocruz, Manaus, Brazil; University of Texas 
Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA.
(16)Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz), Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil; Global Health and Tropical Medicine, Institute of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, NOVA University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.
(17)Department of Pharmacology and Therapy, Faculty of Medicine and Veterinary 
Medicine, Universitas Nusa Cendana, Kupang, Indonesia.
(18)Unit of Leishmaniasis and Malaria, Instituto de Medicina Tropical Alexander 
von Humboldt, Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru.
(19)Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia; Mahidol Vivax Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand; Population Health and Immunity Division, Walter 
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(20)Centro de Pesquisa em Medicina Tropical de Rondônia (CEPEM), Porto Velho, 
Brazil; Fundação Universidade Federal de Rondônia (UNIR), Porto Velho, Brazil.
(21)Department of Pediatrics, Medical Faculty, Universitas Sumatera Utara, 
Medan, Indonesia.
(22)Mahidol Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical 
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(23)Department of Clinical Tropical Medicine, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand; Central Department of Microbiology, 
Tribhuvan University, Kirtipur, Nepal.
(24)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Indonesia, 
Jakarta, Indonesia.
(25)Mahidol Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical 
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand; Centre for Tropical Medicine 
and Global Health, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, UK.
(26)National Institute of Malariology, Parasitology and Entomology, Hanoi, Viet 
Nam.
(27)Global Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research and Charles Darwin 
University, Darwin, NT, Australia.
(28)Federal University of Pará (Universidade Federal do Pará - UFPA), Belém, 
Brazil.
(29)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of 
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; Oxford University Clinical Research 
Unit, Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam; WWARN, Oxford, 
UK.
(30)Grupo Malaria, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, 
Colombia; Facultad Nacional de Salud Publica, Universidad de Antioquia, 
Medellín, Colombia.
(31)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of 
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; WWARN, Oxford, UK; Infectious 
Diseases Data Observatory (IDDO), Oxford, UK.
(32)WorldWide Antimalarial Resistance Network (WWARN), Asia-Pacific Regional 
Centre, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, The University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(33)Global Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research and Charles Darwin 
University, Darwin, NT, Australia; WorldWide Antimalarial Resistance Network 
(WWARN), Asia-Pacific Regional Centre, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; Centre for 
Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University 
of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

BACKGROUND: Primaquine is used to eliminate Plasmodium vivax hypnozoites, but 
its optimal dosing regimen remains unclear. We undertook a systematic review and 
individual patient data meta-analysis to investigate the efficacy and 
tolerability of different primaquine dosing regimens to prevent P vivax 
recurrence.
METHODS: For this systematic review and individual patient data meta-analysis, 
we searched MEDLINE, Web of Science, Embase, and Cochrane Central for 
prospective clinical studies of uncomplicated P vivax from endemic countries 
published between Jan 1, 2000, and June 8, 2023. We included studies if they had 
active follow-up of at least 28 days, and if they included a treatment group 
with daily primaquine given over multiple days, where primaquine was commenced 
within 7 days of schizontocidal treatment and was given alone or coadministered 
with chloroquine or one of four artemisinin-based combination therapies (ie, 
artemether-lumefantrine, artesunate-mefloquine, artesunate-amodiaquine, or 
dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine). We excluded studies if they were on prevention, 
prophylaxis, or patients with severe malaria, or if data were extracted 
retrospectively from medical records outside of a planned trial. For the 
meta-analysis, we contacted the investigators of eligible trials to request 
individual patient data and we then pooled data that were made available by Aug 
23, 2021. We assessed the effects of total dose and duration of primaquine 
regimens on the rate of first P vivax recurrence between day 7 and day 180 by 
Cox's proportional hazards regression (efficacy analysis). The effect of 
primaquine daily dose on gastrointestinal symptoms on days 5-7 was assessed by 
modified Poisson regression (tolerability analysis). The study was registered 
with PROSPERO, CRD42019154470.
FINDINGS: Of 226 identified studies, 23 studies with patient-level data from 
6879 patients from 16 countries were included in the efficacy analysis. At day 
180, the risk of recurrence was 51·0% (95% CI 48·2-53·9) in 1470 patients 
treated without primaquine, 19·3% (16·9-21·9) in 2569 patients treated with a 
low total dose of primaquine (approximately 3·5 mg/kg), and 8·1% (7·0-9·4) in 
2811 patients treated with a high total dose of primaquine (approximately 7 
mg/kg), regardless of primaquine treatment duration. Compared with treatment 
without primaquine, the rate of P vivax recurrence was lower after treatment 
with low-dose primaquine (adjusted hazard ratio 0·21, 95% CI 0·17-0·27; 
p<0·0001) and high-dose primaquine (0·10, 0·08-0·12; p<0·0001). High-dose 
primaquine had greater efficacy than low-dose primaquine in regions with high 
and low relapse periodicity (ie, the time from initial infection to vivax 
relapse). 16 studies with patient-level data from 5609 patients from ten 
countries were included in the tolerability analysis. Gastrointestinal symptoms 
on days 5-7 were reported by 4·0% (95% CI 0·0-8·7) of 893 patients treated 
without primaquine, 6·2% (0·5-12·0) of 737 patients treated with a low daily 
dose of primaquine (approximately 0·25 mg/kg per day), 5·9% (1·8-10·1) of 1123 
patients treated with an intermediate daily dose (approximately 0·5 mg/kg per 
day) and 10·9% (5·7-16·1) of 1178 patients treated with a high daily dose 
(approximately 1 mg/kg per day). 20 of 23 studies included in the efficacy 
analysis and 15 of 16 in the tolerability analysis had a low or unclear risk of 
bias.
INTERPRETATION: Increasing the total dose of primaquine from 3·5 mg/kg to 7 
mg/kg can reduce P vivax recurrences by more than 50% in most endemic regions, 
with a small associated increase in gastrointestinal symptoms.
FUNDING: Australian National Health and Medical Research Council, Bill & Melinda 
Gates Foundation, and Medicines for Malaria Venture.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open 
Access article under the CC BY 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1473-3099(23)00430-9
PMCID: PMC7615564
PMID: 37748496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests JAG and GCKWK are 
former employees of GSK and hold shares in GSK and AstraZeneca. GCKWK reports 
travel support from AstraZeneca. JKB reports institutional research funding from 
Medicines for Malaria Venture, GSK, Wellcome Trust, and Sanaria; participation 
on the US National Institutes of Health data safety monitoring board; and 
membership of the editorial board of Travel Medicine and Infectious Disease and 
the guidelines development group for malaria control and elimination, Global 
Malaria Programme, WHO. RJC, JKB, and RNP report contributions to Up-to-Date. 
All other authors declare no competing interests.