---
reference_id: "PMID:39998747"
title: Identification and structural analysis of pathogenic variants in MYOC and CYP1B1 genes in Indian JOAG patients.
authors:
- Yadav M
- Kumar M
- Dhull CS
- Sachdeva S
- Bhardwaj A
- Yadav A
- Panghal V
- Sharma P
- Kumari A
- Yadav R
- Singh M
- Kumar R
- Deora A
- Rathi M
- Kaur P
- Tanwar M
journal: Jpn J Ophthalmol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s10384-025-01173-8
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cytochrome P-450 CYP1B1/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- "Eye Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- India/epidemiology
- Female
- "Glycoproteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Glaucoma, Open-Angle/genetics, epidemiology, metabolism, diagnosis"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Adult
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Intraocular Pressure/physiology
- Mutation
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- DNA/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Myocilin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification and structural analysis of pathogenic variants in MYOC and CYP1B1 genes in Indian JOAG patients.
**Authors:** Yadav M, Kumar M, Dhull CS, Sachdeva S, Bhardwaj A, Yadav A, Panghal V, Sharma P, Kumari A, Yadav R, Singh M, Kumar R, Deora A, Rathi M, Kaur P, Tanwar M
**Journal:** Jpn J Ophthalmol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10384-025-01173-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10384-025-01173-8)

## Content

1. Jpn J Ophthalmol. 2025 May;69(3):469-481. doi: 10.1007/s10384-025-01173-8.
Epub  2025 Feb 25.

Identification and structural analysis of pathogenic variants in MYOC and CYP1B1 
genes in Indian JOAG patients.

Yadav M(1), Kumar M(2), Dhull CS(3), Sachdeva S(3), Bhardwaj A(1), Yadav A(1), 
Panghal V(1), Sharma P(2), Kumari A(4), Yadav R(1), Singh M(5), Kumar R(6), 
Deora A(1), Rathi M(3), Kaur P(2), Tanwar M(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, HR, 124001, 
India.
(2)Department of Biophysics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari 
Nagar, New Delhi, 110029, India.
(3)Regional Institute of Ophthalmology, Pt. B.D. Sharma, University of Health 
Sciences, Rohtak, Haryana, 124001, India.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, HR, 
124001, India.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, Dr. B. R. A.-Institute Rotary Cancer 
Hospital, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari Nagar, New Delhi, 
110029, India.
(6)School of Biotechnology, Shri Mata Vaishno Devi University, Katra, J&K, 
182320, India.
(7)Department of Genetics, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, HR, 124001, 
India. mukeshtanwar@gmail.com.
(8)National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. 
mukeshtanwar@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: Juvenile onset open-angle glaucoma (JOAG) manifests in individuals 
under the age of 40, resulting in elevated intraocular pressure and significant 
optic nerve damage. To broaden the spectrum of mutations associated with JOAG 
and to determine their specific structural implications, we examined Myocilin 
and Cytochrome P450 1B1 gene in a cohort of 111 unrelated North Indian patients 
diagnosed with JOAG.
STUDY DESIGN: A clinical and experimental study.
METHODS: PCR-DNA sequencing screened the coding exons and intron-exon junctions 
of the MYOC and CYP1B1 genes in 111 unrelated JOAG patients and 100 controls. 
Identified sequence variations were searched in the ClinVar database, HGMD, and 
dbSNP. Six different online available algorithms including rare exome variant 
ensemble learner (REVEL), Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant (SIFT), Mutation 
Taster, SNAP2, IMutant2.0, and MutPred2 were used for the pathogenicity 
prediction of missense variations. The Structural consequences of detected 
possible pathogenic variations were predicted by using PyMol, Chimera and MD 
simulation of these changes.
RESULTS: Potentially-pathogenic variations were observed in thirty patients 
(27.02%) within the MYOC and CYP1B1 genes, encompassing both novel and 
previously documented variants. Structural predictions of novel 
potentially-pathogenic mutations indicate altered stability and flexibility.
CONCLUSION: Analysis reveals a higher prevalence of CYP1B1 gene variants (22.5%) 
relative to MYOC gene variants (4.5%), suggesting that CYP1B1 is the predominant 
gene implicated in JOAG among Indian patients. Our findings enhance the 
understanding of mutation spectra and frequencies of MYOC and CYP1B1gene in JOAG 
among the North Indian population. Structural predictions of novel pathogenic 
mutations could enhance the understanding of JOAG pathogenesis and support 
subsequent functional analysis.

© 2025. Japanese Ophthalmological Society.

DOI: 10.1007/s10384-025-01173-8
PMID: 39998747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: M. Yadav, None; M. Kumar, 
None; C. S. Dhull, None; S. Sachdeva, None; A. Bhardwaj, None; A. Yadav, None; 
V. Panghal, None; P. Sharma, None; A. Kumari, None; R. Yadav, None; M. Singh, 
None; R. Kumar, None; A. Deora, None; M. Rathi, None; P. Kaur, None; M. Tanwar, 
None.