---
reference_id: "PMID:27511600"
title: "The Associations of HLA-A*02:01 and DRB1*11:01 with Hepatitis C Virus Spontaneous Clearance Are Independent of IL28B in the Chinese Population."
authors:
- Huang J
- Huang K
- Xu R
- Wang M
- Liao Q
- Xiong H
- Li C
- Tang X
- Shan Z
- Zhang M
- Rong X
- Nelson K
- Fu Y
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/srep31485
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Asian People
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- HLA-A Antigens/genetics
- Hepacivirus/immunology
- Hepatitis C/genetics
- Humans
- Interferons
- Interleukins/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- RNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Young Adult
- Interferon Lambda
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Associations of HLA-A*02:01 and DRB1*11:01 with Hepatitis C Virus Spontaneous Clearance Are Independent of IL28B in the Chinese Population.
**Authors:** Huang J, Huang K, Xu R, Wang M, Liao Q, Xiong H, Li C, Tang X, Shan Z, Zhang M, Rong X, Nelson K, Fu Y
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/srep31485](https://doi.org/10.1038/srep31485)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2016 Aug 11;6:31485. doi: 10.1038/srep31485.

The Associations of HLA-A*02:01 and DRB1*11:01 with Hepatitis C Virus
Spontaneous Clearance Are Independent of IL28B in the Chinese Population.

Huang J(1)(2), Huang K(1)(2), Xu R(1)(2), Wang M(1)(2), Liao Q(1)(2), Xiong
H(1)(2), Li C(3), Tang X(3), Shan Z(1)(2), Zhang M(4), Rong X(1)(2), Nelson
K(5), Fu Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Guangzhou Blood Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)The Key Medical Disciplines and Specialties Program of Guangzhou, Guangdong,
China.
(3)Department of Transfusion Medicine, School of Biotechnology, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Faculty of Infectious Diseases,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Spontaneous clearance of hepatitis C virus (HCV) occurs in 10-40% of the
infections. Specific human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles have been identified
in associating with HCV clearance. However, data on the association of HLA with
the spontaneous clearance of HCV are scarce in the Chinese population. In the
current study we studied the HLA class I and class II genes in 231 Chinese
voluntary blood donors who had cleared HCV infection spontaneously compared to
429 subjects with chronic HCV infections. We also studied their IL28B SNP
(rs8099917) genotype, since a number of investigators have found a strong
association of IL28B with spontaneous or treatment induced HCV clearance. We
found that HLA-A*02:01 and DQB1*05:02 distributed differently between the two
groups after Bonferroni correction (odds ratio [OR] = 1.839, Pc = 0.024 and
OR = 0.547, Pc = 0.016, respectively). Multivariate logistic regression analysis
suggested that A*02:01 and DRB1*11:01 (OR = 1.798, P = 0.008 and OR = 1.921,
P = 0.005, respectively) were associated with HCV spontaneous clearance,
independent of age, gender and IL28B polymorphism. We concluded that in the
Chinese population, HLA-A*02:01 and DRB1*11:01 might be associated with the host
capacity to clear HCV independent of IL28B, which suggesting that the innate and
adaptive immune responses both play an important role in the control of HCV.

DOI: 10.1038/srep31485
PMCID: PMC4980596
PMID: 27511600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
