---
reference_id: "PMID:32914558"
title: "Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome: A case series from India."
authors:
- Chaudhry C
- Kaur A
- Panigrahi I
- Kaur A
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61856
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome: A case series from India.
**Authors:** Chaudhry C, Kaur A, Panigrahi I, Kaur A
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.61856](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61856)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2020 Dec;182(12):3048-3051. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61856. Epub 
2020 Sep 10.

Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome: A case series from India.

Chaudhry C(1), Kaur A(1), Panigrahi I(1), Kaur A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, India.

Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) (OMIM#194190) is a contiguous gene syndrome with 
estimated prevalence being around 1 in 50,000 births. The syndrome is caused by 
deletion of a critical region (Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome Critical region-WHSCR) 
on chromosome 4p16.3. Its core features are typical facial gestalt, growth 
retardation, intellectual disability, or developmental delay and seizures. We 
describe four patients, each highlighting a different aspect of this syndrome. 
One patient was detected by karyotype where a large deletion was identified. 
Three other children were diagnosed after targeted multiplex ligation-dependent 
probe amplification (MLPA) where heterozygous deletion of the probes on 
chromosome 4p16.3 were identified. One of these children additionally had 
heterozygous duplication of the probe for chromosome band 5p13.3. Less than half 
of the patients can be identified by conventional cytogenetics and molecular 
cytogenetic testing should be offered for diagnosis. Karyotyping of the parents 
should always be offered in a child with WHS.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61856
PMID: 32914558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]