---
reference_id: "PMID:35420547"
title: A clinical scoring system for early onset (neonatal) Marfan syndrome.
authors:
- Zarate YA
- Morris SA
- Blackshare A
- Algaze CA
- Connor BS
- Kim AJ
- Yutzey KE
- Miller EM
- Weaver KN
- Collins RT 2nd
journal: Genet Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.03.016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A clinical scoring system for early onset (neonatal) Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Zarate YA, Morris SA, Blackshare A, Algaze CA, Connor BS, Kim AJ, Yutzey KE, Miller EM, Weaver KN, Collins RT 2nd
**Journal:** Genet Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gim.2022.03.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gim.2022.03.016)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2022 Jul;24(7):1503-1511. doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.03.016. Epub 2022
 Apr 14.

A clinical scoring system for early onset (neonatal) Marfan syndrome.

Zarate YA(1), Morris SA(2), Blackshare A(3), Algaze CA(4), Connor BS(4), Kim 
AJ(5), Yutzey KE(5), Miller EM(6), Weaver KN(7), Collins RT 2nd(4).

Author information:
(1)Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, College of 
Medicine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR. 
Electronic address: yazarate@uams.edu.
(2)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of 
Medicine and Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX.
(3)College of Medicine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences School of 
Medicine, Little Rock, AR.
(4)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Lucile Packard Children's Hospital, 
Stanford Children's Health, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, 
CA.
(5)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, The Heart Institute, Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH; Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, OH; Division of Cardiology, The Heart Institute, Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, OH; Division of Cardiology, The Heart Institute, Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH; Division of Human Genetics, 
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH.

PURPOSE: This study aimed to develop objective diagnostic criteria for early 
onset Marfan syndrome (eoMFS) to facilitate early diagnosis and timely 
interventions.
METHODS: On the basis of an extensive literature review and the responses from a 
survey distributed among providers with expertise in the diagnosis and 
management of eoMFS, we developed an age-based, diagnostic scoring system 
encompassing 10 features common to eoMFS (9 clinical + 1 laboratory) and divided 
them into cardiac, systemic, and FBN1 (on the basis of the location of the 
pathogenic FBN1 variant) scores.
RESULTS: In total, 77 individuals with eoMFS (13 newly reported) and 49 
individuals diagnosed with classical Marfan syndrome during early childhood were 
used to validate the criteria. Median cardiac (8 vs 0, P < .001), systemic (11 
vs 3, P < .001), FBN1 (5 vs 0, P < .001), and total (23 vs 4, P < .001) scores 
were significantly higher in individuals with eoMFS than in those without. A 
proposed clinical score (cardiac + systemic) cutoff of ≥14 points showed 
excellent sensitivity (100%), specificity (92%), and reliability (correctly 
classified = 94%).
CONCLUSION: Distinct from classical Marfan syndrome in phenotype and morbidity, 
eoMFS can be diagnosed clinically using an objective scoring system encompassing 
the typical physical features and cardiac disease manifestations. Although 
genetic testing can be suggestive of eoMFS, genetic testing alone is 
insufficient for diagnosis.

Copyright © 2022 American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.03.016
PMID: 35420547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.