---
reference_id: "PMID:26385475"
title: Discovery of a Potent Allosteric Kinase Modulator by Combining Computational and Synthetic Methods.
authors:
- Kroon E
- Schulze JO
- Süß E
- Camacho CJ
- Biondi RM
- Dömling A
journal: Angew Chem Int Ed Engl
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/anie.201506310
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Discovery of a Potent Allosteric Kinase Modulator by Combining Computational and Synthetic Methods.
**Authors:** Kroon E, Schulze JO, Süß E, Camacho CJ, Biondi RM, Dömling A
**Journal:** Angew Chem Int Ed Engl (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/anie.201506310](https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201506310)

## Content

1. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2015 Nov 16;54(47):13933-6. doi:
10.1002/anie.201506310.  Epub 2015 Sep 4.

Discovery of a Potent Allosteric Kinase Modulator by Combining Computational and 
Synthetic Methods.

Kroon E(1), Schulze JO(2), Süß E(2), Camacho CJ(3), Biondi RM(2), Dömling A(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Groningen, Department of Drug Design, A. Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV 
Groningen (The Netherlands) http://www.drugdesign.nl.
(2)Universitätsklinikum Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt 
(Germany).
(3)University of Pittsburgh, 200 Lothrop Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15261 (USA).
(4)University of Groningen, Department of Drug Design, A. Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV 
Groningen (The Netherlands) http://www.drugdesign.nl. a.s.s.domling@rug.nl.

The rational design of allosteric kinase modulators is challenging but 
rewarding. The protein kinase PDK1, which lies at the center of the 
growth-factor signaling pathway, possesses an allosteric regulatory site 
previously validated both in vitro and in cells. ANCHOR.QUERY software was used 
to discover a potent allosteric PDK1 kinase modulator. Using a recently 
published PDK1 compound as a template, several new scaffolds that bind to the 
allosteric target site were generated and one example was validated. The 
inhibitor can be synthesized in one step by multicomponent reaction (MCR) 
chemistry when using the ANCHOR.QUERY approach. Our results are significant 
because the outlined approach allows rapid and efficient scaffold hopping from 
known molecules into new easily accessible and biologically active ones. Based 
on increasing interest in allosteric-site drug discovery, we foresee many 
potential applications for this approach.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/anie.201506310
PMCID: PMC4721676
PMID: 26385475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]