---
reference_id: "PMID:30657064"
title: Human immunodeficiency virus in a cohort of systemic lupus erythematosus patients.
authors:
- Hax V
- Moro ALD
- Piovesan RR
- Goldani LZ
- Xavier RM
- Monticielo OA
journal: Adv Rheumatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s42358-018-0003-2
keywords:
- Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome/complications
- Adult
- "Anemia, Hemolytic/complications"
- Exanthema/complications
- Female
- "HIV Infections/complications, diagnosis, mortality"
- Humans
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/complications, diagnosis, mortality"
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/complications"
- Male
- Nephritis/complications
- Prospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human immunodeficiency virus in a cohort of systemic lupus erythematosus patients.
**Authors:** Hax V, Moro ALD, Piovesan RR, Goldani LZ, Xavier RM, Monticielo OA
**Journal:** Adv Rheumatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s42358-018-0003-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s42358-018-0003-2)

## Content

1. Adv Rheumatol. 2018 Jul 11;58(1):12. doi: 10.1186/s42358-018-0003-2.

Human immunodeficiency virus in a cohort of systemic lupus erythematosus
patients.

Hax V(1), Moro ALD(2), Piovesan RR(3), Goldani LZ(4), Xavier RM(2), Monticielo
OA(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Universidade
Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, 2350 Ramiro Barcelos St, Room 645, Porto Alegre,
RS, 90035-903, Brazil. vanessahax@gmail.com.br.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Universidade
Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, 2350 Ramiro Barcelos St, Room 645, Porto Alegre,
RS, 90035-903, Brazil.
(3)Medical School Student, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto
Alegre, Brazil.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre,
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS) share many clinical manifestations and laboratory findings,
therefore, concomitant diagnosis of SLE and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
can be challenging.
METHODS: Prospective cohort with 602 patients with SLE who attended the
Rheumatology Clinic of the Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre since 2000. All
patients were followed until 01 May 2015 or until death, if earlier.
Demographic, clinical and laboratory data were prospectively collected.
RESULTS: Out of the 602 patients, 11 presented with the diagnosis of AIDS
(1.59%). The following variables were significantly more prevalent in patients
with concomitant HIV and SLE: neuropsychiatric lupus (10.9% vs. 36.4%;
p = 0.028) and smoking (37.6% vs. 80%; p = 0.0009) while malar rash was
significantly less prevalent in this population (56% vs. 18.2%; p = 0.015).
Nephritis (40.5% vs. 63.6%; p = 0.134) and hemolytic anemia (28.6% vs. 54.5%;
p = 0.089) were more prevalent in SLE patients with HIV, but with no statistical
significance compared with SLE patients without HIV. The SLICC damage index
median in the last medical consultation was significantly higher in SLE patients
with HIV (1 vs. 2; p = 0,047).
CONCLUSIONS: Our patients with concomitant HIV and SLE have clinically more
neuropsychiatric manifestations. For the first time, according to our knowledge,
higher cumulative damage was described in lupus patients with concomitant HIV
infection. Further studies are needed to elucidate this complex association, its
outcomes, prognosis and which therapeutic approach it's best for each case.

DOI: 10.1186/s42358-018-0003-2
PMID: 30657064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
