---
reference_id: "PMID:20301692"
title: Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Stoller JK
- Hupertz V
- Aboussouan LS
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Stoller JK, Hupertz V, Aboussouan LS

## Content

1. Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.

Stoller JK(1), Hupertz V(2), Aboussouan LS(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2006 Oct 27 [updated 2023 Jun 1].

Author information:
(1)Respiratory and Education Institutes, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio
(2)Pediatric Gastroenterology, Pediatric Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, 
Ohio
(3)Respiratory Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) can present with 
hepatic dysfunction in individuals from infancy to adulthood and with chronic 
obstructive lung disease (emphysema and/or bronchiectasis), characteristically 
in individuals older than age 30 years. Individuals with AATD are also at 
increased risk for panniculitis (migratory, inflammatory, tender skin nodules 
which may ulcerate on legs and lower abdomen) and C-ANCA-positive vasculitis 
(granulomatosis with polyangiitis). Phenotypic expression varies within and 
between families. In adults, smoking is the major factor in accelerating the 
development of COPD; nonsmokers may have a normal life span, but can also 
develop lung and/or liver disease. Although reported, emphysema in children with 
AATD is extremely rare. AATD-associated liver disease, which is present in only 
a small portion of affected children, manifests as neonatal cholestasis. The 
incidence of liver disease increases with age. Liver disease in adults 
(manifesting as cirrhosis and fibrosis) may occur in the absence of a history of 
neonatal or childhood liver disease. The risk for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) 
is increased in individuals with AATD.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of AATD relies on demonstration of low serum 
concentration of alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) and either identification of 
biallelic pathogenic variants in SERPINA1 or detection of a functionally 
deficient AAT protein variant by protease inhibitor (PI) typing. Note: The 
unconventional nomenclature of SERPINA1 alleles is based on electrophoretic 
protein variants that were identified long before the gene (SERPINA1) was known. 
Alleles were named with the prefix PI* (protease inhibitor*) serving as an alias 
for the gene. Using this nomenclature, the most common (normal) allele is PI*M 
and the most common pathogenic allele is PI*Z.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: COPD is treated with standard therapy. 
Augmentation therapy with periodic intravenous infusion of pooled human serum 
alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) is used in individuals who have established emphysema. 
Lung transplantation may be an appropriate option for individuals with end-stage 
lung disease. Liver transplantation is the definitive treatment for severe 
disease (will restore AAT levels). Dapsone or doxycycline therapy is used for 
panniculitis; if refractory to this, high-dose intravenous AAT augmentation 
therapy is indicated. Surveillance: Every six to 12 months: pulmonary function 
tests including spirometry with bronchodilators and diffusing capacity 
measurements; liver function tests, platelet count and liver ultrasound, 
elastography (e.g., FibroScan), magnetic resonance imaging. Agents/circumstances 
to avoid: Smoking (both active and passive); occupational exposure to 
environmental pollutants used in agriculture, mineral dust, gas, and fumes; 
excessive use of alcohol. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Evaluation of 
parents, older and younger sibs, and offspring of an individual with severe AATD 
in order to identify as early as possible those relatives who would benefit from 
institution of treatment and preventive measures.
GENETIC COUNSELING: AATD is inherited in an autosomal codominant manner. If both 
parents are heterozygous for one SERPINA1 pathogenic variant (e.g., PI*MZ), each 
sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being affected (PI*ZZ), a 50% 
chance of being heterozygous (PI*MZ), and a 25% chance of inheriting neither of 
the pathogenic variants (PI*MM). In the less frequent instance in which one 
parent is homozygous (PI*ZZ) and one parent is heterozygous (PI*MZ), the risk to 
each sib of being homozygous (PI*ZZ) is 50%. Unless an individual with AATD has 
children with an affected individual or a heterozygote, offspring will be 
obligate heterozygotes for a pathogenic variant. (Risk of lung disease may be 
increased in heterozygous individuals depending on their environmental exposures 
such as smoking.) Heterozygote testing for at-risk family members and prenatal 
and preimplantation genetic testing are possible once the pathogenic SERPINA1 
variants have been identified in the family.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301692