---
reference_id: "PMID:32491808"
title: Loperamide.
authors:
- Sahi N
- Nguyen R
- Patel P
- Santos C
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loperamide.
**Authors:** Sahi N, Nguyen R, Patel P, Santos C

## Content

1. Loperamide.

Sahi N, Nguyen R, Patel P, Santos C(1).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2024 Feb 28.

Author information:
(1)Rutgers New Jersey Medical School

Loperamide is an FDA-approved synthetic phenylpiperidine opioid with high 
lipophilicity and is a medication used to treat various forms of diarrhea. 
Recognized and approved by the FDA, loperamide is an effective intervention for 
conditions such as traveler's diarrhea, irritable bowel syndrome associated with 
chronic diarrhea, and acute nonspecific diarrhea in patients older than 2. 
Loperamide is also indicated for conditions requiring reducing ileostomy output 
to manage diverse gastrointestinal challenges. However, this medication requires 
careful consideration due to its potential for misuse, with reports indicating a 
concerning increase in morbidity and mortality associated with high doses. This 
activity explores loperamide's indications, contraindications, activities, and 
adverse events, focusing on the essential elements crucial for members of an 
interprofessional healthcare team involved in managing patients facing toxicity 
and its related conditions.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 32491808

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Nidhi Sahi declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Rosalee Nguyen 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Preeti Patel declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies. Disclosure: Cynthia Santos declares no relevant financial 
relationships with ineligible companies.