---
reference_id: "PMID:19805654"
title: "Harmonizing the metabolic syndrome: a joint interim statement of the International Diabetes Federation Task Force on Epidemiology and Prevention; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; American Heart Association; World Heart Federation; International Atherosclerosis Society; and International Association for the Study of Obesity."
authors:
- Alberti KG
- Eckel RH
- Grundy SM
- Zimmet PZ
- Cleeman JI
- Donato KA
- Fruchart JC
- James WP
- Loria CM
- Smith SC Jr
- International Diabetes Federation Task Force on Epidemiology and Prevention
- "Hational Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute"
- American Heart Association
- World Heart Federation
- International Atherosclerosis Society
- International Association for the Study of Obesity
journal: Circulation
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192644
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Harmonizing the metabolic syndrome: a joint interim statement of the International Diabetes Federation Task Force on Epidemiology and Prevention; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; American Heart Association; World Heart Federation; International Atherosclerosis Society; and International Association for the Study of Obesity.
**Authors:** Alberti KG, Eckel RH, Grundy SM, Zimmet PZ, Cleeman JI, Donato KA, Fruchart JC, James WP, Loria CM, Smith SC Jr, International Diabetes Federation Task Force on Epidemiology and Prevention, Hational Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, American Heart Association, World Heart Federation, International Atherosclerosis Society, International Association for the Study of Obesity
**Journal:** Circulation (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192644](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192644)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2009 Oct 20;120(16):1640-5. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192644.  Epub 2009 Oct 5.

Harmonizing the metabolic syndrome: a joint interim statement of the 
International Diabetes Federation Task Force on Epidemiology and Prevention; 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; American Heart Association; World 
Heart Federation; International Atherosclerosis Society; and International 
Association for the Study of Obesity.

Alberti KG, Eckel RH, Grundy SM, Zimmet PZ, Cleeman JI, Donato KA, Fruchart JC, 
James WP, Loria CM, Smith SC Jr; International Diabetes Federation Task Force on 
Epidemiology and Prevention; Hational Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; American 
Heart Association; World Heart Federation; International Atherosclerosis 
Society; International Association for the Study of Obesity.

Comment in
    Int J Cardiol. 2013 Oct 3;168(3):2954-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.03.150.

A cluster of risk factors for cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes 
mellitus, which occur together more often than by chance alone, have become 
known as the metabolic syndrome. The risk factors include raised blood pressure, 
dyslipidemia (raised triglycerides and lowered high-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol), raised fasting glucose, and central obesity. Various diagnostic 
criteria have been proposed by different organizations over the past decade. 
Most recently, these have come from the International Diabetes Federation and 
the American Heart Association/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. The 
main difference concerns the measure for central obesity, with this being an 
obligatory component in the International Diabetes Federation definition, lower 
than in the American Heart Association/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
criteria, and ethnic specific. The present article represents the outcome of a 
meeting between several major organizations in an attempt to unify criteria. It 
was agreed that there should not be an obligatory component, but that waist 
measurement would continue to be a useful preliminary screening tool. Three 
abnormal findings out of 5 would qualify a person for the metabolic syndrome. A 
single set of cut points would be used for all components except waist 
circumference, for which further work is required. In the interim, national or 
regional cut points for waist circumference can be used.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192644
PMID: 19805654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]