---
reference_id: PMID:23788369
title: Clinical characteristics of rod and cone photoreceptor dystrophies in patients with mutations in the C8orf37 gene.
authors:
- van Huet RA
- Estrada-Cuzcano A
- Banin E
- Rotenstreich Y
- Hipp S
- Kohl S
- Hoyng CB
- den Hollander AI
- Collin RW
- Klevering BJ
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.12-11439
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Electroretinography
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Proteins/genetics
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Visual Fields/physiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical characteristics of rod and cone photoreceptor dystrophies in patients with mutations in the C8orf37 gene.
**Authors:** van Huet RA, Estrada-Cuzcano A, Banin E, Rotenstreich Y, Hipp S, Kohl S, Hoyng CB, den Hollander AI, Collin RW, Klevering BJ
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.12-11439](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.12-11439)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013 Jul 12;54(7):4683-90. doi: 
10.1167/iovs.12-11439.

Clinical characteristics of rod and cone photoreceptor dystrophies in patients 
with mutations in the C8orf37 gene.

van Huet RA(1), Estrada-Cuzcano A, Banin E, Rotenstreich Y, Hipp S, Kohl S, 
Hoyng CB, den Hollander AI, Collin RW, Klevering BJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

PURPOSE: To provide the clinical features in patients with retinal disease 
caused by C8orf37 gene mutations.
METHODS: Eight patients--four diagnosed with retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and four 
with cone-rod dystrophy (CRD), carrying causal C8orf37 mutations--were 
clinically evaluated, including extensive medical history taking, slit-lamp 
biomicroscopy, ophthalmoscopy, kinetic perimetry, electroretinography (ERG), 
spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT), autofluorescence (AF) 
imaging, and fundus photography.
RESULTS: In families A and D, respectively, one and three patients showed a 
classic RP phenotype with night blindness followed by concentric loss of visual 
field. Severe visual loss to light perception occurred early in the course of 
the disease. The symptoms initiated during infancy (family A) or adolescence 
(family D). Ophthalmoscopy revealed macular atrophy, bone spicules, attenuated 
vessels, and waxy pale optic discs. SD-OCT showed profound photoreceptor 
degeneration and AF demonstrated atrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium 
(RPE). ERG responses were nonrecordable in these patients. In families B and C, 
the patients were diagnosed with CRD. Initial symptoms were photophobia or loss 
of visual acuity and occurred during infancy (family B) or adolescence (family 
C). Ophthalmoscopy and AF revealed profound macular RPE atrophy and SD-OCT 
demonstrated macular photoreceptor degeneration. ERG responses were severely 
reduced in a cone-rod pattern or were nonrecordable. Interestingly, both 
patients in family B demonstrated polydactyly.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in C8orf37 give rise to an early or adolescent-onset 
autosomal recessive CRD or RP phenotype with early macular atrophy. The 
occurrence of postaxial polydactyly in one family suggests a syndromic 
phenotype, which may indicate C8orf37 has a ciliary function.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.12-11439
PMID: 23788369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]