---
reference_id: "PMID:40545783"
title: CT Characteristics of Osteolathyrism in a Pig Model of β-Aminopropionitrile and Surgery-Induced Aortic Aneurysm.
authors:
- Jones J
- Breed M
- Rimoldi G
- Vyavahare N
- Ali A
journal: Vet Radiol Ultrasound
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/vru.70057
keywords:
- Animals
- Male
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed/veterinary"
- Swine
- "Aminopropionitrile/adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Pilot Projects
- Prospective Studies
- "Aortic Aneurysm/veterinary, chemically induced, diagnostic imaging"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CT Characteristics of Osteolathyrism in a Pig Model of β-Aminopropionitrile and Surgery-Induced Aortic Aneurysm.
**Authors:** Jones J, Breed M, Rimoldi G, Vyavahare N, Ali A
**Journal:** Vet Radiol Ultrasound (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/vru.70057](https://doi.org/10.1111/vru.70057)

## Content

1. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 2025 Jul;66(4):e70057. doi: 10.1111/vru.70057.

CT Characteristics of Osteolathyrism in a Pig Model of β-Aminopropionitrile and 
Surgery-Induced Aortic Aneurysm.

Jones J(1), Breed M(2), Rimoldi G(3), Vyavahare N(4), Ali A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal and Veterinary Sciences; College of Agriculture, 
Forestry, and Life Sciences; Clemson University, Clemson, South Carolina, USA.
(2)Office of Animal Resources, Clemson, South Carolina, USA.
(3)Veterinary Diagnostic Center, Clemson Livestock Poultry Health, Clemson 
University, Clemson, South Carolina, USA.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, Clemson University, Clemson, South Carolina, 
USA.

Pigs are established animal models for translational research studies of aortic 
aneurysms in humans. A recent publication recommended adding oral treatment of 
β-aminopropionitrile (BAPN) as a technique for enhancing surgically induced 
aortic aneurysm formation in pig models. The aims of the current prospective 
pilot study were to build on previous studies and develop a reproducible 
protocol for future use in our group's longitudinal research studies. Two, 
3-month-old, male castrated, Yorkshire pigs were included. Pigs were treated 
with oral BAPN, and aortic aneurysms were induced using a surgical protocol we 
had developed and refined in previous pilot studies. Pigs were evaluated using 
whole-body CT and full necropsy examinations at the study's 4-week termination 
timepoint. We identified and described previously unreported CT characteristics 
of osteolathyrism as an unexpected adverse event in both pigs. Authors recommend 
using lower doses of BAPN and monitoring pigs closely for bone changes in future 
studies.

© 2025 The Author(s). Veterinary Radiology & Ultrasound published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American College of Veterinary Radiology.

DOI: 10.1111/vru.70057
PMCID: PMC12183494
PMID: 40545783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.