---
reference_id: "PMID:3595047"
title: Chest pain, dyspnea on exertion, and exercise induced asthma in children and adolescents.
authors:
- Nudel DB
- Diamant S
- Brady T
- Jarenwattananon M
- Buckley BJ
- Gootman N
journal: Clin Pediatr (Phila)
year: '1987'
doi: 10.1177/000992288702600802
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chest pain, dyspnea on exertion, and exercise induced asthma in children and adolescents.
**Authors:** Nudel DB, Diamant S, Brady T, Jarenwattananon M, Buckley BJ, Gootman N
**Journal:** Clin Pediatr (Phila) (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1177/000992288702600802](https://doi.org/10.1177/000992288702600802)

## Content

1. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 1987 Aug;26(8):388-92. doi: 10.1177/000992288702600802.

Chest pain, dyspnea on exertion, and exercise induced asthma in children and 
adolescents.

Nudel DB, Diamant S, Brady T, Jarenwattananon M, Buckley BJ, Gootman N.

The contribution of maximal exercise tests to the evaluation of 180 patients 
with chest pain associated with exercise (n = 147) or dyspnea on exertion (DOE, 
n = 33) was examined. The ages ranged from 5 to 22 (mean 13.2) years, and 68 
patients were females. All patients had a normal cardiovascular examination, 
electrocardiogram, chest x-ray, and 2D-echocardiogram. Maximal exercise tests 
were performed on a treadmill or bicycle ergometer, and flow volume loops were 
performed before and after exercise (n = 65). Exercise tests did not reveal any 
cardiovascular abnormalities, but 14 patients with chest pain (9.5%) and seven 
patients with DOE (21.2%) developed exercise-induced asthma. Postexercise 
decrease in peak expiratory flow rate was 26.2 +/- 3.7 percent in patients with 
chest pain and 39.4 +/- 8.9 percent in those with DOE. Only five patients had a 
personal history and four others had a family history of asthma. Seven patients 
had a personal or family history of allergies.
IMPLICATIONS: exercise-induced asthma should be considered in pediatric patients 
with symptoms of chest pain or dyspnea on exertion; when exercise tests are 
performed, flow volume loops should be included before and after exercise; 
maximal exercise tests are unlikely to unmask any cardiovascular abnormalities 
in such patients.

DOI: 10.1177/000992288702600802
PMID: 3595047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]