---
reference_id: PMID:25485838
title: "Mutations in the deubiquitinase gene USP8 cause Cushing's disease."
authors:
- Reincke M
- Sbiera S
- Hayakawa A
- Theodoropoulou M
- Osswald A
- Beuschlein F
- Meitinger T
- Mizuno-Yamasaki E
- Kawaguchi K
- Saeki Y
- Tanaka K
- Wieland T
- Graf E
- Saeger W
- Ronchi CL
- Allolio B
- Buchfelder M
- Strom TM
- Fassnacht M
- Komada M
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/ng.3166
keywords:
- 14-3-3 Proteins/metabolism
- "ACTH-Secreting Pituitary Adenoma/complications, genetics, metabolism"
- Adenoma/genetics
- Adrenocorticotropic Hormone/metabolism
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- COS Cells
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- "Endopeptidases/genetics, physiology"
- "Endosomal Sorting Complexes Required for Transport/genetics, physiology"
- ErbB Receptors/metabolism
- Exome/genetics
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Neoplasm Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- Pituitary ACTH Hypersecretion/genetics
- "Pituitary Neoplasms/complications, genetics, metabolism"
- "Pro-Opiomelanocortin/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Sequence Alignment
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- "Ubiquitin Thiolesterase/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the deubiquitinase gene USP8 cause Cushing's disease.
**Authors:** Reincke M, Sbiera S, Hayakawa A, Theodoropoulou M, Osswald A, Beuschlein F, Meitinger T, Mizuno-Yamasaki E, Kawaguchi K, Saeki Y, Tanaka K, Wieland T, Graf E, Saeger W, Ronchi CL, Allolio B, Buchfelder M, Strom TM, Fassnacht M, Komada M
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.3166](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3166)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2015 Jan;47(1):31-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.3166. Epub 2014 Dec 8.

Mutations in the deubiquitinase gene USP8 cause Cushing's disease.

Reincke M(1), Sbiera S(2), Hayakawa A(3), Theodoropoulou M(4), Osswald A(1), 
Beuschlein F(1), Meitinger T(5), Mizuno-Yamasaki E(3), Kawaguchi K(3), Saeki 
Y(6), Tanaka K(6), Wieland T(7), Graf E(7), Saeger W(8), Ronchi CL(9), Allolio 
B(10), Buchfelder M(11), Strom TM(12), Fassnacht M(13), Komada M(3).

Author information:
(1)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität 
München, Munich, Germany.
(2)1] Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität 
München, Munich, Germany. [2] Department of Medicine I, Endocrine and Diabetes 
Unit, University Hospital, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, 
Germany.
(5)1] Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, 
Germany. [2] Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, 
Munich, Germany. [3] DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research) partner 
site, Munich Heart Alliance, Munich, Germany.
(6)Laboratory of Protein Metabolism, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany.
(8)Institut für Neuropathologie der Universität Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.
(9)Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, 
Germany.
(10)1] Department of Medicine I, Endocrine and Diabetes Unit, University 
Hospital, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. [2] Comprehensive Heart 
Failure Center, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(11)Neurochirurgische Klinik, Klinikum der Universität Erlangen, Erlangen, 
Germany.
(12)1] Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, 
Germany. [2] Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, 
Munich, Germany.
(13)1] Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität 
München, Munich, Germany. [2] Department of Medicine I, Endocrine and Diabetes 
Unit, University Hospital, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. [3] 
Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, 
Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2015 Mar;11(3):131. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2014.235.

Cushing's disease is caused by corticotroph adenomas of the pituitary. To 
explore the molecular mechanisms of endocrine autonomy in these tumors, we 
performed exome sequencing of 10 corticotroph adenomas. We found somatic 
mutations in the USP8 deubiquitinase gene in 4 of 10 adenomas. The mutations 
clustered in the 14-3-3 protein binding motif and enhanced the proteolytic 
cleavage and catalytic activity of USP8. Cleavage of USP8 led to increased 
deubiqutination of the EGF receptor, impairing its downregulation and sustaining 
EGF signaling. USP8 mutants enhanced promoter activity of the gene encoding 
proopiomelanocortin. In summary, our data show that dominant mutations in USP8 
cause Cushing's disease via activation of EGF receptor signaling.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.3166
PMID: 25485838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]