---
reference_id: "PMID:30685520"
title: "Chewing induced reflex seizures (\"eating epilepsy\") and eye closure sensitivity as a common feature in pediatric patients with SYNGAP1 mutations: Review of literature and report of 8 cases."
authors:
- von Stülpnagel C
- Hartlieb T
- Borggräfe I
- Coppola A
- Gennaro E
- Eschermann K
- Kiwull L
- Kluger F
- Krois I
- Møller RS
- Rössler F
- Santulli L
- Schwermer C
- Wallacher-Scholz B
- Zara F
- Wolf P
- Kluger G
journal: Seizure
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.seizure.2018.12.020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chewing induced reflex seizures ("eating epilepsy") and eye closure sensitivity as a common feature in pediatric patients with SYNGAP1 mutations: Review of literature and report of 8 cases.
**Authors:** von Stülpnagel C, Hartlieb T, Borggräfe I, Coppola A, Gennaro E, Eschermann K, Kiwull L, Kluger F, Krois I, Møller RS, Rössler F, Santulli L, Schwermer C, Wallacher-Scholz B, Zara F, Wolf P, Kluger G
**Journal:** Seizure (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.seizure.2018.12.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seizure.2018.12.020)

## Content

1. Seizure. 2019 Feb;65:131-137. doi: 10.1016/j.seizure.2018.12.020. Epub 2018
Dec  22.

Chewing induced reflex seizures ("eating epilepsy") and eye closure sensitivity 
as a common feature in pediatric patients with SYNGAP1 mutations: Review of 
literature and report of 8 cases.

von Stülpnagel C(1), Hartlieb T(2), Borggräfe I(3), Coppola A(4), Gennaro E(5), 
Eschermann K(6), Kiwull L(6), Kluger F(6), Krois I(7), Møller RS(8), Rössler 
F(9), Santulli L(4), Schwermer C(7), Wallacher-Scholz B(10), Zara F(11), Wolf 
P(12), Kluger G(2).

Author information:
(1)Comprehensive Epilepsy Program for Children, Division of Pediatric Neurology, 
Developmental Medicine and Social Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, 
University Hospital Munich, Lindwurmstr. 3, 80337 Munich, Germany; Paracelsus 
Medical University, Strubergasse 21, 5020 Salzburg, Austria. Electronic address: 
cvstuelpnagel@steinbeis.co.
(2)Paracelsus Medical University, Strubergasse 21, 5020 Salzburg, Austria; 
Hospital for Neuropediatrics and Neurological Rehabilitation, Epilepsy Center 
for Children and Adolescents, Krankenhausstr. 20, 83569 Vogtareuth, Germany.
(3)Comprehensive Epilepsy Program for Children, Division of Pediatric Neurology, 
Developmental Medicine and Social Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, 
University Hospital Munich, Lindwurmstr. 3, 80337 Munich, Germany.
(4)Epilepsy Centre, Department of Neuroscience, Reproductive and 
Odontostomatological Sciences, Federico II University Building 17, Via Pansini 
5, 80131 Naples, Italy.
(5)Genetic Laboratory, E.O. Ospedali Galliera, Via Volta 6, 16128 Genova, Italy.
(6)Hospital for Neuropediatrics and Neurological Rehabilitation, Epilepsy Center 
for Children and Adolescents, Krankenhausstr. 20, 83569 Vogtareuth, Germany.
(7)Helios Klinikum Krefeld, Sozialpädiatrisches Zentrum, Zentrum für Kinder- und 
Jugendmedizin, Lutherplatz 40, 47805 Krefeld, Germany.
(8)The Danish Epilepsy Centre, Filadelfia, Department of Epilepsy Genetics, 
Kolonivej 1, 4293 Dianalund, Denmark; Institute for Regional Health Services, 
University of Southern Denmark, Winsløwparken 19, 3, 5000 Odense, Denmark.
(9)Schweizerische Epilepsie Klinik, Klinik Lengg AG, Bleulerstrasse 60, 8008 
Zürich, Switzerland.
(10)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Developmental Medicine and Social 
Pediatrics, Integrated Social Pediatric Centre of the Dr. von Haunersche 
Kinderspital, University Hospital Munich, Lindwurmstr. 3, 80337 Munich, Germany.
(11)Laboratorio di Neurogenetica, Istituto G. Gaslini, Largo G. Gaslini 5; 16147 
Genova, Italy.
(12)The Danish Epilepsy Centre, Filadelfia, Department of Epilepsy Genetics, 
Kolonivej 1, 4293 Dianalund, Denmark; Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências 
Médicas, Universidad Federal de Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, SC, Brazil.

PURPOSE: Heterozygous SYNGAP1 gene mutations have been associated with several 
forms of idiopathic generalized epilepsy, autism spectrum disorders and delay of 
psychomotor development. We report eight patients with a SYNGAP1 mutation and 
chewing/eating induced reflex seizures as new phenotype and compare them to 
other patients with eating epilepsy and genetic mutations.
METHODS: Presentation of clinical and anamnestic features and retrospective 
analysis of Video-EEG data of a 4 year old index patient with SYNGAP1 mutation 
and chewing /eating induced seizures. Clinical and anamnestic features and home 
videos of seven additional patients (4 female; age: 4-14 years) with SYNGAP1 
mutation and eating induced reflex seizures were compared.
RESULTS: All reflex seizures of the index patient showed similar focal EEG 
pattern with 1-5 seconds high amplitude, irregular 3/sec spike-wave complexes 
with initiation from left temporo-occipital, right temporo-occipital or bi- 
occipital / temporo-occipital regions. Eyelid myoclonia, the most common seizure 
type in all 8 patients, were typically initiated by eating or other simple 
orofacial stimuli. In the index patient eye closure preceded eating 
induced-eyelid myoclonia in 30/38 seizures.
CONCLUSION: The main clinical features of our patient (i.e. intellectual 
disability, epilepsy, autistic features) are compatible with previous reports on 
patients with SYNGAP1 mutations. This is the first complete description of 
eating induced seizures in association with SYNGAP1 mutations. Whether eye 
closure sensitivity (ECS) represents an independent reflex epileptic trait, as 
seen in other patients with idiopathic "generalized" epilepsies (IGE), or eye 
closure is part of a complex trigger mechanism in SYNGAP1 patients' remains to 
be elucidated.

Copyright © 2018 British Epilepsy Association. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.seizure.2018.12.020
PMID: 30685520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]