---
reference_id: "PMID:25388407"
title: Transaldolase deficiency caused by the homozygous p.R192C mutation of the TALDO1 gene in four Emirati patients with considerable phenotypic variability.
authors:
- Al-Shamsi AM
- Ben-Salem S
- Hertecant J
- Al-Jasmi F
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-014-2449-5
keywords:
- Adult
- "Carbohydrate Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Transaldolase/deficiency, genetics"
- United Arab Emirates
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transaldolase deficiency caused by the homozygous p.R192C mutation of the TALDO1 gene in four Emirati patients with considerable phenotypic variability.
**Authors:** Al-Shamsi AM, Ben-Salem S, Hertecant J, Al-Jasmi F
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-014-2449-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-014-2449-5)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2015 May;174(5):661-8. doi: 10.1007/s00431-014-2449-5. Epub
2014  Nov 12.

Transaldolase deficiency caused by the homozygous p.R192C mutation of the TALDO1
gene in four Emirati patients with considerable phenotypic variability.

Al-Shamsi AM(1), Ben-Salem S, Hertecant J, Al-Jasmi F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, College of Medicine and Heath Sciences, United
Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, 17666, United Arab Emirates,
aishamsi@tawamhospital.ae.

Transaldolase deficiency is a heterogeneous disorder of carbohydrate metabolism
characterized clinically by dysmorphic features, cutis laxa, hepatosplenomegaly,
hepatic fibrosis, pancytopenia, renal and cardiac abnormalities, and urinary
excretion of polyols. This report describes four Emirati patients with
transaldolase deficiency caused by the homozygous p.R192C missense mutation in
TALDO1 displaying wide phenotypic variability. The patients had variable
clinical presentations including hepatosplenomegaly, pancytopenia, liver
failure, proteinuria, hydrops fetalis, cardiomyopathy, and skin manifestations
(e.g., dryness, cutis laxa, ichthyosis, telangiectasias, and hemangiomas).
Biochemical analyses including urinary concentration of polyols were consistent
with transaldolase deficiency. The mutation p.R192C was previously identified in
an Arab patient, suggesting a founder effect in Arab populations.
CONCLUSION: The above findings support the premise that biallelic mutations in
TALDO1 are responsible for transaldolase deficiency and confirm the broad
phenotypic variability of this condition, even with the same genotype.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-014-2449-5
PMID: 25388407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
