---
reference_id: "PMID:38588653"
title: "Cross-Sectional Study on Autosomal Recessive Congenital Ichthyoses: Association of Genotype with Disease Severity, Phenotypic, and Ultrastructural Features in 74 Italian Patients."
authors:
- Diociaiuti A
- Corbeddu M
- Rossi S
- Pisaneschi E
- Cesario C
- Condorelli AG
- Samela T
- Giancristoforo S
- Angioni A
- Zambruno G
- Novelli A
- Alaggio R
- Abeni D
- El Hachem M
journal: Dermatology
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000536366
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Male
- Female
- Adolescent
- Phenotype
- Adult
- Severity of Illness Index
- Young Adult
- Infant
- Middle Aged
- "Ichthyosiform Erythroderma, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- Italy
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Ichthyosis, Lamellar/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Transglutaminases/genetics
- Lipase/genetics
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics
- Genotype
- Arachidonate 12-Lipoxygenase/genetics
- "Skin/pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Ichthyosis/genetics, pathology"
- Phospholipases
- "Receptors, Cell Surface"
- Acyltransferases
- Sphingosine N-Acyltransferase
- Cytochrome P-450 Enzyme System
- Oxidoreductases
- Lipoxygenase
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cross-Sectional Study on Autosomal Recessive Congenital Ichthyoses: Association of Genotype with Disease Severity, Phenotypic, and Ultrastructural Features in 74 Italian Patients.
**Authors:** Diociaiuti A, Corbeddu M, Rossi S, Pisaneschi E, Cesario C, Condorelli AG, Samela T, Giancristoforo S, Angioni A, Zambruno G, Novelli A, Alaggio R, Abeni D, El Hachem M
**Journal:** Dermatology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000536366](https://doi.org/10.1159/000536366)

## Content

1. Dermatology. 2024;240(3):397-413. doi: 10.1159/000536366. Epub 2024 Apr 8.

Cross-Sectional Study on Autosomal Recessive Congenital Ichthyoses: Association 
of Genotype with Disease Severity, Phenotypic, and Ultrastructural Features in 
74 Italian Patients.

Diociaiuti A(1), Corbeddu M(1)(2), Rossi S(3), Pisaneschi E(4), Cesario C(4), 
Condorelli AG(5), Samela T(6), Giancristoforo S(1), Angioni A(4), Zambruno G(5), 
Novelli A(4), Alaggio R(3), Abeni D(6), El Hachem M(1).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Unit and Genodermatosis Unit, Translational Paediatrics and 
Clinical Genetics Research Division, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, 
Rome, Italy.
(2)Dermatology Clinic, Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health, 
University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(3)Pathology Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(4)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Translational Cytogenomics Research Unit, 
Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(5)Genodermatosis Unit, Translational Paediatrics and Clinical Genetics Research 
Division, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(6)Clinical Epidemiology Unit, IDI-IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyoses (ARCIs) are a clinically 
heterogeneous group of keratinization disorders characterized by generalized 
skin scaling due to mutations in at least 12 genes. The aim of our study was to 
assess disease severity, phenotypic, and ultrastructural features and to 
evaluate their association with genetic findings in ARCI patients.
METHODS: Clinical signs and symptoms, and disease severity were scored in a 
single-center series of patients with a genetic diagnosis of ARCI. Skin 
ultrastructural findings were reviewed.
RESULTS: Seventy-four consecutive patients (mean age 11.0 years, range 0.1-48.8) 
affected with lamellar ichthyosis (50/74, 67.5%), congenital ichthyosiform 
erythroderma (18/74, 24.3%), harlequin ichthyosis (two/74, 2.7%), and other 
minor ARCI subtypes (four/74, 5.4%) were enrolled. Mutated genes were as 
follows: TGM1 in 18/74 (24.3%) patients, ALOX12B in 18/74 (24.3%), CYP4F22 in 
12/74 (16.2%), ABCA12 in nine/74 (12.2%), ALOXE3 in seven/74 (9.5%), NIPAL4 in 
seven/74 (9.5%), and CERS3, PNPLA1, and SDR9C7 in 1 patient each (1.4%). 
Twenty-five previously undescribed mutations in the different ARCI causative 
genes, as well as two microduplications in TGM1, and two microdeletions in 
CYP4F22 and NIPAL4 were identified. The mean ichthyosis severity score in TGM1- 
and ABCA12-mutated patients was significantly higher than in all other mutated 
genes, while the lowest score was observed in CYP4F22-mutated patients. 
Alopecia, ectropion, and eclabium were significantly associated with TGM1 and 
ABCA12 mutations, and large, thick, and brownish scales with TGM1 mutations. 
Among specific phenotypic features, psoriasis-like lesions as well as a trunk 
reticulate scale pattern and striated keratoderma were present in NIPAL4-mutated 
patients. Ultrastructural data available for 56 patients showed a 100% 
specificity of cholesterol clefts for TGM1-mutated cases and revealed abnormal 
lamellar bodies in SDR9C7 and CERS3 patients.
CONCLUSION: Our study expands the phenotypic and genetic characterization of 
ARCI by the description of statistically significant associations between 
disease severity, specific clinical signs, and different mutated genes. Finally, 
we highlighted the presence of psoriasis-like lesions in NIPAL4-ARCI patients as 
a novel phenotypic feature with diagnostic and possible therapeutic 
implications.

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000536366
PMCID: PMC11168449
PMID: 38588653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.