---
reference_id: "PMID:40005568"
title: Neuropathogenesis of Encephalitic Alphaviruses in Non-Human Primate and Mouse Models of Infection.
authors:
- Woodson CM
- Carney SK
- Kehn-Hall K
journal: Pathogens
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/pathogens14020193
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mice
- Alphavirus/pathogenicity
- Primates
- "Alphavirus Infections/virology, pathology"
- Humans
- Host-Pathogen Interactions
- "Encephalitis Virus, Venezuelan Equine/pathogenicity"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropathogenesis of Encephalitic Alphaviruses in Non-Human Primate and Mouse Models of Infection.
**Authors:** Woodson CM, Carney SK, Kehn-Hall K
**Journal:** Pathogens (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/pathogens14020193](https://doi.org/10.3390/pathogens14020193)

## Content

1. Pathogens. 2025 Feb 14;14(2):193. doi: 10.3390/pathogens14020193.

Neuropathogenesis of Encephalitic Alphaviruses in Non-Human Primate and Mouse 
Models of Infection.

Woodson CM(1)(2), Carney SK(1)(2), Kehn-Hall K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland College 
of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 
Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.
(2)Center for Emerging, Zoonotic, and Arthropod-Borne Pathogens, Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.

Encephalitic alphaviruses, including eastern, Venezuelan, and western equine 
encephalitis virus (EEEV, VEEV, and WEEV, respectively) are New World 
alphaviruses primarily transmitted by mosquitos that cause debilitating and 
lethal central nervous system (CNS) disease in both humans and horses. Despite 
over one hundred years of research on these viruses, the underpinnings of the 
molecular mechanisms driving virally induced damage to the CNS remain 
unresolved. Moreover, virally induced encephalitis following exposure to these 
viruses causes catastrophic damage to the CNS, and survivors of infection often 
suffer from permanent neurological sequelae as a result of sustained 
neuroinflammation and neurological insults encountered. Animal models are 
undoubtedly invaluable tools in biomedical research, where physiologically 
relevant models are required to study pathogenesis and host-pathogen 
interactions. Here, we review the literature to examine nonhuman primate (NHP) 
and mouse models of infection for EEEV, VEEV, and WEEV. We provide a brief 
overview of relevant background information for each virus, including geography, 
epidemiology, and clinical disease. The primary focus of this review is to 
describe neuropathological features associated with CNS disease in NHP and mouse 
models of infection and compare CNS invasion and neuropathogenesis for aerosol, 
intranasal, and subcutaneous routes of exposure to EEEV, VEEV, and WEEV.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens14020193
PMCID: PMC11858634
PMID: 40005568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.