---
reference_id: "PMID:37347877"
title: Multicentric Case Series and Literature Review of Coccidioidal Otomastoiditis.
authors:
- Schwartz IS
- Marek C
- Sandhu H
- Abdelmonem A
- Petersen G
- Dishner E
- Heidari A
- Thompson GR 3rd
journal: Emerg Infect Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3201/eid2907.230129
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multicentric Case Series and Literature Review of Coccidioidal Otomastoiditis.
**Authors:** Schwartz IS, Marek C, Sandhu H, Abdelmonem A, Petersen G, Dishner E, Heidari A, Thompson GR 3rd
**Journal:** Emerg Infect Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3201/eid2907.230129](https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2907.230129)

## Content

1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2023 Jul;29(7):1297-1301. doi: 10.3201/eid2907.230129.

Multicentric Case Series and Literature Review of Coccidioidal Otomastoiditis.

Schwartz IS, Marek C, Sandhu H, Abdelmonem A, Petersen G, Dishner E, Heidari A, 
Thompson GR 3rd.

Coccidioidomycosis involving the ear, mastoid bone, or both is uncommon. We 
describe 5 new cases from the United States and review 4 cases reported in the 
literature of otomycosis and mastoiditis caused by Coccidioides. Of the 9 cases, 
8 were linked to residence in or travel to California. Two patients had poorly 
controlled diabetes mellitus, 7 had otomastoiditis, 1 had otitis externa without 
mastoid involvement, and 1 had mastoiditis without otic involvement. Four 
patients had concurrent or prior pulmonary coccidioidomycosis. Ipsilateral 
facial nerve palsies developed in 2 patients. All patients received antifungal 
treatment for varying durations, and 8 of the 9 patients underwent surgical 
debridement. Clinicians should consider coccidioidomycosis as a differential 
diagnosis for otomastoiditis in patients with geographic risks.

DOI: 10.3201/eid2907.230129
PMCID: PMC10310367
PMID: 37347877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]