---
reference_id: "PMID:20585617"
title: Brca2 and Trp53 deficiency cooperate in the progression of mouse prostate tumourigenesis.
authors:
- Francis JC
- McCarthy A
- Thomsen MK
- Ashworth A
- Swain A
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000995
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- "BRCA2 Protein/deficiency, metabolism"
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Damage
- Disease Progression
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Prostatic Intraepithelial Neoplasia/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/deficiency, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brca2 and Trp53 deficiency cooperate in the progression of mouse prostate tumourigenesis.
**Authors:** Francis JC, McCarthy A, Thomsen MK, Ashworth A, Swain A
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1000995](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000995)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2010 Jun 24;6(6):e1000995. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000995.

Brca2 and Trp53 deficiency cooperate in the progression of mouse prostate
tumourigenesis.

Francis JC(1), McCarthy A, Thomsen MK, Ashworth A, Swain A.

Author information:
(1)Section of Gene Function and Regulation, Institute of Cancer Research,
London, United Kingdom.

Epidemiological studies have shown that one of the strongest risk factors for
prostate cancer is a family history of the disease, suggesting that inherited
factors play a major role in prostate cancer susceptibility. Germline mutations
in BRCA2 predispose to breast and ovarian cancer with its predominant tumour
suppressor function thought to be the repair of DNA double-strand breaks. BRCA2
has also been implicated in prostate cancer etiology, but it is unclear the
impact that mutations in this gene have on prostate tumourigenesis. Here we have
undertaken a genetic analysis in the mouse to determine the role of Brca2 in the
adult prostate. We show that deletion of Brca2 specifically in prostate
epithelia results in focal hyperplasia and low-grade prostate intraepithelial
neoplasia (PIN) in animals over 12 months of age. Simultaneous deletion of Brca2
and the tumour suppressor Trp53 in prostate epithelia gave rise to focal
hyperplasia and atypical cells at 6 months, leading to high-grade PIN in animals
from 12 months. Epithelial cells in these lesions show an increase in DNA damage
and have higher levels of proliferation, but also elevated apoptosis. Castration
of Brca2;Trp53 mutant animals led to regression of PIN lesions, but atypical
cells persisted that continued to proliferate and express nuclear androgen
receptor. This study provides evidence that Brca2 can act as a tumour suppressor
in the prostate, and the model we describe should prove useful in the
development of new therapeutic approaches.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000995
PMCID: PMC2891704
PMID: 20585617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
