---
reference_id: "PMID:34238550"
title: "Coronary Artery Fistulas: Indications, Techniques, Outcomes, and Complications of Transcatheter Fistula Closure."
authors:
- Al-Hijji M
- El Sabbagh A
- El Hajj S
- AlKhouli M
- El Sabawi B
- Cabalka A
- Miranda WR
- Holmes DR
- Rihal CS
journal: JACC Cardiovasc Interv
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcin.2021.02.044
keywords:
- Cardiac Catheterization/adverse effects
- Coronary Angiography
- "Coronary Artery Disease/diagnostic imaging, therapy"
- Coronary Vessel Anomalies
- Fistula
- Humans
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vascular Fistula/diagnostic imaging, etiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coronary Artery Fistulas: Indications, Techniques, Outcomes, and Complications of Transcatheter Fistula Closure.
**Authors:** Al-Hijji M, El Sabbagh A, El Hajj S, AlKhouli M, El Sabawi B, Cabalka A, Miranda WR, Holmes DR, Rihal CS
**Journal:** JACC Cardiovasc Interv (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcin.2021.02.044](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcin.2021.02.044)

## Content

1. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2021 Jul 12;14(13):1393-1406. doi: 
10.1016/j.jcin.2021.02.044.

Coronary Artery Fistulas: Indications, Techniques, Outcomes, and Complications 
of Transcatheter Fistula Closure.

Al-Hijji M(1), El Sabbagh A(2), El Hajj S(3), AlKhouli M(3), El Sabawi B(3), 
Cabalka A(3), Miranda WR(3), Holmes DR(3), Rihal CS(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, 
USA; Heart Hospital, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida, 
USA.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, 
USA.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, 
USA. Electronic address: rihal@mayo.edu.

Coronary artery fistulas (CAFs) are rare coronary anomalies that are usually 
diagnosed incidentally with cardiac imaging. Small CAFs are generally 
asymptomatic and can close over time, while some untreated medium or large CAFs 
can enlarge, leading to clinical sequelae such as cardiac chamber enlargement or 
myocardial ischemia. With the advancement of transcatheter equipment and 
techniques, CAFs have been increasingly closed using a percutaneous approach. 
However, the procedure is not free of limitations given the risk for myocardial 
infarction, device embolization, and fistula recanalization. In this review, the 
authors illustrate the contemporary procedural considerations, techniques, and 
outcomes of transcatheter CAF closure.

Copyright © 2021 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcin.2021.02.044
PMID: 34238550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Funding Support and Author Disclosures The 
authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to the contents 
of this paper to disclose.