---
reference_id: "PMID:25879635"
title: "Common variants at the 9q22.33, 14q13.3 and ATM loci, and risk of differentiated thyroid cancer in the Cuban population."
authors:
- Pereda CM
- Lesueur F
- Pertesi M
- Robinot N
- Lence-Anta JJ
- Turcios S
- Velasco M
- Chappe M
- Infante I
- Bustillo M
- García A
- Clero E
- Xhaard C
- Ren Y
- Maillard S
- Damiola F
- Rubino C
- Salazar S
- Rodriguez R
- Ortiz RM
- de Vathaire F
journal: BMC Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s12863-015-0180-5
keywords:
- Alleles
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/genetics
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 9"
- Cuba/epidemiology
- Gene Frequency
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Variation
- Genotype
- Humans
- Neoplasm Grading
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Quantitative Trait Loci
- Risk
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Common variants at the 9q22.33, 14q13.3 and ATM loci, and risk of differentiated thyroid cancer in the Cuban population.
**Authors:** Pereda CM, Lesueur F, Pertesi M, Robinot N, Lence-Anta JJ, Turcios S, Velasco M, Chappe M, Infante I, Bustillo M, García A, Clero E, Xhaard C, Ren Y, Maillard S, Damiola F, Rubino C, Salazar S, Rodriguez R, Ortiz RM, de Vathaire F
**Journal:** BMC Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12863-015-0180-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12863-015-0180-5)

## Content

1. BMC Genet. 2015 Mar 1;16:22. doi: 10.1186/s12863-015-0180-5.

Common variants at the 9q22.33, 14q13.3 and ATM loci, and risk of differentiated
thyroid cancer in the Cuban population.

Pereda CM(1), Lesueur F(2)(3), Pertesi M(4), Robinot N(5), Lence-Anta JJ(6),
Turcios S(7), Velasco M(8), Chappe M(9), Infante I(10), Bustillo M(11), García
A(12), Clero E(13)(14)(15), Xhaard C(16)(17)(18), Ren Y(19)(20)(21), Maillard
S(22)(23)(24), Damiola F(25), Rubino C(26)(27)(28), Salazar S(29), Rodriguez
R(30), Ortiz RM(31), de Vathaire F(32)(33)(34).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Oncology and Radiobiology, Havana, Cuba. celiam@infomed.sld.cu.
(2)The French National Institute of Health and Medical Research (Inserm), U900,
Institut Curie, Mines ParisTech, Paris, F-75005, France.
fabienne.lesueur@curie.fr.
(3)Genetic Cancer Susceptibility, International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC), Lyon, F-69372, France. fabienne.lesueur@curie.fr.
(4)Genetic Cancer Susceptibility, International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC), Lyon, F-69372, France. PertesiM@fellows.iarc.fr.
(5)Genetic Cancer Susceptibility, International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC), Lyon, F-69372, France. robinotn@iarc.fr.
(6)Institute of Oncology and Radiobiology, Havana, Cuba. lence@infomed.sld.cu.
(7)National Institute of Endocrinology, Havana, Cuba.
silviaelena@infomed.sld.cu.
(8)Institute of Oncology and Radiobiology, Havana, Cuba.
milagros.velasco@infomed.sld.cu.
(9)Institute of Oncology and Radiobiology, Havana, Cuba.
maechappe@infomed.sld.cu.
(10)Cuban Health Public Ministry, Havana, Cuba. idalmis@infomed.sld.cu.
(11)Institute of Oncology and Radiobiology, Havana, Cuba.
marlene.bustillo@infomed.sld.cu.
(12)Institute of Oncology and Radiobiology, Havana, Cuba.
anabel.garcia@infomed.sld.cu.
(13)The French National Institute of Health and Medical Research (Inserm),
Centre for Research in Epidemiology and Population Health (CESP), U1018,
Radiation Epidemiology Group, Villejuif, 94805, France. enora.clero@irsn.fr.
(14)Paris-Sud University, Villejuif, 94805, France. enora.clero@irsn.fr.
(15)Institut Gustave Roussy (IGR), Villejuif, 94805, France.
enora.clero@irsn.fr.
(16)The French National Institute of Health and Medical Research (Inserm),
Centre for Research in Epidemiology and Population Health (CESP), U1018,
Radiation Epidemiology Group, Villejuif, 94805, France.
constance.xhaard@gustaveroussy.fr.
(17)Paris-Sud University, Villejuif, 94805, France.
constance.xhaard@gustaveroussy.fr.
(18)Institut Gustave Roussy (IGR), Villejuif, 94805, France.
constance.xhaard@gustaveroussy.fr.
(19)The French National Institute of Health and Medical Research (Inserm),
Centre for Research in Epidemiology and Population Health (CESP), U1018,
Radiation Epidemiology Group, Villejuif, 94805, France.
yan.ren@gustaveroussy.fr.
(20)Paris-Sud University, Villejuif, 94805, France. yan.ren@gustaveroussy.fr.
(21)Institut Gustave Roussy (IGR), Villejuif, 94805, France.
yan.ren@gustaveroussy.fr.
(22)The French National Institute of Health and Medical Research (Inserm),
Centre for Research in Epidemiology and Population Health (CESP), U1018,
Radiation Epidemiology Group, Villejuif, 94805, France.
maillard.steph@gmail.com.
(23)Paris-Sud University, Villejuif, 94805, France. maillard.steph@gmail.com.
(24)Institut Gustave Roussy (IGR), Villejuif, 94805, France.
maillard.steph@gmail.com.
(25)CRCL, CNRS UMR5286, the French National Institute of Health and Medical
Research (Inserm) U1052, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, F-69008, France.
francesca.damiola@lyon.unicancer.fr.
(26)The French National Institute of Health and Medical Research (Inserm),
Centre for Research in Epidemiology and Population Health (CESP), U1018,
Radiation Epidemiology Group, Villejuif, 94805, France.
carole.rubino@gustaveroussy.fr.
(27)Paris-Sud University, Villejuif, 94805, France.
carole.rubino@gustaveroussy.fr.
(28)Institut Gustave Roussy (IGR), Villejuif, 94805, France.
carole.rubino@gustaveroussy.fr.
(29)Institute of Oncology and Radiobiology, Havana, Cuba.
sirced.salazar@infomed.sld.cu.
(30)Cuban Health Public Ministry, Havana, Cuba. regla.rodriguez@infomed.sld.cu.
(31)Institute of Oncology and Radiobiology, Havana, Cuba.
rmortiz@infomed.sld.cu.
(32)The French National Institute of Health and Medical Research (Inserm),
Centre for Research in Epidemiology and Population Health (CESP), U1018,
Radiation Epidemiology Group, Villejuif, 94805, France.
florent.devathaire@gustaveroussy.fr.
(33)Paris-Sud University, Villejuif, 94805, France.
florent.devathaire@gustaveroussy.fr.
(34)Institut Gustave Roussy (IGR), Villejuif, 94805, France.
florent.devathaire@gustaveroussy.fr.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of differentiated thyroid carcinoma (DTC) in Cuba is
low and the contribution of host genetic factors to DTC in this population has
not been investigated so far. Our goal was to assess the role of known risk
polymorphisms in DTC cases living in Havana. We genotyped five polymorphisms
located at the DTC susceptibility loci on chromosome 14q13.3 near NK2 homeobox 1
(NKX2-1), on chromosome 9q22.33 near Forkhead factor E1 (FOXE1) and within the
DNA repair gene Ataxia-Telangiectasia Mutated (ATM) in 203 cases and 212 age-
and sex- matched controls. Potential interactions between these polymorphisms
and other DTC risk factors such as body surface area, body mass index, size,
ethnicity, and, for women, the parity were also examined.
RESULTS: Significant association with DTC risk was found for rs944289 near
NKX2-1 (OR per A allele = 1.6, 95% CI: 1.2-2.1), and three polymorphisms near or
within FOXE1, namely rs965513 (OR per A allele = 1.7, 95% CI: 1.2-2.3),
rs1867277 in the promoter region of the gene (OR per A allele = 1.5, 95% CI:
1.1-1.9) and the poly-alanine tract expansion polymorphism rs71369530 (OR per
Long Allele = 1.8, 95% CI: 1.3-2.5), only the 2 latter remaining significant
when correcting for multiple tests. Overall, no association between DTC and the
coding SNP D1853N (rs1801516) in ATM (OR per A Allele = 1.1, 95% CI: 0.7-1.7)
was seen. Nevertheless women who had 2 or more pregnancies had a 3.5-fold
increase in risk of DTC if they carried the A allele (OR 3.5, 95% CI: 3.2-9.8)
as compared to 0.8 (OR 0.8, 95% CI: 0.4-1.6) in those who had fewer than 2.
CONCLUSIONS: We confirmed in the Cuban population the role of the loci
previously associated with DTC susceptibility in European and Japanese
populations through genome-wide association studies. Our results on ATM and the
number of pregnancies raise interesting questions on the mechanisms by which
oestrogens, or other hormones, alter the DNA damage response and DNA repair
through the regulation of key effector proteins such as ATM. Due to the small
size of our study and to multiple tests, all these results warrant further
investigation.

DOI: 10.1186/s12863-015-0180-5
PMCID: PMC4354996
PMID: 25879635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
