---
reference_id: "PMID:36811343"
title: Contribution of parvovirus B19 in suspected cases of measles/rubella in Osaka, Japan, between 2011 and 2021.
authors:
- Kaida Y
- Kanbayashi D
- Kurata T
- Mori H
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.28593
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contribution of parvovirus B19 in suspected cases of measles/rubella in Osaka, Japan, between 2011 and 2021.
**Authors:** Kaida Y, Kanbayashi D, Kurata T, Mori H
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.28593](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.28593)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2023 Mar;95(3):e28593. doi: 10.1002/jmv.28593.

Contribution of parvovirus B19 in suspected cases of measles/rubella in Osaka, 
Japan, between 2011 and 2021.

Kaida Y(1), Kanbayashi D(1), Kurata T(1), Mori H(1).

Author information:
(1)Osaka Institute of Public Health, Osaka, Japan.

Erythema infectiosum, caused by human parvovirus B19 (B19V), is difficult to 
diagnose by its clinical symptoms and is often misdiagnosed as measles or 
rubella. Timely confirmation of measles/rubella or other viral etiologies via 
laboratory tests can provide an accurate picture of the infection status, which 
can appropriate response. The purpose of this study was to determine the 
contribution of B19V as an etiological agent for fever-rash in suspected cases 
of measles and rubella in Osaka Prefecture between 2011 and 2021. Of 1356 
suspected cases, 167 were confirmed with measles and 166 with rubella using 
nucleic acid testing (NAT). Of the remaining 1023 cases, 970 from which blood 
specimens could be obtained were screened by real-time polymerase chain reaction 
for B19V, from which 136 (14%) tested positive. Of the positives cases, 21% were 
young children (9 years and younger), while 64% were adults (20 years and 
older). Phylogenetic tree analysis showed that 93 samples belonged to genotype 
1a. The importance of B19V in the etiology of fever-rash illness was revealed in 
this study. The importance of laboratory diagnosis by NAT in maintaining the 
status of measles elimination and to eliminate rubella was reaffirmed.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.28593
PMID: 36811343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]