---
reference_id: "PMID:39812476"
title: "Transmastoid superior semicircular canal dehiscence plugging: VHIT findings."
authors:
- Benoit C
- Hautefort C
- Verillaud B
- Herman P
- Kania R
journal: Acta Otolaryngol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1080/00016489.2025.2449593
keywords:
- Humans
- "Semicircular Canal Dehiscence/surgery, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Female
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Head Impulse Test
- Aged
- Semicircular Canals/surgery
- Mastoid/surgery
- Otologic Surgical Procedures/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transmastoid superior semicircular canal dehiscence plugging: VHIT findings.
**Authors:** Benoit C, Hautefort C, Verillaud B, Herman P, Kania R
**Journal:** Acta Otolaryngol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00016489.2025.2449593](https://doi.org/10.1080/00016489.2025.2449593)

## Content

1. Acta Otolaryngol. 2026 Feb;146(2):141-144. doi: 10.1080/00016489.2025.2449593.
 Epub 2025 Jan 15.

Transmastoid superior semicircular canal dehiscence plugging: VHIT findings.

Benoit C(1)(2), Hautefort C(3), Verillaud B(3), Herman P(3), Kania R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Otolaryngology, AP-HP, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, 
France.
(2)Paris Cité University, Inserm, NeuroDiderot, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, Center of 
Neurosensorial-Head & Neck Diseases, Lariboisière Hospital, University of Paris 
Cité, Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris & UMR 1141 Center for the 
Developing Brain, Paris Biobank BB-0033-00064, Platform of Biopathology and 
Innovative Technologies for Health, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Superior canal dehiscence syndrome (Minor's syndrome) is a condition 
characterized by a bony defect in the superior semicircular canal (SSCC), with 
treatment primarily being surgical, notably through plugging of SSCC.
AIMS/OBJECTIVES: To examine the clinical outcome and postoperative VHIT findings 
after transmastoid plugging of the SSCC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients having a superior semicircular canal dehiscence 
(SSCCD) syndrome with debilitating symptoms who underwent a plugging of the SSCC 
via a transmastoid approach were included. Through a retrospective chart review 
and literature review, postop video head impulse test (VHIT) findings, pre and 
post-operative audiological/vestibular symptoms and audiograms were analyzed in 
a tertiary care university hospital.
RESULTS: All patients operated by plugging of the SSCC through a transmastoid 
approach had a significative post-operative VHIT deficit in the function of the 
SSCC (range 0.34-0.70, median gain function 0.41, mean gain function 0.46, 
standard deviation of 0.15, p = 0.0391) Almost all patients had improvement of 
their preoperative symptoms. No surgical complication was noted. The literature 
review also highlighted safety and effectiveness of this surgical technique.
CONCLUSION AND SIGNIFICANCE: Post-operative VHIT findings showed an elective 
deficit of the SSCC function thus confirming the surgical SSCC plugging through 
a trans mastoid approach.

DOI: 10.1080/00016489.2025.2449593
PMID: 39812476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]