---
reference_id: "PMID:39202358"
title: "The Clinical Heterogeneity of Spinal Muscular Atrophy with Respiratory Distress Type 1 (SMARD1)-A Report of Three Cases, Including Twins."
authors:
- Leśniak A
- Glińska M
- Patalan M
- Ostrowska I
- Świrska-Sobolewska M
- Giżewska-Kacprzak K
- Kotkowiak A
- Leśniak A
- Walczak M
- Śmigiel R
- Giżewska M
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/genes15080997
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- "Muscular Atrophy, Spinal/genetics, pathology"
- "Respiratory Distress Syndrome, Newborn/genetics, pathology"
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Clinical Heterogeneity of Spinal Muscular Atrophy with Respiratory Distress Type 1 (SMARD1)-A Report of Three Cases, Including Twins.
**Authors:** Leśniak A, Glińska M, Patalan M, Ostrowska I, Świrska-Sobolewska M, Giżewska-Kacprzak K, Kotkowiak A, Leśniak A, Walczak M, Śmigiel R, Giżewska M
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes15080997](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes15080997)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2024 Jul 30;15(8):997. doi: 10.3390/genes15080997.

The Clinical Heterogeneity of Spinal Muscular Atrophy with Respiratory Distress 
Type 1 (SMARD1)-A Report of Three Cases, Including Twins.

Leśniak A(1), Glińska M(1), Patalan M(1), Ostrowska I(1), Świrska-Sobolewska 
M(1), Giżewska-Kacprzak K(2), Kotkowiak A(1), Leśniak A(1), Walczak M(1), 
Śmigiel R(3), Giżewska M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Endocrinology, Diabetology, Metabolic Diseases and 
Cardiology of the Developmental Age, Pomeranian Medical University in Szczecin, 
71-252 Szczecin, Poland.
(2)Department of Pediatric and Oncological Surgery, Urology and Hand Surgery, 
Pomeranian Medical University in Szczecin, Prof. Tadeusz Sokołowski University 
Clinical Hospital No. 1, 71-252 Szczecin, Poland.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Endocrinology, Diabetology and Metabolic Diseases, 
Wroclaw Medical University, 50-368 Wroclaw, Poland.

Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1 (SMARD1; OMIM #604320, 
ORPHA:98920) is a rare autosomal recessive congenital motor neuron disease. It 
is caused by variants in the IGHMBP2 gene. Clinically, it presents with 
respiratory failure due to diaphragmatic paralysis, progressive muscle weakness 
starting in the distal parts of the limbs, dysphagia, and damage to sensory and 
autonomic nerves. Unlike spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), SMARD1 has a distinct 
genetic etiology and is not detected in the population newborn screening 
programs. Most children with SMARD1 do not survive beyond the first year of life 
due to progressive respiratory failure. Artificial ventilation can prolong 
survival, but no specific treatment is available. Therapy focuses on mechanical 
ventilation and improving the patient's quality of life. Research into gene 
therapy is ongoing. We report three female patients with SMARD1, including twins 
from a triplet pregnancy. In twin sisters (patient no. 1 and patient no. 2), two 
heterozygous variants in the IGHMBP2 gene were identified: c.595G>C/p.Ala199Pro 
and c.1615_1623del/p.Ser539_Tyr541del. In patient no. 3, a variant 
c.1478C>T/p.Thr493Ile and a variant c.439C>T/p.Arg147* in the IGHMBP2 gene were 
detected. Our findings underscore the variability of clinical presentations, 
even among patients sharing the same pathogenic variants in the IGHMBP2 gene, 
and emphasize the importance of early genetic diagnosis in patients presenting 
with respiratory failure, with or without associated diaphragmatic muscle 
paralysis.

DOI: 10.3390/genes15080997
PMCID: PMC11353554
PMID: 39202358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.