---
reference_id: "PMID:37679855"
title: "The psychosocial impact of childhood dementia on children and their parents: a systematic review."
authors:
- Nevin SM
- McGill BC
- Kelada L
- Hilton G
- Maack M
- Elvidge KL
- Farrar MA
- Baynam G
- Katz NT
- Donovan L
- Grattan S
- Signorelli C
- Bhattacharya K
- Nunn K
- Wakefield CE
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02859-3
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- Quality of Life
- "Adaptation, Psychological"
- "Databases, Factual"
- Parents
- Rare Diseases
- Dementia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The psychosocial impact of childhood dementia on children and their parents: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Nevin SM, McGill BC, Kelada L, Hilton G, Maack M, Elvidge KL, Farrar MA, Baynam G, Katz NT, Donovan L, Grattan S, Signorelli C, Bhattacharya K, Nunn K, Wakefield CE
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02859-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02859-3)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Sep 7;18(1):277. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02859-3.

The psychosocial impact of childhood dementia on children and their parents: a 
systematic review.

Nevin SM(1)(2), McGill BC(3)(4), Kelada L(3)(4), Hilton G(5), Maack M(5), 
Elvidge KL(5), Farrar MA(3)(6), Baynam G(7)(8)(9), Katz NT(10), Donovan L(3)(4), 
Grattan S(3), Signorelli C(3)(4), Bhattacharya K(11)(12), Nunn K(13), Wakefield 
CE(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Clinical Medicine, UNSW Medicine and Health, Discipline of 
Paediatrics and Child Health, Sydney, Australia. s.nevin@unsw.edu.au.
(2)Behavioral Sciences Unit, Kids Cancer Centre, Sydney Children's Hospital, 
Randwick, Australia. s.nevin@unsw.edu.au.
(3)School of Clinical Medicine, UNSW Medicine and Health, Discipline of 
Paediatrics and Child Health, Sydney, Australia.
(4)Behavioral Sciences Unit, Kids Cancer Centre, Sydney Children's Hospital, 
Randwick, Australia.
(5)Childhood Dementia Initiative, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(6)Department of Neurology, Sydney Children's Hospital, Randwick, Australia.
(7)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Division of Paediatrics, University 
of Western Australia, Western Australia, Australia.
(8)Rare Care Centre, Perth Children's Hospital, Perth, WA, Australia.
(9)Telethon Kids Institute, Perth, WA, Australia.
(10)Victorian Paediatric Palliative Care Program, Royal Children's Hospital, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(11)Genetic Metabolic Disorders Service, Sydney Children's Hospitals' Network, 
Randwick and Westmead, Australia.
(12)Faculty of Medicine and Health, Discipline of Genomics, Sydney University, 
Westmead, Australia.
(13)Department of Psychological Medicine, Children's Hospital at Westmead, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Childhood dementias are a group of rare and ultra-rare paediatric 
conditions clinically characterised by enduring global decline in central 
nervous system function, associated with a progressive loss of developmentally 
acquired skills, quality of life and shortened life expectancy. Traditional 
research, service development and advocacy efforts have been fragmented due to a 
focus on individual disorders, or groups classified by specific mechanisms or 
molecular pathogenesis. There are significant knowledge and clinician skill gaps 
regarding the shared psychosocial impacts of childhood dementia conditions. This 
systematic review integrates the existing international evidence of the 
collective psychosocial experiences of parents of children living with dementia.
METHODS: We used the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and 
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. We systematically searched four databases to 
identify original, peer-reviewed research reporting on the psychosocial impacts 
of childhood dementia, from the parent perspective. We synthesised the data into 
three thematic categories: parents' healthcare experiences, psychosocial 
impacts, and information and support needs.
RESULTS: Nineteen articles met review criteria, representing 1856 parents. 
Parents highlighted extensive difficulties connecting with an engaged clinical 
team and navigating their child's rare, life-limiting, and progressive 
condition. Psychosocial challenges were manifold and encompassed physical, 
economic, social, emotional and psychological implications. Access to 
coordinated healthcare and community-based psychosocial supports was associated 
with improved parent coping, psychological resilience and reduced psychological 
isolation. Analysis identified a critical need to prioritize access to 
integrated family-centred psychosocial supports throughout distinct stages of 
their child's condition trajectory.
CONCLUSION: This review will encourage and guide the development of 
evidence-based and integrated psychosocial resources to optimise quality of life 
outcomes for of children with dementia and their families.

© 2023. Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02859-3
PMCID: PMC10486052
PMID: 37679855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Gail Hilton is the Head of Programs at the 
Childhood Dementia Initiative Foundation. Megan Maack is the Chief Executive 
Officer at the Childhood Dementia Initiative Foundation. Kris Elvidge is the 
Head of Research at the Childhood Dementia Initiative Foundation.