---
reference_id: "PMID:21466929"
title: Susceptibility-weighted angiography (SWAN) of cerebral veins and arteries compared to TOF-MRA.
authors:
- Boeckh-Behrens T
- Lutz J
- Lummel N
- Burke M
- Wesemann T
- Schöpf V
- Brückmann H
- Linn J
journal: Eur J Radiol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2011.02.057
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Susceptibility-weighted angiography (SWAN) of cerebral veins and arteries compared to TOF-MRA.
**Authors:** Boeckh-Behrens T, Lutz J, Lummel N, Burke M, Wesemann T, Schöpf V, Brückmann H, Linn J
**Journal:** Eur J Radiol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejrad.2011.02.057](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejrad.2011.02.057)

## Content

1. Eur J Radiol. 2012 Jun;81(6):1238-45. doi: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2011.02.057. Epub 
2011 Apr 5.

Susceptibility-weighted angiography (SWAN) of cerebral veins and arteries 
compared to TOF-MRA.

Boeckh-Behrens T(1), Lutz J, Lummel N, Burke M, Wesemann T, Schöpf V, Brückmann 
H, Linn J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroradiology, University Hospital Munich, Marchioninistrasse 
15, 81377 München, Germany. Tobias.BoeckhBehrens@med.uni-muenchen.de

PROBLEM: High resolution, non-contrast imaging of both cerebral veins and 
arteries by use of gradient echo T2 star weighted angiography (SWAN) is a new 
method for susceptibility-weighted imaging with short acquisition times. We 
assessed the potential of this sequence for the depiction of both cerebral veins 
and arteries.
METHODS: 15 healthy volunteers were included in the study. MRI was performed on 
a 3T MR scanner using the following sequences: (1) a 3D multi-echo gradient echo 
T2 star weighted angiography (SWAN), (2) an arterial 3D TOF MR angiography and 
(3) a venous 2D TOF. With regard to the SWAN sequence, both MinIP and MIP images 
were reconstructed and systematically compared to MIP reconstructions of the 
artTOF and the venTOF. To suggest possible clinical implications of our 
findings, we additionally included two illustrative cases.
RESULTS: With regard to the visualization of the cerebral veins, the MinIP 
reconstructions of the SWAN sequence were considerably superior compared to the 
venTOF. Concerning the depiction of the main segments of the big cerebral 
arteries the value of the MIP reconstructions of the SWAN was comparable to that 
of the artTOF with limitations in the homogenity and in the depiction of smaller 
arteries.
CONCLUSIONS: SWAN allows for high-resolution visualization of both cerebral 
veins and arteries in one sequence without application of contrast agent and 
with significantly shortened scan time compared to the combined scan time of 
TOF-MRA and TOF-MRV. By use of either MinIP or MIP reconstructions, the arteries 
can be distinguished from the veins.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2011.02.057
PMID: 21466929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]