---
reference_id: "PMID:37589044"
title: The role of lenvatinib in the era of immunotherapy of hepatocellular carcinoma.
authors:
- Lee MMP
- Chan LL
- Chan SL
journal: J Liver Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.17998/jlc.2023.07.17
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of lenvatinib in the era of immunotherapy of hepatocellular carcinoma.
**Authors:** Lee MMP, Chan LL, Chan SL
**Journal:** J Liver Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.17998/jlc.2023.07.17](https://doi.org/10.17998/jlc.2023.07.17)

## Content

1. J Liver Cancer. 2023 Sep;23(2):262-271. doi: 10.17998/jlc.2023.07.17. Epub
2023  Aug 17.

The role of lenvatinib in the era of immunotherapy of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Lee MMP(1), Chan LL(1), Chan SL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong Faculty of Medicine, Shatin, Hong Kong, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Translational Oncology, State Key Lab & Research
Institutes, Hong Kong Cancer Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Faculty of Medicine, Shatin, Hong Kong, China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) frequently presents as advanced stage with poor
prognosis and high mortality. Systemic treatment is the treatment of choice for
advanced disease. In 2007, the first multi-kinase inhibitor (MKI) sorafenib was
approved and shown to modestly prolong overall survival (OS). The progress of
systemic therapy has been slow afterwards until 2018 when lenvatinib, another
MKI, was shown to be non-inferior to sorafenib on median OS as the first-line
therapy for HCC. Since then, remarkable progress has been achieved on the
treatment of advanced HCC, including the development of second-line targeted
treatment, including regorafenib, cabozantinib and ramucirumab from 2017 to
2019. A growing focus has been placed on immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs)
targeting programmed cell death-1 (PD-1), its ligand PD-L1, and cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4. These ICIs have proven their potency in
treating HCC as both initial and subsequent line of therapy. At present, both
regimens of atezolizumab combined with bevacizumab, as well as the combination
of tremelimumab and durvalumab, are recommended as the first-line treatments
based on positive phase III clinical trials. With the advancement of ICIs, it is
anticipated that the role of MKIs in the treatment of HCC will evolve. In this
article, lenvatinib, one of the most commonly used MKIs in HCC, is chosen to be
reviewed.

DOI: 10.17998/jlc.2023.07.17
PMCID: PMC10565543
PMID: 37589044

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest SCL has served on advisory
boards for Astra-Zeneca, MSD, Eisai, BMS, and Roche, and has received research
funds from MSD, Bayer, Eisai, Ipsen, SIRTEX. MPL and LLC have no conflicts of
interest to disclose.
