---
reference_id: "PMID:10423374"
title: "Practical methods for solid-state NMR distance measurements on large biomolecules: constant-time rotational resonance."
authors:
- Balazs YS
- Thompson LK
journal: J Magn Reson
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1006/jmre.1999.1791
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Practical methods for solid-state NMR distance measurements on large biomolecules: constant-time rotational resonance.
**Authors:** Balazs YS, Thompson LK
**Journal:** J Magn Reson (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1006/jmre.1999.1791](https://doi.org/10.1006/jmre.1999.1791)

## Content

1. J Magn Reson. 1999 Aug;139(2):371-6. doi: 10.1006/jmre.1999.1791.

Practical methods for solid-state NMR distance measurements on large 
biomolecules: constant-time rotational resonance.

Balazs YS(1), Thompson LK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts 
01003, USA.

Simple modifications of the rotational resonance experiment substantially reduce 
the total experimental time needed to measure weak homonuclear dipolar 
couplings, a critical factor for achieving routine internuclear distance 
measurements in large biomolecular systems. These modifications also address 
several problems cited in the literature. Here we introduce a constant-time 
rotational resonance experiment that eliminates the need for control spectra to 
correct for effects from variable RF heating, particularly critical for accurate 
long-distance measurements. This reduces the total number of experiments needed 
by as much as a factor of 2. Other improvements incorporated include achieving 
selective inversion with a delay rather than a weak pulse (P. R. Costa et al., 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 119, 10487-10493, 1997), which we observe results in the 
elimination of oscillations in peak intensities for short mixing time points. 
This reduces the total experiment time in two ways. First, there is no longer a 
need to average different "zero"-time points (S. O. Smith et al., Biochemistry 
33, 6334-6341, 1994) to correct for intensity variations. Second, 
short-mixing-time lineshape differences observed in large membrane-bound 
proteins only appear with the weak-pulse inversion and not when using the delay 
inversion. Consistent lineshapes between short and long mixing times permit the 
use of a single spectrum for subtraction of natural abundance background signals 
from all labeled-protein time points. Elimination of these effects improves the 
accuracy and efficiency of rotational resonance internuclear distance 
measurements.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmre.1999.1791
PMID: 10423374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]