---
reference_id: "PMID:38420274"
title: "Efficacy of Dialectical Behavior Therapy in the Treatment of Borderline Personality Disorder: A Systematic Review of Randomized Controlled Trials."
authors:
- Hernandez-Bustamante M
- Cjuno J
- Hernández RM
- Ponce-Meza JC
journal: Iran J Psychiatry
year: '2024'
doi: 10.18502/ijps.v19i1.14347
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of Dialectical Behavior Therapy in the Treatment of Borderline Personality Disorder: A Systematic Review of Randomized Controlled Trials.
**Authors:** Hernandez-Bustamante M, Cjuno J, Hernández RM, Ponce-Meza JC
**Journal:** Iran J Psychiatry (2024)
**DOI:** [10.18502/ijps.v19i1.14347](https://doi.org/10.18502/ijps.v19i1.14347)

## Content

1. Iran J Psychiatry. 2024 Jan;19(1):119-129. doi: 10.18502/ijps.v19i1.14347.

Efficacy of Dialectical Behavior Therapy in the Treatment of Borderline 
Personality Disorder: A Systematic Review of Randomized Controlled Trials.

Hernandez-Bustamante M(1), Cjuno J(2), Hernández RM(3), Ponce-Meza JC(4).

Author information:
(1)Universidad Peruana Unión, Lima, Peru.
(2)Universidad Privada Antenor Orrego, Trujillo, Peru.
(3)Universidad Privada Norbert Wiener, Lima, Peru.
(4)Universidad Privada del Norte, Lima, Peru.

Objective: Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is a serious public health 
problem. Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT) is a program that has provided 
encouraging results for its treatment. However, scientific evidence about its 
efficacy is scarce. Therefore, we aimed to describe the scientific production on 
the components of the DBT program and its therapeutic efficacy in the treatment 
of people with BPD. Method : A systematic review with relevant keywords was 
conducted based on studies available in Scopus, Web of Science, and PubMed until 
June 2023, including studies in English, research on therapeutic intervention, 
studies with a randomized controlled trial (RCT) design that included people 
with the diagnosis of BPD. Results: We found 18 RCTs, most of which supported 
the effectiveness of DBT for BPD. There were a total of 1,755 participants in 
these studies, most of whom were women. These studies looked for treating 
self-injurious behaviors, suicidal thoughts or ideations, number of visits to 
emergency services, and frequency of hospital admissions. Most studies revealed 
that both short-term DBT and standard DBT improved suicidality in BPD patients 
with small or moderate effect sizes, lasting up to 24 months after the treatment 
period. Furthermore, these studies showed that DBT can significantly improve 
general psychopathology and depressive symptoms in patients with BPD. 
Improvement of compliance, impulsivity, mood instability, as well as reduction 
in hospitalization rate are other findings observed in the trials following DBT. 
Conclusion: Although DBT shows efficacy in the treatment of BPD, heterogeneity 
in the methodologies employed is highlighted. Therefore, it is necessary to 
design studies from a homogeneous theoretical and methodological framework.

Copyright © 2024 Tehran University of Medical Sciences. Published by Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.18502/ijps.v19i1.14347
PMCID: PMC10896753
PMID: 38420274

Conflict of interest statement: None.