---
reference_id: "PMID:35069422"
title: "Multifaceted and Age-Dependent Phenotypes Associated With Biallelic PNPLA6 Gene Variants: Eight Novel Cases and Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Nanetti L
- Di Bella D
- Magri S
- Fichera M
- Sarto E
- Castaldo A
- Mongelli A
- Baratta S
- Fenu S
- Moscatelli M
- Bonati MT
- Martinuzzi A
- Mariotti C
- Taroni F
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2021.793547
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multifaceted and Age-Dependent Phenotypes Associated With Biallelic PNPLA6 Gene Variants: Eight Novel Cases and Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Nanetti L, Di Bella D, Magri S, Fichera M, Sarto E, Castaldo A, Mongelli A, Baratta S, Fenu S, Moscatelli M, Bonati MT, Martinuzzi A, Mariotti C, Taroni F
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2021.793547](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2021.793547)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2022 Jan 6;12:793547. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2021.793547.
eCollection  2021.

Multifaceted and Age-Dependent Phenotypes Associated With Biallelic PNPLA6 Gene 
Variants: Eight Novel Cases and Review of the Literature.

Nanetti L(1), Di Bella D(1), Magri S(1), Fichera M(1), Sarto E(1), Castaldo 
A(1), Mongelli A(1), Baratta S(1), Fenu S(2), Moscatelli M(3), Bonati MT(4), 
Martinuzzi A(5), Mariotti C(1), Taroni F(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Medical Genetics and Neurogenetics, Fondazione Istituto di Ricovero e 
Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS) Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, 
Italy.
(2)Unit of Rare Neurodegenerative and Neurometabolic Diseases, Fondazione 
Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS) Istituto Neurologico 
Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy.
(3)Unit of Neuroradiology, Fondazione Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere 
Scientifico (IRCCS) Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy.
(4)Unit of Medical Genetics, Institute for Maternal and Child Health Istituto di 
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS) Burlo Garofalo, Trieste, Italy.
(5)Conegliano Research Center, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere 
Scientifico (IRCCS) Eugenio Medea, Conegliano, Italy.

A wide spectrum of neurodegenerative diseases has been associated with 
pathogenic variants in the PNPLA6 (patatin-like phospholipase domain-containing 
protein 6) gene, including spastic paraplegia type 39, Gordon-Holmes, 
Boucher-Neuhauser, Oliver-Mc Farlane, and Laurence-Moon syndromes. These 
syndromes present variable and overlapping clinical symptoms, encompassing 
cerebellar ataxia, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, chorioretinal dystrophy, 
spastic paraplegia, muscle wasting, peripheral neuropathy, and cognitive 
impairment. In the present study, we performed a wide genetic screening in 292 
patients presenting with ataxia or spastic paraplegia using a probe-based 
customized gene panel, covering >200 genes associated with spinocerebellar 
diseases. We identified six novel and four recurrent PNPLA6 gene variants in 
eight patients (2.7%). Six patients presented an infantile or juvenile onset 
(age <18), and two patients had an adult onset. Cerebellar ataxia was observed 
in seven patients and spastic paraplegia in one patient. Progression of 
cerebellar symptoms was slow in all patients, who retained ambulation even after 
a mean disease duration of 15 years. Brain MRI showed cerebellar atrophy in 6/8 
patients, more pronounced in superior and dorsal vermis lobules (I to VII). 
Additional clinical features included hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (5/8), 
growth hormone deficiency (2/8), peripheral axonal neuropathy (4/8), cognitive 
impairment (3/8), chorioretinal dystrophy (2/8), and bilateral vestibular 
areflexia with a reduced visual vestibule-ocular reflex (1/8). In accordance 
with previous studies, chorioretinal dystrophy was the most frequent presenting 
symptom in early onset patients, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in juvenile onset 
cases, and cerebellar ataxia in adult patients. One patient had an initial 
clinical presentation compatible with Cerebellar Ataxia with Neuropathy and 
Vestibular Areflexia Syndrome (CANVAS), but no pathological expansions in the 
RFC1 gene. In conclusion, patients with PNPLA6 variants present a variable age 
of onset spanning from infancy to adulthood, and each clinical symptom has an 
age-dependent manifestation thus requiring a multi-systemic diagnostic approach. 
The description of patients presenting very late-onset cerebellar ataxia 
suggests that PNPLA6 genetic screening should also be considered in the 
diagnostic workout of adult cerebellar ataxia.

Copyright © 2022 Nanetti, Di Bella, Magri, Fichera, Sarto, Castaldo, Mongelli, 
Baratta, Fenu, Moscatelli, Bonati, Martinuzzi, Mariotti and Taroni.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2021.793547
PMCID: PMC8770815
PMID: 35069422

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.