---
reference_id: "PMID:312016"
title: Felty's syndrome without splenomegaly.
authors:
- Logue GL
- Silberman HR
journal: Am J Med
year: '1979'
doi: 10.1016/0002-9343(79)91188-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Felty's syndrome without splenomegaly.
**Authors:** Logue GL, Silberman HR
**Journal:** Am J Med (1979)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0002-9343(79)91188-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/0002-9343(79)91188-4)

## Content

1. Am J Med. 1979 Apr;66(4):703-6. doi: 10.1016/0002-9343(79)91188-4.

Felty's syndrome without splenomegaly.

Logue GL, Silberman HR.

A woman with chronic rheumatoid arthritis and severe granulocytopenia but 
without splenic enlargement by physical examination or radionuclide scanning was 
studied for granulocyte-bound immunoglobulin G (IgG) and serum antigranulocyte 
antibodies. Prior to splenectomy 73 to 110 X 10(-14) g/cell of IgG were detected 
on the patient's granulocytes, a value in the range (20 to 220 X 10(-14) g) 
found in 16 patients with classic Felty's syndrome. Granulocyte-bound IgG in 21 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis without Felty's syndrome was less than 20 X 
10(-14) g. Following splenectomy, the patient had a partial correction of her 
peripheral granulocyte count, and granulocyte bound IgG was repeated less than 
20 X 10(-14) g/cell. When paraformaldehyde-fixed granulocytes, obtained either 
from normal donors or from the patient after splenectomy, were incubated in the 
patient's serum obtained before splenectomy, more IgG was bound than with 
control serums from patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Similar results were 
obtained when serums from patients with classic Felty's syndrome were incubated 
with paraformaldehyde-fixed granulocytes. Thus, patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis without overt splenic enlargement may have pathophysiologic Felty's 
syndrome, and in vitro studies such as these may be used to define this process.

DOI: 10.1016/0002-9343(79)91188-4
PMID: 312016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]