---
reference_id: "PMID:34396590"
title: Surgical management of the scimitar syndrome.
authors:
- Chowdhury UK
- Anderson RH
- Sankhyan LK
- George N
- Pandey NN
- Chauhan AS
- Arora Y
- Goja S
journal: J Card Surg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/jocs.15857
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical management of the scimitar syndrome.
**Authors:** Chowdhury UK, Anderson RH, Sankhyan LK, George N, Pandey NN, Chauhan AS, Arora Y, Goja S
**Journal:** J Card Surg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jocs.15857](https://doi.org/10.1111/jocs.15857)

## Content

1. J Card Surg. 2021 Oct;36(10):3770-3795. doi: 10.1111/jocs.15857. Epub 2021 Aug
 16.

Surgical management of the scimitar syndrome.

Chowdhury UK(1), Anderson RH(2), Sankhyan LK(3), George N(1), Pandey NN(1), 
Chauhan AS(1), Arora Y(1), Goja S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery, Cardiothoracic Centre, All 
India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(2)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 
UK.
(3)Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery, All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Bilaspur, Himachal Pradesh, India.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: We sought to address the varied anatomical details, the 
diagnostic challenges, associated cardiopulmonary anomalies, the techniques, and 
outcomes of management, including re-interventions of scimitar syndrome.
METHODS: A total of 92 published investigations of scimitar syndrome were 
reviewed. Diagnostic information was provided by clinical presentations, 
radiographic findings, transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography, 
computed-tomographic angiography, magnetic resonance imaging, angiocardiography, 
and ventilation/perfusion scans. These investigations served to elucidate the 
origin, course, and termination of the scimitar vein, the intracardiac anatomy, 
the presence of associated defects, and the patterns of any accompanying 
pulmonary lesions prior to surgical intervention.
RESULTS: Of the patients described, up to four-fifths presented during infancy, 
with cardiac failure, increased pulmonary flow, and pulmonary hypertension. 
Associated cardiac and extracardiac defects, particularly hypoplasia of the 
right lung, are present in up to three-quarters of cases. Overall operative 
mortality has been cited between 4.8% and 5.9%. Mortality was highest in 
patients with preoperative pulmonary hypertension, and those undergoing surgery 
in infancy. Despite timely surgical intervention, post-repair obstruction of the 
scimitar vein, intra-atrial baffle obstruction, or stenosis of the inferior 
caval vein were reported in up to two-thirds of cases. The venous obstruction 
could not be related to any particular surgical technique. On long term 
follow-up, one sixth of patients reported persistent dyspnoea and recurrent 
respiratory infections.
CONCLUSIONS: Any infants presenting with heart failure, right-sided heart, and 
hypoplastic right lung should be evaluated to exclude the syndrome. An increased 
appreciation of variables will contribute to improved surgical management.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/jocs.15857
PMID: 34396590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]