---
reference_id: "PMID:39374801"
title: "Human molecular mechanisms of discogenic low back pain: A scoping review."
authors:
- Chiu AP
- Lesnak J
- Gabriel K
- Price TJ
- Arendt-Nielsen L
- Bobos P
- Curatolo M
journal: J Pain
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2024.104693
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human molecular mechanisms of discogenic low back pain: A scoping review.
**Authors:** Chiu AP, Lesnak J, Gabriel K, Price TJ, Arendt-Nielsen L, Bobos P, Curatolo M
**Journal:** J Pain (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpain.2024.104693](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpain.2024.104693)

## Content

1. J Pain. 2025 Feb;27:104693. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2024.104693. Epub 2024 Oct 5.

Human molecular mechanisms of discogenic low back pain: A scoping review.

Chiu AP(1), Lesnak J(2), Gabriel K(2), Price TJ(2), Arendt-Nielsen L(3), Bobos 
P(4), Curatolo M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, University of Washington 
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA; Clinical Learning, Evidence And Research 
(CLEAR) Center for Musculoskeletal Research, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Center for Advanced Pain Studies, University 
of Texas at Dallas, USA.
(3)Center for Neuroplasticity and Pain (CNAP), SMI, Medical School, Aalborg 
University, Denmark; Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Mech-Sense, 
Clinical Institute, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark; Steno 
Diabetes Center North Denmark, Clinical Institute, Aalborg University Hospital, 
Aalborg, Denmark.
(4)School of Physical Therapy, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada; 
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Western University, London, 
Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, University of Washington 
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA; Clinical Learning, Evidence And Research 
(CLEAR) Center for Musculoskeletal Research, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, USA. Electronic address: curatolo@uw.edu.

The limited understanding of the mechanisms underlying human discogenic low back 
pain (DLBP) has hampered the development of effective treatments. While there is 
much research on disc degeneration, the association between degeneration and 
pain is weak. Therefore, there is an urgent need to identify pain-inducing 
molecular mechanism to facilitate the development of mechanism-specific 
therapeutics. This scoping review aims to determine the current knowledge of 
molecular mechanisms associated with human DLBP. A systematic search on CENTRAL, 
CINAHL, Citation searching, ClinicalTrials.gov, Embase, Google Scholar, MEDLINE, 
PsycINFO, PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, and World Health Organization was 
performed. Studies with human DLBP as diagnosed by discography or imaging that 
analyzed human disc tissues and reported pain-related outcomes were included, 
and those on predominant radicular pain were excluded. The search returned 6012 
studies. Most studies did not collect pain-related outcomes. Those that included 
pain assessment relied on self-report of pain intensity and disability. Six 
studies qualified for data extraction and synthesis. The main molecular 
mechanisms associated with DLBP were the expressions of nociceptive 
neuropeptides and cytokines, particularly TNF-αdue to its strong association 
with pain outcomes. Activation of NF-κB signaling pathway, alterations in 
adrenoceptor expressions, and increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) were 
also associated with DLBP through regulation of pro-inflammatory factors and 
pain-related neuropeptides. Current evidence converges to TNF-α, NF-κB 
signaling, and ROS-induced pro-inflammation. Major weaknesses in the current 
literature are the focus on degeneration without pain phenotyping, and lack of 
association of molecular findings with pain outcomes. PERSPECTIVE: This scoping 
review identified TNF-α, NF-κB signaling, and ROS-induced pro-inflammation as 
relevant mechanisms of human discogenic low back pain. Major weaknesses in the 
current literature are the focus on degeneration without pain phenotyping, and 
lack of association of molecular findings with pain outcomes.

Copyright © 2024 United States Association for the Study of Pain, Inc. Published 
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpain.2024.104693
PMCID: PMC11807758
PMID: 39374801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
certify that there is no conflict of interest with any financial organization 
regarding the material discussed in the manuscript.