---
reference_id: "PMID:32143182"
title: Elevated myocardial SORBS2 and the underlying implications in left ventricular noncompaction cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Li C
- Liu F
- Liu S
- Pan H
- Du H
- Huang J
- Xie Y
- Li Y
- Zhao R
- Wei Y
journal: EBioMedicine
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2020.102695
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- Calcium Signaling
- "Cardiomyopathy, Dilated/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- "Isolated Noncompaction of the Ventricular Myocardium/genetics, metabolism"
- Membrane Proteins/metabolism
- Mice
- Muscle Proteins/metabolism
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism"
- "RNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Tubulin/metabolism
- Up-Regulation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elevated myocardial SORBS2 and the underlying implications in left ventricular noncompaction cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Li C, Liu F, Liu S, Pan H, Du H, Huang J, Xie Y, Li Y, Zhao R, Wei Y
**Journal:** EBioMedicine (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ebiom.2020.102695](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2020.102695)

## Content

1. EBioMedicine. 2020 Mar;53:102695. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2020.102695. Epub 2020 
Mar 3.

Elevated myocardial SORBS2 and the underlying implications in left ventricular 
noncompaction cardiomyopathy.

Li C(1), Liu F(2), Liu S(1), Pan H(3), Du H(1), Huang J(1), Xie Y(1), Li Y(1), 
Zhao R(1), Wei Y(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Fuwai Hospital, National 
Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and 
Peking Union Medical College, 167 Beilishi Road, Beijing 100037, China.
(2)Department of Human Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Institute of Basic 
Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(3)Children's Heart Center, the Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying Children's 
Hospital, Institute of Cardiovascular Development and Translational Medicine, 
Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Fuwai Hospital, National 
Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and 
Peking Union Medical College, 167 Beilishi Road, Beijing 100037, China. 
Electronic address: weiyingjie@fuwaihospital.org.

BACKGROUND: Left ventricular noncompaction cardiomyopathy (LVNC) is a hereditary 
heart disease characterized by an excessive trabecular meshwork of deep 
intertrabecular recesses within the ventricular myocardium. The guidelines for 
management of LVNC patients aim to improve quality of life by preventing cardiac 
heart failure. However, the mechanism underlying LVNC-associated heart failure 
remains poorly understood.
METHODS: Using protein mass spectrometry analysis, we established that Sorbin 
And SH3 Domain Containing 2 (SORBS2) is up-regulated in LVNC hearts without 
changes to structure proteins. We conducted in vivo experiments wherein the 
heart tissues of wild-type mice were injected with an AAV9 vector to overexpress 
SORBS2, followed by analysis using echocardiography, T-tubule analysis and Ca2+ 
imaging to identify functional and morphological changes. In addition, we 
analyzed the function and structure of SORBS2 overexpressing human embryonic 
stem cell (hESC) derived cardiomyocytes (hESC-CM) via immunoblotting, 
immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence, and confocal Ca2+ imaging.
FINDINGS: LVNC myocardial tissues feature strongly elevated expression of 
SORBS2, microtubule densification and redistribution of Junctophilin 2 (JP2). 
SORBS2 interacts with β-tubulin, promoting its polymerization in 293T cells and 
hESC-derived CMs. In vivo, cardiac dysfunction, β-tubulin densification, JP2 
translocation, T-tubule disorganization and Ca2+ handling dysfunction were 
observed in mice overexpressing SORBS2.
INTERPRETATION: We identified a novel mechanism through which SORBS2 interacts 
with β-tubulin and promotes microtubule densification, eventually effecting JP2 
distribution and T-tubule, potentially contributing to heart failure in LVNC 
disease. FUND: This work was supported by a CAMS Initiative for Innovative 
Medicine grant (CAMS-I2M, 2016-I2M-1-015 to Y.J.Wei).

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2020.102695
PMCID: PMC7058526
PMID: 32143182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.