---
reference_id: "PMID:37567036"
title: Dicarboxylic acylcarnitine biomarkers in peroxisome biogenesis disorders.
authors:
- Wangler MF
- Lesko B
- Dahal R
- Jangam S
- Bhadane P
- Wilson TE
- McPheron M
- Miller MJ
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107680
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dicarboxylic acylcarnitine biomarkers in peroxisome biogenesis disorders.
**Authors:** Wangler MF, Lesko B, Dahal R, Jangam S, Bhadane P, Wilson TE, McPheron M, Miller MJ
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107680](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107680)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2023 Nov;140(3):107680. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107680.
Epub  2023 Aug 7.

Dicarboxylic acylcarnitine biomarkers in peroxisome biogenesis disorders.

Wangler MF(1), Lesko B(2), Dahal R(2), Jangam S(1), Bhadane P(1), Wilson TE(3), 
McPheron M(3), Miller MJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, United States of America; Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological 
Research Institute, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, United States 
of America.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University, 
Indianapolis, IN 46202, United States of America.
(3)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, United States of America.
(4)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, United States of America. Electronic address: 
majamill@iu.edu.

The peroxisome is an essential eukaryotic organelle with diverse metabolic 
functions. Inherited peroxisomal disorders are associated with a wide spectrum 
of clinical outcomes and are broadly divided into two classes, those impacting 
peroxisome biogenesis (PBD) and those impacting specific peroxisomal factors. 
Prior studies have indicated a role for acylcarnitine testing in the diagnosis 
of some peroxisomal diseases through the detection of long chain dicarboxylic 
acylcarnitine abnormalities (C16-DC and C18-DC). However, there remains limited 
independent corroboration of these initial findings and acylcarnitine testing 
for peroxisomal diseases has not been widely adopted in clinical laboratories. 
To explore the utility of acylcarnitine testing in the diagnosis of peroxisomal 
disorders we applied a LC-MS/MS acylcarnitine method to study a heterogenous 
clinical sample set (n = 598) that included residual plasma specimens from 
nineteen patients with PBD caused by PEX1 or PEX6 deficiency, ranging in 
severity from lethal neonatal onset to mild late onset forms. Multiple 
dicarboxylic acylcarnitines were significantly elevated in PBD patients 
including medium to long chain (C8-DC to C18-DC) species as well as previously 
undescribed elevations of malonylcarnitine (C3-DC) and very long chain 
dicarboxylic acylcarnitines (C20-DC and C22-DC). The best performing plasma 
acylcarnitine biomarkers, C20-DC and C22-DC, were detected at elevated levels in 
100% and 68% of PBD patients but were rarely elevated in patients that did not 
have a PBD. We extended our analysis to residual newborn screening blood spot 
cards and were able to detect dicarboxylic acylcarnitine abnormalities in a 
newborn with a PBD caused by PEX6 deficiency. Similar to prior studies, we 
failed to detect substantial dicarboxylic acylcarnitine abnormalities in blood 
spot cards from patients with x-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (x-ald) indicating 
that these biomarkers may have utility in quickly narrowing the differential 
diagnosis in patients with a positive newborn screen for x-ald. Overall, our 
study identifies widespread dicarboxylic acylcarnitine abnormalities in patients 
with PBD and highlights key acylcarnitine biomarkers for the detection of this 
class of inherited metabolic disease.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107680
PMCID: PMC10840807
PMID: 37567036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare they have no conflicts of interest.