---
reference_id: "PMID:36920308"
title: Spatial mapping reveals granuloma diversity and histopathological superstructure in human tuberculosis.
authors:
- Sawyer AJ
- Patrick E
- Edwards J
- Wilmott JS
- Fielder T
- Yang Q
- Barber DL
- Ernst JD
- Britton WJ
- Palendira U
- Chen X
- Feng CG
journal: J Exp Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1084/jem.20221392
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spatial mapping reveals granuloma diversity and histopathological superstructure in human tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Sawyer AJ, Patrick E, Edwards J, Wilmott JS, Fielder T, Yang Q, Barber DL, Ernst JD, Britton WJ, Palendira U, Chen X, Feng CG
**Journal:** J Exp Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.20221392](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20221392)

## Content

1. J Exp Med. 2023 Jun 5;220(6):e20221392. doi: 10.1084/jem.20221392. Epub 2023
Mar  15.

Spatial mapping reveals granuloma diversity and histopathological superstructure 
in human tuberculosis.

Sawyer AJ(1)(2)(3), Patrick E(4)(5)(6), Edwards J(1)(7), Wilmott JS(1)(3)(7), 
Fielder T(8), Yang Q(9), Barber DL(10), Ernst JD(11), Britton WJ(2)(12), 
Palendira U(1)(2)(3), Chen X(13), Feng CG(1)(2)(3)(14).

Author information:
(1)School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of 
Sydney , Sydney, Australia.
(2)Centenary Institute, The University of Sydney , Sydney, Australia.
(3)Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney , Sydney, Australia.
(4)School of Mathematics and Statistics, Faculty of Science, The University of 
Sydney , Sydney, Australia.
(5)Centre for Cancer Research, Westmead Institute for Medical Research, The 
University of Sydney , Westmead, Australia.
(6)Sydney Precision Data Science Centre, The University of Sydney , Sydney, 
Australia.
(7)Melanoma Institute Australia, The University of Sydney , Sydney, Australia.
(8)Department of Tissue Pathology and Diagnostic Oncology, Royal Prince Alfred 
Hospital , Camperdown, Australia.
(9)Guangdong Key Lab for Diagnosis and Treatment of Emerging Infectious 
Diseases, Shenzhen, Third People's Hospital, Shenzhen , Shenzhen, China.
(10)Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases , National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(11)Division of Experimental Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
California San Francisco , San Francisco, CA, USA.
(12)Department of Clinical Immunology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital , 
Camperdown, Australia.
(13)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Regional Immunity and Diseases, Department of 
Pathogen Biology, Shenzhen University School of Medicine , Shenzhen, China.
(14)Institute for Infectious Diseases, The University of Sydney , Sydney, 
Australia.

The hallmark of tuberculosis (TB) is the formation of immune cell-enriched 
aggregates called granulomas. While granulomas are pathologically diverse, their 
tissue-wide heterogeneity has not been spatially resolved at the single-cell 
level in human tissues. By spatially mapping individual immune cells in every 
lesion across entire tissue sections, we report that in addition to necrotizing 
granulomas, the human TB lung contains abundant non-necrotizing leukocyte 
aggregates surrounding areas of necrotizing tissue. These cellular lesions were 
more diverse in composition than necrotizing lesions and could be stratified 
into four general classes based on cellular composition and spatial distribution 
of B cells and macrophages. The cellular composition of non-necrotizing 
structures also correlates with their proximity to necrotizing lesions, 
indicating these are foci of distinct immune reactions adjacent to necrotizing 
granulomas. Together, we show that during TB, diseased lung tissue develops a 
histopathological superstructure comprising at least four different types of 
non-necrotizing cellular aggregates organized as satellites of necrotizing 
granulomas.

© 2023 Sawyer et al.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20221392
PMCID: PMC10035589
PMID: 36920308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: J. Edwards reported being currently 
employed by Bristol Myers Squibb, but was not employed at the time the data was 
generated and analyzed. No other disclosures were reported.