---
reference_id: "PMID:26494589"
title: Systemic lupus erythematosus flare triggered by a spider bite.
authors:
- Martín Nares E
- López Iñiguez A
- Ontiveros Mercado H
journal: Joint Bone Spine
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2015.04.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic lupus erythematosus flare triggered by a spider bite.
**Authors:** Martín Nares E, López Iñiguez A, Ontiveros Mercado H
**Journal:** Joint Bone Spine (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbspin.2015.04.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbspin.2015.04.011)

## Content

1. Joint Bone Spine. 2016 Jan;83(1):85-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2015.04.011. Epub
 2015 Oct 19.

Systemic lupus erythematosus flare triggered by a spider bite.

Martín Nares E(1), López Iñiguez A(2), Ontiveros Mercado H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Civil of Guadalajara "Fray Antonio 
Alcalde", Hospital 278, 44280 Guadalajara, Mexico. Electronic address: 
eduardomartinnares@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Civil of Guadalajara "Fray Antonio 
Alcalde", Hospital 278, 44280 Guadalajara, Mexico.

Systemic lupus erythematosus is a chronic autoimmune disease with a relapsing 
and remitting course characterized by disease flares. Flares are a major cause 
of hospitalization, morbidity and mortality in patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus. Some triggers for these exacerbations have been identified, 
including infections, vaccines, pregnancy, environmental factors such as 
weather, stress and drugs. We report a patient who presented with a lupus flare 
with predominantly mucocutaneous, serosal and cardiac involvement after being 
bitten by a spider and we present the possible mechanisms by which the venom 
elicited such a reaction. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first such 
case reported in the literature.

Copyright © 2015 Société française de rhumatologie. Published by Elsevier SAS. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2015.04.011
PMID: 26494589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]