---
reference_id: "PMID:30696238"
title: "Pharmacological and Neuromodulatory Treatments for Panic Disorder: Clinical Trials from 2010 to 2018."
authors:
- Zugliani MM
- Cabo MC
- Nardi AE
- Perna G
- Freire RC
journal: Psychiatry Investig
year: '2019'
doi: 10.30773/pi.2018.12.21.1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pharmacological and Neuromodulatory Treatments for Panic Disorder: Clinical Trials from 2010 to 2018.
**Authors:** Zugliani MM, Cabo MC, Nardi AE, Perna G, Freire RC
**Journal:** Psychiatry Investig (2019)
**DOI:** [10.30773/pi.2018.12.21.1](https://doi.org/10.30773/pi.2018.12.21.1)

## Content

1. Psychiatry Investig. 2019 Jan;16(1):50-58. doi: 10.30773/pi.2018.12.21.1. Epub
 2019 Jan 25.

Pharmacological and Neuromodulatory Treatments for Panic Disorder: Clinical 
Trials from 2010 to 2018.

Zugliani MM(1), Cabo MC(1), Nardi AE(1), Perna G(2)(3), Freire RC(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Panic and Respiration, Institute of Psychiatry, Federal 
University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Rozzano, Milan, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Villa San Benedetto Menni, Hermanas 
Hospitalarias, FoRiPsi, Albese con Cassano, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: Treatment for panic disorder (PD) have evolved, although there is 
still a strong unmet need for more effective and tolerable options. The present 
study summarizes and discusses recent evidence regarding the pharmacological and 
neuromodulatory treatment of PD.
METHODS: MEDLINE, Cochrane Library, PsycINFO and Thomson Reuters's Web of 
Science were searched for clinical trials published between 2010 and 2018. We 
included all prospective experimental studies including randomized controlled 
trials (RCT) and other clinical trials with more than 10 patients.
RESULTS: Only 11 articles met the inclusion criteria, including 4 RCT, 3 open 
clinical trials and 5 comparative clinical trials. RCT demonstrated efficacy of 
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) in only one of two trials. Neither 
pindolol nor d-fenfluramine were effective in blocking flumazenil-induced panic 
attacks. Augmentation with quetiapine was not superior to placebo. Open trials 
indicated that escitalopram, vortioxetine and TMS may be effective. Comparative 
trials did not demonstrate superiority from any drug, but confirmed 
tranylcypromine, paroxetine, clonazepam and alprazolam as effective options.
CONCLUSION: The current study confirmed the efficacy of tranylcypromine, 
paroxetine, clonazepam, alprazolam and escitalopram. Vortioxetine and TMS, with 
duration of 4 or more weeks, also seems to be effective. Quetiapine, pindolol 
and d-fenfluramine were not considered effective compounds.

DOI: 10.30773/pi.2018.12.21.1
PMCID: PMC6354041
PMID: 30696238