---
reference_id: "PMID:24663488"
title: Admixture fine-mapping in African Americans implicates XAF1 as a possible sarcoidosis risk gene.
authors:
- Levin AM
- Iannuzzi MC
- Montgomery CG
- Trudeau S
- Datta I
- Adrianto I
- Chitale DA
- McKeigue P
- Rybicki BA
journal: PLoS One
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092646
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Black or African American/genetics
- Alleles
- Apoptosis Regulatory Proteins
- Chromosome Mapping
- Computational Biology
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Quantitative Trait Loci/genetics
- Radiography
- "Sarcoidosis/diagnostic imaging, ethnology, genetics"
- X-Linked Inhibitor of Apoptosis Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Admixture fine-mapping in African Americans implicates XAF1 as a possible sarcoidosis risk gene.
**Authors:** Levin AM, Iannuzzi MC, Montgomery CG, Trudeau S, Datta I, Adrianto I, Chitale DA, McKeigue P, Rybicki BA
**Journal:** PLoS One (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0092646](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0092646)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 24;9(3):e92646. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092646.
eCollection 2014.

Admixture fine-mapping in African Americans implicates XAF1 as a possible
sarcoidosis risk gene.

Levin AM(1), Iannuzzi MC(2), Montgomery CG(3), Trudeau S(1), Datta I(1),
Adrianto I(3), Chitale DA(4), McKeigue P(5), Rybicki BA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health Sciences, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit,
Michigan, United States of America.
(2)Department of Medicine, Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York,
United States of America.
(3)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America.
(4)Department of Pathology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, Michigan, United
States of America.
(5)Public Health Sciences Section, University of Edinburgh Medical School,
Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom.

Sarcoidosis is a complex, multi-organ granulomatous disease with a likely
genetic component. West African ancestry confers a higher risk for sarcoidosis
than European ancestry. Admixture mapping provides the most direct method to
locate genes that underlie such ethnic variation in disease risk. We sought to
identify genetic risk variants within four previously-identified
ancestry-associated regions-6p24.3-p12.1, 17p13.3-13.1, 2p13.3-q12.1, and
6q23.3-q25.2-in a sample of 2,727 African Americans. We used logistic regression
fit by generalized estimating equations and the MIX score statistic to determine
which variants within ancestry-associated regions were associated with risk and
responsible for the admixture signal. Fine mapping was performed by imputation,
based on a previous genome-wide association study; significant variants were
validated by direct genotyping. Within the 6p24.3-p12.1 locus, the most
significant ancestry-adjusted SNP was rs74318745 (p = 9.4*10-11), an intronic
SNP within the HLA-DRA gene that did not solely explain the admixture signal,
indicating the presence of more than a single risk variant within this
well-established sarcoidosis risk region. The locus on chromosome 17p13.3-13.1
revealed a novel sarcoidosis risk SNP, rs6502976 (p = 9.5*10-6), within intron 5
of the gene X-linked Inhibitor of Apoptosis Associated Factor 1 (XAF1) that
accounted for the majority of the admixture linkage signal. Immunohistochemical
expression studies demonstrated lack of expression of XAF1 and a corresponding
high level of expression of its downstream target, X-linked Inhibitor of
Apoptosis (XIAP) in sarcoidosis granulomas. In conclusion, ancestry and
association fine mapping revealed a novel sarcoidosis susceptibility gene, XAF1,
which has not been identified by previous genome-wide association studies. Based
on the known biology of the XIAP/XAF1 apoptosis pathway and the differential
expression patterns of XAF1 and XIAP in sarcoidosis granulomas, we suggest that
this pathway may play a role in the maintenance of sarcoidosis granulomas.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092646
PMCID: PMC3963923
PMID: 24663488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
