---
reference_id: "PMID:19668335"
title: Small deletions of SATB2 cause some of the clinical features of the 2q33.1 microdeletion syndrome.
authors:
- Rosenfeld JA
- Ballif BC
- Lucas A
- Spence EJ
- Powell C
- Aylsworth AS
- Torchia BA
- Shaffer LG
journal: PLoS One
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006568
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Artificial, Bacterial"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2"
- Female
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- Matrix Attachment Region Binding Proteins/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Small deletions of SATB2 cause some of the clinical features of the 2q33.1 microdeletion syndrome.
**Authors:** Rosenfeld JA, Ballif BC, Lucas A, Spence EJ, Powell C, Aylsworth AS, Torchia BA, Shaffer LG
**Journal:** PLoS One (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0006568](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0006568)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2009 Aug 10;4(8):e6568. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006568.

Small deletions of SATB2 cause some of the clinical features of the 2q33.1 
microdeletion syndrome.

Rosenfeld JA(1), Ballif BC, Lucas A, Spence EJ, Powell C, Aylsworth AS, Torchia 
BA, Shaffer LG.

Author information:
(1)Signature Genomic Laboratories LLC, Spokane, WA, USA.

Recurrent deletions of 2q32q33 have recently been reported as a new 
microdeletion syndrome. Clinical features of this syndrome include severe mental 
retardation, growth retardation, dysmorphic features, thin and sparse hair, 
feeding difficulties and cleft or high palate. The commonly deleted region 
contains at least seven genes. Haploinsufficiency of one of these genes, SATB2, 
a DNA-binding protein that regulates gene expression, has been implicated as 
causative in the cleft or high palate of individuals with 2q32q33 microdeletion 
syndrome. In this study we describe three individuals with smaller 
microdeletions of this region, within 2q33.1. The deletions ranged in size from 
173.1 kb to 185.2 kb and spanned part of SATB2. Review of clinical records 
showed similar clinical features among these individuals, including severe 
developmental delay and tooth abnormalities. Two of the individuals had 
behavioral problems. Only one of the subjects presented here had a cleft palate, 
suggesting reduced penetrance for this feature. Our results suggest that 
deletion of SATB2 is responsible for several of the clinical features associated 
with 2q32q33 microdeletion syndrome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006568
PMCID: PMC2719055
PMID: 19668335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: L.G. Shaffer sits on the 
Members' Board of, owns shares in, and is an employee of Signature Genomic 
Laboratories, LLC. J.A. Rosenfeld, B.C. Ballif and B.A. Torchia are employees of 
Signature Genomic Laboratories, LLC.