---
reference_id: "PMID:38235043"
title: Expanding the Clinical Spectrum of UBTF-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder.
authors:
- Pietra A
- Palombo F
- Giannotta M
- Maffei M
- Fiorini C
- Costa R
- Cenacchi G
- Carelli V
- Cordelli DM
- Pini A
- Garone C
journal: Neurol Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200098
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the Clinical Spectrum of UBTF-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder.
**Authors:** Pietra A, Palombo F, Giannotta M, Maffei M, Fiorini C, Costa R, Cenacchi G, Carelli V, Cordelli DM, Pini A, Garone C
**Journal:** Neurol Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXG.0000000000200098](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXG.0000000000200098)

## Content

1. Neurol Genet. 2023 Nov 14;9(6):e200098. doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200098. 
eCollection 2023 Dec.

Expanding the Clinical Spectrum of UBTF-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder.

Pietra A(1), Palombo F(1), Giannotta M(1), Maffei M(1), Fiorini C(1), Costa 
R(1), Cenacchi G(1), Carelli V(1), Cordelli DM(1), Pini A(1), Garone C(1).

Author information:
(1)From the UO Genetica Medica (Andrea Pietra), IRCCS Azienda 
Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna; Department of Medical and Surgical 
Sciences (Andrea Pietra, C.G.), Alma Mater Studiorum University of Bologna; 
IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna (F.P.), Programma di 
Neurogenetica; IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna (M.G., 
Antonella Pini, C.G.), UOC Neuropsichiatria dell'età Pediatrica; IRCCS Istituto 
delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna (M.M., C.F.), Programma di neuroradiologia 
con tecniche ad elevata complessità; Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor 
Sciences (R.C., G.C., V.C., D.M.C.), Alma Mater Studiorum University of Bologna; 
and UO Anatomia (G.C.), Istologia Patologica, IRCCS Azienda 
Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: UBTF1 gene encodes for Upstream Binding Transcription Factor, an 
essential protein for RNA metabolism. A recurrent de novo variant (c.628G>A; 
p.Glu210Lys) has recently been associated with a childhood-onset 
neurodegenerative disorder characterized by motor and language regression, 
ataxia, dystonia, and acquired microcephaly. In this study, we report the 
clinical, metabolic, molecular genetics and neuroimaging findings and 
histologic, histochemical, and electron microscopy studies in muscle samples of 
2 patients from unrelated families with a neurodevelopmental disorder.
METHODS: Data were retrospectively analyzed by medical charts revision.
RESULTS: Patient 1, a 16-year-old boy, presented a childhood-onset slowly 
progressive neurodegenerative disorder mainly affecting language skills, 
behavior, and motor coordination. Patient 2, a 22-year-old woman, presented with 
a severe and rapidly progressive disease with dystonic tetra paresis, acquired 
microcephaly, and severe cognitive deficit complicated by pseudobulbar syndrome 
characterized by involuntary and uncontrollable outbursts of laughing, dysphagia 
requiring tube feeding, and nocturnal hypoventilation treated with noninvasive 
ventilation. Both patients carried the recurrent previously described UBTF1 de 
novo variant and had signs of mitochondrial dysfunction at muscle biopsy. The 
metabolic profile of patient 2 also revealed a decrease in CSF biopterin.
DISCUSSION: These case reports add new insights to the UBTF1 disease spectrum 
instrumental to improving the diagnostic rate in neurodevelopmental disorders.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200098
PMCID: PMC10683853
PMID: 38235043

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no relevant disclosures. Go 
to Neurology.org/NG for full disclosures.