---
reference_id: "PMID:15543571"
title: Epstein-Barr viral load as a marker of lymphoma in AIDS patients.
authors:
- Fan H
- Kim SC
- Chima CO
- Israel BF
- Lawless KM
- Eagan PA
- Elmore S
- Moore DT
- Schichman SA
- Swinnen LJ
- Gulley ML
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.20238
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epstein-Barr viral load as a marker of lymphoma in AIDS patients.
**Authors:** Fan H, Kim SC, Chima CO, Israel BF, Lawless KM, Eagan PA, Elmore S, Moore DT, Schichman SA, Swinnen LJ, Gulley ML
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.20238](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.20238)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2005 Jan;75(1):59-69. doi: 10.1002/jmv.20238.

Epstein-Barr viral load as a marker of lymphoma in AIDS patients.

Fan H(1), Kim SC, Chima CO, Israel BF, Lawless KM, Eagan PA, Elmore S, Moore DT, 
Schichman SA, Swinnen LJ, Gulley ML.

Author information:
(1)University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and the Lineberger Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is implicated in the pathogenesis of acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) lymphoma, and viral DNA is present within the 
malignant cells in about half of affected patients. We examined the extent to 
which EBV viral load is elevated in the plasma of AIDS lymphoma patients 
compared to AIDS patients with opportunistic infections. Sixty-one AIDS patients 
were studied including 35 with lymphoma (24 non-Hodgkin, six Hodgkin, and five 
brain lymphoma) and 26 with various opportunistic infections. In situ 
hybridization revealed EBV encoded RNA (EBER) expression in the malignant cells 
of 17/28 AIDS lymphomas (61%). In 232 serial plasma samples from 35 lymphoma 
patients and in 128 samples from AIDS controls, EBV viral load was assayed by 
quantitative-polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) using a TaqMan probe targeting 
the BamH1W sequence. EBV was detected in plasma from all 17 EBER-positive AIDS 
lymphoma patients, with viral loads ranging from 34 to 1,500,000 copies per ml 
(median 3,210). Viral load usually fell rapidly upon initiation of lymphoma 
therapy and remained undetectable except in two patients with persistent tumor. 
In 11 AIDS patients, whose lymphoma lacked EBER expression, and in 26 control 
patients without lymphoma, levels of EBV in plasma were usually low or 
undetectable (range 0-1,995 and 0-2,409, median 0 and 0, respectively). There 
was no association between EBV viral load and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
load or CD4 count. In conclusion, EBV viral load shows promise as a tool to 
assist in diagnosis and management of EBV-related lymphoma patients.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.20238
PMID: 15543571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]