---
reference_id: "PMID:18753193"
title: "Primary central nervous system vasculitis: comparison of patients with and without cerebral amyloid angiopathy."
authors:
- Salvarani C
- Brown RD Jr
- Calamia KT
- Christianson TJ
- Huston J 3rd
- Meschia JF
- Giannini C
- Miller DV
- Hunder GG
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/ken328
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/analysis
- Brain/pathology
- Brain Chemistry
- "Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, pathology"
- Cerebral Angiography
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Gadolinium
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prednisone/therapeutic use
- Radiopharmaceuticals
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary central nervous system vasculitis: comparison of patients with and without cerebral amyloid angiopathy.
**Authors:** Salvarani C, Brown RD Jr, Calamia KT, Christianson TJ, Huston J 3rd, Meschia JF, Giannini C, Miller DV, Hunder GG
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/ken328](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/ken328)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2008 Nov;47(11):1671-7. doi:
10.1093/rheumatology/ken328.  Epub 2008 Aug 27.

Primary central nervous system vasculitis: comparison of patients with and 
without cerebral amyloid angiopathy.

Salvarani C(1), Brown RD Jr, Calamia KT, Christianson TJ, Huston J 3rd, Meschia 
JF, Giannini C, Miller DV, Hunder GG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To describe the clinical features and outcomes of patients with 
primary central nervous system vasculitis (PCNSV) and cerebral amyloid 
angiopathy (CAA) from a large cohort of consecutive patients with PCNSV treated 
at a single institution.
METHODS: We identified 101 consecutive patients with PCNSV admitted between 
January 1983 and December 2003. PCNSV diagnoses were based on findings from a 
central nervous system (CNS) biopsy (n = 31) and conventional angiography (n = 
70). CNS tissue specimens from 49 cases were examined histologically, and 49 
were stained for amyloid deposits. Those with vascular amyloid deposits (CAA) 
were compared with those without histological evidence of amyloid deposition.
RESULTS: Eight cases (26%) with CNS biopsy specimens positive for PCNSV also 
showed findings of CAA. Compared with patients with PCNSV only, these patients 
were older at diagnosis, predominantly male, had a more acute onset, a higher 
frequency of cognitive dysfunction and showed prominent gadolinium-enhanced 
leptomeningeal lesions with MRI. Histologically, all had a granulomatous 
vascular inflammatory pattern. Six patients responded promptly to therapy. 
Outcomes at last follow-up were similar in the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: PCNSV with CAA appears to form a clinical subset of PCNSV. The 
vasculitis influences the clinical findings to a greater degree than the 
presence of amyloid deposits in the vessels.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/ken328
PMID: 18753193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]