---
reference_id: "PMID:34634625"
title: Meta-analysis of effectiveness of steroid-sparing attack prevention in MOG-IgG-associated disorder.
authors:
- Thakolwiboon S
- Zhao-Fleming H
- Karukote A
- Mao-Draayer Y
- Flanagan EP
- Avila M
journal: Mult Scler Relat Disord
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2021.103310
keywords:
- Azathioprine
- Child
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous"
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Neuromyelitis Optica
- Rituximab
- Steroids
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meta-analysis of effectiveness of steroid-sparing attack prevention in MOG-IgG-associated disorder.
**Authors:** Thakolwiboon S, Zhao-Fleming H, Karukote A, Mao-Draayer Y, Flanagan EP, Avila M
**Journal:** Mult Scler Relat Disord (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.msard.2021.103310](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msard.2021.103310)

## Content

1. Mult Scler Relat Disord. 2021 Nov;56:103310. doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2021.103310.
 Epub 2021 Oct 4.

Meta-analysis of effectiveness of steroid-sparing attack prevention in
MOG-IgG-associated disorder.

Thakolwiboon S(1), Zhao-Fleming H(2), Karukote A(3), Mao-Draayer Y(4), Flanagan
EP(2), Avila M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center,
Lubbock TX, United States; Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine,
Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United States.
(3)Department of Neurology, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center,
Lubbock TX, United States.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, United States.
(5)Department of Neurology, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center,
Lubbock TX, United States. Electronic address: mirla.avila@ttuhsc.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To estimate the efficacy of the commonly used long-term
immunotherapies in myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein IgG associated disorder
(MOGAD) METHOD: A comprehensive search of the databases including
PubMed/MEDLINE, EMBASE, and Cochrane database was performed for all studies that
assessed the efficacy of azathioprine (AZA), mycophenolate mofetil (MMF),
rituximab (RTX), and maintenance intravenous immunoglobulin (mIVIG) in MOGAD.
The random-effect model is used to estimate the standard mean difference (SMD)
of annualized relapse rate (ARR) and expanded disability status scale (EDSS),
mean ARR, probabilities of relapse and worsening EDSS during treatment.
RESULTS: The initial search identified 714 articles, and 21 satisfied
eligibility criteria. All immunotherapies significantly reduced ARR in both
pediatric and adult populations. Relapse probabilities and pooled mean ARR (SE:
standard error) during therapies were as follow: AZA 53.1% [95%CI 37.4% to
68.2%; ARR 0.291 (0.134)], MMF 38.5% [95%CI 19.4% to 62.0%; ARR 0.836 (0.176)],
RTX 48.9% [95%CI 37.8% to 60.2%; ARR 0.629(0.162)], and mIVIG 25.3% [95%CI 14.0%
to 41.3%; ARR 0.081 (0.058)]. Only RTX significantly improved EDSS, SMD -0.499
(95%CI -0.996 to -0.003). The proportion of worsening EDSS with immunotherapies
were 20.7% (95%CI 8.8% to 41.6%), 8.1% (95%CI 1.1% to 41.2%), and 10.8% (95%CI
3.8% to 26.8%) for AZA, MMF, and RTX, respectively.
CONCLUSION: These commonly used immunotherapies significantly reduced ARR in
MOGAD. Only RTX had a significant benefit in EDSS improvement. However, a
substantial portion of patients continued to relapse with treatment. Randomized
controlled studies are needed to verify these findings and perform head-to-head
comparisons among these treatment options.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msard.2021.103310
PMID: 34634625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
