---
reference_id: PMID:25630876
title: Adaptation and remodelling of the pulmonary circulation in pulmonary hypertension.
authors:
- Vaillancourt M
- Ruffenach G
- Meloche J
- Bonnet S
journal: Can J Cardiol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2014.10.023
keywords:
- "Adaptation, Physiological/physiology"
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/physiopathology"
- Pulmonary Artery/physiopathology
- Pulmonary Circulation/physiology
- Pulmonary Wedge Pressure
- Vascular Remodeling/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adaptation and remodelling of the pulmonary circulation in pulmonary hypertension.
**Authors:** Vaillancourt M, Ruffenach G, Meloche J, Bonnet S
**Journal:** Can J Cardiol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cjca.2014.10.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cjca.2014.10.023)

## Content

1. Can J Cardiol. 2015 Apr;31(4):407-15. doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2014.10.023. Epub
2014  Oct 23.

Adaptation and remodelling of the pulmonary circulation in pulmonary 
hypertension.

Vaillancourt M(1), Ruffenach G(1), Meloche J(2), Bonnet S(3).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Hypertension Research Group of The Quebec Heart And Lung Institute 
Research Centre, Québec City, Québec, Canada.
(2)Pulmonary Hypertension Research Group of The Quebec Heart And Lung Institute 
Research Centre, Québec City, Québec, Canada. Electronic address: 
jolyane.meloche@criucpq.ulaval.ca.
(3)Pulmonary Hypertension Research Group of The Quebec Heart And Lung Institute 
Research Centre, Québec City, Québec, Canada. Electronic address: 
sebastien.bonnet@criucpq.ulaval.ca.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is characterized by remodelling of 
pulmonary arteries caused by a proliferation/apoptosis imbalance within the 
vascular wall. This pathological phenotype seems to be triggered by different 
environmental stress and injury events such as increased inflammation, DNA 
damage, and epigenetic deregulation. It appears that one of the first hit to 
occur is endothelial cells (ECs) injury and apoptosis, which leads to paracrine 
signalling to other ECs, pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (PASMCs), and 
fibroblasts. These signals promote a phenotypic change of surviving ECs by 
disturbing different signalling pathways leading to sustained vasoconstriction, 
proproliferative and antiapoptotic phenotype, deregulated angiogenesis, and 
formation of plexiform lesions. EC signalling also recruits proinflammatory 
cells, leading to pulmonary infiltration of lymphocytes, macrophages, and 
dendritic cells, sustaining the inflammatory environment and autoimmune 
response. Finally, EC signalling promotes proliferative and antiapoptotic 
PAH-PASMC phenotypes, which acquire migratory capacities, resulting in increased 
vascular wall thickness and muscularization of small pulmonary arterioles. 
Adaptation and remodelling of pulmonary circulation also involves epigenetic 
components, such as microRNA deregulation, DNA methylation, and histone 
modification. This review will focus on the different cellular and epigenetic 
aspects including EC stress response, molecular mechanisms contributing to 
PAH-PASMC and PAEC proliferation and resistance to apoptosis, as well as 
epigenetic control involved in adaptation and remodelling of the pulmonary 
circulation in PAH.

Copyright © 2015 Canadian Cardiovascular Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cjca.2014.10.023
PMID: 25630876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]