---
reference_id: "PMID:22102186"
title: "Von Willebrand disease: local diagnosis and management of a globally distributed bleeding disorder."
authors:
- Favaloro EJ
journal: Semin Thromb Hemost
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1281028
keywords:
- Antifibrinolytic Agents/therapeutic use
- Deamino Arginine Vasopressin/therapeutic use
- Developing Countries
- Global Health
- Hemostatics/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "von Willebrand Diseases/classification, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- von Willebrand Factor/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Von Willebrand disease: local diagnosis and management of a globally distributed bleeding disorder.
**Authors:** Favaloro EJ
**Journal:** Semin Thromb Hemost (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0031-1281028](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0031-1281028)

## Content

1. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2011 Jul;37(5):440-55. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1281028. Epub 
2011 Nov 18.

Von Willebrand disease: local diagnosis and management of a globally distributed 
bleeding disorder.

Favaloro EJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology, Institute of Clinical Pathology and Medical 
Research, Westmead Hospital, NSW, Australia. 
emmanuel.favaloro@swahs.health.nsw.gov.au

von Willebrand disease (VWD) is the most common inherited bleeding disorder and 
arises from deficiencies and/or defects in the plasma protein von Willebrand 
factor (VWF). The current report overviews the diagnosis and management of VWD 
as reflected by differential processes applied within centers around the world. 
The prevalence of VWD, as well as the frequency of different VWD types, is also 
reported. VWD prevalence data varies according to methodology used, with 
epidemiological/population screening estimates approximating 1% of the 
population (or 10,000 cases per million population), several orders of magnitude 
higher than estimates from bleeding disorders registry data or regional/center 
analysis (which instead range from <1 to ~450 cases per million population). 
Frequency of different VWD types also varies according to source and analysis, 
with type 1 VWD identified as the clear dominant type in most developed 
countries (ranging from 40% to 90% of all VWD cases), whereas type 3 VWD 
predominates in developing countries such as India and Iran. The frequency of 
qualitative (i.e., type 2) VWD also varies considerably among different reports, 
ranging from 3% to >50% of all VWD cases, as does the frequency of specific 
qualitative VWD types (i.e., 2A, 2B, 2M, and 2N). Although type 2A VWD is 
considered the most common form of type 2 VWD, in some reports workers consider 
type 2M VWD to be as, or more, common. Although not considered to be a "true" 
VWD, given its platelet origin, platelet-type VWD is only rarely identified. 
Finally, management of VWD also differs according to geographic region. Most 
developed countries use standard therapy, employing desmopressin (DDAVP) 
wherever possible, factor concentrate in other situations, and antifibrinolytic 
therapy as required. In contrast, the relative high cost and unavailability of 
factor concentrates in developing countries, and sometimes the unavailability of 
DDAVP, requires different management strategies to be applied.

© Thieme Medical Publishers.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0031-1281028
PMID: 22102186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]