---
reference_id: "PMID:18832177"
title: Dysfunction in ankyrin-B-dependent ion channel and transporter targeting causes human sinus node disease.
authors:
- Le Scouarnec S
- Bhasin N
- Vieyres C
- Hund TJ
- Cunha SR
- Koval O
- Marionneau C
- Chen B
- Wu Y
- Demolombe S
- Song LS
- Le Marec H
- Probst V
- Schott JJ
- Anderson ME
- Mohler PJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0805500105
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- "Ankyrins/genetics, physiology"
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Calcium/metabolism
- Heart Conduction System/physiopathology
- Humans
- Ion Channels/metabolism
- Membrane Transport Proteins/metabolism
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Sinoatrial Node/metabolism, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dysfunction in ankyrin-B-dependent ion channel and transporter targeting causes human sinus node disease.
**Authors:** Le Scouarnec S, Bhasin N, Vieyres C, Hund TJ, Cunha SR, Koval O, Marionneau C, Chen B, Wu Y, Demolombe S, Song LS, Le Marec H, Probst V, Schott JJ, Anderson ME, Mohler PJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0805500105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0805500105)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Oct 7;105(40):15617-22. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0805500105. Epub 2008 Oct 1.

Dysfunction in ankyrin-B-dependent ion channel and transporter targeting causes
human sinus node disease.

Le Scouarnec S(1), Bhasin N, Vieyres C, Hund TJ, Cunha SR, Koval O, Marionneau
C, Chen B, Wu Y, Demolombe S, Song LS, Le Marec H, Probst V, Schott JJ, Anderson
ME, Mohler PJ.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale, UMR 915, F-44000
Nantes, France.

The identification of nearly a dozen ion channel genes involved in the genesis
of human atrial and ventricular arrhythmias has been critical for the diagnosis
and treatment of fatal cardiovascular diseases. In contrast, very little is
known about the genetic and molecular mechanisms underlying human sinus node
dysfunction (SND). Here, we report a genetic and molecular mechanism for human
SND. We mapped two families with highly penetrant and severe SND to the human
ANK2 (ankyrin-B/AnkB) locus. Mice heterozygous for AnkB phenocopy human SND
displayed severe bradycardia and rate variability. AnkB is essential for normal
membrane organization of sinoatrial node cell channels and transporters, and
AnkB is required for physiological cardiac pacing. Finally, dysfunction in
AnkB-based trafficking pathways causes abnormal sinoatrial node (SAN) electrical
activity and SND. Together, our findings associate abnormal channel targeting
with human SND and highlight the critical role of local membrane organization
for sinoatrial node excitability.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0805500105
PMCID: PMC2563133
PMID: 18832177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
