---
reference_id: "PMID:29940160"
title: Myelinated axons fail to develop properly in a genetically authentic mouse model of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2E.
authors:
- Lancaster E
- Li J
- Hanania T
- Liem R
- Scheideler MA
- Scherer SS
journal: Exp Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2018.06.010
keywords:
- Animals
- "Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Intermediate Filaments/pathology
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Mutation
- "Nerve Fibers, Myelinated/pathology"
- Neurofilament Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myelinated axons fail to develop properly in a genetically authentic mouse model of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2E.
**Authors:** Lancaster E, Li J, Hanania T, Liem R, Scheideler MA, Scherer SS
**Journal:** Exp Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.expneurol.2018.06.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2018.06.010)

## Content

1. Exp Neurol. 2018 Oct;308:13-25. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2018.06.010. Epub
2018  Jun 22.

Myelinated axons fail to develop properly in a genetically authentic mouse model 
of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2E.

Lancaster E(1), Li J(1), Hanania T(2), Liem R(3), Scheideler MA(4), Scherer 
SS(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States.
(2)Psychogenics Inc 215 College Road Paramus, NJ 07652, United States.
(3)Department of Pathology, Columbia University College of Physicians & 
Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, United States.
(4)HumanFirst Therapeutics LLC, Silver Spring, MD 20910, United States.
(5)Department of Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States. Electronic address: 
sscherer@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

We have analyzed a mouse model of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 2E (CMT2E) 
harboring a heterozygous p.Asn98Ser (p.N98S) Nefl mutation, whose human 
counterpart results in a severe, early-onset neuropathy. Behavioral, 
electrophysiological, and pathological analyses were done on separate cohorts of 
NeflN98S/+ mutant mice and their wild type Nefl+/+ littermates between 8 and 
48 weeks of age. The motor performance of NeflN98S/+ mice, as evidenced by 
altered balance and gait measures, was impaired at every age examined (from 6 to 
25 weeks of age). At all times examined, myelinated axons were smaller and 
contained markedly fewer neurofilaments in NeflN98S/+ mice, in all examined 
aspects of the PNS, from the nerve roots to the distal ends of the sciatic and 
caudal nerves. Similarly, the myelinated axons in the various tracts of the 
spinal cord and in the optic nerves were smaller and contained fewer 
neurofilaments in mutant mice. The myelinated axons in both the PNS and the CNS 
of mutant mice had relatively thicker myelin sheaths. The amplitude and the 
nerve conduction velocity of the caudal nerves were reduced in proportion with 
the diminished sizes of myelinated axons. Conspicuous aggregations of 
neurofilaments were only seen in primary sensory and motor neurons, and were 
largely confined to the cell bodies and proximal axons. There was evidence of 
axonal degeneration and regeneration of myelinated axons, mostly in distal 
nerves. In summary, the p.N98S mutation causes a profound reduction of 
neurofilaments in the myelinated axons of the PNS and CNS, resulting in 
substantially reduced axonal diameters, particularly of large myelinated axons, 
and distal axon loss in the PNS.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2018.06.010
PMID: 29940160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]