---
reference_id: "PMID:10570908"
title: Molecular characterization of galactokinase deficiency in Japanese patients.
authors:
- Asada M
- Okano Y
- Imamura T
- Suyama I
- Hase Y
- Isshiki G
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1007/s100380050182
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Base Sequence
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Galactokinase/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Galactosemias/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Japan
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular characterization of galactokinase deficiency in Japanese patients.
**Authors:** Asada M, Okano Y, Imamura T, Suyama I, Hase Y, Isshiki G
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s100380050182](https://doi.org/10.1007/s100380050182)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 1999;44(6):377-82. doi: 10.1007/s100380050182.

Molecular characterization of galactokinase deficiency in Japanese patients.

Asada M(1), Okano Y, Imamura T, Suyama I, Hase Y, Isshiki G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka City University Medical School, Japan.

Galactokinase (GALK) deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder, which causes 
cataract formation in children not maintained on a lactose-free diet. We 
characterized the human GALK gene by screening a Japanese genomic DNA phage 
library, and found that several nucleotides in the 5'-untranslated region and 
introns 1,2, and 5 in our GALK genomic analysis differed from published data. A 
20-bp tandem repeat was found in three places in intron 5, which were considered 
insertion sequences. We identified five novel mutations in seven unrelated 
Japanese patients with GALK deficiency. There were three missense mutations and 
two deletions. All three missense mutations (R256W, T344M, and G349S) occurred 
at CpG dinucleotides, and the T344M and G349S mutations occurred in the 
conserved region. The three missense mutations led to a drastic reduction in 
GALK activity when individual mutant cDNAs were expressed in a mammalian cell 
system. These findings indicated that these missense mutations caused GALK 
deficiency. The two deletions, of 410delG and 509-510delGT, occurred at the 
nucleotide repeats GGGGGG and GTGTGT, respectively, and resulted in in-frame 
nonsense codons at amino acids 163 and 201. These mutations arose by slipped 
strand mispairing. All five mutations occurred at hot spots in the CpG 
dinucleotide for missense mutations and in short direct repeats for deletions. 
These five mutations in Japanese have not yet been identified in Caucasians. We 
speculate that the origin of GALK mutations in Japanese is different from that 
in Caucasians.

DOI: 10.1007/s100380050182
PMID: 10570908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]