---
reference_id: "PMID:28087720"
title: A liminal stage after predictive testing for Huntington disease.
authors:
- Gargiulo M
- Tezenas du Montcel S
- Jutras MF
- Herson A
- Cazeneuve C
- Durr A
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104199
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A liminal stage after predictive testing for Huntington disease.
**Authors:** Gargiulo M, Tezenas du Montcel S, Jutras MF, Herson A, Cazeneuve C, Durr A
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104199](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104199)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2017 Aug;54(8):511-520. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104199. Epub 
2017 Jan 13.

A liminal stage after predictive testing for Huntington disease.

Gargiulo M(1)(2)(3), Tezenas du Montcel S(4)(5), Jutras MF(6), Herson A(2)(3), 
Cazeneuve C(3), Durr A(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Psychology, Psychopathology and Psychoanalysis (PCPP, 
EA 4056), University Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris City, France.
(2)Institute of Myology, Pitié-Salpêtrière University Hospital, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Genetics, APHP, Pitié-Salpêtrière University Hospital, Paris, 
France.
(4)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06 UMR_S1136; INSERM UMR_S 1136, 
Institut Pierre Louis d'Epidémiologie et de Santé Publique, Paris, France.
(5)Unit of Biostatistics, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Groupe 
Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière Charles-Foix, Paris, France.
(6)Clinique Neuro Rive-Sud, Québec, Canada.
(7)ICM (Brain and Spine Institute -Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle 
Epinière), Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06 UMRS1127, and INSERM U1127, 
and CNRS UMR 7225 Pitié-Salpêtrière University Hospital, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Following predictive testing for Huntington disease (HD), knowledge 
of one's carrier status may have consequences on disease onset. Our study aimed 
to address two questions. First, does knowledge of being a carrier of the 
pathological HD mutation trigger onset of the disease? Second, does this 
knowledge influence self-awareness and allow carriers to identify signs and 
symptoms of disease onset?
METHODS: Between 2012 and 2015, 75 HD mutation carriers were examined using the 
Unified Huntington's Disease Rating Scale (UHDRS) motor score. Onset estimation 
made with the disease burden score was compared with UHDRS findings. We 
collected qualitative data with questionnaires and semistructured interviews.
RESULTS: 38 women and 37 men, aged 43.7 years±10.5 (20-68), were interviewed 
after a mean delay between test and study interview of 10.5 years±4.7 (from 4 to 
21 years). Estimation of age at onset was 4.5±8.5 years earlier than 
data-derived age at onset. Participants were categorised according to their 
motor score: scores <5 were premanifest (n=35), and scores >5 were manifest 
carriers (n=40). Self-observation was a major preoccupation for all, independent 
of their clinical status (82% vs 74%, p=0.57). Among manifest carriers, 56% 
thought they showed symptoms, but only 33% felt ill. Interestingly, this was 
also observed in those without motor signs (20% and 9%). Being a mutation 
carrier did not significantly facilitate recognition of motor signs. Interviews 
with premanifest carriers allowed the burden of self-observation to be 
illustrated despite lack of motor signs.
CONCLUSIONS: Estimating age at onset based on disease burden score may not be 
accurate. The transition to disease was experienced as an ambiguous or liminal 
experience. The view of mutation carriers is not always concordant with medical 
onset estimation, highlighting the difficulties involved in the concept of onset 
and its use as an outcome in future disease-modifying trials.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104199
PMID: 28087720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.