---
reference_id: "PMID:27224742"
title: Varicella zoster virus triggers the immunopathology of giant cell arteritis.
authors:
- Gilden D
- Nagel MA
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000292
keywords:
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- Aortitis/virology
- Biopsy
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/drug therapy, immunology, pathology, virology"
- "Herpes Zoster/complications, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Herpesvirus 3, Human/isolation & purification"
- Humans
- "Temporal Arteries/pathology, virology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Varicella zoster virus triggers the immunopathology of giant cell arteritis.
**Authors:** Gilden D, Nagel MA
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0000000000000292](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0000000000000292)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2016 Jul;28(4):376-82. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000292.

Varicella zoster virus triggers the immunopathology of giant cell arteritis.

Gilden D(1), Nagel MA.

Author information:
(1)aDepartment of NeurologybDepartment of Immunology and Microbiology,
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Giant cell arteritis (GCA) is a severe form of vasculitis in
the elderly. The recent discovery of varicella zoster virus (VZV) in the
temporal arteries and adjacent skeletal muscle of patients with GCA, and the
rationale and strategy for antiviral and corticosteroid treatment for GCA are
reviewed.
RECENT FINDINGS: The clinical features of GCA include excruciating headache/head
pain, often with scalp tenderness, a nodular temporal arteries and decreased
temporal artery pulsations. Jaw claudication, night sweats, fever, malaise, and
a history of polymyalgia rheumatica (aching and stiffness of large muscles
primarily in the shoulder girdle, upper back, and pelvis without objective signs
of weakness) are common. ESR and CRP are usually elevated. Diagnosis is
confirmed by temporal artery biopsy which reveals vessel wall damage and
inflammation, with multinucleated giant cells and/or epithelioid macrophages.
Skip lesions are common. Importantly, temporal artery biopsies are
pathologically negative in many clinically suspect cases. This review highlights
recent virological findings in temporal arteries from patients with
pathologically verified GCA and in temporal arteries from patients who manifest
clinical and laboratory features of GCA, but whose temporal artery biopsies (Bx)
are pathologically negative for GCA (Bx-negative GCA). Virological analysis
revealed that VZV is present in most GCA-positive and GCA-negative temporal
artery biopsies, mostly in skip areas that correlate with adjacent GCA
pathology.
SUMMARY: The presence of VZV in Bx-positive and Bx-negative GCA temporal
arteries indicates that VZV triggers the immunopathology of GCA. However, the
presence of VZV in about 20% of temporal artery biopsies from non-GCA postmortem
controls also suggests that VZV alone is not sufficient to produce disease.
Treatment trials should be performed to determine if antiviral agents confer
additional benefits to corticosteroids in both Bx-positive and Bx-negative GCA
patients. These studies should also examine whether oral antiviral agents and
corticosteroids are as effective as intravenous acyclovir and corticosteroids.
Appropriate dosage and duration of treatment also remain to be determined.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000292
PMCID: PMC4896311
PMID: 27224742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts of
interest.
