---
reference_id: "PMID:1554806"
title: Synergism between occupational arsenic exposure and smoking in the induction of lung cancer.
authors:
- Hertz-Picciotto I
- Smith AH
- Holtzman D
- Lipsett M
- Alexeeff G
journal: Epidemiology
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1097/00001648-199201000-00006
keywords:
- Arsenic/adverse effects
- Case-Control Studies
- Cohort Studies
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/chemically induced, epidemiology, etiology"
- "Models, Biological"
- "Occupational Diseases/chemically induced, epidemiology, etiology"
- Occupational Exposure
- Risk Factors
- Smoking/adverse effects
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Synergism between occupational arsenic exposure and smoking in the induction of lung cancer.
**Authors:** Hertz-Picciotto I, Smith AH, Holtzman D, Lipsett M, Alexeeff G
**Journal:** Epidemiology (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00001648-199201000-00006](https://doi.org/10.1097/00001648-199201000-00006)

## Content

1. Epidemiology. 1992 Jan;3(1):23-31. doi: 10.1097/00001648-199201000-00006.

Synergism between occupational arsenic exposure and smoking in the induction of
lung cancer.

Hertz-Picciotto I(1), Smith AH, Holtzman D, Lipsett M, Alexeeff G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Environmental Health Sciences, University of
California, Berkeley.

Comment in
    Epidemiology. 1992 Sep;3(5):471-2. doi: 10.1097/00001648-199209000-00016.

We assembled data from numerous studies to examine whether active smoking and
occupational exposure to arsenic act synergistically (more than additively) to
increase the risk of lung cancer. Although several smaller studies lacked the
power to reject simple additive relations, the joint effect from both exposures
consistently exceeded the sum of the separate effects by about 70 to 130%. The
only study not showing a greater than additive effect appeared to have
inadequate data to address this question. We calculated the excess fractions for
the synergism; these showed that a minimum of between 30% and 54% of lung cancer
cases among those with both exposures could not be attributed to either one or
the other exposure alone. Previous authors addressing the synergism between
arsenic exposure and smoking have evaluated deviations from a multiplicative
model, which is inappropriate for this purpose. Reports of no interaction or
"negative" interaction have therefore been misleading. Taken as a whole, the
evidence is compelling that arsenic and smoking act in a synergistic manner to
produce lung cancer. Substantial reductions in the lung cancer burden of smokers
occupationally exposed to arsenic could be achieved by reductions in either
exposure. The mechanism for the synergism is unclear.

DOI: 10.1097/00001648-199201000-00006
PMID: 1554806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
