---
reference_id: "PMID:38474387"
title: "Role of Inflammatory Mechanisms in Major Depressive Disorder: From Etiology to Potential Pharmacological Targets."
authors:
- Kouba BR
- de Araujo Borba L
- Borges de Souza P
- Gil-Mohapel J
- Rodrigues ALS
journal: Cells
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cells13050423
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of Inflammatory Mechanisms in Major Depressive Disorder: From Etiology to Potential Pharmacological Targets.
**Authors:** Kouba BR, de Araujo Borba L, Borges de Souza P, Gil-Mohapel J, Rodrigues ALS
**Journal:** Cells (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells13050423](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells13050423)

## Content

1. Cells. 2024 Feb 28;13(5):423. doi: 10.3390/cells13050423.

Role of Inflammatory Mechanisms in Major Depressive Disorder: From Etiology to 
Potential Pharmacological Targets.

Kouba BR(1), de Araujo Borba L(1), Borges de Souza P(1), Gil-Mohapel J(2)(3), 
Rodrigues ALS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Center of Biological Sciences, Universidade 
Federal de Santa Catarina, Florianópolis 88040-900, SC, Brazil.
(2)Island Medical Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, 
Victoria, BC V8P 5C2, Canada.
(3)Division of Medical Sciences, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC V8P 5C2, 
Canada.

The involvement of central and peripheral inflammation in the pathogenesis and 
prognosis of major depressive disorder (MDD) has been demonstrated. The increase 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines (interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, IL-18, and TNF-α) in 
individuals with depression may elicit neuroinflammatory processes and 
peripheral inflammation, mechanisms that, in turn, can contribute to gut 
microbiota dysbiosis. Together, neuroinflammation and gut dysbiosis induce 
alterations in tryptophan metabolism, culminating in decreased serotonin 
synthesis, impairments in neuroplasticity-related mechanisms, and 
glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity. This review aims to highlight the 
inflammatory mechanisms (neuroinflammation, peripheral inflammation, and gut 
dysbiosis) involved in the pathophysiology of MDD and to explore novel 
anti-inflammatory therapeutic approaches for this psychiatric disturbance. 
Several lines of evidence have indicated that in addition to antidepressants, 
physical exercise, probiotics, and nutraceuticals (agmatine, ascorbic acid, and 
vitamin D) possess anti-inflammatory effects that may contribute to their 
antidepressant properties. Further studies are necessary to explore the 
therapeutic benefits of these alternative therapies for MDD.

DOI: 10.3390/cells13050423
PMCID: PMC10931285
PMID: 38474387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.