---
reference_id: "PMID:18512345"
title: "Host cell actin remodeling in response to Trypanosoma cruzi: trypomastigote versus amastigote entry."
authors:
- Mortara RA
- Andreoli WK
- Fernandes MC
- da Silva CV
- Fernandes AB
- "L'Abbate C"
- da Silva S
journal: Subcell Biochem
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-78267-6_8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Host cell actin remodeling in response to Trypanosoma cruzi: trypomastigote versus amastigote entry.
**Authors:** Mortara RA, Andreoli WK, Fernandes MC, da Silva CV, Fernandes AB, L'Abbate C, da Silva S
**Journal:** Subcell Biochem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-0-387-78267-6_8](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-78267-6_8)

## Content

1. Subcell Biochem. 2008;47:101-9. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-78267-6_8.

Host cell actin remodeling in response to Trypanosoma cruzi: trypomastigote 
versus amastigote entry.

Mortara RA(1), Andreoli WK, Fernandes MC, da Silva CV, Fernandes AB, L'Abbate C, 
da Silva S.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Microbiologia, Imunologia e Parasitologia, UNIFESP, Escola 
Paulista de Medicina, Rua Botucatu, 862, 6o andar, 04023-062 São Paulo, SP, 
Brazil. renato@ecb.epm.br

Trypanosoma cruzi is the protozoan parasite that causes Chagas' disease, a 
highly prevalent vector-borne disease in Latin America. Chagas' disease is a 
major public health problem in endemic regions with an estimated 18 million 
people are infected with T. cruzi and another 100 million at risk 
(http://www.who.int/ctd/chagas/disease.htm). During its life cycle, T. cruzi 
alternates between triatomine insect vectors and mammalian hosts. While feeding 
on host's blood, infected triatomines release in their feces highly motile and 
infective metacyclic trypomastigotes that may initiate infection. Metacyclic 
trypomastigotes promptly invade host cells (including gastric mucosa) and once 
free in the cytoplasm, differentiate into amastigotes that replicate by binary 
fission. Just before disruption of the parasite-laden cell, amastigotes 
differentiate back into trypomastigotes which are then released into the tissue 
spaces and access the circulation. Circulating trypomastigotes that disseminate 
the infection in the mammalian host may be taken up by feeding triatomines and 
may also transform, extracellularly, into amastigote-like forms. Unlike their 
intracellular counterparts, these amastigote-like forms, henceforth called 
amastigotes, are capable of infecting host cells. Studies in which the 
mechanisms of amastigote invasion of host cells have been compared to metacyclic 
trypomastigote entry have revealed interesting differences regarding the 
involvement of the target cell actin microfilament system.

DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-78267-6_8
PMID: 18512345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]