---
reference_id: "PMID:28662915"
title: "A New Patient With Intermediate Severe Salla Disease With Hypomyelination: A Literature Review for Salla Disease."
authors:
- Barmherzig R
- Bullivant G
- Cordeiro D
- Sinasac DS
- Blaser S
- Mercimek-Mahmutoglu S
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2017.05.022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A New Patient With Intermediate Severe Salla Disease With Hypomyelination: A Literature Review for Salla Disease.
**Authors:** Barmherzig R, Bullivant G, Cordeiro D, Sinasac DS, Blaser S, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu S
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2017.05.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2017.05.022)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2017 Sep;74:87-91.e2. doi:
10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2017.05.022.  Epub 2017 Jun 1.

A New Patient With Intermediate Severe Salla Disease With Hypomyelination: A 
Literature Review for Salla Disease.

Barmherzig R(1), Bullivant G(2), Cordeiro D(2), Sinasac DS(3), Blaser S(4), 
Mercimek-Mahmutoglu S(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Alberta Children's Hospital, Cumming School 
of Medicine, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Division of Pediatric Neuroradiology, Department of Diagnostic Imaging, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Diagnostic Neuroradiology, 
Department of Medical Imaging, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario Canada.
(5)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, 
Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada; Genetics and Genome Biology Program, Research Institute, The Hospital 
for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario Canada; Institute of Medical Sciences, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario Canada. Electronic address: 
saadet.mahmutoglu@sickkids.ca.

Comment in
    Pediatr Neurol. 2018 Apr;81:52-53. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2018.01.002.

BACKGROUND: Likely pathogenic variants in SLC17A5 results in allelic disorders 
of free sialic acid metabolism including (1) infantile free sialic acid storage 
disease with severe global developmental delay, coarse facial features, 
hepatosplenomegaly, and cardiomegaly; (2) intermediate severe Salla disease with 
moderate to severe global developmental delay, hypotonia, and hypomyelination 
with or without coarse facial features, and (3) Salla disease with normal 
appearance, mild cognitive dysfunction, and spasticity.
PATIENT DESCRIPTION: This five-year-old girl presented with infantile-onset 
severe global developmental delay, truncal hypotonia, and generalized dystonia 
following normal development during her first six months of life. Brain magnetic 
resonance imaging showed marked hypomyelination and a thin corpus callosum at 
age 19 months, both unchanged on follow-up at age 28 months. Urine free sialic 
acid was moderately elevated. Cerebrospinal fluid free sialic acid was 
marginally elevated. Sequencing of SLC17A5 revealed compound heterozygous likely 
pathogenic variants, namely, a known missense (c.291G>A) variant and a novel 
truncating (c.819+1G>A) variant, confirming the diagnosis of Salla disease at 
age 3.5 years.
CONCLUSION: We report a new patient with intermediate severe Salla disease. 
Normal or marginally elevated urine or cerebrospinal fluid free sialic acid 
levels cannot exclude Salla disease. In patients with progressive global 
developmental delay and hypomyelination on brain magnetic resonance imaging, 
Salla disease should be included into the differential diagnosis.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2017.05.022
PMID: 28662915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]