---
reference_id: "PMID:36628530"
title: "Double-spiral: a bioinspired pre-programmable compliant joint with multiple degrees of freedom."
authors:
- Jafarpour M
- Gorb S
- Rajabi H
journal: J R Soc Interface
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2022.0757
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Double-spiral: a bioinspired pre-programmable compliant joint with multiple degrees of freedom.
**Authors:** Jafarpour M, Gorb S, Rajabi H
**Journal:** J R Soc Interface (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1098/rsif.2022.0757](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2022.0757)

## Content

1. J R Soc Interface. 2023 Jan;20(198):20220757. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2022.0757.
Epub  2023 Jan 11.

Double-spiral: a bioinspired pre-programmable compliant joint with multiple 
degrees of freedom.

Jafarpour M(1), Gorb S(1), Rajabi H(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Functional Morphology and Biomechanics, Institute of Zoology, Kiel 
University, Kiel 24118, Germany.
(2)Division of Mechanical Engineering and Design, School of Engineering, London 
South Bank University, London SE1 0AA, UK.
(3)Mechanical Intelligence Research Group, South Bank Applied BioEngineering 
Research (SABER) Centre, School of Engineering, London South Bank University, 
London SE1 0AA, UK.

Geometry and material are two key factors that determine the functionality of 
mechanical elements under a specific boundary condition. Optimum combinations of 
these factors fulfil desired mechanical behaviour. By exploring biological 
systems, we find widespread spiral-shaped mechanical elements with various 
combinations of geometries and material properties functioning under different 
boundary conditions and load cases. Although these spirals work towards a wide 
range of goals, some of them are used as nature's solution to compactify highly 
extensible prolonged structures. Characterizing the principles underlying the 
functionality of these structures, here we profited from the coiling-uncoiling 
behaviour and easy adjustability of logarithmic spirals to design a 
pre-programmable compliant joint. Using the finite-element method, we developed 
a simple model of the joint and investigated the influence of design variables 
on its geometry and mechanical behaviour. Our results show that the design 
variables give us a great possibility to tune the response of the joint and 
reach a high level of passive control on its behaviour. Using 3D printing and 
mechanical testing, we replicated the numerical simulations and illustrated the 
application of the joint in practice. The simplicity, pre-programmability and 
predictable response of our double-spiral design suggest that it provides an 
efficient solution for a wide range of engineering applications, such as 
articulated robotic systems and modular metamaterials.

DOI: 10.1098/rsif.2022.0757
PMCID: PMC9832290
PMID: 36628530