---
reference_id: "PMID:29625568"
title: Consensus clinical management guidelines for Niemann-Pick disease type C.
authors:
- Geberhiwot T
- Moro A
- Dardis A
- Ramaswami U
- Sirrs S
- Marfa MP
- Vanier MT
- Walterfang M
- Bolton S
- Dawson C
- Héron B
- Stampfer M
- Imrie J
- Hendriksz C
- Gissen P
- Crushell E
- Coll MJ
- Nadjar Y
- Klünemann H
- Mengel E
- Hrebicek M
- Jones SA
- Ory D
- Bembi B
- Patterson M
- International Niemann-Pick Disease Registry (INPDR)
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-018-0785-7
keywords:
- Humans
- "Niemann-Pick Disease, Type C/therapy"
- Systematic Reviews as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Consensus clinical management guidelines for Niemann-Pick disease type C.
**Authors:** Geberhiwot T, Moro A, Dardis A, Ramaswami U, Sirrs S, Marfa MP, Vanier MT, Walterfang M, Bolton S, Dawson C, Héron B, Stampfer M, Imrie J, Hendriksz C, Gissen P, Crushell E, Coll MJ, Nadjar Y, Klünemann H, Mengel E, Hrebicek M, Jones SA, Ory D, Bembi B, Patterson M, International Niemann-Pick Disease Registry (INPDR)
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-018-0785-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-018-0785-7)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2018 Apr 6;13(1):50. doi: 10.1186/s13023-018-0785-7.

Consensus clinical management guidelines for Niemann-Pick disease type C.

Geberhiwot T(1), Moro A(2), Dardis A(2), Ramaswami U(3), Sirrs S(4), Marfa 
MP(5), Vanier MT(6), Walterfang M(7), Bolton S(8), Dawson C(8), Héron B(9), 
Stampfer M(10), Imrie J(11), Hendriksz C(12), Gissen P(13), Crushell E(14), Coll 
MJ(15), Nadjar Y(16), Klünemann H(17), Mengel E(18), Hrebicek M(19), Jones 
SA(20), Ory D(21), Bembi B(2), Patterson M(22); International Niemann-Pick 
Disease Registry (INPDR).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Metabolism and System Research, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK. tarekegn.hiwot@uhb.nhs.uk.
(2)AMC Hospital of Udine, Udine, Italy.
(3)Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(4)Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, Canada.
(5)Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)INSERM U820, Université de Lyon, Faculté de Médecine Lyon-Est, Lyon, 69372, 
France.
(7)Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Australia.
(8)University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(9)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Reference Center of Lysosomal Diseases, 
Trousseau Hospital, APHP, GRC ConCer-LD, Sorbonne Universities, UPMC University 
06, Paris, France.
(10)Universitatsklinikum Tubingen Institut fur Medizinische Genetik 
undangewandte Genomik, Tubingen, Germany.
(11)Niemann-Pick UK, Washington, UK.
(12)Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Salford, UK.
(13)MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, London, UK.
(14)Children's University Hospital, Dublin, Republic of Ireland.
(15)Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(16)Hopital Universitaire Pitie Salpetriere, Paris, France.
(17)Universitatsklinikum Regensburg Klinik und Poliklinik fur Chirurgie, 
Regensburg, Germany.
(18)Universitatmedizin Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(19)Charlies University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
(20)Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, 
UK.
(21)University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, USA.
(22)Mayo 1290 Clinic Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Minnesota, 
USA.

Niemann-Pick Type C (NPC) is a progressive and life limiting autosomal recessive 
disorder caused by mutations in either the NPC1 or NPC2 gene. Mutations in these 
genes are associated with abnormal endosomal-lysosomal trafficking, resulting in 
the accumulation of multiple tissue specific lipids in the lysosomes. The 
clinical spectrum of NPC disease ranges from a neonatal rapidly progressive 
fatal disorder to an adult-onset chronic neurodegenerative disease. The age of 
onset of the first (beyond 3 months of life) neurological symptom may predict 
the severity of the disease and determines life expectancy.NPC has an estimated 
incidence of ~ 1: 100,000 and the rarity of the disease translate into 
misdiagnosis, delayed diagnosis and barriers to good care. For these reasons, we 
have developed clinical guidelines that define standard of care for NPC 
patients, foster shared care arrangements between expert centres and family 
physicians, and empower patients. The information contained in these guidelines 
was obtained through a systematic review of the literature and the experiences 
of the authors in their care of patients with NPC. We adopted the Appraisal of 
Guidelines for Research & Evaluation (AGREE II) system as method of choice for 
the guideline development process. We made a series of conclusive statements and 
scored them according to level of evidence, strengths of recommendations and 
expert opinions. These guidelines can inform care providers, care funders, 
patients and their carers of best practice of care for patients with NPC. In 
addition, these guidelines have identified gaps in the knowledge that must be 
filled by future research. It is anticipated that the implementation of these 
guidelines will lead to a step change in the quality of care for patients with 
NPC irrespective of their geographical location.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-018-0785-7
PMCID: PMC5889539
PMID: 29625568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: AD, 
BB,TH, YN, SJ, MW, DO, SS, PG, MS, UR, MTV and MP has received travel grant from 
Actelion. Shire has provided funding to YN, SJ, SS, MTV, AD, BB, MH and MP. 
Genzyme has provided funding to YN, SJ, SS, JI, MH and MP. Orphazyme has 
provided funding to JI, AD and BB. Alexion has provided funding to SS and MP. 
Vtesse has provided travel grants to MTV and MP. SS has received funding from 
Biomarin and Pfizer. MP has received funding from Agio, Amicus and Novartis. SJ 
has received funding from Biomarin, Ultragenyx, PTC and Orchard Theraputics. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.