---
reference_id: "PMID:41070433"
title: Transcatheter correction of the scimitar variant with dual pulmonary venous drainage-an international multicentre series.
authors:
- Kogure T
- Jones MI
- Goreczny S
- Navarro-Castellanos I
- Riahi M
- Miro J
- Qureshi SA
journal: Cardiol Young
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1017/S1047951125110044
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcatheter correction of the scimitar variant with dual pulmonary venous drainage-an international multicentre series.
**Authors:** Kogure T, Jones MI, Goreczny S, Navarro-Castellanos I, Riahi M, Miro J, Qureshi SA
**Journal:** Cardiol Young (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S1047951125110044](https://doi.org/10.1017/S1047951125110044)

## Content

1. Cardiol Young. 2025 Nov;35(11):2311-2314. doi: 10.1017/S1047951125110044. Epub
 2025 Oct 10.

Transcatheter correction of the scimitar variant with dual pulmonary venous 
drainage-an international multicentre series.

Kogure T(1)(2), Jones MI(1), Goreczny S(3), Navarro-Castellanos I(4)(5), Riahi 
M(6), Miro J(4), Qureshi SA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric and Congenital Cardiology, 
https://ror.org/058pgtg13Evelina London Children's Hospital, London, UK.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Paediatric and Cardiology, Jagiellonian University Medical 
College, Kraków, Poland.
(4)Department of Paediatric Cardiology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire 
Sainte-Justine, Montréal, Canada.
(5)Department of Paediatric Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Mexico Federico 
Gómez, Mexico City, Mexico.
(6)Department of Congenital Cardiology, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de 
Montréal, Montréal, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Scimitar syndrome is an uncommon congenital malformation of 
pulmonary venous drainage to the junction of the right atrium and inferior caval 
vein. Treatment is usually surgical, depending on the morphological variant. 
When there is dual drainage of the anomalous veins to the inferior caval vein 
and the left atrium, a transcatheter procedure may represent an alternative to 
surgery.
METHODS: We report a series of four patients with the scimitar variant with dual 
pulmonary venous drainage treated with a transcatheter approach.
RESULT: All four patients (three children, one adult) had dual drainage of right 
pulmonary veins into the inferior caval vein and to the left atrium via a 
connecting vein. All patients underwent a successful catheter occlusion of the 
anomalous connection to the systemic vein without complication. Vascular plug 
devices were used in two patients: a left atrial appendage closure device in one 
patient and a ventricular septal defect closure device in one patient. All the 
procedures resulted in complete occlusion of the anomalous venous drainage to 
the inferior caval vein and unobstructed drainage to the left atrium.

DOI: 10.1017/S1047951125110044
PMID: 41070433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]