---
reference_id: "PMID:31093395"
title: Fulminant Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation as Initial Presentation of BRAF-Mutated Melanoma.
authors:
- Chuang J
- Uche A
- Gupta R
- Margolin K
- Kim P
journal: Case Rep Oncol Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1155/2019/9246596
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fulminant Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation as Initial Presentation of BRAF-Mutated Melanoma.
**Authors:** Chuang J, Uche A, Gupta R, Margolin K, Kim P
**Journal:** Case Rep Oncol Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2019/9246596](https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/9246596)

## Content

1. Case Rep Oncol Med. 2019 Apr 9;2019:9246596. doi: 10.1155/2019/9246596. 
eCollection 2019.

Fulminant Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation as Initial Presentation of 
BRAF-Mutated Melanoma.

Chuang J(1), Uche A(2), Gupta R(2)(3), Margolin K(3), Kim P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, 1000 West Carson 
Street, Torrance, CA 90509, USA.
(2)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, 1000 
West Carson Street, Torrance, CA 90509, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology and Therapeutics Research, City of Hope 
National Medical Center, 1500 E Duarte Rd, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

Acute disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is a pathological process 
involving dysfunction of the coagulation cascade. In this case report, we 
discuss a 33-year-old woman with BRAF V600E-mutated metastatic melanoma who 
presented in fulminant DIC with concurrent hemorrhagic and thrombotic 
manifestations and discuss the patient's brief response to combination therapy. 
In our discussion, we highlight the current understanding of DIC and also 
identify opportunities for future research to elucidate the genetic aberrations 
in melanoma that may result in treatment resistance to combination therapy.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/9246596
PMCID: PMC6481122
PMID: 31093395