---
reference_id: "PMID:20952379"
title: "Clinical, neuroradiological and genetic findings in pontocerebellar hypoplasia."
authors:
- Namavar Y
- Barth PG
- Kasher PR
- van Ruissen F
- Brockmann K
- Bernert G
- Writzl K
- Ventura K
- Cheng EY
- Ferriero DM
- Basel-Vanagaite L
- Eggens VR
- Krägeloh-Mann I
- De Meirleir L
- King M
- Graham JM Jr
- von Moers A
- Knoers N
- Sztriha L
- Korinthenberg R
- PCH Consortium
- Dobyns WB
- Baas F
- Poll-The BT
journal: Brain
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awq287
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Arginine-tRNA Ligase/genetics
- Brain/pathology
- Chi-Square Distribution
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Endoribonucleases/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- "Image Processing, Computer-Assisted"
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Mutation
- "Olivopontocerebellar Atrophies/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, neuroradiological and genetic findings in pontocerebellar hypoplasia.
**Authors:** Namavar Y, Barth PG, Kasher PR, van Ruissen F, Brockmann K, Bernert G, Writzl K, Ventura K, Cheng EY, Ferriero DM, Basel-Vanagaite L, Eggens VR, Krägeloh-Mann I, De Meirleir L, King M, Graham JM Jr, von Moers A, Knoers N, Sztriha L, Korinthenberg R, PCH Consortium, Dobyns WB, Baas F, Poll-The BT
**Journal:** Brain (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awq287](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awq287)

## Content

1. Brain. 2011 Jan;134(Pt 1):143-56. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq287. Epub 2010 Oct 15.

Clinical, neuroradiological and genetic findings in pontocerebellar hypoplasia.

Namavar Y(1), Barth PG, Kasher PR, van Ruissen F, Brockmann K, Bernert G, Writzl 
K, Ventura K, Cheng EY, Ferriero DM, Basel-Vanagaite L, Eggens VR, Krägeloh-Mann 
I, De Meirleir L, King M, Graham JM Jr, von Moers A, Knoers N, Sztriha L, 
Korinthenberg R; PCH Consortium; Dobyns WB, Baas F, Poll-The BT.

Collaborators: Van der Aa N, Arts WF, Ades LC, Bahi-Buisson N, Battini R, 
Bodamer O, Boltshauser E, Boycott K, Brueton L, Brussel W, Chandler KE, Cowan 
FM, Crow Y, Debus O, Demir E, Hastanesi G, Eason J, Ferrie CD, Fisher RB, Foulds 
N, Freeman JL, Gooskens R, Haeussler M, Hageman G, Hammersen G, Horn D, Isidor 
B, van der Knaap MS, Kress W, Kroisel PM, Kyllerman M, Lachmeijer AM, Lunsing 
RJ, McGillivray G, Möllmann S, Muntoni F, Nemeth AH, Neufeld-Kaiser W, van 
Nieuwenhuizen O, Ouvrier R, Pálmafy B, Peeters EA, Phillips JJ, Price S, Rankin 
J, Régal L, de Rijk-van Andel JF, Roelens F, Rutledge JC, Ryan MM, Seidl R, 
Sellerer NC, Shannon NL, Sival DA, Snoeck IN, Straussberg R, Tijssen MA, Verloo 
P, de Vries LS, Wargowski D, Williams AN, Windpassinger C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Analysis, Academic Medical Centre, University of 
Amsterdam, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Brain. 2012 Jan;135(Pt 1):e199; author reply e200. doi: 
10.1093/brain/awr108.

Pontocerebellar hypoplasia is a group of autosomal recessive neurodegenerative 
disorders with prenatal onset. The common characteristics are cerebellar 
hypoplasia with variable atrophy of the cerebellum and the ventral pons. 
Supratentorial involvement is reflected by variable neocortical atrophy, 
ventriculomegaly and microcephaly. Mutations in the transfer RNA splicing 
endonuclease subunit genes (TSEN54, TSEN2, TSEN34) were found to be associated 
with pontocerebellar hypoplasia types 2 and 4. Mutations in the mitochondrial 
transfer RNA arginyl synthetase gene (RARS2) were associated with 
pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 6. We studied a cohort of 169 patients from 141 
families for mutations in these genes, of whom 106 patients tested positive for 
mutations in one of the TSEN genes or the RARS2 gene. In order to delineate the 
neuroradiological and clinical phenotype of patients with mutations in these 
genes, we compared this group with 63 patients suspected of pontocerebellar 
hypoplasia who were negative on mutation analysis. We found a strong correlation 
(P < 0.0005) between TSEN54 mutations and a dragonfly-like cerebellar pattern on 
magnetic resonance imaging, in which the cerebellar hemispheres are flat and 
severely reduced in size and the vermis is relatively spared. Mutations in 
TSEN54 are clinically associated with dyskinesia and/or dystonia and variable 
degrees of spasticity, in some cases with pure generalized spasticity. Nonsense 
or splice site mutations in TSEN54 are associated with a more severe phenotype 
of more perinatal symptoms, ventilator dependency and early death. In addition, 
we present ten new mutations in TSEN54, TSEN2 and RARS2. Furthermore, we show 
that pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1 together with elevated cerebrospinal 
fluid lactate may be caused by RARS2 mutations.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awq287
PMCID: PMC9136852
PMID: 20952379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]