---
reference_id: "PMID:30328690"
title: Overview of the prevention and management of CINV.
authors:
- Natale JJ
journal: Am J Manag Care
year: '2018'
keywords:
- Antiemetics/therapeutic use
- Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects
- Drug Combinations
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Humans
- "Nausea/chemically induced, prevention & control"
- Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- "Vomiting/chemically induced, prevention & control"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Overview of the prevention and management of CINV.
**Authors:** Natale JJ
**Journal:** Am J Manag Care (2018)

## Content

1. Am J Manag Care. 2018 Oct;24(18 Suppl):S391-S397.

Overview of the prevention and management of CINV.

Natale JJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Manager of Outpatient Oncology Pharmacy Services, Residency Program Director,
UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, PA. Email: natalej@upmc.edu.

The prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) is critically
important in reducing morbidity and total healthcare costs in patients receiving
emetogenic chemotherapy. The different types of CINV (ie, acute, delayed,
anticipatory, breakthrough, and refractory) are controlled through various
pathways and neurotransmitters, so the pharmacologic approach to prevention and
treatment varies based on the type of CINV. New therapeutic agents and
combinations of agents have changed the dynamic of CINV control, and national
guidelines have been recently updated based on current evidence. Along with
current national guideline recommendations, this educational activity will
provide an overview of the pathophysiology of CINV and how the mechanisms of
action of various antiemetic agents relate to efficacy and safety in the
prevention and treatment of CINV.

PMID: 30328690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
