---
reference_id: "PMID:14605602"
title: Thyroid cancer yield in patients with Graves' disease.
authors:
- Stocker DJ
- Burch HB
journal: Minerva Endocrinol
year: '2003'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thyroid cancer yield in patients with Graves' disease.
**Authors:** Stocker DJ, Burch HB
**Journal:** Minerva Endocrinol (2003)

## Content

1. Minerva Endocrinol. 2003 Sep;28(3):205-12.

Thyroid cancer yield in patients with Graves' disease.

Stocker DJ(1), Burch HB.

Author information:
(1)Endocrine-Metabolic Service, Department of Medicine, Walter Reed Army Medical 
Center, Washington, D.C. 20307-5001, USA.

The management of thyroid nodules in patients with Graves' disease remains an 
issue both of concern and controversy for those who care for these patients. At 
one time, thyroid cancer in patients with thyrotoxicosis was considered to be 
extremely rare, but this perception has proven to be incorrect. Several studies 
have demonstrated both an increased incidence of nodules and of thyroid cancer 
in patients with Graves' disease, with cancer rates varying from as low as 1% to 
as high as 9% of cases. These divergent estimates of malignancy rates in Graves' 
disease have predictably led to variability in management recommendations. 
Considerable controversy also exists as to whether or not thyroid cancer behaves 
more aggressively in patients with Graves' disease. Anecdotal experience and a 
number of studies have suggested an increased aggressiveness of papillary and 
follicular thyroid cancer in patients with Graves' disease, but these findings 
are not universal. Underlying both issues of the incidence and aggressiveness of 
thyroid cancer is the role of thyrotropin (thyroid stimulating hormone, TSH) in 
the development and stimulation of thyroid cancer. The association between TSH 
and thyroid cancer has long been known. TSH has a central role in thyroid growth 
and normal functioning and appears to play a similar part in the growth and 
development of thyroid cancer. The close relationship of TSH to the stimulating 
TSH-R antibodies (TSH-R AB) seen in Graves' disease has led to the perception 
that thyroid cancer occurring in the setting of Graves' disease may become more 
aggressive as a result of stimulation by these autoantibodies. This article will 
summarize the existing literature pertaining to thyroid cancer in Graves' 
disease, and suggest an evidence-based approach to the management of these 
patients.

PMID: 14605602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]