---
reference_id: "PMID:20301728"
title: GNPTAB-Related Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Leroy JG
- Cathey SS
- Friez MJ
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GNPTAB-Related Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Leroy JG, Cathey SS, Friez MJ

## Content

1. GNPTAB-Related Disorders.

Leroy JG(1)(2), Cathey SS(3), Friez MJ(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2008 Aug 26 [updated 2019 Aug 29].

Author information:
(1)Professor and Chairman Emeritus, Departments of Pediatrics and Medical 
Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium
(2)Senior Scholar, Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, South Carolina
(3)Clinical Geneticist, Greenwood Genetic Center, Charleston, South Carolina
(4)Director, Diagnostic Laboratory, Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, South 
Carolina

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: GNPTAB-related disorders comprise the phenotypes 
mucolipidosis II (ML II) and mucolipidosis IIIα/β (ML IIIα/β), and phenotypes 
intermediate between ML II and ML IIIα/β. ML II is evident at birth and slowly 
progressive; death most often occurs in early childhood. Orthopedic 
abnormalities present at birth may include thoracic deformity, kyphosis, 
clubfeet, deformed long bones, and/or dislocation of the hip(s). Growth often 
ceases in the second year of life; contractures develop in all large joints. The 
skin is thickened, facial features are coarse, and gingiva are hypertrophic. All 
children have cardiac involvement, most commonly thickening and insufficiency of 
the mitral valve and, less frequently, the aortic valve. Progressive mucosal 
thickening narrows the airways, and gradual stiffening of the thoracic cage 
contributes to respiratory insufficiency, the most common cause of death. ML 
IIIα/β becomes evident at about age three years with slow growth rate and short 
stature; joint stiffness and pain initially in the shoulders, hips, and fingers; 
gradual mild coarsening of facial features; and normal to mildly impaired 
cognitive development. Pain from osteoporosis becomes more severe during 
adolescence. Cardiorespiratory complications (restrictive lung disease, 
thickening and insufficiency of the mitral and aortic valves, left and/or right 
ventricular hypertrophy) are common causes of death, typically in early to 
middle adulthood. Phenotypes intermediate between ML II and ML IIIα/β are 
characterized by physical growth in infancy that resembles that of ML II and 
neuromotor and speech development that resemble that of ML IIIα/β.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a GNPTAB-related disorder is established in 
a proband with suggestive clinical, radiographic, and biochemical findings and 
biallelic pathogenic (or likely pathogenic) variants in GNPTAB identified on 
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management is supportive and 
symptomatic. ML II. Low-impact therapies, including aqua therapy, to avoid joint 
and tendon strain; cognitive stimulation through interactive programs; 
gingivectomy as needed for oral health. ML IIIα/β. Low-impact physical therapy 
is usually well tolerated. Carpal tunnel signs may require tendon release. In 
late childhood or early adolescence symptomatic relief of hip pain with 
over-the-counter analgesics; in some older adolescents and adults bilateral hip 
replacement has been successful. Later in disease course: management focuses on 
relief of general bone pain caused by osteoporosis; scheduled intermittent IV 
administration of the bisphosphonate pamidronate has been effective in some 
individuals. All phenotypes. Because of concerns about airway management, 
surgical intervention should be avoided if possible and undertaken only in 
tertiary care settings. Surveillance: ML II. Outpatient follow-up visits 
approximately every three months for infants and toddlers; outpatient visits 
approximately every six months for older children until cardiac and respiratory 
monitoring need to be more frequent. ML IIIα/β. Twice-yearly outpatient clinic 
visits for young children; annual routine follow-up visits after age six years 
unless bone pain, deteriorating ambulation, and/or cardiac and respiratory 
monitoring necessitate more frequent attention.
GENETIC COUNSELING: GNPTAB-related disorders are inherited in an autosomal 
recessive manner. At conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% 
chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 
25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the GNPTAB pathogenic 
variants in the family are known, carrier testing for at-risk relatives, 
prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, and preimplantation genetic 
testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301728