---
reference_id: "PMID:30943217"
title: Clinical outcomes of second-generation limus-eluting stents compared to paclitaxel-eluting stents for acute myocardial infarction with cardiogenic shock.
authors:
- Mao CT
- Chen TH
- Tseng CN
- Chen SW
- Hsieh IC
- Hung MJ
- Chu PH
- Wang CH
- Wen MS
- Cherng WJ
- Chen DY
journal: PLoS One
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0214417
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical outcomes of second-generation limus-eluting stents compared to paclitaxel-eluting stents for acute myocardial infarction with cardiogenic shock.
**Authors:** Mao CT, Chen TH, Tseng CN, Chen SW, Hsieh IC, Hung MJ, Chu PH, Wang CH, Wen MS, Cherng WJ, Chen DY
**Journal:** PLoS One (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0214417](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0214417)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2019 Apr 3;14(4):e0214417. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0214417. 
eCollection 2019.

Clinical outcomes of second-generation limus-eluting stents compared to 
paclitaxel-eluting stents for acute myocardial infarction with cardiogenic 
shock.

Mao CT(1), Chen TH(1), Tseng CN(2), Chen SW(2), Hsieh IC(3), Hung MJ(1), Chu 
PH(3), Wang CH(1), Wen MS(3), Cherng WJ(3), Chen DY(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital, Keelung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital at Linkou, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(3)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital at Linkou, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: Whether the cardiovascular (CV) outcomes of second-generation 
limus-eluting stents (LESs) differ from those of paclitaxel-eluting stents 
(PESs) in patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) complicated by 
cardiogenic shock (CS) is still unclear.
METHODS: We used the Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database to 
analyse data of 516 patients with AMI and CS diagnosed from January 2007 to 
December 2011. We used propensity score matching to adjust for the imbalance in 
covariate baseline values between these two groups. We evaluated clinical 
outcomes by comparing 197 subjects who used second-generation LESs to 319 
matched subjects who used PESs.
RESULTS: The risk of the primary composite outcomes (i.e., myocardial 
infarction, coronary revascularisation or CV death) was significantly lower in 
the second-generation LES group than in the PES group [37.3% vs. 51.8%; hazard 
ratio (HR), 0.73; 95% CI: 0.56-0.95] at the 12-month follow-up. The patients who 
received second-generation LESs had a lower risk of coronary revascularisation 
(HR 0.62; 95% CI: 0.41-0.93) than those who used PESs. However, the risks of 
myocardial infarction (HR 0.56; 95% CI: 0.26-1.24), ischemic stroke (HR 0.73; 
95% CI: 0.23-2.35), or CV death (HR 0.90; 95% CI: 0.63-1.28) were not 
significantly different between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with CS-complicating AMI, second-generation LES 
implantation significantly reduced the risk of coronary revascularisation and 
composite CV events compared to PES implantation at the 12-month follow-up.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0214417
PMCID: PMC6447233
PMID: 30943217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.