---
reference_id: "PMID:37979064"
title: Obesity and Dyslipidemia.
authors:
- Nussbaumerova B
- Rosolova H
journal: Curr Atheroscler Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s11883-023-01167-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Obesity and Dyslipidemia.
**Authors:** Nussbaumerova B, Rosolova H
**Journal:** Curr Atheroscler Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11883-023-01167-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11883-023-01167-2)

## Content

1. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2023 Dec;25(12):947-955. doi:
10.1007/s11883-023-01167-2.  Epub 2023 Nov 18.

Obesity and Dyslipidemia.

Nussbaumerova B(1), Rosolova H(2).

Author information:
(1)2nd Medical Department, Chales University, Faculty of Medicine in Pilsen, 
alej Svobody 76, Plzen (Pilsen), 323 00, Czech Republic. 
nussbaumerova@fnplzen.cz.
(2)2nd Medical Department, Chales University, Faculty of Medicine in Pilsen, 
alej Svobody 76, Plzen (Pilsen), 323 00, Czech Republic.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This article sumarizes pathopysiological consequencies 
between obesity and dyslipidemia and aims to bring some practical approach.
RECENT FINDINGS: Dyslipidemia is often present in individuals with obesity and 
simultaneusly, many obese individuals have lipid metabolism disorders. 
Especially the abdominal obesity increases the cardiometabolic risk because of 
the presence of atherogenic dyslipidemia while the total low density lipoprotein 
cholesterol (LDL-C) may be normal. LDL-C is the primary goal in dyslipidemia 
treatment. Apoliprotein B (Apo B) and non - high density lipoprotein cholesterol 
(non-HDL-C) should be estimated to precise the cardiovascular risk and 
represents the secondary goal in treatment. Weight loss either with diet or 
antiobestic medication induces the decrease in triglycerides (TG) and LDL-C and 
the increase in HDL-C. Composition of nutrients, esp. fatty acids, influences 
lipid levels. Bariatric surgery is efficient in weight loss and has a 
significant effect on serum lipids. Dyslipidemia and obesity present common 
diseases that must be managed to decrease the cardiovascular risk and the risk 
of obesity-related complications.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11883-023-01167-2
PMID: 37979064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]