---
reference_id: "PMID:17577053"
title: Comparative analysis of host-cell signalling mechanisms activated in response to infection with Rickettsia conorii and Rickettsia typhi.
authors:
- Rydkina E
- Sahni A
- Silverman DJ
- Sahni SK
journal: J Med Microbiol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.47050-0
keywords:
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chemokines/metabolism
- "Endothelial Cells/immunology, microbiology"
- Humans
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
- "Rickettsia conorii/immunology, pathogenicity"
- "Rickettsia typhi/immunology, pathogenicity"
- Signal Transduction/immunology
- p38 Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative analysis of host-cell signalling mechanisms activated in response to infection with Rickettsia conorii and Rickettsia typhi.
**Authors:** Rydkina E, Sahni A, Silverman DJ, Sahni SK
**Journal:** J Med Microbiol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1099/jmm.0.47050-0](https://doi.org/10.1099/jmm.0.47050-0)

## Content

1. J Med Microbiol. 2007 Jul;56(Pt 7):896-906. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.47050-0.

Comparative analysis of host-cell signalling mechanisms activated in response to
infection with Rickettsia conorii and Rickettsia typhi.

Rydkina E(1), Sahni A(1), Silverman DJ(2), Sahni SK(1).

Author information:
(1)Hematology-Oncology Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Rochester
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

The Gram-negative intracellular bacteria Rickettsia conorii and Rickettsia typhi
are the aetiological agents of Mediterranean spotted fever and endemic typhus,
respectively, in humans. Infection of endothelial cells (ECs) lining vessel
walls, and the resultant vascular inflammation and haemostatic alterations are
salient pathogenetic features of both of these rickettsial diseases. An
important consideration, however, is that dramatic differences in the
intracellular motility and accumulation patterns for spotted fever versus typhus
group rickettsiae have been documented, suggesting the possibility of unique and
potentially different interactions with host cells. This study characterized and
compared R. conorii- and R. typhi-mediated effects on cultured human ECs. The
DNA-binding activity of nuclear transcription factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) and the
phosphorylation status of stress-activated p38 kinase were determined as
indicators of NF-kappaB and p38 activation. R. conorii infection resulted in a
biphasic activation of NF-kappaB, with an early increase in DNA-binding activity
at 3 h, followed by a later peak at 24 h. The activated NF-kappaB species were
composed mainly of RelA p65-p50 heterodimers and p50 homodimers. R. typhi
infection of ECs resulted in only early activation of NF-kappaB at 3 h, composed
primarily of p65-p50 heterodimers. Whilst R. conorii infection induced increased
phosphorylation of p38 kinase (threefold mean induction) with the maximal
response at 3 h, a considerably less-intense response peaking at about 6 h
post-infection was found with R. typhi. Furthermore, mRNA expression of the
chemokines interleukin (IL)-8 and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 in ECs
infected with either Rickettsia species was higher than the corresponding
controls, but there were distinct differences in the secretion patterns for
IL-8, suggesting the possibility of involvement of post-transcriptional control
mechanisms or differences in the release from intracellular storage sites. Thus,
the intensity and kinetics of host-cell responses triggered by spotted fever and
typhus species exhibit distinct variations that could subsequently lead to
differences in the extent of endothelial activation and inflammation and serve
as important determinants of pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.47050-0
PMID: 17577053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
