---
reference_id: "PMID:39408941"
title: The Role of the Extracellular Matrix in the Pathogenesis and Treatment of Pulmonary Emphysema.
authors:
- Cantor J
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms251910613
keywords:
- Humans
- Extracellular Matrix/metabolism
- "Pulmonary Emphysema/metabolism, drug therapy, pathology, etiology"
- Animals
- Elastin/metabolism
- Hyaluronic Acid/metabolism
- "Pulmonary Alveoli/metabolism, pathology"
- "Elastic Tissue/metabolism, pathology"
- Desmosine/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of the Extracellular Matrix in the Pathogenesis and Treatment of Pulmonary Emphysema.
**Authors:** Cantor J
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms251910613](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms251910613)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Oct 2;25(19):10613. doi: 10.3390/ijms251910613.

The Role of the Extracellular Matrix in the Pathogenesis and Treatment of 
Pulmonary Emphysema.

Cantor J(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy and Allied Health Sciences, St John's University, Queens, 
NY 11439, USA.

Pulmonary emphysema involves progressive destruction of alveolar walls, leading 
to enlarged air spaces and impaired gas exchange. While the precise mechanisms 
responsible for these changes remain unclear, there is growing evidence that the 
extracellular matrix plays a critical role in the process. An essential feature 
of pulmonary emphysema is damage to the elastic fiber network surrounding the 
airspaces, which stores the energy needed to expel air from the lungs. The 
degradation of these fibers disrupts the mechanical forces involved in 
respiration, resulting in distension and rupture of alveolar walls. While the 
initial repair process mainly consists of elastin degradation and resynthesis, 
continued alveolar wall injury may be associated with increased collagen 
deposition, resulting in a mixed pattern of emphysema and interstitial fibrosis. 
Due to the critical role of elastic fiber injury in pulmonary emphysema, 
preventing damage to this matrix component has emerged as a potential 
therapeutic strategy. One treatment approach involves the intratracheal 
administration of hyaluronan, a polysaccharide that prevents elastin breakdown 
by binding to lung elastic fibers. In clinical trials, inhalation of aerosolized 
HA decreased elastic fiber injury, as measured by the release of the 
elastin-specific cross-linking amino acids, desmosine, and isodesmosine. By 
protecting elastic fibers from enzymatic and oxidative damage, aerosolized HA 
could alter the natural history of pulmonary emphysema, thereby reducing the 
risk of respiratory failure.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms251910613
PMCID: PMC11477147
PMID: 39408941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Jerome Cantor is an inventor on USPTO patent 
number 10933084 entitled “Compositions and Methods for Treating Elastic Fiber 
Breakdown”.