---
reference_id: "PMID:36831464"
title: "Rare Neuronal, Glial and Glioneuronal Tumours in Adults."
authors:
- Crainic N
- Furtner J
- Pallud J
- Bielle F
- Lombardi G
- Rudà R
- Idbaih A
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cancers15041120
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rare Neuronal, Glial and Glioneuronal Tumours in Adults.
**Authors:** Crainic N, Furtner J, Pallud J, Bielle F, Lombardi G, Rudà R, Idbaih A
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers15041120](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers15041120)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Feb 9;15(4):1120. doi: 10.3390/cancers15041120.

Rare Neuronal, Glial and Glioneuronal Tumours in Adults.

Crainic N(1)(2), Furtner J(3)(4), Pallud J(5)(6), Bielle F(7), Lombardi G(8), 
Rudà R(9)(10), Idbaih A(1).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Université, Institut du Cerveau-Paris Brain Institute-ICM, Inserm, 
CNRS, AP-HP, Hôpital Universitaire La Pitié Salpêtrière, DMU Neurosciences, 
Service de Neurologie 2, 75013 Paris, France.
(2)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Brest, 29200 Brest, France.
(3)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy, Medical University 
of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(4)Research Center of Medical Image Analysis and Artificial Intelligence 
(MIAAI), Danube Private University, 3500 Krems, Austria.
(5)Service de Neurochirurgie, GHU Paris Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, Hôpital 
Sainte-Anne, 75014 Paris, France.
(6)Institute of Psychiatry and Neuroscience of Paris, IMABRAIN, INSERM U1266, 
Université de Paris, 75014 Paris, France.
(7)Sorbonne Université, Institut du Cerveau-Paris Brain Institute-ICM, Inserm, 
CNRS, AP-HP, Hôpital Universitaire La Pitié Salpêtrière, DMU Neurosciences, 
Service de Neuropathologie, 75013 Paris, France.
(8)Department of Oncology, Oncology 1, Veneto Institute of Oncology-IRCCS, 35128 
Padua, Italy.
(9)Division of Neurology, Castelfranco Veneto and Treviso Hospitals, 31033 
Treviso, Italy.
(10)Department of Neuro-Oncology, University of Turin, 10126 Turin, Italy.

Rare glial, neuronal and glioneuronal tumours in adults form a heterogeneous 
group of rare, primary central nervous system tumours. These tumours, with a 
glial and/or neuronal component, are challenging in terms of diagnosis and 
therapeutic management. The novel classification of primary brain tumours 
published by the WHO in 2021 has significantly improved the diagnostic criteria 
of these entities. Indeed, diagnostic criteria are nowadays multimodal, 
including histological, immunohistochemical and molecular (i.e., genetic and 
methylomic). These integrated parameters have allowed the specification of 
already known tumours but also the identification of novel tumours for a better 
diagnosis.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15041120
PMCID: PMC9954092
PMID: 36831464

Conflict of interest statement: A.I. reports research grants and others from 
Carthera, Transgene, Sanofi, Nutritheragene; travel funding from Enterome and 
Carthera; personal fees and other from Leo Pharma, Novocure, Novartis, and 
Boehringer Ingelheim outside the submitted work. The other authors declare no 
conflict of interest.