---
reference_id: "PMID:41453694"
title: "Advances in understanding the neurotoxicity of lead, cadmium, arsenic, and therapeutic strategies."
authors:
- Li YL
- Huang ZX
- Peng JC
- Ho TT
- Huang H
- Aschner M
- Jiang YM
journal: Toxicol Lett
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2025.111810
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances in understanding the neurotoxicity of lead, cadmium, arsenic, and therapeutic strategies.
**Authors:** Li YL, Huang ZX, Peng JC, Ho TT, Huang H, Aschner M, Jiang YM
**Journal:** Toxicol Lett (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.toxlet.2025.111810](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.toxlet.2025.111810)

## Content

1. Toxicol Lett. 2026 Jan;415:111810. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2025.111810. Epub
2025  Dec 24.

Advances in understanding the neurotoxicity of lead, cadmium, arsenic, and 
therapeutic strategies.

Li YL(1), Huang ZX(1), Peng JC(1), Ho TT(1), Huang H(1), Aschner M(2), Jiang 
YM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Toxicology, School of Public Health, Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning 530021, China; Key Laboratory of Prevention and Control of 
Highly Prevalent Diseases (Guangxi Medical University), Education Department of 
Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, Nanning 530021, China.
(2)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
(3)Department of Toxicology, School of Public Health, Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning 530021, China; Key Laboratory of Prevention and Control of 
Highly Prevalent Diseases (Guangxi Medical University), Education Department of 
Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, Nanning 530021, China. Electronic address: 
ymjianggxmu@163.com.

The rapid progression of industrialization and urbanization has intensified the 
public health threat posed by heavy metal pollution. Among these, lead (Pb), 
cadmium (Cd), and arsenic (As) are pervasive environmental toxicants capable of 
entering the human body via multiple exposure routes, leading to profound 
neurotoxic effects. Conventional chelation therapy, when used long-term, can 
lead to renal and gastrointestinal diseases. This review aims to summarize the 
neurotoxicity mechanisms of Pb, Cd, and As. Additionally, it focuses on the 
latest advancements in therapeutic strategies for their neurotoxicity. 
Particular emphasis is placed on evaluating research progress of 
nanoparticle-assisted therapeutic approaches. It is expected that this review 
will offer theoretical and empirical support and research insights for the 
development of more efficient therapeutic methods in the future.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2025.111810
PMID: 41453694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.