---
reference_id: "PMID:36307212"
title: Discovery and functional characterization of the oncogenicity and targetability of a novel NOTCH1-ROS1 gene fusion in pediatric angiosarcoma.
authors:
- Jain P
- Iyer S
- Straka J
- Surrey LF
- Pogoriler J
- Han H
- Smith T
- Busch C
- Fox E
- Li M
- Waanders AJ
- Resnick A
- Davare MA
journal: Cold Spring Harb Mol Case Stud
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1101/mcs.a006222
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Mice
- Animals
- "Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Hemangiosarcoma/drug therapy, genetics"
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- NIH 3T3 Cells
- Gene Fusion
- "Receptor, Notch1/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Discovery and functional characterization of the oncogenicity and targetability of a novel NOTCH1-ROS1 gene fusion in pediatric angiosarcoma.
**Authors:** Jain P, Iyer S, Straka J, Surrey LF, Pogoriler J, Han H, Smith T, Busch C, Fox E, Li M, Waanders AJ, Resnick A, Davare MA
**Journal:** Cold Spring Harb Mol Case Stud (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1101/mcs.a006222](https://doi.org/10.1101/mcs.a006222)

## Content

1. Cold Spring Harb Mol Case Stud. 2022 Oct 28;8(6):a006222. doi:
10.1101/mcs.a006222. Print 2022 Oct.

Discovery and functional characterization of the oncogenicity and targetability
of a novel NOTCH1-ROS1 gene fusion in pediatric angiosarcoma.

Jain P(1)(2), Iyer S(3), Straka J(1)(2), Surrey LF(4)(5), Pogoriler J(4)(5), Han
H(1)(2), Smith T(1)(2), Busch C(6), Fox E(6), Li M(4)(5), Waanders AJ(7)(8),
Resnick A(#)(1)(2), Davare MA(#)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Data Driven Discovery in Biomedicine, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
(2)Division of Neurosurgery, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health and Sciences University, Portland,
Oregon 97239, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
(6)Division of Oncology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Feinberg School of Medicine Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.
(8)Division of Hematology, Oncology, and Stem Cell Transplant, Ann & Robert H
Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Angiosarcomas are rare, malignant soft tissue tumors in children that arise in a
wide range of anatomical locations and have limited targeted therapies
available. Here, we report a rare case of a pediatric angiosarcoma (pAS) with
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) expressing a novel NOTCH1-ROS1 gene fusion. Although
both NOTCH1 and ROS1 are established proto-oncogenes, our study is the first to
describe the mechanistic role of NOTCH1-ROS1 fusion arising via intrachromosomal
rearrangement. NOTCH1-ROS1 displayed potent neoplastic transformation propensity
in vitro, and harbors tumorigenic potential in vivo, where it induced oncogenic
activation of the MAPK, PI3K/mTOR, and JAK-STAT signaling pathways in a murine
allograft model. We found an unexpected contribution of the NOTCH1 extracellular
region in mediating NOTCH1-ROS1 activation and oncogenic function, highlighting
the contribution of both NOTCH1 and ROS1 fusion partners in driving
tumorigenicity. Interestingly, neither membrane localization nor fusion protein
dimerization were found to be essential for NOTCH1-ROS1 fusion oncogenicity. To
target NOTCH1-ROS1-driven tumors, we tested both NOTCH1-directed inhibitors and
ROS1-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) in heterologous models (NIH3T3,
Ba/F3). Although NOTCH1 inhibitors did not suppress NOTCH1-ROS1-driven oncogenic
growth, we found that oral entrectinib treatment effectively suppressed the
growth of NOTCH-ROS1-driven tumors. Taken together, we report the first known
pAS case with a novel NOTCH1-ROS1 alteration along with a detailed report on the
function and therapeutic targeting of NOTCH1-ROS1. Our study highlights the
importance of genomic profiling of rare cancers such as pAS to reveal actionable
drivers and improve patient outcomes.

© 2022 Jain et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/mcs.a006222
PMCID: PMC9632357
PMID: 36307212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
