---
reference_id: "PMID:22653730"
title: A Papaver somniferum 10-gene cluster for synthesis of the anticancer alkaloid noscapine.
authors:
- Winzer T
- Gazda V
- He Z
- Kaminski F
- Kern M
- Larson TR
- Li Y
- Meade F
- Teodor R
- Vaistij FE
- Walker C
- Bowser TA
- Graham IA
journal: Science
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1126/science.1220757
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Papaver somniferum 10-gene cluster for synthesis of the anticancer alkaloid noscapine.
**Authors:** Winzer T, Gazda V, He Z, Kaminski F, Kern M, Larson TR, Li Y, Meade F, Teodor R, Vaistij FE, Walker C, Bowser TA, Graham IA
**Journal:** Science (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1220757](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1220757)

## Content

1. Science. 2012 Jun 29;336(6089):1704-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1220757. Epub 2012
 May 31.

A Papaver somniferum 10-gene cluster for synthesis of the anticancer alkaloid 
noscapine.

Winzer T(1), Gazda V, He Z, Kaminski F, Kern M, Larson TR, Li Y, Meade F, Teodor 
R, Vaistij FE, Walker C, Bowser TA, Graham IA.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Novel Agricultural Products, Department of Biology, University of 
York, York YO10 5DD, UK.

Comment in
    Science. 2012 Jun 29;336(6089):1648-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1225473.

Noscapine is an antitumor alkaloid from opium poppy that binds tubulin, arrests 
metaphase, and induces apoptosis in dividing human cells. Elucidation of the 
biosynthetic pathway will enable improvement in the commercial production of 
noscapine and related bioactive molecules. Transcriptomic analysis revealed the 
exclusive expression of 10 genes encoding five distinct enzyme classes in a high 
noscapine-producing poppy variety, HN1. Analysis of an F(2) mapping population 
indicated that these genes are tightly linked in HN1, and bacterial artificial 
chromosome sequencing confirmed that they exist as a complex gene cluster for 
plant alkaloids. Virus-induced gene silencing resulted in accumulation of 
pathway intermediates, allowing gene function to be linked to noscapine 
synthesis and a novel biosynthetic pathway to be proposed.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1220757
PMID: 22653730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]