---
reference_id: "PMID:36707871"
title: "Leading co-production in five UK collaborative research partnerships (2008-2018): responses to four tensions from senior leaders using auto-ethnography."
authors:
- van der Graaf P
- Kislov R
- Smith H
- Langley J
- Hamer N
- Cheetham M
- Wolstenholme D
- Cooke J
- Mawson S
journal: Implement Sci Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s43058-022-00385-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Leading co-production in five UK collaborative research partnerships (2008-2018): responses to four tensions from senior leaders using auto-ethnography.
**Authors:** van der Graaf P, Kislov R, Smith H, Langley J, Hamer N, Cheetham M, Wolstenholme D, Cooke J, Mawson S
**Journal:** Implement Sci Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s43058-022-00385-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s43058-022-00385-0)

## Content

1. Implement Sci Commun. 2023 Jan 27;4(1):12. doi: 10.1186/s43058-022-00385-0.

Leading co-production in five UK collaborative research partnerships 
(2008-2018): responses to four tensions from senior leaders using 
auto-ethnography.

van der Graaf P(1), Kislov R(2)(3), Smith H(4), Langley J(5), Hamer N(6), 
Cheetham M(7), Wolstenholme D(8), Cooke J(9), Mawson S(9).

Author information:
(1)Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. 
peter.graaf@northumbria.ac.uk.
(2)Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, UK.
(3)University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(4)National Institute for Health and Care Research, Liverpool, UK.
(5)Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield, UK.
(6)Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(7)Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(8)Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, London, UK.
(9)Sheffield University, Sheffield, UK.

Erratum in
    Implement Sci Commun. 2023 Feb 24;4(1):19. doi: 10.1186/s43058-023-00401-x.

BACKGROUND: Despite growing enthusiasm for co-production in healthcare services 
and research, research on co-production practices is lacking. Multiple 
frameworks, guidelines and principles are available but little empirical 
research is conducted on 'how to do' co-production of research to improve 
healthcare services. This paper brings together insights from UK-based 
collaborative research partnerships on leading co-production. Its aim is to 
inform practical guidance for new partnerships planning to facilitate the 
co-production of applied health research in the future.
METHODS: Using an auto-ethnographic approach, experiential evidence was elicited 
through collective sense making from recorded conversations between the research 
team and senior leaders of five UK-based collaborative research partnerships. 
This approach applies a cultural analysis and interpretation of the leaders' 
behaviours, thoughts and experiences of co-production taking place in 2008-2018 
and involving academics, health practitioners, policy makers and representatives 
of third sector organisations.
RESULTS: The findings highlight a variety of practices across CLAHRCs, whereby 
the intersection between the senior leaders' vision and local organisational 
context in which co-production occurs largely determines the nature of 
co-production process and outcomes. We identified four tensions in doing 
co-production: (1) idealistic, tokenistic vs realistic narratives, (2) power 
differences and (lack of) reciprocity, (3) excluding vs including language and 
communication, (4) individual motivation vs structural issues.
CONCLUSIONS: The tensions were productive in helping collaborative research 
partnerships to tailor co-production practices to their local needs and 
opportunities. Resulting variation in co-production practices across 
partnerships can therefore be seen as highly advantageous creative adaptation, 
which makes us question the utility of seeking a unified 'gold standard' of 
co-production. Strategic leadership is an important starting point for finding 
context-tailored solutions; however, development of more distributed forms of 
leadership over time is needed to facilitate co-production practices between 
partners. Facilitating structures for co-production can enable power sharing and 
boost capacity and capability building, resulting in more inclusive language and 
communication and, ultimately, more credible practices of co-production in 
research. We provide recommendations for creating more realistic narratives 
around co-production and facilitating power sharing between partners.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s43058-022-00385-0
PMCID: PMC9883908
PMID: 36707871

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.