---
reference_id: "PMID:26610379"
title: In Vivo NMR Studies of the Brain with Hereditary or Acquired Metabolic Disorders.
authors:
- Sherry EB
- Lee P
- Choi IY
journal: Neurochem Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s11064-015-1772-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In Vivo NMR Studies of the Brain with Hereditary or Acquired Metabolic Disorders.
**Authors:** Sherry EB, Lee P, Choi IY
**Journal:** Neurochem Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11064-015-1772-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11064-015-1772-1)

## Content

1. Neurochem Res. 2015 Dec;40(12):2647-85. doi: 10.1007/s11064-015-1772-1. Epub 
2015 Nov 26.

In Vivo NMR Studies of the Brain with Hereditary or Acquired Metabolic 
Disorders.

Sherry EB(1), Lee P(1)(2), Choi IY(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Hoglund Brain Imaging Center, University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 
Rainbow Blvd, Mail Stop 1052, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA.
(2)The Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas 
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA.
(3)Hoglund Brain Imaging Center, University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 
Rainbow Blvd, Mail Stop 1052, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA. ichoi@kumc.edu.
(4)The Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas 
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA. ichoi@kumc.edu.
(5)The Department of Neurology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas 
City, KS, USA. ichoi@kumc.edu.

Metabolic disorders, whether hereditary or acquired, affect the brain, and 
abnormalities of the brain are related to cellular integrity; particularly in 
regard to neurons and astrocytes as well as interactions between them. Metabolic 
disturbances lead to alterations in cellular function as well as microscopic and 
macroscopic structural changes in the brain with diabetes, the most typical 
example of metabolic disorders, and a number of hereditary metabolic disorders. 
Alternatively, cellular dysfunction and degeneration of the brain lead to 
metabolic disturbances in hereditary neurological disorders with 
neurodegeneration. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques allow us to 
assess a range of pathophysiological changes of the brain in vivo. For example, 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy detects alterations in brain metabolism and 
energetics. Physiological magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) detects accompanying 
changes in cerebral blood flow related to neurovascular coupling. Diffusion and 
T1/T2-weighted MRI detect microscopic and macroscopic changes of the brain 
structure. This review summarizes current NMR findings of functional, 
physiological and biochemical alterations within a number of hereditary and 
acquired metabolic disorders in both animal models and humans. The global view 
of the impact of these metabolic disorders on the brain may be useful in 
identifying the unique and/or general patterns of abnormalities in the living 
brain related to the pathophysiology of the diseases, and identifying future 
fields of inquiry.

DOI: 10.1007/s11064-015-1772-1
PMID: 26610379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]