---
reference_id: "PMID:29617304"
title: The Pathological Spectrum of Systemic Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma (ALCL).
authors:
- Montes-Mojarro IA
- Steinhilber J
- Bonzheim I
- Quintanilla-Martinez L
- Fend F
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3390/cancers10040107
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Pathological Spectrum of Systemic Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma (ALCL).
**Authors:** Montes-Mojarro IA, Steinhilber J, Bonzheim I, Quintanilla-Martinez L, Fend F
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers10040107](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers10040107)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2018 Apr 4;10(4):107. doi: 10.3390/cancers10040107.

The Pathological Spectrum of Systemic Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma (ALCL).

Montes-Mojarro IA(1), Steinhilber J(2), Bonzheim I(3), Quintanilla-Martinez
L(4), Fend F(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology and Neuropathology and Comprehensive Cancer Center
Tübingen, Eberhard-Karls-University, Liebermeisterstraße 8, 72076 Tübingen,
Germany. Ivonne.Montes@med.uni-tuebingen.de.
(2)Institute of Pathology and Neuropathology and Comprehensive Cancer Center
Tübingen, Eberhard-Karls-University, Liebermeisterstraße 8, 72076 Tübingen,
Germany. Julia.Steinhilber@med.uni-tuebingen.de.
(3)Institute of Pathology and Neuropathology and Comprehensive Cancer Center
Tübingen, Eberhard-Karls-University, Liebermeisterstraße 8, 72076 Tübingen,
Germany. Irina.Bonzheim@med.uni-tuebingen.de.
(4)Institute of Pathology and Neuropathology and Comprehensive Cancer Center
Tübingen, Eberhard-Karls-University, Liebermeisterstraße 8, 72076 Tübingen,
Germany. Leticia.Quintanilla-Fend@med.uni-tuebingen.de.
(5)Institute of Pathology and Neuropathology and Comprehensive Cancer Center
Tübingen, Eberhard-Karls-University, Liebermeisterstraße 8, 72076 Tübingen,
Germany. Falko.Fend@med.uni-tuebingen.de.

Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) represents a group of malignant T-cell
lymphoproliferations that share morphological and immunophenotypical features,
namely strong CD30 expression and variable loss of T-cell markers, but differ in
clinical presentation and prognosis. The recognition of anaplastic lymphoma
kinase (ALK) fusion proteins as a result of chromosomal translocations or
inversions was the starting point for the distinction of different subgroups of
ALCL. According to their distinct clinical settings and molecular findings, the
2016 revised World Health Organization (WHO) classification recognizes four
different entities: systemic ALK-positive ALCL (ALK+ ALCL), systemic
ALK-negative ALCL (ALK&minus; ALCL), primary cutaneous ALCL (pC-ALCL), and
breast implant-associated ALCL (BI-ALCL), the latter included as a provisional
entity. ALK is rearranged in approximately 80% of systemic ALCL cases with one
of its partner genes, most commonly NPM1, and is associated with favorable
prognosis, whereas systemic ALK&minus; ALCL shows heterogeneous clinical,
phenotypical, and genetic features, underlining the different oncogenesis
between these two entities. Recognition of the pathological spectrum of ALCL is
crucial to understand its pathogenesis and its boundaries with other entities.
In this review, we will focus on the morphological, immunophenotypical, and
molecular features of systemic ALK+ and ALK&minus; ALCL. In addition, BI-ALCL
will be discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers10040107
PMCID: PMC5923362
PMID: 29617304

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
