---
reference_id: "PMID:11207871"
title: Late-onset multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Polliack ML
- Barak Y
- Achiron A
journal: J Am Geriatr Soc
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1046/j.1532-5415.2001.49038.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Late-onset multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Polliack ML, Barak Y, Achiron A
**Journal:** J Am Geriatr Soc (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1532-5415.2001.49038.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1532-5415.2001.49038.x)

## Content

1. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2001 Feb;49(2):168-71. doi:
10.1046/j.1532-5415.2001.49038.x.

Late-onset multiple sclerosis.

Polliack ML(1), Barak Y, Achiron A.

Author information:
(1)Multiple Sclerosis Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel.

OBJECTIVE: The onset of multiple sclerosis (MS) after age 50 is infrequent and 
presents a diagnostic challenge. The purpose of the present study was to review 
the prevalence, presentation, and clinical characteristics of late-onset MS.
DESIGN: A retrospective chart review.
SETTING: The Multiple Sclerosis Center at Sheba Medical Center, Israel.
PARTICIPANTS: 640 patients with a definite diagnosis of MS.
MEASUREMENTS: Diagnosis of MS was established according to Poser criteria and 
confirmed by brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) using our unit's 
computerized database. Late-onset MS was defined as the first presentation of 
clinical symptoms after the age of 50 years. For each patient, age, gender, 
clinical presentation, disease course, neurological involvement, disease 
duration, neurological disability assessed, and Progression Index (PI) were 
analyzed. All patients were interviewed using the structured clinical interview 
for DSM-IV, SCID-lifetime Hebrew version.
RESULTS: Of 640 MS patients, 30 (4.6%) were diagnosed as suffering from 
late-onset MS. Mean age at onset was 53.5 +/- 3.1, range 50 to 62 years. Female 
to male ratio was 1.73:1. Mean disease duration was 7.6 years, range 2 to 11 
years. In 50% of patients the disease course was relapsing-remitting. Motor 
symptoms were the most common neurological presentation at onset (63.3%). Major 
depressive episode was diagnosed in 6 out of 30 patients (20%) in the two years 
prior to the diagnosis of MS. After a mean disease duration of 7.6 years there 
was a marked increase in sphincteric and cerebellar involvement. In addition 7 
out of 30 patients had suffered a major depressive episode within 4 years of 
diagnosis. Mean PI was 0.81, suggesting rapid neurological deterioration.
CONCLUSIONS: Late-onset MS is not rare and may present as major depression and, 
although neurological presentation at onset is similar to that of young adults, 
progression to disability is more rapid and a primary progressive course is more 
prevalent.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1532-5415.2001.49038.x
PMID: 11207871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]