---
reference_id: "PMID:19012988"
title: Primary Budd-Chiari syndrome.
authors:
- Valla DC
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2008.10.007
keywords:
- Angioplasty
- "Budd-Chiari Syndrome/etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Diuretics
- Hepatic Veins/physiopathology
- Humans
- Janus Kinase 2/genetics
- Liver Transplantation
- Mutation/genetics
- Regional Blood Flow/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary Budd-Chiari syndrome.
**Authors:** Valla DC
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2008.10.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2008.10.007)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2009 Jan;50(1):195-203. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2008.10.007. Epub 2008 
Oct 26.

Primary Budd-Chiari syndrome.

Valla DC(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Référence des Maladies Vasculaires du Foie, AP-HP, Hôpital Beaujon, 
Service d'Hépatologie, Clichy 92118, France. dominique.valla@bjn.aphp.fr

Primary Budd-Chiari syndrome is characterized by a blocked hepatic venous 
outflow tract at various levels from small hepatic veins to inferior vena cava, 
resulting from thrombosis or its fibrous sequellae. This rare disease affects 
mainly young adults. Multiple risk factors have been identified and are often 
combined in the same patient. Myeloproliferative diseases of atypical 
presentation account for nearly 50% of patients; their diagnosis can be made by 
showing the V617F mutation in Janus tyrosine kinase-2 gene of peripheral blood 
granulocytes and, should this mutation be absent, by showing clusters of 
dystrophic megacaryocytes at bone marrow biopsy. Presentation and manifestations 
are extremely varied, so that the diagnosis must be considered in any patient 
with acute or chronic liver disease. Doppler-ultrasound, computed tomography or 
magnetic resonance imaging of hepatic veins and inferior vena cava are usually 
successful in demonstrating non-invasively the obstacle or its consequences, the 
collaterals to hepatic veins or inferior vena cava. The disease is considered to 
be spontaneously lethal within 3 years of first symptoms. A therapeutic strategy 
has been proposed where anticoagulation, correction of risk factors, diuretics 
and prophylaxis for portal hypertension are used first; then angioplasty for 
short-length venous stenoses; then TIPS; and ultimately liver transplantation. 
Treatment progression is dictated by the response to previous therapy. This 
strategy has achieved 5-year survival rates approaching 90%. Medium-term 
prognosis depends on the severity of liver disease. Long-term outcome might be 
jeopardized by transformation of underlying conditions and hepatocellular 
carcinoma.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2008.10.007
PMID: 19012988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]