---
reference_id: "PMID:31296348"
title: A patient with early-onset Alzheimer's disease with a novel PSEN1 p.Leu424Pro mutation.
authors:
- Guven G
- Erginel-Unaltuna N
- Samanci B
- Gulec C
- Hanagasi H
- Bilgic B
journal: Neurobiol Aging
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2019.05.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A patient with early-onset Alzheimer's disease with a novel PSEN1 p.Leu424Pro mutation.
**Authors:** Guven G, Erginel-Unaltuna N, Samanci B, Gulec C, Hanagasi H, Bilgic B
**Journal:** Neurobiol Aging (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2019.05.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2019.05.014)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Aging. 2019 Dec;84:238.e1-238.e4. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2019.05.014. Epub 2019 Jun 13.

A patient with early-onset Alzheimer's disease with a novel PSEN1 p.Leu424Pro 
mutation.

Guven G(1), Erginel-Unaltuna N(2), Samanci B(3), Gulec C(4), Hanagasi H(3), 
Bilgic B(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Aziz Sancar Institute of Experimental Medicine, 
Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. Electronic address: zgamzee@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Genetics, Aziz Sancar Institute of Experimental Medicine, 
Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Department of Neurology, Behavioral Neurology and Movement Disorders Unit, 
Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul 
University, Istanbul, Turkey.

"Presenilin 1" (PSEN1) gene mutations are the major known genetic cause of 
early-onset Alzheimer's disease. Herein, we report a novel heterozygous PSEN1 
mutation (p.Leu424Pro) in a Turkish patient presenting with deterioration of 
short-term memory and visuospatial skills starting at the age of 47 years. This 
novel mutation is located in the conserved residue of transmembrane domain 8 
coded by exon 12. At the protein level, this mutation caused a disruption in the 
alpha helix structure of PSEN1. The structural and possible functional 
consequences of the mutation suggest that it has probably a pathogenic effect, 
which in turns had a potential role in the development of Alzheimer's disease in 
our patient.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2019.05.014
PMID: 31296348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]