---
reference_id: "PMID:34986968"
title: Review of Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorder with Pain-Depression Comorbidity.
authors:
- Zhang X
- Xu Y
- Pei LJ
journal: Chin Med Sci J
year: '2021'
doi: 10.24920/003859
keywords:
- Comorbidity
- Depression/epidemiology
- Humans
- "Neuromyelitis Optica/complications, epidemiology"
- Pain
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review of Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorder with Pain-Depression Comorbidity.
**Authors:** Zhang X, Xu Y, Pei LJ
**Journal:** Chin Med Sci J (2021)
**DOI:** [10.24920/003859](https://doi.org/10.24920/003859)

## Content

1. Chin Med Sci J. 2021 Dec 31;36(4):316-322. doi: 10.24920/003859.

Review of Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorder with Pain-Depression 
Comorbidity.

Zhang X(1), Xu Y(2), Pei LJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, 
China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, 
China.

Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) is an inflammatory disorder of 
the central nervous system predominantly targeting optic nerves and the spinal 
cord. The prevalence of the disease is much higher in Asia than in other parts 
of the world. Pain can be detected in more than 80% of NMOSD patients, with 
evoked pain mostly being caused by painful tonic muscle spasms and neuropathic 
pain as the most characteristic types. Depression is often comorbid with pain, 
and their comorbidity can severely influence quality of life. In recent years, 
studies have found considerable overlaps between the mechanisms of pain and 
depression; however, their association remains unclear. This article reviews the 
epidemiology, mechanism, evaluation and treatment of pain-depression comorbidity 
in NMOSD patients.

DOI: 10.24920/003859
PMID: 34986968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]