---
reference_id: "PMID:35307034"
title: Asthma and COPD exacerbation in relation to outdoor air pollution in the metropolitan area of Berlin, Germany.
authors:
- Hoffmann C
- Maglakelidze M
- von Schneidemesser E
- Witt C
- Hoffmann P
- Butler T
journal: Respir Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12931-022-01983-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Asthma and COPD exacerbation in relation to outdoor air pollution in the metropolitan area of Berlin, Germany.
**Authors:** Hoffmann C, Maglakelidze M, von Schneidemesser E, Witt C, Hoffmann P, Butler T
**Journal:** Respir Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12931-022-01983-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12931-022-01983-1)

## Content

1. Respir Res. 2022 Mar 20;23(1):64. doi: 10.1186/s12931-022-01983-1.

Asthma and COPD exacerbation in relation to outdoor air pollution in the 
metropolitan area of Berlin, Germany.

Hoffmann C(#)(1), Maglakelidze M(#)(2)(3), von Schneidemesser E(2), Witt C(4), 
Hoffmann P(#)(4), Butler T(#)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Outpatient Pneumology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 
Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353, Berlin, Germany. Christina.Hoffmann2@charite.de.
(2)Institute for Advanced Sustainability Studies e.V. (IASS), Potsdam, Germany.
(3)Petre Shotadze Tbilisi Medical Academy, Tbilisi, Georgia.
(4)Department of Outpatient Pneumology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 
Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353, Berlin, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Ambient air pollution poses a major risk for the development and 
aggravation of respiratory diseases. Evidence suggests that even in low-level 
air pollution environments there is a risk for an increase in adverse 
respiratory symptoms. We examined whether variations in daily air pollution 
levels of nitrogen dioxide, ozone, or particulate matter in Berlin, Germany were 
associated with hospital admissions of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) and asthma patients in a time series analysis.
METHODS: We calculated single and multi-pollutant models, investigated possible 
lags in effect, and analysed the influence of meteorological variables on the 
results. Data from January 2005 through December 2015 were used to quantify the 
concentration-response.
RESULTS: The risk ratio for asthma patients to be hospitalised on the same day 
of NO2 exposure was 1.101 per 10 µg/m3 NO2 increase (95% CI: 1.013 to 1.195), 
for COPD patients 1.123 (95% CI: 1.081 to 1.168). Neither the exposure to ozone 
(95% CI: 0.904 to 1.020), PM10 (95% CI: 0.990 to 1.127), nor PM2.5 (95% CI: 
0.981 to 1.148) was associated with an increased risk ratio for asthma patients 
to be hospitalised. Risk ratios for the hospital admission of COPD patients were 
also not increased due to ozone (95% CI: 0.981 to 1.033), PM10 (95% CI: 0.988 to 
1.032), or PM2.5 (95% CI: 0.966 to 1.019) exposure. The presented risk ratios 
and confidence intervals relate to the day of exposure. We found no increased 
hospitalisation risks with a delayed occurrence on subsequent days.
CONCLUSIONS: A quantifiable, statistically significant increase in risk for 
asthma and COPD exacerbations owing to NO2 exposure at levels well below 
European regulatory limit values was observed.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-022-01983-1
PMCID: PMC8935815
PMID: 35307034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.