---
reference_id: "PMID:23344888"
title: High risk of primary liver cancer in a cohort of 179 patients with Acute Hepatic Porphyria.
authors:
- Sardh E
- Wahlin S
- Björnstedt M
- Harper P
- Andersson DE
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-012-9576-9
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/epidemiology, etiology"
- Cohort Studies
- Disease Susceptibility
- Female
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Porphobilinogen Synthase/deficiency
- "Porphyrias, Hepatic/complications, epidemiology"
- Risk Factors
- Survival Analysis
- Sweden/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High risk of primary liver cancer in a cohort of 179 patients with Acute Hepatic Porphyria.
**Authors:** Sardh E, Wahlin S, Björnstedt M, Harper P, Andersson DE
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-012-9576-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-012-9576-9)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2013 Nov;36(6):1063-71. doi: 10.1007/s10545-012-9576-9.
Epub 2013 Jan 23.

High risk of primary liver cancer in a cohort of 179 patients with Acute Hepatic
Porphyria.

Sardh E(1), Wahlin S, Björnstedt M, Harper P, Andersson DE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm South
Hospital, 11883, Stockholm, Sweden, eliane.sardh@ki.se.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Previous studies have indicated a high risk of hepatocellular
carcinoma in acute hepatic porphyrias. In this retrospective study we present
the incidence of primary liver cancer and clinical characteristics in a cohort
of 179 acute porphyria patients above the age of 50 years.
METHODS: Twenty-three cases with primary liver cancer were found either by a
surveillance program or due to clinical suspicion. Standardized rate ratio was
used to estimate the relative risk of primary liver cancer after indirect
standardization. Survival data were calculated using the Kaplan-Meier method.
RESULTS: The mean age at diagnosis was 69 years. Hepatocellular carcinoma was
found in 19 patients while four patients had cholangiocarcinoma or a combination
of the two. Four patients had underlying cirrhosis. Mean tumour size was 4.3 cm
in the surveillance group and 10.3 cm in the non-surveillance group (p = 0.01).
The overall relative risk of primary liver cancer was 86 above the age of 50:
150 for women and 37 for men. Mean survival time was 5.7 years.
CONCLUSION: Acute hepatic porphyria carries a high risk of primary liver cancer
above the age of 50 which warrants ultrasound surveillance. Sex distribution and
frequency of cirrhosis differs from more common aetiologies of primary liver
cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-012-9576-9
PMID: 23344888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
