---
reference_id: "PMID:14683543"
title: Pilocytic and pilomyxoid hypothalamic/chiasmatic astrocytomas.
authors:
- Komotar RJ
- Burger PC
- Carson BS
- Brem H
- Olivi A
- Goldthwaite PT
- Tihan T
journal: Neurosurgery
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1227/01.neu.0000097266.89676.25
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Astrocytoma/mortality, pathology, therapy"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypothalamic Neoplasms/mortality, pathology, therapy"
- Infant
- Male
- "Myxoma/mortality, pathology, therapy"
- Survival Rate
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pilocytic and pilomyxoid hypothalamic/chiasmatic astrocytomas.
**Authors:** Komotar RJ, Burger PC, Carson BS, Brem H, Olivi A, Goldthwaite PT, Tihan T
**Journal:** Neurosurgery (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1227/01.neu.0000097266.89676.25](https://doi.org/10.1227/01.neu.0000097266.89676.25)

## Content

1. Neurosurgery. 2004 Jan;54(1):72-9; discussion 79-80. doi:
10.1227/01.neu.0000097266.89676.25.

Pilocytic and pilomyxoid hypothalamic/chiasmatic astrocytomas.

Komotar RJ(1), Burger PC, Carson BS, Brem H, Olivi A, Goldthwaite PT, Tihan T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, New York, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Pilocytic astrocytoma (PA) is a common type of pediatric brain tumor
that can arise within the hypothalamic/chiasmatic region and typically has an
excellent outcome. We identified a group of tumors, previously classified as
PAs, with unique histological features and aggressive behavior. This article
describes the clinicopathological features of these unusual neoplasms, which are
currently known as pilomyxoid astrocytomas (PMAs), to better differentiate them
from typical PAs.
METHODS: Medical information and surgical specimens were obtained for 42 PA
cases and 21 PMA cases. Patient demographic features, treatment modalities,
progression-free survival (PFS) times, overall survival (OS) times, and outcomes
were compared between the groups with nonparametric tests.
RESULTS: The PMA group included 12 male and 9 female patients. The PA group
included 27 male and 15 female patients. The mean ages at diagnosis for the PMA
and PA groups were 18 months (range, 2-84 mo) and 58 months (range, 4-189 mo),
respectively (P < 0.01). The mean PFS times for the PMA and PA groups were 26
and 147 months, respectively (P < 0.001). The mean OS times for the PMA and PA
groups were 63 and 213 months, respectively (P < 0.001). Sixteen patients with
PMAs (76%) experienced local recurrence, and three of those patients
demonstrated evidence of cerebrospinal fluid dissemination. Twenty-one patients
with PAs (50%) experienced local recurrence, none with evidence of cerebrospinal
fluid dissemination. Within the follow-up period, seven patients with PMAs (33%)
and seven patients with PAs (17%) died as a result of their disease. In an
age-matched set, the mean PFS times for the PMA and PA groups were 25 and 163
months, respectively (P < 0.01), and the mean OS times for the PMA and PA groups
were 60 and 233 months, respectively (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Hypothalamic/chiasmatic PMAs occurred in a significantly younger
population and were associated with substantially shorter PFS and OS times than
were typical PAs. Increased recognition of these lesions could affect the
prognosis and treatment of pediatric astrocytomas.

DOI: 10.1227/01.neu.0000097266.89676.25
PMID: 14683543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
