---
reference_id: "PMID:26849556"
title: Identifying Adult Dengue Patients at Low Risk for Clinically Significant Bleeding.
authors:
- Wong JG
- Thein TL
- Leo YS
- Pang J
- Lye DC
journal: PLoS One
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148579
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identifying Adult Dengue Patients at Low Risk for Clinically Significant Bleeding.
**Authors:** Wong JG, Thein TL, Leo YS, Pang J, Lye DC
**Journal:** PLoS One (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0148579](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0148579)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 5;11(2):e0148579. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148579. 
eCollection 2016.

Identifying Adult Dengue Patients at Low Risk for Clinically Significant 
Bleeding.

Wong JG(1)(2), Thein TL(1), Leo YS(1)(3)(4)(5), Pang J(1)(4), Lye DC(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Infectious Disease and Epidemiology, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(3)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Clinically significant bleeding is important for subsequent optimal 
case management in dengue patients, but most studies have focused on dengue 
severity as an outcome. Our study objective was to identify differences in 
admission parameters between patients who developed clinically significant 
bleeding and those that did not. We sought to develop a model for discriminating 
between these patients.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective study of 4,383 adults aged >18 years who 
were hospitalized with dengue infection at Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore 
from 2005 to 2008. Patients were divided into those with clinically significant 
bleeding (n = 188), and those without (n = 4,195). Demographic, clinical, and 
laboratory variables on admission were compared between groups to determine 
factors associated with clinically significant bleeding during hospitalization.
RESULTS: On admission, female gender (p<0.001); temperature >38°C (p<0.001); 
nausea/vomiting (p = 0.009) and abdominal pain/tenderness (p = 0.005); lower 
systolic blood pressure (p<0.001); higher pulse rate (p<0.001); increased 
absolute neutrophil count (ANC; p<0.001); reduced absolute lymphocyte count 
(ALC; p<0.001), haematocrit percentage (p<0.001) and platelet count (p = 0.04), 
and increased prothrombin time (p = 0.003) were significantly associated with 
clinically significant bleeding on univariate analysis. Multivariate analysis 
showed that independent variables in the final model were female gender (aOR 
2.85; 95% CI: 1.9-4.33); temperature >38°C (aOR 1.81; 95% CI: 1.27-2.61), 
nausea/vomiting (aOR 1.39; 95% CI: 0.94-2.12), ANC (aOR 1.3; 95% CI: 1.15-1.46), 
ALC (aOR 0.4; 95% CI: 0.25-0.64), hematocrit percentage (aOR 0.96; 95% CI: 
0.92-1.002) and platelet count (aOR 0.993; 95% CI: 0.988-0.998). At the cutoff 
of -3.919, the model achieved an AUC of 0.758 (sensitivity:0.87, specificity: 
0.38, PPV: 0.06, NPV: 0.98).
CONCLUSION: Clinical risk factors associated with clinically significant 
bleeding were identified. This model may be useful to complement clinical 
judgement in triaging adult dengue patients given the dynamic nature of acute 
dengue, particularly in pre-identifying those less likely to develop clinically 
significant bleeding.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148579
PMCID: PMC4743958
PMID: 26849556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.