---
reference_id: "PMID:9389311"
title: Prevention of opportunistic infections in the era of improved antiretroviral therapy.
authors:
- Chaisson RE
- Moore RD
journal: J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1097/00042560-199701001-00003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevention of opportunistic infections in the era of improved antiretroviral therapy.
**Authors:** Chaisson RE, Moore RD
**Journal:** J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00042560-199701001-00003](https://doi.org/10.1097/00042560-199701001-00003)

## Content

1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol. 1997;16 Suppl 1:S14-22. doi: 
10.1097/00042560-199701001-00003.

Prevention of opportunistic infections in the era of improved antiretroviral 
therapy.

Chaisson RE(1), Moore RD.

Author information:
(1)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287-6220, 
USA.

Comment in
    J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol. 1997;16 Suppl 1:S1-2.

Patients with advanced human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection who are 
severely immunosuppressed develop a variety of opportunistic infections that 
have a significant impact on their well-being, quality of life, health-care 
costs, and survival. The risk for development of opportunistic infections 
depends on exposure to potential pathogens, the virulence of the pathogens, the 
degree of host immunity, and the use of antimicrobial prophylaxis. Many studies 
have confirmed the benefits of prophylaxis in severely immunosuppressed 
patients. Factors that affect the use of prophylaxis for prevention of 
opportunistic infections in HIV-infected patients include the prevalence and 
potential severity of the disease, ease of treatment if infection occurs, the 
cost-effectiveness of the prophylactic regimen, and the potential for increased 
survival, drug toxicity, drug interactions, and emergence of resistance with the 
regimen. The United States Public Health Service and the Infectious Diseases 
Society of America (USPHS/IDSA) have established disease-specific 
recommendations for use of prophylaxis for opportunistic infections in 
HIV-infected patients. These guidelines identify regimens that are strongly 
recommended as standards of care, regimens that should be seriously considered 
in selected patients, and regimens that are not routinely indicated but may be 
considered in selected patients. Although further study is needed, advances in 
antiretroviral therapy may have an important impact on the recommendations for 
prophylaxis and may eventually allow discontinuation of these regimens in 
patients who regain functional immunity.

DOI: 10.1097/00042560-199701001-00003
PMID: 9389311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]