---
reference_id: "PMID:12953088"
title: Human papillomavirus infection and time to progression and regression of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia.
authors:
- Schlecht NF
- Platt RW
- Duarte-Franco E
- Costa MC
- Sobrinho JP
- Prado JC
- Ferenczy A
- Rohan TE
- Villa LL
- Franco EL
journal: J Natl Cancer Inst
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1093/jnci/djg037
keywords:
- Actuarial Analysis
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/virology"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasm Regression, Spontaneous"
- Papillomaviridae
- "Papillomavirus Infections/complications, virology"
- Time Factors
- "Tumor Virus Infections/complications, virology"
- "Uterine Cervical Neoplasms/pathology, virology"
- "Uterine Cervical Dysplasia/pathology, virology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human papillomavirus infection and time to progression and regression of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia.
**Authors:** Schlecht NF, Platt RW, Duarte-Franco E, Costa MC, Sobrinho JP, Prado JC, Ferenczy A, Rohan TE, Villa LL, Franco EL
**Journal:** J Natl Cancer Inst (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jnci/djg037](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djg037)

## Content

1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003 Sep 3;95(17):1336-43. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djg037.

Human papillomavirus infection and time to progression and regression of
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia.

Schlecht NF(1), Platt RW, Duarte-Franco E, Costa MC, Sobrinho JP, Prado JC,
Ferenczy A, Rohan TE, Villa LL, Franco EL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology and Epidemiology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the duration of precancerous cervical lesions
in relation to human papillomavirus (HPV) infection. We estimated rates of
progression and regression and sojourn times of cervical squamous
intraepithelial lesions (SILs) according to HPV status.
METHODS: We used data from a longitudinal study of HPV infection and cervical
neoplasia in São Paulo, Brazil. Cervical specimens were taken from 2404 women
for Pap cytology and polymerase chain reaction-based HPV testing every 4-6
months over a period of 8 years. We used actuarial and non-actuarial analyses to
measure time to and rates of lesion progression and regression according to
status and type of HPV infection.
RESULTS: During follow-up, 118 low-grade SIL (LSIL), 24 high-grade SIL (HSIL),
and 173 atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance (ASCUS) events were
detected. Mean time to progression from ASCUS to LSIL or worse and from LSIL to
HSIL or worse was shorter in women with oncogenic HPV types than in women with
no HPV infection (mean times for ASCUS progression were 67.0 and 88.0 months,
respectively, in women with oncogenic HPV and no HPV, difference = 21.0 months,
95% confidence interval [CI] = 11.3 to 30.7 months; mean times for LSIL
progression were 73.3 and 83.5 months, respectively, difference = 10.2 months,
95% CI = -0.15 to 20.6 months). Half of the LSILs regressed to normal or ASCUS
within 6 months. Mean times for regression from ASCUS to normal, from LSIL to
ASCUS or normal, and from HSIL/cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 2 to ASCUS or
normal were longer for women with oncogenic HPV types (16.8 months, 95% CI = 7.5
to 26.2 months; 13.8 months, 95% CI = 8.8 to 18.7 months; and 17.1 months, 95%
CI = 4.1 to 30.1 months, respectively) than for women with non-oncogenic HPV
types (7.7 months, 95% CI = 5.2 to 10.2 months; 7.8 months, 95% CI = 5.3 to 10.2
months; 8.9 months, 95% CI = 3.3 to 14.6 months) or for women with no HPV
infection (7.6 months, 95% CI = 6.9 to 8.4 months; 7.6 months, 95% CI = 6.4 to
8.7 months; and 7.0 months, 95% CI = 5.0 to 8.9 months, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Precursor lesions of the cervix persist longer and progress more
quickly in women with oncogenic HPV infections than in women with non-oncogenic
infections or without HPV. Testing cervical lesions for oncogenic HPVs may help
identify those that are likely to progress rapidly.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djg037
PMID: 12953088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
