---
reference_id: "PMID:36207129"
title: "Impact of electronic cigarette and heated tobacco product on conventional smoking: an Italian prospective cohort study conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic."
authors:
- Gallus S
- Stival C
- McKee M
- Carreras G
- Gorini G
- Odone A
- van den Brandt PA
- Pacifici R
- Lugo A
journal: Tob Control
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1136/tc-2022-057368
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of electronic cigarette and heated tobacco product on conventional smoking: an Italian prospective cohort study conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic.
**Authors:** Gallus S, Stival C, McKee M, Carreras G, Gorini G, Odone A, van den Brandt PA, Pacifici R, Lugo A
**Journal:** Tob Control (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1136/tc-2022-057368](https://doi.org/10.1136/tc-2022-057368)

## Content

1. Tob Control. 2024 Feb 20;33(2):267-270. doi: 10.1136/tc-2022-057368.

Impact of electronic cigarette and heated tobacco product on conventional 
smoking: an Italian prospective cohort study conducted during the COVID-19 
pandemic.

Gallus S(1), Stival C(2), McKee M(3), Carreras G(4), Gorini G(4), Odone A(5)(6), 
van den Brandt PA(7)(8), Pacifici R(9), Lugo A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Istituto di Ricerche 
Farmacologiche Mario Negri IRCCS, Milan, Italy silvano.gallus@marionegri.it.
(2)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Istituto di Ricerche 
Farmacologiche Mario Negri IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(3)London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(4)Oncologic Network, Prevention and Research Institute, Florence, Italy.
(5)Department of Public Health, Experimental and Forensic Medicine, University 
of Pavia Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, Pavia, Italy.
(6)School of Medicine, Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.
(7)Department of Epidemiology, GROW-School for Oncology and Developmental 
Biology, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Epidemiology, CAPHRI-School for Public Health and Primary Care, 
Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(9)National Centre on Addiction and Doping, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, 
Italy.

OBJECTIVE: Debate continues about whether electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes) 
and heated tobacco products (HTP) reduce or increase the probability of smoking, 
with many studies compromised by stated or unstated conflicts of interest. We 
undertook a longitudinal study in Italy.
METHODS: 3185 Italian participants aged 18-74 years provided baseline 
(April-May) and follow-up (November-December) responses in 2020, reporting 
smoking status and use of e-cigarettes and HTP. We tracked transitions over that 
period and reported risk ratios (RR) and corresponding 95% CIs for changes in 
smoking in relation to baseline use of e-cigarettes and HTPs.
RESULTS: Never cigarette smokers who used e-cigarettes at baseline were much 
more likely to start smoking (compared with never users, RR 8.78; 95% CI: 5.65 
to 13.65) and current HTP users (RR 5.80; 95% CI: 3.65 to 9.20). Among 
ex-smokers, relapse (17.2%) at follow-up was more likely among e-cigarette (RR 
4.25; 95% CI: 2.40 to 7.52) and HTP users (RR 3.32; 95% CI: 2.05 to 5.37). Among 
current smokers at baseline, those who had continued smoking at follow-up were 
85.4% overall. These were more frequently current novel product users (compared 
with non-users, RR 1.10; 95% CI: 1.02 to 1.19 for e-cigarette users; RR 1.17; 
95% CI: 1.10 to 1.23 for HTP users).
CONCLUSIONS: Both e-cigarette and HTP use predict starting smoking and relapse, 
and appear to reduce smoking cessation. Due to the limited sample size within 
specific strata, the association with quitting smoking should be confirmed by 
larger prospective studies. These findings do not support the use of 
e-cigarettes and HTPs in tobacco control as a consumer product, at least in 
Italy.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/tc-2022-057368
PMID: 36207129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.