---
reference_id: "PMID:37619836"
title: "Arterial tortuosity syndrome: Phenotypic features and cardiovascular manifestations in 4 newly identified patients."
authors:
- Esmel-Vilomara R
- Valenzuela I
- Riaza L
- Rodríguez-Santiago B
- Rosés-Noguer F
- Boronat S
- Sabaté-Rotés A
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2023.104823
keywords:
- Arteries/abnormalities
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic/genetics"
- Humans
- Aorta
- Consanguinity
- Joint Instability
- Vascular Malformations
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arterial tortuosity syndrome: Phenotypic features and cardiovascular manifestations in 4 newly identified patients.
**Authors:** Esmel-Vilomara R, Valenzuela I, Riaza L, Rodríguez-Santiago B, Rosés-Noguer F, Boronat S, Sabaté-Rotés A
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2023.104823](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2023.104823)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2023 Sep;66(9):104823. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2023.104823. Epub 
2023 Aug 22.

Arterial tortuosity syndrome: Phenotypic features and cardiovascular 
manifestations in 4 newly identified patients.

Esmel-Vilomara R(1), Valenzuela I(2), Riaza L(3), Rodríguez-Santiago B(4), 
Rosés-Noguer F(5), Boronat S(6), Sabaté-Rotés A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Cardiology, Vall d'Hebron Hospital Campus, 
Barcelona, Spain; Department of Paediatrics, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant 
Pau, Barcelona, Spain; Faculty of Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: resmel@santpau.cat.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; 
Department of Genetics, Vall d'Hebron Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; 
Department of Paediatric Radiology, Vall d'Hebron Hospital Campus, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; 
Department of Genetics, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau and Center for 
Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER) and Sant Pau Biomedical 
Research Institute (IIB Sant Pau), Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Paediatric Cardiology, Vall d'Hebron Hospital Campus, 
Barcelona, Spain; Faculty of Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Department of Paediatrics, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, 
Spain; Faculty of Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS) is an autosomal recessive connective tissue 
disease caused by biallelic variants in the SLC2A10 gene (NG_016284.1) and 
characterised by tortuosity and elongation of the aorta and medium-sized 
arteries. It is considered an extremely rare disease; only 106 individuals with 
genetically confirmed ATS have been identified to date. Four cases of ATS from 
two families are described, contributing to the clinical delineation of this 
condition. A patient with microcephaly and a complex uropathy and two cases with 
diaphragmatic hernia are noticed. Regarding the vascular involvement, a 
predominant supra-aortic involvement stands out and only 1 patient with 
significant arterial stenoses was described. All presented severe tortuosity of 
the intracranial arteries. To reduce hemodynamic stress on the arterial wall, 
beta-adrenergic blocking treatment was prescribed. A not previously described 
variant (NM_030777.4:c.899T>G (p.Leu300Trp)) was detected in a proband; it has 
an allegedly deleterious effect in compound heterozygous state with the 
pathogenic variant c.417T>A (p.Tyr139Ter). The other 3 patients, siblings born 
to healthy consanguineous parents, had a variant in homozygous state: c.510G>A 
(p.Trp170Ter).

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2023.104823
PMID: 37619836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]