---
reference_id: "PMID:19665761"
title: Mechanisms of antiphospholipid antibody-associated pregnancy complications.
authors:
- Abrahams VM
journal: Thromb Res
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2009.07.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of antiphospholipid antibody-associated pregnancy complications.
**Authors:** Abrahams VM
**Journal:** Thromb Res (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.thromres.2009.07.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.thromres.2009.07.011)

## Content

1. Thromb Res. 2009 Nov;124(5):521-5. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2009.07.011. Epub 
2009 Aug 8.

Mechanisms of antiphospholipid antibody-associated pregnancy complications.

Abrahams VM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Reproductive Sciences, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. vikki.abrahams@yale.edu

Women with antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) and antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) 
are at high risk for recurrent spontaneous miscarriage and late pregnancy 
complications, such as preeclampsia and preterm labor. Recent clinical and 
experimental observations suggest that the pathophysiology of pregnancy failure 
in patients with APS may involve inflammation at the maternal-fetal interface 
and disruption of normal trophoblast function and survival, rather than a 
pro-thrombotic event. While treatment with heparin and aspirin from early 
pregnancy has been shown to significantly increase the live birth rate in 
recurrent miscarriage patients with APS, the incidence of severe late pregnancy 
complications still remains high. This review will discuss what is currently 
known about the mechanisms by which aPL may compromise pregnancy outcome.

DOI: 10.1016/j.thromres.2009.07.011
PMID: 19665761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]