---
reference_id: "PMID:29467388"
title: A novel MAP3K7 splice mutation causes cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome with features of hereditary connective tissue disorder.
authors:
- Morlino S
- Castori M
- Dordoni C
- Cinquina V
- Santoro G
- Grammatico P
- Venturini M
- Colombi M
- Ritelli M
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-017-0079-x
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Child
- "Connective Tissue Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- MAP Kinase Kinase Kinases/genetics
- Mutation
- RNA Splicing
- Syndrome
- MAP Kinase Kinase Kinase 7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel MAP3K7 splice mutation causes cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome with features of hereditary connective tissue disorder.
**Authors:** Morlino S, Castori M, Dordoni C, Cinquina V, Santoro G, Grammatico P, Venturini M, Colombi M, Ritelli M
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-017-0079-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-017-0079-x)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2018 Apr;26(4):582-586. doi: 10.1038/s41431-017-0079-x. Epub 
2018 Feb 21.

A novel MAP3K7 splice mutation causes cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome with 
features of hereditary connective tissue disorder.

Morlino S(1), Castori M(2), Dordoni C(3), Cinquina V(3), Santoro G(3), 
Grammatico P(1), Venturini M(4), Colombi M(3), Ritelli M(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Department of Molecular Medicine, University 
"La Sapienza", San Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San 
Giovanni Rotondo (Foggia), Italy. m.castori@operapadrepio.it.
(3)Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Molecular and Translational 
Medicine, University of Brescia, School of Medicine, Brescia, Italy.
(4)Division of Dermatology, Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, 
Spedali Civili University Hospital, Brescia, Italy.

Heterozygous variants in MAP3K7, encoding the transforming growth 
factor-β-activated kinase 1 (TAK1), are associated with the ultrarare 
cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome (CSCFS). Specific gain-of-function variants 
in the same gene cause the allelic frontometaphyseal dysplasia type 2. 
Phenotypic series of frontometaphyseal dysplasia also comprise variants in FLNA 
(type 1) and two patients with a heterozygous variant in TAB2 (type 3). We 
report on a 7-year-old girl with CSCFS due to the novel heterozygous c.737-7A>G 
variant in MAP3K7. The identified variant generates a new splice acceptor site 
causing an in-frame insertion of 2 amino acid residues 
(p.Asn245_Gly246insValVal), as demonstrated by RNA study. The patient was 
originally ascertained for a presumed hereditary connective tissue disorder due 
to soft/dystrophic skin, extreme joint hypermobility, polyvalvular heart 
disease, and upper gastrointestinal dismotility. Our study confirms locus 
homogeneity for CSCFS, expands the mutational spectrum of MAP3K7, and adds data 
on the existence of a community of connective tissue disorders caused by 
abnormalities of the TAK1-dependent signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-017-0079-x
PMCID: PMC5891500
PMID: 29467388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.