---
reference_id: "PMID:34104234"
title: Vitiligo and chronic autoimmune thyroiditis.
authors:
- Sandru F
- Carsote M
- Albu SE
- Dumitrascu MC
- Valea A
journal: J Med Life
year: '2021'
doi: 10.25122/jml-2019-0134
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vitiligo and chronic autoimmune thyroiditis.
**Authors:** Sandru F, Carsote M, Albu SE, Dumitrascu MC, Valea A
**Journal:** J Med Life (2021)
**DOI:** [10.25122/jml-2019-0134](https://doi.org/10.25122/jml-2019-0134)

## Content

1. J Med Life. 2021 Mar-Apr;14(2):127-130. doi: 10.25122/jml-2019-0134.

Vitiligo and chronic autoimmune thyroiditis.

Sandru F(1)(2), Carsote M(3)(4), Albu SE(5)(6), Dumitrascu MC(5)(6), Valea 
A(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Elias Emergency University Hospital, Bucharest, 
Romania.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Bucharest, Romania.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, C. I. Parhon National Institute of 
Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Carol Davila University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Emergency University Hospital, 
Bucharest, Romania.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Carol Davila University of Medicine 
and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
(7)Department of Endocrinology, Clinical County Hospital, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(8)Department of Endocrinology, Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.

Vitiligo, the discoloration of the skin, has different autoimmune mechanisms 
reflected by many biomarkers as shown by skin histology, staining for CD4 and 
CD8 T lymphocytes, chemokine ligand 9 or circulating cytokines such as 
interleukin (IL)-1 beta, interferon (IFN)-gamma, transforming growth factor 
(TGF)-beta, antibodies, markers of oxidative stress, chemokines, and others. In 
this narrative review, we aim to overview vitiligo in relationship with chronic 
autoimmune thyroiditis. Regarding vitiligo, more than 50 different genetic loci 
have been associated with this disease, and the heritability is high. There is a 
20% risk of an environmental connection which may also act as a trigger; 
moreover, the association with human leukocyte antigen (HLA) expression is well 
recognized. The specific lesions display CD8+ tissue-resident memory T cells as 
continuous key activators of melanocytes. The association with chronic 
thyroiditis is based on common autoimmune background and excessive reactive 
oxygen species that destroy melanocytes and thyrocytes (oxidative stress 
hypothesis) with thyroxine and melanin as target molecules, thus sharing a 
common origin: tyrosine. Moreover, common epigenetic anomalies or mutations of 
the Forkhead transcription factor D3 (FOXD3) have been described. Since vitiligo 
affects up to 1-2% of the population worldwide and 34% of patients have positive 
thyroid antibodies, apart from common autoimmunity background and oxidative 
stress toxicity, the association is clinically relevant for different 
practitioners.

©2021 JOURNAL of MEDICINE and LIFE.

DOI: 10.25122/jml-2019-0134
PMCID: PMC8169145
PMID: 34104234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]