---
reference_id: "PMID:19597960"
title: Mortality and cause of death in mucopolysaccharidosis type II-a historical review based on data from the Hunter Outcome Survey (HOS).
authors:
- Jones SA
- Almássy Z
- Beck M
- Burt K
- Clarke JT
- Giugliani R
- Hendriksz C
- Kroepfl T
- Lavery L
- Lin SP
- Malm G
- Ramaswami U
- Tincheva R
- Wraith JE
- HOS Investigators
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-009-1119-7
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Cause of Death
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Data Collection
- Female
- Humans
- Iduronate Sulfatase/therapeutic use
- Infant
- Male
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis II/drug therapy, mortality"
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mortality and cause of death in mucopolysaccharidosis type II-a historical review based on data from the Hunter Outcome Survey (HOS).
**Authors:** Jones SA, Almássy Z, Beck M, Burt K, Clarke JT, Giugliani R, Hendriksz C, Kroepfl T, Lavery L, Lin SP, Malm G, Ramaswami U, Tincheva R, Wraith JE, HOS Investigators
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-009-1119-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-009-1119-7)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2009 Aug;32(4):534-43. doi: 10.1007/s10545-009-1119-7.
Epub  2009 Jul 14.

Mortality and cause of death in mucopolysaccharidosis type II-a historical
review based on data from the Hunter Outcome Survey (HOS).

Jones SA(1), Almássy Z, Beck M, Burt K, Clarke JT, Giugliani R, Hendriksz C,
Kroepfl T, Lavery L, Lin SP, Malm G, Ramaswami U, Tincheva R, Wraith JE; HOS
Investigators.

Collaborators: Kroepfl T, Bodamer O, De Meirleir L, Melgar D, Giugliani R, Boy
R, Horovitz D, Tincheva R, Clarke J, Clarke L, Mabe P, Barisić I, Barić I, Zeman
J, Lund AM, Guffon N, Valayannopoulos V, Héron B, Beck M, Frenking GS, Muschol
N, Zafeiriou D, Almássy Z, Gabrielli O, Cicognani A, DiRocco M, Parini R, Scarpa
M, Feliciani C, Ricci R, Gaspar A, Teles EL, Martina E, Novikov P, Pintos G,
Galán E, del Toro M, Pineda M, Aldámiz L, Herrero MM, Munguira P,
Gutiérrez-Solana LG, Domingo R, Novoa G, de Azua B, Lluch D, Dalmau J, Muro JM,
Baldellou A, Calvo JP, Nilsson N, Papadopoulou D, Malm G, Lin SP, van der PLoeg
A, Hendriksz C, Deegan P, Ramaswami U, Vellodi A, Jones S, Wraith E, Fernhoff P,
Hamosh A, Leslie N, Muenzer J, Wilson W, Burton B, Thomas J, Greenstein R, Eng
C, Copeland S, Peters C, Smith L, Moeschler J, Jayakar P, Mendelsohn N, Whitley
C, Pastories G, Proud V, Harmatz P, Schaefer B, Aleck K, Steiner R, Viskochil D,
Keppen L, Tifft C.

Author information:
(1)Willink Unit, Genetic Medicine, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre,
Central Manchester University Hospitals, NHS Foundation Trust, St Mary's
Hospital, Manchester, UK. simon.jones@cmft.nhs.uk

Comment in
    Med Clin (Barc). 2013 May 13;140(10):451-2. doi:
10.1016/j.medcli.2012.12.009.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II or Hunter syndrome) is a progressive,
multisystemic disease caused by a deficiency of iduronate-2-sulfatase. Patients
with the severe form of the disease have cognitive impairment and typically die
in the second decade of life. Patients with the less severe form do not
experience significant cognitive involvement and may survive until the fifth or
sixth decade of life. We studied the relationship of both severity of MPS II and
the time period in which patients died with age at death in 129 patients for
whom data were entered retrospectively into HOS (Hunter Outcome Survey), the
only large-scale, multinational observational study of patients with MPS II.
Median age at death was significantly lower in patients with cognitive
involvement compared with those without cognitive involvement (11.7 versus 14.1
years; p = 0.024). These data indicate that cognitive involvement is indicative
of more severe disease and lower life expectancy in patients with MPS II. Median
age at death was significantly lower in patients who died in or before 1985
compared with those who died after 1985 (11.3 versus 14.1 years; p alpha 0.001).
The difference in age at death between patients dying in or before, relative to
after, the selected cut-off date of 1985 may reflect improvements in patient
identification, care and management over the past two decades. Data from
patients who died after 1985 could serve as a control in analyses of the effects
of enzyme replacement therapy with idursulfase on mortality in patients with MPS
II.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-009-1119-7
PMID: 19597960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
