---
reference_id: "PMID:32062032"
title: "Long-term remission, relapses and maintenance therapy in adult primary central nervous system vasculitis: A single-center 35-year experience."
authors:
- Salvarani C
- Brown RD Jr
- Christianson TJH
- Huston J 3rd
- Giannini C
- Hunder GG
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102497
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Cyclophosphamide/therapeutic use
- Female
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Maintenance Chemotherapy
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mycophenolic Acid/therapeutic use
- Prednisone/therapeutic use
- Recurrence
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/drug therapy"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term remission, relapses and maintenance therapy in adult primary central nervous system vasculitis: A single-center 35-year experience.
**Authors:** Salvarani C, Brown RD Jr, Christianson TJH, Huston J 3rd, Giannini C, Hunder GG
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102497](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102497)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2020 Apr;19(4):102497. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102497. Epub 
2020 Feb 13.

Long-term remission, relapses and maintenance therapy in adult primary central 
nervous system vasculitis: A single-center 35-year experience.

Salvarani C(1), Brown RD Jr(2), Christianson TJH(3), Huston J 3rd(4), Giannini 
C(5), Hunder GG(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Azienda USL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, 
Italy; Università di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. Electronic address: 
salvarani.carlo@ausl.re.it.
(2)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States of 
America.
(3)Department of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
MN, United States of America.
(4)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States of 
America.
(5)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States 
of America.
(6)Division of Rheumatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States of 
America.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate long-term treatment and outcomes of patients with 
primary central nervous system vasculitis (PCNSV).
METHODS: In this cohort of 191 consecutive patients with PCNSV seen at Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN, over 35 years with long-term follow-up we analyzed 
response to and duration of therapy, frequency of relapses, long-term remission, 
efficacy of maintenance therapy and initial intravenous glucocorticoid (GC) 
pulses, survival and degree of disability. We also compared the efficacy of 
initial IV and oral cyclophosphamide (CYC).
RESULTS: A favorable initial response was observed in 83% of patients treated 
with prednisone (PDN) alone, 81% of those treated with PDN and CYC and 95% of 
those initially treated with PDN and an immunosuppressant other than CYC. One or 
more relapses were observed in 30% of patients, 35% had discontinued therapy by 
last follow-up, and 21.5% maintained remission for at least 12 months after 
discontinuing therapy. Maintenance therapy was prescribed in 19% of all patients 
and 34% of patients initially treated with CYC and PDN. High disability scores 
(Rankin 4-6) and deaths were less frequently observed in patients receiving 
maintenance therapy and more frequently in patients with Aβ-related angiitis. 
Large vessel involvement and cerebral infarction at diagnosis were associated 
with a poor treatment response. Aspirin use was positively associated with 
long-term remission and having gadolinium-enhanced cerebral lesions or meninges 
was negatively associated. A high disability score at last follow-up and higher 
mortality rate were associated with increasing age, cerebral infarction and 
cognitive dysfunction at diagnosis. Lymphocytic vasculitis on biopsy was 
associated with a more benign course with reduced disability and mortality. 
Patients initially treated with mycophenolate mofetil had better outcomes 
compared to those treated with CYC and PDN. No therapeutic advantages were 
observed in the patients initially treated with intravenous GC pulses. 
Intravenous and oral CYC were equally effective in inducing the remission.
CONCLUSIONS: The majority of patients with PCNSV responded to treatment. We 
found patient subsets with different outcomes. Mycophenolate mofetil may be an 
effective alternative to CYC.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102497
PMID: 32062032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest There were no 
financial support for this work or other financial interests which could create 
a potential conflict of interest.