---
reference_id: "PMID:38302651"
title: "Bardet-Biedl syndrome: A focus on genetics, mechanisms and metabolic dysfunction."
authors:
- Tomlinson JW
journal: Diabetes Obes Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/dom.15480
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bardet-Biedl syndrome: A focus on genetics, mechanisms and metabolic dysfunction.
**Authors:** Tomlinson JW
**Journal:** Diabetes Obes Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dom.15480](https://doi.org/10.1111/dom.15480)

## Content

1. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2024 Apr;26 Suppl 2:13-24. doi: 10.1111/dom.15480. Epub 
2024 Feb 1.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome: A focus on genetics, mechanisms and metabolic 
dysfunction.

Tomlinson JW(1).

Author information:
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, NIHR Oxford 
Biomedical Research Centre, University of Oxford, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, 
UK.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a rare, monogenic, multisystem disorder 
characterized by retinal dystrophy, renal abnormalities, polydactyly, learning 
disabilities, as well as metabolic dysfunction, including obesity and an 
increased risk of type 2 diabetes. It is a primary ciliopathy, and causative 
mutations in more than 25 different genes have been described. Multiple cellular 
mechanisms contribute to the development of the metabolic phenotype associated 
with BBS, including hyperphagia as a consequence of altered hypothalamic 
appetite signalling as well as alterations in adipocyte biology promoting 
adipocyte proliferation and adipogenesis. Within this review, we describe in 
detail the metabolic phenotype associated with BBS and discuss the mechanisms 
that drive its evolution. In addition, we review current approaches to the 
metabolic management of patients with BBS, including the use of weight loss 
medications and bariatric surgery. Finally, we evaluate the potential of 
targeting hypothalamic appetite signalling to limit hyperphagia and induce 
clinically significant weight loss.

© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/dom.15480
PMID: 38302651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]