---
reference_id: "PMID:26648833"
title: "Novel KIF7 Mutation in a Tunisian Boy with Acrocallosal Syndrome: Case Report and Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Ibisler A
- Hehr U
- Barth A
- Koch M
- Epplen JT
- Hoffjan S
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1159/000439414
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel KIF7 Mutation in a Tunisian Boy with Acrocallosal Syndrome: Case Report and Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Ibisler A, Hehr U, Barth A, Koch M, Epplen JT, Hoffjan S
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000439414](https://doi.org/10.1159/000439414)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2015 Oct;6(4):173-80. doi: 10.1159/000439414. Epub 2015 Oct 7.

Novel KIF7 Mutation in a Tunisian Boy with Acrocallosal Syndrome: Case Report 
and Review of the Literature.

Ibisler A(1), Hehr U(2), Barth A(3), Koch M(3), Epplen JT(1), Hoffjan S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Ruhr University, Bochum, Germany.
(2)Center for and Department of Human Genetics, University of Regensburg, 
Regensburg, Germany.
(3)Children's Hospital Datteln, University Witten/Herdecke, Datteln, Germany.

Acrocallosal syndrome (ACLS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder 
characterized by agenesis of the corpus callosum, facial dysmorphism, postaxial 
polydactyly of the hands as well as preaxial polydactyly of the feet, and 
developmental delay. Mutations in the KIF7 gene, encoding a molecule within the 
Sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathway, have been identified as causative for ACLS but 
also for the fatal hydrolethalus syndrome and some cases of Joubert syndrome. We 
report here on a Tunisian boy who shows the clinical characteristics of ACLS and 
was found to have a novel homozygous KIF7 nonsense mutation. Further, we 
summarize the current knowledge about the clinical spectrum associated with KIF7 
mutations as well as genetic and/or phenotypic overlap with ciliopathies and 
other mutations in the SHH pathway.

DOI: 10.1159/000439414
PMCID: PMC4662294
PMID: 26648833