---
reference_id: "PMID:21325953"
title: "Lynch syndrome and MYH-associated polyposis: review and testing strategy."
authors:
- Goodenberger M
- Lindor NM
journal: J Clin Gastroenterol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/MCG.0b013e318206489c
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lynch syndrome and MYH-associated polyposis: review and testing strategy.
**Authors:** Goodenberger M, Lindor NM
**Journal:** J Clin Gastroenterol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MCG.0b013e318206489c](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCG.0b013e318206489c)

## Content

1. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2011 Jul;45(6):488-500. doi:
10.1097/MCG.0b013e318206489c.

Lynch syndrome and MYH-associated polyposis: review and testing strategy.

Goodenberger M(1), Lindor NM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Lab Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Individuals with Lynch syndrome have an increased risk for colorectal cancer, 
endometrial cancer, and other associated cancers such as gastric cancer, ovarian 
cancer, urothelial cancers, hepatobiliary tract cancer, brain cancer, cancer of 
the small intestine, pancreatic cancer, and particular skin cancers. Lynch 
syndrome caused by defects in DNA mismatch repair genes, and diagnostic testing 
for Lynch syndrome begins with microsatellite instability and 
immunohistochemical analysis on the tumor specimen followed by germline genetic 
testing and possibly further studies on the tumor. MYH-associated polyposis 
syndrome is a recently characterized, autosomal recessive, polyposis syndrome 
caused by biallelic mutations in the MYH gene. Individuals carrying 2 copies of 
the mutation have a significantly increased risk of polyposis, colorectal 
cancer, upper gastrointestinal polyps and additional features commonly seen in 
familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome. Genetic testing for MYH mutation is 
complicated by the phenotypic overlap of MYH-associated polyposis with other 
colorectal cancer syndromes. This study serves to clarify the best testing 
approach.

DOI: 10.1097/MCG.0b013e318206489c
PMID: 21325953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]