---
reference_id: "PMID:18985070"
title: Kallmann syndrome.
authors:
- Dodé C
- Hardelin JP
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.206
keywords:
- "Extracellular Matrix Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Humans
- "Kallmann Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kallmann syndrome.
**Authors:** Dodé C, Hardelin JP
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2008.206](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2008.206)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Feb;17(2):139-46. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.206. Epub 2008
Nov 5.

Kallmann syndrome.

Dodé C(1), Hardelin JP.

Author information:
(1)Inserm U567, Département de Génétique et Développement, Institut Cochin,
Paris, France. catherine.dode@inserm.fr

The Kallmann syndrome (KS) combines hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH) with
anosmia. This is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disease. KAL1,
encoding the extracellular glycoprotein anosmin-1, is responsible for the X
chromosome-linked recessive form of the disease. Mutations in FGFR1 or FGF8,
encoding fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 and fibroblast growth factor-8,
respectively, underlie an autosomal dominant form with incomplete penetrance.
Finally, mutations in PROKR2 and PROK2, encoding prokineticin receptor-2 and
prokineticin-2, have been found in heterozygous, homozygous, and compound
heterozygous states. These two genes are likely to be involved both in monogenic
recessive and digenic/oligogenic KS transmission modes. Notably, mutations in
any of the above-mentioned KS genes have been found in less than 30% of the KS
patients, which indicates that other genes involved in the disease remain to be
discovered.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.206
PMCID: PMC2986064
PMID: 18985070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
