---
reference_id: "PMID:35702684"
title: "The association between SARS-CoV-2 vaccines and transverse myelitis: A review."
authors:
- Naeem FN
- Hasan SFS
- Ram MD
- Waseem S
- Ahmed SH
- Shaikh TG
journal: Ann Med Surg (Lond)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103870
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The association between SARS-CoV-2 vaccines and transverse myelitis: A review.
**Authors:** Naeem FN, Hasan SFS, Ram MD, Waseem S, Ahmed SH, Shaikh TG
**Journal:** Ann Med Surg (Lond) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103870](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103870)

## Content

1. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2022 Jun 9;79:103870. doi: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103870. 
eCollection 2022 Jul.

The association between SARS-CoV-2 vaccines and transverse myelitis: A review.

Naeem FN(1), Hasan SFS(1), Ram MD(1), Waseem S(1), Ahmed SH(1), Shaikh TG(1).

Author information:
(1)Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi, Pakistan.

In late 2019, the emergence of a new viral strain, later referred to as Severe 
Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) took the shape of a global 
pandemic, affecting millions of lives and deteriorating economies around the 
globe. Vaccines were developed at an exceptional rate to combat the viral 
desolation, all of them being rolled out once they displayed sufficient safety 
and efficacy. However, assorted adverse events came into attention, one of them 
being Transverse Myelitis (TM), an infrequent, immune-mediated, focal disease of 
the spinal cord. This disorder can lead to severe neurological complications 
including autonomic, sensory, and motor deficits. The literature aims to shed 
light on TM and its various etiologies, specifically in line with the vaccine, 
and a comprehensive treatment plan. Discussing and reducing the number of 
vaccines related adverse events can help succor in bringing down the vaccine 
hesitancy and ultimately combatting the pandemic.

© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of IJS Publishing Group 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103870
PMCID: PMC9181565
PMID: 35702684

Conflict of interest statement: N/A.