---
reference_id: "PMID:15588970"
title: Does early rheumatoid arthritis exist?
authors:
- Dixon WG
- Symmons DP
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.berh.2004.08.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Does early rheumatoid arthritis exist?
**Authors:** Dixon WG, Symmons DP
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.berh.2004.08.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.berh.2004.08.003)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2005 Feb;19(1):37-53. doi: 
10.1016/j.berh.2004.08.003.

Does early rheumatoid arthritis exist?

Dixon WG(1), Symmons DP.

Author information:
(1)ARC Epidemiology Unit, University of Manchester Medical School, Oxford Road, 
Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

The 'life cycle' of established rheumatoid arthritis can be divided into four 
phases. The first is the period leading up to the onset of arthritis. The second 
is the period during which persistence or remission is determined. The third is 
the evolution into a specific form of inflammatory arthritis, and the fourth is 
the outcome/severity of that arthritis. In some patients, these four phases 
follow in rapid succession; however, in other patients, the time course is 
prolonged over several months or years. This chapter explores the hypothesis 
that these four phases are distinct in the majority of patients, and that 
different genetic and environmental factors influence the various phases. It 
investigates the suggestion that a defect in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal 
axis may underlie the persistence of inflammatory arthritis. It suggests that 
the term 'early rheumatoid arthritis' is not appropriate and that patients 
either have established rheumatoid arthritis or an undifferentiated inflammatory 
arthritis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.berh.2004.08.003
PMID: 15588970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]