---
reference_id: "PMID:36968924"
title: "Bosma Arhinia Microphthalmia Syndrome (BAMS): First Report from Vietnam."
authors:
- Cong NV
- Minh LHN
- Hoang LH
- Do U
- Dung NTM
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.35222
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bosma Arhinia Microphthalmia Syndrome (BAMS): First Report from Vietnam.
**Authors:** Cong NV, Minh LHN, Hoang LH, Do U, Dung NTM
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.35222](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.35222)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Feb 20;15(2):e35222. doi: 10.7759/cureus.35222. eCollection 2023
Feb.

Bosma Arhinia Microphthalmia Syndrome (BAMS): First Report from Vietnam.

Cong NV(1), Minh LHN(2)(3), Hoang LH(4), Do U(5), Dung NTM(4).

Author information:
(1)Otolaryngology, Cho Ray Hospital, Ho Chi Minh City, VNM.
(2)College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, TWN.
(3)Research Center for Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, TWN.
(4)Otolaryngology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy at Ho Chi Minh City, Ho
Chi Minh City, VNM.
(5)Nelda C. Stark School of Nursing, Texas Woman's University, Houston, USA.

Bosma arhinia microphthalmia syndrome (BAMS) is a rare condition, with about 100
cases identified worldwide. It is characterized by nasal and ophthalmic
abnormalities, as well as disturbances in puberty and sexual development. The
cardinal sign is arhinia, though some cases have partial aplasia of the external
nose. In addition, several reports have revealed abnormal brain structure,
including changes to the olfactory bulbs. This case describes a 29-year-old
female who has suffered from BAMS since birth. On presentation, she was noted to
have congenital arhinia, bilateral microphthalmia, vision loss, mouth-breathing,
an unclear speaking voice, a high arched or cleft palate, and a hypoplastic
maxilla. Her paranasal sinuses were ossified and underdeveloped. This syndrome
occurs rarely, both within Vietnam and worldwide. It is characterized by four
major features: arrhinia, complete absence of the paranasal sinuses, eye
defects, and absent sexual maturation. This case report describes the
presentation of the disorder to improve otolaryngologists' understanding of
BAMS. Criteria for diagnosis consist of arhinia, midface hypoplasia (with a
hypoplastic maxilla), hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and normal intellectual
abilities. Additional important findings are microphthalmia with or without
coloboma, anosmia, maxillary hypoplasia, a high-arched palate, and absence of
paranasal sinuses and olfactory bulbs.

Copyright © 2023, Cong et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.35222
PMCID: PMC10032420
PMID: 36968924

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
