---
reference_id: "PMID:36573969"
title: "Anxiety Disorders: A Review."
authors:
- Szuhany KL
- Simon NM
journal: JAMA
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2022.22744
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- "Anxiety Disorders/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Quality of Life
- Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Serotonin and Noradrenaline Reuptake Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Sertraline/therapeutic use
- Venlafaxine Hydrochloride
- United States/epidemiology
- Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anxiety Disorders: A Review.
**Authors:** Szuhany KL, Simon NM
**Journal:** JAMA (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2022.22744](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2022.22744)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2022 Dec 27;328(24):2431-2445. doi: 10.1001/jama.2022.22744.

Anxiety Disorders: A Review.

Szuhany KL(1), Simon NM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, New York University Grossman School of Medicine,
New York.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2023 Apr 18;329(15):1315-1316. doi: 10.1001/jama.2023.2428.

IMPORTANCE: Anxiety disorders have a lifetime prevalence of approximately 34% in
the US, are often chronic, and significantly impair quality of life and
functioning.
OBSERVATIONS: Anxiety disorders are characterized by symptoms that include
worry, social and performance fears, unexpected and/or triggered panic attacks,
anticipatory anxiety, and avoidance behaviors. Generalized anxiety disorder
(6.2% lifetime prevalence), social anxiety disorder (13% lifetime prevalence),
and panic disorder (5.2% lifetime prevalence) with or without agoraphobia are
common anxiety disorders seen in primary care. Anxiety disorders are associated
with physical symptoms, such as palpitations, shortness of breath, and
dizziness. Brief screening measures applied in primary care, such as the
Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7, can aid in diagnosis of anxiety disorders
(sensitivity, 57.6% to 93.9%; specificity, 61% to 97%). Providing information
about symptoms, diagnosis, and evidence-based treatments is a first step in
helping patients with anxiety. First-line treatments include pharmacotherapy and
psychotherapy. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs, eg, sertraline)
and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs, eg, venlafaxine
extended release) remain first-line pharmacotherapy for generalized anxiety
disorder, social anxiety disorder, and panic disorder. Meta-analyses suggest
that SSRIs and SNRIs are associated with small to medium effect sizes compared
with placebo (eg, generalized anxiety disorder: standardized mean difference
[SMD], -0.55 [95% CI, -0.64 to -0.46]; social anxiety disorder: SMD, -0.67 [95%
CI, -0.76 to -0.58]; panic disorder: SMD, -0.30 [95% CI, -0.37 to -0.23]).
Cognitive behavioral therapy is the psychotherapy with the most evidence of
efficacy for anxiety disorders compared with psychological or pill placebo (eg,
generalized anxiety disorder: Hedges g = 1.01 [large effect size] [95% CI, 0.44
to 1.57]; social anxiety disorder: Hedges g = 0.41 [small to medium effect] [95%
CI, 0.25 to 0.57]; panic disorder: Hedges g = 0.39 [small to medium effect[ [95%
CI, 0.12 to 0.65]), including in primary care. When selecting treatment,
clinicians should consider patient preference, current and prior treatments,
medical and psychiatric comorbid illnesses, age, sex, and reproductive planning,
as well as cost and access to care.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Anxiety disorders affect approximately 34% of adults
during their lifetime in the US and are associated with significant distress and
impairment. First-line treatments for anxiety disorders include cognitive
behavioral therapy, SSRIs such as sertraline, and SNRIs such as venlafaxine
extended release.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2022.22744
PMID: 36573969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
