---
reference_id: "PMID:21220737"
title: Blocking the NOTCH pathway inhibits vascular inflammation in large-vessel vasculitis.
authors:
- Piggott K
- Deng J
- Warrington K
- Younge B
- Kubo JT
- Desai M
- Goronzy JJ
- Weyand CM
journal: Circulation
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.936203
keywords:
- Adoptive Transfer
- Animals
- "Calcium-Binding Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Dendritic Cells/immunology
- Dipeptides/pharmacology
- "Down-Regulation/drug effects, immunology"
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/drug therapy, immunology, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Interferon-gamma/metabolism
- Interleukin-17/metabolism
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Jagged-1 Protein
- "Membrane Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, SCID"
- "Receptor, Notch1/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Serrate-Jagged Proteins
- "Signal Transduction/drug effects, immunology"
- "Th1 Cells/drug effects, immunology, metabolism"
- Transplantation Chimera
- "Transplantation, Heterologous"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Blocking the NOTCH pathway inhibits vascular inflammation in large-vessel vasculitis.
**Authors:** Piggott K, Deng J, Warrington K, Younge B, Kubo JT, Desai M, Goronzy JJ, Weyand CM
**Journal:** Circulation (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.936203](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.936203)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2011 Jan 25;123(3):309-18. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.936203.  Epub 2011 Jan 10.

Blocking the NOTCH pathway inhibits vascular inflammation in large-vessel
vasculitis.

Piggott K(1), Deng J, Warrington K, Younge B, Kubo JT, Desai M, Goronzy JJ,
Weyand CM.

Author information:
(1)Lowance Center for Human Immunology and Rheumatology, Emory University,
Atlanta, GA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Giant cell arteritis is a granulomatous vasculitis of the aorta and
its branches that causes blindness, stroke, and aortic aneurysm. CD4 T cells are
key pathogenic regulators, instructed by vessel wall dendritic cells to
differentiate into vasculitic T cells. The unique pathways driving this
dendritic cell-T-cell interaction are incompletely understood, but may provide
novel therapeutic targets for a disease in which the only established therapy is
long-term treatment with high doses of corticosteroids.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Immunohistochemical and gene expression analyses of giant
cell arteritis-affected temporal arteries revealed abundant expression of the
NOTCH receptor and its ligands, Jagged1 and Delta1. Cleavage of the NOTCH
intracellular domain in wall-infiltrating T cells indicated ongoing NOTCH
pathway activation in large-vessel vasculitis. NOTCH activation did not occur in
small-vessel vasculitis affecting branches of the vasa vasorum tree. We devised
2 strategies to block NOTCH pathway activation: γ-secretase inhibitor treatment,
preventing nuclear translocation of the NOTCH intracellular domain, and
competing for receptor-ligand interactions through excess soluble ligand,
Jagged1-Fc. In a humanized mouse model, NOTCH pathway disruption had strong
immunosuppressive effects, inhibiting T-cell activation in the early and
established phases of vascular inflammation. NOTCH inhibition was particularly
effective in downregulating Th17 responses, but also markedly suppressed Th1
responses.
CONCLUSIONS: Blocking NOTCH signaling depleted T cells from the vascular
infiltrates, implicating NOTCH- NOTCH ligand interactions in regulating T-cell
retention and survival in vessel wall inflammation. Modulating the NOTCH
signaling cascade emerges as a promising new strategy for immunosuppressive
therapy of large-vessel vasculitis.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.936203
PMCID: PMC3056570
PMID: 21220737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
