---
reference_id: "PMID:24262501"
title: HLA-DQA1 and PLA2R1 polymorphisms and risk of idiopathic membranous nephropathy.
authors:
- Bullich G
- Ballarín J
- Oliver A
- Ayasreh N
- Silva I
- Santín S
- Díaz-Encarnación MM
- Torra R
- Ars E
journal: Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.2215/CJN.05310513
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Biopsy
- Case-Control Studies
- Disease Progression
- Female
- GPI-Linked Proteins/genetics
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Glomerulonephritis, Membranous/drug therapy, genetics, immunology"
- HLA-DQ alpha-Chains/genetics
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- "Kidney/drug effects, immunology, physiopathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Proteinuria/genetics, immunology"
- "Receptors, IgG/genetics"
- "Receptors, Phospholipase A2/genetics"
- Remission Induction
- Risk Factors
- Spain
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HLA-DQA1 and PLA2R1 polymorphisms and risk of idiopathic membranous nephropathy.
**Authors:** Bullich G, Ballarín J, Oliver A, Ayasreh N, Silva I, Santín S, Díaz-Encarnación MM, Torra R, Ars E
**Journal:** Clin J Am Soc Nephrol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.2215/CJN.05310513](https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.05310513)

## Content

1. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014 Feb;9(2):335-43. doi: 10.2215/CJN.05310513. Epub
2013 Nov 21.

HLA-DQA1 and PLA2R1 polymorphisms and risk of idiopathic membranous nephropathy.

Bullich G(1), Ballarín J, Oliver A, Ayasreh N, Silva I, Santín S,
Díaz-Encarnación MM, Torra R, Ars E.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory and, †Nephrology Department, Fundació Puigvert,
Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Sant Pau (IIB-Sant Pau), Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Red de Investigación Renal, Instituto de Investigación
Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within HLA
complex class II HLA-DQ α-chain 1 (HLA-DQA1) and M-type phospholipase A2
receptor (PLA2R1) genes were identified as strong risk factors for idiopathic
membranous nephropathy (IMN) development in a recent genome-wide association
study. Copy number variants (CNVs) within the Fc gamma receptor III (FCGR3)
locus have been associated with several autoimmune diseases, but their role in
IMN has not been studied. This study aimed to validate the association of
HLA-DQA1 and PLA2R1 risk alleles with IMN in a Spanish cohort, test the putative
association of FCGR3A and FCGR3B CNVs with IMN, and assess the use of these
genetic factors to predict the clinical outcome of the disease.
DESIGN, SETTINGS, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: A Spanish cohort of 89 IMN
patients and 286 matched controls without nephropathy was recruited between
October of 2009 and July of 2012. Case-control studies for SNPs within HLA-DQA1
(rs2187668) and PLA2R1 (rs4664308) genes and CNVs for FCGR3A and FCGR3B genes
were performed. The contribution of these polymorphisms to predict clinical
outcome and renal function decline was analyzed.
RESULTS: This study validated the association of these HLA-DQA1 and PLA2R1 SNPs
with IMN in a Spanish cohort and its increased risk when combining both risk
genotypes. No significant association was found between FCGR3 CNVs and IMN.
These results revealed that HLA-DQA1 and PLA2R1 genotype combination adjusted
for baseline proteinuria strongly predicted response to immunosuppressive
therapy. HLA-DQA1 genotype adjusted for proteinuria was also linked with renal
function decline.
CONCLUSION: This study confirms that HLA-DQA1 and PLA2R1 genotypes are risk
factors for IMN, whereas no association was identified for FCGR3 CNVs. This
study provides, for the first time, evidence of the contribution of these
HLA-DQA1 and PLA2R1 polymorphisms in predicting IMN response to
immunosuppressors and disease progression. Future studies are needed to validate
and identify prognostic markers.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.05310513
PMCID: PMC3913240
PMID: 24262501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
