---
reference_id: "PMID:36776324"
title: A population-based study of synchronous distant metastases and prognosis in patients with PDAC at initial diagnosis.
authors:
- Zhang L
- Jin R
- Yang X
- Ying D
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1087700
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A population-based study of synchronous distant metastases and prognosis in patients with PDAC at initial diagnosis.
**Authors:** Zhang L, Jin R, Yang X, Ying D
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2023.1087700](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2023.1087700)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2023 Jan 26;13:1087700. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1087700.
eCollection  2023.

A population-based study of synchronous distant metastases and prognosis in
patients with PDAC at initial diagnosis.

Zhang L(1)(2), Jin R(1)(2), Yang X(2), Ying D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Minimally Invasive Surgery, The Affiliated Lihuili Hospital,
Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang, China.
(2)School of Medicine, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang, China.

OBJECTIVE: Cancer of the pancreas is a life-threatening condition and has a high
distant metastasis (DM) rate of over 50% at diagnosis. Therefore, this study
aimed to determine whether patterns of distant metastases correlated with
prognosis in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) with metastatic spread, and
build a novel nomogram capable of predicting the 6, 12, 18-month survival rate
with high accuracy.
METHODS: We analyzed data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
(SEER) database for cases of PDAC with DM. Kaplan-Meier analysis, log-rank tests
and Cox-regression proportional hazards model were used to assess the impact of
site and number of DM on the cancer-specific survival (CSS) and over survival
(OS). A total of 2709 patients with DM were randomly assigned to the training
group and validation group in a 7:3 ratio. A nomogram was constructed by the
dependent risk factors which were determined by multivariate Cox-regression
analysis. An assessment of the discrimination and ability of the prediction
model was made by measuring AUC, C-index, calibration curve and decision curve
analysis (DCA). In addition, we collected 98 patients with distant metastases at
the time of initial diagnosis from Ningbo University Affiliated LiHuili Hospital
to verify the efficacy of the prediction model.
RESULTS: There was a highest incidence of liver metastases from pancreatic
cancer (2387,74.36%), followed by lung (625,19.47%), bone (190,5.92%), and brain
(8,0.25%). The prognosis of liver metastases differed from that of lung
metastases, and the presence of multiple organ metastases was associated with
poorer prognosis. According to univariate and multivariate Cox-regression
analyses, seven factors (i.e., diagnosis age, tumor location, grade of tumor
differentiation, T-stage, receipt of surgery, receipt of chemotherapy status,
presence of multiple organ metastases) were included in our nomogram model. In
internal and external validation, the ROC curves, C-index, calibration curves
and DCA were calculated, which confirmed that this nomogram can precisely
predict prognosis of PDAC with DM.
CONCLUSION: Metastatic PDAC patients with liver metastases tended to have a
worse prognosis than those with lung metastases. The number of DM had
significant effect on the overall survival rate of metastatic PDAC. This study
had a high prediction accuracy, which was helpful clinicians to analyze the
prognosis of PDAC with DM and implement individualized diagnosis and treatment.

Copyright © 2023 Zhang, Jin, Yang and Ying.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1087700
PMCID: PMC9909560
PMID: 36776324

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
