---
reference_id: "PMID:39457053"
title: Pathogenesis and Therapy of Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome (HPS)-Associated Pulmonary Fibrosis.
authors:
- Hu X
- Wei Z
- Wu Y
- Zhao M
- Zhou L
- Lin Q
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms252011270
keywords:
- "Hermanski-Pudlak Syndrome/therapy, genetics, complications"
- Humans
- "Pulmonary Fibrosis/etiology, therapy, pathology"
- Animals
- "Alveolar Epithelial Cells/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis and Therapy of Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome (HPS)-Associated Pulmonary Fibrosis.
**Authors:** Hu X, Wei Z, Wu Y, Zhao M, Zhou L, Lin Q
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms252011270](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms252011270)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Oct 19;25(20):11270. doi: 10.3390/ijms252011270.

Pathogenesis and Therapy of Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome (HPS)-Associated Pulmonary 
Fibrosis.

Hu X(1), Wei Z(1), Wu Y(1), Zhao M(1), Zhou L(1), Lin Q(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Jiangsu University, 301 Xuefu Road, Zhenjiang 212013, 
China.

Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS)-associated pulmonary fibrosis (HPS-PF) is a 
progressive lung disease that is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in HPS 
patients. Previous studies have demonstrated that the HPS proteins play an 
essential role in the biogenesis and function of lysosome-related organelles 
(LROs) in alveolar epithelial type II (AT2) cells and found that HPS-PF is 
associated with dysfunction of AT2 cells and abnormal immune reactions. Despite 
recent advances in research on HPS and the pathology of HPS-PF, the pathological 
mechanisms underlying HPS-PF remain poorly understood, and no effective 
treatment has been established. Therefore, it is necessary to refresh the 
progress in the pathogenesis of HPS-PF to increase our understanding of the 
pathogenic mechanism of HPS-PF and develop targeted therapeutic strategies. This 
review summarizes the recent progress in the pathogenesis of HPS-PF provides 
information about the current treatment strategies for HPS-PF, and hopefully 
increases our understanding of the pathogenesis of HPS-PF and offers thoughts 
for new therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms252011270
PMCID: PMC11508683
PMID: 39457053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.