---
reference_id: "PMID:39379149"
title: Shwachman-Diamond syndrome due to biallelic EFL1 variants with complex and fatal clinical course in early infancy.
authors:
- Cario H
- Bertrand A
- Tan S
- Auber B
- Erlacher M
- Mair EM
- von Hardenberg S
- Lebrecht D
- Revy P
- Warren AJ
journal: Br J Haematol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/bjh.19793
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Young Adult
- Alleles
- Bone Marrow Diseases/genetics
- Fatal Outcome
- Lipomatosis/genetics
- Mutation
- Peptide Elongation Factors/genetics
- Shwachman-Diamond Syndrome
- "Ribonucleoprotein, U5 Small Nuclear"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Shwachman-Diamond syndrome due to biallelic EFL1 variants with complex and fatal clinical course in early infancy.
**Authors:** Cario H, Bertrand A, Tan S, Auber B, Erlacher M, Mair EM, von Hardenberg S, Lebrecht D, Revy P, Warren AJ
**Journal:** Br J Haematol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjh.19793](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjh.19793)

## Content

1. Br J Haematol. 2024 Dec;205(6):2363-2369. doi: 10.1111/bjh.19793. Epub 2024
Oct  8.

Shwachman-Diamond syndrome due to biallelic EFL1 variants with complex and fatal
clinical course in early infancy.

Cario H(1)(2), Bertrand A(3)(4)(5), Tan S(6)(7)(8), Auber B(9), Erlacher
M(1)(10), Mair EM(11), von Hardenberg S(9), Lebrecht D(10), Revy P(3)(4), Warren
AJ(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center
Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(2)Center for Rare Hematopoietic Disorders and Immunodeficiencies (ZSHI), Rare
Disease Center, University Medical Center Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(3)Laboratory of Genome Dynamics in the Immune System, INSERM UMR 1163, Imagine
Institute, Paris, France.
(4)Université Paris Cité, Imagine Institute, Paris, France.
(5)Université Paris-Saclay, Paris, France.
(6)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge
Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, UK.
(7)Wellcome Trust-Medical Research Council Stem Cell Institute, Jeffrey Cheah
Biomedical Centre, Puddicombe Way, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, UK.
(8)Department of Haematology, Jeffrey Cheah Biomedical Centre, Cambridge
Biomedical Campus, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine,
Cambridge, UK.
(9)Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(10)Center for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Pediatric Hematology and
Oncology, University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(11)Division of Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care Medicine, Department of
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

Shwachman-Diamond syndrome represents a clinically and genetically heterogeneous
disorder. We report on an infant with a very severe, fatal clinical course
caused by biallelic EFL1 variants: c.89A>G, p.(His30Arg), and c.2599A>G,
p.(Asn867Asp). Functional analysis of patient-derived B-lymphoblastoid and
SV40-transformed fibroblast cell lines suggests that the compound heterozygous
EFL1 variants impaired mature ribosome formation leading to compromised protein
synthesis, ultimately resulting in a severe form of Shwachman-Diamond syndrome.

© 2024 The Author(s). British Journal of Haematology published by British
Society for Haematology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/bjh.19793
PMCID: PMC11637716
PMID: 39379149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
