---
reference_id: "PMID:36623815"
title: "Solitary Peutz-Jeghers type harmartomatous polyp in duodenum with gastric foveolar epithelium: a case report."
authors:
- Choi E
- Lee J
- Park Y
journal: J Pathol Transl Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4132/jptm.2022.11.07
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Solitary Peutz-Jeghers type harmartomatous polyp in duodenum with gastric foveolar epithelium: a case report.
**Authors:** Choi E, Lee J, Park Y
**Journal:** J Pathol Transl Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4132/jptm.2022.11.07](https://doi.org/10.4132/jptm.2022.11.07)

## Content

1. J Pathol Transl Med. 2023 Mar;57(2):128-131. doi: 10.4132/jptm.2022.11.07.
Epub  2023 Jan 10.

Solitary Peutz-Jeghers type harmartomatous polyp in duodenum with gastric 
foveolar epithelium: a case report.

Choi E(1), Lee J(2), Park Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Peutz-Jeghers type hamartomatous polyp is known to be associated with 
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, which shows characteristic multiple hamartomatous polyp 
involvement in the gastrointestinal tract, combined with mucocutaneous symptom, 
familial history of Peutz- Jeghers syndrome or STK11/LTB1 mutation. However, 
some cases showing histologic appearance of the polyps discovered in Peutz- 
Jeghers syndrome while lacking other diagnostic criteria of the syndrome have 
been reported, and these are called solitary Peutz- Jeghers type polyps. Herein, 
we report a case of solitary Peutz-Jeghers type polyp covered with heterotopic 
epithelium. The patient was 47-year-old female without any mucocutaneous 
symptoms nor familial history of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. Microscopic examination 
revealed Peutz-Jeghers type hamartomatous polyp in duodenum covered with gastric 
type foveolar epithelium. Considering the definition of hamartomatous polyp, 
which is, the abnormal overgrowth of the indigenous epithelial component, the 
histological feature of current case is noteworthy in a point that it shows 
proliferation of heterotopic component, rather than the indigenous component.

DOI: 10.4132/jptm.2022.11.07
PMCID: PMC10028010
PMID: 36623815

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The authors declare that 
they have no potential conflicts of interest.