---
reference_id: "PMID:15473967"
title: Mitotic spindle regulation by Nde1 controls cerebral cortical size.
authors:
- Feng Y
- Walsh CA
journal: Neuron
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.09.023
keywords:
- Animals
- "Blotting, Southern"
- COS Cells
- Carrier Proteins/physiology
- Cell Movement/physiology
- Cerebral Cortex/embryology
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Flow Cytometry
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Mice
- Microcephaly/genetics
- "Neurons/cytology, physiology"
- Spindle Apparatus/physiology
- Stem Cells/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitotic spindle regulation by Nde1 controls cerebral cortical size.
**Authors:** Feng Y, Walsh CA
**Journal:** Neuron (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2004.09.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2004.09.023)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2004 Oct 14;44(2):279-93. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.09.023.

Mitotic spindle regulation by Nde1 controls cerebral cortical size.

Feng Y(1), Walsh CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2004 Oct 14;44(2):213-4. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.10.002.

Ablation of the LIS1-interacting protein Nde1 (formerly mNudE) in mouse produces
a small brain (microcephaly), with the most dramatic reduction affecting the
cerebral cortex. While cortical lamination is mostly preserved, the mutant
cortex has fewer neurons and very thin superficial cortical layers (II to IV).
BrdU birthdating revealed retarded and modestly disorganized neuronal migration;
however, more dramatic defects on mitotic progression, mitotic orientation, and
mitotic chromosome localization in cortical progenitors were observed in Nde1
mutant embryos. The small cerebral cortex seems to reflect both reduced
progenitor cell division and altered neuronal cell fates. In vitro analysis
demonstrated that Nde1 is essential for centrosome duplication and mitotic
spindle assembly. Our data show that mitotic spindle function and orientation
are essential for normal development of mammalian cerebral cortex.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.09.023
PMID: 15473967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
