---
reference_id: "PMID:34874625"
title: Microglial TREM2 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
authors:
- Xie M
- Zhao S
- Bosco DB
- Nguyen A
- Wu LJ
journal: Dev Neurobiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/dneu.22864
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microglial TREM2 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
**Authors:** Xie M, Zhao S, Bosco DB, Nguyen A, Wu LJ
**Journal:** Dev Neurobiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/dneu.22864](https://doi.org/10.1002/dneu.22864)

## Content

1. Dev Neurobiol. 2022 Jan;82(1):125-137. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22864. Epub 2021 Dec 
18.

Microglial TREM2 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Xie M(1)(2), Zhao S(1), Bosco DB(1), Nguyen A(3), Wu LJ(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Rochester, Minnesota, 
USA.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida, USA.
(5)Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), also known as Lou Gehrig's disease, is an 
aggressive motor neuron degenerative disease characterized by selective loss of 
both upper and lower motor neurons. The mechanisms underlying disease initiation 
and progression are poorly understood. The involvement of nonmotor neuraxis 
emphasizes the contribution of glial cells in disease progress. Microglia 
comprise a unique subset of glial cells and are the principal immune cells in 
the central nervous system (CNS). Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cell 
2 (TREM2) is a surface receptor that, within the CNS, is exclusively expressed 
on microglia and plays crucial roles in microglial proliferation, migration, 
activation, metabolism, and phagocytosis. Genetic evidence has linked TREM2 to 
neurodegenerative diseases including ALS, but its function in ALS pathogenesis 
is largely unknown. In this review, we summarize how microglial activation, with 
a specific focus on TREM2 function, affects ALS progression clinically and 
experimentally. Understanding microglial TREM2 function will help pinpoint the 
molecular target for ALS treatment.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/dneu.22864
PMCID: PMC8898078
PMID: 34874625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.