---
reference_id: "PMID:31221659"
title: "Active receptor tyrosine kinases, but not Brachyury, are sufficient to trigger chordoma in zebrafish."
authors:
- "D'Agati G"
- Cabello EM
- Frontzek K
- Rushing EJ
- Klemm R
- Robinson MD
- White RM
- Mosimann C
- Burger A
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.039545
keywords:
- Animals
- "Chordoma/enzymology, genetics"
- Fetal Proteins/metabolism
- "Notochord/enzymology, pathology"
- Oncogenes
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/metabolism
- T-Box Domain Proteins/metabolism
- Zebrafish
- Brachyury Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Active receptor tyrosine kinases, but not Brachyury, are sufficient to trigger chordoma in zebrafish.
**Authors:** D'Agati G, Cabello EM, Frontzek K, Rushing EJ, Klemm R, Robinson MD, White RM, Mosimann C, Burger A
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.039545](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.039545)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2019 Jul 16;12(7):dmm039545. doi: 10.1242/dmm.039545.

Active receptor tyrosine kinases, but not Brachyury, are sufficient to trigger 
chordoma in zebrafish.

D'Agati G(1), Cabello EM(1), Frontzek K(2), Rushing EJ(2), Klemm R(1), Robinson 
MD(1)(3), White RM(4)(5), Mosimann C(1), Burger A(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zürich, 8057 Zürich, 
Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Neuropathology, University Hospital Zürich, 8091 Zürich, 
Switzerland.
(3)SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Zürich, 8057 Zürich, 
Switzerland.
(4)Cancer Biology & Genetics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY 10065, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10065, USA.
(6)Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zürich, 8057 Zürich, 
Switzerland alexa.burger@imls.uzh.ch.

The aberrant activation of developmental processes triggers diverse cancer 
types. Chordoma is a rare, aggressive tumor arising from transformed notochord 
remnants. Several potentially oncogenic factors have been found to be 
deregulated in chordoma, yet causation remains uncertain. In particular, 
sustained expression of TBXT - encoding the notochord regulator protein 
brachyury - is hypothesized as a key driver of chordoma, yet experimental 
evidence is absent. Here, we employ a zebrafish chordoma model to identify the 
notochord-transforming potential of implicated genes in vivo We find that 
Brachyury, including a form with augmented transcriptional activity, is 
insufficient to initiate notochord hyperplasia. In contrast, the 
chordoma-implicated receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) EGFR and Kdr/VEGFR2 are 
sufficient to transform notochord cells. Aberrant activation of RTK/Ras 
signaling attenuates processes required for notochord differentiation, including 
the unfolded protein response and endoplasmic reticulum stress pathways. Our 
results provide the first in vivo evidence against a tumor-initiating potential 
of Brachyury in the notochord, and imply activated RTK signaling as a possible 
initiating event in chordoma. Furthermore, our work points at modulating 
endoplasmic reticulum and protein stress pathways as possible therapeutic 
avenues against chordoma.

© 2019. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.039545
PMCID: PMC6679381
PMID: 31221659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.