---
reference_id: "PMID:7859284"
title: Autosomal dominant and recessive osteochondrodysplasias associated with the COL11A2 locus.
authors:
- Vikkula M
- Mariman EC
- Lui VC
- Zhidkova NI
- Tiller GE
- Goldring MB
- van Beersum SE
- de Waal Malefijt MC
- van den Hoogen FH
- Ropers HH
journal: Cell
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90493-x
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Bone Development/genetics
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Collagen/genetics, physiology"
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant/genetics"
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Morphogenesis
- Mutation/genetics
- Netherlands
- Osteoarthritis/genetics
- Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal dominant and recessive osteochondrodysplasias associated with the COL11A2 locus.
**Authors:** Vikkula M, Mariman EC, Lui VC, Zhidkova NI, Tiller GE, Goldring MB, van Beersum SE, de Waal Malefijt MC, van den Hoogen FH, Ropers HH
**Journal:** Cell (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(95)90493-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(95)90493-x)

## Content

1. Cell. 1995 Feb 10;80(3):431-7. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90493-x.

Autosomal dominant and recessive osteochondrodysplasias associated with the
COL11A2 locus.

Vikkula M(1), Mariman EC, Lui VC, Zhidkova NI, Tiller GE, Goldring MB, van
Beersum SE, de Waal Malefijt MC, van den Hoogen FH, Ropers HH, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115.

Comment in
    Cell. 1995 Feb 10;80(3):371-8. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90487-5.

Identifying mutations that cause specific osteochondrodysplasias will provide
novel insights into the function of genes that are essential for skeletal
morphogenesis. We report here that an autosomal dominant form of Stickler
syndrome, characterized by mild spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, osteoarthritis,
and sensorineural hearing loss, but no eye involvement, is caused by a splice
donor site mutation resulting in "in-frame" exon skipping within the COL11A2
gene, encoding the alpha 2(XI) chain of the quantitatively minor fibrillar
collagen XI. We also show that an autosomal recessive disorder with similar, but
more severe, characteristics is linked to the COL11A2 locus and is caused by a
glycine to arginine substitution in alpha 2(XI) collagen. The results suggest
that mutations in collagen XI genes are associated with a spectrum of
abnormalities in human skeletal development and support the conclusion of
others, based on studies of murine chondrodysplasia, that collagen XI is
essential for skeletal morphogenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90493-x
PMID: 7859284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
