---
reference_id: "PMID:34459252"
title: "LAMP2 Cardiomyopathy: Consequences of Impaired Autophagy in the Heart."
authors:
- Alcalai R
- Arad M
- Wakimoto H
- Yadin D
- Gorham J
- Wang L
- Burns E
- Maron BJ
- Roberts WC
- Konno T
- Conner DA
- Perez-Atayde AR
- Seidman JG
- Seidman CE
journal: J Am Heart Assoc
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1161/JAHA.120.018829
keywords:
- Animals
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/genetics"
- Autophagy
- Calcium
- Cardiomegaly
- Cardiomyopathies/genetics
- Glycogen Storage Disease Type IIb/genetics
- "Hypertrophy, Left Ventricular"
- Lysosomal-Associated Membrane Protein 2/genetics
- Male
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# LAMP2 Cardiomyopathy: Consequences of Impaired Autophagy in the Heart.
**Authors:** Alcalai R, Arad M, Wakimoto H, Yadin D, Gorham J, Wang L, Burns E, Maron BJ, Roberts WC, Konno T, Conner DA, Perez-Atayde AR, Seidman JG, Seidman CE
**Journal:** J Am Heart Assoc (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1161/JAHA.120.018829](https://doi.org/10.1161/JAHA.120.018829)

## Content

1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2021 Sep 7;10(17):e018829. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.120.018829.
Epub  2021 Aug 28.

LAMP2 Cardiomyopathy: Consequences of Impaired Autophagy in the Heart.

Alcalai R(1)(2), Arad M(3), Wakimoto H(2), Yadin D(3), Gorham J(2), Wang L(2),
Burns E(1), Maron BJ(4), Roberts WC(5), Konno T(2), Conner DA(2), Perez-Atayde
AR(6), Seidman JG(2), Seidman CE(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Heart InstituteHadassah Hebrew University Medical Center Jerusalem Israel.
(2)Department of Genetics Harvard Medical School Boston MA.
(3)Division of Cardiology Sheba Medical Centre and Tel Aviv University Ramat Gan
Israel.
(4)Minneapolis Heart Institute Foundation Minneapolis MN.
(5)Baylor Heart & Vascular InstituteBaylor University Medical Center Dallas TX.
(6)Department of Pathology Children's Hospital BostonHarvard Medical School
Boston MA.
(7)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Cardiovascular DivisionBrigham and
Women's Hospital Boston MA.

Background Human mutations in the X-linked lysosome-associated membrane
protein-2 (LAMP2) gene can cause a multisystem Danon disease or a primary
cardiomyopathy characterized by massive hypertrophy, conduction system
abnormalities, and malignant ventricular arrhythmias. We introduced an in-frame
LAMP2 gene exon 6 deletion mutation (denoted L2Δ6) causing human cardiomyopathy,
into mouse LAMP2 gene, to elucidate its consequences on cardiomyocyte biology.
This mutation results in in-frame deletion of 41 amino acids, compatible with
presence of some defective LAMP2 protein. Methods and Results Left ventricular
tissues from L2Δ6 and wild-type mice had equivalent amounts of LAMP2 RNA, but a
significantly lower level of LAMP2 protein. By 20 weeks of age male mutant mice
developed left ventricular hypertrophy which was followed by left ventricular
dilatation and reduced systolic function. Cardiac electrophysiology and isolated
cardiomyocyte studies demonstrated ventricular arrhythmia, conduction
disturbances, abnormal calcium transients and increased sensitivity to
catecholamines. Myocardial fibrosis was strikingly increased in 40-week-old L2Δ6
mice, recapitulating findings of human LAMP2 cardiomyopathy. Immunofluorescence
and transmission electron microscopy identified mislocalization of lysosomes and
accumulation of autophagosomes between sarcomeres, causing profound
morphological changes disrupting the cellular ultrastructure. Transcription
profile and protein expression analyses of L2Δ6 hearts showed significantly
increased expression of genes encoding activators and protein components of
autophagy, hypertrophy, and apoptosis. Conclusions We suggest that impaired
autophagy results in cardiac hypertrophy and profound transcriptional reactions
that impacted metabolism, calcium homeostasis, and cell survival. These
responses define the molecular pathways that underlie the pathology and aberrant
electrophysiology in cardiomyopathy of Danon disease.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.120.018829
PMCID: PMC8649277
PMID: 34459252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.A. and D.Y. received a research support from
Genzyme Corporation for a project entitled “Phenotype Modification and
Developing Therapy in Cardiac Danon Disease.” The remaining authors have no
disclosures to report.
