---
reference_id: "PMID:33945063"
title: Characteristics Associated with Monitoring and Treatment of Chronic Hepatitis B in a Large Cohort of Australian Adults.
authors:
- He WQ
- Matthews GV
- Liu B
journal: Dig Dis Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s10620-021-07008-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characteristics Associated with Monitoring and Treatment of Chronic Hepatitis B in a Large Cohort of Australian Adults.
**Authors:** He WQ, Matthews GV, Liu B
**Journal:** Dig Dis Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10620-021-07008-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10620-021-07008-z)

## Content

1. Dig Dis Sci. 2022 Jun;67(6):2600-2607. doi: 10.1007/s10620-021-07008-z. Epub 
2021 May 4.

Characteristics Associated with Monitoring and Treatment of Chronic Hepatitis B 
in a Large Cohort of Australian Adults.

He WQ(1), Matthews GV(2), Liu B(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health and Community Medicine, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, 2052, 
Australia. wen-qiang.he@unsw.edu.au.
(2)Kirby Institute, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(3)School of Public Health and Community Medicine, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, 2052, 
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Regular monitoring and treatment of chronic hepatitis B (CHB) are 
known to reduce the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma. We sought to describe 
patterns of monitoring and treatment among adults diagnosed with CHB in 
Australia.
METHODS: Population-based prospective cohort study of Australian adults aged 
45 + years followed by record-linkage to hepatitis B notifications, monitoring 
and treatment. Proportions of those with CHB who: had viral load test; were 
dispensed antiviral treatment; and had ultrasound surveillance were estimated. 
The characteristics associated with viral load test and ultrasound surveillance 
were examined using logistic regression.
RESULTS: A total of 576 adults with CHB were identified. From 2008 to 2015, 
14.8% (85/576) had at least one viral load test recorded every 2 years and 19.1% 
(110/576) had at least one antiviral treatment recorded, 19.9% (58/292) had at 
least one ultrasound recorded every year among those eligible for ultrasound 
surveillance. A record of having at least one viral load test every 2 years was 
more likely among adults born in Asia compared to Australian-born (21.4% vs 
8.6%), those notified in more recent years compared to earlier years, and those 
on antiviral treatment compared to not on treatment. Increasing proportions of 
cases had records of at least one viral load test over time (2008: 10.5%, 2015: 
27.2%) and at least one antiviral treatment (2008: 3.0%, 2015: 18.5%).
CONCLUSIONS: In Australian adults, estimates of care interventions for CHB 
management have increased over time but still fall short of targets recommended 
in the National Hepatitis B Strategy.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-021-07008-z
PMID: 33945063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]