---
reference_id: "PMID:38534131"
title: "Effect of an Arsenic Mitigation Program on Arsenic Exposure in American Indian Communities: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of the Community-Led Strong Heart Water Study Program."
authors:
- George CM
- Zacher T
- Endres K
- Richards F
- Bear Robe L
- Harvey D
- Best LG
- Red Cloud R
- Black Bear A
- Skinner L
- Cuny C
- Rule A
- Schwab KJ
- Gittelsohn J
- Glabonjat RA
- Schilling K
- "O'Leary M"
- Thomas ED
- Umans J
- Zhu J
- Moulton LH
- Navas-Acien A
journal: Environ Health Perspect
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1289/EHP12548
keywords:
- Humans
- American Indian or Alaska Native
- Arsenic/urine
- Creatinine
- Drinking Water/chemistry
- Telemedicine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of an Arsenic Mitigation Program on Arsenic Exposure in American Indian Communities: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of the Community-Led Strong Heart Water Study Program.
**Authors:** George CM, Zacher T, Endres K, Richards F, Bear Robe L, Harvey D, Best LG, Red Cloud R, Black Bear A, Skinner L, Cuny C, Rule A, Schwab KJ, Gittelsohn J, Glabonjat RA, Schilling K, O'Leary M, Thomas ED, Umans J, Zhu J, Moulton LH, Navas-Acien A
**Journal:** Environ Health Perspect (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1289/EHP12548](https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP12548)

## Content

1. Environ Health Perspect. 2024 Mar;132(3):37007. doi: 10.1289/EHP12548. Epub
2024  Mar 27.

Effect of an Arsenic Mitigation Program on Arsenic Exposure in American Indian
Communities: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of the Community-Led Strong
Heart Water Study Program.

George CM(1), Zacher T(2), Endres K(1), Richards F(2), Bear Robe L(2), Harvey
D(3), Best LG(2), Red Cloud R(4), Black Bear A(2), Skinner L(2), Cuny C(2), Rule
A(5), Schwab KJ(5), Gittelsohn J(1), Glabonjat RA(6), Schilling K(6), O'Leary
M(2), Thomas ED(1), Umans J(7)(8), Zhu J(7), Moulton LH(1), Navas-Acien A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Missouri Breaks Industries Research Inc., Eagle Butte, South Dakota, USA.
(3)Indian Health Service, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(4)Environmental Resource Department, Oglala Sioux Tribe, Pine Ridge, South
Dakota, USA.
(5)Department of Environmental Health and Engineering, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(6)Department of Environmental Health Science, Mailman School of Public Health,
Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.
(7)Biomarker, Biochemistry, and Biorepository Core, Medstar Health, Washington,
District of Columbia, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Georgetown University,
Washington, District of Columbia, USA.

BACKGROUND: Chronic arsenic exposure has been associated with an increased risk
of cardiovascular disease; diabetes; cancers of the lung, pancreas and prostate;
and all-cause mortality in American Indian communities in the Strong Heart
Study.
OBJECTIVE: The Strong Heart Water Study (SHWS) designed and evaluated a
multilevel, community-led arsenic mitigation program to reduce arsenic exposure
among private well users in partnership with Northern Great Plains American
Indian Nations.
METHODS: A cluster randomized controlled trial (cRCT) was conducted to evaluate
the effectiveness of the SHWS arsenic mitigation program over a 2-y period on a)
urinary arsenic, and b) reported use of arsenic-safe water for drinking and
cooking. The cRCT compared the installation of a point-of-use arsenic filter and
a mobile Health (mHealth) program (3 phone calls; SHWS mHealth and Filter arm)
to a more intensive program, which included this same program plus three home
visits (3 phone calls and 3 home visits; SHWS Intensive arm).
RESULTS: A 47% reduction in urinary arsenic [geometric mean (GM) = 13.2 to 7.0
μg/g creatinine] was observed from baseline to the final follow-up when both
study arms were combined. By treatment arm, the reduction in urinary arsenic
from baseline to the final follow-up visit was 55% in the mHealth and Filter arm
(GM = 14.6 to 6.55 μg/g creatinine) and 30% in the Intensive arm (GM
= 11.2 to 7.82 μg/g creatinine). There was no significant difference in urinary
arsenic levels by treatment arm at the final follow-up visit comparing the
Intensive vs. mHealth and Filter arms: GM ratio of 1.21 (95% confidence
interval: 0.77, 1.90). In both arms combined, exclusive use of arsenic-safe
water from baseline to the final follow-up visit significantly increased for
water used for cooking (17% to 53%) and drinking (12% to 46%).
DISCUSSION: Delivery of the interventions for the community-led SHWS arsenic
mitigation program, including the installation of a point-of-use arsenic filter
and a mHealth program on the use of arsenic-safe water (calls only, no home
visits), resulted in a significant reduction in urinary arsenic and increases in
reported use of arsenic-safe water for drinking and cooking during the 2-y study
period. These results demonstrate that the installation of an arsenic filter and
phone calls from a mHealth program presents a promising approach to reduce water
arsenic exposure among private well users. https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP12548.

DOI: 10.1289/EHP12548
PMCID: PMC10967367
PMID: 38534131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
