---
reference_id: "PMID:34006508"
title: "Three-year results of phase I retinal gene therapy trial for CNGA3-mutated achromatopsia: results of a non randomised controlled trial."
authors:
- Reichel FF
- Michalakis S
- Wilhelm B
- Zobor D
- Muehlfriedel R
- Kohl S
- Weisschuh N
- Sothilingam V
- Kuehlewein L
- Kahle N
- Seitz I
- Paquet-Durand F
- Tsang SH
- Martus P
- Peters T
- Seeliger M
- Bartz-Schmidt KU
- Ueffing M
- Zrenner E
- Biel M
- Wissinger B
- Fischer D
journal: Br J Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2021-319067
keywords:
- Humans
- "Color Vision Defects/genetics, therapy"
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- Retina
- Cyclic Nucleotide-Gated Cation Channels/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Three-year results of phase I retinal gene therapy trial for CNGA3-mutated achromatopsia: results of a non randomised controlled trial.
**Authors:** Reichel FF, Michalakis S, Wilhelm B, Zobor D, Muehlfriedel R, Kohl S, Weisschuh N, Sothilingam V, Kuehlewein L, Kahle N, Seitz I, Paquet-Durand F, Tsang SH, Martus P, Peters T, Seeliger M, Bartz-Schmidt KU, Ueffing M, Zrenner E, Biel M, Wissinger B, Fischer D
**Journal:** Br J Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bjophthalmol-2021-319067](https://doi.org/10.1136/bjophthalmol-2021-319067)

## Content

1. Br J Ophthalmol. 2022 Nov;106(11):1567-1572. doi: 
10.1136/bjophthalmol-2021-319067. Epub 2021 May 18.

Three-year results of phase I retinal gene therapy trial for CNGA3-mutated 
achromatopsia: results of a non randomised controlled trial.

Reichel FF(1)(2), Michalakis S(3), Wilhelm B(1), Zobor D(2), Muehlfriedel R(2), 
Kohl S(4), Weisschuh N(4), Sothilingam V(2), Kuehlewein L(1), Kahle N(5), Seitz 
I(1)(2), Paquet-Durand F(2), Tsang SH(6), Martus P(5), Peters T(5), Seeliger 
M(2), Bartz-Schmidt KU(1), Ueffing M(2), Zrenner E(1)(2), Biel M(7), Wissinger 
B(4), Fischer D(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University Eye Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Baden-Württemberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital, LMU Munich, Munich, Bayern, 
Germany.
(4)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University 
of Tübingen, Tubingen, Baden-Württemberg, Germany.
(5)University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(6)Columbia University, New York City, new York, USA.
(7)Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, University Eye Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany, Tübingen, Germany dominik.fischer@uni-tuebingen.de.
(9)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK.

AIMS: To determine long-term safety and efficacy outcomes of a subretinal gene 
therapy for CNGA3-associated achromatopsia. We present data from an open-label, 
nonrandomised controlled trial (NCT02610582).
METHODS: Details of the study design have been previously described. Briefly, 
nine patients were treated in three escalating dose groups with subretinal 
AAV8.CNGA3 gene therapy between November 2015 and October 2016. After the first 
year, patients were seen on a yearly basis. Safety assessment constituted the 
primary endpoint. On a secondary level, multiple functional tests were carried 
out to determine efficacy of the therapy.
RESULTS: No adverse or serious adverse events deemed related to the study drug 
occurred after year 1. Safety of the therapy, as the primary endpoint of this 
trial, can, therefore, be confirmed. The functional benefits that were noted in 
the treated eye at year 1 were persistent throughout the following visits at 
years 2 and 3. While functional improvement in the treated eye reached 
statistical significance for some secondary endpoints, for most endpoints, this 
was not the case when the treated eye was compared with the untreated fellow 
eye.
CONCLUSION: The results demonstrate a very good safety profile of the therapy 
even at the highest dose administered. The small sample size limits the 
statistical power of efficacy analyses. However, trial results inform on the 
most promising design and endpoints for future clinical trials. Such trials have 
to determine whether treatment of younger patients results in greater functional 
gains by avoiding amblyopia as a potential limiting factor.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2021-319067
PMID: 34006508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.