---
reference_id: "PMID:31186072"
title: "Triglyceride deposit cardiomyovasculopathy: a rare cardiovascular disorder."
authors:
- Li M
- Hirano KI
- Ikeda Y
- Higashi M
- Hashimoto C
- Zhang B
- Kozawa J
- Sugimura K
- Miyauchi H
- Suzuki A
- Hara Y
- Takagi A
- Ikeda Y
- Kobayashi K
- Futsukaichi Y
- Zaima N
- Yamaguchi S
- Shrestha R
- Nakamura H
- Kawaguchi K
- Sai E
- Hui SP
- Nakano Y
- Sawamura A
- Inaba T
- Sakata Y
- Yasui Y
- Nagasawa Y
- Kinugawa S
- Shimada K
- Yamada S
- Hao H
- Nakatani D
- Ide T
- Amano T
- Naito H
- Nagasaka H
- Kobayashi K
- Japan TGCV study group
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1087-4
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Atherosclerosis/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Lipase/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Rare Diseases/metabolism, pathology"
- Triglycerides/metabolism
- Acyltransferases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Triglyceride deposit cardiomyovasculopathy: a rare cardiovascular disorder.
**Authors:** Li M, Hirano KI, Ikeda Y, Higashi M, Hashimoto C, Zhang B, Kozawa J, Sugimura K, Miyauchi H, Suzuki A, Hara Y, Takagi A, Ikeda Y, Kobayashi K, Futsukaichi Y, Zaima N, Yamaguchi S, Shrestha R, Nakamura H, Kawaguchi K, Sai E, Hui SP, Nakano Y, Sawamura A, Inaba T, Sakata Y, Yasui Y, Nagasawa Y, Kinugawa S, Shimada K, Yamada S, Hao H, Nakatani D, Ide T, Amano T, Naito H, Nagasaka H, Kobayashi K, Japan TGCV study group
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-019-1087-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-019-1087-4)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2019 Jun 11;14(1):134. doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1087-4.

Triglyceride deposit cardiomyovasculopathy: a rare cardiovascular disorder.

Li M(1), Hirano KI(2), Ikeda Y(3), Higashi M(4), Hashimoto C(1), Zhang B(5), 
Kozawa J(6), Sugimura K(7), Miyauchi H(8), Suzuki A(1), Hara Y(1), Takagi A(1), 
Ikeda Y(1), Kobayashi K(9), Futsukaichi Y(1), Zaima N(10), Yamaguchi S(1), 
Shrestha R(11), Nakamura H(12), Kawaguchi K(13), Sai E(14), Hui SP(11), Nakano 
Y(15), Sawamura A(16), Inaba T(17), Sakata Y(7), Yasui Y(18), Nagasawa Y(19), 
Kinugawa S(20), Shimada K(14), Yamada S(21), Hao H(22), Nakatani D(23)(24), Ide 
T(25), Amano T(15), Naito H(26), Nagasaka H(27), Kobayashi K(28); Japan TGCV 
study group.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Novel, Non-invasive, and Nutritional 
Therapeutics and Triglyceride Research Center (TGRC), Graduate School of 
Medicine, Osaka University, 6-2-4, Furuedai, Suita, Osaka, 565-0874, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Novel, Non-invasive, and Nutritional 
Therapeutics and Triglyceride Research Center (TGRC), Graduate School of 
Medicine, Osaka University, 6-2-4, Furuedai, Suita, Osaka, 565-0874, Japan. 
khirano@cnt-osaka.com.
(3)Department of Pathology, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, 5-7-1, 
Fujishirodai, Suita, Osaka, 565-8565, Japan.
(4)Department of Radiology, National Hospital Organization Osaka National 
Hospital, 2-1-14, Hoenzaka, Chuo-ku, Osaka, 540-0006, Japan.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Fukuoka University Medical School, 7-45-1, 
Nanakuma, Jonan-ku, Fukuoka, 814-0180, Japan.
(6)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
University, 2-2, Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
(7)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 1-1, Seiryomachi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi, 980-8574, Japan.
(8)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Chiba University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 1-8-1, Inohara, Chuo-ku, Chiba, 260-8670, Japan.
(9)Division of Molecular Brain Science, Kobe University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 7-5-1, Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, 650-0017, Japan.
(10)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agriculture, 
Kindai University, 3327-204, Nakamachi, Nara, 631-8505, Japan.
(11)Faculty of Health Sciences, Hokkaido University, Kita-12, Nishi-5, Sapporo, 
060-0812, Japan.
(12)Kure Medical Center and Chugoku Cancer Center, National Hospital 
Organization, 3-1, Aoyama-cho, Kure, Hiroshima, 737-0023, Japan.
(13)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Komaki City Hospital, 1-20, Jobushi, 
Komaki, Aichi, 485-8520, Japan.
(14)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Juntendo University Graduate School 
of Medicine, 2-1-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan.
(15)Department of Cardiology, Aichi Medical University, 1-1 Yazakokarimata, 
Nagakute, Aichi, 480-1195, Japan.
(16)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya 
University, 65 Tsurumai, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi, 466-8560, Japan.
(17)Department of Infection Control and Laboratory Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural 
University of Medicine, 465, Kajii-cho, Kawaramachi-Hirokoji, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto, 
602-8566, Japan.
(18)Faculty of Human Life Science, Osaka City University, 3-3-138, Sugimoto, 
Sumiyoshi-ku, Osaka, 558-8585, Japan.
(19)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Kidney and Dialysis, Hyogo 
College of Medicine, 1-1 Mukogawa-cho, Nishinomiya, Hyogo, 663-8501, Japan.
(20)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Hokkaido University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Kita-15, Nishi-7, Kita-ku, Sapporo, 060-8638, Japan.
(21)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Kanazawa Medical 
University, 1-1 Daigaku, Uchinada, Ishikawa, 920-0293, Japan.
(22)Department of Pathology, Nihon University School of Medicine, 30-1 
Ohyaguchikami-cho, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, 173-8610, Japan.
(23)Center for Global Health, Department of Medical Innovation, Osaka University 
Hospital.4F Center of Medical Innovation and Translational Research, 2-2 
Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
(24)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 2-2 (A8) Yamadaoka Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
(25)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyushu 
University, 3-1-1, Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan.
(26)Department of Radiology, Nippon Life Hospital, 2-1-54, Enokojima, Nishi-ku, 
Osaka, 550-0006, Japan.
(27)Department of Pediatrics, Takarazuka City Hospital, 4-5-1, Obama, 
Takarazuka, Hyogo, 665-0827, Japan.
(28)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus, Fukuoka University 
Chikushi Hospital, 1-1-1, Zokumyoin, Chikushino, Fukuoka, 818-8502, Japan.

Triglyceride deposit cardiomyovasculopathy (TGCV) is a phenotype primarily 
reported in patients carrying genetic mutations in PNPLA2 encoding adipose 
triglyceride lipase (ATGL) which releases long chain fatty acid (LCFA) as a 
major energy source by the intracellular TG hydrolysis. These patients suffered 
from intractable heart failure requiring cardiac transplantation. Moreover, we 
identified TGCV patients without PNPLA2 mutations based on pathological and 
clinical studies. We provided the diagnostic criteria, in which TGCV with and 
without PNPLA2 mutations were designated as primary TGCV (P-TGCV) and idiopathic 
TGCV (I-TGCV), respectively. We hereby report clinical profiles of TGCV 
patients. Between 2014 and 2018, 7 P-TGCV and 18 I-TGCV Japanese patients have 
been registered in the International Registry. Patients with I-TGCV, of which 
etiologies and causes are not known yet, suffered from adult-onset severe heart 
disease, including heart failure and coronary artery disease, associated with a 
marked reduction in ATGL activity and myocardial washout rate of LCFA tracer, as 
similar to those with P-TGCV. The present first registry-based study showed that 
TGCV is an intractable, at least at the moment, and heterogeneous cardiovascular 
disorder.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-019-1087-4
PMCID: PMC6560904
PMID: 31186072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.