---
reference_id: "PMID:30046000"
title: Hnf4a deletion in the mouse kidney phenocopies Fanconi renotubular syndrome.
authors:
- Marable SS
- Chung E
- Adam M
- Potter SS
- Park JS
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.97497
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Fanconi Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/genetics"
- "Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Kidney/growth & development"
- "Kidney Tubules, Proximal/growth & development, metabolism"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Organogenesis
- Transcriptome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hnf4a deletion in the mouse kidney phenocopies Fanconi renotubular syndrome.
**Authors:** Marable SS, Chung E, Adam M, Potter SS, Park JS
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.97497](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.97497)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2018 Jul 26;3(14):e97497. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.97497. 
eCollection 2018 Jul 26.

Hnf4a deletion in the mouse kidney phenocopies Fanconi renotubular syndrome.

Marable SS(1)(2), Chung E(1), Adam M(2), Potter SS(2), Park JS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Urology and.
(2)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center (CCHMC), Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Different nephron tubule segments perform distinct physiological functions, 
collectively acting as a blood filtration unit. Dysfunction of the proximal 
tubule segment can lead to Fanconi renotubular syndrome (FRTS), with major 
symptoms such as excess excretion of water, glucose, and phosphate in the urine. 
It has been shown that a mutation in HNF4A is associated with FRTS in humans and 
that Hnf4a is expressed specifically in proximal tubules in adult rat nephrons. 
However, little is known about the role of Hnf4a in nephrogenesis. Here, we 
found that Hnf4a is expressed in both presumptive and differentiated proximal 
tubules in the developing mouse kidney. We show that Hnf4a is required for the 
formation of differentiated proximal tubules but is dispensable for the 
formation of presumptive proximal tubules. Furthermore, we show that loss of 
Hnf4a decreased the expression of proximal tubule-specific genes. Adult Hnf4a 
mutant mice presented with FRTS-like symptoms, including polyuria, polydipsia, 
glycosuria, and phosphaturia. Analysis of the adult Hnf4a mutant kidney also 
showed proximal tubule dysgenesis and nephrocalcinosis. Our results demonstrate 
the critical role of Hnf4a in proximal tubule development and provide 
mechanistic insight into the etiology of FRTS.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.97497
PMCID: PMC6124415
PMID: 30046000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.