---
reference_id: "PMID:26936605"
title: C1q-targeted inhibition of the classical complement pathway prevents injury in a novel mouse model of acute motor axonal neuropathy.
authors:
- McGonigal R
- Cunningham ME
- Yao D
- Barrie JA
- Sankaranarayanan S
- Fewou SN
- Furukawa K
- Yednock TA
- Willison HJ
journal: Acta Neuropathol Commun
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s40478-016-0291-x
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antibodies/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Complement C1q/genetics, metabolism"
- "Complement Pathway, Classical/genetics, physiology"
- "Diaphragm/metabolism, pathology"
- Dicarboxylic Acid Transporters/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Gangliosides/classification, immunology, metabolism"
- "Guillain-Barre Syndrome/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Leukemic Infiltration
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Motor Activity/drug effects, genetics"
- "Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/drug therapy, genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Receptors, Nicotinic/metabolism"
- "Respiration/drug effects, genetics"
- Species Specificity
- Symporters/genetics
- "Tidal Volume/drug effects, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# C1q-targeted inhibition of the classical complement pathway prevents injury in a novel mouse model of acute motor axonal neuropathy.
**Authors:** McGonigal R, Cunningham ME, Yao D, Barrie JA, Sankaranarayanan S, Fewou SN, Furukawa K, Yednock TA, Willison HJ
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol Commun (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40478-016-0291-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-016-0291-x)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2016 Mar 2;4:23. doi: 10.1186/s40478-016-0291-x.

C1q-targeted inhibition of the classical complement pathway prevents injury in a 
novel mouse model of acute motor axonal neuropathy.

McGonigal R(1), Cunningham ME(2), Yao D(2), Barrie JA(2), Sankaranarayanan S(3), 
Fewou SN(2), Furukawa K(4), Yednock TA(3), Willison HJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Infection, Immunity & Inflammation, University of Glasgow, 120 
University Place, Glasgow, G12 8TA, UK. Rhona.mcgonigal@glasgow.ac.uk.
(2)Institute of Infection, Immunity & Inflammation, University of Glasgow, 120 
University Place, Glasgow, G12 8TA, UK.
(3)Annexon Biosciences, 280 Utah Ave, Suite 110, South San Francisco, CA, 94080, 
USA.
(4)College of Life and Health Sciences, Chubu University, 1200 Matsumoto-cho, 
Kasugai, Aichi, 487-8501, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is an autoimmune disease that 
results in acute paralysis through inflammatory attack on peripheral nerves, and 
currently has limited, non-specific treatment options. The pathogenesis of the 
acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN) variant is mediated by complement-fixing 
anti-ganglioside antibodies that directly bind and injure the axon at sites of 
vulnerability such as nodes of Ranvier and nerve terminals. Consequently, the 
complement cascade is an attractive target to reduce disease severity. Recently, 
C5 complement component inhibitors that block the formation of the membrane 
attack complex and subsequent downstream injury have been shown to be 
efficacious in an in vivo anti-GQ1b antibody-mediated mouse model of the GBS 
variant Miller Fisher syndrome (MFS). However, since gangliosides are widely 
expressed in neurons and glial cells, injury in this model was not targeted 
exclusively to the axon and there are currently no pure mouse models for AMAN. 
Additionally, C5 inhibition does not prevent the production of early complement 
fragments such as C3a and C3b that can be deleterious via their known role in 
immune cell and macrophage recruitment to sites of neuronal damage.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we first developed a new in vivo 
transgenic mouse model of AMAN using mice that express complex gangliosides 
exclusively in neurons, thereby enabling specific targeting of axons with 
anti-ganglioside antibodies. Secondly, we have evaluated the efficacy of a novel 
anti-C1q antibody (M1) that blocks initiation of the classical complement 
cascade, in both the newly developed anti-GM1 antibody-mediated AMAN model and 
our established MFS model in vivo. Anti-C1q monoclonal antibody treatment 
attenuated complement cascade activation and deposition, reduced immune cell 
recruitment and axonal injury, in both mouse models of GBS, along with 
improvement in respiratory function. These results demonstrate that neutralising 
C1q function attenuates injury with a consequent neuroprotective effect in acute 
GBS models and promises to be a useful new target for human therapy.

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-016-0291-x
PMCID: PMC4776408
PMID: 26936605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]