---
reference_id: "PMID:17203405"
title: Environmental factors in the development of Type 1 diabetes.
authors:
- Peng H
- Hagopian W
journal: Rev Endocr Metab Disord
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1007/s11154-006-9024-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Environmental factors in the development of Type 1 diabetes.
**Authors:** Peng H, Hagopian W
**Journal:** Rev Endocr Metab Disord (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11154-006-9024-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11154-006-9024-y)

## Content

1. Rev Endocr Metab Disord. 2006 Sep;7(3):149-62. doi: 10.1007/s11154-006-9024-y.

Environmental factors in the development of Type 1 diabetes.

Peng H(1), Hagopian W.

Author information:
(1)Pacific Northwest Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98122, USA.

Environmental factors appear to play an important role in the pathogenesis of 
childhood-onset type 1 diabetes (T1D). The most important factors are thought to 
be infectious, dietary, perinatal, and psychosocial. Enteroviruses (especially 
Coxsackie B virus), breastfeeding, the early presence or lack of certain foods, 
birth weight, childhood over-nutrition, maternal islet autoimmunity, and 
negative stress events have been shown to be related to the prevalence of T1D. 
However, clear conclusions to date are limited because most studies lacked power 
to detect exposure/disease associations, were not prospective or long-term, did 
not start in infancy, had imprecise or infrequent exposure estimates, had 
confounding exposures, and failed to account for genetic susceptibility. In 
addition to the identification of specific antigenic triggers, several more 
general hypotheses, including the accelerator and hygiene hypotheses, are 
testable approaches worth pursuing.

DOI: 10.1007/s11154-006-9024-y
PMID: 17203405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]