---
reference_id: "PMID:38963811"
title: "Clinical and Genetic Characteristics of Congenital Hyperinsulinism in Norway: A Nationwide Cohort Study."
authors:
- Velde CD
- Molnes J
- Berland S
- Njølstad PR
- Molven A
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgae459
keywords:
- Humans
- "Congenital Hyperinsulinism/genetics, epidemiology, diagnosis, pathology"
- Female
- Male
- Norway/epidemiology
- Sulfonylurea Receptors/genetics
- "Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying/genetics"
- Infant
- Cohort Studies
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Phenotype
- Mutation
- Child
- Kcnj11 Channel
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Genetic Characteristics of Congenital Hyperinsulinism in Norway: A Nationwide Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Velde CD, Molnes J, Berland S, Njølstad PR, Molven A
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgae459](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgae459)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2025 Jan 21;110(2):554-563. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgae459.

Clinical and Genetic Characteristics of Congenital Hyperinsulinism in Norway: A 
Nationwide Cohort Study.

Velde CD(1)(2), Molnes J(2)(3), Berland S(3), Njølstad PR(2)(4), Molven 
A(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Gade Laboratory for Pathology, Department of Clinical Medicine, University of 
Bergen, N-5020 Bergen, Norway.
(2)Mohn Center for Diabetes Precision Medicine, Department of Clinical Science, 
University of Bergen, N-5020 Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, N-5021 Bergen, 
Norway.
(4)Children and Youth Clinic, Haukeland University Hospital, N-5021 Bergen, 
Norway.
(5)Department of Pathology and Section for Cancer Genomics, Haukeland University 
Hospital, N-5021 Bergen, Norway.

PURPOSE: Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is a rare, monogenic disease 
characterized by excessive insulin secretion. We aimed to evaluate all probands 
with suspected CHI in Norway registered over the past 2 decades.
METHODS: The study included 98 probands. Clinical data were cumulated from 
medical records. All probands were screened for variants in the genes ABCC8 and 
KCNJ11. Other CHI-related genes were Sanger-sequenced as indicated by the 
patients' phenotype (n = 75) or analyzed by next-generation sequencing employing 
a panel of 30 CHI-related genes (n = 23).
RESULTS: Twenty-one probands (21%) received a diagnosis other than CHI, the most 
common being idiopathic ketotic hypoglycemia (9%) or syndromic hyperinsulinism 
(4%). In the final cohort of 77 CHI probands, genetic findings were revealed in 
46 (60%). ABCC8 variants were most common (n= 40), and 5 novel variants were 
identified. One proband harbored both the pathogenic GCK variant p.(Ala456Val) 
and the ABCC8 variant p.(Gly505Cys). Although most ABCC8 variants caused 
immediate disease onset with severe hypoglycemia and were 
diazoxide-unresponsive, 8 probands had a heterozygous, apparently dominant 
variant with milder phenotype. Two probands had pathogenic variants in GLUD1, 
whereas variants in HADH, HNF4A, KCNJ11, and HK1 were identified in 1 proband 
each, the latter being noncoding. Neurologic sequelae were reported in 53% of 
the CHI probands. Of nonsurgically treated probands, 43% had spontaneous 
resolution. The minimum birth prevalence of CHI in Norway is 1:19,400 live 
births.
MAIN CONCLUSION: Individuals with disease-causing ABCC8 variants dominated our 
cohort. Patients with known genetic etiology had earlier and more severe disease 
onset than genetically unsolved patients.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgae459
PMCID: PMC11747666
PMID: 38963811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]