---
reference_id: "PMID:38443331"
title: "Sneaky tactics: Ingenious immune evasion mechanisms of Bartonella."
authors:
- Xi Y
- Li X
- Liu L
- Xiu F
- Yi X
- Chen H
- You X
journal: Virulence
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/21505594.2024.2322961
keywords:
- Humans
- Bartonella
- Immune Evasion
- Bartonella Infections
- Apoptosis
- Biofilms
- Membrane Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sneaky tactics: Ingenious immune evasion mechanisms of Bartonella.
**Authors:** Xi Y, Li X, Liu L, Xiu F, Yi X, Chen H, You X
**Journal:** Virulence (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21505594.2024.2322961](https://doi.org/10.1080/21505594.2024.2322961)

## Content

1. Virulence. 2024 Dec;15(1):2322961. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2024.2322961. Epub
2024  Mar 5.

Sneaky tactics: Ingenious immune evasion mechanisms of Bartonella.

Xi Y(1), Li X(1), Liu L(1), Xiu F(1), Yi X(1), Chen H(2), You X(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathogenic Biology, Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory for Special 
Pathogens Prevention and Control, Hunan Province Cooperative Innovation Center 
for Molecular Target New Drug Study, Hengyang Medical College, University of 
South China, ChenZhou, Hengyang, China.
(2)Chenzhou NO.1 People's Hospital, The Affiliated Chenzhou Hospital, Hengyang 
Medical College, University of South China, ChenZhou, China.

Gram-negative Bartonella species are facultative intracellular bacteria that can 
survive in the harsh intracellular milieu of host cells. They have evolved 
strategies to evade detection and degradation by the host immune system, which 
ensures their proliferation in the host. Following infection, Bartonella alters 
the initial immunogenic surface-exposed proteins to evade immune recognition via 
antigen or phase variation. The diverse lipopolysaccharide structures of certain 
Bartonella species allow them to escape recognition by the host pattern 
recognition receptors. Additionally, the survival of mature erythrocytes and 
their resistance to lysosomal fusion further complicate the immune clearance of 
this species. Certain Bartonella species also evade immune attacks by producing 
biofilms and anti-inflammatory cytokines and decreasing endothelial cell 
apoptosis. Overall, these factors create a challenging landscape for the host 
immune system to rapidly and effectively eradicate the Bartonella species, 
thereby facilitating the persistence of Bartonella infections and creating a 
substantial obstacle for therapeutic interventions. This review focuses on the 
effects of three human-specific Bartonella species, particularly their 
mechanisms of host invasion and immune escape, to gain new perspectives in the 
development of effective diagnostic tools, prophylactic measures, and treatment 
options for Bartonella infections.

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2024.2322961
PMCID: PMC10936683
PMID: 38443331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).