---
reference_id: "PMID:37851290"
title: "Ethnicity-specific BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, and ATM pathogenic alleles in breast and ovarian cancer patients from the North Caucasus."
authors:
- Sokolenko AP
- Bakaeva EK
- Venina AR
- Kuligina ES
- Romanko AA
- Aleksakhina SN
- Belysheva YV
- Belogubova EV
- Stepanov IA
- Zaitseva OA
- Yatsuk OS
- Togo AV
- Khamgokov ZM
- Kadyrova AO
- Pirmagomedov AS
- Bolieva MB
- Epkhiev AA
- Tsutsaev AK
- Chakhieva MD
- Khabrieva KM
- Khabriev IM
- Murachuev MA
- Buttaeva BN
- Baboshkina LS
- Bayramkulova FI
- Katchiev IR
- Alieva LK
- Raskin GA
- Orlov SV
- Khachmamuk ZK
- Levonyan KR
- Gichko DM
- Kirtbaya DV
- Degtyariov AM
- Sultanova LV
- Musayeva HS
- Belyaev AM
- Imyanitov EN
journal: Breast Cancer Res Treat
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s10549-023-07135-3
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- BRCA1 Protein/genetics
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- Ethnicity
- Alleles
- "Breast Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Ovarian Neoplasms/genetics
- Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group N Protein/genetics
- Eastern European People
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ethnicity-specific BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, and ATM pathogenic alleles in breast and ovarian cancer patients from the North Caucasus.
**Authors:** Sokolenko AP, Bakaeva EK, Venina AR, Kuligina ES, Romanko AA, Aleksakhina SN, Belysheva YV, Belogubova EV, Stepanov IA, Zaitseva OA, Yatsuk OS, Togo AV, Khamgokov ZM, Kadyrova AO, Pirmagomedov AS, Bolieva MB, Epkhiev AA, Tsutsaev AK, Chakhieva MD, Khabrieva KM, Khabriev IM, Murachuev MA, Buttaeva BN, Baboshkina LS, Bayramkulova FI, Katchiev IR, Alieva LK, Raskin GA, Orlov SV, Khachmamuk ZK, Levonyan KR, Gichko DM, Kirtbaya DV, Degtyariov AM, Sultanova LV, Musayeva HS, Belyaev AM, Imyanitov EN
**Journal:** Breast Cancer Res Treat (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10549-023-07135-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10549-023-07135-3)

## Content

1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2024 Jan;203(2):307-315. doi:
10.1007/s10549-023-07135-3. Epub 2023 Oct 18.

Ethnicity-specific BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, and ATM pathogenic alleles in breast and
ovarian cancer patients from the North Caucasus.

Sokolenko AP(1)(2), Bakaeva EK(3), Venina AR(3), Kuligina ES(3), Romanko AA(3),
Aleksakhina SN(3), Belysheva YV(3), Belogubova EV(3), Stepanov IA(3), Zaitseva
OA(3), Yatsuk OS(3), Togo AV(3), Khamgokov ZM(4), Kadyrova AO(4), Pirmagomedov
AS(5), Bolieva MB(6), Epkhiev AA(6), Tsutsaev AK(6), Chakhieva MD(7), Khabrieva
KM(7), Khabriev IM(7), Murachuev MA(8), Buttaeva BN(9), Baboshkina LS(3),
Bayramkulova FI(10), Katchiev IR(10), Alieva LK(10), Raskin GA(11), Orlov
SV(12), Khachmamuk ZK(13), Levonyan KR(13), Gichko DM(14), Kirtbaya DV(14),
Degtyariov AM(14), Sultanova LV(15), Musayeva HS(15), Belyaev AM(3), Imyanitov
EN(3)(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Tumor Growth Biology, N.N. Petrov Institute of Oncology,
Leningradskaya, 68, Pesochny-2, St. Petersburg, Russia, 197758.
annasokolenko@mail.ru.
(2)St. Petersburg Pediatric Medical University, St. Petersburg, Russia.
annasokolenko@mail.ru.
(3)Department of Tumor Growth Biology, N.N. Petrov Institute of Oncology,
Leningradskaya, 68, Pesochny-2, St. Petersburg, Russia, 197758.
(4)Republican Cancer Center, The Kabardino-Balkarian Republic, Nalchik, Russia.
(5)City Hospital No.1, The Kabardino-Balkarian Republic, Nalchik, Russia.
(6)Republican Cancer Center, The Republic of North Ossetia-Alania, Vladikavkaz,
Russia.
(7)Republican Cancer Center, The Republic of Ingushetia, Pliyevo, Russia.
(8)Republican Cancer Center, The Republic of Dagestan, Makhachkala, Russia.
(9)Republican Bureau of Pathology, The Republic of Dagestan, Makhachkala,
Russia.
(10)Republican Cancer Center, The Karachay-Cherkess Republic, Cherkessk, Russia.
(11)Dr. Sergey Berezin Medical Institute of Biological Systems, St. Petersburg,
Russia.
(12)I.P. Pavlov St.-Petersburg State Medical University, St. Petersburg, Russia.
(13)Regional Clinical Cancer Center, Krasnodar, Russia.
(14)City Cancer Center, Sochi, Russia.
(15)Republican Cancer Center, Grozny, The Chechen Republic, Russia.
(16)St. Petersburg Pediatric Medical University, St. Petersburg, Russia.

BACKGROUND: Mountain areas of the North Caucasus host several large ethnic
communities that have preserved their national identity over the centuries.
METHODS: This study involved high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) and breast
cancer (BC) patients from Dagestan (HGSOC: 37; BC: 198), Kabardino-Balkaria
(HGSOC: 68; BC: 155), North Ossetia (HGSOC: 51; BC: 104), Chechnya (HGSOC: 68;
BC: 79), Ingushetia (HGSOC: 19; BC: 103), Karachay-Cherkessia (HGSOC: 13; BC:
47), and several Armenian settlements (HGSOC: 16; BC: 101). The group of BC
patients was enriched by young-onset and/or family history-positive and/or
bilateral and/or receptor triple-negative cases. The entire coding region of
BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, and ATM genes was analyzed by next-generation sequencing.
RESULTS: A significant contribution of BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants (PVs) to
HGSOC and BC development was observed across all North Caucasus regions (HGSOC:
19-39%; BC: 6-13%). Founder alleles were identified in all ethnic groups
studied, e.g., BRCA1 c.3629_3630delAG in Chechens, BRCA2 c.6341delC in North
Ossetians, BRCA2 c.5351dupA in Ingush, and BRCA1 c.2907_2910delTAAA in
Karachays. Some BRCA1/2 alleles, particularly BRCA2 c.9895C > T, were shared by
several nationalities. ATM PVs were detected in 14 patients, with c.1673delG and
c.8876_8879delACTG alleles occurring twice each. PALB2 heterozygosity was
observed in 5 subjects, with one variant seen in 2 unrelated women.
CONCLUSION: This study adds to the evidence for the global-wide contribution of
BRCA1/2 genes to HGSOC and BC morbidity, although the spectrum of their PVs is a
subject of ethnicity-specific variations. The data on founder BRCA1/2 alleles
may be considered when adjusting the BRCA1/2 testing procedure to the ethnic
origin of patients.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-023-07135-3
PMID: 37851290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
