---
reference_id: "PMID:20056628"
title: "Arsenic in drinking water and risk of urinary tract cancer: a follow-up study from northeastern Taiwan."
authors:
- Chen CL
- Chiou HY
- Hsu LI
- Hsueh YM
- Wu MM
- Wang YH
- Chen CJ
journal: Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-0333
keywords:
- Adult
- Arsenic/adverse effects
- Arsenic Poisoning/epidemiology
- Drinking
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Risk Factors
- Taiwan/epidemiology
- "Urologic Neoplasms/chemically induced, epidemiology"
- "Water Pollutants, Chemical/analysis"
- Water Supply/analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenic in drinking water and risk of urinary tract cancer: a follow-up study from northeastern Taiwan.
**Authors:** Chen CL, Chiou HY, Hsu LI, Hsueh YM, Wu MM, Wang YH, Chen CJ
**Journal:** Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-0333](https://doi.org/10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-0333)

## Content

1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010 Jan;19(1):101-10. doi: 
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-0333.

Arsenic in drinking water and risk of urinary tract cancer: a follow-up study 
from northeastern Taiwan.

Chen CL(1), Chiou HY, Hsu LI, Hsueh YM, Wu MM, Wang YH, Chen CJ.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

The evidence linking arsenic in drinking water with increased urinary cancer 
risk comes from populations in relatively high exposure areas (>100 microg/L), 
whereas studies from lower exposure areas (<100 microg/L) reported inconsistent 
results. A previous study conducted in northeastern Taiwan, where residents were 
exposed to relatively lower concentrations, reported increased risk of urinary 
cancer in a dose-response way. Using the same cohort with longer follow-up, we 
conducted analysis to elucidate the relationship between ingested arsenic and 
urinary cancer in lower exposure groups and assessed the influence of duration, 
recency, and latency of drinking arsenic-containing well water. A total of 8,086 
residents from northeastern Taiwan were followed for 12 years. Incident urinary 
cancer was ascertained through linkage with the national cancer registry. All 
analysis was done by Cox proportional hazards regression models. There were 45 
incidences of urinary cancer and a monotonic increased risk of urinary cancer 
was found with increasing arsenic concentration (P < 0.001). For the highly 
exposed (>100 microg/L), the relative risks (RR) were >5-fold, whereas the risk 
was elevated but not significant for low exposure (<100 microg/L). Relative to 
the arsenic concentration <10 microg/L, those who drank well water with higher 
concentration from birth [RR, 3.69; 95% confidence interval (95% CI), 
1.31-10.4], still drank at enrollment (RR, 3.50; 95% CI, 1.33-9.22), and drank 
for >50 years (RR, 4.12; 95% CI, 1.48-11.5) had a significantly increased risk 
of urinary cancer. When restricted to urothelial carcinoma, all risk estimates 
including concentration and characteristics of well water consumption were 
higher.

DOI: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-0333
PMID: 20056628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]