---
reference_id: "PMID:12496040"
title: "Obesity, endogenous hormones, and endometrial cancer risk: a synthetic review."
authors:
- Kaaks R
- Lukanova A
- Kurzer MS
journal: Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
year: '2002'
keywords:
- Age Distribution
- Aged
- "Androgens/adverse effects, metabolism"
- "Endometrial Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology"
- "Estrogens/analysis, metabolism"
- Female
- "Gonadal Steroid Hormones/adverse effects, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Insulin/analysis, metabolism"
- Middle Aged
- Obesity/complications
- Prevalence
- Prognosis
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- Sex Hormone-Binding Globulin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Obesity, endogenous hormones, and endometrial cancer risk: a synthetic review.
**Authors:** Kaaks R, Lukanova A, Kurzer MS
**Journal:** Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev (2002)

## Content

1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2002 Dec;11(12):1531-43.

Obesity, endogenous hormones, and endometrial cancer risk: a synthetic review.

Kaaks R(1), Lukanova A, Kurzer MS.

Author information:
(1)Hormones and Cancer Group, International Agency for Research on Cancer, 69372 
Lyon, France. kaaks@iarc.fr

Endometrial cancer is a disease of the affluent, developed world, where 
epidemiological studies have shown that > or =40% of its incidence can be 
attributed to excess body weight. An additional proportion may be because of 
lack of physical activity. Alterations in endogenous hormone metabolism may 
provide the main links between endometrial cancer risk, and excess body weight 
and physical inactivity. Epidemiological studies have shown increased 
endometrial cancer risks among pre- and postmenopausal women who have elevated 
plasma androstenedione and testosterone, and among postmenopausal women who have 
increased levels of estrone and estradiol. Furthermore, there is evidence that 
chronic hyperinsulinemia is a risk factor. These relationships can all be 
interpreted in the light of the "unopposed estrogen" hypothesis, which proposes 
that endometrial cancer may develop as a result of the mitogenic effects of 
estrogens, when these are insufficiently counterbalanced by progesterone. In our 
overall synthesis, we conclude that development of ovarian hyperandrogenism may 
be a central mechanism relating nutritional lifestyle factors to endometrial 
cancer risk. In premenopausal women, ovarian hyperandrogenism likely increases 
risk by inducing chronic anovulation and progesterone deficiency. After the 
menopause, when progesterone synthesis has ceased altogether, excess weight may 
continue increasing risk through elevated plasma levels of androgen precursors, 
increasing estrogen levels through the aromatization of the androgens in adipose 
tissue. The ovarian androgen excess may be because of an interaction between 
obesity-related, chronic hyperinsulinemia with genetic factors predisposing to 
the development of ovarian hyperandrogenism.

PMID: 12496040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]