---
reference_id: "PMID:28293299"
title: Identification of epigenetic signature associated with alpha thalassemia/mental retardation X-linked syndrome.
authors:
- Schenkel LC
- Kernohan KD
- McBride A
- Reina D
- Hodge A
- Ainsworth PJ
- Rodenhiser DI
- Pare G
- Bérubé NG
- Skinner C
- Boycott KM
- Schwartz C
- Sadikovic B
journal: Epigenetics Chromatin
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13072-017-0118-4
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- CpG Islands
- "DNA/chemistry, isolation & purification, metabolism"
- DNA Methylation
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "X-Linked Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "X-linked Nuclear Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Young Adult
- "alpha-Thalassemia/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of epigenetic signature associated with alpha thalassemia/mental retardation X-linked syndrome.
**Authors:** Schenkel LC, Kernohan KD, McBride A, Reina D, Hodge A, Ainsworth PJ, Rodenhiser DI, Pare G, Bérubé NG, Skinner C, Boycott KM, Schwartz C, Sadikovic B
**Journal:** Epigenetics Chromatin (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13072-017-0118-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13072-017-0118-4)

## Content

1. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2017 Mar 10;10:10. doi: 10.1186/s13072-017-0118-4. 
eCollection 2017.

Identification of epigenetic signature associated with alpha thalassemia/mental 
retardation X-linked syndrome.

Schenkel LC(1), Kernohan KD(2), McBride A(2), Reina D(3)(4), Hodge A(3)(4), 
Ainsworth PJ(1)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9), Rodenhiser DI(6)(7)(8)(9), Pare G(3)(4), Bérubé 
NG(6)(7)(8)(9), Skinner C(10), Boycott KM(2), Schwartz C(10), Sadikovic 
B(1)(5)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Lab Medicine, Western University, London, ON 
Canada.
(2)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, University of 
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON Canada.
(3)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON Canada.
(4)Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON Canada.
(5)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Victoria Hospital, London Health Sciences 
Center, 800 Commissioner's Road E, B10-104, London, ON N6A 5W9 Canada.
(6)Department of Paediatrics, Western University, London, ON Canada.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, Western University, London, ON Canada.
(8)Department of Oncology, Western University, London, ON Canada.
(9)Children's Health Research Institute, London, ON Canada.
(10)Center for Molecular Studies, J.C. Self Research Institute of Human 
Genetics, Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC USA.

BACKGROUND: Alpha thalassemia/mental retardation X-linked syndrome (ATR-X) is 
caused by a mutation at the chromatin regulator gene ATRX. The mechanisms 
involved in the ATR-X pathology are not completely understood, but may involve 
epigenetic modifications. ATRX has been linked to the regulation of histone H3 
and DNA methylation, while mutations in the ATRX gene may lead to the downstream 
epigenetic and transcriptional effects. Elucidating the underlying epigenetic 
mechanisms altered in ATR-X will provide a better understanding about the 
pathobiology of this disease, as well as provide novel diagnostic biomarkers.
RESULTS: We performed genome-wide DNA methylation assessment of the peripheral 
blood samples from 18 patients with ATR-X and compared it to 210 controls. We 
demonstrated the evidence of a unique and highly specific DNA methylation 
"epi-signature" in the peripheral blood of ATRX patients, which was corroborated 
by targeted bisulfite sequencing experiments. Although genomically represented, 
differentially methylated regions showed evidence of preferential clustering in 
pericentromeric and telometric chromosomal regions, areas where ATRX has 
multiple functions related to maintenance of heterochromatin and genomic 
integrity.
CONCLUSION: Most significant methylation changes in the 14 genomic loci provide 
a unique epigenetic signature for this syndrome that may be used as a highly 
sensitive and specific diagnostic biomarker to support the diagnosis of ATR-X, 
particularly in patients with phenotypic complexity and in patients with ATRX 
gene sequence variants of unknown significance.

DOI: 10.1186/s13072-017-0118-4
PMCID: PMC5345252
PMID: 28293299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]