---
reference_id: "PMID:37465770"
title: Acute Flaccid Myelitis.
authors:
- Zappa D
- Herman LL
journal: J Educ Teach Emerg Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.21980/J8MP9G
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Flaccid Myelitis.
**Authors:** Zappa D, Herman LL
**Journal:** J Educ Teach Emerg Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.21980/J8MP9G](https://doi.org/10.21980/J8MP9G)

## Content

1. J Educ Teach Emerg Med. 2022 Jul 15;7(3):O1-O28. doi: 10.21980/J8MP9G.
eCollection 2022 Jul.

Acute Flaccid Myelitis.

Zappa D(1), Herman LL(2).

Author information:
(1)Vituity Healthcare and Medical Staffing Services, St Agnes Medical Center,
Department of Emergency Medicine, Fresno, CA.
(2)Sutter Roseville Medical Center, Department of Emergency Medicine, Roseville,
CA.

AUDIENCE: Emergency medicine residents and medical students on emergency
medicine rotation.
INTRODUCTION: Although a somewhat rare disease, acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) can
cause death, and for those pediatric patients that survive, less than 10% have
full recovery.1 A cluster of cases that resembled polio was first described in
California in 2012.2 After 120 cases of the disease were confirmed in 2014 in a
5-month period, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) began
surveillance of the disease. Since surveillance began, clusters of cases have
occurred in a biennial pattern, usually late summer and early fall. There were
218 cases between 2015 to 2017, 238 cases in 2018, 47 cases in 2019, and 32 in
2020.3,4,5 AFM has become recognized as a global disease with cases reported
across many countries.1 The CDC has noted that the most common location of the
first medical encounter of pediatric patients presenting with AFM is the
emergency department in every year that surveillance occurred.5 Most of the
children that are diagnosed with AFM are admitted to the hospital and of those
admitted, 30% require intubation.5 Deaths related to AFM are due to respiratory
involvement and complications. With appropriate recognition and supportive care,
mortality can be avoided.
EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES: At the end of this oral board session, examinees will:
1) demonstrate the ability to obtain a complete pediatric medical history, 2)
demonstrate an appropriate exam on a pediatric patient including a neurological
exam, 3) investigate the broad differential diagnoses for neuromuscular weakness
in a pediatric patient, 4) order the appropriate evaluation studies including an
MRI, 5) interpret the use of a negative inspiratory force in determining the
need for intubation and level of care upon admission, and 6) demonstrate
effective communication with parents and caregivers.
EDUCATIONAL METHODS: Oral board case following a standard American Board of
Emergency Medicine-style case in a tertiary care hospital with access to all
specialists and resources needed. This case was tested using 5 resident
volunteers ranging from PGY 1 - 3 in an ACGME (Accreditation Council for
Graduate Medical Education)-accredited emergency medicine program. Also,
approximately 3 - 5 observers (other residents and medical students) were
present during the presentation. Learners were immediately able to provide
feedback during the debriefing of the case.
RESEARCH METHODS: Immediate Feedback was solicited from the learners and
observers participating in the case both by verbal discussion and completion of
a rating for the case following the debriefing. The efficacy of the educational
content was assessed by comparing scoring measures across residents based on the
training year. Scoring measures of the ACGME core competencies were performed
using a scale from 1-8, 1-4 being unacceptable performance and 5 - 8 being
acceptable. Efficacy was assumed based on full completion of the case by the
residents who acted as practice oral board candidates, and a debriefing session
followed to discuss the key components of the case.
RESULTS: Practice candidates were 1 PGY1 level, 2 PGY2 Level and 2 PGY3 level
residents. All residents that were practice candidates anchored on the diagnosis
of Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS) but despite the anchoring were able to manage
the patient appropriately and safely. The average score for practice candidates
per level was: PGY1: 5.1, PGY2: 5.8, and PGY3: 6.5. The critical action missed
by the PGY1 resident was ordering a negative inspiratory force and one PGY2 did
not completely order all of the spinal MRI. All learners, both practice
candidates and observers rated the case as 4.2 (1 - 5 Likert scale, 5 being
excellent).
DISCUSSION: The educational content effectiveness was two-fold. The content was
effective for teaching the presentation and appropriate evaluation to diagnose
AFM. AFM is significantly like the presentation of poliomyelitis which
originally occurred in sporadic cluster outbreaks and then the number of cases
in the United States doubled every 4 - 5 years from 1940 - 1952.6 AFM is a
disease that occurs in a biennial pattern and needs to be recognized and
reported appropriately. The case also encouraged the cognizance of other
etiologies for acute neuromuscular weakness in a pediatric patient which may
require different diagnostic evaluation and medical management. AFM'ster
clinical presentation generally involves asymmetric weakness and may occur in
either an ascending or descending pattern with the nadir to maximum weakness
attained in a few days. Although there are variants of GBS, the neuromuscular
weakness is usually symmetrical and occurs in an ascending pattern with the
nadir being reached in 1 - 2 weeks.7 AFM requires an MRI with specific
abnormalities to meet the case definition while an MRI can be performed when GBS
is suspected, but it is not necessary. AFM MRI abnormalities demonstrate
brainstem and spinal cord lesions with a predominance of gray matter affected
while a GBS MRI demonstrates ventral root abnormalities without any spinal cord
or brainstem lesions. Without the MRI results, a patient may be assigned the
incorrect diagnosis upon admission. A lumbar puncture and electromyography are
required for the diagnosis of GBS. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of GBS
demonstrates high protein levels and white blood cell count (WBC) < 10 cells/mm3
while the CSF of AFM demonstrates pleocytosis although usually < 100
cells/mm3.1,8 Electromyography will be abnormal in both GBS and AFM, but the
test is not necessary for the diagnosis of AFM as it is with GBS. Both
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and plasma exchange shorten the recovery time
of GBS while there is no recommendation for treatment of AFM at this time. IVIG,
plasmapheresis, and steroids have been utilized with unclear benefits.1,8
Physical therapy and occupational therapy appear to be significantly important
in AFM with nerve transfer surgery as a possibility of cure to areas of muscles
that have not recovered significant function in AFM.9 Reaching the appropriate
diagnosis allows the emergency medicine physician to communicate more accurately
with worried parents, providing them with correct information on treatment and
progression of the disease.
TOPICS: Pediatric weakness, pediatric neurologic disorders, acute flaccid
myelitis, Gullian-Barré Syndrome, neuromuscular weakness.

© 2022 Zappa, et al.

DOI: 10.21980/J8MP9G
PMCID: PMC10332698
PMID: 37465770
