---
reference_id: PMID:18637947
title: "Huntington's disease: revisiting the aggregation hypothesis in polyglutamine neurodegenerative diseases."
authors:
- Truant R
- Atwal RS
- Desmond C
- Munsie L
- Tran T
journal: FEBS J
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06561.x
keywords:
- Humans
- "Huntington Disease/genetics, pathology"
- "Models, Theoretical"
- Peptides/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Huntington's disease: revisiting the aggregation hypothesis in polyglutamine neurodegenerative diseases.
**Authors:** Truant R, Atwal RS, Desmond C, Munsie L, Tran T
**Journal:** FEBS J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06561.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06561.x)

## Content

1. FEBS J. 2008 Sep;275(17):4252-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06561.x. Epub 
2008 Jul 15.

Huntington's disease: revisiting the aggregation hypothesis in polyglutamine 
neurodegenerative diseases.

Truant R(1), Atwal RS, Desmond C, Munsie L, Tran T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Canada. truantr@mcmaster.ca

Comment in
    FEBS J. 2008 Sep;275(17):4251. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06560.x.

After the successful cloning of the first gene for a polyglutamine disease in 
1991, the expanded polyglutamine tract in the nine polyglutamine disease 
proteins became an obvious therapeutic target. Early hypotheses were that 
misfolded, precipitated protein could be a universal pathogenic mechanism. 
However, new data are accumulating on Huntington's disease and other 
polyglutamine diseases that appear to contradict the toxic aggregate hypothesis. 
Recent data suggest that the toxic species of protein in these diseases may be 
soluble mutant conformers, and that the protein context of expanded 
polyglutamine is critical to understanding disease specificity. Here we discuss 
recent publications that define other important therapeutic targets for 
polyglutamine-mediated neurodegeneration related to the context of the expanded 
polyglutamine tract in the disease protein.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06561.x
PMID: 18637947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]