---
reference_id: "PMID:25143775"
title: "GM2-Gangliosidosis (Sandhoff and Tay Sachs disease): Diagnosis and Neuroimaging Findings (An Iranian Pediatric Case Series)."
authors:
- Karimzadeh P
- Jafari N
- Nejad Biglari H
- Jabbeh Dari S
- Ahmad Abadi F
- Alaee MR
- Nemati H
- Saket S
- Tonekaboni SH
- Taghdiri MM
- Ghofrani M
journal: Iran J Child Neurol
year: '2014'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GM2-Gangliosidosis (Sandhoff and Tay Sachs disease): Diagnosis and Neuroimaging Findings (An Iranian Pediatric Case Series).
**Authors:** Karimzadeh P, Jafari N, Nejad Biglari H, Jabbeh Dari S, Ahmad Abadi F, Alaee MR, Nemati H, Saket S, Tonekaboni SH, Taghdiri MM, Ghofrani M
**Journal:** Iran J Child Neurol (2014)

## Content

1. Iran J Child Neurol. 2014 Summer;8(3):55-60.

GM2-Gangliosidosis (Sandhoff and Tay Sachs disease): Diagnosis and Neuroimaging 
Findings (An Iranian Pediatric Case Series).

Karimzadeh P(1), Jafari N(2), Nejad Biglari H(2), Jabbeh Dari S(2), Ahmad Abadi 
F(3), Alaee MR(4), Nemati H(2), Saket S(2), Tonekaboni SH(1), Taghdiri MM(1), 
Ghofrani M(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Neurology Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran ; Pediatric Neurology Center of Excellence, Department of 
Pediatric Neurology, Mofid Children Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid 
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Pediatric Neurology Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Pediatric Neurology Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran ; Department of Pediatric Neurology, Ardebil University 
of Medical Sciences, Ardabil, Iran.
(4)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: GM2-Gangliosidosis disease is a rare autosomal recessive genetic 
disorder that includes two disorders (Tay-Sachs and Sandhoff disease).These 
disorders cause a progressive deterioration of nerve cells and inherited 
deficiency in creating hexosaminidases A, B, and AB.
MATERIALS & METHODS: Patients who were diagnosed withGM2-Gangliosidosis in the 
Neurology Department of Mofid Children's Hospital in Tehran, Iran from October 
2009 to February 2014were included in our study. The disorder was confirmed by 
neurometabolic and enzyme level detection of hexosaminidases A, B, and AB in 
reference to Wagnester Laboratory in Germany. We assessed age, gender, past 
medical history, developmental status, clinical manifestations, and neuroimaging 
findings of 9 patients with Sandhoff disease and 9 with Tay Sachs disease.
RESULTS: 83% of our patients were the offspring of consanguineous marriages. All 
of them had a developmental disorder as a chief complaint. 38%of patients had a 
history of developmental delay or regression and 22% had seizures. The patients 
with Sandhoff and Tay Sachs disease were followed for approximately 5 years and 
the follow-up showed all patients were bedridden or had expired due to 
refractory seizures, pneumonia aspiration, or swallowing disorders. 
Neuro-imaging findings included bilateral thalamic involvement, brain atrophy, 
and hypo myelination in near half of our patients (48%).
CONCLUSION: According to the results of this study, we suggest that cherry-red 
spots, hyperacusis, refractory seizures, and relative parents in children with 
developmental delay and/or regression should be considered for assessment of 
GM2-Gangliosidosis disease.

PMCID: PMC4135282
PMID: 25143775