---
reference_id: "PMID:38721578"
title: "Compressive Myelopathy Secondary to TRPV4 Skeletal Dysplasia: Spondylometaphyseal Dysplasia, Kozlowski Type."
authors:
- Gowda VK
- Srinivasan VM
- Reddy VM
- Vamyanmane DK
- Shivappa SK
- Ramesh RH
- Vishwanathan GB
journal: J Pediatr Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1741424
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Compressive Myelopathy Secondary to TRPV4 Skeletal Dysplasia: Spondylometaphyseal Dysplasia, Kozlowski Type.
**Authors:** Gowda VK, Srinivasan VM, Reddy VM, Vamyanmane DK, Shivappa SK, Ramesh RH, Vishwanathan GB
**Journal:** J Pediatr Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0041-1741424](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0041-1741424)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Genet. 2022 Jan 6;13(2):158-165. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1741424.
eCollection 2024 Jun.

Compressive Myelopathy Secondary to TRPV4 Skeletal Dysplasia:
Spondylometaphyseal Dysplasia, Kozlowski Type.

Gowda VK(1), Srinivasan VM(1), Reddy VM(1), Vamyanmane DK(2), Shivappa SK(3),
Ramesh RH(4), Vishwanathan GB(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Indira Gandhi Institute of Child Health,
Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of Pediatric Radiology, Indira Gandhi Institute of Child Health,
Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.
(3)Department of Pediatric Medicine, Indira Gandhi Institute of Child Health,
Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.
(4)Deparment of Pediatrics, BGS Global Institute of Medical Sciences, Bengaluru,
India.
(5)Center for Human Genetics, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.

Transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 channel ( TRPV4 ) gene mutations have
been described in skeletal system and peripheral nervous system pathology. The
case described here is a 9-year-old male child patient, born to a
nonconsanguineous marriage with normal birth history who had difficulty in
walking and stiffness of joints for the last 7 years, and progressive weakness
of all four limbs and urine incontinence for 1 year following falls. Physical
examination showed below-average weight and height and short trunk.
Musculoskeletal examination revealed bony prominence bilaterally in the knee
joints and contractures in knee and elbow joints with brachydactyly; muscle tone
was increased, with brisk deep tendon reflexes. Skeletal survey showed
platyspondyly with anterior beaking with metaphyseal dysplasia. Magnetic
resonance imaging of the spine revealed atlantoaxial instability with
hyperintense signal changes at a cervicomedullary junction and upper cervical
cord with thinning and spinal canal stenosis suggestive of compressive
myelopathy with platyspondyly and anterior beaking of the spine at cervical,
thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. Exome sequencing revealed a heterozygous de novo
variant c.2389G > A in exon 15 of TRPV4 , which results in the amino acid
substitution p.Glu797Lys in the encoded protein. The characteristics observed
indicated spondylometaphyseal dysplasia, Kozlowski type (SMD-K). The child
underwent surgical intervention for compressive myelopathy by reduction of
atlantoaxial dislocation with C1 lateral mass and C2 pars fusion using rib graft
and fixation using screws and rods. To conclude, for any child presenting with
progressive kyphoscoliosis, short stature, platyspondyly, and metaphyseal
changes, a diagnosis of SMD-K should be considered and the patient and family
should be advised to avoid spinal injuries.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1741424
PMCID: PMC11076094
PMID: 38721578

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None declared.
