---
reference_id: "PMID:12876834"
title: Bardet-Biedl syndrome and Usher syndrome.
authors:
- Koenig R
journal: Dev Ophthalmol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1159/000072043
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bardet-Biedl syndrome and Usher syndrome.
**Authors:** Koenig R
**Journal:** Dev Ophthalmol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000072043](https://doi.org/10.1159/000072043)

## Content

1. Dev Ophthalmol. 2003;37:126-40. doi: 10.1159/000072043.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome and Usher syndrome.

Koenig R(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. 
r.koenig@em.uni-frankfurt.de

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) and Usher syndrome (USH) are the most prevalent 
syndromic forms of retinitis pigmentosa (RP), together they make up almost a 
quarter of the patients with RP. BBS is defined by the association of 
retinopathy, obesity, hypogonadism, renal dysfunction, postaxial polydactyly and 
mental retardation. This clinically complex syndrome is genetically 
heterogeneous with linkage to more than 6 loci, and 4 genes have been cloned so 
far. Recent molecular data present evidence that, in some instances, the 
clinical manifestation of BBS requires recessive mutations in 1 of the 6 BBS 
loci plus one or two additional mutations in a second BBS locus (tri- or 
tetra-allelic inheritance). USH is characterized by the combination of 
congenital or early-onset sensorineural deafness, RP, and variable degrees of 
vestibular dysfunction. Each of the three clinical types is genetically 
heterogeneous: 7 loci have been mapped for type 1, three loci for type 2, and 
two loci for type 3. Currently, 6 USH genes (MYO7A, USH1C, CDH23, PCDH15, USH2A, 
USH3) have been identified. Pathogenetically, mutations of the USH1 genes seem 
to result in defects of auditory and retinal sensory cells, the USH 2 phenotype 
is caused by defects of extracellular matrix or cell surface receptor proteins, 
and USH3 may be due to synaptic disturbances. The considerable contribution of 
syndromic forms of RP requires interdisciplinary approaches to the clinical and 
diagnostic management of RP patients.

DOI: 10.1159/000072043
PMID: 12876834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]