---
reference_id: "PMID:39392550"
title: Taiwan Nationwide Study of First-Line ALK-TKI Therapy in ALK-Positive Lung Adenocarcinoma.
authors:
- Zheng ZR
- Wu JJ
- Chiang CJ
- Chen TI
- Chen KC
- Chu CH
- Lin SY
- Yu SL
- Lee WC
- Liu TW
- Chang GC
journal: Target Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11523-024-01104-6
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Taiwan
- Retrospective Studies
- "Adenocarcinoma of Lung/drug therapy, pathology, mortality"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/metabolism
- Aged
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Taiwan Nationwide Study of First-Line ALK-TKI Therapy in ALK-Positive Lung Adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Zheng ZR, Wu JJ, Chiang CJ, Chen TI, Chen KC, Chu CH, Lin SY, Yu SL, Lee WC, Liu TW, Chang GC
**Journal:** Target Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11523-024-01104-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11523-024-01104-6)

## Content

1. Target Oncol. 2024 Nov;19(6):941-955. doi: 10.1007/s11523-024-01104-6. Epub
2024  Oct 11.

Taiwan Nationwide Study of First-Line ALK-TKI Therapy in ALK-Positive Lung
Adenocarcinoma.

Zheng ZR(#)(1)(2)(3), Wu JJ(#)(1)(2)(3), Chiang CJ(4)(5), Chen TI(6)(7)(8), Chen
KC(1)(2)(3), Chu CH(1)(2)(3), Lin SY(9), Yu SL(10)(11), Lee WC(4)(5)(12), Liu
TW(13), Chang GC(14)(15)(16)(17).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, No. 110, Sect. 1,
Jianguo N. Road, Taichung, 402, Taiwan.
(2)School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(3)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Chung Shan
Medical University Hospital, No.110, Sect. 1, Jianguo N. Road, Taichung, 402,
Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, College of Public Health,
National Taiwan University, No.17, Xu-Zhou Road, Taipei, 100, Taiwan.
(5)Taiwan Cancer Registry, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Xinzhuang Dist., Fu-Jen Catholic
University, No. 510, Zhongzheng Rd, New Taipei City, 242062, Taiwan.
(7)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes,
Tainan, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Healthcare Administration, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Chung Shan
Medical University, No. 110, Sect. 1, Jianguo N. Road, Taichung, 402, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical Biotechnology,
College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Changde St., Taipei,
10048, Taiwan.
(11)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan.
(12)Institute of Health Data Analytics and Statistics, College of Public Health,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(13)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes,
No. 35, Keyan Road, Zhunan, Miaoli County, 35053, Taiwan.
(14)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, No. 110, Sect. 1,
Jianguo N. Road, Taichung, 402, Taiwan. geechen@gmail.com.
(15)School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
geechen@gmail.com.
(16)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Chung Shan
Medical University Hospital, No.110, Sect. 1, Jianguo N. Road, Taichung, 402,
Taiwan. geechen@gmail.com.
(17)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung,
Taiwan. geechen@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The clinical outcomes of patients with anaplastic lymphoma
kinase-positive (ALK+) advanced lung adenocarcinoma vary according to real-world
data.
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we aimed to investigate the treatment discontinuation
(TTD) and overall survival (OS) of patients with ALK+ advanced lung
adenocarcinoma treated with first-line ALK-TKIs in Taiwan.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This retrospective study evaluated all advanced lung
adenocarcinoma patients registered in the National Taiwan Cancer Registry from
2017 to 2020 who had ALK rearrangement and received ALK-TKI treatment, using
data from Taiwan's National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD). The TKI
treatment sequences were classified into first generation (G1: crizotinib),
second generation (G2: ceritinib, alectinib, brigatinib), and third generation
(G3: lorlatinib).
RESULTS: A total of 587 patients were analyzed, with a median age of 60.0 years,
91 (15.5%) aged ≥ 74 years, 293 (49.9%) female, 397 (67.6%) never smoked, and
534 (91.0%) with stage IV disease. Patients who received next-generation
ALK-TKIs during the treatment course had longer median time to ALK-TKI TTD and
OS. The TTD of the G1, G1+2, G1+2+3, G2, and G2+3 groups was 7.5 (5.4-11.1),
40.6 (29.4-not calculated (NC)), 50.3 (41.3-NC), 34.3 (29.2-43.0), and 36.3
(22.4-NC) months, respectively (p < 0.001). The median OS of the patients in the
G1, G1+2, G1+2+3, G2, and G2+3 groups was 10.6 (7.5-14.6), not reached (NR)
(NC-NC), NR (NC-NC), 43.0 (36.3-NC), and NR (30.3-NC) months, respectively (p <
0.001). Compared with treatment with crizotinib alone, the multivariate analysis
revealed that treatment with next-generation TKIs was independently associated
with longer TTD (G1+2 (hazard ratio (HR), 0.24; 95% CI 0.17-0.33; p < 0.001),
G1+2+3 or G1+3 (HR, 0.17; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.10-0.28; p < 0.001),
G2 (HR, 0.26; 95% CI 0.19-0.36; p < 0.001), and G2+3 (HR, 0.25; 95% CI
0.14-0.44; p < 0.001)) and median OS (G12 (HR, 0.24; 95% CI 0.17-0.35; p <
0.001), G1+2+3 or G1+3 (HR, 0.09; 95% CI 0.04-0.21; p < 0.001), G2 (HR, 0.22;
95% CI 0.15-0.31; p < 0.001), and G2+3 (HR, 0.20; 95% CI 0.10-0.42; p < 0.001)).
CONCLUSIONS: For patients with ALK+ NSCLC, treatments including next-generation
ALK-TKIs were independently associated with longer survival outcomes.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s11523-024-01104-6
PMID: 39392550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Funding This study was funded by
Pfizer (tracking no. 75046155), the Ministry of Health and Welfare
(MOHW112-TDU-B-222-124019), and Formatting the Risk Prediction Models for
Never-Smoking Lung Cancer (FORMOSA). Conflict of interest Zhe-Rong Zheng,
Jia-Jun Wu, Chun-Ju Chiang, Tzu-I Chen, Kun-Chieh Chen, Cheng-Hsiang Chu,
Sheng-Yi Lin, Sung-Liang Yu, Wen-Chung Lee, Tsang-Wu Liu, and Gee-Chen Chang
declare that they have no conflicts of interest that might be relevant to the
contents of this manuscript. Ethics approval The study was approved by the
Institutional Review Board (IRB) of CSMUH, Taiwan (IRB no. CS1-22160). Consent
to participate Not applicable. Consent for publication All authors reviewed the
manuscript and approved the version for publication. Availability of data and
material The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study
are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. Code
availability Not applicable. Author contributions Zhe-Rong Zheng, Jia-Jun Wu,
Chun-Ju Chiang, and Gee-Chen Chang contributed to the study conception and
design. Material preparation and data collection were performed by Jia-Jun Wu
and Chun-Ju Chiang. The analysis of the data was done by Jia-Jun Wu, Chun-Ju
Chiang, Tzu-I Chen, Kun-Chieh Chen, and Gee-Chen Chang. The writing of the
original draft was performed by Zhe-Rong Zheng, Jia-Jun Wu, Chun-Ju Chiang,
Tzu-I Chen, Kun-Chieh Chen, Cheng-Hsiang Chu, Sheng-Yi Lin, Sung-Liang Yu,
Wen-Chung Lee, Tsang-Wu Liu, and Gee-Chen Chang. Jia-Jun Wu and Gee-Chen Chang
revised the manuscript critically for important intellectual content.
