---
reference_id: "PMID:39391064"
title: "Case report: Two siblings with very late onset of holocarboxylase synthase deficiency and a mini-review."
authors:
- Gaschignard M
- Domenach L
- Lamireau D
- Guibet C
- Roche S
- Richard E
- Redonnet-Vernhet I
- Mesli S
- Lebreton L
journal: Front Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1249480
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: Two siblings with very late onset of holocarboxylase synthase deficiency and a mini-review.
**Authors:** Gaschignard M, Domenach L, Lamireau D, Guibet C, Roche S, Richard E, Redonnet-Vernhet I, Mesli S, Lebreton L
**Journal:** Front Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2024.1249480](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2024.1249480)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2024 Sep 26;15:1249480. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1249480. 
eCollection 2024.

Case report: Two siblings with very late onset of holocarboxylase synthase 
deficiency and a mini-review.

Gaschignard M(1), Domenach L(2), Lamireau D(1), Guibet C(2), Roche S(1), Richard 
E(2), Redonnet-Vernhet I(1)(3), Mesli S(2), Lebreton L(2).

Author information:
(1)Hôpital Pédiatrique, Pôle Pédiatrique, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Biochimie, Pôle de Biologie et Pathologie, CHU de Bordeaux, 
Bordeaux, France.
(3)lNSERM MRGM U1211, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.

Holocarboxylase synthase (HCS) deficiency is an extremely rare metabolic 
disorder typically presenting as severe neonatal metabolic acidosis, lethargy, 
hypotonia, vomiting, and seizures. This report describes two siblings in a 
family with late-onset forms of HCS deficiency. The younger sister presented at 
the age of 11 years and manifested as acute metabolic acidosis, which promptly 
resolved following rehydration and biotin administration. The results of the 
organic urine profile confirmed multiple carboxylase deficiency, and genetic 
testing revealed a novel pathogenic variant in the HLCS gene (NM_000411.8) in 
the homozygous state: c.995A>G; p. (Gln332Arg). No further decompensation was 
observed for her during the 3-year follow-up period. His older brother was 
diagnosed at the age of 23 years-old through biochemical tests, without any 
history of acidotic decompensation. A mini-review of HCS deficiency with late 
onset (>1 year) or early onset (<1 month) revealed that splice variants are 
associated with late onset, while both variants p. (Leu216Arg) and p. 
(Leu237Pro) are associated with early onset. However, the majority of genotypes 
do not show a clear correlation with the timing of HCS deficiency onset. The 
most significant point here is the description of extremely late-onset cases of 
HCS deficiency. This can prompt metabolic investigations and raise suspicion of 
this rare disease in cases of unexplained metabolic acidosis, even beyond early 
childhood.

Copyright © 2024 Gaschignard, Domenach, Lamireau, Guibet, Roche, Richard, 
Redonnet-Vernhet, Mesli and Lebreton.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1249480
PMCID: PMC11464450
PMID: 39391064

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.