---
reference_id: "PMID:40197397"
title: "Early initiated noradrenaline versus fluid therapy for hypotension and shock in the emergency department (VASOSHOCK): a protocol for a pragmatic, multi-center, superiority, randomized controlled trial."
authors:
- Bentsen LP
- Strøm T
- Forberg JL
- Tiwald G
- Biesenbach P
- Kalmriz M
- Rasmussen JH
- Raaber N
- Möller S
- Løkke M
- Tygesen GB
- Nygaard H
- Brok JH
- Andersen JW
- Bajusz N
- Brabrand M
journal: Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13049-025-01369-4
keywords:
- Humans
- Fluid Therapy/methods
- "Norepinephrine/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Hypotension/therapy
- "Emergency Service, Hospital"
- Shock/therapy
- "Vasoconstrictor Agents/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Multicenter Studies as Topic
- Equivalence Trials as Topic
- Male
- Pragmatic Clinical Trials as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early initiated noradrenaline versus fluid therapy for hypotension and shock in the emergency department (VASOSHOCK): a protocol for a pragmatic, multi-center, superiority, randomized controlled trial.
**Authors:** Bentsen LP, Strøm T, Forberg JL, Tiwald G, Biesenbach P, Kalmriz M, Rasmussen JH, Raaber N, Möller S, Løkke M, Tygesen GB, Nygaard H, Brok JH, Andersen JW, Bajusz N, Brabrand M
**Journal:** Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13049-025-01369-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13049-025-01369-4)

## Content

1. Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med. 2025 Apr 7;33(1):59. doi:
10.1186/s13049-025-01369-4.

Early initiated noradrenaline versus fluid therapy for hypotension and shock in
the emergency department (VASOSHOCK): a protocol for a pragmatic, multi-center,
superiority, randomized controlled trial.

Bentsen LP(1)(2)(3)(4), Strøm T(5)(6)(7), Forberg JL(8)(9), Tiwald G(10),
Biesenbach P(5)(11)(12), Kalmriz M(13), Rasmussen JH(14), Raaber N(15), Möller
S(5)(16), Løkke M(17)(18), Tygesen GB(13)(19), Nygaard H(14), Brok
JH(17)(18)(5), Andersen JW(17)(18)(5), Bajusz N(10), Brabrand M(17)(18)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Odense University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark. lasse.paludan.bentsen@rsyd.dk.
(2)Research Unit for Emergency Medicine, Odense University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark. lasse.paludan.bentsen@rsyd.dk.
(3)Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,
Denmark. lasse.paludan.bentsen@rsyd.dk.
(4)Department of Emergency Medicine, Lillebaelt Hospital, Kolding, Denmark.
lasse.paludan.bentsen@rsyd.dk.
(5)Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,
Denmark.
(6)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine, Odense University
Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(7)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine, Hospital of Southern
Jutland, Aabenraa, Denmark.
(8)Department of Emergency Medicine, Helsingborg Hospital, Helsingborg, Sweden.
(9)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(10)Emergency Department, Zealand University Hospital, Køge, Denmark.
(11)Department of Emergency Medicine, Esbjerg University Hospital, Esbjerg,
Denmark.
(12)Research Unit of Emergency Medicine, Esbjerg University Hospital, Esbjerg,
Denmark.
(13)Emergency Department, Gødstrup Regional Hospital, Herning, Denmark.
(14)Department of Emergency Medicine, Copenhagen University Hospital, Bispebjerg
and Frederiksberg Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(15)Department of Emergency Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus,
Denmark.
(16)Open Patient Exploratory Network (OPEN), University of Southern Denmark and
Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(17)Department of Emergency Medicine, Odense University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark.
(18)Research Unit for Emergency Medicine, Odense University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark.
(19)Research Center for Emergency Medicine, Department of Clinical Medicine,
Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Shock is a condition with high mortality even with early
intervention and treatment. Usual care for shock and hypotension in the
Emergency Department (ED) is intravenous fluid resuscitation which can lead to
fluid overload and other complications. When fluid therapy fails or risk of
complications are high, the next treatment step is the use of vasopressors for
stabilisation. Noradrenaline therapy for hypotension and shock are commonly used
in ED's outside Scandinavia, but the evidence on the optimal initiation time is
sparse. The lack of noradrenaline therapy in Scandinavia provides a unique
environment to investigate the possible implications of early initiation. The
aim of this trial is to investigate whether the use of early initiated
noradrenaline compared to ED fluid therapy can improve blood pressure goals and
by that, reduce the need for ICU admittance.
METHODS: This protocol describes a pragmatic, multi-center, superiority
randomized controlled trial, randomizing patients with hypotension to
intervention or control. Eligible patients are ≥ 18-year-old who have received
at least 500 ml intravenous fluids (including prehospital administration), and
without suspected cardiogenic, haemorrhagic, anaphylactic, or neurogenic causes,
or require direct ICU admittance due to non-hemodynamic severe organ failure.
The intervention group receives noradrenaline initiated at 0.05 mcg/kg/min with
a maximum of 0.15 mcg/kg/min through a peripheral venous catheter for up to
24 h. The control group receives usual care. Treatment is targeted for a
systolic blood pressure ≥ 100 mmHg, a mean arterial pressure ≥ 65 mmHg or a
clinician defined blood pressure target. We require a sample size of 320
patients to show a significant difference in proportion of patients achieving
shock control within 90 min (primary endpoint). Key secondary outcomes include
ICU free days alive within 30-days and 30-day all-cause mortality.
DISCUSSION: Previous prospective randomized trials on early peripheral
noradrenaline treatment for shock are sparse and are investigated in settings
where noradrenaline use is already usual care. Since noradrenaline are not used
as standard treatment for shock in Scandinavian EDs, this provides a unique
opportunity not only to investigate the early initiation of noradrenaline for
shock, but also comparing it directly to ED fluid only approach.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: EU CT ID 2023-504584-16-00.
CLINICALTRIALS: gov NCT05931601. URL: https://classic.
CLINICALTRIALS: gov/ct2/show/NCT05931601.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13049-025-01369-4
PMCID: PMC11978030
PMID: 40197397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent for
participation: The trial is approved by the Danish Medicines Agency and The
Ethical Committee on Medical Research under European Medical Medicines Agency
under EU CT ID 2023-504584-16-00. In addition, the trial is registered at
clinicaltrials.gov under ID NCT05931601. Patients in the trial are included
under the regulation for acute drug trials following the EU regulation no.
536/2014, Chapter V, Article 35 [34]. Inclusion of trial participants are
therefore conducted without prior consent from the patient due to the severity
and time-critical condition. The possibility to obtain informed consent is not
possible due to the patient’s mental state in the early stages of their
condition. After patients are included, the investigators will seek to obtain
informed consent in accordance with national law and regulations in the
individual participation country. Competing interests: The authors declare no
competing interests.
