---
reference_id: "PMID:37115999"
title: The Role of Extracellular Matrix in Wound Healing.
authors:
- Lin P
- Zhang G
- Li H
journal: Dermatol Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/DSS.0000000000003779
keywords:
- Humans
- Wound Healing
- Skin/pathology
- Keloid/pathology
- Extracellular Matrix/pathology
- Inflammation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of Extracellular Matrix in Wound Healing.
**Authors:** Lin P, Zhang G, Li H
**Journal:** Dermatol Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/DSS.0000000000003779](https://doi.org/10.1097/DSS.0000000000003779)

## Content

1. Dermatol Surg. 2023 May 1;49(5S):S41-S48. doi: 10.1097/DSS.0000000000003779. 
Epub 2023 Apr 3.

The Role of Extracellular Matrix in Wound Healing.

Lin P(1)(2)(3)(4), Zhang G(5), Li H(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Peking University First Hospital, 
Beijing, China.
(2)Beijing Key Laboratory of Molecular Diagnosis on Dermatoses, Beijing, China.
(3)National Clinical Research Center for Skin and Immune Diseases, Beijing, 
China.
(4)NMPA Key Laboratory for Quality Control and Evaluation of Cosmetics, Beijing, 
China.
(5)Department of Pathology, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, 
Guangdong, China.

BACKGROUND: Extracellular matrix communicates with surrounding cells to maintain 
skin homeostasis and modulate multiple cellular processes including wound 
healing.
OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the dynamic composition and potential roles of 
extracellular matrix in normal skin, wound healing process, and abnormal skin 
scarring.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Literature review was performed to identify relevant 
publications pertaining to the extracellular matrix deposition in normal skin 
and wound healing process, as well as in abnormal scars.
RESULTS: A summary of the matrix components in normal skin is presented. Their 
primary roles in hemostasis, inflammation, proliferation, and remodeling phases 
of wound healing are briefly discussed. Identification of novel extracellular 
matrix in keloids is also provided.
CONCLUSION: Abnormal scarring remains a challenging condition with unmet 
satisfactory treatments. Illumination of extracellular matrix composition and 
functions in wound healing process will allow for the development of targeted 
therapies in the future.

Copyright © 2023 by the American Society for Dermatologic Surgery, Inc. 
Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/DSS.0000000000003779
PMID: 37115999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]