---
reference_id: "PMID:26644564"
title: Human cerebral organoids recapitulate gene expression programs of fetal neocortex development.
authors:
- Camp JG
- Badsha F
- Florio M
- Kanton S
- Gerber T
- Wilsch-Bräuninger M
- Lewitus E
- Sykes A
- Hevers W
- Lancaster M
- Knoblich JA
- Lachmann R
- Pääbo S
- Huttner WB
- Treutlein B
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1520760112
keywords:
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Lineage
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Humans
- Neocortex/embryology
- Organoids/physiology
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
- Single-Cell Analysis
- Tissue Culture Techniques
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human cerebral organoids recapitulate gene expression programs of fetal neocortex development.
**Authors:** Camp JG, Badsha F, Florio M, Kanton S, Gerber T, Wilsch-Bräuninger M, Lewitus E, Sykes A, Hevers W, Lancaster M, Knoblich JA, Lachmann R, Pääbo S, Huttner WB, Treutlein B
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1520760112](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1520760112)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Dec 22;112(51):15672-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1520760112. Epub 2015 Dec 7.

Human cerebral organoids recapitulate gene expression programs of fetal
neocortex development.

Camp JG(1), Badsha F(2), Florio M(2), Kanton S(1), Gerber T(1),
Wilsch-Bräuninger M(2), Lewitus E(3), Sykes A(2), Hevers W(1), Lancaster M(4),
Knoblich JA(5), Lachmann R(6), Pääbo S(7), Huttner WB(8), Treutlein B(9).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Department of
Evolutionary Genetics, 04103 Leipzig, Germany;
(2)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, 01307 Dresden,
Germany;
(3)Institut de Biologie, Ecole Normale Superieure, 75005 Paris, France;
(4)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge CB2 0QH,
United Kingdom; Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of
Sciences (IMBA), 1030 Vienna, Austria;
(5)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences
(IMBA), 1030 Vienna, Austria;
(6)Technische Universität Dresden, Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus,
Klinik und Poliklinik für Frauenheilkunde und Geburtshilfe, 01307 Dresden,
Germany.
(7)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Department of
Evolutionary Genetics, 04103 Leipzig, Germany; barbara_treutlein@eva.mpg.de
paabo@eva.mpg.de huttner@mpi-cbg.de.
(8)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, 01307 Dresden,
Germany; barbara_treutlein@eva.mpg.de paabo@eva.mpg.de huttner@mpi-cbg.de.
(9)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Department of
Evolutionary Genetics, 04103 Leipzig, Germany; Max Planck Institute of Molecular
Cell Biology and Genetics, 01307 Dresden, Germany; barbara_treutlein@eva.mpg.de
paabo@eva.mpg.de huttner@mpi-cbg.de.

Cerebral organoids-3D cultures of human cerebral tissue derived from pluripotent
stem cells-have emerged as models of human cortical development. However, the
extent to which in vitro organoid systems recapitulate neural progenitor cell
proliferation and neuronal differentiation programs observed in vivo remains
unclear. Here we use single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to dissect and
compare cell composition and progenitor-to-neuron lineage relationships in human
cerebral organoids and fetal neocortex. Covariation network analysis using the
fetal neocortex data reveals known and previously unidentified interactions
among genes central to neural progenitor proliferation and neuronal
differentiation. In the organoid, we detect diverse progenitors and
differentiated cell types of neuronal and mesenchymal lineages and identify
cells that derived from regions resembling the fetal neocortex. We find that
these organoid cortical cells use gene expression programs remarkably similar to
those of the fetal tissue to organize into cerebral cortex-like regions. Our
comparison of in vivo and in vitro cortical single-cell transcriptomes
illuminates the genetic features underlying human cortical development that can
be studied in organoid cultures.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1520760112
PMCID: PMC4697386
PMID: 26644564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
