---
reference_id: "PMID:34573339"
title: GDF6 Knockdown in a Family with Multiple Synostosis Syndrome and Speech Impairment.
authors:
- Clarke RA
- Fang Z
- Murrell D
- Sheriff T
- Eapen V
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/genes12091354
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Growth Differentiation Factor 6/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Pedigree
- "Speech Disorders/etiology, genetics"
- Syndrome
- "Synostosis/diagnostic imaging, etiology, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GDF6 Knockdown in a Family with Multiple Synostosis Syndrome and Speech Impairment.
**Authors:** Clarke RA, Fang Z, Murrell D, Sheriff T, Eapen V
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes12091354](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12091354)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Aug 29;12(9):1354. doi: 10.3390/genes12091354.

GDF6 Knockdown in a Family with Multiple Synostosis Syndrome and Speech 
Impairment.

Clarke RA(1), Fang Z(1), Murrell D(2), Sheriff T(2), Eapen V(1).

Author information:
(1)Ingham Institute, School of Psychiatry, University of NSW, Sydney, NSW 2170, 
Australia.
(2)School of Medicine, St George Hospital, University of NSW, Sydney, NSW 2217, 
Australia.

Multiple synostoses syndrome type 4 (SYNS4; MIM 617898) is an autosomal dominant 
disorder characterized by carpal-tarsal coalition and otosclerosis-associated 
hearing loss. SYSN4 has been associated with GDF6 gain-of-function mutations. 
Here we report a five-generation SYNS4 family with a reduction in GDF6 
expression resulting from a chromosomal breakpoint 3' of GDF6. A 30-year medical 
history of the family indicated bilateral carpal-tarsal coalition in ~50% of 
affected family members and acquired otosclerosis-associated hearing loss in 
females only, whereas vertebral fusion was present in all affected family 
members, most of whom were speech impaired. All vertebral fusions were acquired 
postnatally in progressive fashion from a very early age. Thinning across the 
2nd cervical vertebral interspace (C2-3) in the proband during infancy 
progressed to block fusion across C2-7 and T3-7 later in life. Carpal-tarsal 
coalition and pisiform expansion were bilaterally symmetrical within, but varied 
greatly between, affected family members. This is the first report of SYNS4 in a 
family with reduced GDF6 expression indicating a prenatal role for GDF6 in 
regulating development of the joints of the carpals and tarsals, the pisiform, 
ears, larynx, mouth and face and an overlapping postnatal role in suppression of 
aberrant ossification and synostosis of the joints of the inner ear 
(otosclerosis), larynx and vertebrae. RNAseq gene expression analysis indicated 
>10 fold knockdown of NOMO3, RBMXL1 and NEIL2 in both primary fibroblast 
cultures and fresh white blood cells. Together these results provide greater 
insight into the role of GDF6 in skeletal joint development.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12091354
PMCID: PMC8470939
PMID: 34573339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.