---
reference_id: "PMID:36357946"
title: Microglia as Central Protagonists in the Chronic Stress Response.
authors:
- Schramm E
- Waisman A
journal: Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000200023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microglia as Central Protagonists in the Chronic Stress Response.
**Authors:** Schramm E, Waisman A
**Journal:** Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXI.0000000000200023](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXI.0000000000200023)

## Content

1. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2022 Sep 7;9(6):e200023. doi: 
10.1212/NXI.0000000000200023. Print 2022 Nov.

Microglia as Central Protagonists in the Chronic Stress Response.

Schramm E(1), Waisman A(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Institute for Molecular Medicine (E.S., A.W.), University Medical 
Center, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz; Focus Program Translational 
Neurosciences (A.W.), University Medical Center of the Johannes 
Gutenberg-University Mainz; and Research Center for Immunotherapy (A.W.), 
University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Germany.
(2)From the Institute for Molecular Medicine (E.S., A.W.), University Medical 
Center, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz; Focus Program Translational 
Neurosciences (A.W.), University Medical Center of the Johannes 
Gutenberg-University Mainz; and Research Center for Immunotherapy (A.W.), 
University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Germany. 
waisman@uni-mainz.de.

Chronic stress is a major risk factor for developing psychiatric conditions. In 
addition to elevating the levels of stress hormones released in the body, 
chronic stress activates the immune system, resulting in increased levels of 
proinflammatory cytokines and innate immune cells in the circulation of rodents 
and humans. Furthermore, exposure to chronic stress alters the phenotype of 
microglia, a population of innate immune cells that reside in the CNS 
parenchyma. In rodent models, chronic stress activates microglia in defined 
brain regions and induces changes in their phenotype and functional properties. 
In this review, we discussed how microglia are activated in stressful 
situations. Furthermore, we described how microglia affect the CNS environment 
during chronic stress, through the production of cytokines, the induction of 
reactive oxygen species, and phagocytosis. We suggested that, due to their 
strategic location as immune cells within the CNS, microglia are important 
players in the induction of psychopathologies after chronic stress.

© 2022 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000200023
PMCID: PMC9453699
PMID: 36357946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]