---
reference_id: "PMID:32818557"
title: A Rare Manifestation of Right Ventricular Dysfunction in an Adult Patient With Mucolipidosis Type III α/β.
authors:
- Kashihara S
- Ohtani K
- Sato T
- Nishizaki A
- Shojima Y
- Deguchi Y
- Fujino T
- Hashimoto T
- Higo T
- Tsutsui H
journal: Can J Cardiol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2020.07.239
keywords:
- Adult
- "Aortic Valve Insufficiency/diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- "Cardiomegaly/diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- "Dilatation, Pathologic"
- "Diuretics/administration & dosage"
- Echocardiography/methods
- "Heart Ventricles/diagnostic imaging, pathology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Cine/methods"
- Male
- Mucolipidoses/diagnosis
- Organ Size
- Patient Care Management/methods
- "Pulmonary Valve Insufficiency/diagnostic imaging, etiology, physiopathology"
- "Ventricular Dysfunction, Right/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Rare Manifestation of Right Ventricular Dysfunction in an Adult Patient With Mucolipidosis Type III α/β.
**Authors:** Kashihara S, Ohtani K, Sato T, Nishizaki A, Shojima Y, Deguchi Y, Fujino T, Hashimoto T, Higo T, Tsutsui H
**Journal:** Can J Cardiol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cjca.2020.07.239](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cjca.2020.07.239)

## Content

1. Can J Cardiol. 2020 Dec;36(12):1978.e1-1978.e3. doi:
10.1016/j.cjca.2020.07.239.  Epub 2020 Aug 17.

A Rare Manifestation of Right Ventricular Dysfunction in an Adult Patient With
Mucolipidosis Type III α/β.

Kashihara S(1), Ohtani K(2), Sato T(1), Nishizaki A(1), Shojima Y(1), Deguchi
Y(1), Fujino T(1), Hashimoto T(1), Higo T(1), Tsutsui H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan; Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, National
Hospital Organization, Kyushu Medical Center, Fukuoka, Japan. Electronic
address: ohtani@cardiol.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

Mucolipidosis type III α/β is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease,
caused by the deficient activity of UDP-N-acetyl
glucosamine-1-phosphotransferase. The resultant intralysosomal accumulation of
partly degraded mucopolysaccharides and sphingolipids causes multiple-organ
damage, including the heart. The most documented cardiac manifestation is the
thickening and insufficiency of mitral and aortic valves, but there are very few
reports about the myocardial involvement. We report a case with mucolipidosis
type III α/β complicated by marked dilatation and dysfunction of the right
ventricle, which is quite rare and further broadens the clinical spectrum of the
disease.

Copyright © 2020 Canadian Cardiovascular Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cjca.2020.07.239
PMID: 32818557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
