---
reference_id: "PMID:31427285"
title: "Hepatitis C Virus Entry: Protein Interactions and Fusion Determinants Governing Productive Hepatocyte Invasion."
authors:
- Gerold G
- Moeller R
- Pietschmann T
journal: Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a036830
keywords:
- Animals
- Claudin-1/metabolism
- Hepacivirus/physiology
- Hepatocytes/virology
- Host-Pathogen Interactions
- Humans
- Lipoproteins/metabolism
- Occludin/metabolism
- Protein Binding
- "Scavenger Receptors, Class B/metabolism"
- Tetraspanin 28/metabolism
- "Viral Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Virus Internalization
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis C Virus Entry: Protein Interactions and Fusion Determinants Governing Productive Hepatocyte Invasion.
**Authors:** Gerold G, Moeller R, Pietschmann T
**Journal:** Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1101/cshperspect.a036830](https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a036830)

## Content

1. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2020 Feb 3;10(2):a036830. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a036830.

Hepatitis C Virus Entry: Protein Interactions and Fusion Determinants Governing
Productive Hepatocyte Invasion.

Gerold G(1)(2), Moeller R(1), Pietschmann T(1).

Author information:
(1)TWINCORE, Center for Experimental and Clinical Infection Research, Institute
for Experimental Virology, 30625 Hannover, Germany.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Virology & Wallenberg Centre for
Molecular Medicine (WCMM), Umeå University, 901 85 Umeå, Sweden.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) entry is among the best-studied uptake processes for
human pathogenic viruses. Uptake follows a spatially and temporally tightly
controlled program. Numerous host factors including proteins, lipids, and
glycans promote productive uptake of HCV particles into human liver cells. The
virus initially attaches to surface proteoglycans, lipid receptors such as the
scavenger receptor BI (SR-BI), and to the tetraspanin CD81. After lateral
translocation of virions to tight junctions, claudin-1 (CLDN1) and occludin
(OCLN) are essential for entry. Clathrin-mediated endocytosis engulfs HCV
particles, which fuse with endosomal membranes after pH drop. Uncoating of the
viral RNA genome in the cytoplasm completes the entry process. Here we
systematically review and classify HCV entry factors by their mechanistic role,
relevance, and level of evidence. Finally, we report on more recent knowledge on
determinants of membrane fusion and close with an outlook on future implications
of HCV entry research.

Copyright © 2020 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1101/cshperspect.a036830
PMCID: PMC6996445
PMID: 31427285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
