---
reference_id: "PMID:39207520"
title: "Narrative review of diagnosis, management and treatment of dysphagia and sialorrhea in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis."
authors:
- Bjelica B
- Petri S
journal: J Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-024-12657-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Narrative review of diagnosis, management and treatment of dysphagia and sialorrhea in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
**Authors:** Bjelica B, Petri S
**Journal:** J Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-024-12657-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-024-12657-x)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2024 Oct;271(10):6508-6513. doi: 10.1007/s00415-024-12657-x. Epub
2024  Aug 29.

Narrative review of diagnosis, management and treatment of dysphagia and 
sialorrhea in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Bjelica B(1), Petri S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hannover Medical School, 1, Carl-Neuberg-Strasse, 
30625, Hannover, Germany. bjelica.bogdan@mh-hannover.de.
(2)Department of Neurology, Hannover Medical School, 1, Carl-Neuberg-Strasse, 
30625, Hannover, Germany.

The degenerative motor neuron disorder amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) 
frequently leads bulbar symptoms like dysarthria, dysphagia, and sialorrhea, in 
approximately one-third of cases being the initial symptom. Throughout the 
disease, more than two-thirds of ALS patients experience dysphagia, regardless 
of the region of onset. In this review, we aimed to offer an updated overview of 
dysphagia and sialorrhea in ALS, covering its diagnosis, monitoring, and 
treatment in clinical practice. Regular assessment of dysphagia and sialorrhea 
during each patient visit is essential and should be a standard aspect of ALS 
care. Early discussion of potential treatments such as high-calorie diets or 
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) is crucial. Furthermore, this review 
highlights and discusses potential areas for improvement in both clinical 
practice and research.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-024-12657-x
PMCID: PMC11447084
PMID: 39207520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: BB received compensation for travel expenses 
from ITF Pharma GmbH outside of the submitted work. SP has received speaker 
fees, non-financial support and research support from Biogen, Roche, AL-S 
Pharma, Amylyx, Cytokinetics, Ferrer, ITF-Pharma, and Sanofi and served on 
advisory boards of Amylyx, Biogen, Roche, Zambon and ITF Pharma outside of the 
submitted work.