---
reference_id: "PMID:25944381"
title: "DYRK1A haploinsufficiency causes a new recognizable syndrome with microcephaly, intellectual disability, speech impairment, and distinct facies."
authors:
- Ji J
- Lee H
- Argiropoulos B
- Dorrani N
- Mann J
- Martinez-Agosto JA
- Gomez-Ospina N
- Gallant N
- Bernstein JA
- Hudgins L
- Slattery L
- Isidor B
- Le Caignec C
- David A
- Obersztyn E
- Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik B
- Fox M
- Deignan JL
- Vilain E
- Hendricks E
- Horton Harr M
- Noon SE
- Jackson JR
- Wilkens A
- Mirzaa G
- Salamon N
- Abramson J
- Zackai EH
- Krantz I
- Innes AM
- Nelson SF
- Grody WW
- Quintero-Rivera F
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.71
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, physiopathology"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Down Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Facies
- Female
- Haploinsufficiency
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- "Microcephaly/genetics, physiopathology"
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Dyrk Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DYRK1A haploinsufficiency causes a new recognizable syndrome with microcephaly, intellectual disability, speech impairment, and distinct facies.
**Authors:** Ji J, Lee H, Argiropoulos B, Dorrani N, Mann J, Martinez-Agosto JA, Gomez-Ospina N, Gallant N, Bernstein JA, Hudgins L, Slattery L, Isidor B, Le Caignec C, David A, Obersztyn E, Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik B, Fox M, Deignan JL, Vilain E, Hendricks E, Horton Harr M, Noon SE, Jackson JR, Wilkens A, Mirzaa G, Salamon N, Abramson J, Zackai EH, Krantz I, Innes AM, Nelson SF, Grody WW, Quintero-Rivera F
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2015.71](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2015.71)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Nov;23(11):1473-81. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.71. Epub 2015
 May 6.

DYRK1A haploinsufficiency causes a new recognizable syndrome with microcephaly, 
intellectual disability, speech impairment, and distinct facies.

Ji J(1)(2), Lee H(1)(2), Argiropoulos B(3), Dorrani N(1)(2)(4), Mann J(5), 
Martinez-Agosto JA(2)(4)(6), Gomez-Ospina N(7), Gallant N(4), Bernstein JA(7), 
Hudgins L(7), Slattery L(7), Isidor B(8), Le Caignec C(8), David A(8), Obersztyn 
E(9), Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik B(9), Fox M(2)(4), Deignan JL(1)(2), Vilain 
E(1)(2)(4)(6), Hendricks E(10), Horton Harr M(11), Noon SE(11), Jackson JR(11), 
Wilkens A(11), Mirzaa G(10), Salamon N(12), Abramson J(13)(14), Zackai EH(11), 
Krantz I(11), Innes AM(3), Nelson SF(1)(2)(4)(6), Grody WW(1)(2)(4)(6), 
Quintero-Rivera F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of 
Medicine at University of California Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)UCLA Clinical Genomics Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Cumming School of Medicine, University of 
Calgary, and Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute for Child and 
Maternal Health, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine at University of 
California Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)Kaiser Permanente, Fresno, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at University 
of California Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA, USA.
(8)CHU Nantes, Service de Génétique Médicale, and Inserm UMR957, Faculté de 
Médecine, Nantes, France.
(9)Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland.
(10)Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
(11)Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(12)Department of Radiology, David Geffen School of Medicine at University of 
California Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(13)Department of Physiology, David Geffen School of Medicine at University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(14)The Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine (inStem), 
National Centre for Biological Sciences-Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, 
Bangalore, Karnataka, India.

Dual-specificity tyrosine-(Y)-phosphorylation-regulated kinase 1 A (DYRK1A ) is 
a highly conserved gene located in the Down syndrome critical region. It has an 
important role in early development and regulation of neuronal proliferation. 
Microdeletions of chromosome 21q22.12q22.3 that include DYRK1A (21q22.13) are 
rare and only a few pathogenic single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) in the DYRK1A 
gene have been described, so as of yet, the landscape of DYRK1A disruptions and 
their associated phenotype has not been fully explored. We have identified 14 
individuals with de novo heterozygous variants of DYRK1A; five with 
microdeletions, three with small insertions or deletions (INDELs) and six with 
deleterious SNVs. The analysis of our cohort and comparison with published cases 
reveals that phenotypes are consistent among individuals with the 21q22.12q22.3 
microdeletion and those with translocation, SNVs, or INDELs within DYRK1A. All 
individuals shared congenital microcephaly at birth, intellectual disability, 
developmental delay, severe speech impairment, short stature, and distinct 
facial features. The severity of the microcephaly varied from -2 SD to -5 SD. 
Seizures, structural brain abnormalities, eye defects, ataxia/broad-based gait, 
intrauterine growth restriction, minor skeletal abnormalities, and feeding 
difficulties were present in two-thirds of all affected individuals. Our study 
demonstrates that haploinsufficiency of DYRK1A results in a new recognizable 
syndrome, which should be considered in individuals with Angelman syndrome-like 
features and distinct facial features. Our report represents the largest cohort 
of individuals with DYRK1A disruptions to date, and is the first attempt to 
define consistent genotype-phenotype correlations among subjects with 21q22.13 
microdeletions and DYRK1A SNVs or small INDELs.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.71
PMCID: PMC4613469
PMID: 25944381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]