---
reference_id: "PMID:10938265"
title: "Regulation of the microphthalmia-associated transcription factor gene by the Waardenburg syndrome type 4 gene, SOX10."
authors:
- Verastegui C
- Bille K
- Ortonne JP
- Ballotti R
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.C000445200
keywords:
- 3T3 Cells
- Animals
- "Blotting, Western"
- Codon
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Cyclic AMP Response Element-Binding Protein/metabolism
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics, metabolism"
- Endothelin-3/genetics
- "Epistasis, Genetic"
- Frameshift Mutation
- Gene Deletion
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Genes, Reporter"
- "High Mobility Group Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Humans
- Luciferases/metabolism
- Lymphoid Enhancer-Binding Factor 1
- Melanocytes/metabolism
- Mice
- Microphthalmia-Associated Transcription Factor
- Mutation
- PAX3 Transcription Factor
- Paired Box Transcription Factors
- Plasmids/metabolism
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Protein Binding
- SOXE Transcription Factors
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Transcriptional Activation
- Transfection
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
- Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Regulation of the microphthalmia-associated transcription factor gene by the Waardenburg syndrome type 4 gene, SOX10.
**Authors:** Verastegui C, Bille K, Ortonne JP, Ballotti R
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.C000445200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C000445200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 6;275(40):30757-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C000445200.

Regulation of the microphthalmia-associated transcription factor gene by the
Waardenburg syndrome type 4 gene, SOX10.

Verastegui C(1), Bille K, Ortonne JP, Ballotti R.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U385, Biologie et Physiopathologie de la Peau, Faculté de Médecine,
Avenue de Valombrose, Nice, 06107 Cedex, France.

The absence of melanocytes from the cochlea and epidermis is responsible of
deafness and hypopigmentation, two symptoms shared by the four Waardenburg
syndrome (WS) subtypes. Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF)
controls melanocyte survival and differentiation. Mutations, which impair MITF
function or expression, result in an abnormal melanocyte development leading to
the WS2. WS1 and WS3 are caused by mutation in the gene encoding the
transcription factor Pax3, which regulates MITF expression. Recently, mutations
in SOX10, a gene encoding a SRY-related transcription factor, have been reported
in patients with WS4. However, the molecular basis of the defective melanocyte
development in these patients remained to be elucidated. In the present report,
we demonstrate that Sox10 is a strong activator of the MITF promoter, and we
identify a Sox10 binding site between -264 and -266 of the MITF promoter.
Finally, we show that three SOX10 mutations found in WS4 abolish the
transcriptional activity of the resulting Sox10 proteins toward the MITF
promoter. Taken together, our observations bring new and meaningful information
concerning the molecular process that leads to a defective melanocyte
development in WS4 patients with SOX10 mutations.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C000445200
PMID: 10938265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
