---
reference_id: "PMID:31455405"
title: Applicability of adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells in treatment of patients with type 2 diabetes.
authors:
- Qi Y
- Ma J
- Li S
- Liu W
journal: Stem Cell Res Ther
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13287-019-1362-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Applicability of adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells in treatment of patients with type 2 diabetes.
**Authors:** Qi Y, Ma J, Li S, Liu W
**Journal:** Stem Cell Res Ther (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13287-019-1362-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13287-019-1362-2)

## Content

1. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2019 Aug 28;10(1):274. doi: 10.1186/s13287-019-1362-2.

Applicability of adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells in treatment of patients 
with type 2 diabetes.

Qi Y(1), Ma J(1), Li S(1), Liu W(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, 
RenJi Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University, 160# Pujian 
Road, Pudong, Shanghai, 200127, China.
(2)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, 
RenJi Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University, 160# Pujian 
Road, Pudong, Shanghai, 200127, China. sue_liuwei@163.com.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is mainly characterized by insulin resistance 
(IR) and impaired insulin secretion. The chronic inflammatory process 
contributed to IR and could also hamper pancreatic β cell function. However, 
currently applied treatment cannot reverse β cell damage or alleviate 
inflammation. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), the cell-based therapy for their 
self-renewable, differentiation potential, and immunosuppressive properties, 
have been demonstrated in displaying therapeutic effects in T2DM. 
Adipose-derived MSCs (AD-MSCs) attracted more attention due to less harvested 
inconvenience and ethical issues commonly accompany with bone marrow-derived 
MSCs (BM-MSCs) and fetal annex-derived MSCs. Both AD-MSC therapy studies and 
mechanism explorations in T2DM animals presented that AD-MSCs could translate to 
clinical application. However, hyperglycemia, hyperinsulinemia, and metabolic 
disturbance in T2DM are crucial for impairment of AD-MSC function, which may 
limit the therapeutical effects of MSCs. This review focuses on the outcomes and 
the molecular mechanisms of MSC therapies in T2DM which light up the hope of 
AD-MSCs as an innovative strategy to cure T2DM.

DOI: 10.1186/s13287-019-1362-2
PMCID: PMC6712852
PMID: 31455405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.