---
reference_id: "PMID:36619867"
title: "Understanding laterality disorders and the left-right organizer: Insights from zebrafish."
authors:
- Forrest K
- Barricella AC
- Pohar SA
- Hinman AM
- Amack JD
journal: Front Cell Dev Biol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.1035513
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding laterality disorders and the left-right organizer: Insights from zebrafish.
**Authors:** Forrest K, Barricella AC, Pohar SA, Hinman AM, Amack JD
**Journal:** Front Cell Dev Biol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcell.2022.1035513](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2022.1035513)

## Content

1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022 Dec 23;10:1035513. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.1035513.
eCollection 2022.

Understanding laterality disorders and the left-right organizer: Insights from
zebrafish.

Forrest K(1), Barricella AC(1), Pohar SA(1), Hinman AM(1), Amack JD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, State University of New York
Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, United States.
(2)BioInspired Syracuse: Institute for Material and Living Systems, Syracuse,
NY, United States.

Vital internal organs display a left-right (LR) asymmetric arrangement that is
established during embryonic development. Disruption of this LR asymmetry-or
laterality-can result in congenital organ malformations. Situs inversus totalis
(SIT) is a complete concordant reversal of internal organs that results in a low
occurrence of clinical consequences. Situs ambiguous, which gives rise to
Heterotaxy syndrome (HTX), is characterized by discordant development and
arrangement of organs that is associated with a wide range of birth defects. The
leading cause of health problems in HTX patients is a congenital heart
malformation. Mutations identified in patients with laterality disorders
implicate motile cilia in establishing LR asymmetry. However, the cellular and
molecular mechanisms underlying SIT and HTX are not fully understood. In several
vertebrates, including mouse, frog and zebrafish, motile cilia located in a
"left-right organizer" (LRO) trigger conserved signaling pathways that guide
asymmetric organ development. Perturbation of LRO formation and/or function in
animal models recapitulates organ malformations observed in SIT and HTX
patients. This provides an opportunity to use these models to investigate the
embryological origins of laterality disorders. The zebrafish embryo has emerged
as an important model for investigating the earliest steps of LRO development.
Here, we discuss clinical characteristics of human laterality disorders, and
highlight experimental results from zebrafish that provide insights into LRO
biology and advance our understanding of human laterality disorders.

Copyright © 2022 Forrest, Barricella, Pohar, Hinman and Amack.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2022.1035513
PMCID: PMC9816872
PMID: 36619867

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
