---
reference_id: "PMID:12624191"
title: "Are dental diseases examples of ecological catastrophes?"
authors:
- Marsh PD
journal: Microbiology (Reading)
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1099/mic.0.26082-0
keywords:
- "Bacteria, Anaerobic/growth & development, pathogenicity"
- Dental Plaque/microbiology
- Ecosystem
- "Gram-Negative Anaerobic Bacteria/growth & development, pathogenicity"
- "Gram-Positive Bacteria/growth & development, pathogenicity"
- Homeostasis/physiology
- Humans
- Mouth/microbiology
- Periodontal Diseases/microbiology
- Tooth Diseases/microbiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Are dental diseases examples of ecological catastrophes?
**Authors:** Marsh PD
**Journal:** Microbiology (Reading) (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1099/mic.0.26082-0](https://doi.org/10.1099/mic.0.26082-0)

## Content

1. Microbiology (Reading). 2003 Feb;149(Pt 2):279-294. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.26082-0.

Are dental diseases examples of ecological catastrophes?

Marsh PD(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Division, Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Salisbury
SP4 0JG, and Division of Oral Biology, Leeds Dental Institute, Clarendon Way,
Leeds LS2 9LU, UK.

Dental diseases are among the most prevalent and costly diseases affecting
industrialized societies, and yet are highly preventable. The microflora of
dental plaque biofilms from diseased sites is distinct from that found in
health, although the putative pathogens can often be detected in low numbers at
normal sites. In dental caries, there is a shift towards community dominance by
acidogenic and acid-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria (e.g. mutans streptococci
and lactobacilli) at the expense of the acid-sensitive species associated with
sound enamel. In contrast, the numbers and proportions of obligately anaerobic
bacteria, including Gram-negative proteolytic species, increase in periodontal
diseases. Modelling studies using defined consortia of oral bacteria grown in
planktonic and biofilm systems have been undertaken to identify environmental
factors responsible for driving these deleterious shifts in the plaque
microflora. Repeated conditions of low pH (rather than sugar availability per
se) selected for mutans streptococci and lactobacilli, while the introduction of
novel host proteins and glycoproteins (as occurs during the inflammatory
response to plaque), and the concomitant rise in local pH, enriched for
Gram-negative anaerobic and asaccharolytic species. These studies emphasized
(a). significant properties of dental plaque as both a biofilm and a microbial
community, and (b). the dynamic relationship existing between the environment
and the composition of the oral microflora. This research resulted in a novel
hypothesis (the 'ecological plaque hypothesis') to better describe the
relationship between plaque bacteria and the host in health and disease.
Implicit in this hypothesis is the concept that disease can be prevented not
only by directly inhibiting the putative pathogens, but also by interfering with
the environmental factors driving the selection and enrichment of these
bacteria. Thus, a more holistic approach can be taken in disease control and
management strategies.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.26082-0
PMID: 12624191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
