---
reference_id: "PMID:38638933"
title: "Global, regional, and national burden and trends analysis of gallbladder and biliary tract cancer from 1990 to 2019 and predictions to 2030: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019."
authors:
- Su J
- Liang Y
- He X
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2024.1384314
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global, regional, and national burden and trends analysis of gallbladder and biliary tract cancer from 1990 to 2019 and predictions to 2030: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019.
**Authors:** Su J, Liang Y, He X
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2024.1384314](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2024.1384314)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2024 Apr 4;11:1384314. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2024.1384314. 
eCollection 2024.

Global, regional, and national burden and trends analysis of gallbladder and 
biliary tract cancer from 1990 to 2019 and predictions to 2030: a systematic 
analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019.

Su J(#)(1), Liang Y(#)(2), He X(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Changzhi Medical College, Changzhi, China.
(2)Clinical Experimental Center, Jiangmen Key Laboratory of Clinical Biobanks 
and Translational Research, Jiangmen Central Hospital, Jiangmen, China.
(3)Institute of Evidence-Based Medicine, Heping Hospital Affiliated to Changzhi 
Medical College, Changzhi, China.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVES: Our aim was to explore the disease burden caused by gallbladder and 
biliary tract cancer globally, regionally, and nationally, by age and sex.
METHODS: The absolute number of cases and age-standardized rates (ASR) of 
incidence, prevalence, mortality, and disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) due 
to gallbladder and biliary tract cancer were extracted from the Global Burden of 
Disease (GBD) Study 2019. We estimated the trends in disease burden by 
calculating the percentage change in the absolute number of cases and the 
estimated annual percentage change (EAPC) in ASR, by social development index 
(SDI), region, nation, sex, and age.
RESULTS: From 1990 to 2019, the number of incident cases, prevalent cases, 
deaths, and DALYs worldwide significantly increased by 1.85-fold, 1.92-fold, 
1.82-fold, and 1.68-fold, respectively. However, the age-standardized rates of 
incidence, prevalence, mortality, and DALYs tend to decrease globally over time. 
Nevertheless, heterogeneous disease burden patterns exist between geographic 
regions due to different geographical risk factors, distinct epidemiologically 
predominant gallbladder and biliary tract cancer subtypes, and potential genetic 
predispositions or ethnicity. Additionally, socioeconomic status mediates the 
regional variation in disease burden, with increasing SDI or HDI scores 
associated with downward trends in the age-standardized rates of incidence, 
prevalence, mortality, and DALYs. Older individuals and females are at higher 
risk of gallbladder and biliary tract cancer, but the increasing burden of 
early-onset gallbladder and biliary tract cancer is a cause for concern, 
especially for those living in lower SDI areas and males. High BMI is the 
primary risk factors underlying gallbladder and biliary tract cancer, accounted 
for 15.2% of deaths and 15.7% DALYs globally in 2019.
CONCLUSION: Our study comprehensively elucidated the distribution and dynamic 
trends of gallbladder and biliary tract cancer burden over the past three 
decades, from multiple dimensions. These findings emphasize the importance of 
promoting a healthy lifestyle as a population-level cancer prevention strategy 
and tailoring cancer control actions based on localized risk factors and the 
epidemic profiles of gallbladder and biliary tract cancer by anatomical subtype.

Copyright © 2024 Su, Liang and He.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2024.1384314
PMCID: PMC11024434
PMID: 38638933

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.