---
reference_id: "PMID:31986875"
title: Molecular Mechanisms of Arsenic-Induced Disruption of DNA Repair.
authors:
- Tam LM
- Price NE
- Wang Y
journal: Chem Res Toxicol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.9b00464
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Mechanisms of Arsenic-Induced Disruption of DNA Repair.
**Authors:** Tam LM, Price NE, Wang Y
**Journal:** Chem Res Toxicol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.chemrestox.9b00464](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrestox.9b00464)

## Content

1. Chem Res Toxicol. 2020 Mar 16;33(3):709-726. doi: 
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.9b00464. Epub 2020 Feb 7.

Molecular Mechanisms of Arsenic-Induced Disruption of DNA Repair.

Tam LM, Price NE, Wang Y.

Exposure to arsenic in contaminated drinking water is an emerging public health 
problem that impacts more than 200 million people worldwide. Accumulating lines 
of evidence from epidemiological studies revealed that chronic exposure to 
arsenic can result in various human diseases including cancer, type 2 diabetes, 
and neurodegenerative disorders. Arsenic is also classified as a Group I human 
carcinogen. In this review, we survey extensively different modes of action for 
arsenic-induced carcinogenesis, with focus being placed on arsenic-mediated 
impairment of DNA repair pathways. Inorganic arsenic can be bioactivated by 
methylation, and the ensuing products are highly genotoxic. Bioactivation of 
arsenicals also elicits the production of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species 
(ROS and RNS), which can directly damage DNA and modify cysteine residues in 
proteins. Results from recent studies suggest zinc finger proteins as crucial 
molecular targets for direct binding to As3+ or for modifications by 
arsenic-induced ROS/RNS, which may constitute a common mechanism underlying 
arsenic-induced perturbations of DNA repair.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.9b00464
PMCID: PMC7078036
PMID: 31986875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.