---
reference_id: "PMID:25383261"
title: Periostin Expression is Altered in Aortic Valves in Smad6 Mutant Mice.
authors:
- Sugi Y
- Kern MJ
- Markwald RR
- Burnside JL
journal: J Neonatal Biol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.4172/2167-0897.1000101
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Periostin Expression is Altered in Aortic Valves in Smad6 Mutant Mice.
**Authors:** Sugi Y, Kern MJ, Markwald RR, Burnside JL
**Journal:** J Neonatal Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.4172/2167-0897.1000101](https://doi.org/10.4172/2167-0897.1000101)

## Content

1. J Neonatal Biol. 2012 Jan 21;1:4692. doi: 10.4172/2167-0897.1000101.

Periostin Expression is Altered in Aortic Valves in Smad6 Mutant Mice.

Sugi Y(1), Kern MJ(1), Markwald RR(1), Burnside JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, Cardiovascular
Developmental Biology Center, Medical University of South Carolina, USA.

Smad6 is known to predominantly inhibit BMP signaling by negatively regulating
the BMP signaling process. Therefore, Smad6 mutation potentially provides an
important genetic model for investigating the role of BMP signaling in vivo.
Periostin is a 90-kDA secreted extracellular matrix (ECM) protein and implicated
in cardiac valve progenitor cell differentiation, maturation and adult aortic
valve calcification in mice. We have previously reported periostin expression
patterns during AV valve development in mice. Because periostin can play
critical roles in aortic valve interstitial cell differentiation and can be
correlated with adult valve disease pathogenesis, in the present study we
specifically focused on periostin expression during outflow tract (OT)
development and its expression within the adult mouse valves. We previously
reported that periostin expression in valve progenitor cells was altered by
exogenously adding BMP-2 in culture. In this study, we investigated whether
expression of periostin and other valvulogenic ECM proteins was altered in
Smad6-mutant newborn mice in vivo. Periostin protein was localized within OT
during embryonic development in mice. At embryonic day (ED) 13.5, robust
periostin expression was detected within the developing pulmonary trunk and
developing pulmonary and aortic valves. Periostin expression remained intense in
pulmonary and aortic valves up to the adult stage. Our immunohistochemical and
immunointensity analyses revealed that periostin expression was significantly
reduced in the aortic valves in Smad6-/- neonatal hearts. Versican expression
was also significantly reduced in Smad6-/- aortic valves, whereas, hyaluronan
deposition was not significantly altered in the Smad6-/- neonatal valves.
Expression of periostin and versican was less prominently affected in AV valves
compared to the aortic valves, suggesting that a cell lineage/origin-dependent
response to regulatory molecules may play a critical role in valve interstitial
cell development and ECM protein expression.

DOI: 10.4172/2167-0897.1000101
PMCID: PMC4224111
PMID: 25383261
