---
reference_id: "PMID:33692356"
title: "Meta-analysis of the Parkinson's disease gut microbiome suggests alterations linked to intestinal inflammation."
authors:
- Romano S
- Savva GM
- Bedarf JR
- Charles IG
- Hildebrand F
- Narbad A
journal: NPJ Parkinsons Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41531-021-00156-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meta-analysis of the Parkinson's disease gut microbiome suggests alterations linked to intestinal inflammation.
**Authors:** Romano S, Savva GM, Bedarf JR, Charles IG, Hildebrand F, Narbad A
**Journal:** NPJ Parkinsons Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41531-021-00156-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41531-021-00156-z)

## Content

1. NPJ Parkinsons Dis. 2021 Mar 10;7(1):27. doi: 10.1038/s41531-021-00156-z.

Meta-analysis of the Parkinson's disease gut microbiome suggests alterations
linked to intestinal inflammation.

Romano S(1), Savva GM(2), Bedarf JR(2)(3), Charles IG(2)(4), Hildebrand F(5)(6),
Narbad A(2).

Author information:
(1)Quadram Institute Bioscience, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, UK.
stefano.romano@quadram.ac.uk.
(2)Quadram Institute Bioscience, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, UK.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(4)University of East Anglia, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, UK.
(5)Quadram Institute Bioscience, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, UK.
falk.hildebrand@quadram.ac.uk.
(6)Earlham Institute, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, UK.
falk.hildebrand@quadram.ac.uk.

The gut microbiota is emerging as an important modulator of neurodegenerative
diseases, and accumulating evidence has linked gut microbes to Parkinson's
disease (PD) symptomatology and pathophysiology. PD is often preceded by
gastrointestinal symptoms and alterations of the enteric nervous system
accompany the disease. Several studies have analyzed the gut microbiome in PD,
but a consensus on the features of the PD-specific microbiota is missing. Here,
we conduct a meta-analysis re-analyzing the ten currently available 16S
microbiome datasets to investigate whether common alterations in the gut
microbiota of PD patients exist across cohorts. We found significant alterations
in the PD-associated microbiome, which are robust to study-specific technical
heterogeneities, although differences in microbiome structure between PD and
controls are small. Enrichment of the genera Lactobacillus, Akkermansia, and
Bifidobacterium and depletion of bacteria belonging to the Lachnospiraceae
family and the Faecalibacterium genus, both important short-chain fatty acids
producers, emerged as the most consistent PD gut microbiome alterations. This
dysbiosis might result in a pro-inflammatory status which could be linked to the
recurrent gastrointestinal symptoms affecting PD patients.

DOI: 10.1038/s41531-021-00156-z
PMCID: PMC7946946
PMID: 33692356

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
