---
reference_id: "PMID:31527662"
title: A missense variant in PER2 is associated with delayed sleep-wake phase disorder in a Japanese population.
authors:
- Miyagawa T
- Hida A
- Shimada M
- Uehara C
- Nishino Y
- Kadotani H
- Uchiyama M
- Ebisawa T
- Inoue Y
- Kamei Y
- Tokunaga K
- Mishima K
- Honda M
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s10038-019-0665-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A missense variant in PER2 is associated with delayed sleep-wake phase disorder in a Japanese population.
**Authors:** Miyagawa T, Hida A, Shimada M, Uehara C, Nishino Y, Kadotani H, Uchiyama M, Ebisawa T, Inoue Y, Kamei Y, Tokunaga K, Mishima K, Honda M
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s10038-019-0665-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s10038-019-0665-6)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2019 Dec;64(12):1219-1225. doi: 10.1038/s10038-019-0665-6. Epub 
2019 Sep 17.

A missense variant in PER2 is associated with delayed sleep-wake phase disorder 
in a Japanese population.

Miyagawa T(1)(2), Hida A(3), Shimada M(4)(5), Uehara C(5)(6), Nishino Y(5)(6), 
Kadotani H(7), Uchiyama M(8), Ebisawa T(9), Inoue Y(10)(11), Kamei Y(12), 
Tokunaga K(5), Mishima K(3)(13)(14), Honda M(4)(15).

Author information:
(1)Sleep Disorders Project, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo, Japan. 
miyagawa-tk@igakuken.or.jp.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. miyagawa-tk@igakuken.or.jp.
(3)Department of Sleep-Wake Disorders, National Institute of Mental Health, 
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Sleep Disorders Project, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Health Science 
Technology, Bunkyo Gakuin University, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Sleep and Behavioral Sciences, Shiga University of Medical 
Science, Shiga, Japan.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Yokohama Clinic for Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychiatry, Medical 
Corporation Warakukai, Kanagawa, Japan.
(10)Department of Somnology, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(11)Yoyogi Sleep Disorder Center, Tokyo, Japan.
(12)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Center Hospital, National Center 
of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.
(13)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Akita University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Akita, Japan.
(14)International Institute for Integrative Sleep Medicine, Tsukuba, Japan.
(15)Seiwa Hospital, Neuropsychiatric Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

Delayed sleep-wake phase disorder (DSWPD) is a subtype of circadian rhythm 
sleep-wake disorders, and is characterized by an inability to fall asleep until 
late at night and wake up at a socially acceptable time in the morning. The 
study aim was to identify low-frequency nonsense and missense variants that are 
associated with DSWPD. Candidate variants in circadian rhythm-related genes were 
extracted by integration of genetic variation databases and in silico 
assessment. We narrowed down the candidates to six variants. To examine whether 
the six variants are associated with DSWPD, we performed an association study in 
236 Japanese patients with DSWPD and 1436 controls. A low-frequency missense 
variant (p.Val1205Met) in PER2 showed a significant association with DSWPD (2.5% 
in cases and 1.1% in controls, P = 0.026, odds ratio (OR) = 2.32). The variant 
was also associated with idiopathic hypersomnia known to have a tendency toward 
phase delay (P = 0.038, OR = 2.07). PER2 forms a heterodimer with CRY, and the 
heterodimer plays an important role in the regulation of circadian rhythms. 
Val1205 is located in the CRY-binding domain of PER2 and was hypothesized to 
interact with CRY. The p.Val1205Met substitution could be a potential genetic 
marker for DSWPD.

DOI: 10.1038/s10038-019-0665-6
PMID: 31527662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]