---
reference_id: "PMID:38126739"
title: Advances in non-biological drugs for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Venetsanopoulou AI
- Voulgari PV
- Drosos AA
journal: Expert Opin Pharmacother
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/14656566.2023.2297798
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances in non-biological drugs for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Venetsanopoulou AI, Voulgari PV, Drosos AA
**Journal:** Expert Opin Pharmacother (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14656566.2023.2297798](https://doi.org/10.1080/14656566.2023.2297798)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2024 Jan-Apr;25(1):45-53. doi: 
10.1080/14656566.2023.2297798. Epub 2024 Feb 1.

Advances in non-biological drugs for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.

Venetsanopoulou AI(1), Voulgari PV(1), Drosos AA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece.

INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a complex autoimmune disease that 
affects millions of people worldwide, with a systemic impact. This review 
explores the role of non-biological conventional synthetic disease-modifying 
antirheumatic drugs (csDMARDs) in its management.
AREAS COVERED: We discuss the effectiveness and safety of key csDMARDs such as 
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, corticosteroids, Hydroxychloroquine, 
Sulfasalazine, Methotrexate, and Leflunomide in relieving symptoms and slowing 
the progression of the disease. We also highlight the importance of combination 
therapy using csDMARDs, supported by clinical studies demonstrating the benefits 
of various csDMARD combinations. Early intervention with these drugs is 
emphasized to prevent joint damage, improve clinical symptoms, and enhance 
patient outcomes.
EXPERT OPINION: Overall, csDMARDs have proven pivotal in managing RA, providing 
cost-effective and versatile treatment options. We acknowledge the advantages of 
biologics but highlight the associated challenges, making the choice between 
non-biological and biological drugs a personalized decision. This comprehensive 
overview aims to provide a deeper understanding of RA treatment strategies, 
contributing to improving the quality of life for patients with this chronic 
condition.

DOI: 10.1080/14656566.2023.2297798
PMID: 38126739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]