---
reference_id: "PMID:39701638"
title: "Comparative efficacy and acceptability of pharmacological, psychological, and neurostimulatory interventions for ADHD in adults: a systematic review and component network meta-analysis."
authors:
- Ostinelli EG
- Schulze M
- Zangani C
- Farhat LC
- Tomlinson A
- Del Giovane C
- Chamberlain SR
- Philipsen A
- Young S
- Cowen PJ
- Bilbow A
- Cipriani A
- Cortese S
journal: Lancet Psychiatry
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(24)00360-2
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/psychology, therapy"
- Central Nervous System Stimulants/therapeutic use
- Cognitive Behavioral Therapy/methods
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative efficacy and acceptability of pharmacological, psychological, and neurostimulatory interventions for ADHD in adults: a systematic review and component network meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Ostinelli EG, Schulze M, Zangani C, Farhat LC, Tomlinson A, Del Giovane C, Chamberlain SR, Philipsen A, Young S, Cowen PJ, Bilbow A, Cipriani A, Cortese S
**Journal:** Lancet Psychiatry (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2215-0366(24)00360-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(24)00360-2)

## Content

1. Lancet Psychiatry. 2025 Jan;12(1):32-43. doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(24)00360-2.

Comparative efficacy and acceptability of pharmacological, psychological, and
neurostimulatory interventions for ADHD in adults: a systematic review and
component network meta-analysis.

Ostinelli EG(1), Schulze M(2), Zangani C(3), Farhat LC(4), Tomlinson A(5), Del
Giovane C(6), Chamberlain SR(7), Philipsen A(2), Young S(8), Cowen PJ(9), Bilbow
A(10), Cipriani A(3), Cortese S(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Warneford Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford,
UK; Oxford Precision Psychiatry Lab, National Institute for Health and Care
Research Oxford Health Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, UK; Oxford Health
National Health Service (NHS) Foundation Trust, Warneford Hospital, Oxford, UK.
Electronic address: edoardo.ostinelli@psych.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Warneford Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford,
UK; Oxford Precision Psychiatry Lab, National Institute for Health and Care
Research Oxford Health Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, UK; Oxford Health
National Health Service (NHS) Foundation Trust, Warneford Hospital, Oxford, UK.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Faculdade de Medicina FMUSP, Universidade de Sao
Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Warneford Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford,
UK; Oxford Precision Psychiatry Lab, National Institute for Health and Care
Research Oxford Health Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, UK.
(6)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences for Children and Adults,
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy; Institute of Primary
Health Care, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(7)Hampshire and Isle of Wight NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK; Department
of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(8)Psychology Services, London, UK; Department of Psychology, Reykjavik
University, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(9)Department of Psychiatry, Warneford Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford,
UK; Oxford Health National Health Service (NHS) Foundation Trust, Warneford
Hospital, Oxford, UK.
(10)The National Attention Deficit Disorder Information and Support Services,
Edgware, UK.
(11)Hampshire and Isle of Wight NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK; Clinical
and Experimental Sciences (CNS and Psychiatry), Faculty of Medicine, University
of Southampton, Southampton, UK; Developmental EPI Evidence Synthesis,
Prediction, Implementation Lab, Centre for Innovation in Mental Health-School of
Psychology, Faculty of Environmental and Life Sciences, University of
Southampton, Southampton, UK; New York University Child Study Center, Hassenfeld
Children's Hospital at NYU Langone, New York, NY, USA; Department of Precision
and Regenerative Medicine and Ionian Area, University of Studies of Bari Aldo
Moro, Bari, Italy.

Comment in
    Lancet Psychiatry. 2025 Jan;12(1):3-4. doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(24)00403-6.

BACKGROUND: The comparative benefits and harms of available interventions for
ADHD in adults remain unclear. We aimed to address these important knowledge
gaps.
METHODS: In this systematic review and component network meta-analysis (NMA), we
searched multiple databases for published and unpublished randomised controlled
trials (RCTs) investigating pharmacological and non-pharmacological
interventions for ADHD in adults from database inception to Sept 6, 2023. We
included aggregate data from RCTs comparing interventions against controls or
any other eligible active intervention for the treatment of symptoms in adults
(ages ≥18 years) with a formal diagnosis of ADHD. Pharmacological therapies were
included only if their maximum planned doses were considered eligible according
to international guidelines. We included RCTs of at least 1-week duration for
medications, of at least four sessions for psychological therapies, and of any
length deemed appropriate for neurostimulation. For RCTs of medications,
cognitive training, or neurostimulation alone, we included only double-blind
RCTs. At least two authors independently screened the identified records and
extracted data from eligible RCTs. Our primary outcomes were efficacy (change in
ADHD core symptom severity on self-rated and clinician-rated scales at
timepoints closest to 12 weeks) and acceptability (all-cause discontinuation).
We estimated standardised mean differences (SMDs) and odds ratios (ORs) using
random effects pairwise and component NMA, dismantling interventions into
specific therapeutic components. This study was registered with PROSPERO
(CRD42021265576). People with relevant lived experience were involved in the
conduct of the research and writing process.
FINDINGS: Of 32 416 records, 113 unique RCTs encompassing 14 887 participants
were eligible for analysis (6787 [45·6%] females, 7638 [51·3%] males, 462 [3·1%]
sex not reported). The RCTs encompassed pharmacological therapies (63 [55·8%] of
113 RCTs; 6875 participants), psychological therapies (28 [24·8%] of 113 RCTs;
1116 participants), neurostimulatory therapy and neurofeedback (ten [8·8%] of
113 RCTs; 194 participants), and control conditions (97 [85·8%] of 113 RCTs;
5770 participants). For reduction of ADHD core symptoms at 12 weeks on both
self-reported and clinician-reported rating scales, atomoxetine (self-reported
scale SMD -0·38, 95% CI -0·56 to -0·21; clinician-reported scale -0·51, -0·64 to
-0·37) and stimulants (0·39, -0·52 to -0·26; -0·61, -0·71 to -0·51) had higher
efficacy than placebo (Confidence in Network Meta-Analysis [CINeMA] ranging
between very low and moderate). Cognitive behavioural therapy (-0·76, -1·26 to
-0·26), cognitive remediation (-1·35, -2·42 to -0·27), mindfulness (-0·79, -1·29
to -0·29), psychoeducation (-0·77, -1·35 to -0·18), and transcranial direct
current stimulation (-0·78; -1·13 to -0·43) were better than placebo only on
clinician-reported measures. Regarding acceptability, all therapeutic components
were similar to placebo other than atomoxetine (OR 1·43, 95% CI 1·14 to 1·80;
CINeMA moderate) and guanfacine (3·70, 1·22 to 11·19; high), which had lower
acceptability compared with placebo. Baseline severity of self-reported ADHD
core symptoms, year of publication, percentage of male individuals, and
percentage of individuals with ADHD and another mental health condition did not
explain the heterogeneity observed in unadjusted non-component models of
self-reported ADHD core symptoms. Treatment length had little effect on
heterogeneity.
INTERPRETATION: Stimulants and atomoxetine were the only interventions with
evidence of beneficial effects in terms of reducing ADHD core symptoms in the
short term, supported by both self-reported and clinician-reported ratings.
However, atomoxetine was less acceptable than placebo. Medications for ADHD were
not efficacious on additional relevant outcomes, such as quality of life, and
evidence in the longer term is underinvestigated. The effects of
non-pharmacological strategies were inconsistent across different raters. Our
network meta-analysis represents the most comprehensive synthesis of available
evidence to inform future guidelines in the field.
FUNDING: UK National Institute for Health and Care Research.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open Access
article under the CC BY 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2215-0366(24)00360-2
PMID: 39701638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests EGO has received
research and consultancy fees from Angelini Pharma. AT has received research and
consultancy fees from the Italian Network for Paediatric Trials (INCiPiT),
Angelini Pharma, and Takeda, and acts as a clinical advisor for Akrivia Health
outside this work. CDG has received research support from the Multiple Sclerosis
International Federation. SRC receives honoraria from Elsevier for journal
editorial work and his research is funded by the National Health Service (NHS).
AP served on advisory boards for, gave lectures for, did phase 3 studies for,
and received travel grants within the past 5 years from MEDICE Arzneimittel
Pütter, Takeda, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Janssen-Cilag; receives royalties from
books published by Elsevier, Hogrefe, MWV, Kohlhammer, Karger, Oxford University
Press, Thieme, Springer, and Schattauer; is a member of the German ADHD
Guideline Group; and is an author of the Updated European Consensus Statement.
SY has received honoraria for consultancy and educational talks from Janssen,
Medice, and Takeda; is author of the ADHD Child Evaluation (ACE) and ACE+ for
adults; and is lead author of three psychological treatment programmes (R&R2 for
ADHD Youths and Adults, the Young–Bramham Programme, and the Young–Smith
Programme). PJC holds a patent on behalf of Oxford University for the use of
ebselen in patients with resistant depression. AC has received research and
consultancy fees from INCiPiT, Fondazione Cariplo, Lundbeck, and Angelini Pharma
outside of the submitted work. SC has received reimbursement for travel and
accommodation expenses in relation to lectures delivered for the Association for
Child and Adolescent Central Health, the Canadian ADHD Alliance Resource, and
the British Association of Psychopharmacology, and has received honoraria from
MEDICE. All other authors declare no competing interests.
