---
reference_id: "PMID:18243212"
title: "Cardiovascular disease in familial hypercholesterolaemia: influence of low-density lipoprotein receptor mutation type and classic risk factors."
authors:
- Alonso R
- Mata N
- Castillo S
- Fuentes F
- Saenz P
- Muñiz O
- Galiana J
- Figueras R
- Diaz JL
- Gomez-Enterría P
- Mauri M
- Piedecausa M
- Irigoyen L
- Aguado R
- Mata P
- Spanish Familial Hypercholesterolaemia Group
journal: Atherosclerosis
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2007.12.024
keywords:
- Adult
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/complications, genetics"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II/complications, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Odds Ratio
- "Receptors, LDL/genetics"
- Risk Factors
- Sex Factors
- Spain
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiovascular disease in familial hypercholesterolaemia: influence of low-density lipoprotein receptor mutation type and classic risk factors.
**Authors:** Alonso R, Mata N, Castillo S, Fuentes F, Saenz P, Muñiz O, Galiana J, Figueras R, Diaz JL, Gomez-Enterría P, Mauri M, Piedecausa M, Irigoyen L, Aguado R, Mata P, Spanish Familial Hypercholesterolaemia Group
**Journal:** Atherosclerosis (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2007.12.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2007.12.024)

## Content

1. Atherosclerosis. 2008 Oct;200(2):315-21. doi: 
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2007.12.024. Epub 2008 Feb 20.

Cardiovascular disease in familial hypercholesterolaemia: influence of 
low-density lipoprotein receptor mutation type and classic risk factors.

Alonso R(1), Mata N, Castillo S, Fuentes F, Saenz P, Muñiz O, Galiana J, 
Figueras R, Diaz JL, Gomez-Enterría P, Mauri M, Piedecausa M, Irigoyen L, Aguado 
R, Mata P; Spanish Familial Hypercholesterolaemia Group.

Author information:
(1)Lipid Clinic, Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. ralonso@fjd.es

AIM: To determine the effect of the type of mutation in low-density lipoprotein 
receptor gene and the risk factors associated with the development of premature 
cardiovascular disease (PCVD) in a large cohort of heterozygous familial 
hypercholesterolemia (hFH) subjects with genetic diagnosis in Spain.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A cross-sectional study was conducted on 811 non-related FH 
patients (mean age 47.1+/-14 years, 383 males and 428 females) with a molecular 
defect in the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene from the Spanish 
National FH Register. Prevalence of PCVD was 21.9% (30.2% in males and 14.5% in 
women, P<0.001). Mean age of onset of cardiovascular event was 42.1 years in 
males and 50.8 years in females. Of those patients with PCVD, 59.5% of males and 
27% of females suffered a second cardiovascular (CV) event. In multivariate 
analysis male gender, age, tobacco consumption (ever), and total 
cholesterol/HDL-cholesterol (TC/HDL-C) ratio were significantly associated with 
PCVD. Two hundred and twenty different mutations were found with a large 
heterogeneity. Patients carrying null-mutations had significantly higher 
frequency of PCVD and recurrence of CV events. No relationship with Lp(a) levels 
and genotype of Apo E were found.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms the importance of identifying some classic risk 
factors such as smoking and TC/HDL-C ratio, and also the type of mutation in 
LDLR gene in order to implement early detection and intensive treatment for the 
prevention of cardiovascular disease in FH patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2007.12.024
PMID: 18243212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]