---
reference_id: "PMID:30806630"
title: "[Body dysmorphic disorder: Symptoms, prevalence, assessment and treatment]."
authors:
- Hardardottir H
- Hauksdottir A
- Bjornsson AS
journal: Laeknabladid
year: '2019'
doi: 10.17992/lbl.2019.03.222
keywords:
- Body Dissatisfaction
- "Body Dysmorphic Disorders/diagnosis, epidemiology, psychology, therapy"
- Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
- Cosmetic Techniques
- Humans
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prevalence
- Prognosis
- Risk Factors
- Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Body dysmorphic disorder: Symptoms, prevalence, assessment and treatment].
**Authors:** Hardardottir H, Hauksdottir A, Bjornsson AS
**Journal:** Laeknabladid (2019)
**DOI:** [10.17992/lbl.2019.03.222](https://doi.org/10.17992/lbl.2019.03.222)

## Content

1. Laeknabladid. 2019 Mar;105(3):125-131. doi: 10.17992/lbl.2019.03.222.

[Body dysmorphic disorder: Symptoms, prevalence, assessment and treatment].

[Article in Icelandic]

Hardardottir H(1), Hauksdottir A(1), Bjornsson AS(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Public Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland.
(2)Faculty of Psychology, University of Iceland.

Body dysmorphic disorder (BDD) is a relatively common disorder characterized by 
a preoccupation with nonexistent or slight defects in appearance. BDD usually 
begins during childhood or adolescence. The preoccupation with the perceived 
appearance defect typically occurs for many hours a day and is often followed by 
repetitive behaviours (for example mirror checking and skin picking). The 
weighted prevalence of BDD in a community sample is around 2%, but it is higher 
in clinical settings and in cosmetic and dermatological settings. BDD leads to 
significant distress and/or impairment at work or school and is highly comorbid 
with major depressive disorder, alcohol or substance use disorder, social 
anxi-ety disorder and obsessive compulsive disorder and often leads to suicidal 
ideation. Research suggests that cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and SSRI 
medication are most effective for BDD. However, cosmetic and dermatological 
treatments rarely improve BDD, and are often harmful. This review contains 
information on how to screen and diagnose BDD. Further research on BDD and 
effective treatment for this often imparing disorder is needed.

DOI: 10.17992/lbl.2019.03.222
PMID: 30806630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]