---
reference_id: "PMID:14630837"
title: Total knee arthroplasty in patients with diastrophic dysplasia.
authors:
- Helenius I
- Remes V
- Lohman M
- Tallroth K
- Poussa M
- Helenius M
- Paavilainen T
journal: J Bone Joint Surg Am
year: '2003'
doi: 10.2106/00004623-200311000-00006
keywords:
- "Arthroplasty, Replacement, Knee/methods"
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/surgery"
- Humans
- Knee Joint/surgery
- Recovery of Function
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Total knee arthroplasty in patients with diastrophic dysplasia.
**Authors:** Helenius I, Remes V, Lohman M, Tallroth K, Poussa M, Helenius M, Paavilainen T
**Journal:** J Bone Joint Surg Am (2003)
**DOI:** [10.2106/00004623-200311000-00006](https://doi.org/10.2106/00004623-200311000-00006)

## Content

1. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2003 Nov;85(11):2097-102. doi: 
10.2106/00004623-200311000-00006.

Total knee arthroplasty in patients with diastrophic dysplasia.

Helenius I(1), Remes V, Lohman M, Tallroth K, Poussa M, Helenius M, Paavilainen 
T.

Author information:
(1)ORTON Orthopaedic Hospital, Invalid Foundation, Helsinki, Finland. 
ilkka.helenius@helsinki.fi

BACKGROUND: Diastrophic dysplasia results in severe disproportionate short 
stature, generalized joint deformities, and early osteoarthritis. The knee joint 
often has an abnormal valgus position and is unstable, and degeneration of all 
joint compartments occurs, even during growth. The purpose of our study was to 
evaluate the clinical and radiographic results of total knee arthroplasty in a 
series of patients with diastrophic dysplasia.
METHODS: Between February 1992 and March 2000, twenty-one primary total knee 
arthroplasties were performed on fourteen consecutive patients with severe 
osteoarthritis due to diastrophic dysplasia. The patients were followed 
prospectively with clinical examinations, determination of the Hungerford knee 
scores, and radiographs. Preoperatively, ten knees had chronic dislocation of 
the patella. The mean duration of follow-up was 3.4 years.
RESULTS: The mean Hungerford knee pain and total scores improved from 5.8 points 
and 46 points preoperatively to 50 points and 83 points, respectively, at the 
final follow-up examination (p < 0.001 for both comparisons). Two knees required 
a distal femoral corrective osteotomy because of metaphyseal angulation. None of 
the total knee arthroplasties had to be revised during the follow-up period. Six 
complications were recorded.
CONCLUSIONS: Total knee arthroplasty substantially improved the function of 
patients with diastrophic dysplasia. Additional peripatellar procedures were 
commonly needed, and complications were frequent.

DOI: 10.2106/00004623-200311000-00006
PMID: 14630837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]