---
reference_id: "PMID:36444570"
title: "Prevalence and Epidemiological Profile of Ameloblastoma in India: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analyses."
authors:
- Thuckanaickenpalayam Ragunathan Y
- Keniyan Kumar S
- Janardhanam D
- Ravi A
- Santhanam V
- Ramdas MN
journal: Asian Pac J Cancer Prev
year: '2022'
doi: 10.31557/APJCP.2022.23.11.3601
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Female
- Ameloblastoma/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- India/epidemiology
- Odontogenic Tumors
- Genotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and Epidemiological Profile of Ameloblastoma in India: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analyses.
**Authors:** Thuckanaickenpalayam Ragunathan Y, Keniyan Kumar S, Janardhanam D, Ravi A, Santhanam V, Ramdas MN
**Journal:** Asian Pac J Cancer Prev (2022)
**DOI:** [10.31557/APJCP.2022.23.11.3601](https://doi.org/10.31557/APJCP.2022.23.11.3601)

## Content

1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2022 Nov 1;23(11):3601-3610. doi: 
10.31557/APJCP.2022.23.11.3601.

Prevalence and Epidemiological Profile of Ameloblastoma in India: A Systematic 
Review and Meta-Analyses.

Thuckanaickenpalayam Ragunathan Y(1), Keniyan Kumar S(2), Janardhanam D(1), Ravi 
A(3), Santhanam V(4), Ramdas MN(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology, Vivekanandha Dental College 
for Women, Tamilnadu, India.
(2)Department of Oral & Maxillofacial Pathology, KSR Institute of Dental Science 
and Research, Tamilnadu-637215, India.
(3)Department of Oral & Maxillofacial Pathology, SRM Kattankulathur Dental 
College and Hospital, Chennai, India.
(4)Department of Oral & Maxillofacial Pathology, Indira Gandhi Institute of 
Dental Sciences, Sri Balaji Vidyapeeth University, Pondicherry, India.
(5)Department of Oral & Maxillofacial Pathology, Rajah Muthiah Dental College & 
Hospital, Annamalai University, Tamil Nadu, India.

INTRODUCTION: Ameloblastoma is regarded as the second most prevalent odontogenic 
tumor in the light of its prevalence, clinical characteristics, greater 
incidence of tumor recurrence, and therapeutic challenges. The aim of this 
systematic review was to establish the prevalence of ameloblastoma in the Indian 
subcontinent and to establish a national epidemiologic profile for these 
lesions.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A systematic review was undertaken based on the PRISMA 
guidelines in search of epidemiologic studies concerning odontogenic tumors and 
ameloblastoma that are listed by PubMed, EBSCO, and Google Scholar embracing the 
period from January 2010 to December 2021, to evaluate the prevalence rate in 
India. A total of 277 publications were retrieved, of which 27 articles were 
selected, based on the World Health Organization classification of odontogenic 
tumors.
RESULTS: The affected individuals were on average in the third decade of life, 
with a higher male predominance. The majority of the tumors were multilocular 
radiolucencies in the posterior mandible, with follicular and plexiform 
histopathological features. The most common type of malignant lesion is 
ameloblastic carcinoma. Over 60% of follicular ameloblastoma recurred more 
frequently than the other types of ameloblastoma.The random effect model shows 
overall point estimate of 4.83 with 95% confidence interval (4.44 -5.26).
CONCLUSION: The systematic study indicates a slight male predisposition to 
ameloblastoma, with a peak incidence in the third decade of life and the 
mandible as the preferred anatomical site. The solid/multicystic ameloblastoma 
is the most prevalent histopathologic pattern. More epidemiological research on 
the prevalence rate of ameloblastoma is required, particularly in India, in an 
effort to accurately determine the national epidemiological profile of 
ameloblastoma.

DOI: 10.31557/APJCP.2022.23.11.3601
PMCID: PMC9930951
PMID: 36444570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.