---
reference_id: PMID:28679403
title: "Identification and in silico characterization of p.G380R substitution in FGFR3, associated with achondroplasia in a non-consanguineous Pakistani family."
authors:
- Ajmal M
- Mir A
- Shoaib M
- Malik SA
- Nasir M
journal: Diagn Pathol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13000-017-0642-3
keywords:
- "Achondroplasia/diagnosis, genetics"
- Amino Acid Sequence/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Testing/methods
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- Pakistan
- Pedigree
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/deficiency, genetics"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- Thanatophoric Dysplasia/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification and in silico characterization of p.G380R substitution in FGFR3, associated with achondroplasia in a non-consanguineous Pakistani family.
**Authors:** Ajmal M, Mir A, Shoaib M, Malik SA, Nasir M
**Journal:** Diagn Pathol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13000-017-0642-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13000-017-0642-3)

## Content

1. Diagn Pathol. 2017 Jul 5;12(1):47. doi: 10.1186/s13000-017-0642-3.

Identification and in silico characterization of p.G380R substitution in FGFR3, 
associated with achondroplasia in a non-consanguineous Pakistani family.

Ajmal M(1), Mir A(2), Shoaib M(3), Malik SA(4), Nasir M(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Genetic Engineering, 24-Mauve area, G-9/1, 
Islamabad, 44000, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, International Islamic University, Islamabad, 
Pakistan.
(3)KRL General Hospital, Orthopedic Department, 24-Mauve area, G-9/1, Islamabad, 
44000, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, 44000, 
Pakistan.
(5)Institute of Biomedical and Genetic Engineering, 24-Mauve area, G-9/1, 
Islamabad, 44000, Pakistan. nasirmalik_soonvalley@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: The dimerization efficiency of FGFR3 transmembrane domain plays a 
critical role in the formation of a normal skeleton through the negative 
regulation of bone development. Recently, gain-of-function mutations in the 
transmembrane domain of FGFR3 has been described associated with an aberrant 
negative regulation, leading to the development of achondroplasia-group 
disorders, including achondroplasia (ACH), hypochondroplasia (HCH) and 
thanatophoric dysplasia (TD). Here, we describe a non-consanguineous Pakistani 
family with achondroplasia to explain hereditary basis of the disease.
METHODS: PCR-based linkage analysis using microsatellite markers was employed to 
localize the disease gene. Gene specific intronic primers were used to amplify 
the genomic DNA from all affected as well as phenotypically healthy individuals. 
Amplified PCR products were then subjected to Sanger sequencing and RFLP 
analysis to identify a potentially pathogenic mutation. The impact of identified 
mutation on FGFR3 protein's structure and stability was highlighted through 
different bioinformatics tools.
RESULTS: Genetic screening of the family revealed a previously reported 
heterozygous c.1138 G > A (p.G380R) mutation in the coding exon 8 of FGFR3 gene. 
Identified genetic variation was confirmed in all affected individuals while 
healthy individuals and controls were found genotypically normal. The results 
were further validated by RFLP analysis as c.1138 G > A substitution generates a 
unique recognition site for SfcI endonuclease. Following SfcI digestion, the 
electrophoretic pattern of three bands/DNA fragments for each patient is 
indicative of heterozygous status of the disease allele. In silico studies of 
the mutant FGFR3 protein predicted to adversely affect the stability of FGFR3 
protein.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutation in the transmembrane domain may adversely affect the 
dimerization efficiency and overall stability of the FGFR3, leading to a 
constitutively active protein. As a result, an uncontrolled intracellular 
signaling or negative bone growth regulation leads to achondroplasia. Our 
findings support the fact that p.G380R is a common mutation among diverse 
population of the world and like other countries, can be used as a molecular 
diagnosis marker for achondroplasia in Pakistan.

DOI: 10.1186/s13000-017-0642-3
PMCID: PMC5499044
PMID: 28679403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
Advance Studies and Research Board (AS&RB), Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, 
Pakistan (Ref. No. QAU/AS&RB/S-19/Meeting-305/16) and the Ethical Committee of 
Institute of Biomedical and Genetic Engineering Islamabad, Pakistan (Ref. No. 
IBGE/IEC/18/01/16) both have reviewed and approved the study. The study conforms 
to the principles of the declaration of Helsinki. Informed written consent from 
participants, in the case of children from their parents, was obtained on 
institutional consent form. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Written informed consent 
for publication of their clinical details and/or clinical images was obtained 
from the patient/parents of the patients who were minors. Copies of the consent 
forms are available for review by the Editor of this journal. COMPETING 
INTERESTS: The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.