---
reference_id: "PMID:30559420"
title: Effect of an intravitreal antisense oligonucleotide on vision in Leber congenital amaurosis due to a photoreceptor cilium defect.
authors:
- Cideciyan AV
- Jacobson SG
- Drack AV
- Ho AC
- Charng J
- Garafalo AV
- Roman AJ
- Sumaroka A
- Han IC
- Hochstedler MD
- Pfeifer WL
- Sohn EH
- Taiel M
- Schwartz MR
- Biasutto P
- Wit W
- Cheetham ME
- Adamson P
- Rodman DM
- Platenburg G
- Tome MD
- Balikova I
- Nerinckx F
- Zaeytijd J
- Van Cauwenbergh C
- Leroy BP
- Russell SR
journal: Nat Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-018-0295-0
keywords:
- Adult
- Alleles
- "Antigens, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- "Cilia/drug effects, pathology"
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- Female
- Humans
- Intravitreal Injections
- "Leber Congenital Amaurosis/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Male
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Photoreceptor Cells, Vertebrate/pathology"
- "Vision, Ocular"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of an intravitreal antisense oligonucleotide on vision in Leber congenital amaurosis due to a photoreceptor cilium defect.
**Authors:** Cideciyan AV, Jacobson SG, Drack AV, Ho AC, Charng J, Garafalo AV, Roman AJ, Sumaroka A, Han IC, Hochstedler MD, Pfeifer WL, Sohn EH, Taiel M, Schwartz MR, Biasutto P, Wit W, Cheetham ME, Adamson P, Rodman DM, Platenburg G, Tome MD, Balikova I, Nerinckx F, Zaeytijd J, Van Cauwenbergh C, Leroy BP, Russell SR
**Journal:** Nat Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-018-0295-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-018-0295-0)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2019 Feb;25(2):225-228. doi: 10.1038/s41591-018-0295-0. Epub 2018 Dec
 17.

Effect of an intravitreal antisense oligonucleotide on vision in Leber 
congenital amaurosis due to a photoreceptor cilium defect.

Cideciyan AV(1), Jacobson SG(2), Drack AV(3), Ho AC(4), Charng J(5), Garafalo 
AV(5), Roman AJ(5), Sumaroka A(5), Han IC(3), Hochstedler MD(3), Pfeifer WL(3), 
Sohn EH(3), Taiel M(6), Schwartz MR(6), Biasutto P(6), Wit W(6), Cheetham ME(7), 
Adamson P(6)(7), Rodman DM(6), Platenburg G(6), Tome MD(6), Balikova I(8), 
Nerinckx F(8), Zaeytijd J(8), Van Cauwenbergh C(8), Leroy BP(8), Russell SR(3).

Author information:
(1)Scheie Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
cideciya@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(2)Scheie Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
jacobsos@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Carver College of Medicine, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(4)Wills Eye Hospital, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Scheie Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)ProQR Therapeutics, Leiden, the Netherlands.
(7)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, UK.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, 
Ghent, Belgium.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2019 Feb;25(2):198-199. doi: 10.1038/s41591-019-0346-1.

Photoreceptor ciliopathies constitute the most common molecular mechanism of the 
childhood blindness Leber congenital amaurosis. Ten patients with Leber 
congenital amaurosis carrying the c.2991+1655A>G allele in the ciliopathy gene 
centrosomal protein 290 (CEP290) were treated (ClinicalTrials.gov no. 
NCT03140969 ) with intravitreal injections of an antisense oligonucleotide to 
restore correct splicing. There were no serious adverse events, and vision 
improved at 3 months. The visual acuity of one exceptional responder improved 
from light perception to 20/400.

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-018-0295-0
PMID: 30559420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]