---
reference_id: "PMID:9577009"
title: "Symptomatic treatment of neurolathyrism with tolperisone HCL (Mydocalm): a randomized double blind and placebo controlled drug trial."
authors:
- Melka A
- Tekle-Haimanot R
- Lambien F
journal: Ethiop Med J
year: '1997'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Muscle Relaxants, Central/therapeutic use"
- "Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- Plant Poisoning/complications
- Tolperisone/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
- Vitamin B Complex/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Symptomatic treatment of neurolathyrism with tolperisone HCL (Mydocalm): a randomized double blind and placebo controlled drug trial.
**Authors:** Melka A, Tekle-Haimanot R, Lambien F
**Journal:** Ethiop Med J (1997)

## Content

1. Ethiop Med J. 1997 Apr;35(2):77-91.

Symptomatic treatment of neurolathyrism with tolperisone HCL (Mydocalm): a 
randomized double blind and placebo controlled drug trial.

Melka A(1), Tekle-Haimanot R, Lambien F.

Author information:
(1)Addis Ababa University, Medical Faculty, Department of Internal Medicine.

The efficacy and safety of oral Tolperisone HCL was evaluated in double blind, 
placebo-controlled, randomized trial in 72 patients with neurolathyrism in 
stages I, II, and III of the disease at Kolla Duba Health Centre of Dembia 
District of North Gondar between January and April 1995. Taken orally daily for 
12 weeks, tolperisone HCL (Mydocalm) in a dose of 150 milligrams (mgs) twice 
daily significantly improved subjective complaints such as muscle cramps, 
heaviness of the legs, startle attacks, flexor spasms and repeated falls. An 
overall subjective improvement was observed in 75% of the patients on 
tolperisone HCL and 39% of the placebo group (P = 0.002). When objectively 
assessed spastic muscle tone in the abductors, stiffness of Achilles and 
spontaneous ankle clonus were significantly reduced in tolperisone HCL group (P 
values = 0.001, 0.04, and 0.0001, respectively). Walking ability and speed of 
walking was also significantly improved. The drug is most effective in relieving 
symptoms of stage I and stage II disease. Some adverse effects like muscle pain, 
generalized body weakness and dizziness were recorded in patients taking the 
drug but all were minor and self limited, none requiring discontinuation of 
treatment. It is concluded that tolperisone is a well tolerated and efficacious 
drug for symptomatic treatment of neurolathyrism.

PMID: 9577009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]