---
reference_id: "PMID:16439621"
title: Germline mutations in genes within the MAPK pathway cause cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome.
authors:
- Rodriguez-Viciana P
- Tetsu O
- Tidyman WE
- Estep AL
- Conger BA
- Cruz MS
- McCormick F
- Rauen KA
journal: Science
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1126/science.1124642
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Germline mutations in genes within the MAPK pathway cause cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome.
**Authors:** Rodriguez-Viciana P, Tetsu O, Tidyman WE, Estep AL, Conger BA, Cruz MS, McCormick F, Rauen KA
**Journal:** Science (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1124642](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1124642)

## Content

1. Science. 2006 Mar 3;311(5765):1287-90. doi: 10.1126/science.1124642. Epub 2006
 Jan 26.

Germline mutations in genes within the MAPK pathway cause cardio-facio-cutaneous 
syndrome.

Rodriguez-Viciana P(1), Tetsu O, Tidyman WE, Estep AL, Conger BA, Cruz MS, 
McCormick F, Rauen KA.

Author information:
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center and Cancer Research Institute, University of 
California, San Francisco, CA 94115, USA.

Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome is a sporadic developmental disorder 
involving characteristic craniofacial features, cardiac defects, ectodermal 
abnormalities, and developmental delay. We demonstrate that heterogeneous de 
novo missense mutations in three genes within the mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAPK) pathway cause CFC syndrome. The majority of cases (18 out of 23) 
are caused by mutations in BRAF, a gene frequently mutated in cancer. Of the 11 
mutations identified, two result in amino acid substitutions that occur in 
tumors, but most are unique and suggest previously unknown mechanisms of B-Raf 
activation. Furthermore, three of five individuals without BRAF mutations had 
missense mutations in either MEK1 or MEK2, downstream effectors of B-Raf. Our 
findings highlight the involvement of the MAPK pathway in human development and 
will provide a molecular diagnosis of CFC syndrome.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1124642
PMID: 16439621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]