---
reference_id: "PMID:16127453"
title: "IPS-1, an adaptor triggering RIG-I- and Mda5-mediated type I interferon induction."
authors:
- Kawai T
- Takahashi K
- Sato S
- Coban C
- Kumar H
- Kato H
- Ishii KJ
- Takeuchi O
- Akira S
journal: Nat Immunol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1038/ni1243
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IPS-1, an adaptor triggering RIG-I- and Mda5-mediated type I interferon induction.
**Authors:** Kawai T, Takahashi K, Sato S, Coban C, Kumar H, Kato H, Ishii KJ, Takeuchi O, Akira S
**Journal:** Nat Immunol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ni1243](https://doi.org/10.1038/ni1243)

## Content

1. Nat Immunol. 2005 Oct;6(10):981-8. doi: 10.1038/ni1243. Epub 2005 Aug 28.

IPS-1, an adaptor triggering RIG-I- and Mda5-mediated type I interferon 
induction.

Kawai T(1), Takahashi K, Sato S, Coban C, Kumar H, Kato H, Ishii KJ, Takeuchi O, 
Akira S.

Author information:
(1)Exploratory Research for Advanced Technology, Japan Science and Technology 
Agency.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2005 Nov;6(11):1074-6. doi: 10.1038/ni1105-1074.

Type I interferons are central mediators for antiviral responses. Using 
high-throughput functional screening of interferon inducers, we have identified 
here a molecule we call interferon-beta promoter stimulator 1 (IPS-1). 
Overexpression of IPS-1 induced type I interferon and interferon-inducible genes 
through activation of IRF3, IRF7 and NF-kappaB transcription factors. TBK1 and 
IKKi protein kinases were required for the IPS-1-mediated interferon induction. 
IPS-1 contained an N-terminal CARD-like structure that mediated interaction with 
the CARD of RIG-I and Mda5, which are cytoplasmic RNA helicases that sense viral 
infection. 'Knockdown' of IPS-1 by small interfering RNA blocked interferon 
induction by virus infection. Thus, IPS-1 is an adaptor involved in RIG-I- and 
Mda5-mediated antiviral immune responses.

DOI: 10.1038/ni1243
PMID: 16127453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]