---
reference_id: "PMID:9127294"
title: Glomerular ultrastructural findings similar to hereditary nephritis in 4 English cocker spaniels.
authors:
- Lees GE
- Wilson PD
- Helman RG
- Homco LD
- Frey MS
journal: J Vet Intern Med
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1111/j.1939-1676.1997.tb00077.x
keywords:
- Animals
- Basement Membrane/ultrastructure
- Capillaries/ultrastructure
- "Dog Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Dogs
- Female
- "Kidney Glomerulus/blood supply, ultrastructure"
- Male
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics, pathology, veterinary"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glomerular ultrastructural findings similar to hereditary nephritis in 4 English cocker spaniels.
**Authors:** Lees GE, Wilson PD, Helman RG, Homco LD, Frey MS
**Journal:** J Vet Intern Med (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1939-1676.1997.tb00077.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1939-1676.1997.tb00077.x)

## Content

1. J Vet Intern Med. 1997 Mar-Apr;11(2):80-5. doi:
10.1111/j.1939-1676.1997.tb00077.x.

Glomerular ultrastructural findings similar to hereditary nephritis in 4 English
cocker spaniels.

Lees GE(1), Wilson PD, Helman RG, Homco LD, Frey MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Small Animal Medicine, Texas Veterinary Medical Center, Texas
A&M University, College Station 77843-4474, USA.

Renal disease affecting 3 male and 1 female English Cocker Spaniels was studied.
Clinical features of the disease included proteinuria and progressive
deterioration of renal function. Dogs were 11 to 27 months old when euthanized
because of severe chronic renal failure. Grossly, the renal cortices were thin.
Light microscopic evaluation revealed diffuse glomerular disease characterized
by mesangial thickening, glomerular fibrosis, periglomerular fibrosis, and
glomerular obsolescence. Based on these clinical and pathologic features,
familial nephropathy of English Cocker Spaniels was suspected despite the fact
that the individual dogs were not closely related. On transmission electron
microscopy, a distinctive ultrastructural lesion was observed in the glomerular
basement membranes (GBM) of all dogs. The GBM exhibited extensive thickening,
multilaminar splitting, and fragmentation. Electron dense deposits, suggestive
of immunocomplex glomerular disease, were notably absent. A similar
ultrastructural GBM lesion is found in human beings and Samoyeds with hereditary
nephritis, diseases caused by mutations in the type IV collagen genes. Familial
nephropathy in English Cocker Spaniels may be a form of hereditary nephritis
caused by a mutation in one of the collagen IV genes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1939-1676.1997.tb00077.x
PMID: 9127294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
