---
reference_id: "PMID:20301688"
title: Tyrosinemia Type I.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Ficicioglu C
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tyrosinemia Type I.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Ficicioglu C

## Content

1. Tyrosinemia Type I.

Ficicioglu C(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2006 Jul 24 [updated 2025 Nov 20].

Author information:
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia;, Division of Human Genetics and
Metabolism, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Untreated tyrosinemia type I usually presents either
in young infants with severe liver involvement or later in the first year with
liver dysfunction and renal tubular dysfunction associated with growth failure
and rickets. Untreated children may have repeated, often unrecognized,
neurologic crises lasting one to seven days that can include change in mental
status, abdominal pain, peripheral neuropathy, and/or respiratory failure
requiring mechanical ventilation. Death in the untreated child usually occurs
before age ten years, typically from liver failure, neurologic crisis, or
hepatocellular carcinoma. Newborn screening / early diagnosis and combined
treatment with nitisinone and a low-tyrosine diet has resulted in a greater than
90% survival rate, normal growth, improved liver function, prevention of
cirrhosis, correction of renal tubular acidosis, and improvement in secondary
rickets.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of tyrosinemia type I can be established in a
proband by identification of increased succinylacetone concentration in the
blood and urine or biallelic pathogenic variants in FAH by molecular genetic
testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Nitisinone; low-phenylalanine, low-tyrosine
diet; liver transplantation for children with severe liver failure at
presentation and failure to respond to nitisinone therapy or malignant changes
in hepatic tissue. Supportive care: Additional treatment (especially for those
not receiving nitisinone) includes: antihypertensive medications and/or referral
to nephrologist for management of hypertension; correction of metabolic
acidosis, restoring calcium and phosphate balance, and 25-hydroxyvitamin D
supplementation for osteoporosis/rickets; management of liver disease per
hepatologist; treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma per oncologist/hepatologist;
nutrition support per metabolic dietician; frequent feeds and avoidance of
fasting to prevent hypoglycemia; developmental services and educational support
as needed; provide written protocols and letters for emergency management;
transitional care plan. Acute inpatient treatment for neurologic crises includes
intravenous glucose, antihypertensives, analgesics, correction of hyponatremia,
and prompt nitisinone therapy, with crises prevented by strict long-term
adherence and monitoring. Surveillance: Plasma concentrations of methionine,
phenylalanine, and tyrosine, blood and urine succinylacetone concentrations,
blood nitisinone concentration, complete blood count, serum alpha-fetoprotein,
routine coagulation tests, liver enzymes, and bilirubin concentrations should be
measured per age-related recommendations. Liver imaging annually or as
clinically indicated to assess for hepatocellular carcinoma. Blood urea nitrogen
and creatinine, urine phosphate, calcium, and protein-to-creatinine ratio, and
kidney ultrasound as clinically indicated to evaluate for kidney disease. Wrist
radiographs as clinically indicated to evaluate for rickets. Developmental
assessment at each visit or as clinically indicated. Neuropsychological testing
should be done before school age and then as indicated. Assess for
ophthalmologic manifestations at each visit with slit lamp examination if
symptomatic. Psychosocial assessment at each visit or as clinically indicated.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Excessive dietary protein or protein malnutrition
inducing catabolic state; prolonged fasting; catabolic illness (intercurrent
infection, brief febrile illness post vaccination); inadequate caloric provision
during other stressors, especially when fasting is involved (surgery or
procedure requiring fasting/anesthesia). Evaluation of relatives at risk:
Testing of at-risk sibs of any age is warranted to allow for early diagnosis and
prompt initiation of treatment. Prenatal testing (if the familial FAH pathogenic
variants are known) may be performed via amniocentesis or chorionic villus
sampling. If prenatal testing was not performed, then – in parallel with NBS –
urine and blood succinylacetone should be analyzed as soon as possible after
birth to enable the earliest possible diagnosis and initiation of therapy (FAH
molecular genetic testing can be performed if the familial pathogenic variants
are known). Pregnancy management: Limited data exist on the use of nitisinone
during human pregnancy; however, at least two women have given birth to healthy
infants while receiving therapeutic doses of nitisinone.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Tyrosinemia type I is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an FAH pathogenic
variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of
being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance
of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the FAH pathogenic variants have
been identified in an affected family member, molecular genetic carrier testing
for at-risk relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing for
tyrosinemia type I are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301688
