---
reference_id: PMID:28627003
title: Sonographic screening for Wilms tumor in children with CLOVES syndrome.
authors:
- Peterman CM
- Fevurly RD
- Alomari AI
- Trenor CC 3rd
- Adams DM
- Vadeboncoeur S
- Liang MG
- Greene AK
- Mulliken JB
- Fishman SJ
journal: Pediatr Blood Cancer
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/pbc.26684
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sonographic screening for Wilms tumor in children with CLOVES syndrome.
**Authors:** Peterman CM, Fevurly RD, Alomari AI, Trenor CC 3rd, Adams DM, Vadeboncoeur S, Liang MG, Greene AK, Mulliken JB, Fishman SJ
**Journal:** Pediatr Blood Cancer (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pbc.26684](https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.26684)

## Content

1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2017 Dec;64(12). doi: 10.1002/pbc.26684. Epub 2017 Jun
19.

Sonographic screening for Wilms tumor in children with CLOVES syndrome.

Peterman CM(1)(2)(3), Fevurly RD(3)(4)(5), Alomari AI(3)(6), Trenor CC 
3rd(3)(7), Adams DM(3)(7), Vadeboncoeur S(2)(3), Liang MG(2)(3), Greene 
AK(3)(8), Mulliken JB(3)(8), Fishman SJ(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Vascular Anomalies Center, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Surgery and Trauma, Eastern Maine Medical Center, Bangor, 
Maine.
(5)Department of Surgery, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(6)Division of Vascular and Interventional Radiology, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(7)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(8)Department of Plastic and Oral Surgery, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: CLOVES syndrome is associated with somatic mosaic PIK3CA mutations 
and characterized by congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malformations, 
epidermal nevi, and skeletal anomalies. Wilms tumor (WT) is a malignant 
embryonal renal neoplasm associated with hemihypertrophy and certain overgrowth 
disorders. After identifying WT in a child with CLOVES, we questioned whether 
ultrasonographic screening was necessary in these patients.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed patients with CLOVES syndrome in our 
Vascular Anomalies Center at Boston Children's Hospital between 1998 and 2016 to 
identify those who developed WT. A PubMed literature search was also conducted 
to find other patients with both conditions.
RESULTS: A total of 122 patients with CLOVES syndrome were found in our database 
(mean age 7.7 years, range 0-53 years). Four patients developed WT; all were 
diagnosed by 2 years of age. The incidence of WT in our CLOVES patient 
population (3.3%) was significantly greater than the incidence of WT in the 
general population (1/10,000) (P < 0.001). Four additional patients with WT and 
CLOVES syndrome were identified in our literature review.
CONCLUSION: Patients with CLOVES syndrome have an increased risk of WT. Given 
the benefits of early detection and treatment, children with CLOVES syndrome 
should be considered for quarterly abdominal ultrasonography until age 7 years. 
Screening may be most beneficial for patients under 3 years of age.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.26684
PMID: 28627003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]