---
reference_id: "PMID:29684080"
title: Unexpected cancer-predisposition gene variants in Cowden syndrome and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome patients without underlying germline PTEN mutations.
authors:
- Yehia L
- Ni Y
- Sesock K
- Niazi F
- Fletcher B
- Chen HJL
- LaFramboise T
- Eng C
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007352
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Glycosylases/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- "Genes, BRCA1"
- "Genes, BRCA2"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Variation
- Germ-Line Mutation
- "Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple/genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasms, Multiple Primary/genetics"
- Oncogenes
- PTEN Phosphohydrolase/genetics
- Prospective Studies
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics
- Tuberous Sclerosis Complex 2 Protein
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics
- Exome Sequencing
- Xeroderma Pigmentosum Group D Protein/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unexpected cancer-predisposition gene variants in Cowden syndrome and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome patients without underlying germline PTEN mutations.
**Authors:** Yehia L, Ni Y, Sesock K, Niazi F, Fletcher B, Chen HJL, LaFramboise T, Eng C
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1007352](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1007352)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2018 Apr 23;14(4):e1007352. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007352. 
eCollection 2018 Apr.

Unexpected cancer-predisposition gene variants in Cowden syndrome and 
Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome patients without underlying germline PTEN 
mutations.

Yehia L(1)(2), Ni Y(1)(3), Sesock K(1), Niazi F(1), Fletcher B(1), Chen HJL(1), 
LaFramboise T(1)(4)(5), Eng C(1)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, 
United States of America.
(3)Center for Clinical Genomics, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, United 
States of America.
(4)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.
(5)Germline High Risk Focus Group, CASE Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case 
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.
(6)Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of 
America.

Patients with heritable cancer syndromes characterized by germline PTEN 
mutations (termed PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome, PHTS) benefit from PTEN-enabled 
cancer risk assessment and clinical management. PTEN-wildtype patients (~50%) 
remain at increased risk of developing certain cancers. Existence of germline 
mutations in other known cancer susceptibility genes has not been explored in 
these patients, with implications for different medical management. We conducted 
a 4-year multicenter prospective study of incident patients with features of 
Cowden/Cowden-like (CS/CS-like) and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndromes (BRRS) 
without PTEN mutations. Exome sequencing and targeted analysis were performed 
including 59 clinically actionable genes from the American College of Medical 
Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) and 24 additional genes associated with inherited 
cancer syndromes. Pathogenic or likely pathogenic cancer susceptibility gene 
alterations were found in 7 of the 87 (8%) CS/CS-like and BRRS patients and 
included MUTYH, RET, TSC2, BRCA1, BRCA2, ERCC2 and HRAS. We found classic 
phenotypes associated with the identified genes in 5 of the 7 (71.4%) patients. 
Variant positive patients were enriched for the presence of second malignant 
neoplasms compared to patients without identified variants (OR = 6.101, 95% CI 
1.143-35.98, p = 0.035). Germline variant spectrum and frequencies were compared 
to The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), including 6 apparently sporadic cancers 
associated with PHTS. With comparable overall prevalence of germline variants, 
the spectrum of mutated genes was different in our patients compared to TCGA. 
Intriguingly, we also found notable enrichment of variants of uncertain 
significance (VUS) in our patients (OR = 2.3, 95% CI 1.5-3.5, p = 0.0002). Our 
data suggest that only a small subset of PTEN-wildtype CS/CS-like and BRRS 
patients could be accounted for by germline variants in some of the known 
cancer-related genes. Thus, the existence of alterations in other and more 
likely non-classic cancer-associated genes is plausible, reflecting the 
complexity of these heterogeneous hereditary cancer syndromes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007352
PMCID: PMC5933810
PMID: 29684080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.