---
reference_id: "PMID:32127495"
title: "Fingolimod Rescues Demyelination in a Mouse Model of Krabbe's Disease."
authors:
- Béchet S
- "O'Sullivan SA"
- Yssel J
- Fagan SG
- Dev KK
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2346-19.2020
keywords:
- Animals
- Astrocytes/metabolism
- "Behavior, Animal"
- Demyelinating Diseases/drug therapy
- Female
- Fingolimod Hydrochloride/therapeutic use
- "Leukodystrophy, Globoid Cell/drug therapy, psychology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Neurologic Mutants"
- Microglia/metabolism
- Myelin Sheath/metabolism
- Neurofilament Proteins/metabolism
- Neurons/metabolism
- Phosphorylation
- Proprotein Convertases/drug effects
- Purkinje Cells/metabolism
- Serine Endopeptidases/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fingolimod Rescues Demyelination in a Mouse Model of Krabbe's Disease.
**Authors:** Béchet S, O'Sullivan SA, Yssel J, Fagan SG, Dev KK
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2346-19.2020](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2346-19.2020)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2020 Apr 8;40(15):3104-3118. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2346-19.2020. 
Epub 2020 Mar 3.

Fingolimod Rescues Demyelination in a Mouse Model of Krabbe's Disease.

Béchet S(1), O'Sullivan SA(1), Yssel J(1), Fagan SG(1), Dev KK(2).

Author information:
(1)Drug Development, School of Medicine, Trinity College Dublin D02 R590, 
Ireland.
(2)Drug Development, School of Medicine, Trinity College Dublin D02 R590, 
Ireland devk@tcd.ie.

Krabbe's disease is an infantile neurodegenerative disease, which is affected by 
mutations in the lysosomal enzyme galactocerebrosidase, leading to the 
accumulation of its metabolite psychosine. We have shown previously that the S1P 
receptor agonist fingolimod (FTY720) attenuates psychosine-induced glial cell 
death and demyelination both in vitro and ex vivo models. These data, together 
with a lack of therapies for Krabbe's disease, prompted the current preclinical 
study examining the effects of fingolimod in twitcher mice, a murine model of 
Krabbe's disease. Twitcher mice, both male and female, carrying a natural 
mutation in the galc gene were given fingolimod via drinking water (1 mg/kg/d). 
The direct impact of fingolimod administration was assessed via histochemical 
and biochemical analysis using markers of myelin, astrocytes, microglia, 
neurons, globoid cells, and immune cells. The effects of fingolimod on twitching 
behavior and life span were also demonstrated. Our results show that treatment 
of twitcher mice with fingolimod significantly rescued myelin levels compared 
with vehicle-treated animals and also regulated astrocyte and microglial 
reactivity. Furthermore, nonphosphorylated neurofilament levels were decreased, 
indicating neuroprotective and neurorestorative processes. These protective 
effects of fingolimod on twitcher mice brain pathology was reflected by an 
increased life span of fingolimod-treated twitcher mice. These in vivo findings 
corroborate initial in vitro studies and highlight the potential use of S1P 
receptors as drug targets for treatment of Krabbe's disease.SIGNIFICANCE 
STATEMENT This study demonstrates that the administration of the therapy known 
as fingolimod in a mouse model of Krabbe's disease (namely, the twitcher mouse 
model) significantly rescues myelin levels. Further, the drug fingolimod also 
regulates the reactivity of glial cells, astrocytes and microglia, in this mouse 
model. These protective effects of fingolimod result in an increased life span 
of twitcher mice.

Copyright © 2020 Béchet et al.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2346-19.2020
PMCID: PMC7141882
PMID: 32127495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]