---
reference_id: "PMID:25690729"
title: "Evaluation of Implementation, Adaptation and Use of the Recently Proposed Urea Cycle Disorders Guidelines."
authors:
- Häberle J
- Huemer M
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/8904_2014_387
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of Implementation, Adaptation and Use of the Recently Proposed Urea Cycle Disorders Guidelines.
**Authors:** Häberle J, Huemer M
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/8904_2014_387](https://doi.org/10.1007/8904_2014_387)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2015;21:65-70. doi: 10.1007/8904_2014_387. Epub 2015 Feb 18.

Evaluation of Implementation, Adaptation and Use of the Recently Proposed Urea
Cycle Disorders Guidelines.

Häberle J(1), Huemer M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism, University Children's Hospital Zurich, 8032, Zürich,
Switzerland, Johannes.Haeberle@kispi.uzh.ch.

BACKGROUND: Implementation of guidelines and assessment of their adaptation is
not an extensively investigated process in the field of rare diseases. However,
whether targeted recipients are reached and willing and able to follow the
recommendations has significant impact on the efficacy of guidelines. In 2012, a
guideline for the management of urea cycle disorders (UCDs) has been published.
We evaluate the efficacy of implementation, adaptation, and use of the UCD
guidelines by applying different strategies.
METHODS: (i) Download statistics from online sources were recorded. (ii)
Facilities relevant for the implementation of the guidelines were assessed in
pediatric units in Germany and Austria. (iii) The guidelines were evaluated by
targeted recipients using the AGREE instrument. (iv) A regional networking-based
implementation process was evaluated.
RESULTS: (i) Download statistics revealed high access with an increase in
downloads over time. (ii) In 18% of hospitals ammonia testing was not available
24/7, and emergency drugs were often not available. (iii) Recipient criticism
expressed in the AGREE instrument focused on incomplete inclusion of patients'
perspectives. (iv) The implementation process improved the availability of
ammonia measurements and access to emergency medication, patient care processes,
and cooperation between nonspecialists and specialists.
CONCLUSION: Interest in the UCD guidelines is high and sustained, but more
precise targeting of the guidelines is advisable. Surprisingly, many hospitals
do not possess all facilities necessary to apply the guidelines. Regional
network and awareness campaigns result in the improvement of both facilities and
knowledge.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2014_387
PMCID: PMC4470941
PMID: 25690729
