---
reference_id: "PMID:35348993"
title: "Review of neuropsychological outcomes in isolated methylmalonic acidemia: recommendations for assessing impact of treatments."
authors:
- Waisbren SE
journal: Metab Brain Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s11011-022-00954-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review of neuropsychological outcomes in isolated methylmalonic acidemia: recommendations for assessing impact of treatments.
**Authors:** Waisbren SE
**Journal:** Metab Brain Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11011-022-00954-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11011-022-00954-1)

## Content

1. Metab Brain Dis. 2022 Jun;37(5):1317-1335. doi: 10.1007/s11011-022-00954-1.
Epub  2022 Mar 29.

Review of neuropsychological outcomes in isolated methylmalonic acidemia: 
recommendations for assessing impact of treatments.

Waisbren SE(1).

Author information:
(1)Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
susan.waisbren@childrens.harvard.edu.

Methylmalonic acidemia (MMA) due to methylmalonyl-CoA mutase deficiency (OMIM 
#251,000) is an autosomal recessive disorder of organic acid metabolism 
associated with life-threatening acute metabolic decompensations and significant 
neuropsychological deficits. "Isolated" MMA refers to the presence of excess 
methylmalonic acid without homocysteine elevation. Belonging to this class of 
disorders are those that involve complete deficiency (mut0) and partial 
deficiency (mut-) of the methylmalonyl-CoA mutase enzyme and other disorders 
causing excess methylmalonic acid excretion. These other disorders include 
enzymatic subtypes related to cobalamin A defect (cblA) (OMIM #25,110), 
cobalamin B defect (cblB) (OMIM #251,110) and related conditions. 
Neuropsychological attributes associated with isolated MMA have become more 
relevant as survival rates increased following improved diagnostic and treatment 
strategies. Children with this disorder still are at risk for developmental 
delay, cognitive difficulties and progressive declines in functioning. Mean IQ 
for all types apart from cblA defect enzymatic subtype is rarely above 85 and 
much lower for mut0 enzymatic subtype. Identifying psychological domains 
responsive to improvements in biochemical status is important. This review 
suggests that processing speed, working memory, language, attention, and quality 
of life may be sensitive to fluctuations in metabolite levels while IQ and motor 
skills may be less amenable to change. Due to slower developmental trajectories, 
Growth Scale Values, Projected Retained Ability Scores and other indices of 
change need to be incorporated into clinical trial study protocols. 
Neuropsychologists are uniquely qualified to provide a differentiated picture of 
cognitive, behavioral and emotional consequences of MMA and analyze benefits or 
shortcomings of novel treatments.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11011-022-00954-1
PMID: 35348993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]