---
reference_id: "PMID:11327248"
title: Neuropsychiatric manifestations and their clinical associations in southern Chinese patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Mok CC
- Lau CS
- Wong RW
journal: J Rheumatol
year: '2001'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Cerebrovascular Disorders/epidemiology
- Child
- China/epidemiology
- Cognition Disorders/epidemiology
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Humans
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/epidemiology"
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/epidemiology, psychology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prevalence
- Seizures/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropsychiatric manifestations and their clinical associations in southern Chinese patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Mok CC, Lau CS, Wong RW
**Journal:** J Rheumatol (2001)

## Content

1. J Rheumatol. 2001 Apr;28(4):766-71.

Neuropsychiatric manifestations and their clinical associations in southern
Chinese patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Mok CC(1), Lau CS, Wong RW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Tuen Mun Hospital, New Territories, Hong Kong, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the neuropsychiatric (NP) manifestations in a large cohort
of southern Chinese patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) according
to the new 1999 American College of Rheumatology (ACR) case definitions and
their clinical associations.
METHOD: Patients with SLE who were followed from 1984 to 2000 were
retrospectively reviewed. Patients with NP manifestations were ascertained and
classified by at least 2 rheumatologists, with the collaboration of neurologists
and psychiatrists. The association of NP manifestations with other clinical
features and autoantibodies was studied by statistical analysis.
RESULTS: Five hundred eighteen patients with SLE were studied. The female to
male ratio was 7.8 to 1 and the mean age of disease onset was 29.5 +/- 12.0
years (range 9-80). The mean duration of followup was 7.3 +/- 6.7 years (range
0.3-23.0). Ninety-six patients (19%) had 133 NP events and the mean number of
events per patient-year of followup was 0.035. In decreasing order of frequency.
these events were: seizure disorder (28%), cerebrovascular disease (19%), acute
confusional state (14%), psychosis (11%), myelopathy (8%), mood disorder (6%),
headache (4%), movement disorder (2%), cranial neuropathy (3%), demyelinating
syndrome (1.5%), anxiety disorder (1.5%), mononeuritis multiplex/mononeuropathy
(1.5%), aseptic meningitis (1%), and polyneuropathy (1%). Cognitive dysfunction
was not classified because of the lack of standard neuropsychological testing
for every patient. Univariate analysis revealed that NP-SLE was associated with
a positive lupus anticoagulant (LAC) (p = 0.001), a strongly positive IgG
anticardiolipin (aCL) (p = 0.01). leukopenia (p = 0.01), lymphopenia (p = 0.03),
thrombocytopenia (p = 0.03), and pulmonary involvement (p = 0.03). Multivariate
analysis showed that a strongly positive IgG aCL [RR 3.1 (1.3-7.7), p = 0.01]
and a history of cyclophosphamide treatment [RR 4.3 (2.1-9.0), p < 0.001] were
independently associated with NP manifestations in our cohort. Among the NP
features, cerebrovascular disorder was particularly associated with the presence
of LAC [OR 3.3 (1.4-8.0), p = 0.01] and a strongly positive IgG aCL [OR 3.1
(1.1-8.2), p = 0.031].
CONCLUSION: The point prevalence of overt NP manifestations in our cohort of
patients with SLE was 19%. This percentage was likely higher if subtle cognitive
dysfunction was included. Seizure and cerebrovascular disorders were the most
common NP features. The presence of antiphospholipid antibodies was
significantly associated with NP manifestations, especially cerebrovascular
disorders.

PMID: 11327248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
