---
reference_id: "PMID:32310539"
title: Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome.
authors:
- Nanagiri A
- Shabbir N
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome.
**Authors:** Nanagiri A, Shabbir N

## Content

1. Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome.

Nanagiri A, Shabbir N(1).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026 
Jan–.
2023 Apr 24.

Author information:
(1)Nassau University Medical Center

Lesch Nyhan syndrome is an inborn disorder caused by a deficiency of 
hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) enzyme, an enzyme of the 
purine salvage pathway. The enzyme is responsible for recycling purines by 
converting guanine and hypoxanthine into guanosine monophosphate and inosine 
monophosphate, respectively. Lack of the enzyme causes an increase in guanine 
and hypoxanthine, which eventually is converted into uric acid. HPRT deficiency 
results in a spectrum of clinical presentations depending on the severity of 
enzyme deficiency. With an enzyme activity of less than 1.5%, Lesch Nyhan falls 
towards the severe end of the spectrum. The characteristics defining the disease 
are hyperuricemia, neurodevelopmental abnormalities with global developmental 
delay, involuntary movements, and self-injurious behavior. Other less severe 
variants include HPRT related hyperuricemia, also known as Keeley–Seegmiller 
syndrome (enzyme activity 8% to 60%, and only hyperuricemia related symptoms), 
and hyperuricemia with neurological disability (enzyme activity 1.5 to 2% with 
hyperuricemia symptoms and neurological symptoms like dystonia, choreoathetosis, 
spasticity, intellectual disability).

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 32310539

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Apoorva Nanagiri declares no 
relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Nadeem 
Shabbir declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.