---
reference_id: "PMID:39655129"
title: "Human Metapneumovirus Associated With Acute Hemorrhagic Oedema of Infancy: A Case Report."
authors:
- Dhariwal K
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.73296
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human Metapneumovirus Associated With Acute Hemorrhagic Oedema of Infancy: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Dhariwal K
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.73296](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.73296)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Nov 8;16(11):e73296. doi: 10.7759/cureus.73296. eCollection 2024
Nov.

Human Metapneumovirus Associated With Acute Hemorrhagic Oedema of Infancy: A
Case Report.

Dhariwal K(1).

Author information:
(1)Paediatrics, NMC Specialty Hospital, Dubai, ARE.

Acute Haemorrhagic Oedema of Infancy (AHOI), also known as Acute Hemorrhagic
Edema of Infancy (AHEI), is characterized by purpuric skin lesions, edema, and
fever. It is classified as a form of cutaneous leukocytoclastic vasculitis.
Clinically, AHOI presents with targetoid, purplish spots on the face and limbs,
accompanied by the sudden onset of peripheral edema. AHOI is often associated
with infections, including rotavirus, cytomegalovirus (CMV), and pneumococcal
bacteremia. In this case, an eight-year-old male infant presented to the
emergency room with fever, cough, and a newly developed, non-blanching red
macular rash that spread across his face, neck, chest, abdomen, back, and legs,
gradually increasing in size over the course of illness. A complete blood count
revealed neutrophilia with a normal leukocyte count, and C-reactive protein
levels were elevated at 70 mg/L. Human metapneumovirus (hMPV) was detected in a
nasopharyngeal aspirate. Abdominal ultrasound showed moderate splenomegaly and
enterocolitis. This case highlights a rare association between AHOI and hMPV
infection, contributing to the understanding of hMPV as a potential infectious
trigger in AHOI pathophysiology.

Copyright © 2024, Dhariwal et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.73296
PMCID: PMC11625520
PMID: 39655129

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent for treatment and open
access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this study.
Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all
authors declare the following: Payment/services info: All authors have declared
that no financial support was received from any organization for the submitted
work. Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they have no
financial relationships at present or within the previous three years with any
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.
