---
reference_id: "PMID:10869432"
title: In vivo urea cycle flux distinguishes and correlates with phenotypic severity in disorders of the urea cycle.
authors:
- Lee B
- Yu H
- Jahoor F
- "O'Brien W"
- Beaudet AL
- Reeds P
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.140082197
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Ammonia/blood
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diet, Protein-Restricted"
- Female
- Glutamine/metabolism
- Humans
- Male
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/metabolism, therapy"
- Middle Aged
- Nitrogen Isotopes
- Proteins/metabolism
- Urea/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In vivo urea cycle flux distinguishes and correlates with phenotypic severity in disorders of the urea cycle.
**Authors:** Lee B, Yu H, Jahoor F, O'Brien W, Beaudet AL, Reeds P
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.140082197](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.140082197)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Jul 5;97(14):8021-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.140082197.

In vivo urea cycle flux distinguishes and correlates with phenotypic severity in
disorders of the urea cycle.

Lee B(1), Yu H, Jahoor F, O'Brien W, Beaudet AL, Reeds P.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Molecular and Human Genetics and Pediatrics and Children's
Nutrition Research Center, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. blee@bcm.tmc.edu

Urea cycle disorders are a group of inborn errors of hepatic metabolism that
result in often life-threatening hyperammonemia and hyperglutaminemia. Clinical
and laboratory diagnosis of partial deficiencies during asymptomatic periods is
difficult, and correlation of phenotypic severity with either genotype and/or in
vitro enzyme activity is often imprecise. We hypothesized that stable
isotopically determined in vivo rates of total body urea synthesis and urea
cycle-specific nitrogen flux would correlate with both phenotypic severity and
carrier status in patients with a variety of different enzymatic deficiencies of
the urea cycle. We studied control subjects, patients, and their relatives with
different enzymatic deficiencies affecting the urea cycle while consuming a low
protein diet. On a separate occasion the subjects either received a higher
protein intake or were treated with an alternative route medication sodium
phenylacetate/benzoate (Ucephan), or oral arginine supplementation. Total urea
synthesis from all nitrogen sources was determined from [(18)O]urea labeling,
and the utilization of peripheral nitrogen was estimated from the relative
isotopic enrichments of [(15)N]urea and [(15)N]glutamine during i.v.
co-infusions of [5-(amide)(15)N]glutamine and [(18)O]urea. The ratio of the
isotopic enrichments of (15)N-urea/(15)N-glutamine distinguished normal control
subjects (ratio = 0.42 +/- 0.06) from urea cycle patients with late (0.17 +/-
0.03) and neonatal (0.003 +/- 0.007) presentations irrespective of enzymatic
deficiency. This index of urea cycle activity also distinguished asymptomatic
heterozygous carriers of argininosuccinate synthetase deficiency (0. 22 +/-
0.03), argininosuccinate lyase deficiency (0.35 +/- 0.11), and partial ornithine
transcarbamylase deficiency (0.26 +/- 0.06) from normal controls. Administration
of Ucephan lowered, and arginine increased, urea synthesis to the degree
predicted from their respective rates of metabolism. The
(15)N-urea/(15)N-glutamine ratio is a sensitive index of in vivo urea cycle
activity and correlates with clinical severity. Urea synthesis is altered by
alternative route medications and arginine supplementation to the degree that is
to be expected from theory. This stable isotope protocol provides a sensitive
tool for evaluating the efficacy of therapeutic modalities and acts as an aid to
the diagnosis and management of urea cycle patients.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.140082197
PMCID: PMC16663
PMID: 10869432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
