---
reference_id: "PMID:17594714"
title: Ki-67 and coagulative tumor necrosis are independent predictors of poor outcome for patients with clear cell renal cell carcinoma and not surrogates for each other.
authors:
- Tollefson MK
- Thompson RH
- Sheinin Y
- Lohse CM
- Cheville JC
- Leibovich BC
- Kwon ED
journal: Cancer
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.22840
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma, Clear Cell/metabolism, pathology, surgery"
- Aged
- "Carcinoma, Renal Cell/metabolism, pathology, surgery"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Ki-67 Antigen/analysis
- "Kidney Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology, surgery"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Necrosis
- "Nephrectomy/methods, statistics & numerical data"
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prognosis
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Survival Analysis
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ki-67 and coagulative tumor necrosis are independent predictors of poor outcome for patients with clear cell renal cell carcinoma and not surrogates for each other.
**Authors:** Tollefson MK, Thompson RH, Sheinin Y, Lohse CM, Cheville JC, Leibovich BC, Kwon ED
**Journal:** Cancer (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.22840](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.22840)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2007 Aug 15;110(4):783-90. doi: 10.1002/cncr.22840.

Ki-67 and coagulative tumor necrosis are independent predictors of poor outcome 
for patients with clear cell renal cell carcinoma and not surrogates for each 
other.

Tollefson MK(1), Thompson RH, Sheinin Y, Lohse CM, Cheville JC, Leibovich BC, 
Kwon ED.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic and Mayo Medical School, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA.

BACKGROUND: Ki-67 is a cell proliferation protein associated with aggressive 
clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). A recent report suggests that Ki-67 may 
represent a surrogate marker for coagulative tumor necrosis. Thus, the goal was 
to directly test whether Ki-67 and necrosis convey similar or distinct 
information for the prognostic assessment of ccRCC.
METHODS: Tumor specimens from 741 consecutively treated patients who underwent 
surgery for ccRCC between 1990 and 1999 were evaluated. Tumor specimens were 
assessed for various clinicopathologic features, including levels of tumor cell 
Ki-67 expression. Associations of these features with death from RCC were 
evaluated using Cox proportional hazards regression models.
RESULTS: At last follow-up, 396 patients had died, including 238 who died from 
ccRCC at a median of 2.1 years after surgery. Although tumor cell Ki-67 
expression and coagulative tumor necrosis were highly correlated, the prognostic 
information conveyed by these 2 markers failed to overlap. For the subset of 
patients with necrotic tumors, high levels of Ki-67 more than doubled the risk 
of death from RCC (risk ratio, 2.18; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.52-3.11; P 
< .001). For patients with tumors lacking necrosis, high levels of Ki-67 
expression were similarly correlated with an increased risk of death from RCC 
(risk ratio, 2.50; 95% CI, 1.66-3.77; P < .001).
CONCLUSIONS: Prognostic information conveyed by Ki-67 and coagulative tumor 
necrosis are not interchangeable. Thus, Ki-67 and coagulative tumor necrosis 
should not be treated as surrogates for one another and both of these features 
should be evaluated when generating outcome predictions for patients with ccRCC.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.22840
PMID: 17594714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]