---
reference_id: "PMID:38368037"
title: "Treatment Strategies for Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy: Surgical."
authors:
- Schaff HV
- Juarez-Casso FM
journal: Am J Cardiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2023.10.053
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment Strategies for Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy: Surgical.
**Authors:** Schaff HV, Juarez-Casso FM
**Journal:** Am J Cardiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjcard.2023.10.053](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjcard.2023.10.053)

## Content

1. Am J Cardiol. 2024 Feb 1;212S:S53-S63. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2023.10.053.
Epub  2024 Jan 29.

Treatment Strategies for Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy: Surgical.

Schaff HV(1), Juarez-Casso FM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. 
Electronic address: schaff@mayo.edu.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

Septal myectomy is a well-established procedure for septal reduction in patients 
with obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) who have not responded to 
medical treatment. The surgical approach is tailored to the unique 
pathophysiology and septal morphology of the patient. Extended transaortic 
myectomy is the standard procedure for patients with isolated subaortic 
obstruction, the most common type of HCM. However, transapical myectomy is a 
useful adjunct for patients with long or midventricular obstruction and is our 
preferred technique for ventricular enlargement in patients with severe 
symptomatic diastolic heart failure because of extensive apical hypertrophy. 
Septal myectomy provides excellent postoperative outcomes as regards symptom 
relief and functional improvement, and operative morbidity and mortality rates 
are low in experienced centers. This article summarizes our current surgical 
management of patients with HCM and details operative methods and outcomes.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2023.10.053
PMID: 38368037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
have no competing interests to declare.