---
reference_id: PMID:39550444
title: "Prevalence of diabetic retinopathy and its associated risk factors among adults in Ethiopia: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Wondmeneh TG
- Mohammed JA
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-78596-9
keywords:
- Ethiopia/epidemiology
- Humans
- "Diabetic Retinopathy/epidemiology, etiology"
- Risk Factors
- Prevalence
- Adult
- Female
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of diabetic retinopathy and its associated risk factors among adults in Ethiopia: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Wondmeneh TG, Mohammed JA
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-78596-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-78596-9)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Nov 16;14(1):28266. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-78596-9.

Prevalence of diabetic retinopathy and its associated risk factors among adults 
in Ethiopia: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Wondmeneh TG(1), Mohammed JA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, College of Medical and Health Science, Samara 
University, Semera, Ethiopia. tomigeb2006@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Public Health, College of Medical and Health Science, Samara 
University, Semera, Ethiopia.

Diabetic retinopathy is a complication of diabetes mellitus and a leading cause 
of blindness and visual impairment globally. Limited information existed on the 
epidemiology of diabetic retinopathy at the national level in Ethiopia. Thus, 
the objective of this review was to determine the pooled prevalence of diabetic 
retinopathy and its associated risk factors in Ethiopia. A systematic review and 
meta-analysis was conducted using previous primary studies that were found in 
electronic databases such as Web of Science, Scopus, PubMed, CINHAL, Google 
Scholar, and online African journals. We evaluated the quality of the included 
studies using the Newcastle-Ottawa Assessment Scale. The random-effects model 
was applied because heterogeneity was expected. I-Square and the Cochrane Q 
statistics were used to evaluate heterogeneity. Publication bias was examined 
using Egger's test and a funnel plot. A random-effect meta-analysis was applied 
to pool the odds ratios of risk factors to determine the association between the 
independent and dependent variables. After 598 articles were found, 22 studies 
that met the eligibility requirements were included. The pooled prevalence of 
retinopathy among patients with diabetes in Ethiopia was 24.35% (95% CI: 
18.88-29.83), with considerable heterogeneity (I2 = 98.18%, p < 0.001). Ten 
years and longer with diabetes (AOR = 4.36, 95% CI: 1.71-7.01), hypertension 
(AOR = 2.54, 95% CI: 1.45-3.63), poor glycemic control (AOR = 3.83, 95% CI: 
1.62-6.04), and positive proteinuria (AHR = 1.55, 95% CI: 1.02-2.07) were risk 
factors for diabetic retinopathy. Retinopathy affects one in four patients with 
diabetes. Diabetic patients with longer duration, hypertension, poor glycemic 
control, and positive proteinuria should receive special care.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-78596-9
PMCID: PMC11569147
PMID: 39550444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Competing interests The authors 
declare no competing interests.