---
reference_id: "PMID:34953066"
title: A genotype and phenotype analysis of SMAD6 mutant patients with radioulnar synostosis.
authors:
- Shen F
- Yang Y
- Li P
- Zheng Y
- Luo Z
- Fu Y
- Zhu G
- Mei H
- Chen S
- Zhu Y
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1850
keywords:
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- Phenotype
- Radius/abnormalities
- Smad6 Protein/genetics
- Synostosis/genetics
- Ulna/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A genotype and phenotype analysis of SMAD6 mutant patients with radioulnar synostosis.
**Authors:** Shen F, Yang Y, Li P, Zheng Y, Luo Z, Fu Y, Zhu G, Mei H, Chen S, Zhu Y
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.1850](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.1850)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2022 Jan;10(1):e1850. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1850. Epub 2021
 Dec 24.

A genotype and phenotype analysis of SMAD6 mutant patients with radioulnar
synostosis.

Shen F(1), Yang Y(1), Li P(1)(2), Zheng Y(1), Luo Z(1), Fu Y(1), Zhu G(3), Mei
H(3), Chen S(2), Zhu Y(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)The Laboratory of Genetics and Metabolism, Institute of Pediatric Medicine of
Hunan Province, Hunan Children's Hospital, Hengyang Medical School, University
of South China, Changsha, China.
(2)Department of Hand Surgery, Beijing Ji Shui Tan Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of orthopedics, Hunan Children's Hospital, Hengyang Meical School,
University of South China, Changsha, China.
(4)Emergency Research Institute of Hunan Province, Hunan People's Hospital,
Changsha, China.

BACKGROUND: SMAD6 variants have been reported in patients with radioulnar
synostosis (RUS). This study aimed to investigate the genotypes and phenotypes
for a large cohort of patients with RUS having mutant SMAD6.
METHODS: Genomic DNA samples were isolated from 251 RUS sporadic patients (with
their parents) and 27 RUS pedigrees. Sanger sequencing was performed for the
SMAD6 coding regions. For positive probands, co-segregation and parental-origin
analysis of SMAD6 variants and phenotypic re-evaluation were performed for their
family members.
RESULTS: We identified 50 RUS probands with SMAD6 variants (13 co-segregated
with RUS in pedigrees and 37 in RUS-sporadic patients). Based on the new and
previous data, we identified SMAD6 mutated in 16/38 RUS pedigrees and 61/393 RUS
sporadic patients, respectively. Overall, 93 SMAD6 mutant patients with RUS were
identified, among which 29 patients had unilateral RUS, where the left side was
more involved than the right side (left:right = 20:9). Female protective effects
and non-full penetrance were observed, in which only 6.90% mothers (vs. ~50%
fathers) of SMAD6 mutant RUS probands had RUS. Pleiotropy was observed as a
re-evaluation of SMAD6 mutant families identified: (a) three families had axial
skeletal malformations; (b) two families had polydactyly; and (c) eight families
had other known malformations.
CONCLUSION: SMAD6 was mutated in 42.11% RUS pedigrees and 15.52% RUS sporadic
patients. The RUS patients with SMAD6 variants exhibit both non-full-penetrance,
variable expressivity, pleiotropy, female protective effects, and the left side
is more susceptible than the right side.

© 2021 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.1850
PMCID: PMC8801148
PMID: 34953066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared no conflict of
interest.
