---
reference_id: "PMID:35421871"
title: "Hypogonadism in men: Updates and treatments."
authors:
- Ugo-Neff G
- Rizzolo D
journal: JAAPA
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/01.JAA.0000824956.78048.ff
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypogonadism in men: Updates and treatments.
**Authors:** Ugo-Neff G, Rizzolo D
**Journal:** JAAPA (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.JAA.0000824956.78048.ff](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.JAA.0000824956.78048.ff)

## Content

1. JAAPA. 2022 May 1;35(5):28-34. doi: 10.1097/01.JAA.0000824956.78048.ff.

Hypogonadism in men: Updates and treatments.

Ugo-Neff G(1), Rizzolo D.

Author information:
(1)Gina Ugo-Neff practices at Uropartners at Rush University in Chicago, Ill. 
Denise Rizzolo is an assistant clinical professor in the Pace Completion Program 
in the Department of Physician Assistant Studies in New York City and an 
assessment specialist at the Physician Assistant Education Association. The 
authors have disclosed no potential conflicts of interest, financial or 
otherwise.

Hypogonadism is a clinical syndrome of testosterone deficiency that presents 
with nonspecific symptoms of sexual dysfunction, fatigue, and decreased strength 
or muscle mass. Men with obesity, diabetes, and other comorbidities are at 
higher risk for hypogonadism. Patients presenting with symptoms should be tested 
for low testosterone and treated with testosterone replacement. Testosterone 
therapy carries risks and must be closely monitored. Patients treated for 
hypogonadism may experience improvement of symptoms and quality of life.

Copyright © 2022 American Academy of Physician Associates.

DOI: 10.1097/01.JAA.0000824956.78048.ff
PMID: 35421871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]