---
reference_id: "PMID:21860658"
title: The failure of R0.
authors:
- Li J
- Blakeley D
- Smith RJ
journal: Comput Math Methods Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1155/2011/527610
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The failure of R0.
**Authors:** Li J, Blakeley D, Smith RJ
**Journal:** Comput Math Methods Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2011/527610](https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/527610)

## Content

1. Comput Math Methods Med. 2011;2011:527610. doi: 10.1155/2011/527610. Epub 2011
 Aug 16.

The failure of R0.

Li J(1), Blakeley D, Smith RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
State College, PA 16802, USA.

The basic reproductive ratio, R(0), is one of the fundamental concepts in 
mathematical biology. It is a threshold parameter, intended to quantify the 
spread of disease by estimating the average number of secondary infections in a 
wholly susceptible population, giving an indication of the invasion strength of 
an epidemic: if R(0) < 1, the disease dies out, whereas if R(0) > 1, the disease 
persists. R(0) has been widely used as a measure of disease strength to estimate 
the effectiveness of control measures and to form the backbone of 
disease-management policy. However, in almost every aspect that matters, R(0) is 
flawed. Diseases can persist with R(0) < 1, while diseases with R(0) > 1 can die 
out. We show that the same model of malaria gives many different values of R(0), 
depending on the method used, with the sole common property that they have a 
threshold at 1. We also survey estimated values of R(0) for a variety of 
diseases, and examine some of the alternatives that have been proposed. If R(0) 
is to be used, it must be accompanied by caveats about the method of 
calculation, underlying model assumptions and evidence that it is actually a 
threshold. Otherwise, the concept is meaningless.

DOI: 10.1155/2011/527610
PMCID: PMC3157160
PMID: 21860658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]