---
reference_id: "PMID:39356721"
title: Quantitative evaluation of DNA damage repair dynamics to elucidate predictors of autism vs. cancer in individuals with germline PTEN variants.
authors:
- Wei R
- Hitomi M
- Sadler T
- Yehia L
- Calvetti D
- Scott J
- Eng C
journal: PLoS Comput Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1012449
keywords:
- Humans
- PTEN Phosphohydrolase/genetics
- DNA Repair/genetics
- DNA Damage/genetics
- Germ-Line Mutation/genetics
- Neoplasms/genetics
- "Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple/genetics"
- Autistic Disorder/genetics
- Autism Spectrum Disorder/genetics
- Phenotype
- Computational Biology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quantitative evaluation of DNA damage repair dynamics to elucidate predictors of autism vs. cancer in individuals with germline PTEN variants.
**Authors:** Wei R, Hitomi M, Sadler T, Yehia L, Calvetti D, Scott J, Eng C
**Journal:** PLoS Comput Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pcbi.1012449](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1012449)

## Content

1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2024 Oct 2;20(10):e1012449. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1012449.  eCollection 2024 Oct.

Quantitative evaluation of DNA damage repair dynamics to elucidate predictors of 
autism vs. cancer in individuals with germline PTEN variants.

Wei R(1)(2), Hitomi M(1)(3), Sadler T(1), Yehia L(1), Calvetti D(4), Scott 
J(1)(3)(5)(6), Eng C(1)(6)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.
(2)Department of Nutrition and Systems Biology and Bioinformatics Program, Case 
Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of 
America.
(3)Translational Hematology & Oncology Research, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, 
Ohio, United States of America.
(4)Department of Mathematics, Applied Mathematics, and Statistics, Case Western 
Reserve University College of Arts and Sciences, Cleveland, Ohio, United States 
of America.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, United 
States of America.
(6)Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of 
America.
(7)Center for Personalized Genetic Healthcare, Medical Specialties Institute, 
Cleveland Clinic, United States of America.
(8)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.
(9)Germline High Risk Cancer Focus Group, Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case 
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

Persons with germline variants in the tumor suppressor gene phosphatase and 
tensin homolog, PTEN, are molecularly diagnosed with PTEN hamartoma tumor 
syndrome (PHTS). PHTS confers high risks of specific malignancies, and up to 23% 
of the patients are diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and/or 
developmental delay (DD). The accurate prediction of these two seemingly 
disparate phenotypes (cancer vs. ASD/DD) for PHTS at the individual level 
remains elusive despite the available statistical prevalence of specific 
phenotypes of the syndrome at the population level. The pleiotropy of the 
syndrome may, in part, be due to the alterations of the key multi-functions of 
PTEN. Maintenance of genome integrity is one of the key biological functions of 
PTEN, but no integrative studies have been conducted to quantify the DNA damage 
response (DDR) in individuals with PHTS and to relate to phenotypes and 
genotypes. In this study, we used 43 PHTS patient-derived lymphoblastoid cell 
lines (LCLs) to investigate the associations between DDR and PTEN genotypes 
and/or clinical phenotypes ASD/DD vs. cancer. The dynamics of DDR of 
γ-irradiated LCLs were analyzed using the exponential decay mathematical model 
to fit temporal changes in γH2AX levels which report the degree of DNA damage. 
We found that PTEN nonsense variants are associated with less efficient DNA 
damage repair ability resulting in higher DNA damage levels at 24 hours after 
irradiation compared to PTEN missense variants. Regarding PHTS phenotypes, LCLs 
from PHTS individuals with ASD/DD showed faster DNA damage repairing rate than 
those from patients without ASD/DD or cancer. We also applied the 
reaction-diffusion partial differential equation (PDE) mathematical model, a 
cell growth model with a DNA damage term, to accurately describe the DDR process 
in the LCLs. For each LCL, we can derive parameters of the PDE. Then we averaged 
the numerical results by PHTS phenotypes. By performing simple subtraction of 
two subgroup average results, we found that PHTS-ASD/DD is associated with 
higher live cell density at lower DNA damage level but lower cell density level 
at higher DNA damage level compared to LCLs from individuals with PHTS-cancer 
and PHTS-neither.

Copyright: © 2024 Wei et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1012449
PMCID: PMC11472915
PMID: 39356721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.