---
reference_id: "PMID:28114362"
title: Clinical Features and Courses of Adenovirus Pneumonia in Healthy Young Adults during an Outbreak among Korean Military Personnel.
authors:
- Park JY
- Kim BJ
- Lee EJ
- Park KS
- Park HS
- Jung SS
- Kim JO
journal: PLoS One
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170592
keywords:
- "Adenovirus Infections, Human/complications, epidemiology, therapy, virology"
- Adult
- Disease Outbreaks
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Military Personnel
- "Pneumonia, Viral/complications, epidemiology, therapy, virology"
- Prospective Studies
- Republic of Korea/epidemiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Features and Courses of Adenovirus Pneumonia in Healthy Young Adults during an Outbreak among Korean Military Personnel.
**Authors:** Park JY, Kim BJ, Lee EJ, Park KS, Park HS, Jung SS, Kim JO
**Journal:** PLoS One (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0170592](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0170592)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2017 Jan 23;12(1):e0170592. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170592. 
eCollection 2017.

Clinical Features and Courses of Adenovirus Pneumonia in Healthy Young Adults 
during an Outbreak among Korean Military Personnel.

Park JY(1)(2), Kim BJ(2)(3), Lee EJ(2), Park KS(4), Park HS(5), Jung SS(5), Kim 
JO(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Anyang, Korea.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, The Armed Forces Daejeon Hospital, Daejeon, Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Kosin University College of Medicine, Busan, 
Korea.
(4)Chungcheongnam-Do Institute of Health and Environment Research, Daejeon, 
Korea.
(5)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Chungnam National University Hospital, Daejeon, Korea.

BACKGROUND: The number of pneumonia patients increased suddenly in Korean 
military hospitals in late December 2014, indicating the urgent need for an 
epidemic outbreak investigation.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective study of pneumonia etiology among 
immunocompetent young adults admitted to Daejeon Armed Forces hospital. Patient 
blood and sputum samples were subjected to conventional culture, serology, and 
polymerase chain reaction tests for respiratory viruses and atypical pathogens.
RESULTS: From January to May 2015, we enrolled 191 (189 male) adults with 
pneumonia; the mean age was 20.1 ± 1.3 years. Five patients had severe 
pneumonia, and one died. Pathogenic human adenoviruses were most common (HAdV, 
153/191 [80.1%]), indicating a HAdV pneumonia outbreak. Genotyping of 35 
isolates indicated that 34 matched HAdV-55 and one matched HAdV-2. HAdV 
pneumonia infected recruit trainees most frequently. High and prolonged fever, 
nasal congestion, sore throat, and pharyngeal inflammation were significantly 
more common in the HAdV pneumonia group, compared to patients with other or 
unknown causes of pneumonia. Only 12% of HAdV pneumonia patients displayed 
leukocytosis, whereas febrile leukopenia (62.7%) and thrombocytopenia (41%) were 
commonly observed. HAdV pneumonia patient chest CT scans displayed ground glass 
opacity (with or without septal thickness) with consolidation in 50.0% of 
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: An outbreak of HAdV respiratory infection occurred at the Korean 
military training center. HAdV pneumonia exhibited specific laboratory and 
clinical features, and although most patients were cured without complication, 
some progressed to respiratory failure and fatality. Therefore, HAdV vaccine 
should be provided to military trainees in Korea.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170592
PMCID: PMC5256920
PMID: 28114362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.