---
reference_id: "PMID:39941219"
title: "Defining Global Thresholds for Serum Ferritin: A Challenging Mission in Establishing the Iron Deficiency Diagnosis in This Era of Striving for Health Equity."
authors:
- Cancado RD
- Leite LAC
- Muñoz M
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics15030289
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defining Global Thresholds for Serum Ferritin: A Challenging Mission in Establishing the Iron Deficiency Diagnosis in This Era of Striving for Health Equity.
**Authors:** Cancado RD, Leite LAC, Muñoz M
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics15030289](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics15030289)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2025 Jan 26;15(3):289. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics15030289.

Defining Global Thresholds for Serum Ferritin: A Challenging Mission in 
Establishing the Iron Deficiency Diagnosis in This Era of Striving for Health 
Equity.

Cancado RD(1)(2)(3), Leite LAC(1)(2)(3), Muñoz M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas da Santa Casa de Sao 
Paulo, Sao Paulo 01224-001, Brazil.
(2)Department of Oncology, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas da Santa Casa de Sao 
Paulo, Sao Paulo 01224-001, Brazil.
(3)Hospital Samaritano de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo 01232-010, Brazil.
(4)Peri-Operative Transfusion Medicine, School of Medicine, 29010 Malaga, Spain.

Iron deficiency (ID) is a critical public health issue globally and the most 
prevalent cause of anemia. Iron deficiency anemia (IDA) affects approximately 
1.2 billion individuals worldwide, and it is estimated that non-anemic iron 
deficiency (NAID) is at least twice as common as IDA. Yet, there is still 
uncertainty about how to diagnose it in clinical practice. The serum ferritin 
(SF) threshold of <15 ng/mL proposed by the World Health Organization (WHO) has 
been questioned over the last decade. The current SF thresholds are 
inappropriately low, and, therefore, a large portion of the population at the 
most significant risk of ID remain undiagnosed and untreated. The correlation 
between SF, hepcidin, and the physiological upregulation of iron absorption in 
healthy adults suggests that SF of <50 ng/mL indicates a more precise threshold 
for diagnosing ID in adults. Therefore, adopting the SF threshold <50 ng/mL 
would break up the perpetuation of an inequitable cycle of disadvantage for ID 
individuals, especially among women.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics15030289
PMCID: PMC11817370
PMID: 39941219

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
The CSL Vifor had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, 
analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the 
decision to publish the results.