---
reference_id: "PMID:26650724"
title: "Cortical and Subcortical Gray Matter Volume in Youths With Conduct Problems: A Meta-analysis."
authors:
- Rogers JC
- De Brito SA
journal: JAMA Psychiatry
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.2423
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Amygdala/pathology
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/epidemiology, pathology"
- Brain/pathology
- Case-Control Studies
- Cerebral Cortex/pathology
- Child
- Comorbidity
- "Conduct Disorder/epidemiology, pathology"
- Female
- Frontal Lobe/pathology
- Gray Matter/pathology
- Gyrus Cinguli/pathology
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Organ Size
- Prefrontal Cortex/pathology
- Regression Analysis
- Temporal Lobe/pathology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cortical and Subcortical Gray Matter Volume in Youths With Conduct Problems: A Meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Rogers JC, De Brito SA
**Journal:** JAMA Psychiatry (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.2423](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.2423)

## Content

1. JAMA Psychiatry. 2016 Jan;73(1):64-72. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.2423.

Cortical and Subcortical Gray Matter Volume in Youths With Conduct Problems: A
Meta-analysis.

Rogers JC(1), De Brito SA(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

IMPORTANCE: A large number of structural neuroimaging studies have used
voxel-based morphometry (VBM) to identify gray matter abnormalities in youths
with conduct problems (CP), but the findings have been disparate and few have
been replicated.
OBJECTIVE: To conduct a meta-analysis of published whole-brain structural
neuroimaging studies on youths with CP that used VBM methods to facilitate
replication and aid further analyses by researchers.
DATA SOURCES: The PubMed, ScienceDirect, Scopus, Google Scholar, and Web of
Science databases were searched for VBM studies published from January 1, 2007,
through March 31, 2015. Manual searches were conducted using title and citation
information. Authors were contacted for additional data.
STUDY SELECTION: A literature search identified 28 studies. Studies were
excluded if they (1) failed to use VBM, (2) failed to report a voxelwise
comparison between youths with CP and typically developing (TD) youths, (3) used
different significance or extent thresholds throughout the brain, (4) included
duplicated datasets, and (5) did not provide peak coordinates or parametric maps
after contact with the authors. Thirteen studies were deemed eligible for
inclusion (394 youths with CP and 350 TD youths).
DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Anisotropic effect-size signed differential
mapping (SDM) was used for voxel-based meta-analyses. Statistical parametric
maps comparing gray matter differences between youths with CP and TD youths were
available for 11 of the studies, with peak coordinates available for the
remaining studies.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Regional gray matter volume (GMV) differences in
youths with CP compared with TD youths.
RESULTS: Youths with CP had decreased GMV in the left amygdala (SDM
estimate = -0.218; P < .001) (extending into anterior insula), right insula (SDM
estimate = -0.174; P < .001) (extending ventrolaterally into the prefrontal
cortex and inferiorly into the superior temporal gyrus), left medial superior
frontal gyrus (SDM estimate = -0.163; P = .001) (extending into the right
anterior cingulate cortex), and left fusiform gyrus (SDM estimate = -0.146;
P = .003). Subgroup meta-analysis assessing age-at-onset effects identified
reduced GMV in the left anterior insula (SDM estimate = -0.232; P < .001)
(extending into amygdala). Meta-regression analyses revealed that greater scores
on measures of callous-unemotional traits were associated with a lower reduction
in GMV in the left putamen (SDM estimate = -0.911; P < .001). The proportion of
male and female youths in the sample was associated with decreased GMV in the
left amygdala (SDM estimate = -0.31; P < .001) and increased GMV in the right
inferior temporal cortex (SDM estimate = 0.755; P < .001). While there was no
association with comorbid attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or IQ, age
range was associated with gray matter differences in the left amygdala.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: We identified gray matter reductions within the
insula, amygdala, frontal and temporal regions in youths with CP as well as
inconsistencies in sample characteristics across studies that should be
addressed in future research.

DOI: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.2423
PMID: 26650724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
