---
reference_id: "PMID:12529507"
title: Identification of a gene causing human cytochrome c oxidase deficiency by integrative genomics.
authors:
- Mootha VK
- Lepage P
- Miller K
- Bunkenborg J
- Reich M
- Hjerrild M
- Delmonte T
- Villeneuve A
- Sladek R
- Xu F
- Mitchell GA
- Morin C
- Mann M
- Hudson TJ
- Robinson B
- Rioux JD
- Lander ES
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.242716699
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/genetics
- Genomics
- Humans
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- Proteomics
- "RNA, Messenger/analysis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a gene causing human cytochrome c oxidase deficiency by integrative genomics.
**Authors:** Mootha VK, Lepage P, Miller K, Bunkenborg J, Reich M, Hjerrild M, Delmonte T, Villeneuve A, Sladek R, Xu F, Mitchell GA, Morin C, Mann M, Hudson TJ, Robinson B, Rioux JD, Lander ES
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.242716699](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.242716699)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jan 21;100(2):605-10. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.242716699. Epub 2003 Jan 14.

Identification of a gene causing human cytochrome c oxidase deficiency by 
integrative genomics.

Mootha VK(1), Lepage P, Miller K, Bunkenborg J, Reich M, Hjerrild M, Delmonte T, 
Villeneuve A, Sladek R, Xu F, Mitchell GA, Morin C, Mann M, Hudson TJ, Robinson 
B, Rioux JD, Lander ES.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute/Massachusetts Institute of Technology Center for Genome 
Research, One Kendall Square, Building 300, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Identifying the genes responsible for human diseases requires combining 
information about gene position with clues about biological function. The recent 
availability of whole-genome data sets of RNA and protein expression provides 
powerful new sources of functional insight. Here we illustrate how such data 
sets can expedite disease-gene discovery, by using them to identify the gene 
causing Leigh syndrome, French-Canadian type (LSFC, Online Mendelian Inheritance 
in Man no. 220111), a human cytochrome c oxidase deficiency that maps to 
chromosome 2p16-21. Using four public RNA expression data sets, we assigned to 
all human genes a "score" reflecting their similarity in RNA-expression profiles 
to known mitochondrial genes. Using a large survey of organellar proteomics, we 
similarly classified human genes according to the likelihood of their protein 
product being associated with the mitochondrion. By intersecting this 
information with the relevant genomic region, we identified a single clear 
candidate gene, LRPPRC. Resequencing identified two mutations on two independent 
haplotypes, providing definitive genetic proof that LRPPRC indeed causes LSFC. 
LRPPRC encodes an mRNA-binding protein likely involved with mtDNA transcript 
processing, suggesting an additional mechanism of mitochondrial pathophysiology. 
Similar strategies to integrate diverse genomic information can be applied 
likewise to other disease pathways and will become increasingly powerful with 
the growing wealth of diverse, functional genomics data.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.242716699
PMCID: PMC141043
PMID: 12529507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]