---
reference_id: "PMID:28526251"
title: Asthma-related lung function, sleep quality, and sleep duration in urban children.
authors:
- Koinis-Mitchell D
- Kopel SJ
- Seifer R
- LeBourgeois M
- McQuaid EL
- Esteban CA
- Boergers J
- Nassau J
- Farrow M
- Fritz GK
- Klein RB
journal: Sleep Health
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.sleh.2017.03.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Asthma-related lung function, sleep quality, and sleep duration in urban children.
**Authors:** Koinis-Mitchell D, Kopel SJ, Seifer R, LeBourgeois M, McQuaid EL, Esteban CA, Boergers J, Nassau J, Farrow M, Fritz GK, Klein RB
**Journal:** Sleep Health (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.sleh.2017.03.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sleh.2017.03.008)

## Content

1. Sleep Health. 2017 Jun;3(3):148-156. doi: 10.1016/j.sleh.2017.03.008. Epub
2017  Apr 11.

Asthma-related lung function, sleep quality, and sleep duration in urban 
children.

Koinis-Mitchell D(1), Kopel SJ(2), Seifer R(2), LeBourgeois M(3), McQuaid EL(2), 
Esteban CA(4), Boergers J(2), Nassau J(4), Farrow M(5), Fritz GK(2), Klein 
RB(4).

Author information:
(1)Bradley/Hasbro Children's Research Center, Providence, RI; Alpert Medical 
School, Brown University, Providence, RI,; Hasbro Children's Hospital/Rhode 
Island Hospital, Providence, RI. Electronic address: 
dkoinismitchell@lifespan.org.
(2)Bradley/Hasbro Children's Research Center, Providence, RI; Alpert Medical 
School, Brown University, Providence, RI,; Hasbro Children's Hospital/Rhode 
Island Hospital, Providence, RI.
(3)University of Colorado Boulder, Providence, RI.
(4)Alpert Medical School, Brown University, Providence, RI,; Hasbro Children's 
Hospital/Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI.
(5)Bradley/Hasbro Children's Research Center, Providence, RI; Hasbro Children's 
Hospital/Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI.

OBJECTIVES: Examine (1) the extent to which changes in objectively measured 
asthma-related lung function (forced expiratory volume in 1 second) within a 
sleep period are associated with sleep quality and sleep duration during that 
sleep period in a group of urban children with persistent asthma, (2) 
associations between morning and evening asthma-related lung function and sleep 
quality and duration on the adjacent night, and (3) whether these associations 
differ by ethnic group.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional, multimethod approach. Children completed a clinic 
assessment of asthma and allergy status and used home-based objective 
measurements of asthma-related lung function and sleep.
SETTING: Children and their caregivers participated in a clinic assessment at an 
asthma and allergy clinic and completed additional assessments at home.
PARTICIPANTS: Two hundred and sixteen African American, Latino, and non-Latino 
white urban children, ages 7-9 years, and their primary caregivers.
MEASUREMENTS: Participants took part in a clinic assessment of asthma and 
allergy status, completed interview-based questionnaires including a diary to 
track asthma symptoms and sleep patterns, and used actigraphy and home-based 
spirometry daily across a 4-week period to assess sleep and lung function.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Results from analyses using structural equation 
modeling revealed an association between worsening asthma-related lung function 
and poor sleep quality in the full sample, as well as better asthma-related lung 
function at night and more optimal sleep efficiency that night. Ethnic group 
differences emerged in the association with morning or nighttime lung function 
measurements and sleep quality. Urban minority children with asthma may be at 
heightened risk for poorer quality sleep. Timing of lung function worsening may 
be important when considering when and how to improve both asthma health 
outcomes and sleep quality within specific groups.

Copyright © 2017 National Sleep Foundation. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleh.2017.03.008
PMCID: PMC5714287
PMID: 28526251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: none