---
reference_id: "PMID:34236252"
title: "Prevalence of Maxillary Sinus Hypoplasia and Silent Sinus Syndrome: A Radiological Cross-Sectional Retrospective Cohort Study."
authors:
- Fiorenza UD
- Spoldi C
- Nekrasova L
- Pipolo C
- Lozza P
- Scotti A
- Maccari A
- Felisati G
- Saibene AM
journal: Am J Rhinol Allergy
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/19458924211029418
keywords:
- Adult
- Cohort Studies
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Enophthalmos/epidemiology
- Humans
- Maxillary Sinus/diagnostic imaging
- "Paranasal Sinus Diseases/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
- Prevalence
- Radiology
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of Maxillary Sinus Hypoplasia and Silent Sinus Syndrome: A Radiological Cross-Sectional Retrospective Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Fiorenza UD, Spoldi C, Nekrasova L, Pipolo C, Lozza P, Scotti A, Maccari A, Felisati G, Saibene AM
**Journal:** Am J Rhinol Allergy (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/19458924211029418](https://doi.org/10.1177/19458924211029418)

## Content

1. Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2022 Jan;36(1):123-128. doi: 10.1177/19458924211029418. 
Epub 2021 Jul 8.

Prevalence of Maxillary Sinus Hypoplasia and Silent Sinus Syndrome: A 
Radiological Cross-Sectional Retrospective Cohort Study.

Fiorenza UD(1), Spoldi C(1), Nekrasova L(2), Pipolo C(1), Lozza P(1), Scotti 
A(1), Maccari A(1), Felisati G(1), Saibene AM(1).

Author information:
(1)9304Otolaryngology Unit, ASST Santi Paolo e Carlo, Department of Health 
Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(2)444273Department of Health Sciences, Universitá degli Studi di Milano, 
Milano, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Maxillary sinus hypoplasia (MSH), associated with enophthalmos and 
hypoglobus in the silent sinus syndrome (SSS), is a poorly studied condition. 
The real incidence of MSH and SSS in the adult population is not known. Our 
study aims at estimating the radiological prevalence of MSH and identifying 
undiagnosed cases of SSS in a retrospective cohort.
METHODS: A cross-sectional retrospective cohort study was performed in adults, 
without a history of maxillofacial surgery or trauma, undergoing head CT scans. 
A radiological database of 1012 consecutive scans was reviewed independently by 
two authors to identify patients with signs of MSH and SSS and associated 
findings (septal deviation, uncinate deviation, concha bullosa, sinus 
opacification, bony rarefaction, and pterygopalatine fossa enlargement). The 
findings of MSH and SSS were compared with radiological reports.
RESULTS: 891 eligible CT scans were analyzed. MSH and SSS prevalences were 6.17% 
(n = 55) and 0,56% (n = 5), respectively. The maxillary sinus was normally or 
partially ventilated in 96.36% of MSH patients. Lateralization of the uncinate 
process was detected in about 50% of MSH patients, while a septal deviation 
towards the affected sinus was detected in 21.82%. In 20% of MSH scans, a concha 
bullosa was identified. Radiological reports identified a single MSH case.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study confirmed the literature data on MSH prevalence, while it 
determined a precedently unknown prevalence for SSS, underestimated in the 
radiology reports. This prevalence needs further confirmation but suggests a 
routine accurate comparison of both maxillary sinuses in CT scans.

DOI: 10.1177/19458924211029418
PMID: 34236252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]