---
reference_id: "PMID:33141444"
title: "GBE1-related disorders: Adult polyglucosan body disease and its neuromuscular phenotypes."
authors:
- Souza PVS
- Badia BML
- Farias IB
- Pinto WBVR
- Oliveira ASB
- Akman HO
- DiMauro S
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12325
keywords:
- Adult
- Brain/pathology
- Glycogen Debranching Enzyme System/genetics
- "Glycogen Storage Disease/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology"
- "Nervous System Diseases/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Peripheral Nerves/pathology
- Phenotype
- Spinal Cord/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GBE1-related disorders: Adult polyglucosan body disease and its neuromuscular phenotypes.
**Authors:** Souza PVS, Badia BML, Farias IB, Pinto WBVR, Oliveira ASB, Akman HO, DiMauro S
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12325](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12325)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2021 May;44(3):534-543. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12325. Epub
2020  Nov 13.

GBE1-related disorders: Adult polyglucosan body disease and its neuromuscular
phenotypes.

Souza PVS(1), Badia BML(1), Farias IB(1), Pinto WBVR(1), Oliveira ASB(1), Akman
HO(2), DiMauro S(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuromuscular Diseases, Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery,
Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New
York, USA.

Adult polyglucosan body disease (APBD) represents a complex autosomal recessive
inherited neurometabolic disorder due to homozygous or compound heterozygous
pathogenic variants in GBE1 gene, resulting in deficiency of glycogen-branching
enzyme and secondary storage of glycogen in the form of polyglucosan bodies,
involving the skeletal muscle, diaphragm, peripheral nerve (including autonomic
fibers), brain white matter, spinal cord, nerve roots, cerebellum, brainstem and
to a lesser extent heart, lung, kidney, and liver cells. The diversity of new
clinical presentations regarding neuromuscular involvement is astonishing and
transformed APBD in a key differential diagnosis of completely different
clinical conditions, including axonal and demyelinating sensorimotor
polyneuropathy, progressive spastic paraparesis, motor neuronopathy
presentations, autonomic disturbances, leukodystrophies or even pure myopathic
involvement with limb-girdle pattern of weakness. This review article aims to
summarize the main clinical, biochemical, genetic, and diagnostic aspects
regarding APBD with special focus on neuromuscular presentations.

© 2020 SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12325
PMID: 33141444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
