---
reference_id: "PMID:25316807"
title: A non-randomized multicentre trial of human immune plasma for treatment of hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome caused by Andes virus.
authors:
- Vial PA
- Valdivieso F
- Calvo M
- Rioseco ML
- Riquelme R
- Araneda A
- Tomicic V
- Graf J
- Paredes L
- Florenzano M
- Bidart T
- Cuiza A
- Marco C
- Hjelle B
- Ye C
- Hanfelt-Goade D
- Vial C
- Rivera JC
- Delgado I
- Mertz GJ
- Hantavirus Study Group in Chile
journal: Antivir Ther
year: '2015'
doi: 10.3851/IMP2875
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antibodies, Neutralizing/therapeutic use"
- "Antibodies, Viral/therapeutic use"
- Female
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- "Orthohantavirus/drug effects, growth & development, immunology"
- "Hantavirus Infections/immunology, mortality, therapy, virology"
- "Heart/drug effects, physiopathology, virology"
- Humans
- Immune Sera/pharmacology
- "Lung/drug effects, immunology, pathology, virology"
- Male
- Methylprednisolone/therapeutic use
- Middle Aged
- Neutralization Tests
- Plasmapheresis
- "RNA, Viral/antagonists & inhibitors, blood, immunology"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Survival Analysis
- Syndrome
- Viral Load/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A non-randomized multicentre trial of human immune plasma for treatment of hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome caused by Andes virus.
**Authors:** Vial PA, Valdivieso F, Calvo M, Rioseco ML, Riquelme R, Araneda A, Tomicic V, Graf J, Paredes L, Florenzano M, Bidart T, Cuiza A, Marco C, Hjelle B, Ye C, Hanfelt-Goade D, Vial C, Rivera JC, Delgado I, Mertz GJ, Hantavirus Study Group in Chile
**Journal:** Antivir Ther (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3851/IMP2875](https://doi.org/10.3851/IMP2875)

## Content

1. Antivir Ther. 2015;20(4):377-86. doi: 10.3851/IMP2875. Epub 2014 Oct 15.

A non-randomized multicentre trial of human immune plasma for treatment of 
hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome caused by Andes virus.

Vial PA(1), Valdivieso F, Calvo M, Rioseco ML, Riquelme R, Araneda A, Tomicic V, 
Graf J, Paredes L, Florenzano M, Bidart T, Cuiza A, Marco C, Hjelle B, Ye C, 
Hanfelt-Goade D, Vial C, Rivera JC, Delgado I, Mertz GJ; Hantavirus Study Group 
in Chile.

Collaborators: Täger M, Osorio C, Yobanolo V, Carriel A, Lanino P, Demian A, 
Bosnich C, Valdes S, Nuñez G, Cornejo C, Wilhelm J, Umaña A, Nagano F, Gonzalez 
MT, Rios S, Belmar E, Ferres M.

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Medicina Clínica Alemana Universidad del Desarrollo, Santiago, 
Chile. pvial@udd.cl.

BACKGROUND: In Chile, Andes virus (ANDV) is the sole aetiological agent of 
hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome (HCPS) with mean annual incidence of 55 
cases, 32% case fatality rate (CFR) and no specific treatment. Neutralizing 
antibody (NAb) titres at hospital admission correlate inversely with HCPS 
severity. We designed an open trial to explore safety and efficacy and evaluate 
pharmacokinetics of immune plasma as a treatment strategy for this disease.
METHODS: We performed plasmapheresis on donors at least 6 months after HCPS and 
measured NAb titres through a focus-reduction neutralization test. Subjects 
admitted to 10 study sites with suspected/confirmed HCPS were eligible for 
treatment with immune plasma by intravenous infusion at an ANDV NAb dose of 
5,000 U/kg. HCPS was confirmed through immunoglobulin M serology or reverse 
transcriptase-PCR. The main outcome was mortality within 30 days.
RESULTS: From 2008-2012, we enrolled and treated 32 cases and confirmed HCPS in 
29. CFR of hantavirus plasma-treated cases was 4/29 (14%); CFR of non-treated 
cases in the same period in Chile was 63/199 (32%; P=0.049, OR=0.35, CI=0.12, 
0.99); CFR of non-treated cases at the same study sites between 2005-2012 was 
18/66 (27%; (P=0.15, OR=0.43, CI=0.14, 1.34) and CFR in a previous 
methylprednisolone treatment study was 20/60 (33%; P=0.052, OR=0.32, CI=0.10, 
1.00). We detected no serious adverse events associated to plasma infusion. 
Plasma NAb titres reached in recipients were variable and viral load remained 
stable.
CONCLUSIONS: Human ANDV immune plasma infusion appears safe for HCPS. We 
observed a decrease in CFR in treated cases with borderline significance that 
will require further studies for confirmation.

DOI: 10.3851/IMP2875
PMID: 25316807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]