---
reference_id: "PMID:8536668"
title: "Photic headshaking in the horse: 7 cases."
authors:
- Madigan JE
- Kortz G
- Murphy C
- Rodger L
journal: Equine Vet J
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1111/j.2042-3306.1995.tb03082.x
keywords:
- Animals
- Anti-Allergic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Behavior, Animal"
- Cyproheptadine/therapeutic use
- Female
- Head
- "Horse Diseases/drug therapy, etiology"
- Horses
- Light/adverse effects
- Male
- "Movement Disorders/drug therapy, etiology, veterinary"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Photic headshaking in the horse: 7 cases.
**Authors:** Madigan JE, Kortz G, Murphy C, Rodger L
**Journal:** Equine Vet J (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.2042-3306.1995.tb03082.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2042-3306.1995.tb03082.x)

## Content

1. Equine Vet J. 1995 Jul;27(4):306-11. doi: 10.1111/j.2042-3306.1995.tb03082.x.

Photic headshaking in the horse: 7 cases.

Madigan JE(1), Kortz G, Murphy C, Rodger L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Epidemiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of California-Davis 95616-8737, USA.

Seven horses with headshaking are described. No physical abnormalities were 
detected in any of the cases. Six of these horses had onset of clinical signs in 
the spring. The role of light was assessed by application of a blindfold or dark 
grey lens to the eyes, covering the eyes with a face mask and observing the 
horse in total darkness outdoors. Cessation of headshaking was observed with 
blindfolding (5/5 horses), night darkness outdoors (4/4 horses) and use of grey 
lenses (2/3 horses). Outdoor behaviour suggested efforts to avoid light in 4/4 
cases. The photic sneeze in man is suggested as a putative mechanism for equine 
headshaking. Five of 7 horses had improvement with cyproheptadine treatment (0.3 
mg/kg bwt b.i.d.). Headshaking developed within 2 calendar weeks of the same 
date for 3 consecutive years in one horse. Neuropharmacological alterations 
associated with photoperiod mechanisms leading to optic trigeminal summation are 
suggested as possible reasons for spring onset of headshaking.

DOI: 10.1111/j.2042-3306.1995.tb03082.x
PMID: 8536668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]