---
reference_id: "PMID:24270420"
title: ADCK4 mutations promote steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome through CoQ10 biosynthesis disruption.
authors:
- Ashraf S
- Gee HY
- Woerner S
- Xie LX
- Vega-Warner V
- Lovric S
- Fang H
- Song X
- Cattran DC
- Avila-Casado C
- Paterson AD
- Nitschké P
- Bole-Feysot C
- Cochat P
- Esteve-Rudd J
- Haberberger B
- Allen SJ
- Zhou W
- Airik R
- Otto EA
- Barua M
- Al-Hamed MH
- Kari JA
- Evans J
- Bierzynska A
- Saleem MA
- Böckenhauer D
- Kleta R
- El Desoky S
- Hacihamdioglu DO
- Gok F
- Washburn J
- Wiggins RC
- Choi M
- Lifton RP
- Levy S
- Han Z
- Salviati L
- Prokisch H
- Williams DS
- Pollak M
- Clarke CF
- Pei Y
- Antignac C
- Hildebrandt F
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1172/JCI69000
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Adrenal Cortex Hormones/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- Consanguinity
- Conserved Sequence
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Drosophila Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Drug Resistance
- Exome/genetics
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Gene Knockdown Techniques
- Humans
- Mitochondria/physiology
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Nephrotic Syndrome/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Podocytes/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- "Protein Kinases/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- Rats
- Sequence Alignment
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- "Ubiquinone/analogs & derivatives, antagonists & inhibitors, biosynthesis, metabolism, therapeutic use"
- Young Adult
- "Zebrafish/embryology, genetics"
- "Zebrafish Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ADCK4 mutations promote steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome through CoQ10 biosynthesis disruption.
**Authors:** Ashraf S, Gee HY, Woerner S, Xie LX, Vega-Warner V, Lovric S, Fang H, Song X, Cattran DC, Avila-Casado C, Paterson AD, Nitschké P, Bole-Feysot C, Cochat P, Esteve-Rudd J, Haberberger B, Allen SJ, Zhou W, Airik R, Otto EA, Barua M, Al-Hamed MH, Kari JA, Evans J, Bierzynska A, Saleem MA, Böckenhauer D, Kleta R, El Desoky S, Hacihamdioglu DO, Gok F, Washburn J, Wiggins RC, Choi M, Lifton RP, Levy S, Han Z, Salviati L, Prokisch H, Williams DS, Pollak M, Clarke CF, Pei Y, Antignac C, Hildebrandt F
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI69000](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI69000)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2013 Dec;123(12):5179-89. doi: 10.1172/JCI69000. Epub 2013 Nov 
25.

ADCK4 mutations promote steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome through CoQ10 
biosynthesis disruption.

Ashraf S, Gee HY, Woerner S, Xie LX, Vega-Warner V, Lovric S, Fang H, Song X, 
Cattran DC, Avila-Casado C, Paterson AD, Nitschké P, Bole-Feysot C, Cochat P, 
Esteve-Rudd J, Haberberger B, Allen SJ, Zhou W, Airik R, Otto EA, Barua M, 
Al-Hamed MH, Kari JA, Evans J, Bierzynska A, Saleem MA, Böckenhauer D, Kleta R, 
El Desoky S, Hacihamdioglu DO, Gok F, Washburn J, Wiggins RC, Choi M, Lifton RP, 
Levy S, Han Z, Salviati L, Prokisch H, Williams DS, Pollak M, Clarke CF, Pei Y, 
Antignac C, Hildebrandt F.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2013 Dec;123(12):4996-9. doi: 10.1172/JCI73168.

Identification of single-gene causes of steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome 
(SRNS) has furthered the understanding of the pathogenesis of this disease. 
Here, using a combination of homozygosity mapping and whole human exome 
resequencing, we identified mutations in the aarF domain containing kinase 4 
(ADCK4) gene in 15 individuals with SRNS from 8 unrelated families. ADCK4 was 
highly similar to ADCK3, which has been shown to participate in coenzyme Q10 
(CoQ10) biosynthesis. Mutations in ADCK4 resulted in reduced CoQ10 levels and 
reduced mitochondrial respiratory enzyme activity in cells isolated from 
individuals with SRNS and transformed lymphoblasts. Knockdown of adck4 in 
zebrafish and Drosophila recapitulated nephrotic syndrome-associated phenotypes. 
Furthermore, ADCK4 was expressed in glomerular podocytes and partially localized 
to podocyte mitochondria and foot processes in rat kidneys and cultured human 
podocytes. In human podocytes, ADCK4 interacted with members of the CoQ10 
biosynthesis pathway, including COQ6, which has been linked with SRNS and COQ7. 
Knockdown of ADCK4 in podocytes resulted in decreased migration, which was 
reversed by CoQ10 addition. Interestingly, a patient with SRNS with a homozygous 
ADCK4 frameshift mutation had partial remission following CoQ10 treatment. These 
data indicate that individuals with SRNS with mutations in ADCK4 or other genes 
that participate in CoQ10 biosynthesis may be treatable with CoQ10.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI69000
PMCID: PMC3859425
PMID: 24270420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]