---
reference_id: "PMID:39203459"
title: "Bacterial and Archaeal Communities in Erhai Lake Sediments: Abundance and Metabolic Insight into a Plateau Lake at the Edge of Eutrophication."
authors:
- Xie Z
- Li W
- Yang K
- Wang X
- Xiong S
- Zhang X
journal: Microorganisms
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12081617
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bacterial and Archaeal Communities in Erhai Lake Sediments: Abundance and Metabolic Insight into a Plateau Lake at the Edge of Eutrophication.
**Authors:** Xie Z, Li W, Yang K, Wang X, Xiong S, Zhang X
**Journal:** Microorganisms (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/microorganisms12081617](https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms12081617)

## Content

1. Microorganisms. 2024 Aug 8;12(8):1617. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12081617.

Bacterial and Archaeal Communities in Erhai Lake Sediments: Abundance and 
Metabolic Insight into a Plateau Lake at the Edge of Eutrophication.

Xie Z(1), Li W(2)(3), Yang K(1), Wang X(2)(3), Xiong S(2)(3), Zhang X(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, and Joint International 
Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life 
Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, 
China.
(2)National Observation and Research Station of Erhai Lake Ecosystem in Yunnan, 
Dali 671000, China.
(3)Yunnan Dali Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Dali 671000, 
China.

The littoral zones of lakes are potential hotspots for local algal blooms and 
biogeochemical cycles; however, the microbial communities within the littoral 
sediments of eutrophic plateau lakes remain poorly understood. Here, we 
investigated the taxonomic composition, co-occurrence networks, and potential 
functional roles of both abundant and rare taxa within bacterial and archaeal 
communities, as well as physicochemical parameters, in littoral sediments from 
Erhai Lake, a mesotrophic lake transitioning towards eutrophy located in the 
Yunnan-Guizhou Plateau. 16S rRNA gene sequencing revealed that bacterial 
communities were dominated by Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, and Chloroflexi, 
while Euryarchaeota was the main archaeal phylum. Co-occurrence network analysis 
revealed that keystone taxa mainly belonged to rare species in the bacterial 
domain, but in the archaeal domain, over half of keystone taxa were abundant 
species, demonstrating their fundamental roles in network persistence. The rare 
bacterial taxa contributed substantially to the overall abundance (81.52%), 
whereas a smaller subset of abundant archaeal taxa accounted for up to 82.70% of 
the overall abundance. Functional predictions highlighted a divergence in 
metabolic potentials, with abundant bacterial sub-communities enriched in 
pathways for nitrogen cycling, sulfur cycling, and chlorate reduction, while 
rare bacterial sub-communities were linked to carbon cycling processes such as 
methanotrophy. Abundant archaeal sub-communities exhibited a high potential for 
methanogenesis, chemoheterotrophy, and dark hydrogen oxidation. Spearman 
correlation analysis showed that genera such as Candidatus competibacter, 
Geobacter, Syntrophobacter, Methanocella, and Methanosarcina may serve as 
potential indicators of eutrophication. Overall, this study provides insight 
into the distinct roles that rare and abundant taxa play in the littoral 
sediments of mesotrophic plateau lakes.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms12081617
PMCID: PMC11356345
PMID: 39203459

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.