---
reference_id: "PMID:37977833"
title: Pulmonary tuberculosis presenting with cluster sign and galaxy sign.
authors:
- Nakamura T
- Nishimura N
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2023-257377
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary tuberculosis presenting with cluster sign and galaxy sign.
**Authors:** Nakamura T, Nishimura N
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2023-257377](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2023-257377)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2023 Nov 17;16(11):e257377. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2023-257377.

Pulmonary tuberculosis presenting with cluster sign and galaxy sign.

Nakamura T(1), Nishimura N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Thoracic Center, St Luke's International 
Hospital, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan tonaka@luke.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Thoracic Center, St Luke's International 
Hospital, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

In a routine medical check-up, a healthy man in his 20s was found to have an 
upper left lung abnormality. Subsequent chest CT revealed the cluster sign (CS) 
and galaxy sign (GS). Although tests such as sputum analysis and 
interferon-gamma assays reduced the likelihood of tuberculosis, these 
abnormalities remained unchanged. A lung biopsy indicated non-caseating 
granuloma unrelated to tuberculosis. Initially suspected of sarcoidosis, the 
patient later developed fever and malaise. Follow-up CT showed CS progressing to 
a cavitatory shadow and GS intensification. The detection of Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis (M. tuberculosis) in a subsequent sputum analysis prompted 
treatment with antitubercular drugs, leading to symptom relief.CS and GS are 
usually associated with sarcoidosis but can also occur in tuberculosis, 
connected to slower pathogen growth and lower isolation rates. Furthermore, 
pulmonary tuberculosis may ultimately be present even when biopsies show 
non-caseating granulomas that are not typical of M. tuberculosis and sputum 
culture results are negative for M. tuberculosis Tuberculosis should not be 
ruled out lightly, and patients should be carefully followed-up.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2023-257377
PMCID: PMC10660153
PMID: 37977833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.