---
reference_id: "PMID:31827472"
title: Contribution of the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) to the Pathogenesis of Proteasome-Associated Autoinflammatory Syndromes (PRAAS).
authors:
- Ebstein F
- Poli Harlowe MC
- Studencka-Turski M
- Krüger E
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02756
keywords:
- "Activating Transcription Factor 6/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Autoimmune Diseases/genetics, immunology"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- "Endoribonucleases/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Interferon Type I/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- "NF-E2-Related Factor 1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Proteasome Endopeptidase Complex/genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Multimerization/genetics
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- Receptor Cross-Talk
- Syndrome
- Unfolded Protein Response/immunology
- "eIF-2 Kinase/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contribution of the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) to the Pathogenesis of Proteasome-Associated Autoinflammatory Syndromes (PRAAS).
**Authors:** Ebstein F, Poli Harlowe MC, Studencka-Turski M, Krüger E
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2019.02756](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2019.02756)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2019 Nov 26;10:2756. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02756. eCollection
 2019.

Contribution of the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) to the Pathogenesis of
Proteasome-Associated Autoinflammatory Syndromes (PRAAS).

Ebstein F(1), Poli Harlowe MC(2)(3), Studencka-Turski M(1), Krüger E(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Medizinische Biochemie und Molekularbiologie,
Universitätsmedizin Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
(2)Facultad de Medicina Clínica Alemana, Universidad del Desarrollo, Santiago,
Chile.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United
States.

Type I interferonopathies cover a phenotypically heterogeneous group of rare
genetic diseases including the recently described proteasome-associated
autoinflammatory syndromes (PRAAS). By definition, PRAAS are caused by inherited
and/or de novo loss-of-function mutations in genes encoding proteasome subunits
such as PSMB8, PSMB9, PSMB7, PSMA3, or proteasome assembly factors including
POMP and PSMG2, respectively. Disruption of any of these subunits results in
perturbed intracellular protein homeostasis including accumulation of
ubiquitinated proteins which is accompanied by a type I interferon (IFN)
signature. The observation that, similarly to pathogens, proteasome dysfunctions
are potent type I IFN inducers is quite unexpected and, up to now, the
underlying molecular mechanisms of this process remain largely unknown. One
promising candidate for triggering type I IFN under sterile conditions is the
unfolded protein response (UPR) which is typically initiated in response to an
accumulation of unfolded and/or misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) (also referred to as ER stress). The recent observation that the UPR is
engaged in subjects carrying POMP mutations strongly suggests its possible
implication in the cause-and-effect relationship between proteasome impairment
and interferonopathy onset. The purpose of this present review is therefore to
discuss the possible role of the UPR in the pathogenesis of PRAAS. We will
particularly focus on pathways initiated by the four ER-membrane proteins ATF6,
PERK, IRE1-α, and TCF11/Nrf1 which undergo activation under proteasome
inhibition. An overview of the current understanding of the mechanisms and
potential cross-talk between the UPR and inflammatory signaling casacades is
provided to convey a more integrated picture of the pathophysiology of PRAAS and
shed light on potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2019 Ebstein, Poli Harlowe, Studencka-Turski and Krüger.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02756
PMCID: PMC6890838
PMID: 31827472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
