---
reference_id: "PMID:17182655"
title: "Genotypes and phenotypes in children with short stature: clinical indicators of SHOX haploinsufficiency."
authors:
- Rappold G
- Blum WF
- Shavrikova EP
- Crowe BJ
- Roeth R
- Quigley CA
- Ross JL
- Niesler B
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2006.046581
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Anthropometry
- Body Height/genetics
- Child
- Demography
- Female
- Genotype
- Haploidy
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Phenotype
- Point Mutation/genetics
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Short Stature Homeobox Protein
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotypes and phenotypes in children with short stature: clinical indicators of SHOX haploinsufficiency.
**Authors:** Rappold G, Blum WF, Shavrikova EP, Crowe BJ, Roeth R, Quigley CA, Ross JL, Niesler B
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2006.046581](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2006.046581)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2007 May;44(5):306-13. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2006.046581. Epub 2006
Dec  20.

Genotypes and phenotypes in children with short stature: clinical indicators of 
SHOX haploinsufficiency.

Rappold G(1), Blum WF, Shavrikova EP, Crowe BJ, Roeth R, Quigley CA, Ross JL, 
Niesler B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany. gudrun.rappold@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Comment in
    J Med Genet. 2007 Oct;44(10):e90; author reply e91.

BACKGROUND: Short stature affects approximately 2% of children, representing one 
of the more frequent disorders for which clinical attention is sought during 
childhood. Despite assumed genetic heterogeneity, mutations or deletions of the 
short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) are found quite frequently in 
subjects with short stature. Haploinsufficiency of the SHOX gene causes short 
stature with highly variable clinical severity, ranging from isolated short 
stature without dysmorphic features to Léri-Weill syndrome, and with no 
functional copy of the SHOX gene, Langer syndrome.
METHODS: To characterise the clinical and molecular spectrum of SHOX deficiency 
in childhood we assessed the association between genotype and phenotype in a 
large cohort of children of short stature from 14 countries.
RESULTS: Screening of 1608 unrelated individuals with sporadic or familial short 
stature revealed SHOX mutations or deletions in 68 individuals (4.2%): complete 
deletions in 48 (70.6%), partial deletions in 4 (5.9%) and point mutations in 16 
individuals (23.5%). Although mean height standard deviation score (SDS) was not 
different between participants of short stature with or without identified SHOX 
gene defects (-2.6 vs -2.6), detailed examination revealed that certain bone 
deformities and dysmorphic signs, such as short forearm and lower leg, cubitus 
valgus, Madelung deformity, high-arched palate and muscular hypertrophy, 
differed markedly between participants with or without SHOX gene defects 
(p<0.001). Phenotypic data were also compared for 33 children with Turner 
syndrome in whom haploinsufficiency of SHOX is thought to be responsible for the 
height deficit.
CONCLUSION: A phenotype scoring system was developed that could assist in 
identifying the most appropriate subjects for SHOX testing. This study offers a 
detailed genotype-phenotype analysis in a large cohort of children of short 
stature, and provides quantitative clinical guidelines for testing of the SHOX 
gene.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2006.046581
PMCID: PMC2597980
PMID: 17182655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.