---
reference_id: "PMID:19410203"
title: "Primary ciliary dyskinesia: prospects for new therapies, building on the experience in cystic fibrosis."
authors:
- Amirav I
- Cohen-Cymberknoh M
- Shoseyov D
- Kerem E
journal: Paediatr Respir Rev
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.prrv.2008.11.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary ciliary dyskinesia: prospects for new therapies, building on the experience in cystic fibrosis.
**Authors:** Amirav I, Cohen-Cymberknoh M, Shoseyov D, Kerem E
**Journal:** Paediatr Respir Rev (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.prrv.2008.11.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prrv.2008.11.003)

## Content

1. Paediatr Respir Rev. 2009 Jun;10(2):58-62. doi: 10.1016/j.prrv.2008.11.003.
Epub  2009 Apr 9.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia: prospects for new therapies, building on the 
experience in cystic fibrosis.

Amirav I(1), Cohen-Cymberknoh M, Shoseyov D, Kerem E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Ziv Medical Center, Safed, Technion, Haifa, Israel.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a genetic disease associated with abnormal 
ciliary structure and function, leading to impaired mucociliary clearance, an 
important primary innate defense mechanism that protects the lungs. Drugs that 
can effectively treat PCD should overcome the defect in ciliary function and 
increase the mucociliary clearance. However, there are currently no therapeutic 
strategies that correct the inborn error of ciliary dysfunction to restore 
mucociliary clearance. It is unclear if osmolar agents like hypertonic saline or 
mannitol, therapies that increase the respiratory surface hydration like 
ion-channel regulators, or therapies aimed at reducing inflammation or mucus 
production, or softening the mucus will be effective in PCD. Many of these 
modalities are used in cystic fibrosis, yet no evidence exists to support their 
routine use in PCD. Newer genetic modifiers show an exciting potential for 
personalized medication, combining selection of patients with a common genetic 
mutation and a drug treatment that has been specifically designed to overcome 
that mutation, and will greatly enhance the therapeutic arsenal for PCD. This 
review summarizes current and future prospects for these therapeutic options.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prrv.2008.11.003
PMID: 19410203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]