---
reference_id: PMID:20301663
title: Pantothenate Kinase-Associated Neurodegeneration.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Gregory A
- Hayflick SJ
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pantothenate Kinase-Associated Neurodegeneration.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Gregory A, Hayflick SJ

## Content

1. Pantothenate Kinase-Associated Neurodegeneration.

Gregory A(1), Hayflick SJ(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2002 Aug 13 [updated 2017 Aug 3].

Author information:
(1)Genetic Counselor and Assistant Professor, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, Oregon
(2)Professor and Chair, Molecular and Medical Genetics, Professor, Pediatrics 
and Neurology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration 
(PKAN) is a type of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA). The 
phenotypic spectrum of PKAN includes classic PKAN and atypical PKAN. Classic 
PKAN is characterized by early-childhood onset of progressive dystonia, 
dysarthria, rigidity, and choreoathetosis. Pigmentary retinal degeneration is 
common. Atypical PKAN is characterized by later onset (age >10 years), prominent 
speech defects, psychiatric disturbances, and more gradual progression of 
disease.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of PKAN is established in a proband with the 
characteristic clinical features and the "eye of the tiger" sign identified on 
brain MRI (a central region of hyperintensity surrounded by a rim of 
hypointensity on coronal or transverse T2-weighted images of the globus 
pallidus). Identification of biallelic PANK2 pathogenic variants on molecular 
genetic testing confirms the diagnosis.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Intramuscular botulinum toxin, ablative 
pallidotomy or thalmotomy, intrathecal or oral baclofen, oral trihexyphenidyl, 
deep brain stimulation, physical therapy and occupational therapy to maintain 
joint mobility, referral for adaptive aids (walker, wheelchair) for gait 
abnormalities, speech therapy and/or assistive communication devices, treatment 
for retinopathy by ophthalmology, referral to community resources: financial 
services, services for the blind, and educational programs. Prevention of 
secondary complications: Full-mouth dental extraction when severe 
orobuccolingual dystonia results in recurrent tongue biting; gastrostomy tube 
feeding as needed. Surveillance: Evaluation for treatable causes of pain during 
episodes of extreme distress; monitoring of height and weight; routine 
ophthalmologic assessment; oral assessment for trauma, assessment of ambulation 
and speech abilities, feeding and nutrition assessment.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PKAN is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At 
conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of 
being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives, 
prenatal testing for a pregnancy at risk, and preimplantation genetic testing 
are possible if both pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected 
family member.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301663