---
reference_id: "PMID:38987869"
title: "Skin cancer risk after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Mansilla-Polo M
- López-Davia J
- De Unamuno-Bustos B
- Martín-Torregrosa D
- Abril-Pérez C
- Ezzatvar Y
- Botella-Estrada R
journal: Int J Dermatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/ijd.17371
keywords:
- Humans
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation/adverse effects
- "Skin Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology"
- Risk Factors
- "Graft vs Host Disease/etiology, epidemiology"
- Incidence
- Whole-Body Irradiation/adverse effects
- "Voriconazole/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Sex Factors
- "Transplantation, Autologous/adverse effects"
- "Transplantation, Homologous/adverse effects"
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/epidemiology, etiology"
- Male
- Female
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skin cancer risk after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Mansilla-Polo M, López-Davia J, De Unamuno-Bustos B, Martín-Torregrosa D, Abril-Pérez C, Ezzatvar Y, Botella-Estrada R
**Journal:** Int J Dermatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ijd.17371](https://doi.org/10.1111/ijd.17371)

## Content

1. Int J Dermatol. 2024 Dec;63(12):1691-1700. doi: 10.1111/ijd.17371. Epub 2024
Jul  10.

Skin cancer risk after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: a systematic
review and meta-analysis.

Mansilla-Polo M(1)(2)(3), López-Davia J(1)(2), De Unamuno-Bustos B(1)(2),
Martín-Torregrosa D(1)(2), Abril-Pérez C(1)(2), Ezzatvar Y(4), Botella-Estrada
R(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Universitario y Politécnico La Fe,
Valencia, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria (IIS) La Fe, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Universitat de València, Valencia, Spain.
(4)Department of Nursing, Universitat de València, Valencia, Spain.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) has improved outcomes for severe
hematologic, malignant, and immune disorders, yet poses an increased risk of
subsequent malignancies. This study aimed to examine the risk of skin cancer
following HSCT and identify potential risk factors. The search was conducted in
MEDLINE, EMBASE, and CINAHL databases until December 2023. Cohort studies
reporting standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) for post-HSCT skin cancer or
investigating risk factors were included. SIRs, or hazard ratios (HRs) with 95%
confidence interval (CI), were calculated using random-effects inverse-variance
models. Outcome endpoints were SIRs of skin cancer post-HSCT and risk factors,
including gender, chronic graft-versus-host disease (cGVHD), voriconazole
exposure, and total body irradiation (TBI). Twenty-six studies involving 164,944
HSCT recipients (allogeneic HSCT, n = 68,637; autologous HSCT, n = 95,435; mean
age: 38.5 ± 13.8 years; 71,354 females [43.3%]) were analyzed. Overall, SIR for
skin cancer post-HSCT was 7.21 (95% CI 3.98-13.08), with SIRs of 2.25 (95% CI:
1.37-3.68) for autologous HSCT, and 10.18 (95% CI 5.07-20.43) for allogeneic
HSCT. Risk factors for skin cancer risk included cGVHD (HR = 2.86 [95% CI:
2.01-4.07]), specifically for basal cell and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
(HR = 1.80 [95% CI: 1.31-2.46] and HR = 3.68 [95% CI: 2.39-5.68], respectively),
male gender (HR = 1.56 [95% CI: 1.15-2.13]), especially for SCC (HR = 1.70 [95%
CI: 1.03-2.80]), and voriconazole exposure (HR = 2.01 [95% CI: 1.12-3.61]). TBI
showed no statistically significant association with subsequent skin cancer
(HR = 1.12 [95% CI: 0.73-1.71]). These findings highlight the importance of
rigorous skin cancer surveillance and preventive strategies in HSCT recipients,
particularly in male individuals undergoing allogeneic transplants and those
with identifiable risk factors, to enable early detection and intervention.

© 2024 the International Society of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.1111/ijd.17371
PMID: 38987869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
