---
reference_id: "PMID:20301657"
title: L1 Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Stumpel C
- Vos YJ
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# L1 Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Stumpel C, Vos YJ

## Content

1. L1 Syndrome.

Stumpel C(1), Vos YJ(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2004 Apr 28 [updated 2021 Jan 7].

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics Academic Hospital Maastricht and School for 
Oncology & Developmental Biology (GROW); Maastricht University and University 
Hospital Maastricht (MUMC+) Maastricht, the Netherlands
(2)Department of Genetics University Medical Center Groningen Groningen, the 
Netherlands

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: L1 syndrome involves a phenotypic spectrum ranging 
from severe to mild and includes three clinical phenotypes: X-linked 
hydrocephalus with stenosis of the aqueduct of Sylvius (HSAS). MASA (mental 
retardation [intellectual disability], aphasia [delayed speech], spastic 
paraplegia [shuffling gait], adducted thumbs) syndrome including X-linked 
complicated hereditary spastic paraplegia type 1. X-linked complicated corpus 
callosum agenesis. Males with HSAS are born with severe hydrocephalus, adducted 
thumbs, and spasticity; intellectual disability is severe. In less severely 
affected males, hydrocephalus may be subclinically present and documented only 
because of developmental delay; intellectual disability ranges from mild (IQ: 
50-70) to moderate (IQ: 30-50). It is important to note that all phenotypes can 
be observed in affected individuals within the same family.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of L1 syndrome is established in a male proband 
with suggestive findings and a hemizygous pathogenic variant in L1CAM identified 
by molecular genetic testing. The diagnosis of L1 syndrome in a female is 
unusual but not impossible (most likely in the setting of general delay and/or 
hydrocephalus) and is established with the identification of a heterozygous 
pathogenic variant in L1CAM by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: It is best to involve a 
multidisciplinary team with expertise in pediatrics, child neurology, 
neurosurgery, rehabilitation, and clinical genetics. Shunting of the 
cerebrospinal fluid should be performed as needed to reduce intracranial 
pressure. Individual educational programming is indicated for developmental 
delay and intellectual disability. Standard treatment guidelines should be 
followed for spasticity. A splint may help reduce the degree of thumb adduction; 
surgery is not generally indicated. Surveillance: Neurologic evaluation at 
regular intervals to monitor hydrocephalus, developmental progress, and spastic 
paraplegia.
GENETIC COUNSELING: L1 syndrome is inherited in an X-linked manner. If the 
mother of the proband is heterozygous for an L1CAM pathogenic variant, the 
chance of transmitting it in each pregnancy is 50%. Males who inherit the L1CAM 
pathogenic variant will be affected; females who inherit the pathogenic variant 
will be heterozygotes and will usually not be affected but may have a range of 
(typically mild) clinical manifestations. Once the L1CAM pathogenic variant has 
been identified in an affected family member, heterozygote detection, prenatal 
testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, and preimplantation genetic testing 
are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301657