---
reference_id: "PMID:17426356"
title: "Hughes Syndrome: the antiphospholipid syndrome--a clinical overview."
authors:
- Hughes G
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2007'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hughes Syndrome: the antiphospholipid syndrome--a clinical overview.
**Authors:** Hughes G
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2007)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2007 Feb;32(1):3-12.

Hughes Syndrome: the antiphospholipid syndrome--a clinical overview.

Hughes G(1).

Author information:
(1)London Lupus Centre, London Bridge Hospital, London, United Kingdom. 
sandyhampson@hcahealthcare.co.uk

In 1983, a detailed clinical description of a new syndrome was published. This 
prothrombotic syndrome was initially called the anticardiolipin syndrome and 
subsequently the antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), or Hughes Syndrome. Almost 
uniquely, it results in arterial as well as venous thrombosis and is marked by 
the presence of circulating antiphospholipid antibodies. Clinical features are 
protean, ranging from peripheral deep vein thrombosis (DVT) to involvement of 
internal organs such as the liver, kidneys, and adrenals. Likewise, arterial 
thrombosis can result in life-threatening infarction of organs such as the 
heart. The nervous system is frequently affected, with migraine, memory loss, 
balance disorders, stroke, and atypical multiple sclerosis being prominent. 
Other features include recurrent miscarriage, thrombocytopenia, and livedo 
reticularis. More recent observations have included ischemic bone fractures, 
renal and celiac artery stenosis, and a possible tendency toward accelerated 
atherosclerosis. The condition is seen in patients with lupus, but, 
significantly, occurs without associated lupus ("primary" APS)-indeed, 
increasing clinical recognition of Hughes Syndrome suggests that this condition 
will overtake lupus in prevalence. Treatment at present is by anticoagulation. 
The mechanisms for thrombosis are being worked out; it has been suggested that 
in some situations (e.g., pregnancy loss), an inflammatory component as well as 
thrombosis may play a part.

PMID: 17426356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]