---
reference_id: "PMID:37206535"
title: "Understanding Auto-Brewery Syndrome in 2023: A Clinical and Comprehensive Review of a Rare Medical Condition."
authors:
- Paramsothy J
- Gutlapalli SD
- Ganipineni VDP
- Okorie IJ
- Ugwendum D
- Piccione G
- Ducey J
- Kouyate G
- Onana A
- Emmer L
- Arulthasan V
- Otterbeck P
- Nfonoyim J
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.37678
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding Auto-Brewery Syndrome in 2023: A Clinical and Comprehensive Review of a Rare Medical Condition.
**Authors:** Paramsothy J, Gutlapalli SD, Ganipineni VDP, Okorie IJ, Ugwendum D, Piccione G, Ducey J, Kouyate G, Onana A, Emmer L, Arulthasan V, Otterbeck P, Nfonoyim J
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.37678](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.37678)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Apr 17;15(4):e37678. doi: 10.7759/cureus.37678. eCollection 2023 
Apr.

Understanding Auto-Brewery Syndrome in 2023: A Clinical and Comprehensive Review 
of a Rare Medical Condition.

Paramsothy J(1), Gutlapalli SD(1)(2), Ganipineni VDP(3)(4)(5), Okorie IJ(1), 
Ugwendum D(1), Piccione G(1), Ducey J(1), Kouyate G(1), Onana A(1), Emmer L(1), 
Arulthasan V(1), Otterbeck P(6), Nfonoyim J(7).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Richmond University Medical Center Affiliated with Mount 
Sinai Health System and Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Staten Island, 
USA.
(2)Internal Medicine Clinical Research, California Institute of Behavioral 
Neurosciences and Psychology, Fairfield, USA.
(3)General Medicine, SRM Medical College Hospital and Research Center, Chennai, 
IND.
(4)General Medicine, Andhra Medical College/King George Hospital, Visakhapatnam, 
IND.
(5)Internal Medicine, Thomas Hospital Infirmary Health, Fairhope, USA.
(6)Endocrinology, Richmond University Medical Center Affiliated with Mount Sinai 
Health System and Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Staten Island, USA.
(7)Pulmonary and Critical Care, Richmond University Medical Center Affiliated 
with Mount Sinai Health System and Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
Staten Island, USA.

Auto-brewery syndrome (ABS) occurs when the gastrointestinal tract produces 
excessive endogenous ethanol. This article examines various aspects of ABS such 
as its epidemiology, underlying etiology, diagnostic difficulties, management 
strategies, and social implications. By synthesizing the existing medical 
literature, we hope to identify understanding gaps, pave the way for further 
research, and ultimately improve detection, treatment, and awareness. The 
databases we used are PubMed, PubMed Central, and Google Scholar. We carefully 
screened all published articles from inception till date and narrowed down 24 
relevant articles. We at Richmond University Medical Center and Mount Sinai are 
one of the leading medical centers for diagnosing and treating this rare 
condition in the United States.

Copyright © 2023, Paramsothy et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.37678
PMCID: PMC10189828
PMID: 37206535

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.