---
reference_id: "PMID:35102081"
title: Social withdrawal and neurocognitive correlates in schizophrenia.
authors:
- De Donatis D
- Porcelli S
- De Ronchi D
- Merlo Pich E
- Kas MJ
- Bilderbeck A
- Serretti A
journal: Int Clin Psychopharmacol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/YIC.0000000000000395
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Social withdrawal and neurocognitive correlates in schizophrenia.
**Authors:** De Donatis D, Porcelli S, De Ronchi D, Merlo Pich E, Kas MJ, Bilderbeck A, Serretti A
**Journal:** Int Clin Psychopharmacol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/YIC.0000000000000395](https://doi.org/10.1097/YIC.0000000000000395)

## Content

1. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2022 May 1;37(3):102-109. doi: 
10.1097/YIC.0000000000000395.

Social withdrawal and neurocognitive correlates in schizophrenia.

De Donatis D(1), Porcelli S(1), De Ronchi D(1), Merlo Pich E(2), Kas MJ(3), 
Bilderbeck A(4), Serretti A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences, University of Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy.
(2)Research & Development, Alfasigma Schweiz, Zofingen, Switzerland.
(3)Groningen Institute for Evolutionary Life Sciences, University of Groningen, 
Groningen, the Netherlands.
(4)P1vital Ltd, Wallingford, UK.

Poor neurocognitive performance has been associated with poor functional outcome 
in schizophrenia (SCZ) in past studies. Nonetheless, the likely association 
between neurocognition and social withdrawal has never been investigated. The 
aim of our study was to investigate in a large and heterogeneous sample of SCZ 
patient cross-sectional associations between neurocognitive domains and social 
withdrawal. The sample included 761 SCZ patients who completed the baseline 
visit in the CATIE study. Neurocognition was assessed by a comprehensive battery 
of tests resulting in five domain scores and a composite score. Social 
withdrawal was measured by a specific item of the Heinrichs-Carpenter Quality of 
Life Scale. Social withdrawal was associated with a lower score in the 
neurocognitive composite score and in 'Verbal memory,' 'Processing speed' and 
'Working memory' scores. 'Verbal memory' score showed the strongest association 
with social withdrawal. Eight percent of the total variance of social withdrawal 
was explained by these three cognitive domains and additional clinical and 
sociodemographic factors (education years, PANSS positive symptoms score, and 
employment). Our results confirmed the wide heterogeneity and specificity of the 
correlation between neurocognitive domains and indicators of functional outcome 
in SCZ, underlining the role of certain neurocognitive abilities in social 
withdrawal.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/YIC.0000000000000395
PMCID: PMC8969845
PMID: 35102081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.S. is or has been a consultant to or has 
received honoraria or grants unrelated to the present work from: Abbott, Abbvie, 
Angelini, Astra Zeneca, Clinical Data, Boheringer, Bristol Myers Squibb, Eli 
Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline, Innovapharma, Italfarmaco, Janssen, Lundbeck, Naurex, 
Pfizer, Polifarma, Sanofi, and Servier. For the remaining authors, there are no 
conflicts of interest.