---
reference_id: "PMID:37850394"
title: Improved Cardiac Performance and Decreased Arrhythmia in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy With Non-β-Blocking R-Enantiomer Carvedilol.
authors:
- Seo K
- Yamamoto Y
- Kirillova A
- Kawana M
- Yadav S
- Huang Y
- Wang Q
- Lane KV
- Pruitt BL
- Perez MV
- Bernstein D
- Wu JC
- Wheeler MT
- Parikh VN
- Ashley EA
journal: Circulation
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.123.065017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Improved Cardiac Performance and Decreased Arrhythmia in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy With Non-β-Blocking R-Enantiomer Carvedilol.
**Authors:** Seo K, Yamamoto Y, Kirillova A, Kawana M, Yadav S, Huang Y, Wang Q, Lane KV, Pruitt BL, Perez MV, Bernstein D, Wu JC, Wheeler MT, Parikh VN, Ashley EA
**Journal:** Circulation (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.123.065017](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.123.065017)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2023 Nov 21;148(21):1691-1704. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.123.065017. Epub 2023 Oct 18.

Improved Cardiac Performance and Decreased Arrhythmia in Hypertrophic 
Cardiomyopathy With Non-β-Blocking R-Enantiomer Carvedilol.

Seo K(1), Yamamoto Y(1), Kirillova A(1), Kawana M(1), Yadav S(1), Huang Y(1), 
Wang Q(1), Lane KV(2), Pruitt BL(2)(3), Perez MV(1), Bernstein D(4), Wu JC(5), 
Wheeler MT(1), Parikh VN(1), Ashley EA(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Medicine (K.S., Y.Y., A.K., M.K., S.Y., Y.H., Q.W., 
M.V.P., M.T.W., V.N.P., E.A.A.), Stanford University School of Medicine, CA.
(2)Departments of Mechanical Engineering (K.V.L., B.L.P.), University of 
California, Santa Barbara, CA.
(3)BioMolecular Science and Engineering (B.L.P.), University of California, 
Santa Barbara, CA.
(4)Pediatrics (D.B.), Stanford University School of Medicine, CA.
(5)Cardiovascular Research Institute (J.C.W.), Stanford University School of 
Medicine, CA.
(6)Genetics (E.A.A.), Stanford University School of Medicine, CA.

BACKGROUND: Hypercontractility and arrhythmia are key pathophysiologic features 
of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), the most common inherited heart disease. 
β-Adrenergic receptor antagonists (β-blockers) are the first-line therapy for 
HCM. However, β-blockers commonly selected for this disease are often poorly 
tolerated in patients, where heart-rate reduction and noncardiac effects can 
lead to reduced cardiac output and fatigue. Mavacamten, myosin ATPase inhibitor 
recently approved by the US Food and Drug Administration, has demonstrated the 
ability to ameliorate hypercontractility without lowering heart rate, but its 
benefits are so far limited to patients with left ventricular (LV) outflow tract 
obstruction, and its effect on arrhythmia is unknown.
METHODS: We screened 21 β-blockers for their impact on myocyte contractility and 
evaluated the antiarrhythmic properties of the most promising drug in a 
ventricular myocyte arrhythmia model. We then examined its in vivo effect on LV 
function by hemodynamic pressure-volume loop analysis. The efficacy of the drug 
was tested in vitro and in vivo compared with current therapeutic options 
(metoprolol, verapamil, and mavacamten) for HCM in an established mouse model of 
HCM (Myh6R403Q/+ and induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived cardiomyocytes 
from patients with HCM (MYH7R403Q/+).
RESULTS: We identified that carvedilol, a β-blocker not commonly used in HCM, 
suppresses contractile function and arrhythmia by inhibiting RyR2 (ryanodine 
receptor type 2). Unlike metoprolol (a β1-blocker), carvedilol markedly reduced 
LV contractility through RyR2 inhibition, while maintaining stroke volume 
through α1-adrenergic receptor inhibition in vivo. Clinically available 
carvedilol is a racemic mixture, and the R-enantiomer, devoid of β-blocking 
effect, retains the ability to inhibit both α1-receptor and RyR2, thereby 
suppressing contractile function and arrhythmias without lowering heart rate and 
cardiac output. In Myh6R403Q/+ mice, R-carvedilol normalized hyperdynamic 
contraction, suppressed arrhythmia, and increased cardiac output better than 
metoprolol, verapamil, and mavacamten. The ability of R-carvedilol to suppress 
contractile function was well retained in MYH7R403Q/+ iPSC-derived 
cardiomyocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: R-enantiomer carvedilol attenuates hyperdynamic contraction, 
suppresses arrhythmia, and at the same time, improves cardiac output without 
lowering heart rate by dual blockade of α1-adrenergic receptor and RyR2 in mouse 
and human models of HCM. This combination of therapeutic effects is unique among 
current therapeutic options for HCM and may particularly benefit patients 
without LV outflow tract obstruction.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.123.065017
PMID: 37850394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures K.S., V.N.P., and E.A.A. filed a US 
patent related to this work (Application No. 63/479,523; filed January 11, 
2023). K.S. and S.Y., previously affiliated with Stanford University at the time 
of the study and manuscript preparation, are now employees of Bristol Myers 
Squibb. V.N.P. receives research funding from BioMarin, as well as consulting 
fees from Lexeo Therapeutics, Nuevocor, and Viz.ai and is a shareholder in 
Constantiam Bio. M.T.W. has consulted for, received clinical trial support from, 
and received in kind support from MyoKardia (which was acquired by Bristol Myers 
Squibb), and received clinical trial support from Novartis and CytoKinetics. 
E.A.A. is a founder of Personalis, Inc, DeepCell, Inc, and Svexa Inc; a founding 
advisor of Nuevocor; a nonexecutive director at AstraZeneca; and an advisor to 
SequenceBio, Novartis, Medical Excellence Capital, Foresite Capital, and Third 
Rock Ventures. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.