---
reference_id: "PMID:18348774"
title: "The treatment of giardiasis in children: single-dose tinidazole compared with 3 days of nitazoxanide."
authors:
- Escobedo AA
- Alvarez G
- González ME
- Almirall P
- Cañete R
- Cimerman S
- Ruiz A
- Pérez R
journal: Ann Trop Med Parasitol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1179/136485908X267894
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The treatment of giardiasis in children: single-dose tinidazole compared with 3 days of nitazoxanide.
**Authors:** Escobedo AA, Alvarez G, González ME, Almirall P, Cañete R, Cimerman S, Ruiz A, Pérez R
**Journal:** Ann Trop Med Parasitol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1179/136485908X267894](https://doi.org/10.1179/136485908X267894)

## Content

1. Ann Trop Med Parasitol. 2008 Apr;102(3):199-207. doi:
10.1179/136485908X267894.

The treatment of giardiasis in children: single-dose tinidazole compared with 3 
days of nitazoxanide.

Escobedo AA(1), Alvarez G, González ME, Almirall P, Cañete R, Cimerman S, Ruiz 
A, Pérez R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Pediatric Academic Hospital 'Pedro Borrás', 616 
F. Plaza Havana City, 10400, Cuba. escobedo@infomed.sld.cu

Giardia lamblia is among the commonest intestinal protozoa world-wide and may 
cause significant morbidity, especially in children. Although 5-nitroimidazole 
compounds have formed the mainstay of giardiasis treatment for several years, 
the increasing number of reports of refractory cases given these and other 
antigiardial agents has raised concern and led to a search for other compounds. 
The aim of the present study was to compare the efficacy and safety, in the 
treatment of children infected with G. lamblia, of nitazoxanide, given at a dose 
of 7.5 mg/kg twice a day for 3 days, with those of tinidazole, given as a single 
dose of 50 mg/kg. Overall, 166 children, each proven to be infected with G. 
lamblia by the microscopical examination of a faecal sample, were included in 
the open and randomized trial, each being allocated to receive nitazoxanide or 
tinidazole. The parents of each treated child were asked to collect two faecal 
samples from the child between 5 and 10 days after the completion of treatment, 
for the parasitological follow-up. Only if no G. lamblia were found in both 
post-treatment samples from a child was that child considered cured. Among the 
137 children who completed the study (74 given nitazoxanide and 63 given 
tinidazole), the frequency of parasitological cure following a single dose of 
tinidazole was significantly higher than that following six doses of 
nitazoxanide (90.5% v. 78.4%; P<0.05). Both treatment schedules were well 
accepted and well tolerated, with only mild, transient and self-limited 
side-effects reported. The commonest symptom on enrolment, diarrhoea, generally 
cleared 2-6 days after the initiation of treatment. Although apparently less 
efficacious than tinidazole, nitazoxanide remains a good candidate for the 
treatment of children with G. lamblia infection.

DOI: 10.1179/136485908X267894
PMID: 18348774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]