---
reference_id: "PMID:19187625"
title: "Vaccination against hepatitis B: the Chinese experience."
authors:
- Zhou YH
- Wu C
- Zhuang H
journal: Chin Med J (Engl)
year: '2009'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vaccination against hepatitis B: the Chinese experience.
**Authors:** Zhou YH, Wu C, Zhuang H
**Journal:** Chin Med J (Engl) (2009)

## Content

1. Chin Med J (Engl). 2009 Jan 5;122(1):98-102.

Vaccination against hepatitis B: the Chinese experience.

Zhou YH(1), Wu C, Zhuang H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing 
University Medical School, Jiangsu, China.

Erratum in
    Chin Med J (Engl). 2009 Feb 20;122(4):459.

OBJECTIVE: To review the implementation of mass vaccination of hepatitis B 
vaccine and its critical role in prevention of hepatitis B virus infection in 
China.
DATA SOURCES: The data were mainly from PubMed, China Hospital Knowledge 
Database, and other popular Chinese journals published from 1980 to 2008. The 
search term was "hepatitis B vaccine".
STUDY SELECTION: Original studies conducted in China and critical reviews 
authored by principal investigators in the field of hepatology in China were 
selected.
RESULTS: Chinese investigators started to develop hepatitis B vaccine in late 
1970s. The first home-made plasma-derived vaccine became available in 1986, 
which has been completely replaced by the domestically produced recombinant 
(yeast or Chinese hamster ovary cell) vaccine since 2001. China health authority 
recommended vaccinating all infants in 1992. From then on, China has put 
tremendous efforts in implementation of mass vaccination. The overall coverage 
of hepatitis B vaccine in infants has increased steadily and reached more than 
95.0% in urban and 83.0% - 97.0% in rural areas. The chronic HBV carrier rate in 
children < 10 years of age decreased from 10.0% before the mass vaccination to 
1.0% - 2.0% in 2006, and that in general population decreased from 10.0% to 
7.2%; overall, the nationwide mass hepatitis B vaccination has reduced more than 
30 million of chronic HBV infections and HBV related severe sequlae.
CONCLUSION: The Chinese successful experience in control of hepatitis B by mass 
vaccination offers an example for any unindustrialized country whoever is 
committed to control this disease.

PMID: 19187625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]