---
reference_id: "PMID:38529463"
title: "Atypical Lyme Disease Rash: A Case Report."
authors:
- Khanna S
- Goebel LJ
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.54779
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical Lyme Disease Rash: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Khanna S, Goebel LJ
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.54779](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.54779)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Feb 23;16(2):e54779. doi: 10.7759/cureus.54779. eCollection 2024 
Feb.

Atypical Lyme Disease Rash: A Case Report.

Khanna S(1), Goebel LJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, Marshall University, 
Huntington, USA.

Lyme disease (LD), caused in the United States primarily by Borrelia burgdorferi 
sensu lato, is a tick-borne illness characterized by a spectrum of clinical 
manifestations depending on the stage of illness. Most clinicians are familiar 
with the classic bullseye appearance of the erythema migrans (EM) rash that 
occurs in the early stage of the disease. However, many providers may not be 
aware of alternate appearances for the rash. This paper reports the case of a 
69-year-old female with LD, exhibiting an atypical rash with purplish 
discoloration that was devoid of an outer ring or central clearing. In 
geographic areas with a high incidence of LD, it is especially important for 
clinicians to recognize alternative LD presentations. Healthcare providers 
should maintain a high index of suspicion of LD in patients with tick bites, 
even without typical EM, to ensure early diagnosis and treatment. Education on 
diverse LD presentations is crucial for improving public health outcomes.

Copyright © 2024, Khanna et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.54779
PMCID: PMC10961653
PMID: 38529463

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.