---
reference_id: "PMID:29622585"
title: Prevalence and Progression of Late Gadolinium Enhancement in Children and Adolescents With Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Axelsson Raja A
- Farhad H
- Valente AM
- Couce JP
- Jefferies JL
- Bundgaard H
- Zahka K
- Lever H
- Murphy AM
- Ashley E
- Day SM
- Sherrid MV
- Shi L
- Bluemke DA
- Canter CE
- Colan SD
- Ho CY
journal: Circulation
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.032966
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and Progression of Late Gadolinium Enhancement in Children and Adolescents With Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Axelsson Raja A, Farhad H, Valente AM, Couce JP, Jefferies JL, Bundgaard H, Zahka K, Lever H, Murphy AM, Ashley E, Day SM, Sherrid MV, Shi L, Bluemke DA, Canter CE, Colan SD, Ho CY
**Journal:** Circulation (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.032966](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.032966)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2018 Aug 21;138(8):782-792. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.032966.

Prevalence and Progression of Late Gadolinium Enhancement in Children and 
Adolescents With Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.

Axelsson Raja A(1)(2), Farhad H(2), Valente AM(3), Couce JP(3)(4), Jefferies 
JL(5), Bundgaard H(1), Zahka K(6), Lever H(6), Murphy AM(7), Ashley E(8), Day 
SM(9), Sherrid MV(10), Shi L(11), Bluemke DA(12), Canter CE(13), Colan SD(3), Ho 
CY(2).

Author information:
(1)Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Denmark (A.A., H.B.).
(2)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA (A.A., H.F., C.Y.H.).
(3)Boston Children's Hospital, MA (A.M.V., J.-P.C., S.D.C.).
(4)The present affiliation for J.-P. Couce is the London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine.
(5)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, OH (J.L.J.).
(6)Cleveland Clinic, OH (K.Z., H.L.).
(7)Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD (A.M.M.).
(8)Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA (E.A.).
(9)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (S.M.D.).
(10)New York University Langone Medical Center, NY (M.V.S.).
(11)New England Research Institutes, Watertown, MA (L.S.).
(12)University of Wisconsin, Madison (D.A.B.).
(13)Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO (C.E.C.).

Comment in
    Ann Transl Med. 2018 Nov;6(Suppl 1):S52. doi: 10.21037/atm.2018.10.07.

BACKGROUND: Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) on cardiac magnetic resonance 
imaging (CMR) is believed to represent dense replacement fibrosis. It is seen in 
≈60% of adult patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). However, the 
prevalence of LGE in children and adolescents with HCM is not well established. 
In addition, longitudinal studies describing the development and evolution of 
LGE in pediatric HCM are lacking. This study assesses the prevalence, 
progression, and clinical correlations of LGE in children and adolescents with, 
or genetically predisposed to, HCM.
METHODS: CMR scans from 195 patients ≤21 years of age were analyzed in an 
observational, retrospective study, including 155 patients with overt HCM and 40 
sarcomere mutation carriers without left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy. The 
extent of LGE was quantified by measuring regions with signal intensity >6 SD 
above nulled remote myocardium.
RESULTS: Patients were 14.3±4.5 years of age at baseline and 68% were male. LGE 
was present in 70 (46%) patients with overt HCM (median extent, 3.3%; 
interquartile range, 0.8-7.1%), but absent in mutation carriers without LV 
hypertrophy. Thirty-one patients had >1 CMR (median interval between studies, 
2.4 years; interquartile range, 1.5-3.2 years). LGE was detected in 13 patients 
(42%) at baseline and in 16 patients (52%) at follow-up CMR. The median extent 
of LGE increased by 2.4 g/y (range, 0-13.2 g/y) from 2.9% (interquartile range, 
0.8-3.2%) of LV mass to 4.3% (interquartile range, 2.9-6.8%) ( P=0.02). In 
addition to LGE, LV mass and left atrial volume, indexed to body surface area, 
and z score for LV mass, as well, increased significantly from first to most 
recent CMR.
CONCLUSIONS: LGE was present in 46% of children and adolescents with overt HCM, 
in contrast to ≈60% typically reported in adult HCM. In the subset of patients 
with serial imaging, statistically significant increases in LGE, LV mass, and 
left atrial size were detected over 2.5 years, indicating disease progression 
over time. Further prospective studies are required to confirm these findings 
and to better understand the clinical implications of LGE in pediatric HCM.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.032966
PMCID: PMC6173664
PMID: 29622585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]