---
reference_id: "PMID:20301416"
title: Krabbe Disease.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Orsini JJ
- Escolar ML
- Wasserstein MP
- Caggana M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Krabbe Disease.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Orsini JJ, Escolar ML, Wasserstein MP, Caggana M

## Content

1. Krabbe Disease.

Orsini JJ(1), Escolar ML(2), Wasserstein MP(3), Caggana M(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2000 Jun 19 [updated 2018 Oct 11].

Author information:
(1)Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, Albany, New York
(2)Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh – UPMC, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
(3)Children's Hospital at Montefiore;, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Bronx, New York

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Krabbe disease comprises a spectrum ranging from 
infantile-onset disease (i.e., onset of extreme irritability, spasticity, and 
developmental delay before age 12 months) to later-onset disease (i.e., onset of 
manifestations after age 12 months and as late as the seventh decade). Although 
historically 85%-90% of symptomatic individuals with Krabbe disease diagnosed by 
enzyme activity alone have infantile-onset Krabbe disease and 10%-15% have 
later-onset Krabbe disease, the experience with newborn screening (NBS) suggests 
that the proportion of individuals with possible later-onset Krabbe disease is 
higher than previously thought. Infantile-onset Krabbe disease is characterized 
by normal development in the first few months followed by rapid severe 
neurologic deterioration; the average age of death is 24 months (range 8 months 
to 9 years). Later-onset Krabbe disease is much more variable in its 
presentation and disease course.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The two diagnostic scenarios are the following: Scenario 1. 
The diagnosis of Krabbe disease, suspected in a symptomatic proband based on 
clinical findings (by age) and other supportive laboratory, neuroimaging, and 
electrophysiologic findings, is established by detection of deficient GALC 
enzyme activity in leukocytes. Abnormal results require follow-up molecular 
genetic testing of GALC; elevated psychosine levels can also help establish the 
diagnosis. Scenario 2. In an asymptomatic newborn with low GALC enzyme activity 
on dried blood spot specimens on NBS urgent time-critical measurement of blood 
psychosine levels and GALC molecular genetic testing is necessary to identify – 
before age 14 days – those newborns with evidence of infantile-onset Krabbe 
disease who are candidates for early treatment with hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation (HSCT).
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment of a child who is symptomatic 
before age six months is supportive and focused on increasing the quality of 
life and avoiding complications. For older individuals, treatment with HSCT is 
individualized based on disease burden and manifestations. Prevention of primary 
manifestations: Consensus guidelines recommend that asymptomatic newborns 
identified by either prenatal/neonatal evaluation because of a positive family 
history of Krabbe disease or an abnormal NBS result undergo additional testing 
to identify those with infantile-onset Krabbe disease. Those with laboratory 
findings consistent with infantile-onset Krabbe disease are candidates for HSCT 
before age 30 days. Surveillance: Monitor symptomatic individuals with Krabbe 
disease for development of: hydrocephalus, swallowing difficulties and chronic 
microaspiration, scoliosis, hip subluxation, and osteopenia, decreased vision, 
and corneal ulcerations. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Atypical antipsychotics 
and multiple medications for seizures can cause over-sedation (affecting 
cognition, respiratory drive, and rate of neurologic decline). Routine childhood 
vaccinations can accelerate disease progression. Evaluation of relatives at 
risk: Couples who have had one child with molecularly confirmed infantile-onset 
Krabbe disease may choose prenatal molecular genetic testing in subsequent 
pregnancies so that newborns with biallelic GALC pathogenic variants can be 
promptly tested and – if appropriate -- referred for HSCT.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Krabbe disease is inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner. At conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of 
being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance 
of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the GALC pathogenic variants have 
been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk 
relatives, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, and 
preimplantation genetic diagnosis are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301416