---
reference_id: "PMID:19779022"
title: "FOXE1 association with both isolated cleft lip with or without cleft palate, and isolated cleft palate."
authors:
- Moreno LM
- Mansilla MA
- Bullard SA
- Cooper ME
- Busch TD
- Machida J
- Johnson MK
- Brauer D
- Krahn K
- Daack-Hirsch S
- "L'heureux J"
- Valencia-Ramirez C
- Rivera D
- López AM
- Moreno MA
- Hing A
- Lammer EJ
- Jones M
- Christensen K
- Lie RT
- Jugessur A
- Wilcox AJ
- Chines P
- Pugh E
- Doheny K
- Arcos-Burgos M
- Marazita ML
- Murray JC
- Lidral AC
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp444
keywords:
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 9/genetics"
- Cleft Lip/genetics
- Cleft Palate/genetics
- Forkhead Transcription Factors/genetics
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Lod Score
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FOXE1 association with both isolated cleft lip with or without cleft palate, and isolated cleft palate.
**Authors:** Moreno LM, Mansilla MA, Bullard SA, Cooper ME, Busch TD, Machida J, Johnson MK, Brauer D, Krahn K, Daack-Hirsch S, L'heureux J, Valencia-Ramirez C, Rivera D, López AM, Moreno MA, Hing A, Lammer EJ, Jones M, Christensen K, Lie RT, Jugessur A, Wilcox AJ, Chines P, Pugh E, Doheny K, Arcos-Burgos M, Marazita ML, Murray JC, Lidral AC
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddp444](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddp444)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Dec 15;18(24):4879-96. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp444. Epub 2009 
Sep 24.

FOXE1 association with both isolated cleft lip with or without cleft palate, and 
isolated cleft palate.

Moreno LM(1), Mansilla MA, Bullard SA, Cooper ME, Busch TD, Machida J, Johnson 
MK, Brauer D, Krahn K, Daack-Hirsch S, L'heureux J, Valencia-Ramirez C, Rivera 
D, López AM, Moreno MA, Hing A, Lammer EJ, Jones M, Christensen K, Lie RT, 
Jugessur A, Wilcox AJ, Chines P, Pugh E, Doheny K, Arcos-Burgos M, Marazita ML, 
Murray JC, Lidral AC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthodontics, College of Dentistry, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA 52242, USA.

Nonsyndromic orofacial clefts are a common complex birth defect caused by 
genetic and environmental factors and/or their interactions. A previous 
genome-wide linkage scan discovered a novel locus for cleft lip with or without 
cleft palate (CL/P) at 9q22-q33. To identify the etiologic gene, we undertook an 
iterative and complementary fine mapping strategy using family-based CL/P 
samples from Colombia, USA and the Philippines. Candidate genes within 9q22-q33 
were sequenced, revealing 32 new variants. Concurrently, 397 SNPs spanning the 
9q22-q33 2-LOD-unit interval were tested for association. Significant SNP and 
haplotype association signals (P = 1.45E - 08) narrowed the interval to a 200 kb 
region containing: FOXE1, C9ORF156 and HEMGN. Association results were 
replicated in CL/P families of European descent and when all populations were 
combined the two most associated SNPs, rs3758249 (P = 5.01E - 13) and rs4460498 
(P = 6.51E - 12), were located inside a 70 kb high linkage disequilibrium block 
containing FOXE1. Association signals for Caucasians and Asians clustered 5' and 
3' of FOXE1, respectively. Isolated cleft palate (CP) was also associated, 
indicating that FOXE1 plays a role in two phenotypes thought to be genetically 
distinct. Foxe1 expression was found in the epithelium undergoing fusion between 
the medial nasal and maxillary processes. Mutation screens of FOXE1 identified 
two family-specific missense mutations at highly conserved amino acids. These 
data indicate that FOXE1 is a major gene for CL/P and provides new insights for 
improved counseling and genetic interaction studies.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddp444
PMCID: PMC2778374
PMID: 19779022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]