---
reference_id: "PMID:3279732"
title: "Color-flow Doppler sonography in Graves disease: \"thyroid inferno\"."
authors:
- Ralls PW
- Mayekawa DS
- Lee KP
- Colletti PM
- Radin DR
- Boswell WD
- Halls JM
journal: AJR Am J Roentgenol
year: '1988'
doi: 10.2214/ajr.150.4.781
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Color-flow Doppler sonography in Graves disease: "thyroid inferno".
**Authors:** Ralls PW, Mayekawa DS, Lee KP, Colletti PM, Radin DR, Boswell WD, Halls JM
**Journal:** AJR Am J Roentgenol (1988)
**DOI:** [10.2214/ajr.150.4.781](https://doi.org/10.2214/ajr.150.4.781)

## Content

1. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1988 Apr;150(4):781-4. doi: 10.2214/ajr.150.4.781.

Color-flow Doppler sonography in Graves disease: "thyroid inferno".

Ralls PW(1), Mayekawa DS, Lee KP, Colletti PM, Radin DR, Boswell WD, Halls JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, School of Medicine, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles.

Comment in
    AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1991 Jan;156(1):199. doi: 10.2214/ajr.156.1.1772472.

Graves disease is a common diffuse abnormality of the thyroid gland usually 
characterized by thyrotoxicosis. We performed color-flow Doppler sonography in 
16 patients with Graves disease and compared the results with those in 15 normal 
volunteers and 14 patients with other thyroid diseases (eight with multinodular 
goiter, four with focal masses, and two with papillary thyroid carcinoma). All 
16 Graves disease patients exhibited a pulsatile pattern we call "thyroid 
inferno." This pattern consists of multiple small areas of intrathyroidal flow 
seen diffusely throughout the gland in both systole and diastole. In systole, 
both high-velocity flow (color coded white) and lower velocity flow (color coded 
red and blue) were noted. In diastole, fewer areas of flow and lower velocity 
flow were noted. Patients with Graves disease also exhibited color flow around 
the periphery of the gland. The inferno pattern did not occur in normal subjects 
or in patients with other thyroid diseases. On occasion, focal areas of 
intrathyroidal flow were detected in patients with multinodular goiter and focal 
thyroid masses. High-resolution gray-scale images did not show the small 
vascular channels from which the flow signal originated. Color-flow Doppler 
sonography shows promise as a cost-effective, noninvasive technique for 
diagnosing Graves disease.

DOI: 10.2214/ajr.150.4.781
PMID: 3279732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]