---
reference_id: "PMID:29229810"
title: Disease onset in X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism correlates with expansion of a hexameric repeat within an SVA retrotransposon in TAF1.
authors:
- Bragg DC
- Mangkalaphiban K
- Vaine CA
- Kulkarni NJ
- Shin D
- Yadav R
- Dhakal J
- Ton ML
- Cheng A
- Russo CT
- Ang M
- Acuña P
- Go C
- Franceour TN
- Multhaupt-Buell T
- Ito N
- Müller U
- Hendriks WT
- Breakefield XO
- Sharma N
- Ozelius LJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1712526114
keywords:
- DNA Repeat Expansion
- Dystonic Disorders/genetics
- Gene Order
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- Genetic Loci
- Histone Acetyltransferases/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- "Models, Biological"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Retroelements
- Short Interspersed Nucleotide Elements
- TATA-Binding Protein Associated Factors/genetics
- Transcription Factor TFIID/genetics
- Transcriptional Activation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease onset in X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism correlates with expansion of a hexameric repeat within an SVA retrotransposon in TAF1.
**Authors:** Bragg DC, Mangkalaphiban K, Vaine CA, Kulkarni NJ, Shin D, Yadav R, Dhakal J, Ton ML, Cheng A, Russo CT, Ang M, Acuña P, Go C, Franceour TN, Multhaupt-Buell T, Ito N, Müller U, Hendriks WT, Breakefield XO, Sharma N, Ozelius LJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1712526114](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1712526114)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Dec 19;114(51):E11020-E11028. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1712526114. Epub 2017 Dec 11.

Disease onset in X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism correlates with expansion of a 
hexameric repeat within an SVA retrotransposon in TAF1.

Bragg DC(1)(2), Mangkalaphiban K(3)(2), Vaine CA(3)(2), Kulkarni NJ(3)(2), Shin 
D(3)(2), Yadav R(3)(4), Dhakal J(3)(2), Ton ML(3)(2), Cheng A(3)(2), Russo 
CT(3)(2), Ang M(5), Acuña P(3)(2), Go C(6), Franceour TN(3)(2), Multhaupt-Buell 
T(3)(2), Ito N(3)(2), Müller U(7), Hendriks WT(3)(2), Breakefield XO(3)(2)(8), 
Sharma N(3)(2), Ozelius LJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The Collaborative Center for X-linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism, Department of 
Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129; 
bragg@helix.mgh.harvard.edu lozelius@partners.org.
(2)Harvard Brain Science Initiative, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114.
(3)The Collaborative Center for X-linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism, Department of 
Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129.
(4)Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114.
(5)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, University of the Philippines, 
Manila, Manila, Philippines.
(6)Department of Neurology, Jose Reyes Memorial Medical Center, Quezon City, 
Philippines.
(7)Institut für Humangenetik, Justus Liebig University Giessen, D-35392 Giessen, 
Germany.
(8)Center for Molecular Imaging Research, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Mar 17;117(11):6277. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2003190117.

X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism (XDP) is a neurodegenerative disease associated 
with an antisense insertion of a SINE-VNTR-Alu (SVA)-type retrotransposon within 
an intron of TAF1 This unique insertion coincides with six additional noncoding 
sequence changes in TAF1, the gene that encodes TATA-binding protein-associated 
factor-1, which appear to be inherited together as an identical haplotype in all 
reported cases. Here we examined the sequence of this SVA in XDP patients (n = 
140) and detected polymorphic variation in the length of a hexanucleotide repeat 
domain, (CCCTCT)n The number of repeats in these cases ranged from 35 to 52 and 
showed a highly significant inverse correlation with age at disease onset. 
Because other SVAs exhibit intrinsic promoter activity that depends in part on 
the hexameric domain, we assayed the transcriptional regulatory effects of 
varying hexameric lengths found in the unique XDP SVA retrotransposon using 
luciferase reporter constructs. When inserted sense or antisense to the 
luciferase reading frame, the XDP variants repressed or enhanced transcription, 
respectively, to an extent that appeared to vary with length of the hexamer. 
Further in silico analysis of this SVA sequence revealed multiple motifs 
predicted to form G-quadruplexes, with the greatest potential detected for the 
hexameric repeat domain. These data directly link sequence variation within the 
XDP-specific SVA sequence to phenotypic variability in clinical disease 
manifestation and provide insight into potential mechanisms by which this 
intronic retroelement may induce transcriptional interference in TAF1 
expression.

Copyright © 2017 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1712526114
PMCID: PMC5754783
PMID: 29229810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.