---
reference_id: "PMID:40330935"
title: "Type 1 laryngeal cleft management: a pediatric tertiary care center case series."
authors:
- Awad BI
- AlRajhi B
- Alkhaldi A
- Alsaab F
journal: AME Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.21037/acr-24-149
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type 1 laryngeal cleft management: a pediatric tertiary care center case series.
**Authors:** Awad BI, AlRajhi B, Alkhaldi A, Alsaab F
**Journal:** AME Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.21037/acr-24-149](https://doi.org/10.21037/acr-24-149)

## Content

1. AME Case Rep. 2025 Feb 18;9:37. doi: 10.21037/acr-24-149. eCollection 2025.

Type 1 laryngeal cleft management: a pediatric tertiary care center case series.

Awad BI(1), AlRajhi B(2), Alkhaldi A(3), Alsaab F(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, King 
Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, King Abdullah International 
Medical Research Center, Ministry of the National Guard - Health Affairs, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(2)College of Medicine, King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Otorhinolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery Department, King Abdulaziz Medical 
City-National Guard Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Type 1 laryngeal cleft (LC) is a congenital condition that can 
present with coughing, choking, and aspiration. There are several management 
options, including laryngoplasty injections and endoscopic laser surgery. We 
aimed to review the clinical presentations, investigations, comorbidities, 
management options, recurrence, and outcomes of patients with type 1 LC in our 
pediatric tertiary center.
CASE DESCRIPTION: Six patients with LC type 1 were included in this case series. 
Their mean age was 22.5 months [standard deviation (SD): 17.1]. All patients 
were male, except for one. The mean weight was 12.2 kg (SD: 5.3). The mean 
height was 84.2 cm (SD: 23.9). All patients experienced cough and choking with 
feeding. Of the six patients, five had no airway symptoms and one had a stridor. 
In our tertiary care hospital, we initially managed patients with type 1 LC with 
hyaluronic acid injections for a few months, depending on the severity of the 
condition, followed by follow-up of the patient. If coughing and/or choking 
reoccur or persists, surgical repair is the next management option. Although 
conservative therapy has been useful for 36% of patients with type 1 LC, 
endoscopic surgical repair remains the optimal management choice. We advocate 
for injection laryngoplasty as a trial to confirm the diagnosis and anticipated 
benefit from endoscopic surgical repairs as it offers less invasive management 
option and decreases the risk of developing potentially life-threatening 
complications.
CONCLUSIONS: Type 1 LC is a rare congenital condition that can be managed using 
injections. However, endoscopic laser repair remains the gold standard treatment 
for type 1 LC. The risk of recurrence after initial hyaluronic acid 
administration is high; however, recurrent symptoms can be treated with 
endoscopic laser repair.

Copyright © 2025 AME Publishing Company. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/acr-24-149
PMCID: PMC12053990
PMID: 40330935

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
https://acr.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/acr-24-149/coif). The authors 
have no conflicts of interest to declare.