---
reference_id: "PMID:26138133"
title: "Efficacy of intravenous immunoglobulin therapy in giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia: A multicenter study."
authors:
- Marsalli G
- Nastasio S
- Sciveres M
- Calvo PL
- Ramenghi U
- Gatti S
- Albano V
- Lega S
- Ventura A
- Maggiore G
journal: Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.clinre.2015.03.009
keywords:
- "Anemia, Hemolytic, Autoimmune/complications"
- Female
- "Hepatitis/complications, drug therapy"
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
- Infant
- Male
- Remission Induction
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of intravenous immunoglobulin therapy in giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia: A multicenter study.
**Authors:** Marsalli G, Nastasio S, Sciveres M, Calvo PL, Ramenghi U, Gatti S, Albano V, Lega S, Ventura A, Maggiore G
**Journal:** Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clinre.2015.03.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinre.2015.03.009)

## Content

1. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2016 Feb;40(1):83-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.clinre.2015.03.009. Epub 2015 Jun 29.

Efficacy of intravenous immunoglobulin therapy in giant cell hepatitis with 
autoimmune hemolytic anemia: A multicenter study.

Marsalli G(1), Nastasio S(2), Sciveres M(3), Calvo PL(4), Ramenghi U(4), Gatti 
S(5), Albano V(5), Lega S(6), Ventura A(6), Maggiore G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, 
Pediatric Gastroenterology Unit; University Hospital Santa Chiara, Pisa, Italy. 
Electronic address: giuliamarsalli.med@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, 
Pediatric Gastroenterology Unit; University Hospital Santa Chiara, Pisa, Italy.
(3)Paediatric Hepatology and Liver Transplant Unit, UPMC-IsMett, Palermo, Italy.
(4)Department of Paediatric and Public Health Sciences, University of Torino, 
Azienda Ospedaliera Città della Salute e della Scienza, Torino, Italy.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, Università Politecnica delle Marche, Ancona, 
Italy.
(6)Institute for Maternal and Child Health, University of Trieste, Trieste, 
Italy; IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia 
(GCH-AHA) is a rare disease of infancy, of possible autoimmune mechanism with 
poor prognosis due to its scarce response to immunosuppressive drugs. The aim of 
this retrospective multicenter study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of 
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) treatment in inducing and maintaining 
remission of the liver disease, in patients with GCH-AHA.
METHODS: Seven children with GCH-AHA, four newly diagnosed, and three in 
relapse, being treated with different therapies, received one to three IVIg 
infusions (0.5 to 2g/kg) in association with other immunosuppressive drugs. 
Subsequently five of them received monthly sequential IVIg infusions (mean 13.4, 
range 7-24).
RESULTS: IVIg infusions as first-line therapy associated with prednisone and 
other immunosuppressive drugs significantly (P=0.04) reduced the 
aminotransferase activity in all patients and normalized prothrombin activity in 
the only patient with severe liver dysfunction. Sequential monthly IVIg 
infusions determined a steroid-sparing effect and allowed a complete or partial 
remission in all patients, although with temporary efficacy, since relapse of 
the hemolytic anemia and/or of liver disease occurred in all patients. IVIg 
infusions were associated with mild side effects in two patients.
CONCLUSIONS: IVIg infusion can be safely and effectively administered in 
patients with severe GCH-AHA at diagnosis, or in case of relapse, in association 
with other immunosuppressive drugs. Repeated IVIg infusions may help maintain 
remission, however, due to their temporary efficacy, they should not be 
routinely employed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinre.2015.03.009
PMID: 26138133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]