---
reference_id: "PMID:37178694"
title: Association of SARS-CoV-2 infection and persistence with long COVID.
authors:
- Yang C
- Zhao H
- Espín E
- Tebbutt SJ
journal: Lancet Respir Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(23)00142-X
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of SARS-CoV-2 infection and persistence with long COVID.
**Authors:** Yang C, Zhao H, Espín E, Tebbutt SJ
**Journal:** Lancet Respir Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2213-2600(23)00142-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(23)00142-X)

## Content

1. Lancet Respir Med. 2023 Jun;11(6):504-506. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(23)00142-X.
 Epub 2023 May 10.

Association of SARS-CoV-2 infection and persistence with long COVID.

Yang C(1), Zhao H(2), Espín E(3), Tebbutt SJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Prevention of Organ Failure Centre of Excellence, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 
Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, Providence Research, St Paul's Hospital, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada; Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6Z 1Y6, Canada.
(2)Department of Surgery, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)Prevention of Organ Failure Centre of Excellence, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 
Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, Providence Research, St Paul's Hospital, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(4)Prevention of Organ Failure Centre of Excellence, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 
Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, Providence Research, St Paul's Hospital, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada; Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6Z 1Y6, Canada. Electronic 
address: scott.tebbutt@hli.ubc.ca.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(23)00142-X
PMCID: PMC10171832
PMID: 37178694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CY and SJT report a grant from the Canadian 
Institutes of Health Research (177747) as payment to their institution to 
support their work in Canada. All other authors declare no competing interests.