---
reference_id: "PMID:30982989"
title: "Suggested guidelines for the diagnosis and management of urea cycle disorders: First revision."
authors:
- Häberle J
- Burlina A
- Chakrapani A
- Dixon M
- Karall D
- Lindner M
- Mandel H
- Martinelli D
- Pintos-Morell G
- Santer R
- Skouma A
- Servais A
- Tal G
- Rubio V
- Huemer M
- Dionisi-Vici C
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12100
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Suggested guidelines for the diagnosis and management of urea cycle disorders: First revision.
**Authors:** Häberle J, Burlina A, Chakrapani A, Dixon M, Karall D, Lindner M, Mandel H, Martinelli D, Pintos-Morell G, Santer R, Skouma A, Servais A, Tal G, Rubio V, Huemer M, Dionisi-Vici C
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12100](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12100)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2019 Nov;42(6):1192-1230. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12100. Epub 
2019 May 15.

Suggested guidelines for the diagnosis and management of urea cycle disorders: 
First revision.

Häberle J(1), Burlina A(2), Chakrapani A(3), Dixon M(4), Karall D(5), Lindner 
M(6), Mandel H(7), Martinelli D(8), Pintos-Morell G(9)(10)(11), Santer R(12), 
Skouma A(13), Servais A(14), Tal G(15), Rubio V(16), Huemer M(1)(17), 
Dionisi-Vici C(8).

Author information:
(1)University Children's Hospital Zurich and Children's Research Centre, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(2)Division of Inborn Metabolic Disease, Department of Pediatrics, University 
Hospital Padua, Padova, Italy.
(3)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children 
NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(4)Dietetics, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, NHS Trust, London, UK.
(5)Clinic for Pediatrics, Division of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Medical 
University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(6)University Children's Hospital, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(7)Institute of Human Genetics and metabolic disorders, Western Galilee Medical 
Center, Nahariya, Israel.
(8)Division of Metabolism, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(9)Centre for Rare Diseases, University Hospital Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(10)CIBERER_GCV08, Research Institute IGTP, Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(13)Institute of Child Health, Agia Sofia Children's Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(14)Service de Néphrologie et maladies métaboliques adulte Hôpital Necker 149, 
Paris, France.
(15)The Ruth Rappaport Children's Hospital, Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, 
Israel.
(16)Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia (IBV-CSIC), Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red para Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Valencia, Spain.
(17)Department of Paediatrics, Landeskrankenhaus Bregenz, Bregenz, Austria.

In 2012, we published guidelines summarizing and evaluating late 2011 evidence 
for diagnosis and therapy of urea cycle disorders (UCDs). With 1:35 000 
estimated incidence, UCDs cause hyperammonemia of neonatal (~50%) or late onset 
that can lead to intellectual disability or death, even while effective 
therapies do exist. In the 7 years that have elapsed since the first guideline 
was published, abundant novel information has accumulated, experience on newborn 
screening for some UCDs has widened, a novel hyperammonemia-causing genetic 
disorder has been reported, glycerol phenylbutyrate has been introduced as a 
treatment, and novel promising therapeutic avenues (including gene therapy) have 
been opened. Several factors including the impact of the first edition of these 
guidelines (frequently read and quoted) may have increased awareness among 
health professionals and patient families. However, under-recognition and 
delayed diagnosis of UCDs still appear widespread. It was therefore necessary to 
revise the original guidelines to ensure an up-to-date frame of reference for 
professionals and patients as well as for awareness campaigns. This was 
accomplished by keeping the original spirit of providing a trans-European 
consensus based on robust evidence (scored with GRADE methodology), involving 
professionals on UCDs from nine countries in preparing this consensus. We 
believe this revised guideline, which has been reviewed by several societies 
that are involved in the management of UCDs, will have a positive impact on the 
outcomes of patients by establishing common standards, and spreading and 
harmonizing good practices. It may also promote the identification of knowledge 
voids to be filled by future research.

© 2019 SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12100
PMID: 30982989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]