---
reference_id: "PMID:17356545"
title: "A common mutation in the COG7 gene with a consistent phenotype including microcephaly, adducted thumbs, growth retardation, VSD and episodes of hyperthermia."
authors:
- Morava E
- Zeevaert R
- Korsch E
- Huijben K
- Wopereis S
- Matthijs G
- Keymolen K
- Lefeber DJ
- De Meirleir L
- Wevers RA
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201813
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- "Adaptor Proteins, Vesicular Transport/genetics"
- Apolipoprotein C-III/metabolism
- "Carbohydrate Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics"
- Failure to Thrive
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- Glycosylation
- Golgi Apparatus
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Isoelectric Focusing
- Male
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Mutation
- Syndrome
- Thumb/abnormalities
- Transferrin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A common mutation in the COG7 gene with a consistent phenotype including microcephaly, adducted thumbs, growth retardation, VSD and episodes of hyperthermia.
**Authors:** Morava E, Zeevaert R, Korsch E, Huijben K, Wopereis S, Matthijs G, Keymolen K, Lefeber DJ, De Meirleir L, Wevers RA
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201813](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201813)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2007 Jun;15(6):638-45. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201813. Epub
2007  Mar 14.

A common mutation in the COG7 gene with a consistent phenotype including
microcephaly, adducted thumbs, growth retardation, VSD and episodes of
hyperthermia.

Morava E(1), Zeevaert R, Korsch E, Huijben K, Wopereis S, Matthijs G, Keymolen
K, Lefeber DJ, De Meirleir L, Wevers RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 6500 HB
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. e.morava@cukz.umcn.nl

Erratum in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2007 Jul;15(7):819.

We describe the clinical and biochemical characteristics in three patients from
two different families diagnosed with Congenital Disorder of Glycosylation type
IIe owing to a defect in Conserved Oligomeric Golgi complex (COG)7; one of the
eight subunits of the COG. The siblings and an unrelated single child of
consanguineous parents presented with growth retardation, progressive, severe
microcephaly, hypotonia, adducted thumbs, feeding problems by gastrointestinal
pseudo-obstruction, failure to thrive, cardiac anomalies, wrinkled skin and
episodes of extreme hyperthermia. A combined disorder in the biosynthesis of N-
and O-linked glycosylation with hyposialylation was detected. Western blot
analysis showed a severe reduction in the COG5 and 7 subunits of the COG. A
homozygous, intronic splice site mutation (c.169+4A>C) of the COG7 gene was
identified in all patients. The phenotype is similar to that previously
described in two patients of North African ethnicity with the same mutation,
except for the lack of skeletal anomalies and only a mild liver involvement in
our patients. We suggest performing protein glycosylation studies and Western
blot for the different COG subunits in patients with progressive microcephaly,
growth retardation, hypotonia, adducted thumbs and cardiac defects, especially
in association with skin anomalies or episodes of hyperthermia. The presence of
the characteristic phenotype might warrant direct DNA analysis.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201813
PMID: 17356545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
