---
reference_id: "PMID:27188332"
title: A cross-sectional study of submacular thickening in intermediate uveitis and determination of treatment threshold.
authors:
- Simonazzi B
- Balaskas K
- Guex-Crosier Y
journal: BMC Ophthalmol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s12886-016-0230-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A cross-sectional study of submacular thickening in intermediate uveitis and determination of treatment threshold.
**Authors:** Simonazzi B, Balaskas K, Guex-Crosier Y
**Journal:** BMC Ophthalmol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12886-016-0230-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12886-016-0230-4)

## Content

1. BMC Ophthalmol. 2016 May 18;16(1):59. doi: 10.1186/s12886-016-0230-4.

A cross-sectional study of submacular thickening in intermediate uveitis and 
determination of treatment threshold.

Simonazzi B(1), Balaskas K(1)(2), Guex-Crosier Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Jules-Gonin Eye Hospital, University of Lausanne, FAA, Av. de France 15, 
CH-1004, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Manchester Royal Eye Hospital, Manchester, UK.
(3)Jules-Gonin Eye Hospital, University of Lausanne, FAA, Av. de France 15, 
CH-1004, Lausanne, Switzerland. yan.guex@fa2.ch.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this work is to refine understanding of anatomical and 
functional alterations in eyes with Intermediate Uveitis (IU), their natural 
history in mild cases not necessitating treatment and their response to 
treatment in severely affected eyes with macular edema.
METHODS: 61 consecutive patients with IU presenting over a 6-year period were 
prospectively recruited into the study. Two subgroups of patients with IU were 
identified on the basis of the need or not for systemic cortico-steroid 
treatment. A group of healthy volunteers was identified for determining normal 
average central foveal thickness (CFT) values. Statistical comparisons were 
sought between patient sub-groups and with the group of normal volunteers for 
CFT and Best Corrected Visual Acuity (BCVA) at baseline and after 6 months. In a 
post hoc analysis, a cut-off value of CFT for systemic treatment initiation in 
IU was statistically identified and its sensitivity and specificity determined.
RESULTS: A statistically significant difference in mean CFT at baseline was 
observed between patients under systemic treatment and untreated patients 
(p = 0.0005) as well as between untreated patients and healthy volunteers. 
(p < 0.001) After six months difference in CFT between the two patients 
subgroups was no longer significant (p = 0.699). BCVA was worse for patients 
under systemic treatment. No statistically significant difference could be 
identified between the subgroup of untreated patients and the group of healthy 
volunteers either at baseline or after 6 months. Correlation between LogMAR 
visual acuity and central retinal thickness at baseline was strong (r = 0.7436, 
p < 0.0001, Pearson's correlation coefficient). The cut-off value of CFT for 
initiating systemic treatment was determined at 215.5 μm in a post hoc analysis 
(sensitivity 62.5 %, specificity 96.4 %).
CONCLUSIONS: Subclinical retinal thickening of mildly inflamed eyes with IU can 
occur though bearing no functional clinical significance and spontaneously 
resolving within 6 months. A cut-off CFT value for treatment of macular edema in 
IU, in the presence of other relevant morphological features on Optical 
Coherence Tomography, seems to emerge from post hoc analysis of collected data 
demonstrating strong specificity and moderate sensitivity.

DOI: 10.1186/s12886-016-0230-4
PMCID: PMC4870757
PMID: 27188332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]