---
reference_id: "PMID:36481668"
title: Osteosarcoma.
authors:
- Beird HC
- Bielack SS
- Flanagan AM
- Gill J
- Heymann D
- Janeway KA
- Livingston JA
- Roberts RD
- Strauss SJ
- Gorlick R
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-022-00409-y
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Quality of Life
- Osteosarcoma
- Bone Neoplasms
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteosarcoma.
**Authors:** Beird HC, Bielack SS, Flanagan AM, Gill J, Heymann D, Janeway KA, Livingston JA, Roberts RD, Strauss SJ, Gorlick R
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-022-00409-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-022-00409-y)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2022 Dec 8;8(1):77. doi: 10.1038/s41572-022-00409-y.

Osteosarcoma.

Beird HC(1), Bielack SS(2), Flanagan AM(3), Gill J(4), Heymann D(5), Janeway
KA(6), Livingston JA(7), Roberts RD(8), Strauss SJ(9), Gorlick R(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genomic Medicine, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Pediatric Oncology, Hematology, Immunology, Klinikum Stuttgart -
Olgahospital, Stuttgart Cancer Center, Stuttgart, Germany.
(3)Research Department of Pathology, Cancer Institute, University College
London, London, UK.
(4)Division of Pediatrics, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, USA.
(5)Nantes Université, CNRS, UMR6286, US2B, Institut de Cancérologie de l'Ouest,
Saint-Herblain, France.
(6)Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(8)Center for Childhood Cancer, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio,
USA.
(9)University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, University College
London, London, UK.
(10)Division of Pediatrics, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, USA. rgorlick@mdanderson.org.
(11)Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. rgorlick@mdanderson.org.

Erratum in
    Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2022 Dec 30;8(1):82. doi: 10.1038/s41572-022-00416-z.

Osteosarcoma is the most common primary malignant tumour of the bone.
Osteosarcoma incidence is bimodal, peaking at 18 and 60 years of age, and is
slightly more common in males. The key pathophysiological mechanism involves
several possible genetic drivers of disease linked to bone formation, causing
malignant progression and metastasis. While there have been significant
improvements in the outcome of patients with localized disease, with event-free
survival outcomes exceeding 60%, in patients with metastatic disease, event-free
survival outcomes remain poor at less than 30%. The suspicion of osteosarcoma
based on radiographs still requires pathological evaluation of a bone biopsy
specimen for definitive diagnosis and CT imaging of the chest should be
performed to identify lung nodules. So far, population-based screening and
surveillance strategies have not been implemented due to the rarity of
osteosarcoma and the lack of reliable markers. Current screening focuses only on
groups at high risk such as patients with genetic cancer predisposition
syndromes. Management of osteosarcoma requires a multidisciplinary team of
paediatric and medical oncologists, orthopaedic and general surgeons,
pathologists, radiologists and specialist nurses. Survivors of osteosarcoma
require specialized medical follow-up, as curative treatment consisting of
chemotherapy and surgery has long-term adverse effects, which also affect the
quality of life of patients. The development of osteosarcoma model systems and
related research as well as the evaluation of new treatment approaches are
ongoing to improve disease outcomes, especially for patients with metastases.

© 2022. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-022-00409-y
PMID: 36481668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
