---
reference_id: "PMID:33294441"
title: A Novel Missense Variant of TP63 Heterozygously Present in Split-Hand/Foot Malformation.
authors:
- Geng H
- Tang D
- Xu C
- He X
- Zhang Z
journal: Biomed Res Int
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1155/2020/4215632
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Asian People/genetics
- Base Sequence
- Conserved Sequence/genetics
- Family
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Transcription Factors/chemistry, genetics"
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Novel Missense Variant of TP63 Heterozygously Present in Split-Hand/Foot Malformation.
**Authors:** Geng H, Tang D, Xu C, He X, Zhang Z
**Journal:** Biomed Res Int (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2020/4215632](https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/4215632)

## Content

1. Biomed Res Int. 2020 Nov 26;2020:4215632. doi: 10.1155/2020/4215632.
eCollection  2020.

A Novel Missense Variant of TP63 Heterozygously Present in Split-Hand/Foot 
Malformation.

Geng H(1)(2)(3), Tang D(1)(2)(3), Xu C(1)(2)(3), He X(1)(2)(3), Zhang 
Z(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, No. 218 Jixi Road, Hefei, 
230022 Anhui, China.
(2)NHC Key Laboratory of Study on Abnormal Gametes and Reproductive Tract (Anhui 
Medical University), No. 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, 230032 Anhui, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Population Health across Life Cycle (Anhui Medical 
University), Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China, No. 81 
Meishan Road, Hefei, 230032 Anhui, China.

BACKGROUND: Split-hand/foot malformation (SHFM) is a severe congenital 
disability mainly characterized by the absence or hypoplasia of the central ray 
of the hand/foot. To date, several candidate genes associated with SHFM have 
been identified, including TP63, DLX5, DLX6, FGFR1, and WNT10B. Herein, we 
report a novel variant of TP63 heterozygously present in affected members of a 
family with SHFM.
METHODS: This study investigated a Chinese family, in which the proband and his 
son suffered from SHFM. The peripheral blood sample of the proband was used to 
perform whole-exome sequencing (WES) to explore the possible genetic causes of 
this disease. Postsequencing bioinformatic analyses and Sanger sequencing were 
conducted to verify the identified variants and parental origins on all family 
members in the pedigree.
RESULTS: By postsequencing bioinformatic analyses and Sanger sequencing, we 
identified a novel missense variant (NM_003722.4:c.948G>A; p.Met316Ile) of TP63 
in this family that results in a substitution of methionine with isoleucine, 
which is probably associated with the occurrence of SHFM.
CONCLUSION: A novel missense variant (NM_003722.4:c.948G>A; p.Met316Ile) of TP63 
in SHFM was thus identified, which may enlarge the spectrum of known TP63 
variants and also provide new approaches for genetic counselling of families 
with SHFM.

Copyright © 2020 Hao Geng et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/4215632
PMCID: PMC7714569
PMID: 33294441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.