---
reference_id: "PMID:37749819"
title: Genetic insights into thymic carcinomas and thymic neuroendocrine neoplasms denote prognosis signatures and pathways.
authors:
- Wang S
- Gu Z
- Zhu L
- Han Y
- Yu H
- Fang W
- Han B
journal: Chin Med J (Engl)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/CM9.0000000000002852
keywords:
- "Neuroendocrine Tumors/genetics, pathology"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Prognosis
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- China
- Mutation/genetics
- Thymoma
- "Neoplasms, Glandular and Epithelial"
- "Thymus Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic insights into thymic carcinomas and thymic neuroendocrine neoplasms denote prognosis signatures and pathways.
**Authors:** Wang S, Gu Z, Zhu L, Han Y, Yu H, Fang W, Han B
**Journal:** Chin Med J (Engl) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/CM9.0000000000002852](https://doi.org/10.1097/CM9.0000000000002852)

## Content

1. Chin Med J (Engl). 2023 Nov 20;136(22):2712-2721. doi: 
10.1097/CM9.0000000000002852. Epub 2023 Sep 25.

Genetic insights into thymic carcinomas and thymic neuroendocrine neoplasms 
denote prognosis signatures and pathways.

Wang S(1), Gu Z(2), Zhu L(3), Han Y(3), Yu H(4), Fang W(2), Han B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Shanghai Chest 
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200030, 
China.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200030, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200030, China.
(4)Department of Radiology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200030, China.

BACKGROUND: Thymic carcinomas (TCs) and thymic neuroendocrine neoplasms (TNENs) 
are two aggressive subtypes of thymic malignancy. Traditional therapy for 
advanced TCs and TNENs has limited outcome. New genomic profiling of TCs and 
TNENs might provide insights that contribute to the development of new treatment 
approaches.
METHODS: We used gene panel sequencing technologies to investigate the genetic 
aberrations of 32 TC patients and 15 TNEN patients who underwent surgery at 
Shanghai Chest Hospital between 2015 and 2017. Patient samples were sequenced 
using a 324-gene platform with licensed technologies. In this study, we focused 
on clinically relevant genomic alterations (CRGAs), which are previously proven 
to be pathogenic alterations, to identify the pathology-specific mutational 
patterns, prognostic signatures of TCs and TNENs.
RESULTS: The mutational profiles between TCs and TNENs were diverse. The genetic 
alterations that ranked highest in TCs were in CDKN2A, TP53, ASXL1, CDKN2B, 
PIK3C2G, PTCH1, and ROS1 , while those in TNENs were in MEN1, MLL2, APC, RB1 , 
and TSC2 . Prognostic analysis showed that mutations of ROS1, CDKN2A, CDKN2B, 
BRAF, and BAP1 were significantly associated with worse outcomes in TC patients, 
and that mutation of ERBB2 indicated shortened disease-free survival (DFS) and 
overall survival (OS) in TNEN patients. Further investigation found that the 
prognosis-related genes were focused on signal pathways of cell cycle control, 
chromatin remodeling/DNA methylation, phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3K)/protein 
kinase B (AKT)/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), and receptor tyrosine 
kinase (RTK)/RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling.
CONCLUSION: We profiled the mutational features of 47 Chinese patients with 
thymic malignancy of diverse pathologic phenotypes to uncover the integrated 
genomic landscape of these rare tumors, and identified the pathology-specific 
mutational patterns, prognostic signatures, and potential therapeutic targets 
for TCs and TNENs.

Copyright © 2023 The Chinese Medical Association, produced by Wolters Kluwer, 
Inc. under the CC-BY-NC-ND license.

DOI: 10.1097/CM9.0000000000002852
PMCID: PMC10684125
PMID: 37749819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.