---
reference_id: "PMID:20301643"
title: Free Sialic Acid Storage Disorder.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Adams D
- Huizing M
- Wasserstein M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Free Sialic Acid Storage Disorder.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Adams D, Huizing M, Wasserstein M

## Content

1. Free Sialic Acid Storage Disorder.

Adams D(1), Huizing M(1), Wasserstein M(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2003 Jun 13 [updated 2025 Jun 26].

Author information:
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland
(2)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Children's Hospital at Montefiore, 
Bronx, New York

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Free sialic acid storage disorder (FSASD) is a 
spectrum of neurodegenerative phenotypes resulting from increased lysosomal 
storage of free sialic acid. Less severe FSASD (historically called Salla 
disease) is characterized by normal appearance and absence of neurologic 
findings at birth, followed by slowly progressive neurologic deterioration 
resulting in mild-to-moderate psychomotor delays, spasticity, athetosis, and 
epileptic seizures. Severe FSASD (historically referred to as infantile free 
sialic acid storage disease, or ISSD) is characterized by severe developmental 
delay, coarse facial features, hepatosplenomegaly, and cardiomegaly; death 
usually occurs in early childhood.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of FSASD is established in a proband by 
identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in SLC17A5 by molecular genetic 
testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management is symptomatic and 
supportive: standard treatment of seizures; developmental and educational 
support; rehabilitation to optimize mobility; supplementation of calcium and 
vitamin D for low bone density; feeding therapy and provision of adequate 
nutrition; treatment of ophthalmologic manifestations per ophthalmologist with 
low vision services as needed; treatment of cardiomegaly per cardiologist; 
treatment of nephropathy / nephrotic syndrome per nephrologist; surgical 
treatment of hernia as needed; family and social support. Surveillance: 
Assessment of seizures, other neurologic manifestations, development, mobility, 
growth, nutrition, feeding, respiratory status, and family needs at each visit. 
Annual ophthalmology exam in those with intermediate or severe FSASD. Annual EKG 
and echocardiography to assess for cardiomegaly. Annual urinalysis for 
proteinuria.
GENETIC COUNSELING: FSASD is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for an SLC17A5 pathogenic variant, each sib 
of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 
50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being 
unaffected and not a carrier. Once the SLC17A5 pathogenic variants have been 
identified in an affected family member, molecular genetic carrier testing and 
prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301643