---
reference_id: "PMID:35020912"
title: Dissecting the genotype-phenotype correlation of COL4A5 gene mutation and its response to renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system blockers in Chinese male patients with Alport syndrome.
authors:
- Di H
- Zhang J
- Gao E
- Zheng C
- Huang X
- Wang Q
- Yu X
- Liu Z
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfac002
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/drug therapy, genetics, diagnosis"
- Renin-Angiotensin System/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- Genetic Association Studies
- Mutation
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/drug therapy, genetics"
- China
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dissecting the genotype-phenotype correlation of COL4A5 gene mutation and its response to renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system blockers in Chinese male patients with Alport syndrome.
**Authors:** Di H, Zhang J, Gao E, Zheng C, Huang X, Wang Q, Yu X, Liu Z
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/gfac002](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfac002)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2022 Nov 23;37(12):2487-2495. doi:
10.1093/ndt/gfac002.

Dissecting the genotype-phenotype correlation of COL4A5 gene mutation and its
response to renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system blockers in Chinese male
patients with Alport syndrome.

Di H(1), Zhang J(2), Gao E(1), Zheng C(1), Huang X(1), Wang Q(1), Yu X(3), Liu
Z(1).

Author information:
(1)National Clinical Research Center of Kidney Diseases, Affiliated Jinling
Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Biosystems Homeostasis and Protection of the Ministry of
Education, Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang,
China.
(3)Liangzhu Laboratory, Zhejiang University Medical Center, Hangzhou, Zhejiang,
China.

BACKGROUND: Alport syndrome (AS) is an inherited type IV collagen-related
disorder with an irreversible tendency to progress to end-stage renal disease
(ESRD). X-linked AS (XLAS) is caused by mutations in the COL4A5 gene. The aim of
this study was to investigate the effects of underlying mutations on clinical
manifestations and the response to therapy in XLAS.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective cohort study of 187 Chinese male patients
with XLAS confirmed by pathological examination and genetic analysis. The
Kaplan-Meier method and Cox proportional hazards model were used to assess the
age and risk of progression to ESRD under different genotypes and treatment
conditions.
RESULTS: A strong relationship between transcript type and renal outcome was
observed, with the median age of ESRD onset being 22 years for truncating
mutations and 39 years for non-truncating mutations. The response of affected
patients to renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) blockers was
genotype-associated. This therapy delayed the onset of ESRD by 16 years in
patients with non-truncating mutations and 3 years in patients with truncating
mutations. The efficacy of RAAS blockers functioned in a time-dependent manner,
with a 7% reduction in the risk of progression to ESRD per each 6-month increase
in treatment duration [hazard ratio 0.93 (95% confidence interval 0.89-0.96); P
< 0.001].
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical features and response to RAAS blockers were observed to be
strongly correlated with the genotypes of male XLAS patients. Genotyping of
COL4A5 gene mutations is essential and is a useful tool to assess the prognosis
of AS patients.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the ERA.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfac002
PMID: 35020912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
