---
reference_id: "PMID:40190818"
title: "Brief Report: Real-World Treatment Patterns and Clinical Outcomes for Patients With Advanced ALK-Rearranged NSCLC in British Columbia."
authors:
- Wang P
- Hughesman C
- Yip S
- Lockwood WW
- Sun S
journal: JTO Clin Res Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtocrr.2024.100697
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brief Report: Real-World Treatment Patterns and Clinical Outcomes for Patients With Advanced ALK-Rearranged NSCLC in British Columbia.
**Authors:** Wang P, Hughesman C, Yip S, Lockwood WW, Sun S
**Journal:** JTO Clin Res Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtocrr.2024.100697](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtocrr.2024.100697)

## Content

1. JTO Clin Res Rep. 2024 Jun 15;6(4):100697. doi: 10.1016/j.jtocrr.2024.100697.
eCollection 2025 Apr.

Brief Report: Real-World Treatment Patterns and Clinical Outcomes for Patients
With Advanced ALK-Rearranged NSCLC in British Columbia.

Wang P(1), Hughesman C(2), Yip S(3), Lockwood WW(1)(3), Sun S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Oncology, BC Cancer Research Institute, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Cancer Genetics and Genomics Laboratory, BC Cancer, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.
(3)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver Centre, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: EML4-ALK rearrangements represent an oncogenic driver alteration
in 5% of NSCLC cases. We aim to better understand real-world treatment patterns
and outcomes of ALK fusion-positive (ALK+) patients with advanced-stage NSCLC.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective population-based chart review of ALK+
patients with locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC in British Columbia (BC),
Canada. Patients diagnosed from January 2014 to May 2023 were identified through
the BC Cancer Genetics Laboratory database, and data were collected up to
December 2023.
RESULTS: A total of 216 patients with stage IIIB, IIIC, or IV ALK+ lung NSCLC
were identified. Median age was 60 (range: 24-91) years, 151 (68.9%) had never
smoked, and 95 (43.9%) were Asian. The median overall survival was 49.4 months
with median follow-up time of 55.4 months. Majority of the cohort (n = 198,
91.7%) received palliative systemic therapy, all of which included at least one
ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI). The most common first-line regimen was
alectinib (n = 97, 49.0%) followed by crizotinib (n = 84, 42.4%); only four and
one patient received lorlatinib and brigatinib first line, respectively.
Alectinib was frequently prescribed overall, with 80.3% of patients receiving it
in any treatment line. Time to treatment discontinuation was significantly
longer (p < 0.0001) on first-line alectinib at 22.9 months as compared with 10.9
months for crizotinib.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with ALK+ advanced NSCLC in BC have durable responses to
ALK TKIs. Despite approval of all ALK TKIs for first-line use since 2021,
alectinib is largely the favored agent in BC. Further real-world investigations
can refine treatment strategies and shape policies around ALK TKIs for patients
with ALK+ NSCLC.

© 2025 by the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtocrr.2024.100697
PMCID: PMC11968262
PMID: 40190818

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Yip is a member of advisory boards and has
received honoraria from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Janssen, and Roche. Dr. Sun
is a member of advisory boards or has consulted for AstraZeneca, Bristol Myers
Squibb, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, and Takeda. These relations did not affect this
work. Ms. Wang, Drs. Lockwood and Hughesman have no conflicts of interest to
declare.
