---
reference_id: "PMID:31729154"
title: Fatigue and health-related quality of life among patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in China.
authors:
- Yang Y
- Li Q
- Mao J
- Mao Z
journal: Clin Respir J
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/crj.13107
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fatigue and health-related quality of life among patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in China.
**Authors:** Yang Y, Li Q, Mao J, Mao Z
**Journal:** Clin Respir J (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/crj.13107](https://doi.org/10.1111/crj.13107)

## Content

1. Clin Respir J. 2020 Feb;14(2):109-115. doi: 10.1111/crj.13107. Epub 2019 Dec
3.

Fatigue and health-related quality of life among patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease in China.

Yang Y(1)(2), Li Q(3), Mao J(2), Mao Z(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Health Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(2)School of Nursing, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science & 
Technology, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, China.
(4)Global Health Institute, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

OBJECTIVES: Fatigue is an important yet ignored symptom of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). However, there is a paucity of literature from China 
on fatigue and its association with health-related quality of life (HRQoL) among 
COPD patients. The purpose of this study was to (a) evaluate fatigue of COPD 
inpatients in China and (b) explore the association between fatigue and HRQoL.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study recruited patients hospitalised for an acute 
exacerbation of COPD within one month from three general hospitals in central 
China. Disease severity, fatigue and HRQoL were assessed for all participants 
using COPD Assessment Test (CAT), 9-item Functional Assessment of Chronic 
Illness Therapy-Fatigue scale (FACIT-F) and 12-Item Short-Form Health Survey 
(SF-12v2).
RESULTS: A total of 210 COPD patients participated in the study between April 
2017 and January 2018, with an average age of 71.1 ± 12.2 years old. The overall 
prevalence of moderate to severe fatigue was 48.5%. A worse FACIT-F score was 
associated with worse CAT score (r = -0.74, P < 0.01; B = -0.70, P < 0.01) and 
worse SF-12v2 score (r = 0.77, P < 0.01; B = 0.66, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Almost half of the COPD patients experience moderate to severe 
fatigue. Patients with greater disease severity exhibited more severe fatigue 
and worse HRQoL. Fatigue symptom has a strongly negative effect on COPD 
patients' HRQoL, physical health and mental health. Health personnel is 
recommended to provide fatigue-related screening, counselling and health 
education, particularly for patients with moderate to severe COPD.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.13107
PMID: 31729154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]