---
reference_id: "PMID:36055643"
title: "Informal care in Huntington's disease: Assessment of objective-subjective burden and its associated risk and protective factors."
authors:
- Bayen E
- de Langavant LC
- Youssov K
- Bachoud-Lévi AC
journal: Ann Phys Rehabil Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.rehab.2022.101703
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Informal care in Huntington's disease: Assessment of objective-subjective burden and its associated risk and protective factors.
**Authors:** Bayen E, de Langavant LC, Youssov K, Bachoud-Lévi AC
**Journal:** Ann Phys Rehabil Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rehab.2022.101703](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rehab.2022.101703)

## Content

1. Ann Phys Rehabil Med. 2023 May;66(4):101703. doi: 10.1016/j.rehab.2022.101703.
 Epub 2022 Dec 2.

Informal care in Huntington's disease: Assessment of objective-subjective burden 
and its associated risk and protective factors.

Bayen E(1), de Langavant LC(2), Youssov K(3), Bachoud-Lévi AC(4).

Author information:
(1)Service de Médecine Physique et de Réadaptation, hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, 
APHP, Paris, France et Faculté de Médecine, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France; 
Laboratoire d'Imagerie Biomédicale (LIB), Sorbonne Université, Paris, France; 
Global Brain Health Institute, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, USA. Electronic address: Eleonore.bayen@gbhi.org.
(2)Global Brain Health Institute, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, USA; National Reference Center for Huntington's Disease, Département 
de Neurologie, hôpital Henri Mondor-Albert Chenevier, APHP, Créteil, France; 
Equipe Neuropsychologie Interventionnelle, Département d'Etudes Cognitives, 
Ecole normale supérieure, PSL Research University, Institut Mondor de Recherche 
Biomédicale, Université Paris-Est Créteil, INSERM U955 E01, Paris et Créteil, 
France; Faculté de Médecine, Université Paris-Est Créteil, Créteil, France.
(3)National Reference Center for Huntington's Disease, Département de 
Neurologie, hôpital Henri Mondor-Albert Chenevier, APHP, Créteil, France; Equipe 
Neuropsychologie Interventionnelle, Département d'Etudes Cognitives, Ecole 
normale supérieure, PSL Research University, Institut Mondor de Recherche 
Biomédicale, Université Paris-Est Créteil, INSERM U955 E01, Paris et Créteil, 
France.
(4)National Reference Center for Huntington's Disease, Département de 
Neurologie, hôpital Henri Mondor-Albert Chenevier, APHP, Créteil, France; Equipe 
Neuropsychologie Interventionnelle, Département d'Etudes Cognitives, Ecole 
normale supérieure, PSL Research University, Institut Mondor de Recherche 
Biomédicale, Université Paris-Est Créteil, INSERM U955 E01, Paris et Créteil, 
France; Faculté de Médecine, Université Paris-Est Créteil, Créteil, France.

BACKGROUND: Because of the genetic transmission of Huntington's disease (HD), 
informal caregivers (ICs, i.e., non-professional caregivers) might experience 
consecutive and/or concurrent caregiving roles to support several symptomatic 
relatives with HD over their life. Additionally, some ICs might be HD carriers. 
However, whether family burden of care is associated with specific factors in HD 
remains poorly studied.
OBJECTIVE: To provide a quantitative view of the IC burden and identify 
associated factors.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional assessment of home-dwelling symptomatic HD 
individuals (from REGISTRY and Bio-HD studies) and their primary adult ICs, 
including the HD individual's motor, cognitive, behavioral, functional Unified 
Huntington's Disease Rating Scale score; IC objective burden (quantification of 
IC time in activities of daily living, instrumental activities of daily living 
and supervision, using the Resource Utilization in Dementia instrument), IC 
subjective burden (Zarit Burden Inventory), and ICs' social economic functioning 
and use of professional home care.
RESULTS: We included 80 ICs (mean [SD] age 57 [12.9] years, 60% women) in charge 
of 80 individuals with early to advanced stage HD (mean age 56 [12.6] years, 51% 
men). The mean hours of informal care time was high: 7.3 (7.9) h/day (range 
0-24); the mean professional home care was 2.8 (2.8) h/day (range 0.1-12.3). 
This objective burden increased with higher functional loss of the HD individual 
and with more severe cognitive-behavioral disorders. The mean subjective burden 
(35.4 [17.8], range 4-73) showed a high level since the earliest stage of HD; it 
was associated with HD duration (mean 9.2 [4.7] years) and with aggressive 
symptoms in individuals (44% of cases). The burden was partially related to the 
multiplex caregiving status (19%). Protective factors lowering the IC burden 
included the absence of financial hardship (57%), a strong social network (16%) 
and keeping active on the job market outside home (46%).
CONCLUSIONS: The objective-subjective burden of ICs related to changing patterns 
of neuro-psychiatric symptoms and mitigating environmental characteristics 
around the HD individual-caregiver dyads.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rehab.2022.101703
PMID: 36055643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]