---
reference_id: "PMID:37507009"
title: A contemporary review of clade-specific virological differences in monkeypox viruses.
authors:
- Okwor T
- Mbala PK
- Evans DH
- Kindrachuk J
journal: Clin Microbiol Infect
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2023.07.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A contemporary review of clade-specific virological differences in monkeypox viruses.
**Authors:** Okwor T, Mbala PK, Evans DH, Kindrachuk J
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Infect (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cmi.2023.07.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmi.2023.07.011)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2023 Dec;29(12):1502-1507. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmi.2023.07.011. Epub 2023 Jul 27.

A contemporary review of clade-specific virological differences in monkeypox 
viruses.

Okwor T(1), Mbala PK(2), Evans DH(3), Kindrachuk J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Planning, Research & Statistics, Nigeria Centre for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Abuja, Nigeria.
(2)Département de Virologie, Institut National de Recherche Biomédicale, 
Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo; Département de Biologie Médicale, 
Université de Kinshasa, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology & Immunology and Li Ka Shing Institute of 
Virology, The University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology & Infectious Diseases, University of 
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. Electronic address: 
Jason.Kindrachuk@umanitoba.ca.

BACKGROUND: Monkeypox virus (MPXV) is an emerging zoonotic virus that has had 
on-going public health impacts in endemic regions of Central and West Africa for 
over a half-century. Historically, the MPXV clade endemic in regions of Central 
Africa is associated with higher morbidity and mortality as compared with the 
clade endemic in West Africa.
OBJECTIVES: Here, we review the virological characteristics of MPXV and discuss 
potential relationships between virulence factors and clade- (and subclade-) 
specific differences in virulence and transmission patterns.
SOURCES: Targeted search was conducted in PubMed using ((monkeypox virus) OR 
(Orthopoxvirus)) AND (zoonosis)) OR ((monkeypox) OR (human mpox).
CONTENT: Forty-seven references were considered that included three publicly 
available data reports and/or press releases, one book chapter, and 44 published 
manuscripts.
IMPLICATIONS: Although zoonosis has been historically linked to emergence events 
in humans, epidemiological analyses of more recent outbreaks have identified 
increasing frequencies of human-to-human transmission. Furthermore, viral 
transmission during the 2022 global human mpox outbreak, caused by a recently 
identified MPXV subclade, has relied exclusively on human-to-human contact with 
no known zoonotic link.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmi.2023.07.011
PMID: 37507009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]