---
reference_id: "PMID:39404378"
title: Immune Checkpoints and Cellular Landscape of the Tumor Microenvironment in Non-Melanoma Skin Cancer (NMSC).
authors:
- Mousa AM
- Enk AH
- Hassel JC
- Reschke R
journal: Cells
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cells13191615
keywords:
- Humans
- Tumor Microenvironment/immunology
- "Skin Neoplasms/immunology, pathology, therapy"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/immunology, pathology"
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/immunology, pathology"
- "Lymphocytes, Tumor-Infiltrating/immunology"
- Animals
- "Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune Checkpoints and Cellular Landscape of the Tumor Microenvironment in Non-Melanoma Skin Cancer (NMSC).
**Authors:** Mousa AM, Enk AH, Hassel JC, Reschke R
**Journal:** Cells (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells13191615](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells13191615)

## Content

1. Cells. 2024 Sep 26;13(19):1615. doi: 10.3390/cells13191615.

Immune Checkpoints and Cellular Landscape of the Tumor Microenvironment in
Non-Melanoma Skin Cancer (NMSC).

Mousa AM(1), Enk AH(1), Hassel JC(1)(2), Reschke R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT),
Medical Faculty Heidelberg, Heidelberg University NCT Heidelberg, a Partnership
between DKFZ and University Hospital Heidelberg, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), DKFZ, Core Center Heidelberg, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany.

Non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) is primarily categorized into basal cell
carcinoma (BCC), the most prevalent form of skin cancer, and cutaneous squamous
cell carcinoma (cSCC), the second most common type. Both BCC and cSCC represent
a significant health burden, particularly in immunocompromised individuals and
the elderly. The immune system plays a pivotal role in the development and
progression of NMSC, making it a critical focus for therapeutic interventions.
This review highlights key immunological targets in BCC and cSCC, with a focus
on immune checkpoint molecules such as PD-1/PD-L1 and CTLA-4, which regulate T
cell activity and contribute to immune evasion. This review also highlights
anti-tumor immune cell subsets within the tumor microenvironment (TME), such as
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and dendritic cells. Additionally, it
examines the immunosuppressive elements of the TME, including regulatory T cells
(Tregs), myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), tumor-associated macrophages
(TAMs), and cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), as well as their roles in NMSC
progression and resistance to therapy. Emerging strategies targeting these
immune elements, such as monoclonal antibodies, are also discussed for their
potential to enhance anti-tumor immune responses and improve clinical outcomes.
By elucidating the immunological landscape of BCC and cSCC and drawing
comparisons to melanoma, this review highlights the transformative potential of
immunotherapy in treating these malignancies.

DOI: 10.3390/cells13191615
PMCID: PMC11475876
PMID: 39404378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
