---
reference_id: "PMID:34484942"
title: "Fampridine and Acetazolamide in EA2 and Related Familial EA: A Prospective Randomized Placebo-Controlled Trial."
authors:
- Muth C
- Teufel J
- Schöls L
- Synofzik M
- Franke C
- Timmann D
- Mansmann U
- Strupp M
journal: Neurol Clin Pract
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1212/CPJ.0000000000001017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fampridine and Acetazolamide in EA2 and Related Familial EA: A Prospective Randomized Placebo-Controlled Trial.
**Authors:** Muth C, Teufel J, Schöls L, Synofzik M, Franke C, Timmann D, Mansmann U, Strupp M
**Journal:** Neurol Clin Pract (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1212/CPJ.0000000000001017](https://doi.org/10.1212/CPJ.0000000000001017)

## Content

1. Neurol Clin Pract. 2021 Aug;11(4):e438-e446. doi:
10.1212/CPJ.0000000000001017.

Fampridine and Acetazolamide in EA2 and Related Familial EA: A Prospective 
Randomized Placebo-Controlled Trial.

Muth C(1), Teufel J(1), Schöls L(1), Synofzik M(1), Franke C(1), Timmann D(1), 
Mansmann U(1), Strupp M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and German Center for Vertigo and Balance Disorders 
(DSGZ) (CM, JT, M. Strupp), Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, LMU 
University Hospital, Campus Grosshadern; Department of Neurology and 
Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Research (LS, M. Synofzik), Eberhard Karls 
University and German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Tübingen; 
Department of Neurology (CF), Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany, Formerly Department of Neurology, University of Dresden; Department of 
Neurology (DT), Essen University Hospital, University of Duisburg-Essen; and 
Department of Medical Information Sciences (UM), Biometry, and Epidemiology 
(IBE), Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the efficacy and safety of the treatment with 
prolonged-release 4-aminopyridine (fampridine) and acetazolamide for patients 
with episodic ataxia type 2 (EA2), patients with EA2 were treated with a random 
sequence of fampridine, acetazolamide, and placebo in a 3-period crossover 
trial.
METHODS: A total of 30 patients with EA2 (8 female; aged 20-71 years; 18 
genetically confirmed, 4 with a positive family history, 8 with the clinical 
diagnosis) were enrolled in this phase III, randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, 3-period crossover trial. Each period lasted 12 weeks with a 
4-week washout period. Each patient received a random sequence of 20 mg/d 
fampridine, 750 mg/d acetazolamide, and placebo. The primary end point was the 
number of attacks during the last 30 days within the 12-week treatment period. 
Participants, caregivers, and those assessing the outcomes were blinded to the 
intervention.
RESULTS: Compared with placebo, fampridine reduced the number of attacks to 63% 
(95% CI 54%-74%) and acetazolamide to 52% (95% CI 46%-60%). A total of 39 
(26.5%) adverse events were observed under treatment with fampridine (mostly 
tingling paresthesia and fatigue), 66 (44.9%) happened under acetazolamide 
(mostly taste disturbance and gastrointestinal complaints), and 42 (28.6%) under 
placebo (mostly gastrointestinal complaints).
CONCLUSION: Both fampridine and acetazolamide significantly reduce the number of 
attacks in patients with EA2 and related EA in comparison to placebo. Fampridine 
10 mg twice daily had fewer side effects than acetazolamide 250 mg 3 times 
daily. The trial was registered with DRKS.de (DRKS00005258) and EudraCT 
(2013-000107-17). This study was supported by the Federal Ministry of Education 
and Research (BMBF) (grant number 01EO0901). Fampridine (study medication) was 
provided by Biogen Idec.
CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: Class II evidence.

© 2021 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/CPJ.0000000000001017
PMCID: PMC8382428
PMID: 34484942