---
reference_id: "PMID:27861775"
title: "Prevalence of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy in people <30 years of age-A population-based study in Norway."
authors:
- Syvertsen M
- Hellum MK
- Hansen G
- Edland A
- Nakken KO
- Selmer KK
- Koht J
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/epi.13613
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Child
- Community Health Planning
- Electroencephalography
- Female
- Humans
- International Classification of Diseases
- Male
- "Myoclonic Epilepsy, Juvenile/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Norway/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy in people <30 years of age-A population-based study in Norway.
**Authors:** Syvertsen M, Hellum MK, Hansen G, Edland A, Nakken KO, Selmer KK, Koht J
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/epi.13613](https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.13613)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2017 Jan;58(1):105-112. doi: 10.1111/epi.13613. Epub 2016 Nov 16.

Prevalence of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy in people <30 years of age-A
population-based study in Norway.

Syvertsen M(1)(2), Hellum MK(1), Hansen G(1), Edland A(1), Nakken KO(3), Selmer
KK(4), Koht J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Drammen Hospital, Vestre Viken Hospital Trust,
Drammen, Norway.
(2)Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Division of Clinical Neuroscience, National Center for Epilepsy, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital and University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

OBJECTIVE: Despite juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME) being considered one of the
most common epilepsies, population-based prevalence studies of JME are lacking.
Our aim was to estimate the prevalence of JME in a Norwegian county, using
updated diagnostic criteria.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study, based on reviews of the medical
records of all patients with a diagnosis of epilepsy at Drammen Hospital in the
period 1999-2013. The study population consisted of 98,152 people <30 years of
age. Subjects diagnosed with JME, unspecified genetic generalized epilepsy, or
absence epilepsy were identified. All of these patients were contacted and asked
specifically about myoclonic jerks. Electroencephalography (EEG) recordings and
medical records were reevaluated for those who confirmed myoclonic jerks.
Information about seizure onset was obtained from the medical records, and
annual frequency of new cases was estimated.
RESULTS: A total of 55 subjects fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for JME. The
point prevalence was estimated at 5.6/10,000. JME constituted 9.3% of all
epilepsies in the age group we investigated. Of subjects diagnosed with either
unspecified genetic generalized epilepsy or absence epilepsy, 21% and 12%,
respectively, had JME. We identified 21 subjects with JME (38%) who had not been
diagnosed previously. Six subjects (11%) had childhood absence epilepsy evolving
into JME. Between 2009 and 2013, the average frequency of JME per 100,000 people
of all ages per year was estimated at 1.7.
SIGNIFICANCE: A substantial portion of people with JME seem to go undiagnosed,
as was the case for more than one third of the subjects in this study. By
investigating subjects diagnosed with unspecified genetic generalized epilepsy
or absence epilepsy, we found a prevalence of JME that was considerably higher
than previously reported. We conclude that JME may go undiagnosed due to the
underrecognition of myoclonic jerks. To make a correct diagnosis, clinicians
need to ask specifically about myoclonic jerks.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. © 2016 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.13613
PMID: 27861775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
