---
reference_id: "PMID:34844291"
title: Selection Strategies and Practical Application of BRAF V600E-Mutated Non-Small Cell Lung Carcinoma.
authors:
- Hwang I
- Choi YL
- Lee H
- Hwang S
- Lee B
- Yang H
- Chelakkot C
- Han J
journal: Cancer Res Treat
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4143/crt.2021.843
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Selection Strategies and Practical Application of BRAF V600E-Mutated Non-Small Cell Lung Carcinoma.
**Authors:** Hwang I, Choi YL, Lee H, Hwang S, Lee B, Yang H, Chelakkot C, Han J
**Journal:** Cancer Res Treat (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4143/crt.2021.843](https://doi.org/10.4143/crt.2021.843)

## Content

1. Cancer Res Treat. 2022 Jul;54(3):782-792. doi: 10.4143/crt.2021.843. Epub 2021
 Nov 23.

Selection Strategies and Practical Application of BRAF V600E-Mutated Non-Small 
Cell Lung Carcinoma.

Hwang I(1), Choi YL(1)(2)(3), Lee H(1), Hwang S(1), Lee B(1)(2), Yang H(4), 
Chelakkot C(5), Han J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Translational Genomics, Samsung Medical Center, 
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Samsung Advanced Institute of Health Science and Technology, Sungkyunkwan 
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Laboratory of Cancer Genomics and Molecular Pathology, Samsung Medical 
Center, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences and College of Pharmacy, Seoul 
National University, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Bio-MAX, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: The incidence of BRAF V600E mutation in non-small cell lung carcinoma 
(NSCLC) is lower than 2%, which poses difficulties in finding legitimate 
patients for targeted therapy. We investigated the predictive factors pertaining 
to BRAF V600E and the effectiveness of the VE1 antibody as a screening method 
for patient selection.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study was designed into two steps. In a first group, 
BRAF-mutated NSCLCs were identified from sequencing data to determine the 
features of BRAF V600E mutation. The results of the first group helped the 
collection of adenocarcinomas with a papillary or micropapillary pattern but 
without EGFR or ALK alterations as a second group so that the frequency of BRAF 
V600E mutation could be calculated. The sensitivity and specificity of the VE1 
were compared with BRAF V600E status.
RESULTS: Among 39 BRAF-mutated NSCLCs in the first group, 20 (51%) were V600E. 
BRAF V600E mutation was more common in female patients and showed no significant 
correlation with smoking status. Nineteen cases were adenocarcinomas without 
EGFR and ALK alterations. The most common patterns of invasion were papillary 
and micropapillary along with central fibrosis. The sensitivity and specificity 
of the VE1 were 90.0% and 92.3%, respectively. In the second group, 6.7% of 
cases were VE1-positive, indicating that the prevalence was significantly higher 
than that reported in previous studies (0.3-1.8%).
CONCLUSION: BRAF V600E-mutated NSCLCs could be enriched with the application of 
clinicopathologic parameters, which are not perfect. Therefore, additional VE1 
immunohistochemistry may be useful as a screening method.

DOI: 10.4143/crt.2021.843
PMCID: PMC9296927
PMID: 34844291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest Conflict of interest 
relevant to this article was not reported.