---
reference_id: "PMID:25322323"
title: "ALK inhibitors in non-small cell lung cancer: crizotinib and beyond."
authors:
- Awad MM
- Shaw AT
journal: Clin Adv Hematol Oncol
year: '2014'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ALK inhibitors in non-small cell lung cancer: crizotinib and beyond.
**Authors:** Awad MM, Shaw AT
**Journal:** Clin Adv Hematol Oncol (2014)

## Content

1. Clin Adv Hematol Oncol. 2014 Jul;12(7):429-39.

ALK inhibitors in non-small cell lung cancer: crizotinib and beyond.

Awad MM(1), Shaw AT(2).

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(2)Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, 
Boston, Massachusetts.

The treatment of patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
harboring chromosomal rearrangements of anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) has 
been revolutionized by the development of crizotinib, a small molecule inhibitor 
of the tyrosine kinases ALK, ROS1, and MET. Resistance to crizotinib invariably 
develops, however, through a variety of mechanisms. In the last few years, a 
flurry of new and more potent ALK inhibitors has emerged for the treatment of 
ALK-positive NSCLC, including ceritinib (LDK378), alectinib 
(RO5424802/CH5424802), AP26113, ASP3026, TSR-011, PF-06463922, RXDX-101, X-396, 
and CEP-37440. Cancers harboring ALK rearrangements may also be susceptible to 
treatment with heat shock protein 90 inhibitors. This review focuses on the 
pharmacologic and clinical properties of these compounds, either as 
monotherapies or in combination with other drugs. With so many ALK inhibitors in 
development, the challenges of how these agents should be studied and ultimately 
prescribed are also discussed.

PMCID: PMC4215402
PMID: 25322323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]