---
reference_id: "PMID:40950651"
title: "Bone Densitometry is a Valuable Marker for Bone Health Monitoring in Pediatric Wilson's Disease Patients: A Tertiary Center Experience."
authors:
- Kotb MA
- Fakhry S
- AbdElBaky H
- Abd El Khalek MY
- Kamal NM
- Alfifi J
- Oshi MAM
- Alalyani SA
- Basanti C
journal: Sage Open Pediatr
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1177/30502225251367480
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone Densitometry is a Valuable Marker for Bone Health Monitoring in Pediatric Wilson's Disease Patients: A Tertiary Center Experience.
**Authors:** Kotb MA, Fakhry S, AbdElBaky H, Abd El Khalek MY, Kamal NM, Alfifi J, Oshi MAM, Alalyani SA, Basanti C
**Journal:** Sage Open Pediatr (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1177/30502225251367480](https://doi.org/10.1177/30502225251367480)

## Content

1. Sage Open Pediatr. 2025 Sep 11;12:30502225251367480. doi: 
10.1177/30502225251367480. eCollection 2025 Jan-Dec.

Bone Densitometry is a Valuable Marker for Bone Health Monitoring in Pediatric 
Wilson's Disease Patients: A Tertiary Center Experience.

Kotb MA(1), Fakhry S(1), AbdElBaky H(1), Abd El Khalek MY(1), Kamal NM(1), 
Alfifi J(2), Oshi MAM(3), Alalyani SA(4), Basanti C(1).

Author information:
(1)Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
(2)University of Bisha, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Dr Gaafar Ibn Auf Specialized Hospital For Children, Khartoum, Sudan.
(4)Alhada Armed Forces Hospital, Taif, Saudi Arabia.

Wilson's disease is a rare inherited disorder causing copper accumulation, which 
may adversely affect bone health in children. To assess bone mineral density and 
the prevalence of osteopenia and osteoporosis in pediatric Wilson's disease 
patients using DEXA. A cross-sectional study was conducted on 15 children with 
confirmed Wilson's disease. Bone mineral density was assessed using dual-energy 
X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA), and clinical, biochemical, and treatment-related 
variables were analyzed. The mean age was 10 ± 3.6 years; 53% were female. DEXA 
revealed bone disease in 60%: mild osteopenia (13%), moderate (27%), and 
osteoporosis (20%). Bone disease did not correlate with treatment duration, 
urinary copper, calcium, phosphorus, or alkaline phosphatase. However, serum 
albumin positively correlated with bone density (P = .018). Bone disease is 
frequent and often subclinical in pediatric Wilson's disease. DEXA is a useful 
tool for early detection. Larger studies are needed to evaluate the effects of 
treatment and micronutrient status on bone health.

© The Author(s) 2025.

DOI: 10.1177/30502225251367480
PMCID: PMC12426392
PMID: 40950651

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.