---
reference_id: "PMID:29924900"
title: Elucidating the genetic architecture of Adams-Oliver syndrome in a large European cohort.
authors:
- Meester JAN
- Sukalo M
- Schröder KC
- Schanze D
- Baynam G
- Borck G
- Bramswig NC
- Duman D
- Gilbert-Dussardier B
- Holder-Espinasse M
- Itin P
- Johnson DS
- Joss S
- Koillinen H
- McKenzie F
- Morton J
- Nelle H
- Reardon W
- Roll C
- Salih MA
- Savarirayan R
- Scurr I
- Splitt M
- Thompson E
- Titheradge H
- Travers CP
- Van Maldergem L
- Whiteford M
- Wieczorek D
- Vandeweyer G
- Trembath R
- Van Laer L
- Loeys BL
- Zenker M
- Southgate L
- Wuyts W
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/humu.23567
keywords:
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics, physiopathology"
- Extremities/physiopathology
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Receptors, Notch/genetics"
- Scalp/physiopathology
- "Scalp Dermatoses/congenital, genetics, physiopathology"
- rho GTP-Binding Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elucidating the genetic architecture of Adams-Oliver syndrome in a large European cohort.
**Authors:** Meester JAN, Sukalo M, Schröder KC, Schanze D, Baynam G, Borck G, Bramswig NC, Duman D, Gilbert-Dussardier B, Holder-Espinasse M, Itin P, Johnson DS, Joss S, Koillinen H, McKenzie F, Morton J, Nelle H, Reardon W, Roll C, Salih MA, Savarirayan R, Scurr I, Splitt M, Thompson E, Titheradge H, Travers CP, Van Maldergem L, Whiteford M, Wieczorek D, Vandeweyer G, Trembath R, Van Laer L, Loeys BL, Zenker M, Southgate L, Wuyts W
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23567](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23567)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2018 Sep;39(9):1246-1261. doi: 10.1002/humu.23567. Epub 2018 Jul 4.

Elucidating the genetic architecture of Adams-Oliver syndrome in a large 
European cohort.

Meester JAN(1), Sukalo M(2), Schröder KC(2), Schanze D(2), Baynam G(3)(4)(5), 
Borck G(6), Bramswig NC(7), Duman D(8), Gilbert-Dussardier B(9), 
Holder-Espinasse M(10), Itin P(11), Johnson DS(12), Joss S(13), Koillinen H(14), 
McKenzie F(15), Morton J(16), Nelle H(17), Reardon W(18), Roll C(19), Salih 
MA(20), Savarirayan R(21), Scurr I(22), Splitt M(23), Thompson E(24)(25), 
Titheradge H(16), Travers CP(26), Van Maldergem L(27), Whiteford M(28), 
Wieczorek D(29), Vandeweyer G(1), Trembath R(30), Van Laer L(1), Loeys BL(1), 
Zenker M(2), Southgate L(30)(31), Wuyts W(1).

Author information:
(1)Center of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and Antwerp University 
Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Magdeburg, Magdeburg, 
Germany.
(3)Genetic Services of Western Australia and the Western Australian Register of 
Developmental Anomalies, King Edward Memorial Hospital, Perth, Australia.
(4)Telethon Kids Institute, Perth, Australia.
(5)School of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Western Australia, 
Perth, Australia.
(6)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(7)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Universität 
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(8)Division of Pediatric Genetics, Ankara University School of Medicine, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(9)Service de Génétique, CHU de Poitiers, University of Poitiers, Poitiers, 
France.
(10)Guy's Regional Genetics Service, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, United Kingdom.
(11)Department of Dermatology, Basel University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland.
(12)Department of Clinical Genetics, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation Trust, 
Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(13)West of Scotland Clinical Genetics Service, Queen Elizabeth University 
Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(14)Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, 
Finland.
(15)Genetic Services of Western Australia, King Edward Memorial Hospital for 
Women, Subiaco, Australia.
(16)West Midlands Regional Clinical Genetics Service and Birmingham Health 
Partners, Birmingham Women's Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United 
Kingdom.
(17)MVZ für Pränatalmedizin und Genetik, Nürnberg, Germany.
(18)Clinical Genetics, National Maternity Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(19)Abteilung Neonatologie und Pädiatrische Intensivmedizin, Vestische Kinder- 
und Jugendklinik Datteln, Universität Witten/Herdecke, Datteln, Germany.
(20)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, King Khalid 
University Hospital and College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.
(21)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
and the University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(22)Bristol Genetics Service, University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust, 
St Michael's Hospital, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(23)Northern Genetics Service, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(24)South Australian Clinical Genetics Service, North Adelaide, South Australia, 
Australia, SA Clinical Genetics Service, SA Pathology at the Women's and 
Children's Hospital, North Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(25)School of Medicine, University of Adelaide, North Terrace, Adelaide, SA, 
Australia.
(26)Division of Neonatology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
USA.
(27)Centre de Génétique Humaine, Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, France.
(28)West of Scotland Genetic Services, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, 
Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(29)Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University, 
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(30)Division of Genetics & Molecular Medicine, King's College London, Faculty of 
Life Sciences & Medicine, Guy's Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(31)Molecular and Clinical Sciences Research Institute, St George's University 
of London, London, United Kingdom.

Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is a rare developmental disorder, characterized by 
scalp aplasia cutis congenita (ACC) and transverse terminal limb defects (TTLD). 
Autosomal dominant forms of AOS are linked to mutations in ARHGAP31, DLL4, 
NOTCH1 or RBPJ, while DOCK6 and EOGT underlie autosomal recessive inheritance. 
Data on the frequency and distribution of mutations in large cohorts are 
currently limited. The purpose of this study was therefore to comprehensively 
examine the genetic architecture of AOS in an extensive cohort. Molecular 
diagnostic screening of 194 AOS/ACC/TTLD probands/families was conducted using 
next-generation and/or capillary sequencing analyses. In total, we identified 63 
(likely) pathogenic mutations, comprising 56 distinct and 22 novel mutations, 
providing a molecular diagnosis in 30% of patients. Taken together with previous 
reports, these findings bring the total number of reported disease variants to 
63, with a diagnostic yield of 36% in familial cases. NOTCH1 is the major 
contributor, underlying 10% of AOS/ACC/TTLD cases, with DLL4 (6%), DOCK6 (6%), 
ARHGAP31 (3%), EOGT (3%), and RBPJ (2%) representing additional causality in 
this cohort. We confirm the relevance of genetic screening across the 
AOS/ACC/TTLD spectrum, highlighting preliminary but important genotype-phenotype 
correlations. This cohort offers potential for further gene identification to 
address missing heritability.

© 2018 The Authors. Human Mutation published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23567
PMCID: PMC6175364
PMID: 29924900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]