---
reference_id: "PMID:37278968"
title: "D-galactose Supplementation for the Treatment of Mild Malformation of Cortical Development with Oligodendroglial Hyperplasia in Epilepsy (MOGHE): A Pilot Trial of Precision Medicine After Epilepsy Surgery."
authors:
- Aledo-Serrano Á
- Valls-Carbó A
- Fenger CD
- Groeppel G
- Hartlieb T
- Pascual I
- Herraez E
- Cabal B
- García-Morales I
- Toledano R
- Budke M
- Beltran-Corbellini Á
- Baldassari S
- Coras R
- Kobow K
- Herrera DM
- Del Barrio A
- Dahl HA
- Del Pino I
- Baulac S
- Blumcke I
- Møller RS
- Gil-Nagel A
journal: Neurotherapeutics
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s13311-023-01395-z
keywords:
- Humans
- Galactose
- Precision Medicine
- Hyperplasia
- Pilot Projects
- Quality of Life
- Epilepsy/therapy
- Seizures
- Electroencephalography/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# D-galactose Supplementation for the Treatment of Mild Malformation of Cortical Development with Oligodendroglial Hyperplasia in Epilepsy (MOGHE): A Pilot Trial of Precision Medicine After Epilepsy Surgery.
**Authors:** Aledo-Serrano Á, Valls-Carbó A, Fenger CD, Groeppel G, Hartlieb T, Pascual I, Herraez E, Cabal B, García-Morales I, Toledano R, Budke M, Beltran-Corbellini Á, Baldassari S, Coras R, Kobow K, Herrera DM, Del Barrio A, Dahl HA, Del Pino I, Baulac S, Blumcke I, Møller RS, Gil-Nagel A
**Journal:** Neurotherapeutics (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13311-023-01395-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-023-01395-z)

## Content

1. Neurotherapeutics. 2023 Sep;20(5):1294-1304. doi: 10.1007/s13311-023-01395-z. 
Epub 2023 Jun 6.

D-galactose Supplementation for the Treatment of Mild Malformation of Cortical 
Development with Oligodendroglial Hyperplasia in Epilepsy (MOGHE): A Pilot Trial 
of Precision Medicine After Epilepsy Surgery.

Aledo-Serrano Á(1)(2)(3), Valls-Carbó A(4)(5), Fenger CD(6)(7), Groeppel G(8), 
Hartlieb T(9)(10), Pascual I(4), Herraez E(4)(11), Cabal B(4)(12), 
García-Morales I(4)(13), Toledano R(4)(13), Budke M(4)(14), Beltran-Corbellini 
Á(4), Baldassari S(15), Coras R(16), Kobow K(16), Herrera DM(4)(17), Del Barrio 
A(4), Dahl HA(7), Del Pino I(18), Baulac S(15), Blumcke I(16), Møller 
RS(19)(20), Gil-Nagel A(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Epilepsy and Neurogenetics Program, Ruber Internacional Hospital, La Masó 34, 
28034, Madrid, Spain. aaledo@synaptia.org.
(2)Initiative for Neuroscience (INCE) Foundation, Madrid, Spain. 
aaledo@synaptia.org.
(3)Neuroscience Institute, Vithas Madrid La Milagrosa University Hospital, 
Vithas Hospital Group, Madrid, Spain. aaledo@synaptia.org.
(4)Epilepsy and Neurogenetics Program, Ruber Internacional Hospital, La Masó 34, 
28034, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Initiative for Neuroscience (INCE) Foundation, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Department of Epilepsy Genetics and Personalized Medicine, Danish Epilepsy 
Centre, Dianalund, Denmark.
(7)Amplexa Genetics A/S (H.A.D.), Odense, Denmark.
(8)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine and Department of 
Neurology, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Kepler University Hospital, Linz, 
Austria.
(9)Center for Pediatric Neurology, Neurorehabilitation, and Epileptology, Schoen 
Clinic, Vogtareuth, Germany.
(10)Research Institute "Rehabilitation, " PMU Salzburg, Transition, 
PalliationSalzburg, Austria.
(11)Department of Neurophysiology, Rey Juan Carlos University Hospital, Madrid, 
Spain.
(12)Department of Neurology, Puerta de Hierro University Hospital, Madrid, 
Spain.
(13)Epilepsy Unit, Department of Neurology, Clinico San Carlos University 
Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(14)Department of Neurosurgery, Niño Jesus University Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(15)Sorbonne Université, Institut du Cerveau-Paris Brain Institute-ICM, Inserm, 
CNRS, Paris, France.
(16)Department of Neuropathology, University Hospital, Erlangen, Germany.
(17)Epilepsy Unit, Department of Neurology, Kennedy University Hospital, Bogota, 
Colombia.
(18)Institute of Neurosciences (IN), Higher Council for Scientific 
Research-Miguel Hernandez University, Alicante, Spain.
(19)Neuroscience Institute, Vithas Madrid La Milagrosa University Hospital, 
Vithas Hospital Group, Madrid, Spain.
(20)Department of Regional Health Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.

MOGHE is defined as mild malformation of cortical development with 
oligodendroglial hyperplasia in epilepsy. Approximately half of the patients 
with histopathologically confirmed MOGHE carry a brain somatic variant in the 
SLC35A2 gene encoding a UDP-galactose transporter. Previous research showed that 
D-galactose supplementation results in clinical improvement in patients with a 
congenital disorder of glycosylation due to germline variants in SLC35A2. We 
aimed to evaluate the effects of D-galactose supplementation in patients with 
histopathologically confirmed MOGHE, with uncontrolled seizures or cognitive 
impairment and epileptiform activity at the EEG after epilepsy surgery 
(NCT04833322). Patients were orally supplemented with D-galactose for 6 months 
in doses up to 1.5 g/kg/day and monitored for seizure frequency including 24-h 
video-EEG recording, cognition and behavioral scores, i.e., WISC, BRIEF-2, 
SNAP-IV, and SCQ, and quality of life measures, before and 6 months after 
treatment. Global response was defined by > 50% improvement of seizure frequency 
and/or cognition and behavior (clinical global impression of "much improved" or 
better). Twelve patients (aged 5-28 years) were included from three different 
centers. Neurosurgical tissue samples were available in all patients and 
revealed a brain somatic variant in SLC35A2 in six patients (non-present in the 
blood). After 6 months of supplementation, D-galactose was well tolerated with 
just two patients presenting abdominal discomfort, solved after dose spacing or 
reduction. There was a 50% reduction or higher of seizure frequency in 3/6 
patients, with an improvement at EEG in 2/5 patients. One patient became 
seizure-free. An improvement of cognitive/behavioral features encompassing 
impulsivity (mean SNAP-IV - 3.19 [- 0.84; - 5.6]), social communication (mean 
SCQ - 2.08 [- 0.63; - 4.90]), and executive function (BRIEF-2 inhibit - 5.2 
[- 1.23; - 9.2]) was observed. Global responder rate was 9/12 (6/6 in 
SLC35A2-positive). Our results suggest that supplementation with D-galactose in 
patients with MOGHE is safe and well tolerated and, although the efficacy data 
warrant larger studies, it might build a rationale for precision medicine after 
epilepsy surgery.

© 2023. The American Society for Experimental Neurotherapeutics, Inc.

DOI: 10.1007/s13311-023-01395-z
PMCID: PMC10480113
PMID: 37278968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.