---
reference_id: "PMID:29526182"
title: Pulmonary Rehabilitation and Exercise Training in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.
authors:
- Gloeckl R
- Schneeberger T
- Jarosch I
- Kenn K
journal: Dtsch Arztebl Int
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3238/arztebl.2018.0117
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary Rehabilitation and Exercise Training in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.
**Authors:** Gloeckl R, Schneeberger T, Jarosch I, Kenn K
**Journal:** Dtsch Arztebl Int (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3238/arztebl.2018.0117](https://doi.org/10.3238/arztebl.2018.0117)

## Content

1. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2018 Feb 23;115(8):117-123. doi: 10.3238/arztebl.2018.0117.

Pulmonary Rehabilitation and Exercise Training in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease.

Gloeckl R(1), Schneeberger T, Jarosch I, Kenn K.

Author information:
(1)Schön Klinik Berchtesgadener Land, Schönau am Königssee; The Centre for 
Preventive and Sports Medicine, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technical University 
of; Munich (TUM); Philipps-Universität Marburg, German Center for Lung Research 
(DZL).

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common condition 
that is becoming increasingly prevalent. It affects 13.2% of the population over 
age 40 in Germany. In 2020, it will be the third most common cause of morbidity 
and mortality around the world. It markedly impairs the quality of life of those 
who suffer from it and presents a major economic challenge to the health-care 
system.
METHODS: This review is based on pertinent publications retrieved by a selective 
literature search and on the authors' clinical experience.
RESULTS: Pulmonary rehabilitation (PR) for patients with COPD is supported by 
evidence on the highest level. It is associated with statistically significant 
(p <0.001) and clinically relevant improvement in physical performance (6-minute 
walk distance: + 44 m; 95% confidence interval [33; 55]), shortness of breath 
(Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire: +0.79 points [0.56; 1.03]), and the 
quality of life (Saint George´s Respiratory Questionnaire: -6.9 points [-9.3; 
-4.5]). The benefits of PR are especially evident after an acute exacerbation of 
COPD: it significantly lowers the rate of readmission to the hospital (odds 
ratio 0.22 [0.08; 0.58], p = 0.002) and improves physical performance ability 
(6-minute walk distance: + 62 m [38; 86] and the quality of life (Saint George´s 
Respiratory Questionnaire: -7.8 points [-12.1; -3.5]; p <0.001 for both).
CONCLUSION: PR is an effective and cost-effective therapeutic intervention that 
improves physical performance ability, shortness of breath, and the quality of 
life in patients with COPD, but it has not yet been fully implemented as 
recommended in the relevant guidelines. There is a need for targeted, 
problem-oriented referral to a range of PR programs with problem-specific 
content. The necessary outpatient PR structures still need to be established in 
Germany.

DOI: 10.3238/arztebl.2018.0117
PMCID: PMC5852307
PMID: 29526182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]