---
reference_id: "PMID:31796109"
title: "Developmental hypomyelination in Wolfram syndrome: new insights from neuroimaging and gene expression analyses."
authors:
- Samara A
- Rahn R
- Neyman O
- Park KY
- Samara A
- Marshall B
- Dougherty J
- Hershey T
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1260-9
keywords:
- Animals
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, metabolism"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum
- Humans
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Neuroimaging/methods
- Unfolded Protein Response/physiology
- "Wolfram Syndrome/diagnostic imaging, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Developmental hypomyelination in Wolfram syndrome: new insights from neuroimaging and gene expression analyses.
**Authors:** Samara A, Rahn R, Neyman O, Park KY, Samara A, Marshall B, Dougherty J, Hershey T
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-019-1260-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-019-1260-9)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2019 Dec 3;14(1):279. doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1260-9.

Developmental hypomyelination in Wolfram syndrome: new insights from
neuroimaging and gene expression analyses.

Samara A(1), Rahn R(1)(2)(3), Neyman O(1), Park KY(1), Samara A(4), Marshall
B(5), Dougherty J(1)(3), Hershey T(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, 4525
Scott Avenue, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA.
(2)Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics, Washington University Medical School, St. Louis, MO,
63110, USA.
(4)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, An-Najah National University,
Nablus, Palestine.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University Medical School, St. Louis,
MO, 63110, USA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, 4525
Scott Avenue, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA. tammy@wustl.edu.
(7)Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA. tammy@wustl.edu.
(8)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO, 63110, USA. tammy@wustl.edu.

Wolfram syndrome is a rare multisystem disorder caused by mutations in WFS1 or
CISD2 genes leading to brain structural abnormalities and neurological symptoms.
These abnormalities appear in early stages of the disease. The pathogenesis of
Wolfram syndrome involves abnormalities in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and
mitochondrial dynamics, which are common features in several other
neurodegenerative disorders. Mutations in WFS1 are responsible for the majority
of Wolfram syndrome cases. WFS1 encodes for an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
protein, wolframin. It is proposed that wolframin deficiency triggers the
unfolded protein response (UPR) pathway resulting in an increased ER
stress-mediated neuronal loss. Recent neuroimaging studies showed marked
alteration in early brain development, primarily characterized by abnormal white
matter myelination. Interestingly, ER stress and the UPR pathway are implicated
in the pathogenesis of some inherited myelin disorders like Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease, and Vanishing White Matter disease. In addition, exploratory
gene-expression network-based analyses suggest that WFS1 expression occurs
preferentially in oligodendrocytes during early brain development. Therefore, we
propose that Wolfram syndrome could belong to a category of neurodevelopmental
disorders characterized by ER stress-mediated myelination impairment. Further
studies of myelination and oligodendrocyte function in Wolfram syndrome could
provide new insights into the underlying mechanisms of the Wolfram
syndrome-associated brain changes and identify potential connections between
neurodevelopmental disorders and neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-019-1260-9
PMCID: PMC6889680
PMID: 31796109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests..
