---
reference_id: "PMID:35328914"
title: "Wolfram Syndrome 1: From Genetics to Therapy."
authors:
- Rigoli L
- Caruso V
- Salzano G
- Lombardo F
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph19063225
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Neurodegenerative Diseases
- "Optic Atrophy/complications, genetics, therapy"
- Quality of Life
- "Wolfram Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wolfram Syndrome 1: From Genetics to Therapy.
**Authors:** Rigoli L, Caruso V, Salzano G, Lombardo F
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph19063225](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19063225)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022 Mar 9;19(6):3225. doi:
10.3390/ijerph19063225.

Wolfram Syndrome 1: From Genetics to Therapy.

Rigoli L(1), Caruso V(2), Salzano G(1), Lombardo F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Pathology of Adulthood and Childhood G. Barresi,
University of Messina, 98125 Messina, Italy.
(2)Psychiatry 2 Unit, Clinical and Experimental Medicine Department, University
of Pisa, 56126 Pisa, Italy.

Wolfram syndrome 1 (WS1) is a rare neurodegenerative disease transmitted in an
autosomal recessive mode. It is characterized by diabetes insipidus (DI),
diabetes mellitus (DM), optic atrophy (OA), and sensorineural hearing loss (D)
(DIDMOAD). The clinical picture may be complicated by other symptoms, such as
urinary tract, endocrinological, psychiatric, and neurological abnormalities.
WS1 is caused by mutations in the WFS1 gene located on chromosome 4p16 that
encodes a transmembrane protein named wolframin. Many studies have shown that
wolframin regulates some mechanisms of ER calcium homeostasis and therefore
plays a role in cellular apoptosis. More than 200 mutations are responsible for
WS1. However, abnormal phenotypes of WS with or without DM, inherited in an
autosomal dominant mode and associated with one or more WFS1 mutations, have
been found. Furthermore, recessive Wolfram-like disease without DM has been
described. The prognosis of WS1 is poor, and the death occurs prematurely.
Although there are no therapies that can slow or stop WS1, a careful clinical
monitoring can help patients during the rapid progression of the disease, thus
improving their quality of life. In this review, we describe natural history and
etiology of WS1 and suggest criteria for a most pertinent approach to the
diagnosis and clinical follow up. We also describe the hallmarks of new
therapies for WS1.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph19063225
PMCID: PMC8949990
PMID: 35328914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
