---
reference_id: "PMID:35012455"
title: "GRAde: a long-read sequencing approach to efficiently identifying the CYP11B1/CYP11B2 chimeric form in patients with glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism."
authors:
- Wu YC
- Chen CI
- Chen PY
- Kuo CH
- Hung YH
- Peng KY
- Wu VC
- Tsai-Wu JJ
- Hsu CL
- TAIPAI group
journal: BMC Bioinformatics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12859-022-04561-w
keywords:
- Cytochrome P-450 CYP11B2/genetics
- Humans
- Hyperaldosteronism/genetics
- Mutant Chimeric Proteins
- Mutation
- Steroid 11-beta-Hydroxylase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GRAde: a long-read sequencing approach to efficiently identifying the CYP11B1/CYP11B2 chimeric form in patients with glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism.
**Authors:** Wu YC, Chen CI, Chen PY, Kuo CH, Hung YH, Peng KY, Wu VC, Tsai-Wu JJ, Hsu CL, TAIPAI group
**Journal:** BMC Bioinformatics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12859-022-04561-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-022-04561-w)

## Content

1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2022 Jan 10;22(Suppl 10):613. doi:
10.1186/s12859-022-04561-w.

GRAde: a long-read sequencing approach to efficiently identifying the
CYP11B1/CYP11B2 chimeric form in patients with glucocorticoid-remediable
aldosteronism.

Wu YC(1), Chen CI(1), Chen PY(2), Kuo CH(1), Hung YH(1), Peng KY(2), Wu VC(2),
Tsai-Wu JJ(3), Hsu CL(4)(5)(6); TAIPAI group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Research, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(3)Department of Medical Research, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan. jjtsai@ntuh.gov.tw.
(4)Department of Medical Research, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan. chialanghsu@ntuh.gov.tw.
(5)Graduate Institute of Oncology, National Taiwan University College of
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. chialanghsu@ntuh.gov.tw.
(6)Graduate Institute of Medical Genomics and Proteomics, National Taiwan
University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. chialanghsu@ntuh.gov.tw.

BACKGROUND: Glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism (GRA) is a form of heritable
hypertension caused by a chimeric fusion resulting from unequal crossing over
between 11β-hydroxylase (CYP11B1) and aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2), which are
two genes with similar sequences. Different crossover patterns of the CYP11B1
and CYP11B2 chimeric genes may be associated with a variety of clinical
presentations. It is therefore necessary to develop an efficient approach for
identifying the differences between the hybrid genes of a patient with GRA.
RESULTS: We developed a long-read analysis pipeline named GRAde (GRA
deciphering), which utilizes the nonidentical bases in the CYP11B1 and CYP11B2
genomic sequences to identify and visualize the chimeric form. We sequenced the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products of the CYP11B1/CYP11B2 chimeric gene
from 36 patients with GRA using the Nanopore MinION device and analyzed the
sequences using GRAde. Crossover events were identified for 30 out of the 36
samples. The crossover sites appeared in the region exhibiting high sequence
similarity between CYP11B1 and CYP11B2, and 53.3% of the cases were identified
as having a gene conversion in intron 2. More importantly, there were six cases
for whom the PCR products indicated a chimeric gene, but the GRAde results
revealed no crossover pattern. The crossover regions were further verified by
Sanger sequencing analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: PCR-based target enrichment followed by long-read sequencing is an
efficient and precise approach to dissecting complex genomic regions, such as
those involved in GRA mutations, which could be directly applied to clinical
diagnosis. The scripts of GRAde are available at
https://github.com/hsu-binfo/GRAde .

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-022-04561-w
PMCID: PMC8750845
PMID: 35012455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
