---
reference_id: PMID:28987175
title: Inflammatory demyelinating diseases of the central nervous system.
authors:
- Höftberger R
- Lassmann H
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-802395-2.00019-5
keywords:
- Animals
- "Central Nervous System/immunology, pathology"
- "Demyelinating Diseases/immunology, pathology"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inflammatory demyelinating diseases of the central nervous system.
**Authors:** Höftberger R, Lassmann H
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-12-802395-2.00019-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-802395-2.00019-5)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2017;145:263-283. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-802395-2.00019-5.

Inflammatory demyelinating diseases of the central nervous system.

Höftberger R(1), Lassmann H(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Center for Brain Research, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. 
Electronic address: hans.lassmann@meduniwien.ac.at.

Inflammatory demyelinating diseases are a heterogeneous group of disorders, 
which occur against the background of an acute or chronic inflammatory process. 
The pathologic hallmark of multiple sclerosis (MS) is the presence of focal 
demyelinated lesions with partial axonal preservation and reactive astrogliosis. 
Demyelinated plaques are present in the white as well as gray matter, such as 
the cerebral or cerebellar cortex and brainstem nuclei. Activity of the disease 
process is reflected by the presence of lesions with ongoing myelin destruction. 
Axonal and neuronal destruction in the lesions is a major substrate for 
permanent neurologic deficit in MS patients. The MS pathology is qualitatively 
similar in different disease stages, such as relapsing remitting MS or secondary 
or primary progressive MS, but the prevalence of different lesion types differs 
quantitatively. Acute MS and Balo's type of concentric sclerosis appear to be 
variants of classic MS. In contrast, neuromyelitis optica (NMO) and spectrum 
disorders (NMOSD) are inflammatory diseases with primary injury of astrocytes, 
mediated by aquaporin-4 antibodies. Finally, we discuss the histopathology of 
other inflammatory demyelinating diseases such as acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated 
demyelination. Knowledge of the heterogenous immunopathology in demyelinating 
diseases is important, to understand the clinical presentation and disease 
course and to find the optimal treatment for an individual patient.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-802395-2.00019-5
PMCID: PMC7149979
PMID: 28987175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]