---
reference_id: "PMID:32758449"
title: Episignatures Stratifying Helsmoortel-Van Der Aa Syndrome Show Modest Correlation with Phenotype.
authors:
- Breen MS
- Garg P
- Tang L
- Mendonca D
- Levy T
- Barbosa M
- Arnett AB
- Kurtz-Nelson E
- Agolini E
- Battaglia A
- Chiocchetti AG
- Freitag CM
- Garcia-Alcon A
- Grammatico P
- Hertz-Picciotto I
- Ludena-Rodriguez Y
- Moreno C
- Novelli A
- Parellada M
- Pascolini G
- Tassone F
- Grice DE
- Di Marino D
- Bernier RA
- Kolevzon A
- Sharp AJ
- Buxbaum JD
- Siper PM
- De Rubeis S
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.07.003
keywords:
- "Autism Spectrum Disorder/genetics, pathology"
- Child
- DNA Methylation/genetics
- "Developmental Disabilities/genetics, pathology"
- "Epigenesis, Genetic/genetics"
- Female
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- "Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Transcriptome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Episignatures Stratifying Helsmoortel-Van Der Aa Syndrome Show Modest Correlation with Phenotype.
**Authors:** Breen MS, Garg P, Tang L, Mendonca D, Levy T, Barbosa M, Arnett AB, Kurtz-Nelson E, Agolini E, Battaglia A, Chiocchetti AG, Freitag CM, Garcia-Alcon A, Grammatico P, Hertz-Picciotto I, Ludena-Rodriguez Y, Moreno C, Novelli A, Parellada M, Pascolini G, Tassone F, Grice DE, Di Marino D, Bernier RA, Kolevzon A, Sharp AJ, Buxbaum JD, Siper PM, De Rubeis S
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.07.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.07.003)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2020 Sep 3;107(3):555-563. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.07.003.
Epub  2020 Aug 5.

Episignatures Stratifying Helsmoortel-Van Der Aa Syndrome Show Modest 
Correlation with Phenotype.

Breen MS(1), Garg P(2), Tang L(3), Mendonca D(4), Levy T(3), Barbosa M(5), 
Arnett AB(6), Kurtz-Nelson E(6), Agolini E(7), Battaglia A(8), Chiocchetti 
AG(9), Freitag CM(9), Garcia-Alcon A(10), Grammatico P(11), Hertz-Picciotto 
I(12), Ludena-Rodriguez Y(13), Moreno C(10), Novelli A(7), Parellada M(10), 
Pascolini G(11), Tassone F(14), Grice DE(15), Di Marino D(16), Bernier RA(6), 
Kolevzon A(4), Sharp AJ(17), Buxbaum JD(18), Siper PM(19), De Rubeis S(20).

Author information:
(1)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Genetics and 
Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, 
USA; The Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(3)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(4)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; The Mindich Child Health and 
Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 
10029, USA.
(5)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; The Mindich Child Health and Development 
Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; 
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY 10029, USA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(7)Laboratory of Medical Genetics Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, 00145 
Rome, Italy.
(8)Department of Developmental Neuroscience, IRCCS "Stella Maris Foundation," 
56128 Pisa, Italy.
(9)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and 
Psychotherapy, Autism Research and Intervention Center of Excellence, University 
Hospital Frankfurt Goethe University, Deutschordenstr. 50, 60528 Frankfurt am 
Main, Germany.
(10)Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Department, Hospital General Universitario 
Gregorio Marañón, School of Medicine, Universidad Complutense, IiSGM, CIBERSAM, 
Madrid 28007, Spain.
(11)Medical Genetics, Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University, San 
Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, 00152 Rome, Italy.
(12)MIND Institute, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis, Davis, 
CA 95817, USA; Department of Public Health Sciences, School of Medicine, 
University of California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
(13)Department of Public Health Sciences, School of Medicine, University of 
California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
(14)MIND Institute, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis, Davis, 
CA 95817, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of 
California, Davis, Davis, CA 95817, USA.
(15)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; The Mindich Child Health and 
Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 
10029, USA; Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY 10029, USA.
(16)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, New York-Marche Structural 
Biology Center (NY-MaSBiC), Polytechnic University of Marche, 60131 Ancona, 
Italy.
(17)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; The Mindich Child Health and Development 
Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(18)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Genetics and 
Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, 
USA; The Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Friedman Brain Institute, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of 
Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(19)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; The Mindich Child Health and 
Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 
10029, USA. Electronic address: paige.siper@mssm.edu.
(20)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; The Mindich Child Health and 
Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 
10029, USA; Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic address: silvia.derubeis@mssm.edu.

Helsmoortel-Van der Aa syndrome (HVDAS) is a neurodevelopmental condition 
associated with intellectual disability/developmental delay, autism spectrum 
disorder, and multiple medical comorbidities. HVDAS is caused by mutations in 
activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP). A recent study identified 
genome-wide DNA methylation changes in 22 individuals with HVDAS, adding to the 
group of neurodevelopmental disorders with an epigenetic signature. This 
methylation signature segregated those with HVDAS into two groups based on the 
location of the mutations. Here, we conducted an independent study on 24 
individuals with HVDAS and replicated the existence of the two 
mutation-dependent episignatures. To probe whether the two distinct 
episignatures correlate with clinical outcomes, we used deep behavioral and 
neurobiological data from two prospective cohorts of individuals with a genetic 
diagnosis of HVDAS. We found limited phenotypic differences between the two 
HVDAS-affected groups and no evidence that individuals with more widespread 
methylation changes are more severely affected. Moreover, in spite of the 
methylation changes, we observed no profound alterations in the blood 
transcriptome of individuals with HVDAS. Our data warrant caution in harnessing 
methylation signatures in HVDAS as a tool for clinical stratification, at least 
with regard to behavioral phenotypes.

Copyright © 2020 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.07.003
PMCID: PMC7477006
PMID: 32758449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.D.R., P.M.S., J.D.B., and A.K. are supported 
by the ADNP Kids Research Foundation. A.K. receives research support from AMO 
Pharma and is on the scientific advisory board of Ovid Therapeutics. A.K. has 
also consulted to Takeda, Acadia, and Sema4 in the past year. M.P. has consulted 
for Servier and Exeltis. C.M. has acted as consultant or participated in the 
Data Monitoring Committee for Janssen, Servier, Lundbeck, Nuvelution, Angelini, 
and Otsuka and has received grant support from European Union Funds and 
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness. 
All other authors declare no competing interests.