---
reference_id: "PMID:22010032"
title: Quantifying the Erlenmeyer flask deformity.
authors:
- Carter A
- Rajan PS
- Deegan P
- Cox TM
- Bearcroft P
journal: Br J Radiol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1259/bjr/33890893
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quantifying the Erlenmeyer flask deformity.
**Authors:** Carter A, Rajan PS, Deegan P, Cox TM, Bearcroft P
**Journal:** Br J Radiol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1259/bjr/33890893](https://doi.org/10.1259/bjr/33890893)

## Content

1. Br J Radiol. 2012 Jul;85(1015):905-9. doi: 10.1259/bjr/33890893. Epub 2011 Oct
 18.

Quantifying the Erlenmeyer flask deformity.

Carter A(1), Rajan PS, Deegan P, Cox TM, Bearcroft P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK. andrewcarter@yahoo.com.au

OBJECTIVE: Erlenmeyer flask deformity is a common radiological finding in 
patients with Gaucher's disease; however, no definition of this deformity exists 
and the reported prevalence of the deformity varies widely. To devise an easily 
applied definition of this deformity, we investigated a cohort of knee 
radiographs in which there was consensus between three experienced radiologists 
as to the presence or absence of Erlenmeyer flask morphology.
METHODS: Using the presence or absence of Erlenmeyer flask morphology as a 
benchmark, we measured the diameter of the femur at the level of the physeal 
scar and serially at defined intervals along the metadiaphysis.
RESULTS: A measured ratio in excess of 0.57 between the diameter of the femoral 
shaft 4 cm from the physis to the diameter of the physeal baseline itself on a 
frontal radiograph of the knee predicted the Erlenmeyer flask deformity with 
95.6% sensitivity and 100% specificity in our series of 43 independently 
diagnosed adults with Gaucher's disease. Application of this method to the 
distal femur detected the Erlenmeyer flask deformity reproducibly and was simple 
to carry out.
CONCLUSION: Unlike diagnostic assignments based on subjective review, our simple 
procedure for identifying the modelling deformity is based on robust 
quantitative measurement: it should facilitate comparative studies between 
different groups of patients, and may allow more rigorous exploration of the 
pathogenesis of the complex osseous manifestations of Gaucher's disease to be 
undertaken.

DOI: 10.1259/bjr/33890893
PMCID: PMC3474079
PMID: 22010032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]