---
reference_id: "PMID:27295195"
title: Hydroxysteroid 17-Beta Dehydrogenase Type 10 Disease in Siblings.
authors:
- Richardson A
- Berry GT
- Garganta C
- Abbott MA
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/8904_2016_547
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hydroxysteroid 17-Beta Dehydrogenase Type 10 Disease in Siblings.
**Authors:** Richardson A, Berry GT, Garganta C, Abbott MA
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/8904_2016_547](https://doi.org/10.1007/8904_2016_547)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2017;32:25-32. doi: 10.1007/8904_2016_547. Epub 2016 Jun 14.

Hydroxysteroid 17-Beta Dehydrogenase Type 10 Disease in Siblings.

Richardson A(1), Berry GT(2), Garganta C(3), Abbott MA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baystate Children's Hospital, Springfield, MA, 
01199, USA. annely.richardsonMD@baystatehealth.org.
(2)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(3)University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 32611, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Baystate Children's Hospital, Springfield, MA, 
01199, USA.

Hydroxysteroid 17-beta dehydrogenase type 10 (HSD10) deficiency (HSD10 disease) 
is a rare X-linked neurodegenerative condition caused by abnormalities in the 
HSD17B10 gene. A total of 10 mutations have been reported in the literature 
since 2000. Described phenotypes include a severe neonatal or progressive 
infantile form with hypotonia, choreoathetosis, seizures, cardiomyopathy, 
neurodegeneration, and death, as well as an attenuated form with variable 
regression. Here we present the second report of a c.194T>C (p.V65A) mutation in 
two half-brothers with a clinical phenotype characterized by neurodevelopmental 
delay, choreoathetosis, visual loss, cardiac findings, and behavioral 
abnormalities, with regressions now noted in the older sibling. Neither has 
experienced a metabolic crisis. Both of the siblings had normal tandem mass 
spectroscopy analysis of their newborn screening samples. The older brother's 
phenotype may be complicated by the presence of a 3q29 microduplication. 
Diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion, as the characteristic urine 
organic acid pattern may escape detection. The exact pathogenic mechanism of 
disease remains to be elucidated, but may involve the non-dehydrogenase 
functionalities of the HSD10 protein. Our report highlights clinical features of 
two patients with the less fulminant phenotype associated with a V65A mutation, 
compares the reported phenotypes to date, and reviews recent findings regarding 
the potential pathophysiology of this condition.Summary Sentence Hydroxysteroid 
17-beta dehydrogenase type 10 (HSD10) disease (HSD10 disease) is a rare X-linked 
neurodegenerative condition with a variable clinical phenotype; diagnosis 
requires a high index of suspicion.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2016_547
PMCID: PMC5355379
PMID: 27295195