---
reference_id: "PMID:20346438"
title: "Autosomal-dominant woolly hair resulting from disruption of keratin 74 (KRT74), a potential determinant of human hair texture."
authors:
- Shimomura Y
- Wajid M
- Petukhova L
- Kurban M
- Christiano AM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.02.025
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Animals
- Case-Control Studies
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 12/genetics"
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant/genetics"
- Genetic Linkage
- "Hair Diseases/genetics, physiopathology"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Keratins, Hair-Specific/genetics"
- "Keratins, Type II/genetics"
- Male
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal-dominant woolly hair resulting from disruption of keratin 74 (KRT74), a potential determinant of human hair texture.
**Authors:** Shimomura Y, Wajid M, Petukhova L, Kurban M, Christiano AM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.02.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.02.025)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Apr 9;86(4):632-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.02.025. Epub 
2010 Mar 25.

Autosomal-dominant woolly hair resulting from disruption of keratin 74 (KRT74), 
a potential determinant of human hair texture.

Shimomura Y(1), Wajid M, Petukhova L, Kurban M, Christiano AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Columbia University College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Autosomal-dominant woolly hair (ADWH) is a rare disorder characterized by 
tightly curled hair. The molecular basis of ADWH has not previously been 
reported. In this study, we identified a Pakistani family with ADWH. The family 
showed linkage to chromosome 12q12-q14.1, containing the type II keratin gene 
cluster. We discovered a heterozygous mutation, p.Asn148Lys, within the helix 
initiation motif of the keratin 74 (KRT74) gene in all affected family members. 
KRT74 encodes the inner root sheath (IRS)-specific epithelial (soft) keratin 74. 
We demonstrate that the mutant K74 protein results in disruption of keratin 
intermediate filament formation in cultured cells, most likely in a 
dominant-negative manner. Furthermore, we sequenced the mouse Krt71-74 genes in 
the dominant Caracul-like 4 (Cal4) allele, which is characterized by a wavy-coat 
phenotype and maps to the same region of mouse chromosome 15 as the Caracul (Ca) 
and Reduced coat (Rco) alleles. We identified a heterozygous mutation, 
p.Glu440Lys, not in Krt74 but in the neighboring gene, Krt71. Krt71 was 
previously reported to harbor Ca and Rco mutations, as well as a coding SNP that 
is associated with curly-coated dogs. In this study, we define the ADWH 
phenotype resulting from a mutation in a hair-follicle-specific epithelial 
keratin in humans. Our findings not only further underscore the crucial roles of 
the IRS-specific epithelial keratin genes Krt71-74 in hair disorders but also 
open the possibility that these genes might function as genetic determinants of 
normal variation in hair texture across mammalian species.

(c) 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.02.025
PMCID: PMC2850421
PMID: 20346438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]