---
reference_id: "PMID:30709635"
title: "[Primary skin lymphomas: Current therapy]."
authors:
- Dereure O
journal: Ann Dermatol Venereol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.annder.2018.11.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Primary skin lymphomas: Current therapy].
**Authors:** Dereure O
**Journal:** Ann Dermatol Venereol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.annder.2018.11.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annder.2018.11.012)

## Content

1. Ann Dermatol Venereol. 2019 Feb;146(2):92-99. doi:
10.1016/j.annder.2018.11.012.  Epub 2019 Jan 30.

[Primary skin lymphomas: Current therapy].

[Article in French]

Dereure O(1).

Author information:
(1)Unité Inserm U1058, département de dermatologie, université Montpellier, 
hôpital Saint-Éloi, 80, avenue Augustin-Fliche, 34295 Montpellier cedex 5, 
France. Electronic address: o-dereure@chu-montpellier.fr.

Therapeutic progress in primary cutaneous lymphomas continues to be largely 
dominated by the T-cell lymphomas, towards which the great majority of recent 
therapeutic innovations have been directed. The latter include local treatments 
consisting either of relatively classical but "revamped" approaches involving 
different pharmaceutical forms (example: chlormethine gel) or else lower but 
seemingly equally effective dosages (electron therapy), or of more innovative 
approaches (example: UVA-1, dynamic phototherapy, imiquimod, resimiquimod). 
However, significant progress has been made chiefly in terms of systemic 
treatments with the emergence of "targeted" drugs that directly and specifically 
target tumour cells (monoclonal antibodies directed against CD30, CCR4 or 
CD158k) and the further development of "small" molecules such as histone 
deacetylase inhibitors and new cytostatics. Immunotherapies, which have proven 
so effective in other areas of oncodermatology, are also of great interest, 
while allogeneic haematopoietic stem-cell transplantation has clearly shown its 
superiority over autologous transplantation and now constitutes a significant 
component of the therapeutic arsenal in advanced disease. While the innovations 
in terms of B-cell lymphomas are certainly less significant, mention must also 
be made of the value of rituximab combined with polychemotherapy (CHOP) and of 
lenalidomide (as second-line therapy) in primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma, leg type, along with the development of localized (very) low-dose 
radiotherapy in unilesional or paucilesional indolent forms.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.annder.2018.11.012
PMID: 30709635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]