---
reference_id: "PMID:36833359"
title: "Tuberous Sclerosis, Type II Diabetes Mellitus and the PI3K/AKT/mTOR Signaling Pathways-Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Jurca CM
- Kozma K
- Petchesi CD
- Zaha DC
- Magyar I
- Munteanu M
- Faur L
- Jurca A
- Bembea D
- Severin E
- Jurca AD
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes14020433
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Adult
- Infant
- Adolescent
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics
- Tuberous Sclerosis/genetics
- Tuberous Sclerosis Complex 2 Protein
- Tuberous Sclerosis Complex 1 Protein
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/complications"
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt
- Epilepsy/complications
- Seizures
- TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases
- Signal Transduction
- Metformin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tuberous Sclerosis, Type II Diabetes Mellitus and the PI3K/AKT/mTOR Signaling Pathways-Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Jurca CM, Kozma K, Petchesi CD, Zaha DC, Magyar I, Munteanu M, Faur L, Jurca A, Bembea D, Severin E, Jurca AD
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14020433](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14020433)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Feb 8;14(2):433. doi: 10.3390/genes14020433.

Tuberous Sclerosis, Type II Diabetes Mellitus and the PI3K/AKT/mTOR Signaling
Pathways-Case Report and Literature Review.

Jurca CM(1)(2), Kozma K(1)(2), Petchesi CD(1)(2), Zaha DC(1), Magyar I(1),
Munteanu M(3), Faur L(3), Jurca A(4), Bembea D(5), Severin E(6), Jurca AD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Preclinical Disciplines, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy,
University of Oradea, 410081 Oradea, Romania.
(2)Regional Center of Medical Genetics Bihor, County Emergency Clinical Hospital
Oradea (Part of ERN-ITHACA), 410469 Oradea, Romania.
(3)Department of Medical Disciplines, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy,
University of Oradea, 410081 Oradea, Romania.
(4)Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, University of Oradea, 410081 Oradea,
Romania.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Iuliu Hațieganu",
400012 Cluj Napoca, Romania.
(6)Department of Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Carol Davila",
020021 Bucharest, Romania.

Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is a rare autosomal dominant neurocutaneous
syndrome. It is manifested mainly in cutaneous lesions, epilepsy and the
emergence of hamartomas in several tissues and organs. The disease sets in due
to mutations in two tumor suppressor genes: TSC1 and TSC2. The authors present
the case of a 33-year-old female patient registered with the Bihor County
Regional Center of Medical Genetics (RCMG) since 2021 with a TSC diagnosis. She
was diagnosed with epilepsy at eight months old. At 18 years old she was
diagnosed with tuberous sclerosis and was referred to the neurology department.
Since 2013 she has been registered with the department for diabetes and
nutritional diseases with a type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) diagnosis. The
clinical examination revealed: growth delay, obesity, facial angiofibromas,
sebaceous adenomas, depigmented macules, papillomatous tumorlets in the thorax
(bilateral) and neck, periungual fibroma in both lower limbs, frequent
convulsive seizures; on a biological level, high glycemia and glycated
hemoglobin levels. Brain MRI displayed a distinctive TS aspect with five
bilateral hamartomatous subependymal nodules associating cortical/subcortical
tubers with the frontal, temporal and occipital distribution. Molecular
diagnosis showed a pathogenic variant in the TSC1 gene, exon 13, c.1270A>T (p.
Arg424*). Current treatment targets diabetes (Metformin, Gliclazide and the
GLP-1 analog semaglutide) and epilepsy (Carbamazepine and Clonazepam). This case
report presents a rare association between type 2 diabetes mellitus and Tuberous
Sclerosis Complex. We suggest that the diabetes medication Metformin may have
positive effects on both the progression of the tumor associated with TSC and
the seizures specific to TSC and we assume that the association of TSC and T2DM
in the presented cases is accidental, as there are no similar cases reported in
the literature.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14020433
PMCID: PMC9957184
PMID: 36833359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
