---
reference_id: "PMID:29478616"
title: Tuberous sclerosis complex.
authors:
- Hasbani DM
- Crino PB
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-64076-5.00052-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tuberous sclerosis complex.
**Authors:** Hasbani DM, Crino PB
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-444-64076-5.00052-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-64076-5.00052-1)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2018;148:813-822. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-64076-5.00052-1.

Tuberous sclerosis complex.

Hasbani DM(1), Crino PB(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, St. Christopher's Hospital 
for Children, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United 
States.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, United States. Electronic address: PCrino@som.umaryland.edu.

Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is an autosomal-dominant or sporadic 
multisystem disorder that results from mutations in either TSC1 or TSC2. The 
primary organs affected include the brain, skin, lung, kidney, and heart, all 
with variable frequency, penetrance, and severity. There are over 2000 known 
allelic variants for TSC, including nonsense and misssense mutation, and all 
pathogenic mutations are inactivating, leading to loss-of-function effects on 
the encoded proteins, TSC1 and TSC2. These proteins form a complex to 
constitutively inhibit the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling 
cascade, and as a consequence, mTOR signaling is constitutively active within 
all TSC-associated lesions. The mTOR inhibitors rapamycin (sirolimus) and 
everolimus have been shown to reduce renal and brain lesion size, and improve 
pulmonary function in TSC, and these compounds may also decrease seizure 
frequency. The clinical application of mTOR inhibitors in TSC has provided one 
of the first examples of precision medicine in a neurodevelopmental disorder.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-64076-5.00052-1
PMID: 29478616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]