---
reference_id: "PMID:36211391"
title: "(NZW × BXSB) F1 male mice: An unusual, severe and fatal mouse model of lupus erythematosus."
authors:
- Almizraq RJ
- Frias Boligan K
- Loriamini M
- McKerlie C
- Branch DR
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.977698
content_type: abstract_only
---

# (NZW × BXSB) F1 male mice: An unusual, severe and fatal mouse model of lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Almizraq RJ, Frias Boligan K, Loriamini M, McKerlie C, Branch DR
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2022.977698](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.977698)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2022 Sep 23;13:977698. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.977698. 
eCollection 2022.

(NZW × BXSB) F1 male mice: An unusual, severe and fatal mouse model of lupus 
erythematosus.

Almizraq RJ(1), Frias Boligan K(1), Loriamini M(1), McKerlie C(2)(3), Branch 
DR(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Innovation, Canadian Blood Services, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)The Centre for Phenogenomics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic 
autoimmune/inflammatory disease. The heterogeneity and complexity of clinical 
presentation has made it challenging to study or treat this syndrome. The 
(NZW×BXSB) F1 lupus-prone male mouse model of this disease is potentially useful 
to study mechanism and treatment modalities, but there is a lack of information 
about this model's characterization and disease progression. Therefore, the aim 
was to examine this lupus model's physical/clinical disease presentation and its 
immunological status.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Clinical and physical status were observed in 8- and 
16-week-old male and female (± 1 week) (NZW/LacJ x BXSB/MpJ) F1 mice (n = 8 per 
group). Young males (8 ± 1 week) without disease and female (16 ± 1 week) mice 
served as controls. Physical changes, quantitative values of autoantibodies, and 
blood cell parameters were determined. Necropsy and post-mortem histopathology 
were also performed.
RESULTS: With aging (≥ 12 weeks), significant increases in severe abdominal 
distension/swelling, inability to walk, paleness of paws and significant weight 
increase were observed compared to controls (p < 0.05). The necropsy examination 
showed abdominal distension associated with serous effusion and histological 
examination identified severe edema and multi-organ abnormalities (spleen, lymph 
nodes, and kidney). Significant increases in anti-double-stranded DNA antibody 
(anti-dsDNA) was seen in old/sick compared to female (p = 0.0002) or young male 
(p = 0.0036) mice. Old mice developed immune thrombocytopenia compared to female 
(p = 0.0056) and young male (p = 0.0007) mice. Anti-platelet was detectable in 
old, sick mice. The mortality rate increased with aging; more than 35% of male 
mice died during this study between the ages of 13-18 weeks.
CONCLUSION: We found that the (NZW/LacJ x BXSB/MpJ) F1 male mice spontaneously 
exhibit, over varying lengths of time, extremely severe and fatal clinical 
disease symptoms. This model may be too severe to be helpful in investigating 
SLE and testing potential treatment modalities.

Copyright © 2022 Almizraq, Frias Boligan, Loriamini, McKerlie and Branch.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.977698
PMCID: PMC9541624
PMID: 36211391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.