---
reference_id: "PMID:32506774"
title: "Baraitser-Winter cerebrofrontofacial syndrome: Report of two adult siblings."
authors:
- Hampshire K
- Martin PM
- Carlston C
- Slavotinek A
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61637
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Actins/genetics
- Adult
- "Coloboma/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Epilepsy/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Facies
- Female
- Germ-Line Mutation/genetics
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Lissencephaly/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- "Microcephaly/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Mosaicism
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Siblings
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Baraitser-Winter cerebrofrontofacial syndrome: Report of two adult siblings.
**Authors:** Hampshire K, Martin PM, Carlston C, Slavotinek A
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.61637](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61637)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2020 Aug;182(8):1923-1932. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61637. Epub 
2020 Jun 7.

Baraitser-Winter cerebrofrontofacial syndrome: Report of two adult siblings.

Hampshire K(1), Martin PM(2), Carlston C(1), Slavotinek A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)Institute for Human Genetics, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.

Baraitser-Winter cerebrofrontofacial syndrome (BWCS) is a rare, autosomal 
dominant condition that is characterized by intellectual disability, distinctive 
craniofacial features, structural brain abnormalities, seizures, microcephaly, 
hearing loss, and ocular colobomas. The first three cases were described in 1988 
by Baraitser and Winter and included two siblings and an unrelated third 
patient. Subsequently, causative missense variants in the ACTB and ACTG1 genes 
were identified, with de novo occurrence in patients with the condition. Herein, 
we describe two adult siblings who were born to unaffected parents and who were 
diagnosed with BWCS in their fourth and sixth decade of life following exome 
sequencing performed for intellectual disability. We review the literature 
reports of adult patients with BWCS to document the clinical features and 
phenotypic variability that can occur later in life. This is the first 
molecularly confirmed report of germline mosaicism in BWCS and one of only a few 
reports to describe two BWCS patients belonging to the same family.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61637
PMID: 32506774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]