---
reference_id: "PMID:2547390"
title: Gastric antisecretory and antiulcer/cytoprotective effects of 2-cyano-3-(ethylthio-3-methylthio)-2-propenoic acid methyl ester.
authors:
- Borella LE
- DiJoseph JF
journal: Arzneimittelforschung
year: '1989'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gastric antisecretory and antiulcer/cytoprotective effects of 2-cyano-3-(ethylthio-3-methylthio)-2-propenoic acid methyl ester.
**Authors:** Borella LE, DiJoseph JF
**Journal:** Arzneimittelforschung (1989)

## Content

1. Arzneimittelforschung. 1989 May;39(5):598-601.

Gastric antisecretory and antiulcer/cytoprotective effects of 
2-cyano-3-(ethylthio-3-methylthio)-2-propenoic acid methyl ester.

Borella LE(1), DiJoseph JF.

Author information:
(1)Wyeth-Ayerst Research, Inc., Princeton, NJ.

AY-28,200 (2-cyano-3-(ethylthio-3-methylthio)-2-propenoic acid methyl ester), a 
new gastric antisecretory/antiulcer agent, inhibited basal and 
pentagastrin-stimulated gastric acid secretion in the conscious rat (ED50 = 7.6 
and 1.9 mg/kg i.g., respectively). For inhibition of basal secretion, peak 
activity was attained in 5 to 6 h after dosing and was maintained for more than 
10 h, with no gastric antisecretory activity occurring at 24 h. The K+ 
stimulated H+-K+ ATPase activity from rabbit gastric microsomes was inhibited by 
AY-28,200 (IC50 = 22 mumol/l). AY-28,200 inhibited ethanol-induced gastric 
lesions, at 3 mg/kg p.o. AY-28,200's cytoprotective effects against ethanol 
lasted for more than 4 h. AY-28,200 blocked acetylsalicylic acid and 
stress-induced gastric ulcers but was inactive against indomethacin-induced 
gastric ulcers. These results suggest that AY-28,200 is a parietal cell proton 
pump inhibitor with cytoprotective properties, and may produce its 
cytoprotective effect by stimulating the formation of endogenous prostaglandins.

PMID: 2547390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]