---
reference_id: "PMID:32602730"
title: "Chronic Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis, an Interstitial Lung Disease with Distinct Molecular Signatures."
authors:
- Furusawa H
- Cardwell JH
- Okamoto T
- Walts AD
- Konigsberg IR
- Kurche JS
- Bang TJ
- Schwarz MI
- Brown KK
- Kropski JA
- Rojas M
- Cool CD
- Lee JS
- Wolters PJ
- Yang IV
- Schwartz DA
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1164/rccm.202001-0134OC
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis, an Interstitial Lung Disease with Distinct Molecular Signatures.
**Authors:** Furusawa H, Cardwell JH, Okamoto T, Walts AD, Konigsberg IR, Kurche JS, Bang TJ, Schwarz MI, Brown KK, Kropski JA, Rojas M, Cool CD, Lee JS, Wolters PJ, Yang IV, Schwartz DA
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1164/rccm.202001-0134OC](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.202001-0134OC)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2020 Nov 15;202(10):1430-1444. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.202001-0134OC.

Chronic Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis, an Interstitial Lung Disease with Distinct 
Molecular Signatures.

Furusawa H(1), Cardwell JH(1), Okamoto T(1)(2), Walts AD(1), Konigsberg IR(1), 
Kurche JS(1), Bang TJ(3), Schwarz MI(1), Brown KK(1)(4), Kropski JA(5), Rojas 
M(6), Cool CD(4)(7), Lee JS(1), Wolters PJ(8), Yang IV(1), Schwartz DA(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine.
(2)Department of Radiology.
(3)Department of Pathology, and.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(5)National Jewish Health, Denver, Colorado.
(6)Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; 
and.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California.
(9)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado, Aurora, 
Colorado.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2020 Nov 15;202(10):1338-1339. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.202007-2855ED.

Rationale: Chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (CHP) is caused by an immune 
response to antigen inhalation and is characterized by variable 
histopathological and clinical features. A subset of subjects with CHP have 
usual interstitial pneumonia and appear to be clinically similar to subjects 
with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF).Objectives: To determine the common and 
unique molecular features of CHP and IPF.Methods: Transcriptome analysis of lung 
samples from CHP (n = 82), IPF (n = 103), and unaffected controls (n = 103) was 
conducted. Differential gene expression was determined adjusting for sex, race, 
age, and smoking history and using false discovery rate to control for multiple 
comparisons.Measurements and Main Results: When compared with controls, we 
identified 413 upregulated and 317 downregulated genes in CHP and 861 
upregulated and 322 downregulated genes in IPF. Concordantly upregulated or 
downregulated genes in CHP and IPF were related to collagen catabolic processes 
and epithelial development, whereas genes specific to CHP (differentially 
expressed in CHP when compared with control and not differentially expressed in 
IPF) were related to chemokine-mediated signaling and immune responsiveness. 
Using weighted gene coexpression network analysis, we found that among subjects 
with CHP, genes involved in adaptive immunity or epithelial cell development 
were associated with improved or reduced lung function, respectively, and that 
MUC5B expression was associated with epithelial cell development. MUC5B 
expression was also associated with lung fibrosis and honeycombing.Conclusions: 
Gene expression analysis of CHP and IPF identified signatures common to CHP and 
IPF, as well as genes uniquely expressed in CHP. Select modules of gene 
expression are characterized by distinct clinical and pathological features of 
CHP.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.202001-0134OC
PMCID: PMC7667907
PMID: 32602730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]