---
reference_id: "PMID:14514738"
title: "X-linked Alport syndrome: natural history and genotype-phenotype correlations in girls and women belonging to 195 families: a \"European Community Alport Syndrome Concerted Action\" study."
authors:
- Jais JP
- Knebelmann B
- Giatras I
- De Marchi M
- Rizzoni G
- Renieri A
- Weber M
- Gross O
- Netzer KO
- Flinter F
- Pirson Y
- Dahan K
- Wieslander J
- Persson U
- Tryggvason K
- Martin P
- Hertz JM
- Schröder C
- Sanak M
- Carvalho MF
- Saus J
- Antignac C
- Smeets H
- Gubler MC
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1097/01.asn.0000090034.71205.74
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, X"
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- Europe
- Family Health
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics"
- Phenotype
- Prognosis
- Proteinuria/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-linked Alport syndrome: natural history and genotype-phenotype correlations in girls and women belonging to 195 families: a "European Community Alport Syndrome Concerted Action" study.
**Authors:** Jais JP, Knebelmann B, Giatras I, De Marchi M, Rizzoni G, Renieri A, Weber M, Gross O, Netzer KO, Flinter F, Pirson Y, Dahan K, Wieslander J, Persson U, Tryggvason K, Martin P, Hertz JM, Schröder C, Sanak M, Carvalho MF, Saus J, Antignac C, Smeets H, Gubler MC
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.asn.0000090034.71205.74](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.asn.0000090034.71205.74)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2003 Oct;14(10):2603-10. doi:
10.1097/01.asn.0000090034.71205.74.

X-linked Alport syndrome: natural history and genotype-phenotype correlations in
girls and women belonging to 195 families: a "European Community Alport Syndrome
Concerted Action" study.

Jais JP(1), Knebelmann B, Giatras I, De Marchi M, Rizzoni G, Renieri A, Weber M,
Gross O, Netzer KO, Flinter F, Pirson Y, Dahan K, Wieslander J, Persson U,
Tryggvason K, Martin P, Hertz JM, Schröder C, Sanak M, Carvalho MF, Saus J,
Antignac C, Smeets H, Gubler MC.

Author information:
(1)Biostatistique et Informatique Médicale, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades,
Université René Descartes, Paris, France.

Alport syndrome (AS) is a type IV collagen hereditary disease characterized by
progressive hematuric nephritis, hearing loss, and ocular changes. Mutations in
the COL4A5 collagen gene are responsible for the more common X-linked dominant
form of the disease characterized by much less severe disease in girls and
women. A "European Community Alport Syndrome Concerted Action" (ECASCA) group
was established to delineate the Alport syndrome phenotype in each gender and to
determine genotype-phenotype correlations in a large number of families. Data
concerning 329 families, 250 of them with an X-linked transmission, were
collected. Characteristics of heterozygous girls and women belonging to the 195
families with proven COL4A5 mutation are compared with those of hemizygous boys
and men. Hematuria was observed in 95% of carriers and consistently absent in
the others. Proteinuria, hearing loss, and ocular defects developed in 75%, 28%,
and 15%, respectively. The probability of developing end-stage renal disease or
deafness before the age of 40 yr was 12% and 10%, respectively, in girls and
women versus 90 and 80%, respectively, in boys and men. The risk of progression
to end-stage renal disease appears to increase after the age of 60 yr in women.
Because of the absence of genotype-phenotype correlation and the large
intrafamilial phenotypic heterogeneity, early prognosis of the disease in
X-linked Alport syndrome carriers remains moot. Risk factors for developing
renal failure have been identified: the occurrence and progressive increase in
proteinuria, and the development of a hearing defect.

DOI: 10.1097/01.asn.0000090034.71205.74
PMID: 14514738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
