---
reference_id: "PMID:20037588"
title: "Alterations in the ankyrin domain of TRPV4 cause congenital distal SMA, scapuloperoneal SMA and HMSN2C."
authors:
- Auer-Grumbach M
- Olschewski A
- Papić L
- Kremer H
- McEntagart ME
- Uhrig S
- Fischer C
- Fröhlich E
- Bálint Z
- Tang B
- Strohmaier H
- Lochmüller H
- Schlotter-Weigel B
- Senderek J
- Krebs A
- Dick KJ
- Petty R
- Longman C
- Anderson NE
- Padberg GW
- Schelhaas HJ
- van Ravenswaaij-Arts CM
- Pieber TR
- Crosby AH
- Guelly C
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1038/ng.508
keywords:
- Amino Acid Substitution/genetics
- Ankyrin Repeat
- Calcium/metabolism
- HeLa Cells
- "Hereditary Sensory and Motor Neuropathy/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Intracellular Space/metabolism
- Ion Channel Gating
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Muscular Atrophy, Spinal/complications, congenital, genetics, physiopathology"
- Mutant Proteins/metabolism
- Mutation/genetics
- Osmosis
- "TRPV Cation Channels/chemistry, genetics"
- Transfection
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Alterations in the ankyrin domain of TRPV4 cause congenital distal SMA, scapuloperoneal SMA and HMSN2C.
**Authors:** Auer-Grumbach M, Olschewski A, Papić L, Kremer H, McEntagart ME, Uhrig S, Fischer C, Fröhlich E, Bálint Z, Tang B, Strohmaier H, Lochmüller H, Schlotter-Weigel B, Senderek J, Krebs A, Dick KJ, Petty R, Longman C, Anderson NE, Padberg GW, Schelhaas HJ, van Ravenswaaij-Arts CM, Pieber TR, Crosby AH, Guelly C
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.508](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.508)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2010 Feb;42(2):160-4. doi: 10.1038/ng.508. Epub 2009 Dec 27.

Alterations in the ankyrin domain of TRPV4 cause congenital distal SMA, 
scapuloperoneal SMA and HMSN2C.

Auer-Grumbach M(1), Olschewski A, Papić L, Kremer H, McEntagart ME, Uhrig S, 
Fischer C, Fröhlich E, Bálint Z, Tang B, Strohmaier H, Lochmüller H, 
Schlotter-Weigel B, Senderek J, Krebs A, Dick KJ, Petty R, Longman C, Anderson 
NE, Padberg GW, Schelhaas HJ, van Ravenswaaij-Arts CM, Pieber TR, Crosby AH, 
Guelly C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz, Austria. 
michaela.auergrumbach@medunigraz.at

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2010 Feb;42(2):98-100. doi: 10.1038/ng0210-98.
    Clin Genet. 2010 Aug;78(2):134-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01452_2.x.

Spinal muscular atrophies (SMA, also known as hereditary motor neuropathies) and 
hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies (HMSN) are clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous disorders of the peripheral nervous system. Here we report that 
mutations in the TRPV4 gene cause congenital distal SMA, scapuloperoneal SMA, 
HMSN 2C. We identified three missense substitutions (R269H, R315W and R316C) 
affecting the intracellular N-terminal ankyrin domain of the TRPV4 ion channel 
in five families. Expression of mutant TRPV4 constructs in cells from the HeLa 
line revealed diminished surface localization of mutant proteins. In addition, 
TRPV4-regulated Ca(2+) influx was substantially reduced even after stimulation 
with 4alphaPDD, a TRPV4 channel-specific agonist, and with hypo-osmotic 
solution. In summary, we describe a new hereditary channelopathy caused by 
mutations in TRPV4 and present evidence that the resulting substitutions in the 
N-terminal ankyrin domain affect channel maturation, leading to reduced surface 
expression of functional TRPV4 channels.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.508
PMCID: PMC3272392
PMID: 20037588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Congenital distal SMA (MIM%600175), scapuloperoneal SMA (SPSMA, MIM%181405) and hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy 2C (HMSN2C, MIM%606071) are distinct subtypes of spinal muscular atrophies and hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies characterized by distal and proximal muscle weakness and wasting and by autosomal dominant inheritance. Additional features such as vocal cord paralysis, scoliosis and/or arthrogryposis are likely to occur within families carrying these diseases1-4. Sensory abnormalities have also been described in HMSN2C. Risk loci for congenital distal SMA, SPSMA and HMSN2C have been linked to chromosome 12q23–24 (refs. 2-4). Although clinically distinct, these disorders show some phenotypic overlap, leading to the suggestion that they may result from mutations in the same gene4. Recently, non-neurological diseases have also been linked to the same chromosomal region5. We identified a large family (FAM_1; see anonymized pedigree, Supplementary Fig. 1) with ten living individuals showing a mild to severe congenital distal SMA, SPSMA or HMSN2C phenotype. We first carried out a genome-wide scan using 10K SNP Affymetrix arrays on 12 individuals of the family (left branch of the pedigree; Supplementary Fig. 1) and observed linkage to three chromosomal regions with log10 of odds (lod) scores >2 for several SNP markers, including the chromosome 12q23–24 region (data not shown). We constructed haplotypes by including additional distantly related family members (right branch of the pedigree; Supplementary Fig. 1). The genetic interval transmitted with the disease resides between SNPs rs2374688 and rs35426 (Chr. 12: 106,197,332–114,054,429 bp; Supplementary Table 1) and overlaps with the intervals reported for risk of congenital distal SMA, SPSMA and HMSN2C2-4.

In an affected individual from family FAM_1, we began sequencing all protein-coding exons and exon-intron boundaries of 19 genes but initially observed only known SNPs (Supplementary Table 2). However, sequencing of all protein-coding exons of TRPV4 (transient receptor potential vanilloid 4; chr. 12: 108,705,277–108,755,595; reverse strand) revealed a heterozygous C-to-T nucleotide change at position 943 in exon 6 (Supplementary Fig. 2a), which is predicted to cause the substitution of arginine with tryptophan at position 315 of TRPV4 (R315W). We then screened DNA samples from additional families showing one of the phenotypes described above, including two families previously reported1,3,4. All affected individuals from the chromosome 12q23–24-linked family (here called FAM_2) described by van der Vleuten et al. and diagnosed with congenital distal SMA and arthrogryposis1,3 had a G806A transition in exon 5 of TRPV4 leading to the amino acid substitution R269H (arginine to histidine) (Supplementary Fig. 2b). The family afflicted with HMSN2C named A5 in the report of McEntagart et al.4 carried the same R315W substitution as detected in FAM_1, whereas two other, unreported small families with HMSN2C (here called FAM_3 and FAM_4) carried the C946T transition changing arginine to cysteine at position 316 (R316C) (Supplementary Fig. 2a). The mutations causing these three substitutions were present in all affected individuals but were not found in 162 (looking at exon 5) and 304 (looking at exon 6) healthy European control individuals.

Apparent gain-of-function mutations in TRPV4 have recently been identified in a newly categorized family of autosomal dominant skeletal dysplasias characterized by varying degrees of short trunk and short limbs, ranging from the relatively mild type 3 brachyolmia, through Kozlowski spondylometaphyseal dysplasia, to the more severe metatropic dysplasia5,6. Although many of the affected individuals in our study showed mild to severe scoliosis (Supplementary Table 3), they did not have a short trunk, short stature, short limbs or brachydactyly. It seems likely that the scoliosis in these families is neuromuscular in etiology and caused by a different pathogenic mechanism. Additional support for a neuromuscular explanation for the scoliosis is provided by the finding that some infants were born with arthrogryposis, a clinical phenotype marked by multiple joint contractures likely resulting from reduced fetal movements in utero. Trpv4-knockout mice show increased bone mass due to reduced bone resorption7 and have impaired pressure sensation8 and abnormal osmotic regulation9. The sensory system has been tested extensively in Trpv4−/− mice8,9. In these animals, the threshold for response to noxious stimuli and the conduction velocity of myelinated nerves responding to stimuli were impaired8. The clinical phenotype of the affected individuals described here differs from the phenotypic abnormalities described for Trpv4−/− mice. Although some of the subjects we examined showed sensory abnormalities, mainly comprising reduced surface sensation, the human disorder much more resembles that of a predominantly motor neuron disease. More detailed studies addressing the function of the motor and sensory nerves in individuals with congenital distal SMA, SPSMA and HMSN2C and in Trpv4−/− mice might be able to elucidate common neurological abnormalities.

Based on structure and function, the mammalian TRPV family comprises four groups10: TRPV1/TRPV2, TRPV3, TRPV4 and TRPV5/TRPV6. The thermosensitive TRPV1, TRPV2, TRPV3 and TRPV4 channels are modestly permeable to Ca2+, with a permeability ratio PCa/PNa between ~1 and ~10 (ref. 11). The first description of TRPV4 and its functional characterization linked it to vertebrate mechanosensation12-15. Mechano- and osmosensory functions of TRPV4 in endothelia, in the alveolar unit of the lung and in intestinal sensory innervation have been subsequently described16-18.

All six TRPV family members share large C- and N-terminal cytosolic domains and a six-transmembrane-segment ion-transport domain (Fig. 1a) and are presumed to function as tetramers19. At their N terminus, the TRPV proteins harbor six ankyrin repeats (ANK) that have been reported to be critical determinants of channel maturation and function in multiple in vitro studies20-22. Crystal structures of the ankyrin repeat domains (ARD) of TRPV1, TRPV2 and TRPV6 have been shown to be highly similar23-25. Each ARD consists of six pairs of antiparallel inner and outer α-helices, followed by a ‘finger loop’ (Fig. 1b). The mutations we found resulted in a replacement of highly polar and positively charged arginines (R269H, R315W and R316C) with less polar or nonpolar residues at the outer helices of ANK4 and ANK5 (Fig. 1b). It is likely that these changes either affect the intrinsic ARD stability or directly abrogate critical protein-protein interactions required for proper TRPV4 channel maturation and function. Also, sequence comparisons of TRPV4 orthologs revealed conservation of each of the arginine residues across multiple vertebrate species, suggesting an important functional role for these residues and a potential pathogenic effect of substitutions (Supplementary Fig. 3).

To evaluate the consequences of the TRPV4 mutations, we expressed differentially tagged (polyhistidine (His)- or Flag-tagged) mutant and wild-type human TRPV4 in HeLa cells. This cell line did not express any detectable levels of endogenous TRPV4, thereby contrasting it to several batches of HEK293 cells analyzed in our laboratory. Wild-type TRPV4 proteins were predominantly detected at the plasma membrane, whereas mutant TRPV4 proteins formed cytoplasmic aggregates without plasma membrane involvement, as shown by immunofluorescence (Fig. 2). When cotransfected at equimolar levels, wild-type TRPV4 protein could still be detected at the plasma membrane, but cytoplasmic aggregates were formed by both mutant and wild-type proteins (Fig. 3, upper). To exclude adverse effects of cytoplasmic mutant TRPV4 aggregates on HeLa cell viability, we determined membrane permeability as a measure of cell viability. No difference was observed for mutant and wild-type TRPV4 constructs (~15% of the cells were double-positive for DsRed and YO-PRO-1, indicating unchanged viability; Supplementary Fig. 4a–e).

Next, we examined the functional properties of HeLa cells transfected with wild-type or mutant TRPV4 channels (Fig. 4). Calcium-imaging studies revealed no significant differences in basal calcium levels among the transfected cells (Fig. 4b and Supplementary Table 4a). However, cells transfected with wild-type TRPV4 responded with a rapid increase in intracellular calcium when challenged by hypo-osmotic solution, whereas the response of the different mutant TRPV4–transfected cells was significantly lower (P < 0.01) and heterogeneous between the different mutations (Fig. 4a,c and Supplementary Table 4b). The R269H and R316C mutants showed a significantly decreased (~30%) calcium peak compared to wild-type (Fig. 4c), whereas the calcium peak of the R315W mutant was decreased by ~75%. When HeLa cells coexpressed wild-type and any of the mutant TRPV4 proteins, we observed no significant change in basal calcium level (data not shown) or response to hypo-osmotic challenge (Fig. 4d and Supplementary Table 4c).

In patch-clamp studies, the mutant channels yielded significantly (90%, P < 0.001) smaller currents (Fig. 5a–c) when subjected to a hypo-osmotic challenge (reduction of extracellular osmolarity from 320 to 200 mOsm). Furthermore, activation with the TRPV4-specific agonist 4α-PDD resulted in significantly decreased (P < 0.001) currents in the mutant TRPV4-expressing cells, whereas, as in the Ca2+ study, cotransfected cells showed a wild-type phenotype (Fig. 5d,e). Mutant channels could not be activated when cells were shifted to 37 °C (Supplementary Fig. 5). The TRPV4 V620I gain-of-function mutant yielded significantly (P < 0.05) increased constitutively activated current and significantly (P < 0.05) elevated response after agonist application (Supplementary Fig. 6) in HeLa cells, as was previously demonstrated in HEK293 cells5. Based on our results using HeLa cells as a heterologous expression system, we suggest that the mutations described here lead to decreased stimulus-dependent TRPV4 channel activity.

Cell surface biotinylation assays suggested that the functional alterations seen here might result from differences in the levels of surface-displayed wild-type and mutant TRPV4 proteins (Supplementary Fig. 7). Cell surface expression was markedly reduced for the TRPV4 mutants R269H and R315W and was completely abrogated for the R316C mutant.

TRPV4 protein localization and functionality were restored when the mutated amino acid residues were replaced by lysines (Figs. 2, 3,4c,d and 5c), suggesting that site-specific biochemical constraints at positions 269 and 315 are critical for TRPV4 channel localization and function. Previous studies have shown that TRP biogenesis involves protein folding, core glycosylation and oligomerization in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), followed by transfer to the Golgi network and final transport of the tetramers to the plasma membrane14,16,26, and that substitutions or deletions in the ARDs result in defective trafficking19,20. Retention and ER-associated degradation have been described for a number of artificial ankyrin domain–deletion TRPV4 mutants or immature and unfolded TRPV4 monomers21. Mutations leading to the exposure of di-arginine motifs of type RXR, which are normally concealed within the tetrameric structure, may result in the retention of the misfolded or unfolded proteins within the ER, thereby preventing nonfunctional channel proteins from reaching the cell surface14,16,27. The TRPV4 protein contains four RXR motifs, two of which are located in the N-terminal (122RWR and 269RGR) and two in the C-terminal intracellular region of the protein. The arginine missense substitutions R269H, R315W and R316C disrupt one of these repeats, which allowed us to identify a new 315RR repeat that appears to affect proper TRPV4 channel maturation. The observed TRPV4 alterations are unlikely to interfere with recently published binding sites for ATP, Ca2+-calmodulin (corresponding to amino acids 189–222 in TRPV1)24 and PACSIN3 (amino acids 142–143 in TRPV4), which have been shown to affect channel sensitivity and localization22. Interaction with phosphatidylinositol phosphates (PIPs), and in particular phosphatidyl-4,5-bisphosphate (PI(4,5)P2), has been shown to regulate the function of various TRPs28,29. Candidate interaction motifs are pleckstrin homology–like domains, which have been identified as a cluster of positively charged residues. The proposed N-terminal pleckstrin homology–like motif of TRPV4 includes amino acids 114–125 (RHHSSDNKRWRKK) and is thus not directly affected by the mutations identified in this study.

Reduced surface expression accompanied by residual mutant TRPV4 channel activity suggests that the alterations do not directly affect the conductive properties of TRPV4 channels but do have a deleterious impact on channel assembly or trafficking. Based on current knowledge on TRPV channel maturation, we cannot reliably predict how tetramers comprising mutant TRPV4 subunits (that is, with mutant/wild-type ratios of 3:1, 2:2 and 1:3) will behave in surface trafficking and channel function, thus necessitating further studies, both in vitro and in vivo. Compared to the numerous nerve fibers in the healthy peripheral nerve showing intense TRPV4 staining and to the TRPV4 staining pattern of healthy skeletal muscle cells, the pattern seen for the diseased nerve of one subject with HMSN2C (and the R316C substitution) involved less positively stained nerve fibers and weaker cytoplasmic staining of the muscle cells (Fig. 6a–d). Haploinsufficiency can be considered the most likely underlying pathomechanism, although we cannot fully exclude adverse interaction of wild-type and mutant TRPV4 subunits.

In summary, this work identifies TRPV4 malfunction as the molecular basis for a new channelopathy underlying a heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders. Our findings may lead to improved diagnosis of this diverse group of SMAs and HMSNs and may also contribute to the development of specific treatments.