---
reference_id: "PMID:14619605"
title: Genetic counseling.
authors:
- Hassed SJ
journal: J Okla State Med Assoc
year: '2003'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic counseling.
**Authors:** Hassed SJ
**Journal:** J Okla State Med Assoc (2003)

## Content

1. J Okla State Med Assoc. 2003 Oct;96(10):495-7.

Genetic counseling.

Hassed SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Rm. 2B 2418, 940 NE 13th St., 
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Medical professionals and the public are rapidly becoming aware of the 
overwhelming influence that an individual's genetic constitution has on fetal 
health and mortality, congenital malformations, cancer and other chronic 
diseases. Great strides have been made in recognizing and understanding modes of 
inheritance that had not previously been well described. Besides single-gene 
disorders, genetic conditions are known to be caused by a variety of different 
mechanisms: chromosome microdeletions and fragility, multifactorial inheritance, 
mitochondrial genes, triplet repeat expansions, imprinting, and uniparental 
disomy. Because of the complexity of genetic information, an extensive 
discussion is often necessary to sort out advertising, news information, and 
personal health concerns to enable individuals to make decisions for themselves 
about the various options available for testing and treatment. Genetic 
counseling has developed as a discipline in response to the need to educate 
patients, families and professionals about genetic mechanisms and their 
application in health care. In the future, we anticipate that the emphasis will 
be on primary care physicians as health-care managers, and genetic counselors 
will be required to educate individuals about their personal risks of inherited 
disorders and the implications for future generations. Genetic counseling is a 
process of medical education based upon empathy, patient autonomy and 
confidentiality in an atmosphere of empathy, support and understanding. This 
profession combines the knowledge of complex medical and genetic theory with the 
skills of a concerned, supportive counselor.

PMID: 14619605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]