---
reference_id: "PMID:39291212"
title: Global aHUS Registry Analysis of Patients Switching to Ravulizumab From Eculizumab.
authors:
- Schaefer F
- Al-Dakkak I
- Anokhina K
- Cohen D
- Greenbaum LA
- Ariceta G
journal: Kidney Int Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ekir.2024.06.020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global aHUS Registry Analysis of Patients Switching to Ravulizumab From Eculizumab.
**Authors:** Schaefer F, Al-Dakkak I, Anokhina K, Cohen D, Greenbaum LA, Ariceta G
**Journal:** Kidney Int Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ekir.2024.06.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ekir.2024.06.020)

## Content

1. Kidney Int Rep. 2024 Jun 20;9(9):2648-2656. doi: 10.1016/j.ekir.2024.06.020.
eCollection 2024 Sep.

Global aHUS Registry Analysis of Patients Switching to Ravulizumab From
Eculizumab.

Schaefer F(1), Al-Dakkak I(2), Anokhina K(3), Cohen D(4), Greenbaum LA(5),
Ariceta G(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg,
Germany.
(2)Epidemiology, Alexion, AstraZeneca Rare Disease, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Global Medical Affairs, Alexion, AstraZeneca Rare Disease, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New
York, USA.
(5)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Emory University School of Medicine and
Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Vall d'Hebron Hospital, Barcelona, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) is a progressive rare
disease that, if untreated, can result in severe organ damage and death.
Ravulizumab, a next-generation terminal complement inhibitor, provides
immediate, complete, and sustained complement C5 inhibition. Real-world data in
patients with aHUS who switched to ravulizumab from eculizumab are lacking.
METHODS: The Global aHUS Registry is a multicenter study (NCT01522183)
collecting data on adult or pediatric patients with an aHUS diagnosis,
regardless of treatment. Patient characteristics, genetic data, hematological
and renal parameters, clinical events (e.g., dialysis and kidney
transplantation), and adverse events (AEs) were extracted from patients who
switched to ravulizumab from eculizumab up to July 3, 2023.
RESULTS: Overall, 60 patients switched to ravulizumab (adult: n = 43; pediatric:
n = 17); 11 patients were excluded from effectiveness and genetic analyses (N =
49; adult: n = 40; pediatric: n = 9) because they received <3 months ravulizumab
treatment and/or had >1 month between eculizumab discontinuation and ravulizumab
initiation. Pathogenic complement variants were identified in 11 of 49 patients
(22%); the most common was a complement factor H variant (n = 5/49 [10%]).
During ravulizumab treatment, 20 AEs occurred in 13 patients, with no unexpected
AEs and only 3 treatment-related AEs (infusion reaction, headaches, and
fatigue). No meningococcal infections or deaths were reported. No new events of
dialysis, kidney transplantation, or thrombotic microangiopathy were reported.
Renal and hematological parameters remained stable after switching to
ravulizumab.
CONCLUSION: This is the first real-world cohort analysis of data from patients
treated with ravulizumab and reinforces the real-world safety and effectiveness
data of ravulizumab in patients with aHUS who switched from eculizumab.

© 2024 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ekir.2024.06.020
PMCID: PMC11403068
PMID: 39291212
