---
reference_id: "PMID:21423165"
title: Shank3 mutant mice display autistic-like behaviours and striatal dysfunction.
authors:
- Peça J
- Feliciano C
- Ting JT
- Wang W
- Wells MF
- Venkatraman TN
- Lascola CD
- Fu Z
- Feng G
journal: Nature
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/nature09965
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Shank3 mutant mice display autistic-like behaviours and striatal dysfunction.
**Authors:** Peça J, Feliciano C, Ting JT, Wang W, Wells MF, Venkatraman TN, Lascola CD, Fu Z, Feng G
**Journal:** Nature (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature09965](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09965)

## Content

1. Nature. 2011 Apr 28;472(7344):437-42. doi: 10.1038/nature09965. Epub 2011 Mar 
20.

Shank3 mutant mice display autistic-like behaviours and striatal dysfunction.

Peça J(1), Feliciano C, Ting JT, Wang W, Wells MF, Venkatraman TN, Lascola CD, 
Fu Z, Feng G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina 27710, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2011 May;12(5):248-9. doi: 10.1038/nrn3033.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) comprise a range of disorders that share a core 
of neurobehavioural deficits characterized by widespread abnormalities in social 
interactions, deficits in communication as well as restricted interests and 
repetitive behaviours. The neurological basis and circuitry mechanisms 
underlying these abnormal behaviours are poorly understood. SHANK3 is a 
postsynaptic protein, whose disruption at the genetic level is thought to be 
responsible for the development of 22q13 deletion syndrome (Phelan-McDermid 
syndrome) and other non-syndromic ASDs. Here we show that mice with Shank3 gene 
deletions exhibit self-injurious repetitive grooming and deficits in social 
interaction. Cellular, electrophysiological and biochemical analyses uncovered 
defects at striatal synapses and cortico-striatal circuits in Shank3 mutant 
mice. Our findings demonstrate a critical role for SHANK3 in the normal 
development of neuronal connectivity and establish causality between a 
disruption in the Shank3 gene and the genesis of autistic-like behaviours in 
mice.

DOI: 10.1038/nature09965
PMCID: PMC3090611
PMID: 21423165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author Information: The authors declare no 
competing financial interests.