---
reference_id: "PMID:16638549"
title: Scimitar syndrome.
authors:
- Gudjonsson U
- Brown JW
journal: Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1053/j.pcsu.2006.02.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Scimitar syndrome.
**Authors:** Gudjonsson U, Brown JW
**Journal:** Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.pcsu.2006.02.011](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.pcsu.2006.02.011)

## Content

1. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu. 2006:56-62. doi: 
10.1053/j.pcsu.2006.02.011.

Scimitar syndrome.

Gudjonsson U(1), Brown JW.

Author information:
(1)Section of Cardiothoracic Surgery, James W. Riley Hospital for Children and 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5123, USA.

Scimitar syndrome is a rare congenital anomaly consisting in part of right 
pulmonary venous return to the inferior vena cava. There is a clear bimodal 
presentation of this syndrome with either an infantile manifestation or a 
pediatric/adult form. The infantile variant is marked by a higher incidence and 
severity of associated defects, heart failure, pulmonary hypertension, and 
significant mortality. The patient with the pediatric/adult form is less 
severely affected and may be asymptomatic on diagnosis. In this article, we 
review the historical aspects, presentation, and pathophysiology of Scimitar 
syndrome and discuss available treatment strategies. We emphasize the safe and 
effective approach developed at Indiana University that obviates both the need 
for an intra-atrial baffle or use of cardiopulmonary bypass. The results with 
our alternative approach to Scimitar syndrome are summarized and they compare 
favorably with other published reports.

DOI: 10.1053/j.pcsu.2006.02.011
PMID: 16638549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]