---
reference_id: "PMID:34612806"
title: Structure and Function of the Bestrophin family of calcium-activated chloride channels.
authors:
- Owji AP
- Kittredge A
- Zhang Y
- Yang T
journal: Channels (Austin)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/19336950.2021.1981625
keywords:
- Animals
- Bestrophins
- Calcium/metabolism
- Cattle
- Chloride Channels
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- Electrophysiological Phenomena
- Eye Proteins/metabolism
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structure and Function of the Bestrophin family of calcium-activated chloride channels.
**Authors:** Owji AP, Kittredge A, Zhang Y, Yang T
**Journal:** Channels (Austin) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/19336950.2021.1981625](https://doi.org/10.1080/19336950.2021.1981625)

## Content

1. Channels (Austin). 2021 Dec;15(1):604-623. doi: 10.1080/19336950.2021.1981625.

Structure and Function of the Bestrophin family of calcium-activated chloride
channels.

Owji AP(1), Kittredge A(1), Zhang Y(2), Yang T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Columbia University, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Columbia University, NY, USA.

Bestrophins are a family of calcium-activated chloride channels (CaCCs) with
relevance to human physiology and a myriad of eye diseases termed
"bestrophinopathies". Since the identification of bestrophins as CaCCs nearly
two decades ago, extensive studies from electrophysiological and structural
biology perspectives have sought to define their key channel features including
calcium sensing, gating, inactivation, and anion selectivity. The initial X-ray
crystallography studies on the prokaryotic homolog of Best1, Klebsiella
pneumoniae (KpBest), and the Best1 homolog from Gallus gallus (chicken Best1,
cBest1), laid the foundational groundwork for establishing the architecture of
Best1. Recent progress utilizing single-particle cryogenic electron microscopy
has further elucidated the molecular mechanism of gating in cBest1 and,
separately, the structure of Best2 from Bos taurus (bovine Best2, bBest2).
Meanwhile, whole-cell patch clamp, planar lipid bilayer, and other
electrophysiologic analyses using these models as well as the human Best1
(hBest1) have provided ample evidence describing the functional properties of
the bestrophin channels. This review seeks to consolidate these structural and
functional results to paint a broad picture of the underlying mechanisms
comprising the bestrophin family's structure-function relationship.

DOI: 10.1080/19336950.2021.1981625
PMCID: PMC8496536
PMID: 34612806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported
by the author(s).
