---
reference_id: "PMID:39448038"
title: "Reduced-dose Radiation Therapy for Stage IE Gastric Mucosa-Associated Lymphoid Tissue Lymphoma: A Multi-Institutional Prospective Study (KROG 16-18)."
authors:
- Jeon SH
- Chang JH
- Kim IH
- Yoon HI
- Eom KY
journal: Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2024.10.020
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, B-Cell, Marginal Zone/radiotherapy, pathology, mortality"
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- "Stomach Neoplasms/radiotherapy, pathology, mortality"
- Prospective Studies
- Aged
- Radiotherapy Dosage
- Adult
- "Radiotherapy, Intensity-Modulated/methods, adverse effects"
- Helicobacter Infections
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Radiotherapy, Conformal/methods"
- Neoplasm Staging
- Helicobacter pylori
- Remission Induction
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduced-dose Radiation Therapy for Stage IE Gastric Mucosa-Associated Lymphoid Tissue Lymphoma: A Multi-Institutional Prospective Study (KROG 16-18).
**Authors:** Jeon SH, Chang JH, Kim IH, Yoon HI, Eom KY
**Journal:** Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijrobp.2024.10.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2024.10.020)

## Content

1. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2025 Mar 15;121(4):1000-1005. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2024.10.020. Epub 2024 Oct 23.

Reduced-dose Radiation Therapy for Stage IE Gastric Mucosa-Associated Lymphoid 
Tissue Lymphoma: A Multi-Institutional Prospective Study (KROG 16-18).

Jeon SH(1), Chang JH(2), Kim IH(2), Yoon HI(3), Eom KY(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea; Department of Radiation Oncology, Seoul National University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, Republic of Korea; Department of Radiation Oncology, Seoul National 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: 
978sarang@snubh.org.

PURPOSE: Definitive radiation therapy (RT) of 30 Gy or higher is commonly 
recommended to treat Helicobacter pylori-independent gastric mucosa-associated 
lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma with an excellent disease control rate. However, 
the efficacy of reduced-dose RT has not yet been evaluated in a prospective 
cohort study. This multi-institutional study aimed to determine the role of 
reduced-dose RT in the treatment of stage IE gastric MALT lymphoma.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Between March 2017 and June 2022, 62 patients with 
histologically confirmed stage IE gastric MALT lymphoma without evidence of H 
pylori infection were enrolled. The patients were treated with reduced-dose RT 
at a total dose of 24 to 25.5 Gy to the entire stomach. The response to therapy 
was evaluated by endoscopy with a biopsy of suspicious lesions if necessary. The 
primary endpoints were 6-month complete remission (CR) and local failure-free 
survival.
RESULTS: Among 62 patients, 32 (51.6%) were previously treated for H pylori 
eradication. Radiation therapy was delivered using 3D-conformal (n = 20, 32.3%) 
or intensity modulated radiation therapy (n = 42, 67.7%). The median follow-up 
duration was 34.5 months (range, 9.6-68.8 months). The 6-month CR rate was 
96.7%. The 5-year local failure-free survival and progression-free survival 
rates were 92.0% and 90.4%, respectively. None of the patients experienced grade 
3 or worse acute toxicities, and grade 2 acute toxicities were reported in 17 
patients (27.4%).
CONCLUSIONS: Reduced-dose RT exhibited excellent response rates in stage IE 
gastric MALT lymphoma, comparable to historical controls of standard-dose (≥30 
Gy) radiation therapy, with a minimal toxicity profile. Current prospective 
evidence strongly supports the use of definitive radiation therapy (24-25.5 Gy) 
for the treatment of H pylori-independent stage IE gastric MALT lymphoma.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2024.10.020
PMID: 39448038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]