---
reference_id: "PMID:31933930"
title: "Wnt/β-catenin signaling regulates pathogenesis of human middle ear cholesteatoma."
journal: Int J Clin Exp Pathol
year: "2019"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wnt/β-catenin signaling regulates pathogenesis of human middle ear cholesteatoma.

## Content

Cholesteatoma is characterized by the presence of a squamous epithelium invading
the middle ear altering its growth properties. Wnt/β-catenin signaling controls
cell proliferation and differentiation by regulating expressions of target genes.
Elevated levels of β-catenin are related to tissue pathogenesis and tumor
progression. Nevertheless, the mechanisms through which β-catenin contributes to
middle ear cholesteatoma development remain to be elucidated. We used
proliferation assay, qRT-PCR assay, and western blotting to measure levels of
the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway. β-Catenin expression evidently increased in
middle ear cholesteatoma cells when compared with normal epithelial cells. Next,
we found that treatment of Wnt inhibitor dickkopf1 (Dkk1) decreased β-catenin
expression, as well as the expression levels of cytokeratin 16 (CK16), CK18,
Ki67 and PCNA. Overexpression of Wnt3a or β-catenin induced the expression
levels of CK16, CK18, Ki67 and PCNA. Furthermore, Dkk1 treatment significantly
inhibited proliferation activity of middle ear cholesteatoma cells, whereas
forced expression of Wnt3a or β-catenin promoted proliferation activity of
middle ear cholesteatoma cells. Wnt/β-catenin signaling induced cell
proliferation and up-regulated expressions of targeted genes in human middle ear
cholesteatoma.
