---
reference_id: "PMID:29843121"
title: Alterations of Cortisol Metabolism in Human Disorders.
authors:
- White PC
journal: Horm Res Paediatr
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1159/000485508
keywords:
- "11-beta-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Type 1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Carbohydrate Dehydrogenases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/enzymology, genetics"
- Humans
- "Hydrocortisone/genetics, metabolism"
- "Hyperandrogenism/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Hypertension/enzymology, genetics"
- Isoenzymes
- "Metabolic Syndrome/enzymology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alterations of Cortisol Metabolism in Human Disorders.
**Authors:** White PC
**Journal:** Horm Res Paediatr (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000485508](https://doi.org/10.1159/000485508)

## Content

1. Horm Res Paediatr. 2018;89(5):320-330. doi: 10.1159/000485508. Epub 2018 May
29.

Alterations of Cortisol Metabolism in Human Disorders.

White PC.

The interconversion of active and inactive corticosteroids - cortisol and
cortisone, respectively, in humans - is modulated by isozymes of
11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11-HSD). Studies of this process have provided
crucial insights into glucocorticoid effects in a wide variety of tissues. The
11-HSD1 isozyme functions mainly as an oxoreductase (cortisone to cortisol) and
is expressed at high levels in the liver and other glucocorticoid target
tissues. Because it is required for full physiological effects of cortisol, it
has emerged as a drug target for metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes.
Mutations in the corresponding HSD11B1 gene, or in the H6PD gene encoding
hexose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (which supplies the NADPH required for the
oxoreductase activity of 11-HSD1), cause apparent cortisone reductase
deficiency, a rare syndrome of adrenocortical hyperactivity and
hyperandrogenism. In contrast, the 11-HSD2 isozyme functions as a dehydrogenase
(cortisol to cortisone) and is expressed mainly in mineralocorticoid target
tissues, where it bars access of cortisol to the mineralocorticoid receptor.
Mutations in the HSD11B2 gene encoding 11-HSD2 cause the syndrome of apparent
mineralocorticoid excess, a severe form of familial hypertension. The role of
this enzyme in the pathogenesis of common forms of low-renin hypertension
remains uncertain.

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000485508
PMID: 29843121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
