---
reference_id: "PMID:10355667"
title: Anti-ganglioside antibodies can bind peripheral nerve nodes of Ranvier and activate the complement cascade without inducing acute conduction block in vitro.
authors:
- Paparounas K
- "O'Hanlon GM"
- "O'Leary CP"
- Rowan EG
- Willison HJ
journal: Brain
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1093/brain/122.5.807
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-ganglioside antibodies can bind peripheral nerve nodes of Ranvier and activate the complement cascade without inducing acute conduction block in vitro.
**Authors:** Paparounas K, O'Hanlon GM, O'Leary CP, Rowan EG, Willison HJ
**Journal:** Brain (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/122.5.807](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/122.5.807)

## Content

1. Brain. 1999 May;122 ( Pt 5):807-16. doi: 10.1093/brain/122.5.807.

Anti-ganglioside antibodies can bind peripheral nerve nodes of Ranvier and 
activate the complement cascade without inducing acute conduction block in 
vitro.

Paparounas K(1), O'Hanlon GM, O'Leary CP, Rowan EG, Willison HJ.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Neurology, Institute of Neurological Sciences, 
Southern General Hospital, Glasgow, Scotland, UK.

Comment in
    Brain. 1999 May;122 ( Pt 5):797-8. doi: 10.1093/brain/122.5.797.

The neurophysiological effects of nine neuropathy-associated human 
anti-ganglioside antisera, three monoclonal antibodies to ganglioside GM1 (GM1) 
and of the cholera toxin B subunit (a GM1 ligand) were studied on mouse sciatic 
nerve in vitro. GM1 antisera and monoclonal antibodies from patients with 
chronic motor neuropathies and Guillain-Barre syndrome, and GQ1b/ disialosyl 
antisera and monoclonal antibodies from patients with chronic ataxic 
neuropathies and Miller Fisher syndrome were studied. In vitro recording, for up 
to 6 h, of compound nerve action potentials, latencies, rise times and stimulus 
thresholds from isolated desheathed sciatic nerve was performed in the presence 
of antiganglioside antibodies and fresh human serum as an additional source of 
complement. No changes were observed over this time course, with 4-6 h values 
for all electrophysiological parameters being within 15% of the starting values 
for both normal and antibody containing sera and for the cholera toxin B 
subunit. Parallel experiments on identically prepared desheathed nerves 
performed with 0.5 nM saxitoxin led to complete conduction block within 10 min 
of application. Under identical conditions to those used for 
electrophysiological recordings, quantitative immunohistological evaluation 
revealed a significant increase in IgM (immunoglobulin M) deposition at nodes of 
Ranvier from 5.3+/-3.1% to 28.7+/-8.4% (mean+/-SEM) of desheathed nerves exposed 
to three normal and three antibody containing sera, respectively (P < 0.03). 
Complement activation was seen at 100% of normal and 79% of disease-associated 
IgM positive nodes of Ranvier. These data indicate that anti-ganglioside 
antibodies can diffuse into a desheathed nerve, bind to nodes of Ranvier and fix 
complement in vitro without resulting in any overt physiological deterioration 
of the nerve over 4-6 h. This suggests that the node of Ranvier is relatively 
resistant to acute antiganglioside antibody mediated injury over this time scale 
and that anti-ganglioside antibodies and the cholera toxin B subunit are 
unlikely to have major direct pharmacological effects on nodal function, at 
least in comparison with the effect of saxitoxin. This in vitro sciatic nerve 
model appears of limited use for analysing electrophysiologically the effects of 
anti-ganglioside antibodies on nerve function, possibly because its short-term 
viability and isolation from circulating systemic factors do not permit the 
evolution of an inflammatory lesion of sufficient magnitude to induce overt 
electrophysiological abnormalities. In vivo models may be more suitable for 
identifying the effects of these antibodies on nerve conduction.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/122.5.807
PMID: 10355667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]