---
reference_id: "PMID:39735012"
title: "Characterization of Acute Myeloid Leukemia With RUNX1/RUNX1T1 Gene Rearrangement: Clinical, Hematological, and Morphological Features."
authors:
- Maqbool S
- Maqbool I
- Yousaf M
- Farooqi B
- Sikandar MZ
- Zainab R
- Bakht K
- Shahid M
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.74760
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of Acute Myeloid Leukemia With RUNX1/RUNX1T1 Gene Rearrangement: Clinical, Hematological, and Morphological Features.
**Authors:** Maqbool S, Maqbool I, Yousaf M, Farooqi B, Sikandar MZ, Zainab R, Bakht K, Shahid M
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.74760](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.74760)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Nov 29;16(11):e74760. doi: 10.7759/cureus.74760. eCollection 2024
 Nov.

Characterization of Acute Myeloid Leukemia With RUNX1/RUNX1T1 Gene 
Rearrangement: Clinical, Hematological, and Morphological Features.

Maqbool S(1), Maqbool I(2), Yousaf M(3), Farooqi B(4), Sikandar MZ(5), Zainab 
R(6), Bakht K(7), Shahid M(8).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Egon German Clinic Accra, Accra, GHA.
(2)Internal Medicine, Akhter Saeed Medical and Dental College, Lahore, PAK.
(3)Community Medicine, Central Park Medical College, Lahore, PAK.
(4)General Surgery, Sargodha Medical College, Sargodha, PAK.
(5)Nephrology, Central Park Medical College, Lahore, PAK.
(6)Oncology, Aziz Bhatti Shaheed Teaching Hospital, Gujrat, PAK.
(7)Psychiatry, Lincolnshire Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, London, GBR.
(8)Oncology, Pak Red Cresent Medical And Dental College, Lahore, PAK.

OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to determine the frequency of RUNX1/RUNX1T1 gene 
rearrangement in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients by polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) and analyze their clinical, hematological, and morphological 
features of positive patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted in which newly 
diagnosed patients with AML were included in the study. A total of 101 AML cases 
were calculated from the World Health Organization (WHO) formula. Sysmex 
Hematology Analyzer XP-100 (Sysmex Corporation, Kobe, Japan) performed a 
complete blood picture of these positive patients. Molecular analysis was 
carried out by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: A total of 101 AML cases were enrolled. Twelve (11.9%) were found 
positive for this specific recurrent RUNX1/RUNX1T1 gene rearrangement. Nine 
(75%) were males, while three (25%) were females. The mean age of the 
participants was 42 years. The most common clinical feature was pallor. The 
average count of hemoglobin, platelets, and total leukocyte count was 8 g/dl, 
41.5×109/L, and 71.4×109/L, respectively. Bone marrow aspiration showed 
erythropoiesis, thrombopoiesis, and myelopoiesis depressed in all positive cases 
of acute myeloblastic leukemia with maturation (AML-M2). The mean blast 
percentage of AML-M2 was 58%. Auer rods were also found in these positive 
patients.
CONCLUSION: Identifying this fusion protein in AML patients with the AML-M2 FAB 
subtype is valuable because it has prognostic and therapeutic significance.

Copyright © 2024, Maqbool et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.74760
PMCID: PMC11682721
PMID: 39735012

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent for treatment and open 
access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this study. The 
Institutional Review Board of Central Park Medical College issued approval 
(CPMC/IR-no/1486). Animal subjects: All authors have confirmed that this study 
did not involve animal subjects or tissue. Conflicts of interest: In compliance 
with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.