---
reference_id: "PMID:37884692"
title: The Use of Noninvasive Scores in Predicting NAFLD Progression After Bariatric Surgery.
authors:
- Ahmed L
- Gebran S
- Persaud A
- Saeed K
- Khan K
- Saeed S
- Alothman S
- Passos-Fox B
- DePaz H
- Suman P
journal: Obes Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s11695-023-06912-9
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Adult
- Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease/surgery
- Retrospective Studies
- "Obesity, Morbid/surgery"
- Weight Loss
- Bariatric Surgery/methods
- Gastric Bypass/methods
- Liver Cirrhosis/surgery
- Gastrectomy/methods
- Diabetes Mellitus/surgery
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Use of Noninvasive Scores in Predicting NAFLD Progression After Bariatric Surgery.
**Authors:** Ahmed L, Gebran S, Persaud A, Saeed K, Khan K, Saeed S, Alothman S, Passos-Fox B, DePaz H, Suman P
**Journal:** Obes Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11695-023-06912-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11695-023-06912-9)

## Content

1. Obes Surg. 2023 Dec;33(12):4026-4033. doi: 10.1007/s11695-023-06912-9. Epub
2023  Oct 26.

The Use of Noninvasive Scores in Predicting NAFLD Progression After Bariatric 
Surgery.

Ahmed L(1)(2), Gebran S(3), Persaud A(1)(2), Saeed K(1)(2), Khan K(1)(2), Saeed 
S(1), Alothman S(1)(2), Passos-Fox B(1)(2), DePaz H(1)(2), Suman P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Harlem Hospital Center, 506 Lenox Ave, New York, NY, 
10037, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, Wyckoff Heights Medical Center, 374 Stockholm St, Room 
C-408, Brooklyn, NY, Brooklyn, NY, 11237, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, Wyckoff Heights Medical Center, 374 Stockholm St, Room 
C-408, Brooklyn, NY, Brooklyn, NY, 11237, USA. selimgebran@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Bariatric surgery has been postulated to impact liver function 
resulting in favorable effects on nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). We 
aimed to analyze the long-term impact of bariatric surgery on noninvasive scores 
predicting the progression of liver fibrosis in a bariatric population.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the records of patients without 
pre-existing liver disease who underwent sleeve gastrectomy or Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass (RYGB) at our center between 2010 and 2018. Four predictive scores for 
liver fibrosis (AST/ALT, APRI, Fib-4, and BARD) were calculated preoperatively, 
6 months post-operatively, and annually up to 5 years. Correlations were 
analyzed with Pearson R. Subgroup and sensitivity analyses were performed to 
identify populations at increased risk.
RESULTS: A total of 2769 patients were included. The mean age was 40 years, and 
the majority was females (88.5%) and of Hispanic ethnicity (59.2%). There was a 
steady post-operative increase in the percentage of patients at increased risk 
of progression of liver fibrosis. The Fib-4 score showed the largest increase in 
the population at risk for liver fibrosis (11.3% preoperatively to 28.9% at 5 
years). Patients with diabetes and those who underwent a sleeve gastrectomy 
continued to display a higher risk for liver fibrosis than did patients without 
diabetes and those who underwent RYGB, respectively.
CONCLUSION: There was an overall trend to increased liver fibrosis scores over 
the 5-year post-operative follow-up, but this increase remained lower than that 
reported in previous literature. Bariatric surgery offers NAFLD risk reduction 
in a high-risk population.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11695-023-06912-9
PMID: 37884692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]