---
reference_id: "PMID:38837003"
title: A targeted gene panel illuminates pathogenesis in young people with unexplained kidney failure.
authors:
- Beal F
- Forrester N
- Watson E
- Williams M
- Buckton A
- Marlais M
- Maxted A
- UK Gene Panel Study Group
- Woolf AS
- Saleem MA
- Platt C
journal: J Nephrol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s40620-024-01964-1
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Adolescent
- Genetic Testing
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Child
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/genetics, etiology"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Phenotype
- England
- "Child, Preschool"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics, diagnosis, complications"
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A targeted gene panel illuminates pathogenesis in young people with unexplained kidney failure.
**Authors:** Beal F, Forrester N, Watson E, Williams M, Buckton A, Marlais M, Maxted A, UK Gene Panel Study Group, Woolf AS, Saleem MA, Platt C
**Journal:** J Nephrol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40620-024-01964-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40620-024-01964-1)

## Content

1. J Nephrol. 2024 Jun;37(5):1273-1284. doi: 10.1007/s40620-024-01964-1. Epub
2024  Jun 5.

A targeted gene panel illuminates pathogenesis in young people with unexplained
kidney failure.

Beal F(1), Forrester N(2), Watson E(2), Williams M(2), Buckton A(3), Marlais
M(4)(5), Maxted A(6); UK Gene Panel Study Group; Woolf AS(7)(8), Saleem MA(9),
Platt C(9).

Collaborators: Bebb C, Beecroft F, Burkitt E, Cilliers D, Dixit A, Galliford J,
Hayes W, Hillman KA, Holt R, Jarvis J, Jones C, Kamath A, Kharbanda M, Kraus A,
Krishnan R, Leitch H, Metcalfe K, Muorah M, Plant N, Shenoy M, Stuart HM, Van
Der Voort J, Wakeling E, Williams D.

Author information:
(1)Paediatric Nephrology, Birmingham Children's Hospital, Steelhouse Lane,
Birmingham, UK. felicity.beal@nhs.net.
(2)Bristol Genetics Laboratory, North Bristol NHS Trust, Southmead Hospital,
Bristol, UK.
(3)Great Ormond Street Genetics Laboratory, Great Ormond Street Hospital for
Children, NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(4)UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London,
London, UK.
(5)Paediatric Nephrology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, NHS
Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(6)Paediatric Nephrology, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham,
UK.
(7)Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine, School of
Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health, The University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(8)Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester University NHS Foundation
Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK.
(9)Paediatric Nephrology, Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, University
Hospitals Bristol and Weston NHS Foundation Trust, Bristol, UK.

BACKGROUND: Kidney failure in young people is often unexplained and a
significant proportion will have an underlying genetic diagnosis. National
Health Service England pioneered a comprehensive genomic testing service for
such circumstances accessible to clinicians working outside of genetics. This is
the first review of patients using this novel service since October 2021,
following its introduction into clinical practice.
METHODS: The 'Unexplained Young-Onset End-Stage Renal Disease' (test-code R257)
gene panel uses targeted next generation sequencing to analyse 175 genes
associated with renal disease in patients under 36 years of age. All tests
undertaken between October 2021 and February 2022 were reviewed. Phenotypic data
were extracted from request forms and referring clinicians contacted where
additional details were required.
RESULTS: Seventy-one patients underwent R257 testing over the study period.
Among them, 23/71 patients (32%) were confirmed to have a genetic diagnosis and
2/71 (3%) had a genetically suggestive variant. Nephronophthisis and Alport
syndrome were the most common conditions identified, (4/23 (17%) with pathogenic
variants in NPHP1 and 4/23 (17%) with pathogenic variants in COL4A3/COL4A4).
Positive predictors of a genetic diagnosis included a family history of renal
disease (60% of positive cases) and extra-renal disease manifestations (48% of
positive cases).
CONCLUSION: This is the first study to evaluate the R257 gene panel in
unexplained young-onset kidney failure, freely accessible to patients meeting
testing criteria in England. A genetic diagnosis was identified in 32% of
patients. This study highlights the essential and expanding role that genomic
testing has for children and families affected by renal disease today.

© 2024. The Author(s) under exclusive licence to Italian Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1007/s40620-024-01964-1
PMID: 38837003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
