---
reference_id: "PMID:38250789"
title: Observations on the transmission of Dientamoeba fragilis and the cyst life cycle stage.
authors:
- Hall LM
- Munasinghe VS
- Vella NGF
- Ellis JT
- Stark D
journal: Parasitology
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1017/S0031182024000076
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Observations on the transmission of Dientamoeba fragilis and the cyst life cycle stage.
**Authors:** Hall LM, Munasinghe VS, Vella NGF, Ellis JT, Stark D
**Journal:** Parasitology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S0031182024000076](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0031182024000076)

## Content

1. Parasitology. 2024 Mar;151(3):337-345. doi: 10.1017/S0031182024000076. Epub
2024  Jan 22.

Observations on the transmission of Dientamoeba fragilis and the cyst life cycle 
stage.

Hall LM(1)(2), Munasinghe VS(1), Vella NGF(3), Ellis JT(1), Stark D(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Technology Sydney, Broadway, NSW 2007, 
Australia.
(2)Division of Microbiology, Sydpath, St Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst, 
NSW 2010, Australia.
(3)Macquarie University Microscopy Unit, Faculty of Science and Engineering, 
Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW 2109, Australia.

Little is known about the life cycle and mode of transmission of Dientamoeba 
fragilis. Recently it was suggested that fecal–oral transmission of cysts may 
play a role in the transmission of D. fragilis. In order to establish an 
infection, D. fragilis is required to remain viable when exposed to the pH of 
the stomach. In this study, we investigated the ability of cultured trophozoites 
to withstand the extremes of pH. We provide evidence that trophozoites of D. 
fragilis are vulnerable to highly acidic conditions. We also investigated 
further the ultrastructure of D. fragilis cysts obtained from mice and rats by 
transmission electron microscopy. These studies of cysts showed a clear cyst 
wall surrounding an encysted parasite. The cyst wall was double layered with an 
outer fibrillar layer and an inner layer enclosing the parasite. Hydrogenosomes, 
endoplasmic reticulum and nuclei were present in the cysts. Pelta-axostyle 
structures, costa and axonemes were identifiable and internal flagellar axonemes 
were present. This study therefore provides additional novel details and 
knowledge of the ultrastructure of the cyst stage of D. fragilis.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182024000076
PMCID: PMC11007279
PMID: 38250789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.