---
reference_id: "PMID:37547294"
title: DNM2 levels normalization improves muscle phenotypes of a novel mouse model for moderate centronuclear myopathy.
authors:
- de Carvalho Neves J
- Moschovaki-Filippidou F
- Böhm J
- Laporte J
journal: Mol Ther Nucleic Acids
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.omtn.2023.07.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DNM2 levels normalization improves muscle phenotypes of a novel mouse model for moderate centronuclear myopathy.
**Authors:** de Carvalho Neves J, Moschovaki-Filippidou F, Böhm J, Laporte J
**Journal:** Mol Ther Nucleic Acids (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.omtn.2023.07.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtn.2023.07.003)

## Content

1. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2023 Jul 17;33:321-334. doi:
10.1016/j.omtn.2023.07.003.  eCollection 2023 Sep 12.

DNM2 levels normalization improves muscle phenotypes of a novel mouse model for 
moderate centronuclear myopathy.

de Carvalho Neves J(1), Moschovaki-Filippidou F(1), Böhm J(1), Laporte J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), CNRS 
UMR7104, INSERM U1258, 1 rue Laurent Fries, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, France.

Dynamin 2 (DNM2) is a ubiquitously expressed GTPase regulating membrane 
trafficking and cytoskeleton dynamics. Heterozygous dominant mutations in DNM2 
cause centronuclear myopathy (CNM), associated with muscle weakness and atrophy 
and histopathological hallmarks as fiber hypotrophy and organelles mis-position. 
Different severities range from the severe neonatal onset form to the moderate 
form with childhood onset and to the mild adult onset form. No therapy is 
approved for CNM. Here we aimed to validate and rescue a mouse model for the 
moderate form of DNM2-CNM harboring the common DNM2 R369W missense mutation. 
Dnm2R369W/+ mice presented with increased DNM2 protein level in muscle and 
moderate CNM-like phenotypes with force deficit, muscle and fiber hypotrophy, 
impaired mTOR signaling, and progressive mitochondria and nuclei mis-position 
with age. Molecular analyses revealed a fiber type switch toward oxidative 
metabolism correlating with decreased force and alteration of mitophagy markers 
paralleling mitochondria structural defects. Normalization of DNM2 levels 
through intramuscular injection of AAV-shDnm2 targeting Dnm2 mRNA significantly 
improved histopathology and muscle and myofiber hypotrophy. These results showed 
that the Dnm2R369W/+ mouse is a faithful model for the moderate form of DNM2-CNM 
and revealed that DNM2 normalization after a short 4-week treatment is 
sufficient to improve the CNM phenotypes.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtn.2023.07.003
PMCID: PMC10400865
PMID: 37547294

Conflict of interest statement: J.L. is co-founder of Dynacure.