---
reference_id: "PMID:31714263"
title: "Visual snow syndrome: a review on diagnosis, pathophysiology, and treatment."
authors:
- Traber GL
- Piccirelli M
- Michels L
journal: Curr Opin Neurol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000768
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Visual snow syndrome: a review on diagnosis, pathophysiology, and treatment.
**Authors:** Traber GL, Piccirelli M, Michels L
**Journal:** Curr Opin Neurol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1097/WCO.0000000000000768](https://doi.org/10.1097/WCO.0000000000000768)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Neurol. 2020 Feb;33(1):74-78. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000768.

Visual snow syndrome: a review on diagnosis, pathophysiology, and treatment.

Traber GL(1)(2), Piccirelli M(3), Michels L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital Basel, University of Basel.
(2)Institute of Molecular and Clinical Ophthalmology Basel (IOB), Basel.
(3)Department of Neuroradiology, Clinical Neuroscience Center, University 
Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Visual snow is considered a disorder of central visual 
processing resulting in a perturbed perception of constant bilateral 
whole-visual field flickering or pixelation. When associated with additional 
visual symptoms, it is referred to as visual snow syndrome. Its pathophysiology 
remains elusive. This review highlights the visual snow literature focusing on 
recent clinical studies that add to our understanding of its clinical picture, 
pathophysiology, and treatment.
RECENT FINDINGS: Clinical characterization of visual snow syndrome is evolving, 
including a suggested modification of diagnostic criteria. Regarding 
pathophysiology, two recent studies tested the hypothesis of dysfunctional 
visual processing and occipital cortex hyperexcitability using 
electrophysiology. Likewise, advanced functional imaging shows promise to allow 
further insights into disease mechanisms. A retrospective study now provides 
Class IV evidence for a possible benefit of lamotrigine in a minority of 
patients.
SUMMARY: Scientific understanding of visual snow syndrome is growing. Major 
challenges remain the subjective nature of the disease, its overlap with 
migraine, and the lack of quantifiable outcome measures, which are necessary for 
clinical trials. In that context, refined perceptual assessment, objective 
electrophysiological parameters, as well as advanced functional brain imaging 
studies, are promising tools in the pipeline.

DOI: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000768
PMID: 31714263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]