---
reference_id: "PMID:15858711"
title: Alternative splicing suggests extended function of PEX26 in peroxisome biogenesis.
authors:
- Weller S
- Cajigas I
- Morrell J
- Obie C
- Steel G
- Gould SJ
- Valle D
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1086/430637
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alternative splicing suggests extended function of PEX26 in peroxisome biogenesis.
**Authors:** Weller S, Cajigas I, Morrell J, Obie C, Steel G, Gould SJ, Valle D
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1086/430637](https://doi.org/10.1086/430637)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Jun;76(6):987-1007. doi: 10.1086/430637. Epub 2005 Apr
27.

Alternative splicing suggests extended function of PEX26 in peroxisome 
biogenesis.

Weller S(1), Cajigas I, Morrell J, Obie C, Steel G, Gould SJ, Valle D.

Author information:
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Matsumoto and colleagues recently identified PEX26 as the gene responsible for 
complementation group 8 of the peroxisome biogenesis disorders and showed that 
it encodes an integral peroxisomal membrane protein with a single C-terminal 
transmembrane domain and a cytosolic N-terminus that interacts with the 
PEX1/PEX6 heterodimer through direct binding to the latter. They proposed that 
PEX26 functions as the peroxisomal docking factor for the PEX1/PEX6 heterodimer. 
Here, we identify new PEX26 disease alleles, localize the PEX6-binding domain to 
the N-terminal half of the protein (aa 29-174), and show that, at the cellular 
level, PEX26 deficiency impairs peroxisomal import of both PTS1- and 
PTS2-targeted matrix proteins. Also, we find that PEX26 undergoes alternative 
splicing to produce several splice forms--including one, PEX26- delta ex5, that 
maintains frame and encodes an isoform lacking the transmembrane domain of 
full-length PEX26 (PEX26-FL). Despite its cytosolic location, PEX26- delta ex5 
rescues peroxisome biogenesis in PEX26-deficient cells as efficiently as does 
PEX26-FL. To test our observation that a peroxisomal location is not required 
for PEX26 function, we made a chimeric protein (PEX26-Mito) with PEX26 as its 
N-terminus and the targeting segment of a mitochondrial outer membrane protein 
(OMP25) at its C-terminus. We found PEX26-Mito localized to the mitochondria and 
directed all detectable PEX6 and a fraction of PEX1 to this extraperoxisomal 
location; yet PEX26-Mito retains the full ability to rescue peroxisome 
biogenesis in PEX26-deficient cells. On the basis of these observations, we 
suggest that a peroxisomal localization of PEX26 and PEX6 is not required for 
their function and that the interaction of PEX6 with PEX1 is dynamic. This model 
predicts that, once activated in an extraperoxisomal location, PEX1 moves to the 
peroxisome and completes the function of the PEX1/6 heterodimer.

DOI: 10.1086/430637
PMCID: PMC1196456
PMID: 15858711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]