---
reference_id: "PMID:33039241"
title: Chemical induced pathognomonic features observed in human vitiligo are mediated through miR-2909 RNomics pathway.
authors:
- Kaushik H
- Kaul D
- Kumaran MS
- Parsad D
journal: J Dermatol Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2020.06.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chemical induced pathognomonic features observed in human vitiligo are mediated through miR-2909 RNomics pathway.
**Authors:** Kaushik H, Kaul D, Kumaran MS, Parsad D
**Journal:** J Dermatol Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jdermsci.2020.06.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdermsci.2020.06.004)

## Content

1. J Dermatol Sci. 2020 Nov;100(2):92-98. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2020.06.004.
Epub  2020 Jun 12.

Chemical induced pathognomonic features observed in human vitiligo are mediated 
through miR-2909 RNomics pathway.

Kaushik H(1), Kaul D(2), Kumaran MS(1), Parsad D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Leprology, Post Graduate Institute 
of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India.
(2)Deparment of Experimental Medicine and Biotechnology, Post Graduate Institute 
of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Leprology, Post Graduate Institute 
of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India. Electronic address: 
parsad@me.com.

BACKGROUND: Chemicals like Monobenzyl Ether of Hydroquinone (MBEH) and 
4-Tertiary Butyl Phenol (4-TBP) have been widely recognized to induce clinical 
lesions that resemble vitiligo, but exact molecular pathway through which these 
chemicals initiate vitiligo is still far from clear.
OBJECTIVES: Since vitiligo is widely considered as an autoimmune disease, this 
study was an attempt to understand miR-2909 RNomics in vitiligo pathogenesis 
using MBEH treated primary melanocytes as an archetype cellular model because 
MBEH causes pathological features indistinguishable from clinical vitiligo.
METHODS: Primary melanocytes were treated with MBEH and 4-TBP and the role of 
miR-2909 RNomics at transcriptional and translational level was explored through 
qRT-PCR, western blot analysis, flow cytometry, immunocytochemistry, 
immunohistochemistry and in silico binding affinities. 4 mm punch biopsies were 
also obtained from lesional sites of vitiligo patients to validate the results 
observed in cell culture experiments.
RESULTS: MBEH induced miR-2909 RNomics led to downregulation of MITF, TYR, 
TYRP1, and TYRP2 leading to decreased melanin synthesis which in turn is a 
characteristic trait of vitiligo. On the other hand, 4-TBP increased TGF-β which 
also has the intrinsic capacity to downregulate MITF leading to decreased 
melanin synthesis and thereby initiation of vitiligo.
CONCLUSION: Based upon our results we propose a molecular pathway which has the 
inherent capacity to resolve the mechanism through which these chemicals may 
induce vitiligo. This mechanism was also found to be involved in the lesional 
biopsies of vitiligo patients. These results could be exploited in better 
understanding the pathogenesis as well as in treatment of vitiligo.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2020.06.004
PMID: 33039241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
have no conflict of interest to declare.