---
reference_id: PMID:25868797
title: The effect of SERPINF1 in-frame mutations in osteogenesis imperfecta type VI.
authors:
- Al-Jallad H
- Palomo T
- Roughley P
- Glorieux FH
- McKee MD
- Moffatt P
- Rauch F
journal: Bone
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.04.008
keywords:
- 3T3 Cells
- Adolescent
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Child
- "Eye Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Nerve Growth Factors/chemistry, genetics"
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, pathology"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- "Serpins/chemistry, genetics"
- Pigment Epithelium-Derived Factor
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The effect of SERPINF1 in-frame mutations in osteogenesis imperfecta type VI.
**Authors:** Al-Jallad H, Palomo T, Roughley P, Glorieux FH, McKee MD, Moffatt P, Rauch F
**Journal:** Bone (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2015.04.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2015.04.008)

## Content

1. Bone. 2015 Jul;76:115-20. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.04.008. Epub 2015 Apr 11.

The effect of SERPINF1 in-frame mutations in osteogenesis imperfecta type VI.

Al-Jallad H(1), Palomo T(1), Roughley P(1), Glorieux FH(1), McKee MD(2), Moffatt 
P(1), Rauch F(3).

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children and McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada.
(2)Faculty of Dentistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department 
of Anatomy and Cell Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Shriners Hospital for Children and McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada. Electronic address: frauch@shriners.mcgill.ca.

Osteogenesis imperfecta type VI is caused by mutations in SERPINF1, which codes 
for pigment-epithelium derived factor (PEDF). Most of the reported SERPINF1 
mutations lead to premature termination codons, but three in-frame insertion or 
deletion mutations have also been reported. It is not clear how such in-frame 
mutations lead to OI type VI. In the present study we therefore investigated how 
SERPINF1 in-frame mutations affect the intracellular localization and secretion 
of PEDF. Skin fibroblasts affected by SERPINF1 in-frame mutations transcribed 
SERPINF1 at slightly reduced levels but secretion of PEDF was markedly 
diminished. Two deletions (p.F277del and the deletion of SERPINF1 exon 5) were 
associated with retention of PEDF in the endoplasmic reticulum and a stress 
response in osteoblastic cells. A recurrent in-frame duplication of three amino 
acids (p.Ala91_Ser93dup) appeared to lead to intracellular degradation but no 
retention in the endoplasmic reticulum or stress response. Immunofluorescence 
imaging in transiently transfected osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells suggested that 
PEDF affected by in-frame mutations was not transported along the secretory 
pathway. MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts stably overexpressing SERPINF1 with the 
p.Ala91_Ser93dup mutation had decreased collagen type I deposition and 
mineralization. Thus, the assessed homozygous in-frame deletions or insertions 
lead to retention or degradation within cellular compartments and thereby 
interfere with PEDF secretion.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.04.008
PMID: 25868797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]