---
reference_id: "PMID:40069065"
title: "IgA Vasculitis and IgA Nephropathy: Two Sides of the Same Coin?"
authors:
- Pillebout E
journal: Semin Nephrol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2025.151571
keywords:
- Humans
- "Glomerulonephritis, IGA/pathology, diagnosis, immunology, drug therapy"
- Immunoglobulin A/blood
- Kidney/pathology
- Prognosis
- "Vasculitis/pathology, immunology, diagnosis"
- "IgA Vasculitis/pathology, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IgA Vasculitis and IgA Nephropathy: Two Sides of the Same Coin?
**Authors:** Pillebout E
**Journal:** Semin Nephrol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semnephrol.2025.151571](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semnephrol.2025.151571)

## Content

1. Semin Nephrol. 2024 Sep;44(5):151571. doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2025.151571.
Epub 2025 Mar 11.

IgA Vasculitis and IgA Nephropathy: Two Sides of the Same Coin?

Pillebout E(1).

Author information:
(1)Nephrology and Renal Transplant Unit, St Louis Hospital, 1 Avenue Claude
Vellefaux 75010, Paris, France. Electronic address:
evangeline.pillebout@aphp.fr.

IgA vasculitis (IgAV) is considered a systemic form of IgA nephropathy (IgAN).
The two diseases share similar geographic and ethnic distribution, along with
common variants in genetic association studies. The pathophysiology of IgAN and
IgA vasculitis nephritis (IgAVN) can be explained by the four-hit hypothesis.
Key molecules involved at each step in both diseases were evaluated as
diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers with many common factors, most prominently
serum galactose-deficient IgA1. On kidney biopsy, the two diseases are
indistinguishable, and the established histological Oxford classification for
IgAN will soon be validated for IgAVN. Chronic lesions (segmental
glomerulosclerosis and tubular atrophy / interstitial fibrosis) seem more
frequent in IgAN, while proliferative lesions (endocapillary hypercellularity
and crescents) are more frequent in IgAVN, which could explain the worse IgAN
renal prognosis. Due to characteristic skin rash, IgAVN patients are diagnosed
precociously. Conversely, the frequent absence of overt clinical signs in IgAN
leads to a delayed diagnostic kidney biopsy in the disease evolution, which
explains the chronic pathologic lesions. From a therapeutic perspective, while
impressive advances have been made in recent years for IgAN, there is a glaring
lack of evidence-based guidelines for the treatment of IgAVN. Large therapeutic
clinical studies are required, and future IgAN trials should include IgAVN.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2025.151571
PMID: 40069065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
