---
reference_id: "PMID:9861478"
title: "Cerebrospinal fluid levels of oxytocin in Prader-Willi syndrome: a preliminary report."
authors:
- Martin A
- State M
- Anderson GM
- Kaye WM
- Hanchett JM
- McConaha CW
- North WG
- Leckman JF
journal: Biol Psychiatry
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s0006-3223(98)00190-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Arginine Vasopressin/cerebrospinal fluid
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Oxytocin/cerebrospinal fluid
- Prader-Willi Syndrome/cerebrospinal fluid
- Reference Values
- Sex Characteristics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebrospinal fluid levels of oxytocin in Prader-Willi syndrome: a preliminary report.
**Authors:** Martin A, State M, Anderson GM, Kaye WM, Hanchett JM, McConaha CW, North WG, Leckman JF
**Journal:** Biol Psychiatry (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0006-3223(98)00190-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0006-3223(98)00190-5)

## Content

1. Biol Psychiatry. 1998 Dec 15;44(12):1349-52. doi:
10.1016/s0006-3223(98)00190-5.

Cerebrospinal fluid levels of oxytocin in Prader-Willi syndrome: a preliminary 
report.

Martin A(1), State M, Anderson GM, Kaye WM, Hanchett JM, McConaha CW, North WG, 
Leckman JF.

Author information:
(1)Child Study Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA.

BACKGROUND: Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a genetic disorder characterized by 
mental retardation, appetite dysregulation, and a high risk for 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Microscopic abnormalities of the 
hypothalamus have been described in PWS, and oxytocin has been implicated in 
both appetite regulation and OCD.
METHODS: Oxytocin and arginine vasopressin (AVP) were measured in the 
cerebrospinal fluid of 5 subjects with PWS (2 male, 3 female) and in 6 normal 
control subjects (all female).
RESULTS: CSF oxytocin was elevated in PWS (9.2 +/- 3.9 pmol/L) as compared to 
normal control subjects (5.1 +/- 0.9 pmol/L, p = 0.045), a finding that was more 
significant when excluding male subjects from analysis (p = 0.02). AVP was not 
significantly different between the groups as a whole.
CONCLUSIONS: These data provide further evidence for hypothalamic and 
oxytocinergic dysfunction in PWS. The associations between oxytocin, appetite 
regulation, and obsessive compulsive symptomatology in PWS warrant further 
investigation.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-3223(98)00190-5
PMID: 9861478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]