---
reference_id: "PMID:23643382"
title: "Mutations in FGF17, IL17RD, DUSP6, SPRY4, and FLRT3 are identified in individuals with congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism."
authors:
- Miraoui H
- Dwyer AA
- Sykiotis GP
- Plummer L
- Chung W
- Feng B
- Beenken A
- Clarke J
- Pers TH
- Dworzynski P
- Keefe K
- Niedziela M
- Raivio T
- Crowley WF Jr
- Seminara SB
- Quinton R
- Hughes VA
- Kumanov P
- Young J
- Yialamas MA
- Hall JE
- Van Vliet G
- Chanoine JP
- Rubenstein J
- Mohammadi M
- Tsai PS
- Sidis Y
- Lage K
- Pitteloud N
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.04.008
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Computational Biology
- Dual Specificity Phosphatase 6/genetics
- Female
- Fibroblast Growth Factors/genetics
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Hypogonadism/genetics
- Immunohistochemistry
- Inheritance Patterns/genetics
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- Male
- Membrane Glycoproteins
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- "Receptors, Interleukin/genetics"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Sequence Homology
- Surface Plasmon Resonance
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in FGF17, IL17RD, DUSP6, SPRY4, and FLRT3 are identified in individuals with congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
**Authors:** Miraoui H, Dwyer AA, Sykiotis GP, Plummer L, Chung W, Feng B, Beenken A, Clarke J, Pers TH, Dworzynski P, Keefe K, Niedziela M, Raivio T, Crowley WF Jr, Seminara SB, Quinton R, Hughes VA, Kumanov P, Young J, Yialamas MA, Hall JE, Van Vliet G, Chanoine JP, Rubenstein J, Mohammadi M, Tsai PS, Sidis Y, Lage K, Pitteloud N
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.04.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.04.008)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 May 2;92(5):725-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.04.008.

Mutations in FGF17, IL17RD, DUSP6, SPRY4, and FLRT3 are identified in
individuals with congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.

Miraoui H(1), Dwyer AA, Sykiotis GP, Plummer L, Chung W, Feng B, Beenken A,
Clarke J, Pers TH, Dworzynski P, Keefe K, Niedziela M, Raivio T, Crowley WF Jr,
Seminara SB, Quinton R, Hughes VA, Kumanov P, Young J, Yialamas MA, Hall JE, Van
Vliet G, Chanoine JP, Rubenstein J, Mohammadi M, Tsai PS, Sidis Y, Lage K,
Pitteloud N.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne in collaboration with
Service of Endocrinology, Diabetology, and Metabolism, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire Vaudois, Rue du Bugnon 7, Lausanne CH-1005, Switzerland.

Congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (CHH) and its anosmia-associated form
(Kallmann syndrome [KS]) are genetically heterogeneous. Among the >15 genes
implicated in these conditions, mutations in FGF8 and FGFR1 account for ~12% of
cases; notably, KAL1 and HS6ST1 are also involved in FGFR1 signaling and can be
mutated in CHH. We therefore hypothesized that mutations in genes encoding a
broader range of modulators of the FGFR1 pathway might contribute to the
genetics of CHH as causal or modifier mutations. Thus, we aimed to (1)
investigate whether CHH individuals harbor mutations in members of the so-called
"FGF8 synexpression" group and (2) validate the ability of a bioinformatics
algorithm on the basis of protein-protein interactome data (interactome-based
affiliation scoring [IBAS]) to identify high-quality candidate genes. On the
basis of sequence homology, expression, and structural and functional data,
seven genes were selected and sequenced in 386 unrelated CHH individuals and 155
controls. Except for FGF18 and SPRY2, all other genes were found to be mutated
in CHH individuals: FGF17 (n = 3 individuals), IL17RD (n = 8), DUSP6 (n = 5),
SPRY4 (n = 14), and FLRT3 (n = 3). Independently, IBAS predicted FGF17 and
IL17RD as the two top candidates in the entire proteome on the basis of a
statistical test of their protein-protein interaction patterns to proteins known
to be altered in CHH. Most of the FGF17 and IL17RD mutations altered protein
function in vitro. IL17RD mutations were found only in KS individuals and were
strongly linked to hearing loss (6/8 individuals). Mutations in genes encoding
components of the FGF pathway are associated with complex modes of CHH
inheritance and act primarily as contributors to an oligogenic genetic
architecture underlying CHH.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.04.008
PMCID: PMC3644636
PMID: 23643382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
