---
reference_id: "PMID:25307949"
title: Immunological function of familial Mediterranean fever disease protein Pyrin.
authors:
- Yang J
- Xu H
- Shao F
journal: Sci China Life Sci
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s11427-014-4758-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunological function of familial Mediterranean fever disease protein Pyrin.
**Authors:** Yang J, Xu H, Shao F
**Journal:** Sci China Life Sci (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11427-014-4758-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11427-014-4758-3)

## Content

1. Sci China Life Sci. 2014 Dec;57(12):1156-61. doi: 10.1007/s11427-014-4758-3. 
Epub 2014 Oct 11.

Immunological function of familial Mediterranean fever disease protein Pyrin.

Yang J(1), Xu H, Shao F.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing, 102206, China.

Pyrin, encoded by MEFV gene, is conserved in humans and mice. Mutations in the 
MEFV gene are associated with the human autoinflammatory disease familial 
Mediterranean fever (FMF). Pyrin can interact with the inflammasome adaptor ASC 
and induce inflammatory caspase-1 activation in monocytic cells, but the 
physiological function of Pyrin has been unknown for many years. Here we 
summarize previous studies of Pyrin function under the context of FMF and 
immunity, and discuss a recent study demonstrating that Pyrin forms an 
inflammasome complex for caspase-1 activation in innate immunity. Pyrin 
inflammasome detects inactivating modifications of host Rho GTPases by diverse 
bacterial toxins and infections, including Clostridium difficile glucosylating 
cytotoxin TcdB, FIC-domain adenylyltransferase effectors from Vibrio 
parahaemolyticus and Histophilus somni, ADP-ribosylating Clostridium botulinum 
C3 toxin as well as Burkholderia cenocepacia infection. The mode of Pyrin 
action, i.e., sensing pathogen virulence activity rather than directly 
recognizing a microbial molecule, represents a new paradigm in innate immunity.

DOI: 10.1007/s11427-014-4758-3
PMID: 25307949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]