---
reference_id: "PMID:29974501"
title: Management of afebrile neonates with pustules and vesicles in a pediatric emergency department.
authors:
- Manice CS
- Planet PJ
- Chase HS
- Lauren CT
journal: Pediatr Dermatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/pde.13538
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of afebrile neonates with pustules and vesicles in a pediatric emergency department.
**Authors:** Manice CS, Planet PJ, Chase HS, Lauren CT
**Journal:** Pediatr Dermatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pde.13538](https://doi.org/10.1111/pde.13538)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dermatol. 2018 Sep;35(5):660-665. doi: 10.1111/pde.13538. Epub 2018
Jul  4.

Management of afebrile neonates with pustules and vesicles in a pediatric 
emergency department.

Manice CS(1), Planet PJ(2), Chase HS(3), Lauren CT(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, 
USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, 
USA.

Comment in
    Pediatr Dermatol. 2018 Sep;35(5):696-697. doi: 10.1111/pde.13573.

OBJECTIVES: To assess the management and outcomes of vesicles and pustules in 
afebrile neonates presenting to the pediatric emergency department.
METHODS: Using International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, codes, 
we identified patients 0-60 days old presenting to our pediatric emergency 
department from 2008 to 2015 with a possible diagnosis of pustules or vesicles. 
We then used natural language processing followed by manual chart review to 
identify afebrile neonates with pustules or vesicles. We collected clinical data 
from the electronic medical record. We also assessed current practice patterns 
for neonatal pustules or vesicles using a survey administered to attending 
physicians.
RESULTS: Of the 971 possible cases identified using International Classification 
of Diseases, Ninth Revision, codes for fluid-filled lesions, only 64 patients 
had vesicles (n = 9) and pustules (n = 55). One-third (22/64) of afebrile 
neonates with pustules and vesicles were admitted to the hospital and received 
empiric parenteral therapy. Admission, parenteral antibiotics, and antiviral 
therapy were more common in neonates presenting with vesicles than in those with 
pustules alone. Apart from 2 presumed blood culture contaminants, there were no 
positive blood or cerebrospinal fluid cultures. Two patients had positive urine 
cultures. Institutional survey data showed practice patterns consistent with 
these retrospective results.
CONCLUSION: Although one-third of neonates with pustules and vesicles were 
admitted to the hospital and received parenteral therapy, there were no 
cerebrospinal fluid or blood infections or any confirmed evidence of herpes 
simplex virus disease. These findings suggest that afebrile, well-appearing 
neonates presenting with pustules alone may not need a full serious bacterial 
infection examination. Larger studies are needed to confirm these findings and 
assess outcomes, especially in afebrile neonates with vesicles.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/pde.13538
PMID: 29974501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]