---
reference_id: "PMID:11836356"
title: Identification of a 52 kb deletion downstream of the SOST gene in patients with van Buchem disease.
authors:
- Balemans W
- Patel N
- Ebeling M
- Van Hul E
- Wuyts W
- Lacza C
- Dioszegi M
- Dikkers FG
- Hildering P
- Willems PJ
- Verheij JB
- Lindpaintner K
- Vickery B
- Foernzler D
- Van Hul W
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.39.2.91
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a 52 kb deletion downstream of the SOST gene in patients with van Buchem disease.
**Authors:** Balemans W, Patel N, Ebeling M, Van Hul E, Wuyts W, Lacza C, Dioszegi M, Dikkers FG, Hildering P, Willems PJ, Verheij JB, Lindpaintner K, Vickery B, Foernzler D, Van Hul W
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.39.2.91](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.39.2.91)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2002 Feb;39(2):91-7. doi: 10.1136/jmg.39.2.91.

Identification of a 52 kb deletion downstream of the SOST gene in patients with 
van Buchem disease.

Balemans W(1), Patel N, Ebeling M, Van Hul E, Wuyts W, Lacza C, Dioszegi M, 
Dikkers FG, Hildering P, Willems PJ, Verheij JB, Lindpaintner K, Vickery B, 
Foernzler D, Van Hul W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and University Hospital 
Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, 2610 Antwerp, Belgium.

Van Buchem disease is an autosomal recessive skeletal dysplasia characterised by 
generalised bone overgrowth, predominantly in the skull and mandible. Clinical 
complications including facial nerve palsy, optic atrophy, and impaired hearing 
occur in most patients. These features are very similar to those of 
sclerosteosis and the two conditions are only differentiated by the hand 
malformations and the tall stature appearing in sclerosteosis. Using an extended 
Dutch inbred van Buchem family and two inbred sclerosteosis families, we mapped 
both disease genes to the same region on chromosome 17q12-q21, supporting the 
hypothesis that van Buchem disease and sclerosteosis are caused by mutations in 
the same gene. In a previous study, we positionally cloned a novel gene, called 
SOST, from the linkage interval and identified three different, homozygous 
mutations in the SOST gene in sclerosteosis patients leading to loss of function 
of the underlying protein. The present study focuses on the identification of a 
52 kb deletion in all patients from the van Buchem family. The deletion, which 
results from a homologous recombination between Alu sequences, starts 
approximately 35 kb downstream of the SOST gene. Since no evidence was found for 
the presence of a gene within the deleted region, we hypothesise that the 
presence of the deletion leads to a down regulation of the transcription of the 
SOST gene by a cis regulatory action or a position effect.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.39.2.91
PMCID: PMC1735035
PMID: 11836356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]