---
reference_id: "PMID:34034501"
title: A review of the diagnosis and management of liver hydatid cyst.
authors:
- Ferrer Inaebnit E
- Molina Romero FX
- Segura Sampedro JJ
- González Argenté X
- Morón Canis JM
journal: Rev Esp Enferm Dig
year: '2022'
doi: 10.17235/reed.2021.7896/2021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A review of the diagnosis and management of liver hydatid cyst.
**Authors:** Ferrer Inaebnit E, Molina Romero FX, Segura Sampedro JJ, González Argenté X, Morón Canis JM
**Journal:** Rev Esp Enferm Dig (2022)
**DOI:** [10.17235/reed.2021.7896/2021](https://doi.org/10.17235/reed.2021.7896/2021)

## Content

1. Rev Esp Enferm Dig. 2022 Jan;114(1):35-41. doi: 10.17235/reed.2021.7896/2021.

A review of the diagnosis and management of liver hydatid cyst.

Ferrer Inaebnit E(1), Molina Romero FX(2), Segura Sampedro JJ(2), González 
Argenté X(2), Morón Canis JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Cirugía General y Digestiva, Hospital Universitario Son Espases, España.
(2)Cirugía General y Digestiva, Hospital Universitario Son Espases.

Hydatidosis is a zoonosis caused by Echinococcus in the larval stage. Humans are 
accidental intermediary hosts where cystic lesions develop, primarily in the 
liver and the lungs. It is usually asymptomatic, hence it often represents an 
incidental finding. Symptoms result from cyst expansion and/or host inflammatory 
reaction. Hepatomegaly is the most common sign. Hydatidosis induces no specific 
changes in lab tests but immunodiagnostics are available that may complement its 
study, with antibody detection being the modality of choice. While ultrasound is 
the main diagnostic technique, tomography offers more accurate information 
regarding both characteristics and anatomical relations. A number of therapy 
options are presently available. Treatment with albendazole, whether combined or 
not with praziquantel, is useful for smaller, uncomplicated cysts (< 5 cm). Only 
30 % of cysts disappear with medical treatment alone. Surgery is indicated for 
bigger liver cysts (> 10 cm), and cysts at risk of rupture and/or complicated 
cysts. The laparoscopic approach is scarcely widespread. The radical technique 
(total cystopericystectomy) is preferable because of its lower risk for 
postoperative abdominal infection, biliary fistula, and overall morbidity. 
Conservative techniques are appropriate in endemic areas where surgery is 
performed by nonspecialist surgeons. PAIR 
(puncture-aspiration-injection-reaspiration) is an innovative technique 
representing an alternative to surgery. It is indicated for inoperable cases 
and/or patients who reject surgery, for recurrence after surgery, and for lack 
of response to medical treatment. Active surveillance without treatment may be 
indicated for quiescent or inactive, uncomplicated liver cysts.

DOI: 10.17235/reed.2021.7896/2021
PMID: 34034501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]