---
reference_id: "PMID:35241104"
title: "SATB2-associated syndrome: characterization of skeletal features and of bone fragility in a prospective cohort of 19 patients."
authors:
- Mouillé M
- Rio M
- Breton S
- Piketty ML
- Afenjar A
- Amiel J
- Capri Y
- Goldenberg A
- Francannet C
- Michot C
- Mignot C
- Perrin L
- Quelin C
- Van Gils J
- Barcia G
- Pingault V
- Maruani G
- Koumakis E
- Cormier-Daire V
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02229-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Biomarkers
- Bone Density/genetics
- Bone and Bones
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- "Fractures, Compression/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
- "Matrix Attachment Region Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Prospective Studies
- "Spinal Fractures/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Syndrome
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SATB2-associated syndrome: characterization of skeletal features and of bone fragility in a prospective cohort of 19 patients.
**Authors:** Mouillé M, Rio M, Breton S, Piketty ML, Afenjar A, Amiel J, Capri Y, Goldenberg A, Francannet C, Michot C, Mignot C, Perrin L, Quelin C, Van Gils J, Barcia G, Pingault V, Maruani G, Koumakis E, Cormier-Daire V
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-022-02229-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-022-02229-5)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2022 Mar 3;17(1):100. doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02229-5.

SATB2-associated syndrome: characterization of skeletal features and of bone 
fragility in a prospective cohort of 19 patients.

Mouillé M(1)(2), Rio M(1), Breton S(3), Piketty ML(4), Afenjar A(5), Amiel J(1), 
Capri Y(6), Goldenberg A(7), Francannet C(8), Michot C(1)(9), Mignot C(5)(10), 
Perrin L(6), Quelin C(11), Van Gils J(12), Barcia G(13), Pingault V(13), Maruani 
G(14), Koumakis E(9)(15), Cormier-Daire V(16)(17).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Genetics, Necker Enfants Malades Hospital, APHP, 149 rue de Sevres, 
Paris, 75015, France.
(2)Department of Neonatal Medicine, Cochin-Port Royal Hospital, APHP, Paris, 
France.
(3)Department of Pediatric Radiology, Necker Enfants Malades Hospital, APHP, 
Paris, France.
(4)Functional Exploration Laboratory, Necker Enfants Malades Hospital, APHP, 
Paris, France.
(5)Sorbonne University, Reference Center for Intellectual Disabilities, 
Department of Genetics and Medical Embryology, Armand-Trousseau Hospital, APHP, 
Paris, France.
(6)Clinical Genetics Functional Unit, Robert Debré Hospital, APHP, Paris, 
France.
(7)Department of Clinical Genetics, Rouen, France.
(8)Clinical Genetics, Clermont-Ferrand CHU, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(9)Paris Cité University, Reference Center for Constitutional Bone Diseases, 
INSERM UMR1163, Imagine Institute, Paris, France.
(10)Clinical Genetics, La Pitié Salpétrière Hospital, APHP, Paris, France.
(11)Clinical Genetics, Hospital Sud, Rennes, France.
(12)Clinical Genetics, Hospital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France.
(13)Molecular Genetics, Necker Enfants Malades Hospital, APHP, Paris, France.
(14)Department of Physiology, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades and Hôpital 
Européen Georges Pompidou, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(15)Reference Center for Skeletal Dysplasia, Cochin Hospital, APHP, Paris, 
France.
(16)Clinical Genetics, Necker Enfants Malades Hospital, APHP, 149 rue de Sevres, 
Paris, 75015, France. valerie.cormier-daire@inserm.fr.
(17)Paris Cité University, Reference Center for Constitutional Bone Diseases, 
INSERM UMR1163, Imagine Institute, Paris, France. 
valerie.cormier-daire@inserm.fr.

BACKGROUND: Individuals with pathogenic variants in SATB2 display intellectual 
disability, speech and behavioral disorders, dental abnormalities and often 
features of Pierre Robin sequence. SATB2 encodes a transcription factor thought 
to play a role in bone remodeling. The primary aim of our study was to 
systematically review the skeletal manifestations of SATB2-associated syndrome. 
For this purpose, we performed a non-interventional, multicenter cohort study, 
from 2017 to 2018. We included 19 patients, 9 females and 10 males ranging in 
age from 2 to 19 years-old. The following data were collected prospectively for 
each patient: clinical data, bone markers and calcium and phosphate metabolism 
parameters, skeletal X-rays and bone mineral density.
RESULTS: Digitiform impressions were present in 8/14 patients (57%). Vertebral 
compression fractures affected 6/17 patients (35%). Skeletal demineralization 
(16/17, 94%) and cortical thinning of vertebrae (15/17) were the most frequent 
radiological features at the spine. Long bones were generally demineralized 
(18/19). The distal phalanges were short, thick and abnormally shaped. 
C-telopeptide (CTX) and Alkaline phosphatase levels were in the upper normal 
values and osteocalcin and serum procollagen type 1 amino-terminal propeptide 
(P1NP) were both increased. Vitamin D insufficiency was frequent (66.7%).
CONCLUSION: We conclude that SATB2 pathogenic variants are responsible for 
skeletal demineralization and osteoporosis. We found increased levels of bone 
formation markers, supporting the key role of SATB2 in osteoblast 
differentiation. These results support the need for bone evaluation in children 
and adult patients with SATB2-associated syndrome (SAS).

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-022-02229-5
PMCID: PMC8895909
PMID: 35241104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.