---
reference_id: PMID:37551423
title: Phenotypic defects from the expression of wild-type and pathogenic TATA-binding proteins in new Drosophila models of Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 17.
authors:
- Patel N
- Alam N
- Libohova K
- Dulay R
- Todi SV
- Sujkowski A
journal: G3 (Bethesda)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/g3journal/jkad180
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Drosophila/genetics
- Quality of Life
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic defects from the expression of wild-type and pathogenic TATA-binding proteins in new Drosophila models of Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 17.
**Authors:** Patel N, Alam N, Libohova K, Dulay R, Todi SV, Sujkowski A
**Journal:** G3 (Bethesda) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/g3journal/jkad180](https://doi.org/10.1093/g3journal/jkad180)

## Content

1. G3 (Bethesda). 2023 Sep 30;13(10):jkad180. doi: 10.1093/g3journal/jkad180.

Phenotypic defects from the expression of wild-type and pathogenic TATA-binding 
proteins in new Drosophila models of Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 17.

Patel N(1), Alam N(1), Libohova K(1), Dulay R(1), Todi SV(1)(2), Sujkowski A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Wayne State University, 
Detroit, MI 48201, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Wayne State University, Detroit, 
MI 48201, USA.

Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 17 (SCA17) is the most recently identified member of 
the polyglutamine (polyQ) family of disorders, resulting from abnormal CAG/CAA 
expansion in the TATA box-binding protein (TBP), an initiation factor essential 
for of all eukaryotic transcription. A largely autosomal dominant inherited 
disease, SCA17, is unique in both its heterogeneous clinical presentation and 
low incidence of genetic anticipation, the phenomenon in which subsequent 
generations inherit longer polyQ expansions that yield earlier and more severe 
symptom onset. Like other polyQ disease family members, SCA17 patients 
experience progressive ataxia and dementia, and treatments are limited to 
preventing symptoms and increasing quality of life. Here, we report 2 new 
Drosophila models that express human TBP with polyQ repeats in either wild-type 
or SCA17 patient range. We find that TBP expression has age- and tissue-specific 
effects on neurodegeneration, with polyQ-expanded SCA17 protein expression 
generally having more severe effects. In addition, SCA17 model flies accumulate 
more aggregation-prone TBP, with a greater proportion localizing to the nucleus. 
These new lines provide a new resource for the biochemical characterization of 
SCA17 pathology and the future identification of therapeutic targets.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Genetics Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/g3journal/jkad180
PMCID: PMC10542169
PMID: 37551423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors have no 
conflict of interest to report.