---
reference_id: "PMID:23994350"
title: Clinical and genetic study of two patients with Zimmermann-Laband syndrome and literature review.
authors:
- Castori M
- Valiante M
- Pascolini G
- Leuzzi V
- Pizzuti A
- Grammatico P
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.08.004
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Female
- "Fibromatosis, Gingival/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Mosaicism
- Pedigree
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic study of two patients with Zimmermann-Laband syndrome and literature review.
**Authors:** Castori M, Valiante M, Pascolini G, Leuzzi V, Pizzuti A, Grammatico P
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.08.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.08.004)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2013 Oct;56(10):570-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.08.004. Epub
2013 Aug 27.

Clinical and genetic study of two patients with Zimmermann-Laband syndrome and
literature review.

Castori M(1), Valiante M, Pascolini G, Leuzzi V, Pizzuti A, Grammatico P.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza
University, San Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy. Electronic address:
mcastori@scamilloforlanini.rm.it.

Zimmermann-Laband syndrome (ZLS) is a rare MCA/MR condition mainly characterized
by gingival hypertrophy, hypo/aplastic nails and distal phalanges,
hypertrichosis and intellectual disability. The molecular basis of ZLS is
unknown. Most patients are sporadic, although familial aggregation is also
observed with different inheritance patterns. We report on two unrelated
children with full-blown characteristics of ZLS. Remarkable variability in
expression included severity of neurocognitive involvement and extent of
appendicular and facial features. In both, comparative genome hybridization
array at a ~ 75 Mb resolution resulted negative, while aminoacid metabolic
screening revealed high plasma levels of hypoxanthine and xanthine in one.
Literature review identified 50 previously published patients (27 females, 23
males), including 14 familial, clustered in four pedigrees, and 37 sporadic.
Tabulation of clinical features confirmed the core phenotype and identified
developmental delay as the unique major clinical problem (occurring in 40% of
the cases) with a moderately high risk of epilepsy (13%). Segregation analysis
in the 20 sporadic patients with available data on healthy sibs and a single
pedigree with affected sibs was significantly in contrast with an autosomal
recessive mutation. An autosomal dominant mutation with high mutation rate and
rare instances of germinal mosaicism seems the most likely inheritance pattern.
This work may represent a starting point for future molecular studies aimed at
identifying the molecular basis of ZLS.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.08.004
PMID: 23994350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
