---
reference_id: "PMID:8069184"
title: Phenotypic characteristics of acute megakaryocytic leukemia and transient abnormal myelopoiesis.
authors:
- Yumura-Yagi K
- Hara J
- Tawa A
- Kawa-Ha K
journal: Leuk Lymphoma
year: '1994'
doi: 10.3109/10428199409049628
keywords:
- Hematopoiesis/physiology
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Megakaryoblastic, Acute/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Myeloproliferative Disorders/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic characteristics of acute megakaryocytic leukemia and transient abnormal myelopoiesis.
**Authors:** Yumura-Yagi K, Hara J, Tawa A, Kawa-Ha K
**Journal:** Leuk Lymphoma (1994)
**DOI:** [10.3109/10428199409049628](https://doi.org/10.3109/10428199409049628)

## Content

1. Leuk Lymphoma. 1994 May;13(5-6):393-400. doi: 10.3109/10428199409049628.

Phenotypic characteristics of acute megakaryocytic leukemia and transient 
abnormal myelopoiesis.

Yumura-Yagi K(1), Hara J, Tawa A, Kawa-Ha K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka Medical Center, Osaka University Hospital, 
Japan.

By immunophenotyping and ultrastructural cytochemistry, the disorders involving 
megakaryocytic lineage cells have been clarified. These disorders are termed 
acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AMKL) and transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM). 
The characteristics of blasts in these disorders have been extensively 
investigated from various standpoints including cytochemistry, cytogenetics, 
ultrastructure and in vitro-colony differentiation. The target cells of AMKL and 
TAM are immature cells close to stem cells which are capable of differentiating 
into lineage cells such as megakaryocytes, erythrocytes and myeloid cells. 
Phenotypically, these blasts frequently express antigens appearing at an early 
stage in the hematopoietic differentiation pathway. They thus often emerge as 
mixed phenotypes as seen in mixed lineage leukemia of immature cell origin.

DOI: 10.3109/10428199409049628
PMID: 8069184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]