---
reference_id: "PMID:35698202"
title: "Literature review and expert opinion on the impact of achondroplasia on medical complications and health-related quality of life and expectations for long-term impact of vosoritide: a modified Delphi study."
authors:
- Savarirayan R
- Baratela W
- Butt T
- Cormier-Daire V
- Irving M
- Miller BS
- Mohnike K
- Ozono K
- Rosenfeld R
- Selicorni A
- Thompson D
- White KK
- Wright M
- Fredwall SO
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02372-z
keywords:
- "Achondroplasia/complications, drug therapy"
- Delphi Technique
- Humans
- Motivation
- "Natriuretic Peptide, C-Type/analogs & derivatives"
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Literature review and expert opinion on the impact of achondroplasia on medical complications and health-related quality of life and expectations for long-term impact of vosoritide: a modified Delphi study.
**Authors:** Savarirayan R, Baratela W, Butt T, Cormier-Daire V, Irving M, Miller BS, Mohnike K, Ozono K, Rosenfeld R, Selicorni A, Thompson D, White KK, Wright M, Fredwall SO
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-022-02372-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-022-02372-z)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2022 Jun 13;17(1):224. doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02372-z.

Literature review and expert opinion on the impact of achondroplasia on medical 
complications and health-related quality of life and expectations for long-term 
impact of vosoritide: a modified Delphi study.

Savarirayan R(1), Baratela W(2), Butt T(3), Cormier-Daire V(4), Irving M(5), 
Miller BS(6), Mohnike K(7), Ozono K(8), Rosenfeld R(9), Selicorni A(10), 
Thompson D(11), White KK(12), Wright M(13), Fredwall SO(14).

Author information:
(1)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, and University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, Melbourne, VIC, 3052, Australia. ravi.savarirayan@vcgs.org.au.
(2)Hospital Sirio-Libanes, São Paolo, Brazil.
(3)BioMarin International Ltd, London, UK.
(4)Université de Paris, Reference Center for Skeletal Dysplasia, Hôpital 
Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.
(5)Guy's and St. Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(6)University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(7)Universitätskinderklinik, Otto-Von-Guericke Universität, Magdeburg, Germany.
(8)Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
(9)Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR, USA.
(10)ASST Lariana, Como, Italy.
(11)Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(12)University of Washington, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA, USA.
(13)Northern Genetics Service, Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle-Upon-Tyne 
Hospitals, NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK.
(14)TRS National Resource Centre for Rare Disorders, Sunnaas Rehabilitation 
Hospital, Nesodden, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Achondroplasia is associated with disproportionate short stature and 
significant and potentially severe medical complications. Vosoritide is the 
first medicine to treat the underlying cause of achondroplasia and data from 
phase 3 and phase 2 extension studies showed effects on growth and body 
proportions. However, there are currently no long-term data available on the 
direct impact on endpoints such as medical complications and health-related 
quality of life (HRQoL). This study explored the perceived impact of 
achondroplasia on medical complications, HRQoL, healthcare resource use and 
mortality, and potential modifying effects of vosoritide, based on published 
evidence and expert opinion. Structured expert opinion was obtained by an 
international modified Delphi study among 14 experts in managing achondroplasia 
performed on a virtual platform and consisting of an explorative phase followed 
by an anonymous individual rating round.
RESULTS: Overall, the panelists expect that in individuals starting long-term 
treatment between 2 years of age and puberty, growth velocity increases observed 
in the clinical trials will be maintained until final height is reached (92% 
agreement) and will likely result in clinically meaningful improvements in 
upper-to-lower body segment ratio (85%). Earlier treatment initiation will 
likely result in a greater final height (100%) and more likely improve 
proportionality (92%) than later treatment. Although current data are 
limited, ≥ 75% of panelists find it conceivable that the earlier long-term 
treatment is started, the greater the probability of a positive effect on the 
lifetime incidence of symptomatic spinal stenosis, kyphosis, obstructive sleep 
apnea, and foramen magnum stenosis. These are among the most clinically 
important complications of achondroplasia because of their high impact on 
comorbidity, mortality, and/or HRQoL. A positive effect of vosoritide on the 
incidence of surgeries through lifetime was considered more likely with earlier 
long-term treatment (90%).
CONCLUSIONS: This explorative study, based on international expert opinion, 
provides further insight into the medical and functional impacts of 
achondroplasia and how these might be modified through long-term use of 
vosoritide. The results can be used to guide the direction and design of future 
research to validate the assumptions and to discuss potential treatment outcomes 
with disease modifying therapies with families and clinicians.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-022-02372-z
PMCID: PMC9195406
PMID: 35698202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RS has received grants and honoraria from 
BioMarin and is a principal investigator in BioMarin sponsored clinical trials. 
WB has received honoraria from BioMarin. TB is an employee of BioMarin 
International Ltd. VCD has received honoraria from BioMarin. MI has received 
honoraria from BioMarin and is a principal investigator in BioMarin-sponsored 
clinical trials. BSM is a consultant for Abbvie, Ascendis Pharma, BioMarin, EMD 
Serono, Novo Nordisk, Orchard Therapeutics, Pfizer, Tolmar and Vertice and has 
received research support from Alexion, Abbvie, Amgen, Ascendis, Lumos Pharma, 
Novo Nordisk, OPKO Health, Pfizer, and Tolmar. KM received grants and honoraria 
from BioMarin, Lilly, and Novo-Nordisk and has been an advisor of QED; he is a 
principal investigator in BioMarin-sponsored clinical trials and member of 
advocacy group BKMF e.V. KO reports honoraria for lectures from BioMarin. RR has 
received consulting fees, payments and support for attending meetings, and 
participated in scientific and marketing boards from BioMarin. AS received 
honoraria from BioMarin for participating in the expert panel. DT has received 
honoraria from BioMarin. KKW has received payments, honoraria, and consulting 
fees from BioMarin, and grants from Ascendis, Pfizer (Theracon), and Ultragenyx, 
and royalties/licences from UptoDate.com. MW has received honoraria from 
BioMarin for acting as a Medical Advisor in the vosoritide programme. SF has 
received payments of consultation honoraria from BioMarin and Sanofi to his 
working institution. VCD, MI, KM, KO, RS, and KW are principal investigators in 
the vosoritide clinical trials.