---
reference_id: "PMID:23219093"
title: "GJB6, of which mutations underlie Clouston syndrome, is a potential direct target gene of p63."
authors:
- Fujimoto A
- Kurban M
- Nakamura M
- Farooq M
- Fujikawa H
- Kibbi AG
- Ito M
- Dahdah M
- Matta M
- Diab H
- Shimomura Y
journal: J Dermatol Sci
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2012.11.005
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- Connexin 30
- "Connexins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics, metabolism"
- Family Health
- Female
- Gap Junctions/metabolism
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- HEK293 Cells
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Hypotrichosis/genetics, metabolism"
- Infant
- Keratinocytes/cytology
- Male
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- "Nail Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Phosphoproteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Pregnancy
- "RNA, Small Interfering/genetics"
- "Trans-Activators/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GJB6, of which mutations underlie Clouston syndrome, is a potential direct target gene of p63.
**Authors:** Fujimoto A, Kurban M, Nakamura M, Farooq M, Fujikawa H, Kibbi AG, Ito M, Dahdah M, Matta M, Diab H, Shimomura Y
**Journal:** J Dermatol Sci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jdermsci.2012.11.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdermsci.2012.11.005)

## Content

1. J Dermatol Sci. 2013 Feb;69(2):159-66. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2012.11.005.
Epub  2012 Nov 16.

GJB6, of which mutations underlie Clouston syndrome, is a potential direct 
target gene of p63.

Fujimoto A(1), Kurban M, Nakamura M, Farooq M, Fujikawa H, Kibbi AG, Ito M, 
Dahdah M, Matta M, Diab H, Shimomura Y.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetic Skin Diseases, Niigata University Graduate School of 
Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Clouston syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant condition 
characterized by hypotrichosis, nail dystrophy, and occasionally palmoplantar 
keratoderma. The disease is caused by mutations in GJB6 gene, which encodes a 
gap junction protein connexin 30 (Cx30).
OBJECTIVE: To disclose the molecular basis of Clouston syndrome in a 
Lebanese-German family, and also to determine precise expression of Cx30 in 
normal skin of humans and mice, as well as transcriptional regulation for the 
GJB6 expression.
METHODS: We searched for mutations in the GJB6 gene using DNA of the family 
members with Clouston syndrome. We performed immunostaining to localize the Cx30 
expression in normal human skin and mouse embryos. In addition, we did a series 
of in vitro studies to investigate if the GJB6 could be a direct transcriptional 
target gene of p63.
RESULTS: We identified a recurrent heterozygous mutation c.31G>C (p.Gly11Arg) in 
the GJB6 gene in the Lebanese-German family with Clouston syndrome. 
Immunostaining in normal human skin sections demonstrated predominant expression 
of Cx30 in hair follicles, nails, and palmoplantar epidermis, which partially 
overlapped with p63 expression. We also showed co-expression of Cx30 and p63 in 
developing mouse hair follicles and nail units. In cultured cells, the GJB6 
expression was significantly upregulated by ΔNp63α isoform. Further in vitro 
analyses suggested that ΔNp63α was potentially involved in the GJB6 expression 
via binding to the sequences in intron 1 of the GJB6 gene.
CONCLUSION: Our data further underscore the crucial roles of Cx30 in 
morphogenesis and development of skin and its appendages.

Copyright © 2012 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by 
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2012.11.005
PMID: 23219093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]