---
reference_id: "PMID:24612204"
title: Association of aromatase (TTTA)n repeat polymorphisms with central precocious puberty in girls.
authors:
- Lee HS
- Kim KH
- Hwang JS
journal: Clin Endocrinol (Oxf)
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1111/cen.12439
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of aromatase (TTTA)n repeat polymorphisms with central precocious puberty in girls.
**Authors:** Lee HS, Kim KH, Hwang JS
**Journal:** Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cen.12439](https://doi.org/10.1111/cen.12439)

## Content

1. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2014 Sep;81(3):395-400. doi: 10.1111/cen.12439. Epub
2014  Mar 19.

Association of aromatase (TTTA)n repeat polymorphisms with central precocious 
puberty in girls.

Lee HS(1), Kim KH, Hwang JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Ajou University School of Medicine, Ajou University 
Hospital, Suwon, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Precocious puberty is characterized by early activation of the 
pituitary-gonadal axis. Oestrogen is the final key factor to start the onset of 
puberty. The cytochrome P450 19A1 (CYP19A1) gene encodes an aromatase that is 
responsible for the conversion of androgens to oestrogen, which is a key step in 
oestrogen biosynthesis. The aim of this study was to identify CYP19A1 gene 
mutations or polymorphisms in girls with central precocious puberty (CPP).
METHODS: We evaluated the frequency of allelic variants of the CYP19A1 exons and 
the tetranucleotide tandem repeat (TTTA)n in intron 4 in 203 idiopathic central 
precocious puberty (CPP) girls and 101 normal healthy women.
RESULTS: The genotype analysis of the CYP19A1 (TTTA)n polymorphism revealed six 
different alleles ranging from seven to 13 repeats. Among the six different 
repeat alleles detected in this study, the (TTTA)₁₃ repeat allele was only 
detected in the patient group and carriers of the (TTTA)₁₃ allele were 
significantly associated with an increased risk of CPP (OR = 1·509, 95% CI = 
1·425-1·598, P = 0·033). Carriers of the (TTTA)₁₃ repeat allele were 
significantly younger at pubertal onset and had higher levels of oestrogen than 
noncarriers of the (TTTA)₁₃ repeat allele. Although nine polymorphisms were 
detected in exons of the CYP19A1 gene, no clinical significance was observed.
CONCLUSION: In this study, carriers of a higher repeat (TTTA)₁₃ polymorphism in 
intron 4 of the CYP19A1 gene had higher levels of oestrogen. Those carrying the 
(TTTA)₁₃ repeat allele may have a higher risk of developing CPP.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cen.12439
PMID: 24612204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]