---
reference_id: "PMID:12099566"
title: Three-dimensional ultrasonographic presentation of micrognathia.
authors:
- Lee W
- McNie B
- Chaiworapongsa T
- Conoscenti G
- Kalache KD
- Vettraino IM
- Romero R
- Comstock CH
journal: J Ultrasound Med
year: '2002'
doi: 10.7863/jum.2002.21.7.775
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnostic imaging"
- Female
- Humans
- "Imaging, Three-Dimensional"
- "Micrognathism/diagnostic imaging, embryology"
- Pregnancy
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Three-dimensional ultrasonographic presentation of micrognathia.
**Authors:** Lee W, McNie B, Chaiworapongsa T, Conoscenti G, Kalache KD, Vettraino IM, Romero R, Comstock CH
**Journal:** J Ultrasound Med (2002)
**DOI:** [10.7863/jum.2002.21.7.775](https://doi.org/10.7863/jum.2002.21.7.775)

## Content

1. J Ultrasound Med. 2002 Jul;21(7):775-81. doi: 10.7863/jum.2002.21.7.775.

Three-dimensional ultrasonographic presentation of micrognathia.

Lee W(1), McNie B, Chaiworapongsa T, Conoscenti G, Kalache KD, Vettraino IM, 
Romero R, Comstock CH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, William Beaumont Hospital, Royal 
Oak, Michigan 48073-6769, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To present the variable appearance of micrognathia in fetuses by 
three-dimensional ultrasonography and to describe practical methods for analysis 
of these volume data.
METHODS: Three-dimensional multiplanar imaging and surface-rendering techniques 
were used to show various syndromes and diagnostic approaches for the evaluation 
of fetal micrognathia.
RESULTS: Nine cases of fetal micrognathia are presented. Orthogonal multiplanar 
views were used to obtain a midsagittal facial profile. Examples of micrognathia 
include 3 cases of Pierre Robin sequence, cerebrocostomandibular syndrome, 
Cornelia de Lange syndrome, and hypochondrogenesis. Diagnostic pitfalls for 
micrognathia are also shown.
CONCLUSIONS: Three-dimensional multiplanar imaging increases the likelihood that 
a true midline sagittal view of the facial profile is being analyzed. Surface 
rendering provides another way to qualitatively evaluate the fetal chin from 
different viewing perspectives. Three-dimensional ultrasonographic methods are 
useful adjuncts to the preliminary diagnostic impression from two-dimensional 
ultrasonography.

DOI: 10.7863/jum.2002.21.7.775
PMID: 12099566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]