---
reference_id: "PMID:30827358"
title: Medical and Audiological Indications for Implantable Auditory Devices.
authors:
- Svrakic M
- Vambutas A
journal: Otolaryngol Clin North Am
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.otc.2018.11.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medical and Audiological Indications for Implantable Auditory Devices.
**Authors:** Svrakic M, Vambutas A
**Journal:** Otolaryngol Clin North Am (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.otc.2018.11.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.otc.2018.11.001)

## Content

1. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2019 Apr;52(2):195-210. doi: 
10.1016/j.otc.2018.11.001.

Medical and Audiological Indications for Implantable Auditory Devices.

Svrakic M(1), Vambutas A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Long Island Jewish Medical Center, Hearing and 
Speech Center, Northwell Health, 430 Lakeville Road, New Hyde Park, NY 11042, 
USA. Electronic address: msvrakic@northwell.edu.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Long Island Jewish Medical Center, Hearing and 
Speech Center, Northwell Health, 430 Lakeville Road, New Hyde Park, NY 11042, 
USA.

Implantable auditory devices (IADs) are a viable hearing restoration option for 
patients with hearing loss. Conditions such as chronic otitis externa, 
congenital aural atresia, and chronic otitis media can be treated with a variety 
of implants. Progressive disease are also amenable to restoration with IADs, 
providing stabilized hearing. When considering the best rehabilitative options, 
the patient's preference, ease of surgery, ease of device use, quality of life, 
and the traditional alternatives (such as ossiculoplasty, hearing aids, and 
cochlear implants) need to be considered. Patients with conductive, mixed, and 
sensorineural losses, mild to severe in nature, can be candidates for IADs.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.otc.2018.11.001
PMID: 30827358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]