---
reference_id: PMID:26785477
title: "Human telomere biology: A contributory and interactive factor in aging, disease risks, and protection."
authors:
- Blackburn EH
- Epel ES
- Lin J
journal: Science
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1126/science.aab3389
keywords:
- Aging/genetics
- Cell Division/genetics
- Disease/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Life Style
- Neoplasms/genetics
- "Stress, Physiological"
- Telomerase/metabolism
- "Telomere/chemistry, physiology, ultrastructure"
- Telomere Homeostasis/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Human telomere biology: A contributory and interactive factor in aging, disease risks, and protection.
**Authors:** Blackburn EH, Epel ES, Lin J
**Journal:** Science (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.aab3389](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aab3389)

## Content

1. Science. 2015 Dec 4;350(6265):1193-8. doi: 10.1126/science.aab3389.

Human telomere biology: A contributory and interactive factor in aging, disease 
risks, and protection.

Blackburn EH(1), Epel ES(2), Lin J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. elizabeth.blackburn@ucsf.edu.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, 
USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Telomeres are the protective end-complexes at the termini of eukaryotic 
chromosomes. Telomere attrition can lead to potentially maladaptive cellular 
changes, block cell division, and interfere with tissue replenishment. Recent 
advances in the understanding of human disease processes have clarified the 
roles of telomere biology, especially in diseases of human aging and in some 
aging-related processes. Greater overall telomere attrition predicts mortality 
and aging-related diseases in inherited telomere syndrome patients, and also in 
general human cohorts. However, genetically caused variations in telomere 
maintenance either raise or lower risks and progression of cancers, in a highly 
cancer type-specific fashion. Telomere maintenance is determined by genetic 
factors and is also cumulatively shaped by nongenetic influences throughout 
human life; both can interact. These and other recent findings highlight both 
causal and potentiating roles for telomere attrition in human diseases.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aab3389
PMID: 26785477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]