---
reference_id: "PMID:27798626"
title: Stabilizing mutations of KLHL24 ubiquitin ligase cause loss of keratin 14 and human skin fragility.
authors:
- Lin Z
- Li S
- Feng C
- Yang S
- Wang H
- Ma D
- Zhang J
- Gou M
- Bu D
- Zhang T
- Kong X
- Wang X
- Sarig O
- Ren Y
- Dai L
- Liu H
- Zhang J
- Li F
- Hu Y
- Padalon-Brauch G
- Vodo D
- Zhou F
- Chen T
- Deng H
- Sprecher E
- Yang Y
- Tan X
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/ng.3701
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- Case-Control Studies
- "Child, Preschool"
- Epidermolysis Bullosa/genetics
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Keratin-14/metabolism
- Male
- Mice
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Proteolysis
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- Skin/metabolism
- Ubiquitin/metabolism
- Ubiquitination
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stabilizing mutations of KLHL24 ubiquitin ligase cause loss of keratin 14 and human skin fragility.
**Authors:** Lin Z, Li S, Feng C, Yang S, Wang H, Ma D, Zhang J, Gou M, Bu D, Zhang T, Kong X, Wang X, Sarig O, Ren Y, Dai L, Liu H, Zhang J, Li F, Hu Y, Padalon-Brauch G, Vodo D, Zhou F, Chen T, Deng H, Sprecher E, Yang Y, Tan X
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.3701](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3701)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2016 Dec;48(12):1508-1516. doi: 10.1038/ng.3701. Epub 2016 Oct 31.

Stabilizing mutations of KLHL24 ubiquitin ligase cause loss of keratin 14 and 
human skin fragility.

Lin Z(1), Li S(2), Feng C(1), Yang S(2), Wang H(1)(3), Ma D(2), Zhang J(1)(3), 
Gou M(2), Bu D(1), Zhang T(2), Kong X(2), Wang X(1), Sarig O(4), Ren Y(5), Dai 
L(6), Liu H(6), Zhang J(6), Li F(7), Hu Y(8), Padalon-Brauch G(4), Vodo D(4), 
Zhou F(9), Chen T(7), Deng H(10), Sprecher E(4), Yang Y(1)(3), Tan X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing Key 
Laboratory of Molecular Diagnosis on Dermatoses, Beijing, China.
(2)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Center for Infectious Disease Research, 
School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life 
Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Centre, Department of 
Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(5)Laboratory of Electron Microscopy, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, 
China.
(6)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China.
(7)National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing, China.
(8)Laboratory Animal Facility, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.
(9)Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Shanghai Medical College of Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(10)MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences and Centre of 
Biomedical Analysis, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

Skin integrity is essential for protection from external stress and trauma. 
Defects in structural proteins such as keratins cause skin fragility, epitomized 
by epidermolysis bullosa (EB), a life-threatening disorder. Here we show that 
dominant mutations of KLHL24, encoding a cullin 3-RBX1 ubiquitin ligase 
substrate receptor, cause EB. We have identified start-codon mutations in the 
KLHL24 gene in five patients with EB. These mutations lead to truncated KLHL24 
protein lacking the initial 28 amino acids (KLHL24-ΔN28). KLHL24-ΔN28 is more 
stable than its wild-type counterpart owing to abolished autoubiquitination. We 
have further identified keratin 14 (KRT14) as a KLHL24 substrate and found that 
KLHL24-ΔN28 induces excessive ubiquitination and degradation of KRT14. Using a 
knock-in mouse model, we have confirmed that the Klhl24 mutations lead to 
stabilized Klhl24-ΔN28 and cause Krt14 degradation. Our findings identify a new 
disease-causing mechanism due to dysregulation of autoubiquitination and open 
new avenues for the treatment of related disorders.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.3701
PMID: 27798626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]