---
reference_id: "PMID:12825057"
title: Ocular findings in lissencephaly.
authors:
- Nabi NU
- Mezer E
- Blaser SI
- Levin AA
- Buncic JR
journal: J AAPOS
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s1091-8531(02)42005-8
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Anterior Eye Segment/abnormalities
- Brain/abnormalities
- "Child, Preschool"
- Eye Abnormalities
- Humans
- Macula Lutea/abnormalities
- Nervous System Malformations/complications
- Optic Atrophy/complications
- Optic Nerve/abnormalities
- Retina/abnormalities
- Retrospective Studies
- Vision Disorders/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ocular findings in lissencephaly.
**Authors:** Nabi NU, Mezer E, Blaser SI, Levin AA, Buncic JR
**Journal:** J AAPOS (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1091-8531(02)42005-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1091-8531(02)42005-8)

## Content

1. J AAPOS. 2003 Jun;7(3):178-84. doi: 10.1016/s1091-8531(02)42005-8.

Ocular findings in lissencephaly.

Nabi NU(1), Mezer E, Blaser SI, Levin AA, Buncic JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of
Toronto, Canada.

PURPOSE: To report our retrospective study of 20 cases with lissencephaly and
describe ocular and visual abnormalities associated with this disorder.
METHODS: Patients with lissencephaly were identified and classified into classic
(type I) or cobblestone (type 2) lissencephaly on the basis of a review of
clinical records and neuroimaging studies. Only patients examined by an
ophthalmologist were included in the study.
RESULTS: Only 1 patient had a normal ocular examination. Ocular abnormalities
included optic nerve hypoplasia and atrophy, retinal dysplasia, retinal
nonattachment, macular hypoplasia, anterior segment malformation, and
strabismus.
CONCLUSIONS: Ocular abnormalities in classic (type 1) lissencephaly are less
severe. Central, steady, and maintained fixation may be present despite the
presence of optic nerve hypoplasia, optic atrophy, macular hypoplasia,
strabismus, or refractive errors. Retinal and anterior segment abnormalities
were observed only in cobblestone (type 2) lissencephaly. These patients often
have severe visual impairment because of retinal or cortical disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s1091-8531(02)42005-8
PMID: 12825057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
