---
reference_id: "PMID:15739154"
title: "Molecular and clinical analyses of Greig cephalopolysyndactyly and Pallister-Hall syndromes: robust phenotype prediction from the type and position of GLI3 mutations."
authors:
- Johnston JJ
- Olivos-Glander I
- Killoran C
- Elson E
- Turner JT
- Peters KF
- Abbott MH
- Aughton DJ
- Aylsworth AS
- Bamshad MJ
- Booth C
- Curry CJ
- David A
- Dinulos MB
- Flannery DB
- Fox MA
- Graham JM
- Grange DK
- Guttmacher AE
- Hannibal MC
- Henn W
- Hennekam RC
- Holmes LB
- Hoyme HE
- Leppig KA
- Lin AE
- Macleod P
- Manchester DK
- Marcelis C
- Mazzanti L
- McCann E
- McDonald MT
- Mendelsohn NJ
- Moeschler JB
- Moghaddam B
- Neri G
- Newbury-Ecob R
- Pagon RA
- Phillips JA
- Sadler LS
- Stoler JM
- Tilstra D
- Walsh Vockley CM
- Zackai EH
- Zadeh TM
- Brueton L
- Black GC
- Biesecker LG
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1086/429346
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular and clinical analyses of Greig cephalopolysyndactyly and Pallister-Hall syndromes: robust phenotype prediction from the type and position of GLI3 mutations.
**Authors:** Johnston JJ, Olivos-Glander I, Killoran C, Elson E, Turner JT, Peters KF, Abbott MH, Aughton DJ, Aylsworth AS, Bamshad MJ, Booth C, Curry CJ, David A, Dinulos MB, Flannery DB, Fox MA, Graham JM, Grange DK, Guttmacher AE, Hannibal MC, Henn W, Hennekam RC, Holmes LB, Hoyme HE, Leppig KA, Lin AE, Macleod P, Manchester DK, Marcelis C, Mazzanti L, McCann E, McDonald MT, Mendelsohn NJ, Moeschler JB, Moghaddam B, Neri G, Newbury-Ecob R, Pagon RA, Phillips JA, Sadler LS, Stoler JM, Tilstra D, Walsh Vockley CM, Zackai EH, Zadeh TM, Brueton L, Black GC, Biesecker LG
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1086/429346](https://doi.org/10.1086/429346)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Apr;76(4):609-22. doi: 10.1086/429346. Epub 2005 Feb 28.

Molecular and clinical analyses of Greig cephalopolysyndactyly and 
Pallister-Hall syndromes: robust phenotype prediction from the type and position 
of GLI3 mutations.

Johnston JJ(1), Olivos-Glander I, Killoran C, Elson E, Turner JT, Peters KF, 
Abbott MH, Aughton DJ, Aylsworth AS, Bamshad MJ, Booth C, Curry CJ, David A, 
Dinulos MB, Flannery DB, Fox MA, Graham JM, Grange DK, Guttmacher AE, Hannibal 
MC, Henn W, Hennekam RC, Holmes LB, Hoyme HE, Leppig KA, Lin AE, Macleod P, 
Manchester DK, Marcelis C, Mazzanti L, McCann E, McDonald MT, Mendelsohn NJ, 
Moeschler JB, Moghaddam B, Neri G, Newbury-Ecob R, Pagon RA, Phillips JA, Sadler 
LS, Stoler JM, Tilstra D, Walsh Vockley CM, Zackai EH, Zadeh TM, Brueton L, 
Black GC, Biesecker LG.

Author information:
(1)National Institutes of Health, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
Bethesda, MD 20892-4472, USA. jjohnsto@mail.nih.gov

Mutations in the GLI3 zinc-finger transcription factor gene cause Greig 
cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) and Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS), which 
are variable but distinct clinical entities. We hypothesized that GLI3 mutations 
that predict a truncated functional repressor protein cause PHS and that 
functional haploinsufficiency of GLI3 causes GCPS. To test these hypotheses, we 
screened patients with PHS and GCPS for GLI3 mutations. The patient group 
consisted of 135 individuals: 89 patients with GCPS and 46 patients with PHS. We 
detected 47 pathological mutations (among 60 probands); when these were combined 
with previously published mutations, two genotype-phenotype correlations were 
evident. First, GCPS was caused by many types of alterations, including 
translocations, large deletions, exonic deletions and duplications, small 
in-frame deletions, and missense, frameshift/nonsense, and splicing mutations. 
In contrast, PHS was caused only by frameshift/nonsense and splicing mutations. 
Second, among the frameshift/nonsense mutations, there was a clear 
genotype-phenotype correlation. Mutations in the first third of the gene (from 
open reading frame [ORF] nucleotides [nt] 1-1997) caused GCPS, and mutations in 
the second third of the gene (from ORF nt 1998-3481) caused primarily PHS. 
Surprisingly, there were 12 mutations in patients with GCPS in the 3' third of 
the gene (after ORF nt 3481), and no patients with PHS had mutations in this 
region. These results demonstrate a robust correlation of genotype and phenotype 
for GLI3 mutations and strongly support the hypothesis that these two allelic 
disorders have distinct modes of pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1086/429346
PMCID: PMC1199298
PMID: 15739154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]