---
reference_id: "PMID:37477516"
title: "Clinical and genetic characteristics of children with cystic fibrosis in Henan China: A single-center retrospective analysis."
authors:
- Xu C
- Tang Y
- Dong L
- Shen Y
journal: Pediatr Pulmonol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ppul.26601
keywords:
- Infant
- Humans
- Child
- "Cystic Fibrosis/complications, genetics, microbiology"
- Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- Mutation
- Genotype
- Bronchiectasis/genetics
- China/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic characteristics of children with cystic fibrosis in Henan China: A single-center retrospective analysis.
**Authors:** Xu C, Tang Y, Dong L, Shen Y
**Journal:** Pediatr Pulmonol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ppul.26601](https://doi.org/10.1002/ppul.26601)

## Content

1. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2023 Oct;58(10):2865-2870. doi: 10.1002/ppul.26601. Epub
2023  Jul 21.

Clinical and genetic characteristics of children with cystic fibrosis in Henan
China: A single-center retrospective analysis.

Xu C(1), Tang Y(1), Dong L(1), Shen Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Department, Children's Hospital Affiliated to Zhengzhou
University, Henan Children's Hospital, Zhengzhou Children's Hospital, Zhengzhou,
China.
(2)Respiratory Department II, National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory
Diseases, Beijing Children's Hospital, National Center for Children's Health,
Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Despite the growing awareness of cystic fibrosis (CF) in China, few
cases have been reported in Henan, which is the most populous province in the
country. This study aimed to describe the clinical phenotype and genotype of
children with CF in Henan.
METHODS: We retrospectively recruited 18 Chinese children with CF who presented
to Children's Hospital affiliated to Zhengzhou University from January 2019 to
June 2023. The demographic data, imaging examinations, and laboratory tests of
the patients were reviewed to clarify the clinical phenotype. Whole exome
sequencing was conducted to identify the genotype.
RESULTS: Respiratory diseases were the main clinical manifestation, including
recurrent/persistent pneumonia (88.9%), sinusitis (77.8%), bronchiectasis
(77.8%). CF-related liver disease and pancreatic insufficiency were less common.
Infant cases had high frequency of pseudo-Bartter Syndrome (80.0%). Chest
computed tomography showed bronchiectasis in older children and air trapping in
infant cases. The most common pathogens in the airway were Pseudomonas
aeruginosa (72.2%) and Staphylococcus aureus (66.7%). Twenty-five different
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene variants were
detected, including five novel observations (c.1064C>G[p. Pro355Arg],
c.1209+1G>C, c.1925C>G[p. Ser642X], c.2810T>G[p. Leu937Arg], and c.3792delA[p.
Gly1265GlufsX13]). The most common variant was c.2909G>A(p. Gly970Asp), with a
detected rate of 21.9%.
CONCLUSION: Children with CF in Henan had varied clinical phenotypes by age,
with respiratory disease being predominant. The most frequent CFTR gene variant
was c.2909G>A(p. Gly970Asp). This study is the first and most comprehensive one
on the clinical phenotype and genotype of children with CF in Henan, China. We
also reported the first CF case of Mycobacterium abscessus infection in China.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ppul.26601
PMID: 37477516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
