---
reference_id: "PMID:20301552"
title: "Microphthalmia/Anophthalmia/Coloboma Spectrum – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY."
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Bardakjian T
- Weiss A
- Schneider A
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microphthalmia/Anophthalmia/Coloboma Spectrum – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bardakjian T, Weiss A, Schneider A

## Content

1. Microphthalmia/Anophthalmia/Coloboma Spectrum – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR
HISTORICAL  REFERENCE ONLY.

Bardakjian T(1), Weiss A(2), Schneider A(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2004 Jan 29 [updated 2015 Jul 9].

Author information:
(1)GeneDx, Gaithersburg, Maryland
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Children's Hospital and Regional Medical Center, 
Seattle, Washington
(3)Department of Genetics, Einstein Medical Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

NOTE: THIS PUBLICATION HAS BEEN RETIRED. THIS ARCHIVAL VERSION IS FOR HISTORICAL 
REFERENCE ONLY, AND THE INFORMATION MAY BE OUT OF DATE.
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Microphthalmia, anophthalmia, and coloboma comprise 
the MAC spectrum of ocular malformations. Microphthalmia refers to a globe with 
a total axial length that is at least two standard deviations below the mean for 
age. Anophthalmia refers to complete absence of the globe in the presence of 
ocular adnexa (eyelids, conjunctiva, and lacrimal apparatus). Coloboma refers to 
the ocular malformations that result from failure of closure of the optic 
fissure. Chorioretinal coloboma refers to coloboma of the retina and choroid. 
Iris coloboma causes the iris to appear keyhole-shaped. Microphthalmia, 
anophthalmia, and coloboma may be unilateral or bilateral; when bilateral they 
may occur in any combination.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Molecular genetic testing (which can include sequence 
analysis, gene-targeted deletion/duplication analysis, and chromosome microarray 
analysis [CMA]) can identify a genetic cause in 80% of individuals with 
bilateral anophthalmia/severe microphthalmia and in up to 20% of all individuals 
with an ocular malformation in the MAC spectrum.
GENETIC COUNSELING: When an inherited or de novo chromosome abnormality or a 
specific syndrome is identified either by phenotypic findings or by 
genetic/genomic testing, genetic counseling is indicated based on the mode of 
inheritance for that condition.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of MAC spectrum: Prosthetic intervention is appropriate 
for those with severe microphthalmia and anophthalmia. In many infants, an 
ocularist can start shortly after birth to expand the palpebral fissures, 
conjunctival cul-de-sac, and orbit using conformers of progressively increasing 
size. An oculoplastic surgeon can help determine the most suitable options for 
surgical intervention after age six months (when postnatal growth of the orbit 
can be assessed) and before the age that orbital dimensions are fixed (after 
which extensive orbital reconstruction may be required). Children with reduced 
vision may benefit from visual aids and other visual resources as well as early 
intervention to help optimize psychomotor development, educational endeavors, 
life skills, and mobility. Protection of the healthy eye in those with 
unilateral involvement is recommended.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301552