---
reference_id: "PMID:32299679"
title: "A multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind phase 3 trial with open-arm comparison indicates safety and efficacy of nephroprotective therapy with ramipril in children with Alport's syndrome."
authors:
- Gross O
- Tönshoff B
- Weber LT
- Pape L
- Latta K
- Fehrenbach H
- Lange-Sperandio B
- Zappel H
- Hoyer P
- Staude H
- König S
- John U
- Gellermann J
- Hoppe B
- Galiano M
- Hoecker B
- Ehren R
- Lerch C
- Kashtan CE
- Harden M
- Boeckhaus J
- Friede T
- German Pediatric Nephrology (GPN) Study Group and EARLY PRO-TECT Alport Investigators
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2019.12.015
keywords:
- Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors/adverse effects
- Bayes Theorem
- Child
- Double-Blind Method
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Humans
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics"
- Prospective Studies
- Ramipril/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind phase 3 trial with open-arm comparison indicates safety and efficacy of nephroprotective therapy with ramipril in children with Alport's syndrome.
**Authors:** Gross O, Tönshoff B, Weber LT, Pape L, Latta K, Fehrenbach H, Lange-Sperandio B, Zappel H, Hoyer P, Staude H, König S, John U, Gellermann J, Hoppe B, Galiano M, Hoecker B, Ehren R, Lerch C, Kashtan CE, Harden M, Boeckhaus J, Friede T, German Pediatric Nephrology (GPN) Study Group and EARLY PRO-TECT Alport Investigators
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.kint.2019.12.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2019.12.015)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2020 Jun;97(6):1275-1286. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2019.12.015. Epub
2020  Jan 17.

A multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind phase 3 trial with 
open-arm comparison indicates safety and efficacy of nephroprotective therapy 
with ramipril in children with Alport's syndrome.

Gross O(1), Tönshoff B(2), Weber LT(3), Pape L(4), Latta K(5), Fehrenbach H(6), 
Lange-Sperandio B(7), Zappel H(8), Hoyer P(9), Staude H(10), König S(11), John 
U(12), Gellermann J(13), Hoppe B(14), Galiano M(15), Hoecker B(2), Ehren R(3), 
Lerch C(4), Kashtan CE(16), Harden M(17), Boeckhaus J(18), Friede T(17); German 
Pediatric Nephrology (GPN) Study Group and EARLY PRO-TECT Alport Investigators.

Collaborators: Koziolek M, Bramlage CP, Weber F, Albrecht-Nock T, Sonntag J, 
Frese J, Kettwig M, Hilgers R, Hansen M, Wedekin M, Meyer N, Klaiber S, Gessner 
M, Liebau M, Vogt-Weigeldt AK, Jungraithmayr T, Ponsel S, Jacoby U, Konrad M, 
Kranz B, Koenig J, Loechtermann L, Pohl M, Husain R, Mueller K, Thumfart J, 
Schalk G, Feldkoetter M, Schmidt S, Sauerstein K, Muschiol E, Billing H, 
Wilkening F.

Author information:
(1)Clinic for Nephrology and Rheumatology, University Medical Center Göttingen, 
Göttingen, Germany. Electronic address: gross.oliver@med.uni-goettingen.de.
(2)Department of Pediatrics I, University Children's Hospital Heidelberg, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Pediatric Nephrology, Children`s and Adolescents` Hospital, University of 
Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(4)Department of Pediatric Kidney, Liver and Metabolic Diseases, Hannover 
Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(5)Clementine Kinderhospital Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany.
(6)Pediatric Nephrology, Children's Hospital, Memmingen, Germany.
(7)Dr. v. Hauner Children's Hospital, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, 
Germany.
(8)Clinic of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center 
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(9)Pediatric Nephrology, Pediatrics II, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, 
Germany.
(10)Pediatric Nephrology, University Children's Hospital Rostock, Rostock, 
Germany.
(11)University Children's Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.
(12)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, University Children's Hospital, Jena, 
Germany.
(13)Pediatric Nephrology, Charité Children's Hospital, Berlin, Germany.
(14)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(15)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital, 
Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Nephrology, University of Minnesota 
Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(17)Department of Medical Statistics, University Medical Center Göttingen, 
Göttingen, Germany.
(18)Clinic for Nephrology and Rheumatology, University Medical Center Göttingen, 
Göttingen, Germany.

Children with Alport syndrome develop renal failure early in life. Since the 
safety and efficacy of preemptive nephroprotective therapy are uncertain we 
conducted a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial in 14 German 
sites of pediatric patients with ramipril for three to six years plus six months 
follow-up to determine these parameters. Pretreated children and those whose 
parents refused randomization became an open-arm control, which were compared to 
prospective real-world data from untreated children. The co-primary endpoints 
were safety (adverse drug reactions) and efficacy (time to progression). Out of 
66 oligosymptomatic children, 22 were randomized and 44 joined the open-arm 
comparison. Ramipril therapy showed no safety issues (total of 216.4 
patient-years on ramipril; adverse event rate-ratio 1.00; 95% confidence 
interval 0.66-1.53). Although not significant, our results cautiously showed 
that ramipril therapy was effective: in the randomized arm, Ramipril decreased 
the risk of disease progression by almost half (hazard ratio 0.51 (0.12-2.20)), 
diminished the slope of albuminuria progression and the decline in glomerular 
filtration. In adjusted analysis, indications of efficacy were supported by 
prospective data from participants treated open label compared with untreated 
children, in whom ramipril again seemed to reduce progression by almost half 
(0.53 (0.22-1.29)). Incorporating these results into the randomized data by 
Bayesian evidence synthesis resulted in a more precise estimate of the 
hazard-ratio of 0.52 (0.19-1.39). Thus, our study shows the safety of early 
initiation of therapy and supports the hope to slow renal failure by many years, 
emphasizing the value of preemptive therapy. Hence, screening programs for 
glomerular hematuria in children and young adults could benefit from inclusion 
of genetic testing for Alport-related gene-variants.

Copyright © 2020 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2019.12.015
PMID: 32299679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]