---
reference_id: "PMID:39596690"
title: "Multiple Osteochondritis Dissecans as Main Manifestation of Multiple Epiphyseal Dysplasia Caused by a Novel Cartilage Oligomeric Matrix Protein Pathogenic Variant: A Clinical Report."
authors:
- Mazzotti A
- Artioli E
- Brizola E
- Moroni A
- Tremosini M
- Di Cecco A
- Gallone S
- Faldini C
- Sangiorgi L
- Gnoli M
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/genes15111490
keywords:
- Humans
- Cartilage Oligomeric Matrix Protein/genetics
- Male
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, pathology"
- "Osteochondritis Dissecans/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Collagen Type IX/genetics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple Osteochondritis Dissecans as Main Manifestation of Multiple Epiphyseal Dysplasia Caused by a Novel Cartilage Oligomeric Matrix Protein Pathogenic Variant: A Clinical Report.
**Authors:** Mazzotti A, Artioli E, Brizola E, Moroni A, Tremosini M, Di Cecco A, Gallone S, Faldini C, Sangiorgi L, Gnoli M
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes15111490](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes15111490)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2024 Nov 20;15(11):1490. doi: 10.3390/genes15111490.

Multiple Osteochondritis Dissecans as Main Manifestation of Multiple Epiphyseal 
Dysplasia Caused by a Novel Cartilage Oligomeric Matrix Protein Pathogenic 
Variant: A Clinical Report.

Mazzotti A(1)(2), Artioli E(1)(2), Brizola E(3), Moroni A(3), Tremosini M(3), Di 
Cecco A(3), Gallone S(4), Faldini C(1)(2), Sangiorgi L(3), Gnoli M(3).

Author information:
(1)1st Orthopaedics and Traumatologic Clinic, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 
40136 Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences (DIBINEM), Alma Mater 
Studiorum University of Bologna, 40123 Bologna, Italy.
(3)Department Rare Skeletal Disorders, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 40136 
Bologna, Italy.
(4)Clinic Neurogenetic Neuroscience Department, University of Turin, 10124 
Turin, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (MED) is a clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous group of skeletal diseases characterized by epiphyseal 
abnormalities associated with mild short stature. The clinical variability is 
wide, and the first clinical manifestations still occur in childhood with joint 
pain and stiffness that evolve into degenerative joint disease. MED, caused by 
mutations in the Cartilage Oligomeric Matrix Protein (COMP) gene, is the most 
common form of the disease. COMP-MED usually shows significant involvement of 
the capital femoral epiphyses and irregular acetabulum; instead, COL9A1-, 
COL9A2-, and COL9A3-MED appear to have more severe knee involvement than hips, 
resulting in a milder presentation than COMP-MED cases. Other complications have 
been reported, in particular osteochondritis dissecans (OCD), which has been 
described in two large COL9A2-related MED families associated with myopathy.
METHODS: Here, we report the case of a 24-year-old man affected by COMP-MED with 
a positive family history for the disease and a clinical presentation that 
interestingly is characterized by the presence of multiple OCD.
RESULTS: To our knowledge, this is the first case of COMP mutations related to 
multiple OCD as the main clinical feature.
CONCLUSIONS: This report can expand the clinical phenotype related to the 
pathogenic variants of the COMP gene, as it shows that multiple OCD can also be 
present in COMP-related MED as well as in COL9A2-related MED.

DOI: 10.3390/genes15111490
PMCID: PMC11593528
PMID: 39596690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.