---
reference_id: "PMID:33456755"
title: "Epidemiology of pulmonary arterial hypertension and chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension: identification of the most accurate estimates from a systematic literature review."
authors:
- Leber L
- Beaudet A
- Muller A
journal: Pulm Circ
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/2045894020977300
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Epidemiology of pulmonary arterial hypertension and chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension: identification of the most accurate estimates from a systematic literature review.
**Authors:** Leber L, Beaudet A, Muller A
**Journal:** Pulm Circ (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/2045894020977300](https://doi.org/10.1177/2045894020977300)

## Content

1. Pulm Circ. 2021 Jan 7;11(1):2045894020977300. doi: 10.1177/2045894020977300. 
eCollection 2021 Jan-Mar.

Epidemiology of pulmonary arterial hypertension and chronic thromboembolic 
pulmonary hypertension: identification of the most accurate estimates from a 
systematic literature review.

Leber L(1), Beaudet A(1), Muller A(1).

Author information:
(1)Actelion Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Allschwil, Switzerland.

This systematic review of literature and online reports critically appraised 
incidence and prevalence estimates of pulmonary arterial hypertension and 
chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension to identify the most accurate 
estimates. Medline® and Embase® databases were searched for articles published 
between 1 January 2003 and 31 August 2020. Studies were grouped according to 
whether they were registries (population-based estimates), clinical databases 
(hospital-based estimates) or claims/administrative databases. Registries were 
classified into systematic and non-systematic registries, according to whether 
every national centre participated. Of 7309 publications identified, 5414 were 
screened after removal of duplicates and 33 were included. Inclusion was based 
on study type, availability of a clear numerator (diagnosed population) and a 
population- or hospital-based denominator, or all primary data required to 
calculate estimates. Only the most recent publication from a database was 
included. Most studies were based on European data and very few included 
children. In adults, the range of estimates per million was approximately 
20-fold for pulmonary arterial hypertension incidence (1.5-32) and prevalence 
(12.4-268) and of similar magnitude for chronic thromboembolic pulmonary 
hypertension incidence (0.9-39) and prevalence (14.5-144). Recent (≤5 years) 
national systematic registry data from centralised healthcare systems provided 
the following ranges in adult estimates per million: approximately 5.8 for 
pulmonary arterial hypertension incidence, 47.6-54.7 for pulmonary arterial 
hypertension prevalence, 3.1-6.0 for chronic thromboembolic pulmonary 
hypertension incidence and 25.8-38.4 for chronic thromboembolic pulmonary 
hypertension prevalence. These estimates were considered the most reliable and 
consistent for the scientific community to plan for resource allocation and 
improve detection rates.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1177/2045894020977300
PMCID: PMC7797595
PMID: 33456755

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The author(s) declared the 
following potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article: A.B. and A.M. are employees of 
Actelion Pharmaceuticals Ltd, a Janssen Pharmaceutical Company of Johnson & 
Johnson and L.L. was an employee of Actelion Pharmaceuticals Ltd at the time of 
study.

Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is a progressive disease characterised by increased
pulmonary vascular resistance that ultimately leads to right heart failure and
death. Patients usually present with non-specific symptoms, such as shortness of
breath, fatigue, angina and syncope.1 Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) and chronic thromboembolic pulmonary
hypertension (CTEPH) are two groups of PH (Groups 1 and 4, respectively).2,3 As per the 2015 European Society
of Cardiology (ESC)/European Respiratory Society (ERS) guidelines, PH should be
diagnosed by right heart catheterisation (RHC) and imaging techniques are required
to differentiate CTEPH from PAH, with ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) scintigraphy being
the recommended diagnostic tool for CTEPH.2,3

PAH and CTEPH are rare diseases with low but also wide ranges of published incidence
and prevalence estimates.2,3
The variety of design, data sources and observation period used in studies can
create discrepancies in the reported epidemiology of the diseases.

While awareness, diagnosis and clinical management of PAH and CTEPH have greatly
improved over the past few decades,4–6 there is still a lack of
consensus in the scientific community on which estimates could reflect the true
incidence and prevalence of PAH and CTEPH.7–9 Identifying the most
generalisable estimates would help clinicians and scientists to assess the
likelihood of PAH and CTEPH being under-diagnosed in certain countries and
subsequently support realistic goal-setting for improving disease detection. This
systematic review aimed to first, identify PAH and CTEPH incidence and prevalence
estimates available in the literature and online reports and, second, to critically
appraise these estimates, in order to better understand their quality, validity and
relevance in research and clinical practice.

The design of this systematic literature review was based on the Preferred Reporting
Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines.10 The search of literature and online reports, screening and data extraction
was conducted by the first author (L.L.).

Medline® and Embase® databases were searched using OvidSP® for articles published
between 1 January 2003 and 31 August 2020. The start of this search period
coincides with a major modification made to the clinical classification of PH at
the 2003 World Symposium on PH in Venice, where the term ‘primary pulmonary
hypertension’ was replaced by ‘idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension’.11 The definition of the term ‘primary pulmonary hypertension’ has changed
considerably since its first use in 1950 and previously encompassed both PAH and
CTEPH, hence the rationale for excluding articles prior to 2003 that may use
outdated and ambiguous terminology.12 The following search string was used to identify articles on the
population and outcome of interest: pulmonary hypertension [Title/Abstract] OR
pulmonary arterial hypertension [Title/Abstract] AND prevalence [Title/Abstract]
OR incidence [Title/Abstract]. The searches were filtered for human studies,
written in the English language and with abstract available. Duplicate records
were removed. Details of this search strategy are available in Appendix 1.

In addition, ClinicalTrials.gov and the European Network of Centres for
Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacovigilance websites were screened using the
keywords ‘pulmonary hypertension’ and ‘registry’ to identify potentially
relevant data sources. Publicly available reports of PH registries were
extracted from websites of identified registries.

Eligible articles were (i) studying patients diagnosed with PAH or CTEPH, and
included a description of the diagnostic or identification method(s), and (ii)
reporting primary data on the incidence and/or prevalence of PAH and/or CTEPH.
The primary data had to clearly state the numerator of the diagnosed population
and include a population or hospital-based denominator that is not specific to a
disease associated with PH (e.g. PAH in systemic sclerosis population) or report
all primary data and information from which to calculate estimates that satisfy
these criteria. In instances where estimates for PAH or CTEPH were available in
several publications from the same database, only the most recent publication
was selected. Review articles, letters to the editor, case reports, case
studies, clinical trials, in vitro or animal studies were excluded, as were
original research articles in which the main disease under investigation was not
the disease of interest (PH Groups 2, 3 or 5, subgroups of PAH/CTEPH or not PH).
Conference abstracts were included.

First, the titles and abstracts were manually screened for eligibility. If the
article remained potentially relevant, or its eligibility was not clear from the
title and abstract, the full text article was screened. The bibliographies of
identified articles were then manually searched for other articles potentially
of interest to this literature review.

Data extraction was performed using Microsoft Excel. To the best of the authors’
knowledge, there is no data extraction form validated for PH. However, the data
extraction form used was very similar to the validated Joanna Briggs Institute
data extraction form for prevalence studies.13 Data extracted included details of the publication (first author, year of
publication), the study (design, observation period, location), the patient
population (age, diagnosis, size of population), the outcomes of interest
(denominator, incidence and prevalence estimates) and any relevant information
that would contribute to appraisal or interpretation of epidemiology estimates.
For publications that did not have estimates directly available, the country’s
population at the time of study was taken from the US Census14 or Eurostat15 as appropriate, and was used to derive incidence and prevalence.

A narrative synthesis of the evidence is presented herein. Results are grouped
according to the following study designs: (i) national systematic registries,
defined as those in which all national referral PH expert centres participate
and all patients with a confirmed PAH or CTEPH diagnosis are invited to enrol,
(ii) non-systematic registries, including national registries, in which the
majority but not all PH-treating centres are included, as well as multi-centre
registries, (iii) claims/administrative databases, where estimates are based on
prescriptive or diagnostic codes, and (iv) clinical (hospital) databases, in
which diagnoses are clinically confirmed. Clinical databases and registries are
differentiated by whether they present hospital-based estimates (clinical
database) or population-based estimates (registries).

The appraisal of PAH and CTEPH incidence and prevalence estimates was based on
assessment of: database type, number of centres included, country and healthcare
system, observation period, age criteria, diagnosis or identification methods,
PH classification used, sample size and finally the numerator and denominator of
the estimates. These factors were selected and evaluated by the authors; further
details of this process are presented in the discussion. The latest PH guideline
recommendations2,3 were followed to assess the validity of the disease
diagnosis and classification.

The literature search returned a total of 7309 publications. Following the removal of
duplicates, 5414 publications were screened, and 33 were found to meet the
eligibility criteria, as summarized by the PRISMA flow diagram in Fig. 1. The selected
publications comprised 30 manuscripts, one conference abstract and two online
registry reports (the UK PH Audit (2019)16 and the Swedish Pulmonary
Arterial Hypertension Registry (SPAHR)),17 from 13 European, 3 Asian, 2 North American countries and 1 South American
country. Fifteen publications were on PAH, 7 on CTEPH and 11 included both diseases.
PAH and CTEPH epidemiology estimates were mostly reported for adult populations only
(n = 12 for PAH, n = 7 for CTEPH and
n = 7 for publications studying both diseases).

PRISMA flow diagram.

PH: pulmonary hypertension.

All studies were open cohort studies (patients were continually added at diagnosis)
and used the 2003 PH classification (Venice) or a later version.11 When the study observation period was partly prior to 2003, the latest
classification available at end of the study was systematically used (i.e. 2003
classification or a later version), avoiding misclassification bias by the use of
out-dated and ambiguous PH terminology. The included publications are summarised in
Tables 1–4 and Supplementary Tables 1–2. Table 1.Study details and epidemiology estimates from identified studies
investigating PAH epidemiology in adults.Study classificationStudy descriptionCountryTime period rangeNumber of participantsPublication (study acronym)Annual incidence (ppm)Prevalence (ppm)National systematic registryNational systematic registryUK2018–2019NRNHS Digital, 201916,a–54.7bSweden2008–20191034Kjellström et al., 2020 (SPAHR)17,a5.8b47.6bUK (Scotland)1997–2006NRPeacock et al., 200725,a7.626Czech Republic2000–2007191Jansa et al., 201441,a10.722.4Latvia2007–2016130Skride et al., 201820,a13.745.7Non-systematicNational, non-systematicPortugal2008–201046Baptista et al., 201344,a1.5–South Korea2008–2011297Chung et al., 2015 (KORPAH)261.9–France2002–2003674Humbert et al., 200622,a2.415Switzerland1999–2004152Tueller et al., 2008233.515.5Spain2007–2008866Escribano-Subias et al., 2012 (REHAP)33,a3.716Germany2007–20141752Hoeper et al., 2016 (COMPERA)21,a3.925.9Poland2018970Kopeć et al., 2020 (BNP-PL)19,a5.230.8Non-national (multi-centre)USA2006–20072967Frost et al., 2011 (REVEAL)5,a,c2.312.4Claims/administrative databasesClaims (Medicare)USA1999–2007215Kirson et al., 201128–30.4bClaims (PHIC)Colombia201518Miranda-Machado et al., 201947,a–28Claims (HIRA)South Korea2008–20161307Song et al., 2018274.820.2National hospitalization database (SMR)UK (Scotland)1986–2001374Peacock et al., 2007257.152Administrative database (ICES)Canada1993–20126705Wijeratne et al., 20182432268Clinical databasesSingle-centre studyUK2001–2010598Hurdman et al., 2012 (ASPIRE)48,a6.1–Single-centre studyIsrael1998–200584Fruchter and Yigla, 2008497.1b–Single-centre studyUSA2016154Dubroff et al., 202050,a1493Notes: Studies are ordered by study design and then in ascending
order of incidence estimate. Estimates are rounded to one decimal
place, except where only integers were published.aPAH definition included mPAP >/≥ 25 mmHg at rest (± or
>30 mmHg on exercise) and PAWP </≤ 15 mmHg, as assessed by
RHC.bEstimates are derived from the publication using the
method outlined in Table 5.cREVEAL registry included an expanded criterion for
patients with PAWP ≤18 mmHg.ASPIRE: Assessing the spectrum of pulmonary hypertension identified
at a REferral centre; COMPERA: Comparative, Prospective Registry of
Newly Initiated Therapies for Pulmonary Hypertension; HIRA: Health
Insurance Review and Assessment Service; ICES: Institute for
Clinical Evaluative Sciences; KORPAH: Korean Registry of Pulmonary
Arterial Hypertension; NHS: National Health Service; NR: not
reported; PAWP: pulmonary arterial wedge pressure; ppm: patients per
million; REHAP: Spanish Registry of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension;
REVEAL: The Registry to Evaluate Early and Long-term Pulmonary
Arterial Hypertension Disease Management; RHC: right heart
catheterisation; SMR: Scottish Morbidity Record scheme; SPAHR:
Swedish Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension Registry; BNP-PL: Polish
Registry of Pulmonary Hypertension.

Study details and epidemiology estimates from identified studies
investigating PAH epidemiology in adults.

Notes: Studies are ordered by study design and then in ascending
order of incidence estimate. Estimates are rounded to one decimal
place, except where only integers were published.

aPAH definition included mPAP >/≥ 25 mmHg at rest (± or
>30 mmHg on exercise) and PAWP </≤ 15 mmHg, as assessed by
RHC.

bEstimates are derived from the publication using the
method outlined in Table 5.

cREVEAL registry included an expanded criterion for
patients with PAWP ≤18 mmHg.

ASPIRE: Assessing the spectrum of pulmonary hypertension identified
at a REferral centre; COMPERA: Comparative, Prospective Registry of
Newly Initiated Therapies for Pulmonary Hypertension; HIRA: Health
Insurance Review and Assessment Service; ICES: Institute for
Clinical Evaluative Sciences; KORPAH: Korean Registry of Pulmonary
Arterial Hypertension; NHS: National Health Service; NR: not
reported; PAWP: pulmonary arterial wedge pressure; ppm: patients per
million; REHAP: Spanish Registry of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension;
REVEAL: The Registry to Evaluate Early and Long-term Pulmonary
Arterial Hypertension Disease Management; RHC: right heart
catheterisation; SMR: Scottish Morbidity Record scheme; SPAHR:
Swedish Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension Registry; BNP-PL: Polish
Registry of Pulmonary Hypertension.

Study details and epidemiology estimates from identified studies
investigating PAH epidemiology in children.

Notes: Studies are ordered by study design and then in ascending order of
incidence estimate. Estimates are rounded to one decimal place, except
where only integers were published.

aEstimates are derived from the publication using the method
outlined in Table
5.

ICES: Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences; ppm: patients per
million; REHIPED: The Spanish Registry for Paediatric Pulmonary
Hypertension; BNP-PL: Polish Registry of Pulmonary Hypertension.

Study details and epidemiology estimates from identified studies
investigating CTEPH epidemiology in adults.

Notes: Studies are ordered by study design and then in ascending order of
incidence estimate. Estimates are rounded to one decimal place, except
where only integers were published.

aEstimates are derived from the publication using the method
outlined in Table
5.

ASPIRE: assessing the spectrum of pulmonary hypertension identified at a
REferral centre; COMPERA: Comparative, Prospective Registry of Newly
Initiated Therapies for Pulmonary Hypertension; ICES: Institute for
Clinical Evaluative Sciences; NHS: National Health Service; PMSI: French
exhaustive hospital discharge database; ppm: patients per million;
REHAP: Spanish Registry of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension; SPAHR:
Swedish Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension Registry.

Study details and epidemiology estimates from identified studies
investigating CTEPH epidemiology in children.

Notes: Studies are ordered by study design and then in ascending order of
incidence estimate.

aEstimates are derived from the publication using the method
outlined in Table
5.

ICES: Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences; ppm: patients per
million; REHIPED: The Spanish Registry for Paediatric Pulmonary
Hypertension.

Method of deriving estimates from articles not stating the
incidence/prevalence of PAH/CTEPH per million individuals.

CTD-PAH: connective tissue disease-associated pulmonary arterial
hypertension; CTEPH: chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension;
iPAH: idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension; NHS: National Health
Service; PAH: pulmonary arterial hypertension; PAH-CHD: pulmonary
arterial hypertension associated with congenital heart disease; PH:
pulmonary hypertension; ppm: patients per million; RHC: right heart
catheterisation.

All but one18 incidence estimates were incidence proportions (incidence based on person at
risk) rather than incidence rate (incidence based on person-time at risk). Studies
calculated incidence using the last year of observation (n = 19),
an average of each annual incidence of the period (n = 4) and an
average over the whole observation period (n = 4). Point prevalence
using the last year of observation was reported in 12 studies. Period prevalence
using the last year of observation was reported in 11 studies, and two used the
whole observation period. For simplicity, the terminology ‘incidence’ and
‘prevalence’ are used consistently in this review. Supplementary Table 3 contains
full details on how incidence and prevalence were calculated and reported. Estimates
for incidence are presented in patient per million (ppm) per year and estimates for
prevalence are presented in ppm at a given time.

The published estimates of PAH epidemiology in adults are summarised in Table 1. The
publications include five national systematic registries, eight non-systematic
registries, five claims/administrative databases and three clinical databases
(Table 1). One
publication used two different study designs and is therefore counted twice,
resulting in a total of 21 studies. For six of the 13 registries, the
observation period was prior to 2010, and the most recent registries include the
SPAHR (2019 data cut-off),17 the UK National Health Service (NHS) Audit (2019),16 Polish Registry of Pulmonary Hypertension (BNP-PL, 2018),19 Latvian registry (2016)20 and the Comparative, Prospective
Registry of Newly Initiated Therapies for Pulmonary Hypertension (COMPERA, 2014).21 Mean age ranged between 43 and 67 years, and female gender predominated
in all data sources (55–81%, Supplementary Table 1). The French and Swiss
registries included information on the number of patients who withdrew: none of
the 121 incident cases included in the French registry were lost to follow-up,22 24 patients were lost to follow-up in the Swiss registry and these
withdrawals occurred uniformly throughout the follow-up period.23

The ranges of estimates for PAH incidence and prevalence were 1.5–32 and
12.4–268 ppm, respectively. National systematic registries reported PAH adult
incidence to be between 5.8 and 13.7 ppm (four studies), while estimates from
all non-systematic registries except one (BNP-PL; 5.2 ppm) were below 4 ppm
(1.5–3.9 ppm; seven studies). A similar trend was observed for PAH prevalence,
with estimates from national systematic registries being generally higher than
those from non-systematic registries (Table 1).

The estimates from claims/administrative databases overlapped with those from
registries, with the exception of a Canadian (Ontario) administrative database
study reporting an incidence of 32 ppm and a prevalence of 268 ppm.24 PAH estimates from all databases other than the Canadian study, including
clinical databases, ranged from 4.8 to 14 ppm for incidence and from 20.2 to
93 ppm for prevalence.

In Scotland, the USA and South Korea, estimates were available from registries as
well as claims/administrative databases. For Scotland, the registry-based
estimate was similar to that reported in a claims/administrative database study
for PAH incidence, with estimates of 7.6 and 7.1 ppm, respectively, while
prevalence estimates differed more substantially (26 and 52 ppm, respectively).25 The registry-based estimate used RHC-confirmed diagnoses, whilst the
administrative database included patients with an International Classification
of Diseases, ninth revision (ICD-9) or ICD-10 code for a discharge diagnosis of
primary PH/PAH (ICD-9 code 416.0; ICD-10 code I27.0).25 For the USA and South Korea, national estimates from
claims/administrative databases were more than double compared with the
respective multi-centre registries (Table 1).5,26–28

Paediatric epidemiology was reported among four national non-systematic
registries and three claims/administrative database studies (Table 2). PAH
incidence and prevalence ranged from 2.4 to 16.7 ppm and 3.7 to 397 ppm,
respectively. Considering only registry-based estimates, incidence was
approximately 2–3 ppm and prevalence ranged from 3.7 to 20 ppm, while estimates
from claims/administrative databases were higher (Table 2).

The systematic review identified 15 publications (Table 3). Mean age ranged between 58
and 73 years, and female gender represented 37–70% of CTEPH patients
(Supplementary Table 2). The ranges of CTEPH incidence and prevalence in adults
were 0.9–39 ppm and 14.5–144 ppm, respectively (Table 3).

According to national systematic registries (three studies), the incidence of
CTEPH was between 3.1 and 6.0 ppm and prevalence ranged from 15.7 to 38.4 ppm.
Estimates from non-systematic registries (four studies) were similar or lower
than those from systematic registries.

Estimates were also reported in three claims/administrative databases, including
the Canadian administrative database study reporting high incidence (39 ppm) and
prevalence (144 ppm),24 and five clinical databases.

CTEPH epidemiology among children was identified in two non-systematic registries
and two claims/administrative database studies. The Canadian administrative
database study reported an incidence of 2 ppm and a prevalence of 19 ppm,24 while the others estimated the incidence and prevalence to be lower than
1 ppm (Table 4).

This systematic literature review reports a wide variation in the published estimates
of PAH and CTEPH epidemiology. In adults, the range of estimates was approximately
20-fold for PAH incidence and prevalence (1.5–32 and 12.4–268 ppm, respectively) and
a similarly large range was observed for CTEPH incidence and prevalence (0.9–39 and
14.5–144 ppm, respectively). The critical appraisal of the most robust estimates,
outlined in this discussion, focuses on the adult population, since so few
paediatric studies were identified.

The variation in estimates across the included studies could be indicative of
geographic differences in PAH and CTEPH populations. Recent publications have
suggested racial and ethnic differences in prevalence, presentation and outcomes of
PH sub-groups.29–31 However, most
estimates identified in this research originated from Western European countries
with comparable ethnicity and socioeconomic status. No major differences were noted
for demographic distribution of the populations observed in the selected
studies.

The geographic variation of disease estimates may be the consequence of differences
in healthcare systems and patient tracking. In the UK, PH care is centralised:
patients must be referred to one of the eight designated PH centres to receive
diagnosis and disease-targeted treatment. These centres are governed by NHS England
and are audited annually,32 making the PH audit an authoritative data source for PH epidemiology in the
UK. Similarly, in Sweden, the seven nationally designated specialist centres
automatically invite every patient with a confirmed PAH or CTEPH diagnosis to enrol
into the SPAHR registry.17 As a result, 88% of the national PH population and 91% of the national PAH
population, registered by the National Board of Health and Welfare, were estimated
to be covered by the Swedish registry in 2017.17 Interestingly, the most recent nationwide estimates from the Swedish and UK
registries are similar for PAH prevalence (47.6 and 54.7 ppm) and are in the same
range for CTEPH prevalence (25.8 and 38.4 ppm).16,17 In countries where these
referral pathways and/or registry upkeep are not mandatory, national registries may
not be representative and their estimates are likely an underestimate. Indeed, in
the present review, estimates from non-systematic national registries and/or
countries with decentralised healthcare systems, such as the national registries
from Switzerland, France or Spain, were lower than those from the UK and Sweden (PAH
prevalence from 15 to 16 ppm).22,23,33 Despite using non-systematic
patient registration, in which centres were invited – rather than mandated – to
participate, the Polish registry reported a higher PAH prevalence estimate
(30.8 ppm). This likely reflects the fact that all expert PH centres in the country
agreed to participate.19

Routine clinical practice also differs between countries and may also influence the
reported estimates. Confirmation of PH/PAH diagnosis by RHC is the gold standard as
per the current ESC/ERS guidelines.2,3 While being routinely carried
out in France, the UK and Sweden, only 40% and 72% of registrants in the South
Korean and Swiss registries underwent RHC.23,26 In countries where RHC or V/Q
scanning are either unavailable or not systematically used, estimates of
epidemiology can be less accurate due to misdiagnosis.

The type of data source used to derive incidence or prevalence estimates could also
cause variability in the epidemiology estimates. Large claims/administrative
databases were used by several authors, despite the limitation of unconfirmed PAH or
CTEPH diagnosis with this study type.18,24,27,28,34 PH ICD codes can be assigned
to patients with suspected PH to ensure reimbursement for the diagnostic procedure,
regardless of the final diagnosis. These coding practices likely contribute to an
overestimation of patient numbers in claims/administrative databases. The coding
status of PAH and CTEPH is also problematic. Although the ICD-10 codes released in
October 2017 allow the identification of idiopathic or hereditable PAH (primary PH;
I27.0), PAH associated with other conditions (secondary PAH; I27.21) and CTEPH (I27.24),35 no study identified in this systematic literature review included the five
digit ICD-10 code implemented in 2017 and thus, may have misclassified patients. The
highest PAH and CTEPH estimates were reported from the Canadian (Ontario)
administrative database study, in which only 40.9% of the incidence cohort had a
record of RHC. Furthermore, the study algorithm allowed all PH patients, except
those in Group 1, to belong to multiple PH Groups and, as a result, 35.4% of
patients were assigned to more than one PH diagnosis. This study may therefore be
overestimating the true epidemiology of the diseases in Ontario.24

Several studies using claim/administrative databases implemented algorithms combining
ICD codes with medication and procedure codes to improve the specificity of patient
identification. There is no standardisation across studies and only a few code-based
algorithms have been evaluated against clinical data, albeit with a limited success.36 The risk of including false-positive patients (those who were not diagnosed
with the disease of interest) remains a limitation of this data source and may
partly explain the higher PAH estimates reported in the US and South Korean
claims/administrative databases compared with the respective country’s national
registries.5,26–28

Registries have the advantage of being designed with the purpose of supporting
scientific research for a specific disease and, as such, only patients with a
confirmed diagnosis should be included. The same advantage is true for clinical
databases (i.e. hospital-based estimates as per the definitions used in this
systematic review); however, their national coverage is less clear and, therefore,
their estimates cannot be extrapolated to the whole country’s population.

Another key factor in assessing the validity of epidemiology estimates is the
observation period for data collection. The number of PAH-targeted treatments
available has increased since the first treatment – epoprostenol – was licensed in
199537: more than 10 drugs and formulations are currently
available.38–40 In the Czech
Republic registry, the increase in PAH-specific therapy options after 2006 is
thought to explain why the number of incident cases in 2006 sharply increased
(n = 91) given that only 100 prevalent cases were identified in
the previous six-year period.41 Moreover, when the aetiology is multifactorial or unclear, there may be an
incentive to classify patients as PH Group 1 or 4, which have procedures and drugs
available. Given the burden of RHC, in the absence of treatment options, performing
this diagnostic procedure to reach a definitive PAH or CTEPH diagnostic may be
perceived as unethical, thus it may have been used less frequently in the past.

The observation period is also important to consider when interpreting CTEPH
estimates. In Latvia, for example, routine use of V/Q scanning to differentiate
CTEPH from PAH was not available across the total observation period (2007–2016) of
the national registry and, as a result, the number of CTEPH cases may have been underestimated.20 Treatment options for CTEPH are also evolving rapidly8,40,42,43 and it is therefore important
to identify studies using data collected during a recent time period. The most
recent publications from the Swedish and UK systematic registries may therefore be
the most accurate, as their observation periods are within the previous five years
and diagnosis was based on the latest PH guideline’s recommendations.16,17

The length of observation period also determines the extent to which the study’s
estimate represents the true epidemiology. For example, epidemiology data provided
by the French and US registries were derived from enrolled consecutive PAH patients
over a time period of one year,5,22 with the assumption that
patients have an annual clinic visit as a minimum. In cases where this assumption
does not reflect the reality, patients with less frequent visits captured in the
database will be missed, resulting in underestimation of prevalence. Of note, six of
the 12 registries reporting PAH incidence estimates had an observation period of ≤4
years, and all but the BNP-PL registry reported incidence to be below
4 ppm.5,19,22,26,33,44 The remaining
six registries had an observation period of ≥5 years and incidence for all but the
two non-systematic registries conducted in countries with de-centralised healthcare
(Germany and Switzerland) was higher.21,23

The present study represents the authors’ recommendation for which estimates are
considered most valid, based on objective criteria. The incidence/prevalence
estimates were critically appraised according to the criteria outlined herein. The
following factors were considered, shown in order of importance, as key for
selecting the most valid estimates: (i) study design, with national systematic
registries being the most likely to yield accurate estimates, (ii) structure of the
healthcare system, with centralised systems in countries with access to the latest
treatments and procedures being selected, and (iii) the recency of the observation
period (ideally from the previous five years). As such, the estimates from the
Swedish registry SPAHR and the UK PH Audit are considered to be the most
generalisable.

Critically appraising epidemiology estimates is important for several reasons. These
estimates could be used as a guide or threshold level to assess if a country is
likely to be under-diagnosing PAH and CTEPH. This would help to set detection rate
goals and guide allocation of research grants and healthcare resources by
decision-makers. Furthermore, by providing an assessment of the published incidence
and prevalence estimates, the authors hope to guide readers in their own critical
appraisal of such upcoming data. This is particularly important given that the
highest estimates identified in this systematic review create confusion on whether
PAH and CTEPH are rare diseases. The critical appraisal presented herein highlighted
the possible reasons for overestimation by these studies and is in agreement with
the classification of PAH and CTEPH as rare diseases.

This study has several potential limitations. There was the potential for reviewer
bias, however, given the sparsity of PH literature, the authors’ specialisation in
PH and as the systematic screening of bibliographies of the identified articles was
conducted to capture any additional eligible publications, a single reviewer was
believed to be sufficient. It remains possible that non-indexed publications may
have been missed, particularly publications in non-English language.

The methods used to calculate incidence and prevalence were not consistent across the
publications, thus hindering comparison of their estimates.45 While incidence rate is a more accurate estimate of the rate at which the
outcome develops, its denominator is more challenging to calculate in open
populations that are, per definition, dynamic rather than fixed in time. Incidence
rate can only be calculated if periodic follow-up information is available for each
patient, including if they developed the disease and when they developed it.
Checking every citizen at the beginning and end of the year, to calculate the
incidence of PAH or CTEPH in a country over a calendar year is not feasible.
However, the population at risk, i.e. the general population of the country, is so
large compared with the number of new patients with the disease, that the impact of
these patients on the size of the population at risk is negligible. As incidence
rate is similar to annual incidence proportion for a rare disease, the only
incidence rate identified18 was interpreted in the same way as for incidence proportions in this review.
Point prevalence refers to prevalence measured at a particular point in time, while
period prevalence refers to prevalence measured over an interval of time. As PAH and
CTEPH prevalence estimates have increased over the past few decades, period
prevalence calculated over a long period would not be representative of the
contemporaneous epidemiological status of the diseases. Thus, this critical
appraisal only selected estimates from recent observation periods.

Populations from Asia, Africa and South America were under-represented in the
literature. Data from these regions will be required to establish whether
generalising estimates from European and North American countries to other regions
is appropriate.

This literature review identified few studies in paediatric populations: seven
studies reported epidemiology estimates for paediatric cases while the remaining 26
studies only included adult estimates. Due to their pathophysiology, PAH and CTEPH
are predominantly diagnosed in older patients, with mean age at diagnosis often
being between 50 and 65 years old.2,17 Paediatric PAH and CTEPH are
rare forms of rare conditions and the relative lack of research into paediatric
cases of rare diseases is still being addressed.46 It is then unsurprising that this systematic literature review highlights the
scarcity of paediatric epidemiology studies in PAH and CTEPH, and the need for
further study.

In conclusion, the appraisal of available evidence identified through a systematic
literature review suggests that the following adult estimates are the most reliable
for the scientific community to use as a guide for resource allocation and
improvement of detection rates: approximately 5.8 ppm for PAH incidence,
47.6–54.7 ppm for PAH prevalence, 3.1–6.0 ppm for CTEPH incidence and 25.8–38.4 ppm
for CTEPH prevalence.

Click here for additional data file.

Supplemental material, sj-pdf-1-pul-10.1177_2045894020977300 for Epidemiology of
pulmonary arterial hypertension and chronic thromboembolic pulmonary
hypertension: identification of the most accurate estimates from a systematic
literature review by Laurence Leber, Amélie Beaudet and Audrey Muller in
Pulmonary Circulation