---
reference_id: "PMID:28289063"
title: Photoreceptor Cilia and Retinal Ciliopathies.
authors:
- Bujakowska KM
- Liu Q
- Pierce EA
journal: Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a028274
keywords:
- Animals
- Cilia/physiology
- Humans
- Photoreceptor Cells/physiology
- Protein Transport
- Retina/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Photoreceptor Cilia and Retinal Ciliopathies.
**Authors:** Bujakowska KM, Liu Q, Pierce EA
**Journal:** Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1101/cshperspect.a028274](https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a028274)

## Content

1. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2017 Oct 3;9(10):a028274. doi: 
10.1101/cshperspect.a028274.

Photoreceptor Cilia and Retinal Ciliopathies.

Bujakowska KM(1), Liu Q(1), Pierce EA(1).

Author information:
(1)Ocular Genomics Institute, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Department of 
Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114.

Photoreceptors are sensory neurons designed to convert light stimuli into 
neurological responses. This process, called phototransduction, takes place in 
the outer segments (OS) of rod and cone photoreceptors. OS are specialized 
sensory cilia, with analogous structures to those present in other nonmotile 
cilia. Deficient morphogenesis and/or dysfunction of photoreceptor sensory cilia 
(PSC) caused by mutations in a variety of photoreceptor-specific and common 
cilia genes can lead to inherited retinal degenerations (IRDs). IRDs can 
manifest as isolated retinal diseases or syndromic diseases. In this review, we 
describe the structure and composition of PSC and different forms of 
ciliopathies with retinal involvement. We review the genetics of the IRDs, which 
are monogenic disorders but genetically diverse with regard to causality.

Copyright © 2017 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1101/cshperspect.a028274
PMCID: PMC5629997
PMID: 28289063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]