---
reference_id: "PMID:9566402"
title: Variable clinical expression of mutations in the P/Q-type calcium channel gene in familial hemiplegic migraine. Dutch Migraine Genetics Research Group.
authors:
- Terwindt GM
- Ophoff RA
- Haan J
- Vergouwe MN
- van Eijk R
- Frants RR
- Ferrari MD
journal: Neurology
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1212/wnl.50.4.1105
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Brain Chemistry/genetics
- Calcium Channels/genetics
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type"
- Cerebellar Ataxia/genetics
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Family Health
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Genotype
- "Hemiplegia/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- "Migraine Disorders/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Repetitive Sequences, Nucleic Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variable clinical expression of mutations in the P/Q-type calcium channel gene in familial hemiplegic migraine. Dutch Migraine Genetics Research Group.
**Authors:** Terwindt GM, Ophoff RA, Haan J, Vergouwe MN, van Eijk R, Frants RR, Ferrari MD
**Journal:** Neurology (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1212/wnl.50.4.1105](https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.50.4.1105)

## Content

1. Neurology. 1998 Apr;50(4):1105-10. doi: 10.1212/wnl.50.4.1105.

Variable clinical expression of mutations in the P/Q-type calcium channel gene
in familial hemiplegic migraine. Dutch Migraine Genetics Research Group.

Terwindt GM(1), Ophoff RA, Haan J, Vergouwe MN, van Eijk R, Frants RR, Ferrari
MD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands.

Familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) is an autosomal dominant subtype of migraine
with aura, with half of the families being assigned to chromosome 19p13. We
identified missense mutations in a brain-specific calcium channel
alpha1A-subunit (CACNA1A) gene on 19p13 segregating with FHM and truncating
mutations in families with episodic ataxia type 2 (EA-2). Expansions of an
intragenic CAG repeat have been shown in autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia
(SCA6). Hence, FHM, EA-2, and SCA6 are allelic ion channel disorders. We
analyzed the phenotype-genotype relation in three unrelated FHM families with
the calcium channel alpha1A-subunit gene mutations I1811L (two families) and
V714A (one family). We found mutations in all but three patients with FHM (i.e.,
three phenocopies). In addition, the I1811L mutation occurred in two patients
with "nonhemiplegic" migraine and in one subject without migraine. Cerebellar
ataxia was found in both families with the I1811L mutation but not in the family
with the V714A mutation. We failed to find expansions of the intragenic CAG
repeat in FHM patients with cerebellar ataxia. We conclude that the I1811L
mutation causes both FHM and cerebellar ataxia independent of the number of CAG
repeats. The I1811L mutation may also occur in "normal" migraine patients,
supporting the hypothesis that FHM is part of the migraine spectrum.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.50.4.1105
PMID: 9566402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
