---
reference_id: "PMID:38923610"
title: Proteomic profiling of polyglucosan bodies associated with glycogenin-1 deficiency in skeletal muscle.
authors:
- Visuttijai K
- Hedberg-Oldfors C
- Costello DJ
- Bermingham N
- Oldfors A
journal: Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/nan.12995
keywords:
- Humans
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Glucans/metabolism
- Proteomics
- "Glycogen Storage Disease/metabolism, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- "Muscular Diseases/metabolism, pathology, genetics"
- Glucosyltransferases
- Glycoproteins
- Nervous System Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proteomic profiling of polyglucosan bodies associated with glycogenin-1 deficiency in skeletal muscle.
**Authors:** Visuttijai K, Hedberg-Oldfors C, Costello DJ, Bermingham N, Oldfors A
**Journal:** Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/nan.12995](https://doi.org/10.1111/nan.12995)

## Content

1. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2024 Jun;50(3):e12995. doi: 10.1111/nan.12995.

Proteomic profiling of polyglucosan bodies associated with glycogenin-1 
deficiency in skeletal muscle.

Visuttijai K(1), Hedberg-Oldfors C(1), Costello DJ(2), Bermingham N(3), Oldfors 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, University of 
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Neurology, Cork University Hospital and College of Medicine and 
Health, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(3)Department of Neuropathology, Cork University Hospital, Cork, Ireland.

AIMS: Polyglucosan storage disorders represent an emerging field within 
neurodegenerative and neuromuscular conditions, including Lafora disease (EPM2A, 
EPM2B), adult polyglucosan body disease (APBD, GBE1), polyglucosan body 
myopathies associated with RBCK1 deficiency (PGBM1, RBCK1) or glycogenin-1 
deficiency (PGBM2, GYG1). While the storage material primarily comprises 
glycans, this study aimed to gain deeper insights into the protein components by 
proteomic profiling of the storage material in glycogenin-1 deficiency.
METHODS: We employed molecular genetic analyses, quantitative mass spectrometry 
of laser micro-dissected polyglucosan bodies and muscle homogenate, 
immunohistochemistry and western blot analyses in muscle tissue from a 
45-year-old patient with proximal muscle weakness from late teenage years due to 
polyglucosan storage myopathy.
RESULTS: The muscle tissue exhibited a complete absence of glycogenin-1 due to a 
novel homozygous deep intronic variant in GYG1 (c.7+992T>G), introducing a 
pseudo-exon causing frameshift and a premature stop codon. Accumulated proteins 
in the polyglucosan bodies constituted components of glycogen metabolism, 
protein quality control pathways and desmin. Muscle fibres containing 
polyglucosan bodies frequently exhibited depletion of normal glycogen.
CONCLUSIONS: The absence of glycogenin-1, a protein important for glycogen 
synthesis initiation, causes storage of polyglucosan that displays accumulation 
of several proteins, including those essential for glycogen synthesis, 
sequestosome 1/p62 and desmin, mirroring findings in RBCK1 deficiency. These 
results suggest shared pathogenic pathways across different diseases exhibiting 
polyglucosan storage. Such insights have implications for therapy in these rare 
yet devastating and presently untreatable disorders.

© 2024 The Author(s). Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Neuropathological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/nan.12995
PMID: 38923610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]