---
reference_id: "PMID:22975536"
title: Short-term effects of β-adrenergic antagonists and methimazole in new-onset thyrotoxicosis caused by Graves' disease.
authors:
- Tagami T
- Yambe Y
- Tanaka T
- Tanaka T
- Ogo A
- Yoshizumi H
- Kaise K
- Higashi K
- Tanabe M
- Shimazu S
- Usui T
- Shimatsu A
- Naruse M
- BBGD Study Group
journal: Intern Med
year: '2012'
doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.51.7302
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Short-term effects of β-adrenergic antagonists and methimazole in new-onset thyrotoxicosis caused by Graves' disease.
**Authors:** Tagami T, Yambe Y, Tanaka T, Tanaka T, Ogo A, Yoshizumi H, Kaise K, Higashi K, Tanabe M, Shimazu S, Usui T, Shimatsu A, Naruse M, BBGD Study Group
**Journal:** Intern Med (2012)
**DOI:** [10.2169/internalmedicine.51.7302](https://doi.org/10.2169/internalmedicine.51.7302)

## Content

1. Intern Med. 2012;51(17):2285-90. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.51.7302. Epub 
2012 Sep 1.

Short-term effects of β-adrenergic antagonists and methimazole in new-onset 
thyrotoxicosis caused by Graves' disease.

Tagami T(1), Yambe Y, Tanaka T, Tanaka T, Ogo A, Yoshizumi H, Kaise K, Higashi 
K, Tanabe M, Shimazu S, Usui T, Shimatsu A, Naruse M; BBGD Study Group.

Collaborators: Kobayashi K, Koyama K, Ujihara M, Noto H, Kato Y, Araki R, Noma 
K, Koide J, Satoh Y, Ohyama T, Okajima T, Iino K, Kimura H, Aoki Y.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Institute, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, 
National Hospital Organization Kyoto Medical Center, Japan. 
ttagami@kyotolan.hosp.go.jp

OBJECTIVE: β-adrenergic antagonists (β-blockers) are often used to attenuate the 
hyperadrenergic symptoms of Graves' disease (GD), including palpitation. 
Although β-blockers reduce the heart rate, cardiac output and oxygen 
consumption, no firm evidence exists regarding the effects of combined therapy 
with β-blockers and anti-thyroid drugs. The objective is to elucidate the 
effects of β-blockers on anti-thyroid drug therapy in GD.
METHODS: Patients newly diagnosed with mild GD were randomly assigned to receive 
methimazole with or without β-blockers in a prospective multi-center survey. The 
heart rate and thyroid function were measured and the quality of life was 
assessed using original and SF-36 questionnaires at 0 and 4 weeks.
RESULTS: A total of 28 patients were enrolled in the study. Fourteen patients 
(one man, 13 women) were randomly assigned to the group treated with β-blockers 
and 14 patients (one man, 13 women) were randomly assigned to the group not 
treated with β-blockers. Although no significant differences in the improvement 
of thyroid function were observed between the two groups, the heart rates 
improved more significantly in the group treated with β-blockers. Specific 
symptoms, such as easy fatigability and shortness of breath, also improved more 
significantly with the β-blocker treatment. In addition, 'physical functioning' 
assessed with the SF-36 questionnaires significantly improved only in the group 
treated with β-blockers.
CONCLUSION: Although β-blockers may not reinforce the effects of anti-thyroid 
drugs on thyroid function, at least during the course of one month, they are 
effective in reducing heart rates and ameliorating specific symptoms in patients 
with mild GD.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.51.7302
PMID: 22975536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]