---
reference_id: "PMID:30165986"
title: "Impact of Lipids on Cardiovascular Health: JACC Health Promotion Series."
authors:
- Ference BA
- Graham I
- Tokgozoglu L
- Catapano AL
journal: J Am Coll Cardiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.06.046
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of Lipids on Cardiovascular Health: JACC Health Promotion Series.
**Authors:** Ference BA, Graham I, Tokgozoglu L, Catapano AL
**Journal:** J Am Coll Cardiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacc.2018.06.046](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2018.06.046)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018 Sep 4;72(10):1141-1156. doi:
10.1016/j.jacc.2018.06.046.

Impact of Lipids on Cardiovascular Health: JACC Health Promotion Series.

Ference BA(1), Graham I(2), Tokgozoglu L(3), Catapano AL(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Naturally Randomized Trials, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom.
(2)School of Medicine, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy; IRCCS Multimedica, Milan, Italy. Electronic address: 
alberico.catapano@unimi.it.

Republished in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018 Dec 11;72(23 Pt B):2980-2995. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2018.10.021.

People who maintain ideal cardiovascular heath have a low lifetime risk of 
cardiovascular disease. Therefore, encouraging people to achieve ideal 
cardiovascular health represents an important opportunity to improve the 
prevention of cardiovascular disease. However, preventing cardiovascular disease 
by promoting ideal cardiovascular health requires shifting the focus from 
treating disease after it develops to preventing cardiovascular events before 
they happen by slowing the progression of atherosclerosis. Because atherogenic 
lipoproteins play a central causal role in the initiation and progression of 
atherosclerosis, maintaining optimal lipid levels is necessary to achieve ideal 
cardiovascular health. This review describes the cumulative effect of 
lipid-carrying lipoproteins on the risk of cardiovascular disease, estimates the 
magnitude of the clinical benefit that can be achieved by maintaining optimal 
lipid levels, identifies the most effective timing for implementing strategies 
designed to achieve optimal lipid levels, and provides a clinical pathway to 
help people achieve the lipid levels necessary for ideal cardiovascular health.

Copyright © 2018 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.06.046
PMID: 30165986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]