---
reference_id: "PMID:31986193"
title: "The relationship between stress and vitiligo: Evaluating perceived stress and electronic medical record data."
authors:
- Henning SW
- Jaishankar D
- Barse LW
- Dellacecca ER
- Lancki N
- Webb K
- Janusek L
- Mathews HL
- Price RN Jr
- Le Poole IC
journal: PLoS One
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0227909
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The relationship between stress and vitiligo: Evaluating perceived stress and electronic medical record data.
**Authors:** Henning SW, Jaishankar D, Barse LW, Dellacecca ER, Lancki N, Webb K, Janusek L, Mathews HL, Price RN Jr, Le Poole IC
**Journal:** PLoS One (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0227909](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0227909)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2020 Jan 27;15(1):e0227909. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0227909. 
eCollection 2020.

The relationship between stress and vitiligo: Evaluating perceived stress and 
electronic medical record data.

Henning SW(1), Jaishankar D(2), Barse LW(1), Dellacecca ER(2), Lancki N(3), Webb 
K(4), Janusek L(5), Mathews HL(6), Price RN Jr(7), Le Poole IC(3)(8).

Author information:
(1)Oncology Research Institute, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, 
United States of America.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.
(3)Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, 
Illinois, United States of America.
(4)Division of Dermatology, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, United 
States of America.
(5)Marcella Niehoff School of Nursing, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, 
Illinois, United States of America.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Loyola University Chicago, 
Maywood, Illinois, United States of America.
(7)Office of Informatics and System Development, Loyola University Chicago, 
Maywood, Illinois, United States of America.
(8)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Vitiligo is a T-cell mediated skin disorder characterized by progressive loss of 
skin color. In individuals genetically predisposed to the disease, various 
triggers contribute to the initiation of vitiligo. Precipitating factors can 
stress the skin, leading to T-cell activation and recruitment. Though hereditary 
factors are implicated in the pathogenesis of vitiligo, it is unknown whether 
precipitating, stressful events play a role in vitiligo. To understand this, we 
utilized a validated perceived stress scale (PSS) to measure this parameter in 
vitiligo patients compared to persons without vitiligo. Additionally, we probed 
a clinical database, using a knowledge linking software called ROCKET, to gauge 
stress-related conditions in the vitiligo patient population. From a pool of 
patients in an existing database, a hundred individuals with vitiligo and 
twenty-five age- and sex-matched comparison group of individuals without 
vitiligo completed an online survey to quantify their levels of perceived 
stress. In parallel, patients described specifics of their disease condition, 
including the affected body sites, the extent, duration and activity of their 
vitiligo. Perceived stress was significantly higher among vitiligo individuals 
compared to those without vitiligo. ROCKET analyses suggested signs of 
metabolic-related disease (i.e., 'stress') preceding vitiligo development. No 
correlation was found between perceived stress and the stage or the extent of 
disease, suggesting that elevated stress may not be a consequence of pigment 
loss alone. The data provide further support for stress as a precipitating 
factor in vitiligo development.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0227909
PMCID: PMC6984686
PMID: 31986193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.