---
reference_id: "PMID:36652160"
title: "Have Therapeutics Enhanced Our Knowledge of Axial Spondyloarthritis?"
authors:
- Harrison SR
- Marzo-Ortega H
journal: Curr Rheumatol Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s11926-023-01097-7
keywords:
- Humans
- "Spondylitis, Ankylosing/drug therapy"
- Spondylarthritis/drug therapy
- Antirheumatic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal/therapeutic use"
- Axial Spondyloarthritis
- Biological Products/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Have Therapeutics Enhanced Our Knowledge of Axial Spondyloarthritis?
**Authors:** Harrison SR, Marzo-Ortega H
**Journal:** Curr Rheumatol Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11926-023-01097-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11926-023-01097-7)

## Content

1. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2023 Mar;25(3):56-67. doi: 10.1007/s11926-023-01097-7.

Have Therapeutics Enhanced Our Knowledge of Axial Spondyloarthritis?

Harrison SR(1)(2), Marzo-Ortega H(3).

Author information:
(1)The University of Leeds, Leeds Institute for Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal 
Medicine (LIRMM), NIHR Leeds Biomedical Research Centre, Leeds Teaching 
Hospitals Trust, Leeds, UK.
(2)The University of Leeds, Leeds Institute of Cardiovascular and Metabolic 
Medicine, the LIGHT building, Clarendon Way, Leeds, UK.
(3)The University of Leeds, Leeds Institute for Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal 
Medicine (LIRMM), NIHR Leeds Biomedical Research Centre, Leeds Teaching 
Hospitals Trust, Leeds, UK. h.marzo-ortega@leeds.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2023 Jun;25(6):117. doi: 10.1007/s11926-023-01101-0.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: An overview of how the treatment landscape of axial 
spondyloarthritis (axSpA) has shaped our understanding of the disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: Prior to the millennium, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) were the only treatment for axSpA, yet only 30% of patients responded 
and many developed side effects. In 2003, the first biological disease-modifying 
drug (bDMARD) was licensed for axSpA which substantially improved outcomes in 
comparison to NSAIDs. In 2022, there are now several bDMARDs for axSpA; however, 
they too are not universally efficacious in treating axial inflammation and may 
have deleterious effects on extramusculoskeletal manifestations. Nevertheless, 
successful or not, each bDMARD gives invaluable insight into axSpA 
immunobiology. This review discusses how much we have learned from the use of 
bDMARDs in axSpA, how this has redefined our understanding of the disease, and 
how we might use this knowledge to develop new and better treatments for axSpA 
in the future.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11926-023-01097-7
PMCID: PMC9958165
PMID: 36652160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SRH has the following disclosures not related to 
this work; fees to give a non-promotional educational lecture from Lily and 
sponsorship to attend a conference from UCB. HMO has the following disclosures 
not related to this work: received honoraria or speaker bureau fees from AbbVie, 
Biogen, Celgene, Eli-Lilly, Janssen, Moonlake, Novartis, Pfizer, Takeda and UCB; 
received consultancy fees from Eli-Lilly, Janssen, Moonlake, Novartis, Pfizer 
and UCB; and received grant/research support from Janssen, Novartis, and 
UCB. H.M-O is supported by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) 
Leeds Biomedical Research Centre (BRC). The views expressed are those of the 
authors and not necessarily those of the (UK) National Health Service (NHS), the 
NIHR, or the (UK) Department of Health.