---
reference_id: "PMID:30120786"
title: Factors impacting on the action of glucocorticoids in patients receiving glucocorticoid therapy.
authors:
- Dineen R
- Stewart PM
- Sherlock M
journal: Clin Endocrinol (Oxf)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/cen.13837
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Factors impacting on the action of glucocorticoids in patients receiving glucocorticoid therapy.
**Authors:** Dineen R, Stewart PM, Sherlock M
**Journal:** Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cen.13837](https://doi.org/10.1111/cen.13837)

## Content

1. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2019 Jan;90(1):3-14. doi: 10.1111/cen.13837. Epub 2018 
Sep 24.

Factors impacting on the action of glucocorticoids in patients receiving 
glucocorticoid therapy.

Dineen R(1), Stewart PM(2), Sherlock M(1).

Author information:
(1)Academic Department of Endocrinology, Beaumont Hospital and the Royal College 
of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.

Glucocorticoids (GCs) are steroid hormones, which are essential for life. They 
are secreted by the adrenal cortex under the control of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Glucocorticoids are essential for the 
normal function of most organ systems and, in both, excess and deficiency can 
lead to significant adverse consequences. Adrenal insufficiency (AI) is a rare, 
life-threatening disorder characterized by insufficient production of 
corticosteroid hormones. Primary AI is defined by the inability of the adrenal 
cortex to produce sufficient amounts of glucocorticoids and/or 
mineralocorticoids despite normal or increased adrenocorticotropin hormone 
(ACTH). Secondary AI is adrenal hypofunction due to insufficient amount of ACTH 
produced by the pituitary gland. Conventional treatment of both primary and 
secondary adrenal insufficiencies involves lifelong glucocorticoid replacement 
therapy. The role of cortisol deficiency and the impact of hydrocortisone 
replacement on morbidity and mortality in this patient group are under 
increasing scrutiny. Established glucocorticoid replacement regimens do not 
completely mirror endogenous hormonal production, and their monitoring to ensure 
optimum therapy is hampered by the lack of reliable biomarkers of hormone 
sufficiency. A further confounding issue is the tissue-specific regulation of 
glucocorticoid through the two isozymes of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
(11β-HSD) with research focusing on the role of this prereceptor regulation in 
the development of adverse metabolic features in patients. This review defines 
the factors influencing glucocorticoid action in patients with adrenal 
insufficiency receiving glucocorticoid therapy.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cen.13837
PMID: 30120786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]