---
reference_id: "PMID:11060787"
title: Therapeutic developments in peroxisome biogenesis disorders.
authors:
- McGuinness MC
- Wei H
- Smith KD
journal: Expert Opin Investig Drugs
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1517/13543784.9.9.1985
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic developments in peroxisome biogenesis disorders.
**Authors:** McGuinness MC, Wei H, Smith KD
**Journal:** Expert Opin Investig Drugs (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1517/13543784.9.9.1985](https://doi.org/10.1517/13543784.9.9.1985)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2000 Sep;9(9):1985-92. doi: 
10.1517/13543784.9.9.1985.

Therapeutic developments in peroxisome biogenesis disorders.

McGuinness MC(1), Wei H, Smith KD.

Author information:
(1)Kennedy Krieger Institute, Room 400A, 707 North Broadway, Baltimore, MD 
21205, USA. smithk@welchlink.welch.jhu.edu

Clinically, peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBDs) are a group of lethal 
diseases with a continuum of severity of clinical symptoms ranging from the most 
severe form, Zellweger syndrome, to the milder forms, infantile Refsum disease 
and rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata. PBDs are characterised by a number of 
biochemical abnormalities including impaired degradation of peroxide, very long 
chain fatty acids, pipecolic acid, phytanic acid and xenobiotics and impaired 
synthesis of plasmalogens, bile acids, cholesterol and docosahexaenoic acid. 
Treatment of PBD patients as a group is problematic since a number of patients, 
especially those with Zellweger syndrome, have significant neocortical 
alterations in the brain at birth so that full recovery would be impossible even 
with postnatal therapy. To date, treatment of PBD patients has generally 
involved only supportive care and symptomatic therapy. However, the fact that 
some of the milder PBD patients live into the second decade has prompted 
research into possible treatments for these patients. A number of experimental 
therapies have been evaluated to determine whether or not correction of 
biochemical abnormalities through dietary supplementation and/or modification is 
of clinical benefit to PBD patients. Another approach has been pharmacological 
induction of peroxisomes in PBD patients to improve overall peroxisomal 
biochemical function. Well known rodent peroxisomal proliferators were found not 
to induce human peroxisomes. Recently, our laboratory demonstrated that sodium 
4-phenylbutyrate induces peroxisome proliferation and improves biochemical 
function (very long chain fatty acid beta-oxidation rates and very long chain 
fatty acid and plasmalogens levels) in fibroblast cell lines from patients with 
milder PBD phenotypes. Dietary supplementation and/or modification and 
pharmacological induction of peroxisomes as treatment strategies for PBD 
patients will be the subject of this review.

DOI: 10.1517/13543784.9.9.1985
PMID: 11060787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]