---
reference_id: "PMID:38129330"
title: "Mitochondrial impairment, decreased sirtuin activity and protein acetylation in dorsal root ganglia in Friedreich Ataxia models."
authors:
- Sanz-Alcázar A
- Britti E
- Delaspre F
- Medina-Carbonero M
- Pazos-Gil M
- Tamarit J
- Ros J
- Cabiscol E
journal: Cell Mol Life Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00018-023-05064-4
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- Friedreich Ataxia
- Sirtuin 3/metabolism
- "Ganglia, Spinal/metabolism"
- Sirtuins/metabolism
- Acetylation
- Iron-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Frataxin
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Superoxide Dismutase/metabolism
- Iron/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial impairment, decreased sirtuin activity and protein acetylation in dorsal root ganglia in Friedreich Ataxia models.
**Authors:** Sanz-Alcázar A, Britti E, Delaspre F, Medina-Carbonero M, Pazos-Gil M, Tamarit J, Ros J, Cabiscol E
**Journal:** Cell Mol Life Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00018-023-05064-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-023-05064-4)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2023 Dec 21;81(1):12. doi: 10.1007/s00018-023-05064-4.

Mitochondrial impairment, decreased sirtuin activity and protein acetylation in
dorsal root ganglia in Friedreich Ataxia models.

Sanz-Alcázar A(1), Britti E(1), Delaspre F(1), Medina-Carbonero M(1), Pazos-Gil
M(1), Tamarit J(1), Ros J(1), Cabiscol E(2).

Author information:
(1)Departament de Ciències Mèdiques Bàsiques, Facultat de Medicina, Universitat
de Lleida, IRBLleida, Edifici Biomedicina I, Av. Rovira Roure, 80, 25198,
Lleida, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Departament de Ciències Mèdiques Bàsiques, Facultat de Medicina, Universitat
de Lleida, IRBLleida, Edifici Biomedicina I, Av. Rovira Roure, 80, 25198,
Lleida, Catalonia, Spain. elisa.cabiscol@udl.cat.

Erratum in
    Cell Mol Life Sci. 2025 Nov 26;82(1):428. doi: 10.1007/s00018-025-05948-7.

Friedreich ataxia (FA) is a rare, recessive neuro-cardiodegenerative disease
caused by deficiency of the mitochondrial protein frataxin. Mitochondrial
dysfunction, a reduction in the activity of iron-sulfur enzymes, iron
accumulation, and increased oxidative stress have been described. Dorsal root
ganglion (DRG) sensory neurons are among the cellular types most affected in the
early stages of this disease. However, its effect on mitochondrial function
remains to be elucidated. In the present study, we found that in primary
cultures of DRG neurons as well as in DRGs from the FXNI151F mouse model,
frataxin deficiency resulted in lower activity and levels of the electron
transport complexes, mainly complexes I and II. In addition, altered
mitochondrial morphology, indicative of degeneration was observed in DRGs from
FXNI151F mice. Moreover, the NAD+/NADH ratio was reduced and sirtuin activity
was impaired. We identified alpha tubulin as the major acetylated protein from
DRG homogenates whose levels were increased in FXNI151F mice compared to WT
mice. In the mitochondria, superoxide dismutase (SOD2), a SirT3 substrate,
displayed increased acetylation in frataxin-deficient DRG neurons. Since SOD2
acetylation inactivates the enzyme, and higher levels of mitochondrial
superoxide anion were detected, oxidative stress markers were analyzed. Elevated
levels of hydroxynonenal bound to proteins and mitochondrial Fe2+ accumulation
was detected when frataxin decreased. Honokiol, a SirT3 activator, restores
mitochondrial respiration, decreases SOD2 acetylation and reduces mitochondrial
superoxide levels. Altogether, these results provide data at the molecular level
of the consequences of electron transport chain dysfunction, which starts
negative feedback, contributing to neuron lethality. This is especially
important in sensory neurons which have greater susceptibility to frataxin
deficiency compared to other tissues.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-023-05064-4
PMCID: PMC10739563
PMID: 38129330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial or
non-financial interests to disclose.
