---
reference_id: "PMID:22615343"
title: "The United States Registry for Fibromuscular Dysplasia: results in the first 447 patients."
authors:
- Olin JW
- Froehlich J
- Gu X
- Bacharach JM
- Eagle K
- Gray BH
- Jaff MR
- Kim ES
- Mace P
- Matsumoto AH
- McBane RD
- Kline-Rogers E
- White CJ
- Gornik HL
journal: Circulation
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.091223
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Fibromuscular Dysplasia/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prospective Studies
- Registries
- Retrospective Studies
- United States/epidemiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The United States Registry for Fibromuscular Dysplasia: results in the first 447 patients.
**Authors:** Olin JW, Froehlich J, Gu X, Bacharach JM, Eagle K, Gray BH, Jaff MR, Kim ES, Mace P, Matsumoto AH, McBane RD, Kline-Rogers E, White CJ, Gornik HL
**Journal:** Circulation (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.091223](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.091223)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2012 Jun 26;125(25):3182-90. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.091223. Epub 2012 May 21.

The United States Registry for Fibromuscular Dysplasia: results in the first 447 
patients.

Olin JW(1), Froehlich J, Gu X, Bacharach JM, Eagle K, Gray BH, Jaff MR, Kim ES, 
Mace P, Matsumoto AH, McBane RD, Kline-Rogers E, White CJ, Gornik HL.

Author information:
(1)Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1033, New 
York, NY 10029, USA. jeffrey.olin@mountsinai.org

BACKGROUND: Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD), a noninflammatory disease of 
medium-size arteries, may lead to stenosis, occlusion, dissection, and/or 
aneurysm. There has been little progress in understanding the epidemiology, 
pathogenesis, and outcomes since its first description in 1938.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Clinical features, presenting symptoms, and vascular events 
are reviewed for the first 447 patients enrolled in a national FMD registry from 
9 US sites. Vascular beds were imaged selectively based on clinical presentation 
and local practice. The majority of patients were female (91%) with a mean age 
at diagnosis of 51.9 (SD 13.4 years; range, 5-83 years). Hypertension, headache, 
and pulsatile tinnitus were the most common presenting symptoms of the disease. 
Self-reported family history of stroke (53.5%), aneurysm (23.5%), and sudden 
death (19.8%) were common, but FMD in first- or second-degree relatives was 
reported only in 7.3%. FMD was identified in the renal artery in 294 patients, 
extracranial carotid arteries in 251 patients, and vertebral arteries in 82 
patients. A past or presenting history of vascular events were common: 19.2% of 
patients had a transient ischemic attack or stroke, 19.7% had experienced 
arterial dissection(s), and 17% of patients had an aneurysm(s). The most 
frequent indications for therapy were hypertension, aneurysm, and dissection.
CONCLUSIONS: In this registry, FMD occurred primarily in middle-aged women, 
although it presents across the lifespan. Cerebrovascular FMD occurred as 
frequently as renal FMD. Although a significant proportion of FMD patients may 
present with a serious vascular event, many present with nonspecific symptoms 
and a subsequent delay in diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.091223
PMID: 22615343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]