---
reference_id: "PMID:28114823"
title: Comparison of urinary aflatoxin M1 and aflatoxin albumin adducts as biomarkers for assessing aflatoxin exposure in Tanzanian children.
authors:
- Chen G
- Gong YY
- Kimanya ME
- Shirima CP
- Routledge MN
journal: Biomarkers
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1080/1354750X.2017.1285960
keywords:
- "Aflatoxin M1/blood, urine"
- "Aflatoxins/blood, urine"
- Albumins
- "Biomarkers/blood, urine"
- Cohort Studies
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- Food Contamination/analysis
- Humans
- Infant
- Tanzania
- Zea mays
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of urinary aflatoxin M1 and aflatoxin albumin adducts as biomarkers for assessing aflatoxin exposure in Tanzanian children.
**Authors:** Chen G, Gong YY, Kimanya ME, Shirima CP, Routledge MN
**Journal:** Biomarkers (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1080/1354750X.2017.1285960](https://doi.org/10.1080/1354750X.2017.1285960)

## Content

1. Biomarkers. 2018 Mar;23(2):131-136. doi: 10.1080/1354750X.2017.1285960. Epub
2017 Feb 20.

Comparison of urinary aflatoxin M1 and aflatoxin albumin adducts as biomarkers
for assessing aflatoxin exposure in Tanzanian children.

Chen G(1), Gong YY(1)(2), Kimanya ME(3), Shirima CP(4), Routledge MN(5).

Author information:
(1)a Institute for Global Food Security, School of Biological Sciences, Queen's
University Belfast , Belfast , United Kingdom.
(2)b School of Food Science and Nutrition, University of Leeds , Leeds , United
Kingdom.
(3)c The Nelson Mandela Institution of Science and Technology, School of Life
Sciences and Bioengineering , Arusha , Tanzania.
(4)d Tanzania Food and Drugs Authority , Dar es Salaam , Tanzania.
(5)e LICAMM , School of Medicine, University of Leeds , Leeds, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: To determine levels of urinary aflatoxin M1 (AFM1) in children and
correlate the concentrations with previously reported aflatoxin albumin adduct
(AF-alb) levels in these children.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Matched urine and blood samples were collected from 84
Tanzanian children aged 6-14 months old. From 31 children in one village
(Kigwa), samples were collected at three time points six months apart. Samples
were collected from 31 and 22 children from two different regions at the second
time point only. Urinary AFM1 was measured using a commercial enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit with a modified protocol to improve sensitivity.
AF-alb was measured using an established ELISA method.
RESULTS: The relative ranking of the three villages for exposure to aflatoxin
based on either AFM1 or AF-alb biomarker measurements was the same. In Kigwa
village, both AFM1 and AF-alb levels were higher at six months post-harvest
compared to baseline. However, at the next visit, the AFM1 levels dropped from a
GM (interquartile range) of 71.0 (44.7, 112.6) at visit two to 49.3 (31.5, 77.3)
pg/ml urine, whereas AF-alb levels increased from 47.3 (29.7, 75.2) to 52.7
(35.4, 78.3) pg/mg albumin between these two visits, reflecting the fact that
AFM1 measures short-term exposure, whereas AF-alb measures longer term exposure.
There was a correlation between AFB1 intake and AFM1 excretion (r= 0.442,
p ≤ 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Urinary AFM1 is a good biomarker for AFB1 exposure in Tanzanian
children, reflecting geographical and temporal variations in exposure to this
foodborne toxin.

DOI: 10.1080/1354750X.2017.1285960
PMID: 28114823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
