---
reference_id: "PMID:33955040"
title: "Compound heterozygous p. Arg949Trp and p. Gly970Ala mutations deteriorated the function of PEX1p: A study on PEX1 in a patient with Zellweger syndrome."
authors:
- Alamatsaz M
- Jalalypour F
- Hashemi MS
- Shafeghati Y
- Nasr-Esfahani MH
- Ghaedi K
journal: J Cell Biochem
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jcb.29945
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Compound heterozygous p. Arg949Trp and p. Gly970Ala mutations deteriorated the function of PEX1p: A study on PEX1 in a patient with Zellweger syndrome.
**Authors:** Alamatsaz M, Jalalypour F, Hashemi MS, Shafeghati Y, Nasr-Esfahani MH, Ghaedi K
**Journal:** J Cell Biochem (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcb.29945](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcb.29945)

## Content

1. J Cell Biochem. 2021 May 6. doi: 10.1002/jcb.29945. Online ahead of print.

Compound heterozygous p. Arg949Trp and p. Gly970Ala mutations deteriorated the 
function of PEX1p: A study on PEX1 in a patient with Zellweger syndrome.

Alamatsaz M(1), Jalalypour F(2), Hashemi MS(3), Shafeghati Y(4), Nasr-Esfahani 
MH(3), Ghaedi K(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Division of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Nour 
Danesh Institute of Higher Education, Meymeh, Isfahan, Iran.
(2)Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Sabanci University, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(3)Department of Animal Biotechnology, Cell Science Research Center, Royan 
Institute for Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan, Iran.
(4)Sarem Cell Research Center and Medical Genetics Department, Sarem Women 
Hospital, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Faculty of 
Biological Science and Technology, University of Isfahan, Isfahan, Postal Code 
81746-73441, Iran.

The peroxisome is responsible for a variety of vital pathways in primary 
metabolism, including the very long-chain fatty-acid oxidation and plasmalogen 
lipid biosynthesis. Autosomal recessive disorder of the Zellweger spectrum (ZSD) 
is a major subset of peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBDs) that can be caused 
by mutations in any of the 14 PEX genes. Zellweger syndrome (ZS) is the foremost 
common and severe phenotype within the heterogeneous ZSD. However, missense 
mutations encode proteins with residual functions, which are associated with 
phenotypes that are milder than ZS. Mutations in the PEX1 gene are among the 
most prevalent. PEX1 and PEX6 proteins, belonging to the AAA family of ATPases, 
form a hexameric complex, which is associated with peroxisome membranes and 
essential for peroxisome biology. In this study, a two-month-old Iranian boy 
with hypotonia, poor feeding, and difficulty in breathing was diagnosed with 
Zellweger syndrome. The parents of the patient were second cousins and healthy 
and no similar cases were observed in the parents' family. The PEX1 gene was 
sequenced in the patient and his parents. The compound heterozygous mutations, 
p. Arg949Trp and p. Gly970Ala, were identified in the patient, while the parents 
were heterozygous for these alleles. Sequence analysis of the mutant PEX1 D2 
domain revealed that mutation p. Arg949Trp precisely occurred in a conserved 
arginine residue (P4 Arg), which hinders the substrate processing of the 
complex. Several database records have reported mutation p. Arg949Trp(R949W) but 
its clinical significance is given as uncertain. We report here a novel 
mutation, p. Gly970Ala, which is not recorded before and may prevent proper 
interaction of PEX1 and PEX6 proteins. In summary, the clinical findings and 
peroxisome profile of the patient suggested that compound heterozygosity for 
these two missense mutations resulted in a nonfunctional PEX1/PEX6 complex 
causing the severe ZS phenotype.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.29945
PMID: 33955040