---
reference_id: "PMID:41734302"
title: Diagnostic value of ultrasound parameters combined with clinical features in children with alveolar and non- alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma.
authors:
- Li N
- Wang T
- Li T
- Liu B
journal: Med Ultrason
year: '2026'
doi: 10.11152/mu-4589
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic value of ultrasound parameters combined with clinical features in children with alveolar and non- alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma.
**Authors:** Li N, Wang T, Li T, Liu B
**Journal:** Med Ultrason (2026)
**DOI:** [10.11152/mu-4589](https://doi.org/10.11152/mu-4589)

## Content

1. Med Ultrason. 2026 Feb 12. doi: 10.11152/mu-4589. Online ahead of print.

Diagnostic value of ultrasound parameters combined with clinical features in
children with alveolar and non- alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma.

Li N(1), Wang T(1), Li T(1), Liu B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ultrasound, Xi'an Children's Hospital, Xi'an.
(2)Department of Ultrasound, Xi'an Children's Hospital, Xi'an.
bailingliu168@163.com.

AIMS: The aim of this study was to investigate the differences in clinical and
ultrasound findings between alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (ARMS) and non-ARMS in
order to improve the accuracy of preoperative diagnosis of ARMS in children.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A retrospective study of 33 children with pathologically
confirmed RMS (ARMS and non-ARMS groups) was realized.  Clinical features and
ultrasound parameters were compared between ARMS and non-ARMS using Fisher 's
exact test analysis. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves and area
under the curve (AUC) were used to represent diagnostic performance.
RESULTS: Among the clinical features, there were statistically significant
differences between ARMS and non-ARMS groups in site (p=0.020), TNM stage
(p=0.007), IRS stage (p=0.009), risk grade (p=0.011), and distant metastasis
(p=0.020). There were statistical differences in necrosis (p= p0.039) and
central hyperechoic fiber bundles (p<0.001) between the two groups. The
combination of ultrasound and clinical characteristics demonstrated excellent
predictive ability (AUC was 0.964).
CONCLUSIONS: Children with ARMS more often present with poor prognosis, and
combined clinical and ultrasound features are helpful for preoperative
identification of ARMS and providing imaging evidence for accurate clinical
diagnosis and treatment.

DOI: 10.11152/mu-4589
PMID: 41734302
