---
reference_id: "PMID:29314663"
title: MEFV gene testing may guide physicians for early diagnosis of familial Mediterranean fever.
authors:
- Tezcan ME
- Avci M
- Mercan R
- Aliustaoglu M
- Sargin M
journal: Int J Rheum Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.13258
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MEFV gene testing may guide physicians for early diagnosis of familial Mediterranean fever.
**Authors:** Tezcan ME, Avci M, Mercan R, Aliustaoglu M, Sargin M
**Journal:** Int J Rheum Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1756-185X.13258](https://doi.org/10.1111/1756-185X.13258)

## Content

1. Int J Rheum Dis. 2018 Jul;21(7):1452-1457. doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.13258. Epub 
2018 Jan 5.

MEFV gene testing may guide physicians for early diagnosis of familial 
Mediterranean fever.

Tezcan ME(1), Avci M(2), Mercan R(3), Aliustaoglu M(4), Sargin M(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Rheumatology, Kartal Dr. Lutfi Kirdar Training and Research 
Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Family Medicine and Diabetes, Kartal Dr. Lutfi Kirdar Training 
and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Antakya State Hospital, Hatay, Turkey.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine and Oncology, Kartal Dr. Lutfi Kirdar 
Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is characterized by recurrent 
attacks of polyserositis. Even though clinical assessment is accepted to be the 
most important factor in the diagnosis of FMF, some diagnostic procedures may 
help the physician. In this study, we aimed to compare the number of diagnostic 
procedures performed and number of physician referrals in early diagnosed and 
late diagnosed cases. Furthermore, we assessed which diagnostic approaches would 
affect the decision-making of physicians in the early diagnosed patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We enrolled into the study 143 FMF patients who met the 
Tel-Hashomer Criteria. Demographic variables, MEFV mutations (when available), 
diagnostic procedures (if performed) and specialist referrals were evaluated. 
Early diagnosis was defined as establishment of definite diagnosis within a 
5-year period after the appearance of the first symptom.
RESULTS: Early diagnosed were referred to physicians less often, and except for 
genetic testing, had fewer diagnostic procedures. In addition to clinical 
features, MEFV testing was found to be the only method that might influence the 
diagnosis by a physician.
CONCLUSIONS: MEFV gene assessment, unlike other diagnostic procedures, might 
support physicians in the early diagnosis of FMF. Especially in atypical cases, 
MEFV gene assessment might be considered for diagnosis of FMF.

© 2018 Asia Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and John Wiley & 
Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1756-185X.13258
PMID: 29314663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]