---
reference_id: "PMID:35604455"
title: Prevalence of scoliosis and impaired pulmonary function in patients with type III osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Keuning MC
- Leeuwerke SJG
- van Dijk PR
- Harsevoort AGJ
- Grotjohan HP
- Franken AAM
- Janus GJM
journal: Eur Spine J
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00586-022-07260-5
keywords:
- Humans
- Lung Diseases
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/complications, diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
- Prevalence
- Retrospective Studies
- "Scoliosis/complications, diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of scoliosis and impaired pulmonary function in patients with type III osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Keuning MC, Leeuwerke SJG, van Dijk PR, Harsevoort AGJ, Grotjohan HP, Franken AAM, Janus GJM
**Journal:** Eur Spine J (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00586-022-07260-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00586-022-07260-5)

## Content

1. Eur Spine J. 2022 Sep;31(9):2295-2300. doi: 10.1007/s00586-022-07260-5. Epub 
2022 May 23.

Prevalence of scoliosis and impaired pulmonary function in patients with type 
III osteogenesis imperfecta.

Keuning MC(1), Leeuwerke SJG(2), van Dijk PR(3), Harsevoort AGJ(4), Grotjohan 
HP(5), Franken AAM(6), Janus GJM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University Medical Center, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. m.c.keuning@umcg.nl.
(2)Department of Surgery, University Medical Center, University of Groningen, 
Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, University Medical Center, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Isala, Zwolle, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Isala, Zwolle, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Isala, Zwolle, The Netherlands.

PURPOSE: Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is a rare group of congenital genetic 
disorders that consists of a collagen synthesis defect. The most severe 
phenotype is type III OI. Characterized by progressive bone deformity, fragility 
and pulmonary impairment, causing significant morbidity and mortality. Also, 
multilevel spine deformities are observed, such as scoliosis. The literature on 
the pathophysiology of pulmonary impairment in relation to scoliosis in these 
patients is scarce and conflicting. This study aims to determine the prevalence 
of scoliosis and its relation to pulmonary function in type III OI patients.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study took place between April 2020 and 
November 2021. Forty-two patients with type III OI were included. 
Anterior-posterior spine radiographs were evaluated for scoliosis. Pulmonary 
function was assessed using spirometry and partial pressure of carbon dioxide.
RESULTS: All 42 patients had scoliosis, with a mean curve of 66° (95% CI of 
range). Vital lung capacity was decreased, compared to a non-OI population (mean 
1.57 L). This was correlated to the degree of scoliosis (st. β - 0.40, 
P = 0.03), especially in increasing thoracic curves. Restrictive lung 
pathophysiology was shown in our study population with a mean FEV1/FVC ratio of 
0.85.
CONCLUSIONS: Increasing thoracic scoliosis was correlated with decreased vital 
lung capacity in our study population of type III OI patients. High FEV1/FVC 
ratios found in this study population show restrictive lung pathophysiology. 
Therefore, it is plausible that the pulmonary impairment found in type III OI 
patients is a combined issue, partly associated to scoliosis and partly 
intrinsic to OI.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00586-022-07260-5
PMID: 35604455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]