---
reference_id: "PMID:25844897"
title: "Quantification of mutant huntingtin protein in cerebrospinal fluid from Huntington's disease patients."
authors:
- Wild EJ
- Boggio R
- Langbehn D
- Robertson N
- Haider S
- Miller JR
- Zetterberg H
- Leavitt BR
- Kuhn R
- Tabrizi SJ
- Macdonald D
- Weiss A
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1172/JCI80743
keywords:
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- British Columbia
- Cohort Studies
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Genetic Carrier Screening
- Humans
- Huntingtin Protein
- Huntington Disease/cerebrospinal fluid
- Immunoassay/methods
- London
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/cerebrospinal fluid, genetics, immunology"
- Neurofilament Proteins/cerebrospinal fluid
- Recombinant Fusion Proteins/metabolism
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Single-Blind Method
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
- tau Proteins/cerebrospinal fluid
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quantification of mutant huntingtin protein in cerebrospinal fluid from Huntington's disease patients.
**Authors:** Wild EJ, Boggio R, Langbehn D, Robertson N, Haider S, Miller JR, Zetterberg H, Leavitt BR, Kuhn R, Tabrizi SJ, Macdonald D, Weiss A
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI80743](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI80743)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2015 May;125(5):1979-86. doi: 10.1172/JCI80743. Epub 2015 Apr
6.

Quantification of mutant huntingtin protein in cerebrospinal fluid from 
Huntington's disease patients.

Wild EJ, Boggio R, Langbehn D, Robertson N, Haider S, Miller JR, Zetterberg H, 
Leavitt BR, Kuhn R, Tabrizi SJ, Macdonald D, Weiss A.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2015 May;11(5):245. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2015.63.

BACKGROUND: Quantification of disease-associated proteins in the cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) has been critical for the study and treatment of several 
neurodegenerative disorders; however, mutant huntingtin protein (mHTT), the 
cause of Huntington's disease (HD), is at very low levels in CSF and, to our 
knowledge, has never been measured previously.
METHODS: We developed an ultrasensitive single-molecule counting (SMC) mHTT 
immunoassay that was used to quantify mHTT levels in CSF samples from 
individuals bearing the HD mutation and from control individuals in 2 
independent cohorts.
RESULTS: This SMC mHTT immunoassay demonstrated high specificity for mHTT, high 
sensitivity with a femtomolar detection threshold, and a broad dynamic range. 
Analysis of the CSF samples showed that mHTT was undetectable in CSF from all 
controls but quantifiable in nearly all mutation carriers. The mHTT 
concentration in CSF was approximately 3-fold higher in patients with manifest 
HD than in premanifest mutation carriers. Moreover, mHTT levels increased as the 
disease progressed and were associated with 5-year onset probability. The mHTT 
concentration independently predicted cognitive and motor dysfunction. 
Furthermore, the level of mHTT was associated with the concentrations of tau and 
neurofilament light chain in the CSF, suggesting a neuronal origin for the 
detected mHTT.
CONCLUSIONS: We have demonstrated that mHTT can be quantified in CSF from HD 
patients using the described SMC mHTT immunoassay. Moreover, the level of mHTT 
detected is associated with proximity to disease onset and diminished cognitive 
and motor function. The ability to quantify CSF mHTT will facilitate the study 
of HD, and mHTT quantification could potentially serve as a biomarker for the 
development and testing of experimental mHTT-lowering therapies for HD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Not applicable.
FUNDING: CHDI Foundation Inc.; Medical Research Council (MRC) UK; National 
Institutes for Health Research (NIHR); Rosetrees Trust; Swedish Research 
Council; and Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI80743
PMCID: PMC4463213
PMID: 25844897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]