---
reference_id: "PMID:9458170"
title: "Peroxisomal disorders: genotype, phenotype, major neuropathologic lesions, and pathogenesis."
authors:
- Powers JM
- Moser HW
journal: Brain Pathol
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.1998.tb00139.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peroxisomal disorders: genotype, phenotype, major neuropathologic lesions, and pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Powers JM, Moser HW
**Journal:** Brain Pathol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1750-3639.1998.tb00139.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-3639.1998.tb00139.x)

## Content

1. Brain Pathol. 1998 Jan;8(1):101-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.1998.tb00139.x.

Peroxisomal disorders: genotype, phenotype, major neuropathologic lesions, and 
pathogenesis.

Powers JM(1), Moser HW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology (Neuropathology and Postmortem Medicine), University 
of Rochester Medical Center, NY 14642, USA. jpowers@pathology.rochester.edu

Neurological dysfunction is a prominent feature of most peroxisomal disorders. 
Enormous progress in defining their gene defects has been achieved. The genes 
and gene products, peroxins (PEX), in five of the complementation groups have 
been defined. These studies confirm that Zellweger syndrome (ZS), neonatal 
adrenoleukodystrophy (NALD), and infantile Refsum disease (IRD) are a disease 
continuum. The gene defect in adreno-leukodystrophy (ALD) / 
adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) involves an integral peroxisomal membrane protein. 
Neuropathologic lesions are of three major classes: (i) abnormalities in 
neuronal migration or differentiation, (ii) defects in the formation or 
maintenance of central white matter, and (iii) postdevelopmental neuronal 
degenerations. The central white matter lesions are those of: (i) inflammatory 
demyelination, (ii) non-inflammatory dysmyelination, and (iii) non-specific 
reductions in myelin volume or staining with or without reactive astrocytosis. 
The neuronal degenerations are of two major types: (i) the axonopathy of AMN 
involving ascending and descending tracts of the spinal cord, and (ii) 
cerebellar atrophy in rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata and probably IRD. We 
postulate that the abnormal fatty acids in peroxisomal disorders, particularly 
very long chain fatty acids and phytanic acid, are incorporated into cell 
membranes and perturb their microenvironments resulting in dysfunction, atrophy 
and death of vulnerable cells. The advent of mouse models for ZS and ALD is 
anticipated to provide even greater pathogenetic insights into the peroxisomal 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.1998.tb00139.x
PMCID: PMC8098283
PMID: 9458170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]