---
reference_id: "PMID:35874958"
title: Long COVID and its Management.
authors:
- Koc HC
- Xiao J
- Liu W
- Li Y
- Chen G
journal: Int J Biol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7150/ijbs.75056
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long COVID and its Management.
**Authors:** Koc HC, Xiao J, Liu W, Li Y, Chen G
**Journal:** Int J Biol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7150/ijbs.75056](https://doi.org/10.7150/ijbs.75056)

## Content

1. Int J Biol Sci. 2022 Jul 11;18(12):4768-4780. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.75056. 
eCollection 2022.

Long COVID and its Management.

Koc HC(1)(2), Xiao J(1)(2)(3), Liu W(1)(4), Li Y(3), Chen G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Reproduction, Development & Aging, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of Macau, Taipa, Macau, China.
(2)Institute of Translational Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University 
of Macau, Taipa, Macau, China.
(3)Interventional Medical Centre, Zhuhai People's Hospital, Zhuhai Hospital 
Affiliated with Jinan University, Zhuhai 519000, China.
(4)Bioimaging and Stem Cell Core Facility, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of Macau, Taipa, Macau, China.

The pandemic of COVID-19 is the biggest public health crisis in 21st Century. 
Besides the acute symptoms after infection, patients and society are also being 
challenged by the long-term health complications associated with COVID-19, 
commonly known as long COVID. While health professionals work hard to find 
proper treatments, large amount of knowledge has been accumulated in recent 
years. In order to deal with long COVID efficiently, it is important for people 
to keep up with current progresses and take proactive actions on long COVID. For 
this purpose, this review will first introduce the general background of long 
COVID, and then discuss its risk factors, diagnostic indicators and management 
strategies. This review will serve as a useful resource for people to understand 
and prepare for long COVID that will be with us in the foreseeable future.

© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.75056
PMCID: PMC9305273
PMID: 35874958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.