---
reference_id: "PMID:26628280"
title: "Macroscopic hematuria with normal renal biopsy-following the chain to the diagnosis: Answers."
authors:
- Truong J
- Deschênes G
- Callard P
- Antignac C
- Niel O
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-015-3268-2
keywords:
- Child
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Genetic Testing/methods
- Hematuria
- Humans
- Kidney/pathology
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/etiology"
- "Kidney Glomerulus/pathology, ultrastructure"
- Male
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- Mutation
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Macroscopic hematuria with normal renal biopsy-following the chain to the diagnosis: Answers.
**Authors:** Truong J, Deschênes G, Callard P, Antignac C, Niel O
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-015-3268-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-015-3268-2)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2017 Feb;32(2):279-281. doi: 10.1007/s00467-015-3268-2. Epub
2015 Dec 1.

Macroscopic hematuria with normal renal biopsy-following the chain to the
diagnosis: Answers.

Truong J(1), Deschênes G(2), Callard P(3), Antignac C(4), Niel O(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Nephrology Department, Robert Debré Hospital, 48 boulevard
Sérurier, 75019, Paris, France. jeanne.truong09@gmail.com.
(2)Pediatric Nephrology Department, Robert Debré Hospital, 48 boulevard
Sérurier, 75019, Paris, France.
(3)Pathology Department, Tenon Hospital, 4 rue de la Chine, 75020, Paris,
France.
(4)Molecular Bases of Kidney Development, Inserm U1163 - Sorbonne Paris Cité -
Paris Descartes University, 24 boulevard du Montparnasse, 75015, Paris, France.

Comment on
    Pediatr Nephrol. 2017 Feb;32(2):277-278. doi: 10.1007/s00467-015-3266-4.

BACKGROUND: Alport syndrome (AS) is an inherited glomerular disease associated
with hearing and eye defects; its morbidity is a public health issue in
developed countries. AS results from mutations in COL4A3, COL4A4, or COL4A5
genes, respectively encoding the alpha-3, alpha-4, and alpha-5 chains of type IV
collagen, a major component of the renal glomerular basement membrane (GBM). The
diagnosis is usually confirmed by a renal biopsy showing a thinning/thickening
of the GBM, with a longitudinal splitting of the lamina densa.
CASE DIAGNOSIS: We report the case of a 10-year-old patient who presented
multiple episodes of macroscopic hematuria. On the renal biopsy, the electron
microscopy analysis of the GBM was normal, as was the COL4A5 immunofluorescence
assay. Genetic analyses showed a homozygous duplication of exons 44 to 47 of the
COL4A3 gene, confirming the diagnosis of autosomal recessive AS.
CONCLUSIONS: Our report suggests that in patients with clinical evidence of AS,
genetic testing should be performed whenever pathological analysis is not in
favor of AS diagnosis. This will ensure that AS patients benefit from an early
diagnosis, adequate treatment, and that end-stage renal disease (ESRD) onset is
delayed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-015-3268-2
PMID: 26628280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
