---
reference_id: "PMID:33041192"
title: Screening and diagnosis of acute and chronic bird-related hypersensitivity pneumonitis by serum IgG and IgA antibodies to bird antigens with ImmunoCAP®.
authors:
- Shirai T
- Tanino Y
- Nikaido T
- Takaku Y
- Hashimoto S
- Taguchi Y
- Baba T
- Ogura T
- Kataoka K
- Nakayama M
- Yamada Y
- Matsushima S
- Nakayama S
- Miyazaki Y
journal: Allergol Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.alit.2020.09.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Screening and diagnosis of acute and chronic bird-related hypersensitivity pneumonitis by serum IgG and IgA antibodies to bird antigens with ImmunoCAP®.
**Authors:** Shirai T, Tanino Y, Nikaido T, Takaku Y, Hashimoto S, Taguchi Y, Baba T, Ogura T, Kataoka K, Nakayama M, Yamada Y, Matsushima S, Nakayama S, Miyazaki Y
**Journal:** Allergol Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.alit.2020.09.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alit.2020.09.003)

## Content

1. Allergol Int. 2021 Apr;70(2):208-214. doi: 10.1016/j.alit.2020.09.003. Epub
2020  Oct 8.

Screening and diagnosis of acute and chronic bird-related hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis by serum IgG and IgA antibodies to bird antigens with ImmunoCAP®.

Shirai T(1), Tanino Y(2), Nikaido T(2), Takaku Y(3), Hashimoto S(4), Taguchi 
Y(4), Baba T(5), Ogura T(5), Kataoka K(6), Nakayama M(7), Yamada Y(8), 
Matsushima S(9), Nakayama S(10), Miyazaki Y(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Fukushima Medical University School of 
Medicine, Fukushima, Japan.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Saitama Cardiovascular and Respiratory 
Center, Saitama, Japan.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tenri Hospital, Nara, Japan.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kanagawa Cardiovascular and Respiratory 
Center, Kanagawa, Japan.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, Tosei General Hospital, 
Aichi, Japan.
(7)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine Jichi Medical 
University, Tochigi, Japan.
(8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, JR Tokyo General Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan.
(10)Immuno Diagnostic Division, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Tokyo, Japan.
(11)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 
Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: miyazaki.pilm@tmd.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Bird antigens are some of the most relevant antigens in 
hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP). Possible sources of bird antigens are bird 
breeding, feather products and fertilizer with fowl droppings. For the screening 
and diagnosis of HP, the measurement of bird-specific antibodies should be 
standardized. The aim of this study was to clarify the utility of serum IgG 
(sIgG) and IgA (sIgA) antibodies to bird antigens in screening and diagnosing 
acute/chronic bird-related HP with ImmunoCAP® in multi-centre clinical research.
METHODS: We executed a clinical performance test by conducting a 
multi-institutional study to measure the levels of sIgG/sIgA against pigeon, 
parrot and budgerigar antigens by the ImmunoCAP® system in 29 acute and 46 
chronic bird-related HP patients.
RESULTS: The levels of sIgG/sIgA against the bird antigens of the three species 
were significantly higher in subjects with acute bird-related HP and chronic 
bird-related HP with acute episodes (recurrent type) than in the control 
subjects. For sIgG, the optimal cutoff values by receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) analysis were 24.6 mgA/L for pigeon, 14.0 mgA/L for parrot, 
and 8.7 mgA/L for budgerigar. By measuring multiple bird antigens and combining 
sIgG values of two species, the sensitivity and specificity for acute and 
recurrent-type chronic bird-related HP patients were 85-91% and 73-80%, 
respectively. For recurrent and insidious types of chronic bird-related HP, the 
sensitivity and specificity were 48-61% and 73-80%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Measurement of the levels of sIgG/sIgA against pigeon, budgerigar 
and parrot antigens by ImmunoCAP® was useful for screening and diagnosis in 
bird-related HP.

Copyright © 2020 Japanese Society of Allergology. Production and hosting by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.alit.2020.09.003
PMID: 33041192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]