---
reference_id: "PMID:39734593"
title: "New Germline TP53 Variant Detected After Radiotherapy-Induced Angiosarcoma of the Chest Wall in a Previously Treated Breast Cancer Patient: A Case Report and Review of Li-Fraumeni Syndrome and Radiotherapy-Induced Sarcoma."
authors:
- David BBL
- Silva SSA
- Dinoa V
- Diniz T
- Pereira E
- Bustamante C
- Garicochea B
journal: Case Rep Oncol Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1155/crom/6640468
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New Germline TP53 Variant Detected After Radiotherapy-Induced Angiosarcoma of the Chest Wall in a Previously Treated Breast Cancer Patient: A Case Report and Review of Li-Fraumeni Syndrome and Radiotherapy-Induced Sarcoma.
**Authors:** David BBL, Silva SSA, Dinoa V, Diniz T, Pereira E, Bustamante C, Garicochea B
**Journal:** Case Rep Oncol Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1155/crom/6640468](https://doi.org/10.1155/crom/6640468)

## Content

1. Case Rep Oncol Med. 2024 Dec 19;2024:6640468. doi: 10.1155/crom/6640468.
eCollection 2024.

New Germline TP53 Variant Detected After Radiotherapy-Induced Angiosarcoma of
the Chest Wall in a Previously Treated Breast Cancer Patient: A Case Report and
Review of Li-Fraumeni Syndrome and Radiotherapy-Induced Sarcoma.

David BBL(1)(2), Silva SSA(1), Dinoa V(3), Diniz T(3)(4), Pereira E(5),
Bustamante C(5), Garicochea B(5).

Author information:
(1)Medical Oncology Department, Oncoclinicas Group, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Clinical Research Department, National Cancer Institute (INCA), Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Radiology Department/Surgical Orthopedics Department, Rio de Janeiro Federal
University (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Surgical Orthopedics Department, National Institute of Traumatology and
Orthopedics (INTO), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(5)Pathology Department, Oncoclinicas Group, São Paulo, Brazil.

Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is one of the most common hereditary cancer
predisposition syndromes in Brazil. The high frequency of the syndrome is due to
a founding variant (R337H) in the country. LFS is characterized by a wide
variety of malignant phenotypes. Despite the great epidemiological importance of
the R337H variant, the frequency of other types of pathogenic variants is like
other populations, with the majority of these being missense variants. There is
strong evidence that radiotherapy is associated with secondary sarcomas,
including angiosarcomas, and this finding is especially true for LFS patients.
Angiosarcoma is not described as overrepresented in individuals with LFS, except
in patients submitted to radiotherapy. Germline testing in all breast cancer
patients under 65 will reveal many germline mutations in TP53 without a family
history of cancers associated with the syndrome. We present a case of a
previously undescribed pathogenic variant in TP53 (c788del, pAns263llefs⁣∗82) in
a patient with no family history of cancer, with a previous diagnosis of breast
carcinoma treated with radiotherapy, who developed angiosarcoma after a few
years leading to germline testing. The presence of angiosarcoma in a
radiotherapy bed should raise suspicion for LFS. The recent recommendation of
testing breast cancer patients under the age of 65, even without any family
history, can be a source of discoveries of new mutations and assist in
therapeutic decisions.

Copyright © 2024 Bruna Bianca Lopes David et al.

DOI: 10.1155/crom/6640468
PMCID: PMC11671632
PMID: 39734593

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
