---
reference_id: "PMID:32592473"
title: "Temple syndrome and Kagami-Ogata syndrome: clinical presentations, genotypes, models and mechanisms."
authors:
- Prasasya R
- Grotheer KV
- Siracusa LD
- Bartolomei MS
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa133
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Temple syndrome and Kagami-Ogata syndrome: clinical presentations, genotypes, models and mechanisms.
**Authors:** Prasasya R, Grotheer KV, Siracusa LD, Bartolomei MS
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddaa133](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddaa133)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2020 Sep 30;29(R1):R107-R116. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa133.

Temple syndrome and Kagami-Ogata syndrome: clinical presentations, genotypes, 
models and mechanisms.

Prasasya R(1), Grotheer KV(2), Siracusa LD(2), Bartolomei MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Epigenetics Institute, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Perelman 
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Sciences, Hackensack Meridian School of Medicine at 
Seton Hall University, 340 Kingsland Street, Building 123, Nutley, NJ 07110, 
USA.

Temple syndrome (TS) and Kagami-Ogata syndrome (KOS) are imprinting disorders 
caused by absence or overexpression of genes within a single imprinted cluster 
on human chromosome 14q32. TS most frequently arises from maternal UPD14 or 
epimutations/deletions on the paternal chromosome, whereas KOS most frequently 
arises from paternal UPD14 or epimutations/deletions on the maternal chromosome. 
In this review, we describe the clinical symptoms and genetic/epigenetic 
features of this imprinted region. The locus encompasses paternally expressed 
protein-coding genes (DLK1, RTL1 and DIO3) and maternally expressed lncRNAs 
(MEG3/GTL2, RTL1as and MEG8), as well as numerous miRNAs and snoRNAs. Control of 
expression is complex, with three differentially methylated regions regulating 
germline, placental and tissue-specific transcription. The strong conserved 
synteny between mouse chromosome 12aF1 and human chromosome 14q32 has enabled 
the use of mouse models to elucidate imprinting mechanisms and decipher the 
contribution of genes to the symptoms of TS and KOS. In this review, we describe 
relevant mouse models and highlight their value to better inform treatment 
options for long-term management of TS and KOS patients.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa133
PMCID: PMC8325017
PMID: 32592473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]