---
reference_id: "PMID:26411584"
title: "Phase II study of bendamustine combined with rituximab in relapsed/refractory mantle cell lymphoma: efficacy, tolerability, and safety findings."
authors:
- Czuczman MS
- Goy A
- Lamonica D
- Graf DA
- Munteanu MC
- van der Jagt RH
journal: Ann Hematol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00277-015-2478-9
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Bendamustine Hydrochloride/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, Mantle-Cell/drug therapy, mortality"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Recurrence
- "Rituximab/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Survival Rate
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase II study of bendamustine combined with rituximab in relapsed/refractory mantle cell lymphoma: efficacy, tolerability, and safety findings.
**Authors:** Czuczman MS, Goy A, Lamonica D, Graf DA, Munteanu MC, van der Jagt RH
**Journal:** Ann Hematol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00277-015-2478-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00277-015-2478-9)

## Content

1. Ann Hematol. 2015 Dec;94(12):2025-32. doi: 10.1007/s00277-015-2478-9. Epub
2015  Sep 28.

Phase II study of bendamustine combined with rituximab in relapsed/refractory 
mantle cell lymphoma: efficacy, tolerability, and safety findings.

Czuczman MS(1), Goy A(2), Lamonica D(3), Graf DA(3)(4), Munteanu MC(5), van der 
Jagt RH(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Elm and Carlton Streets, Roswell Park Cancer 
Institute, Buffalo, NY, 14263, USA. docczucz@gmail.com.
(2)Lymphoma Division, Hackensack University Medical Center, Hackensack, NJ, 
07601, USA.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, 
14263, USA.
(4)University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, TX, 77555, USA.
(5)Teva Branded Pharmaceutical Products R&D, Inc., Frazer, PA, 19355, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital, General Campus, K1H 8L6, Ottawa, 
Canada.

In most cases of relapsed/refractory mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), patients 
respond to salvage therapy, though typically responses are partial and/or 
transient followed by disease progression, even with newer agents (e.g., 
ibrutinib). In this multicenter, open-label, single-arm, phase II study, 
patients with relapsed/refractory non-blastoid MCL received bendamustine 90 
mg/m(2) (days 1 and 2) and rituximab 375 mg/m(2) (day 1) for 6 planned 28-day 
cycles. Functional imaging with 18-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission 
tomography/computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) was conducted at baseline and 
after cycle 6. Forty-five patients were enrolled (median age, 70 years; 82 % 
stage IV disease; median number of prior chemotherapies, 2 [range, 1-4]), 
showing an overall response rate (ORR; primary efficacy measure) of 82 % 
(complete response [CR], 40 %; partial response, 42 %). In the 32 patients with 
complete 18F-FDG PET/CT data, 75 % achieved a complete metabolic response. 
Median duration of response was 1.6 years, 1-year progression-free survival was 
67 %, and 3-year overall survival was 55 %. Main non-hematologic adverse events 
were nausea (69 %), fatigue (56 %), decreased appetite (42 %), constipation (38 
%), diarrhea (36 %), vomiting (36 %), and decreased weight (31 %). Grade 3/4 
neutropenia and lymphopenia occurred in 44 and 89 % of patients, respectively. 
ORR and CR rate compared favorably with single-agent ibrutinib (ORR, 67 %; CR, 
23 %); bendamustine-rituximab is an effective therapy with manageable toxicity 
in relapsed/refractory MCL.

DOI: 10.1007/s00277-015-2478-9
PMID: 26411584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]