---
reference_id: "PMID:15026601"
title: "From the archives of the AFIP. Meckel diverticulum: radiologic features with pathologic Correlation."
authors:
- Levy AD
- Hobbs CM
journal: Radiographics
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1148/rg.242035187
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From the archives of the AFIP. Meckel diverticulum: radiologic features with pathologic Correlation.
**Authors:** Levy AD, Hobbs CM
**Journal:** Radiographics (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1148/rg.242035187](https://doi.org/10.1148/rg.242035187)

## Content

1. Radiographics. 2004 Mar-Apr;24(2):565-87. doi: 10.1148/rg.242035187.

From the archives of the AFIP. Meckel diverticulum: radiologic features with 
pathologic Correlation.

Levy AD(1), Hobbs CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiologic Pathology, Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 6825 
16th St NW, Washington, DC 20306-6000, USA. levya@afip.osd.mil

Comment in
    N Z Med J. 2004 Oct 22;117(1204):U1133.

Meckel diverticulum is the most common congenital anomaly of the 
gastrointestinal tract, occurring in 2%-3% of the population. It results from 
improper closure and absorption of the omphalomesenteric duct. Meckel 
diverticulum is the most common end result of the spectrum of omphalomesenteric 
duct anomalies, which also include umbilicoileal fistula, umbilical sinus, 
umbilical cyst, and a fibrous cord connecting the ileum to the umbilicus. The 
formation of Meckel diverticulum occurs with equal frequency in both sexes, but 
symptoms from complications are more common in male patients. Sixty percent of 
patients come to medical attention before 10 years of age, with the remainder of 
cases manifesting in adolescence and adulthood. Heterotopic gastric and 
pancreatic mucosa are frequently found histologically within the diverticula of 
symptomatic patients. The most common complications are hemorrhage from peptic 
ulceration, small intestinal obstruction, and diverticulitis. Although the 
clinical, pathologic, and radiologic features of the complications of Meckel 
diverticulum are well known, the diagnosis of Meckel diverticulum is difficult 
to establish preoperatively.

DOI: 10.1148/rg.242035187
PMID: 15026601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]