---
reference_id: "PMID:39327289"
title: "Exclusive endoscopic tympanoplasty efficacy in the treatment of cholesteatoma without mastoid involvement."
journal: Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
year: "2024"
doi: 10.1007/s00405-024-08778-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exclusive endoscopic tympanoplasty efficacy in the treatment of cholesteatoma without mastoid involvement.

## Content

Purpose: The purpose of this study is to determine the recurrence rate of
cholesteatoma in patients who have undergone exclusive endoscopic tympanoplasty
at our tertiary referral institution. A secondary objective is to analyze
different clinical aspects that could be considered risk factors for recurrence
to establish if it is possible to determine when a second-look procedure is
indicated instead of a clinical follow-up.

Methods: A retrospective study was performed on patients who had undergone
exclusive endoscopic tympanoplasty for cholesteatoma in the last eight years and
who were followed up for at least one year. The efficacy of the treatment
performed only with the exclusive endoscopic technique was analyzed. Then, the
anamnestic and intraoperative data were studied to identify possible factors
that could increase the risk of recurrence.

Results: The recurrence rate (14.5%) in patients (164) who underwent primary
surgery with the exclusive endoscopic technique between January 2014 and January
2022 was similar to that in patients who underwent the microscopic technique
with mastoidectomy in literature. In addition, we analyzed several clinical
factors such as age, ossicular chain erosion, extension and localization of the
cholesteatoma finding that only the last one could potentially be a risk factor
for recurrence in this selected population.

Conclusion: Exclusive endoscopic tympanoplasty has been shown to be effective in
removing cholesteatoma in patients without evidence of mastoid involvement, with
recurrence rates comparable to traditional microscopic technique and a minimally
invasive approach, even considering the patient's age, ossicular chain erosion
and extension of the disease.
