---
reference_id: "PMID:27246648"
title: Lower sulfurtransferase detoxification rates of cyanide in konzo-A tropical spastic paralysis linked to cassava cyanogenic poisoning.
authors:
- Kambale KJ
- Ali ER
- Sadiki NH
- Kayembe KP
- Mvumbi LG
- Yandju DL
- Boivin MJ
- Boss GR
- Stadler DD
- Lambert WE
- Lasarev MR
- Okitundu LA
- Mumba Ngoyi D
- Banea JP
- Tshala-Katumbay DD
journal: Neurotoxicology
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2016.05.016
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Analysis of Variance
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cognition Disorders/etiology
- Cyanides/toxicity
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Motor Disorders/etiology
- Nitriles
- "Paraparesis, Tropical Spastic/chemically induced, metabolism"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Statistics, Nonparametric"
- Sulfurtransferases/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lower sulfurtransferase detoxification rates of cyanide in konzo-A tropical spastic paralysis linked to cassava cyanogenic poisoning.
**Authors:** Kambale KJ, Ali ER, Sadiki NH, Kayembe KP, Mvumbi LG, Yandju DL, Boivin MJ, Boss GR, Stadler DD, Lambert WE, Lasarev MR, Okitundu LA, Mumba Ngoyi D, Banea JP, Tshala-Katumbay DD
**Journal:** Neurotoxicology (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuro.2016.05.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2016.05.016)

## Content

1. Neurotoxicology. 2017 Mar;59:256-262. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2016.05.016. Epub 
2016 May 28.

Lower sulfurtransferase detoxification rates of cyanide in konzo-A tropical 
spastic paralysis linked to cassava cyanogenic poisoning.

Kambale KJ(1), Ali ER(2), Sadiki NH(3), Kayembe KP(3), Mvumbi LG(1), Yandju 
DL(4), Boivin MJ(5), Boss GR(6), Stadler DD(7), Lambert WE(8), Lasarev MR(9), 
Okitundu LA(10), Mumba Ngoyi D(11), Banea JP(12), Tshala-Katumbay DD(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Kinshasa, Congo-Kinshasa, 
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Kinshasa, Congo-Kinshasa, Democratic 
Republic of the Congo; Institut National de Recherches Biomédicales (INRB), 
Congo-Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(3)School of Public Health, University of Kinshasa, Congo-Kinshasa, Democratic 
Republic of the Congo.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Kinshasa, Congo-Kinshasa, Democratic 
Republic of the Congo.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Neurology/Ophthalmology, Michigan State 
University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
USA.
(7)Graduate Programs in Human Nutrition, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland, OR, USA.
(8)Department of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, OR, USA.
(9)Department of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, OR, USA; Oregon Institute of Occupational Health Sciences, 
Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA.
(10)Department of Neurology, University of Kinshasa, Congo-Kinshasa, Democratic 
Republic of the Congo.
(11)Department of Tropical Medicine, University of Kinshasa, Congo-Kinshasa, 
Democratic Republic of the Congo; Institut National de Recherches Biomédicales 
(INRB), Congo-Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(12)School of Public Health, University of Kinshasa, Congo-Kinshasa, Democratic 
Republic of the Congo; National Nutrition Program, Ministry of Health, 
Congo-Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(13)Department of Neurology, University of Kinshasa, Congo-Kinshasa, Democratic 
Republic of the Congo; Institut National de Recherches Biomédicales (INRB), 
Congo-Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo; Department of Neurology, 
Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA. Electronic address: 
tshalad@ohsu.edu.

Using a matched case-control design, we sought to determine whether the odds of 
konzo, a distinct spastic paraparesis associated with food (cassava) cyanogenic 
exposure in the tropics, were associated with lower cyanide detoxification rates 
(CDR) and malnutrition. Children with konzo (N=122, 5-17 years of age) were age- 
and sex-matched with presumably healthy controls (N=87) and assessed for motor 
and cognition performances, cyanogenic exposure, nutritional status, and cyanide 
detoxification rates (CDR). Cyanogenic exposure was ascertained by thiocyanate 
(SCN) concentrations in plasma (P-SCN) and urine (U-SCN). Children with a 
height-for-age z-score (HAZNCHS)<-2 were classified as nutritionally stunted. 
CDR was measured as time required to convert cyanide to SCN, and expressed as 
ms/μmol SCN/mg protein or as mmolSCN/ml plasma/min. Mean (SD) U-SCN in children 
with konzo was 521.9 (353.6) μmol/l and was, significantly higher than 384.6 
(223.7) μmol/l in those without konzo. Conditional regression analysis of data 
for age- and sex- matched case-control pairs showed that konzo was associated 
with stunting (OR: 5.8; 95% CI: 2.7-12.8; p<0.01; N=83 paired groups) and higher 
U-SCN (OR: 1.1; 95% CI: 1.02-1.20 per 50-μmol increase in U-SCN; p=0.02; N=47 
paired groups). After adjusting for stunting and U-SCN, the odds of developing 
konzo was reduced by 63% (95% CI: 11-85%, p=0.03; N=41 paired groups) for each 
5mmol SCN/(ml plasma/min)-increase in CDR. Linear regression analysis indicated 
a significant association between BOT-2 or KABC-II scores and both the HAZNCHS 
z-score and the U-SCN concentration, but not the CDR. Our findings provide 
evidence in support of interventions to remove cyanogenic compounds from cassava 
prior to human consumption or, peharps, enhance the detoxification of cyanide in 
those relying on the cassava as the main source of food.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuro.2016.05.016
PMCID: PMC5125906
PMID: 27246648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]