---
reference_id: "PMID:39040103"
title: A novel iPSC-based model of ICF syndrome subtype 2 recapitulates the molecular phenotype of ZBTB24 deficiency.
authors:
- Lullo V
- Cecere F
- Batti S
- Allegretti S
- Morone B
- Fioriniello S
- Pisapia L
- Genesio R
- Della Ragione F
- Giardino G
- Pignata C
- Riccio A
- Matarazzo MR
- Strazzullo M
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1419748
keywords:
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Repressor Proteins/genetics, deficiency"
- DNA Methylation
- Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/genetics
- Male
- Mutation
- Female
- Face/abnormalities
- Nuclear Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel iPSC-based model of ICF syndrome subtype 2 recapitulates the molecular phenotype of ZBTB24 deficiency.
**Authors:** Lullo V, Cecere F, Batti S, Allegretti S, Morone B, Fioriniello S, Pisapia L, Genesio R, Della Ragione F, Giardino G, Pignata C, Riccio A, Matarazzo MR, Strazzullo M
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1419748](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1419748)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Jul 8;15:1419748. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1419748.
eCollection 2024.

A novel iPSC-based model of ICF syndrome subtype 2 recapitulates the molecular
phenotype of ZBTB24 deficiency.

Lullo V(1), Cecere F(2), Batti S(1), Allegretti S(1), Morone B(1), Fioriniello
S(1), Pisapia L(1), Genesio R(3), Della Ragione F(1)(4), Giardino G(5), Pignata
C(5), Riccio A(1)(2), Matarazzo MR(#)(1), Strazzullo M(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics (IGB) "Adriano Buzzati-Traverso",
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR), Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Environmental Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences and
Technologies (DiSTABiF), Università degli Studi della Campania "Luigi
Vanvitelli", Caserta, Italy.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of
Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(4)IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Mediterraneo Neuromed, Pozzilli, Isernia, Italy.
(5)Pediatric Section, Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Federico II
University, Naples, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

Immunodeficiency, Centromeric instability and Facial anomalies (ICF) syndrome is
a rare genetic disorder characterized by variable immunodeficiency. More than
half of the affected individuals show mild to severe intellectual disability at
early onset. This disorder is genetically heterogeneous and ZBTB24 is the
causative gene of the subtype 2, accounting for about 30% of the ICF cases.
ZBTB24 is a multifaceted transcription factor belonging to the Zinc-finger and
BTB domain-containing protein family, which are key regulators of developmental
processes. Aberrant DNA methylation is the main molecular hallmark of ICF
syndrome. The functional link between ZBTB24 deficiency and DNA methylation
errors is still elusive. Here, we generated a novel ICF2 disease model by
deriving induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from peripheral CD34+-blood
cells of a patient homozygous for the p.Cys408Gly mutation, the most frequent
missense mutation in ICF2 patients and which is associated with a broad clinical
spectrum. The mutation affects a conserved cysteine of the ZBTB24 zinc-finger
domain, perturbing its function as transcriptional activator. ICF2-iPSCs
recapitulate the methylation defects associated with ZBTB24 deficiency,
including centromeric hypomethylation. We validated that the mutated ZBTB24
protein loses its ability to directly activate expression of CDCA7 and other
target genes in the patient-derived iPSCs. Upon hematopoietic differentiation,
ICF2-iPSCs showed decreased vitality and a lower percentage of CD34+/CD43+/CD45+
progenitors. Overall, the ICF2-iPSC model is highly relevant to explore the role
of ZBTB24 in DNA methylation homeostasis and provides a tool to investigate the
early molecular events linking ZBTB24 deficiency to the ICF2 clinical phenotype.

Copyright © 2024 Lullo, Cecere, Batti, Allegretti, Morone, Fioriniello, Pisapia,
Genesio, Della Ragione, Giardino, Pignata, Riccio, Matarazzo and Strazzullo.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1419748
PMCID: PMC11260623
PMID: 39040103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission.
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.
