---
reference_id: "PMID:11950702"
title: Increased atherosclerosis in hyperlipidemic mice with inactivation of ABCA1 in macrophages.
authors:
- Aiello RJ
- Brees D
- Bourassa PA
- Royer L
- Lindsey S
- Coskran T
- Haghpassand M
- Francone OL
journal: Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1161/01.atv.0000014804.35824.da
keywords:
- ATP Binding Cassette Transporter 1
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/metabolism
- Animals
- Apolipoproteins E/deficiency
- "Arteriosclerosis/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- Bone Marrow Transplantation
- Cholesterol/blood
- "Crosses, Genetic"
- Female
- "Hyperlipidemias/complications, metabolism"
- Lipids/blood
- Lipoproteins/blood
- "Macrophages/metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL/genetics"
- "Mice, Inbred DBA/genetics"
- "Receptors, LDL/deficiency"
- Xanthomatosis/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased atherosclerosis in hyperlipidemic mice with inactivation of ABCA1 in macrophages.
**Authors:** Aiello RJ, Brees D, Bourassa PA, Royer L, Lindsey S, Coskran T, Haghpassand M, Francone OL
**Journal:** Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.atv.0000014804.35824.da](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.atv.0000014804.35824.da)

## Content

1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2002 Apr 1;22(4):630-7. doi:
10.1161/01.atv.0000014804.35824.da.

Increased atherosclerosis in hyperlipidemic mice with inactivation of ABCA1 in
macrophages.

Aiello RJ(1), Brees D, Bourassa PA, Royer L, Lindsey S, Coskran T, Haghpassand
M, Francone OL.

Author information:
(1)Pfizer Global Research and Development, Groton, Connecticut, USA.
Robert_J_Aiello@groton.pfizer.com

The ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) encodes a membrane protein that
promotes cholesterol and phospholipid efflux from cells. Mutations in ABCA1 lead
to HDL deficiency and tissue accumulation of macrophages in patients with
homozygous Tangier disease. In this study, we examined whether the complete
absence of ABCA1 or selected inactivation in macrophages is accompanied by an
increase in atherosclerotic lesion progression in hypercholesterolemic
apolipoprotein E-deficient (apoE(-/-)) mice and LDLR receptor-deficient
(LDLr(-/-)) mice. The absence of ABCA1 led to reduced plasma cholesterol levels
in both the apoE(-/-) and LDLr(-/-) mice, along with severe skin xanthomatosis
characterized by marked foamy macrophages and cholesterol ester accumulation.
However, the complete absence of ABCA1 did not affect the development,
progression, or composition of atherosclerotic lesions in either the LDLr(-/-)
or the apoE(-/-) mice fed a chow or atherogenic diet. In contrast, bone marrow
transplantation studies demonstrated that the selective inactivation of ABCA1 in
macrophages markedly increased atherosclerosis and foam cell accumulation in
apoE(-/-). Taken together, these findings demonstrate that the complete absence
of ABCA1 has a major impact on plasma lipoprotein homeostasis, and the proposed
antiatherogenic effect resulting from ABCA1 deficiency is compensated by a less
atherogenic profile. ABCA1 deficiency in macrophages, however, demonstrates the
antiatherogenic properties of ABCA1 independent of plasma lipids and HDL levels.

DOI: 10.1161/01.atv.0000014804.35824.da
PMID: 11950702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
