---
reference_id: "PMID:21623381"
title: Misregulated alternative splicing of BIN1 is associated with T tubule alterations and muscle weakness in myotonic dystrophy.
authors:
- Fugier C
- Klein AF
- Hammer C
- Vassilopoulos S
- Ivarsson Y
- Toussaint A
- Tosch V
- Vignaud A
- Ferry A
- Messaddeq N
- Kokunai Y
- Tsuburaya R
- de la Grange P
- Dembele D
- Francois V
- Precigout G
- Boulade-Ladame C
- Hummel MC
- Lopez de Munain A
- Sergeant N
- Laquerrière A
- Thibault C
- Deryckere F
- Auboeuf D
- Garcia L
- Zimmermann P
- Udd B
- Schoser B
- Takahashi MP
- Nishino I
- Bassez G
- Laporte J
- Furling D
- Charlet-Berguerand N
journal: Nat Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/nm.2374
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics, physiology"
- Alternative Splicing/physiology
- Animals
- Cell Line
- Exons/genetics
- Humans
- Mice
- "Muscle Fibers, Skeletal/physiology"
- "Muscle Weakness/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Myotonic Dystrophy/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- "Protein Isoforms/genetics, physiology"
- "RNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism, physiology"
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Misregulated alternative splicing of BIN1 is associated with T tubule alterations and muscle weakness in myotonic dystrophy.
**Authors:** Fugier C, Klein AF, Hammer C, Vassilopoulos S, Ivarsson Y, Toussaint A, Tosch V, Vignaud A, Ferry A, Messaddeq N, Kokunai Y, Tsuburaya R, de la Grange P, Dembele D, Francois V, Precigout G, Boulade-Ladame C, Hummel MC, Lopez de Munain A, Sergeant N, Laquerrière A, Thibault C, Deryckere F, Auboeuf D, Garcia L, Zimmermann P, Udd B, Schoser B, Takahashi MP, Nishino I, Bassez G, Laporte J, Furling D, Charlet-Berguerand N
**Journal:** Nat Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm.2374](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.2374)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2011 Jun;17(6):720-5. doi: 10.1038/nm.2374. Epub 2011 May 29.

Misregulated alternative splicing of BIN1 is associated with T tubule
alterations and muscle weakness in myotonic dystrophy.

Fugier C(1), Klein AF, Hammer C, Vassilopoulos S, Ivarsson Y, Toussaint A, Tosch
V, Vignaud A, Ferry A, Messaddeq N, Kokunai Y, Tsuburaya R, de la Grange P,
Dembele D, Francois V, Precigout G, Boulade-Ladame C, Hummel MC, Lopez de Munain
A, Sergeant N, Laquerrière A, Thibault C, Deryckere F, Auboeuf D, Garcia L,
Zimmermann P, Udd B, Schoser B, Takahashi MP, Nishino I, Bassez G, Laporte J,
Furling D, Charlet-Berguerand N.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Institut
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U964, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique UMR7104, University of Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.

Myotonic dystrophy is the most common muscular dystrophy in adults and the first
recognized example of an RNA-mediated disease. Congenital myotonic dystrophy
(CDM1) and myotonic dystrophy of type 1 (DM1) or of type 2 (DM2) are caused by
the expression of mutant RNAs containing expanded CUG or CCUG repeats,
respectively. These mutant RNAs sequester the splicing regulator
Muscleblind-like-1 (MBNL1), resulting in specific misregulation of the
alternative splicing of other pre-mRNAs. We found that alternative splicing of
the bridging integrator-1 (BIN1) pre-mRNA is altered in skeletal muscle samples
of people with CDM1, DM1 and DM2. BIN1 is involved in tubular invaginations of
membranes and is required for the biogenesis of muscle T tubules, which are
specialized skeletal muscle membrane structures essential for
excitation-contraction coupling. Mutations in the BIN1 gene cause centronuclear
myopathy, which shares some histopathological features with myotonic dystrophy.
We found that MBNL1 binds the BIN1 pre-mRNA and regulates its alternative
splicing. BIN1 missplicing results in expression of an inactive form of BIN1
lacking phosphatidylinositol 5-phosphate-binding and membrane-tubulating
activities. Consistent with a defect of BIN1, muscle T tubules are altered in
people with myotonic dystrophy, and membrane structures are restored upon
expression of the normal splicing form of BIN1 in muscle cells of such
individuals. Finally, reproducing BIN1 splicing alteration in mice is sufficient
to promote T tubule alterations and muscle weakness, a predominant feature of
myotonic dystrophy.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.2374
PMID: 21623381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
