---
reference_id: "PMID:36537191"
title: Perceived Stress and Prediction of Worse Disease Activity and Symptoms in a Multiracial, Multiethnic Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Cohort.
authors:
- Patterson S
- Trupin L
- Hartogensis W
- DeQuattro K
- Lanata C
- Gordon C
- Barbour KE
- Greenlund KJ
- Dall'Era M
- Yazdany J
- Katz P
journal: Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/acr.25076
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Perceived Stress and Prediction of Worse Disease Activity and Symptoms in a Multiracial, Multiethnic Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Cohort.
**Authors:** Patterson S, Trupin L, Hartogensis W, DeQuattro K, Lanata C, Gordon C, Barbour KE, Greenlund KJ, Dall'Era M, Yazdany J, Katz P
**Journal:** Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/acr.25076](https://doi.org/10.1002/acr.25076)

## Content

1. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2023 Aug;75(8):1681-1689. doi:
10.1002/acr.25076.  Epub 2023 Feb 3.

Perceived Stress and Prediction of Worse Disease Activity and Symptoms in a 
Multiracial, Multiethnic Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Cohort.

Patterson S(1), Trupin L(1), Hartogensis W(1), DeQuattro K(2), Lanata C(3), 
Gordon C(4), Barbour KE(5), Greenlund KJ(5), Dall'Era M(1), Yazdany J(1), Katz 
P(1).

Author information:
(1)University of California, San Francisco.
(2)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
(3)National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(4)Institute of Inflammation and Ageing, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, 
UK.
(5)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.

OBJECTIVE: Studies have suggested a potential link between traumatic 
experiences, psychological stress, and autoimmunity, but the impact of stress on 
disease activity and symptom severity in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 
remains unclear. The present study was undertaken to examine whether increases 
in perceived stress independently associate with worse SLE disease outcomes over 
3 years of follow-up.
METHODS: Participants were drawn from the California Lupus Epidemiology Study 
(CLUES). Stress was measured annually using the 4-item Perceived Stress Scale 
(PSS). Participants with increases of ≥0.5 SD in PSS score were defined as 
having an increase in stress. Four outcomes were measured at the year 3 
follow-up visit: physician-assessed disease activity (Systemic Lupus 
Erythematosus Disease Activity Index); patient-reported disease activity 
(Systemic Lupus Activity Questionnaire); pain (Patient-Reported Outcomes 
Measurement Information System [PROMIS] pain interference scale); and fatigue 
(PROMIS fatigue scale). Multivariable linear regression evaluated longitudinal 
associations of increase in stress with all 4 outcomes while controlling for 
potential confounders.
RESULTS: The sample (n = 260) was 91% female, 36% Asian, 30% White, 22% 
Hispanic, and 11% African American; the mean ± SD age was 46 ± 14 years. In 
adjusted longitudinal analyses, increase in stress was independently associated 
with greater physician-assessed disease activity (P = 0.015), greater 
self-reported disease activity (P < 0.001), more pain (P = 0.019), and more 
fatigue (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: In a racially diverse sample of individuals with SLE, those who 
experienced an increase in stress had significantly worse disease activity and 
greater symptom burden at follow-up compared to those with stress levels that 
remained stable or declined. Findings underscore the need for interventions to 
bolster stress resilience and support effective coping strategies among 
individuals living with lupus.

© 2022 American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/acr.25076
PMCID: PMC10279800
PMID: 36537191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors have no 
financial disclosures.