---
reference_id: "PMID:18511691"
title: "MeCP2, a key contributor to neurological disease, activates and represses transcription."
authors:
- Chahrour M
- Jung SY
- Shaw C
- Zhou X
- Wong ST
- Qin J
- Zoghbi HY
journal: Science
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1126/science.1153252
keywords:
- Animals
- Cyclic AMP Response Element-Binding Protein/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Hypothalamic Diseases/genetics
- Hypothalamus/metabolism
- Male
- "Methyl-CpG-Binding Protein 2/genetics, physiology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/metabolism
- Nervous System Diseases/genetics
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Protein Binding
- "Repressor Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- Rett Syndrome/genetics
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, physiology"
- Transcriptional Activation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MeCP2, a key contributor to neurological disease, activates and represses transcription.
**Authors:** Chahrour M, Jung SY, Shaw C, Zhou X, Wong ST, Qin J, Zoghbi HY
**Journal:** Science (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1153252](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1153252)

## Content

1. Science. 2008 May 30;320(5880):1224-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1153252.

MeCP2, a key contributor to neurological disease, activates and represses
transcription.

Chahrour M(1), Jung SY, Shaw C, Zhou X, Wong ST, Qin J, Zoghbi HY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2008 May 30;320(5880):1172-3. doi: 10.1126/science.1159146.

Mutations in the gene encoding the transcriptional repressor methyl-CpG binding
protein 2 (MeCP2) cause the neurodevelopmental disorder Rett syndrome. Loss of
function as well as increased dosage of the MECP2 gene cause a host of
neuropsychiatric disorders. To explore the molecular mechanism(s) underlying
these disorders, we examined gene expression patterns in the hypothalamus of
mice that either lack or overexpress MeCP2. In both models, MeCP2 dysfunction
induced changes in the expression levels of thousands of genes, but unexpectedly
the majority of genes (approximately 85%) appeared to be activated by MeCP2. We
selected six genes and confirmed that MeCP2 binds to their promoters.
Furthermore, we showed that MeCP2 associates with the transcriptional activator
CREB1 at the promoter of an activated target but not a repressed target. These
studies suggest that MeCP2 regulates the expression of a wide range of genes in
the hypothalamus and that it can function as both an activator and a repressor
of transcription.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1153252
PMCID: PMC2443785
PMID: 18511691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
