---
reference_id: "PMID:10571008"
title: "Aspartylglycosaminuria: biochemistry and molecular biology."
authors:
- Aronson NN Jr
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1016/s0925-4439(99)00076-9
keywords:
- "Acetylglucosamine/analogs & derivatives, urine"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Aspartylglucosylaminase/genetics, metabolism"
- Base Sequence
- "DNA, Complementary/metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Evolution, Molecular"
- Finland/ethnology
- Gene Deletion
- Gene Rearrangement
- Glycoproteins/metabolism
- Humans
- "Lysosomal Storage Diseases/genetics, pathology, urine"
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aspartylglycosaminuria: biochemistry and molecular biology.
**Authors:** Aronson NN Jr
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0925-4439(99)00076-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0925-4439(99)00076-9)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Oct 8;1455(2-3):139-54. doi:
10.1016/s0925-4439(99)00076-9.

Aspartylglycosaminuria: biochemistry and molecular biology.

Aronson NN Jr(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of South
Alabama, Mobile 36688-0002, USA. naronson@jaguar1.usouthal.edu

Aspartylglucosaminuria (AGU, McKusick 208400) is an autosomal recessive
lysosomal storage disease caused by defective degradation of Asn-linked
glycoproteins. AGU mutations occur in the gene (AGA) for glycosylasparaginase,
the enzyme necessary for hydrolysis of the protein oligosaccharide linkage in
Asn-linked glycoprotein substrates undergoing metabolic turnover. Loss of
glycosylasparaginase activity leads to accumulation of the linkage unit
Asn-GlcNAc in tissue lysosomes. Storage of this fragment affects the
pathophysiology of neuronal cells most severely. The patients notably suffer
from decreased cognitive abilities, skeletal abnormalities and facial
grotesqueness. The progress of the disease is slower than in many other
lysosomal storage diseases. The patients appear normal during infancy and
generally live from 25 to 45 years. A specific AGU mutation is concentrated in
the Finnish population with over 200 patients. The carrier frequency in Finland
has been estimated to be in the range of 2.5-3% of the population. So far there
are 20 other rare family AGU alleles that have been characterized at the
molecular level in the world's population. Recently, two knockout mouse models
for AGU have been developed. In addition, the crystal structure of human
leukocyte glycosylasparaginase has been determined and the protein has a unique
alphabetabetaalpha sandwich fold shared by a newly recognized family of
important enzymes called N-terminal nucleophile (Ntn) hydrolases. The nascent
single-chain precursor of glycosylase araginase self-cleaves into its mature
alpha- and beta-subunits, a reaction required to activate the enzyme. This
interesting biochemical feature is also shared by most of the Ntn-hydrolase
family of proteins. Many of the disease-causing mutations prevent proper folding
and subsequent activation of the glycosylasparaginase.

DOI: 10.1016/s0925-4439(99)00076-9
PMID: 10571008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
