---
reference_id: "PMID:7273526"
title: "Köhler's disease of the tarsal navicular."
authors:
- Williams GA
- Cowell HR
journal: Clin Orthop Relat Res
year: '1981'
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Osteochondritis/diagnostic imaging, pathology, therapy"
- Radiography
- Sex Factors
- "Tarsal Bones/blood supply, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Köhler's disease of the tarsal navicular.
**Authors:** Williams GA, Cowell HR
**Journal:** Clin Orthop Relat Res (1981)

## Content

1. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1981 Jul-Aug;(158):53-8.

Köhler's disease of the tarsal navicular.

Williams GA, Cowell HR.

Twenty patients with Köhler's disease of the tarsal navicular were treated at 
the Alfred I. duPont Institute between 1948 and 1974. Three patients with 
asymptomatic, irregular ossification of the tarsal navicular also were 
investigated to evaluate the various modes of therapy and the long-term effects 
of various treatment programs. Symptomatic or true Köhler's disease must be 
differentiated clinically from asymptomatic roentgenographic changes resembling 
Köhler's osteochondrosis. The patients showed a significant decrease in 
morbidity with the use of a short-leg cast for an an eight-week period. Whereas 
patients who were not treated in a short-leg cast had symptoms for an average 
duration of 15 months, treated patients had symptoms for less than three months. 
Notwithstanding the decrease in morbidity with the use of a short-leg walking 
cast, the long-term results suggest that all of our patients eventually had 
spontaneous reconstitution of the navicular and excellent recovery of function.

PMID: 7273526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]