---
reference_id: "PMID:29510914"
title: Testing patterns for genetically triggered aortic and arterial aneurysms and dissections at an academic center.
authors:
- Hicks KL
- Byers PH
- Quiroga E
- Pepin MG
- Shalhub S
journal: J Vasc Surg
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2017.12.023
keywords:
- Academic Medical Centers
- Adult
- Aortic Dissection/genetics
- Aortic Aneurysm/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Practice Patterns, Physicians'"
- Retrospective Studies
- Tertiary Care Centers
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Testing patterns for genetically triggered aortic and arterial aneurysms and dissections at an academic center.
**Authors:** Hicks KL, Byers PH, Quiroga E, Pepin MG, Shalhub S
**Journal:** J Vasc Surg (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jvs.2017.12.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvs.2017.12.023)

## Content

1. J Vasc Surg. 2018 Sep;68(3):701-711. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2017.12.023. Epub 2018
 Mar 3.

Testing patterns for genetically triggered aortic and arterial aneurysms and
dissections at an academic center.

Hicks KL(1), Byers PH(2), Quiroga E(1), Pepin MG(3), Shalhub S(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of
Washington, Seattle, Wash.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of
Washington, Seattle, Wash; Department of Pathology, University of Washington,
Seattle, Wash.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Wash.
(4)Division of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of
Washington, Seattle, Wash. Electronic address: shalhub@uw.edu.

OBJECTIVE: The contemporary practice of testing for genetically triggered aortic
and arterial aneurysms and dissections is not well described. This study aimed
to describe this practice at a tertiary care academic center and to ascertain
the yield of testing in establishing the diagnosis in patients referred on the
basis of clinical suspicion.
METHODS: This is a retrospective cohort study of patients referred for vascular
genetic testing at an academic medical center between 2010 and 2015. Patients
were identified by Current Procedural Terminology diagnostic codes 81405, 81408,
and 81479 for genetic testing (Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome,
aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome, COL3A1, and familial thoracic aortic aneurysm
panel [ACTA2, COL3A1, TGFBR1, TGFBR2, SMAD3, TGFB2, MYLK, MYH11, and PRKG1
genes]) and by review of the collagen vascular laboratory database for genetic
testing results. Data abstracted included demographics, clinical history, reason
for referral, family history, referring provider type, and outcomes of genetic
testing.
RESULTS: Ninety-six patients (44.3% male; median age, 40.8 years) were referred
for suspected genetic vascular disease. Genetic testing was performed in 75
cases thought to have heritable mutations related to aortic or arterial
aneurysms and dissections. The most common reason for genetic testing was a
personal history of aortic or arterial aneurysms and dissections (62.3%; mean
age, 45.8 ± 11.1 years), followed by a family history of aortic or arterial
aneurysms and dissections without a personal history (26.6%; age, 28.8 ±
17.9 years). The most common genetic testing performed was a familial thoracic
aortic aneurysm gene panel (44%), followed by single gene testing for vascular
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (33.3%). Genetic testing identified a pathogenic mutation
in 36% of the cases. The highest likelihood of identifying a pathogenic mutation
was in those who had a family history with an already diagnosed mutation
(57.1%), followed by patients with aortic root and ascending aortic aneurysm or
dissection (42.3%).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with suspected genetically triggered vascular disease,
the yield of clinical vascular genetic testing is reasonable when selective
genetic testing is performed on the basis of personal or family history. These
tests should be obtained with appropriate expertise in genetic counseling and
interpretation of genetic testing results. Negative genetic test results in the
setting of a positive family history demonstrate the limits of testing and known
mutations leading to genetically triggered aortic and arterial aneurysms and
dissections and support the need for novel gene discovery.

Copyright © 2018 Society for Vascular Surgery. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2017.12.023
PMID: 29510914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
