---
reference_id: "PMID:32904109"
title: "Surgical Management of Shoulder and Knee Instability in Patients with Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: Joint Hypermobility Syndrome."
authors:
- Homere A
- Bolia IK
- Juhan T
- Weber AE
- Hatch GF
journal: Clin Orthop Surg
year: '2020'
doi: 10.4055/cios20103
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical Management of Shoulder and Knee Instability in Patients with Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: Joint Hypermobility Syndrome.
**Authors:** Homere A, Bolia IK, Juhan T, Weber AE, Hatch GF
**Journal:** Clin Orthop Surg (2020)
**DOI:** [10.4055/cios20103](https://doi.org/10.4055/cios20103)

## Content

1. Clin Orthop Surg. 2020 Sep;12(3):279-285. doi: 10.4055/cios20103. Epub 2020
Aug  19.

Surgical Management of Shoulder and Knee Instability in Patients with 
Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: Joint Hypermobility Syndrome.

Homere A(1), Bolia IK(1), Juhan T(1), Weber AE(1), Hatch GF(1).

Author information:
(1)USC Epstein Family Center for Sports Medicine, Keck Medicine of USC, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.

Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS) is a hereditary disorder of the connective tissue, 
which has been classified into numerous subtypes over the years. EDS is 
generally characterized by hyperextensible skin, hypermobile joints, and tissue 
fragility. According to the 2017 International Classification of EDS, 13 
subtypes of EDS have been recognized. The majority of genes involved in EDS are 
either collagen-encoding genes or genes encoding collagen-modifying enzymes. 
Orthopedic surgeons most commonly encounter patients with the hypermobile type 
EDS (hEDS), who present with signs and symptoms of hypermobility and/or 
instability in one or more joints. Patients with joint hypermobility syndrome 
(JHS) might also present with similar symptomatology. This article will focus on 
the surgical management of patients with knee or shoulder abnormalities related 
to hEDS/JHS.

Copyright © 2020 by The Korean Orthopaedic Association.

DOI: 10.4055/cios20103
PMCID: PMC7449847
PMID: 32904109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.