---
reference_id: "PMID:37794034"
title: "Genomic signatures of past and present chromosomal instability in Barrett's esophagus and early esophageal adenocarcinoma."
authors:
- Bao C
- Tourdot RW
- Brunette GJ
- Stewart C
- Sun L
- Baba H
- Watanabe M
- Agoston AT
- Jajoo K
- Davison JM
- Nason KS
- Getz G
- Wang KK
- Imamura Y
- Odze R
- Bass AJ
- Stachler MD
- Zhang CZ
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-41805-6
keywords:
- Humans
- "Barrett Esophagus/genetics, pathology"
- "Esophageal Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Adenocarcinoma/genetics, pathology"
- Chromosomal Instability/genetics
- "Precancerous Conditions/genetics, pathology"
- Genomics
- Disease Progression
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic signatures of past and present chromosomal instability in Barrett's esophagus and early esophageal adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Bao C, Tourdot RW, Brunette GJ, Stewart C, Sun L, Baba H, Watanabe M, Agoston AT, Jajoo K, Davison JM, Nason KS, Getz G, Wang KK, Imamura Y, Odze R, Bass AJ, Stachler MD, Zhang CZ
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-023-41805-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41805-6)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2023 Oct 4;14(1):6203. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-41805-6.

Genomic signatures of past and present chromosomal instability in Barrett's
esophagus and early esophageal adenocarcinoma.

Bao C(1)(2)(3)(4), Tourdot RW(2)(4)(5), Brunette GJ(2)(5), Stewart C(4), Sun
L(2)(6), Baba H(7), Watanabe M(8), Agoston AT(3), Jajoo K(9), Davison JM(10),
Nason KS(11), Getz G(3), Wang KK(12), Imamura Y(8), Odze R(3)(13), Bass
AJ(14)(15)(16), Stachler MD(17)(18)(19)(20), Zhang CZ(21)(22)(23).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline
Ave, Boston, MA, 02215, USA.
(2)Department of Data Science, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline Ave,
Boston, MA, 02215, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis St, Boston,
MA, 02115, USA.
(4)Cancer Program, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 415 Main St, Cambridge,
MA, 02142, USA.
(5)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Blavatnik Institute of Harvard Medical
School, 10 Shattuck St, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(6)Single-Cell Sequencing Program, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline
Ave, Boston, MA, 02215, USA.
(7)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, 2 Chome-40-1 Kurokami, Chuo Ward, Kumamoto,
Japan.
(8)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Cancer Institute Hospital of
Japanese Foundation of Cancer Research, 3-8-31 Ariake, Koto, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, 75 Francis St, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(10)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 200
Lothrop Street, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA.
(11)Department of Surgery, Baystate Medical Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, 759 Chestnut St, Springfield, MA, 01107, USA.
(12)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, 200 1st St SW,
Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.
(13)Department of Pathology and Lab Medicine, Tufts University School of
Medicine, 145 Harrison Ave, Boston, MA, 02111, USA.
(14)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline
Ave, Boston, MA, 02215, USA. adam.bass@novartis.com.
(15)Cancer Program, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 415 Main St, Cambridge,
MA, 02142, USA. adam.bass@novartis.com.
(16)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA.
adam.bass@novartis.com.
(17)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline
Ave, Boston, MA, 02215, USA. Matthew.Stachler@ucsf.edu.
(18)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis St,
Boston, MA, 02115, USA. Matthew.Stachler@ucsf.edu.
(19)Cancer Program, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 415 Main St, Cambridge,
MA, 02142, USA. Matthew.Stachler@ucsf.edu.
(20)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco. 513
Parnassus Ave, San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA. Matthew.Stachler@ucsf.edu.
(21)Department of Data Science, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline Ave,
Boston, MA, 02215, USA. cheng-zhong_zhang@dfci.harvard.edu.
(22)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis St,
Boston, MA, 02115, USA. cheng-zhong_zhang@dfci.harvard.edu.
(23)Cancer Program, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 415 Main St, Cambridge,
MA, 02142, USA. cheng-zhong_zhang@dfci.harvard.edu.

The progression of precancerous lesions to malignancy is often accompanied by
increasing complexity of chromosomal alterations but how these alterations arise
is poorly understood. Here we perform haplotype-specific analysis of chromosomal
copy-number evolution in the progression of Barrett's esophagus (BE) to
esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) on multiregional whole-genome sequencing data of
BE with dysplasia and microscopic EAC foci. We identify distinct patterns of
copy-number evolution indicating multigenerational chromosomal instability that
is initiated by cell division errors but propagated only after p53 loss. While
abnormal mitosis, including whole-genome duplication, underlies chromosomal
copy-number changes, segmental alterations display signatures of successive
breakage-fusion-bridge cycles and chromothripsis of unstable dicentric
chromosomes. Our analysis elucidates how multigenerational chromosomal
instability generates copy-number variation in BE cells, precipitates complex
alterations including DNA amplifications, and promotes their independent clonal
expansion and transformation. In particular, we suggest sloping copy-number
variation as a signature of ongoing chromosomal instability that precedes
copy-number complexity. These findings suggest copy-number heterogeneity in
advanced cancers originates from chromosomal instability in precancerous cells
and such instability may be identified from the presence of sloping copy-number
variation in bulk sequencing data.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-41805-6
PMCID: PMC10550953
PMID: 37794034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.J.B. had received research funding from Bayer,
Merck, and Novartis, was a consultant to Earli and HelixNano, a co-founder of
Signet Therapeutics, and is now an employee of the Novartis Institutes for
Biomedical Research. C.-Z.Zhang co-founded and serves as a scientific advisor to
Pillar Biosciences. J.M.D. has received consulting income from Castle
Biosciences. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.
