---
reference_id: "PMID:28741180"
title: "Loss of NHEJ1 Protein Due to a Novel Splice Site Mutation in a Family Presenting with Combined Immunodeficiency, Microcephaly, and Growth Retardation and Literature Review."
authors:
- Sheikh F
- Hawwari A
- Alhissi S
- Al Gazlan S
- Al Dhekri H
- Rehan Khaliq AM
- Borrero E
- El-Baik L
- Arnaout R
- Al-Mousa H
- Alazami AM
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-017-0423-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Alternative Splicing
- Child
- DNA Repair Enzymes/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- Family
- Female
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/genetics
- Male
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Protein Isoforms/genetics
- RNA Splice Sites/genetics
- Siblings
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of NHEJ1 Protein Due to a Novel Splice Site Mutation in a Family Presenting with Combined Immunodeficiency, Microcephaly, and Growth Retardation and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Sheikh F, Hawwari A, Alhissi S, Al Gazlan S, Al Dhekri H, Rehan Khaliq AM, Borrero E, El-Baik L, Arnaout R, Al-Mousa H, Alazami AM
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-017-0423-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-017-0423-5)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2017 Aug;37(6):575-581. doi: 10.1007/s10875-017-0423-5. Epub 
2017 Jul 24.

Loss of NHEJ1 Protein Due to a Novel Splice Site Mutation in a Family Presenting 
with Combined Immunodeficiency, Microcephaly, and Growth Retardation and 
Literature Review.

Sheikh F(1), Hawwari A(2)(3), Alhissi S(4), Al Gazlan S(5), Al Dhekri H(6), 
Rehan Khaliq AM(5)(7), Borrero E(4)(8), El-Baik L(4), Arnaout R(5)(7), Al-Mousa 
H(6)(7)(9), Alazami AM(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Allergy and Immunology section, King Faisal 
Specialist Hospital and Research Center, P.O Box 3354, MBC 46, Riyadh, 11211, 
Saudi Arabia. fsheikh96@kfshrc.edu.sa.
(2)King Abdullah International Medical Research Center (KAIMRC), King Saud bin 
Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, King Abdulaziz Medical City Hospital, 
Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs, Mail Code 520, PO Box 6664, Al Hasa, 
31982, Saudi Arabia. hawwariab@ngha.med.sa.
(3)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, 
P.O Box 3354, MBC 3, Riyadh, 11211, Saudi Arabia. hawwariab@ngha.med.sa.
(4)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, 
P.O Box 3354, MBC 3, Riyadh, 11211, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Medicine, Allergy and Immunology section, King Faisal 
Specialist Hospital and Research Center, P.O Box 3354, MBC 46, Riyadh, 11211, 
Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Allergy and Immunology section, King Faisal 
Specialist Hospital and Research Center, P.O Box 3354, MBC 58, Riyadh, 11211, 
Saudi Arabia.
(7)Alfaisal University, P.O. Box 50927, Riyadh, 1153, Saudi Arabia.
(8)SmartGenetics DNATICS S.A, 787 y Portugal Edf. 7sur, Tamesis, El Salvador.
(9)Saudi Human Genome Program, King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, 
Riyadh, 11442, Saudi Arabia.
(10)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, 
P.O Box 3354, MBC 3, Riyadh, 11211, Saudi Arabia. amalazami@kfshrc.edu.sa.
(11)Saudi Human Genome Program, King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, 
Riyadh, 11442, Saudi Arabia. amalazami@kfshrc.edu.sa.

INTRODUCTION: Non-homologous end joining gene 1 (NHEJ1) defect is a rare form of 
primary immune deficiency. Very few cases have been described from around the 
world.
PURPOSE: We are reporting the first family from the Arabian Gulf with three 
siblings presenting with combined immunodeficiency (CID), microcephaly, and 
growth retardation due to a novel NHEJ1 splice site mutation, in addition to a 
review of the previously published literature on this subject.
METHODS: Patients' clinical, immunological, and laboratory features were 
examined. Samples were subjected to targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS). 
The pathogenic change in NHEJ1 was confirmed by Sanger sequencing, then further 
assessed at the RNA and protein levels.
RESULTS: Patients were found to have a homozygous splice site mutation 
immediately downstream of exon 3 in NHEJ1 (c.390 + 1G > C). This led to two 
distinct mRNA products, one of which demonstrated skipping of the last 69 
basepairs (bp) of exon 3 while the other showed complete skipping of the entire 
exon. Although both deletions were in-frame, immunoblotting did not reveal any 
NHEJ1 protein products in patient cells, indicating a null phenotype.
CONCLUSION: Patients presenting with CID, microcephaly, and growth retardation 
should be screened for NHEJ1 gene mutations. We discuss our data in the context 
of one of our patients who is still alive at the age of 30 years, without 
transplantation, and who is the longest known survivor of this disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-017-0423-5
PMID: 28741180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]