---
reference_id: "PMID:34597127"
title: Cancer in Children With Fanconi Anemia and Ataxia-Telangiectasia-A Nationwide Register-Based Cohort Study in Germany.
authors:
- Dutzmann CM
- Spix C
- Popp I
- Kaiser M
- Erdmann F
- Erlacher M
- Dörk T
- Schindler D
- Kalb R
- Kratz CP
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.21.01495
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age Factors
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Fanconi Anemia/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Female
- Germany/epidemiology
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- Male
- "Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Prognosis
- Registries
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cancer in Children With Fanconi Anemia and Ataxia-Telangiectasia-A Nationwide Register-Based Cohort Study in Germany.
**Authors:** Dutzmann CM, Spix C, Popp I, Kaiser M, Erdmann F, Erlacher M, Dörk T, Schindler D, Kalb R, Kratz CP
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.21.01495](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.21.01495)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2022 Jan 1;40(1):32-39. doi: 10.1200/JCO.21.01495. Epub 2021 Oct
 1.

Cancer in Children With Fanconi Anemia and Ataxia-Telangiectasia-A Nationwide
Register-Based Cohort Study in Germany.

Dutzmann CM(1), Spix C(2), Popp I(3), Kaiser M(2), Erdmann F(2), Erlacher
M(4)(5)(6), Dörk T(7), Schindler D(3), Kalb R(3), Kratz CP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany.
(2)Division of Childhood Cancer Epidemiology, Institute of Medical
Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics, University Medical Center of the
Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, University of Würzburg, Biocenter, Würzburg,
Germany.
(4)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Freiburg, Germany.
(5)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(6)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2022 Jan 1;40(1):5-7. doi: 10.1200/JCO.21.02251.

PURPOSE: Fanconi anemia (FA) and ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) are rare inherited
syndromes characterized by abnormal DNA damage response and caused by pathogenic
variants in key DNA repair proteins that are also relevant in the pathogenesis
of breast cancer and other cancer types. The risk of cancer in children with
these diseases is poorly understood and has never been assessed in a
population-based cohort before.
METHODS: We identified 421 patients with FA and 160 patients with AT diagnosed
between 1973 and 2020 through German DNA repair disorder reference laboratories.
We linked patients' laboratory data with childhood cancer data from the German
Childhood Cancer Registry.
RESULTS: Among 421 patients with FA, we observed 33 cases of childhood cancer
(15 cases of myelodysplastic syndrome; seven cases of acute myeloid leukemia;
two cases of lymphoma, carcinoma, medulloblastoma, and nephroblastoma,
respectively; and one case of rhabdomyosarcoma, acute lymphoblastic leukemia,
and glioma, respectively) versus 0.74 expected (on the basis of population-based
incidence rates in Germany). This corresponds to a 39-fold increased risk
(standardized incidence ratio [SIR] = 39; 95% CI, 26 to 56). For all FA
subgroups combined, the cancer-specific SIR for myeloid neoplasms was 445 (95%
CI, 272 to 687). Among the 160 patients with AT, we observed 19 cases of
childhood cancer (15 cases of lymphoma, three cases of leukemia, and one case of
medulloblastoma) versus 0.32 expected. This corresponds to a 56-fold increased
risk (SIR = 56; 95% CI, 33 to 88). The cancer-specific SIR for Hodgkin lymphoma
was 215 (95% CI, 58 to 549) and for non-Hodgkin lymphoma 470 (95% CI, 225 to
865).
CONCLUSION: Approximately 11% of patients with FA and 14% of patients with AT
develop cancer by age 18 years.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.21.01495
PMCID: PMC8683217
PMID: 34597127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The following represents disclosure information
provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are considered
compensated unless otherwise noted. Relationships are self-held unless noted. I
= Immediate Family Member, Inst = My Institution. Relationships may not relate
to the subject matter of this manuscript. For more information about ASCO's
conflict of interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or
ascopubs.org/jco/authors/author-center. Open Payments is a public database
containing information reported by companies about payments made to US-licensed
physicians (Open Payments). No potential conflicts of interest were reported.
