---
reference_id: "PMID:18801598"
title: "[Scarlet fever with multisystem organ failure and hypertrophic gastritis]."
authors:
- Sandrini J
- Beucher AB
- Kouatchet A
- Lavigne C
journal: Rev Med Interne
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2008.07.010
keywords:
- Amoxicillin/therapeutic use
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Antistreptolysin/blood
- Biomarkers/blood
- Cefotaxime/therapeutic use
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Exanthema/microbiology
- Female
- "Gastritis, Hypertrophic/diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology, microbiology"
- Humans
- Immunologic Factors/blood
- Middle Aged
- "Multiple Organ Failure/diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology, microbiology"
- "Scarlet Fever/diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology, microbiology"
- "Shock, Septic/microbiology"
- "Streptococcus pyogenes/isolation & purification"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Scarlet fever with multisystem organ failure and hypertrophic gastritis].
**Authors:** Sandrini J, Beucher AB, Kouatchet A, Lavigne C
**Journal:** Rev Med Interne (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.revmed.2008.07.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.revmed.2008.07.010)

## Content

1. Rev Med Interne. 2009 May;30(5):456-9. doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2008.07.010. Epub
 2008 Sep 17.

[Scarlet fever with multisystem organ failure and hypertrophic gastritis].

[Article in French]

Sandrini J(1), Beucher AB, Kouatchet A, Lavigne C.

Author information:
(1)Département de médecine interne et gérontologie, CHU d'Angers, 49933 Angers 
cedex 9, France.

Scarlet fever is a rare disease in adult patients. We report a patient in whom 
scarlet fever was associated with hypertrophic gastritis and multiple organ 
failure. A 62-year-old woman presented with septic shock and multiple organ 
failure. Bacteriological survey was negative. Abdominal tomodensitometry showed 
an hypertrophic gastritis. Histological analysis demonstrated a non specific 
gastritis without any tumoral sign. Cefotaxime and amoxicillin led to 
improvement and hypertrophic gastritis progressively resolved. A sandpaper rash 
over the body with finger desquamation, elevation of antistreptolysin O and a 
recent contact with an infected grandson led to the diagnosis of scarlet fever. 
Due to antibiotic prescription, scarlet fever is now uncommon. Although 
classical, ENT or gastroenteritis presentations may be puzzling for the 
diagnosis of scarlet fever. As 150 years ago, diagnosis of scarlet fever is 
still a clinical challenge.

DOI: 10.1016/j.revmed.2008.07.010
PMID: 18801598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]