---
reference_id: "PMID:36627619"
title: "Struggling with the governance of interprofessional elderly care in mandated collaboratives: a qualitative study."
authors:
- Chrifou R
- Stalenhoef H
- Grit K
- Braspenning J
journal: BMC Health Serv Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12913-023-09026-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Struggling with the governance of interprofessional elderly care in mandated collaboratives: a qualitative study.
**Authors:** Chrifou R, Stalenhoef H, Grit K, Braspenning J
**Journal:** BMC Health Serv Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12913-023-09026-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-023-09026-1)

## Content

1. BMC Health Serv Res. 2023 Jan 11;23(1):26. doi: 10.1186/s12913-023-09026-1.

Struggling with the governance of interprofessional elderly care in mandated 
collaboratives: a qualitative study.

Chrifou R(1)(2), Stalenhoef H(3), Grit K(3), Braspenning J(4).

Author information:
(1)Radboud University Medical Centre, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, 
Scientific Centre for Quality of Healthcare (IQ Healthcare), Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Department of Public Health and 
Primary Care, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Erasmus School of Health Policy & Management (ESHPM), Erasmus University, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Radboud University Medical Centre, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, 
Scientific Centre for Quality of Healthcare (IQ Healthcare), Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands. joze.braspenning@radboudumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Governing interprofessional elderly care requires the commitment of 
many different organisations connected in mandated collaboratives. Research over 
a decade ago showed that the governance relied on clan-based mechanisms, while 
lacking formal rules and incentives for collaborations. Awareness and reflection 
were seen as first steps towards progression. We aim to identify critical 
governance features of contemporary mandated collaboratives by discussing cases 
introduced by the healthcare professionals and managers themselves.
METHODS: Semi-structured interviews (n = 24) with two regional mandated 
collaboratives took place from November 2019 to November 2020 in the Netherlands 
to learn more about critical governance features. The interviews were 
thematically analysed by the project team (authors) to synthesise the results 
and were subsequently validated during a focus group.
RESULTS: Critical governance features of interorganisational activities in 
mandated collaboratives include the gradual formulation of shared vision and 
clear client-centred goals, building trust and acquaintanceship for the 
advancement of an open collaborative culture, establishing a non-extreme 
formalised governance structure through leadership, mutual trust and innovation 
support and facilitating information exchange and formalisation tools for 
optimal elderly care.
CONCLUSION: Trust and leadership form the backbone of interorganisational 
functioning. Interorganisational functioning should be seen in light of their 
national embedment and resources that are (being made) available, which makes 
them susceptible to constant change as they struggle with balancing between 
critical features in a fluid and intermingled governance context. The identified 
critical features of (contemporary) mandated collaboratives may aid in assessing 
and improving interprofessional functioning within integrated elderly care. 
International debate on governance expectations of mandated collaboratives may 
further contribute to sharpening the roles of both managers and healthcare 
professionals.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-023-09026-1
PMCID: PMC9832249
PMID: 36627619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.