---
reference_id: "PMID:34807421"
title: Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes, Joint Hypermobility and Hypermobility Spectrum Disorders.
authors:
- Micale L
- Fusco C
- Castori M
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-80614-9_9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes, Joint Hypermobility and Hypermobility Spectrum Disorders.
**Authors:** Micale L, Fusco C, Castori M
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-030-80614-9_9](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80614-9_9)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2021;1348:207-233. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-80614-9_9.

Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes, Joint Hypermobility and Hypermobility Spectrum 
Disorders.

Micale L(1), Fusco C(1), Castori M(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della 
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della 
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. m.castori@operapadrepio.it.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is an umbrella term for a clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous group of hereditary soft connective tissue disorders mainly 
featuring abnormal cutaneous texture (doughy/velvety, soft, thin, and/or 
variably hyperextensible skin), easy bruising, and joint hypermobility. 
Currently, musculoskeletal manifestations related to joint hypermobility are 
perceived as the most prevalent determinants of the quality of life of affected 
individuals. The 2017 International Classification of Ehlers-Danlos syndromes 
and related disorders identifies 13 clinical types due to deleterious variants 
in 19 different genes. Recent publications point out the possibility of a wider 
spectrum of conditions that may be considered members of the Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome community. Most Ehlers-Danlos syndromes are due to inherited 
abnormalities affecting the biogenesis of fibrillar collagens and other 
components of the extracellular matrix. The introduction of next-generation 
sequencing technologies in the diagnostic setting fastened patients' 
classification and improved our knowledge on the phenotypic variability of many 
Ehlers-Danlos syndromes. This is impacting significantly patients' management 
and family counseling. At the same time, most individuals presenting with joint 
hypermobility and associated musculoskeletal manifestations still remain without 
a firm diagnosis, due to a too vague clinical presentation and/or the lack of an 
identifiable molecular biomarker. These individuals are currently defined with 
the term "hypermobility spectrum disorders". Hence, in parallel with a 
continuous update of the International Classification of Ehlers-Danlos 
syndromes, the scientific community is investing efforts in offering a more 
efficient framework for classifying and, hopefully, managing individuals with 
joint hypermobility.

© 2021. Springer Nature Switzerland AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-80614-9_9
PMID: 34807421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]