---
reference_id: "PMID:30985511"
title: "Incidence, Risk Factors and Outcomes Among Children With Acute Flaccid Myelitis: A Population-based Cohort Study in a California Health Network Between 2011 and 2016."
authors:
- Kane MS
- Sonne C
- Zhu S
- Malhotra A
- Van Haren K
- Messacar K
- Glaser CA
journal: Pediatr Infect Dis J
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/INF.0000000000002276
keywords:
- Adolescent
- California/epidemiology
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/epidemiology, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Enterovirus/classification, isolation & purification"
- "Enterovirus Infections/epidemiology, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- Male
- "Myelitis/epidemiology, pathology"
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/epidemiology, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence, Risk Factors and Outcomes Among Children With Acute Flaccid Myelitis: A Population-based Cohort Study in a California Health Network Between 2011 and 2016.
**Authors:** Kane MS, Sonne C, Zhu S, Malhotra A, Van Haren K, Messacar K, Glaser CA
**Journal:** Pediatr Infect Dis J (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/INF.0000000000002276](https://doi.org/10.1097/INF.0000000000002276)

## Content

1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2019 Jul;38(7):667-672. doi:
10.1097/INF.0000000000002276.

Incidence, Risk Factors and Outcomes Among Children With Acute Flaccid Myelitis:
A Population-based Cohort Study in a California Health Network Between 2011 and
2016.

Kane MS(1), Sonne C(2)(3), Zhu S(4), Malhotra A(5), Van Haren K(6), Messacar
K(7), Glaser CA(8).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pediatric Hospital Medicine, Kaiser Permanente Oakland
Medical Center, Oakland, California, University of California Berkeley School of
Public Health, Berkeley, California.
(2)Department of Radiology, Kaiser Permanente Oakland Medical Center, Oakland,
California.
(3)Department of Radiology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California.
(4)Division of Research, Biostatistical Consulting Unit, Kaiser Permanente,
Oakland, California.
(5)Department of Pediatric Specialty, Kaiser Permanente Oakland Medical Center,
Oakland, California.
(6)Department of Neurology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto,
California.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Sections of Hospital Medicine and Infectious
Diseases, University of Colorado/Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado.
(8)Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Kaiser Permanente Oakland
Medical Center, Oakland, California.

BACKGROUND: Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is defined as an acute onset of limb
weakness with longitudinal spinal gray matter lesions. Reporting bias and
misdiagnosis confound epidemiologic studies of AFM. We mitigated these
confounders by using a large data set to assess AFM incidence, risk factors and
outcomes in a fixed population.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was conducted within Kaiser Permanente
Northern California population among children 1-18 years. Cases met radiographic
and clinical criteria for AFM and were confirmed by two clinicians. Clinical and
demographic data were assessed.
RESULTS: A total of 28 patients met study criteria for AFM between January 1,
2011 and December 31, 2016, an overall rate of 1.46 per 100,000 person-years.
Incidence increased from 0.30 to 1.43 cases/per 100,000 person-years between
2011 and 2016, respectively. Median age was 9 years. Risk factors included male
sex, Asian ancestry and history of asthma, atopic dermatitis or head injury.
Risk factors associated with poliomyelitis were absent. Prodromal illness was
common; enterovirus was the most common pathogen detected (n = 5). Among the 27
patients with 12-month follow-up, most demonstrated some improvement, 11 (41.0%)
had full recovery, but several had significant deficits with one death reported
after the study period.
CONCLUSIONS: We employed a closed-population study to generate AFM incidence,
risk and outcome data. Our findings support previous reports of male sex and
atopy as risk factors. Interval increase in incidence, predisposing Asian
ancestry and history of head injury were unique findings to this study. Overall
prognosis was better than prior reports, but recovery was incomplete in several
patients.

DOI: 10.1097/INF.0000000000002276
PMID: 30985511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
