---
reference_id: "PMID:41430586"
title: Real-world analysis of subsequent-line strategies for EGFR C797S mutant non-small cell lung cancer patients acquired resistance to third-generation EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
authors:
- Xu J
- Zhu A
- Xu Y
- Zhang Y
- Shen Y
- Niu Y
- Zhong H
- Zhong R
journal: BMC Cancer
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s12885-025-15335-x
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, mortality, pathology"
- "ErbB Receptors/genetics, antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, mortality, pathology"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Female
- Male
- Mutation
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Adult
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Progression-Free Survival
- Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Real-world analysis of subsequent-line strategies for EGFR C797S mutant non-small cell lung cancer patients acquired resistance to third-generation EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
**Authors:** Xu J, Zhu A, Xu Y, Zhang Y, Shen Y, Niu Y, Zhong H, Zhong R
**Journal:** BMC Cancer (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12885-025-15335-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-025-15335-x)

## Content

1. BMC Cancer. 2025 Dec 22;25(1):1879. doi: 10.1186/s12885-025-15335-x.

Real-world analysis of subsequent-line strategies for EGFR C797S mutant
non-small cell lung cancer patients acquired resistance to third-generation EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Xu J(1), Zhu A(2), Xu Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Shen Y(1), Niu Y(3), Zhong H(1), Zhong
R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Shanghai Chest
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, Huaihai
West Road No. 241, 200030, China.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, No.2 People's Hospital
of Fuyang City; Infectious Disease Clinical College of Anhui Medical University,
Fuyang, China.
(4)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Shanghai Chest
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, Huaihai
West Road No. 241, 200030, China. tonic_chung@139.com.

BACKGROUND: The C797S mutation is a prevalent resistance mechanism to
third-generation EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Management of C797S-positive NSCLC encompasses diverse
approaches, including targeted and chemotherapy-based therapies.
METHODS: This analysis included 44 C797S mutant NSCLC patients, all of whom had
developed resistance to third-generation EGFR TKIs and had comprehensive
treatment and survival data available.
RESULTS: In the collective C797S + NSCLC cohort, chemotherapy-based therapies
demonstrated superior progression-free survival (PFS) relative to
non-chemotherapy treatments (5.5 versus 3.4 months, p = 0.014). Specific median
PFS outcomes for various regimens were as follows: chemotherapy plus
bevacizumab, 6.4 months; chemotherapy with both immunotherapy and bevacizumab,
6.1 months; and chemotherapy with immunotherapy, 4.2 months; chemotherapy alone,
3.8 months. Monotherapy and combinations involving anlotinib, different
generations of EGFR TKIs, brigatinib with cetuximab, and immunotherapy alone
ranged from 3.5 to 1.5 months. Among T790M+/C797S + cis patients, those
receiving chemotherapy-based regimens experienced longer PFS compared to those
treated with brigatinib and cetuximab (6.0 versus 2.9 months, p = 0.018). The
T790M-/C797S + subgroup saw greater PFS benefits from EGFR TKI-based therapies
compared to chemotherapy-based therapies (5.8 versus 4.8 months, p = 0.043).
CONCLUSIONS: To date, chemotherapy-based treatments remain the standard of care
for C797S + NSCLC patients resistant to third-generation EGFR TKIs. However, for
T790M-/C797S + patients received a third-generation EGFR TKI as first-line
therapy, EGFR-TKI rechallenge, involving a combination of first and
third-generation EGFR TKIs or first/second-generation TKIs, may be an optimal
strategy.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-025-15335-x
PMCID: PMC12723867
PMID: 41430586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to
participate: This retrospective study was approved by the Ethics Committee of
Shanghai Chest Hospital (approve number: IS24099) and was performed following
the Helsinki Declaration of 1964 (revised 2008). Informe consent was waived due
to the retrospective design of the study. Consent for publication: Not
applicable. Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
