---
reference_id: "PMID:26289251"
title: A physician survey reveals differences in management of idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis.
authors:
- Chin CI
- Kohn SL
- Keens TG
- Margetis MF
- Kato RM
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0319-5
keywords:
- Hemosiderosis/therapy
- Humans
- Lung Diseases/therapy
- Physicians
- "Practice Patterns, Physicians'"
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- "Hemosiderosis, Pulmonary"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A physician survey reveals differences in management of idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis.
**Authors:** Chin CI, Kohn SL, Keens TG, Margetis MF, Kato RM
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-015-0319-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-015-0319-5)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2015 Aug 20;10:98. doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0319-5.

A physician survey reveals differences in management of idiopathic pulmonary
hemosiderosis.

Chin CI(1), Kohn SL(2), Keens TG(3)(4), Margetis MF(3)(4), Kato RM(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California. chana.chantaw@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Pulmonology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California. sloloyan@chla.usc.edu.
(3)Division of Pulmonology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California.
(5)Division of Pulmonology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California. rkato@chla.usc.edu.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California. rkato@chla.usc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis (IPH) is a rare disorder of
unknown etiology characterized by chronic pulmonary hemorrhage and presents with
a triad of anemia, hemoptysis and pulmonary infiltrates. IPH is a diagnosis of
exclusion with a variable and disparate clinical course. Despite existing
therapies, few children achieve full remission while others have recurrent
hemorrhage, progressive lung damage, and premature death.
METHODS: We surveyed physicians who care for patients with IPH via a web-based
survey to assess the most common practices. 88 providers responded, caring for
274 IPH patients from five continents.
RESULTS: 63.3 % of respondents had patients that were initially misdiagnosed
with anemia (60.0 %) or gastrointestinal bleed (18.2 %). Respondents varied in
diagnostic tools used for evaluation. The key difference was in the use of lung
biopsy (51.9 %) for diagnosis. Common medications respondents used for treatment
at initial presentation and chronic maintenance therapy were corticosteroids
(98.7 and 84.0 %, initial and chronic therapy respectively), hydroxychloroquine
(33.3 and 64.0 %), azathioprine (8.0 and 37.3 %), and cyclophosphamide (4.0 and
16.0 %). There was agreement on the use of corticosteroids for exacerbation
amongst all respondents. Reported deaths before adulthood occurred in 7.3 % of
patients. We conclude that there were common features and specific variations in
physician management of IPH. Respondents were divided on whether to perform lung
biopsy for diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: Despite the availability of various immunomodulators,
corticosteroids remained the primary therapy. We speculate that the
standardization of care for diffuse alveolar hemorrhage will improve patient
outcomes.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-015-0319-5
PMCID: PMC4545926
PMID: 26289251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
