---
reference_id: "PMID:27573920"
title: Growth and nutrition in children with ataxia telangiectasia.
authors:
- Stewart E
- Prayle AP
- Tooke A
- Pasalodos S
- Suri M
- Bush A
- Bhatt JM
journal: Arch Dis Child
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2015-310373
keywords:
- Ataxia Telangiectasia/complications
- Body Height/physiology
- Body Mass Index
- Body Weight/physiology
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- "Enteral Nutrition/statistics & numerical data"
- Female
- "Growth Disorders/diet therapy, etiology"
- Humans
- Male
- Nutritional Status/physiology
- Prospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Growth and nutrition in children with ataxia telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Stewart E, Prayle AP, Tooke A, Pasalodos S, Suri M, Bush A, Bhatt JM
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1136/archdischild-2015-310373](https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2015-310373)

## Content

1. Arch Dis Child. 2016 Dec;101(12):1137-1141. doi:
10.1136/archdischild-2015-310373. Epub 2016 Aug 29.

Growth and nutrition in children with ataxia telangiectasia.

Stewart E(1), Prayle AP(2), Tooke A(1), Pasalodos S(3), Suri M(3), Bush
A(4)(5)(6), Bhatt JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Nottingham Children's Hospital, National Paediatric Ataxia Telangiectasia
Clinic, QMC, Nottingham, UK.
(2)University of Nottingham, School of Clinical Science, Queens Medical Centre,
Child Health, Nottingham, UK.
(3)Nottingham Clinical Genetics Service, National Paediatric Ataxia
Telangiectasia Clinic, Clinical Genetics Service, City Hospital Campus,
Nottingham, UK.
(4)Imperial College, London, UK.
(5)National Heart and Lung Institute, London, UK.
(6)Royal Brompton & Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare multisystem disease with high
early mortality from lung disease and cancer. Nutritional failure adversely
impacts outcomes in many respiratory diseases. Several factors influence
nutrition in children with A-T. We hypothesised that children with A-T have
progressive growth failure and that early gastrostomy tube feeding (percutaneous
endoscopic gastrostomy, PEG) is a favourable management option with good
nutritional outcomes.
METHODS: Data were collected prospectively on weight, height and body mass index
(BMI) at the national paediatric A-T clinic. Adequacy and safety of oral intake
was assessed. Nutritional advice was given at each multidisciplinary review.
RESULTS: 101 children (51 girls) had 222 measurements (32 once, 32 twice, 24
thrice) between 2009 and 2016. Median (IQR) age was 9.3 (6.4 to 13.1) years.
Mean (SD) weight, height and BMI Z-scores were respectively -1 (1.6), -1.2 (1.2)
and -0.4 (1.4). 35/101 children had weight Z-scores below -2 on at least one
occasion. Weight, height and BMI Z-scores declined over time. Decline was most
obvious after 8 years of age. 14/101 (14%) children had a PEG, with longitudinal
data available for 12. In a nested case control study, there was a trend for
improvement in weight in those with a PEG (p=0.10).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with A-T decline in growth over time. There is an urgent
need for new strategies, including an understanding of why growth falters. We
suggest early proactive consideration of PEG from age 8 years onwards to prevent
progressive growth failure.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/.

DOI: 10.1136/archdischild-2015-310373
PMID: 27573920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
