---
reference_id: "PMID:15615815"
title: "2-ethylhydracrylic aciduria in short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: application to diagnosis and implications for the R-pathway of isoleucine oxidation."
authors:
- Korman SH
- Andresen BS
- Zeharia A
- Gutman A
- Boneh A
- Pitt JJ
journal: Clin Chem
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2004.043265
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 2-ethylhydracrylic aciduria in short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: application to diagnosis and implications for the R-pathway of isoleucine oxidation.
**Authors:** Korman SH, Andresen BS, Zeharia A, Gutman A, Boneh A, Pitt JJ
**Journal:** Clin Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1373/clinchem.2004.043265](https://doi.org/10.1373/clinchem.2004.043265)

## Content

1. Clin Chem. 2005 Mar;51(3):610-7. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2004.043265. Epub 2004 
Dec 22.

2-ethylhydracrylic aciduria in short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 
deficiency: application to diagnosis and implications for the R-pathway of 
isoleucine oxidation.

Korman SH(1), Andresen BS, Zeharia A, Gutman A, Boneh A, Pitt JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical 
Center, Jerusalem, Israel. korman@hadassah.org.il

BACKGROUND: Isolated excretion of 2-methylbutyrylglycine (2-MBG) is the hallmark 
of short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (SBCADD), a recently 
identified defect in the proximal pathway of L-isoleucine oxidation. SBCADD 
might be underdiagnosed because detection and recognition of urine acylglycines 
is problematic. Excretion of 2-ethylhydracrylic acid (2-EHA), an intermediate 
formed in the normally minor R-pathway of L-isoleucine oxidation, has not 
previously been described in SBCADD.
METHODS: Samples from four patients with 2-MBG excretion were analyzed by gas 
chromatography-mass spectrometry for urine organic acids, quantification of 
2-MBG, and chiral determination of 2-methylbutyric acid. Blood-spot 
acylcarnitines were measured by electrospray-tandem mass spectrometry. Mutations 
in the ACADSB gene encoding SBCAD were identified by direct sequencing.
RESULTS: SBCADD was confirmed in each patient by demonstration of different 
ACADSB gene mutations. In multiple urine samples, organic acid analysis revealed 
a prominent 2-EHA peak usually exceeding the size of the 2-MBG peak. 
Approximately 40-46% of total 2-methylbutyric acid conjugates were in the form 
of the R-isomer, indicating significant metabolism via the R-pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: If, as generally believed, SBCAD is responsible for R-2-MBG 
dehydrogenation in the R-pathway, 2-EHA would not be produced in SBCADD. Our 
observation of 2-ethylhydracrylic aciduria in SBCADD implies that a different or 
alternative enzyme serves this function. Increased flux through the R-pathway 
may act as a safety valve for overflow of accumulating S-pathway metabolites and 
thereby mitigate the severity of SBCADD. Awareness of 2-ethylhydracrylic 
aciduria as a diagnostic marker could lead to increased detection of SBCADD and 
improved definition of its clinical phenotype.

DOI: 10.1373/clinchem.2004.043265
PMID: 15615815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]