---
reference_id: "PMID:38527963"
title: RTN2 deficiency results in an autosomal recessive distal motor neuropathy with lower limb spasticity.
authors:
- Maroofian R
- Sarraf P
- "O'Brien TJ"
- Kamel M
- Cakar A
- Elkhateeb N
- Lau T
- Patil SJ
- Record CJ
- Horga A
- Essid M
- Selim L
- Benrhouma H
- Ben Younes T
- Zifarelli G
- Pagnamenta AT
- Bauer P
- Khundadze M
- Mirecki A
- Kamel SM
- Elmonem MA
- Ghayoor Karimiani E
- Jamshidi Y
- Offiah AC
- Rossor AM
- Youssef-Turki IB
- Hübner CA
- Munot P
- Reilly MM
- Brown AEX
- Nagy S
- Houlden H
journal: Brain
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awae091
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Child
- Adult
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Middle Aged
- Animals
- Pedigree
- Lower Extremity/physiopathology
- Caenorhabditis elegans
- "Muscle Spasticity/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Spastic Paraplegia, Hereditary/genetics, physiopathology"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RTN2 deficiency results in an autosomal recessive distal motor neuropathy with lower limb spasticity.
**Authors:** Maroofian R, Sarraf P, O'Brien TJ, Kamel M, Cakar A, Elkhateeb N, Lau T, Patil SJ, Record CJ, Horga A, Essid M, Selim L, Benrhouma H, Ben Younes T, Zifarelli G, Pagnamenta AT, Bauer P, Khundadze M, Mirecki A, Kamel SM, Elmonem MA, Ghayoor Karimiani E, Jamshidi Y, Offiah AC, Rossor AM, Youssef-Turki IB, Hübner CA, Munot P, Reilly MM, Brown AEX, Nagy S, Houlden H
**Journal:** Brain (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awae091](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awae091)

## Content

1. Brain. 2024 Jul 5;147(7):2334-2343. doi: 10.1093/brain/awae091.

RTN2 deficiency results in an autosomal recessive distal motor neuropathy with 
lower limb spasticity.

Maroofian R(1), Sarraf P(2)(3), O'Brien TJ(4)(5), Kamel M(6), Cakar A(1)(7), 
Elkhateeb N(8), Lau T(1), Patil SJ(9), Record CJ(1), Horga A(1), Essid M(10), 
Selim L(6), Benrhouma H(10), Ben Younes T(10), Zifarelli G(11), Pagnamenta 
AT(12), Bauer P(11), Khundadze M(13), Mirecki A(13), Kamel SM(14), Elmonem 
MA(15), Ghayoor Karimiani E(16)(17), Jamshidi Y(16), Offiah AC(18), Rossor 
AM(1), Youssef-Turki IB(10), Hübner CA(13)(19), Munot P(20), Reilly MM(1), Brown 
AEX(4)(5), Nagy S(1)(21), Houlden H(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, 
London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(2)Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, Iranian Centre of Neurological 
Research, Neuroscience Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran 
1416753955, Iran.
(3)Department of Neurology, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran 1416753955, Iran.
(4)Institute of Clinical Sciences, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK.
(5)MRC Laboratory of Medical Sciences, London W12 0HS, UK.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Neurology and Metabolic Division, Kasr Alainy 
Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo 4240310, Egypt.
(7)Neuromuscular Unit, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul 34093, Turkey.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(9)Division of Medical Genetics, Mazumdar Shaw Medical Center, Narayana 
Hrudayalaya Hospital, Bangalore 560099, India.
(10)LR18SP04, Department of Child and Adolescent Neurology, National Institute 
Mongi Ben Hmida of Neurology, University of Tunis El Manar, Tunis, 1007, 
Tunisia.
(11)CENTOGENE GmbH, Rostock 18055, Germany.
(12)NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Centre for Human Genetics, 
University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.
(13)Institute of Human Genetics, Jena University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller 
University, Jena 07747, Germany.
(14)Department of Radiology, Cairo University, Cairo 12613, Egypt.
(15)Department of Clinical and Chemical Pathology, Kasr Alainy Faculty of 
Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo 12613, Egypt.
(16)Molecular and Clinical Sciences Institute, St. George's, University of 
London, London SW17 0RE, UK.
(17)Innovative Medical Research Center, Mashhad Branch, Islamic Azad University, 
Mashhad 9187147578, Iran.
(18)Division of Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine & Population Health, 
University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2RX, UK.
(19)Center for Rare Diseases, Jena University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller 
Universität, Jena 07747, Germany.
(20)Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Trust, 
London WC1N 3JH, UK.
(21)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Basel, University of Basel, 
Basel 4031, Switzerland.

Heterozygous RTN2 variants have been previously identified in a limited cohort 
of families affected by autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia 
(SPG12-OMIM:604805) with a variable age of onset. Nevertheless, the definitive 
validity of SPG12 remains to be confidently confirmed due to the scarcity of 
supporting evidence. In this study, we identified and validated seven novel or 
ultra-rare homozygous loss-of-function RTN2 variants in 14 individuals from 
seven consanguineous families with distal hereditary motor neuropathy (dHMN) 
using exome, genome and Sanger sequencing coupled with deep-phenotyping. All 
affected individuals (seven males and seven females, aged 9-50 years) exhibited 
weakness in the distal upper and lower limbs, lower limb spasticity and 
hyperreflexia, with onset in the first decade of life. Nerve conduction studies 
revealed axonal motor neuropathy with neurogenic changes in the 
electromyography. Despite a slowly progressive disease course, all patients 
remained ambulatory over a mean disease duration of 19.71 ± 13.70 years. 
Characterization of Caenorhabditis elegans RTN2 homologous loss-of-function 
variants demonstrated morphological and behavioural differences compared with 
the parental strain. Treatment of the mutant with an endoplasmic/sarcoplasmic 
reticulum Ca2+ reuptake inhibitor (2,5-di-tert-butylhydroquinone) rescued key 
phenotypic differences, suggesting a potential therapeutic benefit for 
RTN2-disorder. Despite RTN2 being an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident 
membrane shaping protein, our analysis of patient fibroblast cells did not find 
significant alterations in ER structure or the response to ER stress. Our 
findings delineate a distinct form of autosomal recessive dHMN with pyramidal 
features associated with RTN2 deficiency. This phenotype shares similarities 
with SIGMAR1-related dHMN and Silver-like syndromes, providing valuable insights 
into the clinical spectrum and potential therapeutic strategies for RTN2-related 
dHMN.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awae091
PMCID: PMC11224604
PMID: 38527963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: G.Z. and P.B. are employees of CENTOGENE. The 
other authors report no competing interests.