---
reference_id: "PMID:37688320"
title: Epigenomic signature of accelerated ageing in progeroid Cockayne syndrome.
authors:
- Crochemore C
- Chica C
- Garagnani P
- Lattanzi G
- Horvath S
- Sarasin A
- Franceschi C
- Bacalini MG
- Ricchetti M
journal: Aging Cell
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/acel.13959
keywords:
- Humans
- Aging/genetics
- Epigenomics
- Photosensitivity Disorders
- DNA Repair
- "DNA Repair Enzymes/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Cockayne Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenomic signature of accelerated ageing in progeroid Cockayne syndrome.
**Authors:** Crochemore C, Chica C, Garagnani P, Lattanzi G, Horvath S, Sarasin A, Franceschi C, Bacalini MG, Ricchetti M
**Journal:** Aging Cell (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/acel.13959](https://doi.org/10.1111/acel.13959)

## Content

1. Aging Cell. 2023 Oct;22(10):e13959. doi: 10.1111/acel.13959. Epub 2023 Sep 8.

Epigenomic signature of accelerated ageing in progeroid Cockayne syndrome.

Crochemore C(1)(2)(3), Chica C(4), Garagnani P(5)(6), Lattanzi G(7)(8), Horvath 
S(9)(10), Sarasin A(11), Franceschi C(12), Bacalini MG(13), Ricchetti M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité, Molecular Mechanisms of Pathological 
and Physiological Ageing Unit, UMR3738 CNRS, Paris, France.
(2)Institut Pasteur, Team Stability of Nuclear and Mitochondrial DNA, Stem Cells 
and Development, UMR3738 CNRS, Paris, France.
(3)Sup'Biotech, Villejuif, France.
(4)Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité, Bioinformatics and Biostatistics 
Hub, Paris, France.
(5)IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(6)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences (DIMEC), University of Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy.
(7)CNR Institute of Molecular Genetics "Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza", Unit of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(8)IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy.
(9)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, USA.
(10)Department of Biostatistics Fielding School of Public Health, University of 
California, Los Angeles, USA.
(11)Laboratory of Genetic Stability and Oncogenesis, Institut de Cancérologie 
Gustave Roussy, University Paris-Sud, Villejuif, France.
(12)Institute of Information Technologies, Mathematics and Mechanics, 
Lobachevsky University, Nizhniy Novgorod, Russia.
(13)IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Cockayne syndrome (CS) and UV-sensitive syndrome (UVSS) are rare genetic 
disorders caused by mutation of the DNA repair and multifunctional CSA or CSB 
protein, but only CS patients display a progeroid and neurodegenerative 
phenotype, providing a unique conceptual and experimental paradigm. As DNA 
methylation (DNAm) remodelling is a major ageing marker, we performed 
genome-wide analysis of DNAm of fibroblasts from healthy, UVSS and CS 
individuals. Differential analysis highlighted a CS-specific epigenomic 
signature (progeroid-related; not present in UVSS) enriched in three categories: 
developmental transcription factors, ion/neurotransmitter membrane transporters 
and synaptic neuro-developmental genes. A large fraction of CS-specific DNAm 
changes were associated with expression changes in CS samples, including in 
previously reported post-mortem cerebella. The progeroid phenotype of CS was 
further supported by epigenomic hallmarks of ageing: the prediction of DNAm of 
repetitive elements suggested an hypomethylation of Alu sequences in CS, and the 
epigenetic clock returned a marked increase in CS biological age respect to 
healthy and UVSS cells. The epigenomic remodelling of accelerated ageing in CS 
displayed both commonalities and differences with other progeroid diseases and 
regular ageing. CS shared DNAm changes with normal ageing more than other 
progeroid diseases do, and included genes functionally validated for regular 
ageing. Collectively, our results support the existence of an epigenomic basis 
of accelerated ageing in CS and unveil new genes and pathways that are 
potentially associated with the progeroid/degenerative phenotype.

© 2023 The Authors. Aging Cell published by Anatomical Society and John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.13959
PMCID: PMC10577576
PMID: 37688320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interests.