---
reference_id: "PMID:38982205"
title: Update on the pathophysiology and treatment of primary Sjögren syndrome.
authors:
- Baldini C
- Fulvio G
- La Rocca G
- Ferro F
journal: Nat Rev Rheumatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41584-024-01135-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on the pathophysiology and treatment of primary Sjögren syndrome.
**Authors:** Baldini C, Fulvio G, La Rocca G, Ferro F
**Journal:** Nat Rev Rheumatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41584-024-01135-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41584-024-01135-3)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2024 Aug;20(8):473-491. doi: 10.1038/s41584-024-01135-3.
Epub  2024 Jul 9.

Update on the pathophysiology and treatment of primary Sjögren syndrome.

Baldini C(1), Fulvio G(2), La Rocca G(2), Ferro F(2).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, 
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. chiara.baldini74@gmail.com.
(2)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, 
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

Sjögren syndrome or Sjögren disease is a chronic form of autoimmune epithelitis 
characterized by lymphocytic infiltration of the exocrine glands, particularly 
the salivary and lacrimal glands, leading to progressive glandular dysfunction 
and subsequent xerostomia and xerophthalmia. Other common manifestations include 
pain and fatigue, various systemic manifestations and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. 
Sjögren syndrome is therefore a complex and disabling disease associated with a 
reduced quality of life and with considerable long-term damage. Most of the 
available treatments are merely symptomatic with limited efficacy in both 
preventing glandular damage and suppressing systemic disease activity. In the 
past 10 years, great progress has been made in understanding the pathophysiology 
of Sjögren syndrome, opening new avenues towards a more targeted and 
individualized therapeutic approach to the disease. Indeed, several randomized 
controlled trials have just been completed or are poised to commence evaluating 
the effectiveness of novel drugs targeting both innate and adaptive immune 
pathways, including pro-inflammatory cytokines, the type I interferon system, B 
cell activation, B cell and T cell co-stimulation pathway, and ectopic germinal 
centre formation. Novel clinical trials are also ongoing exploring various 
targeted approaches (that is, IgG recycling inhibition, nuclease therapy and 
CAR-T cell therapy) for Sjögren syndrome.

© 2024. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41584-024-01135-3
PMID: 38982205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]