---
reference_id: "PMID:36140376"
title: Identification of a Novel Missense Mutation of POLR3A Gene in a Cohort of Sicilian Patients with Leukodystrophy.
authors:
- Musumeci A
- Calì F
- Scuderi C
- Vinci M
- Vitello GA
- Musumeci SA
- Chiavetta V
- Federico C
- Amore G
- Saccone S
- Di Rosa G
- Nicotera AG
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines10092276
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a Novel Missense Mutation of POLR3A Gene in a Cohort of Sicilian Patients with Leukodystrophy.
**Authors:** Musumeci A, Calì F, Scuderi C, Vinci M, Vitello GA, Musumeci SA, Chiavetta V, Federico C, Amore G, Saccone S, Di Rosa G, Nicotera AG
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines10092276](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines10092276)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2022 Sep 14;10(9):2276. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines10092276.

Identification of a Novel Missense Mutation of POLR3A Gene in a Cohort of 
Sicilian Patients with Leukodystrophy.

Musumeci A(1), Calì F(1), Scuderi C(1), Vinci M(1), Vitello GA(1), Musumeci 
SA(1), Chiavetta V(1), Federico C(2), Amore G(3), Saccone S(2), Di Rosa G(3), 
Nicotera AG(3).

Author information:
(1)Oasi Research Institute-IRCCS, Via Conte Ruggero 73, 94018 Troina, Italy.
(2)Department Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University of 
Catania, Via Androne 81, 95124 Catania, Italy.
(3)Department of Human Pathology of the Adult and Developmental Age, "Gaetano 
Barresi" University of Messina, Via Consolare Valeria 1, 98125 Messina, Italy.

Recessive mutations in the POLR3A gene cause POLR3-HLD (the second-most-common 
form of childhood-onset hypomyelinating leukodystrophy), a neurodegenerative 
disorder featuring deficient cerebral myelin formation. To date, more than 140 
POLR3A (NM_007055.3) missense mutations are related to the pathogenesis of 
POLR3-related leukodystrophy and spastic ataxia. Herein, in a cohort of five 
families from Sicily (Italy), we detected two cases of patients affected by 
POLR3-related leukodystrophy, one due to a compound heterozygous mutation in the 
POLR3A gene, including a previously undescribed missense mutation (c.328A > G 
(p.Lys110Glu)). Our study used an in-house NGS gene panel comprising 41 known 
leukodystrophy genes. Successively, we used a predictive test supporting the 
missense mutation as causative of disease, thus this mutation can be considered 
“Likely Pathogenic” and could be as a new pathogenetic mutation of the POLR3A 
gene causing a severe form of POLR3-HLD.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines10092276
PMCID: PMC9496502
PMID: 36140376

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.