---
reference_id: "PMID:29048419"
title: "A cross-sectional quantitative analysis of the natural history of Farber disease: an ultra-orphan condition with rheumatologic and neurological cardinal disease features."
authors:
- Zielonka M
- Garbade SF
- Kölker S
- Hoffmann GF
- Ries M
journal: Genet Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/gim.2017.133
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Cluster Analysis
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Farber Lipogranulomatosis/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality"
- Female
- Global Health
- Humans
- Male
- Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Rare Diseases/diagnosis
- Rheumatic Diseases/diagnosis
- Survival Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A cross-sectional quantitative analysis of the natural history of Farber disease: an ultra-orphan condition with rheumatologic and neurological cardinal disease features.
**Authors:** Zielonka M, Garbade SF, Kölker S, Hoffmann GF, Ries M
**Journal:** Genet Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/gim.2017.133](https://doi.org/10.1038/gim.2017.133)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2018 Apr;20(5):524-530. doi: 10.1038/gim.2017.133. Epub 2017 Oct
19.

A cross-sectional quantitative analysis of the natural history of Farber
disease: an ultra-orphan condition with rheumatologic and neurological cardinal
disease features.

Zielonka M(1)(2)(3), Garbade SF(1)(2), Kölker S(1)(2), Hoffmann GF(1)(2), Ries
M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Center for Pediatric
and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Center for Rare Diseases, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany.
(3)Heidelberg Research Center for Molecular Medicine (HRCMM), Heidelberg,
Germany.

PurposeFarber disease (OMIM 22800) is an ultrarare progressive multisystemic
neurodevelopmental storage disorder caused by a deficiency of the lysosomal
enzyme acid ceramidase (AC). Hard clinical end points for future clinical trials
remain to be defined.MethodsWe quantitatively analyzed published cases with
Farber disease (N = 96). The main outcome variables were survival and diagnostic
delay. As a potential predictor of survival, the influence of residual AC enzyme
activity was investigated. The analysis was performed in compliance with STROBE
criteria.ResultsThe median survival period of the study population was 3 years.
The median age at disease onset was 3 months, and the median age at diagnosis
was 17 months. The median diagnostic delay was 13.75 months. Patients with
residual AC activity in fibroblasts at more than 5.1% of the normal level
survived significantly longer than patients with residual AC activity below this
threshold. In addition, higher residual AC activity was associated with a later
onset of symptoms.ConclusionFarber disease onset is in infancy. Diagnostic delay
is typically substantial. Our data suggest a phenotype-biomarker association
with implications for future clinical and therapeutic trials. In the absence of
a prospective multicenter natural-history study protocol, we believe that our
modeling approach, based on published case descriptions, is the best and most
timely approximation for generalizability.

DOI: 10.1038/gim.2017.133
PMID: 29048419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
