---
reference_id: "PMID:25098561"
title: Identification of a homozygous splice site mutation in the dynein axonemal light chain 4 gene on 22q13.1 in a large consanguineous family from Pakistan with congenital mirror movement disorder.
authors:
- Ahmed I
- Mittal K
- Sheikh TI
- Vasli N
- Rafiq MA
- Mikhailov A
- Ohadi M
- Mahmood H
- Rouleau GA
- Bhatti A
- Ayub M
- Srour M
- John P
- Vincent JB
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1475-8
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Axonemal Dyneins/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 22/genetics"
- Consanguinity
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- Genetic Linkage
- Genotype
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Movement Disorders/congenital, genetics"
- Mutation
- Pakistan
- Pedigree
- RNA Splicing
- Sequence Alignment
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a homozygous splice site mutation in the dynein axonemal light chain 4 gene on 22q13.1 in a large consanguineous family from Pakistan with congenital mirror movement disorder.
**Authors:** Ahmed I, Mittal K, Sheikh TI, Vasli N, Rafiq MA, Mikhailov A, Ohadi M, Mahmood H, Rouleau GA, Bhatti A, Ayub M, Srour M, John P, Vincent JB
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-014-1475-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-014-1475-8)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2014 Nov;133(11):1419-29. doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1475-8. Epub 2014
 Aug 7.

Identification of a homozygous splice site mutation in the dynein axonemal light 
chain 4 gene on 22q13.1 in a large consanguineous family from Pakistan with 
congenital mirror movement disorder.

Ahmed I(1), Mittal K, Sheikh TI, Vasli N, Rafiq MA, Mikhailov A, Ohadi M, 
Mahmood H, Rouleau GA, Bhatti A, Ayub M, Srour M, John P, Vincent JB.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry and Development (MiND) Lab, Centre For Addiction 
and Mental Health, Campbell Family Mental Health Research Institute, R32, 250 
College Street, Toronto, ON, M5T 1R8, Canada.

Mirror movements (MRMV) are involuntary movements on one side of the body that 
mirror voluntary movements on the opposite side. Congenital mirror movement 
disorder is a rare, typically autosomal-dominant disorder, although it has been 
suspected that some sporadic cases may be due to recessive inheritance. Using a 
linkage analysis and a candidate gene approach, two genes have been implicated 
in congenital MRMV disorder to date: DCC on 18q21.2 (MRMV1), which encodes a 
netrin receptor, and RAD51 on 15q15.1 (MRMV2), which is involved in the 
maintenance of genomic integrity. Here, we describe a large consanguineous 
Pakistani family with 11 cases of congenital MRMV disorder reported across five 
generations, with autosomal recessive inheritance likely. Sanger sequencing of 
DCC and RAD51 did not identify a mutation. We then employed microarray 
genotyping and autozygosity mapping to identify a shared region of 
homozygosity-by-descent among the affected individuals. We identified a large 
autozygous region of ~3.3 Mb on chromosome 22q13.1 (Chr22:36605976-39904648). We 
used Sanger sequencing to exclude several candidate genes within this region, 
including DMC1 and NPTXR. Whole exome sequencing was employed, and identified a 
splice site mutation in the dynein axonemal light chain 4 gene, DNAL4. This 
splice site change leads to skipping of exon 3, and omission of 28 amino acids 
from DNAL4 protein. Linkage analysis using Simwalk2 gives a maximum Lod score of 
6.197 at this locus. Whether or how DNAL4 function may relate to the function of 
DCC or RAD51 is not known. Also, there is no suggestion of primary ciliary 
dyskinesis, situs inversus, or defective sperm in affected family members, which 
might be anticipated given a putative role for DNAL4 in axonemal-based dynein 
complexes. We suggest that DNAL4 plays a role in the cytoplasmic dynein complex 
for netrin-1-directed retrograde transport, and in commissural neurons of the 
corpus callosum in particular. This, in turn, could lead to faulty cross-brain 
wiring, resulting in MRMV.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-014-1475-8
PMID: 25098561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]