---
reference_id: "PMID:39040029"
title: "Raynaud's Phenomenon: A Current Update on Pathogenesis, Diagnostic Workup, and Treatment."
authors:
- Ture HY
- Lee NY
- Kim NR
- Nam EJ
journal: Vasc Specialist Int
year: '2024'
doi: 10.5758/vsi.240047
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Raynaud's Phenomenon: A Current Update on Pathogenesis, Diagnostic Workup, and Treatment.
**Authors:** Ture HY, Lee NY, Kim NR, Nam EJ
**Journal:** Vasc Specialist Int (2024)
**DOI:** [10.5758/vsi.240047](https://doi.org/10.5758/vsi.240047)

## Content

1. Vasc Specialist Int. 2024 Jul 23;40:26. doi: 10.5758/vsi.240047.

Raynaud's Phenomenon: A Current Update on Pathogenesis, Diagnostic Workup, and 
Treatment.

Ture HY(1), Lee NY(2), Kim NR(1), Nam EJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, School of 
Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Korea.
(2)Department of Clinical Pathology, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National 
University, Daegu, Korea.

Raynaud's phenomenon (RP) is a condition characterized by episodic, excessive 
vasoconstriction in the fingers and toes, triggered by cold or stress. This 
leads to a distinctive sequence of color changes in the digits. Pallor indicates 
reduced blood flow due to oxygen deprivation, while erythema appears as 
reperfusion. RP can be primary, with no identifiable underlying cause, or 
secondary, associated with other conditions. These conditions include autoimmune 
diseases, most commonly systemic sclerosis, vascular diseases; and neurological 
conditions. While the exact cause of RP remains unclear, genetic and hormonal 
(estrogen) factors are likely contributors. The pathogenesis of RP involves a 
complex interaction between the vascular wall, nerves, hormones, and humoral 
factors, disrupting the balance between vasoconstriction and vasodilation. In 
primary RP, the vascular abnormalities are primarily functional. However, in 
secondary RP, both functional and structural components occur in blood vessels. 
This explains why digital tissue damage frequently occurs in secondary RP but 
not primary RP. Diagnosis of RP is primarily clinical. Recent advancements in 
imaging techniques have aided in diagnosis and monitoring, but nail fold 
capillaroscopy remains the gold standard for distinguishing between primary and 
secondary RP. If there are signs of acute ischemic injury, vascular imaging, 
particularly preoperatively, is crucial to rule out other vaso-occlusive 
conditions. Management of RP focuses on alleviating symptoms and preventing 
tissue damage. Vasodilator medications are the first-line treatment when general 
measures like warmth and stress management are not sufficient. Dihydropyridine 
calcium channel blockers (CCBs), such as nifedipine, are commonly used for 
vasodilation. Phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors and prostaglandin analogs are 
alternative options for patients who do not respond to CCBs or have ischemic 
tissue damage. Bosentan, an endothelin-1 receptor antagonist, has shown 
effectiveness in treating and preventing digital ulcers, especially in patients 
with multiple ulcers. For severe cases, botulinum toxin injections or 
sympathectomy surgery can be used to control RP symptoms. However, botulinum 
toxin injections require repeated administration, and sympathectomy's long-term 
effectiveness is uncertain. Fat grafting is a promising surgical therapy for 
promoting healing and preventing tissue injury.

DOI: 10.5758/vsi.240047
PMCID: PMC11266082
PMID: 39040029

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors have nothing 
to disclose.