---
reference_id: "PMID:21976273"
title: "New insights into the molecular mechanism of multiple synostoses syndrome (SYNS): mutation within the GDF5 knuckle epitope causes noggin-resistance."
authors:
- Schwaerzer GK
- Hiepen C
- Schrewe H
- Nickel J
- Ploeger F
- Sebald W
- Mueller T
- Knaus P
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.532
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New insights into the molecular mechanism of multiple synostoses syndrome (SYNS): mutation within the GDF5 knuckle epitope causes noggin-resistance.
**Authors:** Schwaerzer GK, Hiepen C, Schrewe H, Nickel J, Ploeger F, Sebald W, Mueller T, Knaus P
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.532](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.532)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2012 Feb;27(2):429-42. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.532.

New insights into the molecular mechanism of multiple synostoses syndrome 
(SYNS): mutation within the GDF5 knuckle epitope causes noggin-resistance.

Schwaerzer GK(1), Hiepen C, Schrewe H, Nickel J, Ploeger F, Sebald W, Mueller T, 
Knaus P.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Chemistry and Biochemistry, Free University Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany.

Growth and differentiation factor 5 (GDF5), a member of the bone morphogenetic 
protein (BMP) family, is essential for cartilage, bone, and joint formation. 
Antagonists such as noggin counteract BMP signaling by covering the ligand's BMP 
type I (BMPRI) and type II (BMPRII, ActRII, ActRIIB) interaction sites. The 
mutation GDF5-S94N is located within the BMPRII interaction site, the so-called 
knuckle epitope, and was identified in patients suffering from multiple 
synostoses syndrome (SYNS). SYNS is characterized by progressive symphalangism, 
carpal/tarsal fusions, deafness and mild facial dysmorphism. Here we present a 
novel molecular mechanism of a GDF5 mutation affecting chondrogenesis and 
osteogenesis. GDF5-S94N exhibits impaired binding to BMPRII causing alleviated 
Smad and non-Smad signaling and reduced chondrogenic differentiation of ATDC5 
cells. Surprisingly, chondrogenesis in mouse micromass cultures was strongly 
enhanced by GDF5-S94N. By using quantitative techniques (SPR, reporter gene 
assay, ALP assay, qPCR), we uncovered that this gain of function is caused by 
strongly reduced affinity of GDF5-S94N to the BMP/GDF antagonist noggin and the 
consequential lack of noggin inhibition. Thus, since noggin is upregulated 
during chondrogenic differentiation, GDF5-S94N exceeds the GDF5 action, which 
results in the phenotypic outcome of SYNS. The detailed molecular 
characterization of GDF5-S94N as a noggin-resistant growth factor illustrates 
the potential of GDF5 mutants in applications with defined therapeutical needs.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.532
PMID: 21976273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]