---
reference_id: "PMID:37257666"
title: "Aspergillus welwitschiae; an otomycosis predominant agent, new epidemiological and antifungal susceptibility data from Iran."
authors:
- Halvaeezadeh M
- Jalaee GA
- Fatahinia M
- Mahmoudabadi AZ
journal: Microb Pathog
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2023.106180
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aspergillus welwitschiae; an otomycosis predominant agent, new epidemiological and antifungal susceptibility data from Iran.
**Authors:** Halvaeezadeh M, Jalaee GA, Fatahinia M, Mahmoudabadi AZ
**Journal:** Microb Pathog (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.micpath.2023.106180](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micpath.2023.106180)

## Content

1. Microb Pathog. 2023 Aug;181:106180. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2023.106180. Epub 
2023 May 29.

Aspergillus welwitschiae; an otomycosis predominant agent, new epidemiological 
and antifungal susceptibility data from Iran.

Halvaeezadeh M(1), Jalaee GA(2), Fatahinia M(1), Mahmoudabadi AZ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Mycology, School of Medicine, Ahvaz Jundishapur 
University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran; Infectious and Tropical Diseases 
Research Center, Health Research Institute, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of 
Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.
(2)Apadana Hospital, Sorosh Street, Ahvaz, Iran.
(3)Department of Medical Mycology, School of Medicine, Ahvaz Jundishapur 
University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran; Infectious and Tropical Diseases 
Research Center, Health Research Institute, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of 
Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran. Electronic address: zarei40@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Black aspergilli (section Nigri) are predominate etiologic agents of 
otomycosis, however, there is controversy in the exact differentiation of 
species. For several decades Aspergillus niger is considered the main otomycosis 
etiologic agent. Recently calmodulin gene has been accepted as a more suitable 
gene for the accurate assignment of Aspergillus species. Therefore, it is found 
that A. welwitschiae and A. tubingensis are the main otomycosis agents based on 
calmodulin gene sequencing.
AIMS: The objective of the study was to isolate and identify black aspergilli 
from otomycosis using the calmodulin gene and their susceptibility was evaluated 
against several antifungals.
METHODS: 134 clinically confirmed patients with otomycosis were sampled and 
specimens were cultured on Sabouraud dextrose agar (SDA) at ambient temperature. 
Black aspergilli were screened based on colony morphology on SDA and microscopy 
features and then subjected to sequencing using calmodulin primers. Moreover, 
antifungal susceptibility for isolates was applied based on CLSI M38 3rd 
edition.
RESULTS: 132 (98.5%) of patients had positive cultures for different species of 
molds or yeasts. Most of the patients (30.3%) ranged from 31 to 40 years, and 
56.1% of them were female. Aspergillus section Nigri was the most prevalent 
fungal pathogen and of 86 isolates, 60.5% isolates were identified as A. 
welwitschiae, A. tubingensis, 31 (36.0%), A. niger (sensu stricto), 2 (2.3%), 
and A. neoniger 1 (1.2%). According to the maximum likelihood method, all 
isolates of A. tubingensis and one isolate of A. neoniger were included in the 
A. tubingensis clade. On the other hand, the clade of A. niger/A. welwitschiae 
contains, all isolates of A. welwitschiae, two A. niger (sensu stricto) 
isolates, and 36 isolates from other countries. Aspergillus welwitschiae was 
more sensitive to luliconazole, voriconazole, and amphotericin B compared to A. 
tubingensis. 78.8% of A. welwitschiae strains were classified as non-wild type 
to nystatin compared to 35.5% of A. tubingensis. Moreover, 3.2% of A. 
tubingensis strains were non-wild type against amphotericin B. The isolates of 
A. tubingensis were more sensitive to itraconazole than A. welwitschiae.
CONCLUSIONS: It is concluded that in contrast, to the previous study A. 
welwitschiae from section Nigri is the most causative agent of otomycosis 
followed by A. tubingensis. In addition, the isolates of A. welwitschiae were 
more sensitive to luliconazole, voriconazole, and amphotericin B compared to A. 
tubingensis. Whereas, the isolates of A. tubingensis were more sensitive to 
itraconazole than A. welwitschiae. On the other hand, 78.8% and 35.5% of A. 
welwitschiae and A. tubingensis strains were classified as a non-wild type 
against nystatin. Also, 3.2% of A. tubingensis strains were non-wild type 
against amphotericin B. All A. welwitschiae were included in the A. niger/A. 
welwitschiae clade, associated with different clinical and environmental species 
from different countries.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2023.106180
PMID: 37257666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
state that there is no competitive concern of any nature with this manuscript.