---
reference_id: "PMID:34436699"
title: "Drug-induced colitis on BRAF and MEK inhibitors for BRAF V600E-mutated non-small cell lung cancer: a case report."
authors:
- Gelsomino F
- Di Federico A
- Tardio ML
- Grilli G
- "D'Errico A"
- Ardizzoni A
- Salvagni S
journal: Invest New Drugs
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s10637-021-01166-7
keywords:
- Aged
- "Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects
- "Benzimidazoles/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Carbamates/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Colitis/chemically induced
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- "Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Mutation
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- "Sulfonamides/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Drug-induced colitis on BRAF and MEK inhibitors for BRAF V600E-mutated non-small cell lung cancer: a case report.
**Authors:** Gelsomino F, Di Federico A, Tardio ML, Grilli G, D'Errico A, Ardizzoni A, Salvagni S
**Journal:** Invest New Drugs (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10637-021-01166-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10637-021-01166-7)

## Content

1. Invest New Drugs. 2022 Feb;40(1):190-193. doi: 10.1007/s10637-021-01166-7.
Epub  2021 Aug 26.

Drug-induced colitis on BRAF and MEK inhibitors for BRAF V600E-mutated non-small
cell lung cancer: a case report.

Gelsomino F(1)(2), Di Federico A(3)(4), Tardio ML(5), Grilli G(3)(4), D'Errico
A(4)(5), Ardizzoni A(3)(4), Salvagni S(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical Oncology Unit, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Di Bologna,
Bologna, Italy. francesco_gelsomino@aosp.bo.it.
(2)Department of Specialized, Experimental and Diagnostic Medicine, University
of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. francesco_gelsomino@aosp.bo.it.
(3)Medical Oncology Unit, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Di Bologna,
Bologna, Italy.
(4)Department of Specialized, Experimental and Diagnostic Medicine, University
of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(5)Anatomy and Histopathology Unit, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Di
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: The combination of BRAF and MEK inhibitors has deeply changed the
treatment of BRAF V600-mutant non-small cell lung cancer patients. These agents
demonstrated high antitumor activity as well as safe and manageable toxicity
profile. Hypertension, pyrexia and increased liver enzymes are the most common
adverse events. Gastrointestinal toxicities are rare, and mainly consist of mild
grade vomiting and diarrhea.
CASE REPORT: We report the case of 70-year-old man affected by BRAF V600-mutant
NSCLC with bilateral lung and bone metastases. First-line treatment with
encorafenib (450 mg once daily) and binimetinib (45 mg twice daily) was
administered within a clinical trial. At the first radiological assessment,
computed tomography (CT) scan showed a partial response and signs of intestinal
inflammation were reported. The investigational treatment was timely withheld.
The subsequent colonoscopy demonstrated the presence of ulcerative lesions at
the caecal tract, and the histological diagnosis suggested a drug-induced
colitis. No specific treatment was given as the patient did not report abdominal
disturbances. Forty-five days after treatment interruption a new CT scan showed
the resolution of bowel inflammation and investigational treatment was resumed
at the same doses. The patient is still alive and free of toxicity recurrence
after 11 months from treatment initiation. Conclusion. Severe gastrointestinal
toxicities are uncommon with BRAF and MEK inhibitors, although cases of colitis
and intestinal perforation have already been reported in literature. The
pathogenesis seems to be related to the MAPK pathway inhibition performed by MEK
inhibitors. These adverse events should be accounted given the potential to
evolve into life-threatening conditions.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-021-01166-7
PMCID: PMC8763820
PMID: 34436699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Francesco Gelsomino received honoraria for
advisory board participation: Eli-Lilly. Andrea Ardizzoni received honoraria for
advisory board participation: BMS, MSD, ROCHE, Astra Zeneca, Eli-Lilly. Research
Grants: Celgene, BMS, Ipsen, Roche. All remaining authors have declared no
conflicts of interest.
