---
reference_id: "PMID:31974582"
title: Hypophosphataemic osteomalacia due to cadmium exposure in the silver industry.
authors:
- Paul J
- Cherian KE
- Thomas N
- Paul TV
journal: Occup Med (Lond)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/occmed/kqaa001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypophosphataemic osteomalacia due to cadmium exposure in the silver industry.
**Authors:** Paul J, Cherian KE, Thomas N, Paul TV
**Journal:** Occup Med (Lond) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/occmed/kqaa001](https://doi.org/10.1093/occmed/kqaa001)

## Content

1. Occup Med (Lond). 2020 May 27;70(3):207-210. doi: 10.1093/occmed/kqaa001.

Hypophosphataemic osteomalacia due to cadmium exposure in the silver industry.

Paul J(1), Cherian KE(1), Thomas N(1), Paul TV(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Christian Medical College and Hospital, Vellore, 
Tamil Nadu, India.

Chronic heavy metal exposure and the health hazards that ensue are important 
public-health problems. We highlight the occurrence of hypophosphataemic 
osteomalacia due to chronic cadmium exposure in the silver industry in India. 
Three silversmiths presented similarly with clinical, biochemical and 
radiological evidence of hypophosphataemic osteomalacia. Considering their 
occupation, their blood samples were screened for heavy metals and were found to 
have toxic levels of cadmium. They were initiated on neutral phosphate and 
calcitriol. On follow-up, they reported significant reduction in severity of 
symptoms. It is essential to maintain a high index of suspicion in diagnosing 
this condition. A thorough knowledge of the occupational background of patients, 
as well as ambient conditions at the workplace is of utmost importance in 
contemplating the possibility of such rare occurrences. Moreover, regulatory 
agencies and policy makers ought to survey the silver industry and ensure that 
the metals used are within permissible safe limits of exposure.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society of Occupational Medicine. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/occmed/kqaa001
PMID: 31974582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]