---
reference_id: "PMID:16036877"
title: "Primary ciliary dyskinesia: a review."
authors:
- Carlén B
- Stenram U
journal: Ultrastruct Pathol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1080/01913120590951220
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary ciliary dyskinesia: a review.
**Authors:** Carlén B, Stenram U
**Journal:** Ultrastruct Pathol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1080/01913120590951220](https://doi.org/10.1080/01913120590951220)

## Content

1. Ultrastruct Pathol. 2005 May-Aug;29(3-4):217-20. doi:
10.1080/01913120590951220.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia: a review.

Carlén B(1), Stenram U.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Lund, Lund, Sweden. b.carlen@telia.com

Comment in
    Ultrastruct Pathol. 2006 Sep-Oct;30(5):401-2. doi: 
10.1080/01913120600939532.

The entity sinusitis, bronchiectasis, and situs inversus is since long named 
Kartagener syndrome. Nowadays the designation used is primary ciliary dyskinesia 
(PCD), which implies cilia with decreased or total absence of motility, which 
may result in sinusitis, chronic bronchitis, bronchiectasis, and male 
infertility. A large number of deficiencies detectable on the ultrastructural 
level give rise to PCD. There may also be aberrations not detected up to the 
present. The normal left-right asymmetry of the body is thought to be due to the 
beating of the cilia in the embryonic (Hensen's) node. Total immotility of the 
cilia should therefore result in random asymmetry of the body that is situs 
inversus in 50% of the cases. It has also been claimed that 50% of cases with 
PCD have situs inversus. However, several deficiencies apparently do not cause 
total immotility, and all ultrastructural variants are not associated with situs 
inversus in 50% of the cases. Several of the deficiencies are difficult to 
detect. Optimal fixation and handling are therefore obligatory. The genetic 
changes behind the variants are now being studied in several laboratories. 
Patients with PCD have very low levels of nasal nitric oxide, which is of 
increasing diagnostic importance. Other established diagnostic methods are the 
saccharine test and determination of ciliary beat frequency.

DOI: 10.1080/01913120590951220
PMID: 16036877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]