---
reference_id: "PMID:34576247"
title: "Chronic Kidney Disease: Strategies to Retard Progression."
authors:
- Yan MT
- Chao CT
- Lin SH
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms221810084
keywords:
- Acidosis/physiopathology
- "Acute Kidney Injury/physiopathology, therapy"
- Anemia
- "Culture Media, Conditioned"
- Diabetes Complications/physiopathology
- Diabetes Mellitus/physiopathology
- Disease Progression
- Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Humans
- Hyperkalemia
- Hypertension/physiopathology
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/complications"
- Mesenchymal Stem Cells/metabolism
- Nephrolithiasis/physiopathology
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/physiopathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic Kidney Disease: Strategies to Retard Progression.
**Authors:** Yan MT, Chao CT, Lin SH
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms221810084](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms221810084)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Sep 18;22(18):10084. doi: 10.3390/ijms221810084.

Chronic Kidney Disease: Strategies to Retard Progression.

Yan MT(1)(2), Chao CT(3)(4)(5), Lin SH(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Cathay General Hospital, 
School of Medicine, Fu-Jen Catholic University, Taipei 106, Taiwan.
(2)National Defense Medical Center, Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Taipei 114, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Nephrology Division, National Taiwan 
University Hospital, Taipei 104, Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Toxicology, National Taiwan University College of 
Medicine, Taipei 104, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Nephrology Division, National Taiwan 
University College of Medicine, Taipei 104, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Nephrology Division, National Defense 
Medical Center, Taipei 104, Taiwan.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD), defined as the presence of irreversible structural 
or functional kidney damages, increases the risk of poor outcomes due to its 
association with multiple complications, including altered mineral metabolism, 
anemia, metabolic acidosis, and increased cardiovascular events. The mainstay of 
treatments for CKD lies in the prevention of the development and progression of 
CKD as well as its complications. Due to the heterogeneous origins and the 
uncertainty in the pathogenesis of CKD, efficacious therapies for CKD remain 
challenging. In this review, we focus on the following four themes: first, a 
summary of the known factors that contribute to CKD development and progression, 
with an emphasis on avoiding acute kidney injury (AKI); second, an 
etiology-based treatment strategy for retarding CKD, including the approaches 
for the common and under-recognized ones; and third, the recommended approaches 
for ameliorating CKD complications, and the final section discusses the novel 
agents for counteracting CKD progression.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms221810084
PMCID: PMC8470895
PMID: 34576247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial or 
non-financial competing interests to declare in relation to this manuscript.