---
reference_id: "PMID:3309860"
title: "Achondrogenesis type II, abnormalities of extracellular matrix."
authors:
- Horton WA
- Machado MA
- Chou JW
- Campbell D
journal: Pediatr Res
year: '1987'
doi: 10.1203/00006450-198709000-00017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Achondrogenesis type II, abnormalities of extracellular matrix.
**Authors:** Horton WA, Machado MA, Chou JW, Campbell D
**Journal:** Pediatr Res (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1203/00006450-198709000-00017](https://doi.org/10.1203/00006450-198709000-00017)

## Content

1. Pediatr Res. 1987 Sep;22(3):324-9. doi: 10.1203/00006450-198709000-00017.

Achondrogenesis type II, abnormalities of extracellular matrix.

Horton WA(1), Machado MA, Chou JW, Campbell D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical School, Houston 77225.

Immune and lectin histochemical and microchemical methods were employed to study 
growth cartilage from seven cases of achondrogenesis type II (Langer-Saldino). 
The normal architecture of the epiphyseal and growth plate cartilage was 
replaced by a morphologically heterogeneous tissue. Some areas were comprised of 
vascular canals surrounded by extensive fibrous tissue and enlarged cells that 
had the appearance and histochemical characteristics of hypertrophic 
chondrocytes. Other areas contained a mixture of cells ranging from small to the 
enlarged chondrocytes. The extracellular matrix in the latter areas was more 
abundant and had characteristics of both precartilage mesenchymal matrix and 
typical cartilage matrix; it contained types I and II collagen, cartilage 
proteoglycan, fibronectin, and peanut agglutinin binding glycoconjugate(s). 
Peptide mapping of cyanogen bromide cartilage collagen peptides revealed the 
presence of types I and II collagen. These observations could be explained by a 
defect in the biosynthesis of type II collagen or in chondrocyte 
differentiation.

DOI: 10.1203/00006450-198709000-00017
PMID: 3309860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]