---
reference_id: "PMID:40397469"
title: Burden of Skin Cancer in Older Adults From 1990 to 2021 and Modelled Projection to 2050.
authors:
- Wang R
- Chen Y
- Shao X
- Chen T
- Zhong J
- Ou Y
- Chen J
journal: JAMA Dermatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2025.1276
keywords:
- Humans
- "Skin Neoplasms/epidemiology, mortality"
- Aged
- Male
- Female
- Basal Cell Carcinoma/epidemiology
- Incidence
- Prevalence
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/epidemiology"
- Global Burden of Disease/trends
- Melanoma/epidemiology
- Disability-Adjusted Life Years
- "Global Health/statistics & numerical data"
- Registries
- Quality-Adjusted Life Years
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Burden of Skin Cancer in Older Adults From 1990 to 2021 and Modelled Projection to 2050.
**Authors:** Wang R, Chen Y, Shao X, Chen T, Zhong J, Ou Y, Chen J
**Journal:** JAMA Dermatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamadermatol.2025.1276](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamadermatol.2025.1276)

## Content

1. JAMA Dermatol. 2025 Jul 1;161(7):715-722. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2025.1276.

Burden of Skin Cancer in Older Adults From 1990 to 2021 and Modelled Projection
to 2050.

Wang R(1), Chen Y(1), Shao X(1), Chen T(1), Zhong J(1), Ou Y(1), Chen J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, China.

IMPORTANCE: Skin cancer is a significant public health threat in the aging
population, yet data on its burden and trends are limited.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the global burden of skin cancer among adults 65 years or
older from 1990 to 2021, and to project its change to 2050.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: In this observational study, population-based
registry data were extracted from the Global Burden of Diseases (GBD) Study
2021. The database covers 204 countries and territories, ensuring global
applicability of the results. Data analysis was conducted from June 9, 2024, to
February 18, 2025.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Age-standardized rates of prevalence, incidence,
deaths, and disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) were calculated per 100 000
population. Estimated rates of disease burden were calculated for 2050.
RESULTS: A worldwide total of 153 993 melanoma, 1 463 424 squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC), and 2 802 354 basal cell carcinoma (BCC) instances were
estimated for 2021. SCC exhibited the highest age-standardized rate of
prevalence (236.91 per 100 000 population; 95% uncertainty interval [UI],
188.23-303.82), deaths (6.16 per 100 000 population; 95% UI, 5.13-6.87), and
DALYs (95.50 per 100 000 population; 95% UI, 81.65-106.39), whereas BCC
displayed the highest incidence rate (371.97 per 100 000 population; 95% UI,
310.75-439.58). The disease burden was notably greater in male individuals than
in female individuals. During the observation period, the global burden of skin
cancer among older people demonstrated a general upward trend. Decomposition
analysis indicated that population growth was the primary contributor to this
increase. Health-inequality analysis revealed a disproportionately higher burden
shouldered by countries with higher sociodemographic index (SDI) levels.
Frontier analysis identified the countries with considerable potential to
mitigate skin cancer. It was anticipated that only incidence and prevalence
rates attributable to keratinocyte cancer (KC), along with DALYs rate related to
BCC, would increase by 2050.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The older population (particularly male individuals
and those living in high-SDI countries) is facing a substantial growing burden
of skin cancer. Despite the relative incompleteness of KC data and lack of race
and ethnicity data, these results highlight the urgency for more effective
prevention and management strategies targeting high-risk groups.

DOI: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2025.1276
PMCID: PMC12096324
PMID: 40397469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
