---
reference_id: "PMID:36639608"
title: "Long COVID: major findings, mechanisms and recommendations."
authors:
- Davis HE
- McCorkell L
- Vogel JM
- Topol EJ
journal: Nat Rev Microbiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41579-022-00846-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long COVID: major findings, mechanisms and recommendations.
**Authors:** Davis HE, McCorkell L, Vogel JM, Topol EJ
**Journal:** Nat Rev Microbiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41579-022-00846-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-022-00846-2)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2023 Mar;21(3):133-146. doi: 10.1038/s41579-022-00846-2.
Epub  2023 Jan 13.

Long COVID: major findings, mechanisms and recommendations.

Davis HE(1), McCorkell L(2), Vogel JM(3), Topol EJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Patient-Led Research Collaborative, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Patient-Led Research Collaborative, Oakland, CA, USA.
(3)Scripps Research Translational Institute, Scripps Research, La Jolla, CA, 
USA.
(4)Scripps Research Translational Institute, Scripps Research, La Jolla, CA, 
USA. etopol@scripps.edu.

Erratum in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2023 Jun;21(6):408. doi: 10.1038/s41579-023-00896-0.

Long COVID is an often debilitating illness that occurs in at least 10% of 
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infections. More 
than 200 symptoms have been identified with impacts on multiple organ systems. 
At least 65 million individuals worldwide are estimated to have long COVID, with 
cases increasing daily. Biomedical research has made substantial progress in 
identifying various pathophysiological changes and risk factors and in 
characterizing the illness; further, similarities with other viral-onset 
illnesses such as myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome and 
postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome have laid the groundwork for research 
in the field. In this Review, we explore the current literature and highlight 
key findings, the overlap with other conditions, the variable onset of symptoms, 
long COVID in children and the impact of vaccinations. Although these key 
findings are critical to understanding long COVID, current diagnostic and 
treatment options are insufficient, and clinical trials must be prioritized that 
address leading hypotheses. Additionally, to strengthen long COVID research, 
future studies must account for biases and SARS-CoV-2 testing issues, build on 
viral-onset research, be inclusive of marginalized populations and meaningfully 
engage patients throughout the research process.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41579-022-00846-2
PMCID: PMC9839201
PMID: 36639608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.