---
reference_id: "PMID:19959667"
title: "Ca2+ dysregulation in Ryr1(I4895T/wt) mice causes congenital myopathy with progressive formation of minicores, cores, and nemaline rods."
authors:
- Zvaritch E
- Kraeva N
- Bombardier E
- McCloy RA
- Depreux F
- Holmyard D
- Kraev A
- Seidman CE
- Seidman JG
- Tupling AR
- MacLennan DH
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0912126106
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcium/physiology
- Mice
- "Microscopy, Electron, Transmission"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Myopathies, Nemaline/physiopathology"
- Phenotype
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ca2+ dysregulation in Ryr1(I4895T/wt) mice causes congenital myopathy with progressive formation of minicores, cores, and nemaline rods.
**Authors:** Zvaritch E, Kraeva N, Bombardier E, McCloy RA, Depreux F, Holmyard D, Kraev A, Seidman CE, Seidman JG, Tupling AR, MacLennan DH
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0912126106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0912126106)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Dec 22;106(51):21813-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0912126106. Epub 2009 Dec 3.

Ca2+ dysregulation in Ryr1(I4895T/wt) mice causes congenital myopathy with
progressive formation of minicores, cores, and nemaline rods.

Zvaritch E(1), Kraeva N, Bombardier E, McCloy RA, Depreux F, Holmyard D, Kraev
A, Seidman CE, Seidman JG, Tupling AR, MacLennan DH.

Author information:
(1)Banting and Best Department of Medical Research, Charles H. Best Institute,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L6.

Ryr1(I4895T/wt) (IT/+) mice express a knockin mutation corresponding to the
human I4898T EC-uncoupling mutation in the type 1 ryanodine receptor/Ca(2+)
release channel (RyR1), which causes a severe form of central core disease
(CCD). IT/+ mice exhibit a slowly progressive congenital myopathy, with neonatal
respiratory stress, skeletal muscle weakness, impaired mobility, dorsal
kyphosis, and hind limb paralysis. Lesions observed in myofibers from diseased
mice undergo age-dependent transformation from minicores to cores and nemaline
rods. Early ultrastructural abnormalities include sarcomeric misalignment,
Z-line streaming, focal loss of cross-striations, and myofibrillar splitting and
intermingling that may arise from defective myofibrillogenesis. However,
manifestation of the disease phenotype is highly variable on a Sv129 genomic
background. Quantitative RT-PCR shows an equimolar ratio of WT and mutant Ryr1
transcripts within IT/+ myofibers and total RyR1 protein expression levels are
normal. We propose a unifying theory in which the cause of core formation lies
in functional heterogeneity among RyR1 tetramers. Random combinations of normal
and either leaky or EC-uncoupled RyR subunits would lead to spatial differences
in Ca(2+) transients; the resulting heterogeneity of contraction among
myofibrils would lead to focal, irreversible tearing and shearing, which would,
over time, enlarge to form minicores, cores, and nemaline rods. The IT/+ mouse
line is proposed to be a valid model of RyR1-related congenital myopathy,
offering high potential for elucidation of the pathogenesis of skeletal muscle
disorders arising from impaired EC coupling.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0912126106
PMCID: PMC2788482
PMID: 19959667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
