---
reference_id: "PMID:21415759"
title: Natural history of Danon disease.
authors:
- Boucek D
- Jirikowic J
- Taylor M
journal: Genet Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e31820ad795
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Genetic Counseling
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type IIb/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Humans
- Lysosomal-Associated Membrane Protein 2
- Lysosomal Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Male
- Muscle Weakness/diagnosis
- Phenotype
- Sex Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of Danon disease.
**Authors:** Boucek D, Jirikowic J, Taylor M
**Journal:** Genet Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/GIM.0b013e31820ad795](https://doi.org/10.1097/GIM.0b013e31820ad795)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2011 Jun;13(6):563-8. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e31820ad795.

Natural history of Danon disease.

Boucek D(1), Jirikowic J, Taylor M.

Author information:
(1)Adult Medical Genetics Program, CU Cardiovascular Institute, University of
Colorado Denver, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

BACKGROUND: Danon disease is a rare but serious cardiac and skeletal myopathy
leading to substantial morbidity and early mortality due to arrhythmia and
cardiomyopathy. The X-linked nature of inheritance accounts for reported
differences in phenotypic severity between men and women. The rarity of Danon
disease has limited understanding of the complete phenotype. Clinical estimates
of ages of disease onset and survival based on gender have not been published.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We present data on 82 patients with Danon disease from 36
families, the largest series to date. Men were severely affected with cognitive
disabilities (100%), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (88%), and muscle weakness
(80%). Men had a high morbidity and were unlikely to reach the age of 25 years
without a cardiac transplantation. Women were less severely affected but
reported higher than expected levels of cognitive (47%) and skeletal muscle
complaints (50%) and manifesting an equal prevalence of dilated cardiomyopathy
and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Combining our data with that of 63 other Danon
disease case reports in the literature, the average ages of first symptom,
cardiac transplantation, and death were 12.1, 17.9, and 19.0 years in men and
27.9, 33.7, and 34.6 years in women, respectively.
CONCLUSION: These data more broadly illuminate the Danon disease phenotype and
should prove useful to physicians working with and providing genetic counseling
to families with Danon disease. Women with Danon disease present with clinical
symptoms and events approximately 15 years after men and report a higher
proportion of cognitive and skeletal muscle problems than previously recognized.

DOI: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e31820ad795
PMID: 21415759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
