---
reference_id: "PMID:14530779"
title: "Morbidity and mortality in systemic lupus erythematosus during a 10-year period: a comparison of early and late manifestations in a cohort of 1,000 patients."
authors:
- Cervera R
- Khamashta MA
- Font J
- Sebastiani GD
- Gil A
- Lavilla P
- Mejía JC
- Aydintug AO
- Chwalinska-Sadowska H
- de Ramón E
- Fernández-Nebro A
- Galeazzi M
- Valen M
- Mathieu A
- Houssiau F
- Caro N
- Alba P
- Ramos-Casals M
- Ingelmo M
- Hughes GR
- European Working Party on Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1097/01.md.0000091181.93122.55
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Cause of Death
- Chi-Square Distribution
- Child
- Europe
- Female
- Humans
- Logistic Models
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/complications, epidemiology, mortality"
- Male
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prospective Studies
- Survival Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Morbidity and mortality in systemic lupus erythematosus during a 10-year period: a comparison of early and late manifestations in a cohort of 1,000 patients.
**Authors:** Cervera R, Khamashta MA, Font J, Sebastiani GD, Gil A, Lavilla P, Mejía JC, Aydintug AO, Chwalinska-Sadowska H, de Ramón E, Fernández-Nebro A, Galeazzi M, Valen M, Mathieu A, Houssiau F, Caro N, Alba P, Ramos-Casals M, Ingelmo M, Hughes GR, European Working Party on Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.md.0000091181.93122.55](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.md.0000091181.93122.55)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2003 Sep;82(5):299-308. doi: 
10.1097/01.md.0000091181.93122.55.

Morbidity and mortality in systemic lupus erythematosus during a 10-year period: 
a comparison of early and late manifestations in a cohort of 1,000 patients.

Cervera R(1), Khamashta MA, Font J, Sebastiani GD, Gil A, Lavilla P, Mejía JC, 
Aydintug AO, Chwalinska-Sadowska H, de Ramón E, Fernández-Nebro A, Galeazzi M, 
Valen M, Mathieu A, Houssiau F, Caro N, Alba P, Ramos-Casals M, Ingelmo M, 
Hughes GR; European Working Party on Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.

Author information:
(1)Department of Autoimmune Diseases, Institut Clínic d'Infeccions i 
Immunologia, IDIBAPS (Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer), 
Hospital Clínic, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. 
cervera@medicina.ub.es

In the present study, we assessed the frequency and characteristics of the main 
causes of morbidity and mortality in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) during a 
10-year period and compared the frequency of early manifestations with those 
that appeared later in the evolution of the disease. In 1990, we started a 
multicenter study of 1,000 patients from 7 European countries. All had medical 
histories documented and underwent medical interview and routine general 
physical examination when entered in the study, and all were followed 
prospectively by the same physicians during the ensuing 10 years (1990-2000).A 
total of 481 (48.1%) patients presented 1 or more episodes of arthritis at any 
time during the 10 years, 311 (31.1%) patients had malar rash, 279 (27.9%) 
active nephropathy, 194 (19.4%) neurologic involvement, 166 (16.6%) fever, 163 
(16.3%) Raynaud phenomenon, 160 (16.0%) serositis (pleuritis and/or 
pericarditis), 134 (13.4%) thrombocytopenia, and 92 (9.2%) thrombosis. When the 
prevalences of the clinical manifestations during the initial 5 years of 
follow-up (1990-1995) were compared with those during the ensuing 5 years 
(1995-2000), most manifestations were found to be more frequent during the 
initial 5 years. Of the 1,000 patients, 360 (36%) presented infections, 169 
(16.9%) hypertension, 121 (12.1%) osteoporosis, and 81 (8.1%) cytopenia due to 
immunosuppressive agents. Twenty-three (2.3%) patients developed malignancies; 
the most frequent primary localizations were the uterus and the 
breast.Sixty-eight (6.8%) patients died, and the most frequent causes of death 
were similarly divided between active SLE (26.5%), thromboses (26.5%), and 
infections (25%). A survival probability of 92% at 10 years was found. A lower 
survival probability was detected in those patients who presented at the 
beginning of the study with nephropathy (88% versus 94% in patients without 
nephropathy, p = 0.045). When the causes of death during the initial 5 years of 
follow-up (1990-1995) were compared with those during the ensuing 5 years 
(1995-2000), active SLE and infections (28.9% each) appeared to be the most 
common causes during the initial 5 years, while thromboses (26.1%) became the 
most common cause of death during the last 5 years.In conclusion, most of the 
SLE inflammatory manifestations appear to be less common after a long-term 
evolution of the disease, probably reflecting the effect of therapy as well as 
the progressive remission of the disease in many patients. Meanwhile, a more 
prominent role of thrombotic events is becoming evident, affecting both 
morbidity and mortality in SLE.

DOI: 10.1097/01.md.0000091181.93122.55
PMID: 14530779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]