---
reference_id: "PMID:39702585"
title: Systematic proteome-wide Mendelian randomization to prioritize causal plasma proteins for skin cancers.
authors:
- Yoshikawa M
- Nakayama T
- Asaba K
journal: Commun Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s42003-024-07403-y
keywords:
- "Skin Neoplasms/genetics, blood"
- Humans
- Mendelian Randomization Analysis
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Proteome
- Blood Proteins/genetics
- Quantitative Trait Loci
- "Melanoma/genetics, blood"
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/genetics, blood"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics, blood"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic proteome-wide Mendelian randomization to prioritize causal plasma proteins for skin cancers.
**Authors:** Yoshikawa M, Nakayama T, Asaba K
**Journal:** Commun Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s42003-024-07403-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-07403-y)

## Content

1. Commun Biol. 2024 Dec 19;7(1):1681. doi: 10.1038/s42003-024-07403-y.

Systematic proteome-wide Mendelian randomization to prioritize causal plasma
proteins for skin cancers.

Yoshikawa M(1), Nakayama T(2), Asaba K(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Laboratory Medicine, Department of Pathology and Microbiology,
Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. myosh-tky@umin.ac.jp.
(2)Division of Laboratory Medicine, Department of Pathology and Microbiology,
Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Computational Diagnostic Radiology and Preventive Medicine, The
University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

Skin cancer is one of the most common cancers worldwide. Some risk factors
including sun exposure and MC1R variants are recognized; however, the
identification of additional genetic factors is essential for the development of
novel therapeutic strategies. Here, we conducted a proteome-wide Mendelian
randomization (MR) using plasma protein quantitative trait loci (pQTLs) from a
published study and the UK Biobank genome-wide association study (GWAS) of skin
cancers. We replicated the published result of ASIP, which was significantly
associated with increased risks of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and malignant
melanoma. Moreover, we newly identified CTSS, which was significantly associated
with a decreased risk of BCC. A series of replication analyses using the DeCODE
pQTLs and the FinnGen GWAS, and sensitivity analyses including Steiger
filtering, reverse MR, and Bayesian colocalization, supported our primary
results. Our findings highlighted the possibility of prioritizing proteins for
novel therapeutic or preventive targets and biomarkers for skin cancers.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-024-07403-y
PMCID: PMC11659389
PMID: 39702585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no
competing interests. Ethics approval and consent to participate: In this study,
we used only publicly available summary statistics. Ethical approval and consent
to participate were obtained in the original studies.
