---
reference_id: "PMID:34417985"
title: "Proteome Profile of Trigeminal Ganglion in Murine Model of Allergic Contact Dermatitis: Complement 3 Pathway Contributes to Itch and Pain Sensation."
authors:
- Su W
- Yu J
- Zhang X
- Ma L
- Huang Y
journal: Neurotox Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s12640-021-00384-4
keywords:
- Animals
- "Complement C3/genetics, metabolism"
- "Dermatitis, Allergic Contact/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Pain/genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Interaction Maps/physiology
- "Proteome/genetics, metabolism"
- Proteomics/methods
- "Pruritus/genetics, metabolism"
- Trigeminal Ganglion/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proteome Profile of Trigeminal Ganglion in Murine Model of Allergic Contact Dermatitis: Complement 3 Pathway Contributes to Itch and Pain Sensation.
**Authors:** Su W, Yu J, Zhang X, Ma L, Huang Y
**Journal:** Neurotox Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12640-021-00384-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12640-021-00384-4)

## Content

1. Neurotox Res. 2021 Oct;39(5):1564-1574. doi: 10.1007/s12640-021-00384-4. Epub 
2021 Aug 21.

Proteome Profile of Trigeminal Ganglion in Murine Model of Allergic Contact 
Dermatitis: Complement 3 Pathway Contributes to Itch and Pain Sensation.

Su W(#)(1), Yu J(#)(1), Zhang X(1), Ma L(2), Huang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China. 
malulu@pumch.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) is a common inflammatory dermatosis 
characterized by persistent itch and pain after topical contact with reactive 
chemicals. Although it has been long recognized as a type-IV hypersensitivity, 
its complexity of pathophysiology mechanism makes it still a clinical aporia in 
treatment. In this study, we aimed to identify crucial proteins involved in the 
nociceptive sensation of ACD. Based on a chemical-induced ACD murine model, we 
collected trigeminal ganglions of ACD and control mice for quantitative tandem 
mass tag (TMT)-labeling proteomic analysis. Immunohistochemistry was further 
practiced to validate the bioinformatic analysis. A total of 7685 proteins were 
identified and analyzed. Sixty-four proteins were significantly upregulated, and 
75 proteins were downregulated in ACD mice. GO analysis demonstrated that the 
changed proteins were significantly enriched in terms of immune and peptidase 
activity in ACD mice. Proteins involved in the complement and coagulation 
cascades were notably changed in the KEGG enrichment analysis. The upregulation 
of complement component 3 (C3) in trigeminal satellite cells of ACD mice was 
further confirmed by immunohistochemistry. ACD upregulated C3 in trigeminal 
satellite cells. The complement system in sensory ganglion might play an 
essential role in forming pruritic and nociceptive sensations in ACD.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12640-021-00384-4
PMID: 34417985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]