---
reference_id: "PMID:35602833"
title: "Adult Presentation of Joubert Syndrome Presenting With Dysphagia: A Case Report."
authors:
- Al-Smair A
- Younes S
- Saadeh O
- Saadeh A
- Al-Ali A
journal: Cureus
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.24226
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult Presentation of Joubert Syndrome Presenting With Dysphagia: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Al-Smair A, Younes S, Saadeh O, Saadeh A, Al-Ali A
**Journal:** Cureus (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.24226](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.24226)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2022 Apr 18;14(4):e24226. doi: 10.7759/cureus.24226. eCollection 2022 
Apr.

Adult Presentation of Joubert Syndrome Presenting With Dysphagia: A Case Report.

Al-Smair A(1), Younes S(2), Saadeh O(3), Saadeh A(2), Al-Ali A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Medray International Radiology Center, Amman, JOR.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, The University of Jordan, Amman, JOR.
(3)Public Health, Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, Jordan Ministry of Health, Amman, JOR.

Joubert syndrome (JS) is a rare autosomal recessive disease affecting the 
cilium, an intracellular organelle. It has a wide spectrum of presentations with 
the involvement of multiple genes. JS has multiple subtypes that are either pure 
JS or JS with other organ involvement such as the kidneys, liver, and 
others. However, all subtypes share the involvement of the cerebellar peduncles 
and the brainstem, which presents as "a molar tooth sign" on magnetic resonance 
imaging, hypotonia, and intellectual disability. It has a higher prevalence 
among children with few able to survive to adulthood. Unfortunately, survivors 
live with debilitating comorbidities. Here, we present the case of a 20-year-old 
patient who presented with a new onset of dysphagia that led to a diagnosis of 
JS.

Copyright © 2022, Al-Smair et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.24226
PMCID: PMC9114833
PMID: 35602833

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.