---
reference_id: "PMID:39400299"
title: Shared and unique consequences of Joubert Syndrome gene dysfunction on the zebrafish central nervous system.
authors:
- Noble AR
- Masek M
- Hofmann C
- Cuoco A
- Rusterholz TDS
- Özkoc H
- Greter NR
- Phelps IG
- Vladimirov N
- Kollmorgen S
- Stoeckli E
- Bachmann-Gagescu R
journal: Biol Open
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1242/bio.060421
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Shared and unique consequences of Joubert Syndrome gene dysfunction on the zebrafish central nervous system.
**Authors:** Noble AR, Masek M, Hofmann C, Cuoco A, Rusterholz TDS, Özkoc H, Greter NR, Phelps IG, Vladimirov N, Kollmorgen S, Stoeckli E, Bachmann-Gagescu R
**Journal:** Biol Open (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1242/bio.060421](https://doi.org/10.1242/bio.060421)

## Content

1. Biol Open. 2024 Nov 15;13(11):bio060421. doi: 10.1242/bio.060421. Epub 2024
Nov  12.

Shared and unique consequences of Joubert Syndrome gene dysfunction on the 
zebrafish central nervous system.

Noble AR(1)(2), Masek M(1), Hofmann C(1), Cuoco A(1), Rusterholz TDS(1), Özkoc 
H(1), Greter NR(1), Phelps IG(3), Vladimirov N(2)(4)(5), Kollmorgen S(2), 
Stoeckli E(1)(2), Bachmann-Gagescu R(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(2)University Research Priority Program (URPP), Adaptive Brain Circuits in 
Development and Learning (AdaBD), University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 8057, USA.
(4)Brain Research Institute, University of Zurich, 98105 Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Center for Microscopy and Image Analysis (ZMB), University of Zurich, 8057 
Zurich, Switzerland.
(6)Institute for Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, 8952 Zurich, 
Switzerland.

Joubert Syndrome (JBTS) is a neurodevelopmental ciliopathy defined by a highly 
specific midbrain-hindbrain malformation, variably associated with additional 
neurological features. JBTS displays prominent genetic heterogeneity with >40 
causative genes that encode proteins localising to the primary cilium, a sensory 
organelle that is essential for transduction of signalling pathways during 
neurodevelopment, among other vital functions. JBTS proteins localise to 
distinct ciliary subcompartments, suggesting diverse functions in cilium 
biology. Currently, there is no unifying pathomechanism to explain how 
dysfunction of such diverse primary cilia-related proteins results in such a 
highly specific brain abnormality. To identify the shared consequence of JBTS 
gene dysfunction, we carried out transcriptomic analysis using zebrafish mutants 
for the JBTS-causative genes cc2d2aw38, cep290fh297, inpp5ezh506, talpid3i264 
and togaram1zh510 and the Bardet-Biedl syndrome-causative gene bbs1k742. We 
identified no commonly dysregulated signalling pathways in these mutants and yet 
all mutants displayed an enrichment of altered gene sets related to central 
nervous system function. We found that JBTS mutants have altered primary cilia 
throughout the brain but do not display abnormal brain morphology. Nonetheless, 
behavioural analyses revealed reduced locomotion and loss of postural control 
which, together with the transcriptomic results, hint at underlying 
abnormalities in neuronal activity and/or neuronal circuit function. These 
zebrafish models therefore offer the unique opportunity to study the role of 
primary cilia in neuronal function beyond early patterning, proliferation and 
differentiation.

© 2024. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/bio.060421
PMCID: PMC11583916
PMID: 39400299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.