---
reference_id: "PMID:31426099"
title: "A Technological Revolution: The Integration of New Treatments to Manage Type 1 Diabetes."
authors:
- Galderisi A
- Sherr JL
journal: Pediatr Ann
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3928/19382359-20190725-03
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Technological Revolution: The Integration of New Treatments to Manage Type 1 Diabetes.
**Authors:** Galderisi A, Sherr JL
**Journal:** Pediatr Ann (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3928/19382359-20190725-03](https://doi.org/10.3928/19382359-20190725-03)

## Content

1. Pediatr Ann. 2019 Aug 1;48(8):e311-e318. doi: 10.3928/19382359-20190725-03.

A Technological Revolution: The Integration of New Treatments to Manage Type 1 
Diabetes.

Galderisi A, Sherr JL.

Intensive insulin treatment and frequent self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) 
have been recognized as pillars of diabetes treatment. Many patients with type 1 
diabetes (T1D) struggle to achieve targeted glycemic control. Technology has 
vastly changed how these tenets to treatment can occur. Continuous subcutaneous 
insulin infusion (CSII) pumps and continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) can be 
used in place of their counterparts, multiple daily injections and SMBG. We 
present a review of CSII, CGM, and of different levels of integration among 
these two therapies, ranging from low glucose suspension devices to hybrid 
closed loop insulin delivery. Analysis of the various tools, their effect on 
glycemic control, and a guide to integrate them into pediatric clinical practice 
is presented. Although a cure for T1D remains the ultimate goal, technology 
holds the promise of keeping youth with T1D in targeted control and minimize the 
burden of this chronic medical condition. [Pediatr Ann. 2019;48(8):e311-e318.].

Copyright 2019, SLACK Incorporated.

DOI: 10.3928/19382359-20190725-03
PMID: 31426099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]