---
reference_id: "PMID:31438988"
title: Left ventricular decompression on Veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation with intra-aortic balloon Counterpulsation.
authors:
- Griffin JM
- Restaino S
- Takeda K
- Garan AR
journal: J Cardiothorac Surg
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13019-019-0970-3
keywords:
- Aged
- "Decompression, Surgical"
- "Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation/adverse effects, methods"
- Fatal Outcome
- Heart Transplantation/adverse effects
- Heart Ventricles/surgery
- Hemodynamics
- Humans
- Intra-Aortic Balloon Pumping
- Male
- "Shock, Cardiogenic/etiology, therapy"
- "Ventricular Function, Left/physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Left ventricular decompression on Veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation with intra-aortic balloon Counterpulsation.
**Authors:** Griffin JM, Restaino S, Takeda K, Garan AR
**Journal:** J Cardiothorac Surg (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13019-019-0970-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13019-019-0970-3)

## Content

1. J Cardiothorac Surg. 2019 Aug 22;14(1):153. doi: 10.1186/s13019-019-0970-3.

Left ventricular decompression on Veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation with intra-aortic balloon Counterpulsation.

Griffin JM(1), Restaino S(2), Takeda K(2), Garan AR(2).

Author information:
(1)Columbia University Irving Medical Center, 173 Fort Washington Avenue, Room
4617, 630 West 168th St, New York, NY, 10032, USA. janmgriffinmd@gmail.com.
(2)Columbia University Irving Medical Center, 173 Fort Washington Avenue, Room
4617, 630 West 168th St, New York, NY, 10032, USA.

BACKGROUND: Veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) has been
used increasingly to support patients with cardiogenic shock (CS). There has
been growing recognition of the favorable and unfavorable hemodynamic effects of
this therapy and recent interest in the use of other percutaneous circulatory
support devices to offset some of the potentially harmful hemodynamic effects.
Herein, we provide visual evidence of the effects of intra-aortic balloon pump
(IABP) counterpulsation for a patient with peripheral VA-ECMO cannulation.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 68 year old man who had undergone orthotopic heart
transplantation presented with 2 days of fatigue, orthopnea, and paroxysmal
nocturnal dyspnea. On examination, he was tachycardic, hypotensive and hypoxic
with cool extremities, consistent with CS. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE)
showed new severe biventricular dysfunction with a left ventricular ejection
fraction of 15%, right heart catheterization demonstrated elevated filling
pressures and low output. An IABP was inserted via the left femoral artery with
minimal improvement in hemodynamics. He was escalated to VA-ECMO. Repeat TTE
demonstrated aortic valve (AV) opening with each cardiac cycle and mild MR. With
placement of the IABP on standby Additional file 1: Video 1 (video 0:03), the AV
no longer opened. Re-initiation of balloon counterpulsation resulted in resumed
AV opening with each beat Additional file 1: Video 1 (video 0:17). He was
treated for presumed acute allograft rejection with methylprednisolone,
thymoglobulin, intravenous immunoglobulin and plasmapheresis with improvement in
allograft function. However, he developed an Enterobacter aerogenes pneumonia
and rapidly fatal septic shock.
CONCLUSIONS: This case visually demonstrates effective LV decompression by IABP
counterpulsation in VA-ECMO support. While the overall effects of LV
decompression in patients on VA-ECMO with IABP are still unclear, this report
demonstrates one potential mechanism of benefit in the prevention of stagnation
of blood flow that may lead to intra-cardiac or aortic root thrombus formation.

DOI: 10.1186/s13019-019-0970-3
PMCID: PMC6704520
PMID: 31438988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
