---
reference_id: "PMID:39119533"
title: "Ileocolic intussusception secondary to Peutz-Jeghers polyp: the need for oncological resection surgery."
authors:
- Ylli K
- Eljack W
- Hayes B
- Murphy T
journal: J Surg Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/jscr/rjae489
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ileocolic intussusception secondary to Peutz-Jeghers polyp: the need for oncological resection surgery.
**Authors:** Ylli K, Eljack W, Hayes B, Murphy T
**Journal:** J Surg Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jscr/rjae489](https://doi.org/10.1093/jscr/rjae489)

## Content

1. J Surg Case Rep. 2024 Aug 8;2024(8):rjae489. doi: 10.1093/jscr/rjae489. 
eCollection 2024 Aug.

Ileocolic intussusception secondary to Peutz-Jeghers polyp: the need for 
oncological resection surgery.

Ylli K(1), Eljack W(1), Hayes B(2), Murphy T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Mercy University Hospital, Grenville Place, Cork T12 
WE28, Ireland.
(2)Department of Histopathology, Cork University Hospital, Wilton, Cork T12 
DC4A, Ireland.

In this case report, we detail the management of a woman in her late 30s with 
ileocolic intussusception, emphasizing the high malignancy risk inherent in 
adult intussusception cases. Given the patient's acute symptoms and significant 
family history of ovarian and breast cancers, radical oncological resection was 
pursued. The surgical intervention comprised a right hemicolectomy and right 
ovarian cystectomy, with histopathological findings revealing a Peutz-Jeghers 
polyp and benign thyroid tissue, but no malignancy. This case underscores the 
imperative for a surgical approach that anticipates the potential for malignancy 
in adult intussusception, advocating for radical resection as a fundamental 
strategy, even in the absence of confirmed malignant histopathology, to ensure 
comprehensive management and alignment with oncological best practices.

Published by Oxford University Press and JSCR Publishing Ltd. © The Author(s) 
2024.

DOI: 10.1093/jscr/rjae489
PMCID: PMC11306112
PMID: 39119533

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.