---
reference_id: "PMID:20301500"
title: Joubert Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Glass IA
- Dempsey JC
- Parisi M
- Doherty D
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Joubert Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Glass IA, Dempsey JC, Parisi M, Doherty D

## Content

1. Joubert Syndrome.

Glass IA(1), Dempsey JC(2), Parisi M(3), Doherty D(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2003 Jul 9 [updated 2025 Mar 13].

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetic Medicine, Seattle Children's Hospital, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington
(2)Division of Genetic Medicine University of Washington Seattle, Washington
(3)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(4)Divisions of Developmental Medicine and Genetic Medicine, Seattle Children's 
Hospital, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington

The purpose of this overview is to: 1.. Briefly describe the clinical 
characteristics of Joubert syndrome; 2.. Review the genetic causes of Joubert 
syndrome; 3.. Provide evaluation strategies to identify the genetic cause of 
Joubert syndrome in a proband (when possible); 4.. Review management of Joubert 
syndrome; 5.. Inform genetic counseling of family members of an individual with 
Joubert syndrome.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301500