---
reference_id: "PMID:32653651"
title: Inflammatory Bowel Disease - Non-biological treatment.
authors:
- Magro F
- Cordeiro G
- Dias AM
- Estevinho MM
journal: Pharmacol Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2020.105075
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inflammatory Bowel Disease - Non-biological treatment.
**Authors:** Magro F, Cordeiro G, Dias AM, Estevinho MM
**Journal:** Pharmacol Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.phrs.2020.105075](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2020.105075)

## Content

1. Pharmacol Res. 2020 Oct;160:105075. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2020.105075. Epub 2020
 Jul 9.

Inflammatory Bowel Disease - Non-biological treatment.

Magro F(1), Cordeiro G(2), Dias AM(2), Estevinho MM(3).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Unit, São João Hospital University Centre, Porto, 
Portugal; Department of Biomedicine, Unit of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; Service of 
Gastroenterology, São João Hospital University Centre, Porto, Portugal. 
Electronic address: fm@med.up.pt.
(2)Clinical Pharmacology Unit, São João Hospital University Centre, Porto, 
Portugal.
(3)Department of Biomedicine, Unit of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; Department of Gastroenterology, 
Centro Hospitalar Vila Nova de Gaia/Espinho, Vila Nova de Gaia, Portugal.

Nowadays, non-biological treatments remain valuable approaches among the 
therapeutic armamentarium of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Mesalamine is the 
core treatment of mild‑to‑moderate ulcerative colitis (UC) and corticosteroids 
are crucial for the induction of remission of moderate‑to‑severe flares in both 
UC and Crohn's disease (CD). Even approaches as cyclosporine, tacrolimus, 
azathioprine, methotrexate, and surgery still have a nuclear position as 
strategies to induce and/or maintain remission in IBD. Due to their 
particularities and to the accumulated evidence, each of these strategies 
conquered peculiar roles in the overall IBD strategy, all of them contributing 
to better outcomes. This review emphasizes the particular roles that 
non-biological treatments gained over time: recent mesalamine formulations to 
increase adhesion rates, higher doses of 5-ASA for high-risk patients, MMX 
technology to improve drug release and attain higher bowel concentrations, 
cyclosporine as a bridge to vedolizumab, tacrolimus as a potential alternative 
to thiopurines or infliximab, azathioprine in combination therapy with 
infliximab and dubious in monotherapy, and surgery as a mean to a "better end".

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2020.105075
PMID: 32653651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]