---
reference_id: "PMID:18824553"
title: Costs and cost-effectiveness of different follow-up schedules for detection of occupational hepatitis C virus infection.
authors:
- Deuffic-Burban S
- Abiteboul D
- Lot F
- Branger M
- Bouvet E
- Yazdanpanah Y
journal: Gut
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1136/gut.2007.145516
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Alanine Transaminase/blood
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- Biomarkers/blood
- Cost-Benefit Analysis
- Early Diagnosis
- Europe
- "Health Care Costs/statistics & numerical data"
- Health Personnel
- Health Services Research/methods
- "Hepacivirus/genetics, isolation & purification"
- "Hepatitis C/diagnosis, drug therapy, economics, transmission"
- Hepatitis C Antibodies/blood
- Humans
- "Long-Term Care/economics, methods"
- "Occupational Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, economics"
- Occupational Exposure/adverse effects
- Quality of Life
- "RNA, Viral/blood"
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Costs and cost-effectiveness of different follow-up schedules for detection of occupational hepatitis C virus infection.
**Authors:** Deuffic-Burban S, Abiteboul D, Lot F, Branger M, Bouvet E, Yazdanpanah Y
**Journal:** Gut (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1136/gut.2007.145516](https://doi.org/10.1136/gut.2007.145516)

## Content

1. Gut. 2009 Jan;58(1):105-10. doi: 10.1136/gut.2007.145516. Epub 2008 Sep 29.

Costs and cost-effectiveness of different follow-up schedules for detection of
occupational hepatitis C virus infection.

Deuffic-Burban S(1), Abiteboul D, Lot F, Branger M, Bouvet E, Yazdanpanah Y.

Author information:
(1)LEM-CNRS, Université Catholique de Lille, 41 rue du Port, 59046 Lille Cedex,
France; sylvie.burban@neuf.fr.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to compare the costs and
cost-effectiveness (C/E) of early hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA testing
(alternative-US recommendations) after occupational exposure to HCV with
existing follow-up strategies: (1) French, anti-HCV antibodies and alanine
transaminase (ALT) activity at months 1, 3 and 6; (2) European, monthly ALT
activity for 4 months and anti-HCV antibodies at month 6; (3) and baseline-US,
anti-HCV antibodies and ALT activity at month 6.
METHODS: A decision tree simulated each strategy for 7300 healthcare workers
(HCWs) exposed to HCV each year in France, taking into account the impact of
early diagnosis on the response to antiviral treatment and the deterioration of
HCW quality of life after exposure.
RESULTS: For a HCV transmission risk of 0.5% after exposure, the French strategy
led to the highest costs/person (181.40 euros) and the baseline-US strategy to
the lowest (126.60 euros) (178.50 euros) for alternative-US). The shortest mean
time to HCV infection diagnosis (1 month) and the lowest number of chronic
hepatitis C (CHC) patients (1.9/7300 HCWs exposed) was obtained with the
alternative-US strategy (vs 6 months and 7.9 CHC, respectively with
baseline-US). Compared with the alternative-US, the French strategy was
associated with higher costs and lower utilities, and the European with a higher
incremental C/E ratio. Compared with the baseline-US strategy, the
alternative-US strategy C/E ratio was 2020 euros per quality-adjusted life year
saved.
CONCLUSION: In HCWs exposed to HCV, a strategy based on early HCV RNA testing
shortens the period during which the HCW's wait for his HCV status, leads to
lower risk of progression to CHC and is reasonably cost-effective.

DOI: 10.1136/gut.2007.145516
PMCID: PMC2597690
PMID: 18824553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.
