---
reference_id: "PMID:25899238"
title: "Mechanical thrombectomy in cerebral venous thrombosis: systematic review of 185 cases."
authors:
- Siddiqui FM
- Dandapat S
- Banerjee C
- Zuurbier SM
- Johnson M
- Stam J
- Coutinho JM
journal: Stroke
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.007465
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Intracranial Hemorrhages/surgery
- "Intracranial Thrombosis/complications, surgery"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Risk Factors
- "Thrombectomy/adverse effects, methods"
- Thrombolytic Therapy
- Treatment Outcome
- Venous Thrombosis/surgery
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanical thrombectomy in cerebral venous thrombosis: systematic review of 185 cases.
**Authors:** Siddiqui FM, Dandapat S, Banerjee C, Zuurbier SM, Johnson M, Stam J, Coutinho JM
**Journal:** Stroke (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.007465](https://doi.org/10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.007465)

## Content

1. Stroke. 2015 May;46(5):1263-8. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.007465. Epub 2015
Apr  21.

Mechanical thrombectomy in cerebral venous thrombosis: systematic review of 185 
cases.

Siddiqui FM(1), Dandapat S(2), Banerjee C(2), Zuurbier SM(2), Johnson M(2), Stam 
J(2), Coutinho JM(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology, Southern Illinois University School of 
Medicine, Springfield (F.M.S., S.D.); Department of Neurology, UT Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas, TX (F.M.S., C.B., M.J.); Department of Neurology, 
Academic Medical Hospital, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
(S.M.Z., J.S., J.M.C.); and Division of Neuroradiology, Department of Medical 
Imaging, Toronto Western Hospital, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada (J.M.C.). fazeelmukhtar@gmail.com.
(2)From the Department of Neurology, Southern Illinois University School of 
Medicine, Springfield (F.M.S., S.D.); Department of Neurology, UT Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas, TX (F.M.S., C.B., M.J.); Department of Neurology, 
Academic Medical Hospital, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
(S.M.Z., J.S., J.M.C.); and Division of Neuroradiology, Department of Medical 
Imaging, Toronto Western Hospital, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada (J.M.C.).

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Cerebral venous thrombosis is generally treated with 
anticoagulation. However, some patients do not respond to medical therapy and 
these might benefit from mechanical thrombectomy. The aim of this study was to 
gain a better understanding of the efficacy and safety of mechanical 
thrombectomy in patients with cerebral venous thrombosis, by performing a 
systematic review of the literature.
METHODS: We identified studies published between January 1995 and February 2014 
from PubMed and Ovid. We included all cases of cerebral venous thrombosis in 
whom mechanical thrombectomy was performed with or without intrasinus 
thrombolysis. Good outcome was defined as normal or mild neurological deficits 
at discharge (modified Rankin Scale, 0-2). Secondary outcome variables included 
periprocedural complications and recanalization rates.
RESULTS: Our study included 42 studies (185 patients). Sixty percent of patient 
had a pretreatment intracerebral hemorrhage and 47% were stuporous or comatose. 
AngioJet was the most commonly used device (40%). Intrasinus thrombolysis was 
used in 131 patients (71%). Overall, 156 (84%) patients had a good outcome and 
22 (12%) died. Nine (5%) patients had no recanalization, 38 (21%) had partial, 
and 137 (74%) had near to complete recanalization. The major periprocedural 
complication was new or increased intracerebral hemorrhage (10%). The use of 
AngioJet was associated with lower rate of complete recanalization (odds ratio, 
0.2; 95% confidence interval, 0.09-0.4) and lower chance of good outcome (odds 
ratio, 0.5; 95% confidence interval, 0.2-1.0).
CONCLUSIONS: Our systematic review suggests that mechanical thrombectomy is 
reasonably safe but controlled studies are required to provide a definitive 
answer on its efficacy and safety in patients with cerebral venous thrombosis.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.007465
PMID: 25899238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]