---
reference_id: "PMID:34270559"
title: "Mycobacterial heparin-binding hemagglutinin (HBHA)-induced interferon-γ release assay (IGRA) for discrimination of latent and active tuberculosis: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Tang J
- Huang Y
- Cai Z
- Ma Y
journal: PLoS One
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0254571
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mycobacterial heparin-binding hemagglutinin (HBHA)-induced interferon-γ release assay (IGRA) for discrimination of latent and active tuberculosis: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Tang J, Huang Y, Cai Z, Ma Y
**Journal:** PLoS One (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0254571](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0254571)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2021 Jul 16;16(7):e0254571. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0254571. 
eCollection 2021.

Mycobacterial heparin-binding hemagglutinin (HBHA)-induced interferon-γ release 
assay (IGRA) for discrimination of latent and active tuberculosis: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis.

Tang J(1), Huang Y(1), Cai Z(1), Ma Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Air Force Medical Centre, Air Force 
Medical University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: The Mycobacterial heparin-binding hemagglutinin (HBHA) is an 
important latency-associated antigen that can be used to distinguish between 
latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI) and active tuberculosis (ATB). Although 
many studies were explored the efficiency of the HBHA-induced interferon-γ 
release assay (IGRA) in different populations, the clinical differential value 
of HBHA-IGRA is still controversial. Therefore, the aim of this study was to 
determine whether the HBHA-IGRA can be used as an efficient test for the 
discrimination of LTBI and ATB by a systematic review and meta-analysis.
METHODS: Relevant articles were retrieved from PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, 
and the Cochrane Library on Oct 18, 2020, with no start date limitation. The 
quality of each study was evaluated using Review Manager 5.4. The Stata MP 
v.14.0 software was used to combine sensitivity, specificity, likelihood ratio 
(LR), diagnostic odds ratio (DOR), summary receiver operating characteristic 
(SROC) curve, and area under SROC (AUC) to evaluate the diagnostic value of 
HBHA-IGRA for discrimination of LTBI and ATB. Meta-regression and subgroup 
analysis were performed for the sources of heterogeneity based on the selection 
criteria for active TB, the population, the TB burden, the type of antigen, the 
type of sample, and the time of antigen stimulation.
RESULTS: A total of 13 studies (14 results) were included in this meta-analysis, 
including 603 ATB patients and 514 LTBI individuals. The pooled sensitivity and 
specificity of the HBHA-IGRA for discrimination of the LTBI and ATB were 0.70 
(95% CI, 0.57~0.80) and 0.78 (95% CI, 0.71~0.84), respectively. The pooled 
positive likelihood ratio (PLR), negative likelihood ratio (NLR), and diagnostic 
odds ratio (DOR) were 3.15 (95%CI, 2.43~4.09), 0.39 (95% CI, 0.27~0.56), and 
8.11 (95% CI, 4.81~13.67), respectively. The AUC was 0.81 (95% CI, 0.77~0.84). 
The subgroup analysis showed that the main source of heterogeneity was due to 
the HIV-infected population incorporated, and the different selection criteria 
of active TB subjects would also lead to the variation of the pooled sensitivity 
and specificity. Different TB burdens, HBHA antigen types, sample types, antigen 
stimulation time and BCG vaccination did not affect the heterogeneity in this 
analysis.
CONCLUSION: The HBHA-IGRA is a promising immunodiagnostic test for 
discrimination of latent and active TB, which can be added in commercial IGRAs 
to enhance the differential diagnostic performance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0254571
PMCID: PMC8284824
PMID: 34270559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.