---
reference_id: "PMID:38808315"
title: "Linking Angelman and dup15q data for expanded research (LADDER) database: a model for advancing research, clinical guidance, and therapeutic development for rare conditions."
authors:
- Potter SN
- Reynolds E
- Okoniewski KC
- Edwards A
- Gable J
- Hill C
- Bakalov V
- Zentz S
- Whiting C
- Cheves E
- Garbarini K
- Jalazo E
- Howell C
- Moore A
- Wheeler A
journal: Ther Adv Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/26330040241254122
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Linking Angelman and dup15q data for expanded research (LADDER) database: a model for advancing research, clinical guidance, and therapeutic development for rare conditions.
**Authors:** Potter SN, Reynolds E, Okoniewski KC, Edwards A, Gable J, Hill C, Bakalov V, Zentz S, Whiting C, Cheves E, Garbarini K, Jalazo E, Howell C, Moore A, Wheeler A
**Journal:** Ther Adv Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/26330040241254122](https://doi.org/10.1177/26330040241254122)

## Content

1. Ther Adv Rare Dis. 2024 May 27;5:26330040241254122. doi: 
10.1177/26330040241254122. eCollection 2024 Jan-Dec.

Linking Angelman and dup15q data for expanded research (LADDER) database: a 
model for advancing research, clinical guidance, and therapeutic development for 
rare conditions.

Potter SN(1), Reynolds E(2), Okoniewski KC(2), Edwards A(2), Gable J(2), Hill 
C(2), Bakalov V(2), Zentz S(2), Whiting C(2), Cheves E(2), Garbarini K(3)(4), 
Jalazo E(5), Howell C(4), Moore A(3), Wheeler A(2).

Author information:
(1)RTI International, 3040 E. Cornwallis Road, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709-2194, USA.
(2)RTI International, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(3)Angelman Syndrome Foundation, Aurora, IL, USA.
(4)Dup15q Alliance, Matthews, NC, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, The University of North Carolina School of 
Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

Angelman syndrome (AS) and duplication 15q (dup15q) syndrome are rare 
neurogenetic conditions arising from a common locus on the long arm of 
chromosome 15. Individuals with both conditions share some clinical features 
(e.g. intellectual disability, epilepsy) and often require lifelong care. 
Disease-modifying therapies for both conditions are emerging, resulting in a 
significant need for a better understanding of the natural history of both AS 
and dup15q. Patient advocacy groups for both conditions recognized a need for a 
data repository that would link data on individuals from multiple sources to 
expand research, increase understanding of natural history, and accelerate the 
development of treatments, resulting in the Linking Angelman and Dup15q Data for 
Expanded Research (LADDER) Database. This paper describes the development and 
functionality of the LADDER Database - including challenges, lessons learned, 
and preliminary feasibility - and how it can be used as a model for other rare 
conditions.

Plain Language Summary: The LADDER database: a model for advancing research, 
clinical guidance, and therapeutic development for rare conditions This paper 
describes the development and functionality of the Linking Angelman and Dup15q 
Data for Expanded Research (LADDER) Database, which is a data repository for two 
rare neurogenetic conditions: Angelman syndrome (AS) and duplication 15q 
(dup15q) syndrome. AS and dup15q syndrome arise from genetic abnormalities on 
chromosome 15 and share some clinical features (e.g. intellectual disability, 
epilepsy). LADDER was developed by patient advocacy organizations representing 
each condition in partnership with RTI International. LADDER links data on 
individuals from multiple sources to expand research, increase understanding of 
natural history, and accelerate the development of treatments for both AS and 
dup15q syndrome. The LADDER Database can be used as a model for expanding 
research and enhancing clinical trial readiness in other rare conditions.

© The Author(s), 2024.

DOI: 10.1177/26330040241254122
PMCID: PMC11131393
PMID: 38808315

Conflict of interest statement: KG is a former employee of and owns stock in 
Invitae Laboratories. EJ is a paid consultant for both RTI International and the 
ASF. AW has received funding from the ASF, Foundation for Angelman Syndrome 
Therapeutics (FAST), Ovid Therapeutics, Ionis Pharmaceuticals, and F. 
Hoffmann-La Roche. The remaining authors declare that they have no relevant 
competing interests.