---
reference_id: "PMID:23456415"
title: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) at the Kenyatta National Hospital.
authors:
- Ekwom PE
journal: Clin Rheumatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s10067-013-2217-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) at the Kenyatta National Hospital.
**Authors:** Ekwom PE
**Journal:** Clin Rheumatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10067-013-2217-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10067-013-2217-3)

## Content

1. Clin Rheumatol. 2013 Aug;32(8):1215-7. doi: 10.1007/s10067-013-2217-3. Epub
2013  Mar 3.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) at the Kenyatta National Hospital.

Ekwom PE(1).

Author information:
(1)Kenyatta National Hospital, P.O Box 20723, 00202 Nairobi, Kenya. 
etau@centreforrheumatic.co.ke

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex disease with varied clinical 
presentation and autoantibody production. It has previously been reported as 
rare in Black Africans. We established a Rheumatology clinic at the Kenyatta 
National Hospital in April 2010, and a 1 year audit of this clinic was carried 
out in September 2011. This is a report of this audit of patients who met the 
American College of Rheumatology (ACR) criteria for SLE. Thirteen patients met 
the ACR criteria; their mean age was 34 years, and they were all female. The 
commonest manifestations were malar rash and arthritis in 69.2 %. Antinuclear 
antibody was present in 79.6 %, and anti-dsDNA was present in 38.5 %. None of 
them had human immunodeficiency virus infection; 30 % had other comorbidities 
(hypertension, diabetes, and renal failure). Thirty percent also had an 
infection during this period. All these 13 were on prednisolone and 92 % of them 
were on hydroxychloroquine. There was no reported death during the study period. 
This confirms the presence of SLE in patients in Kenya who meet the ACR 
criteria.

DOI: 10.1007/s10067-013-2217-3
PMID: 23456415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]