---
reference_id: "PMID:37727298"
title: Updating Osteonecrosis of the Femoral Head.
authors:
- Ko YS
- Ha JH
- Park JW
- Lee YK
- Kim TY
- Koo KH
journal: Hip Pelvis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.5371/hp.2023.35.3.147
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Updating Osteonecrosis of the Femoral Head.
**Authors:** Ko YS, Ha JH, Park JW, Lee YK, Kim TY, Koo KH
**Journal:** Hip Pelvis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.5371/hp.2023.35.3.147](https://doi.org/10.5371/hp.2023.35.3.147)

## Content

1. Hip Pelvis. 2023 Sep;35(3):147-156. doi: 10.5371/hp.2023.35.3.147. Epub 2023
Sep  6.

Updating Osteonecrosis of the Femoral Head.

Ko YS(1), Ha JH(2), Park JW(1), Lee YK(1), Kim TY(3), Koo KH(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Seoul National University Bundang 
Hospital, Seongnam, Korea.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Gumdan Top General Hospital, Incheon, 
Korea.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Konkuk University Medical Center, Konkuk 
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Kay Joint Center at Cheil Orthopaedic Hospital, Seoul, Korea.

Osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH), a condition characterized by the 
presence of a necrotic bone lesion in the femoral head, is caused by a 
disruption in the blood supply. Its occurrence is more common in young and 
middle-aged adults and it is the main reason for performance of total hip 
arthroplasty in this age group. Its incidence is increasing along with increased 
use of glucocorticoids for management of adjuvant therapy for treatment of 
leukemia as well as organ transplantation and other myelogenous diseases. 
Current information on etiology and pathogenesis, as well as natural history, 
stage system, and treatments is provided in this review. A description of the 
Association Research Circulation Osseous (ARCO) criteria for classification of 
glucocorticoids- and alcohol-associated ONFH, 2019 ARCO staging system, and 2021 
ARCO classification using computed tomography for the early stages of ONFH is 
also provided.

Copyright © 2023 by Korean Hip Society.

DOI: 10.5371/hp.2023.35.3.147
PMCID: PMC10505838
PMID: 37727298

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: Young-Kyun Lee has been an 
editorial board member since January 2023, but had no role in the decision to 
publish this article. No other potential conflict of interest relevant to this 
article was reported.