---
reference_id: "PMID:26522830"
title: Compound heterozygous mutations in the noncoding RNU4ATAC cause Roifman Syndrome by disrupting minor intron splicing.
authors:
- Merico D
- Roifman M
- Braunschweig U
- Yuen RK
- Alexandrova R
- Bates A
- Reid B
- Nalpathamkalam T
- Wang Z
- Thiruvahindrapuram B
- Gray P
- Kakakios A
- Peake J
- Hogarth S
- Manson D
- Buncic R
- Pereira SL
- Herbrick JA
- Blencowe BJ
- Roifman CM
- Scherer SW
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/ncomms9718
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Compound heterozygous mutations in the noncoding RNU4ATAC cause Roifman Syndrome by disrupting minor intron splicing.
**Authors:** Merico D, Roifman M, Braunschweig U, Yuen RK, Alexandrova R, Bates A, Reid B, Nalpathamkalam T, Wang Z, Thiruvahindrapuram B, Gray P, Kakakios A, Peake J, Hogarth S, Manson D, Buncic R, Pereira SL, Herbrick JA, Blencowe BJ, Roifman CM, Scherer SW
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncomms9718](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms9718)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2015 Nov 2;6:8718. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9718.

Compound heterozygous mutations in the noncoding RNU4ATAC cause Roifman Syndrome 
by disrupting minor intron splicing.

Merico D(1), Roifman M(2)(3)(4), Braunschweig U(5), Yuen RK(1), Alexandrova 
R(1), Bates A(6), Reid B(6), Nalpathamkalam T(1), Wang Z(1), Thiruvahindrapuram 
B(1), Gray P(7), Kakakios A(8), Peake J(9)(10), Hogarth S(9)(10), Manson D(11), 
Buncic R(12), Pereira SL(1), Herbrick JA(1), Blencowe BJ(5)(13), Roifman 
CM(4)(6), Scherer SW(1)(13)(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)The Centre for Applied Genomics (TCAG), Program in Genetics and Genome 
Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 0A4.
(2)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Paediatrics, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X8.
(3)The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics Program, Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynaecology, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1Z5.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
M5G 1X8.
(5)Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3E1.
(6)Division for Immunology and Allergy, Canadian Center for Primary 
Immunodeficiency, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 
1X8.
(7)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Sydney Children's Hospital, 
Sydney, New South Wales 2031, Australia.
(8)Department of Allergy and Immunology, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, 
Westmead, New South Wales 2145, Australia.
(9)Queensland Paediatric Immunology and Allergy Service, The Lady Cilento 
Children's Hospital, South Brisbane, Queensland 4101, Australia.
(10)School of Medicine, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4006, 
Australia.
(11)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada M5G 1X8.
(12)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X8.
(13)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada M5S 1A8.
(14)McLaughlin Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 0A4.
(15)Centre of Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research (CEGMR), King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah 21589, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Roifman Syndrome is a rare congenital disorder characterized by growth 
retardation, cognitive delay, spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia and antibody 
deficiency. Here we utilize whole-genome sequencing of Roifman Syndrome patients 
to reveal compound heterozygous rare variants that disrupt highly conserved 
positions of the RNU4ATAC small nuclear RNA gene, a minor spliceosome component 
that is essential for minor intron splicing. Targeted sequencing confirms allele 
segregation in six cases from four unrelated families. RNU4ATAC rare variants 
have been recently reported to cause microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial 
dwarfism, type I (MOPD1), whose phenotype is distinct from Roifman Syndrome. 
Strikingly, all six of the Roifman Syndrome cases have one variant that overlaps 
MOPD1-implicated structural elements, while the other variant overlaps a highly 
conserved structural element not previously implicated in disease. RNA-seq 
analysis confirms extensive and specific defects of minor intron splicing. 
Available allele frequency data suggest that recessive genetic disorders caused 
by RNU4ATAC rare variants may be more prevalent than previously reported.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms9718
PMCID: PMC4667643
PMID: 26522830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]