---
reference_id: "PMID:37150818"
title: Identification of a novel de novo mutation of SETBP1 and new findings of SETBP1 in tumorgenesis.
authors:
- Wang H
- Gao Y
- Qin L
- Zhang M
- Shi W
- Feng Z
- Guo L
- Zhu B
- Liao S
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02705-6
keywords:
- Ulna/abnormalities
- Urinary Bladder Neoplasms
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- Female
- "Carcinoma, Transitional Cell"
- Humans
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Breast Diseases
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a novel de novo mutation of SETBP1 and new findings of SETBP1 in tumorgenesis.
**Authors:** Wang H, Gao Y, Qin L, Zhang M, Shi W, Feng Z, Guo L, Zhu B, Liao S
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02705-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02705-6)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 May 7;18(1):107. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02705-6.

Identification of a novel de novo mutation of SETBP1 and new findings of SETBP1 
in tumorgenesis.

Wang H(1)(2), Gao Y(3), Qin L(3), Zhang M(3), Shi W(3), Feng Z(4), Guo L(3), Zhu 
B(5), Liao S(6).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetic Institute of Henan Province, Henan Provincial People's 
Hospital, Zhengzhou University People's Hospital, Zhengzhou, China. 
wanghongdan@zzu.edu.cn.
(2)National Health Commission Key Laboratory of Birth Defects Prevention, Henan 
Key Laboratory of Population Defects Prevention, Zhengzhou, China. 
wanghongdan@zzu.edu.cn.
(3)Medical Genetic Institute of Henan Province, Henan Provincial People's 
Hospital, Zhengzhou University People's Hospital, Zhengzhou, China.
(4)Department of Urology, The First People's Hospital of Zhengzhou, Zhengzhou, 
China.
(5)Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Forensic Multi-Omics for Precision 
Identification, School of Forensic Medicine, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China. zhubofeng7372@126.com.
(6)Medical Genetic Institute of Henan Province, Henan Provincial People's 
Hospital, Zhengzhou University People's Hospital, Zhengzhou, China. 
ychslshx@zzu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: In the past decade, SETBP1 has attracted a lot of interest on that 
the same gene with different type or level (germline or somatic) of variants 
could provoke different pathologic consequences such as Schinzel-Giedon 
syndrome, SETBP1 Haploinsufficiency Disorder (SETBP1-HD) and myeloid 
malignancies. Whole exome sequencing was conducted to detect the etiology of a 
pregnant woman with mental retardation. As a new oncogene and potential marker 
of myeloid malignancies, somatic SETBP1 variants in other cancers were rarely 
studied. We performed a pan-cancer analysis of SETBP1 gene in different cancers 
for the first time.
RESULTS: A novel heterozygous mutation of the SETBP1 gene (c.1724_1727del, 
p.D575Vfs*4) was found in the patient and the fetus and the mutation was 
predicted to result in a truncated protein. Reduced SETBP1 expression was 
associated with SETBP1-HD. The pan-cancer analysis of SETBP1 showed that SETBP1 
overexpression should be given special attention in Bladder Urothelial Carcinoma 
(BLCA) and Stomach adenocarcinoma (STAD).
CONCLUSIONS: The de novo SETBP1 mutation was the genetic cause of SETBP1-HD in 
the family. BLCA and STAD might be related to SETBP1 overexpression.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02705-6
PMCID: PMC10165755
PMID: 37150818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.