---
reference_id: "PMID:28306649"
title: Secondary Endolymphatic Hydrops.
authors:
- Ferster APO
- Cureoglu S
- Keskin N
- Paparella MM
- Isildak H
journal: Otol Neurotol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000001377
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Secondary Endolymphatic Hydrops.
**Authors:** Ferster APO, Cureoglu S, Keskin N, Paparella MM, Isildak H
**Journal:** Otol Neurotol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MAO.0000000000001377](https://doi.org/10.1097/MAO.0000000000001377)

## Content

1. Otol Neurotol. 2017 Jun;38(5):774-779. doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000001377.

Secondary Endolymphatic Hydrops.

Ferster APO(1), Cureoglu S, Keskin N, Paparella MM, Isildak H.

Author information:
(1)*Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Surgery, 
College of Medicine, The Pennsylvania State University, Hershey, Pennsylvania 
†Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota ‡Department of Internal Medicine of Ankara University, 
Ankara, Turkey §Department of Otolaryngology, Otopathology Laboratory, 
University of Minnesota ||The Paparella Ear, Head, and Neck Institute, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota.

HYPOTHESIS: A review of the most recent literature will provide clinicians with 
an update of secondary endolymphatic hydrops, aiding in diagnosis and treatment 
of affected patients.
BACKGROUND: Secondary endolymphatic hydrops is a pathologic finding of the inner 
ear resulting in episodic vertigo and intermittent hearing loss. It is a finding 
for which extensive research is being performed.
METHODS: A review of the most recent literature on secondary endolymphatic 
hydrops was performed using PubMed literature search.
RESULTS: Recent investigation of secondary endolymphatic hydrops has brought 
attention to traumatic and inflammatory insults as causes for secondary 
endolymphatic hydrops. Such etiologies, including postsurgical effects of 
cochlear implantation and endolymphatic sac ablation; otosclerosis and its 
operative intervention(s); acoustic and mechanical trauma; medications; and 
systemic inflammatory processes, have been determined as causes of secondary 
lymphatic hydrops. Histopathological slides for many of the etiologies of 
secondary endolymphatic hydrops are presented.
CONCLUSION: Through an understanding of the pathophysiology and etiologies of 
secondary endolymphatic hydrops, clinicians will gain a better understanding of 
this complex disease process, which will aid in treatment of patients with this 
disease process.

DOI: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000001377
PMCID: PMC5425947
PMID: 28306649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None