---
reference_id: "PMID:28745854"
title: "Points & Pearls: Vaccine-preventable diseases in pediatric patients: a review of measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella."
authors:
- Pade KH
journal: Pediatr Emerg Med Pract
year: '2016'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Points & Pearls: Vaccine-preventable diseases in pediatric patients: a review of measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella.
**Authors:** Pade KH
**Journal:** Pediatr Emerg Med Pract (2016)

## Content

1. Pediatr Emerg Med Pract. 2016 Dec 22;13(12):e1-e2.

Points & Pearls: Vaccine-preventable diseases in pediatric patients: a review of 
measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella.

Pade KH(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Emergency Medicine Chief Fellow, Emergency & Transport Medicine, 
Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Keck School of Medicine/University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA.

Vaccine-preventable diseases such as measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella 
continue to plague children and adults worldwide. Although public health 
programs have helped decrease the prevalence and sequelae of these diseases, 
outbreaks still occur. To limit the spread of these diseases, emergency 
clinicians must be able to readily identify the characteristic presentations of 
the rashes associated with measles, rubella, and varicella, as well as the 
common presenting features associated with mumps. Diagnostic laboratory studies 
are not usually necessary, as a complete history and physical examination 
usually lead to an accurate diagnosis. Treatment for these vaccine-preventable 
diseases usually consists of supportive care, but, in some cases, severe 
complications and death may occur. This issue provides a review of the clinical 
features, differential diagnoses, potential complications, and treatment options 
for measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella. [Points & Pearls is a digest of 
Pediatric Emergency Medicine Practice].

PMID: 28745854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]