---
reference_id: "PMID:25222658"
title: Innate immune factors in the development and maintenance of pouchitis.
authors:
- Landy J
- Al-Hassi HO
- Ronde E
- English NR
- Mann ER
- Bernardo D
- Ciclitira PJ
- Clark SK
- Knight SC
- Hart AL
journal: Inflamm Bowel Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000182
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Innate immune factors in the development and maintenance of pouchitis.
**Authors:** Landy J, Al-Hassi HO, Ronde E, English NR, Mann ER, Bernardo D, Ciclitira PJ, Clark SK, Knight SC, Hart AL
**Journal:** Inflamm Bowel Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MIB.0000000000000182](https://doi.org/10.1097/MIB.0000000000000182)

## Content

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2014 Nov;20(11):1942-9. doi: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000182.

Innate immune factors in the development and maintenance of pouchitis.

Landy J(1), Al-Hassi HO, Ronde E, English NR, Mann ER, Bernardo D, Ciclitira PJ, 
Clark SK, Knight SC, Hart AL.

Author information:
(1)*Department of Gastroenterology, St Mark's Hospital, London, United Kingdom; 
†Antigen Presentation Research Group, Imperial College London, Northwick Park 
and St Mark's Campus, London, United Kingdom; ‡Department of Gastroenterology, 
The Rayne Institute, St Thomas' Hospital, London, United Kingdom; and 
§Department of Surgery, St Mark's Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Tight junction proteins (TJPs) and dendritic cells (DC) are critical 
in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel diseases. The ileal pouch formed by 
restorative proctocolectomy provides a unique human model for studying the 
pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel diseases. Data implicate the microbiota in 
the pathogenesis of pouchitis, while the role of innate immune factors remains 
unclear. We performed longitudinal and cross-sectional studies of patients after 
restorative proctocolectomy and assessed TJP and DC characteristics in the ileal 
pouch.
METHODS: Mucosal biopsies were taken from the ileal pouch of patients with 
ulcerative colitis (UC) and familial adenomatous polyposis (n = 8). Of patients 
with UC, one group (n = 5) was followed longitudinally over the first year after 
ileostomy closure, another group had pouchitis (n = 15), and another group no 
inflammation (n = 18). Dendritic cell phenotype and epithelial cell TJP 
expression were assessed using flow cytometric analysis.
RESULTS: Increased epithelial expression of the "pore-forming" TJP claudin 2, 
and DC expression of gut-homing markers CCR 9 and integrin β7, occurred early 
after ileostomy closure. In patients with UC with pouchitis, epithelial 
expression of ZO-1 and claudin 1 were reduced, DC were activated with increased 
CD40, and Toll-like receptor 4 expression increased. In pouchitis, DC expressing 
CCR 9 were decreased, whereas DC expressing β7 increased.
CONCLUSIONS: Abnormalities were found in TJP expression in the pouch of patients 
with UC, in particular, increased expression of the pore-forming claudin 2 as an 
early event in the development of pouch inflammation and an aberrant DC 
phenotype was characterized in the ileal pouch of patients with UC.

DOI: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000182
PMID: 25222658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]