---
reference_id: "PMID:29972109"
title: Utility of serial 12-lead electrocardiograms in children with Marfan syndrome.
authors:
- Arunamata AA
- Nguyen CT
- Ceresnak SR
- Dubin AM
- Olson IL
- Murphy DJ
- Selamet Tierney ES
journal: Cardiol Young
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1017/S1047951118000707
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Utility of serial 12-lead electrocardiograms in children with Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Arunamata AA, Nguyen CT, Ceresnak SR, Dubin AM, Olson IL, Murphy DJ, Selamet Tierney ES
**Journal:** Cardiol Young (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S1047951118000707](https://doi.org/10.1017/S1047951118000707)

## Content

1. Cardiol Young. 2018 Aug;28(8):1009-1013. doi: 10.1017/S1047951118000707. Epub 
2018 Jul 4.

Utility of serial 12-lead electrocardiograms in children with Marfan syndrome.

Arunamata AA(1), Nguyen CT(1), Ceresnak SR(1), Dubin AM(1), Olson IL(1), Murphy 
DJ(1), Selamet Tierney ES(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics,Division of Pediatric Cardiology,Stanford University 
School of Medicine,Palo Alto,CA,USA.

OBJECTIVES: The goal of this study was to assess the utility of serial 
electrocardiograms in routine follow-up of paediatric Marfan patients.
METHODS: Children ⩽18 years who met the revised Ghent criteria for Marfan 
syndrome and received a 12-lead electrocardiogram and echocardiogram within a 
3-month period were included. Controls were matched by age, body surface area, 
gender, race, and ethnicity, and consisted of patients assessed in clinic with a 
normal cardiac evaluation. Demographic, clinical, echocardiographic, and 
electrocardiographic data were collected.
RESULTS: A total of 45 Marfan patients (10.8 [2.4-17.1] years) and 37 controls 
(12.8 [1.3-17.1] years) were included. Left atrial enlargement and left 
ventricular hypertrophy were more frequently present on 12-lead 
electrocardiogram of Marfan patients compared with controls (12 (27%) versus 0 
(0%), p<0.001; and 8 (18%) versus 0 (0%), p=0.008, respectively); however, only 
two patients with left atrial enlargement on 12-lead electrocardiogram were 
confirmed to have left atrial enlargement by echocardiogram, and one patient had 
mild left ventricular hypertrophy by echocardiogram, not appreciated on 12-lead 
electrocardiogram. QTc interval was longer in Marfan patients compared with 
controls (427±16 versus 417±22 ms, p=0.03), with four Marfan patients 
demonstrating borderline prolonged QTc intervals for gender.
CONCLUSIONS: While Marfan patients exhibited a higher frequency of left atrial 
enlargement and left ventricular hypertrophy on 12-lead electrocardiograms 
compared with controls, these findings were not supported by echocardiography. 
Serial 12-lead electrocardiograms in routine follow-up of asymptomatic 
paediatric Marfan patients may be more appropriate for a subgroup of Marfan 
patients only, specifically those with prolonged QTc interval at their baseline 
visit.

DOI: 10.1017/S1047951118000707
PMID: 29972109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]