---
reference_id: "PMID:24767772"
title: Pathologic highlights of dengue hemorrhagic fever in 13 autopsy cases from Myanmar.
authors:
- Aye KS
- Charngkaew K
- Win N
- Wai KZ
- Moe K
- Punyadee N
- Thiemmeca S
- Suttitheptumrong A
- Sukpanichnant S
- Prida M
- Halstead SB
journal: Hum Pathol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.01.022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathologic highlights of dengue hemorrhagic fever in 13 autopsy cases from Myanmar.
**Authors:** Aye KS, Charngkaew K, Win N, Wai KZ, Moe K, Punyadee N, Thiemmeca S, Suttitheptumrong A, Sukpanichnant S, Prida M, Halstead SB
**Journal:** Hum Pathol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.humpath.2014.01.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humpath.2014.01.022)

## Content

1. Hum Pathol. 2014 Jun;45(6):1221-33. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.01.022. Epub 
2014 Feb 20.

Pathologic highlights of dengue hemorrhagic fever in 13 autopsy cases from 
Myanmar.

Aye KS(1), Charngkaew K(2), Win N(3), Wai KZ(4), Moe K(1), Punyadee N(5), 
Thiemmeca S(5), Suttitheptumrong A(6), Sukpanichnant S(2), Prida M(7), Halstead 
SB(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Research (Lower Myanmar), Yangon, Myanmar.
(2)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)National Health Laboratory, Yangon, Myanmar.
(4)Intensive Care Unit, Yangon Children Hospital, Yangon, Myanmar.
(5)Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever Research Unit, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 
Thailand.
(6)Division of Molecular Medicine, Office for Research and Development, Faculty 
of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(7)Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever Research Unit, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 
Thailand; Medical Biotechnology Unit, National Center for Genetic Engineering 
and Biotechnology, National Science and Technology Development Agency, Bangkok, 
Thailand. Electronic address: sipml@mahidol.ac.th.
(8)Dengue Vaccine Initiative, International Vaccine Institute, Seoul, South 
Korea. Electronic address: halsteads@erols.com.

Vascular permeability, thrombocytopenia, liver pathology, complement activation, 
and altered hemostasis accompanying a febrile disease are the hallmarks of the 
dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome, a major arthropod-borne viral 
disease that causes significant morbidity and mortality throughout tropical 
countries. We studied tissues from 13 children who died of acute dengue 
hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome at the Childrens' Hospital, Yangon, 
Myanmar. Dengue viral RNA from each of the 4 dengue viruses (DENVs) was detected 
by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction in 11 cases, and dengue viral 
proteins (envelope, NS1, or NS3) were detected in 1 or more tissues from all 13 
cases. Formalin-fixed and frozen tissues were studied for evidence of virus 
infection using monoclonal antibodies against DENV structural and nonstructural 
antigens (E, NS1, and nonsecreting NS3). In the liver, DENV infection occurred 
in hepatocytes and Kupffer cells but not in endothelial cells. Liver damage was 
associated with deposition on hepatocytes of complement components of both 
classical and alternative pathways. Evidence of dengue viral replication was 
observed in macrophage-like cells in spleens and lymph nodes. No dengue antigens 
were detected in endothelial cells in any organ. Germinal centers of the spleen 
and lymph nodes showed a marked reduction in the number of lymphocytes that were 
replaced by eosinophilic deposits, which contained dengue antigens as well as 
immunoglobulins, and complement components (C3, C1q, and C9). The latter 
findings had previously been reported but overlooked as a diagnostic feature.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.01.022
PMID: 24767772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]