---
reference_id: "PMID:31327504"
title: "First-episode psychosis and vocational outcomes: A predictive model."
authors:
- Chua YC
- Abdin E
- Tang C
- Subramaniam M
- Verma S
journal: Schizophr Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2019.07.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# First-episode psychosis and vocational outcomes: A predictive model.
**Authors:** Chua YC, Abdin E, Tang C, Subramaniam M, Verma S
**Journal:** Schizophr Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.schres.2019.07.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2019.07.009)

## Content

1. Schizophr Res. 2019 Sep;211:63-68. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2019.07.009. Epub
2019  Jul 19.

First-episode psychosis and vocational outcomes: A predictive model.

Chua YC(1), Abdin E(2), Tang C(3), Subramaniam M(4), Verma S(5).

Author information:
(1)Early Psychosis Intervention Program, Institute of Mental Health, Buangkok 
Green Medical Park, 10 Buangkok View, 539747, Singapore. Electronic address: 
yi_chian_chua@imh.com.sg.
(2)Research Division, Institute of Mental Health, Buangkok Green Medical Park, 
10 Buangkok View, 539747, Singapore. Electronic address: 
edimansyah_abdin@imh.com.sg.
(3)Early Psychosis Intervention Program, Institute of Mental Health, Buangkok 
Green Medical Park, 10 Buangkok View, 539747, Singapore. Electronic address: 
charmaine_yz_tang@imh.com.sg.
(4)Research Division, Institute of Mental Health, Buangkok Green Medical Park, 
10 Buangkok View, 539747, Singapore. Electronic address: mythily@imh.com.sg.
(5)Early Psychosis Intervention Program, Institute of Mental Health, Buangkok 
Green Medical Park, 10 Buangkok View, 539747, Singapore; Duke-NUS Medical 
School, 8 College Road, 169857, Singapore. Electronic address: 
swapna_verma@imh.com.sg.

Most studies on predictors of vocational outcomes are cross-sectional and 
results are varied. This study aimed to examine the vocational rates of patients 
with first-episode psychosis (FEP), identify factors predicting a lack of 
engagement in age-appropriate roles, and evaluate the predictive ability of a 
model with baseline sociodemographic information and 2-year symptom and 
functioning trajectories on vocational outcomes. The Singapore Early Psychosis 
Intervention Program (EPIP) has maintained a standing database on patient 
clinico-demographic information. The primary outcome, vocational status, was 
operationalized as "meaningfully employed", that is, being gainfully employed or 
engaged in an age-appropriate role, and "unemployed". Using logistic regression, 
the predictive ability of the proposed model was evaluated. Vocational data was 
available for 1177 patients accepted into EPIP between 2001 and 2012. At the end 
of two years in the service, 829 (70.4%) patients were meaningfully employed and 
348 (29.6%) patients were unemployed. The binary logistic regression model on 
the prediction of 2-year vocational outcomes yielded an AUC of 0.759 
(SE = 0.016, p-value < 0.001). Clinico-demographic risk factors for being 
unemployed at the end of two years included being Malay, single, and unemployed 
at baseline; having a longer duration of untreated psychosis (DUP); a diagnosis 
of schizophrenia, schizophreniform, or delusional disorder at baseline; and 
belonging to the 'delayed response' or 'slower response and no response' general 
psychopathology trajectories. We have proposed a model that allows vocational 
outcomes to be predicted with high specificity. The results of this study will 
be relevant in developing future intervention models to improve outcomes among 
FEP patients with different illness trajectories.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2019.07.009
PMID: 31327504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]