---
reference_id: "PMID:39294906"
title: "Immunodeficiency: Complement disorders."
authors:
- McMurray JC
- Schornack BJ
- Weskamp AL
- Park KJ
- Pollock JD
- Day WG
- Brockshus AT
- Beakes DE
- Schwartz DJ
- Mikita CP
- Pittman LM
journal: Allergy Asthma Proc
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2500/aap.2024.45.240050
keywords:
- Humans
- "Complement System Proteins/immunology, metabolism"
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/diagnosis, immunology"
- Complement Activation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunodeficiency: Complement disorders.
**Authors:** McMurray JC, Schornack BJ, Weskamp AL, Park KJ, Pollock JD, Day WG, Brockshus AT, Beakes DE, Schwartz DJ, Mikita CP, Pittman LM
**Journal:** Allergy Asthma Proc (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2500/aap.2024.45.240050](https://doi.org/10.2500/aap.2024.45.240050)

## Content

1. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2024 Sep 1;45(5):305-309. doi:
10.2500/aap.2024.45.240050.

Immunodeficiency: Complement disorders.

McMurray JC(1), Schornack BJ(1), Weskamp AL(1), Park KJ(1), Pollock JD(1), Day 
WG(1), Brockshus AT(1), Beakes DE(1), Schwartz DJ(1), Mikita CP(2), Pittman 
LM(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Allergy and Immunology Service, Walter Reed National Military 
Medical Center, Bethesda, Maryland; and.
(2)Immunization Healthcare Division, Defense Health Agency - Public Health, 
Falls Church, Virginia.

The complement system is an important component of innate and adaptive immunity 
that consists of three activation pathways. The classic complement pathway plays 
a role in humoral immunity, whereas the alternative and lectin pathways augment 
the innate response. Impairment, deficiency, or overactivation of any of the 
known 50 complement proteins may lead to increased susceptibility to infection 
with encapsulated organisms, autoimmunity, hereditary angioedema, or thrombosis, 
depending on the affected protein. Classic pathway defects result from 
deficiencies of complement proteins C1q, C1r, C1s, C2, and C4, and typically 
manifest with features of systemic lupus erythematosus and infections with 
encapsulated organisms. Alternative pathway defects due to deficiencies of 
factor B, factor D, and properdin may present with increased susceptibility to 
Neisseria infections. Lectin pathway defects, including Mannose-binding 
protein-associated serine protease 2 (MASP2) and ficolin 3, may be asymptomatic 
or lead to pyogenic infections and autoimmunity. Complement protein C3 is common 
to all pathways, deficiency of which predisposes patients to severe frequent 
infections and glomerulonephritis. Deficiencies in factor H and factor I, which 
regulate the alternative pathway, may lead to hemolytic uremic syndrome. 
Disseminated Neisseria infections result from terminal pathway defects (i.e., 
C5, C6, C7, C8, and C9). Diagnosis of complement deficiencies involves screening 
with functional assays (i.e., total complement activity [CH50], alternative 
complement pathway activity [AH50], enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA]) 
followed by measurement of individual complement factors by immunoassay. 
Management of complement deficiencies requires a comprehensive and 
individualized approach with special attention to vaccination against 
encapsulated bacteria, consideration of prophylactic antibiotics, treatment of 
comorbid autoimmunity, and close surveillance.

DOI: 10.2500/aap.2024.45.240050
PMCID: PMC11441536
PMID: 39294906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare pertaining to this article