---
reference_id: "PMID:34992251"
title: Large-vessel vasculitis.
authors:
- Pugh D
- Karabayas M
- Basu N
- Cid MC
- Goel R
- Goodyear CS
- Grayson PC
- McAdoo SP
- Mason JC
- Owen C
- Weyand CM
- Youngstein T
- Dhaun N
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-021-00327-5
keywords:
- Adult
- Aorta
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Humans
- "Takayasu Arteritis/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Large-vessel vasculitis.
**Authors:** Pugh D, Karabayas M, Basu N, Cid MC, Goel R, Goodyear CS, Grayson PC, McAdoo SP, Mason JC, Owen C, Weyand CM, Youngstein T, Dhaun N
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-021-00327-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-021-00327-5)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2022 Jan 6;7(1):93. doi: 10.1038/s41572-021-00327-5.

Large-vessel vasculitis.

Pugh D(1), Karabayas M(2), Basu N(3), Cid MC(4), Goel R(5), Goodyear CS(3), 
Grayson PC(6), McAdoo SP(7), Mason JC(8), Owen C(9), Weyand CM(10), Youngstein 
T(8), Dhaun N(11).

Author information:
(1)British Hearth Foundation/University Centre for Cardiovascular Science, 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(2)Centre for Arthritis & Musculoskeletal Health, University of Aberdeen, 
Aberdeen, UK.
(3)Institute of Infection, Immunity & Inflammation, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, UK.
(4)Department of Autoimmune Diseases, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques 
August Pi I Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Clinical Immunology & Rheumatology, Christian Medical College, 
Vellore, India.
(6)National Institute of Arthritis & Musculoskeletal & Skin Diseases, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Immunology & Inflammation, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(8)National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(9)Patient representative, Edinburgh, UK.
(10)Centre for Translational Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, 
California, USA.
(11)British Hearth Foundation/University Centre for Cardiovascular Science, 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. bean.dhaun@ed.ac.uk.

Large-vessel vasculitis (LVV) manifests as inflammation of the aorta and its 
major branches and is the most common primary vasculitis in adults. LVV 
comprises two distinct conditions, giant cell arteritis and Takayasu arteritis, 
although the phenotypic spectrum of primary LVV is complex. Non-specific 
symptoms often predominate and so patients with LVV present to a range of 
health-care providers and settings. Rapid diagnosis, specialist referral and 
early treatment are key to good patient outcomes. Unfortunately, disease relapse 
remains common and chronic vascular complications are a source of considerable 
morbidity. Although accurate monitoring of disease activity is challenging, 
progress in vascular imaging techniques and the measurement of laboratory 
biomarkers may facilitate better matching of treatment intensity with disease 
activity. Further, advances in our understanding of disease pathophysiology have 
paved the way for novel biologic treatments that target important mediators of 
disease in both giant cell arteritis and Takayasu arteritis. This work has 
highlighted the substantial heterogeneity present within LVV and the importance 
of an individualized therapeutic approach. Future work will focus on 
understanding the mechanisms of persisting vascular inflammation, which will 
inform the development of increasingly sophisticated imaging technologies. 
Together, these will enable better disease prognostication, limit 
treatment-associated adverse effects, and facilitate targeted development and 
use of novel therapies.

© 2022. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-021-00327-5
PMCID: PMC9115766
PMID: 34992251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.