---
reference_id: "PMID:35181536"
title: Persistent Clostridium difficile Colitis Mimicking A Fatal Case Of Strongyloides Hyperinfection Syndrome.
authors:
- Grossman J
- Fan J
- Allard F
- Moon J
- Marcos LA
journal: Int J Infect Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2022.02.023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Persistent Clostridium difficile Colitis Mimicking A Fatal Case Of Strongyloides Hyperinfection Syndrome.
**Authors:** Grossman J, Fan J, Allard F, Moon J, Marcos LA
**Journal:** Int J Infect Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijid.2022.02.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2022.02.023)

## Content

1. Int J Infect Dis. 2022 Apr;117:369-371. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2022.02.023. Epub 
2022 Feb 15.

Persistent Clostridium difficile Colitis Mimicking A Fatal Case Of Strongyloides 
Hyperinfection Syndrome.

Grossman J(1), Fan J(2), Allard F(3), Moon J(4), Marcos LA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine-Pediatrics, Stony Brook University, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Stony Brook University, NY, USA. Electronic address: 
Jun.Fan@Stonybrookmedicine.edu.
(3)Department of Pathology, Stony Brook University, NY, USA. Electronic address: 
Felicia.Allard@Stonybrookmedicine.edu.
(4)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA.. Electronic address: 
Jane.Moon@Stonybrookmedicine.edu.
(5)Department of Medicine (Division of Infectious Diseases) and Department of 
Microbiology and Immunology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA.

Strongyloidiasis, a disease caused by the helminth Strongyloides stercoralis, 
has been identified as a life-threatening parasitic infection among 
immunocompromised patients. In the most severe cases, which include 
hyperinfection syndrome and dissemination of larvae throughout multiple organ 
sites, there is typically a history of immunosuppression among the infected. 
Herein, we describe a fatal case of S. stercoralis hyperinfection in an 
immigrant from rural Ecuador presenting with diarrhea along with Clostridium 
difficile colitis after the use of a prolonged course of steroids. Despite the 
appropriate administration of ivermectin, living Strongyloides larvae were 
discovered in a tracheal lavage. The patient ultimately developed a multiorgan 
failure requiring life-supporting measures in the intensive care unit and later 
succumbed to his condition. This case of S. stercoralis hyperinfection 
emphasizes the importance of screening for this parasite in the appropriate 
clinical scenarios. The diagnosis of S. stercoralis can be made more accessible 
to practitioners through the use of methods such as the modified Baermann 
technique, agar-plate culture, and serologic antibody testing.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2022.02.023
PMID: 35181536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]