---
reference_id: "PMID:15956168"
title: Brain gamma-aminobutyric acid changes in stiff-person syndrome.
authors:
- Levy LM
- Levy-Reis I
- Fujii M
- Dalakas MC
journal: Arch Neurol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1001/archneur.62.6.970
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain gamma-aminobutyric acid changes in stiff-person syndrome.
**Authors:** Levy LM, Levy-Reis I, Fujii M, Dalakas MC
**Journal:** Arch Neurol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archneur.62.6.970](https://doi.org/10.1001/archneur.62.6.970)

## Content

1. Arch Neurol. 2005 Jun;62(6):970-4. doi: 10.1001/archneur.62.6.970.

Brain gamma-aminobutyric acid changes in stiff-person syndrome.

Levy LM(1), Levy-Reis I, Fujii M, Dalakas MC.

Author information:
(1)Neuroimaging Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. llevy@mfa.gwu.edu

BACKGROUND: Patients with stiff-person syndrome (SPS) have circulating 
antibodies against glutamic acid decarboxylase, the rate-limiting enzyme 
responsible for the synthesis of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Although the 
patients' symptoms of stiffness and unexpected spasms can be explained on the 
basis of reduced or impaired inhibitory neurotransmitters, such as GABA, it is 
unclear whether the level of GABA in the brains of these patients is reduced 
and, if so, whether the reduction is due to anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase 
antibodies.
OBJECTIVE: To measure GABA levels in the brains of patients with SPS.
DESIGN: Prospective case-control study.
SETTING: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md.
PATIENTS: Eight patients with SPS with high titers of circulating anti-glutamic 
acid decarboxylase antibodies and typical clinical symptoms of SPS and 16 
control subjects.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Results of brain magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy, which measures GABA levels in specific brain regions.
RESULTS: No abnormalities were noted on brain magnetic resonance images. A 
prominent and significant decrease in GABA level was, however, observed in the 
sensorimotor cortex and a smaller decrease in the posterior occipital cortex but 
not in the cingulate cortex or pons.
CONCLUSIONS: The reduction of brain GABA in patients with SPS supports the 
clinical symptoms and indicates that the inhibitory GABAergic pathways are 
involved in the disease. Regardless of the responsible autoantigens, in SPS 
autoantibodies block the function of GABAergic neurons and interfere with the 
synthesis of GABA but do not cause structural changes in the brain.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.62.6.970
PMID: 15956168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]