---
reference_id: "PMID:33357469"
title: "Acute flaccid myelitis: cause, diagnosis, and management."
authors:
- Murphy OC
- Messacar K
- Benson L
- Bove R
- Carpenter JL
- Crawford T
- Dean J
- DeBiasi R
- Desai J
- Elrick MJ
- Farias-Moeller R
- Gombolay GY
- Greenberg B
- Harmelink M
- Hong S
- Hopkins SE
- Oleszek J
- Otten C
- Sadowsky CL
- Schreiner TL
- Thakur KT
- Van Haren K
- Carballo CM
- Chong PF
- Fall A
- Gowda VK
- Helfferich J
- Kira R
- Lim M
- Lopez EL
- Wells EM
- Yeh EA
- Pardo CA
- AFM working group
journal: Lancet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32723-9
keywords:
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/cerebrospinal fluid, diagnostic imaging, rehabilitation, virology"
- Child
- "Enterovirus Infections/cerebrospinal fluid, complications, epidemiology"
- Global Health
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Muscle Hypotonia/etiology
- Muscle Weakness/etiology
- "Myelitis/cerebrospinal fluid, diagnostic imaging, rehabilitation, virology"
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/cerebrospinal fluid, diagnostic imaging, rehabilitation, virology"
- Patient Outcome Assessment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute flaccid myelitis: cause, diagnosis, and management.
**Authors:** Murphy OC, Messacar K, Benson L, Bove R, Carpenter JL, Crawford T, Dean J, DeBiasi R, Desai J, Elrick MJ, Farias-Moeller R, Gombolay GY, Greenberg B, Harmelink M, Hong S, Hopkins SE, Oleszek J, Otten C, Sadowsky CL, Schreiner TL, Thakur KT, Van Haren K, Carballo CM, Chong PF, Fall A, Gowda VK, Helfferich J, Kira R, Lim M, Lopez EL, Wells EM, Yeh EA, Pardo CA, AFM working group
**Journal:** Lancet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32723-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32723-9)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2021 Jan 23;397(10271):334-346. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32723-9.
Epub  2020 Dec 23.

Acute flaccid myelitis: cause, diagnosis, and management.

Murphy OC(1), Messacar K(2), Benson L(3), Bove R(4), Carpenter JL(5), Crawford
T(6), Dean J(7), DeBiasi R(8), Desai J(9), Elrick MJ(1), Farias-Moeller R(10),
Gombolay GY(11), Greenberg B(12), Harmelink M(10), Hong S(13), Hopkins SE(14),
Oleszek J(15), Otten C(16), Sadowsky CL(17), Schreiner TL(18), Thakur KT(19),
Van Haren K(20), Carballo CM(21), Chong PF(22), Fall A(23), Gowda VK(24),
Helfferich J(25), Kira R(22), Lim M(26), Lopez EL(21), Wells EM(5), Yeh EA(27),
Pardo CA(28); AFM working group.

Collaborators: Salazar-Camelo A, Mithal D, Wilson-Murphy M, Bauer A, Watkins C,
Abzug M, Dominguez S, Press C, Yang M, Ahsan N, Ramos-Platt L, Tiongson E,
Seruya M, Tilton A, Katz E, Kirschen M, Shah A, Ulloa E, Yum S, Mondok L,
Blaufuss M, Rosenfeld A, Vargas W, Zucker J, Yeshokumar A, Navis A, Chao K,
Hagen K, Melicosta M, Porter C, Tunney M, Scheuermann R, Duggal P, Pekosz A,
Bayliss A, Moore M, Belzberg A, Bembea M, O'Brien C, Riggs R, Nance J, Milstone
A, Rice J, Garcia-Dominguez MA, Flanagan E, Tillema JM, Bosques G, Bhatia S,
Gordon-Lipkin E, Deike D, Revivo G, Zlotolow D, deFiebre G, Lazerow P, Lotze T,
Bitnun A, Davidge K, Vajsar J, Moore A, Konersman C, Nash K, Strober J, Gupta N,
Chiu C, Sweeney M, Jackson W, Simon D, Thakkar K, Cheng J, Luce J, Das S, Vogt
M, Vu N, Gofshteyn J, Makhani N, Patel P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Children's Hospital Colorado,
Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Weill Institute for Neurosciences, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Children's National Health System, Washington, DC,
USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(7)International Center for Spinal Cord Injury, Kennedy Krieger Institute,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Children's National Health
System, Washington, DC, USA.
(9)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Wisconsin and the Medical
College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
(11)Department of Neurology, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(12)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX, USA.
(13)Division of Pediatric Critical Care, Ann & Robert H Lurie Children's
Hospital of Chicago, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL, USA.
(14)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(15)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Children's Hospital
Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.
(16)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA,
USA.
(17)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; International Center for Spinal Cord
Injury, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(18)Department of Child Neurology, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO,
USA.
(19)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New
York, NY, USA.
(20)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA.
(21)Department of Infectious Diseases, Hospital de Niños "Ricardo Gutiérrez",
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(22)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Fukuoka Children's Hospital, Fukuoka,
Japan.
(23)Institut Pasteur de Dakar, Département de Virologie, Dakar, Senegal.
(24)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Indira Gandhi Institute of Child Health,
Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
(25)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
(26)Children's Neuroscience Center, Evelina London Children's Hospital, Guy's
and St Thomas' NHS Trust, and Faculty of Life Sciences, King's College, London,
UK.
(27)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick
Children, University of Toronto, ON, Canada.
(28)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA; Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. Electronic address: cpardov1@jhmi.edu.

Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is a disabling, polio-like illness mainly affecting
children. Outbreaks of AFM have occurred across multiple global regions since
2012, and the disease appears to be caused by non-polio enterovirus infection,
posing a major public health challenge. The clinical presentation of flaccid and
often profound muscle weakness (which can invoke respiratory failure and other
critical complications) can mimic several other acute neurological illnesses.
There is no single sensitive and specific test for AFM, and the diagnosis relies
on identification of several important clinical, neuroimaging, and cerebrospinal
fluid characteristics. Following the acute phase of AFM, patients typically have
substantial residual disability and unique long-term rehabilitation needs. In
this Review we describe the epidemiology, clinical features, course, and
outcomes of AFM to help to guide diagnosis, management, and rehabilitation.
Future research directions include further studies evaluating host and pathogen
factors, including investigations into genetic, viral, and immunological
features of affected patients, host-virus interactions, and investigations of
targeted therapeutic approaches to improve the long-term outcomes in this
population.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32723-9
PMCID: PMC7909727
PMID: 33357469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
