---
reference_id: "PMID:33175854"
title: "Can multitrophic interactions shape morphometry, allometry, and fluctuating asymmetry of seed-feeding insects?"
authors:
- Oliveira TCT
- Monteiro AB
- Faria LDB
journal: PLoS One
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0241913
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Can multitrophic interactions shape morphometry, allometry, and fluctuating asymmetry of seed-feeding insects?
**Authors:** Oliveira TCT, Monteiro AB, Faria LDB
**Journal:** PLoS One (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0241913](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0241913)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2020 Nov 11;15(11):e0241913. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0241913. 
eCollection 2020.

Can multitrophic interactions shape morphometry, allometry, and fluctuating 
asymmetry of seed-feeding insects?

Oliveira TCT(1), Monteiro AB(1), Faria LDB(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Applied Ecology, Federal University of Lavras, Lavras, 
Brazil.
(2)Department of Ecology and Conservation, Institute of Natural Science, Federal 
University of Lavras, Lavras, Brazil.

Body size is commonly associated with biological features such as reproductive 
capacity, competition, and resource acquisition. Many studies have tried to 
understand how these isolated factors can affect the body pattern of 
individuals. However, little is known about how interactions among species in 
multitrophic communities determine the body shape of individuals exploiting the 
same resource. Here, we evaluate the effect of fruit infestation, parasitism 
rate, and seed biomass on size, allometric and asymmetric patterns of 
morphological structures of insects that exploit the same resource. To test it, 
we measured 750 individuals associated with the plant Senegalia tenuifolia 
(Fabaceae), previously collected over three consecutive years. Negative 
allometry was maintained for all species, suggesting that with increasing body 
size the body structure did not grow proportionally. Despite this, some 
variations in allometric slopes suggest that interactions in a multitrophic food 
web can shape the development of these species. Also, we observed a higher 
confidence interval at higher categories of infestation and parasitism rate, 
suggesting a great variability in the allometric scaling. We did not observe 
fluctuating asymmetry for any category or species, but we found some changes in 
morphological structures, depending on the variables tested. These findings show 
that both allometry and morphological trait measurements are the most indicated 
in studies focused on interactions and morphometry. Finally, we show that, 
except for the fluctuating asymmetry, each species and morphological structure 
respond differently to interactions, even if the individuals play the same 
functional role within the food web.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0241913
PMCID: PMC7657534
PMID: 33175854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.