---
reference_id: "PMID:37999643"
title: "Fibroblasts under pressure: cardiac fibroblast responses to hypertension and antihypertensive therapies."
authors:
- Chalise U
- Hale TM
journal: Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00401.2023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibroblasts under pressure: cardiac fibroblast responses to hypertension and antihypertensive therapies.
**Authors:** Chalise U, Hale TM
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpheart.00401.2023](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00401.2023)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2024 Jan 1;326(1):H223-H237. doi: 
10.1152/ajpheart.00401.2023. Epub 2023 Nov 24.

Fibroblasts under pressure: cardiac fibroblast responses to hypertension and 
antihypertensive therapies.

Chalise U(1), Hale TM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, United States.
(2)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Arizona, College of 
Medicine-Phoenix, Phoenix, Arizona, United States.

Approximately 50% of Americans have hypertension, which significantly increases 
the risk of heart failure. In response to increased peripheral resistance in 
hypertension, intensified mechanical stretch in the myocardium induces 
cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and fibroblast activation to withstand increased 
pressure overload. This changes the structure and function of the heart, leading 
to pathological cardiac remodeling and eventual progression to heart failure. In 
the presence of hypertensive stimuli, cardiac fibroblasts activate and 
differentiate to myofibroblast phenotype capable of enhanced extracellular 
matrix secretion in coordination with other cell types, mainly cardiomyocytes. 
Both systemic and local renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system activation lead to 
increased angiotensin II stimulation of fibroblasts. Angiotensin II directly 
activates fibrotic signaling such as transforming growth factor β/SMAD and 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling to produce extracellular 
matrix comprised of collagens and matricellular proteins. With the advent of 
single-cell RNA sequencing techniques, heterogeneity in fibroblast populations 
has been identified in the left ventricle in models of hypertension and pressure 
overload. The various clusters of fibroblasts reveal a range of phenotypes and 
activation states. Select antihypertensive therapies have been shown to be 
effective in limiting fibrosis, with some having direct actions on cardiac 
fibroblasts. The present review focuses on the fibroblast-specific changes that 
occur in response to hypertension and pressure overload, the knowledge gained 
from single-cell analyses, and the effect of antihypertensive therapies. 
Understanding the dynamics of hypertensive fibroblast populations and their 
similarities and differences by sex is crucial for the advent of new targets and 
personalized medicine.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00401.2023
PMCID: PMC11219059
PMID: 37999643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest, financial or 
otherwise, are declared by the authors.