---
reference_id: "PMID:31183366"
title: Whole-Exome Sequencing Identified a Novel Compound Heterozygous Genotype in ASL in a Chinese Han Patient with Argininosuccinate Lyase Deficiency.
authors:
- Zhao M
- Hou L
- Teng H
- Li J
- Wang J
- Zhang K
- Yang L
journal: Biomed Res Int
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1155/2019/3530198
keywords:
- Amino Acid Substitution
- "Argininosuccinate Lyase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Argininosuccinic Aciduria/enzymology, genetics"
- "Citrulline/blood, genetics"
- HEK293 Cells
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole-Exome Sequencing Identified a Novel Compound Heterozygous Genotype in ASL in a Chinese Han Patient with Argininosuccinate Lyase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Zhao M, Hou L, Teng H, Li J, Wang J, Zhang K, Yang L
**Journal:** Biomed Res Int (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2019/3530198](https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/3530198)

## Content

1. Biomed Res Int. 2019 Apr 30;2019:3530198. doi: 10.1155/2019/3530198.
eCollection  2019.

Whole-Exome Sequencing Identified a Novel Compound Heterozygous Genotype in ASL
in a Chinese Han Patient with Argininosuccinate Lyase Deficiency.

Zhao M(1), Hou L(2), Teng H(2), Li J(2), Wang J(1), Zhang K(1), Yang L(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Lab of Mental Health, Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 4A Datun Rd., Beijing 100101, China.
(2)Beijing Institutes of Life Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100101, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China.

Pathogenic variants in the argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) gene have been shown to
cause argininosuccinate lyase deficiency (ASLD); therefore, sequencing analysis
offers advantages for prenatal testing and counseling in families afflicted with
this condition. Here, we performed a genetic analysis of an ASLD patient and his
family with an aim to offer available information for clinical diagnosis. The
research subjects were a 23-month-old patient with a high plasma level of
citrulline and his unaffected parents. Whole-exome sequencing identified
potential related ASL gene mutations in this trio. Enzymatic activity was
detected spectrophotometrically by a coupled assay using arginase and measuring
urea production. We identified a novel nonsynonymous mutation (c.206A>G,
p.Lys69Arg) and a stop mutation (c.637C>T, p.Arg213∗) in ASL in a Chinese Han
patient with ASLD. The enzymatic activity of a p.Lys69Arg ASL construct in human
embryonic kidney 293T cells was significantly reduced compared to that of the
wild-type construct, and no significant activity was observed for the p.Arg213∗
construct. Compound heterozygous p.Lys69Arg and p.Arg213∗ mutations that
resulted in reduced ASL enzyme activity were found in a patient with ASLD. This
finding expands the clinical spectrum of ASL pathogenic variants.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/3530198
PMCID: PMC6515145
PMID: 31183366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
