---
reference_id: "PMID:34807953"
title: "Respiratory symptoms and respiratory deaths: A multi-cohort study with 45 years observation time."
authors:
- Stavem K
- Johannessen A
- Nielsen R
- Gulsvik A
journal: PLoS One
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260416
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Respiratory symptoms and respiratory deaths: A multi-cohort study with 45 years observation time.
**Authors:** Stavem K, Johannessen A, Nielsen R, Gulsvik A
**Journal:** PLoS One (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0260416](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0260416)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 22;16(11):e0260416. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260416. 
eCollection 2021.

Respiratory symptoms and respiratory deaths: A multi-cohort study with 45 years 
observation time.

Stavem K(1)(2)(3), Johannessen A(4), Nielsen R(5), Gulsvik A(5).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Department, Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway.
(2)Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Health Services Research Unit, Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, 
Norway.
(4)Centre for International Health, Department of Global Public Health and 
Primary Care, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(5)Department of Clinical Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Bergen, 
Bergen, Norway.

This study determined the association between respiratory symptoms and death 
from respiratory causes over a period of 45 years. In four cohorts of random 
samples of Norwegian populations with 103,881 participants, 43,731 persons had 
died per 31 December 2016. In total, 5,949 (14%) had died from respiratory 
diseases; 2,442 (41%) from lung cancer, 1,717 (29%) chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD), 1,348 (23%) pneumonia, 119 (2%) asthma, 147 (2%) 
interstitial lung disease and 176 (3%) other pulmonary diseases. Compared with 
persons without respiratory symptoms the multivariable adjusted hazard ratio 
(HR) for lung cancer deaths increased with score of breathlessness on effort and 
cough and phlegm, being 2.6 (95% CI 2.1-3.2) for breathlessness score 3 and 2.1 
(95% CI 1.7-2.5) for cough and phlegm score 5. The HR of COPD death was 6.4 (95% 
CI 5.4-7.7) for breathlessness score 3 and 3.0 (2.4-3.6) for cough and phlegm 
score 5. Attacks of breathlessness and wheeze score 2 had a HR of 1.6 (1.4-1.9) 
for COPD death. The risk of pneumonia deaths increased also with higher 
breathlessness on effort score, but not with higher cough and phlegm score, 
except for score 2 with HR 1.5 (1.2-1.8). In this study with >2.4 million 
person-years at risk, a positive association was observed between scores of 
respiratory symptoms and deaths due to COPD and lung cancer. Respiratory 
symptoms are thus important risk factors, which should be followed thoroughly by 
health care practitioners for the benefit of public health.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260416
PMCID: PMC8608323
PMID: 34807953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: RN reports grants and 
personal fees from AstraZeneca, grants from GlaxoSmithKline, grants from 
Boehringer Ingelheim, outside the submitted work. All other authors have 
declared that no competing interests exist. This does not alter our adherence to 
PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.