---
reference_id: "PMID:40310290"
title: "Phosphatidylserine-binding receptor, CD300f, on macrophages mediates host invasion of pathogenic and non-pathogenic rickettsiae."
authors:
- Voss OH
- Moin I
- Gaytan H
- Sadik M
- Ullah S
- Rahman MS
journal: Infect Immun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1128/iai.00059-25
keywords:
- Animals
- "Macrophages/microbiology, immunology, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Rickettsia/pathogenicity, immunology"
- "Receptors, Immunologic/metabolism, genetics, immunology"
- Phosphatidylserines/metabolism
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Rickettsia Infections/immunology, microbiology"
- Rickettsia typhi/pathogenicity
- "Mice, Knockout"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phosphatidylserine-binding receptor, CD300f, on macrophages mediates host invasion of pathogenic and non-pathogenic rickettsiae.
**Authors:** Voss OH, Moin I, Gaytan H, Sadik M, Ullah S, Rahman MS
**Journal:** Infect Immun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1128/iai.00059-25](https://doi.org/10.1128/iai.00059-25)

## Content

1. Infect Immun. 2025 Jun 10;93(6):e0005925. doi: 10.1128/iai.00059-25. Epub 2025
 May 1.

Phosphatidylserine-binding receptor, CD300f, on macrophages mediates host
invasion of pathogenic and non-pathogenic rickettsiae.

Voss OH(1), Moin I(1), Gaytan H(1), Sadik M(1), Ullah S(1), Rahman MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2025 Jan 29:2024.05.10.593542. doi: 10.1101/2024.05.10.593542.

Some arthropod-borne obligate intracellular rickettsiae are among the most
virulent human pathogens. Rickettsia species modulate immune (e.g., macrophages;
MΦ) and non-immune cell (e.g., endothelial cells) responses to create a
habitable environment for host colonization. MΦ play a crucial role in either
terminating an infection at an early stage or succumbing to bacterial
replication and colonization. However, our understanding of how Rickettsia
species invade host cells, including MΦ, remains poorly defined. In this study,
we describe a mechanism of host invasion by Rickettsia species, involving
rickettsial phosphatidylserine (PS), as a ligand, and the CD300f receptor on MΦ.
Our data reveal that engulfment of both pathogenic Rickettsia typhi (the
etiologic agent of murine typhus) and Rickettsia rickettsii (the etiologic agent
of Rocky Mountain spotted fever) species, as well as the non-pathogenic
Rickettsia montanensis, is significantly reduced in bone marrow-derived
macrophages (BMDMΦ) from CD300f-/- mice, as compared to that of wild-type (WT)
animals. Furthermore, our mechanistic analysis suggests bacterial PS as the
potential source for the CD300f-mediated rickettsiae engulfment by MΦ. In vivo
infection studies using WT and CD300f-/- C57BL/6J mice show that CD300f-/-
animals are protected against R. typhi- or R. rickettsii-induced fatal
rickettsiosis, which corroborates with the level of the bacterial burden
detected in the spleens of the mice. Adoptive transfer studies reveal that
CD300f-expressing MΦ are important mediators to control rickettsiosis in vivo.
Collectively, our findings describe a previously unappreciated role for the
efferocytic receptor, CD300f, to facilitate engulfment of rickettsiae within the
host.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.00059-25
PMCID: PMC12150758
PMID: 40310290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
