---
reference_id: "PMID:22713499"
title: Twin-twin transfusion syndrome.
authors:
- Mosquera C
- Miller RS
- Simpson LL
journal: Semin Perinatol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1053/j.semperi.2012.02.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Twin-twin transfusion syndrome.
**Authors:** Mosquera C, Miller RS, Simpson LL
**Journal:** Semin Perinatol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.semperi.2012.02.006](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.semperi.2012.02.006)

## Content

1. Semin Perinatol. 2012 Jun;36(3):182-9. doi: 10.1053/j.semperi.2012.02.006.

Twin-twin transfusion syndrome.

Mosquera C(1), Miller RS, Simpson LL.

Author information:
(1)Carmen and John Thain Center for Prenatal Pediatrics, Columbia University 
Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA. cm2973@columbia.edu

Twin-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) is a serious condition that affects 10% to 
15% of twin pregnancies with monochorionic diamniotic placentation. The 
pathophysiology of TTTS is not completely understood; however, the presence of 
unbalanced placental vascular communications within a shared circulation has 
been implicated in its development. The presentation of TTTS is highly variable, 
and it does not always progress in a predictable manner. Monochorionic twin 
gestations should, therefore, be monitored for signs of TTTS with serial 
sonograms starting in the second trimester. Early TTTS can be managed 
conservatively. However, without intervention, early-onset advanced TTTS is 
associated with a high perinatal loss rate and risk of severe neurologic 
impairment among survivors. Limited studies suggest that fetoscopic laser 
photocoagulation is the best available treatment for advanced TTTS diagnosed in 
the second trimester. Even with laser therapy, there remains a significant risk 
of twin demise and neurologic handicap in survivors.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1053/j.semperi.2012.02.006
PMID: 22713499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]