---
reference_id: "PMID:12365916"
title: The phenotype in Norwegian patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome with mutations in the BBS4 gene.
authors:
- Riise R
- Tornqvist K
- Wright AF
- Mykytyn K
- Sheffield VC
journal: Arch Ophthalmol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1001/archopht.120.10.1364
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The phenotype in Norwegian patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome with mutations in the BBS4 gene.
**Authors:** Riise R, Tornqvist K, Wright AF, Mykytyn K, Sheffield VC
**Journal:** Arch Ophthalmol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archopht.120.10.1364](https://doi.org/10.1001/archopht.120.10.1364)

## Content

1. Arch Ophthalmol. 2002 Oct;120(10):1364-7. doi: 10.1001/archopht.120.10.1364.

The phenotype in Norwegian patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome with mutations in 
the BBS4 gene.

Riise R(1), Tornqvist K, Wright AF, Mykytyn K, Sheffield VC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Central Hospital of Hedmark, 2326 Hamar, Norway. 
ruthr@online.no

OBJECTIVE: To describe the phenotype of the Bardet-Biedl syndrome in patients 
with mutations in the BBS4 gene.
METHODS: We examined 3 pairs of siblings with Bardet-Biedl syndrome in whom 3 
different mutations in the BBS4 gene were detected, 2 of which were homozygous 
for the mutation.
RESULTS: All patients had an increased body mass index. The obesity varied 
between families from moderate to severe. All of the males had hypogenitalism. 
All had brachydactyly and similar dental anomalies. Polydactyly was present in 5 
of the 6 patients. The number and location of the extra digits varied even 
between siblings. The intelligence varied between families and was within the 
normal range in 4 individuals. One male had spinal stenosis with paraparesis of 
his legs. Four patients had increased blood pressure, but only 1 had impaired 
renal function. Severe retinitis pigmentosa with onset in early childhood was 
present in all patients. There were few abnormal retinal pigmentary deposits 
even at advanced stages.
CONCLUSIONS: The phenotype of patients with BBS4 mutations consists of severe 
retinitis pigmentosa, variable obesity, brachydactyly with variable polydactyly, 
small or missing teeth, genital hypoplasia, and cardiovascular disease. The 
combinations of clinical signs are mostly independent of the individual BBS4 
mutation and can vary even within pairs of siblings. It is possible that there 
is a characteristic appearance of the ocular fundus in patients with BBS4 
mutations.

DOI: 10.1001/archopht.120.10.1364
PMID: 12365916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]