---
reference_id: "PMID:39935927"
title: "Efficacy of Mycophenolate in Steroid-Dependent and Frequently Relapsing Adult Minimal Change Disease: A Retrospective Cohort Study."
authors:
- Rathore SS
- Nirja K
- Choudhary S
journal: Cureus
year: '2025'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.77314
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of Mycophenolate in Steroid-Dependent and Frequently Relapsing Adult Minimal Change Disease: A Retrospective Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Rathore SS, Nirja K, Choudhary S
**Journal:** Cureus (2025)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.77314](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.77314)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2025 Jan 12;17(1):e77314. doi: 10.7759/cureus.77314. eCollection 2025 
Jan.

Efficacy of Mycophenolate in Steroid-Dependent and Frequently Relapsing Adult 
Minimal Change Disease: A Retrospective Cohort Study.

Rathore SS(1), Nirja K(2), Choudhary S(2).

Author information:
(1)Nephrology, Dr. Sampurnanand Medical College, Jodhpur, IND.
(2)Physiology, Dr. Sampurnanand Medical College, Jodhpur, IND.

Background Just like in the pediatric population, minimal change disease (MCD) 
in adults is characterized by a high relapse rate following steroid therapy. A 
significant proportion of these patients become either frequent relapsers or 
steroid-dependent (SD). These SD or frequently relapsing (FR) adult MCD cases 
require additional forms of immunosuppressive therapy to avoid steroid-related 
adverse effects. Aim The primary objective of this study was to evaluate the 
efficacy of mycophenolate (MF) in maintaining complete remission in adult MCD 
patients with steroid dependence or frequent relapses. The secondary objective 
was to assess the safety and long-term outcomes of MF therapy in this patient 
population. Methods This retrospective cohort study included all adult 
biopsy-proven FR/SD MCD cases who were prescribed MF therapy during period of 
January 2018 till May 2024. MF drug was prescribed for 12 months duration in 
MF-responsive patients. After extracting baseline demographic data, these 
patients were retrospectively followed up to assess induction of remission and 
maintenance of remission after discontinuation of MF therapy. Results In the 
present study, 24 adult FR/SD nephrotic syndrome cases were included for 
analysis. MF therapy was able to maintain steroid-free remission for the whole 
duration of therapy (12 months) in 20 (83.3%) patients. Four patients were 
non-responsive to MF therapy and relapsed once steroids were withdrawn despite 
patients being on full dose of MF. Among 20 MF-responsive patients, there was no 
relapse of nephrotic syndrome in 14 (70%) patients (sustained remission) till 
the last follow-up, with a mean duration of 18.78±8.07 months. In six (30%) 
cases, there was a relapse of nephrotic syndrome after MF drug was stopped, with 
a mean interval of 10.16±3.65 months. Conclusions Our study concludes that MF is 
effective in steroid-sparing in adult FR/SD MCD patients. The MF-based therapy 
was able to maintain complete remission in 83.3% cases for the whole duration of 
therapy. Moreover, in 70% of 20 MF responsive patients, the 12 months of MF 
therapy achieved sustained remission till the last follow-up.

Copyright © 2025, Rathore et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.77314
PMCID: PMC11812487
PMID: 39935927

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent for treatment and open 
access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this study. 
Institutional Ethics Committee, Dr. Sampurnanand Medical College, Jodhpur issued 
approval snmc/iec/iip/2024/plan/085. Animal subjects: All authors have confirmed 
that this study did not involve animal subjects or tissue. Conflicts of 
interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors 
declare the following: Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no 
financial support was received from any organization for the submitted work. 
Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they have no financial 
relationships at present or within the previous three years with any 
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other 
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships 
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.