---
reference_id: "PMID:29907460"
title: Clinical and genetic predictors of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome phenotype and outcome.
authors:
- Schaefer F
- Ardissino G
- Ariceta G
- Fakhouri F
- Scully M
- Isbel N
- Lommelé Å
- Kupelian V
- Gasteyger C
- Greenbaum LA
- Johnson S
- Ogawa M
- Licht C
- Vande Walle J
- Frémeaux-Bacchi V
- Global aHUS Registry
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2018.02.029
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- "Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Child
- Complement Factor H/genetics
- Complement Factor I/genetics
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/epidemiology, pathology"
- Male
- Membrane Cofactor Protein/genetics
- Phenotype
- Prospective Studies
- "Registries/statistics & numerical data"
- Retrospective Studies
- Sex Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic predictors of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome phenotype and outcome.
**Authors:** Schaefer F, Ardissino G, Ariceta G, Fakhouri F, Scully M, Isbel N, Lommelé Å, Kupelian V, Gasteyger C, Greenbaum LA, Johnson S, Ogawa M, Licht C, Vande Walle J, Frémeaux-Bacchi V, Global aHUS Registry
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.kint.2018.02.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2018.02.029)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2018 Aug;94(2):408-418. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2018.02.029. Epub 2018
 Jun 19.

Clinical and genetic predictors of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome phenotype 
and outcome.

Schaefer F(1), Ardissino G(2), Ariceta G(3), Fakhouri F(4), Scully M(5), Isbel 
N(6), Lommelé Å(7), Kupelian V(8), Gasteyger C(8), Greenbaum LA(9), Johnson 
S(10), Ogawa M(8), Licht C(11), Vande Walle J(12), Frémeaux-Bacchi V(13); Global 
aHUS Registry.

Collaborators: Blasco M, Cresseri D, Generolova G, Webb N, Hirt-Minkowski P, 
Lvovna Kozlovskaya N, Landau D, Lapeyraque AL, Loirat C, Mache C, Malina M, 
Martola L, Massart A, Rondeau E, Siedlecki A, Sartz L.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Heidelberg University Center for Pediatrics 
and Adolescent Medicine, Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address: 
Franz.Schaefer@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(2)Pediatric Nephrology, Dialysis and Transplantation Unit, Fondazione Istituto 
di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(3)Pediatric Nephrology, University Hospital Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Department of Nephrology and Immunology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de 
Nantes, Nantes, France.
(5)Department of Haematology, University College London Hospital and 
Cardiometabolic Programme-National Institute for Health Research University 
College London Hospitals National Health Service Foundation Trust/University 
College London Biomedical Research Center, London, UK.
(6)Department of Nephrology, Princess Alexandra Hospital, University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(7)Alexion Pharma GmbH, Zurich, Switzerland.
(8)Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc., New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(9)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Emory University and Children's Healthcare 
of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(10)Paediatric Nephrology, Great North Children's Hospital, Sir James Spence 
Institute, Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle, UK.
(11)Division of Nephrology and Program in Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(12)Pediatric Nephrology, Safepedrug Consortium, Ghent University Hospital, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(13)Department of Immunology, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital 
Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France.

Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) is a rare, genetic, life-threatening 
disease. The Global aHUS Registry collects real-world data on the natural 
history of the disease. Here we characterize end-stage renal disease (ESRD)-free 
survival, the rate of thrombotic microangiopathy, organ involvement and the 
genetic background of 851 patients in the registry, prior to eculizumab 
treatment. A sex-specific difference was apparent according to age at initial 
disease onset as the ratio of males to females was 1.3:1 for childhood 
presentation and 1:2 for adult presentation. Complement Factor I and Membrane 
Cofactor Protein mutations were more common in patients with initial 
presentation as adults and children, respectively. Initial presentation in 
childhood significantly predicted ESRD risk (adjusted hazard ratio 0.55 [95% 
confidence interval 0.41-0.73], whereas sex, race, family history of aHUS, and 
time from initial presentation to diagnosis, did not. Patients with a Complement 
Factor H mutation had reduced ESRD-free survival, whereas Membrane Cofactor 
Protein mutation was associated with longer ESRD-free survival. Additionally 
extrarenal organ manifestations occur in 19%-38% of patients within six months 
of initial disease presentation (dependent on organ). Thus, our real-world 
results provide novel insights regarding phenotypic variables and genotypes on 
the clinical manifestation and progression of aHUS.

Copyright © 2018 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2018.02.029
PMID: 29907460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]