---
reference_id: "PMID:27562569"
title: "Arterial calcification due to CD73 deficiency (ACDC): imaging manifestations of ectopic mineralization."
authors:
- Gutierrez LB
- Link T
- Chaganti K
- Motamedi D
journal: Skeletal Radiol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00256-016-2465-9
keywords:
- "5'-Nucleotidase/deficiency"
- Adult
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- GPI-Linked Proteins/deficiency
- Humans
- "Ossification, Heterotopic/diagnostic imaging, metabolism"
- "Vascular Calcification/diagnostic imaging, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arterial calcification due to CD73 deficiency (ACDC): imaging manifestations of ectopic mineralization.
**Authors:** Gutierrez LB, Link T, Chaganti K, Motamedi D
**Journal:** Skeletal Radiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00256-016-2465-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00256-016-2465-9)

## Content

1. Skeletal Radiol. 2016 Nov;45(11):1583-7. doi: 10.1007/s00256-016-2465-9. Epub
2016 Aug 26.

Arterial calcification due to CD73 deficiency (ACDC): imaging manifestations of
ectopic mineralization.

Gutierrez LB(1), Link T(2), Chaganti K(3), Motamedi D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San
Francisco, 505 Parnassus Ave., Room M391, Box 0628, San Francisco, CA, 94143,
USA. luis.gutierrez@ucsf.edu.
(2)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San
Francisco, 505 Parnassus Ave., Room M391, Box 0628, San Francisco, CA, 94143,
USA.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, University of California, San Francisco, 505
Parnassus Ave., Room M391, Box 0628, San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA.

Arterial calcification due to CD73 deficiency (ACDC) is a recently identified
rare and debilitating adult-onset disorder caused by autosomal recessive NT5E
gene mutations. ACDC is characterized by progressive and painful arterial
calcifications primarily affecting the lower extremities, as well as
calcifications affecting small joint capsules of the hands and feet. In this
case report, the authors provide clinical follow-up for one of the first
individuals identified by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) as having
ACDC, focusing mainly on the imaging manifestations of periarticular joint
mineralization, which are bilateral but slightly asymmetric, bulky up to the
levels of the metacarpophalangeal and metatarsophalangeal joints, but smaller
and more capsular in distribution at the proximal and distal interphalangeal
joints, without erosive change or intra-articular mineralization. Differential
considerations for similar appearing joint mineralization are provided.

DOI: 10.1007/s00256-016-2465-9
PMID: 27562569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
