---
reference_id: "PMID:36921301"
title: "Pagetoid Spread in Basal Cell Carcinoma: Potential for Misdiagnosis."
authors:
- Khurana M
- Mandal R
- Cassarino DS
journal: Am J Dermatopathol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000002386
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pagetoid Spread in Basal Cell Carcinoma: Potential for Misdiagnosis.
**Authors:** Khurana M, Mandal R, Cassarino DS
**Journal:** Am J Dermatopathol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/DAD.0000000000002386](https://doi.org/10.1097/DAD.0000000000002386)

## Content

1. Am J Dermatopathol. 2023 Apr 1;45(4):254-258. doi:
10.1097/DAD.0000000000002386.

Pagetoid Spread in Basal Cell Carcinoma: Potential for Misdiagnosis.

Khurana M(1), Mandal R(2), Cassarino DS(3).

Author information:
(1)Yale University, New Haven, CT.
(2)La Cañada High School, La Cañada, CA; and.
(3)Department of Pathology, Kaiser Permanente LAMC, Los Angeles, CA.

Basal cell carcinomas are one of the most common cutaneous carcinomas and show 
classical histologic features of basaloid nests with peripheral palisading. 
Pagetoid and intraepidermal spread has not been described in basal cell 
carcinoma to the best of our knowledge. We report 5 cases of basal cell 
carcinoma with classic histologic patterns and overlying basaloid nests and 
single intraepidermal tumor cells. A panel of immunostains were performed that 
included CK7, MOC31, CEA-m, EMA, androgen receptor, and Bcl2. Most of our cases 
were positive for both MOC31 and CK7, and all cases were negative for CEA-m and 
EMA excluding extramammary Paget disease, one of the most common differential 
diagnoses. These cases expand the spectrum of findings that can be seen in basal 
cell carcinoma and can help prevent misdiagnoses of basal cell carcinomas as 
more aggressive tumors.

Copyright © 2023 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000002386
PMID: 36921301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.