---
reference_id: "PMID:9359036"
title: "Mutations in Hirschsprung disease: when does a mutation contribute to the phenotype."
authors:
- Hofstra RM
- Osinga J
- Buys CH
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '1997'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in Hirschsprung disease: when does a mutation contribute to the phenotype.
**Authors:** Hofstra RM, Osinga J, Buys CH
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (1997)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 1997 Jul-Aug;5(4):180-5.

Mutations in Hirschsprung disease: when does a mutation contribute to the 
phenotype.

Hofstra RM(1), Osinga J, Buys CH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.

Hirschsprung disease is a congenital disorder clinically characterized by the 
absence of colonic ganglia and genetically by extensive heterogeneity. Genes 
involved include RET, GDNF, EDNRB and EDN3. Mutations of these genes may give 
dominant, recessive, or polygenic patterns of inheritance. In particular in the 
case of missense mutations, it is therefore far from easy to assess whether a 
given mutation will contribute to the phenotype. We discuss criteria for such an 
assessment and pay special attention to functional assays. The interpretation of 
mutations as contributing to a disease phenotype or as merely representing a 
rare polymorphism has direct clinical consequences. Hirschsprung disease with 
major and modifying sequence variants in a variety of genes might well serve as 
a model for the many complex disorders for which the search for genes involved 
has only just been initiated.

PMID: 9359036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]