---
reference_id: "PMID:32455011"
title: "Clinicopathologic Features and Outcome of Adenocarcinoma of the Anal Canal: A Population-Based Study."
authors:
- Gogna S
- Bergamaschi R
- Kajmolli A
- Gachabayov M
- Rojas A
- Samson D
- Latifi R
- Dong XD
journal: Int J Surg Oncol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1155/2020/5139236
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/diagnosis, epidemiology, pathology, surgery"
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Anus Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology, pathology, surgery"
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Proctectomy
- Retrospective Studies
- SEER Program
- Survival Analysis
- Treatment Outcome
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathologic Features and Outcome of Adenocarcinoma of the Anal Canal: A Population-Based Study.
**Authors:** Gogna S, Bergamaschi R, Kajmolli A, Gachabayov M, Rojas A, Samson D, Latifi R, Dong XD
**Journal:** Int J Surg Oncol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2020/5139236](https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/5139236)

## Content

1. Int J Surg Oncol. 2020 May 13;2020:5139236. doi: 10.1155/2020/5139236. 
eCollection 2020.

Clinicopathologic Features and Outcome of Adenocarcinoma of the Anal Canal: A 
Population-Based Study.

Gogna S(1), Bergamaschi R(1), Kajmolli A(1), Gachabayov M(1), Rojas A(1), Samson 
D(1), Latifi R(1), Dong XD(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Surgical Oncology, Westchester Medical Center, New York Medical 
College, 100 Woods Road, Taylor Pavilion, Office Suite #353, Valhalla, NY 10595, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Anal canal adenocarcinoma (AA) is an uncommon tumor of the 
gastrointestinal tract. We seek to provide a detailed description of the 
incidence, demographics, and outcome of this rare tumor in the United States.
METHODS: The data on anal canal adenocarcinoma from SEER Program, between 
1973-2015, were extracted. We analyzed the incidence rates by demographics and 
tumor characteristics, followed by analysis of its impact on survival.
RESULTS: The incidence of AA increased initially by 4.03% yearly from 1973 to 
1985 but had a modest decline of 0.32% annually thereafter. The mean age for 
diagnosis of AA was 68.12 ± 14.02 years. Males outnumbered females by 54.8 to 
45.2%. Tumors were mostly localized on presentation (44.4%) and moderately 
differentiated (41.1%). Age generally correlated with poor overall cancer 
survival. However, young patients (age <40 years) also showed poor long-term 
survival. Patients with localized disease and well-differentiated tumors showed 
better survival outcomes. Surgical intervention improved survival significantly 
as compared to patients who did not (116.7 months vs 42.7 months, p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Anal canal adenocarcinoma demonstrated a poor bimodal cancer-free 
survival in both younger and older patient groups. Surgery significantly 
improves odds of survival and should be offered to patients amenable to 
intervention.

Copyright © 2020 Shekhar Gogna et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/5139236
PMCID: PMC7243005
PMID: 32455011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.