---
reference_id: "PMID:11170954"
title: "Whipple's disease and Tropheryma whippelii: secrets slowly revealed."
authors:
- Maiwald M
- Relman D
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1086/318512
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whipple's disease and Tropheryma whippelii: secrets slowly revealed.
**Authors:** Maiwald M, Relman D
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1086/318512](https://doi.org/10.1086/318512)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2001 Feb 1;32(3):457-63. doi: 10.1086/318512. Epub 2001 Jan
18.

Whipple's disease and Tropheryma whippelii: secrets slowly revealed.

Maiwald M(1), Relman D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.

Whipple's disease was described in 1907 and was designated "intestinal 
lipodystrophy," despite the detection of bacteria in 1 specimen. This finding 
was later substantiated by the success of antibiotic therapy, which resulted in 
dramatic clinical responses, and by use of electron microscopy, which detected 
monomorphic bacilli in affected tissues. Many attempts at culture failed, and 
these bacteria were characterized as actinomycetes for the first time by means 
of broad-range 16S rDNA amplification and molecular phylogenetic methods. The 
name "Tropheryma whippelii" was proposed for this bacterium. Whipple's disease 
is a systemic disease that affects many organ systems, producing protean 
manifestations. This article summarizes recent developments with regard to this 
topic as well as unanswered questions regarding the pathogenesis and acquisition 
of infection, the biology and ecology of the organism, the clinical spectrum of 
disease, diagnosis of the disease, and therapy.

DOI: 10.1086/318512
PMID: 11170954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]