---
reference_id: "PMID:38334859"
title: "Fungal Otitis Externa (Otomycosis) Associated with Aspergillus Flavus: A Case Image."
journal: Head Neck Pathol
year: "2024"
doi: 10.1007/s12105-023-01606-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fungal Otitis Externa (Otomycosis) Associated with Aspergillus Flavus: A Case Image.

## Content

A 48-year-old man presented with a chief complaint of intermittent right ear
otorrhea of several-month duration, occasional otalgia and progressive
unilateral hearing impairment. He also reported frequent episodes of headache
and pressure in the sinuses and maxilla. Previous systemic treatment with
antibiotics failed to alleviate the symptoms. A head/neck CT showed completely
normal mastoid, middle ear and external auditory canal regions without any
evidence of opacification or bone erosion. Otoscopic examination of the right
ear disclosed aggregates of dried, brown, fibrillar material and debris
occluding the external auditory canal and obstructing the otherwise intact
tympanic membrane. Dilation of the external auditory canal or thickening of the
tympanic membrane were not appreciated. The canal was debrided and the fibrillar
material was placed in formalin. Histopathologic examination revealed numerous
branching, septated fungal hyphae organized in densely-packed clusters. In other
areas, the fungal hyphae abutted or were attached to lamellated collections of
orthokeratin. As highlighted by GMS staining, the fungi were morphologically
compatible with Aspergillus species. The clinicopathologic findings supported a
diagnosis of fungal otitis externa, while the numerous anucleate squamous cells
were compatible with colonization of an underlying, probably developing,
cholesteatoma. Culture of material isolated from the external auditory canal
confirmed the presence of Aspergillus flavus. In this illustrative case, we
present the main clinical and microscopic characteristics of
Aspergillus-related otomycosis developing in the setting of a tautochronous
cholesteatoma.
