---
reference_id: "PMID:9482645"
title: "Central nervous system malformations and early end-stage renal disease in oro-facio-digital syndrome type I: a review."
authors:
- Odent S
- Le Marec B
- Toutain A
- David A
- Vigneron J
- Tréguier C
- Jouan H
- Milon J
- Fryns JP
- Verloes A
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1998'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Central nervous system malformations and early end-stage renal disease in oro-facio-digital syndrome type I: a review.
**Authors:** Odent S, Le Marec B, Toutain A, David A, Vigneron J, Tréguier C, Jouan H, Milon J, Fryns JP, Verloes A
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1998)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1998 Feb 3;75(4):389-94.

Central nervous system malformations and early end-stage renal disease in 
oro-facio-digital syndrome type I: a review.

Odent S(1), Le Marec B, Toutain A, David A, Vigneron J, Tréguier C, Jouan H, 
Milon J, Fryns JP, Verloes A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Genetics, University Hospital Pontchaillou, 
Rennes, France.

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet. 1998 Jul 7;78(3):303. doi: 
10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19980707)78:3<303::aid-ajmg20>3.0.co;2-i.

Intracerebral cysts and porencephaly or arachnoid cysts are rarely but are 
repeatedly reported in orofaciodigital (OFD) syndrome type 1. We report on 2 
families in which OFD syndrome type 1 was observed with central nervous system 
(CNS) malformations and 3 sporadic cases of OFD with CNS defects, most likely 
representing fresh mutations for OFD 1. In one case, vermis hypoplasia was 
present; in another, periventricular heterotopiae were noted. We review the 
literature on CNS anomalies in OFD syndromes and stress the difficulties in 
genetic counseling and functional prognosis for children of OFD 1 female 
carriers prenatally diagnosed with a malformation of the brain. As for CNS 
malformations, renal cystic disease is an often overlooked complication specific 
to OFD 1. In 1 family, cystic medullary disease was noted in OFD 1 carriers, 
leading 1 patient to dialysis by age 35 years and the other to severe renal 
insufficiency by age 28 years. Longitudinal follow-up of OFD 1 carriers should 
be performed, and renal function should be assessed in those with cysts because 
the functional prognosis of this developmental anomaly may be worse than usually 
reported in the literature.

PMID: 9482645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]