---
reference_id: "PMID:30364207"
title: "Eosinophilic Esophagitis: Review and Update."
authors:
- Gomez Torrijos E
- Gonzalez-Mendiola R
- Alvarado M
- Avila R
- Prieto-Garcia A
- Valbuena T
- Borja J
- Infante S
- Lopez MP
- Marchan E
- Prieto P
- Moro M
- Rosado A
- Saiz V
- Somoza ML
- Uriel O
- Vazquez A
- Mur P
- Poza-Guedes P
- Bartra J
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2018.00247
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eosinophilic Esophagitis: Review and Update.
**Authors:** Gomez Torrijos E, Gonzalez-Mendiola R, Alvarado M, Avila R, Prieto-Garcia A, Valbuena T, Borja J, Infante S, Lopez MP, Marchan E, Prieto P, Moro M, Rosado A, Saiz V, Somoza ML, Uriel O, Vazquez A, Mur P, Poza-Guedes P, Bartra J
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2018.00247](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2018.00247)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2018 Oct 9;5:247. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2018.00247. 
eCollection 2018.

Eosinophilic Esophagitis: Review and Update.

Gomez Torrijos E(1), Gonzalez-Mendiola R(2), Alvarado M(3), Avila R(4), 
Prieto-Garcia A(5), Valbuena T(6), Borja J(1), Infante S(5), Lopez MP(7), 
Marchan E(8), Prieto P(9), Moro M(10), Rosado A(10), Saiz V(11), Somoza ML(12), 
Uriel O(13), Vazquez A(14), Mur P(15), Poza-Guedes P(16), Bartra J(17).

Author information:
(1)Hospital General Universitario de Ciudad Real, Ciudad Real, Spain.
(2)Hospital Central de la Cruz Roja San José y Santa Adela, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Hospital San Pedro de Alcántara, Cáceres, Spain.
(4)Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Seville, Spain.
(5)Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Hospital Infanta Sofía, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Hospital Clinico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain.
(8)Hospital Virgen del Valle, Toledo, Spain.
(9)Hospital General Universitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain.
(10)Hospital Universitario Fundación Alcorcón, Alcorcón, Spain.
(11)Hospital UniversitarioReina Sofía de Córdoba, Cordoba, Spain.
(12)Hospital Universitario Infanta Leonor, Madrid, Spain.
(13)Hospital Universitario de Araba, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain.
(14)Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain.
(15)Hospital Santa Barbara, Puertollano, Spain.
(16)Allergy Section, Hospital Universitario de La Laguna, San Cristóbal de La 
Laguna, Spain.
(17)Allergy Section, Pneumology Department, Hospital Clínic Universitat de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Background: Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) was first described in the 1990s, 
showing an increasing incidence and prevalence since then, being the leading 
cause of food impaction and the major cause of dysphagia. Probably, in a few 
years, EoE may no longer be considered a rare disease. Methods: This article 
discusses new aspects of the pathogenesis, symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment of 
EoE according to the last published guidelines. Results: The epidemiological 
studies indicate a multifactorial origin for EoE, where environmental and 
genetic factors take part. EoE affects both children and adults and it is 
frequently associated with atopic disease and IgE-mediated food allergies. In 
patients undergoing oral immunotherapy for desensitization from IgE-mediated 
food allergy the risk of developing EoE is 2.72%. Barrier dysfunction and 
T-helper 2 inflammation is considered to be pathogenetically important factors. 
There are different patterns of clinical presentation varying with age and can 
be masked by adaptation habits. Besides, symptoms do not usually correlate with 
histologic disease activity. The diagnostic criteria for EoE has evolved but 
mainly requires symptoms of esophageal dysfunction with histologic evidence of a 
peak value of at least 15 eosinophils per high-power field. Endoscopies have to 
be repeated in order to diagnose, monitor, and treat EoE. Treatment of EoE can 
be started either by drugs (PPIs and topical corticosteroids) or elimination 
diets. The multistage step-up elimination diet management approach of EoE is 
promising. Endoscopic dilation is used for patients with severe dysphagia/food 
impaction with inadequate response to anti-inflammatory treatment. Conclusions: 
Research in recent years has contributed to a better understanding of EoE's 
pathogenesis, genetic background, natural history, allergy workup, 
standardization in assessment of disease activity, evaluation of minimally 
invasive diagnostic tools, and new therapeutic approaches. However, several 
unmet needs are to be solved urgently, as finding a non-invasive 
disease-monitoring methods and biomarkers for routine practice, the development 
or new therapies, novel food allergy testing to detect triggering foods, drug, 
and doses required for initial therapy and safety issues with long-term 
maintenance therapy, amongst others. Besides, multidisciplinary management units 
of EoE, involving gastroenterologists, pediatricians, allergists, pathologists, 
dietitians, and ENT specialists are needed.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2018.00247
PMCID: PMC6192373
PMID: 30364207