---
reference_id: "PMID:37224026"
title: "Adenine nucleotide translocase: Current knowledge in post-translational modifications, regulations and pathological implications for human diseases."
authors:
- Chen Y
- Wu L
- Liu J
- Ma L
- Zhang W
journal: FASEB J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1096/fj.202201855RR
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adenine nucleotide translocase: Current knowledge in post-translational modifications, regulations and pathological implications for human diseases.
**Authors:** Chen Y, Wu L, Liu J, Ma L, Zhang W
**Journal:** FASEB J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.202201855RR](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.202201855RR)

## Content

1. FASEB J. 2023 Jun;37(6):e22953. doi: 10.1096/fj.202201855RR.

Adenine nucleotide translocase: Current knowledge in post-translational 
modifications, regulations and pathological implications for human diseases.

Chen Y(1), Wu L(2), Liu J(3), Ma L(3), Zhang W(4).

Author information:
(1)Grade 2020, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(2)Grade 2019, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China.
(4)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department of College of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China.

Adenine nucleotide translocases (ANTs) are central to mitochondrial integrity 
and bioenergetic metabolism. This review aims to integrate the progresses and 
knowledge on ANTs over the last few years, contributing to a potential 
implication of ANTs for various diseases. Structures, functions, modifications, 
regulators and pathological implications of ANTs for human diseases are 
intensively demonstrated here. ANTs have four isoforms (ANT1-4), responsible for 
exchanging ATP/ADP, possibly composing of pro-apoptotic mPTP as a major 
component, and mediating FA-dependent uncoupling of proton efflux. ANT can be 
modified by methylation, nitrosylation and nitroalkylation, acetylation, 
glutathionylation, phosphorylation, carbonylation and hydroxynonenal-induced 
modifications. Compounds, including bongkrekic acid, atractyloside calcium, 
carbon monoxide, minocycline, 4-(N-(S-penicillaminylacetyl)amino) phenylarsonous 
acid, cardiolipin, free long-chain fatty acids, agaric acid, long chain 
acyl-coenzyme A esters, all have an ability to regulate ANT activities. ANT 
impairment leads to bioenergetic failure and mitochondrial dysfunction, 
contributing to pathogenesis of diseases, such as diabetes (deficiency), heart 
disease (deficiency), Parkinson's disease (reduction), Sengers Syndrome 
(decrease), cancer (isoform shifting), Alzheimer's Disease (coaggregation with 
Tau), Progressive External Opthalmoplegia (mutation), and Fascioscapulohumeral 
muscular dystrophy (overexpression). This review improves the understanding of 
the mechanism of ANT in pathogenesis of human diseases, and opens a window for 
novel therapeutic strategies targeted on ANT in diseases.

© 2023 Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.202201855RR
PMID: 37224026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]