---
reference_id: "PMID:21250552"
title: "Clinical presentation and the presence of hearing impairment in branchio-oculo-facial syndrome: a new mutation in the TFAP2A gene."
authors:
- Thomeer HG
- Crins TT
- Kamsteeg EJ
- Buijsman W
- Cruysberg JR
- Knoers NV
- Cremers CW
journal: Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1177/000348941011901204
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Branchio-Oto-Renal Syndrome/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Child
- "Ear, External/abnormalities"
- Female
- "Hearing Loss, Conductive/complications, congenital, surgery"
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Transcription Factor AP-2/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical presentation and the presence of hearing impairment in branchio-oculo-facial syndrome: a new mutation in the TFAP2A gene.
**Authors:** Thomeer HG, Crins TT, Kamsteeg EJ, Buijsman W, Cruysberg JR, Knoers NV, Cremers CW
**Journal:** Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1177/000348941011901204](https://doi.org/10.1177/000348941011901204)

## Content

1. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2010 Dec;119(12):806-14. doi: 
10.1177/000348941011901204.

Clinical presentation and the presence of hearing impairment in 
branchio-oculo-facial syndrome: a new mutation in the TFAP2A gene.

Thomeer HG(1), Crins TT, Kamsteeg EJ, Buijsman W, Cruysberg JR, Knoers NV, 
Cremers CW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Center for Clinical Neuroscience, Radboud 
University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

We report on the clinical presentation of branchio-oculo-facial (BOF) syndrome 
in 2 patients with mutations in the TFAP2A gene (OMIM 107580). This TFAP2A gene 
was recently shown to be involved in the causation of BOF syndrome. An overview 
of the literature on BOF syndrome is given based on clinical reports written in 
the period during which mutation analysis was not yet available for BOF 
syndrome. We also give descriptions of the mutations in the TFAP2A gene in our 2 
new patients with BOF syndrome. Congenital conductive hearing impairments are 
described, including hearing rehabilitation and the results of ear surgery.

DOI: 10.1177/000348941011901204
PMID: 21250552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]