---
reference_id: "PMID:27226607"
title: The Activity of Menkes Disease Protein ATP7A Is Essential for Redox Balance in Mitochondria.
authors:
- Bhattacharjee A
- Yang H
- Duffy M
- Robinson E
- Conrad-Antoville A
- Lu YW
- Capps T
- Braiterman L
- Wolfgang M
- Murphy MP
- Yi L
- Kaler SG
- Lutsenko S
- Ralle M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.727248
keywords:
- 3T3-L1 Cells
- "Adenosine Triphosphatases/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Biological Transport, Active/genetics"
- "Cation Transport Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cell Line, Transformed"
- Copper/metabolism
- Copper-Transporting ATPases
- "Fibroblasts/enzymology, pathology"
- Humans
- Hydrogen Peroxide/metabolism
- "Menkes Kinky Hair Syndrome/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mitochondria/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Oxidation-Reduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Activity of Menkes Disease Protein ATP7A Is Essential for Redox Balance in Mitochondria.
**Authors:** Bhattacharjee A, Yang H, Duffy M, Robinson E, Conrad-Antoville A, Lu YW, Capps T, Braiterman L, Wolfgang M, Murphy MP, Yi L, Kaler SG, Lutsenko S, Ralle M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M116.727248](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M116.727248)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Aug 5;291(32):16644-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.727248. Epub 
2016 May 16.

The Activity of Menkes Disease Protein ATP7A Is Essential for Redox Balance in 
Mitochondria.

Bhattacharjee A(1), Yang H(1), Duffy M(2), Robinson E(2), Conrad-Antoville A(2), 
Lu YW(1), Capps T(2), Braiterman L(3), Wolfgang M(4), Murphy MP(5), Yi L(6), 
Kaler SG(6), Lutsenko S(7), Ralle M(8).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Physiology.
(2)the Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, Oregon 97239.
(3)Biological Chemistry, and.
(4)Cell Biology Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 
21205.
(5)the Medical Research Council Mitochondrial Biology Unit, Cambridge CB2 0XY, 
United Kingdom, and.
(6)the Section on Translational Neuroscience, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.
(7)From the Departments of Physiology, Lutsenko@jhmi.edu.
(8)the Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, Oregon 97239, rallem@ohsu.edu.

Copper-transporting ATPase ATP7A is essential for mammalian copper homeostasis. 
Loss of ATP7A activity is associated with fatal Menkes disease and various other 
pathologies. In cells, ATP7A inactivation disrupts copper transport from the 
cytosol into the secretory pathway. Using fibroblasts from Menkes disease 
patients and mouse 3T3-L1 cells with a CRISPR/Cas9-inactivated ATP7A, we 
demonstrate that ATP7A dysfunction is also damaging to mitochondrial redox 
balance. In these cells, copper accumulates in nuclei, cytosol, and 
mitochondria, causing distinct changes in their redox environment. Quantitative 
imaging of live cells using GRX1-roGFP2 and HyPer sensors reveals highest 
glutathione oxidation and elevation of H2O2 in mitochondria, whereas the redox 
environment of nuclei and the cytosol is much less affected. Decreasing the H2O2 
levels in mitochondria with MitoQ does not prevent glutathione oxidation; i.e. 
elevated copper and not H2O2 is a primary cause of glutathione oxidation. Redox 
misbalance does not significantly affect mitochondrion morphology or the 
activity of respiratory complex IV but markedly increases cell sensitivity to 
even mild glutathione depletion, resulting in loss of cell viability. Thus, 
ATP7A activity protects mitochondria from excessive copper entry, which is 
deleterious to redox buffers. Mitochondrial redox misbalance could significantly 
contribute to pathologies associated with ATP7A inactivation in tissues with 
paradoxical accumulation of copper (i.e. renal epithelia).

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.727248
PMCID: PMC4974379
PMID: 27226607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]