---
reference_id: "PMID:16000322"
title: Alms1-disrupted mice recapitulate human Alström syndrome.
authors:
- Collin GB
- Cyr E
- Bronson R
- Marshall JD
- Gifford EJ
- Hicks W
- Murray SA
- Zheng QY
- Smith RS
- Nishina PM
- Naggert JK
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi235
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/genetics"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Electroretinography
- Female
- Hearing Loss/genetics
- Humans
- Hyperinsulinism/genetics
- Insulin Resistance/genetics
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Nerve Degeneration/genetics
- Obesity/genetics
- Protein Transport/genetics
- "Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- Retinal Degeneration/genetics
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alms1-disrupted mice recapitulate human Alström syndrome.
**Authors:** Collin GB, Cyr E, Bronson R, Marshall JD, Gifford EJ, Hicks W, Murray SA, Zheng QY, Smith RS, Nishina PM, Naggert JK
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddi235](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddi235)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Aug 15;14(16):2323-33. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi235. Epub 2005
Jul 6.

Alms1-disrupted mice recapitulate human Alström syndrome.

Collin GB(1), Cyr E, Bronson R, Marshall JD, Gifford EJ, Hicks W, Murray SA,
Zheng QY, Smith RS, Nishina PM, Naggert JK.

Author information:
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA.

Mutations in the human ALMS1 gene cause Alström syndrome (AS), a progressive
disease characterized by neurosensory deficits and by metabolic defects
including childhood obesity, hyperinsulinemia and Type 2 diabetes. Other
features that are more variable in expressivity include dilated cardiomyopathy,
hypertriglyceridemia, hypercholesterolemia, scoliosis, developmental delay and
pulmonary and urological dysfunctions. ALMS1 encodes a ubiquitously expressed
protein of unknown function. To obtain an animal model in which the etiology of
the observed pathologies could be further studied, we generated a mouse model
using an Alms1 gene-trapped ES cell line. Alms1-/- mice develop features similar
to patients with AS, including obesity, hypogonadism, hyperinsulinemia, retinal
dysfunction and late-onset hearing loss. Insulin resistance and increased body
weight are apparent between 8 and 12 weeks of age, with hyperglycemia
manifesting at approximately 16 weeks of age. In addition, Alms1-/- mice have
normal hearing until 8 months of age, after which they display abnormal auditory
brainstem responses. Diminished cone ERG b-wave response is observed early,
followed by the degeneration of photoreceptor cells. Electron microscopy
revealed accumulation of intracellular vesicles in the inner segments of
photoreceptors, whereas immunohistochemical analysis showed mislocalization of
rhodopsin to the outer nuclear layer. These findings suggest that ALMS1 has a
role in intracellular trafficking.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddi235
PMCID: PMC2862911
PMID: 16000322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest statement. None declared.
