---
reference_id: "PMID:37355146"
title: "Ebola virus disease: A narrative review."
authors:
- Letafati A
- Salahi Ardekani O
- Karami H
- Soleimani M
journal: Microb Pathog
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2023.106213
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebola virus disease: A narrative review.
**Authors:** Letafati A, Salahi Ardekani O, Karami H, Soleimani M
**Journal:** Microb Pathog (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.micpath.2023.106213](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micpath.2023.106213)

## Content

1. Microb Pathog. 2023 Aug;181:106213. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2023.106213. Epub 
2023 Jun 23.

Ebola virus disease: A narrative review.

Letafati A(1), Salahi Ardekani O(2), Karami H(3), Soleimani M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, Faculty of Public Health, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: arashletafati@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Bacteriology & Virology, School of Medicine, Shiraz University 
of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. Electronic address: omid.salahi23@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Virology, Faculty of Public Health, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: hassan.karami2120@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Paramedical Sciences, Mashhad 
Medical Sciences, Islamic Azad University, Mashhad, Iran. Electronic address: 
minasoleimani2000@gmail.com.

Ebola virus disease (EVD), which is also referred to as Ebola hemorrhagic fever, 
is a highly contagious and frequently lethal sickness caused by the Ebola virus. 
In 1976, the disease emerged in two simultaneous outbreaks in Sudan and the 
Democratic Republic of Congo. Subsequently, it has caused intermittent outbreaks 
in several African nations. The virus is primarily spread via direct contact 
with the bodily fluids of an infected individual or animal. EVD is distinguished 
by symptoms such as fever, fatigue, muscle pain, headache, and hemorrhage. The 
outbreak of EVD in West Africa in 2014-2016 emphasized the need for effective 
control and prevention measures. Despite advancements and the identification of 
new treatments for EVD, the primary approach to treatment continues to be 
centered around providing supportive care. Early detection and supportive care 
can enhance the likelihood of survival. This includes intravenous fluids, 
electrolyte replacement, and treatment of secondary infections. Experimental 
therapies, for instance, monoclonal antibodies and antiviral drugs, have shown 
promising results in animal studies and some clinical trials. Some African 
countries have implemented the use of vaccines developed for EVD, but their 
effectiveness and long-term safety are still being studied. This article 
provides an overview of the history, transmission, symptoms, diagnosis, 
treatment, epidemiology, and Ebola coinfection, as well as highlights the 
ongoing research efforts to develop effective treatments and vaccines to combat 
this deadly virus.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2023.106213
PMID: 37355146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.