---
reference_id: PMID:28258187
title: "Bi-allelic variants in COL3A1 encoding the ligand to GPR56 are associated with cobblestone-like cortical malformation, white matter changes and cerebellar cysts."
authors:
- Vandervore L
- Stouffs K
- Tanyalçin I
- Vanderhasselt T
- Roelens F
- Holder-Espinasse M
- Jørgensen A
- Pepin MG
- Petit F
- Khau Van Kien P
- Bahi-Buisson N
- Lissens W
- Gheldof A
- Byers PH
- Jansen AC
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104421
keywords:
- Adult
- Alleles
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Cerebellar Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Collagen Type III/genetics
- "Cysts/genetics, pathology"
- Exome/genetics
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Fibroblasts/pathology
- Humans
- Ligands
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- "Malformations of Cortical Development/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/genetics"
- White Matter/pathology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bi-allelic variants in COL3A1 encoding the ligand to GPR56 are associated with cobblestone-like cortical malformation, white matter changes and cerebellar cysts.
**Authors:** Vandervore L, Stouffs K, Tanyalçin I, Vanderhasselt T, Roelens F, Holder-Espinasse M, Jørgensen A, Pepin MG, Petit F, Khau Van Kien P, Bahi-Buisson N, Lissens W, Gheldof A, Byers PH, Jansen AC
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104421](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104421)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2017 Jun;54(6):432-440. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104421. Epub
2017 Mar 3.

Bi-allelic variants in COL3A1 encoding the ligand to GPR56 are associated with
cobblestone-like cortical malformation, white matter changes and cerebellar
cysts.

Vandervore L(1)(2), Stouffs K(1)(2), Tanyalçin I(1)(2), Vanderhasselt T(3),
Roelens F(4), Holder-Espinasse M(5), Jørgensen A(6), Pepin MG(7), Petit F(8),
Khau Van Kien P(9), Bahi-Buisson N(10), Lissens W(1)(2), Gheldof A(1)(2), Byers
PH(7)(11), Jansen AC(1)(12).

Author information:
(1)Neurogenetics Research Group, Research Cluster Reproduction, Genetics and
Regenerative Medicine, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Center for Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Department of Radiology, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Department of Pediatric Neurology, AZ Delta, Roeselare, Belgium.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Guy's Hospital, London, UK.
(6)Division of Child and Adolescent Health, Department of Medical Genetics,
University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
(7)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(8)Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital J. de Flandre, Lille, France.
(9)Unité de Génétique Médicale, Nîmes University Hospital,CHU Carémeau, Nîmes,
France.
(10)Institut Imagine, Université Paris Descartes - Sorbonne Paris Cités, Paris,
France.
(11)Department of Medicine (Medical Genetics), University of Washington,
Seattle, USA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Neurology Unit, UZ Brussel, Brussels,
Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Collagens are one of the major constituents of the pial membrane,
which plays a crucial role in neuronal migration and cortical lamination during
brain development. Type III procollagen, the chains of which are encoded by
COL3A1, is the ligand of the G protein-coupled receptor 56 (GPR56), also known
as adhesion G protein-coupled receptor G1. Bi-allelic mutations in GPR56 give
rise to cobblestone-like malformation, white matter changes and cerebellar
dysplasia. This report shows that bi-allelic mutations in COL3A1 are associated
with a similar phenotype.
METHODS: Exome analysis was performed in a family consisting of two affected and
two non-affected siblings. Brain imaging studies of this family and of two
previously reported individuals with bi-allelic mutations in COL3A1 were
reviewed. Functional assays were performed on dermal fibroblasts.
RESULTS: Exome analysis revealed a novel homozygous variant c.145C>G
(p.Pro49Ala) in exon 2 of COL3A1. Brain MRI in the affected siblings as well as
in the two previously reported individuals with bi-allelic COL3A1 mutations
showed a brain phenotype similar to that associated with mutations in GPR56.
CONCLUSION: Homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in COL3A1 are
associated with cobblestone-like malformation in all three families reported to
date. The variability of the phenotype across patients suggests that genetic
alterations in distinct domains of type III procollagen can lead to different
outcomes. The presence of cobblestone-like malformation in patients with
bi-allelic COL3A1 mutations emphasises the critical role of the type III
collagen-GPR56 axis and the pial membrane in the regulation of brain development
and cortical lamination.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of
the article) 2017. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104421
PMID: 28258187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
