---
reference_id: "PMID:26182194"
title: Nephrotoxicity of the BRAF Inhibitors Vemurafenib and Dabrafenib.
authors:
- Jhaveri KD
- Sakhiya V
- Fishbane S
journal: JAMA Oncol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2015.1713
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/chemically induced, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Adverse Drug Reaction Reporting Systems
- Aged
- Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects
- Female
- Humans
- Imidazoles/adverse effects
- Indoles/adverse effects
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasms/drug therapy, enzymology"
- Oximes/adverse effects
- Prevalence
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/adverse effects
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Risk Factors
- Sex Factors
- Sulfonamides/adverse effects
- Treatment Outcome
- United States/epidemiology
- United States Food and Drug Administration
- Vemurafenib
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nephrotoxicity of the BRAF Inhibitors Vemurafenib and Dabrafenib.
**Authors:** Jhaveri KD, Sakhiya V, Fishbane S
**Journal:** JAMA Oncol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaoncol.2015.1713](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaoncol.2015.1713)

## Content

1. JAMA Oncol. 2015 Nov;1(8):1133-4. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2015.1713.

Nephrotoxicity of the BRAF Inhibitors Vemurafenib and Dabrafenib.

Jhaveri KD(1), Sakhiya V(1), Fishbane S(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Hofstra North Shore LIJ School of Medicine, North
Shore University Medical Center, Long Island Jewish Medical Center, Great Neck,
New York.

IMPORTANCE: The selective BRAF inhibitors vemurafenib and dabrafenib have shown
significant improvement in patient survival compared with standard therapy in
BRAF V600-mutant metastatic melanoma.
OBSERVATIONS: We reviewed Food and Drug Administration Adverse Event Reporting
System (FAERS) data for both agents for renal toxic effects. From July 2011
through June 2014, 132 cases of acute kidney injury in patients receiving
vemurafenib therapy were reported. Renal injury was more common in men (85 men
vs 47 women; P<.001). From April 2013 through June 2014, 13 cases of renal
injury in patients receiving dabrafenib therapy were reported (12 men and 1
woman). Hypokalemia (6 cases in patients receiving vemurafenib and 2 cases in
patients receiving dabrafenib) and hyponatremia (8 and 6 cases, respectively)
were also reported.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Vemurafenib seems to be more nephrotoxic than
dabrafenib. This renal toxicity seems to be more prevalent among male patients
with melanoma. On the basis of the few published case reports, the mode of
injury seems to be tubular interstitial injury. Our findings suggest a need to
monitor renal function and electrolyte levels in all patients who receive these
drugs. Dermatologists, oncologists, and nephrologists need to be aware of this
potential hazard.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2015.1713
PMID: 26182194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
