---
reference_id: "PMID:34466801"
title: Pathogenic NR2F1 variants cause a developmental ocular phenotype recapitulated in a mutant mouse model.
authors:
- Jurkute N
- Bertacchi M
- Arno G
- Tocco C
- Kim US
- Kruszewski AM
- Avery RA
- Bedoukian EC
- Han J
- Ahn SJ
- Pontikos N
- Acheson J
- Davagnanam I
- Bowman R
- Kaliakatsos M
- Gardham A
- Wakeling E
- Oluonye N
- Reddy MA
- Clark E
- Rosser E
- Amati-Bonneau P
- Charif M
- Lenaers G
- Meunier I
- Defoort S
- Vincent-Delorme C
- Robson AG
- Holder GE
- Jeanjean L
- Martinez-Monseny A
- Vidal-Santacana M
- Dominici C
- Gaggioli C
- Giordano N
- Caleo M
- Liu GT
- Genomics England Research Consortium
- Webster AR
- Studer M
- Yu-Wai-Man P
journal: Brain Commun
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab162
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenic NR2F1 variants cause a developmental ocular phenotype recapitulated in a mutant mouse model.
**Authors:** Jurkute N, Bertacchi M, Arno G, Tocco C, Kim US, Kruszewski AM, Avery RA, Bedoukian EC, Han J, Ahn SJ, Pontikos N, Acheson J, Davagnanam I, Bowman R, Kaliakatsos M, Gardham A, Wakeling E, Oluonye N, Reddy MA, Clark E, Rosser E, Amati-Bonneau P, Charif M, Lenaers G, Meunier I, Defoort S, Vincent-Delorme C, Robson AG, Holder GE, Jeanjean L, Martinez-Monseny A, Vidal-Santacana M, Dominici C, Gaggioli C, Giordano N, Caleo M, Liu GT, Genomics England Research Consortium, Webster AR, Studer M, Yu-Wai-Man P
**Journal:** Brain Commun (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/braincomms/fcab162](https://doi.org/10.1093/braincomms/fcab162)

## Content

1. Brain Commun. 2021 Jul 20;3(3):fcab162. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab162. 
eCollection 2021.

Pathogenic NR2F1 variants cause a developmental ocular phenotype recapitulated 
in a mutant mouse model.

Jurkute N(1)(2), Bertacchi M(3), Arno G(1)(2), Tocco C(3), Kim US(1)(4), 
Kruszewski AM(5), Avery RA(6)(7)(8), Bedoukian EC(9), Han J(10), Ahn SJ(11), 
Pontikos N(1)(2), Acheson J(1)(12), Davagnanam I(1)(13), Bowman R(14), 
Kaliakatsos M(15), Gardham A(16), Wakeling E(17), Oluonye N(1)(18), Reddy 
MA(1)(19), Clark E(20), Rosser E(21), Amati-Bonneau P(22)(23)(24), Charif 
M(22)(25), Lenaers G(22), Meunier I(26), Defoort S(27), Vincent-Delorme C(28), 
Robson AG(1)(2), Holder GE(2)(29), Jeanjean L(30), Martinez-Monseny A(31), 
Vidal-Santacana M(32), Dominici C(33), Gaggioli C(33), Giordano N(34), Caleo 
M(34), Liu GT(6)(7)(8); Genomics England Research Consortium; Webster AR(1)(2), 
Studer M(3), Yu-Wai-Man P(1)(2)(35)(36).

Author information:
(1)Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(2)Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London, UK.
(3)Université Côte d'Azur, CNRS, Inserm, iBV, Nice, France.
(4)Kim's Eye Hospital, Seoul, South Korea.
(5)Department of Neurology, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Perelman 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Division of Ophthalmology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(9)Roberts Individualized Medical Genetics Center, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(10)Institute of Vision Research, Department of Ophthalmology, Gangnam Severance 
Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(11)Department of Radiology, Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(12)National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, University College London 
Hospitals NHS Trust, London, UK.
(13)Department of Brain Repair & Rehabilitation, UCL Queen Square Institute of 
Neurology, London, UK.
(14)Department of Ophthalmology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(15)Paediatric Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(16)North West Thames Regional Genetics Service, Northwick Park Hospital, 
Harrow, UK.
(17)North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital 
for Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(18)Wolfson Neurodisability Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust, London, UK.
(19)Royal London Hospital, Barts Health NHS Trust, London, UK.
(20)Department of Neuroscience, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(21)Department of Clinical Genetics, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children 
NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(22)MitoLab Team, UMR CNRS 6015 - INSERM U1083, Institut MitoVasc, Angers 
University and Hospital, Angers, France.
(23)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, University Hospital Angers, Angers, 
France.
(24)Genetics and Immuno-cell Therapy Team, Mohammed First University, Oujda, 
Morocco.
(25)National Center for Rare Diseases, Inherited Sensory Disorders, Gui de 
Chauliac Hospital, Montpellier, France.
(26)Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, INSERM INSERM U1051, Université 
de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(27)Service d'exploration de la vision et neuro-ophtalmologie, CHRU de Lille, 
Lille, France.
(28)Service de Génétique médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU de Lille, 
Lille, France.
(29)Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, Department of Ophthalmology, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(30)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital of Nimes, Nimes, France.
(31)Genetic and Molecular Medicine Department, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(32)Department of Ophthalmology, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain.
(33)University Côte d'Azur, CNRS UMR7284, INSERM U1081, Institute for Research 
on Cancer and Aging, Nice, France.
(34)Neuroscience Institute-CNR, Pisa, Italy.
(35)Cambridge Eye Unit, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge University Hospitals, 
Cambridge, UK.
(36)John van Geest Centre for Brain Repair and MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit, 
Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Pathogenic NR2F1 variants cause a rare autosomal dominant neurodevelopmental 
disorder referred to as the Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf Optic Atrophy Syndrome. 
Although visual loss is a prominent feature seen in affected individuals, the 
molecular and cellular mechanisms contributing to visual impairment are still 
poorly characterized. We conducted a deep phenotyping study on a cohort of 22 
individuals carrying pathogenic NR2F1 variants to document the 
neurodevelopmental and ophthalmological manifestations, in particular the 
structural and functional changes within the retina and the optic nerve, which 
have not been detailed previously. The visual impairment became apparent in 
early childhood with small and/or tilted hypoplastic optic nerves observed in 10 
cases. High-resolution optical coherence tomography imaging confirmed 
significant loss of retinal ganglion cells with thinning of the ganglion cell 
layer, consistent with electrophysiological evidence of retinal ganglion cells 
dysfunction. Interestingly, for those individuals with available longitudinal 
ophthalmological data, there was no significant deterioration in visual function 
during the period of follow-up. Diffusion tensor imaging tractography studies 
showed defective connections and disorganization of the extracortical visual 
pathways. To further investigate how pathogenic NR2F1 variants impact on retinal 
and optic nerve development, we took advantage of an Nr2f1 mutant mouse disease 
model. Abnormal retinogenesis in early stages of development was observed in 
Nr2f1 mutant mice with decreased retinal ganglion cell density and disruption of 
retinal ganglion cell axonal guidance from the neural retina into the optic 
stalk, accounting for the development of optic nerve hypoplasia. The mutant mice 
showed significantly reduced visual acuity based on electrophysiological 
parameters with marked conduction delay and decreased amplitude of the 
recordings in the superficial layers of the visual cortex. The clinical 
observations in our study cohort, supported by the mouse data, suggest an early 
neurodevelopmental origin for the retinal and optic nerve head defects caused by 
NR2F1 pathogenic variants, resulting in congenital vision loss that seems to be 
non-progressive. We propose NR2F1 as a major gene that orchestrates early 
retinal and optic nerve head development, playing a key role in the maturation 
of the visual system.

© The Author(s) (2021). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab162
PMCID: PMC8397830
PMID: 34466801