---
reference_id: "PMID:38749502"
title: Genetic Landscape and Its Prognostic Impact in Children With Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis.
authors:
- Wang CJ
- Cui L
- Li SS
- Ma HH
- Wang D
- Lian HY
- Zhao YZ
- Zhang LP
- Li WJ
- Zhang Q
- Zhao XX
- Yang Y
- Huang XT
- Liu W
- Wang YZ
- Wu WS
- Wang TY
- Zhang R
- Li ZG
journal: Arch Pathol Lab Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.5858/arpa.2023-0236-OA
keywords:
- Humans
- "Histiocytosis, Langerhans-Cell/genetics, pathology, mortality, diagnosis"
- Male
- Child
- Female
- "Child, Preschool"
- Proto-Oncogene Mas
- Infant
- Mutation
- Prognosis
- Adolescent
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- MAP Kinase Kinase 1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Landscape and Its Prognostic Impact in Children With Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis.
**Authors:** Wang CJ, Cui L, Li SS, Ma HH, Wang D, Lian HY, Zhao YZ, Zhang LP, Li WJ, Zhang Q, Zhao XX, Yang Y, Huang XT, Liu W, Wang YZ, Wu WS, Wang TY, Zhang R, Li ZG
**Journal:** Arch Pathol Lab Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.5858/arpa.2023-0236-OA](https://doi.org/10.5858/arpa.2023-0236-OA)

## Content

1. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2025 Feb 1;149(2):175-190. doi:
10.5858/arpa.2023-0236-OA.

Genetic Landscape and Its Prognostic Impact in Children With Langerhans Cell 
Histiocytosis.

Wang CJ(1)(2)(3), Cui L(1)(2)(3), Li SS(4), Ma HH(1)(2)(3), Wang D(1)(2)(3), 
Lian HY(1)(2)(3), Zhao YZ(1)(2)(3), Zhang LP(1)(2)(3), Li WJ(1)(2)(3), Zhang 
Q(1)(2)(3), Zhao XX(1)(2)(3), Yang Y(1)(2)(3), Huang XT(1)(2)(3), Liu W(5), Wang 
YZ(6), Wu WS(7), Wang TY(1)(2)(3), Zhang R(1)(2)(3), Li ZG(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Laboratory of Hematologic Diseases, Beijing Pediatric Research 
Institute (C-J Wang, Cui, W-J Li, Q Zhang, X-X Zhao, Huang, Z-G Li) and Beijing 
Key Laboratory of Pediatric Hematology Oncology, Hematology Center (C-J Wang, 
Cui, Ma, D Wang, Lian, Y-Z Zhao, L-P Zhang, W-J Li, Q Zhang, X-X Zhao, Yang, 
Huang, T-Y Wang, R Zhang, Z-G Li), Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, National Center for Children's Health, Beijing, China.
(2)National Key Discipline of Pediatrics, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 
China (C-J Wang, Cui, Ma, D Wang, Lian, Y-Z Zhao, L-P Zhang, W-J Li, Q Zhang, 
X-X Zhao, Yang, Huang, T-Y Wang, R Zhang, Z-G Li).
(3)Key Laboratory of Major Diseases in Children, Ministry of Education, Beijing, 
China (C-J Wang, Cui, Ma, D Wang, Lian, Y-Z Zhao, L-P Zhang, W-J Li, Q Zhang, 
X-X Zhao, Yang, Huang, T-Y Wang, R Zhang, Z-G Li).
(4)MyGenostics Inc, Beijing, China (S-S Li).
(5)the Department of Hematology Oncology, Children's Hospital Affiliated to 
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China (Liu).
(6)the Department of Pediatrics, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China (Y-Z Wang).
(7)and the Department of Pediatrics, Beijing Shijitan Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China (Wu).

CONTEXT.—: Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a rare myeloid neoplasm that 
predominantly affects young children.
OBJECTIVE.—: To investigate genetic alterations and their correlation with 
clinical characteristics and prognosis in pediatric LCH.
DESIGN.—: We performed targeted sequencing to detect mutations in LCH lesions 
from pediatric patients.
RESULTS.—: A total of 30 genomic alterations in 5 genes of the MAPK pathway were 
identified in 187 of 223 patients (83.9%). BRAF V600E (B-Raf proto-oncogene, 
serine/threonine kinase) was the most common mutation (51.6%), followed by 
MAP2K1 (mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1) alterations (17.0%) and other 
BRAF mutations (13.0%). ARAF (A-Raf proto-oncogene, serine/threonine kinase) and 
KRAS (KRAS proto-oncogene, GTPase) mutations were relatively rare (2.2% and 
0.9%, respectively). Additionally, FNBP1 (formin-binding protein 1)::BRAF fusion 
and MAP3K10 (mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 10) mutations A17T and 
R823C were identified in 1 case each, with possible constitutive activation of 
ERK1/2 phosphorylation. BRAF V600E was more frequent in patients with risk organ 
involvement, while MAP2K1 mutation was more prevalent in patients with 
single-system LCH (P = .001). BRAF V600E was associated with craniofacial bone, 
skin, liver, spleen, and ear involvement (all P < .05). Patients with other BRAF 
mutations had a higher proportion of spinal column involvement (P = .006). 
Univariate analysis showed a significant difference in progression-free survival 
among the 4 molecular subgroups for patients treated with first-line therapy (P 
= .02). According to multivariate analysis, risk organ involvement was the 
strongest independent adverse prognostic factor (hazard ratio, 8.854; P < .001); 
BRAF or MAP2K1 mutation was not an independent prognostic factor.
CONCLUSIONS.—: Most pediatric patients with LCH carry somatic mutations 
involving the MAPK pathway, correlating with clinical characteristics and 
outcomes for first-line chemotherapy.

© 2025 College of American Pathologists.

DOI: 10.5858/arpa.2023-0236-OA
PMID: 38749502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial interest 
in the products or companies described in this article.