---
reference_id: "PMID:40004108"
title: Mitochondrial HMG-CoA Synthase Deficiency in Vietnamese Patients.
authors:
- Nguyen KN
- Dien TM
- Can TBN
- Thao BP
- Do TS
- Dang TKG
- Nguyen NL
- Tran VK
- Nguyen TT
- Trang TTQ
- Phuong LT
- Nguyen PL
- Tran TH
- Tu NH
- Vu CD
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/ijms26041644
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Infant
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Synthase/deficiency, genetics"
- Vietnam
- "Mitochondria/enzymology, genetics"
- Mutation
- Child
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics, diagnosis"
- Southeast Asian People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial HMG-CoA Synthase Deficiency in Vietnamese Patients.
**Authors:** Nguyen KN, Dien TM, Can TBN, Thao BP, Do TS, Dang TKG, Nguyen NL, Tran VK, Nguyen TT, Trang TTQ, Phuong LT, Nguyen PL, Tran TH, Tu NH, Vu CD
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms26041644](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms26041644)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2025 Feb 14;26(4):1644. doi: 10.3390/ijms26041644.

Mitochondrial HMG-CoA Synthase Deficiency in Vietnamese Patients.

Nguyen KN(1)(2), Dien TM(3), Can TBN(1), Thao BP(1), Do TS(1), Dang TKG(1),
Nguyen NL(4), Tran VK(4), Nguyen TT(4), Trang TTQ(4), Phuong LT(4), Nguyen
PL(4), Tran TH(5), Tu NH(2), Vu CD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center of Endocrinology, Metabolism, Genetic/Genomics and Molecular Therapy,
Vietnam National Children's Hospital, 18/879 La Thanh, Dong Da, Hanoi 11512,
Vietnam.
(2)Hanoi Medical University, 1st Ton That Tung Street, Hanoi 11521, Vietnam.
(3)Vietnam National Children's Hospital, 18/879 La Thanh, Dong Da, Hanoi 11512,
Vietnam.
(4)Center for Gene and Protein Research, Hanoi Medical University, 1st Ton That
Tung Street, Hanoi 11521, Vietnam.
(5)Biochemistry Department, Hanoi Medical University, 1st Ton That Tung Street,
Hanoi 11521, Vietnam.

Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase deficiency (HMGCS2D) is a
rare metabolic disorder that impairs the body's ability to produce ketone bodies
and regulate energy metabolism. Diagnosing HMGCS2D is challenging because
patients typically remain asymptomatic unless they experience fasting or
illness. Due to the absence of reliable biochemical markers, genetic testing has
become the definitive method for diagnosing HMGCS2D. This study included 19
patients from 14 unrelated families diagnosed with HMGCS2D in our department
between October 2018 and October 2024. The clinical presentations, biochemical
findings, molecular characteristics, and management strategies were
systematically summarized and analyzed. Of the 19 cases studied, 16 were
symptomatic, and 3 were asymptomatic. The onset of the first acute episode
occurred between 10 days and 28 months of age. Triggers for the initial crisis
in the symptomatic cases included poor feeding (93.8%), vomiting (56.3%),
diarrhea (25.0%), and fever (18.8%). Clinical manifestations during the first
episode were lethargy/coma (81.3%), rapid breathing (68.8%), hepatomegaly
(56.3%), shock (37.5%), and seizures (18.8%). The biochemical abnormalities
observed included elevated plasma transaminases (100%), metabolic acidosis
(75%), hypoglycemia (56.3%), and elevated plasma ammonia levels (31.3%).
Additionally, low free carnitine levels were found in seven cases, elevated C2
levels were found in one case, dicarboxylic aciduria was found in two cases, and
ketonuria was found in two cases. Abnormal brain MRI findings were detected in
three patients. Genetic analysis revealed seven HMGCS2 gene variants across the
19 cases. Notably, a novel variant, c.407A>T (p.D136V), was identified and has
not been reported in any existing databases. Two common variants, c.559+1G>A and
c.1090T>A (p.F364I), were present in 11 out of 19 cases (57.9%) and 10 out of 19
cases (55.5%), respectively. The implementation of a high glucose infusion and
proactive management strategies-such as preventing prolonged fasting and
providing enteral carbohydrate/glucose infusion during illness-effectively
reduced the rate of acute relapses following accurate diagnosis. Currently, all
19 patients are alive, with ages ranging from 5 months to 14 years, and exhibit
normal physical development. To the best of our knowledge, this study represents
the first reported cases of HMGCS2D in Vietnamese patients. Our findings
contribute to a broader understanding of the clinical phenotype and expand the
known spectrum of HMGCS2 gene variants, enhancing current knowledge of this rare
metabolic disorder.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms26041644
PMCID: PMC11855759
PMID: 40004108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
