---
reference_id: "PMID:38396064"
title: Comprehensive analyses of solute carrier family members identify SLC12A2 as a novel therapy target for colorectal cancer.
authors:
- Chen DY
- Zhang YY
- Nie HH
- Wang HZ
- Qiu PS
- Wang F
- Peng YN
- Xu F
- Zhao Q
- Zhang M
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-55048-y
keywords:
- Humans
- Algorithms
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Membrane Transport Proteins
- Phenotype
- Prognosis
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 2"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive analyses of solute carrier family members identify SLC12A2 as a novel therapy target for colorectal cancer.
**Authors:** Chen DY, Zhang YY, Nie HH, Wang HZ, Qiu PS, Wang F, Peng YN, Xu F, Zhao Q, Zhang M
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-55048-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-55048-y)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Feb 23;14(1):4459. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-55048-y.

Comprehensive analyses of solute carrier family members identify SLC12A2 as a 
novel therapy target for colorectal cancer.

Chen DY(#)(1)(2), Zhang YY(#)(1)(2)(3), Nie HH(#)(1)(2), Wang HZ(1)(2), Qiu 
PS(1)(2), Wang F(1)(2), Peng YN(1)(2), Xu F(1)(2), Zhao Q(4)(5), Zhang M(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, No. 
169, Donghu Road, Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430071, Hubei Province, China.
(2)Hubei Clinical Center and Key Lab of Intestinal and Colorectal Diseases, 
Wuhan, 430071, China.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to 
Shandong First Medical University, 250021, Jinan, China.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, No. 
169, Donghu Road, Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430071, Hubei Province, China. 
qiuzhao@whu.edu.cn.
(5)Hubei Clinical Center and Key Lab of Intestinal and Colorectal Diseases, 
Wuhan, 430071, China. qiuzhao@whu.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, No. 
169, Donghu Road, Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430071, Hubei Province, China. 
zhangmeng81@whu.edu.cn.
(7)Hubei Clinical Center and Key Lab of Intestinal and Colorectal Diseases, 
Wuhan, 430071, China. zhangmeng81@whu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

As the largest transporter family impacting on tumor genesis and development, 
the prognostic value of solute carrier (SLC) members has not been elucidated in 
colorectal cancer (CRC). We aimed to identify a prognostic signature from the 
SLC members and comprehensively analyze their roles in CRC. Firstly, we 
downloaded transcriptome data and clinical information of CRC samples from GEO 
(GSE39582) and TCGA as training and testing dataset, respectively. We extracted 
the expression matrix of SLC genes and established a prognostic model by 
univariate and multivariate Cox regression. Afterwards, the low-risk and 
high-risk group were identified. Then, the differences of prognosis traits, 
transcriptome features, clinical characteristics, immune infiltration and drug 
sensitivity between the two groups were explored. Furthermore, molecular 
subtyping was also implemented by non-negative matrix factorization (NMF). 
Finally, we studied the expression of the screened SLC genes in CRC tumor 
tissues and normal tissues as well as investigated the role of SLC12A2 by loss 
of function and gain of function. As a result, we developed a prognostic risk 
model based on the screened 6-SLC genes (SLC39A8, SLC2A3, SLC39A13, SLC35B1, 
SLC4A3, SLC12A2). Both in the training and testing sets, CRC patients in the 
high-risk group had the poorer prognosis and were in the more advanced 
pathological stage. What's more, the high-risk group were enriched with CRC 
progression signatures and immune infiltration. Two groups showed different drug 
sensitivity. On the other hand, two distinct subclasses (C1 and C2) were 
identified based on the 6 SLC genes. CRC patients in the high-risk group and C1 
subtype had a worse prognosis. Furthermore, we found and validated that SLC12A2 
was steadily upregulated in CRC. A loss-of-function study showed that knockdown 
of SLC12A2 expression restrained proliferation and stemness of CRC cells while a 
gain-of-function study showed the contrary results. Hence, we provided a 6-SLC 
gene signature for prognosis prediction of CRC patients. At the same time, we 
identified that SLC12A2 could promote tumor progression in CRC, which may serve 
as a potential therapeutic target.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-55048-y
PMCID: PMC10891168
PMID: 38396064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.