---
reference_id: "PMID:24259609"
title: "Vismodegib: an inhibitor of the Hedgehog signaling pathway in the treatment of basal cell carcinoma."
authors:
- Proctor AE
- Thompson LA
- "O'Bryant CL"
journal: Ann Pharmacother
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1177/1060028013506696
keywords:
- "Anilides/adverse effects, pharmacokinetics, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Animals
- "Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects, pharmacokinetics, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Basal Cell Carcinoma/drug therapy
- Drug Interactions
- "Hedgehog Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Humans
- "Pyridines/adverse effects, pharmacokinetics, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Signal Transduction
- Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vismodegib: an inhibitor of the Hedgehog signaling pathway in the treatment of basal cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Proctor AE, Thompson LA, O'Bryant CL
**Journal:** Ann Pharmacother (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1060028013506696](https://doi.org/10.1177/1060028013506696)

## Content

1. Ann Pharmacother. 2014 Jan;48(1):99-106. doi: 10.1177/1060028013506696. Epub
2013 Oct 15.

Vismodegib: an inhibitor of the Hedgehog signaling pathway in the treatment of
basal cell carcinoma.

Proctor AE(1), Thompson LA, O'Bryant CL.

Author information:
(1)University of Colorado Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Aurora, CO, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To review vismodegib, the first Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)-approved Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway inhibitor, in the treatment of
advanced basal cell carcinoma (BCC).
DATA SOURCES: MEDLINE and PubMed were searched using the terms vismodegib,
GDC-0449, RG3616, and basal cell carcinoma for relevant clinical trials through
September 2013. The FDA Web site, the National Clinical Trials registry, and
abstracts from the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) were also
evaluated to identify unpublished data and future clinical trials.
STUDY SELECTION/DATA EXTRACTION: All identified clinical and preclinical studies
published in the English language were assessed, including selected references
from the bibliographies of articles.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Activation of the Hh signaling pathway is well documented in
BCC. Vismodegib is a small-molecule inhibitor of Hh signaling that acts by
antagonizing the protein Smoothened (SMO), thereby preventing downstream
transcriptional activation of genes involved in cell proliferation and survival.
Vismodegib was approved by the FDA in January 2012 for the treatment of
recurrent, locally advanced BCC (laBCC), or metastatic BCC (mBCC) for which
surgery or radiation cannot be utilized. A pivotal phase 2 trial evaluating 104
patients demonstrated that treatment with vismodegib, 150 mg orally once daily,
resulted in a 30% and 43% objective response rate in patients with mBCC and
laBCC, respectively. The most common adverse effects from vismodegib were mild
to moderate and included muscle spasms, dysgeusia, decreased weight, fatigue,
alopecia, and diarrhea. However, clinical studies noted a high incidence of
discontinuation of therapy by patients for reasons other than disease
progression.
CONCLUSIONS: The approval of vismodegib represents the only targeted,
prospectively studied treatment option for patients with advanced BCC. Further
research assessing the utility of vismodegib in the treatment of other
malignancies and the development of resistance patterns will more clearly define
the role of Hedgehog inhibition in the broader scheme of oncological disorders.

DOI: 10.1177/1060028013506696
PMID: 24259609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
