---
reference_id: "PMID:40550287"
title: Sleep apnea among individuals with Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency-associated lung disease.
authors:
- Holm KE
- Sandhaus RA
- Allison S
- Schroth T
- McCathern J
- Strange C
journal: Respir Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2025.108217
keywords:
- Humans
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/genetics, complications, epidemiology"
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Sleep Apnea, Obstructive/epidemiology, etiology, genetics"
- Genotype
- Adult
- Body Mass Index
- Risk Factors
- "Pulmonary Disease, Chronic Obstructive/epidemiology, genetics"
- Aged
- "Disorders of Excessive Somnolence/epidemiology, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sleep apnea among individuals with Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency-associated lung disease.
**Authors:** Holm KE, Sandhaus RA, Allison S, Schroth T, McCathern J, Strange C
**Journal:** Respir Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rmed.2025.108217](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmed.2025.108217)

## Content

1. Respir Med. 2025 Sep;246:108217. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2025.108217. Epub 2025
Jun  21.

Sleep apnea among individuals with Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency-associated
lung disease.

Holm KE(1), Sandhaus RA(2), Allison S(3), Schroth T(3), McCathern J(3), Strange
C(4).

Author information:
(1)AlphaNet, Inc, US; National Jewish Health, US. Electronic address:
holmk@njhealth.org.
(2)AlphaNet, Inc, US; National Jewish Health, US.
(3)AlphaNet, Inc, US.
(4)AlphaNet, Inc, US; Medical University of South Carolina, US.

PURPOSE: Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a genetic condition that has
high rates of associated COPD. We explored whether obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)
diagnosis, excessive sleepiness, and OSA risk scores differ by AATD genotype.
PROCEDURES: A cross-sectional survey was completed by individuals with
AATD-associated lung disease. Multivariate logistic regression was used to
examine the association of genotype and other participant characteristics with:
1) self-reported OSA diagnosis, 2) excessive sleepiness measured by Epworth
Sleepiness Scale, and 3) risk of OSA measured by STOP-BAG. We also examined
whether characteristics such as body mass index (BMI) differ by genotype, using
chi-square tests.
RESULTS: Of the 1137 participants, 31.57 % had been diagnosed with OSA.
Individuals with low-to-moderate risk genotypes (e.g., MZ, SZ) had a higher rate
of OSA diagnosis than severe deficiency genotypes (e.g., ZZ, ZNull): 39.76 % vs
26.76 % (p < 0.001) and were more likely to have excessive sleepiness if
diagnosed with OSA (31.52 % vs 19.79 %, p = 0.012). These differences remained
statistically significant in multivariate models: for OSA diagnosis OR = 1.37,
p = 0.046 and for excessive sleepiness OR = 1.87, p = 0.021. Individuals with
low-to-moderate risk genotypes had a higher rate of BMI >35 kg/m2 (17.86 % vs
8.31 %, p < 0.001) and were more likely to have smoked ≥40 pack-years (29.60 %
vs 8.16 %, p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Among individuals with AATD-associated lung disease, OSA is highly
prevalent. Differential OSA prevalence by genotype in the AATD population may be
driven by health behaviors such as smoking and weight management. Direct
comparison to populations without AATD is needed to define if AATD directly
contributes to OSA risk.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2025.108217
PMID: 40550287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest KEH receives
consulting income from AlphaNet. RAS is a paid medical director for AlphaNet. He
has grants in alpha-1antitrypsin deficiency paid to National Jewish Health from
Inhibrx/Sanofi, the Alpha-1 Foundation, and Mereo. He has consulted for CSL
Berhing, Vertex, Grifols, Takeda, Inhibrx, Peak Bio, and Beam Therapeutics. SA
has no competing interests to declare. TS has no competing interests to declare.
JM has no competing interests to declare. CS is a paid medical director for
AlphaNet and Pulmanage. He has grants in alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency or COPD
paid to the Medical University of South Carolina from AstraZeneca, Beam
Therapeutics, Biomarin, CSA Medical, Dicerna, Grifols, Krystal, Mereo, Nuvaira,
OCI, Renovion, Takeda and Vertex. CS has consulted for Astra Zeneca, CSL
Behring, Inhibrx, Morair, UpToDate, and Vertex for Alpha-1 and/or COPD.
