---
reference_id: "PMID:37700346"
title: Childhood-onset rheumatoid arthritis at a tertiary hospital in Senegal, West Africa.
authors:
- Sabounji MM
- Lissimo H
- Deme A
journal: Pediatr Rheumatol Online J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12969-023-00889-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Childhood-onset rheumatoid arthritis at a tertiary hospital in Senegal, West Africa.
**Authors:** Sabounji MM, Lissimo H, Deme A
**Journal:** Pediatr Rheumatol Online J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12969-023-00889-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12969-023-00889-6)

## Content

1. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2023 Sep 12;21(1):98. doi: 
10.1186/s12969-023-00889-6.

Childhood-onset rheumatoid arthritis at a tertiary hospital in Senegal, West 
Africa.

Sabounji MM(1)(2), Lissimo H(3), Deme A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Aristide Le Dantec Hospital, Dakar, Senegal. 
sabounji.mounib@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, COUD Hospital, UCAD, Dakar, Senegal. 
sabounji.mounib@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, UCAD, Dakar, Senegal.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, Aristide Le Dantec Hospital, Dakar, Senegal.

BACKGROUND: Childhood-onset rheumatoid arthritis (CORA), known as rheumatoid 
factor (RF)-positive juvenile idiopathic arthritis is a type of juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis that shares the same genetic factors and clinical features 
as adult-onset rheumatoid arthritis. In Africa, CORA hasn't been the subject of 
a specific study.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study is to describe the clinical features, disease 
activity, functional disability, and treatment of CORA at diagnosis in Senegal 
and compare the findings to other CORA populations.
METHODS: We conducted a mixed cohort study by reviewing the medical records of 
patients diagnosed with CORA with an age of symptom onset < 18 years according 
to the 2019 PRINTO provisional criteria for RF-positive JIA from January 2020 to 
December 2022 at rheumatology department of Aristide Le Dantec Hospital in 
Dakar, Senegal. We collected demographic, clinical, paraclinical and therapeutic 
data. Disease activity score was assessed by DAS28-ESR and DAS28-CRP. Functional 
disability was assessed using Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ) or Childhood 
HAQ.
RESULTS: A total of 21 patients were included. Eighteen (85.7%) were Females. 
The mean age at symptom onset was 13.0 ± 3.0 years, and at diagnosis was 
16.4 ± 4.2 years. Morning stiffness, joint swelling, and joint deformities were 
found in 20, 18 and 13 patients respectively. Four patients had a family history 
of rheumatoid arthritis. Five patients had extra-articular involvement such as 
rheumatoid nodules. Two patients had interstitial lung disease. The biological 
inflammatory syndrome was found in 90% of cases. 16 of 21 (76.2%) patients had 
positive RF, and 18 of 20 (90%) patients had positive Anti-CCP. Seven of 12 
(58.3%) patients had positive anti-nuclear antibodies. The mean DAS28-ESR was 
5.7 ± 1.0. Fifteen (71.4%) patients had high disease activity (DAS28-ESR > 5.1). 
The mean DAS28-CRP was 5.4 ± 1.1. The median HAQ was 2.12 with a mean HAQ of 
1.9. Nineteen (90.5%) patients were treated with methotrexate, while 17 (81%) 
had a combination of methotrexate and hydroxychloroquine. Oral prednisone was 
used in 17 (81%) cases. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were used in 4 
cases (19%). After 6 months of treatment, mean DAS28-CRP was 2.9.
CONCLUSION: In our study, CORA mainly affects 13-year-old girls, characterised 
by high disease activity with joint deformity and significant functional 
impairment. Treatment is mainly based on methotrexate, prednisone and 
hydroxychloroquine. Further studies are needed to determine the exact clinical 
phenotype of this disease.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s12969-023-00889-6
PMCID: PMC10496368
PMID: 37700346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.