---
reference_id: "PMID:23073310"
title: "The 2q37-deletion syndrome: an update of the clinical spectrum including overweight, brachydactyly and behavioural features in 14 new patients."
authors:
- Leroy C
- Landais E
- Briault S
- David A
- Tassy O
- Gruchy N
- Delobel B
- Grégoire MJ
- Leheup B
- Taine L
- Lacombe D
- Delrue MA
- Toutain A
- Paubel A
- Mugneret F
- Thauvin-Robinet C
- Arpin S
- Le Caignec C
- Jonveaux P
- Beri M
- Leporrier N
- Motte J
- Fiquet C
- Brichet O
- Mozelle-Nivoix M
- Sabouraud P
- Golovkine N
- Bednarek N
- Gaillard D
- Doco-Fenzy M
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.230
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Behavior
- "Brachydactyly/complications, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosome Disorders/complications, genetics"
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2/genetics"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- DNA Copy Number Variations/genetics
- Female
- "Fibrous Dysplasia, Polyostotic/complications, genetics"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/complications, genetics"
- Male
- "Overweight/complications, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The 2q37-deletion syndrome: an update of the clinical spectrum including overweight, brachydactyly and behavioural features in 14 new patients.
**Authors:** Leroy C, Landais E, Briault S, David A, Tassy O, Gruchy N, Delobel B, Grégoire MJ, Leheup B, Taine L, Lacombe D, Delrue MA, Toutain A, Paubel A, Mugneret F, Thauvin-Robinet C, Arpin S, Le Caignec C, Jonveaux P, Beri M, Leporrier N, Motte J, Fiquet C, Brichet O, Mozelle-Nivoix M, Sabouraud P, Golovkine N, Bednarek N, Gaillard D, Doco-Fenzy M
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2012.230](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2012.230)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Jun;21(6):602-12. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.230. Epub 2012 
Oct 17.

The 2q37-deletion syndrome: an update of the clinical spectrum including 
overweight, brachydactyly and behavioural features in 14 new patients.

Leroy C(1), Landais E, Briault S, David A, Tassy O, Gruchy N, Delobel B, 
Grégoire MJ, Leheup B, Taine L, Lacombe D, Delrue MA, Toutain A, Paubel A, 
Mugneret F, Thauvin-Robinet C, Arpin S, Le Caignec C, Jonveaux P, Beri M, 
Leporrier N, Motte J, Fiquet C, Brichet O, Mozelle-Nivoix M, Sabouraud P, 
Golovkine N, Bednarek N, Gaillard D, Doco-Fenzy M.

Author information:
(1)CHU-Reims, HMB, Service de génétique, Reims, France.

The 2q37 locus is one of the most commonly deleted subtelomeric regions. Such a 
deletion has been identified in >100 patients by telomeric fluorescence in situ 
hybridization (FISH) analysis and, less frequently, by array-based comparative 
genomic hybridization (array-CGH). A recognizable '2q37-deletion syndrome' or 
Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy-like syndrome has been previously 
described. To better map the deletion and further refine this deletional 
syndrome, we formed a collaboration with the Association of French Language 
Cytogeneticists to collect 14 new intellectually deficient patients with a 
distal or interstitial 2q37 deletion characterized by FISH and array-CGH. 
Patients exhibited facial dysmorphism (13/14) and brachydactyly (10/14), 
associated with behavioural problems, autism or autism spectrum disorders of 
varying severity and overweight or obesity. The deletions in these 14 new 
patients measured from 2.6 to 8.8 Mb. Although the major role of HDAC4 has been 
demonstrated, the phenotypic involvement of several other genes in the deleted 
regions is unknown. We further refined the genotype-phenotype correlation for 
the 2q37 deletion. To do this, we examined the smallest overlapping deleted 
region for candidate genes for skeletal malformations (facial dysmorphism and 
brachydactyly), overweight, behavioural problems and seizures, using clinical 
data, a review of the literature, and the Manteia database. Among the candidate 
genes identified, we focus on the roles of PRLH, PER2, TWIST2, CAPN10, KIF1A, 
FARP2, D2HGDH and PDCD1.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.230
PMCID: PMC3658200
PMID: 23073310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]