---
reference_id: "PMID:26621825"
title: "Pathophysiology of type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus: a 90-year perspective."
authors:
- Zaccardi F
- Webb DR
- Yates T
- Davies MJ
journal: Postgrad Med J
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1136/postgradmedj-2015-133281
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus: a 90-year perspective.
**Authors:** Zaccardi F, Webb DR, Yates T, Davies MJ
**Journal:** Postgrad Med J (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1136/postgradmedj-2015-133281](https://doi.org/10.1136/postgradmedj-2015-133281)

## Content

1. Postgrad Med J. 2016 Feb;92(1084):63-9. doi: 10.1136/postgradmedj-2015-133281.
 Epub 2015 Nov 30.

Pathophysiology of type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus: a 90-year perspective.

Zaccardi F(1), Webb DR(1), Yates T(2), Davies MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Diabetes Research Centre, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(2)Diabetes Research Centre, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK NIHR 
Leicester-Loughborough Diet, Lifestyle and Physical Activity Biomedical Research 
Unit, Leicester, UK.

Diabetes mellitus is a complex metabolic disorder associated with an increased 
risk of microvascular and macrovascular disease; its main clinical 
characteristic is hyperglycaemia. The last century has been characterised by 
remarkable advances in our understanding of the mechanisms leading to 
hyperglycaemia. The central role of insulin in glucose metabolism regulation was 
clearly demonstrated during the early 1920s, when Banting, Best, Collip and 
Macleod successfully reduced blood glucose levels and glycosuria in a patient 
treated with a substance purified from bovine pancreata. Later, during the 
mid-1930s, clinical observations suggested a possible distinction between 
'insulin-sensitive' and 'insulin-insensitive' diabetes. Only during the 1950s, 
when a reliable measure of circulating insulin was available, was it possible to 
translate these clinical observations into pathophysiological and biochemical 
differences, and the terms 'insulin-dependent' (indicating undetectable insulin 
levels) and 'non-insulin-dependent' (normal or high insulin levels) started to 
emerge. The next 30 years were characterised by pivotal progress in the field of 
immunology that were instrumental in demonstrating an immune-mediated loss of 
insulin-secreting β-cells in subjects with 'insulin-dependent' diabetes. At the 
same time, new experimental techniques allowing measurement of insulin 
'impedance' showed a reduced peripheral effect of insulin in subjects with 
'non-insulin-dependent' diabetes (insulin resistance). The difference between 
the two types of diabetes emerging from decades of observations and experiments 
was further formally recognised in 1979, when the definitions 'type I' and 'type 
II' diabetes were introduced to replace the former 'insulin-dependent' and 
'non-insulin-dependent' terms. In the following years, many studies elucidated 
the natural history and temporal contribution of insulin resistance and β-cell 
insulin secretion in 'type II' diabetes. Furthermore, a central role for insulin 
resistance in the development of a cluster of cardiometabolic alterations 
(dyslipidaemia, inflammation, high blood pressure) was suggested. Possibly as a 
consequence of the secular changes in diabetes risk factors, in the last 
10 years the limitation of a simple distinction between 'type I' and 'type II' 
diabetes has been increasingly recognised, with subjects showing the coexistence 
of insulin resistance and immune activation against β-cells. With the 
advancement of our cellular and molecular understanding of diabetes, a more 
pathophysiological classification that overcomes the historical and simple 
'glucocentric' view could result in a better patient phenotyping and therapeutic 
approach.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/postgradmedj-2015-133281
PMID: 26621825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]