---
reference_id: "PMID:27903528"
title: Consensus guidelines for the diagnosis and management of patients with classic hairy cell leukemia.
authors:
- Grever MR
- Abdel-Wahab O
- Andritsos LA
- Banerji V
- Barrientos J
- Blachly JS
- Call TG
- Catovsky D
- Dearden C
- Demeter J
- Else M
- Forconi F
- Gozzetti A
- Ho AD
- Johnston JB
- Jones J
- Juliusson G
- Kraut E
- Kreitman RJ
- Larratt L
- Lauria F
- Lozanski G
- Montserrat E
- Parikh SA
- Park JH
- Polliack A
- Quest GR
- Rai KR
- Ravandi F
- Robak T
- Saven A
- Seymour JF
- Tadmor T
- Tallman MS
- Tam C
- Tiacci E
- Troussard X
- Zent CS
- Zenz T
- Zinzani PL
- Falini B
journal: Blood
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2016-01-689422
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Cladribine/therapeutic use
- Disease Management
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Hairy Cell/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Neoplasm, Residual/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Pentostatin/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Consensus guidelines for the diagnosis and management of patients with classic hairy cell leukemia.
**Authors:** Grever MR, Abdel-Wahab O, Andritsos LA, Banerji V, Barrientos J, Blachly JS, Call TG, Catovsky D, Dearden C, Demeter J, Else M, Forconi F, Gozzetti A, Ho AD, Johnston JB, Jones J, Juliusson G, Kraut E, Kreitman RJ, Larratt L, Lauria F, Lozanski G, Montserrat E, Parikh SA, Park JH, Polliack A, Quest GR, Rai KR, Ravandi F, Robak T, Saven A, Seymour JF, Tadmor T, Tallman MS, Tam C, Tiacci E, Troussard X, Zent CS, Zenz T, Zinzani PL, Falini B
**Journal:** Blood (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2016-01-689422](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2016-01-689422)

## Content

1. Blood. 2017 Feb 2;129(5):553-560. doi: 10.1182/blood-2016-01-689422. Epub 2016
 Nov 30.

Consensus guidelines for the diagnosis and management of patients with classic
hairy cell leukemia.

Grever MR(1), Abdel-Wahab O(2), Andritsos LA(1), Banerji V(3), Barrientos J(4),
Blachly JS(1), Call TG(5), Catovsky D(6), Dearden C(7), Demeter J(8), Else M(6),
Forconi F(9), Gozzetti A(10), Ho AD(11), Johnston JB(3), Jones J(1), Juliusson
G(12), Kraut E(1), Kreitman RJ(13), Larratt L(14), Lauria F(10), Lozanski G(15),
Montserrat E(16), Parikh SA(5), Park JH(2), Polliack A(17), Quest GR(18), Rai
KR(4), Ravandi F(19), Robak T(20), Saven A(21), Seymour JF(22), Tadmor T(23),
Tallman MS(2), Tam C(22), Tiacci E(24), Troussard X(25), Zent CS(26), Zenz
T(27), Zinzani PL(28), Falini B(24).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State
University James Cancer Hospital, Columbus, OH.
(2)Leukemia Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY.
(3)Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, Hofstra North Shore-Long Island Jewish School of
Medicine, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY.
(5)Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(6)Division of Molecular Pathology, The Institute of Cancer Research, London,
United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Haemato-Oncology, Royal Marsden Biomedical Research Centre,
London, United Kingdom.
(8)First Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest,
Hungary.
(9)Haematology Department, University Hospital Trust and Cancer Sciences Unit,
Cancer Research UK and National Institute for Health Research Experimental
Cancer Medicine Centres, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton,
Southampton, United Kingdom.
(10)Hematology, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy.
(11)Department of Medicine V, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(12)Department of Hematology, Skåne University Hospital and Stem Cell Center,
Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(13)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(14)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(15)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.
(16)Department of Hematology, Hospital Clinic, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.
(17)Department of Hematology, Hadassah University Hospital and Hebrew University
Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel.
(18)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University Health Network,
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(19)Section of Developmental Therapeutics, Department of Leukemia, University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.
(20)Department of Hematology, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
(21)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Scripps Clinic, La Jolla, CA.
(22)Haematology Department, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(23)Hematology Unit, Bnai-Zion Medical Center, and the Rappaport Faculty of
Medicine, Technion Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(24)Institute of Hematology, Department of Medicine, University and Hospital of
Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(25)Department of Hematology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Côte de Nacre,
Caen, France.
(26)James P. Wilmot Cancer Institute, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, NY.
(27)Department of Molecular Therapy in Hematology and Oncology, National Center
for Tumor Diseases and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany; and.
(28)Institute of Hematology "Seràgnoli," University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Hairy cell leukemia is an uncommon hematologic malignancy characterized by
pancytopenia and marked susceptibility to infection. Tremendous progress in the
management of patients with this disease has resulted in high response rates and
improved survival, yet relapse and an appropriate approach to re-treatment
present continuing areas for research. The disease and its effective treatment
are associated with immunosuppression. Because more patients are being treated
with alternative programs, comparison of results will require general agreement
on definitions of response, relapse, and methods of determining minimal residual
disease. The development of internationally accepted, reproducible criteria is
of paramount importance in evaluating and comparing clinical trials to provide
optimal care. Despite the success achieved in managing these patients, continued
participation in available clinical trials in the first-line and particularly in
the relapse setting is highly recommended. The Hairy Cell Leukemia Foundation
convened an international conference to provide common definitions and structure
to guide current management. There is substantial opportunity for continued
research in this disease. In addition to the importance of optimizing the
prevention and management of the serious risk of infection, organized
evaluations of minimal residual disease and treatment at relapse offer ample
opportunities for clinical research. Finally, a scholarly evaluation of quality
of life in the increasing number of survivors of this now manageable chronic
illness merits further study. The development of consensus guidelines for this
disease offers a framework for continued enhancement of the outcome for
patients.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2016-01-689422
PMCID: PMC5290982
PMID: 27903528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
