---
reference_id: "PMID:29442328"
title: ZIC3 in Heterotaxy.
authors:
- Bellchambers HM
- Ware SM
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/978-981-10-7311-3_15
keywords:
- Animals
- "Dextrocardia/embryology, genetics"
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/embryology, genetics"
- "Heterotaxy Syndrome/embryology, genetics"
- "Homeodomain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ZIC3 in Heterotaxy.
**Authors:** Bellchambers HM, Ware SM
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-981-10-7311-3_15](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-7311-3_15)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2018;1046:301-327. doi: 10.1007/978-981-10-7311-3_15.

ZIC3 in Heterotaxy.

Bellchambers HM(1), Ware SM(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN, USA. stware@iu.edu.
(3)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. stware@iu.edu.

Mutation of ZIC3 causes X-linked heterotaxy, a syndrome in which the laterality
of internal organs is disrupted. Analysis of model organisms and gene expression
during early development suggests ZIC3-related heterotaxy occurs due to defects
at the earliest stage of left-right axis formation. Although there are data to
support abnormalities of the node and cilia as underlying causes, it is unclear
at the molecular level why loss of ZIC3 function causes such these defects. ZIC3
has putative roles in a number of developmental signalling pathways that have
distinct roles in establishing the left-right axis. This complicates the
understanding of the mechanistic basis of Zic3 in early development and
left-right patterning. Here we summarise our current understanding of ZIC3
function and describe the potential role ZIC3 plays in important signalling
pathways and their links to heterotaxy.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-7311-3_15
PMCID: PMC8445495
PMID: 29442328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
