---
reference_id: "PMID:23072534"
title: 5-HT₃ receptor antagonists ameliorate 5-fluorouracil-induced intestinal mucositis by suppression of apoptosis in murine intestinal crypt cells.
authors:
- Yasuda M
- Kato S
- Yamanaka N
- Iimori M
- Matsumoto K
- Utsumi D
- Kitahara Y
- Amagase K
- Horie S
- Takeuchi K
journal: Br J Pharmacol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/bph.12019
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antimetabolites, Antineoplastic/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- "Apoptosis Regulatory Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "Benzimidazoles/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Colonic Neoplasms/drug therapy
- "Cytokines/genetics, metabolism"
- "Diarrhea/etiology, prevention & control"
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Drug Interactions
- "Fluorouracil/adverse effects, antagonists & inhibitors, therapeutic use"
- "Gastrointestinal Agents/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Gene Expression Regulation/drug effects
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/adverse effects, antagonists & inhibitors, therapeutic use"
- "Intestinal Mucosa/drug effects, immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mucositis/chemically induced, metabolism, pathology, prevention & control"
- "Ondansetron/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Serotonin 5-HT3 Receptor Agonists/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Serotonin 5-HT3 Receptor Antagonists/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 5-HT₃ receptor antagonists ameliorate 5-fluorouracil-induced intestinal mucositis by suppression of apoptosis in murine intestinal crypt cells.
**Authors:** Yasuda M, Kato S, Yamanaka N, Iimori M, Matsumoto K, Utsumi D, Kitahara Y, Amagase K, Horie S, Takeuchi K
**Journal:** Br J Pharmacol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bph.12019](https://doi.org/10.1111/bph.12019)

## Content

1. Br J Pharmacol. 2013 Mar;168(6):1388-400. doi: 10.1111/bph.12019.

5-HT₃ receptor antagonists ameliorate 5-fluorouracil-induced intestinal
mucositis by suppression of apoptosis in murine intestinal crypt cells.

Yasuda M(1), Kato S, Yamanaka N, Iimori M, Matsumoto K, Utsumi D, Kitahara Y,
Amagase K, Horie S, Takeuchi K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pathological Sciences, Department of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, Kyoto Pharmaceutical University, Kyoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Chemotherapeutic agents, including 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU), frequently cause intestinal mucositis resulting in severe diarrhoea and
morphological mucosal damage. 5-HT₃ receptor antagonists are clinically
effective in the treatment of nausea and emesis during cancer chemotherapy.
Therefore we here have examined the effects of 5-HT₃ receptor antagonists on
5-FU-induced intestinal mucositis in mice.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Intestinal mucositis was induced in male C57BL/6 mice by
daily administration of 5-FU (50 mg·kg⁻¹) for 5 days. Effects of 5-HT₃ receptor
antagonists, ramosetron (0.01-0.1 mg·kg⁻¹) and ondansetron (5 mg·kg⁻¹), on the
accompanying histology, cytokine production and apoptosis were assessed.
KEY RESULTS: Continuous administration of 5-FU to mice caused severe intestinal
mucositis, which was histologically characterized by the shortening of villi and
destruction of intestinal crypts, accompanied by body weight loss and diarrhoea.
Daily ramosetron administration dose-dependently reduced the severity of
intestinal mucositis, body weight loss and diarrhoea. Similar beneficial effects
were observed with ondansetron. The number of apoptotic, caspase-3- and
caspase-8-activated cells increased 24 h after the first 5-FU administration,
and these responses were reduced by ramosetron. The up-regulation of TNF-α,
IL-1β and IL-6 following 5-FU treatment was also attenuated by ramosetron.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: 5-HT₃ receptor antagonists ameliorated
5-FU-induced intestinal mucositis in mice, and this action could result from
suppression of apoptotic responses in the intestinal crypt cells via inhibition
of cytokine expression. Thus, 5-HT₃ receptor antagonists may be useful for
preventing not only nausea and emesis but also intestinal mucositis during 5-FU
chemotherapy.

© 2012 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2012 The British
Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bph.12019
PMCID: PMC3596644
PMID: 23072534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
