---
reference_id: "PMID:35004732"
title: Molecular Mechanisms of Proteinuria in Minimal Change Disease.
authors:
- Purohit S
- Piani F
- Ordoñez FA
- de Lucas-Collantes C
- Bauer C
- Cara-Fuentes G
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.761600
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Mechanisms of Proteinuria in Minimal Change Disease.
**Authors:** Purohit S, Piani F, Ordoñez FA, de Lucas-Collantes C, Bauer C, Cara-Fuentes G
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2021.761600](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2021.761600)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Dec 23;8:761600. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.761600. 
eCollection 2021.

Molecular Mechanisms of Proteinuria in Minimal Change Disease.

Purohit S(1)(2), Piani F(1)(3), Ordoñez FA(4), de Lucas-Collantes C(5), Bauer 
C(2), Cara-Fuentes G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Renal Diseases and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, 
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, United States.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Pediatric Nephrology, Children's 
Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, United States.
(3)Department of Medicine and Surgery Sciences, Alma Mater Studiorum University 
of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(4)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, 
Oviedo, Spain.
(5)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Hospital Niño Jesus, Madrid, Spain.

Minimal change disease (MCD) is the most common type of idiopathic nephrotic 
syndrome in childhood and represents about 15% cases in adults. It is 
characterized by massive proteinuria, edema, hypoalbuminemia, and podocyte foot 
process effacement on electron microscopy. Clinical and experimental studies 
have shown an association between MCD and immune dysregulation. Given the lack 
of inflammatory changes or immunocomplex deposits in the kidney tissue, MCD has 
been traditionally thought to be mediated by an unknown circulating factor(s), 
probably released by T cells that directly target podocytes leading to podocyte 
ultrastructural changes and proteinuria. Not surprisingly, research efforts have 
focused on the role of T cells and podocytes in the disease process. 
Nevertheless, the pathogenesis of the disease remains a mystery. More recently, 
B cells have been postulated as an important player in the disease either by 
activating T cells or by releasing circulating autoantibodies against podocyte 
targets. There are also few reports of endothelial injury in MCD, but whether 
glomerular endothelial cells play a role in the disease remains unexplored. 
Genome-wide association studies are providing insights into the genetic 
susceptibility to develop the disease and found a link between MCD and certain 
human haplotype antigen variants. Altogether, these findings emphasize the 
complex interplay between the immune system, glomerular cells, and the genome, 
raising the possibility of distinct underlying triggers and/or mechanisms of 
proteinuria among patients with MCD. The heterogeneity of the disease and the 
lack of good animal models of MCD remain major obstacles in the understanding of 
MCD. In this study, we will review the most relevant candidate mediators and 
mechanisms of proteinuria involved in MCD and the current models of MCD-like 
injury.

Copyright © 2021 Purohit, Piani, Ordoñez, de Lucas-Collantes, Bauer and 
Cara-Fuentes.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.761600
PMCID: PMC8733331
PMID: 35004732

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.