---
reference_id: "PMID:32071837"
title: "Morquio-B disease: Clinical and genetic characteristics of a distinct GLB1-related dysostosis multiplex."
authors:
- Abumansour IS
- Yuskiv N
- Paschke E
- Stockler-Ipsiroglu S
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12065
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Morquio-B disease: Clinical and genetic characteristics of a distinct GLB1-related dysostosis multiplex.
**Authors:** Abumansour IS, Yuskiv N, Paschke E, Stockler-Ipsiroglu S
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmd2.12065](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmd2.12065)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2019 Nov 28;51(1):30-44. doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12065. eCollection 2020 
Jan.

Morquio-B disease: Clinical and genetic characteristics of a distinct 
GLB1-related dysostosis multiplex.

Abumansour IS(1)(2)(3), Yuskiv N(1)(2), Paschke E(4), Stockler-Ipsiroglu 
S(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biochemical Genetics BC Children's Hospital Vancouver British 
Columbia Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatrics University of British Columbia Vancouver British 
Columbia Canada.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine Umm Al-qura University 
Makkah Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Pediatrics Medical University of Graz Graz Austria.
(5)BC-Children's Hospital Research Institute Vancouver British Columbia Canada.

BACKGROUND: Morquio-B disease (MBD) is a distinct GLB1-related dysostosis 
multiplex involving the trabecular parts of long bones and spine, presenting a 
mild phenocopy of GALNS-related Morquio-A disease.
METHODS: We analyzed 63 (n = 62 published) cases with MBD to describe their 
clinical, biochemical and genetic features.
RESULTS: Forty-one of 51 cases with informative clinical data had pure MBD 
including progressive growth impairment, kyphoscoliosis, coxa/genua valga, joint 
laxity, platyspondyly, odontoid hypoplasia. Ten of 51 had MBD plus neuronopathic 
manifestations including intellectual/developmental/speech delay, spasticity, 
ataxia dystonia. Corneal clouding, cardiac valve pathology, hepatosplenomegaly, 
spinal cord compression were infrequent and atlantooccipital dislocation, 
cardiomyopathy and cherry red spot were never reported. Urinary 
glycosaminoglycan and oligosaccharide excretion was consistently abnormal. 
Keratan sulphate-derived oligosaccharides were only detected using 
LC-MS/MS-based methods. Residual β-galactosidase activities measured against 
synthetic substrates were 0%-17%.Among 28 GLB1 variants, W273 L (34/94 alleles) 
and T500A (11/94 alleles) occurred most frequently. W273L was invariably 
associated with pure MBD. Pure MBD also was reported in a case homozygous for 
R201H, and in the majority of cases carrying the T500A variant. Homozygous Y333C 
and G438E were associated with MBD plus neuronopathic manifestations. T82M, 
R201H, and H281Y, observed in seven alleles, previously have been found 
sensitive to experimental chaperones.
CONCLUSION: Data provide a basis for future systematic collection of clinical, 
biochemical, morphologic, and genetic data of this ultra-rare condition.

© 2019 The Authors. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jmd2.12065
PMCID: PMC7012745
PMID: 32071837

Conflict of interest statement: S.S.‐I. holds The Priest Family Fund for 
Morquio‐B Research, a UBC‐based stewardship grant. She has received educational 
grants from Biomarin, Shire, Recordati and she serves/served as PI in clinical 
trials and postmarketing registries sponsored by Actelion, Biomarin, Shire, 
Ultragenyx. I.A., N.Y., and E.P. have no conflicts to declare.