---
reference_id: "PMID:36598161"
title: Multi-modality management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Rao SJ
- Iqbal SB
- Kanwal AS
- Aronow WS
- Naidu SS
journal: Hosp Pract (1995)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/21548331.2022.2162297
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multi-modality management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Rao SJ, Iqbal SB, Kanwal AS, Aronow WS, Naidu SS
**Journal:** Hosp Pract (1995) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21548331.2022.2162297](https://doi.org/10.1080/21548331.2022.2162297)

## Content

1. Hosp Pract (1995). 2023 Feb;51(1):2-11. doi: 10.1080/21548331.2022.2162297.
Epub  2023 Jan 10.

Multi-modality management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Rao SJ(1), Iqbal SB(1), Kanwal AS(2), Aronow WS(3), Naidu SS(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, MedStar Union Memorial Hospital, Baltimore, USA.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Westchester Medical Center, Valhalla, USA.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Westchester Medical Center and Department of 
Medicine, New York Medical College, Valhalla, USA.
(4)Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Center, Cardiac Catheterization Laboratory, 
Department of Cardiology, Westchester Medical Center and Department of Medicine, 
New York Medical College, Valhalla, USA.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an autosomal dominant inherited condition 
defined by left ventricular wall thickness greater than 15 mm in the absence of 
other conditions that could explain that degree of hypertrophy. Obstructive HCM 
associated with left ventricular outflow tract obstruction is defined by an 
intraventricular systolic pressure gradient greater than or equal to 30 mm Hg. 
Over the past couple of decades, there has been an expansion of both invasive 
and pharmacotherapeutic options for patients with HCM, with recent guidelines 
calling for a melody of invasive and non-invasive treatment strategies. There 
are several invasive therapies including proven therapies such as alcohol septal 
ablation and septal myectomy. Novel invasive therapies such as MitraClip, 
radiofrequency septal ablation and SESAME procedure have more recently been 
promoted. Pharmacological therapy has also dramatically evolved and includes 
conventional medications such as beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, and 
disopyramide. Mavacamten, a novel cardiac myosin inhibitor, may significantly 
change management. Other myosin inhibitors and modulators are also being 
developed and tested in large clinical trials. Given significant phenotypical 
variability in patients with HCM, clinical management can be challenging, and 
often requires an individualized approach with a combination of invasive and 
non-invasive options.

DOI: 10.1080/21548331.2022.2162297
PMID: 36598161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]