---
reference_id: "PMID:34315464"
title: Deletion of 2 amino acids in IHH in a Japanese family with brachydactyly type A1.
authors:
- Ozaki N
- Okuda H
- Kobayashi H
- Harada KH
- Inoue S
- Youssefian S
- Koizumi A
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s12920-021-01042-6
keywords:
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Asian People/genetics
- Brachydactyly/genetics
- Hedgehog Proteins/genetics
- Heterozygote
- Japan
- Pedigree
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deletion of 2 amino acids in IHH in a Japanese family with brachydactyly type A1.
**Authors:** Ozaki N, Okuda H, Kobayashi H, Harada KH, Inoue S, Youssefian S, Koizumi A
**Journal:** BMC Med Genomics (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12920-021-01042-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-021-01042-6)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genomics. 2021 Jul 27;14(1):190. doi: 10.1186/s12920-021-01042-6.

Deletion of 2 amino acids in IHH in a Japanese family with brachydactyly type 
A1.

Ozaki N(1), Okuda H(2), Kobayashi H(3), Harada KH(4), Inoue S(2)(4), Youssefian 
S(2)(5), Koizumi A(2)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kadono-Sanjo Children's Clinic, Kyoto, Japan. 
nozk@leto.eonet.ne.jp.
(2)Department of Pain Pharmacogenetics, Kyoto University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Environmental and Molecular Medicine, Mie University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Tsu, Japan.
(4)Department of Health and Environmental Sciences, Kyoto University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(5)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Kyoto University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(6)Institute of Public Health and Welfare, Kyoto-Hokenkai, Kyoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Brachydactyly type A1 (BDA1) is an autosomal dominant disorder 
characterized by uniform shortening of the middle phalanges in all digits. It is 
associated with variants in the Indian Hedgehog (IHH) gene, which plays a key 
role in endochondral ossification. To date, heterozygous pathogenic IHH variants 
involving several codons, which are restricted to a specific region of the 
N-terminal active fragment of IHH, have been reported. The purpose of this study 
was to identify the pathogenic variant in a Japanese family with BDA1 and to 
evaluate its pathogenesis with regard to previous reports.
METHODS: The proband, a 9-year-old boy, his siblings, and his father had 
shortened digits and a short stature of variable severity. Based on physical 
examinations, radiographic findings and family history, they were diagnosed with 
BDA1. This family is the first case of an isolated malformation in Japan. Sanger 
sequencing of IHH was performed on these individuals and on the proband's 
unaffected mother. The significance of the variants was assessed using 
three-dimensional analysis methods.
RESULTS: Sanger sequencing showed a novel IHH heterozygous variant, 
NM_002181.4:c.544_549delTCAAAG(p.Ser182Lys183del) 
[NC_000002.12:g.219057461_219057466del].. These two residues are located outside 
the cluster region considered a hotspot of pathogenic variants. 
Three-dimensional modelling showed that S182 and K183 are located on the same 
surface as other residues associated with BDA1. Analysis of residue interactions 
across the interface between IHH and its interacting receptor protein revealed 
the presence of hydrogen bonds between them.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a novel variant, NM_002181.4:c.544_549delTCAAAG 
(p.Ser182Lys183del) [NC_000002.12:g.219057461_219057466del] in a Japanese family 
with BDA1. Indeed, neither variations in codons 182 or 183 nor with such 
two-amino-acid deletions in IHH have been reported previously. Although these 
two residues are located outside the cluster region considered a hotspot of 
pathogenic variants, we speculate that this variant causes BDA1 through impaired 
interactions between IHH and target receptor proteins in the same manner as 
other pathogenic variants located in the cluster region. This report expands the 
genetic spectrum of BDA1.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-021-01042-6
PMCID: PMC8314500
PMID: 34315464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.