---
reference_id: "PMID:20505092"
title: The therapeutic mode of action of 4-aminopyridine in cerebellar ataxia.
authors:
- Alviña K
- Khodakhah K
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3582-09.2010
keywords:
- 4-Aminopyridine/therapeutic use
- "Action Potentials/drug effects, physiology"
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- "Behavior, Animal/drug effects"
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/drug therapy, pathology, physiopathology"
- Cerebellum/pathology
- "Chlorzoxazone/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Chorea/drug therapy, etiology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Electric Stimulation/methods
- "Excitatory Postsynaptic Potentials/drug effects, genetics"
- Exploratory Behavior/drug effects
- In Vitro Techniques
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Patch-Clamp Techniques/methods
- Potassium Channel Blockers/therapeutic use
- Rats
- "Rats, Wistar"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The therapeutic mode of action of 4-aminopyridine in cerebellar ataxia.
**Authors:** Alviña K, Khodakhah K
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3582-09.2010](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3582-09.2010)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2010 May 26;30(21):7258-68. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3582-09.2010.

The therapeutic mode of action of 4-aminopyridine in cerebellar ataxia.

Alviña K(1), Khodakhah K.

Author information:
(1)Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Episodic ataxia type 2 (EA2) is a hereditary cerebellar ataxia associated with 
mutations in the P/Q-type voltage-gated calcium (Ca(2+)) channels. Therapeutic 
approaches for treatment of EA2 are very limited. Presently, the potassium 
(K(+)) channel blocker 4-aminopyridine (4-AP) constitutes the most promising 
treatment, although its mechanism of action is not understood. Here we show 
that, in contrast to what is commonly believed, therapeutic concentrations of 
4-AP do not increase the inhibitory drive of cerebellar Purkinje cells. Instead, 
4-AP restores the severely diminished precision of pacemaking in Purkinje cells 
of EA2 mutant mice by prolonging the action potential and increasing the action 
potential afterhyperpolarization. Consistent with this mode of action, the 
therapeutic efficacy of 4-AP was comparable, and not additive, to chlorzoxazone, 
an activator of Ca(2+)-dependent K(+) channels that also restores the precision 
of Purkinje cell pacemaking. The likely target of 4-AP at the concentrations 
used are the K(v)1 family of K(+) channels, possibly the K(v)1.5 subtype. 
Because at higher concentrations 4-AP blocks a large array of K(+) channels and 
is a proconvulsant, use of selective K(v)1 channel blockers is likely to be a 
safer substitute for treatment of cerebellar ataxia.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3582-09.2010
PMCID: PMC2909847
PMID: 20505092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]