---
reference_id: "PMID:26740267"
title: "Noma in a child with acute leukaemia: when the 'face of poverty' finds an ally."
authors:
- Singh A
- Mandal A
- Seth R
- Kabra SK
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2015-211674
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- "Child, Preschool"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Face
- Humans
- Leukemia/complications
- Male
- "Noma/drug therapy, etiology"
- Opportunistic Infections/etiology
- Poverty
- Typhoid Fever/therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Noma in a child with acute leukaemia: when the 'face of poverty' finds an ally.
**Authors:** Singh A, Mandal A, Seth R, Kabra SK
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2015-211674](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2015-211674)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2016 Jan 6;2016:bcr2015211674. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2015-211674.

Noma in a child with acute leukaemia: when the 'face of poverty' finds an ally.

Singh A(1), Mandal A(2), Seth R(2), Kabra SK(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Chacha Nehru Bal Chikitsalaya, New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS),
New Delhi, India.

A 2-year-6-month old, appropriately immunised, well-thriving boy, symptomatic
for the past 6 months, presented with recurrent fever, progressive pallor,
lymphadenopathy and a raw area on the right cheek, with discharging sinus. The
necrotising infection of the face developed after one and half months of febrile
illness. This febrile illness with bicytopaenia was diagnosed as enteric fever
and treated with antibiotics. Skin grafting was performed for the full-thickness
defect of the face. The patient continued to have a non-healing oral ulcer with
progressive pallor and was finally diagnosed as having acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia. Immunodeficiency was ruled out by appropriate investigations. Noma is
an indirect measure of extreme poverty, but malignancy is known to predispose to
this debilitating condition. The worldwide incidence of Noma is reported to be
30,000-140,000, with a preponderance in sub-Saharan Africa. This case emphasises
the need for a thorough search for the underlying illness predisposing to a rare
opportunistic infection such as Noma in a well-thriving child.

2016 BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2015-211674
PMCID: PMC4716329
PMID: 26740267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
