---
reference_id: "PMID:30219628"
title: "Overall survival in patients with BRAF-mutant melanoma receiving encorafenib plus binimetinib versus vemurafenib or encorafenib (COLUMBUS): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial."
authors:
- Dummer R
- Ascierto PA
- Gogas HJ
- Arance A
- Mandala M
- Liszkay G
- Garbe C
- Schadendorf D
- Krajsova I
- Gutzmer R
- Chiarion Sileni V
- Dutriaux C
- de Groot JWB
- Yamazaki N
- Loquai C
- Moutouh-de Parseval LA
- Pickard MD
- Sandor V
- Robert C
- Flaherty KT
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(18)30497-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Overall survival in patients with BRAF-mutant melanoma receiving encorafenib plus binimetinib versus vemurafenib or encorafenib (COLUMBUS): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial.
**Authors:** Dummer R, Ascierto PA, Gogas HJ, Arance A, Mandala M, Liszkay G, Garbe C, Schadendorf D, Krajsova I, Gutzmer R, Chiarion Sileni V, Dutriaux C, de Groot JWB, Yamazaki N, Loquai C, Moutouh-de Parseval LA, Pickard MD, Sandor V, Robert C, Flaherty KT
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(18)30497-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(18)30497-2)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2018 Oct;19(10):1315-1327. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(18)30497-2. 
Epub 2018 Sep 12.

Overall survival in patients with BRAF-mutant melanoma receiving encorafenib 
plus binimetinib versus vemurafenib or encorafenib (COLUMBUS): a multicentre, 
open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial.

Dummer R(1), Ascierto PA(2), Gogas HJ(3), Arance A(4), Mandala M(5), Liszkay 
G(6), Garbe C(7), Schadendorf D(8), Krajsova I(9), Gutzmer R(10), Chiarion 
Sileni V(11), Dutriaux C(12), de Groot JWB(13), Yamazaki N(14), Loquai C(15), 
Moutouh-de Parseval LA(16), Pickard MD(17), Sandor V(17), Robert C(18), Flaherty 
KT(19).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zürich Skin Cancer Center, 
Zürich, Switzerland. Electronic address: reinhard.dummer@usz.ch.
(2)Melanoma Unit, Cancer Immunotherapy and Innovative Therapies, Istituto 
Nazionale Tumori IRCCS Fondazione Pascale, Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens, Laikon Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(5)Department of Oncology and Haematology, Papa Giovanni XXIII Cancer Center 
Hospital, Bergamo, Italy.
(6)Department of Dermatology, National Institute of Oncology, Budapest, Hungary.
(7)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
(8)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany; German 
Cancer Consortium, Heidelberg, Germany.
(9)Department of Dermato-oncology, University Hospital Prague and Charles 
University First Medical Faculty, Prague, Czech Republic.
(10)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Skin Cancer Center Hannover, Hannover 
Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(11)Melanoma Cancer Unit, Oncology Institute of Veneto IRCCS, Padua, Italy.
(12)Department of Oncologic Dermatology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de 
Bordeaux, Hôpital Saint-André, Bordeaux Cédex, France.
(13)Department of Medical Oncology, Isala, Zwolle, Netherlands.
(14)Department of Dermatologic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(15)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(16)Translational Clinical Oncology, Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(17)Array BioPharma, Boulder, CO, USA.
(18)Service of Dermatology, Department of Medicine and Paris-Sud University, 
Gustave Roussy, Villejuif Cedex, France.
(19)Cancer Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Erratum in
    Lancet Oncol. 2018 Oct;19(10):e509. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(18)30705-8.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2018 Oct;19(10):1263-1264. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(18)30530-8.

BACKGROUND: Encorafenib plus binimetinib and encorafenib alone improved 
progression-free survival compared with vemurafenib in patients with 
BRAFV600-mutant melanoma in the COLUMBUS trial. Here, we report the results of 
the secondary endpoint of overall survival.
METHODS: COLUMBUS was a two-part, randomised, open-label, phase 3 study done at 
162 hospitals in 28 countries. Eligible patients were aged at least 18 years 
with histologically confirmed, locally advanced, unresectable, or metastatic 
cutaneous melanoma, or unknown primary melanoma, BRAFV600E or BRAFV600K 
mutation, an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 0 
or 1, and were treatment naive or had progressed on or after first-line 
immunotherapy. In part 1 of the study, patients were randomly assigned (1:1:1) 
by use of interactive response technology to receive oral encorafenib 450 mg 
once daily plus oral binimetinib 45 mg twice daily (encorafenib plus binimetinib 
group), oral encorafenib 300 mg once daily (encorafenib group), or oral 
vemurafenib 960 mg twice daily (vemurafenib group). Randomisation was stratified 
by the American Joint Committee on Cancer stage, ECOG performance status, and 
BRAF mutation status. The primary outcome of the trial, progression-free 
survival with encorafenib plus binimetinib versus vemurafenib, was reported 
previously. Here we present the prespecified interim overall survival analysis. 
Efficacy analyses were by intent to treat. Safety was analysed in patients who 
received at least one dose of study drug. Part 2 of the study was initiated at 
the request of the US Food and Drug Administration to better understand the 
contribution of binimetinib to the combination therapy by comparing encorafenib 
300 mg once daily plus binimetinib 45 mg twice daily with encorafenib 300 mg 
once daily alone. Results of part 2 will be published separately. This trial is 
ongoing and is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01909453, and 
EudraCT, number 2013-001176-38.
FINDINGS: Between Dec 30, 2013, and April 10, 2015, 577 of 1345 screened 
patients were randomly assigned to receive encorafenib plus binimetinib (n=192), 
encorafenib (n=194), or vemurafenib (n=191). Median follow-up for overall 
survival was 36·8 months (95% CI 35·9-37·5). Median overall survival was 33·6 
months (95% CI 24·4-39·2) with encorafenib plus binimetinib and 16·9 months 
(14·0-24·5) with vemurafenib (hazard ratio 0·61 [95% CI 0·47-0·79]; two-sided 
p<0·0001). The most common grade 3 or 4 adverse events did not change 
substantially from the first report; those seen in more than 5% of patients 
treated with encorafenib plus binimetinib were increased γ-glutamyltransferase 
(18 [9%] of 192 patients), increased blood creatine phosphokinase (14 [7%]), and 
hypertension (12 [6%]); those seen with encorafenib alone were palmar-plantar 
erythrodysaesthesia syndrome (26 [14%] of 192 patients), myalgia (19 [10%]), and 
arthralgia (18 [9%]); and with vemurafenib the most common grade 3 or 4 adverse 
event was arthralgia (11 [6%] of 186 patients). One death in the combination 
treatment group was considered by the investigator to be possibly related to 
treatment.
INTERPRETATION: The combination of encorafenib plus binimetinib provided 
clinically meaningful efficacy with good tolerability as shown by improvements 
in both progression-free survival and overall survival compared with 
vemurafenib. These data suggest that the combination of encorafenib plus 
binimetinib is likely to become an important therapeutic option in patients with 
BRAFV600-mutant melanoma.
FUNDING: Array BioPharma, Novartis.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(18)30497-2
PMID: 30219628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]