---
reference_id: "PMID:37446072"
title: Clinical Characteristics and Genetic Variants of a Large Cohort of Patients with Retinitis Pigmentosa Using Multimodal Imaging and Next Generation Sequencing.
authors:
- Sather R 3rd
- Ihinger J
- Simmons M
- Khundkar T
- Lobo GP
- Montezuma SR
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms241310895
keywords:
- Humans
- Retrospective Studies
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- "Retina/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Multimodal Imaging
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Characteristics and Genetic Variants of a Large Cohort of Patients with Retinitis Pigmentosa Using Multimodal Imaging and Next Generation Sequencing.
**Authors:** Sather R 3rd, Ihinger J, Simmons M, Khundkar T, Lobo GP, Montezuma SR
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms241310895](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241310895)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jun 30;24(13):10895. doi: 10.3390/ijms241310895.

Clinical Characteristics and Genetic Variants of a Large Cohort of Patients with 
Retinitis Pigmentosa Using Multimodal Imaging and Next Generation Sequencing.

Sather R 3rd(1), Ihinger J(1), Simmons M(1), Khundkar T(1), Lobo GP(1), 
Montezuma SR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Neurosciences, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

This retrospective study identifies patients with RP at the Inherited Retinal 
Disease Clinic at the University of Minnesota (UMN)/M Health System who had 
genetic testing via next generation sequencing. A database was curated to record 
history and examination, genetic findings, and ocular imaging. Causative 
pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants were recorded. Disease status was 
further characterized by ocular coherence tomography (OCT) and fundus 
autofluorescence (AF). Our study cohort included a total of 199 patients 
evaluated between 1 May 2015-5 August 2022. The cohort included 151 patients 
with non-syndromic RP and 48 with syndromic RP. Presenting symptoms included 
nyctalopia (85.4%) photosensitivity/hemeralopia (60.5%), and decreased color 
vision (55.8%). On average, 38.9% had visual acuity of worse than 20/80. 
Ellipsoid zone band width on OCT scan of less than 1500 μm was noted in 73.6%. 
Ninety-nine percent had fundus autofluorescence (AF) findings of a hypo- or 
hyper-fluorescent ring within the macula and/or peripheral hypo-AF. Of the 127 
subjects who underwent genetic testing, a diagnostic pathogenic and/or likely 
pathogenic variant was identified in 67 (52.8%) patients-33.3% of syndromic RP 
and 66.6% of non-syndromic RP patients had a diagnostic gene variant identified. 
It was found that 23.6% of the cohort had negative genetic testing results or 
only variants of uncertain significance identified, which were deemed as 
non-diagnostic. We concluded that patients with RP often present with advanced 
disease. In our population, next generation sequencing panels identified a 
genotype consistent with the exam in just over half the patients. Additional 
work will be needed to identify the underlying genetic etiology for the 
remainder.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241310895
PMCID: PMC10341662
PMID: 37446072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We, as a team, do not have a financial 
interest/arrangement or affiliation with one or more organizations that could be 
perceived as a real conflict of interest in the context of the subject of this 
case report.