---
reference_id: "PMID:34241796"
title: "Agammaglobulinemia: from X-linked to Autosomal Forms of Disease."
authors:
- Cardenas-Morales M
- Hernandez-Trujillo VP
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-021-08870-5
keywords:
- Agammaglobulinaemia Tyrosine Kinase/genetics
- "Agammaglobulinemia/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Agammaglobulinemia: from X-linked to Autosomal Forms of Disease.
**Authors:** Cardenas-Morales M, Hernandez-Trujillo VP
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-021-08870-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-021-08870-5)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2022 Aug;63(1):22-35. doi:
10.1007/s12016-021-08870-5.  Epub 2021 Jul 9.

Agammaglobulinemia: from X-linked to Autosomal Forms of Disease.

Cardenas-Morales M(1), Hernandez-Trujillo VP(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Allergy and Immunology Care Center of South Florida, Miami, FL, USA. 
mcard016@gmail.com.
(2)Allergy and Immunology Care Center of South Florida, Miami, FL, USA.
(3)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Nicklaus Children's Hospital, Miami, FL, 
USA.

Interruptions or alterations in the B cell development pathway can lead to 
primary B cell immunodeficiency with resultant absence or diminished 
immunoglobulin production. While the most common cause of congenital 
agammaglobulinemia is X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA), accounting for 
approximately 85% of cases, other genetic forms of agammaglobulinemia have been 
identified. Early recognition and diagnosis of these conditions are pivotal for 
improved outcomes and prevention of sequelae and complications. The diagnosis of 
XLA is often delayed, and can be missed if patient has a mild phenotype. The 
lack of correlation between phenotype and genotype in this condition makes 
management and predicting outcomes quite difficult. In contrast, while less 
common, autosomal recessive forms of agammaglobulinemia present at younger ages 
and with typically more severe clinical features resulting in an earlier 
diagnosis. Some diagnostic innovations, such as KREC level measurements and 
serum BCMA measurements, may aid in facilitating an earlier identification of 
agammaglobulinemia leading to prompt treatment. Earlier diagnosis may improve 
the overall health of patients with XLA.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-021-08870-5
PMCID: PMC8269404
PMID: 34241796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Vivian Hernandez-Trujillo reports conflict with 
Ad board for Takeda and CSL; Speaker for Takeda; Consultant for Takeda. Melissa 
Cardenas-Morales does not have any conflicts of interest to disclose.