---
reference_id: "PMID:15178757"
title: A cardiac arrhythmia syndrome caused by loss of ankyrin-B function.
authors:
- Mohler PJ
- Splawski I
- Napolitano C
- Bottelli G
- Sharpe L
- Timothy K
- Priori SG
- Keating MT
- Bennett V
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0402546101
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Animals
- "Ankyrins/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- Calcium Signaling
- Electrocardiography
- Female
- Humans
- "Long QT Syndrome/enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Mice
- Middle Aged
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Sodium-Calcium Exchanger/metabolism
- Sodium-Potassium-Exchanging ATPase/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A cardiac arrhythmia syndrome caused by loss of ankyrin-B function.
**Authors:** Mohler PJ, Splawski I, Napolitano C, Bottelli G, Sharpe L, Timothy K, Priori SG, Keating MT, Bennett V
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0402546101](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0402546101)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jun 15;101(24):9137-42. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0402546101. Epub 2004 Jun 3.

A cardiac arrhythmia syndrome caused by loss of ankyrin-B function.

Mohler PJ(1), Splawski I, Napolitano C, Bottelli G, Sharpe L, Timothy K, Priori
SG, Keating MT, Bennett V.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cell Biology, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA. p.mohler@cellbio.duke.edu

220-kDa ankyrin-B is required for coordinated assembly of Na/Ca exchanger, Na/K
ATPase, and inositol trisphosphate (InsP(3)) receptor at
transverse-tubule/sarcoplasmic reticulum sites in cardiomyocytes. A
loss-of-function mutation of ankyrin-B identified in an extended kindred causes
a dominantly inherited cardiac arrhythmia, initially described as type 4 long QT
syndrome. Here we report the identification of eight unrelated probands
harboring ankyrin-B loss-of-function mutations, including four previously
undescribed mutations, whose clinical features distinguish the cardiac phenotype
associated with loss of ankyrin-B activity from classic long QT syndromes.
Humans with ankyrin-B mutations display varying degrees of cardiac dysfunction
including bradycardia, sinus arrhythmia, idiopathic ventricular fibrillation,
catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, and risk of sudden death.
However, a prolonged rate-corrected QT interval was not a consistent feature,
indicating that ankyrin-B dysfunction represents a clinical entity distinct from
classic long QT syndromes. The mutations are localized in the ankyrin-B
regulatory domain, which distinguishes function of ankyrin-B from ankyrin-G in
cardiomyocytes. All mutations abolish ability of ankyrin-B to restore abnormal
Ca(2+) dynamics and abnormal localization and expression of Na/Ca exchanger,
Na/K ATPase, and InsP(3)R in ankyrin-B(+/-) cardiomyocytes. This study,
considered together with the first description of ankyrin-B mutation associated
with cardiac dysfunction, supports a previously undescribed paradigm for human
disease due to abnormal coordination of multiple functionally related ion
channels and transporters, in this case the Na/K ATPase, Na/Ca exchanger, and
InsP(3) receptor.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0402546101
PMCID: PMC428486
PMID: 15178757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
