---
reference_id: "PMID:39633048"
title: Ageing limits stemness and tumorigenesis by reprogramming iron homeostasis.
authors:
- Zhuang X
- Wang Q
- Joost S
- Ferrena A
- Humphreys DT
- Li Z
- Blum M
- Krause K
- Ding S
- Landais Y
- Zhan Y
- Zhao Y
- Chaligne R
- Lee JH
- Carrasco SE
- Bhanot UK
- Koche RP
- Bott MJ
- Katajisto P
- Soto-Feliciano YM
- Pisanic T
- Thomas T
- Zheng D
- Wong ES
- Tammela T
journal: Nature
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08285-0
keywords:
- Animals
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Aging/metabolism
- "Alveolar Epithelial Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Carcinogenesis
- DNA Methylation
- Ferroptosis
- Homeostasis
- Iron/metabolism
- "Lipocalin-2/metabolism, genetics"
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism"
- "Neoplasm Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Stem Cells/metabolism
- DNA-Binding Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ageing limits stemness and tumorigenesis by reprogramming iron homeostasis.
**Authors:** Zhuang X, Wang Q, Joost S, Ferrena A, Humphreys DT, Li Z, Blum M, Krause K, Ding S, Landais Y, Zhan Y, Zhao Y, Chaligne R, Lee JH, Carrasco SE, Bhanot UK, Koche RP, Bott MJ, Katajisto P, Soto-Feliciano YM, Pisanic T, Thomas T, Zheng D, Wong ES, Tammela T
**Journal:** Nature (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-024-08285-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-08285-0)

## Content

1. Nature. 2025 Jan;637(8044):184-194. doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08285-0. Epub 2024
 Dec 4.

Ageing limits stemness and tumorigenesis by reprogramming iron homeostasis.

Zhuang X(1), Wang Q(2), Joost S(1), Ferrena A(3), Humphreys DT(2), Li Z(1)(4), 
Blum M(1), Krause K(1), Ding S(1), Landais Y(2), Zhan Y(5), Zhao Y(6), Chaligne 
R(7), Lee JH(8)(9), Carrasco SE(10), Bhanot UK(11), Koche RP(5), Bott MJ(1), 
Katajisto P(12)(13)(14), Soto-Feliciano YM(15)(16), Pisanic T(17), Thomas T(18), 
Zheng D(3)(19), Wong ES(2)(20), Tammela T(21).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Institute for Clinical and Translational Research, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Weill Cornell Graduate School of Medical Science, Weill Cornell Medicine, New 
York, NY, USA.
(5)Center for Epigenetics Research, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
MD, USA.
(7)Computational and Systems Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(8)Wellcome-MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, Jeffrey Cheah Biomedical Centre, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(9)Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(10)Laboratory of Comparative Pathology, Weill Cornell Medicine, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center and Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.
(11)Pathology Core Facility, Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(12)Institute of Biotechnology, HiLIFE, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland.
(13)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(14)Faculty of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland.
(15)David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(16)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(17)Institute for NanoBioTechnology, Department of Oncology-Cancer Genetics and 
Epigenetics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(18)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY, USA.
(19)Departments of Genetics, Neurology, and Neuroscience, Albert Einstein 
College of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(20)School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, UNSW, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(21)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA. tammelat@mskcc.org.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2025 Jun;642(8067):E17. doi: 10.1038/s41586-025-09124-6.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Jun 28:2024.06.23.600305. doi: 10.1101/2024.06.23.600305.

Ageing is associated with a decline in the number and fitness of adult stem 
cells1,2. Ageing-associated loss of stemness is posited to suppress 
tumorigenesis3,4, but this hypothesis has not been tested in vivo. Here we use 
physiologically aged autochthonous genetically engineered5,6 mouse models and 
primary cells5,6 to demonstrate that ageing suppresses lung cancer initiation 
and progression by degrading the stemness of the alveolar cell of origin. This 
phenotype is underpinned by the ageing-associated induction of the transcription 
factor NUPR1 and its downstream target lipocalin-2 in the cell of origin in mice 
and humans, which leads to functional iron insufficiency in the aged cells. 
Genetic inactivation of the NUPR1-lipocalin-2 axis or iron supplementation 
rescues stemness and promotes the tumorigenic potential of aged alveolar cells. 
Conversely, targeting the NUPR1-lipocalin-2 axis is detrimental to young 
alveolar cells through ferroptosis induction. Ageing-associated DNA 
hypomethylation at specific enhancer sites is associated with increased NUPR1 
expression, which is recapitulated in young alveolar cells through DNA 
methylation inhibition. We uncover that ageing drives functional iron 
insufficiency that leads to loss of stemness and tumorigenesis but promotes 
resistance to ferroptosis. These findings have implications for the therapeutic 
modulation of cellular iron homeostasis in regenerative medicine and in cancer 
prevention. Furthermore, our findings are consistent with a model whereby most 
human cancers initiate at a young age, thereby highlighting the importance of 
directing cancer prevention efforts towards young individuals.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-024-08285-0
PMID: 39633048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: T. Tammela is a scientific 
advisor with equity interests in Lime Therapeutics. His spouse is an employee of 
and has equity in Recursion Pharmaceuticals. The Tammela Laboratory receives 
funding from Ono Pharma unrelated to this work. E.S.W. has equity in and her 
spouse is a co-founder of and equity holder in Gertrude Biomedical Pty. The 
other authors declare no competing interests.