---
reference_id: "PMID:26085577"
title: "Loss of AP-5 results in accumulation of aberrant endolysosomes: defining a new type of lysosomal storage disease."
authors:
- Hirst J
- Edgar JR
- Esteves T
- Darios F
- Madeo M
- Chang J
- Roda RH
- Dürr A
- Anheim M
- Gellera C
- Li J
- Züchner S
- Mariotti C
- Stevanin G
- Blackstone C
- Kruer MC
- Robinson MS
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv220
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Vesicular Transport/genetics"
- Aged
- Endosomes/metabolism
- Female
- "Fibroblasts/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Gene Knockdown Techniques
- Genetic Association Studies
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- "Lysosomal Storage Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- RNA Interference
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of AP-5 results in accumulation of aberrant endolysosomes: defining a new type of lysosomal storage disease.
**Authors:** Hirst J, Edgar JR, Esteves T, Darios F, Madeo M, Chang J, Roda RH, Dürr A, Anheim M, Gellera C, Li J, Züchner S, Mariotti C, Stevanin G, Blackstone C, Kruer MC, Robinson MS
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddv220](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddv220)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Sep 1;24(17):4984-96. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv220. Epub 2015
Jun  17.

Loss of AP-5 results in accumulation of aberrant endolysosomes: defining a new 
type of lysosomal storage disease.

Hirst J(1), Edgar JR(2), Esteves T(3), Darios F(4), Madeo M(5), Chang J(6), Roda 
RH(6), Dürr A(7), Anheim M(8), Gellera C(9), Li J(10), Züchner S(11), Mariotti 
C(9), Stevanin G(12), Blackstone C(6), Kruer MC(13), Robinson MS(2).

Author information:
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
UK, jh228@cam.ac.uk.
(2)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
UK.
(3)Inserm U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06 UMR 
S_1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Paris F-75013, France, 
Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Paris F-75014, France.
(4)Inserm U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06 UMR 
S_1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Paris F-75013, France.
(5)Sanford Children's Health Research Center, Barrow Neurological Institute and 
Ronald A. Matricaria Institute of Molecular Medicine, Phoenix Children's 
Hospital, Sioux Falls, SD, USA.
(6)Cell Biology Section, Neurogenetics Branch, National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.
(7)Inserm U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06 UMR 
S_1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Paris F-75013, France, 
APHP, Department of Genetics, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris F-75013, France.
(8)Département de Neurologie, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France.
(9)Genetics of Neurodegenerative and Metabolic Diseases Unit, IRCCS-Fondazione 
Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan 20133, Italy.
(10)Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt Brain Institute and Centre for Human 
Genetics Research, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 1161 21th Avenue 
South, Nashville, TN, USA.
(11)Department of Human Genetics and Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, 
Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA.
(12)Inserm U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06 UMR 
S_1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Paris F-75013, France, 
Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Paris F-75014, France, APHP, Department of 
Genetics, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris F-75013, France.
(13)Sanford Children's Health Research Center, Barrow Neurological Institute and 
Ronald A. Matricaria Institute of Molecular Medicine, Phoenix Children's 
Hospital, Sioux Falls, SD, USA, Barrow Neurological Institute & Ronald A. 
Matricaria Institute for Molecular Medicine, Phoenix Children's Hospital, 
Phoenix, AZ and Department of Child Health, University of Arizona College of 
Medicine, Phoenix, AZ.

Adaptor proteins (AP 1-5) are heterotetrameric complexes that facilitate 
specialized cargo sorting in vesicular-mediated trafficking. Mutations in AP5Z1, 
encoding a subunit of the AP-5 complex, have been reported to cause hereditary 
spastic paraplegia (HSP), although their impact at the cellular level has not 
been assessed. Here we characterize three independent fibroblast lines derived 
from skin biopsies of patients harbouring nonsense mutations in AP5Z1 and 
presenting with spastic paraplegia accompanied by neuropathy, parkinsonism 
and/or cognitive impairment. In all three patient-derived lines, we show that 
there is complete loss of AP-5 ζ protein and a reduction in the associated AP-5 
µ5 protein. Using ultrastructural analysis, we show that these patient-derived 
lines consistently exhibit abundant multilamellar structures that are positive 
for markers of endolysosomes and are filled with aberrant storage material 
organized as exaggerated multilamellar whorls, striated belts and 'fingerprint 
bodies'. This phenotype can be replicated in a HeLa cell culture model by siRNA 
knockdown of AP-5 ζ. The cellular phenotype bears striking resemblance to 
features described in a number of lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs). 
Collectively, these findings reveal an emerging picture of the role of AP-5 in 
endosomal and lysosomal homeostasis, illuminates a potential pathomechanism that 
is relevant to the role of AP-5 in neurons and expands the understanding of 
recessive HSPs. Moreover, the resulting accumulation of storage material in 
endolysosomes leads us to propose that AP-5 deficiency represents a new type of 
LSDs.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv220
PMCID: PMC4527494
PMID: 26085577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]