---
reference_id: "PMID:40275365"
title: Premature skeletal muscle aging in VPS13A deficiency relates to impaired autophagy.
authors:
- Riccardi V
- Viscomi CF
- Sandri M
- "D'Alessandro A"
- Dzieciatkowska M
- Stephenson D
- Federti E
- Hermann A
- Salviati L
- Siciliano A
- Andolfo I
- Alper SL
- Ceolan J
- Iolascon A
- Vattemi G
- Danek A
- Walker RH
- Mensch A
- Otto M
- Deschauer M
- Armbrust M
- "Beninca' C"
- Salari V
- Fabene P
- Peikert K
- De Franceschi L
journal: Acta Neuropathol Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s40478-025-01997-y
keywords:
- Animals
- "Autophagy/physiology, genetics"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology, metabolism"
- Mice
- Humans
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Vesicular Transport Proteins/genetics, deficiency"
- "Neuroacanthocytosis/pathology, genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Female
- "Aging, Premature/pathology, metabolism, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Premature skeletal muscle aging in VPS13A deficiency relates to impaired autophagy.
**Authors:** Riccardi V, Viscomi CF, Sandri M, D'Alessandro A, Dzieciatkowska M, Stephenson D, Federti E, Hermann A, Salviati L, Siciliano A, Andolfo I, Alper SL, Ceolan J, Iolascon A, Vattemi G, Danek A, Walker RH, Mensch A, Otto M, Deschauer M, Armbrust M, Beninca' C, Salari V, Fabene P, Peikert K, De Franceschi L
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40478-025-01997-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-025-01997-y)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2025 Apr 24;13(1):83. doi:
10.1186/s40478-025-01997-y.

Premature skeletal muscle aging in VPS13A deficiency relates to impaired 
autophagy.

Riccardi V(1), Viscomi CF(2), Sandri M(2)(3), D'Alessandro A(4), Dzieciatkowska 
M(4), Stephenson D(4), Federti E(1), Hermann A(5)(6)(7), Salviati L(8)(9), 
Siciliano A(1)(10), Andolfo I(11)(12), Alper SL(13), Ceolan J(1)(10), Iolascon 
A(11)(12), Vattemi G(10)(14), Danek A(15), Walker RH(16)(17), Mensch A(18), Otto 
M(18), Deschauer M(19), Armbrust M(20)(21)(22)(23), Beninca' C(24), Salari V(1), 
Fabene P(1)(25), Peikert K(5)(6)(7), De Franceschi L(26)(27).

Author information:
(1)Department of Engineering for Innovative Medicine- DIMI, University of 
Verona, Verona, Italy.
(2)Department of Bomedical Sciences, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(3)Venetian Institute of Molecular Medicine, Padova, Italy.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado 
School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.
(5)Translational Neurodegeneration Section "Albrecht Kossel", Department of 
Neurology, University Medical Center Rostock, University of Rostock, Rostock, 
Germany.
(6)Center for Transdisciplinary Neurosciences Rostock (CTNR), University Medical 
Center Rostock, Rostock, Germany.
(7)United Neuroscience Campus Lund-Rostock (UNC), Rostock site, Rostock, 
Germany.
(8)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Women's and Children's Health, 
University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(9)Pediatric Research Institute (IRP) - Fondazione Città della Speranza, Padova, 
Italy.
(10)Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata Verona, Verona, Italy.
(11)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università 
degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Napoli, Italy.
(12)CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate Franco Salvatore, Napoli, Italy.
(13)Division of Nephrology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Department of 
Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(14)Department of Neuroscience, Biomedicine and Movement Science, University of 
Verona, Verona, Italy.
(15)Neurologische Klinik und Poliklinik, LMU Klinikum, LMU München, München, 
Germany.
(16)Department of Neurology, James J. Peters Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 
Bronx, NY, USA.
(17)Department of Neurology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York City, NY, 
USA.
(18)Department of Neurology, Martin-Luther-University of Halle-Wittenberg, Halle 
(Saale), Germany.
(19)Department of Neurology, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, School of Medicine and 
Health, Technical University of Munich, München, Germany.
(20)Goethe University, University Hospital Frankfurt, Neurological Institute 
(Edinger Institute), Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(21)Goethe University, University Hospital Frankfurt, University Cancer Center 
(UCT) Frankfurt-Marburg, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(22)Goethe University, University Hospital Frankfurt, Frankfurt Cancer Institute 
(FCI), Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(23)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Partner site Frankfurt / Mainz and German 
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(24)Mitochondria and Metabolism Imaging Core, Department of Endocrinology, 
University of California, Los Angeles, USA.
(25)Section of Anatomy and Histology, Department of Excellence in Neurosciences, 
Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(26)Department of Engineering for Innovative Medicine- DIMI, University of 
Verona, Verona, Italy. lucia.defranceschi@univr.it.
(27)Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata Verona, Verona, Italy. 
lucia.defranceschi@univr.it.

VPS13A disease (chorea-acanthocytosis), is an ultra-rare autosomal recessive 
neurodegenerative disorder caused by mutations of the VPS13A gene encoding 
Vps13A. Increased serum levels of the muscle isoform of creatine kinase 
associated with often asymptomatic muscle pathology are among the poorly 
understood early clinical manifestations of VPS13A disease. Here, we carried out 
an integrated analysis of skeletal muscle from Vps13a-/- mice and from VPS13A 
disease patient muscle biopsies. The absence of Vps13A impaired autophagy, 
resulting in pathologic metabolic remodeling characterized by cellular energy 
depletion, increased protein/lipid oxidation and a hyperactivated unfolded 
protein response. This was associated with defects in myofibril stability and 
the myofibrillar regulatory proteome, with accumulation of the myocyte 
senescence marker, NCAM1. In Vps13a-/- mice, the impairment of autophagy was 
further supported by the lacking effect of starvation alone or in combination 
with colchicine on autophagy markers. As a proof of concept, we showed that 
rapamycin treatment rescued the accumulation of terminal phase autophagy markers 
LAMP1 and p62 as well as NCAM1, supporting a connection between impaired 
autophagy and accelerated aging in the absence of VPS13A. The premature 
senescence was also corroborated by local activation of pro-inflammatory 
NF-kB-related pathways in both Vps13a-/- mice and patients with VPS13A disease. 
Our data link for the first time impaired autophagy and inflammaging with muscle 
dysfunction in the absence of VPS13A. The biological relevance of our mouse 
findings, supported by human muscle biopsy data, shed new light on the role of 
VPS13A in muscle homeostasis.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-025-01997-y
PMCID: PMC12023462
PMID: 40275365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: The Institutional Animal Experimental Committee of University of 
Verona (CIRSAL) and Italian Ministry of health approved the experimental 
protocol (56DC9.12) following European directive 2010/63/EU and the federation 
for laboratory animal science associations guidelines and recommendations. The 
muscle biopsies of patients with VPS13A disease were obtained for routine 
diagnostic reasons (P1 and P2) and postmortem (P3). Retrospective scientific use 
of remaining biopsy specimens/muscle samples was approved by the institutional 
review boards of the University Medical Center Rostock (A 2022-0058) and 
University Medicine Halle (2021 − 101). Consent for publication: Not applicable. 
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.