---
reference_id: "PMID:20598931"
title: "Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency: mechanisms, mimics and anaplerosis."
authors:
- Marin-Valencia I
- Roe CR
- Pascual JM
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.05.004
keywords:
- Animals
- Carbon/metabolism
- Humans
- Oxaloacetic Acid/metabolism
- Phenotype
- "Pyruvate Carboxylase/genetics, metabolism"
- Pyruvate Carboxylase Deficiency Disease/metabolism
- Pyruvic Acid/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency: mechanisms, mimics and anaplerosis.
**Authors:** Marin-Valencia I, Roe CR, Pascual JM
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.05.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.05.004)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2010 Sep;101(1):9-17. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.05.004. Epub
2010 Jun 9.

Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency: mechanisms, mimics and anaplerosis.

Marin-Valencia I(1), Roe CR, Pascual JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390-8813, USA.

Pyruvate carboxylase (PC) is a regulated mitochondrial enzyme that catalyzes the
conversion of pyruvate to oxaloacetate, a critical transition that replenishes
citric acid cycle intermediates and facilitates other biosynthetic reactions
that drive anabolism. Its deficiency causes multiorgan metabolic imbalance that
predominantly manifests with lactic acidemia and neurological dysfunction at an
early age. Three clinical forms of PC deficiency have been identified: an
infantile form (Type A), a severe neonatal form (Type B), and a benign form
(Type C), all of which exhibit clinical or biochemical correlates of impaired
anaplerosis. There is no effective treatment for these patients and most, except
those affected by the benign form, die in early life. We review the physiology
of this enzyme and dissect the major clinical, biochemical, and genetic aspects
of its dysfunction, emphasizing features that distinguish PC deficiency from
other causes of lactic acidemia that render PC deficiency potentially treatable
using novel interventions capable of enhancing anaplerosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.05.004
PMID: 20598931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
