---
reference_id: "PMID:11309371"
title: "Molecular pathogenesis of a disease: structural consequences of aspartylglucosaminuria mutations."
authors:
- Saarela J
- Laine M
- Oinonen C
- von Schantz C
- Jalanko A
- Rouvinen J
- Peltonen L
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.9.983
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Aspartylglucosaminuria
- "Aspartylglucosylaminase/blood, chemistry, genetics"
- Binding Sites
- "Cell Line, Transformed"
- DNA/metabolism
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Humans
- Ligands
- "Lysosomal Storage Diseases/enzymology, genetics"
- "Lysosomes/chemistry, enzymology"
- "Microscopy, Confocal"
- "Microscopy, Immunoelectron"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- Mutation/physiology
- Precipitin Tests
- Protein Conformation
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular pathogenesis of a disease: structural consequences of aspartylglucosaminuria mutations.
**Authors:** Saarela J, Laine M, Oinonen C, von Schantz C, Jalanko A, Rouvinen J, Peltonen L
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/10.9.983](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/10.9.983)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Apr 15;10(9):983-95. doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.9.983.

Molecular pathogenesis of a disease: structural consequences of
aspartylglucosaminuria mutations.

Saarela J(1), Laine M, Oinonen C, von Schantz C, Jalanko A, Rouvinen J, Peltonen
L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

A deficiency of functional aspartylglucosaminidase (AGA) causes a lysosomal
storage disease, aspartylglucosaminuria (AGU). The recessively inherited disease
is enriched in the Finnish population, where 98% of AGU alleles contain one
founder mutation, AGU(Fin). Elsewhere in the world, we and others have described
18 different sporadic AGU mutations. Many of these are predicted to interfere
with the complex intracellular maturation and processing of the AGA polypeptide.
Proper initial folding of AGA in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is dependent on
intramolecular disulfide bridge formation and dimerization of two precursor
polypeptides. The subsequent activation of AGA occurs autocatalytically in the
ER and the protein is transported via the Golgi to the lysosomal compartment
using the mannose-6-phosphate receptor pathway. Here we use the
three-dimensional structure of AGA to predict structural consequences of AGU
mutations, including six novel mutations, and make an effort to characterize
every known disease mutation by dissecting the effect of mutations on
intracellular stability, maturation, transport and the activity of AGA. Most
mutations are substitutions replacing the original amino acid with a bulkier
residue. Mutations of the dimer interface prevent dimerization in the ER,
whereas active site mutations not only destroy the activity but also affect
maturation of the precursor. Depending on their effects on the AGA polypeptide
the mutations can be categorized as mild, moderate or severe. These data
contribute to the expanding body of knowledge pertaining to molecular
pathogenesis of AGU.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/10.9.983
PMID: 11309371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
