---
reference_id: "PMID:9462749"
title: SOX10 mutations in patients with Waardenburg-Hirschsprung disease.
authors:
- Pingault V
- Bondurand N
- Kuhlbrodt K
- Goerich DE
- Préhu MO
- Puliti A
- Herbarth B
- Hermans-Borgmeyer I
- Legius E
- Matthijs G
- Amiel J
- Lyonnet S
- Ceccherini I
- Romeo G
- Smith JC
- Read AP
- Wegner M
- Goossens M
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1038/ng0298-171
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Cell Line
- DNA Transposable Elements
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Exons
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- "High Mobility Group Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Hirschsprung Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- Rats
- SOXE Transcription Factors
- Sequence Alignment
- Sequence Deletion
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- "Transcription Factors/chemistry, genetics"
- Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SOX10 mutations in patients with Waardenburg-Hirschsprung disease.
**Authors:** Pingault V, Bondurand N, Kuhlbrodt K, Goerich DE, Préhu MO, Puliti A, Herbarth B, Hermans-Borgmeyer I, Legius E, Matthijs G, Amiel J, Lyonnet S, Ceccherini I, Romeo G, Smith JC, Read AP, Wegner M, Goossens M
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0298-171](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0298-171)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1998 Feb;18(2):171-3. doi: 10.1038/ng0298-171.

SOX10 mutations in patients with Waardenburg-Hirschsprung disease.

Pingault V(1), Bondurand N, Kuhlbrodt K, Goerich DE, Préhu MO, Puliti A,
Herbarth B, Hermans-Borgmeyer I, Legius E, Matthijs G, Amiel J, Lyonnet S,
Ceccherini I, Romeo G, Smith JC, Read AP, Wegner M, Goossens M.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U468, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Creteil, France.

Waardenburg syndrome (WS; deafness with pigmentary abnormalities) and
Hirschsprung's disease (HSCR; aganglionic megacolon) are congenital disorders
caused by defective function of the embryonic neural crest. WS and HSCR are
associated in patients with Waardenburg-Shah syndrome (WS4), whose symptoms are
reminiscent of the white coat-spotting and aganglionic megacolon displayed by
the mouse mutants Dom (Dominant megacolon), piebald-lethal (sl) and lethal
spotting (ls). The sl and ls phenotypes are caused by mutations in the genes
encoding the Endothelin-B receptor (Ednrb) and Endothelin 3 (Edn3),
respectively. The identification of Sox10 as the gene mutated in Dom mice (B.H.
et al., manuscript submitted) prompted us to analyse the role of its human
homologue SOX10 in neural crest defects. Here we show that patients from four
families with WS4 have mutations in SOX10, whereas no mutation could be detected
in patients with HSCR alone. These mutations are likely to result in
haploinsufficiency of the SOX10 product. Our findings further define the locus
heterogeneity of Waardenburg-Hirschsprung syndromes, and point to an essential
role of SOX10 in the development of two neural crest-derived human cell
lineages.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0298-171
PMID: 9462749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
