---
reference_id: PMID:14612559
title: Biomagnification of cyanobacterial neurotoxins and neurodegenerative disease among the Chamorro people of Guam.
authors:
- Cox PA
- Banack SA
- Murch SJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2235808100
keywords:
- "Amino Acids, Diamino/metabolism"
- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/pathology
- Animals
- Brain/metabolism
- Chiroptera
- Cyanobacteria/metabolism
- Cyanobacteria Toxins
- Cycas/metabolism
- Dementia/pathology
- Ecosystem
- Food Chain
- Guam
- Humans
- Neurodegenerative Diseases/metabolism
- Neurotoxins/metabolism
- Parkinson Disease/pathology
- "Plant Roots/metabolism, microbiology"
- "Plants, Edible/microbiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biomagnification of cyanobacterial neurotoxins and neurodegenerative disease among the Chamorro people of Guam.
**Authors:** Cox PA, Banack SA, Murch SJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2235808100](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2235808100)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Nov 11;100(23):13380-3. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2235808100.

Biomagnification of cyanobacterial neurotoxins and neurodegenerative disease 
among the Chamorro people of Guam.

Cox PA(1), Banack SA, Murch SJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ethnobotany, National Tropical Botanical Garden, Kalaheo, HI 
96741, USA. paulcox@ntbg.org

We here report biomagnification (the increasing accumulation of bioactive, often 
deleterious molecules through higher trophic levels of a food chain) of the 
neurotoxic nonprotein amino acid beta-methylamino-l-alanine (BMAA) in the Guam 
ecosystem. Free-living cyanobacteria produce 0.3 microg/g BMAA, but produce 2-37 
microg/g as symbionts in the coralloid roots of cycad trees. BMAA is 
concentrated in the developing reproductive tissues of the cycad Cycas 
micronesica, averaging 9 microg/g in the fleshy seed sarcotesta and a mean of 
1,161 microg/g BMAA in the outermost seed layer. Flying foxes (Pteropus 
mariannus), which forage on the seeds, accumulate a mean of 3,556 microg/g BMAA. 
Flying foxes are a prized food item of the indigenous Chamorro people who boil 
them in coconut cream and eat them whole. Chamorros who die of amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis/parkinsonism-dementia complex (AL-SPDC), a neurodegenerative 
disease with symptoms similar to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson's 
disease, and Alzheimer's disease, have an average of 6.6 microg/g BMAA in their 
brain tissues. The biomagnification of BMAA through the Guam ecosystem fits a 
classic triangle of increasing concentrations of toxic compounds up the food 
chain. This may explain why the incidence of ALS-PDC among the Chamorro was 
50-100 times the incidence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis elsewhere. 
Biomagnification of cyanobacterial BMAA may not be unique to Guam; our discovery 
of BMAA in the brain tissue from Alzheimer's patients from Canada suggests 
alternative ecological pathways for the bioaccumulation of BMAA in aquatic or 
terrestrial ecosystems.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2235808100
PMCID: PMC263822
PMID: 14612559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]