---
reference_id: "PMID:33759772"
title: Biology of Melanoma.
authors:
- Ostrowski SM
- Fisher DE
journal: Hematol Oncol Clin North Am
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.hoc.2020.08.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biology of Melanoma.
**Authors:** Ostrowski SM, Fisher DE
**Journal:** Hematol Oncol Clin North Am (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hoc.2020.08.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hoc.2020.08.010)

## Content

1. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2021 Feb;35(1):29-56. doi: 
10.1016/j.hoc.2020.08.010. Epub 2020 Oct 26.

Biology of Melanoma.

Ostrowski SM(1), Fisher DE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Bartlett 6, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Bartlett 6, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA. Electronic address: 
dfisher3@partners.org.

Melanoma skin cancer is derived from skin melanocytes and has a high risk of 
metastatic spread. The era of molecular genetics and next-generation sequencing 
has uncovered the role of oncogenic BRAFV600E mutations in many melanomas, 
validated the role of ultraviolet-induced DNA mutations in melanoma formation, 
and uncovered many of the molecular events that occur during melanoma 
development. Targeted therapies and immunotherapy have dramatically improved 
outcomes and provided an increased rate of cure for metastatic melanoma. This 
article reviews the formation of melanoma, the molecular events involved in 
melanoma growth and metastasis, and the biology underlying resistance to 
melanoma therapies.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hoc.2020.08.010
PMID: 33759772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Dr D.E. Fisher has a financial 
interest in Soltego, Inc, a company developing SIK inhibitors for topical skin 
darkening treatments that might be used for a broad set of human applications. 
Dr D.E. Fisher’s interests were reviewed and are managed by Massachusetts 
General Hospital and Partners Healthcare in accordance with their conflict of 
interest policies.