---
reference_id: "PMID:39691889"
title: Unmasking Primary Carnitine Deficiency as a Mimic of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Stafford SG
- Sang CJ 3rd
- Jensen BC
- Sivak JA
- Weickert TT
journal: JACC Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.102730
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unmasking Primary Carnitine Deficiency as a Mimic of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Stafford SG, Sang CJ 3rd, Jensen BC, Sivak JA, Weickert TT
**Journal:** JACC Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.102730](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.102730)

## Content

1. JACC Case Rep. 2024 Nov 20;29(22):102730. doi: 10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.102730. 
eCollection 2024 Nov 20.

Unmasking Primary Carnitine Deficiency as a Mimic of 
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.

Stafford SG(1), Sang CJ 3rd(2), Jensen BC(2), Sivak JA(2), Weickert TT(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Primary carnitine deficiency may mimic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and be 
mistakenly attributed to genotype-negative sarcomeric protein dysfunction in 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Although rare, timely diagnosis may have 
significant implications on management and should prompt testing of family 
members.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.102730
PMCID: PMC11646912
PMID: 39691889

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Jensen has received research funding from 
grants R01 HL140067 and R01 HL165294. All other authors have reported that they 
have no relationships relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose.