---
reference_id: "PMID:32151000"
title: The Interactions between HBV and the Innate Immunity of Hepatocytes.
authors:
- Megahed FAK
- Zhou X
- Sun P
journal: Viruses
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3390/v12030285
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Interactions between HBV and the Innate Immunity of Hepatocytes.
**Authors:** Megahed FAK, Zhou X, Sun P
**Journal:** Viruses (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v12030285](https://doi.org/10.3390/v12030285)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2020 Mar 5;12(3):285. doi: 10.3390/v12030285.

The Interactions between HBV and the Innate Immunity of Hepatocytes.

Megahed FAK(1)(2), Zhou X(1), Sun P(1).

Author information:
(1)Stem Cell Research Center, Research Center for Reproductive Medicine, 
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Infectious Diseases and Molecular 
Immunopathology, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou 515041, China.
(2)Department of Nucleic Acid Researches, Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology 
Research Institute, General Autority- City of Scientific Researches and 
Technological Applications, Alexandria 21934, Egypt.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection affects ~350 million people and poses a major 
public health problem worldwide. HBV is a major cause of cirrhosis and 
hepatocellular carcinoma. Fewer than 5% of HBV-infected adults (but up to 90% of 
HBV-infected infants and children) develop chronic HBV infection as indicated by 
continued, detectable expression of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) for at 
least 6 months after the initial infection. Increasing evidence indicates that 
HBV interacts with innate immunity signaling pathways of hepatocytes to suppress 
innate immunity. However, it is still not clear how HBV avoids monitoring by the 
innate immunity of hepatocytes and whether the innate immunity of hepatocytes 
can be effective against HBV if re-triggered. Moreover, a deep understanding of 
virus-host interactions is important in developing new therapeutic strategies 
for the treatment of HBV infection. In this review, we summarize the current 
knowledge regarding how HBV represses innate immune recognition, as well as 
recent progress with respect to in vitro models for studying HBV infection and 
innate immunity.

DOI: 10.3390/v12030285
PMCID: PMC7150781
PMID: 32151000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.