---
reference_id: "PMID:38169757"
title: A Rare Case Presentation on Total Colonic Aganglionosis in a Female Infant of Indian Origin.
authors:
- Nayak K
- Khedkar K
- Gattani RG
- Shinde RK
- Durge S
- Patel D
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.49847
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Rare Case Presentation on Total Colonic Aganglionosis in a Female Infant of Indian Origin.
**Authors:** Nayak K, Khedkar K, Gattani RG, Shinde RK, Durge S, Patel D
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.49847](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.49847)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Dec 2;15(12):e49847. doi: 10.7759/cureus.49847. eCollection 2023 
Dec.

A Rare Case Presentation on Total Colonic Aganglionosis in a Female Infant of 
Indian Origin.

Nayak K(1), Khedkar K(2), Gattani RG(1), Shinde RK(1), Durge S(1), Patel D(1).

Author information:
(1)General Surgery, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe Institute of 
Higher Education & Research, Wardha, IND.
(2)Pediatric Surgery, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe Institute of 
Higher Education & Research, Wardha, IND.

Total colonic aganglionosis, also called total colonic Hirschsprung's disease, 
is a known congenital disorder caused by the migration of abnormal embryonic 
neuroblasts. RET, NRG1, and L1CAM genes are reported as pathological gene 
variants associated with the incidence of different variants of Hirschsprung's 
disease. Major clinical presentations are well documented as inefficiency to 
pass stools, vomiting, fever, persistent crying, and other features of 
intestinal obstruction. We present here the case of a two-day-old female infant 
of Indian origin and its diagnostic, clinical, and case management data.

Copyright © 2023, Nayak et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.49847
PMCID: PMC10758538
PMID: 38169757

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.