---
reference_id: "PMID:31335789"
title: Scoliosis and Cardiopulmonary Outcomes in Osteogenesis Imperfecta Patients.
authors:
- Bronheim R
- Khan S
- Carter E
- Sandhaus RA
- Raggio C
journal: Spine (Phila Pa 1976)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/BRS.0000000000003012
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- "Fractures, Compression/complications"
- Humans
- Lung/physiopathology
- "Lung Diseases/etiology, physiopathology"
- Male
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/complications
- Quality of Life
- Radiography
- Respiratory Function Tests
- "Respiratory Insufficiency/etiology, physiopathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Scoliosis/complications, diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- Spinal Fractures/complications
- Thoracic Wall/physiopathology
- Vital Capacity
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Scoliosis and Cardiopulmonary Outcomes in Osteogenesis Imperfecta Patients.
**Authors:** Bronheim R, Khan S, Carter E, Sandhaus RA, Raggio C
**Journal:** Spine (Phila Pa 1976) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BRS.0000000000003012](https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0000000000003012)

## Content

1. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2019 Aug 1;44(15):1057-1063. doi: 
10.1097/BRS.0000000000003012.

Scoliosis and Cardiopulmonary Outcomes in Osteogenesis Imperfecta Patients.

Bronheim R(1), Khan S(1), Carter E(1), Sandhaus RA(2), Raggio C(1).

Author information:
(1)Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, NY.
(2)National Jewish Health, Denver, CO.

STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective clinical study of individuals with osteogenesis 
imperfecta (OI).
OBJECTIVE: To assess the relationship between severity of scoliosis and 
pulmonary function, and to assess the relationship between restrictive lung 
disease and self-reported quality of life in individuals with OI.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: OI is a heritable connective tissue disorder 
characterized by osteopenia and a predisposition to fracture. Respiratory 
insufficiency is a leading cause of mortality. Literature on pulmonary function 
in this population has shown a negative correlation between percent-predicted 
vital capacity and severity of scoliosis. However, it has been suggested that 
decreased pulmonary function in OI may be due to intrinsic pulmonary disease, in 
addition to the impact of vertebral compression fractures and scoliosis.
METHODS: Anterior-posterior spine radiographs and pulmonary function tests from 
30 individuals with OI were reviewed. Radiographs were evaluated for scoliosis, 
defined as a curve ≥ 10°. If more than one curve was present, the largest curve 
was used. Pulmonary function was defined as the forced expiratory volume in 1 
second (FEV1)/forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio. Restrictive pulmonary disease 
was defined as FEV1/FVC > 80%, while obstructive disease was defined as 
FEV1/FVC < 70%. Bivariate correlation analysis was performed, using Spearman rho 
correlation coefficient (P < 0.05). Quality of life was assessed by SF-36.
RESULTS: The mean age was 27.6 years (range: 12-42 yrs). 57.6% were female. OI 
type IV was the most common (46.7%), followed by OI type III (33.3%), OI type I 
(10%), OI type IX (6.67% each), and OI type VIII (3.33%). Pulmonary comorbidity 
was present in 40% of individuals, while 6.67% had a cardiac comorbidity. The 
correlation between scoliosis and pulmonary function was weak and not 
significant (R = -0.059, P = 0.747).
CONCLUSION: Pulmonary function is not significantly correlated with scoliosis, 
supporting the hypothesis that decreased pulmonary function is intrinsic to OI 
and/or chest wall deformities, rather than secondary to scoliosis.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 4.

DOI: 10.1097/BRS.0000000000003012
PMID: 31335789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]