---
reference_id: "PMID:27662322"
title: Role of Glutamate and NMDA Receptors in Alzheimer's Disease.
authors:
- Wang R
- Reddy PH
journal: J Alzheimers Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3233/JAD-160763
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of Glutamate and NMDA Receptors in Alzheimer's Disease.
**Authors:** Wang R, Reddy PH
**Journal:** J Alzheimers Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JAD-160763](https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-160763)

## Content

1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017;57(4):1041-1048. doi: 10.3233/JAD-160763.

Role of Glutamate and NMDA Receptors in Alzheimer's Disease.

Wang R(1), Reddy PH(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Garrison Institute on Aging, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, 
Lubbock, TX, USA.
(2)Cell Biology & Biochemistry Department, Texas Tech University Health Sciences 
Center, Lubbock, TX, USA.
(3)Neuroscience & Pharmacology Department, Texas Tech University Health Sciences 
Center, Lubbock, TX, USA.
(4)Neurology Department, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, 
TX, USA.
(5)Speech, Language and Hearing Sciences Departments, Texas Tech University 
Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX, USA.
(6)Garrison Institute on Aging, South West Campus, Texas Tech University Health 
Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX, USA.

Excitatory glutamatergic neurotransmission via N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor 
(NMDAR) is critical for synaptic plasticity and survival of neurons. However, 
excessive NMDAR activity causes excitotoxicity and promotes cell death, 
underlying a potential mechanism of neurodegeneration occurred in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). Studies indicate that the distinct outcomes of NMDAR-mediated 
responses are induced by regionalized receptor activities, followed by different 
downstream signaling pathways. The activation of synaptic NMDARs initiates 
plasticity and stimulates cell survival. In contrast, the activation of 
extrasynaptic NMDARs promotes cell death and thus contributes to the etiology of 
AD, which can be blocked by an AD drug, memantine, an NMDAR antagonist that 
selectively blocks the function of extrasynaptic NMDARs.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-160763
PMCID: PMC5791143
PMID: 27662322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]