---
reference_id: "PMID:9443882"
title: "Analysis of the COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes by PCR amplification and scanning by conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis identifies only COL1A1 mutations in 15 patients with osteogenesis imperfecta type I: identification of common sequences of null-allele mutations."
authors:
- Körkkö J
- Ala-Kokko L
- De Paepe A
- Nuytinck L
- Earley J
- Prockop DJ
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1086/301689
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of the COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes by PCR amplification and scanning by conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis identifies only COL1A1 mutations in 15 patients with osteogenesis imperfecta type I: identification of common sequences of null-allele mutations.
**Authors:** Körkkö J, Ala-Kokko L, De Paepe A, Nuytinck L, Earley J, Prockop DJ
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1086/301689](https://doi.org/10.1086/301689)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Jan;62(1):98-110. doi: 10.1086/301689.

Analysis of the COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes by PCR amplification and scanning by 
conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis identifies only COL1A1 mutations in 
15 patients with osteogenesis imperfecta type I: identification of common 
sequences of null-allele mutations.

Körkkö J(1), Ala-Kokko L, De Paepe A, Nuytinck L, Earley J, Prockop DJ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Gene Therapy, Allegheny University of the Health Sciences, 
MCP-Hahnemann School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19102-1192, USA.

Although >90% of patients with osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) have been estimated 
to have mutations in the COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes for type I procollagen, 
mutations have been difficult to detect in all patients with the mildest forms 
of the disease (i.e., type I). In this study, we first searched for mutations in 
type I procollagen by analyses of protein and mRNA in fibroblasts from 10 
patients with mild OI; no evidence of a mutation was found in 2 of the patients 
by the protein analyses, and no evidence of a mutation was found in 5 of the 
patients by the RNA analyses. We then searched for mutations in the original 10 
patients and in 5 additional patients with mild OI, by analysis of genomic DNA. 
To assay the genomic DNA, we established a consensus sequence for the first 12 
kb of the COL1A1 gene and for 30 kb of new sequences of the 38-kb COL1A2 gene. 
The sequences were then used to develop primers for PCR for the 103 exons and 
exon boundaries of the two genes. The PCR products were first scanned for 
heteroduplexes by conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis, and then products 
containing heteroduplexes were sequenced. The results detected disease-causing 
mutations in 13 of the 15 patients and detected two additional probable 
disease-causing mutations in the remaining 2 patients. Analysis of the data 
developed in this study and elsewhere revealed common sequences for mutations 
causing null alleles.

DOI: 10.1086/301689
PMCID: PMC1376813
PMID: 9443882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]