---
reference_id: "PMID:20851655"
title: Rheumatoid anemia.
authors:
- Masson C
journal: Joint Bone Spine
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2010.05.017
keywords:
- "Anemia/epidemiology, etiology, physiopathology"
- Antimicrobial Cationic Peptides/physiology
- "Arthritis, Rheumatoid/complications"
- Hepcidins
- Humans
- Interleukin-6/physiology
- Iron/blood
- Prevalence
- Transferrin/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rheumatoid anemia.
**Authors:** Masson C
**Journal:** Joint Bone Spine (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbspin.2010.05.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbspin.2010.05.017)

## Content

1. Joint Bone Spine. 2011 Mar;78(2):131-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2010.05.017.
Epub  2010 Sep 18.

Rheumatoid anemia.

Masson C(1).

Author information:
(1)Service de Rhumatologie, pôle Ostéoarticulaire, 4 rue Larrey, CHU d'Angers, 
Angers 49933 cedex 9, France. ChMasson@chu-angers.fr

Rheumatoid anemia is a typical example of anemia of chronic disease. It differs 
from other forms of anemia, such as iron deficiency anemia or iatrogenic anemia. 
Rheumatoid anemia is normochromic, normocytic or, less often, microcytic, 
aregenerative, and accompanied with thrombocytosis. Serum transferrin levels are 
normal or low, transferrin saturation is decreased, serum ferritin levels are 
normal or high, the soluble transferrin receptor (sTfR) is not increased (a 
distinguishing feature with iron deficiency anemia), and the sTfR/log ferritin 
ratio is lower than 1. This review discusses the prevalence and impact of 
rheumatoid anemia based on a review of the literature. Iron metabolism, 
absorption, diffusion, storage, and use by the bone marrow are described using 
published data on transferrin, ferritin, and hepcidin. Hepcidin is now 
recognized as a key factor in rheumatoid anemia, in conjunction with the 
cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6). Hepcidin is a hormone that lowers serum iron 
levels and regulates iron transport across membranes, preventing iron from 
exiting the enterocytes, macrophages, and hepatocytes. In addition, hepcidin 
inhibits intestinal iron absorption and iron release from macrophages and 
hepatocytes. The action of hepcidin is mediated by binding to the iron exporter 
ferroportin. Hepcidin expression in the liver is dependent on the protein 
hemojuvelin. Inflammation leads to increased hepcidin production via IL-6, 
whereas iron deficiency and factors associated with increased erythropoiesis 
(hypoxia, bleeding, hemolysis, dyserythropoiesis) suppress the production of 
hepcidin. Data from oncology studies and the effects of recombinant human IL-6 
support a causal link between IL-6 production and the development of anemia in 
patients with chronic disease. IL-6 diminishes the proportion of nucleated 
erythroid cells in the bone marrow and lowers the serum iron level, and these 
abnormalities can be corrected by administering an IL-6 antagonist. IL-6 
stimulates hepcidin gene transcription, most notably in the hepatocytes. Studies 
involving human hepatocyte exposure to a panel of cytokines showed that IL-6, 
but not TNFα or IL-1, induced the production of hepcidin mRNA. Recent data on 
hepcidin level variations in patients with rheumatoid arthritis are reviewed. 
Rheumatoid anemia is best corrected by ensuring optimal control of systemic 
disease activity. The role for iron supplementation (per os or intravenously) 
and erythropoietin in the treatment of rheumatoid anemia is discussed. Given the 
cascade of interactions linking IL-6, hepcidin, and anemia, IL-6 antagonists 
hold considerable promise for the management of rheumatoid anemia.

Copyright © 2010 Société française de rhumatologie. Published by Elsevier SAS. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2010.05.017
PMID: 20851655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]