---
reference_id: "PMID:33224678"
title: "Babesiosis: Appreciating the Pathophysiology and Diverse Sequela of the Infection."
authors:
- Ortiz JF
- Millhouse PW
- Morillo Cox Á
- Campoverde L
- Kaur A
- Wirth M
- Atoot A
journal: Cureus
year: '2020'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.11085
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Babesiosis: Appreciating the Pathophysiology and Diverse Sequela of the Infection.
**Authors:** Ortiz JF, Millhouse PW, Morillo Cox Á, Campoverde L, Kaur A, Wirth M, Atoot A
**Journal:** Cureus (2020)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.11085](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.11085)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2020 Oct 21;12(10):e11085. doi: 10.7759/cureus.11085.

Babesiosis: Appreciating the Pathophysiology and Diverse Sequela of the
Infection.

Ortiz JF(1), Millhouse PW(2), Morillo Cox Á(3), Campoverde L(4), Kaur A(5),
Wirth M(6), Atoot A(7).

Author information:
(1)Neurology, California Institute of Behavioral Neurosciences & Psychology,
Fairfield, USA.
(2)General Practice, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, USA.
(3)Medicine, Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Quito, ECU.
(4)Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, USA.
(5)Medicine, California Institute of Behavioral Neurosciences & Psychology,
Fairfield, USA.
(6)Neurology, Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Quito, ECU.
(7)Internal Medicine, Palisades Medical Center, North Bergen, USA.

Babesiosis is a blood-borne disease found mainly in the United States caused by
a parasitic piroplasm. While most infections are mild to moderate in
immunocompetent hosts, life-threatening complications can occur in those with
significant comorbidities like congestive heart failure (CHF) or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). There is sparse literature discussing the
complications of Babesia microti infection or the pathophysiology and management
thereof. A literature review was conducted to consolidate the current knowledge
about the disease, pathophysiology, and proposed management of all potential
complications based on risk factors and other clinical information. A MeSH
cross-references strategy was employed in PubMed using the search terms
"babesia" and "babesiosis" and the established associated conditions, and the
search expanded to increase capture. Only papers written in the English language
and discussing human subjects in the North American patient population were
included. The initial search yielded 315 papers and, after applying the
inclusion/exclusion criteria, a final number of 18 was reviewed. The various
complications and pathophysiology thereof are then discussed according to organ
system. Babesia is a subversive parasite associated with a variety of
conditions. We hope a better appreciation of all potential presentations and
complications will help clinicians manage this increasingly common zoonosis and
reduce adverse effects. More research is recommended into the pathophysiology
and prevention of complications following this and other tick-borne illnesses.

Copyright © 2020, Ortiz et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.11085
PMCID: PMC7678756
PMID: 33224678

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
