---
reference_id: "PMID:35198007"
title: Identification of Novel Compound Heterozygous Variants of the PNPLA6 Gene in Boucher-Neuhäuser Syndrome.
authors:
- He J
- Liu X
- Liu L
- Zeng S
- Shan S
- Liao Z
journal: Front Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.810537
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of Novel Compound Heterozygous Variants of the PNPLA6 Gene in Boucher-Neuhäuser Syndrome.
**Authors:** He J, Liu X, Liu L, Zeng S, Shan S, Liao Z
**Journal:** Front Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2022.810537](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2022.810537)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2022 Feb 7;13:810537. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.810537. eCollection
 2022.

Identification of Novel Compound Heterozygous Variants of the PNPLA6 Gene in 
Boucher-Neuhäuser Syndrome.

He J(1), Liu X(2), Liu L(1), Zeng S(1), Shan S(1), Liao Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Aegicare Technology Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China.

Background: Boucher-Neuhäuser syndrome (BNS, MIM 215470) is a rare autosomal 
recessive syndrome caused by mutations in the PNPLA6 gene. Few BNS cases have 
been reported for functional validation at the RNA level. Herein, we report on 
the family of a 17-year-old girl with clinical characteristics of BNS, genetic 
validation, and a systematic review of PNPLA6 variants related to BNS. Methods: 
Clinical data and blood samples were collected from the patient and their 
parents, and whole-exome sequencing was performed and confirmed by Sanger 
sequencing. RNA-sequencing (RNA-Seq) and quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) were 
performed, and the three-dimensional protein structures of the variants were 
predicted. Results: We report a 17-year-old female with progressive night 
blindness since the age of four, primary amenorrhea, and non-development of 
secondary sexual characteristics. Her impaired vision was diagnosed as retinal 
pigmentary degeneration of the retina. She had congenital hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism (CHH) but no cerebellar ataxia at present. Two novel compound 
heterozygous variants (c.2241del/p.Met748TrpfsTer65 and c.2986A>G/p.Thr996Ala) 
of the PNPLA6 gene (NM_006702.4) were identified by whole-exome sequencing. The 
former variant was carried from her healthy father and has not been reported 
previously. The latter was inherited from her healthy mother and was noted in a 
report without functional studies. The RT-PCR results showed that the mRNA 
expression of PNPLA6 was lower in this patient and her father than in the 
control group. She was diagnosed with BNS. Both variants (c.2241del and 
c.2986A>G) were likely pathogenic according to the ACMG criteria. The novel 
variants in the PNPLA6 gene related to Boucher-Neuhäuser syndrome were 
summarized in this article. Conclusion: The possibility of Boucher-Neuhäuser 
syndrome should be considered when patients present with night blindness, 
impaired vision, and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Gene sequencing is currently 
the primary diagnostic method. Herein, novel compound heterozygous variants of 
PNPLA6 were identified in a BNS patient, and its function was verified at the 
RNA level. The PNPLA6 c.2241del variant is novel and potentially pathogenic, 
expanding the mutation spectrum in PNPLA6.

Copyright © 2022 He, Liu, Liu, Zeng, Shan and Liao.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.810537
PMCID: PMC8859865
PMID: 35198007

Conflict of interest statement: Author XL was employed by Aegicare Technology 
Co. Ltd., Shenzhen, China. The remaining authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.