---
reference_id: "PMID:17884680"
title: Primary-progressive multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Miller DH
- Leary SM
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(07)70243-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary-progressive multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Miller DH, Leary SM
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(07)70243-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(07)70243-0)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2007 Oct;6(10):903-12. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(07)70243-0.

Primary-progressive multiple sclerosis.

Miller DH(1), Leary SM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroinflammation, Institute of Neurology, University College 
London, London, UK. d.miller@ion.ucl.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Lancet Neurol. 2009 Aug;8(8):699.

About 10-15% of patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) present with gradually 
increasing neurological disability, a disorder known as primary-progressive 
multiple sclerosis (PPMS). Compared with relapse-onset multiple sclerosis, 
people with PPMS are older at onset and a higher proportion are men. 
Inflammatory white-matter lesions are less evident but diffuse axonal loss and 
microglial activation are seen in healthy-looking white matter, in addition to 
cortical demyelination, and quantitative MRI shows atrophy and intrinsic 
abnormalities in the grey matter and the white matter. Spinal cord atrophy 
corresponds to the usual clinical presentation of progressive spastic 
paraplegia. Although neuroaxonal degeneration seems to underlie PPMS, the 
pathogenesis and the extent to which immune-mediated mechanisms operate is 
unclear. MRI of the brain and spinal cord, and examination of the CSF, are 
important investigations for diagnosis; conventional immunomodulatory therapies, 
such as interferon beta and glatiramer acetate, are ineffective. Future research 
should focus on the clarification of the mechanisms of axonal loss, improvements 
to the design of clinical trials, and the development of effective 
neuroprotective treatments.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(07)70243-0
PMID: 17884680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]