---
reference_id: "PMID:35912848"
title: "Celiac disease and idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis: a literature review of the Lane-Hamilton syndrome."
authors:
- Tryfon S
- Papadopoulou E
- Psarros G
- Agrafiotis M
- Saroglou M
journal: Postgrad Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/00325481.2022.2109121
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Celiac disease and idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis: a literature review of the Lane-Hamilton syndrome.
**Authors:** Tryfon S, Papadopoulou E, Psarros G, Agrafiotis M, Saroglou M
**Journal:** Postgrad Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00325481.2022.2109121](https://doi.org/10.1080/00325481.2022.2109121)

## Content

1. Postgrad Med. 2022 Nov;134(8):732-742. doi: 10.1080/00325481.2022.2109121.
Epub  2022 Aug 8.

Celiac disease and idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis: a literature review of 
the Lane-Hamilton syndrome.

Tryfon S(1), Papadopoulou E(1), Psarros G(2), Agrafiotis M(3), Saroglou M(1).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Department, "G. Papanikolaou" General Hospital, Thessaloniki, 
Greece.
(2)UniPi Department, Athens, Greece.
(3)Respiratory Failure Unit, "G. Papanikolaou" General Hospital, Thessaloniki, 
Greece.

Lane-Hamilton syndrome (LHS) presents a medical emergency, with 14% mortality 
due to Idiopathic Pulmonary Hemosiderosis (IPH) in acute phase. Despite the 
clinical severity of this entity, there has been no published review in the 
international literature, resulting in lack of awareness and delayed diagnosis.A 
rigorous search of international databases yielded a total of 80 LHS cases from 
January 1971 to August 2020. We analyzed 44 children (8.56 ± 4.72 years, 21 
boys) and 36 adults (33.61 ± 13.41 years, 12 men) to present the clinical 
manifestations, radiological and immunological pattern, therapeutic approaches 
and outcome of LHS. We also elaborated on clinical and laboratory findings' 
associations to propose diagnostic indexes and clarified differences based on 
age distribution.Celiac disease (CD) and IPH diagnosis was made concurrently in 
46 patients, whereas in 21 patients, the diagnosis of LHS was delayed for 2.5y 
(3 months-11 years). Hemoptysis (n = 56, 70%), dyspnea (n = 47, 58.8%), anemia 
(n = 72, 90%), and iron deficiency (n = 54, 67.5%) were most commonly observed. 
Medical history revealed recurrent episodes of hemoptysis (n = 38) and 
persistent iron deficiency anemia (n = 25) in need of multiple blood 
transfusions or iron supplementation. Patchy infiltrate opacities to 
consolidation predominated in children, whereas bilateral diffuse ground-glass 
opacities in adults. Duodenal biopsy was performed in 66 cases (diagnostic 
87.8%), BAL in 51 (diagnostic 74.5%), and surgical lung biopsy in 20. Anti-tTG 
titer was positive in all 24 (54.6%) children and 19 (52.8%) adults that 
documented this assay. Prednisone or methylprednisolone pulse therapy and GFD 
were initiated in the acute phase, whereas chronic therapy included GFD, along 
with long-term prednisone in refractory cases. Three cases with severe 
respiratory failure or hemodynamic instability were intubated and a further 
three succumbed.A thorough understanding of LHS may reveal further diagnostic 
indexes and a consensus on therapy guidelines. Screening for CD is essential in 
all IPH cases for timely recognition and favorable outcome.

DOI: 10.1080/00325481.2022.2109121
PMID: 35912848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]