---
reference_id: "PMID:35205380"
title: "Smith-Magenis Syndrome-Clinical Review, Biological Background and Related Disorders."
authors:
- Rinaldi B
- Villa R
- Sironi A
- Garavelli L
- Finelli P
- Bedeschi MF
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes13020335
keywords:
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- "Smith-Magenis Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Trans-Activators
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Smith-Magenis Syndrome-Clinical Review, Biological Background and Related Disorders.
**Authors:** Rinaldi B, Villa R, Sironi A, Garavelli L, Finelli P, Bedeschi MF
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes13020335](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13020335)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Feb 11;13(2):335. doi: 10.3390/genes13020335.

Smith-Magenis Syndrome-Clinical Review, Biological Background and Related 
Disorders.

Rinaldi B(1), Villa R(1), Sironi A(2)(3), Garavelli L(4), Finelli P(2)(3), 
Bedeschi MF(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, 20122 Milan, Italy.
(2)Experimental Research Laboratory of Medical Cytogenetics and Molecular 
Genetics, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, IRCCS, 20145 Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, Università 
degli Studi di Milano, Segrate, 20090 Milan, Italy.
(4)Clinical Genetics Unit, Azienda USL-IRCCS of Reggio Emilia, 42123 Reggio 
Emilia, Italy.

Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS) is a complex genetic disorder characterized by 
distinctive physical features, developmental delay, cognitive impairment, and a 
typical behavioral phenotype. SMS is caused by interstitial 17p11.2 deletions 
(90%), encompassing multiple genes and including the retinoic acid-induced 1 
gene (RAI1), or by pathogenic variants in RAI1 itself (10%). RAI1 is a 
dosage-sensitive gene expressed in many tissues and acting as transcriptional 
regulator. The majority of individuals exhibit a mild-to-moderate range of 
intellectual disability. The behavioral phenotype includes significant sleep 
disturbance, stereotypes, maladaptive and self-injurious behaviors. In this 
review, we summarize current clinical knowledge and therapeutic approaches. We 
further discuss the common biological background shared with other conditions 
commonly retained in differential diagnosis.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13020335
PMCID: PMC8872351
PMID: 35205380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.