---
reference_id: "PMID:38787785"
title: VCP activator reverses nuclear proteostasis defects and enhances TDP-43 aggregate clearance in multisystem proteinopathy models.
authors:
- Phan JM
- Creekmore BC
- Nguyen AT
- Bershadskaya DD
- Darwich NF
- Mann CN
- Lee EB
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/JCI169039
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Mice
- Cell Nucleus/metabolism
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Frontotemporal Dementia/pathology, genetics, metabolism, drug therapy"
- "Intranuclear Inclusion Bodies/metabolism, pathology, genetics"
- "Myositis, Inclusion Body/metabolism, pathology, genetics, drug therapy"
- "Osteitis Deformans/metabolism, genetics, pathology, drug therapy"
- Protein Aggregates/drug effects
- Proteostasis
- "TDP-43 Proteinopathies/metabolism, pathology, genetics, drug therapy"
- "Valosin Containing Protein/metabolism, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# VCP activator reverses nuclear proteostasis defects and enhances TDP-43 aggregate clearance in multisystem proteinopathy models.
**Authors:** Phan JM, Creekmore BC, Nguyen AT, Bershadskaya DD, Darwich NF, Mann CN, Lee EB
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI169039](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI169039)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2024 May 23;134(14):e169039. doi: 10.1172/JCI169039.

VCP activator reverses nuclear proteostasis defects and enhances TDP-43
aggregate clearance in multisystem proteinopathy models.

Phan JM, Creekmore BC, Nguyen AT, Bershadskaya DD, Darwich NF, Mann CN, Lee EB.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Mar 15:2023.03.15.532082. doi: 10.1101/2023.03.15.532082.

Pathogenic variants in valosin-containing protein (VCP) cause multisystem
proteinopathy (MSP), a disease characterized by multiple clinical phenotypes
including inclusion body myopathy, Paget's disease of the bone, and
frontotemporal dementia (FTD). How such diverse phenotypes are driven by
pathogenic VCP variants is not known. We found that these diseases exhibit a
common pathologic feature: ubiquitinated intranuclear inclusions affecting
myocytes, osteoclasts, and neurons. Moreover, knock-in cell lines harboring MSP
variants show a reduction in nuclear VCP. Given that MSP is associated with
neuronal intranuclear inclusions comprised of TDP-43 protein, we developed a
cellular model whereby proteostatic stress results in the formation of insoluble
intranuclear TDP-43 aggregates. Consistent with a loss of nuclear VCP function,
cells harboring MSP variants or cells treated with VCP inhibitor exhibited
decreased clearance of insoluble intranuclear TDP-43 aggregates. Moreover, we
identified 4 compounds that activate VCP primarily by increasing D2 ATPase
activity, where pharmacologic VCP activation appears to enhance clearance of
insoluble intranuclear TDP-43 aggregate. Our findings suggest that VCP function
is important for nuclear protein homeostasis, that impaired nuclear proteostasis
may contribute to MSP, and that VCP activation may be a potential therapeutic by
virtue of enhancing the clearance of intranuclear protein aggregates.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI169039
PMCID: PMC11257039
PMID: 38787785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
