---
reference_id: "PMID:30111183"
title: Clinical and pharmacological profile of benznidazole for treatment of Chagas disease.
authors:
- Kratz JM
- Garcia Bournissen F
- Forsyth CJ
- Sosa-Estani S
journal: Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1080/17512433.2018.1509704
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and pharmacological profile of benznidazole for treatment of Chagas disease.
**Authors:** Kratz JM, Garcia Bournissen F, Forsyth CJ, Sosa-Estani S
**Journal:** Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17512433.2018.1509704](https://doi.org/10.1080/17512433.2018.1509704)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2018 Oct;11(10):943-957. doi: 
10.1080/17512433.2018.1509704. Epub 2018 Sep 19.

Clinical and pharmacological profile of benznidazole for treatment of Chagas 
disease.

Kratz JM(1), Garcia Bournissen F(2), Forsyth CJ(1), Sosa-Estani S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)a Chagas Clinical Program , Drugs for Neglected Disease initiative (DNDi) , 
Geneva , Switzerland.
(2)b Parasitology and Chagas Service , Buenos Aires Children Hospital Ricardo 
Gutiérrez , Buenos Aires , Argentina.
(3)c Epidemiology and Public Health Research Center , CONICET , Buenos Aires , 
Argentina.

Chagas disease (CD) is one of the most neglected public health problems in the 
Americas, where <1% of the estimated 6 million people with the infection have 
been diagnosed and treated. The goal of treatment is to eliminate the parasite, 
decrease the probability of cardiomyopathy and other complications during the 
chronic stage of infection, and interrupt the cycle of disease transmission by 
preventing congenital infection. Currently, only benznidazole (BZN) and 
nifurtimox are recognized by the World Health Organization as effective drugs 
for treatment of CD. In this paper, we provide an overview of the clinical 
pharmacology of BZN. Areas covered: This review covers the historical 
background, chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacokinetics, preclinical 
research, resistance, clinical research, toxicology, adverse effects, and 
current regulatory status of BZN. Expert commentary: Ongoing investigations aim 
to optimize BZN therapy by adjusting the current standard regimen or by 
combining BZN with new chemical entities. These studies are assessing 
alternatives that improve safety while maintaining or increasing the efficacy of 
BZN. Timely diagnosis and antitrypanosomal treatment are critical components of 
programs to eliminate CD as a public health problem, and can dramatically reduce 
the heavy burden of morbidity and mortality caused by the disease.

DOI: 10.1080/17512433.2018.1509704
PMID: 30111183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]