---
reference_id: "PMID:8675654"
title: IL-6 and IL-8 production from cultured human endothelial cells stimulated by infection with Rickettsia conorii via a cell-associated IL-1 alpha-dependent pathway.
authors:
- Kaplanski G
- Teysseire N
- Farnarier C
- Kaplanski S
- Lissitzky JC
- Durand JM
- Soubeyrand J
- Dinarello CA
- Bongrand P
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1172/JCI118354
keywords:
- Antibodies/pharmacology
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- "Endothelium, Vascular/immunology"
- Humans
- "Interleukin-1/immunology, pharmacology, physiology"
- Interleukin-6/biosynthesis
- Interleukin-8/biosynthesis
- Kinetics
- Rickettsia/immunology
- Time Factors
- Umbilical Veins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IL-6 and IL-8 production from cultured human endothelial cells stimulated by infection with Rickettsia conorii via a cell-associated IL-1 alpha-dependent pathway.
**Authors:** Kaplanski G, Teysseire N, Farnarier C, Kaplanski S, Lissitzky JC, Durand JM, Soubeyrand J, Dinarello CA, Bongrand P
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI118354](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI118354)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 1995 Dec;96(6):2839-44. doi: 10.1172/JCI118354.

IL-6 and IL-8 production from cultured human endothelial cells stimulated by
infection with Rickettsia conorii via a cell-associated IL-1 alpha-dependent
pathway.

Kaplanski G(1), Teysseire N, Farnarier C, Kaplanski S, Lissitzky JC, Durand JM,
Soubeyrand J, Dinarello CA, Bongrand P.

Author information:
(1)Service de Médecine Interne, Laboratoire d'Immunologie-INSERM U 387, Hôpital
Sainte-Marguerite, Marseille, France.

Mediterranean spotted fever due to infection by Rickettsia conorii, is
characterized by a general vasculitis. This vasculitis is thought to be due to a
direct injury to endothelial cells induced by R. conorii. However, production
and activity of cytokines on endothelial cells is an important pathway in
inflammation, and part of the underlying mechanism of vasculitis. In the present
studies, human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) infected with R. conorii
actively secrete high levels of IL-8 and IL-6 (P < 0.002, and P < 0.03,
respectively, compared with uninfected cells). IL-1alpha, IL-1beta, or TNFalpha
were not detected in the culture supernates. Nevertheless, IL-6 and IL-8
production was due, in a large part, to a cell-associated form of IL-1 alpha
expressed on R. conorii-infected HUVEC, since production of these cytokines was
suppressed by 80% (P = 0.0001) and 85% (P < 0.04) by the addition of IL-1
receptor antagonist, or anti-IL-1alpha antibodies (60% inhibition, P < 0.01 and
65% inhibition, P < 0.05, respectively) and IL-1alpha was measured after lysis
of R. conorii-infected HUVEC but not in uninfected cells (P < 0.01). Rickettsial
lipopolysaccharide does not seem to be involved, since polymyxin B did not
reduce cytokine secretion. On the contrary, infection by intracellular R.
conorii appears to be necessary to induce IL-1alpha and subsequently IL-8, since
formalin-fixed R. conorii did not induce cytokine production. These observations
demonstrate that R. conorii-infected HUVEC secrete IL-6 and IL-8 via the
induction of cell-associated IL-1alpha, providing a possible mechanism for the
vasculitis observed in Mediterranean spotted fever.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI118354
PMCID: PMC185994
PMID: 8675654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
