---
reference_id: "PMID:37069859"
title: Recurrent Acute Liver Failure in a Bahraini Child With a Novel Mutation of Spinocerebellar Ataxia-21.
authors:
- Isa HM
- Alkaabi JF
- Alhammadi WH
- Marjan KA
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.36249
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent Acute Liver Failure in a Bahraini Child With a Novel Mutation of Spinocerebellar Ataxia-21.
**Authors:** Isa HM, Alkaabi JF, Alhammadi WH, Marjan KA
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.36249](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.36249)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Mar 16;15(3):e36249. doi: 10.7759/cureus.36249. eCollection 2023 
Mar.

Recurrent Acute Liver Failure in a Bahraini Child With a Novel Mutation of 
Spinocerebellar Ataxia-21.

Isa HM(1)(2), Alkaabi JF(1), Alhammadi WH(1), Marjan KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Arabian Gulf University, Manama, BHR.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Salmaniya Medical Complex, Manama, BHR.

Acute liver failure (ALF) in children is a rare life-threatening condition. ALF 
is caused by different etiologies. The most common causes are drug-induced liver 
injury, infections, and metabolic diseases. Other rare causes of ALF are genetic 
disorders including spinocerebellar ataxia-21 (SCAR21). Herein, we describe the 
first Bahraini child who was diagnosed with a novel homozygous mutation in the 
SCYL1 gene. He was admitted to the hospital twice by the age of two and five 
years due to acute hepatic failure triggered by a febrile illness. Drug-induced, 
infectious causes, and metabolic diseases were excluded. The liver function then 
gradually recovered. The patient had delayed gross motor development as he 
started to walk at 20 months of age. After the first episode of ALF, he had 
progressive difficulty in walking leading to frequent falls and ending with a 
complete inability to walk. A whole-exome sequencing (WES) test revealed that 
the patient has previously unreported autosomal recessive pathogenic non-sense 
variation c.895A>T (p.Lys299Ter) in exon 7 of the SCYL1 gene in a homozygous 
status. It is confirmed that the pathogenicity of this variant in the SCYL1 gene 
was associated with SCAR21 disease.

Copyright © 2023, Isa et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.36249
PMCID: PMC10105628
PMID: 37069859

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.