---
reference_id: "PMID:27198137"
title: Renal involvement in primary antiphospholipid syndrome.
authors:
- Marcantoni C
- Emmanuele C
- Scolari F
journal: J Nephrol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s40620-016-0317-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renal involvement in primary antiphospholipid syndrome.
**Authors:** Marcantoni C, Emmanuele C, Scolari F
**Journal:** J Nephrol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40620-016-0317-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40620-016-0317-2)

## Content

1. J Nephrol. 2016 Aug;29(4):507-15. doi: 10.1007/s40620-016-0317-2. Epub 2016
May  19.

Renal involvement in primary antiphospholipid syndrome.

Marcantoni C(1), Emmanuele C(2), Scolari F(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, Ospedale Cannizzaro, Via Messina, 829, 
95126, Catania, Italy. marcantoni.carmelita@gmail.com.
(2)Pathology Unit, Ospedale Cannizzaro, Catania, Italy.
(3)Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, Ospedale di Montichiari, Spedali Civili 
di Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

Antiphospholipid syndrome is an autoimmune disorder characterized by recurrent 
venous or arterial thrombosis and/or pregnancy-related problems associated with 
persistently elevated levels of antiphospholipid antibodies. The kidney is a 
major target organ in both primary and secondary antiphospholipid syndrome. This 
review describes several aspects of the renal involvement in the primary form of 
the syndrome, in particular the histological pattern of the so-called 
antiphospholipid syndrome nephropathy (APSN). APSN is a vascular nephropathy 
characterized by small vessel vaso-occlusive lesions associated with fibrous 
intimal hyperplasia of interlobular arteries, recanalizing thrombi in arteries 
and arterioles, and focal atrophy, a constellation of morphological lesions 
suggestive of primary antiphospholipid syndrome.

DOI: 10.1007/s40620-016-0317-2
PMID: 27198137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]