---
reference_id: "PMID:17564970"
title: The novel neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis gene MFSD8 encodes a putative lysosomal transporter.
authors:
- Siintola E
- Topcu M
- Aula N
- Lohi H
- Minassian BA
- Paterson AD
- Liu XQ
- Wilson C
- Lahtinen U
- Anttonen AK
- Lehesjoki AE
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1086/518902
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Alternative Splicing
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Conserved Sequence
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Lysosomes/chemistry, metabolism"
- Male
- "Membrane Transport Proteins/analysis, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- Turkey
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The novel neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis gene MFSD8 encodes a putative lysosomal transporter.
**Authors:** Siintola E, Topcu M, Aula N, Lohi H, Minassian BA, Paterson AD, Liu XQ, Wilson C, Lahtinen U, Anttonen AK, Lehesjoki AE
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1086/518902](https://doi.org/10.1086/518902)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Jul;81(1):136-46. doi: 10.1086/518902. Epub 2007 May 14.

The novel neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis gene MFSD8 encodes a putative lysosomal
transporter.

Siintola E(1), Topcu M, Aula N, Lohi H, Minassian BA, Paterson AD, Liu XQ,
Wilson C, Lahtinen U, Anttonen AK, Lehesjoki AE.

Author information:
(1)Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Biomedicum Helsinki, P.O. Box 63
(Haartmaninkatu 8), 00014 University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

The late-infantile-onset forms are the most genetically heterogeneous group
among the autosomal recessively inherited neurodegenerative disorders, the
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs). The Turkish variant was initially
considered to be a distinct genetic entity, with clinical presentation similar
to that of other forms of late-infantile-onset NCL (LINCL), including age at
onset from 2 to 7 years, epileptic seizures, psychomotor deterioration,
myoclonus, loss of vision, and premature death. However, Turkish variant LINCL
was recently found to be genetically heterogeneous, because mutations in two
genes, CLN6 and CLN8, were identified to underlie the disease phenotype in a
subset of patients. After a genomewide scan with single-nucleotide-polymorphism
markers and homozygosity mapping in nine Turkish families and one Indian family,
not linked to any of the known NCL loci, we mapped a novel variant LINCL locus
to chromosome 4q28.1-q28.2 in five families. We identified six different
mutations in the MFSD8 gene (previously denoted "MGC33302"), which encodes a
novel polytopic 518-amino acid membrane protein that belongs to the major
facilitator superfamily of transporter proteins. MFSD8 is expressed
ubiquitously, with several alternatively spliced variants. Like the majority of
the previously identified NCL proteins, MFSD8 localizes mainly to the lysosomal
compartment. However, the function of MFSD8 remains to be elucidated. Analysis
of the genome-scan data suggests the existence of at least three more genes in
the remaining five families, further corroborating the great genetic
heterogeneity of LINCLs.

DOI: 10.1086/518902
PMCID: PMC1950917
PMID: 17564970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]