---
reference_id: "PMID:24976703"
title: "Clinical implications of hepatitis B virus mutations: recent advances."
authors:
- Lazarevic I
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i24.7653
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical implications of hepatitis B virus mutations: recent advances.
**Authors:** Lazarevic I
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v20.i24.7653](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v20.i24.7653)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Jun 28;20(24):7653-64. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v20.i24.7653.

Clinical implications of hepatitis B virus mutations: recent advances.

Lazarevic I(1).

Author information:
(1)Ivana Lazarevic, Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Belgrade, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a major cause of acute and chronic 
hepatitis, and of its long-term complications. It is the most variable among DNA 
viruses, mostly because of its unique life cycle which includes the activity of 
error-prone enzyme, reverse transcriptase, and the very high virion production 
per day. In last two decades, numerous research studies have shown that the 
speed of disease progression, reliability of diagnostic methods and the success 
of antiviral therapy and immunization are all influenced by genetic variability 
of this virus. It was shown that mutations in specific regions of HBV genome 
could be responsible for unwanted clinical outcomes or evasion of detection by 
diagnostic tools, thus making the monitoring for these mutations a necessity in 
proper evaluation of patients. The success of the vaccination programs has now 
been challenged by the discovery of mutant viruses showing amino acid 
substitutions in hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), which may lead to evasion 
of vaccine-induced immunity. However, the emergence of these mutations has not 
yet raised concern since it was shown that they develop slowly. Investigations 
of HBV genetic variability and clinical implications of specific mutations have 
resulted in significant advances over the past decade, particularly in regard to 
management of resistance to antiviral drugs. In the era of drugs with high 
genetic barrier for resistance, on-going monitoring for possible resistance is 
still essential since prolonged therapy is often necessary. Understanding the 
frequencies and clinical implications of viral mutations may contribute to 
improvement of diagnostic procedures, more proper planning of immunization 
programs and creating the most efficient therapeutic protocols.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i24.7653
PMCID: PMC4069294
PMID: 24976703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]