---
reference_id: "PMID:8475950"
title: "Lead nephropathy, gout, and hypertension."
authors:
- Batuman V
journal: Am J Med Sci
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1097/00000441-199304000-00008
keywords:
- Animals
- Edetic Acid/pharmacology
- Gout/etiology
- Humans
- Hypertension/etiology
- Kidney Diseases/etiology
- Lead/pharmacokinetics
- "Lead Poisoning/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Middle Aged
- Nephrosclerosis/etiology
- Occupational Diseases/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lead nephropathy, gout, and hypertension.
**Authors:** Batuman V
**Journal:** Am J Med Sci (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00000441-199304000-00008](https://doi.org/10.1097/00000441-199304000-00008)

## Content

1. Am J Med Sci. 1993 Apr;305(4):241-7. doi: 10.1097/00000441-199304000-00008.

Lead nephropathy, gout, and hypertension.

Batuman V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, 
Louisiana.

The EDTA (calcium disodium edetate) lead mobilization test revealed lead as the 
probable cause of renal disease in industrial lead workers and in patients with 
gout or essential hypertension. The data reviewed here demonstrate persistence 
of lead nephropathy in the contemporary scene despite the introduction of modern 
industrial and environmental exposure standards. Renal function and biopsy 
studies showed that lead nephropathy is a chronic tubulointerstitial renal 
disease with modest proteinuria which frequently presents with hyperuricemia, 
gout and hypertension. Only evaluation of body lead stores by either the EDTA 
lead mobilization test or by x-ray fluorescence is helpful in diagnosing lead 
nephropathy. While chelation therapy is safe and helpful in reversing early lead 
nephropathy, the best treatment is prevention. These studies further raise the 
possibility that chronic environmental lead poisoning and associated renal 
disease and hypertension may be a more widespread problem than suspected. 
Assessment of the true extent of chronic lead poisoning requires large scale 
epidemiological studies.

DOI: 10.1097/00000441-199304000-00008
PMID: 8475950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]