---
reference_id: "PMID:40837246"
title: "Primary Ewing Sarcoma Within an Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney: A Case Report."
authors:
- He S
- Davick J
- Rastogi P
- Kuppachi S
journal: Kidney Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.xkme.2025.101064
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary Ewing Sarcoma Within an Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney: A Case Report.
**Authors:** He S, Davick J, Rastogi P, Kuppachi S
**Journal:** Kidney Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xkme.2025.101064](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xkme.2025.101064)

## Content

1. Kidney Med. 2025 Jul 3;7(9):101064. doi: 10.1016/j.xkme.2025.101064.
eCollection  2025 Sep.

Primary Ewing Sarcoma Within an Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney: A Case 
Report.

He S(1), Davick J(2), Rastogi P(2), Kuppachi S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Transplant & Hepatobiliary Surgery, Organ 
Transplant Center, University of Iowa Health Care Medical Center, Iowa City, IA.
(2)Departments of Pathology, Carver College of Medicine, the University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, IA.
(3)Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Carver College of Medicine, the University 
of Iowa, Iowa City, IA.

Ewing sarcoma, that originates from neuroectoderm, is typically encountered in 
the bone and soft tissue of children and young adults and rarely presents as a 
primary renal tumor. Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease, which is the 
most common type of inherited kidney disease, has been debated to be associated 
with an increased risk of kidney cancer. This report describes the first 
documented case of primary Ewing sarcoma arising within an autosomal dominant 
polycystic kidney. A 44-year-old male with end-stage kidney disease secondary to 
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease presented with left flank pain. 
Imaging revealed a 14 cm heterogeneous mass in the lower pole of the polycystic 
left kidney. The patient underwent laparoscopic left nephrectomy, and pathology 
examination confirmed the diagnosis of primary Ewing sarcoma. He received 12 
cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy, including vincristine, dactinomycin, and 
cyclophosphamide. Despite treatment, disease relapse occurred 13 months after 
the initial diagnosis, and the patient died 3 months later. Primary Ewing 
sarcoma of the kidney is a rare malignancy with nonspecific clinical and imaging 
features. It is associated with a poor prognosis due to delayed diagnosis, high 
metastatic potential, and frequent recurrence.

© 2025 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xkme.2025.101064
PMCID: PMC12361746
PMID: 40837246