---
reference_id: "PMID:39748581"
title: Filsuvez(®) (Birch Triterpenes) Topical Gel.
authors:
- Gupta AK
- Mann A
- Vincent K
- Abramovits W
journal: Skinmed
year: '2024'
keywords:
- Humans
- Gels
- Double-Blind Method
- "Triterpenes/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Wound Healing/drug effects
- Epidermolysis Bullosa/drug therapy
- Female
- Male
- "Administration, Cutaneous"
- Child
- Adult
- Treatment Outcome
- "Administration, Topical"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Filsuvez(®) (Birch Triterpenes) Topical Gel.
**Authors:** Gupta AK, Mann A, Vincent K, Abramovits W
**Journal:** Skinmed (2024)

## Content

1. Skinmed. 2024 Dec 31;22(6):463-465. eCollection 2024.

Filsuvez(®) (Birch Triterpenes) Topical Gel.

Gupta AK(1)(2), Mann A(3), Vincent K(4), Abramovits W(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto School 
of Medicine, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Mediprobe Research Inc., London, Ontario, Canada; 
agupta@mediproberesearch.com.
(3)Mediprobe Research Inc., London, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Private Practice, Sevierville, TN.
(5)Baylor Scott & White University Hospital, Dallas, TX.
(6)The University of North Texas Dermatology Residency Program, Dallas, TX.

Filsuvez® (birch triterpenes) topical gel received approval in 2023 for the 
treatment of epidermolysis bullosa (EB) in pediatric patients (aged ≥6 months) 
and adults. It promotes wound healing by modulating inflammation, encouraging 
new tissue formation, and maintaining the skin barrier. In a randomized, 
double-blind, controlled, parallel-group, phase III trial (EASE, NCT03068780), 
223 patients were randomly assigned to two groups: the first group received 
treatment with birch triterpenes topical gel (study gel, n = 109), and the 
second group received treatment with vehicle gel (n = 114). The study gel or 
vehicle gel was applied as a 1-mm layer to the affected wound surface once every 
4 days for 90 days. The primary efficacy endpoint, defined as the first complete 
closure of the EB target wound by day 45, was achieved at a higher proportion in 
the study gel group (41.3% [45/109]), compared to the vehicle gel group (28.9% 
[33/114]). Application site reactions were reported in 7.3% (8/109) of patients 
in the study gel group and 6.1% (7/114) of patients in the vehicle gel group. It 
is recommended to apply as a 1-mm layer to the affected wound surface only.

PMID: 39748581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]