---
reference_id: "PMID:33475545"
title: Is anaemia frequent in HIV/AIDS patients presenting to a tertiary care hospital?
authors:
- Butt NI
- Tehseen N
- Malik T
- Aniqa Anser Tufail Khan Kakar
- Ashfaq F
- Nouman A
journal: J Pak Med Assoc
year: '2020'
doi: 10.47391/JPMA.321
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is anaemia frequent in HIV/AIDS patients presenting to a tertiary care hospital?
**Authors:** Butt NI, Tehseen N, Malik T, Aniqa Anser Tufail Khan Kakar, Ashfaq F, Nouman A
**Journal:** J Pak Med Assoc (2020)
**DOI:** [10.47391/JPMA.321](https://doi.org/10.47391/JPMA.321)

## Content

1. J Pak Med Assoc. 2020 Dec;70(12(B)):2368-2370. doi: 10.47391/JPMA.321.

Is anaemia frequent in HIV/AIDS patients presenting to a tertiary care hospital?

Butt NI(1), Tehseen N(2), Malik T(2); Aniqa Anser Tufail Khan Kakar(3); Ashfaq 
F(3), Nouman A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Chaudhary Muhammad Akram Teaching and Research 
Hospital, Azra Naheed Medical College, Lahore, Pakistan.
(2)Medical Unit II, Jinnah Hospital, Lahore, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Medicine, Azra Naheed Medical College, Lahore, Pakistan.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the frequency of anaemia among patients with human 
immune-deficiency virus / acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
METHODS: The descriptive cross-sectional single-blind study was conducted at 
Jinnah Hospital, Lahore, Pakistan, from June 25 to December 25, 2016, and 
comprised human immune-deficiency virus / acquire immunodeficiency syndrome 
patients diagnosed at least 3 months earlier. Demographic information was 
obtained along with sample of patient's blood for haemoglobin level estimation. 
Anaemia was defined as haemoglobin <13 g/dL in males and <12 g/dL in females. 
Data was analysed using SPSS 20.
RESULTS: Of the 230 patients, 100(43.7%) were females and 130(56.5%) were males. 
The overall mean age was 37.99±14.48 years. The mean haemoglobin level was 
11.08±2.44 g/dl; 113(49.1%) 8 12 g/dl, 26(11.3%) <8g/dl, and 91(39.6%) >12g/dl. 
Overall, 152(66.1%) patients were anaemic and 78(33.9%) were normal. Age and 
socioeconomic status were significantly associated with anaemia status (p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Anaemia was a common finding among human immune deficiency virus / 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome patients.

DOI: 10.47391/JPMA.321
PMID: 33475545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]