---
reference_id: "PMID:35485780"
title: "[Collagenous sprue in a patient with severe diarrhoea, malnutrition and acute renal failure]."
authors:
- Hallan A
- Jensen MD
- Hagemann-Madsen RH
- Nathan T
journal: Ugeskr Laeger
year: '2022'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Collagenous sprue in a patient with severe diarrhoea, malnutrition and acute renal failure].
**Authors:** Hallan A, Jensen MD, Hagemann-Madsen RH, Nathan T
**Journal:** Ugeskr Laeger (2022)

## Content

1. Ugeskr Laeger. 2022 Apr 18;184(16):V10210791.

[Collagenous sprue in a patient with severe diarrhoea, malnutrition and acute 
renal failure].

[Article in Danish]

Hallan A(1), Jensen MD(2), Hagemann-Madsen RH(3), Nathan T(4).

Author information:
(1)Afdeling for Medicinske Mavetarmsygdomme, Odense Universitetshospital.
(2)Gastroenterologisk Sektion, Medicinsk Afdeling, Sygehus Lillebælt, Vejle.
(3)Klinisk Patologi, Sygehus Lillebælt, Vejle.
(4)Abdominalcenteret, Københavns Universitetshospital - Bispebjerg Hospital.

Collagenous sprue is a rare enteropathy affecting the small intestinal mucosa 
and can resemble and coincide with coeliac disease or collagenous colitis. To 
our knowledge, less than 175 cases of collagenous sprue have been described. 
Both clinicians and pathologists should be aware of the condition in order to 
adequately target their investigations and treatment. This is a case report of 
severe collagenous sprue in a 78-year-old male resulting in severe diarrhoea, 
weight loss, malnutrition and acute kidney failure. The disorder improved on a 
lactose and gluten-free diet, loperamide and corticosteroids.

PMID: 35485780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]