---
reference_id: "PMID:30266153"
title: Alagille Syndrome.
authors:
- Mitchell E
- Gilbert M
- Loomes KM
journal: Clin Liver Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2018.06.001
keywords:
- "Alagille Syndrome/complications, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Jagged-1 Protein/genetics
- Liver Transplantation
- "Receptor, Notch2/genetics"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alagille Syndrome.
**Authors:** Mitchell E, Gilbert M, Loomes KM
**Journal:** Clin Liver Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cld.2018.06.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cld.2018.06.001)

## Content

1. Clin Liver Dis. 2018 Nov;22(4):625-641. doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2018.06.001. Epub 
2018 Aug 22.

Alagille Syndrome.

Mitchell E(1), Gilbert M(2), Loomes KM(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Children's 
Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, 4401 Penn 
Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15224, USA.
(2)Division of Genomic Diagnostics, Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, 3615 Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA.
(3)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, 3401 Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA; Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, 3400 Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. 
Electronic address: LOOMES@email.chop.edu.

Alagille syndrome is a complex multisystem autosomal dominant disorder with a 
wide variability in penetrance of clinical features. A majority of patients have 
pathogenic mutations in either the JAG1 gene, encoding a Notch pathway ligand, 
or the receptor NOTCH2. No genotype-phenotype correlations have been found in 
any organ system. Liver disease is a major cause of morbidity in this 
population, whereas cardiac and vascular involvement accounts for most of the 
mortality. Current therapies are supportive, but the future is promising for the 
development of targeted interventions to augment Notch pathway signaling in 
involved tissues.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cld.2018.06.001
PMID: 30266153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]