---
reference_id: "PMID:39020349"
title: "Enzyme replacement therapy and immunotherapy lead to significant functional improvement in two children with Pompe disease: a case report."
authors:
- Castellar-Leones SM
- Ortiz-Corredor F
- Manrique-Hernández D
- Sánchez-Peñarete D
- Ruiz-Ospina E
- Soto-Peña D
- Correa-Arrieta C
journal: J Med Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13256-024-04638-5
keywords:
- Humans
- Glycogen Storage Disease Type II/drug therapy
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy
- Female
- Infant
- alpha-Glucosidases/therapeutic use
- Methotrexate/therapeutic use
- Child
- Treatment Outcome
- Immunotherapy/methods
- Immunoglobulin G
- Recombinant Proteins/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enzyme replacement therapy and immunotherapy lead to significant functional improvement in two children with Pompe disease: a case report.
**Authors:** Castellar-Leones SM, Ortiz-Corredor F, Manrique-Hernández D, Sánchez-Peñarete D, Ruiz-Ospina E, Soto-Peña D, Correa-Arrieta C
**Journal:** J Med Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13256-024-04638-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13256-024-04638-5)

## Content

1. J Med Case Rep. 2024 Jul 18;18(1):328. doi: 10.1186/s13256-024-04638-5.

Enzyme replacement therapy and immunotherapy lead to significant functional
improvement in two children with Pompe disease: a case report.

Castellar-Leones SM(1)(2)(3), Ortiz-Corredor F(4)(5)(6)(7), Manrique-Hernández
D(8), Sánchez-Peñarete D(9), Ruiz-Ospina E(4)(5), Soto-Peña D(7), Correa-Arrieta
C(5)(7).

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Carrera 30 No. 45-03.
Edificio 471, Piso 5to, Of. 513-A, Bogotá, Colombia. smcastellarl@unal.edu.co.
(2)Centro de Investigación en Fisiatría y Electrodiagnóstico, CIFEL, Bogotá,
Colombia. smcastellarl@unal.edu.co.
(3)Hospital Universitario Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá, Colombia.
smcastellarl@unal.edu.co.
(4)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Carrera 30 No. 45-03.
Edificio 471, Piso 5to, Of. 513-A, Bogotá, Colombia.
(5)Centro de Investigación en Fisiatría y Electrodiagnóstico, CIFEL, Bogotá,
Colombia.
(6)Hospital Universitario Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá, Colombia.
(7)Instituto Roosevelt, Bogotá, Colombia.
(8)Universidad de la Sabana, Chía, Colombia.
(9)Hospital Universitario San Ignacio, Bogotá, Colombia.

BACKGROUND: Pompe disease, a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by acid
alpha-glucosidase deficiency, results in progressive glycogen accumulation and
multisystem dysfunction. Enzyme replacement therapy with recombinant human acid
alpha-glucosidase is the standard of care; however, some patients develop
anti-recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase antibodies, leading to reduced
efficacy. This case report presents two infants with early-onset Pompe disease
who developed IgG antibodies to enzyme replacement therapy and were subsequently
treated with methotrexate, highlighting the importance of monitoring antibody
development and exploring alternative therapeutic approaches.
CASE PRESENTATION: Patient 1, a 10-month-old female from Bogota, Colombia,
presented with generalized hypotonia, macroglossia, hyporeflexia, and mild left
ventricular hypertrophy. Diagnostic tests confirmed early-onset Pompe disease,
and enzyme replacement therapy was started at 12 months. Due to a lack of
improvement and high anti-recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase IgG antibody
titers (1:1800), methotrexate was started at 18 months. After 8 months of
combined therapy, antibody titers were negative and significant improvement in
motor function was observed using the Gross Motor Function Measure 88. Patient
2, a 7-year-old female from Bogota, Colombia, was diagnosed with early-onset
Pompe disease at 12 months and initiated enzyme replacement therapy. At 5 years
of age, she experienced frequent falls and grip strength alterations. Functional
tests revealed motor development delay, generalized hypotonia, and positive
anti-recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase IgG antibody titers (6400).
Methotrexate was initiated, leading to a reduction in falls and antibody titers
(3200) after 6 months, with no adverse events or complications. Motor function
improvement was assessed using the Motor Function Measurement 32.
CONCLUSIONS: The presented cases highlight the importance of monitoring patients
for anti-recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase antibody development during
enzyme replacement therapy and the potential benefit of methotrexate as an
immunomodulatory agent in early-onset Pompe disease. Early diagnosis and timely
initiation of enzyme replacement therapy, combined with prophylactic immune
tolerance induction, may improve clinical outcomes and reduce the development of
anti-recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase antibodies. The cases also
highlight the importance of objective motor function assessment tools, such as
Gross Motor Function Measure 88 and Motor Function Measurement 32, in assessing
treatment response. Further research is needed to optimize treatment regimens,
monitor long-term effects, and address the current limitations of enzyme
replacement therapy in Pompe disease.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13256-024-04638-5
PMCID: PMC11256466
PMID: 39020349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
