---
reference_id: "PMID:33009129"
title: GFR slope as a surrogate endpoint for CKD progression in clinical trials.
authors:
- Inker LA
- Chaudhari J
journal: Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1097/MNH.0000000000000647
keywords:
- Bayes Theorem
- Biomarkers
- Disease Progression
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Humans
- Male
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GFR slope as a surrogate endpoint for CKD progression in clinical trials.
**Authors:** Inker LA, Chaudhari J
**Journal:** Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MNH.0000000000000647](https://doi.org/10.1097/MNH.0000000000000647)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2020 Nov;29(6):581-590. doi: 
10.1097/MNH.0000000000000647.

GFR slope as a surrogate endpoint for CKD progression in clinical trials.

Inker LA(1), Chaudhari J.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: There is a paucity of therapies for chronic kidney disease 
(CKD), in part because of the slow nature of the disease which poses challenges 
in selection of endpoints in randomized controlled trials (RCT). There is 
increasing evidence for the use of glomerular filtration rate (GFR)-based 
endpoints either as percentage decline using time-to-event analyses, or as 
difference in slope between treatment arms. We reviewed the rationale for using 
surrogate endpoints and optimal methods for their evaluation prior to their use 
and evidence for GFR-based endpoints and particularly GFR slope as validated 
surrogate endpoints and considerations for their use in RCTs.
RECENT FINDINGS: In an individual patient meta-analysis of 47 studies (60 620 
participants), treatment effects on the clinical endpoint were accurately 
predicted from treatment effects on 3-year total slope [median R = 0.97 (95% 
Bayesian confidence interval (BCI), 0.78-1.00] and on the chronic slope [R = 
0.96 (95% BCI, 0.63-1.00)]. In a simulation study, GFR slope substantially 
reduced the required sample size and duration of follow-up compared to the 
clinical endpoint given high baseline GFR and absence of acute treatment effect. 
In the presence of acute effect, results were more complicated.
SUMMARY: GFR decline is accepted, and GFR slope is being considered, by 
regulatory authorities as a validated surrogate endpoint for CKD RCTs.

DOI: 10.1097/MNH.0000000000000647
PMID: 33009129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]