---
reference_id: "PMID:41226667"
title: Impact of Isoquinoline Alkaloids on the Intestinal Barrier in a Colonic Model of Campylobacter jejuni Infection.
authors:
- Duda-Madej A
- Gagat P
- Wiśniewski J
- Viscardi S
- Krzyżek P
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/ijms262110634
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of Isoquinoline Alkaloids on the Intestinal Barrier in a Colonic Model of Campylobacter jejuni Infection.
**Authors:** Duda-Madej A, Gagat P, Wiśniewski J, Viscardi S, Krzyżek P
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms262110634](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms262110634)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2025 Oct 31;26(21):10634. doi: 10.3390/ijms262110634.

Impact of Isoquinoline Alkaloids on the Intestinal Barrier in a Colonic Model of 
Campylobacter jejuni Infection.

Duda-Madej A(1), Gagat P(2), Wiśniewski J(3), Viscardi S(4), Krzyżek P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Wroclaw Medical University, 
Chałubińskiego 4, 50-368 Wroclaw, Poland.
(2)Faculty of Biotechnology, University of Wroclaw, Fryderyka Joliot-Curie 14a, 
50-137 Wroclaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Faculty of 
Chemistry, Wroclaw University of Science and Technology, 50-370 Wroclaw, Poland.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Wroclaw Medical University, Ludwika Pasteura 1, 50-367 
Wroclaw, Poland.

Phytotherapy is a growing field of modern medicine, offering natural 
alternatives with multidirectional pharmacological effects. Among plant-derived 
bioactive compounds, isoquinoline alkaloids exhibit antioxidant, 
anti-inflammatory, and antimicrobial properties. Our in vitro model of 
campylobacteriosis confirmed that berberine reduces pathological changes in 
colonocytes not only through its direct antibacterial (minimum inhibitory 
concentration for pure berberine against Campylobacter jejuni was 64 μg/mL) and 
anti-biofilm (fourfold reduction in C. jejuni biomass) effects, but also through 
its protective effect on the morphostructure and secretory profile of host cells 
exposed to bacterial components. Furthermore, berberine stabilized intercellular 
junction proteins, modulated bile acid and arachidonic acid metabolism, and 
supported host-protective signaling pathways. These findings indicate that 
berberine acts through a dual mechanism-directly reducing bacterial virulence 
while enhancing intestinal barrier integrity and metabolic homeostasis. In 
summary, berberine appears to be a multifunctional phytochemical in the 
development of new strategies for the prevention and treatment of C. 
jejuni-induced gastrointestinal infections and epithelial barrier dysfunctions. 
The protective effect we have demonstrated may contribute to alleviating the 
phenomenon of "leaky gut," commonly associated with campylobacteriosis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms262110634
PMCID: PMC12609152
PMID: 41226667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.