---
reference_id: "PMID:36317783"
title: Safety and Efficacy of a Monoclonal Antibody against Malaria in Mali.
authors:
- Kayentao K
- Ongoiba A
- Preston AC
- Healy SA
- Doumbo S
- Doumtabe D
- Traore A
- Traore H
- Djiguiba A
- Li S
- Peterson ME
- Telscher S
- Idris AH
- Kisalu NK
- Carlton K
- Serebryannyy L
- Narpala S
- McDermott AB
- Gaudinski M
- Traore S
- Cisse H
- Keita M
- Skinner J
- Hu Z
- Zéguimé A
- Ouattara A
- Doucoure M
- Dolo A
- Djimdé A
- Traore B
- Seder RA
- Crompton PD
- Mali Malaria mAb Trial Team
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2206966
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety and Efficacy of a Monoclonal Antibody against Malaria in Mali.
**Authors:** Kayentao K, Ongoiba A, Preston AC, Healy SA, Doumbo S, Doumtabe D, Traore A, Traore H, Djiguiba A, Li S, Peterson ME, Telscher S, Idris AH, Kisalu NK, Carlton K, Serebryannyy L, Narpala S, McDermott AB, Gaudinski M, Traore S, Cisse H, Keita M, Skinner J, Hu Z, Zéguimé A, Ouattara A, Doucoure M, Dolo A, Djimdé A, Traore B, Seder RA, Crompton PD, Mali Malaria mAb Trial Team
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2206966](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2206966)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2022 Nov 17;387(20):1833-1842. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2206966. Epub 
2022 Oct 31.

Safety and Efficacy of a Monoclonal Antibody against Malaria in Mali.

Kayentao K(1), Ongoiba A(1), Preston AC(1), Healy SA(1), Doumbo S(1), Doumtabe 
D(1), Traore A(1), Traore H(1), Djiguiba A(1), Li S(1), Peterson ME(1), Telscher 
S(1), Idris AH(1), Kisalu NK(1), Carlton K(1), Serebryannyy L(1), Narpala S(1), 
McDermott AB(1), Gaudinski M(1), Traore S(1), Cisse H(1), Keita M(1), Skinner 
J(1), Hu Z(1), Zéguimé A(1), Ouattara A(1), Doucoure M(1), Dolo A(1), Djimdé 
A(1), Traore B(1), Seder RA(1), Crompton PD(1); Mali Malaria mAb Trial Team.

Collaborators: Diakite D, Kalossi I, Keita M, Somboro AAP, Sylla M, Traore S, 
M'Barakou A, Fofana B, Sacko S, Konate M, Togara A, Traore L, Traore LK, Diarra 
D, Diarra M, Kassogue B, Konare B, Konare M, Konare B, Konate CO, Togora HO, 
Doumbia F, Konare Y, Coulibaly S, Adams W, France B, Poole CJ, Bajwa K, Buyyani 
L, Lange T, Duvenhage M, Kress DR, Namawejje M, Tang P, Tartakovsky M, Whalen C, 
Xiao J, Balde A, Buehn M, Cahill K, Francella S, Frary S, Gulati N, Harmon L, 
Jankelevich S, Kopka S, Le K, Miller T, Opher V, Simpson S, Teitelbaum M, Young 
K, Kayentao K, Ongoiba A, Preston AC, Healy SA, Doumbo S, Doumtabe D, Telscher 
S, Idris AH, Kisalu NK, Carlton K, McDermott AB, Gaudinski M, Hu Z, Zéguimé A, 
Dolo A, Djimdé A, Traore B, Seder RA, Crompton PD, Traore A, Traore H, Djiguiba 
A, Li S, Peterson ME, Serebryannyy L, Narpala S, Traore S, Cisse H, Keita M, 
Ouattara A, Doucoure M, Skinner J.

Author information:
(1)From the Malaria Research and Training Center, Mali International Center for 
Excellence in Research, University of Sciences, Techniques, and Technologies of 
Bamako, Bamako, Mali (K.K., A. Ongoiba, S.D., D.D., A.T., H.T., A. Djiguiba, S. 
Traore, H.C., M.K., A.Z., A. Ouattara, M.D., A. Dolo, A. Djimdé, B.T.); and the 
Malaria Infection Biology and Immunity Section, Laboratory of Immunogenetics, 
Division of Intramural Research (A.C.P., S.A.H., S.L., M.E.P., J.S., P.D.C.), 
and the Biostatistics Research Branch, Division of Clinical Research (Z.H.), 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), Rockville, and the Vaccine Research Center, NIAID, 
NIH, Bethesda (S. Telscher, A.H.I., N.K.K., K.C., L.S., S.N., A.B.M., M.G., 
R.A.S.) - all in Maryland.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2022 Nov 17;387(20):1898-1899. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe2213148.

BACKGROUND: CIS43LS is a monoclonal antibody that was shown to protect against 
controlled Plasmodium falciparum infection in a phase 1 clinical trial. Whether 
a monoclonal antibody can prevent P. falciparum infection in a region in which 
the infection is endemic is unknown.
METHODS: We conducted a phase 2 trial to assess the safety and efficacy of a 
single intravenous infusion of CIS43LS against P. falciparum infection in 
healthy adults in Mali over a 6-month malaria season. In Part A, safety was 
assessed at three escalating dose levels. In Part B, participants were randomly 
assigned (in a 1:1:1 ratio) to receive 10 mg of CIS43LS per kilogram of body 
weight, 40 mg of CIS43LS per kilogram, or placebo. The primary efficacy end 
point, assessed in a time-to-event analysis, was the first P. falciparum 
infection detected on blood-smear examination, which was performed at least 
every 2 weeks for 24 weeks. At enrollment, all the participants received 
artemether-lumefantrine to clear possible P. falciparum infection.
RESULTS: In Part B, 330 adults underwent randomization; 110 were assigned to 
each trial group. The risk of moderate headache was 3.3 times as high with 40 mg 
of CIS43LS per kilogram as with placebo. P. falciparum infections were detected 
on blood-smear examination in 39 participants (35.5%) who received 10 mg of 
CIS43LS per kilogram, 20 (18.2%) who received 40 mg of CIS43LS per kilogram, and 
86 (78.2%) who received placebo. At 6 months, the efficacy of 40 mg of CIS43LS 
per kilogram as compared with placebo was 88.2% (adjusted 95% confidence 
interval [CI], 79.3 to 93.3; P<0.001), and the efficacy of 10 mg of CIS43LS per 
kilogram as compared with placebo was 75.0% (adjusted 95% CI, 61.0 to 84.0; 
P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: CIS43LS was protective against P. falciparum infection over a 
6-month malaria season in Mali without evident safety concerns. (Funded by the 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases; ClinicalTrials.gov 
number, NCT04329104.).

Copyright © 2022 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2206966
PMCID: PMC9881676
PMID: 36317783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]