---
reference_id: "PMID:40404610"
title: The patient-specific mouse model with Foxg1 frameshift mutation provides insights into the pathophysiology of FOXG1 syndrome.
authors:
- Jeon S
- Park J
- Moon JH
- Shin D
- Li L
- "O'Shea H"
- Hwang SU
- Lee HJ
- Brimble E
- Lee JW
- Clark SD
- Lee SK
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-59838-4
keywords:
- Animals
- "Forkhead Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mice
- Humans
- Frameshift Mutation/genetics
- Male
- Neurons/metabolism
- Cell Movement/genetics
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- Phenotype
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The patient-specific mouse model with Foxg1 frameshift mutation provides insights into the pathophysiology of FOXG1 syndrome.
**Authors:** Jeon S, Park J, Moon JH, Shin D, Li L, O'Shea H, Hwang SU, Lee HJ, Brimble E, Lee JW, Clark SD, Lee SK
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-025-59838-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-59838-4)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2025 May 22;16(1):4760. doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-59838-4.

The patient-specific mouse model with Foxg1 frameshift mutation provides
insights into the pathophysiology of FOXG1 syndrome.

Jeon S(#)(1)(2)(3), Park J(#)(4)(5), Moon JH(#)(4)(5)(6), Shin D(4)(5), Li
L(4)(5), O'Shea H(4)(5), Hwang SU(4)(5), Lee HJ(7), Brimble E(8)(9), Lee
JW(4)(5), Clark SD(10), Lee SK(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Arts and Sciences, University
at Buffalo, The State University of New York (SUNY), Buffalo, New York, USA.
shin.jeon@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(2)FOXG1 Research Center, University at Buffalo, The State University of New
York (SUNY), Buffalo, NY, USA. shin.jeon@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(3)Department of Systems Pharmacology & Translational Therapeutics, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.
shin.jeon@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Arts and Sciences, University
at Buffalo, The State University of New York (SUNY), Buffalo, New York, USA.
(5)FOXG1 Research Center, University at Buffalo, The State University of New
York (SUNY), Buffalo, NY, USA.
(6)Samsung Genome Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea.
(7)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do, South Korea.
(8)FOXG1 Research Foundation, Port Washington, New York, USA.
(9)Citizen Health, San Francisco, California, USA.
(10)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University at Buffalo, The State
University of New York (SUNY), Buffalo, NY, USA.
(11)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Arts and Sciences, University
at Buffalo, The State University of New York (SUNY), Buffalo, New York, USA.
slee229@buffalo.edu.
(12)FOXG1 Research Center, University at Buffalo, The State University of New
York (SUNY), Buffalo, NY, USA. slee229@buffalo.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    Res Sq. 2023 Jun 02:rs.3.rs-2953760. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-2953760/v1.
    bioRxiv. 2025 Jan 22:2025.01.21.634140. doi: 10.1101/2025.01.21.634140.

Single allelic mutations in the FOXG1 gene lead to FOXG1 syndrome (FS). To
understand the pathophysiology of FS, which vary depending on FOXG1 mutation
types, patient-specific animal models are critical. Here, we report a
patient-specific Q84Pfs heterozygous (Q84Pfs-Het) mouse model, which
recapitulates various FS phenotypes across cellular, brain structural, and
behavioral levels. Q84Pfs-Het cortex shows dysregulations of genes controlling
cell proliferation, neuronal projection and migration, synaptic assembly, and
synaptic vesicle transport. The Q84Pfs allele produces the N-terminal fragment
of FOXG1 (Q84Pfs protein) in Q84Pfs-Het mouse brains, which forms intracellular
speckles, interacts with FOXG1 full-length protein, and triggers the
sequestration of FOXG1 to distinct subcellular domains. Q84Pfs protein promotes
the radial glial cell identity and suppresses neuronal migration in the cortex.
Our study uncovers the role of the FOXG1 fragment from FS-causing FOXG1 variants
and identifies the genes involved in FS-like cellular and behavioral phenotypes,
providing insights into the pathophysiology of FS.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-025-59838-4
PMCID: PMC12099012
PMID: 40404610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Elise Brimble is a salaried
employee of Citizen Health and holds vested and unvested stock options. All
other authors declare no competing interests.
