---
reference_id: "PMID:35170460"
title: Severity of dengue illness and presence of anti DV IgG in serum of laboratory confirmed dengue cases.
authors:
- Jain A
- Khan DN
- Prakash O
- Shukla S
- Prakash S
- Verma AK
journal: J Vector Borne Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.4103/0972-9062.325637
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severity of dengue illness and presence of anti DV IgG in serum of laboratory confirmed dengue cases.
**Authors:** Jain A, Khan DN, Prakash O, Shukla S, Prakash S, Verma AK
**Journal:** J Vector Borne Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0972-9062.325637](https://doi.org/10.4103/0972-9062.325637)

## Content

1. J Vector Borne Dis. 2021 Jul-Sep;58(3):228-231. doi: 10.4103/0972-9062.325637.

Severity of dengue illness and presence of anti DV IgG in serum of laboratory 
confirmed dengue cases.

Jain A(1), Khan DN(1), Prakash O(1), Shukla S(1), Prakash S(1), Verma AK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, King George's Medical University, Lucknow, India.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: Presence of dengue is reported from India since 1960s. 
Secondary dengue infection may be more severe than primary, hence, distinction 
between primary and secondary dengue is essential. A way to detect secondary 
dengue is demonstration of anti DV IgG in patients' serum. In this study we 
explored the association of dengue severity with anti DV IgG positivity.
METHODS: Laboratory confirmed cases of dengue (positive for anti DV IgM/ NS-1 
Antigen/ DV -RNA), presenting to the hospital within 7 days of illness, were 
consecutively enrolled for a period of one month (September 1-30, 2018) and were 
tested for anti DV IgG in their serum. All PCR positive samples were serotyped. 
Cases positive for anti-dengue IgG were labeled as secondary cases. Clinical 
details were collected to assess the severity of illness. Association of dengue 
severity with anti DV IgG positivity was calculated.
RESULTS: Of the 128 dengue positive cases, 89 (69.5%) were anti DV IgM positive, 
72 (56.3%) were Dengue NS-1 positives and 37 (28.9%) were DV-RNA positive. Only 
39 (30.5%) cases were having detectable anti-dengue IgG in their serum 
(secondary dengue). Anti-dengue IgM positivity was significantly higher in 
secondary dengue cases. No association of anti DV IgG positivity was seen with 
severity of dengue illness.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSION: No association of IgG positivity with severity of 
illness was seen. D4 serotype is first time reported from Uttar Pradesh, India.

DOI: 10.4103/0972-9062.325637
PMID: 35170460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None