---
reference_id: "PMID:35686687"
title: "Intermittent selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors for premenstrual syndromes: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised trials."
authors:
- Reilly TJ
- Wallman P
- Clark I
- Knox CL
- Craig MC
- Taylor D
journal: J Psychopharmacol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/02698811221099645
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Antidepressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Premenstrual Syndrome/drug therapy
- Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intermittent selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors for premenstrual syndromes: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised trials.
**Authors:** Reilly TJ, Wallman P, Clark I, Knox CL, Craig MC, Taylor D
**Journal:** J Psychopharmacol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/02698811221099645](https://doi.org/10.1177/02698811221099645)

## Content

1. J Psychopharmacol. 2023 Mar;37(3):261-267. doi: 10.1177/02698811221099645.
Epub  2022 Jun 10.

Intermittent selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors for premenstrual syndromes: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised trials.

Reilly TJ(1), Wallman P(2), Clark I(2), Knox CL(3), Craig MC(4)(5), Taylor 
D(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(2)Pharmacy Department, Maudsley Hospital, South London and Maudsley NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(3)Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(4)Department of Forensic & Neurodevelopmental Sciences, Institute of 
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(5)National Female Hormone Clinic, South London and Maudsley National Health 
Service Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(6)Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, King's College London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Intermittent (luteal phase) dosing of selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors is one treatment strategy for premenstrual syndromes such as 
premenstrual dysphoric disorder. This avoids the risk of the antidepressant 
withdrawal syndrome associated with long-term continuous dosing.
AIMS: To compare intermittent dosing to continuous dosing in terms of efficacy 
and acceptability.
METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, 
MEDLINE, EMBASE, PsycINFO, PubMed and CINAHL for randomised trials of 
intermittent compared with continuous dosing of selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors in premenstrual syndromes. We extracted response rates, dropout rates 
and changes in symptom scores. We used random effects meta-analyses to pool 
study-level data and calculated odds ratio for dichotomous data and standardised 
mean difference for continuous data. Risk of bias was assessed using the 
Cochrane risk-of-bias tool. The study was registered with PROSPERO 
(CRD42020224176).
RESULTS: A total of 1841 references were identified, with eight studies being 
eligible for analysis, consisting of a total of 460 participants. All included 
studies provided response rates, six provided dropout rates and five provided 
symptom scores. There was no statistically significant differences between 
intermittent and continuous dosing in terms of response rate (odds ratio: 1.0, 
95% confidence interval (CI): 0.23-4.31, I2 = 71%), dropout rate (odds ratio 
1.26, 95% CI: 0.39-4.09, I2 = 33%) or symptom change (standardised mean 
difference: 0.04, 95% CI: -0.27 to 0.35, I2 = 39%). All studies had a moderate 
or high risk of bias.
CONCLUSION: Since intermittent dosing avoids the potential for withdrawal 
symptoms, it should be considered more commonly in this patient population.

DOI: 10.1177/02698811221099645
PMCID: PMC10074750
PMID: 35686687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared the following potential 
conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship and/or 
publication of this article: D.T. reports personal fees from Lundbeck and grants 
and personal fees from Janssen, outside the submitted work. The remaining 
authors report no competing interests.