---
reference_id: "PMID:40597333"
title: Respiratory oscillometry in individuals with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
authors:
- Vasileva A
- Wu JKY
- Valaee M
- Ortiz E
- Hantos Z
- Tile L
- Ho I
- Cheung AM
- Chow CW
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03846-6
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Oscillometry/methods
- Adult
- "Myositis Ossificans/physiopathology, diagnosis"
- Spirometry
- Respiratory Function Tests/methods
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Respiratory oscillometry in individuals with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
**Authors:** Vasileva A, Wu JKY, Valaee M, Ortiz E, Hantos Z, Tile L, Ho I, Cheung AM, Chow CW
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-025-03846-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-025-03846-6)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2025 Jul 1;20(1):323. doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03846-6.

Respiratory oscillometry in individuals with fibrodysplasia ossificans
progressiva.

Vasileva A(1), Wu JKY(1)(2), Valaee M(1), Ortiz E(1), Hantos Z(3), Tile
L(4)(5)(6)(7), Ho I(4)(5), Cheung AM(4)(5)(6)(7), Chow CW(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Respirology, Department of Medicine, University Health Network,
585 University Avenue, 11 PMB 130, Toronto, ON, M5G 2N2, Canada.
(2)Toronto General-Pulmonary Function Laboratory, University Health Network,
Toronto, Canada.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Therapy, Semmelweis University,
Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, University
Health Network, Toronto, Canada.
(5)Osteoporosis Program, University Health Network and Sinai Health System,
Toronto, Canada.
(6)Temerty Faculty of Medicine, Centre of Excellence in Skeletal Health
Assessment, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(7)Department of Medicine, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada.
(8)Division of Respirology, Department of Medicine, University Health Network,
585 University Avenue, 11 PMB 130, Toronto, ON, M5G 2N2, Canada.
chung-wai.chow@uhn.ca.
(9)Department of Medicine, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada. chung-wai.chow@uhn.ca.

BACKGROUND: Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) is an ultra-rare genetic
bone disease that is characterized by progressive heterotopic ossification of
the thoracic cavity. Prognosis is poor with cardiopulmonary complications being
the main cause of death. Spirometry is a well-established metric of functional
exercise capacity and prognosis in lung diseases but its use is limited in this
population. Accuracy and validity of spirometry is dependent on forced
expiratory maneuvers which are difficult to perform for individuals with FOP.
Oscillometry is an effort-independent pulmonary function test that is highly
sensitive to changes in respiratory mechanics. Little is known about
oscillometry in individuals with FOP. The purpose of this paper is to
characterize FOP using oscillometry.
RESULTS: Eight participants with FOP were recruited for oscillometry prior to
spirometry. Cumulative Analogue Joint Involvement Scale (CAJIS) scores were used
to evaluate total body and regional FOP burden. Spirometry showed a uniform
pattern of restrictive physiology in all eight participants with no significant
difference amongst the group. Oscillometry revealed significant diversity in
respiratory mechanics and chest wall involvement from normal, airway obstruction
and ventilatory inhomogeneity to extra-thoracic airflow obstruction. We compared
individuals with normal and abnormal oscillometry and found no statistically
significant differences in functional status and clinical parameters. However,
there is a tendency for lower CAJIS scores and fewer recent flare-ups in those
with more normal respiratory mechanics. The tidal volumes were significantly
higher in the group with more normal respiratory mechanics. Two
wheelchair-dependent participants exhibited a pattern of high respiratory
resistance that increased during both inspiration and expiration, to suggest
presence of a fixed extra-thoracic defect.
CONCLUSIONS: Oscillometry provides additional, more detailed information beyond
spirometry in individuals with FOP. It is far easier than spirometry to complete
and may be useful to help track disease progression and response to therapies in
individuals with FOP.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-025-03846-6
PMCID: PMC12211171
PMID: 40597333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to
participate: This study was approved by the University Health Network (UHN)
Research Ethics Board (#19–5582 and 17–5652). The participants provided their
written informed consent to participate in this study. Consent for publication:
Not applicable. Competing interests: AMC: consultant fees Ipsen, grants to UHN
from Ipsen and Incyte for the clinical trials in FOP; CWC: speaker honoraria
from AstraZeneca Canada and Covis Pharma, investigator-initiated research grant
from Thorasys Thoracic Medical Devices Corp. (held at UHN); JW: speaker
honoraria from Covis Pharma; consultant fees from Thorasys Thoracic Medical
Devices Corp; ZH: consultant fees from Thorasys Thoracic Medical Devices Corp
and Piston Medical Ltd.
