---
reference_id: "PMID:7490327"
title: Immunohistochemical analysis of T cell proliferation in normal tonsil and B cell lymphoma.
authors:
- Wang J
- Isaacson PG
- Spencer J
journal: J Clin Pathol
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1136/jcp.48.9.873
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunohistochemical analysis of T cell proliferation in normal tonsil and B cell lymphoma.
**Authors:** Wang J, Isaacson PG, Spencer J
**Journal:** J Clin Pathol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jcp.48.9.873](https://doi.org/10.1136/jcp.48.9.873)

## Content

1. J Clin Pathol. 1995 Sep;48(9):873-5. doi: 10.1136/jcp.48.9.873.

Immunohistochemical analysis of T cell proliferation in normal tonsil and B cell 
lymphoma.

Wang J(1), Isaacson PG, Spencer J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Histopathology, University College of London Medical School.

A double immunohistochemical technique, incorporating MIB1 and CD3, was used to 
identify proliferating T cells in paraffin wax sections of normal tonsil and B 
cell lymphomas. The number of double stained T cells as a percentage of the 
total T cells was then determined. In normal tonsil and follicular lymphoma the 
follicle centre and T cell zones were counted independently. In normal tonsil 
very few T cells in the follicle centre expressed MIB1. Proliferating T cells 
were concentrated in the T cell zones. The same pattern was observed in 
follicular lymphoma. In contrast, the percentage of T cells expressing MIB1 was 
higher in mucosa associated lymphoid tissue type lymphoma and lymphocytic 
lymphoma, suggesting that T cell activation occurs in these tumours. The highest 
percentage of MIB1 positive T cells was observed in high grade lymphoma. This 
suggests that transformation to high grade lymphoma is associated with an 
increase in T cell activation.

DOI: 10.1136/jcp.48.9.873
PMCID: PMC502882
PMID: 7490327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]