---
reference_id: "PMID:35242566"
title: Hematopoietic cell transplantation for sialidosis type I.
authors:
- Gupta AO
- Patterson MC
- Wood T
- Eisengart JB
- Orchard PJ
- Lund TC
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2021.100832
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hematopoietic cell transplantation for sialidosis type I.
**Authors:** Gupta AO, Patterson MC, Wood T, Eisengart JB, Orchard PJ, Lund TC
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2021.100832](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2021.100832)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2021 Dec 8;30:100832. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2021.100832.
eCollection 2022 Mar.

Hematopoietic cell transplantation for sialidosis type I.

Gupta AO(1), Patterson MC(2), Wood T(3), Eisengart JB(4), Orchard PJ(1), Lund
TC(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplantation, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, United States of America.
(2)Division of Child and Adolescent Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(3)Biochemical Genetics Laboratory, Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC
29646, United States of America.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical Behavioral Neuroscience,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

We report the clinical and laboratory follow-up data of an adolescent female
with Type I Sialidosis who underwent bone marrow transplant (BMT). After BMT,
plasma and urine biomarkers responded concurrently with engraftment.
Neuropsychiatry data showed preservation in some domains, but she did have
overall decline in motor performance. Sialidosis is a very rare lysosomal
condition, and we believe this to be the first report of a case of Type I
Sialidosis undergoing BMT.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2021.100832
PMCID: PMC8856904
PMID: 35242566
