---
reference_id: "PMID:38678257"
title: "Diagnostic and referral pathways in patients with rare lipodystrophy and insulin-resistance syndromes: key milestones assessed from a national reference center."
authors:
- Donadille B
- Janmaat S
- Mosbah H
- Belalem I
- Lamothe S
- Nedelcu M
- Jannot AS
- Christin-Maitre S
- Fève B
- Vatier C
- Vigouroux C
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03173-2
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Insulin Resistance/physiology
- "Lipodystrophy/diagnosis, metabolism"
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- France
- Adolescent
- Referral and Consultation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic and referral pathways in patients with rare lipodystrophy and insulin-resistance syndromes: key milestones assessed from a national reference center.
**Authors:** Donadille B, Janmaat S, Mosbah H, Belalem I, Lamothe S, Nedelcu M, Jannot AS, Christin-Maitre S, Fève B, Vatier C, Vigouroux C
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03173-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03173-2)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Apr 27;19(1):177. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03173-2.

Diagnostic and referral pathways in patients with rare lipodystrophy and 
insulin-resistance syndromes: key milestones assessed from a national reference 
center.

Donadille B(1), Janmaat S(2), Mosbah H(2)(3), Belalem I(2), Lamothe S(2), 
Nedelcu M(2), Jannot AS(4), Christin-Maitre S(2)(5), Fève B(2)(3), Vatier 
C(2)(3), Vigouroux C(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Saint-Antoine Hospital, Reference Center for Rare Diseases of Insulin 
Secretion and Insulin Sensitivity (PRISIS), Department of Endocrinology, 
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), 184 rue du Faubourg 
Saint-Antoine, 75012, Paris, France. bruno.donadille@aphp.fr.
(2)Saint-Antoine Hospital, Reference Center for Rare Diseases of Insulin 
Secretion and Insulin Sensitivity (PRISIS), Department of Endocrinology, 
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), 184 rue du Faubourg 
Saint-Antoine, 75012, Paris, France.
(3)Saint-Antoine Research Center, Institute of CardioMetabolism and Nutrition 
(ICAN), Sorbonne University, Inserm UMR_S 938, Paris, France.
(4)Banque Nationale de Données Maladies Rares, DSN-I&D, APHP, Paris, France.
(5)Sorbonne Université, Inserm UMR_S 933, Paris, France.
(6)Saint-Antoine Hospital, Reference Center for Rare Diseases of Insulin 
Secretion and Insulin Sensitivity (PRISIS), Department of Endocrinology, 
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), 184 rue du Faubourg 
Saint-Antoine, 75012, Paris, France. corinne.vigouroux@aphp.fr.
(7)Saint-Antoine Research Center, Institute of CardioMetabolism and Nutrition 
(ICAN), Sorbonne University, Inserm UMR_S 938, Paris, France. 
corinne.vigouroux@aphp.fr.

BACKGROUND: Rare syndromes of lipodystrophy and insulin-resistance display 
heterogeneous clinical expressions. Their early recognition, diagnosis and 
management are required to avoid long-term complications.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to evaluate the patients' age at referral to our dedicated 
national reference center in France and their elapsed time from first symptoms 
to diagnosis and access to specialized care.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analyzed data from patients with rare lipodystrophy and 
insulin-resistance syndromes referred to the coordinating PRISIS reference 
center (Adult Endocrine Department, Saint-Antoine Hospital, AP-HP, Paris), 
prospectively recorded between 2018 and 2023 in the French National Rare Disease 
Database (BNDMR, Banque Nationale de Données Maladies Rares).
RESULTS: A cohort of 292 patients was analyzed, including 208 women, with the 
following diagnosis: Familial Partial LipoDystrophy (FPLD, n = 124, including 
n = 67 FPLD2/Dunnigan Syndrome); Acquired lipodystrophy syndromes (n = 98, with 
n = 13 Acquired Generalized Lipodystrophy, AGL); Symmetric cervical 
adenolipomatosis (n = 27, Launois-Bensaude syndrome, LB), Congenital generalized 
lipodystrophy (n = 18, CGL) and other rare severe insulin-resistance syndromes 
(n = 25). The median age at referral was 47.6 years [IQR: 31-60], ranging from 
25.2 (CGL) to 62.2 years old (LB). The median age at first symptoms of 27.6 
years old [IQR: 16.8-42.0]) and the median diagnostic delay of 6.4 years [IQR: 
1.3-19.5] varied among diagnostic groups. The gender-specific expression of 
lipodystrophy is well-illustrated in the FPLD2 group (91% of women), presenting 
with first signs at 19.3 years [IQR: 14.4-27.8] with a diagnostic delay of 10.5 
years [IQR: 1.8-27.0].
CONCLUSION: The national rare disease database provides an important tool for 
assessment of care pathways in patients with lipodystrophy and rare 
insulin-resistance syndromes in France. Improving knowledge to reduce diagnostic 
delay is an important objective of the PRISIS reference center.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03173-2
PMCID: PMC11056061
PMID: 38678257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.