---
reference_id: "PMID:37629092"
title: Alterations of Oligodendrocyte and Myelin Energy Metabolism in Multiple Sclerosis.
authors:
- López-Muguruza E
- Matute C
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms241612912
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alterations of Oligodendrocyte and Myelin Energy Metabolism in Multiple Sclerosis.
**Authors:** López-Muguruza E, Matute C
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms241612912](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241612912)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Aug 18;24(16):12912. doi: 10.3390/ijms241612912.

Alterations of Oligodendrocyte and Myelin Energy Metabolism in Multiple 
Sclerosis.

López-Muguruza E(1)(2)(3), Matute C(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Achucarro Basque Center for Neuroscience, 48940 Leioa, Spain.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, 48940 
Leioa, Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Sobre Enfermedades 
Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), 28031 Madrid, Spain.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a complex autoimmune disease of the central nervous 
system (CNS), characterized by demyelination and neurodegeneration. 
Oligodendrocytes play a vital role in maintaining the integrity of myelin, the 
protective sheath around nerve fibres essential for efficient signal 
transmission. However, in MS, oligodendrocytes become dysfunctional, leading to 
myelin damage and axonal degeneration. Emerging evidence suggests that metabolic 
changes, including mitochondrial dysfunction and alterations in glucose and 
lipid metabolism, contribute significantly to the pathogenesis of MS. 
Mitochondrial dysfunction is observed in both immune cells and oligodendrocytes 
within the CNS of MS patients. Impaired mitochondrial function leads to energy 
deficits, affecting crucial processes such as impulse transmission and axonal 
transport, ultimately contributing to neurodegeneration. Moreover, mitochondrial 
dysfunction is linked to the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), 
exacerbating myelin damage and inflammation. Altered glucose metabolism affects 
the energy supply required for oligodendrocyte function and myelin synthesis. 
Dysregulated lipid metabolism results in changes to the composition of myelin, 
affecting its stability and integrity. Importantly, low levels of 
polyunsaturated fatty acids in MS are associated with upregulated lipid 
metabolism and enhanced glucose catabolism. Understanding the intricate 
relationship between these mechanisms is crucial for developing targeted 
therapies to preserve myelin and promote neurological recovery in individuals 
with MS. Addressing these metabolic aspects may offer new insights into 
potential therapeutic strategies to halt disease progression and improve the 
quality of life for MS patients.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241612912
PMCID: PMC10454078
PMID: 37629092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as potential conflict of interest.