---
reference_id: "PMID:36851785"
title: Fragment-Based Approaches Identified Tecovirimat-Competitive Novel Drug Candidate for Targeting the F13 Protein of the Monkeypox Virus.
authors:
- Ali Y
- Imtiaz H
- Tahir MM
- Gul F
- Saddozai UAK
- Ur Rehman A
- Ren ZG
- Khattak S
- Ji XY
journal: Viruses
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/v15020570
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fragment-Based Approaches Identified Tecovirimat-Competitive Novel Drug Candidate for Targeting the F13 Protein of the Monkeypox Virus.
**Authors:** Ali Y, Imtiaz H, Tahir MM, Gul F, Saddozai UAK, Ur Rehman A, Ren ZG, Khattak S, Ji XY
**Journal:** Viruses (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v15020570](https://doi.org/10.3390/v15020570)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2023 Feb 19;15(2):570. doi: 10.3390/v15020570.

Fragment-Based Approaches Identified Tecovirimat-Competitive Novel Drug 
Candidate for Targeting the F13 Protein of the Monkeypox Virus.

Ali Y(1)(2), Imtiaz H(3), Tahir MM(4), Gul F(1), Saddozai UAK(2), Ur Rehman 
A(5), Ren ZG(6), Khattak S(2), Ji XY(2)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Bioinformatics, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad 45320, 
Pakistan.
(2)Henan International Joint Laboratory for Nuclear Protein Regulation, School 
of Basic Medical Sciences, Henan University, Kaifeng 475004, China.
(3)Tehsil Headquarter Hospital Bhera, Sargodha, Punjab 40540, Pakistan.
(4)District Headquarter Hospital Faisalabad, Punjab 38000, Pakistan.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California 
Irvine, Irvine, CA 2697-3900, USA.
(6)The First Affiliated Hospital, Henan University, Kaifeng 475004, China.
(7)Kaifeng Key Laboratory for Infectious Diseases and Biosafety, Kaifeng 475004, 
China.
(8)Faculty of Basic Medical Subjects, Shu-Qing Medical College of Zhengzhou, 
Mazhai, Erqi District, Zhengzhou 450064, China.

Monkeypox is a serious public health issue in tropical and subtropical areas. 
Antivirals that target monkeypox proteins might lead to more effective and 
efficient therapy. The F13 protein is essential for the growth and maturation of 
the monkeypox virus. F13 inhibition might be a viable therapeutic target for 
monkeypox. The in silico fragment-based drug discovery method for developing 
antivirals may provide novel therapeutic options. In this study, we generated 
800 compounds based on tecovirimat, an FDA-approved drug that is efficacious at 
nanomolar quantities against monkeypox. These compounds were evaluated to 
identify the most promising fragments based on binding affinity and 
pharmacological characteristics. The top hits from the chemical screening were 
docked into the active site of the F13 protein. Molecular dynamics simulations 
were performed on the top two probable new candidates from molecular docking. 
The ligand-enzyme interaction analysis revealed that the C2 ligand had lower 
binding free energy than the standard ligand tecovirimat. Water bridges, among 
other interactions, were shown to stabilize the C2 molecule. Conformational 
transitions and secondary structure changes in F13 protein upon C2 binding show 
more native three-dimensional folding of the protein. Prediction of 
pharmacological properties revealed that compound C2 may be promising as a drug 
candidate for monkeypox fever. However, additional in vitro and in vivo testing 
is required for validation.

DOI: 10.3390/v15020570
PMCID: PMC9959752
PMID: 36851785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.