---
reference_id: "PMID:33597073"
title: Medical Advice for Travelers.
authors:
- Wendt S
- Beier D
- Paquet D
- Trawinski H
- Fuchs A
- Lübbert C
journal: Dtsch Arztebl Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3238/arztebl.m2021.0127
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medical Advice for Travelers.
**Authors:** Wendt S, Beier D, Paquet D, Trawinski H, Fuchs A, Lübbert C
**Journal:** Dtsch Arztebl Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3238/arztebl.m2021.0127](https://doi.org/10.3238/arztebl.m2021.0127)

## Content

1. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2021 May 28;118(21):349–356. doi:
10.3238/arztebl.m2021.0127.

Medical Advice for Travelers.

Wendt S, Beier D, Paquet D, Trawinski H, Fuchs A, Lübbert C.

Comment in
    Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2022 Jan 10;119(1-2):10. doi: 10.3238/arztebl.m2022.0004.
    Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2022 Jan 10;119(1-2):10. doi: 10.3238/arztebl.m2022.0005.

BACKGROUND: In 2019, 1.5 billion international tourist trips were counted 
worldwide. Germany, with 70.8 million vacations lasting ≥ 5 days, was one of the 
populations most willing to travel. These days, even elderly and multimorbid 
persons regularly travel long-distance, which can be associated with significant 
health risks. By advising travelers and implementing preventive measures, the 
risk of illness can be reduced significantly.
METHODS: A selective survey of PubMed was performed to identify publications on 
medical advice for travelers between 2000 and 2020. We included guidelines, 
studies, and recommendations that mainly deal with the preventive aspects of 
travel medicine and have a high level of practical relevance and the highest 
possible level of evidence. Previously published guidelines (based on the GRADE 
criteria) were adopted, and recommendations not based on the results of 
scientific studies were characterized as Good Clinical Practice (GCP).
RESULTS: Many medical recommendations for travelers still rely on 
individualized, experience-based, or consensus-based assessments. Apart from a 
review of medical history and vaccination status, a risk analysis is performed, 
travel fitness is evaluated individually, and a prevention plan is designed. 
Particular attention is devoted to malaria prophylaxis, vector protection, and 
traveler's diarrhea. Medical advice before travel is especially important for 
the elderly, children, pregnant women, the chronically ill, long-term and 
adventure travelers as well as migrants from malaria-endemic areas who are 
returning home.
CONCLUSION: The health risks associated with travel can be minimized by 
specialist medical advice. Many recommendations are empirical in nature and 
require further research.

DOI: 10.3238/arztebl.m2021.0127
PMCID: PMC8372008
PMID: 33597073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]