---
reference_id: "PMID:17893250"
title: "The clinical, pathological, and genetic features of familial isolated pituitary adenomas."
authors:
- Beckers A
- Daly AF
journal: Eur J Endocrinol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1530/EJE-07-0348
keywords:
- "Adenoma/genetics, pathology"
- Family
- "Growth Hormone-Secreting Pituitary Adenoma/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Inheritance Patterns
- "Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 1/genetics, pathology"
- "Pituitary Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The clinical, pathological, and genetic features of familial isolated pituitary adenomas.
**Authors:** Beckers A, Daly AF
**Journal:** Eur J Endocrinol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1530/EJE-07-0348](https://doi.org/10.1530/EJE-07-0348)

## Content

1. Eur J Endocrinol. 2007 Oct;157(4):371-82. doi: 10.1530/EJE-07-0348.

The clinical, pathological, and genetic features of familial isolated pituitary
adenomas.

Beckers A(1), Daly AF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Liège,
Domaine Universitaire du Sart Tilman, University of Liège, 4000 Liège, Belgium.
albert.beckers@chu.ulg.ac.be

Pituitary adenomas occur in a familial setting in multiple endocrine neoplasia
type 1 (MEN1) and Carney's complex (CNC), which occur due to mutations in the
genes MEN1 and PRKAR1A respectively. Isolated familial somatotropinoma (IFS) is
also a well-described clinical syndrome related only to patients with
acrogigantism. Pituitary adenomas of all types--not limited to IFS--can occur in
a familial setting in the absence of MEN1 and CNC; this phenotype is termed
familial isolated pituitary adenomas (FIPA). Over the past 7 years, we have
described over 90 FIPA kindreds. In FIPA, both homogeneous and heterogeneous
pituitary adenoma phenotypes can occur within families; virtually all FIPA
kindreds contain at least one prolactinoma or somatotropinoma. FIPA differs from
MEN1 in terms of a lower proportion of prolactinomas and more frequent
somatotropinomas in the FIPA cohort. Patients with FIPA are significantly
younger at diagnosis and have significantly larger pituitary adenomas than
matched sporadic pituitary adenoma counterparts. A minority of FIPA families
overall (15%) exhibit mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting
protein (AIP) gene; AIP mutations are present in only half of IFS kindreds
occurring as part of the FIPA cohort. In families with AIP mutations, pituitary
adenomas have a penetrance of over 50%. AIP mutations are extremely rare in
patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas. This review deals with pituitary
adenomas that occur in a familial setting, describes in detail the clinical,
pathological, and genetic features of FIPA, and addresses aspects of the
clinical approach to FIPA families with and without AIP mutations.

DOI: 10.1530/EJE-07-0348
PMID: 17893250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
