---
reference_id: "PMID:39221877"
title: "Synchronous multiple primary malignancies or transdifferentiation?-A diagnostic challenge in a case of Xeroderma pigmentosum."
authors:
- Kanna SM
- Sandeepa S
- Mukund KN
- Nirupama M
- Bhargavi KN
- Minal J
journal: Indian J Pathol Microbiol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.4103/ijpm.ijpm_324_24
keywords:
- Humans
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- Cheek/pathology
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Hemangiosarcoma/diagnosis, pathology"
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Melanoma/diagnosis, pathology"
- Microscopy
- "Neoplasms, Multiple Primary/diagnosis, pathology"
- Scalp/pathology
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology"
- "Xeroderma Pigmentosum/complications, diagnosis, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Synchronous multiple primary malignancies or transdifferentiation?-A diagnostic challenge in a case of Xeroderma pigmentosum.
**Authors:** Kanna SM, Sandeepa S, Mukund KN, Nirupama M, Bhargavi KN, Minal J
**Journal:** Indian J Pathol Microbiol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.4103/ijpm.ijpm_324_24](https://doi.org/10.4103/ijpm.ijpm_324_24)

## Content

1. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2025 Jul 1;68(3):616-619. doi:
10.4103/ijpm.ijpm_324_24. Epub 2024 Sep 2.

Synchronous multiple primary malignancies or transdifferentiation?-A diagnostic
challenge in a case of Xeroderma pigmentosum.

Kanna SM(1), Sandeepa S(1), Mukund KN(2), Nirupama M(1), Bhargavi KN(1), Minal
J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Dr. Chandramma Dayananda Sagar Institute of Medical
Education and Research, Dayananda Sagar University, Ramanagara, Karnataka,
India.
(2)Department of Surgery, Dr. Chandramma Dayananda Sagar Institute of Medical
Education and Research, Dayananda Sagar University, Ramanagara, Karnataka,
India.

A diagnosis of synchronous tumors is always questionable when they show similar
histology. We present a case of synchronous tumors, i.e. melanoma (MM) arising
from the scalp and angiosarcoma (AS) from the cheek in a patient of Xeroderma
pigmentosum (XP). The presence of melanin in AS of the cheek led to a
differential diagnosis and a possibility of transdifferentiation of malignant
melanoma in the first instance. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was negative for
melanoma markers (Melan A, SOX-10 & S 100) and positive for vascular markers
(ERG, CD31 & CD34) ruling out transdifferentiation and concluding the cheek
swelling as angiosarcoma. The presence of non-cutaneous malignancies is rare in
XP and the presence of MM in a nearby site and the melanin pigment in the
cutaneous malignancy mislead the diagnosis. The morphology of the tumor was the
key which led to the further workup of the case.

Copyright © 2024 Indian Journal of Pathology and Microbiology.

DOI: 10.4103/ijpm.ijpm_324_24
PMID: 39221877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
