---
reference_id: "PMID:36356370"
title: Unraveling the therapeutic potential of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1) in human diseases.
authors:
- Zhang L
- Zou Y
- Lu Y
- Li Z
- Gao F
journal: Bioorg Chem
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2022.106253
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unraveling the therapeutic potential of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1) in human diseases.
**Authors:** Zhang L, Zou Y, Lu Y, Li Z, Gao F
**Journal:** Bioorg Chem (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bioorg.2022.106253](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioorg.2022.106253)

## Content

1. Bioorg Chem. 2023 Jan;130:106253. doi: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2022.106253. Epub 2022
 Nov 5.

Unraveling the therapeutic potential of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1) 
in human diseases.

Zhang L(1), Zou Y(2), Lu Y(2), Li Z(2), Gao F(3).

Author information:
(1)Sichuan Engineering Research Center for Biomimetic Synthesis of Natural 
Drugs, School of Life Science and Engineering, Southwest Jiaotong University, 
Chengdu 610031, China. Electronic address: zhanglanx_9@126.com.
(2)Sichuan Engineering Research Center for Biomimetic Synthesis of Natural 
Drugs, School of Life Science and Engineering, Southwest Jiaotong University, 
Chengdu 610031, China.
(3)Sichuan Engineering Research Center for Biomimetic Synthesis of Natural 
Drugs, School of Life Science and Engineering, Southwest Jiaotong University, 
Chengdu 610031, China. Electronic address: gaof@swjtu.edu.cn.

CPS1, the rate-limiting enzyme that controls the first reaction of the urea 
cycle, is responsible for converting toxic ammonia into non-toxic urea in 
mammals. While disruption of the functions of CPS1 leads to elevated ammonia and 
nerve damage in the body, mainly manifested as urea cycle disorder. Moreover, 
accumulating evidence has recently revealed that CPS1 is involved in a variety 
of human diseases, including CPS1D, cardiovascular disease, cancers, and others. 
In particular, CPS1 expression varies among cancers, being overexpressed in some 
cancers and downregulated in others, suggesting that CPS1 may be a promising 
cancer therapeutic target. In addition, some small-molecule inhibitors of CPS1 
have been reported, which have not been confirmed experimentally in 
malignancies, meaning their future role is far from certain. In this review, we 
describe the structure and function of CPS1, highlight its important roles in 
various human diseases, and further discuss the potential diagnostic and 
therapeutic implications of small molecule compounds targeting CPS1.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2022.106253
PMID: 36356370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.