---
reference_id: "PMID:28672841"
title: Clinicopathological Phenotype and Genetics of X-Linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism (XDP; DYT3; Lubag).
authors:
- Kawarai T
- Morigaki R
- Kaji R
- Goto S
journal: Brain Sci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3390/brainsci7070072
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathological Phenotype and Genetics of X-Linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism (XDP; DYT3; Lubag).
**Authors:** Kawarai T, Morigaki R, Kaji R, Goto S
**Journal:** Brain Sci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3390/brainsci7070072](https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci7070072)

## Content

1. Brain Sci. 2017 Jun 26;7(7):72. doi: 10.3390/brainsci7070072.

Clinicopathological Phenotype and Genetics of X-Linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism 
(XDP; DYT3; Lubag).

Kawarai T(1), Morigaki R(2)(3)(4), Kaji R(5)(6), Goto S(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, 
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Tokushima University, Tokushima 770-8503, 
Japan. tkawarai@tokushima-u.ac.jp.
(2)Parkinson's Disease and Dystonia Research Center, Tokushima University 
Hospital, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan. morigakiryoma@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Neurodegenerative Disorders Research, Institute of Biomedical 
Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Tokushima University, Tokushima 
770-8503, Japan. morigakiryoma@hotmail.com.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Graduate School 
of Medical Sciences, Tokushima University, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan. 
morigakiryoma@hotmail.com.
(5)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, 
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Tokushima University, Tokushima 770-8503, 
Japan. rkaji@tokushima-u.ac.jp.
(6)Parkinson's Disease and Dystonia Research Center, Tokushima University 
Hospital, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan. rkaji@tokushima-u.ac.jp.
(7)Parkinson's Disease and Dystonia Research Center, Tokushima University 
Hospital, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan. sgoto@tokushima-u.ac.jp.
(8)Department of Neurodegenerative Disorders Research, Institute of Biomedical 
Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Tokushima University, Tokushima 
770-8503, Japan. sgoto@tokushima-u.ac.jp.

X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism (XDP; OMIM314250), also referred to as DYT3 
dystonia or "Lubag" disease, was first described as an endemic disease in the 
Philippine island of Panay. XDP is an adult-onset movement disorder 
characterized by progressive and severe dystonia followed by overt parkinsonism 
in the later years of life. Among the primary monogenic dystonias, XDP has been 
identified as a transcriptional dysregulation syndrome with impaired expression 
of the TAF1 (TATA box-binding protein associated factor 1) gene, which is a 
critical component of the cellular transcription machinery. The major 
neuropathology of XDP is progressive neuronal loss in the neostriatum (i.e., the 
caudate nucleus and putamen). XDP may be used as a human disease model to 
elucidate the pathomechanisms by which striatal neurodegeneration leads to 
dystonia symptoms. In this article, we introduce recent advances in the 
understanding of the interplay between pathophysiology and genetics in XDP.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci7070072
PMCID: PMC5532585
PMID: 28672841

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.