---
reference_id: "PMID:35044471"
title: "Comparison of Prolonged Exposure vs Cognitive Processing Therapy for Treatment of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Among US Veterans: A Randomized Clinical Trial."
authors:
- Schnurr PP
- Chard KM
- Ruzek JI
- Chow BK
- Resick PA
- Foa EB
- Marx BP
- Friedman MJ
- Bovin MJ
- Caudle KL
- Castillo D
- Curry KT
- Hollifield M
- Huang GD
- Chee CL
- Astin MC
- Dickstein B
- Renner K
- Clancy CP
- Collie C
- Maieritsch K
- Bailey S
- Thompson K
- Messina M
- Franklin L
- Lindley S
- Kattar K
- Luedtke B
- Romesser J
- McQuaid J
- Sylvers P
- Varkovitzky R
- Davis L
- MacVicar D
- Shih MC
journal: JAMA Netw Open
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.36921
keywords:
- Adult
- Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
- Female
- Humans
- Implosive Therapy
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Stress Disorders, Post-Traumatic/therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
- United States
- Veterans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of Prolonged Exposure vs Cognitive Processing Therapy for Treatment of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Among US Veterans: A Randomized Clinical Trial.
**Authors:** Schnurr PP, Chard KM, Ruzek JI, Chow BK, Resick PA, Foa EB, Marx BP, Friedman MJ, Bovin MJ, Caudle KL, Castillo D, Curry KT, Hollifield M, Huang GD, Chee CL, Astin MC, Dickstein B, Renner K, Clancy CP, Collie C, Maieritsch K, Bailey S, Thompson K, Messina M, Franklin L, Lindley S, Kattar K, Luedtke B, Romesser J, McQuaid J, Sylvers P, Varkovitzky R, Davis L, MacVicar D, Shih MC
**Journal:** JAMA Netw Open (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.36921](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.36921)

## Content

1. JAMA Netw Open. 2022 Jan 4;5(1):e2136921. doi: 
10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.36921.

Comparison of Prolonged Exposure vs Cognitive Processing Therapy for Treatment 
of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Among US Veterans: A Randomized Clinical Trial.

Schnurr PP(1)(2), Chard KM(3)(4), Ruzek JI(5)(6)(7), Chow BK(8), Resick PA(9), 
Foa EB(10), Marx BP(11)(12)(13), Friedman MJ(1)(2), Bovin MJ(11)(12)(13), Caudle 
KL(1), Castillo D(14), Curry KT(15), Hollifield M(16)(17)(18), Huang GD(19), 
Chee CL(20), Astin MC(21), Dickstein B(3), Renner K(22), Clancy CP(23), Collie 
C(23), Maieritsch K(24), Bailey S(25)(26), Thompson K(25)(26), Messina 
M(27)(28), Franklin L(29)(30), Lindley S(31)(32), Kattar K(33), Luedtke B(33), 
Romesser J(34), McQuaid J(35)(36), Sylvers P(37)(38), Varkovitzky R(37)(38), 
Davis L(39)(40), MacVicar D(39)(40), Shih MC(5)(8).

Author information:
(1)Executive Division, National Center for PTSD, White River Junction, Vermont.
(2)Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, New Hampshire.
(3)Cincinnati VA Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(4)University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, 
Stanford, California.
(6)Palo Alto University, Palo Alto, California.
(7)Department of Psychology, University of Colorado, Colorado Springs.
(8)VA Cooperative Studies Program Coordinating Center, Palo Alto, California.
(9)Duke Health, Durham, North Carolina.
(10)University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Department of 
Psychiatry, Philadelphia.
(11)Behavioral Science Division, National Center for PTSD, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(12)VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, Massachusetts.
(13)Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts.
(14)Center of Excellence, Central Texas VA Health Care System, Waco.
(15)Minneapolis VA Medical Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(16)Tibor Rubin VA Medical Center, Long Beach, California.
(17)The George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Washington, District of Columbia.
(18)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of California, 
Riverside.
(19)Cooperative Studies Program Central Office, Department of Veterans Affairs 
Office of Research & Development, Washington, District of Columbia.
(20)Raymond G. Murphy VA Medical Center, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
(21)Atlanta VA Medical Center, Atlanta, Georgia.
(22)VA Northeast Ohio Healthcare System, Cleveland.
(23)Durham VA Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina.
(24)Edward Hines Jr. VA Hospital, Hines, Illinois.
(25)Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center, Houston, Texas.
(26)Menninger Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(27)William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital, Madison, Wisconsin.
(28)Department of Psychiatry, University of Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine 
and Public Health, Madison.
(29)New Orleans VA Medical Center, New Orleans, Louisiana.
(30)South Central VA Mental Illness Research, Education and Clinical Center, New 
Orleans, Louisiana.
(31)Palo Alto VA Medical Center, Palo Alto, California.
(32)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford School of 
Medicine, Stanford University.
(33)Phoenix VA Medical Center, Phoenix, Arizona.
(34)George E. Whalen VA Medical Center, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(35)San Francisco VA Medical Center, San Francisco, California.
(36)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Weill Institute of 
Neuroscience, University of California, San Francisco.
(37)VA Puget Sound Health Care System, American Lake Division, Tacoma, 
Washington.
(38)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, 
Seattle.
(39)Tuscaloosa VA Medical Center, Tuscaloosa, Alabama.
(40)Department of Psychiatry, University of Alabama Heersink School of Medicine, 
Birmingham.

IMPORTANCE: Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a prevalent and serious 
mental health problem. Although there are effective psychotherapies for PTSD, 
there is little information about their comparative effectiveness.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the effectiveness of prolonged exposure (PE) vs cognitive 
processing therapy (CPT) for treating PTSD in veterans.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This randomized clinical trial assessed the 
comparative effectiveness of PE vs CPT among veterans with military-related PTSD 
recruited from outpatient mental health clinics at 17 Department of Veterans 
Affairs medical centers across the US from October 31, 2014, to February 1, 
2018, with follow-up through February 1, 2019. The primary outcome was assessed 
using centralized masking. Tested hypotheses were prespecified before trial 
initiation. Data were analyzed from October 5, 2020, to May 5, 2021.
INTERVENTIONS: Participants were randomized to 1 of 2 individual 
cognitive-behavioral therapies, PE or CPT, delivered according to a flexible 
protocol of 10 to 14 sessions.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was change in PTSD symptom 
severity on the Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale for DSM-5 (CAPS-5) from before 
treatment to the mean after treatment across posttreatment and 3- and 6-month 
follow-ups. Secondary outcomes included other symptoms, functioning, and quality 
of life.
RESULTS: Analyses were based on all 916 randomized participants (730 [79.7%] men 
and 186 [20.3%] women; mean [range] age 45.2 [21-80] years), with 455 
participants randomized to PE (mean CAPS-5 score at baseline, 39.9 [95% CI, 
39.1-40.7] points) and 461 participants randomized to CPT (mean CAPS-5 score at 
baseline, 40.3 [95% CI, 39.5-41.1] points). PTSD severity on the CAPS-5 improved 
substantially in both PE (standardized mean difference [SMD], 0.99 [95% CI, 
0.89-1.08]) and CPT (SMD, 0.71 [95% CI, 0.61-0.80]) groups from before to after 
treatment. Mean improvement was greater in PE than CPT (least square mean, 2.42 
[95% CI, 0.53-4.31]; P = .01), but the difference was not clinically significant 
(SMD, 0.17). Results for self-reported PTSD symptoms were comparable with CAPS-5 
findings. The PE group had higher odds of response (odds ratio [OR], 1.32 [95% 
CI, 1.00-1.65]; P < .001), loss of diagnosis (OR, 1.43 [95% CI, 1.12-1.74]; 
P < .001), and remission (OR, 1.62 [95% CI, 1.24-2.00]; P < .001) compared with 
the CPT group. Groups did not differ on other outcomes. Treatment dropout was 
higher in PE (254 participants [55.8%]) than in CPT (215 participants [46.6%]; 
P < .01). Three participants in the PE group and 1 participant in the CPT group 
were withdrawn from treatment, and 3 participants in each treatment dropped out 
owing to serious adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This randomized clinical trial found that although PE 
was statistically more effective than CPT, the difference was not clinically 
significant, and improvements in PTSD were meaningful in both treatment groups. 
These findings highlight the importance of shared decision-making to help 
patients understand the evidence and select their preferred treatment.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01928732.

DOI: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.36921
PMCID: PMC8771295
PMID: 35044471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Schnurr 
reported receiving grants from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), 
Department of Defense (DoD), National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), and 
Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) outside the submitted work. 
Dr Chard reported grants receiving from Cincinnati VA Medical Center Chris T. 
Sullivan Foundation, DoD, and royalties from Guilford Publications. Dr Ruzek 
reported receiving personal fees from the National Institute for Human 
Resilience, Canadian Red Cross, Institute of Psychology at the Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, and University of Washington. Dr Resick reported receiving grants 
from NIMH, personal fees from DoD Office of Victims of Crime at the Medical 
University of South Carolina, and royalties from Guilford. Dr Foa reported 
receiving personal fees from PTSD workshops and royalties from Oxford University 
Press outside the submitted work. Dr Marx reported receiving grants from the VA, 
PCORI, NIMH, Military Suicide Research Consortium, and DoD and personal fees 
from American Psychological Association outside the submitted work. Dr Bovin 
reported receiving grants from the VA and personal fees from Premier Research 
outside the submitted work. Dr Astin reported grants from Collective Studies 
Program paid for study coordinator and supplies only during the conduct of the 
study. Dr Collie reported serving on the Advisory Steering Committee for the 
American Psychological Association’s Clinical Practice Guidelines. Dr Franklin 
reported receiving personal fees from New Harbinger Publications Royalties and 
grants from Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute outside the submitted 
work. Dr Davis reported receiving personal fees from Otsuka, Lundbeck, Janssen, 
and Signant Health and grants from Tonix, Alkermes, Allergan, Aptinyx, VA, DoD, 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Social Finance, and 
Westat. No other disclosures were reported.