---
reference_id: "PMID:40979762"
title: "Stopping versus continuing renin-angiotensin system inhibitors before surgery: An updated systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials."
authors:
- Algodi M
- Saab O
- Al-Sagban A
- Hashim HT
- Al-Obaidi AD
- Albayyaa M
- Al-Hemyari B
journal: Indian J Anaesth
year: '2025'
doi: 10.4103/ija.ija_416_25
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stopping versus continuing renin-angiotensin system inhibitors before surgery: An updated systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials.
**Authors:** Algodi M, Saab O, Al-Sagban A, Hashim HT, Al-Obaidi AD, Albayyaa M, Al-Hemyari B
**Journal:** Indian J Anaesth (2025)
**DOI:** [10.4103/ija.ija_416_25](https://doi.org/10.4103/ija.ija_416_25)

## Content

1. Indian J Anaesth. 2025 Oct;69(10):984-998. doi: 10.4103/ija.ija_416_25. Epub
2025 Sep 5.

Stopping versus continuing renin-angiotensin system inhibitors before surgery:
An updated systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials.

Algodi M(1), Saab O(2), Al-Sagban A(3), Hashim HT(4), Al-Obaidi AD(5), Albayyaa
M(6), Al-Hemyari B(7).

Author information:
(1)Resident, Department of Medicine, Jersey Shore University Medical Center, New
Jersey, USA.
(2)Assistant Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Texas
Health Sciences Center at Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Assistant Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University, USA.
(4)Resident, Department of Medicine, Al-Gharaf Primary Healthcare Sector, Thi
Qar, Iraq.
(5)Resident, Department of Medicine, University of Baghdad College of Medicine,
Baghdad, Iraq.
(6)Associate Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Texas, USA.
(7)Assistant Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Texas, USA.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The optimal perioperative management of patients
chronically using renin-angiotensin system inhibitors (RASIs) is still
uncertain. This study aims to compare the outcomes of withholding versus
continuing RASIs before surgery, focusing on efficacy and safety.
METHODS: A systematic review and meta-analysis synthesising evidence from
randomised controlled trials (RCTs) obtained from PubMed, CENTRAL, Scopus, and
Web of Science until September 2024. Using Stata MP v. 17, we used the
fixed-effects model to report dichotomous outcomes by using the risk ratio (RR)
with a 95% confidence interval (CI).
RESULTS: Ten RCTs with 3,740 patients were included. There was no statistical
difference between both groups regarding the incidence of major adverse cardiac
events (MACE) [Risk ratio (RR): 0.99; 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.84, 1.16;
P = 0.88], all-cause mortality (RR: 0.88; 95% CI: 0.44, 1.78; P = 0.72),
myocardial infarction (MI) (RR: 1.67; 95% CI: 0.61, 4.58; P = 0.32), heart
failure/acute pulmonary oedema (RR: 1.87; 95% CI: 0.51, 6.84; P = 0.34), stroke
(RR: 1.22; 95% CI: 0.35, 4.24; P = 0.75), postoperative hypotension (RR: 0.85;
95% CI: 0.66, 1.10; P = 0.22), perioperative hypertension (RR: 1.21; 95% CI:
1.00, 1.46; P = 0.05), and acute kidney injury (AKI) (RR: 1.01; 95% CI: 0.80,
1.26; P = 0.97). However, withholding RASIs was significantly associated with a
decreased incidence of intraoperative hypotension (RR: 0.82; 95% CI: 0.75, 0.89;
P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Stopping RASIs in patients undergoing surgery was not associated
with a higher risk of postoperative complications, such as MACE, all-cause
mortality, myocardial infarction, heart failure/acute pulmonary oedema, stroke,
or AKI. Conversely, discontinuing RASIs notably reduced the incidence of
intraoperative hypotension.

Copyright: © 2025 Indian Journal of Anaesthesia.

DOI: 10.4103/ija.ija_416_25
PMCID: PMC12445768
PMID: 40979762

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.
