---
reference_id: "PMID:32066273"
title: "Evaluation and Medical Management of Patients with Cystine Nephrolithiasis: A Consensus Statement."
authors:
- Eisner BH
- Goldfarb DS
- Baum MA
- Langman CB
- Curhan GC
- Preminger GM
- Lieske JC
- Pareek G
- Thomas K
- Zisman AL
- Papagiannopoulos D
- Sur RL
journal: J Endourol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1089/end.2019.0703
keywords:
- Cystine
- "Cystinuria/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Humans
- Kidney
- Kidney Calculi
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation and Medical Management of Patients with Cystine Nephrolithiasis: A Consensus Statement.
**Authors:** Eisner BH, Goldfarb DS, Baum MA, Langman CB, Curhan GC, Preminger GM, Lieske JC, Pareek G, Thomas K, Zisman AL, Papagiannopoulos D, Sur RL
**Journal:** J Endourol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1089/end.2019.0703](https://doi.org/10.1089/end.2019.0703)

## Content

1. J Endourol. 2020 Nov;34(11):1103-1110. doi: 10.1089/end.2019.0703. Epub 2020
Apr  6.

Evaluation and Medical Management of Patients with Cystine Nephrolithiasis: A
Consensus Statement.

Eisner BH(1), Goldfarb DS(2)(3), Baum MA(4), Langman CB(5)(6), Curhan GC(7),
Preminger GM(8), Lieske JC(9), Pareek G(10), Thomas K(11), Zisman AL(12),
Papagiannopoulos D(13), Sur RL(13).

Author information:
(1)Deparment of Urology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.
(2)NYU Langone Health, New York, New York, USA.
(3)NYU School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.
(5)Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(6)Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(7)Renal Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(9)Mayo Clinic Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Rochester, Minnesota,
USA.
(10)The Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, Rhode
Island, USA.
(11)Stone Unit, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, and King's
College, London, United Kingdom.
(12)University of Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(13)UC San Diego Health, San Diego, California, USA.

Comment in
    J Endourol. 2020 Nov;34(11):1111. doi: 10.1089/end.2020.0280.

Purpose: Cystinuria is a genetic disorder with both autosomal recessive and
incompletely dominant inheritance. The disorder disrupts cystine and other
dibasic amino acid transport in proximal tubules of the kidney, resulting in
recurrent kidney stone formation. Currently, there are no consensus guidelines
on evaluation and management of this disease. This article represents the
consensus of the author panel and will provide clinicians with a stepwise
framework for evaluation and clinical management of patients with cystinuria
based on evidence in the existing literature. Materials and Methods: A search of
MEDLINE®/PubMed® and Cochrane databases was performed using the following key
words: "cystine nephrolithiasis," "cystinuria," "penicillamine, cystine," and
"tiopronin, cystine." In total, as of May 2018, these searches yielded 2335
articles, which were then evaluated for their relevance to the topic of
evaluation and management of cystinuria. Evidence was evaluated by the Grading
of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) system.
Results: Twenty-five articles on the topic of cystinuria or cystine
nephrolithiasis were deemed suitable for inclusion in this study. The literature
supports a logical evaluation process and step-wise treatment approach beginning
with conservative measures: fluid intake and dietary modification. If stone
formation recurs, proceed to pharmacotherapeutic options by first alkalinizing
the urine and then using cystine-binding thiol drugs. Conclusions: The proposed
clinical pathways provide a framework for efficient evaluation and treatment of
patients with cystinuria, which should improve overall outcomes of this rare,
but highly recurrent, form of nephrolithiasis.

DOI: 10.1089/end.2019.0703
PMCID: PMC7869875
PMID: 32066273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: B.H.E. is a consultant for Allena
Pharmaceuticals and Retrophin and is a patent holder and owner of Dr. Arnie's,
Inc. D.S.G. is a consultant and has received honoraria from Retrophin and is a
patent holder and owner of Dr. Arnie's, Inc. M.A.B. provides medical advisory to
Retrophin. G.C.C. is a consultant for Allena Pharmaceuticals, Shire, RenalGuard
Solutions, and Akuous. He has also received grant funding from SHOEBOX
Audiometry and personal fees from UpToDate. G.M.P. is a consultant for
Retrophin. J.C.L. has received grant funding from Retrophin. A.L.Z. is a
consultant for Retrophin. R.L.S. is a consultant and speaker for Boston
Scientific; a speaker for Cook Medical and Karl Storz; and a speaker and
advisory board member for Retrophin. He is also the Chief Medical Officer for
Kalera Medical, Inc., and Pacific Litho San Diego, LLC. All other authors
declare that no competing financial interests exist.
