---
reference_id: PMID:29765785
title: "Spondylocostal Dysostosis: A Literature Review and Case Report with Long-Term Follow-Up of a Conservatively Managed Patient."
authors:
- Southam BR
- Schumaier AP
- Crawford AH
journal: Case Rep Orthop
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1155/2018/1795083
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spondylocostal Dysostosis: A Literature Review and Case Report with Long-Term Follow-Up of a Conservatively Managed Patient.
**Authors:** Southam BR, Schumaier AP, Crawford AH
**Journal:** Case Rep Orthop (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2018/1795083](https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/1795083)

## Content

1. Case Rep Orthop. 2018 Mar 22;2018:1795083. doi: 10.1155/2018/1795083. 
eCollection 2018.

Spondylocostal Dysostosis: A Literature Review and Case Report with Long-Term 
Follow-Up of a Conservatively Managed Patient.

Southam BR(1), Schumaier AP(1), Crawford AH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine, University of Cincinnati, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(2)Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, OH, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Patients with spondylocostal dysostosis (SCD) have congenital 
spine and rib deformities associated with frequently severe thoracic 
insufficiency and respiratory compromise. The literature is largely composed of 
case reports and small cohorts, and there is little information regarding adults 
with this condition. In this report, we describe the natural history of a 
conservatively treated patient and include quality-of-life issues such as 
childbearing, athletic participation, and occupational selection.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present a patient with SCD who was conservatively treated 
by a single physician from birth for 31 years. Our patient was capable of a 
reasonably good quality of life through adulthood, including participation in 
gymnastics and employment. At age 18, she became pregnant and subsequently 
terminated the pregnancy due to obstetrical concerns for compromised 
respiration. She has had intermittent respiratory complaints and occasionally 
experiences dyspnea with exertion, but this only has limited her during certain 
activities in the past three years. Currently, she takes naproxen for chronic 
back pain with periodic exacerbations.
DISCUSSION: Other cases in the literature have described adult SCD patients who 
have received nonoperative treatment and achieved a wide range of functional 
outcomes. This provides some limited evidence to suggest that select patients 
with SCD may be treated conservatively and achieve a reasonable quality of life. 
However, close clinical follow-up with these patients is recommended, 
particularly early on, considering the high rates of infant morbidity and 
mortality. Chest physiotherapy and early pulmonary care have been associated 
with favorable outcomes in infancy. Surgery to increase thoracic volume and 
correct scoliosis has been shown in some cases to improve respiratory function. 
Treatment depends on the degree of thoracic insufficiency and quality of life. 
The natural history of SCD remains largely unknown, but some patients are 
capable of relatively favorable life spans, employment, and participation in 
athletics.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/1795083
PMCID: PMC5885401
PMID: 29765785