---
reference_id: "PMID:38804512"
title: Autoantibodies Targeting Nephrin in Podocytopathies.
authors:
- Hengel FE
- Dehde S
- Lassé M
- Zahner G
- Seifert L
- Schnarre A
- Kretz O
- Demir F
- Pinnschmidt HO
- Grahammer F
- Lucas R
- Mehner LM
- Zimmermann T
- Billing AM
- Oh J
- Mitrotti A
- Pontrelli P
- Debiec H
- Dossier C
- Colucci M
- Emma F
- Smoyer WE
- Weins A
- Schaefer F
- Alachkar N
- Diemert A
- Hogan J
- Hoxha E
- Wiech T
- Rinschen MM
- Ronco P
- Vivarelli M
- Gesualdo L
- Tomas NM
- Huber TB
- International Society of Glomerular Disease
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2314471
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Animals
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Middle Aged
- "Autoantibodies/blood, immunology"
- Biopsy
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Glomerulonephritis, IGA/blood, immunology, pathology"
- "Glomerulosclerosis, Focal Segmental/blood, immunology, pathology"
- "Lupus Nephritis/blood, immunology, pathology"
- Membrane Proteins/immunology
- "Nephrosis, Lipoid/blood, immunology, pathology"
- "Nephrotic Syndrome/blood, immunology, pathology"
- "Podocytes/immunology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoantibodies Targeting Nephrin in Podocytopathies.
**Authors:** Hengel FE, Dehde S, Lassé M, Zahner G, Seifert L, Schnarre A, Kretz O, Demir F, Pinnschmidt HO, Grahammer F, Lucas R, Mehner LM, Zimmermann T, Billing AM, Oh J, Mitrotti A, Pontrelli P, Debiec H, Dossier C, Colucci M, Emma F, Smoyer WE, Weins A, Schaefer F, Alachkar N, Diemert A, Hogan J, Hoxha E, Wiech T, Rinschen MM, Ronco P, Vivarelli M, Gesualdo L, Tomas NM, Huber TB, International Society of Glomerular Disease
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2314471](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2314471)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2024 Aug 1;391(5):422-433. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2314471. Epub 2024
 May 25.

Autoantibodies Targeting Nephrin in Podocytopathies.

Hengel FE(1), Dehde S(1), Lassé M(1), Zahner G(1), Seifert L(1), Schnarre A(1), 
Kretz O(1), Demir F(1), Pinnschmidt HO(1), Grahammer F(1), Lucas R(1), Mehner 
LM(1), Zimmermann T(1), Billing AM(1), Oh J(1), Mitrotti A(1), Pontrelli P(1), 
Debiec H(1), Dossier C(1), Colucci M(1), Emma F(1), Smoyer WE(1), Weins A(1), 
Schaefer F(1), Alachkar N(1), Diemert A(1), Hogan J(1), Hoxha E(1), Wiech T(1), 
Rinschen MM(1), Ronco P(1), Vivarelli M(1), Gesualdo L(1), Tomas NM(1), Huber 
TB(1); International Society of Glomerular Disease.

Collaborators: Hengel FE, Dehde S, Lassé M, Zahner G, Seifert L, Schnarre A, 
Kretz O, Demir F, Pinnschmidt HO, Grahammer F, Lucas R, Mehner LM, Zimmermann T, 
Billing AM, Oh J, Mitrotti A, Pontrelli P, Debiec H, Dossier C, Colucci M, Emma 
F, Smoyer WE, Weins A, Schaefer F, Alachkar N, Diemert A, Hogan J, Hoxha E, 
Wiech T, Rinschen MM, Ronco P, Vivarelli M, Gesualdo L, Tomas NM, Huber TB.

Author information:
(1)From the III. Department of Medicine (F.E.H., S.D., M.L., G.Z., L.S., A.S., 
O.K., F.G., R.L., L.M.M., E.H., M.M.R., N.M.T., T.B.H.) and the Departments of 
Medical Biometry and Epidemiology (H.O.P.), Pathology (T.Z., T.W.), Pediatric 
Nephrology (J.O.), and Obstetrics and Fetal Medicine (A.D.), Hamburg Center for 
Kidney Health (F.E.H., S.D., M.L., G.Z., L.S., A.S., O.K., F.G., R.L., L.M.M., 
J.O., E.H., M.M.R., N.M.T., T.B.H.), and the Hamburg Center for Translational 
Immunology (N.M.T., T.B.H.), University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, and the Center for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University 
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg (F.S.) - all in Germany; the Department of 
Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark (F.D., A.M.B., M.M.R.); the 
Department of Precision and Regenerative Medicine and Ionian Area, Nephrology, 
Dialysis, and Transplantation Unit, University of Bari Aldo Moro, Bari (A.M., 
P.P., L.G.), and the Division of Nephrology, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, 
IRCCS, Rome (M.C., F.E., M.V.) - both in Italy; INSERM, Unité Mixte de Recherche 
S 1155, Sorbonne Université (H.D., P.R.), and the Pediatric Nephrology 
Department, Robert Debré Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (C.D., 
J.H.), Paris, and the Division of Nephrology, Centre Hospitalier du Mans, Le 
Mans (P.R.) - all in France; the Center for Clinical and Translational Research, 
Abigail Wexner Research Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital, and the 
Department of Pediatrics, Ohio State University College of Medicine - both in 
Columbus (W.E.S.); the Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
and Harvard Medical School - both in Boston (A.W.); and the Department of 
Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore (N.A.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2024 Oct 10;391(14):1365. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2410840.
    N Engl J Med. 2024 Oct 10;391(14):1365-1366. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2410840.
    N Engl J Med. 2024 Oct 10;391(14):1366. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2410840.
    N Engl J Med. 2024 Oct 10;391(14):1367-1368. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2410840.

BACKGROUND: Minimal change disease and primary focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis in adults, along with idiopathic nephrotic syndrome in 
children, are immune-mediated podocytopathies that lead to nephrotic syndrome. 
Autoantibodies targeting nephrin have been found in patients with minimal change 
disease, but their clinical and pathophysiological roles are unclear.
METHODS: We conducted a multicenter study to analyze antinephrin autoantibodies 
in adults with glomerular diseases, including minimal change disease, focal 
segmental glomerulosclerosis, membranous nephropathy, IgA nephropathy, 
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-associated glomerulonephritis, and lupus 
nephritis, as well as in children with idiopathic nephrotic syndrome and in 
controls. We also created an experimental mouse model through active 
immunization with recombinant murine nephrin.
RESULTS: The study included 539 patients (357 adults and 182 children) and 117 
controls. Among the adults, antinephrin autoantibodies were found in 46 of the 
105 patients (44%) with minimal change disease, 7 of 74 (9%) with primary focal 
segmental glomerulosclerosis, and only in rare cases among the patients with 
other conditions. Of the 182 children with idiopathic nephrotic syndrome, 94 
(52%) had detectable antinephrin autoantibodies. In the subgroup of patients 
with active minimal change disease or idiopathic nephrotic syndrome who were not 
receiving immunosuppressive treatment, the prevalence of antinephrin 
autoantibodies was as high as 69% and 90%, respectively. At study inclusion and 
during follow-up, antinephrin autoantibody levels were correlated with disease 
activity. Experimental immunization induced a nephrotic syndrome, a minimal 
change disease-like phenotype, IgG localization to the podocyte slit diaphragm, 
nephrin phosphorylation, and severe cytoskeletal changes in mice.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, circulating antinephrin autoantibodies were common 
in patients with minimal change disease or idiopathic nephrotic syndrome and 
appeared to be markers of disease activity. Their binding at the slit diaphragm 
induced podocyte dysfunction and nephrotic syndrome, which highlights their 
pathophysiological significance. (Funded by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and 
others.).

Copyright © 2024 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2314471
PMID: 38804512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]