---
reference_id: "PMID:40096720"
title: "Labyrinthine Fistulas in cholesteatoma : Surgical outcome on auditory function."
journal: Tunis Med
year: "2025"
doi: 10.62438/tunismed.v103i2.5191
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Labyrinthine Fistulas in cholesteatoma : Surgical outcome on auditory function.

## Content

INTRODUCTION: A labyrinthine fistula (LF) is a challenging complication
associated with cholesteatomatous chronic otitis media (CCOM). AIM: To describe
the clinical and audiometric characteristics of patients with cholesteatomatous
LF and to evaluate the postoperative outcomes. METHODS: This was a retrospective
study of 46 cases of LF, among 555 patients who underwent surgical treatment for
CCOM at the Otolaryngology department of La Rabta Hospital, from 2010 to 2020.
RESULTS: The mean age was 43.67 years. The incidence of LF was 8.3%. The most
frequent symptoms were otorrhea and hearing loss (87%). Vertigo was present in
43.5% of patients. Facial nerve paralysis was observed in 5 patients (10.9%).
Preoperative tonal audiometry showed hearing impairment in all cases, with no
significant relationship between bone conduction hearing thresholds and the type
of fistula (p: 0.16). LF diagnosis was made intraoperatively, involving the
lateral semicircular canal (LSCC) in all cases, with or without other
locations. Favorable hearing outcome was noted in 73,9% of patients, with
improvement of vestibular signs in all cases. There was no correlation between
the fistula size and postoperative hearing loss (p : 0.09). CONCLUSION:
Cholesteatomatous labyrinthine fistulas pose a complex challenge in managing
middle ear pathologies. Typically, labyrinthine fistula is managed by one stage
total removal of cholesteatoma matrix on the fistula, leading to satisfactory
auditory and vestibular outcomes.
