---
reference_id: "PMID:37000977"
title: "Ultrathin Skin Grafting Versus Suction Blister Epidermal Grafting in the Treatment of Resistant Stable Vitiligo: A Self-Controlled Comparative Study."
authors:
- Ding X
- Sun Y
- Wang F
- Du J
journal: Dermatol Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/DSS.0000000000003780
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ultrathin Skin Grafting Versus Suction Blister Epidermal Grafting in the Treatment of Resistant Stable Vitiligo: A Self-Controlled Comparative Study.
**Authors:** Ding X, Sun Y, Wang F, Du J
**Journal:** Dermatol Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/DSS.0000000000003780](https://doi.org/10.1097/DSS.0000000000003780)

## Content

1. Dermatol Surg. 2023 Jul 1;49(7):659-663. doi: 10.1097/DSS.0000000000003780.
Epub  2023 Mar 30.

Ultrathin Skin Grafting Versus Suction Blister Epidermal Grafting in the 
Treatment of Resistant Stable Vitiligo: A Self-Controlled Comparative Study.

Ding X(1), Sun Y, Wang F, Du J.

Author information:
(1)All authors are affiliated with the Department of Dermatology, Peking 
University People's Hospital.

BACKGROUND: Surgical therapies are effective methods to treat resistant stable 
vitiligo, with each method having advantages and disadvantages.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to compare the efficacy and safety of ultrathin skin 
grafting (UTSG) and suction blister epidermal grafting (SBEG) to treat stable 
vitiligo.
METHODS: A total of 15 patients with 45 vitiligo patches were recruited. Each 
vitiligo patch was divided in half; 1 half was treated by UTSG, whereas the 
other half was treated by SBEG. The patients were followed up monthly for 3 
months to assess the repigmentation rate, relative melanin index (RMI), and 
relative erythema index (REI) at different timepoints.
RESULTS: Excellent repigmentation was observed in 97.8% of patches that 
underwent UTSG and 93.3% that underwent SBEG. The RMI and REI at 1, 2, and 3 
months after the grafting procedure did not significantly differ between the 2 
methods. At the recipient site, incomplete fall-off of the graft occurred in 
4.4% of patches that underwent UTSG, whereas a "cobblestone appearance" was 
observed in 66.7% of patches that underwent SEBG. UTSG caused fewer 
complications at the donor site than SBEG.
CONCLUSION: Compared with SBEG, UTSG is faster and achieves better cosmetic 
outcomes at the recipient and donor sites.

Copyright © 2023 by the American Society for Dermatologic Surgery, Inc. 
Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/DSS.0000000000003780
PMID: 37000977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]