---
reference_id: "PMID:27852077"
title: "Koolen-de Vries Syndrome: Clinical Report of an Adult and Literature Review."
authors:
- Ciaccio C
- Dordoni C
- Ritelli M
- Colombi M
journal: Cytogenet Genome Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1159/000452724
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aging/physiology
- Child
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17/genetics"
- Delayed Diagnosis
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- Diagnostic Errors
- "Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Epilepsy/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Phenotype
- Prognosis
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Koolen-de Vries Syndrome: Clinical Report of an Adult and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Ciaccio C, Dordoni C, Ritelli M, Colombi M
**Journal:** Cytogenet Genome Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000452724](https://doi.org/10.1159/000452724)

## Content

1. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2016;150(1):40-45. doi: 10.1159/000452724. Epub 2016 Nov
 17.

Koolen-de Vries Syndrome: Clinical Report of an Adult and Literature Review.

Ciaccio C(1), Dordoni C, Ritelli M, Colombi M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Molecular and Translational 
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

Koolen-de Vries syndrome (KdS) is a rare genetic condition characterized by 
typical facial dysmorphisms, cardiac and renal defects, skeletal anomalies, 
developmental delay, and intellectual disability of variable level. It is caused 
by a 440-680-kb deletion in the 17q21.31 region, encompassing CRHR1, MAPT, IMP5, 
STH, and KANSL1, or by an intragenic KANSL1 mutation. The majority of the 
patients reported are pediatric or young adults, and long-term studies able to 
define the prognosis of the disease are lacking. Here, we report a patient in 
the fourth decade misdiagnosed in the past as classical Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 
for the presence of generalized joint hypermobility, who carried a 546-kb 
deletion in 17q21.31, and compare his phenotype with those of the few KdS adults 
(aged >18 years) described so far. We observed a favorable prognosis of epilepsy 
and cardiovascular signs and reduction of joint hypermobility with age, thus 
providing insight into the natural history of the disorder.

© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000452724
PMID: 27852077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]