---
reference_id: "PMID:24836310"
title: Efficacy and safety of nintedanib in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
authors:
- Richeldi L
- du Bois RM
- Raghu G
- Azuma A
- Brown KK
- Costabel U
- Cottin V
- Flaherty KR
- Hansell DM
- Inoue Y
- Kim DS
- Kolb M
- Nicholson AG
- Noble PW
- Selman M
- Taniguchi H
- Brun M
- Le Maulf F
- Girard M
- Stowasser S
- Schlenker-Herceg R
- Disse B
- Collard HR
- INPULSIS Trial Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1402584
keywords:
- Aged
- Disease Progression
- Double-Blind Method
- "Enzyme Inhibitors/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Female
- Humans
- "Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- "Indoles/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Quality of Life
- Treatment Outcome
- Vital Capacity/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of nintedanib in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
**Authors:** Richeldi L, du Bois RM, Raghu G, Azuma A, Brown KK, Costabel U, Cottin V, Flaherty KR, Hansell DM, Inoue Y, Kim DS, Kolb M, Nicholson AG, Noble PW, Selman M, Taniguchi H, Brun M, Le Maulf F, Girard M, Stowasser S, Schlenker-Herceg R, Disse B, Collard HR, INPULSIS Trial Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1402584](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1402584)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2014 May 29;370(22):2071-82. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1402584. Epub
2014  May 18.

Efficacy and safety of nintedanib in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.

Richeldi L(1), du Bois RM, Raghu G, Azuma A, Brown KK, Costabel U, Cottin V,
Flaherty KR, Hansell DM, Inoue Y, Kim DS, Kolb M, Nicholson AG, Noble PW, Selman
M, Taniguchi H, Brun M, Le Maulf F, Girard M, Stowasser S, Schlenker-Herceg R,
Disse B, Collard HR; INPULSIS Trial Investigators.

Collaborators: Corte T, Davies H, Glaspole I, Mulder J, Veitch E, De Vuyst P,
Liistro G, Sibille Y, Vincken W, Wuyts W, Fell C, Hernandez P, Kolb M, Undurraga
A, Bai C, Chen P, Gao Z, Kang J, Li H, Li Z, Wan H, Wang H, Wen F, Xiao Q, Xu Z,
Zhang W, Zheng X, Zhu H, Pauk N, Reiterer P, Vasakova M, Hodgson U, Bourdin A,
Cadranel J, Camus P, Chanez P, Cottin V, Crestani B, Israel-Biet D, Jouneau S,
Lebargy F, Marquette C, Prévot G, Valeyre D, Wallaert B, Bonnet R, Costabel U,
Gläser S, Grohé C, Guenther A, Hammerl P, Höffken G, Karagiannidis C, Kirschner
J, Kirsten A, Korn S, Kreuter M, Müller-Quernheim J, Neurohr C, Pfeifer M,
Schönfeld N, Wiewrodt R, Antoniou K, Daniil Z, Diamantea F, Koulouris N,
Mathioudakis G, Ghosal A, Kadappa Shivappa S, Kawedia M, Khatavkar P, Kumar A,
Mehta P, Singh V, Srikanth K, Thakker H, Udwadia Z, Egan J, Fink G, Kramer M,
Yigla M, Agostini C, De Benedetto F, Harari S, Luppi F, Paggiaro P, Tavanti L,
Pesci A, Poletti V, Rottoli P, Saltini C, Sanduzzi Zamparelli A, Vancheri C,
Bando M, Hasegawa Y, Hashimoto K, Homma S, Inase N, Inoue Y, Arai T, Izumi S,
Kawamura T, Kishi K, Kondo Y, Kuwano K, Miura Y, Nishioka Y, Nishiyama O, Ogura
T, Ohkouchi S, Saito T, Setoguchi Y, Shindoh J, Taguchi Y, Tanakadate M, Tomii
K, Sugita Y, Yamaguchi T, Yoshimori K, Jeong S, Kim D, Kim Y, Park C, Song J, Uh
S, Selman M, Bresser P, Grutters J, Wijsenbeek M, Arrobas A, Cardoso J, Costa R,
Morais A, Neves S, Serrado M, Ilkovick M, Vizel A, Alfageme Michavila I,
Ancochea J, Castillo Villegas D, Molina-Molina M, Morell F, Xaubet A, Aktogu
Ozkan S, Kayacan O, Ongen G, Mogulkoc N, Tuncay E, Beirne P, Bettinson H, Burge
P, Dempsey O, Maher T, Millar A, Spencer L, Thickett D, Alvarez J, Andrews C,
Bajwa O, Baker A, Baughman R, Belperio J, Bradley J, Collard H, Cordova F,
Daniels C, de Andrade J, Dushay K, Enelow R, Ettinger N, Gibson K, Gotfried M,
Hajari Case A, Hotchkin D, Huggins J, Kaye M, Kershaw C, Kureishy S, Lancaster
L, Lederer D, Mageto Y, Masson J, Meyer K, Mohabir P, Morrison L, Nathan S, Noth
I, Oelberg D, Rahaghi F, Riley D, Rizzo A, Rossman M, Ruzi J, Sachs P,
Schaumberg T, Scholand M, Schroeder C, Seifer F, Shea J, Sinkowitz D, Tabak J,
Taylor J, Thompson J, Thurm C, Tita J, Wencel M, Westerman J, Lasky J, Demedts
M, Casteels M, Loddenkemper R, Michaelis J, Lasky J, Demedts M, Roman J, Tino G,
Luisetti M.

Author information:
(1)The authors' affiliations are listed in the Appendix.

Erratum in
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Aug 20;373(8):782. doi: 10.1056/NEJMx150012.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2014 May 29;370(22):2142-3. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1403448.
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Aug 21;371(8):783. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1407776.
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Aug 21;371(8):781. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1407776.
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Aug 21;371(8):781-2. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1407776.
    Ann Intern Med. 2014 Oct 21;161(8):JC5. doi:
10.7326/0003-4819-161-8-201410210-02005.
    Perspect Infirm. 2015 Jan-Feb;12(1):62.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015 Jul 15;192(2):249-51. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201503-0554RR.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015 Oct 15;192(8):1020. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201505-0937LE.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015 Oct 15;192(8):1020-1. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201507-1354LE.

BACKGROUND: Nintedanib (formerly known as BIBF 1120) is an intracellular
inhibitor that targets multiple tyrosine kinases. A phase 2 trial suggested that
treatment with 150 mg of nintedanib twice daily reduced lung-function decline
and acute exacerbations in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
METHODS: We conducted two replicate 52-week, randomized, double-blind, phase 3
trials (INPULSIS-1 and INPULSIS-2) to evaluate the efficacy and safety of 150 mg
of nintedanib twice daily as compared with placebo in patients with idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis. The primary end point was the annual rate of decline in
forced vital capacity (FVC). Key secondary end points were the time to the first
acute exacerbation and the change from baseline in the total score on the St.
George's Respiratory Questionnaire, both assessed over a 52-week period.
RESULTS: A total of 1066 patients were randomly assigned in a 3:2 ratio to
receive nintedanib or placebo. The adjusted annual rate of change in FVC was
-114.7 ml with nintedanib versus -239.9 ml with placebo (difference, 125.3 ml;
95% confidence interval [CI], 77.7 to 172.8; P<0.001) in INPULSIS-1 and -113.6
ml with nintedanib versus -207.3 ml with placebo (difference, 93.7 ml; 95% CI,
44.8 to 142.7; P<0.001) in INPULSIS-2. In INPULSIS-1, there was no significant
difference between the nintedanib and placebo groups in the time to the first
acute exacerbation (hazard ratio with nintedanib, 1.15; 95% CI, 0.54 to 2.42;
P=0.67); in INPULSIS-2, there was a significant benefit with nintedanib versus
placebo (hazard ratio, 0.38; 95% CI, 0.19 to 0.77; P=0.005). The most frequent
adverse event in the nintedanib groups was diarrhea, with rates of 61.5% and
18.6% in the nintedanib and placebo groups, respectively, in INPULSIS-1 and
63.2% and 18.3% in the two groups, respectively, in INPULSIS-2.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, nintedanib reduced
the decline in FVC, which is consistent with a slowing of disease progression;
nintedanib was frequently associated with diarrhea, which led to discontinuation
of the study medication in less than 5% of patients. (Funded by Boehringer
Ingelheim; INPULSIS-1 and INPULSIS-2 ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT01335464 and
NCT01335477.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1402584
PMID: 24836310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
