---
reference_id: "PMID:29635838"
title: "Interventions in children with renovascular hypertension: A 27-year retrospective single-center experience."
authors:
- Agrawal H
- Moodie D
- Qureshi AM
- Acosta AA
- Hernandez JA
- Braun MC
- Justino H
journal: Congenit Heart Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/chd.12608
keywords:
- Child
- Endovascular Procedures/methods
- Forecasting
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Renovascular/etiology, surgery"
- "Renal Artery Obstruction/complications, surgery"
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interventions in children with renovascular hypertension: A 27-year retrospective single-center experience.
**Authors:** Agrawal H, Moodie D, Qureshi AM, Acosta AA, Hernandez JA, Braun MC, Justino H
**Journal:** Congenit Heart Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/chd.12608](https://doi.org/10.1111/chd.12608)

## Content

1. Congenit Heart Dis. 2018 May;13(3):349-356. doi: 10.1111/chd.12608. Epub 2018 
Apr 10.

Interventions in children with renovascular hypertension: A 27-year 
retrospective single-center experience.

Agrawal H(1)(2), Moodie D(1), Qureshi AM(1)(2), Acosta AA(3), Hernandez JA(4), 
Braun MC(3), Justino H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Hospital and Baylor College of 
Medicine, Lillie Frank Abercrombie Section of Cardiology, Houston, Texas.
(2)Texas Children's Hospital and Baylor College of Medicine, C. E. Mullins 
Cardiac Catheterization Laboratories, Houston, Texas.
(3)Renal Section, Department of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Hospital and Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(4)Interventional Radiology Section, Pediatric Radiology, Texas Children's 
Hospital and Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.

BACKGROUND: Renovascular hypertension (RVH) can be caused by renal artery 
stenosis (RAS) and/or middle aortic syndrome (MAS).
METHODS: Patients who received surgical or transcatheter treatment for RVH 
between 1/1991 and 11/2017 were retrospectively reviewed using age = adjusted 
blood pressure ratio (BPR).
RESULTS: Fifty-three patients diagnosed with RVH at a median age of 4.5 (0-18) 
years were included. Vascular involvement ranged from MAS with RAS (20), RAS 
only (32), and MAS only (1). The first intervention was transcatheter in 47 
patients (transcatheter group: angioplasty = 41, stenting = 5, and 
thrombectomy = 1), and surgical in 6 patients (surgical group), occurring at a 
median age of 6.2 (0.1-19.6) years. There was a change toward transcatheter 
interventions as the first procedure over the study period. First 
reinterventions in the transcatheter group (27 lesions in 18 patients) were 
repeat transcatheter (in 20 lesions) and surgery (7 lesions) at a median of 92 
(2-2555) days; in the surgical group (5 lesions in 4 patients) first 
reinterventions were transcatheter (4 lesions) and repeat surgery (1) at a 
median of 2.2 (1.1-12.0) years. A total of 136 transcatheter and 30 surgical 
discrete interventions were performed. There was a significant decline in 
antihypertensive medications and BPR at 4-6 months after the first intervention 
and on last follow-up in patients initially treated by transcatheter means while 
the decline was not significant in the surgical group (limited by small sample 
size). Complications were significantly more common in the surgical group 
(P < .01), 11/27 (41%) vs 10/136 (7.4%). Four patients died (2 from each group): 
2 with congenital renal artery atresia and MAS, 2 with MAS and RAS. The median 
follow-up interval was 3.6 (0.1-35.2) years.
CONCLUSION: Pediatric patients with RVH treated with transcatheter means as the 
first intervention had significant improvement in BPR, as well as decline in 
antihypertensive medications and were less likely to suffer major complications.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/chd.12608
PMID: 29635838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]