---
reference_id: "PMID:30559259"
title: "Inhibition of complement C1s improves severe hemolytic anemia in cold agglutinin disease: a first-in-human trial."
authors:
- Jäger U
- "D'Sa S"
- Schörgenhofer C
- Bartko J
- Derhaschnig U
- Sillaber C
- Jilma-Stohlawetz P
- Fillitz M
- Schenk T
- Patou G
- Panicker S
- Parry GC
- Gilbert JC
- Jilma B
journal: Blood
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2018-06-856930
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhibition of complement C1s improves severe hemolytic anemia in cold agglutinin disease: a first-in-human trial.
**Authors:** Jäger U, D'Sa S, Schörgenhofer C, Bartko J, Derhaschnig U, Sillaber C, Jilma-Stohlawetz P, Fillitz M, Schenk T, Patou G, Panicker S, Parry GC, Gilbert JC, Jilma B
**Journal:** Blood (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2018-06-856930](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2018-06-856930)

## Content

1. Blood. 2019 Feb 28;133(9):893-901. doi: 10.1182/blood-2018-06-856930. Epub
2018  Dec 17.

Inhibition of complement C1s improves severe hemolytic anemia in cold agglutinin 
disease: a first-in-human trial.

Jäger U(1), D'Sa S(2), Schörgenhofer C(3), Bartko J(3), Derhaschnig U(3), 
Sillaber C(1), Jilma-Stohlawetz P(4), Fillitz M(5), Schenk T(6), Patou G(7), 
Panicker S(7), Parry GC(7), Gilbert JC(8), Jilma B(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Haematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Medical University 
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Waldenströms, POEMS and Myeloma Clinics, University College London Hospitals, 
National Health Service Foundation Trust & Mount Vernon Cancer Centre, London, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Hanusch Krankenhaus, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Universitätsklinikum St. Pölten, St. Pölten, 
Austria.
(7)Bioverativ, a Sanofi company, Waltham, MA; and.
(8)Band Therapeutics, LLC, Belmont, MA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2019 Feb 28;133(9):885-886. doi: 10.1182/blood-2019-01-894303.

Cold agglutinin disease is a difficult-to-treat autoimmune hemolytic anemia in 
which immunoglobulin M antibodies bind to erythrocytes and fix complement, 
resulting in predominantly extravascular hemolysis. This trial tested the 
hypothesis that the anti-C1s antibody sutimlimab would ameliorate hemolytic 
anemia. Ten patients with cold agglutinin disease participated in the phase 1b 
component of a first-in-human trial. Patients received a test dose of 10-mg/kg 
sutimlimab followed by a full dose of 60 mg/kg 1 to 4 days later and 3 
additional weekly doses of 60 mg/kg. All infusions were well tolerated without 
premedication. No drug-related serious adverse events were observed. Seven of 10 
patients with cold agglutinin disease responded with a hemoglobin increase >2 
g/dL. Sutimlimab rapidly increased hemoglobin levels by a median of 1.6 g/dL 
within the first week, and by a median of 3.9 g/dL (interquartile range, 1.3-4.5 
g/dL; 95% confidence interval, 2.1-4.5) within 6 weeks (P = .005). Sutimlimab 
rapidly abrogated extravascular hemolysis, normalizing bilirubin levels within 
24 hours in most patients and normalizing haptoglobin levels in 4 patients 
within 1 week. Hemolytic anemia recurred when drug levels were cleared from the 
circulation 3 to 4 weeks after the last dose of sutimlimab. Reexposure to 
sutimlimab in a named patient program recapitulated the control of hemolytic 
anemia. All 6 previously transfused patients became transfusion-free during 
treatment. Sutimlimab was safe, well tolerated, and rapidly stopped C1s 
complement-mediated hemolysis in patients with cold agglutinin disease, 
significantly increasing hemoglobin levels and precluding the need for 
transfusions. This trial was registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov as 
#NCT02502903.

© 2019 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2018-06-856930
PMCID: PMC6396179
PMID: 30559259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: U.J. reports 
personal fees from True North Therapeutics during the conduct of the study, 
grants and personal fees from Roche, grants and personal fees from Celgene, 
grants and personal fees from Gilead, personal fees from Amgen, grants and 
personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from Takeda, personal fees from 
AbbVie, and personal fees from Infinity; outside the submitted work, grants and 
personal fees from True North Therapeutics. G.P. is a consultant to Bioverativ 
and was an employee and stockholder of the study sponsor, True North 
Therapeutics, at the time the study was designed and conducted. G.C.P. is an 
employee of Bioverativ. S.P. was an employee and stockholder of the study 
sponsor, True North Therapeutics, at the time the study was designed and 
conducted, and was subsequently an employee of Bioverativ. J.C.G. was an 
employee and stockholder of the study sponsor, True North Therapeutics, at the 
time the study was designed and conducted. B.J. received reimbursement from True 
North Therapeutics related to travel costs for scientific presentations and 
scientific advice. The remaining authors declare no competing financial 
interests.