---
reference_id: "PMID:37745658"
title: "The use of intravenous immunoglobulin in the treatment of Hashimoto's encephalopathy: case based review."
authors:
- Şorodoc V
- Constantin M
- Asaftei A
- Lionte C
- Ceasovschih A
- Sîrbu O
- Haliga RE
- Şorodoc L
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1243787
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The use of intravenous immunoglobulin in the treatment of Hashimoto's encephalopathy: case based review.
**Authors:** Şorodoc V, Constantin M, Asaftei A, Lionte C, Ceasovschih A, Sîrbu O, Haliga RE, Şorodoc L
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2023.1243787](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2023.1243787)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2023 Sep 7;14:1243787. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1243787. 
eCollection 2023.

The use of intravenous immunoglobulin in the treatment of Hashimoto's 
encephalopathy: case based review.

Şorodoc V(1)(2), Constantin M(1)(2), Asaftei A(3), Lionte C(1)(2), Ceasovschih 
A(1)(2), Sîrbu O(1)(2), Haliga RE(1)(2), Şorodoc L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)2nd Internal Medicine Department, Sf. Spiridon Clinical Emergency Hospital, 
Iasi, Romania.
(2)Internal Medicine Department, Faculty of Medicine, Grigore T. Popa University 
of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania.
(3)2nd Rheumatology Department, Clinical Rehabilitation Hospital, Iasi, Romania.

BACKGROUND: Hashimoto's encephalopathy (HE) is a controversial immunological 
neuropsychiatric disease, with a poorly understood pathogenesis. It is 
characterized by symptoms of acute or subacute encephalopathy which usually 
occur in the presence of elevated levels of antithyroid antibodies. Even though 
it is also known as steroid responsive encephalopathy associated with autoimmune 
thyroiditis (SREAT), some cases appear to be steroid-resistant. This review 
examined whether treatment of Hashimoto's encephalopathy with intravenous 
immunoglobulin (IVIG) is associated with better clinical outcomes than the 
standard therapy. Additionally, we presented a case of a 59-year-old man who 
presented with severe neurological manifestations and was successfully treated 
with intravenous immunoglobulin.
METHODS: The online databases PubMed and EMBASE were searched.
RESULTS: A total of 1,365 articles were identified. After the deletion of 112 
duplicates, 1,253 studies were screened by evaluating the title and abstract, 
focusing on Hashimoto's encephalopathy cases where IVIG were used. 846 studies 
were excluded because they were not relevant to the topic or included pediatric 
population. Therefore, 407 full-text articles were assessed for eligibility. The 
final analysis included 14 eligible articles after 393 were excluded (irrelevant 
texts, not written in English, full-text not available). In the majority of the 
selected case-reports, IVIG was associated with a good outcome, sometimes even 
with dramatic improvements in patient's status.
CONCLUSION: In last years, intravenous immunoglobulin therapy proved its utility 
in Hashimoto's encephalopathy's treatment, being a well tolerated therapy 
associated with remarkable improvement in patient's status. Further research is 
still needed in order to define the optimal treatment protocol for Hashimoto's 
encephalopathy and to establish if intravenous immunoglobulin can also be used 
as a first-line therapy, alone or in combination with steroids.

Copyright © 2023 Şorodoc, Constantin, Asaftei, Lionte, Ceasovschih, Sîrbu, 
Haliga and Şorodoc.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1243787
PMCID: PMC10513043
PMID: 37745658

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.