---
reference_id: "PMID:40411338"
title: "Etiology, Clinical Presentation, and Management of Retrograde Cricopharyngeus Dysfunction: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Lechien JR
- Mailly M
- Hans S
- Akst LM
journal: J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1177/19160216251329012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Etiology, Clinical Presentation, and Management of Retrograde Cricopharyngeus Dysfunction: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Lechien JR, Mailly M, Hans S, Akst LM
**Journal:** J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1177/19160216251329012](https://doi.org/10.1177/19160216251329012)

## Content

1. J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2025 Jan-Dec;54:19160216251329012. doi: 
10.1177/19160216251329012. Epub 2025 May 24.

Etiology, Clinical Presentation, and Management of Retrograde Cricopharyngeus 
Dysfunction: A Systematic Review.

Lechien JR(1)(2)(3)(4), Mailly M(2), Hans S(2), Akst LM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, UMONS Research Institute for 
Health Sciences and Technology, University of Mons (UMons), Mons, Belgium.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, Foch Hospital, School of 
Medicine, UFR Simone Veil, Université Versailles Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines 
(Paris Saclay University), Paris, France.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Elsan Hospital, Paris, France.
(4)Phonetics and Phonology Lab, CNRS UMR7018, Sorbonne University, Paris, 
France.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, The Johns Hopkins 
Hospital, Baltimore, USA.

ImportanceThe retrograde cricopharyngeus dysfunction (R-CPD) is an emerging 
topic in otolaryngology, gastroenterology, and primary care.ObjectiveTo review 
the current literature about the etiology, clinical presentation, and management 
of retrograde cricopharyngeus dysfunction (R-CPD).DesignSystematic 
review.SettingThree investigators conducted the PubMED, Scopus, and Cochrane 
Library review of the literature related to the etiologies and management of 
patients with R-CPD through the PRISMA statements.ParticipantsStudies that 
incorporated R-CPD patients.InterventionsIn-office, or operating room botulinum 
toxin injection, or no treatment.Main outcome measuresEtiology, clinical 
presentation, and therapeutic outcomes.ResultsSeventeen studies met the 
inclusion criteria (826 patients). A family history was reported in 28.0% of 
cases with most patients developing R-CDP symptoms in childhood (55.5%). In 
addition to the cardinal symptom of the inability to belch, associated 
complaints of bloating and chest pain, gurgling noises, and excessive flatulence 
were found in 95.7%, 86%, and 80.2% of cases, respectively.The diagnosis was 
recognized by patients themselves in 78.9% of cases. The immediate success rate 
of botulinum toxin injection into the cricopharyngeal sphincter in facilitating 
burping was 92.5%. Recurrence occurred in the first month of follow-up in 9.5% 
of cases, whereas 12.6% and 27.9% of patients had recurrence during the 
1-5 months and more than 6 months posttreatment, respectively. Transient 
dysphagia is the most prevalent complication after botulinum toxin injection 
(31.1%). The heterogeneity was high across studies, limiting the establishment 
of further combined analyses.Conclusion and relevanceR-CPD is a 
recently-recognized and likely-underdiagnosed condition associated with severe 
symptoms affecting the quality of life of patients. Future studies are needed to 
elucidate the etiology of this condition, develop adequate patient-reported 
outcome questionnaires for the baseline and follow-up evaluations of symptoms, 
and propose therapeutic consensus.

DOI: 10.1177/19160216251329012
PMCID: PMC12103659
PMID: 40411338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.