---
reference_id: "PMID:38302170"
title: Systematic Review and Metaanalysis of Pharmacological Interventions in Adult-Onset Still Disease and the Role of Biologic Disease-Modifying Antirheumatic Drugs.
authors:
- Ruscitti P
- McGonagle D
- Garcia VC
- Rabijns H
- Toennessen K
- Chappell M
- Edwards M
- Miller P
- Hansell N
- Moss J
- Graziadio S
- Feist E
journal: J Rheumatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3899/jrheum.2023-0995
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal/therapeutic use"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use"
- Antirheumatic Agents/therapeutic use
- Biological Products/therapeutic use
- Interleukin 1 Receptor Antagonist Protein/therapeutic use
- Remission Induction
- "Still's Disease, Adult-Onset/drug therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic Review and Metaanalysis of Pharmacological Interventions in Adult-Onset Still Disease and the Role of Biologic Disease-Modifying Antirheumatic Drugs.
**Authors:** Ruscitti P, McGonagle D, Garcia VC, Rabijns H, Toennessen K, Chappell M, Edwards M, Miller P, Hansell N, Moss J, Graziadio S, Feist E
**Journal:** J Rheumatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3899/jrheum.2023-0995](https://doi.org/10.3899/jrheum.2023-0995)

## Content

1. J Rheumatol. 2024 May 1;51(5):442-451. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.2023-0995.

Systematic Review and Metaanalysis of Pharmacological Interventions in
Adult-Onset Still Disease and the Role of Biologic Disease-Modifying
Antirheumatic Drugs.

Ruscitti P(1), McGonagle D(2), Garcia VC(3), Rabijns H(3), Toennessen K(3),
Chappell M(4), Edwards M(4), Miller P(4), Hansell N(4), Moss J(4), Graziadio
S(4), Feist E(5).

Author information:
(1)P. Ruscitti, MD, Department of Biotechnological and Applied Clinical
Sciences, University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy; piero.ruscitti@univaq.it.
(2)D. McGonagle, PhD, Leeds NIHR Biomedical Centre and School of Medicine,
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(3)V.C. Garcia, MD, H. Rabijns, MPharm, K. Toennessen, MSc, Novartis Pharma AG,
Basel, Switzerland.
(4)M. Chappell, PhD, M. Edwards, MA, P. Miller, MSc, N. Hansell, BSc, J. Moss,
PhD, S. Graziadio, PhD, York Health Economics Consortium (YHEC), University of
York, York, UK.
(5)E. Feist, MD, Helios Clinic for Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology,
Gommern, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To conduct a systematic review of the effectiveness and safety of
pharmacological treatments for adult-onset Still disease (AOSD).
METHODS: Six databases, 2 trial registries, and conference abstracts were
searched from January 2012 to February 2023 for studies of pharmacological
interventions in people with AOSD. Outcomes were rates of remission and
response, discontinuation of concurrent treatments, complications of AOSD, and
treatment-related adverse events. Risk of bias was assessed with the Cochrane
risk of bias tool and the Joanna Briggs Institute tool for case series.
RESULTS: Forty-four studies evaluated treatments, including nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), corticosteroids (CS), conventional synthetic
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs), and biologic DMARDs (bDMARDs).
For bDMARDs, tocilizumab (TCZ), anakinra (ANK), and canakinumab (CNK) had the
most available data. Although 3 randomized controlled trials did not show
statistically significant benefits of bDMARDs, metaanalyses showed high rates of
complete remission and CS discontinuation. Complete remission was 80% (95% CI
59-92%, I 2 36%), 73% (95% CI 58-84%, I 2 66%), and 77% (95% CI 29-97%, I 2 82%)
and CS discontinuation was 57% (95% CI 29-81%, I 2 66%), 47% (95% CI 18-78%, I 2
79%), and 34% (95% CI 6-81%, I 2 59%), respectively, for TCZ, ANK, and CNK.
Studies with a higher proportion of patients previously treated with bDMARDs
showed a trend toward lower rates of CS discontinuation (P = 0.05). The analyses
had high clinical heterogeneity, largely because treatments were prescribed as
different lines of therapy.
CONCLUSION: Evidence supports TCZ, ANK, and CNK therapy for AOSD. However, the
magnitude of effect and comparative effectiveness of treatments is uncertain.

Copyright © 2024 by the Journal of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.3899/jrheum.2023-0995
PMID: 38302170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
