---
reference_id: "PMID:32173240"
title: Successful liver transplantation in mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE).
authors:
- Kripps K
- Nakayuenyongsuk W
- Shayota BJ
- Berquist W
- Gomez-Ospina N
- Esquivel CO
- Concepcion W
- Sampson JB
- Cristin DJ
- Jackson WE
- Gilliland S
- Pomfret EA
- Kueht ML
- Pettit RW
- Sherif YA
- Emrick LT
- Elsea SH
- Himes R
- Hirano M
- Van Hove JLK
- Scaglia F
- Enns GM
- Larson AA
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.03.001
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Esophageal Motility Disorders/genetics
- Female
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation/mortality
- Humans
- Infant
- "Liver Transplantation/methods, mortality"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Mitochondria/enzymology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Mitochondrial Encephalomyopathies/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/genetics
- Thymidine/blood
- Thymidine Phosphorylase/genetics
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Successful liver transplantation in mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE).
**Authors:** Kripps K, Nakayuenyongsuk W, Shayota BJ, Berquist W, Gomez-Ospina N, Esquivel CO, Concepcion W, Sampson JB, Cristin DJ, Jackson WE, Gilliland S, Pomfret EA, Kueht ML, Pettit RW, Sherif YA, Emrick LT, Elsea SH, Himes R, Hirano M, Van Hove JLK, Scaglia F, Enns GM, Larson AA
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.03.001)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2020 May;130(1):58-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.03.001. Epub
 2020 Mar 6.

Successful liver transplantation in mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal 
encephalomyopathy (MNGIE).

Kripps K(1), Nakayuenyongsuk W(2), Shayota BJ(3), Berquist W(4), Gomez-Ospina 
N(4), Esquivel CO(4), Concepcion W(4), Sampson JB(5), Cristin DJ(6), Jackson 
WE(6), Gilliland S(7), Pomfret EA(8), Kueht ML(9), Pettit RW(9), Sherif YA(9), 
Emrick LT(3), Elsea SH(3), Himes R(10), Hirano M(11), Van Hove JLK(1), Scaglia 
F(12), Enns GM(4), Larson AA(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, University of 
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.
(2)University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA, USA.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.
(7)Department of Anesthesia, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, 
CO, USA.
(8)Division of Transplant Surgery, University of Colorado School of Medicine, 
Aurora, CO, USA.
(9)Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(10)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(11)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York City, 
NY, USA.
(12)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA; Texas Children's Hospital, USA; Joint BCM-CUHK Center of 
Medical Genetics, Prince of Wales Hospital, ShaTin, Hong Kong.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, University of 
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA. Electronic address: 
Austin.Larson@childrenscolorado.org.

Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE) is a fatal 
disorder characterized by progressive gastrointestinal dysmotility, peripheral 
neuropathy, leukoencephalopathy, skeletal myopathy, ophthalmoparesis, and 
ptosis. MNGIE stems from deficient thymidine phosphorylase activity (TP) leading 
to toxic elevations of plasma thymidine. Hematopoietic stem cell transplant 
(HSCT) restores TP activity and halts disease progression but has high 
transplant-related morbidity and mortality. Liver transplant (LT) was reported 
to restore TP activity in two adult MNGIE patients. We report successful LT in 
four additional MNGIE patients, including a pediatric patient. Our patients were 
diagnosed between ages 14 months and 36 years with elevated thymidine levels and 
biallelic pathogenic variants in TYMP. Two patients presented with progressive 
gastrointestinal dysmotility, and three demonstrated progressive peripheral 
neuropathy with two suffering limitations in ambulation. Two patients, including 
the child, had liver dysfunction and cirrhosis. Following LT, thymidine levels 
nearly normalized in all four patients and remained low for the duration of 
follow-up. Disease symptoms stabilized in all patients, with some manifesting 
improvements, including intestinal function. No patient died, and LT appeared to 
have a more favorable safety profile than HSCT, especially when liver disease is 
present. Follow-up studies will need to document the long-term impact of this 
new approach on disease outcome. Take Home Message: Liver transplantation is 
effective in stabilizing symptoms and nearly normalizing thymidine levels in 
patients with mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE) and 
may have an improved safety profile over hematopoietic stem cell transplant.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.03.001
PMCID: PMC8399858
PMID: 32173240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Austin Larson, 
MD and Johan Van Hove, MD, PhD participate in a clinical trial from Stealth 
Therapeutics. Fernando Scaglia, MD and Gregory Enns, MB, ChB receive research 
support from Stealth BioTherapeutics, Inc. and BioElectron Technology 
Corporation and are investigators in the North American Mitochondrial Disease 
Consortium. Brian J. Shayota receives funding through the NIH T32 (GM07526–41) 
Medical Genetics Trainee Grant.

Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE; OMIM:603041) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in TYMP (OMIM:131222). TYMP encodes the enzyme thymidine phosphorylase (TP), necessary for thymidine and deoxyuridine metabolism. In MNGIE, enzyme activity is severely depleted, resulting in significant increases in thymidine and deoxyuridine levels in the blood and tissues(Halter et al 2015). This leads to an imbalance of the mitochondrial deoxyribonucleotide supply and subsequently impairs mitochondrial DNA replication. Over time, there is a build-up of mutations, deletions, and eventual depletion of mtDNA resulting in impaired mitochondrial function(Hirano et al 2006; Di Meo et al 2015; Halter et al 2015).

Characteristic clinical findings of patients with MNGIE include gastrointestinal dysmotility leading to malnutrition and cachexia, peripheral neuropathy, skeletal myopathy, progressive external ophthalmoparesis (PEO), and ptosis(Hirano et al 2006; Halter et al 2015; Yadak et al 2017). MRI of the brain typically demonstrates a leukoencephalopathy(Michio Hirano 2005 [Updated 2016 Jan 14]; Halter et al 2015; Yadak et al 2017). The disease is progressive and ultimately leads to death, usually as a result of severe malnutrition(Halter et al 2015).

Historically, management had largely been supportive. However, in recent years, findings that TP is highly expressed in platelets and leukocytes led investigators to attempt to restore enzyme activity in the body through stem cell transplantation (Lara et al 2006; Halter et al 2015; Yadak et al 2017). Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) has been proven to restore sufficient TP enzyme activity to reduce circulating thymidine and deoxyuridine to normal levels(Hirano et al 2006; Di Meo et al 2015; Halter et al 2015). Following HSCT, disease progression is generally halted and, in some cases, may lead to improvement in peripheral neuropathy and gastrointestinal symptoms(Hirano et al 2006; Halter et al 2015).

HSCT, however, is associated with a high mortality rate in MNGIE patients, especially in those with more severe symptoms at the time of HSCT. In one study, about 1/3 of patients who underwent HSCT died from complications of the transplant while another 1/3 died following transplant secondary to their existing disease(Halter et al 2015).

Erythrocyte encapsulated thymidine phosphorylase (EE-TP) is an emerging enzyme replacement therapy for MNGIE. While it is much less invasive than HSCT and has an encouraging safety profile, initial data show that it is not as effective as HCST in lowering thymidine levels(Levene et al 2019). There is additionally limited patient data to determine the ability of EE-TP to stabilize disease. One patient who received treatment for 73 months had objective improvements in neurologic symptoms, but had progression of cerebral white matter changes on MRI. The other patient who was treated for 28 months had initial minor symptomatic improvements, but then had rapid progression of disease following an illness, ultimately leading to death(Levene et al 2019). Given that TP is also highly expressed in liver, liver transplant (LT) has been explored as a means to restore enzyme activity and halt disease progression in MNGIE(Boschetti et al 2014; Yadak et al 2017). Thus far, two adult MNGIE patients have been reported to have undergone LT, and both are reported to be stable with short-term follow up after transplantation(De Giorgio et al 2016; D’Angelo et al 2017). Herein, we report four additional patients with MNGIE, including a pediatric patient, who underwent LT with successful outcomes, near-normalization of plasma thymidine levels, and clinical improvement.

Patient 1 is a male child who presented at 14 months of age with persistent vomiting, elevated aminotransferases, direct hyperbilirubinemia, and worsening coagulopathy. Further work-up revealed persistently elevated lactic acid and pyruvate, peaking at 7.6 mmol/L (normal 0.5-2.0 mmol/L) and 0.45 mmol/L(normal 0.08-0.16 mmol/L) respectively. Ultrasonography showed a heterogeneously hyperechogenic liver. Liver biopsy demonstrated hepatic parenchyma with extensive microvesicular and macrovesicular steatosis and bridging fibrosis (cirrhosis). MRI of the brain demonstrated T2-hyperintense lesions of the white matter (Figure 1). He had decreased patellar reflexes and decreased muscle tone but no other evidence of neuropathy, ophthalmoplegia, or ptosis. He had developmental delays, with only 3 words known at 22 months of age and the gross motor skill equivalent of an 11-month old child.

Work-up of his liver disease was negative for infectious or autoimmune causes. Given the persistent lactic acidosis and leukoencephalopathy on MRI, a mitochondrial etiology was suspected. Urine organic acid analysis showed slightly increased lactic acid, thymidine, and uracil. Molecular genetic testing showed a homozygous pathogenic splicing variant in TYMP (c.516+2T>A; NM_001953.4). Follow-up studies demonstrated a plasma thymidine level at 25.61 μmol/L (normal <0.25μmol/L) and a deoxyuridine level at 25.9 μmol/L (normal <0.25 μmol/L), confirming a diagnosis of MNGIE.

Following diagnosis, the patient was admitted repeatedly for vomiting, lactic acidosis, and declining liver function. While previously on a regular diet and breast feeding, his oral intake regressed, and he was only able to tolerate slow continuous nasogastric (NG) tube feeding.

Deceased donor liver transplant (DDLT) was performed at 26 months of age in the setting of worsening hepatopathy with ascites, hyperbilirubinemia, and coagulopathy. Histologic examination of the explanted liver showed micro-nodular cirrhosis without evidence of steatosis.

The patient’s post-operative course was uncomplicated, and following transplantation, he demonstrated marked clinical improvement. Follow-up thymidine and deoxyuridine levels dropped to near normal levels (Figure 2). His continuous NG feeds were successfully discontinued, and at 5 years of age he is able to tolerate a regular diet by mouth. There has been no evidence of gastrointestinal dysmotility. Profound sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) was identified following transplantation, and he received cochlear implants at 4 years of age. It is unclear when the hearing loss developed, although he had lost verbal communication well before he underwent LT. Developmental assessment at 4 years, 9 months of age showed language delays consistent with his hearing loss. However, his non-verbal assessment placed him at an average level with a non-verbal IQ standard score of 91 (average 90-110). Examination shows no evidence of PEO or myopathy. The only neurologic deficit appreciated on exam is continued absence of deep tendon reflexes. MRI of the brain performed at 3 years, 7 months of age showed stability of the previous finding of T2 hyperintensity of the white matter.

Patient 2 came to medical attention at 36 years of age, during the latter part of her 3rd pregnancy. She presented to the emergency department following an episode of a blind spot in her right eye accompanied by tingling and weakness in her right arm, confusion, and aphasia. Symptoms resolved spontaneously. Brain MRI revealed T2-hyperintense lesions of the white matter. Nerve conduction studies demonstrated a length dependent sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy with slowed conduction velocities suggestive of a demyelinating disease; no myopathy was noted. Ophthalmology evaluation demonstrated external ophthalmoplegia, ptosis, and convergence insufficiency, symptoms that had been present since the patient’s adolescent years. In retrospect, the patient reported a long history of fatigue, memory issues, and numbness in her hands and feet. She denied gastrointestinal symptoms such as vomiting constipation, diarrhea, early satiety, or abdominal pain. A gastric emptying study was normal. She had a history of mitral regurgitation and palpitations controlled with metoprolol.

Trio whole exome sequencing demonstrated compound heterozygous variants in TYMP, c.866A>C, p.E289A (pathogenic) and c.653T>G, p.I218S (likely pathogenic). Confirmatory studies showed deficient TP activity of 6 nmol/mg/h (normal 414-1020 nmol/mg/h), a thymidine level of 6.63 μmol/L (normal <0.25 μmol/L), and a deoxyuridine level of 11.17 μmol/L (normal <0.25 μmol/L), consistent with a diagnosis of MNGIE. Plasma lactate was normal.

With the goal of preserving her neurologic and intestinal function and concerned about the morbidity and mortality associated with HSCT, the patient elected to undergo LT. Living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) was performed at 37 years of age using the left lobe if an unrelated, anonymous donor. Baseline liver function evaluation prior to transplant was normal, including normal transaminases, γ-glutamyl transferase, and normal clotting times and albumin levels. Aggressive intravenous nutritional support was provided intraoperatively and post-operatively until enteral nutrition was tolerated(Parikh et al 2017). Her immediate post-operative course was complicated by gastrointestinal bleeding related to the Roux-en-Y jejunojejunal anastomosis which resolved without additional intervention. The explanted liver showed diffuse micro and macrovesicular steatosis. Thymidine and deoxyuridine levels following transplant dropped to 1.01 μmol/L and 0.59 μmol/L respectively, nearing normal values. Subsequent thymidine levels have remained consistently within this near-normal range (Figure 2).

The patient was readmitted with a fever 3 months post-transplant. Work up demonstrated a perihepatic fluid collection along the free-edge of the liver. This was treated with percutaneous drainage and antibiotics with resolution. Ten months post-transplant, the patient reported significant improvement in her energy levels. She additionally endorsed a decrease in the duration and frequency of her neuropathic pain. Her PEO, ptosis, and peripheral neuropathy have been stable. Follow-up nerve conduction studies demonstrated similar findings of a chronic axonal sensorimotor neuropathy. However, the pre- and post-LT studies are not directly comparable given that they were performed at different institutions and on opposite legs. She has not developed any symptoms of gastrointestinal dysmotility; although, following an episode of acute rejection of her donor liver, she developed diarrhea and abdominal bloating related to a change in her immunosuppressive regimen and not to her underlying disease.

Patient 3 was diagnosed with MNGIE at 20 years of age following a two-year history of gastrointestinal complaints and a one-year history of fatigue, weakness, and progressively worsening extremity paresthesias. Her neurologic symptoms eventually resulted in an inability to walk without assistive devices, and she was wheelchair dependent for long distances. Her gastrointestinal symptoms of severe gastroesophageal reflux, regurgitation, and chronic abdominal pain progressed to an inability to tolerate oral nutrition, and total parenteral nutrition (TPN) was initiated. At the time of her initial examination by a metabolic physician, she was thin with a BMI of 14 kg/m2, had bilateral extremity paresthesias of the hands and feet, and demonstrated areflexia, mild weakness of arms and legs, and bilateral foot drop. Menstruation had ceased, and she developed hyperglycemia requiring an insulin pump. MNGIE was suspected and TYMP sequencing revealed a pathogenic homozygous intronic variant c.214+1G>T at a canonical splice site. Plasma thymidine levels were elevated at 3.095 μmol/L (normal <0.7 μmol/L).

Brain MRI performed at 21 years of age showed diffuse leukoencephalopathy. Electrocardiography demonstrated sinus tachycardia, thought to be related to dysautonomia. Echocardiography showed a structurally normal heart with mildly decreased left ventricular function. A repeat echocardiogram one year later showed slightly worse left ventricular function, and a cardiac MRI noted a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 50% (normal >55%) and non-specific, patchy mesocardial left ventricular delayed enhancement. Her heart failure was treated with digoxin, but because of worsening extremity paresthesias and increased fatigue, this medication was discontinued after 2 weeks.

She underwent DDLT at age 21 years, 10 months. Her post-operative course was complicated by cytomegalovirus viremia, right lower-lobe pneumonia, methicillin susceptible Staph. aureus bacteremia, and non-occlusive thrombus of the right internal jugular vein. Three days following transplantation her plasma thymidine level had normalized to <0.7 μmol/L (Figure 2). Additionally, her cardiac symptoms, including the sinus tachycardia, resolved and repeat echocardiography was normal (LVEF 59%).

Approximately 6 weeks following LT, she was able to tolerate half her nutrition via gastro-jejunal tube feeding, with the remainder being supplied by parenteral nutrition. At 6 months post-transplantation the patient stopped J-tube feedings secondary to abdominal pain, and was treated with rifaximin for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO), and pyridostigmine and metoclopramide for gastroparesis. Most recently, she had been able to tolerate regular solid food intake by mouth to provide about half her caloric goals. Her oral intake remains limited by associated abdominal pain and she receives the remainder of her nutrition intravenously. Her BMI at the time of diagnosis had dropped to 12.74 kg/m2, and at 14 months post-transplantation was 12.31 kg/m2.

Abdominal imaging post-LT demonstrates persistent diffuse gastric distension and small bowel dilatation. She has persistent elevations of transaminases but normal prothrombin time, decreased albumin (2.8 g/mL), and a persistent microcytic anemia. Lactate levels have improved but not normalized (1.1-3.5 mmol/L post-LT, normal <2.0 mmol/L). Her glucose control significantly improved post-LT with hemoglobin A1C levels decreasing from 8.3% to 5.3%, and she was able to discontinue her insulin pump. Her liver biopsy 6 months post-transplantation showed mild to moderate steatosis and mild pericellular fibrosis but no evidence of rejection. Her menstrual cycles resumed, and she conceived 9 months post-transplantation but miscarried at approximately 10 weeks gestation. The cause of the miscarriage is unknown.

At ten months post-LT, she was able to walk 10 feet with a walker but was otherwise wheelchair dependent; she reported no change in her strength. Her numbness was stable and she continued to experience neuropathic pain in her feet. On exam, she had diminished sensation in her fingers and below the knees to pinprick, 4/5 proximal strength, and bilateral foot drop (2/5 ankle dorsifexion). 14 months post-LT there was subjective improvement in her strength and sensation.

Patient 4 first developed symptoms at the age of 14 years, when he noticed pressure sores on his feet, difficulty walking, and progressive fatigue. Neurological work-up revealed elevated levels of protein in his cerebrospinal fluid, and he was given a diagnosis of chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy. He was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin and steroids with no clinical improvement after two years.

At the age of 17 years, he was found to have hepatosplenomegaly and esophageal varices, suggesting portal hypertension. Subsequent liver biopsy confirmed cirrhosis. His neurological deterioration continued. He lost sensation in his hands due to a mixed demyelinating neuropathy at age 21 years, which was confirmed by nerve conduction studies. At 22 years, he was diagnosed with MNGIE on the basis of an elevated plasma thymidine level at 17 μmol/L (normal <0.7 μmol/L) and molecular confirmation of a homozygous pathogenic splice variant in TYMP c.215-1G>C. By the time of diagnosis, his symptoms had progressed to include gastric dysmotility, early satiety, fecal urgency, and incontinence, culminating in a weight loss of approximately 20 kg over the prior year. Echocardiography revealed no structural abnormalities and normal biventricular systolic function. Due to progressive neurological and gastrointestinal disease, consideration was given to HSCT; however, due to his cirrhosis and knowledge of poor HSCT outcomes in the setting of underlying liver disease, LT was preferred.

At 23 years of age he underwent DDLT. His post-operative course was complicated by hypertension, type II diabetes mellitus, and significant hypertriglyceridemia >5,250 mg/dl (normal <150 mg/dl), eventually responsive to medication. Quantitative plasma thymidine reached the normal range one day post-operative (thymidine <0.7 μmol/L) and remained normal for 6 months post-LT (Figure 2). Untargeted metabolomic studies on plasma were able to detect a small amount of thymidine following LT, however, given that thymidine is a rare analyte, there are no normative values and a z-score could not be calculated.

His early satiety and other gastrointestinal symptoms gradually improved over the first 6 post-LT months with subsequent weight gain. The patient also reported gradual improvement in strength, stability, and proprioception, and by 4 months post-LT, he no longer required a walking stick. Despite significant progress, at his most recent evaluation at 24 years of age he continues to exhibit decreased muscle mass, ophthalmoplegia, absent lower extremity reflexes, and mild distal paresthesia of the upper and lower extremities.

MNGIE is a rare mitochondrial disease. Although the true incidence is unknown, a report in 2012 confirmed 140 historical cases(Hirano et al 2012). Typically, the symptoms of MNGIE appear in the first or second decade of life and progress over time, with the mean life expectancy of an affected individual averaging 37 years (Halter et al 2015). Gastrointestinal dysmotility is usually the most debilitating and life-limiting aspect of the disease.

Our patients demonstrate great variability in their disease presentations. Patient 1 presented with progressive liver cirrhosis and failure in late infancy. TP deficiency typically presents in childhood to young adulthood, and liver cirrhosis is usually a late and variable presentation of the disease, often with a poor prognosis(Finkenstedt et al 2013). Based on the findings in this patient, the clinical characteristics of TP deficiency should be expanded, with MNGIE added to the differential diagnosis of infantile and childhood liver disease.

Furthermore, while Patient 1 had a rapid onset of his liver symptoms, he did not display any significant neurologic deficits or other symptoms of rapidly progressive MNGIE. He did display feeding intolerance with need for slow infusion of NG feeds, but it is difficult to say whether this was due to gastrointestinal dysmotility, or whether this stemmed from his underlying liver disease. Improved feeding tolerance after transplantation suggests either the absence of gastrointestinal dysmotility prior to transplantation, or mild enough disease that transplantation was able to reverse it. His SNHL may be attributable to his MNGIE diagnosis. While the SNHL was not diagnosed until after transplantation, his loss of verbal speech prior to LT supports that the hearing loss was likely present prior to restoration of his TP activity.

Patient 2 did not present to medical attention until 36 years of age, which is nearing the average life expectancy for MNGIE patients. Later onset forms of MNGIE have been documented; however, in these cases, enzyme activity is usually greater than 10%(Marti et al 2005). Patient 2 had an activity level of around 1%. While she had prominent neurologic features of disease, she was still ambulatory without the need for assistive devices and had no GI symptoms.

Patients 3 and 4 were more typical in their presentations, with onset of symptoms in the late teens and significant gastrointestinal dysmotility. The cardiac symptoms of Patient 3 are less common. Cardiac arrhythmias including SVT and ventricular hypertrophy have been reported as rare features in MNGIE, with impairment of cardiac function, as observed in Patient 3, described even more infrequently (Pacitti et al 2018).

Despite the variability in presentation, these cases all document the utility and effectiveness of LT in MNGIE. In all four patients, TP enzyme activity in the graft was sufficient to bring plasma thymidine to near-normal levels. Thymidine was still mildly elevated in patients 1 and 2, and untargeted metabolomics analysis performed on Patient 4 revealed that low levels of thymidine were still detectable following transplant. Regardless, the post-transplant plasma thymidine levels in all patients are far below what is typically seen in MNGIE. Thymidine levels dropped >20 times lower than peak pre-transplant levels in Patient 1, 11 times lower in Patient 2, 8 times lower in Patient 3, and 24 times lower in Patient 4. For Patient 1, over the course of four years, thymidine levels increased slightly, fluctuating between <0.25 μmol/L and 1.27 μmol/L, but have remained far below his pre-transplant level (25 μmol/L).

Further evidence of benefit of LT was the clinical stability, and, in many cases, improvement for all patients. Three years out from transplant, Patient 1 has not demonstrated gastrointestinal motility issues or new neurologic deficits. Although he has a notable speech delay, this can at least in part be attributed to his hearing loss. It is reassuring that on non-verbal measures he scores within the average range, whereas prior to transplantation he had substantial developmental delays. Patient 2 has similarly reported no disease progression 10 months out from transplantation and has improved energy and decreased neuropathic pain. Gastrointestinal motility symptoms in Patient 3 partially resolved as demonstrated by her ability to now tolerate half her nutrition orally. Additionally, she had resolution of her cardiac disease. While Patient 3 still exhibits significant handicaps, this is likely a reflection of the severity of disease prior to LT. Patient 4 showed improvement in his neurologic and gastrointestinal symptoms following LT as demonstrated by improved mobility and weight gain. Overall, the post-LT improvements demonstrated by these four patients are consistent with the improvements seen in the surviving MNGIE patients who underwent HSCT(Halter et al 2015).

Adverse outcomes from liver transplantation in our patients were in-line with known complications of LT and immunosuppressive therapies outside of treatment for MNGIE. These complications include a perihepatic abscess and medication related side effects in Patient 2, infections in Patient 3, development of hypertension in patients 2 and 4, and hypertriglyceridemia and type II diabetes mellitus in patient 4. All complications were successfully managed with standard medical therapies. In contrast to HSCT, our patients are now committed to life-long immunosuppression therapies to maintain their donor organ.

The 100% short-term survival seen in the four MNGIE patients presented, combined with the positive outcomes in the two previously published Italian patients who underwent LT, stands in contrast to HSCT in MNGIE. Halter et al. demonstrated 62% mortality in their cohort, with deaths occurring from 18 days to 3 years following HSCT(Halter et al 2015). HSCT has demonstrated particularly high mortality in patients with prominent disease manifestations going into transplantation, especially in patients with underlying liver disease, as manifested in Patients 1 and 4(Finkenstedt et al 2013; Halter et al 2015). We cannot provide a direct comparison of the two interventions. The size of our LT cohort is much smaller than that of the HSCT cohort, and long-term outcomes over multiple years for our patients have not yet been determined. The LT cohort may also have been diagnosed earlier in the course of the disease due to widespread availability of molecular genetic testing. Therefore, they may have been healthier going into transplant than the older HSCT cohort. The LT cohort involved diagnoses in recent years and may additionally have benefitted from improved contemporary medical practices. However, LT appears effective for stabilization of MNGIE symptoms and for dramatic reduction in the toxic metabolites that drive the disease process. For MNGIE patients with hepatopathy at diagnosis or other contraindications to HSCT, LT should be considered the preferred management strategy. The decision for LT versus HSCT may also depend on local resources, consideration by the individual patient for the quality-of-life factors most important to them, and the morbidity and mortality risks each treatment modality presents.

The effectiveness of HSCT for normalizing thymidine levels demonstrates that bone marrow derived cells harbor sufficient TP activity to maintain appropriate nucleotide homeostasis in the body. Thus, going forward, domino liver transplants could be considered for MNGIE patients, as a recipient of a MNGIE liver theoretically should have enough TP activity in their native blood cells (and other tissues) to prevent disease. In light of the underlying liver failure in two of our patients, before using a MNGIE liver as a graft for another individual, further studies (potentially in animal models) are needed to better characterize the liver disease in MNGIE. The critical question is whether there is an intrinsic propensity for hepatopathy in MNGIE livers even in the setting of normal circulating thymidine.

Erythrocyte encapsulated thymidine phosphorylase (EE-TP) provides a much less invasive approach than either HSCT or LT for lowering thymidine levels in MNGIE patients, and early data is promising in terms of safety and tolerability(Levene et al 2019). While EE-TP has been demonstrated to decrease plasma thymidine levels, it has not yet been shown to bring thymidine to the near-normal limits observed in patients who have undergone HSCT or LT(Levene et al 2019), and its efficacy in stabilizing disease remains in question. Thus, based on early evidence, EE-TP may not be as effective a therapy as LT or HSCT, but is promising as a tool to bridge patients while awaiting transplant, or perhaps for use in patients whose disease has progressed to a severity which precludes their candidacy for either liver or stem cell transplantation.

This series of patients provides evidence for the effectiveness of LT in the management of MNGIE, with near normalization of nucleoside levels and lack of disease progression in the first year. LT can be considered as an alternative to HSCT in the treatment of TP deficiency and seems especially favorable in the setting of underlying liver dysfunction. Long-term follow up post-LT will be essential to evaluate the impact of this approach on disease outcome.