---
reference_id: "PMID:35133008"
title: Varicella-zoster virus reactivation is frequently detected in HIV-infected individuals presenting with stroke.
authors:
- Marais G
- Naidoo M
- McMullen K
- Stanley A
- Bryer A
- van der Westhuizen D
- Bateman K
- Hardie DR
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.27651
keywords:
- HIV Infections/complications
- "Herpes Zoster/complications, diagnosis"
- "Herpesvirus 3, Human/genetics"
- Humans
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Stroke/diagnosis
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Varicella-zoster virus reactivation is frequently detected in HIV-infected individuals presenting with stroke.
**Authors:** Marais G, Naidoo M, McMullen K, Stanley A, Bryer A, van der Westhuizen D, Bateman K, Hardie DR
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.27651](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.27651)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2022 Jun;94(6):2675-2683. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27651. Epub 2022 Feb
17.

Varicella-zoster virus reactivation is frequently detected in HIV-infected 
individuals presenting with stroke.

Marais G(1)(2), Naidoo M(1)(2), McMullen K(3), Stanley A(4), Bryer A(3), van der 
Westhuizen D(2)(5), Bateman K(3), Hardie DR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Virology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, Western 
Cape, South Africa.
(2)National Health Laboratory Service, Groote Schuur Hospital, Cape Town, 
Western Cape, South Africa.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Neurology, University of Cape Town, Cape 
Town, Western Cape, South Africa.
(4)Department of Neurology, Hawke's Bay Fallen Soldiers Memorial Hospital, 
Hastings, New Zealand.
(5)Division of Chemical Pathology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, Western 
Cape, South Africa.

Infections are an underappreciated cause of stroke, particularly in young and 
immunocompromised individuals. Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) reactivation, 
particularly ophthalmic zoster, has been linked to increased risk of stroke but 
diagnosing VZV-associated cerebral vasculopathy is challenging as neither a 
recent zoster rash, nor detectable levels of VZV DNA are universally present at 
stroke presentation. Detection of VZV IgG in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF-VZVG) 
presents a promising alternative, but requires evaluation of individual 
blood-CSF dynamics, particularly in the setting of chronic inflammatory states 
such as HIV infection. Consequently, its use has not been broadly adopted as 
simple diagnostic algorithms are not available. In this study looking at young 
adults presenting with acute stroke, we used an algorithm that includes testing 
for both VZV nucleic acids and CSF-VZVG which was corrected for blood-CSF 
barrier dynamics and poly-specific immune activation. We found that 13 of 35 
(37%), including 7 with a positive CSF VZV PCR, young HIV-infected adults 
presenting with stroke, 3 of 34 (9%) young HIV-uninfected adults presenting with 
stroke, and 1 of 18 (6%) HIV-infected nonstroke controls demonstrated evidence 
of central nervous system reactivation of VZV.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27651
PMID: 35133008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]