---
reference_id: "PMID:27170141"
title: "Dientamoeba fragilis, the Neglected Trichomonad of the Human Bowel."
authors:
- Stark D
- Barratt J
- Chan D
- Ellis JT
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1128/CMR.00076-15
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dientamoeba fragilis, the Neglected Trichomonad of the Human Bowel.
**Authors:** Stark D, Barratt J, Chan D, Ellis JT
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CMR.00076-15](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00076-15)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2016 Jul;29(3):553-80. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00076-15.

Dientamoeba fragilis, the Neglected Trichomonad of the Human Bowel.

Stark D(1), Barratt J(2), Chan D(2), Ellis JT(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Microbiology, Sydpath, St Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst, NSW, 
Australia damien.stark@svha.org.au.
(2)School of Life Sciences and the I3 Institute, University of Technology 
Sydney, Broadway, NSW, Australia.

Dientamoeba fragilis is a protozoan parasite of the human bowel, commonly 
reported throughout the world in association with gastrointestinal symptoms. 
Despite its initial discovery over 100 years ago, arguably, we know less about 
this peculiar organism than any other pathogenic or potentially pathogenic 
protozoan that infects humans. The details of its life cycle and mode of 
transmission are not completely known, and its potential as a human pathogen is 
debated within the scientific community. Recently, several major advances have 
been made with respect to this organism's life cycle and molecular biology. 
While many questions remain unanswered, these and other recent advances have 
given rise to some intriguing new leads, which will pave the way for future 
research. This review encompasses a large body of knowledge generated on various 
aspects of D. fragilis over the last century, together with an update on the 
most recent developments. This includes an update on the latest diagnostic 
techniques and treatments, the clinical aspects of dientamoebiasis, the 
development of an animal model, the description of a D. fragilis cyst stage, and 
the sequencing of the first D. fragilis transcriptome.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.00076-15
PMCID: PMC4861990
PMID: 27170141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]