---
reference_id: "PMID:28631066"
title: "Rheumatoid Vasculitis: A Diminishing Yet Devastating Menace."
authors:
- Kishore S
- Maher L
- Majithia V
journal: Curr Rheumatol Rep
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s11926-017-0667-3
keywords:
- Antirheumatic Agents/therapeutic use
- Biological Products/therapeutic use
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Prognosis
- "Rheumatoid Vasculitis/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rheumatoid Vasculitis: A Diminishing Yet Devastating Menace.
**Authors:** Kishore S, Maher L, Majithia V
**Journal:** Curr Rheumatol Rep (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11926-017-0667-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11926-017-0667-3)

## Content

1. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2017 Jul;19(7):39. doi: 10.1007/s11926-017-0667-3.

Rheumatoid Vasculitis: A Diminishing Yet Devastating Menace.

Kishore S(1), Maher L(2)(3), Majithia V(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of Mississippi 
Medical Center, 2500 N. State Street, Jackson, MS, 39216, USA. skishore@umc.edu.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of Mississippi 
Medical Center, 2500 N. State Street, Jackson, MS, 39216, USA.
(3)G. V. (Sonny) Montgomery VAMC, 1500 E. Woodrow Wilson Drive, Jackson, MS, 
39216, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Rheumatoid vasculitis (RV) is an unusual complication of 
long-standing rheumatoid arthritis, which is characterized by the development of 
necrotizing or leukocytoclastic vasculitis involving small or medium-sized 
vessels. In this review, we aim to provide an update on the epidemiology, 
pathogenesis, clinical presentation, and management of this challenging 
extra-articular manifestation.
RECENT FINDINGS: RV is heterogenous in its clinical presentation depending on 
the organ and size of blood vessels involved. The most common organs involved 
are the skin and peripheral nerve. Based on recent population studies, the 
incidence has significantly decreased with early recognition and the advent of 
immunosuppressive drugs and biologics; however, the mortality rates remain high. 
RV remains a serious extra-articular manifestation of RA that needs to be 
promptly recognized and treated. No consensus is available on treatment, given 
the ongoing debate of whether the biologics can trigger or treat RV.

DOI: 10.1007/s11926-017-0667-3
PMID: 28631066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]