---
reference_id: "PMID:35085835"
title: "Syndromic obesity with neurodevelopmental delay: Opportunities for targeted interventions."
authors:
- Kehinde TA
- Bhatia A
- Olarewaju B
- Shoaib MZ
- Mousa J
- Osundiji MA
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104443
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Syndromic obesity with neurodevelopmental delay: Opportunities for targeted interventions.
**Authors:** Kehinde TA, Bhatia A, Olarewaju B, Shoaib MZ, Mousa J, Osundiji MA
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104443](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104443)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2022 Mar;65(3):104443. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104443. Epub 
2022 Jan 25.

Syndromic obesity with neurodevelopmental delay: Opportunities for targeted 
interventions.

Kehinde TA(1), Bhatia A(2), Olarewaju B(3), Shoaib MZ(4), Mousa J(5), Osundiji 
MA(6).

Author information:
(1)Central and Northwest London NHS Foundation Trust, The Kingswood Centre, 134 
Honeypot Lane, Kingsbury, London, NW9 0QY, United Kingdom.
(2)Merit Academy, Santa Cruz, CA, 95063, USA.
(3)Hammersmith and Charing Cross Hospital, Imperial College NHS Trust, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Faculty of Life Sciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(5)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, 
MN, 55905, USA.
(6)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
555 University Avenue, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, M5G1X8, Canada; 
Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, 
MN, 55905, USA. Electronic address: osundiji.mayowa@mayo.edu.

Obesity is a growing public health problem in many developed countries, although 
similar trends are increasingly being described in some developing nations. The 
genetic underpinnings of obesity continue to arouse increasing research 
interests, investigations, and discussions. The recent advances in next 
generation sequencing technologies have shed some more light on the diverse 
monogenic and polygenic causes of obesity. Syndromic obesity due to chromosomal 
or monogenic defects has attendant co-morbidities, which may include 
neurodevelopmental delays, dysmorphism as well as organ-specific developmental 
anomalies. An improved understanding of the nature of neurodevelopmental 
challenges in syndromic obesity may pave the way for personalized dietary and 
physical activity management approaches. This review article describes the 
clinical and molecular genetic aspects of obesity-related syndromes and the 
associated neurodevelopmental disabilities. The potential opportunities for 
individualized nutrigenomic managements of syndromic obesity are also 
highlighted.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104443
PMID: 35085835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]