---
reference_id: "PMID:31795387"
title: "Exposure of Agriculture Workers to Pesticides: The Effect of Heat on Protective Glove Performance and Skin Exposure to Dichlorvos."
authors:
- Thredgold L
- Gaskin S
- Quy C
- Pisaniello D
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph16234798
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exposure of Agriculture Workers to Pesticides: The Effect of Heat on Protective Glove Performance and Skin Exposure to Dichlorvos.
**Authors:** Thredgold L, Gaskin S, Quy C, Pisaniello D
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph16234798](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16234798)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019 Nov 29;16(23):4798. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph16234798.

Exposure of Agriculture Workers to Pesticides: The Effect of Heat on Protective 
Glove Performance and Skin Exposure to Dichlorvos.

Thredgold L(1), Gaskin S(1), Quy C(1)(2), Pisaniello D(1).

Author information:
(1)Adelaide Exposure Science and Health, School of Public Health, University of 
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5000, Australia.
(2)AgroParisTech, Paris Institute of Technology for Life, Food and Environmental 
Sciences, 75231 Paris, France.

Dichlorvos is a toxic organophosphate insecticide that is used in agriculture 
and other insecticide applications. Dermal uptake is a known exposure route for 
dichlorvos and chemical protective gloves are commonly utilized. Chemical 
handling and application may occur in a variety of thermal environments, and the 
rates of both chemical permeation through gloves and transdermal penetration may 
vary significantly with temperature. There has been no published research on the 
temperature-dependent kinetics of these processes for dichlorvos and thus, this 
study reports on the effects of hot conditions for the concentrated and 
application strength chemical. Dichlorvos breakthrough times for non-disposable 
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) gloves at 60 °C were approximately halved compared to 
25 °C for the concentrate (2 vs. 4 h) and more than halved at application 
strength (3 vs. >8 h). From permeation experiments covering 15-60 °C, there was 
a 460-fold increase in cumulative permeation over 8 h for the concentrated 
dichlorvos and the estimated activation energy halved. Elevated temperature was 
also shown to be a significant factor for human skin penetration increasing the 
cumulative penetration of concentrate dichlorvos from 179 ± 37 to 1315 ± 362 
µg/cm2 (p = 0.0032) and application strength from 29.8 ± 5.7 to 115 ± 19 µg/cm2 
(p = 0.0131). This work illustrates the important role temperature plays in 
glove performance and health risk via dermal exposure. As such, it is important 
to consider in-use conditions of temperature when implementing chemical hygiene 
programs.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph16234798
PMCID: PMC6926567
PMID: 31795387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.