---
reference_id: "PMID:34338012"
title: Management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
authors:
- Katzenberg G
- Deacon A
- Aigbirior J
- Vestbo J
journal: Br J Hosp Med (Lond)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.12968/hmed.2020.0561
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Katzenberg G, Deacon A, Aigbirior J, Vestbo J
**Journal:** Br J Hosp Med (Lond) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.12968/hmed.2020.0561](https://doi.org/10.12968/hmed.2020.0561)

## Content

1. Br J Hosp Med (Lond). 2021 Jul 2;82(7):1-10. doi: 10.12968/hmed.2020.0561.
Epub  2021 Jul 20.

Management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Katzenberg G(1), Deacon A(1), Aigbirior J(1), Vestbo J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)North West Lung Centre, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, 
Manchester Academic Science Centre, Manchester, UK.
(2)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, School of 
Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is a prevalent condition in the UK, 
associated with high morbidity and mortality. Hospital physicians manage a 
significant portion of acute chronic obstructive pulmonary disease admissions to 
hospital and readmissions after discharge. Optimal management of exacerbations 
requires controlled oxygen therapy and ventilatory support where necessary, and 
careful administration of bronchodilators, steroids and antibiotics. Holistic 
care for these patients includes nutritional supplementation and palliative 
support for those with advanced disease. To reduce the chance of readmission, 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease care bundles can be used, along with a 
review of inhaled and oral therapies. Where available, hospital-at-home 
discharge schemes can safely facilitate early discharge. Most importantly, high 
quality evidence-based smoking cessation support must be offered to smokers. 
Exercise improves the physiological and psychological condition of people with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and should be encouraged, with referral to 
a pulmonary rehabilitation service if available.

DOI: 10.12968/hmed.2020.0561
PMID: 34338012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]