---
reference_id: "PMID:22473403"
title: "Wilson's disease: an analysis of 28 Brazilian children."
authors:
- Kleine RT
- Mendes R
- Pugliese R
- Miura I
- Danesi V
- Porta G
journal: Clinics (Sao Paulo)
year: '2012'
doi: 10.6061/clinics/2012(03)05
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Aspartate Aminotransferases/blood
- Biomarkers/blood
- Brazil
- Chelating Agents/therapeutic use
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Copper/therapeutic use
- Early Diagnosis
- Family
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Hepatolenticular Degeneration/diagnosis, drug therapy, prevention & control"
- Humans
- Male
- Mass Screening/methods
- Retrospective Studies
- Zinc Sulfate/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wilson's disease: an analysis of 28 Brazilian children.
**Authors:** Kleine RT, Mendes R, Pugliese R, Miura I, Danesi V, Porta G
**Journal:** Clinics (Sao Paulo) (2012)
**DOI:** [10.6061/clinics/2012(03)05](https://doi.org/10.6061/clinics/2012(03)05)

## Content

1. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2012;67(3):231-5. doi: 10.6061/clinics/2012(03)05.

Wilson's disease: an analysis of 28 Brazilian children.

Kleine RT(1), Mendes R, Pugliese R, Miura I, Danesi V, Porta G.

Author information:
(1)Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. rtkleine@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVES: Clinical-laboratory and evolutionary analysis of twenty-eight
patients with Wilson's disease.
METHODS: Twenty-eight children (twelve females and sixteen males) with Wilson's
disease were evaluated retrospectively between 1987 and 2009, with a follow-up
of 72 months (1 - 240 months). The clinical, laboratory, and histologic features
at diagnosis were recorded at the end of the study.
RESULTS: The median age at diagnosis was 11 years (2 - 18 years). Twelve
patients were asymptomatic, seven had hepatitis symptoms, five had raised
aminotransferase levels, three had hepatomegaly associated with neurological
disorders, one had fulminant hepatitis with hemolytic anemia, and six patients
presented with a Kayser-Fleischer ring. A histological analysis revealed that
six children had chronic hepatitis, seven had cirrhosis, two had steatosis, one
had portal fibrosis, and one had massive necrosis. The treatment consisted of
D-penicillamine associated with pyridoxine for 26 patients. Adverse effects were
observed in the other two patients: one presented with uncontrollable vomiting
and the other demonstrated elastosis perforans serpiginosa. At the end of the
study, all 26 treated patients were asymptomatic. Twenty-four of the patients
were treated with D-penicillamine and pyridoxine, and two were treated with
trientine and zinc sulfate. A liver transplant was performed in one patient with
fulminant hepatitis, but the final patient died 48 hours after admission to the
intensive care unit.
CONCLUSIONS: Family screenings associated with early treatment are important in
preventing Wilson's disease symptoms and potentially fatal disease progression.
The study suggests that Wilson's disease must be ruled out in children older
than two years presenting with abnormal levels of hepatic enzymes because of the
heterogeneity of symptoms and the encouraging treatment results obtained so far.

DOI: 10.6061/clinics/2012(03)05
PMCID: PMC3297031
PMID: 22473403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported.
