---
reference_id: "PMID:35661166"
title: Teclistamab in Relapsed or Refractory Multiple Myeloma.
authors:
- Moreau P
- Garfall AL
- van de Donk NWCJ
- Nahi H
- San-Miguel JF
- Oriol A
- Nooka AK
- Martin T
- Rosinol L
- Chari A
- Karlin L
- Benboubker L
- Mateos MV
- Bahlis N
- Popat R
- Besemer B
- Martínez-López J
- Sidana S
- Delforge M
- Pei L
- Trancucci D
- Verona R
- Girgis S
- Lin SXW
- Olyslager Y
- Jaffe M
- Uhlar C
- Stephenson T
- Van Rampelbergh R
- Banerjee A
- Goldberg JD
- Kobos R
- Krishnan A
- Usmani SZ
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2203478
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Teclistamab in Relapsed or Refractory Multiple Myeloma.
**Authors:** Moreau P, Garfall AL, van de Donk NWCJ, Nahi H, San-Miguel JF, Oriol A, Nooka AK, Martin T, Rosinol L, Chari A, Karlin L, Benboubker L, Mateos MV, Bahlis N, Popat R, Besemer B, Martínez-López J, Sidana S, Delforge M, Pei L, Trancucci D, Verona R, Girgis S, Lin SXW, Olyslager Y, Jaffe M, Uhlar C, Stephenson T, Van Rampelbergh R, Banerjee A, Goldberg JD, Kobos R, Krishnan A, Usmani SZ
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2203478](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2203478)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2022 Aug 11;387(6):495-505. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2203478. Epub
2022  Jun 5.

Teclistamab in Relapsed or Refractory Multiple Myeloma.

Moreau P(1), Garfall AL(1), van de Donk NWCJ(1), Nahi H(1), San-Miguel JF(1), 
Oriol A(1), Nooka AK(1), Martin T(1), Rosinol L(1), Chari A(1), Karlin L(1), 
Benboubker L(1), Mateos MV(1), Bahlis N(1), Popat R(1), Besemer B(1), 
Martínez-López J(1), Sidana S(1), Delforge M(1), Pei L(1), Trancucci D(1), 
Verona R(1), Girgis S(1), Lin SXW(1), Olyslager Y(1), Jaffe M(1), Uhlar C(1), 
Stephenson T(1), Van Rampelbergh R(1), Banerjee A(1), Goldberg JD(1), Kobos 
R(1), Krishnan A(1), Usmani SZ(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Hematology Clinic, University Hospital Hôtel-Dieu, Nantes (P.M.), 
Service d'Hématologie Clinique, Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, Pierre-Bénite 
(L.K.), and Service d'Hématologie et Thérapie Cellulaire, Hôpital Bretonneau, 
Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire, Tours (L.B.) - all in France; 
Abramson Cancer Center, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia (A.L.G.), and Janssen Research and Development, Spring House (R.V., 
S.G., S.X.W.L., C.U., T.S., A.B.) - both in Pennsylvania; the Department of 
Hematology, Amsterdam University Medical Center, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
Cancer Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam (N.W.C.J.D.); Karolinska University Hospital 
at Huddinge, Stockholm (H.N.); Clínica Universidad de Navarra, Centro de 
Investigación Médica Aplicada, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de 
Cáncer (CIBERONC), Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Navarra, Pamplona 
(J.F.S.-M.), Institut Català d'Oncologia and Institut Josep Carreras, Hospital 
Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona (A.O.), Hospital Clínic, August Pi i Sunyer 
Biomedical Research Institute, University of Barcelona, Barcelona (L.R.), 
University Hospital of Salamanca, Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de 
Salamanca, Centro del Investigación del Cáncer, CIBERONC, Salamanca (M.-V.M.), 
and Hematological Malignancies Clinical Research Unit, Hospital 12 de Octubre 
Universidad Complutense, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas, 
CIBERONC, Madrid (J.M.-L.) - all in Spain; Winship Cancer Institute, Emory 
University, Atlanta (A.K.N.); the University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco (T.M.), Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford (S.S.), and 
City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, Duarte (A.K.) - all in California; 
Mount Sinai School of Medicine (A.C.) and Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
(S.Z.U.) - both in New York; Arnie Charbonneau Cancer Institute, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada (N.B.); Clinical Research Facility, National 
Institute for Health Research University College London Hospitals, NHS 
Foundation Trust, London (R.P.); the Department of Hematology, Oncology, and 
Immunology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany (B.B.); the University of 
Leuven, Leuven (M.D.), and Janssen Research and Development, Antwerp (Y.O., 
R.V.R.) - both in Belgium; Janssen Research and Development, Raritan, NJ (L.P., 
D.T., M.J., J.D.G., R.K.); and Levine Cancer Institute-Atrium Health, Charlotte, 
NC (S.Z.U.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2022 Aug 11;387(6):558-561. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe2209692.
    N Engl J Med. 2022 Nov 3;387(18):1721. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2211969.
    N Engl J Med. 2022 Nov 3;387(18):1721-1722. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2211969.

BACKGROUND: Teclistamab is a T-cell-redirecting bispecific antibody that targets 
both CD3 expressed on the surface of T cells and B-cell maturation antigen 
expressed on the surface of myeloma cells. In the phase 1 dose-defining portion 
of the study, teclistamab showed promising efficacy in patients with relapsed or 
refractory multiple myeloma.
METHODS: In this phase 1-2 study, we enrolled patients who had relapsed or 
refractory myeloma after at least three therapy lines, including triple-class 
exposure to an immunomodulatory drug, a proteasome inhibitor, and an anti-CD38 
antibody. Patients received a weekly subcutaneous injection of teclistamab (at a 
dose of 1.5 mg per kilogram of body weight) after receiving step-up doses of 
0.06 mg and 0.3 mg per kilogram. The primary end point was the overall response 
(partial response or better).
RESULTS: Among 165 patients who received teclistamab, 77.6% had triple-class 
refractory disease (median, five previous therapy lines). With a median 
follow-up of 14.1 months, the overall response rate was 63.0%, with 65 patients 
(39.4%) having a complete response or better. A total of 44 patients (26.7%) 
were found to have no minimal residual disease (MRD); the MRD-negativity rate 
among the patients with a complete response or better was 46%. The median 
duration of response was 18.4 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 14.9 to not 
estimable). The median duration of progression-free survival was 11.3 months 
(95% CI, 8.8 to 17.1). Common adverse events included cytokine release syndrome 
(in 72.1% of the patients; grade 3, 0.6%; no grade 4), neutropenia (in 70.9%; 
grade 3 or 4, 64.2%), anemia (in 52.1%; grade 3 or 4, 37.0%), and 
thrombocytopenia (in 40.0%; grade 3 or 4, 21.2%). Infections were frequent (in 
76.4%; grade 3 or 4, 44.8%). Neurotoxic events occurred in 24 patients (14.5%), 
including immune effector cell-associated neurotoxicity syndrome in 5 patients 
(3.0%; all grade 1 or 2).
CONCLUSIONS: Teclistamab resulted in a high rate of deep and durable response in 
patients with triple-class-exposed relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma. 
Cytopenias and infections were common; toxic effects that were consistent with 
T-cell redirection were mostly grade 1 or 2. (Funded by Janssen Research and 
Development; MajesTEC-1 ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT03145181 and 
NCT04557098.).

Copyright © 2022 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2203478
PMCID: PMC10587778
PMID: 35661166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]