---
reference_id: "PMID:9133349"
title: "Atelosteogenesis syndromes: a review, with comments on their pathogenesis."
authors:
- Sillence D
- Worthington S
- Dixon J
- Osborn R
- Kozlowski K
journal: Pediatr Radiol
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1007/s002470050154
keywords:
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Congenital Abnormalities/classification
- Female
- Femur/abnormalities
- Humans
- Humerus/abnormalities
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atelosteogenesis syndromes: a review, with comments on their pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Sillence D, Worthington S, Dixon J, Osborn R, Kozlowski K
**Journal:** Pediatr Radiol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s002470050154](https://doi.org/10.1007/s002470050154)

## Content

1. Pediatr Radiol. 1997 May;27(5):388-96. doi: 10.1007/s002470050154.

Atelosteogenesis syndromes: a review, with comments on their pathogenesis.

Sillence D(1), Worthington S, Dixon J, Osborn R, Kozlowski K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, The New Children's Hospital, P. O. Box 3515, 
Parramatta, NSW 2124, Australia.

The clinical, radiographic, and morphological findings in 25 cases of 
atelosteogenesis and boomerang dysplasia have been reviewed. The review confirms 
the nosologic grouping of atelosteogenesis type I with boomerang dysplasia and 
the clinical and radiographic overlap of features between atel- osteogenesis I 
and atelosteogene- sis II (synonymous with De la Chapelle dysplasia) and a group 
of patients with atelosteogenesis type III. A common pathogenesis is suggested 
for atelosteogenesis type I and boomerang dysplasia. A marked excess of male 
fetuses with boomerang dysplasia was observed. Atelosteogenesis type II shows 
distinctive chondro-osseous histopathology with a major disturbance in cartilage 
matrix macromolecules. An overlap of phenotypic, radiographic, morphological, 
and cartilage histochemical features with those observed in diastrophic 
dysplasia and achondrogenesis type IB suggests that atelosteogenesis type II has 
common pathogenetic features with disorders of sulfation of connective tissue 
matrix macro- molecules.

DOI: 10.1007/s002470050154
PMID: 9133349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]