---
reference_id: "PMID:23327637"
title: "Pseudo (platelet-type) von Willebrand disease in pregnancy: a case report."
authors:
- Grover N
- Boama V
- Chou MR
journal: BMC Pregnancy Childbirth
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2393-13-16
keywords:
- Adult
- "Delivery, Obstetric/methods"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Factor VIII/therapeutic use
- Female
- Humans
- Platelet Transfusion
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Complications, Hematologic/diagnosis, therapy"
- Prenatal Care/methods
- Thrombocytopenia/diagnosis
- "von Willebrand Diseases/diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pseudo (platelet-type) von Willebrand disease in pregnancy: a case report.
**Authors:** Grover N, Boama V, Chou MR
**Journal:** BMC Pregnancy Childbirth (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2393-13-16](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2393-13-16)

## Content

1. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2013 Jan 17;13:16. doi: 10.1186/1471-2393-13-16.

Pseudo (platelet-type) von Willebrand disease in pregnancy: a case report.

Grover N(1), Boama V, Chou MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, East Surrey Hospital, Redhill, 
England, UK.

BACKGROUND: Pseudo (platelet-type)-von Willebrand disease is a rare autosomal 
dominant bleeding disorder caused by an abnormal function of the glycoprotein lb 
protein; the receptor for von Willebrand factor. This leads to an increased 
removal of VWF multimers from the circulation as well as platelets and this 
results in a bleeding diathesis. Worldwide, less than 50 patients are reported 
with platelet type von Willebrand disease (PT-VWD).
CASE PRESENTATION: We describe the management of platelet type von Willebrand 
disease in pregnancy of a 26 year old Caucasian primigravida. The initial 
diagnosis was made earlier following a significant haemorrhage post 
tonsillectomy several years prior to pregnancy. The patient was managed under a 
multidisciplinary team which included obstetricians, haematologists, 
anaesthetists and neonatologists. Care plans were made for the ante- natal, 
intra-partum and post-partum periods in partnership with the patient. The 
patient's platelet count levels dropped significantly during the antenatal 
period. This necessitated the active exclusion of other causes of 
thrombocytopenia in pregnancy. A vaginal delivery was desired and plans were 
made for induction of labour at 38 weeks of gestation with platelet cover in 
view of the progressive fall of the platelet count. The patient however went 
into spontaneous labour on the day of induction. She was transfused two units of 
platelets before delivery. She had an unassisted vaginal delivery of a healthy 
baby. The successful antenatal counselling has encouraged the diagnosis of the 
same condition in her mother and sister. We found this to be a particularly 
interesting case as well as challenging to manage due to its rarity. Psuedo von 
Willebrand disease in pregnancy can be confused with a number of other 
differential diagnoses, such as gestational thrombocutopenia, idiopathatic 
thrombocytopenia, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and pre-eclampsia; all 
need consideration during investigations even in a case such as this where the 
diagnosis of platelet type von Willebrand disease was known before pregnancy.
CONCLUSION: Management of pseudo von Willebrand disease in pregnancy involves 
the co-operation of multidisciplinary teams, regular monitoring of platelet 
levels and factor VIII and replacement as appropriate. This case report 
highlights this rare condition and the need to exclude all the other 
differential diagnoses of thrombocytopenia in pregnant women with 
thrombocytopenia.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2393-13-16
PMCID: PMC3558368
PMID: 23327637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]