---
reference_id: "PMID:16885411"
title: Nephrocystin specifically localizes to the transition zone of renal and respiratory cilia and photoreceptor connecting cilia.
authors:
- Fliegauf M
- Horvath J
- von Schnakenburg C
- Olbrich H
- Müller D
- Thumfart J
- Schermer B
- Pazour GJ
- Neumann HP
- Zentgraf H
- Benzing T
- Omran H
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2005121351
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Animals
- Cilia/physiology
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- Dogs
- Humans
- "Kidney Diseases, Cystic/physiopathology"
- Membrane Proteins
- Mice
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- Nasal Mucosa/ultrastructure
- Photoreceptor Cells/ultrastructure
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nephrocystin specifically localizes to the transition zone of renal and respiratory cilia and photoreceptor connecting cilia.
**Authors:** Fliegauf M, Horvath J, von Schnakenburg C, Olbrich H, Müller D, Thumfart J, Schermer B, Pazour GJ, Neumann HP, Zentgraf H, Benzing T, Omran H
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2005121351](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2005121351)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006 Sep;17(9):2424-33. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2005121351. Epub
2006  Aug 2.

Nephrocystin specifically localizes to the transition zone of renal and 
respiratory cilia and photoreceptor connecting cilia.

Fliegauf M(1), Horvath J, von Schnakenburg C, Olbrich H, Müller D, Thumfart J, 
Schermer B, Pazour GJ, Neumann HP, Zentgraf H, Benzing T, Omran H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Mathildenstrasse 1, 79106 
Freiburg, Germany.

Nephronophthisis (NPHP) is a hereditary cystic kidney disorder that causes renal 
failure in children and young adults and can be associated with various 
extrarenal disorders, including retinitis pigmentosa. Six NPHP genes, whose 
functions are disrupted by autosomal recessive mutations in patients with NPHP, 
have been identified. The majority of patients with NPHP carry homozygous 
deletions of NPHP1 encoding nephrocystin. Previous data indicate that 
nephrocystin forms a complex at cell junctions and focal adhesions. Here, it is 
shown that nephrocystin specifically localizes at the ciliary base to the 
transition zone of renal and respiratory cilia and to photoreceptor connecting 
cilia. During in vitro ciliogenesis of primary human respiratory epithelial 
cells, nephrocystin can be detected first with a diffuse cytoplasmic 
localization as soon as cell polarization starts, and translocates to the 
transition zone when cilia are formed. In columnar respiratory cells, 
nephrocystin is attached tightly to the axonemal structure of the transition 
zone at a region that contains the calcium-sensitive cilia autotomy site. In 
patients with homozygous NPHP1 deletions, nephrocystin is absent from the entire 
respiratory cell, including the transition zone, which might be of interest for 
future diagnostic approaches. Cilia formation is not altered in primary 
nephrocystin-deficient respiratory cells, which is consistent with previous 
findings obtained for the Caenorhabditis elegans ortholog. In addition, it is 
shown that the localization pattern of intraflagellar transport proteins and 
nephrocystin differs, suggesting distinct functional roles. In conclusion, 
nephrocystin deficiency or dysfunction at the transition zone of renal monocilia 
and the photoreceptor connecting cilium might explain renal failure and retinal 
degeneration that are observed in patients with NPHP1.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2005121351
PMID: 16885411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]