---
reference_id: PMID:37876540
title: "Long-term efficacy and safety of subcutaneous pasireotide alone or in combination with cabergoline in Cushing's disease."
authors:
- Feelders RA
- Fleseriu M
- Kadioglu P
- Bex M
- González-Devia D
- Boguszewski CL
- Yavuz DG
- Patino H
- Pedroncelli AM
- Maamari R
- Chattopadhyay A
- Biller BMK
- Pivonello R
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1165681
keywords:
- Humans
- Cabergoline/therapeutic use
- Cushing Syndrome
- Hydrocortisone
- "Pituitary ACTH Hypersecretion/drug therapy, diagnosis"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Somatostatin/analogs & derivatives"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term efficacy and safety of subcutaneous pasireotide alone or in combination with cabergoline in Cushing's disease.
**Authors:** Feelders RA, Fleseriu M, Kadioglu P, Bex M, González-Devia D, Boguszewski CL, Yavuz DG, Patino H, Pedroncelli AM, Maamari R, Chattopadhyay A, Biller BMK, Pivonello R
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2023.1165681](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2023.1165681)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 Oct 9;14:1165681. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2023.1165681. eCollection 2023.

Long-term efficacy and safety of subcutaneous pasireotide alone or in 
combination with cabergoline in Cushing's disease.

Feelders RA(1), Fleseriu M(2), Kadioglu P(3), Bex M(4), González-Devia D(5), 
Boguszewski CL(6), Yavuz DG(7), Patino H(8), Pedroncelli AM(9)(10), Maamari 
R(8), Chattopadhyay A(11), Biller BMK(12), Pivonello R(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Erasmus Medical 
Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Pituitary Center, Departments of Medicine and Neurological Surgery, Oregon 
Health & Science University, Portland, OR, United States.
(3)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes, Cerrahpasa Medical 
Faculty, Istanbul University - Cerrahpasa, Istanbul, Türkiye.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Departamento de Medicina Interna, Sección de Endocrinologia, Hospital 
Universitario Fundación Santa Fé de Bogotá, Bogota, Colombia.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Endocrine Division (SEMPR), Federal 
University of Paraná, Curitiba, Parana, Brazil.
(7)Section of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Marmara University School of 
Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, Istanbul, Türkiye.
(8)Global Medical Affairs, Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, 
NJ, United States.
(9)Recordati AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(10)Global Medical Affairs, Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(11)Global Medical Affairs, Novartis Healthcare Private Limited, Hyderabad, 
Telangana, India.
(12)Neuroendocrine & Pituitary Tumor Clinical Center, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA, United States.
(13)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Sezione di Endocrinologia, 
Università Federico II di Napoli, Naples, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: This study evaluated short- and long-term efficacy and safety of the 
second-generation somatostatin receptor ligand pasireotide alone or in 
combination with dopamine agonist cabergoline in patients with Cushing's disease 
(CD).
STUDY DESIGN: This is an open-label, multicenter, non-comparative, Phase II 
study comprising 35-week core phase and an optional extension phase. All 
patients started with pasireotide, and cabergoline was added if cortisol 
remained elevated. Eligible patients had active CD, with or without prior 
surgery, were pasireotide naïve at screening or had discontinued pasireotide for 
reasons other than safety. Primary endpoint was proportion of patients with a 
mean urinary free cortisol (mUFC) level not exceeding the upper limit of normal 
(ULN) at week 35 with missing data imputed using last available post-baseline 
assessments.
RESULTS: Of 68 patients enrolled, 26 (38.2%) received pasireotide monotherapy 
and 42 (61.8%) received pasireotide plus cabergoline during the core phase. 
Thirty-four patients (50.0%; 95% CI 37.6-62.4) achieved the primary endpoint, of 
whom 17 (50.0%) received pasireotide monotherapy and 17 (50.0%) received 
combination therapy. Proportion of patients with mUFC control remained stable 
during the extension phase up to week 99. Treatment with either mono or 
combination therapy provided sustained improvements in clinical symptoms of 
hypercortisolism up to week 99. Hyperglycemia and nausea (51.5% each), diarrhea 
(44.1%) and cholelithiasis (33.8%) were the most frequent adverse events.
CONCLUSION: Addition of cabergoline in patients with persistently elevated mUFC 
on maximum tolerated doses of pasireotide is an effective and well-tolerated 
long-term strategy for enhancing control of hypercortisolism in some CD 
patients.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01915303, 
identifier NCT01915303.

Copyright © 2023 Feelders, Fleseriu, Kadioglu, Bex, González-Devia, Boguszewski, 
Yavuz, Patino, Pedroncelli, Maamari, Chattopadhyay, Biller and Pivonello.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1165681
PMCID: PMC10593462
PMID: 37876540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: HP and RM were Novartis employees and owned 
Novartis stocks. AMP was employed by Novartis and Recordati. AC is a Novartis 
employee and owns Novartis stocks. RF received research grants from Strongbridge 
and Corcept, consulting fee from Recordati, honoraria and financial support for 
meetings and/or travel from HRA Pharma and Recordati, and attended advisory 
boards for Recordati. MF has received research support to Oregon Health & 
Science University as a principal investigator from Recordati and Xeris 
Strongbridge and has performed occasional scientific consultancy for Recordati, 
HRA Pharma, Sparrow, and Xeris Strongbridge. PK attended advisory boards for 
Recordati. MB’s institution received consulting fee and attended advisory boards 
from Recordati. DG-D received research grants from Recordati Rare Disease and 
Bayer, consulting fee from Abbott-Lafrancol, Biotoscana, PTC lab, Glaxo/Helou, 
Recordati Rare Disease, and Bayer, honoraria from Valentech Pharma, Sanofi, and 
Bayer, travel grants from Recordati Rare Disease, advocacy groups and other 
leadership roles from Asociación Colombiana de Endocrinologia and Asociación 
Colombiana de Osteoporosis y Metabolismo, and other financial and non-financial 
interests include Asociacion Colombiana de Endocrinologia y Metabolismo, 
Hospital Universitario Fundación Santa Fé de Bogota, and Asociación Colombiana 
de Osteoporosis y Metabolismo. CB received research grants from Novartis and 
Recordati, and consulting and speaker fee from Novartis. BB served as the 
principal investigator for grants to Massachusetts General Hospital from 
Cortendo/Strongbridge Xeris, Millendo, and Novartis and has occasionally 
consulted for Cortendo/Strongbridge Xeris, HRA Pharma, Novartis Recordati, and 
Sparrow. RP and his institution received research grants and honoraria from 
Pfizer, Ipsen, Novartis, Merck Serono, IBSA Farmaceutici, Corcept, Shire, HRA 
Pharma, ICON, Covance, Neuroendocrine CAH, Camurus, Recordati, Janssen Cilag, 
and CMED Clinical Services, received consulting fee from Recordati Rare Disease, 
Organon Italia, Siunergos Pharma, Corcept, S&R Farmaceutici S.p.A., DAMOR 
Farmaceutici, and Pfizer, attended advisory boards from Crinetics 
Pharmaceuticals, Recordati Rare Disease, Pfizer, and HRA Pharma. The remaining 
author declares that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest. The authors declare that this study received funding from Novartis 
Pharma AG. Novartis was involved in the study design, analysis, interpretation 
of data, and providing financial support for medical editorial assistance of 
this article.