---
reference_id: "PMID:37092507"
title: Post-Polio Syndrome Revisited.
authors:
- Punsoni M
- Lakis NS
- Mellion M
- de la Monte SM
journal: Neurol Int
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/neurolint15020035
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Post-Polio Syndrome Revisited.
**Authors:** Punsoni M, Lakis NS, Mellion M, de la Monte SM
**Journal:** Neurol Int (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/neurolint15020035](https://doi.org/10.3390/neurolint15020035)

## Content

1. Neurol Int. 2023 Apr 13;15(2):569-579. doi: 10.3390/neurolint15020035.

Post-Polio Syndrome Revisited.

Punsoni M(1), Lakis NS(1), Mellion M(1), de la Monte SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuropathology, Departments of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
Neurology, and Neurosurgery, Rhode Island Hospital, Alpert Medical School of 
Brown University, Providence, RI 02903, USA.

Post-polio syndrome (PPS) is characterized by recrudescence or worsening of 
motor neuron disease symptoms decades after recovery from acute paralytic 
poliovirus infection, i.e., poliomyelitis. PPS afflicts between 25% and 40% of 
poliomyelitis survivors and mimics motor neuron diseases (MNDs), such as 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), due to its selective impairment, 
degeneration, or death of motor neurons in the brainstem and spinal cord. 
Herein, we report a case of PPS in a 68-year-old man with a remote history of 
bulbar and cervical cord involvement by poliomyelitis, review the relevant 
literature, and contrast the salient histopathologic features that distinguish 
our case of PPS from ALS.

DOI: 10.3390/neurolint15020035
PMCID: PMC10123742
PMID: 37092507

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare to have no conflict of 
interest related to this manuscript.