---
reference_id: "PMID:27926500"
title: "The association between clinical prognostic factors and epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) efficacy in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer patients: a retrospective assessment of 94 cases with EGFR mutations."
authors:
- Lin JH
- Lin D
- Xu L
- Wang Q
- Hu HH
- Xu HP
- He ZY
journal: Oncotarget
year: '2017'
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.13787
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The association between clinical prognostic factors and epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) efficacy in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer patients: a retrospective assessment of 94 cases with EGFR mutations.
**Authors:** Lin JH, Lin D, Xu L, Wang Q, Hu HH, Xu HP, He ZY
**Journal:** Oncotarget (2017)
**DOI:** [10.18632/oncotarget.13787](https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.13787)

## Content

1. Oncotarget. 2017 Jan 10;8(2):3412-3421. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.13787.

The association between clinical prognostic factors and epidermal growth factor 
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) efficacy in advanced 
non-small-cell lung cancer patients: a retrospective assessment of 94 cases with 
EGFR mutations.

Lin JH(1)(2), Lin D(1)(2), Xu L(1)(2), Wang Q(1)(2), Hu HH(1)(2), Xu HP(1)(2), 
He ZY(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, Fujian Provincial Cancer Hospital & 
Cancer Hospital Affiliated to Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou 350014, Fujian 
Province, China.
(2)Group of Lung Cancer Treatment, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Translational Cancer Medicine, Fuzhou 350014, Fujian Province, China.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to examine the association of clinical prognostic 
factors with epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor 
(EGFR-TKI) efficacy in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
METHODS: The demographic and clinical characteristics of 94 patients with stage 
IV NSCLC were retrospectively reviewed, and the association between clinical 
factors and EGFR-TKIs efficacy was evaluated.
RESULTS: Of the 94 stage IV NSCLC patients enrolled in this study, a 74.5% 
objective response rate (ORR) and 97.9% disease control rate (DCR) were observed 
for EGFR-TKIs treatment, and a higher ORR was seen in patients with 0 and 1 ECOG 
scores than those with 2 or greater scores (P = 0.049). The subjects had a 
median PFS of 11 months and a median OS of 31 months after EGFR-TKIs treatment. 
ECOG score and timing of targeted therapy were factors affecting PFS, and ECOG 
score, smoking status and brain metastasis were factors affecting OS. In 
addition, ECOG score was an independent prognostic factor for PFS in stage IV 
NSCLC patients, and the patients with EGFR 19del mutation had a longer PFS than 
those with exon 21 L855R mutation (P = 0.003), while ECOG score and brain 
metastasis were independent prognostic factors for OS.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study demonstrate that EGFR-TKI therapy results 
in survival benefits for EGFR-mutant advanced NSCLC patients, regardless of 
gender, smoking history, pathologic type, type of EGFR mutations, brain 
metastasis and timing of targeted therapy. ECOG score is an independent 
prognostic factor for PFS, and ECOG score and brain metastasis are independent 
prognostic factors for OS in advanced NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.13787
PMCID: PMC5356891
PMID: 27926500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.