---
reference_id: "PMID:38867333"
title: Comprehensive multiomics analysis reveals distinct differences between pediatric choroid plexus papilloma and carcinoma.
authors:
- Choi Y
- Choi SA
- Koh EJ
- Yun I
- Park S
- Jeon S
- Kim Y
- Park S
- Woo D
- Phi JH
- Park SH
- Kim DS
- Kim SH
- Choi JW
- Lee JW
- Jung TY
- Bhak J
- Lee S
- Kim SK
journal: Acta Neuropathol Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s40478-024-01814-y
keywords:
- Humans
- "Choroid Plexus Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- Female
- Male
- "Papilloma, Choroid Plexus/genetics, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Carcinoma/genetics, pathology"
- DNA Methylation
- Infant
- Adolescent
- Multiomics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive multiomics analysis reveals distinct differences between pediatric choroid plexus papilloma and carcinoma.
**Authors:** Choi Y, Choi SA, Koh EJ, Yun I, Park S, Jeon S, Kim Y, Park S, Woo D, Phi JH, Park SH, Kim DS, Kim SH, Choi JW, Lee JW, Jung TY, Bhak J, Lee S, Kim SK
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40478-024-01814-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-024-01814-y)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2024 Jun 12;12(1):93. doi:
10.1186/s40478-024-01814-y.

Comprehensive multiomics analysis reveals distinct differences between pediatric
choroid plexus papilloma and carcinoma.

Choi Y(#)(1)(2), Choi SA(#)(3)(4)(5), Koh EJ(#)(3)(4), Yun I(#)(1)(2), Park
S(1)(2), Jeon S(6), Kim Y(6), Park S(1), Woo D(1), Phi JH(3)(4)(5)(7), Park
SH(8), Kim DS(9), Kim SH(10), Choi JW(11), Lee JW(12), Jung TY(13), Bhak
J(1)(2)(6), Lee S(14)(15), Kim SK(16)(17)(18)(19).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Information and
Biotechnology, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST),
Ulsan, Republic of Korea.
(2)Korean Genomics Center, UNIST, Ulsan, Republic of Korea.
(3)Division of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Seoul National University Children's
Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.
(6)Clinomics Inc., Ulsan, Republic of Korea.
(7)Neuroscience Research Institute, Seoul National University Medical Research
Center, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(8)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(9)Department of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Severance Children's Hospital, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(10)Department of Pathology, Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(11)Department of Neurosurgery, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(13)Department of Neurosurgery, Chonnam National University Medical School and
Hwasun Hospital, Hwasun, Republic of Korea.
(14)Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Information and
Biotechnology, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST),
Ulsan, Republic of Korea. seminlee@unist.ac.kr.
(15)Korean Genomics Center, UNIST, Ulsan, Republic of Korea.
seminlee@unist.ac.kr.
(16)Division of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Seoul National University Children's
Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea. nsthomas@snu.ac.kr.
(17)Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
nsthomas@snu.ac.kr.
(18)Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Republic of Korea. nsthomas@snu.ac.kr.
(19)Neuroscience Research Institute, Seoul National University Medical Research
Center, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
nsthomas@snu.ac.kr.
(#)Contributed equally

Choroid plexus tumors (CPTs) are intraventricular tumors derived from the
choroid plexus epithelium and occur frequently in children. The aim of this
study was to investigate the genomic and epigenomic characteristics of CPT and
identify the differences between choroid plexus papilloma (CPP) and choroid
plexus carcinoma (CPC). We conducted multiomics analyses of 20 CPT patients
including CPP and CPC. Multiomics analysis included whole-genome sequencing,
whole-transcriptome sequencing, and methylation sequencing. Mutually exclusive
TP53 and EPHA7 point mutations, coupled with the amplification of chromosome 1,
were exclusively identified in CPC. In contrast, amplification of chromosome 9
was specific to CPP. Differential gene expression analysis uncovered a
significant overexpression of genes related to cell cycle regulation and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition pathways in CPC compared to CPP.
Overexpression of genes associated with tumor metastasis and progression was
observed in the CPC subgroup with leptomeningeal dissemination. Furthermore,
methylation profiling unveiled hypomethylation in major repeat regions,
including long interspersed nuclear elements, short interspersed nuclear
elements, long terminal repeats, and retrotransposons in CPC compared to CPP,
implying that the loss of epigenetic silencing of transposable elements may play
a role in tumorigenesis of CPC. Finally, the differential expression of AK1,
regulated by both genomic and epigenomic factors, emerged as a potential
contributing factor to the histological difference of CPP against CPC. Our
results suggest pronounced genomic and epigenomic disparities between CPP and
CPC, providing insights into the pathogenesis of CPT at the molecular level.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-024-01814-y
PMCID: PMC11167863
PMID: 38867333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflicts of
interest.
