---
reference_id: "PMID:25545930"
title: "Mosquito habitat and dengue risk potential in Kenya: alternative methods to traditional risk mapping techniques."
authors:
- Attaway DF
- Jacobsen KH
- Falconer A
- Manca G
- Rosenshein Bennett L
- Waters NM
journal: Geospat Health
year: '2014'
doi: 10.4081/gh.2014.10
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mosquito habitat and dengue risk potential in Kenya: alternative methods to traditional risk mapping techniques.
**Authors:** Attaway DF, Jacobsen KH, Falconer A, Manca G, Rosenshein Bennett L, Waters NM
**Journal:** Geospat Health (2014)
**DOI:** [10.4081/gh.2014.10](https://doi.org/10.4081/gh.2014.10)

## Content

1. Geospat Health. 2014 Nov;9(1):119-30. doi: 10.4081/gh.2014.10.

Mosquito habitat and dengue risk potential in Kenya: alternative methods to 
traditional risk mapping techniques.

Attaway DF(1), Jacobsen KH(2), Falconer A(1), Manca G(1), Rosenshein Bennett 
L(3), Waters NM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geography and GeoInformation Science, George Mason University, 
Fairfax, USA.
(2)Department of Global and Community Health, George Mason University, Fairfax, 
USA.
(3)ESRI, Redlands, USA.

Outbreaks, epidemics and endemic conditions make dengue a disease that has 
emerged as a major threat in tropical and sub-tropical countries over the past 
30 years. Dengue fever creates a growing burden for public health systems and 
has the potential to affect over 40% of the world population. The problem being 
investigated is to identify the highest and lowest areas of dengue risk. This 
paper presents "Similarity Search", a geospatial analysis aimed at identifying 
these locations within Kenya. Similarity Search develops a risk map by combining 
environmental susceptibility analysis and geographical information systems, and 
then compares areas with dengue prevalence to all other locations. Kenya has had 
outbreaks of dengue during the past 3 years, and we identified areas with the 
highest susceptibility to dengue infection using bioclimatic variables, 
elevation and mosquito habitat as input to the model. Comparison of the modelled 
risk map with the reported dengue epidemic cases obtained from the open source 
reporting ProMED and Government news reports from 1982-2013 confirmed the 
high-risk locations that were used as the Similarity Search presence cells. 
Developing the risk model based upon the bioclimatic variables, elevation and 
mosquito habitat increased the efficiency and effectiveness of the dengue fever 
risk mapping process.

DOI: 10.4081/gh.2014.10
PMID: 25545930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]