---
reference_id: "PMID:37250650"
title: Sex differences in the genetics of sarcoidosis across European and African ancestry populations.
authors:
- Xiong Y
- Kullberg S
- Garman L
- Pezant N
- Ellinghaus D
- Vasila V
- Eklund A
- Rybicki BA
- Iannuzzi MC
- Schreiber S
- Müller-Quernheim J
- Montgomery CG
- Grunewald J
- Padyukov L
- Rivera NV
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1132799
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sex differences in the genetics of sarcoidosis across European and African ancestry populations.
**Authors:** Xiong Y, Kullberg S, Garman L, Pezant N, Ellinghaus D, Vasila V, Eklund A, Rybicki BA, Iannuzzi MC, Schreiber S, Müller-Quernheim J, Montgomery CG, Grunewald J, Padyukov L, Rivera NV
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2023.1132799](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2023.1132799)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2023 May 11;10:1132799. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1132799.
eCollection 2023.

Sex differences in the genetics of sarcoidosis across European and African
ancestry populations.

Xiong Y(1), Kullberg S(1)(2), Garman L(3), Pezant N(3), Ellinghaus D(4), Vasila
V(1), Eklund A(2), Rybicki BA(5), Iannuzzi MC(6), Schreiber S(4)(7),
Müller-Quernheim J(8), Montgomery CG(3), Grunewald J(1)(2)(9), Padyukov
L(9)(10), Rivera NV(1)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Medicine Division, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, Theme Inflammation and
Ageing, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Genes and Human Disease, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City,
OK, United States.
(4)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University of
Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(5)Department of Public Health Sciences, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI,
United States.
(6)Zucker School of Medicine, Staten Island University Hospital,
Northwell/Hofstra University, Staten Island, NY, United States.
(7)Clinic for Internal Medicine I, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel,
Germany.
(8)Department of Pneumology, University Medical Center Freiburg, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.
(9)Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(10)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

Erratum in
    Front Med (Lausanne). 2024 Feb 21;11:1382584. doi:
10.3389/fmed.2024.1382584.

BACKGROUND: Sex differences in the susceptibility of sarcoidosis are unknown.
The study aims to identify sex-dependent genetic variations in two clinical
sarcoidosis phenotypes: Löfgren's syndrome (LS) and non-Löfgren's syndrome
(non-LS).
METHODS: A meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies was conducted on
Europeans and African Americans, totaling 10,103 individuals from three
population-based cohorts, Sweden (n = 3,843), Germany (n = 3,342), and the
United States (n = 2,918), followed by an SNP lookup in the UK Biobank (UKB, n =
387,945). A genome-wide association study based on Immunochip data consisting of
141,000 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) was conducted in the sex groups.
The association test was based on logistic regression using the additive model
in LS and non-LS sex groups independently. Additionally, gene-based analysis,
gene expression, expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) mapping, and pathway
analysis were performed to discover functionally relevant mechanisms related to
sarcoidosis and biological sex.
RESULTS: We identified sex-dependent genetic variations in LS and non-LS sex
groups. Genetic findings in LS sex groups were explicitly located in the
extended Major Histocompatibility Complex (xMHC). In non-LS, genetic differences
in the sex groups were primarily located in the MHC class II subregion and
ANXA11. Gene-based analysis and eQTL enrichment revealed distinct sex-specific
gene expression patterns in various tissues and immune cell types. In LS sex
groups, a pathway map related to antigen presentation machinery by IFN-gamma. In
non-LS, pathway maps related to immune response lectin-induced complement
pathway in males and related to maturation and migration of dendritic cells in
skin sensitization in females were identified.
CONCLUSION: Our findings provide new evidence for a sex bias underlying
sarcoidosis genetic architecture, particularly in clinical phenotypes LS and
non-LS. Biological sex likely plays a role in disease mechanisms in sarcoidosis.

Copyright © 2023 Xiong, Kullberg, Garman, Pezant, Ellinghaus, Vasila, Eklund,
Rybicki, Iannuzzi, Schreiber, Müller-Quernheim, Montgomery, Grunewald, Padyukov
and Rivera.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1132799
PMCID: PMC10213734
PMID: 37250650

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
