---
reference_id: "PMID:22575866"
title: "Solitary fibrous tumor: a clinicopathological study of 110 cases and proposed risk assessment model."
authors:
- Demicco EG
- Park MS
- Araujo DM
- Fox PS
- Bassett RL
- Pollock RE
- Lazar AJ
- Wang WL
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.83
keywords:
- "Abdominal Neoplasms/mortality, pathology, surgery"
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mitotic Index
- "Models, Biological"
- "Pleural Neoplasms/mortality, pathology, surgery"
- Risk Assessment
- "Solitary Fibrous Tumor, Pleural/mortality, pathology, surgery"
- Survival Rate
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Solitary fibrous tumor: a clinicopathological study of 110 cases and proposed risk assessment model.
**Authors:** Demicco EG, Park MS, Araujo DM, Fox PS, Bassett RL, Pollock RE, Lazar AJ, Wang WL
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/modpathol.2012.83](https://doi.org/10.1038/modpathol.2012.83)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2012 Sep;25(9):1298-306. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.83. Epub 2012
 May 11.

Solitary fibrous tumor: a clinicopathological study of 110 cases and proposed 
risk assessment model.

Demicco EG(1), Park MS, Araujo DM, Fox PS, Bassett RL, Pollock RE, Lazar AJ, 
Wang WL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Solitary fibrous tumor represents a spectrum of mesenchymal tumors, encompassing 
tumors previously termed hemangiopericytoma, which are classified as having 
intermediate biological potential (rarely metastasizing) in the 2002 World 
Health Organization classification scheme. Few series have reported on 
clinicopathological predictors with outcome data and formal statistical analysis 
in a large series of primary tumors as a single unified entity. Institutional 
pathology records were reviewed to identify primary solitary fibrous tumor 
cases, and histological sections and clinical records reviewed for canonical 
prognostic indicators, including patient age, tumor size, mitotic index, tumor 
cellularity, nuclear pleomorphism, and tumor necrosis. Patients (n=103) with 
resected primary solitary fibrous tumor were identified (excluding meningeal 
tumors). The most common sites of occurrence were abdomen and pleura; these 
tumors were larger than those occurring in the extremities, head and neck or 
trunk, but did not demonstrate significant outcome differences. Overall 5- and 
10-year metastasis-free rates were 74 and 55%, respectively, while 5- and 
10-year disease-specific survival rates were 89 and 73%. Patient age, tumor 
size, and mitotic index predicted both time to metastasis and disease-specific 
mortality, while necrosis predicted metastasis only. A risk stratification model 
based on age, size, and mitotic index clearly delineated patients at high risk 
for poor outcomes. While small tumors with low mitotic rates are highly unlikely 
to metastasize, large tumors ≥ 15 cm, which occur in patients ≥ 55 years, with 
mitotic figures ≥ 4/10 high-power fields require close follow-up and have a high 
risk of both metastasis and death.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.83
PMID: 22575866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]