---
reference_id: "PMID:29409891"
title: Hereditary galactosemia.
authors:
- Demirbas D
- Coelho AI
- Rubio-Gozalbo ME
- Berry GT
journal: Metabolism
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2018.01.025
keywords:
- Female
- "Galactokinase/genetics, metabolism"
- Galactose/metabolism
- "Galactosemias/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- Genetic Counseling
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "UDPglucose 4-Epimerase/genetics, metabolism"
- "UTP-Hexose-1-Phosphate Uridylyltransferase/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary galactosemia.
**Authors:** Demirbas D, Coelho AI, Rubio-Gozalbo ME, Berry GT
**Journal:** Metabolism (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.metabol.2018.01.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2018.01.025)

## Content

1. Metabolism. 2018 Jun;83:188-196. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2018.01.025. Epub 2018
 Jan 31.

Hereditary galactosemia.

Demirbas D(1), Coelho AI(2), Rubio-Gozalbo ME(2), Berry GT(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Genomics, The Manton Center for Orphan Disease 
Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Department of Clinical Genetics, GROW-School for 
Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(3)Division of Genetics and Genomics, The Manton Center for Orphan Disease 
Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
Electronic address: gerard.berry@childrens.harvard.edu.

Hereditary galactosemia is an inborn error of carbohydrate metabolism. Galactose 
is metabolized by Leloir pathway enzymes; galactokinase (GALK), 
galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase (GALT) and UDP-galactose 4-epimerase 
(GALE). The defects in these enzymes cause galactosemia in an autosomal 
recessive manner. The severe GALT deficiency, or classic galactosemia, is 
life-threatening in the newborn period. The treatment for classic galactosemia 
is dietary restriction of lactose. Although implementation of lactose restricted 
diet is efficient in resolving the acute complications, it is not sufficient to 
prevent long-term complications affecting the brain and female gonads, the two 
main target organs of damage. Implementation of molecular genetics diagnostic 
tools and GALT enzyme assays are instrumental in distinguishing classic 
galactosemia from clinical and biochemical variant forms of GALT deficiency. 
Better understanding of mechanisms responsible for the phenotypic variation even 
within the same genotype is essential to provide appropriate counseling for 
families. Utilization of a lactose restricted diet is also recommended for GALK 
deficiency and some rare forms of GALE deficiency. Novel modes of therapies are 
being explored; they may be beneficial if access issues to the affected tissues 
are circumvented and optimum use of therapeutic window is achieved.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.metabol.2018.01.025
PMID: 29409891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]