---
reference_id: "PMID:12881722"
title: Huntingtin interacts with REST/NRSF to modulate the transcription of NRSE-controlled neuronal genes.
authors:
- Zuccato C
- Tartari M
- Crotti A
- Goffredo D
- Valenza M
- Conti L
- Cataudella T
- Leavitt BR
- Hayden MR
- Timmusk T
- Rigamonti D
- Cattaneo E
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1038/ng1219
keywords:
- Animals
- Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor/genetics
- Cell Line
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- Huntingtin Protein
- Huntington Disease/genetics
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- Neurons/physiology
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Rats
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- "Repressor Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- "Silencer Elements, Transcriptional"
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, physiology"
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- RE1-Silencing Transcription Factor
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Huntingtin interacts with REST/NRSF to modulate the transcription of NRSE-controlled neuronal genes.
**Authors:** Zuccato C, Tartari M, Crotti A, Goffredo D, Valenza M, Conti L, Cataudella T, Leavitt BR, Hayden MR, Timmusk T, Rigamonti D, Cattaneo E
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1219](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1219)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2003 Sep;35(1):76-83. doi: 10.1038/ng1219. Epub 2003 Jul 27.

Huntingtin interacts with REST/NRSF to modulate the transcription of 
NRSE-controlled neuronal genes.

Zuccato C(1), Tartari M, Crotti A, Goffredo D, Valenza M, Conti L, Cataudella T, 
Leavitt BR, Hayden MR, Timmusk T, Rigamonti D, Cattaneo E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences and Center of Excellence on 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Milano, Via Balzaretti 9, 20133 
Milano, Italy.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2003 Sep;35(1):13-4. doi: 10.1038/ng0903-13.

Huntingtin protein is mutated in Huntington disease. We previously reported that 
wild-type but not mutant huntingtin stimulates transcription of the gene 
encoding brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF; ref. 2). Here we show that the 
neuron restrictive silencer element (NRSE) is the target of wild-type huntingtin 
activity on BDNF promoter II. Wild-type huntingtin inhibits the silencing 
activity of NRSE, increasing transcription of BDNF. We show that this effect 
occurs through cytoplasmic sequestering of repressor element-1 transcription 
factor/neuron restrictive silencer factor (REST/NRSF), the transcription factor 
that binds to NRSE. In contrast, aberrant accumulation of REST/NRSF in the 
nucleus is present in Huntington disease. We show that wild-type huntingtin 
coimmunoprecipitates with REST/NRSF and that less immunoprecipitated material is 
found in brain tissue with Huntington disease. We also report that wild-type 
huntingtin acts as a positive transcriptional regulator for other 
NRSE-containing genes involved in the maintenance of the neuronal phenotype. 
Consistently, loss of expression of NRSE-controlled neuronal genes is shown in 
cells, mice and human brain with Huntington disease. We conclude that wild-type 
huntingtin acts in the cytoplasm of neurons to regulate the availability of 
REST/NRSF to its nuclear NRSE-binding site and that this control is lost in the 
pathology of Huntington disease. These data identify a new mechanism by which 
mutation of huntingtin causes loss of transcription of neuronal genes.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1219
PMID: 12881722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]