---
reference_id: "PMID:26330673"
title: Identification of Candidate Predictors of Lupus Flare.
authors:
- Crow MK
- Olferiev M
- Kirou KA
journal: Trans Am Clin Climatol Assoc
year: '2015'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of Candidate Predictors of Lupus Flare.
**Authors:** Crow MK, Olferiev M, Kirou KA
**Journal:** Trans Am Clin Climatol Assoc (2015)

## Content

1. Trans Am Clin Climatol Assoc. 2015;126:184-96.

Identification of Candidate Predictors of Lupus Flare.

Crow MK, Olferiev M, Kirou KA.

Systemic lupus erythematosus, the prototype systemic autoimmune disease, is 
characterized by extensive self-reactivity, inflammation, and organ system 
damage. Sustained production of type I interferon is seen in many patients and 
contributes to immune dysregulation. Disease activity fluctuates with periods of 
relative quiescence or effective management by immunosuppressive drugs, followed 
by disease flares. Tissue damage accumulates over time, with kidneys and 
cardiovascular system particularly affected. Identification of the underlying 
molecular mechanisms that precede clinical exacerbations, allowing prediction of 
future flare, could lead to therapeutic interventions that prevent severe 
disease. We generated gene expression data from a longitudinal cohort of lupus 
patients, some showing at least one period of severe flare and others with 
relatively stable disease over the period of study. Candidate predictors of 
future clinical flare were identified based on analysis of differentially 
expressed gene transcripts between the flare and non-flare groups at a time when 
all patients had relatively quiescent clinical disease activity. Our results 
suggest the hypothesis that altered regulation of genome stability and nucleic 
acid fidelity may be important molecular precursors of future clinical flare, 
generating endogenous nucleic acid triggers that engage intracellular mechanisms 
that mimic a chronic host response to viral infection.

PMCID: PMC4530671
PMID: 26330673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]