---
reference_id: "PMID:26618123"
title: Analysis of the Clinical and Histopathological Patterns of 100 Consecutive Cases of Primary Cutaneous Melanoma and Correlation with Staging.
authors:
- Nam KW
- Bae YC
- Bae SH
- Song KH
- Kim HS
- Choi YJ
journal: Arch Plast Surg
year: '2015'
doi: 10.5999/aps.2015.42.6.746
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of the Clinical and Histopathological Patterns of 100 Consecutive Cases of Primary Cutaneous Melanoma and Correlation with Staging.
**Authors:** Nam KW, Bae YC, Bae SH, Song KH, Kim HS, Choi YJ
**Journal:** Arch Plast Surg (2015)
**DOI:** [10.5999/aps.2015.42.6.746](https://doi.org/10.5999/aps.2015.42.6.746)

## Content

1. Arch Plast Surg. 2015 Nov;42(6):746-52. doi: 10.5999/aps.2015.42.6.746. Epub 
2015 Nov 16.

Analysis of the Clinical and Histopathological Patterns of 100 Consecutive Cases 
of Primary Cutaneous Melanoma and Correlation with Staging.

Nam KW(1), Bae YC(2), Bae SH(1), Song KH(1), Kim HS(3), Choi YJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Pusan National University 
School of Medicine, Buasn, Korea.
(2)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Pusan National University 
School of Medicine, Buasn, Korea. ; Biomedical Research Institute, Pusan 
National University Hospital, Buasn, Korea.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Pusan National University School of Medicine, 
Busan, Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Pusan National University School of 
Medicine, Busan, Korea.

BACKGROUND: This study analyzed 100 consecutive patients with primary cutaneous 
melanoma over the course of 13 years to determine whether epidemiological 
differences correspond to different stages of the disease. We also investigated 
whether epidemiological characteristics affected the survival rate. Our results 
were compared with those of selected descriptive studies of melanoma in other 
East Asian populations, in order to determine whether cutaneous melanoma 
patterns are similar in East Asian populations.
METHODS: The patients' medical records were reviewed retrospectively, and we 
analyzed the relationship of epidemiological characteristics to staging and 
survival rate. Additionally, papers from Hong Kong and Japan describing these 
phenomena in East Asian populations were subjected to a statistical comparison.
RESULTS: The ratio of males to females was 1:1.8, and the foot was the most 
frequent tumor site (49%). Acral lentiginous melanoma occurred most frequently 
(55%). Nodular melanoma was associated with a higher stage. Stage III-IV tumors 
with Clark levels of IV-V were significantly associated with a low survival 
rate. A statistical analysis of comparable papers reported in Hong Kong and 
Japan showed similar results with regard to age, tumor location, and 
histopathological subtypes.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the first full epidemiological description of 
100 consecutive cases of primary cutaneous melanoma in Korea, with results 
similar to those observed in other East Asian populations. Corresponding to 
previous findings, nodular melanoma tended to occur at a higher stage than other 
types, and tumors with high Clark levels and high stages showed a lower survival 
rate.

DOI: 10.5999/aps.2015.42.6.746
PMCID: PMC4659989
PMID: 26618123

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to 
this article was reported.