---
reference_id: "PMID:17635946"
title: A novel point mutation in helix 11 of the ligand-binding domain of the human glucocorticoid receptor gene causing generalized glucocorticoid resistance.
authors:
- Charmandari E
- Kino T
- Ichijo T
- Jubiz W
- Mejia L
- Zachman K
- Chrousos GP
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2006-2830
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel point mutation in helix 11 of the ligand-binding domain of the human glucocorticoid receptor gene causing generalized glucocorticoid resistance.
**Authors:** Charmandari E, Kino T, Ichijo T, Jubiz W, Mejia L, Zachman K, Chrousos GP
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2006-2830](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2006-2830)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Oct;92(10):3986-90. doi: 10.1210/jc.2006-2830. 
Epub 2007 Jul 17.

A novel point mutation in helix 11 of the ligand-binding domain of the human 
glucocorticoid receptor gene causing generalized glucocorticoid resistance.

Charmandari E(1), Kino T, Ichijo T, Jubiz W, Mejia L, Zachman K, Chrousos GP.

Author information:
(1)Section on Endocrinology, Reproductive Biology and Medicine Branch, National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. evangelia.charmandari@googlemail.com

BACKGROUND: Generalized glucocorticoid resistance is a rare condition 
characterized by partial, end-organ insensitivity to glucocorticoids, 
compensatory elevations in adrenocorticotropic hormone and cortisol secretion, 
and increased production of adrenal steroids with androgenic and/or 
mineralocorticoid activity. We have identified a new case of glucocorticoid 
resistance caused by a novel mutation of the human glucocorticoid receptor (hGR) 
gene and studied the molecular mechanisms through which the mutant receptor 
impairs glucocorticoid signal transduction.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We identified a novel, single, heterozygous nucleotide (T 
--> C) substitution at position 2209 (exon 9alpha) of the hGR gene, which 
resulted in phenylalanine (F) to leucine (L) substitution at amino acid position 
737 within helix 11 of the ligand-binding domain of the protein. Compared with 
the wild-type receptor, the mutant receptor hGRalphaF737L demonstrated a 
significant ligand-exposure time-dependent decrease in its ability to 
transactivate the glucocorticoid-inducible mouse mammary tumor virus promoter in 
response to dexamethasone and displayed a 2-fold reduction in the affinity for 
ligand, a 12-fold delay in nuclear translocation, and an abnormal interaction 
with the glucocorticoid receptor-interacting protein 1 coactivator. The mutant 
receptor preserved its ability to bind to DNA and exerted a dominant-negative 
effect on the wild-type hGRalpha only after a short duration of exposure to the 
ligand.
CONCLUSIONS: The mutant receptor hGRalphaF737L causes generalized glucocorticoid 
resistance because of decreased affinity for the ligand, marked delay in nuclear 
translocation, and/or abnormal interaction with the glucocorticoid 
receptor-interacting protein 1 coactivator. These findings confirm the 
importance of the C terminus of the ligand-binding domain of the receptor in 
conferring transactivational activity.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2006-2830
PMID: 17635946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]