---
reference_id: "PMID:22665535"
title: "Randomized study of two chemotherapy regimens for treatment of low-grade glioma in young children: a report from the Children's Oncology Group."
authors:
- Ater JL
- Zhou T
- Holmes E
- Mazewski CM
- Booth TN
- Freyer DR
- Lazarus KH
- Packer RJ
- Prados M
- Sposto R
- Vezina G
- Wisoff JH
- Pollack IF
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.36.6054
keywords:
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Brain Neoplasms/drug therapy
- "Carboplatin/administration & dosage"
- "Central Nervous System Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Drug Administration Schedule
- Female
- "Glioma/drug therapy, pathology"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Lomustine/administration & dosage"
- Male
- Multivariate Analysis
- "Procarbazine/administration & dosage"
- Prognosis
- Risk Factors
- Spinal Cord Neoplasms/drug therapy
- "Thioguanine/administration & dosage"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vincristine/administration & dosage"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Randomized study of two chemotherapy regimens for treatment of low-grade glioma in young children: a report from the Children's Oncology Group.
**Authors:** Ater JL, Zhou T, Holmes E, Mazewski CM, Booth TN, Freyer DR, Lazarus KH, Packer RJ, Prados M, Sposto R, Vezina G, Wisoff JH, Pollack IF
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2011.36.6054](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2011.36.6054)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2012 Jul 20;30(21):2641-7. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.36.6054. Epub
2012 Jun 4.

Randomized study of two chemotherapy regimens for treatment of low-grade glioma
in young children: a report from the Children's Oncology Group.

Ater JL(1), Zhou T, Holmes E, Mazewski CM, Booth TN, Freyer DR, Lazarus KH,
Packer RJ, Prados M, Sposto R, Vezina G, Wisoff JH, Pollack IF.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatrics, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515
Holcombe Blvd, Houston, TX 77030, USA. jater@mdanderson.org

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2012 Dec 20;30(36):4583; author reply 4583-4. doi:
10.1200/JCO.2012.44.9462.

PURPOSE Surgery is curative therapy for pediatric low-grade gliomas (LGGs) in
areas of the brain amenable to complete resection. However, LGGs located in
areas where complete resection is not possible can threaten both function and
life. The purpose of this study was to compare two chemotherapy regimens for
LGGs in children younger than age 10 years for whom radiotherapy was felt by the
practitioner to pose a high risk of neurodevelopmental injury. PATIENTS AND
METHODS Previously untreated children younger than age 10 years with progressive
or residual LGGs were eligible. Children were randomly assigned to receive
carboplatin and vincristine (CV) or thioguanine, procarbazine, lomustine, and
vincristine (TPCV). Children with neurofibromatosis are reported separately.
Results Of 274 randomly assigned patients who met eligibility requirements, 137
received CV and 137 received TPCV. The 5-year event-free survival (EFS) and
overall survival (OS) rates for all eligible patients were 45% ± 3.2% and 86% ±
2.2%, respectively. The 5-year EFS rates were 39% ± 4% for CV and 52% ± 5% for
TPCV (stratified log-rank test P = .10; cure model analysis P = .007). On
multivariate analysis, factors independently predictive of worse EFS and OS were
younger age and tumor size greater than 3 cm(2). Tumor location in the thalamus
was also associated with poor OS. CONCLUSION The difference in EFS between the
regimens did not reach significance on the basis of the stratified log-rank
test. The 5-year EFS was higher for TPCV on the basis of the cure model
analysis. Differences in toxicity may influence physician choice of regimens.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2011.36.6054
PMCID: PMC3413276
PMID: 22665535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors' disclosures of potential conflicts of
interest and author contributions are found at the end of this article.
