---
reference_id: "PMID:26788478"
title: "Deep Neck Space Infections: A Study of 76 Cases."
authors:
- Kataria G
- Saxena A
- Bhagat S
- Singh B
- Kaur M
- Kaur G
journal: Iran J Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2015'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deep Neck Space Infections: A Study of 76 Cases.
**Authors:** Kataria G, Saxena A, Bhagat S, Singh B, Kaur M, Kaur G
**Journal:** Iran J Otorhinolaryngol (2015)

## Content

1. Iran J Otorhinolaryngol. 2015 Jul;27(81):293-9.

Deep Neck Space Infections: A Study of 76 Cases.

Kataria G(1), Saxena A(2), Bhagat S(3), Singh B(3), Kaur M(3), Kaur G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, SGRDIMSR, Amritsar, Punjab, India .
(2)Department of Pathology, GMC, Amritsar, Punjab, India .
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, GMC, Patiala, Punjab, India .

INTRODUCTION: Deep neck space infections (DNSI) are serious diseases that
involve several spaces in the neck. The common primary sources of DNSI are
dental infections, tonsillar and salivary gland infections, malignancies, and
foreign bodies. With widespread use of antibiotics, the prevalence of DNSI has
been reduced. Common complications of DNSI include airway obstruction, jugular
vein thrombosis, and sepsis. Treatment principally comprises airway management,
antibiotic therapy, and surgical intervention. This study was conducted to
investigate the age and sex distribution of patients, symptoms, presentation,
sites involved, bacteriology, and management and complications of DNSI.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This retrospective study was performed from October 2010
to January 2013, and included 76 patients with DNSI. Patients of all age groups
and gender were included. All parameters including age, gender, co-morbidities,
presentation, site, bacteriology, complications, and required interventions were
studied.
RESULTS: In our study, the majority of patients were in the 31-50-year age
group. Males accounted for 55.26% of the sample and females for 44.74%, with a
male:female ratio of 1.23. Most of the patients were from a rural background.
Diabetes was found as a co-morbid condition in 10.52% cases. Neck pain was the
most common symptom, identified in 89.47% cases. The most common etiological
factor was odontogenic infection (34.21%), followed by tonsillar and pharyngeal
infection (27.63%). The most common presentation was Ludwig's angina (28.94%),
followed by peritonsillar abscess and submandibular abscess. In 50% of cases,
Streptococcus and Staphylococcus were found in the culture. Surgical
intervention was carried out in 89.47% cases. Emergency tracheotomy was required
in 5.26% cases.
CONCLUSION: DNSI can be life-threatening in diabetic patients, the
immunocompromised, and elderly patients, and special attention should therefore
be given to these groups. Early diagnosis and treatment is essential to prevent
complications. All patients must be treated initially with intravenous
antibiotics, with treatment subsequently updated based on a culture and
sensitivity report. Due to poor oral hygiene, lack of nutrition, smoking and
chewing of beetle nut and tobacco, odontogenic infections are the most common
cause of DNSI. Thus, DNSI could be prevented by making the population aware of
dental and oral hygiene and offering regular check-ups for dental infections.

PMCID: PMC4710882
PMID: 26788478
