---
reference_id: "PMID:39216803"
title: "Harmonization of Diagnostic Criteria in Mastocytosis for Use in Clinical Practice: WHO vs ICC vs AIM/ECNM."
authors:
- Valent P
- Hartmann K
- Hoermann G
- Reiter A
- Alvarez-Twose I
- Brockow K
- Bonadonna P
- Hermine O
- Niedoszytko M
- Carter MC
- Butterfield JH
- Siebenhaar F
- Zanotti R
- Radia DH
- Castells M
- Sperr WR
- Broesby-Olsen S
- Triggiani M
- Schwartz LB
- George TI
- Gülen T
- Sotlar K
- Gotlib J
- Galli SJ
- Horny HP
- Metcalfe DD
- Orfao A
- Arock M
- Akin C
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaip.2024.08.044
keywords:
- Humans
- Mastocytosis/diagnosis
- World Health Organization
- Mast Cells/immunology
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit/genetics
- "Mastocytosis, Systemic/diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Harmonization of Diagnostic Criteria in Mastocytosis for Use in Clinical Practice: WHO vs ICC vs AIM/ECNM.
**Authors:** Valent P, Hartmann K, Hoermann G, Reiter A, Alvarez-Twose I, Brockow K, Bonadonna P, Hermine O, Niedoszytko M, Carter MC, Butterfield JH, Siebenhaar F, Zanotti R, Radia DH, Castells M, Sperr WR, Broesby-Olsen S, Triggiani M, Schwartz LB, George TI, Gülen T, Sotlar K, Gotlib J, Galli SJ, Horny HP, Metcalfe DD, Orfao A, Arock M, Akin C
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaip.2024.08.044](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2024.08.044)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2024 Dec;12(12):3250-3260.e5. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2024.08.044. Epub 2024 Aug 30.

Harmonization of Diagnostic Criteria in Mastocytosis for Use in Clinical 
Practice: WHO vs ICC vs AIM/ECNM.

Valent P(1), Hartmann K(2), Hoermann G(3), Reiter A(4), Alvarez-Twose I(5), 
Brockow K(6), Bonadonna P(7), Hermine O(8), Niedoszytko M(9), Carter MC(10), 
Butterfield JH(11), Siebenhaar F(12), Zanotti R(13), Radia DH(14), Castells 
M(15), Sperr WR(16), Broesby-Olsen S(17), Triggiani M(18), Schwartz LB(19), 
George TI(20), Gülen T(21), Sotlar K(22), Gotlib J(23), Galli SJ(24), Horny 
HP(25), Metcalfe DD(10), Orfao A(26), Arock M(27), Akin C(28).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Hematology and Hemostaseology, 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for 
Hematology and Oncology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. 
Electronic address: peter.valent@meduniwien.ac.at.
(2)Division of Allergy, Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Basel and 
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland; Department of Biomedicine, University 
Hospital Basel and University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Hematology and Oncology, Medical University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria; MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich, Germany.
(4)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital Mannheim, 
Mannheim, Germany.
(5)Instituto de Estudios de Mastocitosis de Castilla La Mancha (CLMast) and 
CIBERONC, Hospital Virgen del Valle, Toledo, Spain.
(6)Department of Dermatology and Allergy Biederstein, Technical University of 
Munich, Munich, Germany.
(7)Allergy Unit, Verona University Hospital, Verona, Italy.
(8)Imagine Institute Université de Paris, Sorbonne, INSERM U1163, Centre 
national de référence des mastocytoses, Hôpital Necker, Assistance publique 
hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(9)Department of Allergology, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland.
(10)Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, Md.
(11)Mayo Clinic, Division of Allergic Diseases, Rochester, Minn.
(12)Institute of Allergology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Freie 
Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany; 
Fraunhofer Institute for Translational Medicine and Pharmacology ITMP, 
Immunology and Allergology, Berlin, Germany.
(13)Department of Medicine, IRCSS Ospedale Sacro Cuore Don Calabria di Negrar, 
Negrar di Valpolicella, Verona, Italy.
(14)Department of Clinical Haematology, Guys and St Thomas' NHS Hospitals, 
London, United Kingdom.
(15)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Medicine, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass.
(16)Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Hematology and 
Hemostaseology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; Ludwig Boltzmann 
Institute for Hematology and Oncology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(17)Department of Dermatology and Allergy Centre, Odense University Hospital, 
Odense, Denmark.
(18)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of Salerno, Salerno, 
Italy.
(19)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Allergy & 
Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU), Richmond, Va.
(20)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(21)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, Karolinska University 
Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Medicine Solna, Division of 
Immunology and Allergy, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(22)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical 
University Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.
(23)Stanford Cancer Institute/Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
Calif.
(24)Departments of Pathology and of Microbiology and Immunology, and the Sean N. 
Parker Center for Allergy and Asthma Research, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, Calif.
(25)Institute of Pathology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.
(26)Servicio Central de Citometria (NUCLEUS), Centro de Investigacion del Cancer 
(IBMCC; CSIC/USAL) Instituto Biosanitario de Salamanca (IBSAL) and Department of 
Medicine, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(27)CEREMAST, Department of Hematological Biology, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, 
Pierre et Marie Curie University (UPMC), Paris, France.
(28)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Mich.

Mastocytosis is a clonal myeloid disorder defined by an increase and 
accumulation of mast cells (MCs) in one or multiple organ systems. The complex 
pathology of mastocytosis results in variable clinical presentations, courses, 
and outcomes. The World Health Organization (WHO) divides the disease into 
cutaneous mastocytosis (CM), several forms of systemic mastocytosis (SM), and MC 
sarcoma. In most patients with SM, a somatic KIT mutation, usually D816V, is 
identified. Patients diagnosed with CM or nonadvanced SM, including indolent SM, 
have a near-normal life expectancy, whereas those with advanced SM, including 
aggressive SM and MC leukemia, have limited life expectancy. Since 2001, a 
multidisciplinary consensus group consisting of experts from the European 
Competence Network on Mastocytosis and the American Initiative in Mast Cell 
Diseases has supported the field by developing diagnostic criteria for 
mastocytosis. These criteria served as the basis for the WHO classification of 
mastocytosis over 2 decades. More recently, an International Consensus 
Classification group proposed slightly modified diagnostic criteria and a 
slightly revised classification. In this article, these changes are discussed. 
Furthermore, we propose harmonization among the proposals of the American 
Initiative in Mast Cell Diseases/European Competence Network on Mastocytosis 
consensus group, WHO, and the International Consensus Classification Group. Such 
harmonization will facilitate comparisons of retrospective study results and the 
conduct of prospective trials.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2024.08.044
PMID: 39216803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]