---
reference_id: "PMID:29339317"
title: "Arterial stenosis in antiphospholipid syndrome: Update on the unrevealed mechanisms of an endothelial disease."
authors:
- Harifi G
- Nour-Eldine W
- Noureldine MHA
- Berjaoui MB
- Kallas R
- Khoury R
- Uthman I
- Al-Saleh J
- Khamashta MA
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2017.10.016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arterial stenosis in antiphospholipid syndrome: Update on the unrevealed mechanisms of an endothelial disease.
**Authors:** Harifi G, Nour-Eldine W, Noureldine MHA, Berjaoui MB, Kallas R, Khoury R, Uthman I, Al-Saleh J, Khamashta MA
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2017.10.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2017.10.016)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2018 Mar;17(3):256-266. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2017.10.016. Epub
 2018 Jan 16.

Arterial stenosis in antiphospholipid syndrome: Update on the unrevealed 
mechanisms of an endothelial disease.

Harifi G(1), Nour-Eldine W(2), Noureldine MHA(3), Berjaoui MB(4), Kallas R(5), 
Khoury R(4), Uthman I(6), Al-Saleh J(7), Khamashta MA(7).

Author information:
(1)Dr Humeira Badsha Rheumatology Center, Dubai, United Arab Emirates. 
Electronic address: drharifi@drbadshamedical.com.
(2)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (Inserm), Unit 970, 
Paris-Cardiovascular Research Center, Paris, France; Université Paris-Descartes, 
Paris, France.
(3)Division of Neurosurgery, Lebanese American University Medical Center, 
Beirut, Lebanon.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Lebanese American University Medical Center, 
Beirut, Lebanon.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, American University of Beirut, Beirut, 
Lebanon.
(6)Division of Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine, American University of Beirut, 
Beirut, Lebanon.
(7)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Dubai Hospital, 
United Arab Emirates.

First described in 1983, antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is an autoimmune 
condition characterized by the occurrence of recurrent arterial and/or venous 
thrombosis, and/or pregnancy morbidity, in the setting of persistent presence of 
antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL). While thrombosis is the most well-known 
pathogenic mechanism in this disorder, the relevance of some other mechanisms 
such as arterial stenosis is being increasingly recognized. Arterial stenosis 
has been first described in the renal arteries in patients with APS, however 
intracranial and coeliac arteries can also be involved with various and 
treatable clinical manifestations. The underlying pathophysiology of this 
stenotic arterial vasculopathy is not fully understood but some recent studies 
revealed new insights into the molecular mechanism behind this endothelial cell 
activation in APS. In this review, we discuss these newly discovered mechanisms 
and highlight the diagnostic and therapeutic modalities of the APS related 
arterial stenosis.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2017.10.016
PMID: 29339317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]