---
reference_id: "PMID:7823136"
title: "Sharp wave-associated high-frequency oscillation (200 Hz) in the intact hippocampus: network and intracellular mechanisms."
authors:
- Ylinen A
- Bragin A
- Nádasdy Z
- Jandó G
- Szabó I
- Sik A
- Buzsáki G
journal: J Neurosci
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.15-01-00030.1995
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sharp wave-associated high-frequency oscillation (200 Hz) in the intact hippocampus: network and intracellular mechanisms.
**Authors:** Ylinen A, Bragin A, Nádasdy Z, Jandó G, Szabó I, Sik A, Buzsáki G
**Journal:** J Neurosci (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.15-01-00030.1995](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.15-01-00030.1995)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 1995 Jan;15(1 Pt 1):30-46. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.15-01-00030.1995.

Sharp wave-associated high-frequency oscillation (200 Hz) in the intact 
hippocampus: network and intracellular mechanisms.

Ylinen A(1), Bragin A, Nádasdy Z, Jandó G, Szabó I, Sik A, Buzsáki G.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers, State University 
of New Jersey, Newark 07102.

Sharp wave bursts, induced by a cooperative discharge of CA3 pyramidal cells, 
are the most synchronous physiological pattern in the hippocampus. In 
conjunction with sharp wave bursts, CA1 pyramidal cells display a high-frequency 
(200 Hz) network oscillation (ripple). In the present study extracellular field 
and unit activity was recorded simultaneously from 16 closely spaces sites in 
the awake rat and the intracellular activity of CA1 pyramidal cells during the 
network oscillation was studied under anesthesia. Current source density 
analysis of the high-frequency oscillation revealed circumscribed sinks and 
sources in the vicinity of the pyramidal layer. Single pyramidal cells 
discharged at a low frequency but were phase locked to the negative peak of the 
locally derived field oscillation. Approximately 10% of the simultaneously 
recorded pyramidal cells fired during a given oscillatory event. Putative 
interneurons increased their discharge rates during the field ripples 
severalfold and often maintained a 200 Hz frequency during the oscillatory 
event. Under urethane and ketamine anesthesia the frequency of ripples was 
slower (100-120 Hz) than in the awake rat (180-200 Hz). Halothane anesthesia 
prevented the occurrence of high-frequency field oscillations in the CA1 region. 
Both the amplitude (1-4 mV) and phase of the intracellular ripple, but not its 
frequency, were voltage dependent. The amplitude of intracellular ripple was 
smallest between -70 and -80 mV. The phase of intracellular oscillation relative 
to the extracellular ripple reversed when the membrane was hyperpolarized more 
than -80 mV. A histologically verified CA1 basket cell increased its firing rate 
during the network oscillation and discharged at the frequency of the 
extracellular ripple. These findings indicate that the intracellularly recorded 
fast oscillatory rhythm is not solely dependent on membrane currents intrinsic 
to the CA1 pyramidal cells but it is a network driven phenomenon dependent upon 
the participation of inhibitory interneurons. We hypothesize that fast field 
oscillation (200 Hz) in the CA1 region reflects summed IPSPs in pyramidal cells 
as a result of high-frequency barrage of interneurons. The sharp wave associated 
synchronous discharge of pyramidal cells in the millisecond range can exert a 
powerful influence on retrohippocampal targets and may facilitate the transfer 
of transiently stored memory traces from the hippocampus to the entorhinal 
cortex.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.15-01-00030.1995
PMCID: PMC6578299
PMID: 7823136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]