---
reference_id: "PMID:23319608"
title: Brg1 governs distinct pathways to direct multiple aspects of mammalian neural crest cell development.
authors:
- Li W
- Xiong Y
- Shang C
- Twu KY
- Hang CT
- Yang J
- Han P
- Lin CY
- Lin CJ
- Tsai FC
- Stankunas K
- Meyer T
- Bernstein D
- Pan M
- Chang CP
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1218072110
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis/genetics
- "Cardiovascular System/cytology, embryology, metabolism"
- Cell Movement/genetics
- Cell Proliferation
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p21/genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA Helicases/genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Embryo, Mammalian/blood supply, cytology, embryology"
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- In Situ Hybridization
- "MAP Kinase Kinase Kinase 5/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- Multipotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- Mutation
- "Myosin Heavy Chains/genetics, metabolism"
- "Neural Crest/cytology, embryology, metabolism"
- Neural Stem Cells/metabolism
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Pregnancy
- RNA Interference
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brg1 governs distinct pathways to direct multiple aspects of mammalian neural crest cell development.
**Authors:** Li W, Xiong Y, Shang C, Twu KY, Hang CT, Yang J, Han P, Lin CY, Lin CJ, Tsai FC, Stankunas K, Meyer T, Bernstein D, Pan M, Chang CP
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1218072110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1218072110)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jan 29;110(5):1738-43. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1218072110. Epub 2013 Jan 14.

Brg1 governs distinct pathways to direct multiple aspects of mammalian neural 
crest cell development.

Li W(1), Xiong Y, Shang C, Twu KY, Hang CT, Yang J, Han P, Lin CY, Lin CJ, Tsai 
FC, Stankunas K, Meyer T, Bernstein D, Pan M, Chang CP.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Development of the cerebral vessels, pharyngeal arch arteries (PAAs). and 
cardiac outflow tract (OFT) requires multipotent neural crest cells (NCCs) that 
migrate from the neural tube to target tissue destinations. Little is known 
about how mammalian NCC development is orchestrated by gene programming at the 
chromatin level, however. Here we show that Brahma-related gene 1 (Brg1), an 
ATPase subunit of the Brg1/Brahma-associated factor (BAF) chromatin-remodeling 
complex, is required in NCCs to direct cardiovascular development. Mouse embryos 
lacking Brg1 in NCCs display immature cerebral vessels, aberrant PAA patterning, 
and shortened OFT. Brg1 suppresses an apoptosis factor, Apoptosis 
signal-regulating kinase 1 (Ask1), and a cell cycle inhibitor, p21(cip1), to 
inhibit apoptosis and promote proliferation of NCCs, thereby maintaining a 
multipotent cell reservoir at the neural crest. Brg1 also supports Myosin heavy 
chain 11 (Myh11) expression to allow NCCs to develop into mature vascular smooth 
muscle cells of cerebral vessels. Within NCCs, Brg1 partners with chromatin 
remodeler Chromodomain-helicase-DNA-binding protein 7 (Chd7) on the PlexinA2 
promoter to activate PlexinA2, which encodes a receptor for semaphorin to guide 
NCCs into the OFT. Our findings reveal an important role for Brg1 and its 
downstream pathways in the survival, differentiation, and migration of the 
multipotent NCCs critical for mammalian cardiovascular development.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1218072110
PMCID: PMC3562770
PMID: 23319608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.