---
reference_id: "PMID:34554243"
title: "Long-term efficacy and safety of canakinumab in patients with mevalonate kinase deficiency: results from the randomised Phase 3 CLUSTER trial."
authors:
- Jeyaratnam J
- Simon A
- Calvo I
- Constantin T
- Shcherbina A
- Hofer M
- Gattorno M
- Martini A
- Bader-Meunier B
- Vastert B
- Levy J
- Dekker E
- de Benedetti F
- Frenkel J
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/keab696
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/adverse effects"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/adverse effects"
- Double-Blind Method
- Humans
- Mevalonate Kinase Deficiency/drug therapy
- Serum Amyloid A Protein
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term efficacy and safety of canakinumab in patients with mevalonate kinase deficiency: results from the randomised Phase 3 CLUSTER trial.
**Authors:** Jeyaratnam J, Simon A, Calvo I, Constantin T, Shcherbina A, Hofer M, Gattorno M, Martini A, Bader-Meunier B, Vastert B, Levy J, Dekker E, de Benedetti F, Frenkel J
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/keab696](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/keab696)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2022 May 5;61(5):2088-2094. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/keab696.

Long-term efficacy and safety of canakinumab in patients with mevalonate kinase 
deficiency: results from the randomised Phase 3 CLUSTER trial.

Jeyaratnam J(1), Simon A(2), Calvo I(3), Constantin T(4), Shcherbina A(5), Hofer 
M(6), Gattorno M(7), Martini A(8), Bader-Meunier B(9), Vastert B(10), Levy 
J(11), Dekker E(11), de Benedetti F(12), Frenkel J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Radboudumc Expertise Center for Immunodeficiency and Autoinflammation (REIA), 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Pediatric Rheumatology Unit, Hospital Universitario y Politécnico La Fe, 
Valencia, Spain.
(4)2nd Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(5)Department of Immunology, Dmitry Rogachev National Medical Center of 
Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, Russia.
(6)Unité Centre Multisite Romande d'Immuno-e Rhumatologie Pediatrique, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(7)Center for Autoinflammatory Diseases and Immunodeficiencies, IRCCS, G. 
Gaslini.
(8)University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(9)Department of Pediatric Immunology, Hematology and Rheumatology, Universite 
de Paris, Institut des Maladies Genetiques (IMAGINE Institute), Reference Centre 
for Rheumatic, AutoImmune, and Systemic Diseases in Children (RAISE), Necker 
Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(10)Department of Pediatric Immunology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(11)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(12)Division of Rheumatology, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Roma, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the long-term efficacy and safety of canakinumab in 
patients with mevalonate kinase deficiency during the open label extension 
(weeks 41-113) of the randomized controlled CLUSTER trial.
METHODS: During a 72-week period, patients received open-label canakinumab 150 
or 300 mg, every 4 or 8 weeks. The disease activity was evaluated every 8 weeks 
using physician global assessment and counting the number of flares. 
Concentrations of CRP and serum amyloid A protein were measured. The safety was 
studied by determination and classification of observed adverse events. The 
safety and efficacy were analysed separately in three subgroups of patients 
receiving a cumulative dose of less than <35 mg/kg, ≥35 to <70 mg/kg or 
≥70 mg/kg.
RESULTS: Of the 74 patients who started the CLUSTER study, 66 entered Epoch 4 
and 65 completed it. During the 72-week period, 42 (64%) patients experienced no 
flares, while 13 (20%) had one flare, as compared with a median of 12 flares per 
year reported at baseline. Low physician global assessment scores were seen at 
the end of the study for all groups with >90% reporting minimal disease activity 
or none at all. Median CRP concentrations were consistently equal or lower than 
10 mg/l, while median serum amyloid A concentrations remained only slightly 
above the normal range of 10 mg/l. The study showed no new or unexpected adverse 
events.
CONCLUSION: Canakinumab proved effective to control disease activity and prevent 
flares in mevalonate kinase deficiency during the 72-week study period. No new 
safety concerns were reported.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT02059291. https://clinicaltrials.gov.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/keab696
PMID: 34554243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]