---
reference_id: "PMID:27106217"
title: "Glycogen storage disease type III: diagnosis, genotype, management, clinical course and outcome."
authors:
- Sentner CP
- Hoogeveen IJ
- Weinstein DA
- Santer R
- Murphy E
- McKiernan PJ
- Steuerwald U
- Beauchamp NJ
- Taybert J
- Laforêt P
- Petit FM
- Hubert A
- Labrune P
- Smit GPA
- Derks TGJ
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-016-9932-2
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genotype
- Glycogen Debranching Enzyme System/genetics
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type III/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glycogen storage disease type III: diagnosis, genotype, management, clinical course and outcome.
**Authors:** Sentner CP, Hoogeveen IJ, Weinstein DA, Santer R, Murphy E, McKiernan PJ, Steuerwald U, Beauchamp NJ, Taybert J, Laforêt P, Petit FM, Hubert A, Labrune P, Smit GPA, Derks TGJ
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-016-9932-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-016-9932-2)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2016 Sep;39(5):697-704. doi: 10.1007/s10545-016-9932-2.
Epub 2016 Apr 22.

Glycogen storage disease type III: diagnosis, genotype, management, clinical
course and outcome.

Sentner CP(1), Hoogeveen IJ(1), Weinstein DA(2), Santer R(3), Murphy E(4),
McKiernan PJ(5), Steuerwald U(6), Beauchamp NJ(7), Taybert J(8), Laforêt P(9),
Petit FM(10), Hubert A(11), Labrune P(11), Smit GPA(1), Derks TGJ(12).

Author information:
(1)Section of Metabolic Diseases, Beatrix Children's Hospital, University of
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, PO Box 30 001, 9700 RB,
Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Glycogen Storage Disease Program, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL,
USA.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, University Medical Centre Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Charles Dent Metabolic Unit, National Hospital for Neurology and
Neurosurgery, London, UK.
(5)Birmingham Children's Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
(6)Department of Occupational and Public Health (DFAA), Tórshavn, Faroe Islands.
(7)Sheffield Diagnostic Genetics Service, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation
Trust, Sheffield, UK.
(8)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Children's Memorial Health Institute,
Warsaw, Poland.
(9)Centre de Référence de Pathologie, Neuromusculaire Paris-Est, Institut de
Myologie, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris,
France.
(10)Department of Genetics and Cytogenetics, AP-HP, Antoine Béclère University
Hospital, University Paris Sud, Paris, France.
(11)APHP, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Sud, hôpital Antoine Béclère, Centre de
Référence des Maladies héréditaires du Métabolisme Hépatique, and Paris Sud
University, Clamart, France.
(12)Section of Metabolic Diseases, Beatrix Children's Hospital, University of
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, PO Box 30 001, 9700 RB,
Groningen, The Netherlands. t.g.j.derks@umcg.nl.

Glycogen storage disease type III (GSDIII) is a rare disorder of glycogenolysis
due to AGL gene mutations, causing glycogen debranching enzyme deficiency and
storage of limited dextrin. Patients with GSDIIIa show involvement of liver and
cardiac/skeletal muscle, whereas GSDIIIb patients display only liver symptoms
and signs. The International Study on Glycogen Storage Disease (ISGSDIII) is a
descriptive retrospective, international, multi-centre cohort study of
diagnosis, genotype, management, clinical course and outcome of 175 patients
from 147 families (86 % GSDIIIa; 14 % GSDIIIb), with follow-up into adulthood in
91 patients. In total 58 AGL mutations (non-missense mutations were
overrepresented and 21 novel mutations were observed) were identified in 76
families. GSDIII patients first presented before the age of 1.5 years,
hepatomegaly was the most common presenting clinical sign. Dietary management
was very diverse and included frequent meals, uncooked cornstarch and continuous
gastric drip feeding. Chronic complications involved the liver (hepatic
cirrhosis, adenoma(s), and/or hepatocellular carcinoma in 11 %), heart (cardiac
involvement and cardiomyopathy, in 58 % and 15 %, respectively, generally
presenting in early childhood), and muscle (pain in 34 %). Type 2 diabetes
mellitus was diagnosed in eight out of 91 adult patients (9 %). In adult
patients no significant correlation was detected between (non-) missense AGL
genotypes and hepatic, cardiac or muscular complications. This study
demonstrates heterogeneity in a large cohort of ageing GSDIII patients. An
international GSD patient registry is warranted to prospectively define the
clinical course, heterogeneity and the effect of different dietary interventions
in patients with GSDIII.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-016-9932-2
PMCID: PMC4987401
PMID: 27106217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
