---
reference_id: "PMID:40415887"
title: "The sneeze reflex in physiological and pathological states: a mini review."
authors:
- Rui Y
- Xin T
- Chen Y
- Xiang B
- Chen C
- Dong R
- Chen Z
journal: Front Neurosci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2025.1598027
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The sneeze reflex in physiological and pathological states: a mini review.
**Authors:** Rui Y, Xin T, Chen Y, Xiang B, Chen C, Dong R, Chen Z
**Journal:** Front Neurosci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnins.2025.1598027](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2025.1598027)

## Content

1. Front Neurosci. 2025 May 9;19:1598027. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2025.1598027. 
eCollection 2025.

The sneeze reflex in physiological and pathological states: a mini review.

Rui Y(1), Xin T(1), Chen Y(1), Xiang B(1), Chen C(1), Dong R(2), Chen Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cough, Kunshan Key Laboratory of Chronic Cough, Affiliated 
Kunshan Hospital of Jiangsu University, Suzhou, China.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Southeast University, Nanjing, 
China.

The sneeze reflex serves as a protective response of the human body to 
environmental stimuli, with its regulatory mechanism largely depending on a 
complex nervous system. Current research indicates that the sneeze reflex can be 
triggered by both internal and external stimuli, including light and 
temperature. The composition of its reflex arc involves the coordinated action 
of multiple neural structures. Recent in-depth studies on the mechanism of the 
sneeze reflex have revealed a growing association between this reflex and 
various diseases, such as allergic rhinitis and infectious diseases. However, 
existing research primarily focuses on elucidating the neurophysiological basis 
of the sneeze reflex and its related neural pathways. The manifestations and 
mechanisms of the sneeze reflex under different pathological states remain 
underexplored, thereby limiting the potential application of the sneeze reflex 
in clinical diagnosis and treatment. This review aims to discuss the 
physiological mechanisms and pathological manifestations associated with the 
sneeze reflex.

Copyright © 2025 Rui, Xin, Chen, Xiang, Chen, Dong and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2025.1598027
PMCID: PMC12098519
PMID: 40415887

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.