---
reference_id: "PMID:33509804"
title: The Effect of Metformin in Treatment of Adenomas in Patients with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis.
authors:
- Park JJ
- Kim BC
- Hong SP
- Seo Y
- Lee HS
- Park YS
- Na SY
- Park SC
- Park J
- Kim JH
- Moon CM
- Huh KC
- Park SJ
- Cheon JH
- Kim WH
- Kim TI
journal: Cancer Prev Res (Phila)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-20-0580
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Effect of Metformin in Treatment of Adenomas in Patients with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis.
**Authors:** Park JJ, Kim BC, Hong SP, Seo Y, Lee HS, Park YS, Na SY, Park SC, Park J, Kim JH, Moon CM, Huh KC, Park SJ, Cheon JH, Kim WH, Kim TI
**Journal:** Cancer Prev Res (Phila) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-20-0580](https://doi.org/10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-20-0580)

## Content

1. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2021 May;14(5):563-572. doi: 
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-20-0580. Epub 2021 Jan 28.

The Effect of Metformin in Treatment of Adenomas in Patients with Familial 
Adenomatous Polyposis.

Park JJ(#)(1)(2)(3), Kim BC(#)(4), Hong SP(1)(2), Seo Y(2)(5), Lee HS(6), Park 
YS(7), Na SY(8), Park SC(9), Park J(10), Kim JH(11), Moon CM(12), Huh KC(13), 
Park SJ(1)(2), Cheon JH(1)(2), Kim WH(1)(2), Kim TI(14)(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Severance Hospital, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Institute of Gastroenterology, Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College 
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Yonsei Cancer Prevention Center, Severance Hospital, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Center for Colorectal Cancer, Center for Cancer Prevention & Detection, 
Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Management, Research Institute and Hospital, 
National Cancer Center, Goyang-si, Gyeonggi-do, Korea.
(5)Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Biostatics Collaboration Unit, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, 
Korea.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Nowon Eulji University Hospital, Eulji 
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(8)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Incheon St. 
Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Incheon, 
Korea.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, Kangwon National University School of 
Medicine, Chuncheon, Korea.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, Haeundae Paik Hospital, Inje University 
College of Medicine, Busan, Korea.
(11)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Dongguk 
University Ilsan Hospital, Goyang, Korea.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, Ewha Womans 
University, Seoul, Korea.
(13)Department of Internal Medicine, Konyang University College of Medicine, 
Konyang University Hospital, Daejeon, Korea.
(14)Department of Internal Medicine, Severance Hospital, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. taeilkim@yuhs.ac.
(#)Contributed equally

Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a hereditary disease characterized by 
the development of numerous colorectal adenomas in young adults. Metformin, an 
oral diabetic drug, has been shown to have antineoplastic effects and a 
favorable safety profile. We performed a randomized, double-blind, controlled 
trial to evaluate the efficacy of metformin on the regression of colorectal and 
duodenal adenoma in patients with FAP. Thirty-four FAP patients were randomly 
assigned in a 1:2:2 ratio to receive placebo, 500 mg metformin, or 1,500 mg 
metformin per day orally for 7 months. The number and size of polyps and the 
global polyp burden were evaluated before and after the intervention. This study 
was terminated early based on the results of the interim analysis. No 
significant differences were determined in the percentage change of colorectal 
and duodenal polyp number over the course of treatment among the three treatment 
arms (P = 0.627 and P = 1.000, respectively). We found no significant 
differences in the percentage change of colorectal or duodenal polyp size among 
the three groups (P = 0.214 and P = 0.803, respectively). The overall polyp 
burdens of the colorectum and duodenum were not significantly changed by 
metformin treatment at either dosage. Colon polyps removed from the 
metformin-treated patients showed significantly lower mTOR signal (p-S6) 
expression than those from patients in the placebo arm. In conclusion, 7 months 
of treatment with 500 mg or 1,500 mg metformin did not reduce the mean number or 
size of polyps in the colorectum or duodenum in FAP patients (ClinicalTrials.gov 
ID: NCT01725490). PREVENTION RELEVANCE: A 7-month metformin treatment (500 mg or 
1,500 mg) did not reduce the number or size of polyps in the colorectum or 
duodenum of FAP patients as compared to placebo. These results do not support 
the use of metformin to promote regression of intestinal adenomas in FAP 
patients.

©2021 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-20-0580
PMID: 33509804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]