---
reference_id: "PMID:29618308"
title: Genetics and Therapies for GM2 Gangliosidosis.
authors:
- Cachon-Gonzalez MB
- Zaccariotto E
- Cox TM
journal: Curr Gene Ther
year: '2018'
doi: 10.2174/1566523218666180404162622
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics and Therapies for GM2 Gangliosidosis.
**Authors:** Cachon-Gonzalez MB, Zaccariotto E, Cox TM
**Journal:** Curr Gene Ther (2018)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1566523218666180404162622](https://doi.org/10.2174/1566523218666180404162622)

## Content

1. Curr Gene Ther. 2018;18(2):68-89. doi: 10.2174/1566523218666180404162622.

Genetics and Therapies for GM2 Gangliosidosis.

Cachon-Gonzalez MB(1), Zaccariotto E(1), Cox TM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Tay-Sachs disease, caused by impaired β-N-acetylhexosaminidase activity, was the 
first GM2 gangliosidosis to be studied and one of the most severe and earliest 
lysosomal diseases to be described. The condition, associated with the 
pathological build-up of GM2 ganglioside, has acquired almost iconic status and 
serves as a paradigm in the study of lysosomal storage diseases. Inherited as a 
classical autosomal recessive disorder, this global disease of the nervous 
system induces developmental arrest with regression of attained milestones; 
neurodegeneration progresses rapidly to cause premature death in young children. 
There is no effective treatment beyond palliative care, and while the genetic 
basis of GM2 gangliosidosis is well established, the molecular and cellular 
events, from diseasecausing mutations and glycosphingolipid storage to disease 
manifestations, remain to be fully delineated. Several therapeutic approaches 
have been attempted in patients, including enzymatic augmentation, bone marrow 
transplantation, enzyme enhancement, and substrate reduction therapy. Hitherto, 
none of these stratagems has materially altered the course of the disease. 
Authentic animal models of GM2 gangliodidosis have facilitated in-depth 
evaluation of innovative applications such as gene transfer, which in contrast 
to other interventions, shows great promise. This review outlines current 
knowledge pertaining the pathobiology as well as potential innovative treatments 
for the GM2 gangliosidoses.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1566523218666180404162622
PMCID: PMC6040173
PMID: 29618308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]