---
reference_id: "PMID:34444788"
title: Revisiting Konzo Risk Factors in Three Areas Differently Affected by Spastic Paraparesis in Eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo Discloses a Prominent Role of the Nutritional Status-A Comparative Cross-Sectional Study.
authors:
- Baguma M
- Malembaka EB
- Bahizire E
- Mudumbi GZ
- Shamamba DB
- Matabaro AN
- Rigo JM
- Njamnshi AK
- Chabwine JN
journal: Nutrients
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/nu13082628
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Cyanides
- Democratic Republic of the Congo/epidemiology
- Disease Outbreaks
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Malnutrition
- Manihot
- Nutritional Status
- "Paraparesis, Spastic/complications, epidemiology"
- Prevalence
- Risk Factors
- Vegetables
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Revisiting Konzo Risk Factors in Three Areas Differently Affected by Spastic Paraparesis in Eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo Discloses a Prominent Role of the Nutritional Status-A Comparative Cross-Sectional Study.
**Authors:** Baguma M, Malembaka EB, Bahizire E, Mudumbi GZ, Shamamba DB, Matabaro AN, Rigo JM, Njamnshi AK, Chabwine JN
**Journal:** Nutrients (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/nu13082628](https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13082628)

## Content

1. Nutrients. 2021 Jul 29;13(8):2628. doi: 10.3390/nu13082628.

Revisiting Konzo Risk Factors in Three Areas Differently Affected by Spastic 
Paraparesis in Eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo Discloses a Prominent 
Role of the Nutritional Status-A Comparative Cross-Sectional Study.

Baguma M(1)(2)(3)(4), Malembaka EB(1)(5), Bahizire E(1)(4)(6)(7), Mudumbi GZ(8), 
Shamamba DB(9), Matabaro AN(10), Rigo JM(3), Njamnshi AK(11)(12)(13), Chabwine 
JN(1)(14).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Université Catholique de Bukavu (UCB), Bukavu 285, 
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Hôpital Provincial Général de Référence de 
Bukavu (HPGRB), Bukavu 285, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(3)Biomedical Research Institute (BIOMED), Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, 
UHasselt-Hasselt University, 3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium.
(4)Center for Tropical Diseases & Global Health (CTDGH), Université Catholique 
de Bukavu (UCB), Bukavu 285, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
W6030, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(6)Center for Research in Natural Sciences of Lwiro, Bukavu 285, Democratic 
Republic of the Congo.
(7)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Nairobi, Nairobi 00100, 
Kenya.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Hôpital Provincial Général de Référence de Bukavu 
(HPGRB), Bukavu 285, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(9)Plant Pathology Laboratory, Faculty of Agronomy, Université Catholique de 
Bukavu (UCB), Bukavu 285, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(10)Department of Medical Biology, Hôpital Provincial Général de Référence de 
Bukavu (HPGRB), Bukavu 285, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine and Specialties/Neuroscience, Faculty of 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, The University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé P.O. Box 
25625, Cameroon.
(12)Brain Research Africa Initiative (BRAIN), Yaoundé P.O. Box 25625, Cameroon.
(13)Brain Research Africa Initiative (BRAIN), Thônex, 1226 Geneva, Switzerland.
(14)Neurology Unit, Department of Neuroscience and Movement Science, Faculty of 
Science and Medicine, University of Fribourg, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland.

This comparative cross-sectional study aimed to better understand the respective 
contributions of protein malnutrition and cassava-derived cyanide poisoning in 
the development of konzo. We compared data on nutritional status and cyanide 
exposure of school-age adolescent konzo-diseased patients to those of non-konzo 
subjects of similar age from three areas in the Eastern Democratic Republic of 
the Congo. Our results show that konzo patients had a high prevalence of both 
wasting (54.5%) and stunting (72.7%), as well as of cyanide poisoning (81.8%). 
Controls from Burhinyi and those from Idjwi showed a similar profile with a low 
prevalence of wasting (3.3% and 6.5%, respectively) and intermediate prevalence 
of stunting (26.7% and 23.9%, respectively). They both had a high prevalence of 
cyanide poisoning (50.0% and 63.0%, respectively), similar to konzo-patients. On 
the other hand, controls from Bukavu showed the lowest prevalence of both risk 
factors, namely chronic malnutrition (12.1%) and cyanide poisoning (27.6%). In 
conclusion, cassava-derived cyanide poisoning does not necessarily coexist with 
konzo outbreaks. The only factor differentiating konzo patients from healthy 
individuals exposed to cyanide poisoning appeared to be their worse nutritional 
status. This further suggests that, besides the known role of cyanide poisoning 
in the pathogenesis of konzo, malnutrition may be a key factor for the disease 
occurrence.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13082628
PMCID: PMC8399762
PMID: 34444788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.