---
reference_id: "PMID:20301443"
title: Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- McGarrity TJ
- Amos CI
- Baker MJ
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, McGarrity TJ, Amos CI, Baker MJ

## Content

1. Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome.

McGarrity TJ(1), Amos CI(2), Baker MJ(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2001 Feb 23 [updated 2021 Sep 2].

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine Milton S Hershey Medical Center Hershey, Pennsylvania
(2)Department of Medicine Baylor College of Medicine Houston, Texas
(3)Department of Medicine Milton S Hershey Medical Center; Penn State Hershey 
Cancer Institute Hershey, Pennsylvania

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is characterized by the 
association of gastrointestinal (GI) polyposis, mucocutaneous pigmentation, and 
cancer predisposition. PJS-type hamartomatous polyps are most common in the 
small intestine (in order of prevalence: jejunum, ileum, and duodenum) but can 
also occur in the stomach, large bowel, and extraintestinal sites including the 
renal pelvis, bronchus, gall bladder, nasal passages, urinary bladder, and 
ureters. GI polyps can result in chronic bleeding, anemia, and recurrent 
obstruction and intussusception requiring repeated laparotomy and bowel 
resection. Mucocutaneous hyperpigmentation presents in childhood as dark blue to 
dark brown macules around the mouth, eyes, and nostrils, in the perianal area, 
and on the buccal mucosa. Hyperpigmented macules on the fingers are common. The 
macules may fade in puberty and adulthood. Recognition of the distinctive skin 
manifestations is important especially in individuals who have PJS as the result 
of a de novo pathogenic variant as these skin findings often predate GI signs 
and symptoms. Individuals with PJS are at increased risk for a wide variety of 
epithelial malignancies (colorectal, gastric, pancreatic, breast, and ovarian 
cancers). Females are at risk for sex cord tumors with annular tubules (SCTAT), 
a benign neoplasm of the ovaries, and adenoma malignum of the cervix, a rare 
aggressive cancer. Males occasionally develop large calcifying Sertoli cell 
tumors of the testes, which secrete estrogen and can lead to gynecomastia, 
advanced skeletal age, and ultimately short stature, if untreated.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of PJS is based on clinical findings. 
Identification of a heterozygous pathogenic variant in STK11 by molecular 
genetic testing confirms the diagnosis and allows for testing of at-risk 
relatives.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Routine endoscopic surveillance with 
polypectomy decreases the frequency of emergency laparotomy and bowel loss 
resulting from intussusception. Small-bowel imaging includes video capsule 
endoscopy (VCE), CT enterography, and/or magnetic resonance enterography (MRE). 
Balloon-assisted enteroscopy allows for removal of deep small-bowel polyps. 
Occasionally intraoperative enteroscopy and enterotomy is needed for removal of 
large distal small-bowel polyps. Intussusception and malignancies should be 
treated in the standard manner. Prevention of primary manifestations: Although 
not specifically studied in individuals with PJS, prophylactic mastectomy to 
decrease the risk of breast cancer could be considered based on family history 
or other clinical factors. Similarly, there is no prospective data on 
gynecologic prophylactic surgery for the elevated gynecologic cancer risk in 
females with PJS. Surveillance: In children and adolescents: colonoscopy and 
upper endoscopy at age eight years; if negative, follow up at age 18 years. If 
polyps are detected repeat every one to three years based on size, number, and 
histopathology of polyps. Small-bowel surveillance by MRE or VCE every one to 
three years beginning at age eight years. Examination for precocious puberty in 
females annually beginning at age eight years. Testicular examination and 
examination for feminizing changes in males annually beginning at age ten years. 
In adults: Colonoscopy, upper endoscopy, and small-bowel examination by MRE or 
VCE every two to three years beginning at age 18 years; clinical breast 
examination in women every six months beginning at age 30 years; mammogram and 
breast MRI in women annually beginning at age 30 years; pelvic examination and 
pap smear in women annually beginning at age 18 to 20 years. Pancreatic imaging 
with endoscopic ultrasound or MRI/MRCP annually beginning at age 30 to 35 years. 
Evaluation of relatives at risk: If the pathogenic variant in the family is 
known, offer molecular genetic testing to at-risk relatives so that morbidity 
and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and prevention of disease 
through appropriate surveillance and consideration of prophylactic measures in 
affected family members. If the family variant is not known, offer clinical 
diagnostic evaluations to all at-risk family members, who will benefit from 
early treatment and appropriate surveillance.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PJS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. The 
majority of individuals diagnosed with PJS have an affected parent; however, 
many individuals with PJS represent apparently simplex cases. The exact 
proportion of individuals who have PJS as the result of a de novo pathogenic 
variant is unknown. If a parent of the proband is affected and/or is known to 
have the STK11 pathogenic variant identified in the proband, the risk to the 
sibs of inheriting the pathogenic variant is 50%. Once the STK11 pathogenic 
variant has been identified in an affected family member, predictive testing for 
at-risk family members, prenatal testing, and preimplantation genetic testing 
are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301443