---
reference_id: "PMID:40806509"
title: Understanding the Molecular Basis of Miller-Dieker Syndrome.
authors:
- Mahendran G
- Brown JA
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/ijms26157375
keywords:
- Humans
- "Classical Lissencephalies and Subcortical Band Heterotopias/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding the Molecular Basis of Miller-Dieker Syndrome.
**Authors:** Mahendran G, Brown JA
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms26157375](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms26157375)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2025 Jul 30;26(15):7375. doi: 10.3390/ijms26157375.

Understanding the Molecular Basis of Miller-Dieker Syndrome.

Mahendran G(1), Brown JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, Notre 
Dame, IN 46556, USA.

Miller-Dieker Syndrome (MDS) is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder caused by a 
heterozygous deletion of approximately 26 genes within the MDS locus of human 
chromosome 17. MDS, which affects 1 in 100,000 babies, can lead to a range of 
phenotypes, including lissencephaly, severe neurological defects, distinctive 
facial abnormalities, cognitive impairments, seizures, growth retardation, and 
congenital heart and liver abnormalities. One hallmark feature of MDS is an 
unusually smooth brain surface due to abnormal neuronal migration during early 
brain development. Several genes located within the MDS locus have been 
implicated in the pathogenesis of MDS, including PAFAH1B1, YWHAE, CRK, and 
METTL16. These genes play a role in the molecular and cellular pathways that are 
vital for neuronal migration, the proper development of the cerebral cortex, and 
protein translation in MDS. Improved model systems, such as MDS patient-derived 
organoids and multi-omics analyses indicate that WNT/β-catenin signaling, 
calcium signaling, S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) homeostasis, mammalian target of 
rapamycin (mTOR) signaling, Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of 
transcription (JAK/STAT) signaling, and others are dysfunctional in MDS. This 
review of MDS integrates details at the clinical level alongside newly emerging 
details at the molecular and cellular levels, which may inform the development 
of novel therapeutic strategies for MDS.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms26157375
PMCID: PMC12347932
PMID: 40806509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.