---
reference_id: PMID:33341195
title: Diagnosis and management of Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis.
authors:
- Noe MH
- Micheletti RG
journal: Clin Dermatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2020.06.016
keywords:
- Anti-Infective Agents/adverse effects
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal/adverse effects"
- Anticonvulsants/adverse effects
- "Antigens, Differentiation, T-Lymphocyte/metabolism"
- Apoptosis/immunology
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Fas Ligand Protein/metabolism
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Immune System Diseases/complications
- Keratinocytes/immunology
- "Killer Cells, Natural/immunology"
- Neoplasms/complications
- Perforin/metabolism
- Risk Factors
- "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, immunology, therapy"
- Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and management of Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis.
**Authors:** Noe MH, Micheletti RG
**Journal:** Clin Dermatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clindermatol.2020.06.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clindermatol.2020.06.016)

## Content

1. Clin Dermatol. 2020 Nov-Dec;38(6):607-612. doi: 
10.1016/j.clindermatol.2020.06.016. Epub 2020 Jun 30.

Diagnosis and management of Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis.

Noe MH(1), Micheletti RG(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; Department Medicine, Perelman 
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. 
Electronic address: robert.micheletti@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN) is a rare, 
immunologically mediated cutaneous adverse reaction characterized by mucous 
membrane and epidermal detachment, with a mortality ranging from 15% to 25%. 
Risk factors for the development of SJS/TEN include immune dysregulation, active 
malignancy, and genetic predisposition. Medications are the most common cause, 
particularly antimicrobials, antiepileptics, allopurinol, and nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory medications. Drug-specific CD8 T-cells and natural killer 
cells are thought to be the major inducers of keratinocyte apoptosis via release 
of soluble cytotoxic mediators, including Fas ligand, perforin/granzyme, tumor 
necrosis factor, and granulysin. When SJS/TEN is suspected clinically, 
appropriate therapy should be instituted without delay. All patients should be 
managed initially in an intensive care unit or burn unit under a 
multidisciplinary team of physicians experienced in the care of patients with 
SJS/TEN. Available data support the use of various pharmacologic agents to halt 
disease progression and improve outcomes, but no single drug has been found to 
be superior or beneficial for all patients. Future research should focus on 
developing a better understanding of the genetic susceptibility and 
immunopathophysiology of the disease, as well as novel diagnostic and 
therapeutic targets to improve patient outcomes.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2020.06.016
PMID: 33341195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]