---
reference_id: "PMID:11242110"
title: "DiGeorge syndrome phenotype in mice mutant for the T-box gene, Tbx1."
authors:
- Jerome LA
- Papaioannou VE
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/85845
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DiGeorge syndrome phenotype in mice mutant for the T-box gene, Tbx1.
**Authors:** Jerome LA, Papaioannou VE
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/85845](https://doi.org/10.1038/85845)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2001 Mar;27(3):286-91. doi: 10.1038/85845.

DiGeorge syndrome phenotype in mice mutant for the T-box gene, Tbx1.

Jerome LA(1), Papaioannou VE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.

The DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome (DGS/VCFS) is a relatively common human 
disorder, usually associated with deletions of chromosome 22q11. The genetic 
basis for the wide range of developmental anomalies in the heart, glands and 
facial structures has been elusive. We have investigated the potential role of 
one candidate gene, Tbx1, which encodes a transcription factor of the T-box 
family, by producing a null mutation in mice. We found that mice heterozygous 
for the mutation had a high incidence of cardiac outflow tract anomalies, thus 
modeling one of the major abnormalities of the human syndrome. Moreover, Tbx1-/- 
mice displayed a wide range of developmental anomalies encompassing almost all 
of the common DGS/VCFS features, including hypoplasia of the thymus and 
parathyroid glands, cardiac outflow tract abnormalities, abnormal facial 
structures, abnormal vertebrae and cleft palate. On the basis of this phenotype 
in mice, we propose that TBX1 in humans is a key gene in the etiology of 
DGS/VCFS.

DOI: 10.1038/85845
PMID: 11242110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]