---
reference_id: "PMID:30844551"
title: "Juvenile temporal arteritis: A clinicopathological multicentric experience."
authors:
- Journeau L
- Pistorius MA
- Michon-Pasturel U
- Lambert M
- Lapébie FX
- Bura-Riviere A
- de Faucal P
- Jego P
- Didier Q
- Durant C
- Urbanski G
- Hervier B
- Toquet C
- Agard C
- Espitia O
- "Groupe d'Étude Français des Artérites des gros Vaisseaux"
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2019.03.007
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Young Adult
- Biopsy
- France/epidemiology
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/diagnosis, epidemiology, pathology, therapy"
- "Headache/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Retrospective Studies
- Syndrome
- Temporal Arteries/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Juvenile temporal arteritis: A clinicopathological multicentric experience.
**Authors:** Journeau L, Pistorius MA, Michon-Pasturel U, Lambert M, Lapébie FX, Bura-Riviere A, de Faucal P, Jego P, Didier Q, Durant C, Urbanski G, Hervier B, Toquet C, Agard C, Espitia O, Groupe d'Étude Français des Artérites des gros Vaisseaux
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2019.03.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2019.03.007)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2019 May;18(5):476-483. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2019.03.007. Epub
 2019 Mar 4.

Juvenile temporal arteritis: A clinicopathological multicentric experience.

Journeau L(1), Pistorius MA(1), Michon-Pasturel U(2), Lambert M(3), Lapébie
FX(4), Bura-Riviere A(4), de Faucal P(5), Jego P(6), Didier Q(1), Durant C(1),
Urbanski G(7), Hervier B(8), Toquet C(9), Agard C(1), Espitia O(10); Groupe
d'Étude Français des Artérites des gros Vaisseaux.

Author information:
(1)Department of internal medicine, Hôtel-Dieu, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France.
(2)Department of internal medicine, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Lille,
Lille, France.
(3)Department of vascular medicine, Hôpital Saint-Joseph, Paris, France.
(4)Department of vascular medicine, Hôpital Rangueil, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse,
France.
(5)Department of internal medicine, Hôpital privé du Confluent, Nantes, France.
(6)Department of internal medicine, Hôpital Sud, CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France.
(7)Department of internal medicine and vascular diseases, CHU d'Angers, Angers,
France.
(8)Department of internal medicine, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière (AP-HP), Paris,
France.
(9)Departement of pathology, Hôtel-Dieu, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France.
(10)Department of internal medicine, Hôtel-Dieu, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France.
Electronic address: olivier.espitia@chu-nantes.fr.

INTRODUCTION: Juvenile temporal arteritis (JTA) is a recently-described and
little-known inflammatory disease and its etiology is undetermined. Less than
forty cases have been published. This paper is aimed at reporting the largest
JTA series and to compare it to literature data to better evaluate its
characteristics at diagnosis, its evolution and treatment options.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We conducted a retrospective and descriptive multicentric
study in France by identifying adult patients under the age of 50 which had a
pathological temporal artery biopsy owing to the presence of a temporal
arteritis. Patients with temporal arteritis as a manifestation of systemic
vasculitis were excluded.
RESULTS: We included 12 patients and the literature review identified 32 cases
described in 27 articles, thus a total of 44 patients - 34 men and 10 women -
with a median age of 30 and a maximum of 44. All patients presented either a
lump in the temporal region or prominent temporal arteries, and 47.7% of
patients suffered from headaches. Only 11.4% of patients presented general
symptoms and 6.8% a biological inflammatory syndrome; 34.1% had peripheral blood
eosinophilia; 83.7% presented a single episode and complete excision without
further treatment was documented for 72.7%. Pathology analysis revealed
infiltrate of inflammatory cells in the arterial wall in 97.6% of patients but
also sparse giant cells for 25% and granuloma for 22.9%, perivascular extension
of the inflammation for 82.6%, and presence of lymphoid follicles or germinal
centres for 60%. Clinical relapses were present in 16.3% of cases.
CONCLUSION: JTA is a rare, localized and benign disease. The majority of cases
have only one episode which is cured by local surgery.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2019.03.007
PMID: 30844551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]