---
reference_id: "PMID:20876674"
title: "Bardet-Biedl syndrome: a study of the renal and cardiovascular phenotypes in a French cohort."
authors:
- Imhoff O
- Marion V
- Stoetzel C
- Durand M
- Holder M
- Sigaudy S
- Sarda P
- Hamel CP
- Brandt C
- Dollfus H
- Moulin B
journal: Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.2215/CJN.03320410
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bardet-Biedl syndrome: a study of the renal and cardiovascular phenotypes in a French cohort.
**Authors:** Imhoff O, Marion V, Stoetzel C, Durand M, Holder M, Sigaudy S, Sarda P, Hamel CP, Brandt C, Dollfus H, Moulin B
**Journal:** Clin J Am Soc Nephrol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.2215/CJN.03320410](https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.03320410)

## Content

1. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011 Jan;6(1):22-9. doi: 10.2215/CJN.03320410. Epub
2010  Sep 28.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome: a study of the renal and cardiovascular phenotypes in a 
French cohort.

Imhoff O(1), Marion V, Stoetzel C, Durand M, Holder M, Sigaudy S, Sarda P, Hamel 
CP, Brandt C, Dollfus H, Moulin B.

Author information:
(1)Service de Néphrologie, Dialyse et Transplantation Rénale, Hôpitaux 
Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Bardet-Biedl Syndrome (BBS) is a rare autosomal 
recessive ciliopathy with a wide spectrum of clinical features including 
obesity, retinitis pigmentosa, polydactyly, mental retardation, hypogonadism, 
and renal abnormalities. The molecular genetic profile of BBS is currently being 
investigated after the recent identification of 14 BBS genes involved in primary 
cilia-linked disease. This study aims to characterize the renal and 
cardiovascular presentations and to analyze possible relationships between 
genotypes and clinical phenotypes.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS & MEASUREMENTS: This clinical study was performed 
in a national cohort of 33 BBS patients, 22 men and 11 women, all aged >16 years 
(mean age 26.3 years).
RESULTS: Renal abnormalities, including impairment of renal function and signs 
of chronic interstitial nephropathy of dysplastic nature, were documented in 82% 
of the patients. Cardiovascular evaluations revealed that this group of young 
patients had significant cardiovascular risk factors. Hypertension was found in 
>30% of the patients and hyperlipidemia in >60%, and almost 50% had other 
metabolic abnormalities. Overt diabetes was present in only 6%. With regard to 
genotype-phenotype correlation, patients with a mutation in the BBS6, BBS10, or 
BBS12 gene (10 of 33 patients) had more severe renal disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study results confirm the frequent occurrence of renal 
involvement in patients with BBS, underscore the high risk of cardiovascular 
disease in these patients, and provide new information on a possible 
genotype-phenotype correlation.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.03320410
PMCID: PMC3022245
PMID: 20876674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]