---
reference_id: "PMID:15202694"
title: Hemolytic anemia.
authors:
- Dhaliwal G
- Cornett PA
- Tierney LM Jr
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2004'
keywords:
- Algorithms
- "Anemia, Hemolytic/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Autoimmune Diseases
- Communicable Diseases/physiopathology
- Hemoglobinopathies/physiopathology
- Hemolysis
- Humans
- Physical Examination
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hemolytic anemia.
**Authors:** Dhaliwal G, Cornett PA, Tierney LM Jr
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2004)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2004 Jun 1;69(11):2599-606.

Hemolytic anemia.

Dhaliwal G(1), Cornett PA, Tierney LM Jr.

Author information:
(1)San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center/University of California-San 
Francisco School of Medicine, San Francisco, California 94121, USA. 
gurpreet.dhaliwal@med.va.gov

Hemolysis presents as acute or chronic anemia, reticulocytosis, or jaundice. The 
diagnosis is established by reticulocytosis, increased unconjugated bilirubin 
and lactate dehydrogenase, decreased haptoglobin, and peripheral blood smear 
findings. Premature destruction of erythrocytes occurs intravascularly or 
extravascularly. The etiologies of hemolysis often are categorized as acquired 
or hereditary. Common acquired causes of hemolytic anemia are autoimmunity, 
microangiopathy, and infection. Immune-mediated hemolysis, caused by 
antierythrocyte antibodies, can be secondary to malignancies, autoimmune 
disorders, drugs, and transfusion reactions. Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia 
occurs when the red cell membrane is damaged in circulation, leading to 
intravascular hemolysis and the appearance of schistocytes. Infectious agents 
such as malaria and babesiosis invade red blood cells. Disorders of red blood 
cell enzymes, membranes, and hemoglobin cause hereditary hemolytic anemias. 
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency leads to hemolysis in the presence 
of oxidative stress. Hereditary spherocytosis is characterized by spherocytes, a 
family history, and a negative direct antiglobulin test. Sickle cell anemia and 
thalassemia are hemoglobinopathies characterized by chronic hemolysis.

PMID: 15202694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]