---
reference_id: "PMID:15107842"
title: Mutation of the COG complex subunit gene COG7 causes a lethal congenital disorder.
authors:
- Wu X
- Steet RA
- Bohorov O
- Bakker J
- Newell J
- Krieger M
- Spaapen L
- Kornfeld S
- Freeze HH
journal: Nat Med
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/nm1041
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "Carbohydrate Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Carrier Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA, Complementary/genetics"
- Female
- Glycosylation
- Golgi Apparatus/metabolism
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation of the COG complex subunit gene COG7 causes a lethal congenital disorder.
**Authors:** Wu X, Steet RA, Bohorov O, Bakker J, Newell J, Krieger M, Spaapen L, Kornfeld S, Freeze HH
**Journal:** Nat Med (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm1041](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm1041)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2004 May;10(5):518-23. doi: 10.1038/nm1041. Epub 2004 Apr 25.

Mutation of the COG complex subunit gene COG7 causes a lethal congenital 
disorder.

Wu X(1), Steet RA, Bohorov O, Bakker J, Newell J, Krieger M, Spaapen L, Kornfeld 
S, Freeze HH.

Author information:
(1)The Burnham Institute, 10901 N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 
92037, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2004 May;10(5):457-8. doi: 10.1038/nm0504-457.

The congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) are characterized by defects in 
N-linked glycan biosynthesis that result from mutations in genes encoding 
proteins directly involved in the glycosylation pathway. Here we describe two 
siblings with a fatal form of CDG caused by a mutation in the gene encoding 
COG-7, a subunit of the conserved oligomeric Golgi (COG) complex. The mutation 
impairs integrity of the COG complex and alters Golgi trafficking, resulting in 
disruption of multiple glycosylation pathways. These cases represent a new type 
of CDG in which the molecular defect lies in a protein that affects the 
trafficking and function of the glycosylation machinery.

DOI: 10.1038/nm1041
PMID: 15107842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]