---
reference_id: "PMID:40190376"
title: "Biotinidase Deficiency Induced Optic Neuropathy: A Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Cao AA
- Brown MM
- Lee MS
- Rashidi AM
- Rashidi V
journal: Neuroophthalmology
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/01658107.2024.2424209
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biotinidase Deficiency Induced Optic Neuropathy: A Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Cao AA, Brown MM, Lee MS, Rashidi AM, Rashidi V
**Journal:** Neuroophthalmology (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/01658107.2024.2424209](https://doi.org/10.1080/01658107.2024.2424209)

## Content

1. Neuroophthalmology. 2025 Feb 18;49(3):224-231. doi: 
10.1080/01658107.2024.2424209. eCollection 2025.

Biotinidase Deficiency Induced Optic Neuropathy: A Case Report and Literature 
Review.

Cao AA(1), Brown MM(2), Lee MS(2), Rashidi AM(3), Rashidi V(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Neurosciences, University of Minnesota 
Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Neurosciences, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, California, USA.

We report a case of a 19-year-old Somali American woman who presented with 
6 months of progressive bilateral vision changes and ocular discharge, with 
systemic symptoms including angular cheilitis and dermatitis. The patient was 
evaluated with comprehensive ophthalmic examination, optical coherence 
tomography, corticospinal magnetic resonance imaging, and fundus imaging. 
Comprehensive ophthalmic examination revealed bilateral optic neuropathy. 
Laboratory testing showed a biotinidase level of <0.1 (normal, 
5.5-10 nmol/min/ml). The patient was treated with oral biotin supplementation 
with improvement in her visual function. Furthermore, a review of the literature 
of reported cases of biotinidase deficiency optic neuropathy published between 
June 1987 and February 2024 revealed 40 cases. This entity presents more 
commonly in males (63%) (n = 27), with an average age of 11.7 ± 12.0 years 
(n = 35). Patients experienced symptoms for an average of 4.3 ± 8.3 years before 
they were correctly diagnosed (n = 25). Individuals had an average BCVA of 
20/300 in the right eye and 20/250 in the left eye (n = 15) at the time of 
presentation. Additionally, 38.9% of patients had color vision deficits 
(n = 18), and 100% of patients had visual field deficits (n = 19). All patients 
were treated with oral biotin supplementation (n = 25). This case and review of 
the literature underscore that biotinidase deficiency should be considered in 
patients with bilateral and progressive optic neuropathy among young adults. 
Early diagnosis is important as biotin supplementation may halt and/or reverse 
the disease process.

© 2025 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.

DOI: 10.1080/01658107.2024.2424209
PMCID: PMC11970739
PMID: 40190376

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).