---
reference_id: "PMID:11004268"
title: Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome in the age of molecular genetics.
authors:
- Alward WL
journal: Am J Ophthalmol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1016/s0002-9394(00)00525-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome in the age of molecular genetics.
**Authors:** Alward WL
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0002-9394(00)00525-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0002-9394(00)00525-0)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol. 2000 Jul;130(1):107-15. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9394(00)00525-0.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome in the age of molecular genetics.

Alward WL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa 
City, Iowa 52242, USA. wallace-alward@uiowa.edu

PURPOSE: To review the molecular genetics of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and 
related phenotypes and to discuss how this information might affect the way that 
we classify these disorders.
METHODS: A review of historical and recent literature on Axenfeld-Rieger 
syndrome and related disorders. The review includes clinical and molecular 
genetic literature relevant to these phenotypes.
RESULTS: Three chromosomal loci have recently been demonstrated to link to 
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and related phenotypes. These loci are on chromosomes 
4q25, 6p25, and 13q14. The genes at chromosomes 4q25 and 6p25 have been 
identified as PITX2 and FKHL7, respectively. Mutations in these genes can cause 
a wide variety of phenotypes that share features with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome. 
Axenfeld anomaly, Rieger anomaly, Rieger syndrome, iridogoniodysgenesis anomaly, 
iridogoniodysgenesis syndrome, iris hypoplasia, and familial glaucoma 
iridogoniodysplasia all have sufficient genotypic and phenotypic overlap that 
they should be considered one condition.
CONCLUSIONS: Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome is a term that can be used to describe a 
variety of overlapping phenotypes. To date, at least three known genetic loci 
can cause these disorders. The single most important feature of these phenotypes 
is that they confer a 50% or greater risk of developing glaucoma. Currently 
there is a fairly arbitrary grouping of disorders into small categories. 
Considering all of these phenotypes under the heading of Axenfeld-Rieger 
syndrome will allow easier communication between clinicians and scientists and 
eliminate arbitrary and confusing subclassification.

DOI: 10.1016/s0002-9394(00)00525-0
PMID: 11004268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]