---
reference_id: "PMID:30718903"
title: Increased synapse elimination by microglia in schizophrenia patient-derived models of synaptic pruning.
authors:
- Sellgren CM
- Gracias J
- Watmuff B
- Biag JD
- Thanos JM
- Whittredge PB
- Fu T
- Worringer K
- Brown HE
- Wang J
- Kaykas A
- Karmacharya R
- Goold CP
- Sheridan SD
- Perlis RH
journal: Nat Neurosci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41593-018-0334-7
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Anti-Bacterial Agents/administration & dosage"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/physiology
- Male
- "Microglia/drug effects, physiology"
- Middle Aged
- "Minocycline/administration & dosage"
- Neural Stem Cells/physiology
- Neuronal Plasticity/drug effects
- Risk Factors
- Schizophrenia/physiopathology
- "Synapses/drug effects, physiology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased synapse elimination by microglia in schizophrenia patient-derived models of synaptic pruning.
**Authors:** Sellgren CM, Gracias J, Watmuff B, Biag JD, Thanos JM, Whittredge PB, Fu T, Worringer K, Brown HE, Wang J, Kaykas A, Karmacharya R, Goold CP, Sheridan SD, Perlis RH
**Journal:** Nat Neurosci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41593-018-0334-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-018-0334-7)

## Content

1. Nat Neurosci. 2019 Mar;22(3):374-385. doi: 10.1038/s41593-018-0334-7. Epub
2019  Feb 4.

Increased synapse elimination by microglia in schizophrenia patient-derived
models of synaptic pruning.

Sellgren CM(1)(2)(3), Gracias J(4)(5)(6), Watmuff B(4)(5), Biag JD(7), Thanos
JM(4)(5), Whittredge PB(7), Fu T(4)(5), Worringer K(7), Brown HE(4)(5), Wang
J(4)(5), Kaykas A(7), Karmacharya R(4)(5)(8), Goold CP(7), Sheridan SD(4)(5),
Perlis RH(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Center for Quantitative Health, Center for Genomic Medicine and Department of
Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
carl.sellgren@ki.se.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
carl.sellgren@ki.se.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden. carl.sellgren@ki.se.
(4)Center for Quantitative Health, Center for Genomic Medicine and Department of
Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(7)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(8)Schizophrenia and Bipolar Disorder Program, McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA,
USA.
(9)Center for Quantitative Health, Center for Genomic Medicine and Department of
Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
rperlis@mgh.harvard.edu.
(10)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
rperlis@mgh.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2019 Mar;22(3):333-334. doi: 10.1038/s41593-019-0343-1.
    Neuroscientist. 2019 Aug;25(4):286-287. doi: 10.1177/1073858419859504.

Synapse density is reduced in postmortem cortical tissue from schizophrenia
patients, which is suggestive of increased synapse elimination. Using a
reprogrammed in vitro model of microglia-mediated synapse engulfment, we
demonstrate increased synapse elimination in patient-derived neural cultures and
isolated synaptosomes. This excessive synaptic pruning reflects abnormalities in
both microglia-like cells and synaptic structures. Further, we find that
schizophrenia risk-associated variants within the human complement component 4
locus are associated with increased neuronal complement deposition and synapse
uptake; however, they do not fully explain the observed increase in synapse
uptake. Finally, we demonstrate that the antibiotic minocycline reduces
microglia-mediated synapse uptake in vitro and its use is associated with a
modest decrease in incident schizophrenia risk compared to other antibiotics in
a cohort of young adults drawn from electronic health records. These findings
point to excessive pruning as a potential target for delaying or preventing the
onset of schizophrenia in high-risk individuals.

DOI: 10.1038/s41593-018-0334-7
PMCID: PMC6410571
PMID: 30718903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests C.P.G., A.K., K.W., P.B.W.,
and J.D.B. are employees of Novartis. R.H.P. has served on the scientific
advisory boards of Genomind and Psy Therapeutics, and was a consultant to RID
Ventures and Takeda (none related to the present work). C.M.S. discloses lecture
and consulting fees from Otsuka Pharmaceutical and H. Lundbeck A/S (none related
to the present work). None of the other authors declare any competing interests.
