---
reference_id: "PMID:26743931"
title: "Case report: imaging and treatment of ophthalmic manifestations in oculodentodigital dysplasia."
authors:
- Mosaed S
- Jacobsen BH
- Lin KY
journal: BMC Ophthalmol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s12886-015-0173-1
keywords:
- Child
- Chronic Disease
- Ciliary Body/diagnostic imaging
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/diagnosis
- "Cysts/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Eye Abnormalities/diagnosis
- Female
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/diagnosis"
- Glaucoma Drainage Implants
- "Glaucoma, Angle-Closure/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Gonioscopy
- Humans
- Intraocular Pressure
- "Microscopy, Acoustic"
- Syndactyly/diagnosis
- Tooth Abnormalities/diagnosis
- "Uveal Diseases/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: imaging and treatment of ophthalmic manifestations in oculodentodigital dysplasia.
**Authors:** Mosaed S, Jacobsen BH, Lin KY
**Journal:** BMC Ophthalmol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12886-015-0173-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12886-015-0173-1)

## Content

1. BMC Ophthalmol. 2016 Jan 7;16:5. doi: 10.1186/s12886-015-0173-1.

Case report: imaging and treatment of ophthalmic manifestations in
oculodentodigital dysplasia.

Mosaed S(1), Jacobsen BH(2), Lin KY(3).

Author information:
(1)The Gavin Herbert Eye Institute, University of California, Irvine School of
Medicine, 850 Health Sciences Rd, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA. smosaed@uci.edu.
(2)University of California, Irvine School of Medicine, 252 Irvine Hall, Irvine,
CA, 92697, USA. bjacobse@uci.edu.
(3)The Gavin Herbert Eye Institute, University of California, Irvine School of
Medicine, 850 Health Sciences Rd, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA. linky@uci.edu.

BACKGROUND: Diagnostic and surgical management of severe chronic angle- closure
glaucoma secondary to ciliary body cysts can be difficult to manage in a patient
with oculodentodigital dysplasia.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 6-year old girl with oculodentodigital dysplasia, with
progressive chronic angle- closure glaucoma secondary to ciliary body cysts
presented to our clinic. The initial examination revealed counting fingers
vision in the left eye. Intraocular pressure (IOP), as assessed by tonopen, was
31 mm Hg. Ultrasound biomicroscopy revealed ciliary body cysts in the left eye,
and gonioscopy confirmed chronic angle closure. A tube shunt was placed to
control the elevated IOP. A year after her tube shunt placement in the left eye,
ultrasound biomiscropy was performed on her right eye and showed no ciliary body
cysts. Gonioscopy in the right eye revealed an open angle to the ciliary body
band. Subsequent serial gonioscopy every 3 months showed gradual narrowing of
the right eye angle and finally three-and-a-half years after tube placement of
the left eye, her right eye IOP became uncontrolled with medications alone and a
tube shunt was similarly placed in the right eye. Intraoperative ultrasound
biomicroscopy performed at the time of the right eye tube shunt revealed
extensive ciliary body cysts in the right eye. Her IOP in both eyes have been
well controlled since the placement of tube shunts.
CONCLUSIONS: This is one of the first reported cases of severe chronic angle-
closure glaucoma secondary to ciliary body cysts in a patient with
oculodentodigital dysplasia. We believe that early screening for ciliary body
cysts is important in patients with oculodentodigital dysplasia.

DOI: 10.1186/s12886-015-0173-1
PMCID: PMC4705587
PMID: 26743931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
