---
reference_id: "PMID:36334952"
title: "2022 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Aortic Disease: A Report of the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines."
authors:
- Writing Committee Members
- Isselbacher EM
- Preventza O
- Hamilton Black Iii J
- Augoustides JG
- Beck AW
- Bolen MA
- Braverman AC
- Bray BE
- Brown-Zimmerman MM
- Chen EP
- Collins TJ
- DeAnda A Jr
- Fanola CL
- Girardi LN
- Hicks CW
- Hui DS
- Jones WS
- Kalahasti V
- Kim KM
- Milewicz DM
- Oderich GS
- Ogbechie L
- Promes SB
- Ross EG
- Schermerhorn ML
- Times SS
- Tseng EE
- Wang GJ
- Woo YJ
journal: J Am Coll Cardiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2022.08.004
keywords:
- United States
- Humans
- American Heart Association
- Universities
- "Aortic Diseases/diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 2022 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Aortic Disease: A Report of the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines.
**Authors:** Writing Committee Members, Isselbacher EM, Preventza O, Hamilton Black Iii J, Augoustides JG, Beck AW, Bolen MA, Braverman AC, Bray BE, Brown-Zimmerman MM, Chen EP, Collins TJ, DeAnda A Jr, Fanola CL, Girardi LN, Hicks CW, Hui DS, Jones WS, Kalahasti V, Kim KM, Milewicz DM, Oderich GS, Ogbechie L, Promes SB, Ross EG, Schermerhorn ML, Times SS, Tseng EE, Wang GJ, Woo YJ
**Journal:** J Am Coll Cardiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacc.2022.08.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2022.08.004)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022 Dec 13;80(24):e223-e393. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2022.08.004. Epub 2022 Nov 2.

2022 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Aortic Disease: A 
Report of the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology Joint 
Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines.

Writing Committee Members; Isselbacher EM, Preventza O, Hamilton Black Iii J, 
Augoustides JG, Beck AW, Bolen MA, Braverman AC, Bray BE, Brown-Zimmerman MM, 
Chen EP, Collins TJ, DeAnda A Jr, Fanola CL, Girardi LN, Hicks CW, Hui DS, Jones 
WS, Kalahasti V, Kim KM, Milewicz DM, Oderich GS, Ogbechie L, Promes SB, Ross 
EG, Schermerhorn ML, Times SS, Tseng EE, Wang GJ, Woo YJ.

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022 Dec 13;80(24):2348-2352. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2022.10.001.

AIM: The "2022 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Aortic 
Disease" provides recommendations to guide clinicians in the diagnosis, genetic 
evaluation and family screening, medical therapy, endovascular and surgical 
treatment, and long-term surveillance of patients with aortic disease across its 
multiple clinical presentation subsets (ie, asymptomatic, stable symptomatic, 
and acute aortic syndromes).
METHODS: A comprehensive literature search was conducted from January 2021 to 
April 2021, encompassing studies, reviews, and other evidence conducted on human 
subjects that were published in English from PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane 
Library, CINHL Complete, and other selected databases relevant to this 
guideline. Additional relevant studies, published through June 2022 during the 
guideline writing process, were also considered by the writing committee, where 
appropriate.
STRUCTURE: Recommendations from previously published AHA/ACC guidelines on 
thoracic aortic disease, peripheral artery disease, and bicuspid aortic valve 
disease have been updated with new evidence to guide clinicians. In addition, 
new recommendations addressing comprehensive care for patients with aortic 
disease have been developed. There is added emphasis on the role of shared 
decision making, especially in the management of patients with aortic disease 
both before and during pregnancy. The is also an increased emphasis on the 
importance of institutional interventional volume and multidisciplinary aortic 
team expertise in the care of patients with aortic disease.

Copyright © 2022 American College of Cardiology Foundation and the American 
Heart Association, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2022.08.004
PMCID: PMC9860464
PMID: 36334952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]