---
reference_id: "PMID:40503459"
title: "Circulating tumor DNA profiling for non-invasive genomic analysis in Indian lung cancer patients: A real-world experience."
authors:
- Jha P
- Mishra R
- Joshi A
- Sharma N
- Shah M
- Babu G
- Rauthan A
- Limaye S
- Menon N
- Ramachandran V
- Noronha V
- Kumar P
- Prabhash K
journal: J Liq Biopsy
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jlb.2025.100300
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Circulating tumor DNA profiling for non-invasive genomic analysis in Indian lung cancer patients: A real-world experience.
**Authors:** Jha P, Mishra R, Joshi A, Sharma N, Shah M, Babu G, Rauthan A, Limaye S, Menon N, Ramachandran V, Noronha V, Kumar P, Prabhash K
**Journal:** J Liq Biopsy (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jlb.2025.100300](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlb.2025.100300)

## Content

1. J Liq Biopsy. 2025 May 21;8:100300. doi: 10.1016/j.jlb.2025.100300.
eCollection  2025 Jun.

Circulating tumor DNA profiling for non-invasive genomic analysis in Indian lung
cancer patients: A real-world experience.

Jha P(1)(2), Mishra R(1)(2), Joshi A(1)(2), Sharma N(1)(2), Shah M(3)(4), Babu
G(5), Rauthan A(6), Limaye S(7), Menon N(3)(4), Ramachandran V(1)(2)(8), Noronha
V(3)(4), Kumar P(1)(2)(8), Prabhash K(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Karkinos Healthcare Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra, 400705, India.
(2)Karkinos Foundation, Mumbai, Maharashtra, 400086, India.
(3)Homi Bhabha National Institute, Training School Complex, Anushakti Nagar,
Mumbai, 400094, Maharashtra, India.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, 400012,
Maharashtra, India.
(5)HCG Cancer Hospital, Bengaluru, 560027, India.
(6)Manipal Hospital, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.
(7)Department of Medical and Precision Oncology, Sir HN Reliance Foundation
Hospital and Research Centre, Mumbai, 400004, Maharashtra, India.
(8)Centre of Excellence for Cancer - Gangwal School of Medical Sciences and
Technology, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh,
208016, India.

BACKGROUND: Liquid biopsy assays are an important tool for non-invasive
detection of genetic alterations, providing an effective alternative to
traditional tissue biopsies. The study aimed to investigate the utility of ctDNA
based next generation sequencing for clinical management of lung cancer patients
from India.
METHODS: We conducted ctDNA targeted sequencing on 425 lung cancer patients from
India using 50 gene oncomine precision assay. The assay was validated employing
7 controls and 77 clinical samples, and the performance of the assay was
evaluated. The concordance analysis with matched tissue biopsy samples was
performed on 162 cases.
RESULTS: Among the 425 lung cancer samples, 47 % harbored at least one mutation.
EGFR was the most frequently altered gene (25.2 %), followed by TP53 (19.8 %)
and KRAS (4.5 %). Concordance with tissue biopsy data was 77 % for EGFR, 79 %
for TP53 and above 97 % for low frequency mutations. The assay demonstrated
100 % specificity and around 60 % sensitivity for the majority of clinically
relevant genetic alterations including EGFR, KRAS and BRAF. Notably ERBB2
alterations were detected with 100 % sensitivity and specificity.
CONCLUSION: The ctDNA assay demonstrates high accuracy and specificity, for both
prevalent and rare genetic alterations. While further advancements are needed to
enhance sensitivity and routine clinical application, our ctDNA profiling assay
offers a reliable alternative for detecting genetic alterations in lung cancer
patients, with significant potential for clinical integration in the Indian
healthcare context.

© 2025 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jlb.2025.100300
PMCID: PMC12158504
PMID: 40503459
