---
reference_id: "PMID:8952756"
title: "Thrombocytopenia in the antiphospholipid syndrome: pathophysiology, clinical relevance and treatment."
authors:
- Galli M
- Finazzi G
- Barbui T
journal: Ann Med Interne (Paris)
year: '1996'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thrombocytopenia in the antiphospholipid syndrome: pathophysiology, clinical relevance and treatment.
**Authors:** Galli M, Finazzi G, Barbui T
**Journal:** Ann Med Interne (Paris) (1996)

## Content

1. Ann Med Interne (Paris). 1996 Sep;147 Suppl 1:24-7.

Thrombocytopenia in the antiphospholipid syndrome: pathophysiology, clinical 
relevance and treatment.

Galli M(1), Finazzi G, Barbui T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Ospedali Riuniti, Bergamo, Italy.

The antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is characterized by the association of 
antiphospholipid antibodies with venous and/or arterial thrombosis, recurrent 
abortions and thrombocytopenia. With respect to this latter clinical 
manifestation, a variable degree of thrombocytopenia occurs in approximately 
20-40% of the patients with APS, it is generally mild and does not modify the 
policy for treatment of thrombosis. Severe thrombocytopenia is relatively 
uncommon and seldom associated with bleeding complications. When required, its 
treatment is similar to that of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. Finally, 
uncertainties still exist as to the interaction between aPL antibodies and 
platelets and to the role of platelets and these antibodies on the pathogenesis 
of the thrombotic complications of the APS.

PMID: 8952756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]