---
reference_id: "PMID:31104833"
title: "Burosumab versus conventional therapy in children with X-linked hypophosphataemia: a randomised, active-controlled, open-label, phase 3 trial."
authors:
- Imel EA
- Glorieux FH
- Whyte MP
- Munns CF
- Ward LM
- Nilsson O
- Simmons JH
- Padidela R
- Namba N
- Cheong HI
- Pitukcheewanont P
- Sochett E
- Högler W
- Muroya K
- Tanaka H
- Gottesman GS
- Biggin A
- Perwad F
- Mao M
- Chen CY
- Skrinar A
- San Martin J
- Portale AA
journal: Lancet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(19)30654-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Burosumab versus conventional therapy in children with X-linked hypophosphataemia: a randomised, active-controlled, open-label, phase 3 trial.
**Authors:** Imel EA, Glorieux FH, Whyte MP, Munns CF, Ward LM, Nilsson O, Simmons JH, Padidela R, Namba N, Cheong HI, Pitukcheewanont P, Sochett E, Högler W, Muroya K, Tanaka H, Gottesman GS, Biggin A, Perwad F, Mao M, Chen CY, Skrinar A, San Martin J, Portale AA
**Journal:** Lancet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(19)30654-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(19)30654-3)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2019 Jun 15;393(10189):2416-2427. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(19)30654-3. 
Epub 2019 May 16.

Burosumab versus conventional therapy in children with X-linked 
hypophosphataemia: a randomised, active-controlled, open-label, phase 3 trial.

Imel EA(1), Glorieux FH(2), Whyte MP(3), Munns CF(4), Ward LM(5), Nilsson O(6), 
Simmons JH(7), Padidela R(8), Namba N(9), Cheong HI(10), Pitukcheewanont P(11), 
Sochett E(12), Högler W(13), Muroya K(14), Tanaka H(15), Gottesman GS(3), Biggin 
A(16), Perwad F(17), Mao M(18), Chen CY(18), Skrinar A(18), San Martin J(18), 
Portale AA(17).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. Electronic address: eimel@iu.edu.
(2)Shriners Hospital for Children - Canada, McGill University, Montreal, QC, 
Canada.
(3)Shriners Hospitals for Children - St Louis, St Louis, MO, USA.
(4)The University of Sydney Children's Hospital Westmead Clinical School, The 
Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, NSW, Australia; Department of 
Endocrinology, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, NSW, Australia.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, 
ON, Canada.
(6)Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; 
School of Medical Sciences, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(8)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, 
Manchester, UK.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka Hospital, Japan Community Healthcare 
Organization, Osaka, Japan; Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
(10)Seoul National University Children's Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(11)Center of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Children's Hospital of Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(13)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Johannes Kepler 
University Linz, Linz, Austria; Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, 
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(14)Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan.
(15)Okayama Saiseikai General Hospital Outpatient Center, Okayama, Japan.
(16)The University of Sydney Children's Hospital Westmead Clinical School, The 
Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, NSW, Australia.
(17)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(18)Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical, Novato, CA, USA.

Erratum in
    Lancet. 2019 Jul 13;394(10193):120. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(19)31426-6.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2019 Jun 15;393(10189):2364-2366. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(19)31054-2.

BACKGROUND: X-linked hypophosphataemia in children is characterised by elevated 
serum concentrations of fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), hypophosphataemia, 
rickets, lower extremity bowing, and growth impairment. We compared the efficacy 
and safety of continuing conventional therapy, consisting of oral phosphate and 
active vitamin D, versus switching to burosumab, a fully human monoclonal 
antibody against FGF23, in paediatric X-linked hypophosphataemia.
METHODS: In this randomised, active-controlled, open-label, phase 3 trial at 16 
clinical sites, we enrolled children with X-linked hypophosphataemia aged 1-12 
years. Key eligibility criteria were a total Thacher rickets severity score of 
at least 2·0, fasting serum phosphorus lower than 0·97 mmol/L (3·0 mg/dL), 
confirmed PHEX (phosphate-regulating endopeptidase homolog, X-linked) mutation 
or variant of unknown significance in the patient or a family member with 
appropriate X-linked dominant inheritance, and receipt of conventional therapy 
for at least 6 consecutive months for children younger than 3 years or at least 
12 consecutive months for children older than 3 years. Eligible patients were 
randomly assigned (1:1) to receive either subcutaneous burosumab starting at 0·8 
mg/kg every 2 weeks (burosumab group) or conventional therapy prescribed by 
investigators (conventional therapy group). Both interventions lasted 64 weeks. 
The primary endpoint was change in rickets severity at week 40, assessed by the 
Radiographic Global Impression of Change global score. All patients who received 
at least one dose of treatment were included in the primary and safety analyses. 
The trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02915705.
FINDINGS: Recruitment took place between Aug 3, 2016, and May 8, 2017. Of 122 
patients assessed, 61 were enrolled. Of these, 32 (18 girls, 14 boys) were 
randomly assigned to continue receiving conventional therapy and 29 (16 girls, 
13 boys) to receive burosumab. For the primary endpoint at week 40, patients in 
the burosumab group had significantly greater improvement in Radiographic Global 
Impression of Change global score than did patients in the conventional therapy 
group (least squares mean +1·9 [SE 0·1] with burosumab vs +0·8 [0·1] with 
conventional therapy; difference 1·1, 95% CI 0·8-1·5; p<0·0001). 
Treatment-emergent adverse events considered possibly, probably, or definitely 
related to treatment by the investigator occurred more frequently with burosumab 
(17 [59%] of 29 patients in the burosumab group vs seven [22%] of 32 patients in 
the conventional therapy group). Three serious adverse events occurred in each 
group, all considered unrelated to treatment and resolved.
INTERPRETATION: Significantly greater clinical improvements were shown in 
rickets severity, growth, and biochemistries among children with X-linked 
hypophosphataemia treated with burosumab compared with those continuing 
conventional therapy.
FUNDING: Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical and Kyowa Kirin International.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(19)30654-3
PMCID: PMC7179969
PMID: 31104833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]