---
reference_id: "PMID:34570907"
title: "Visual snow syndrome, the spectrum of perceptual disorders, and migraine as a common risk factor: A narrative review."
authors:
- Klein A
- Schankin CJ
journal: Headache
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/head.14213
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Visual snow syndrome, the spectrum of perceptual disorders, and migraine as a common risk factor: A narrative review.
**Authors:** Klein A, Schankin CJ
**Journal:** Headache (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/head.14213](https://doi.org/10.1111/head.14213)

## Content

1. Headache. 2021 Oct;61(9):1306-1313. doi: 10.1111/head.14213. Epub 2021 Sep 27.

Visual snow syndrome, the spectrum of perceptual disorders, and migraine as a 
common risk factor: A narrative review.

Klein A(1), Schankin CJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of 
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this narrative review is to explore the relationship 
between visual snow syndrome (VSS), migraine, and a group of other perceptual 
disorders.
BACKGROUND: VSS is characterized by visual snow and additional visual and 
nonvisual disturbances. The clinical picture suggests a hypersensitivity to 
internal and external stimuli. Imaging and electrophysiological findings 
indicate a hyperexcitability of the primary and secondary visual areas of the 
brain possibly due to an impairment of inhibitory feedback mechanisms. Migraine 
is the most frequent comorbidity. Epidemiological and clinical studies indicate 
that other perceptual disorders, such as tinnitus, fibromyalgia, and dizziness, 
are associated with VSS. Clinical overlaps and parallels in pathophysiology 
might exist in relation to migraine.
METHODS: We performed a PubMed and Google Scholar search with the following 
terms: visual snow syndrome, entoptic phenomenon, fibromyalgia, tinnitus, 
migraine, dizziness, persistent postural-perceptual dizziness (PPPD), 
comorbidities, symptoms, pathophysiology, thalamus, thalamocortical dysrhythmia, 
and salience network.
RESULTS: VSS, fibromyalgia, tinnitus, and PPPD share evidence of a central 
disturbance in the processing of different stimuli (visual, somatosensory/pain, 
acoustic, and vestibular) that might lead to hypersensitivity. Imaging and 
electrophysiological findings hint toward network disorders involving the 
sensory networks and other large-scale networks involved in the management of 
attention and emotional processing. There are clinical and epidemiological 
overlaps between these disorders. Similarly, migraine exhibits a multisensory 
hypersensitivity even in the interictal state with fluctuation during the 
migraine cycle. All the described perceptual disorders are associated with 
migraine suggesting that having migraine, that is, a disorder of sensory 
processing, is a common link.
CONCLUSION: VSS, PPPD, fibromyalgia, and chronic tinnitus might lie on a 
spectrum of perceptual disorders with similar pathophysiological mechanisms and 
the common risk factor migraine. Understanding the underlying network 
disturbances might give insights into how to improve these currently very 
difficult to treat conditions.

© 2021 The Authors. Headache: The Journal of Head and Face Pain published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Headache Society.

DOI: 10.1111/head.14213
PMCID: PMC9293285
PMID: 34570907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AK: No conflicts. CJS: CJS received scientific 
support, travel support, and/or honoraria from Novartis, Eli Lilly, TEVA 
Pharmaceuticals, Lundbeck, Allergan, Almirall, Amgen, MindMed, and Grünenthal. 
He received research grants from the German Migraine and Headache Society, Eye 
on Vision Foundation, and Baasch‐Medicus Foundation.