---
reference_id: "PMID:38520002"
title: Structural rearrangements as a recurrent pathogenic mechanism for SETBP1 haploinsufficiency.
authors:
- Alesi V
- Genovese S
- Roberti MC
- Sallicandro E
- Di Tommaso S
- Loddo S
- Orlando V
- Pompili D
- Calacci C
- Mei V
- Pisaneschi E
- Faggiano MV
- Morgia A
- Mammì C
- Astrea G
- Battini R
- Priolo M
- Dentici ML
- Milone R
- Novelli A
journal: Hum Genomics
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s40246-024-00600-0
keywords:
- Humans
- Haploinsufficiency/genetics
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Gene Rearrangement
- Chromosomes
- Whole Genome Sequencing/methods
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structural rearrangements as a recurrent pathogenic mechanism for SETBP1 haploinsufficiency.
**Authors:** Alesi V, Genovese S, Roberti MC, Sallicandro E, Di Tommaso S, Loddo S, Orlando V, Pompili D, Calacci C, Mei V, Pisaneschi E, Faggiano MV, Morgia A, Mammì C, Astrea G, Battini R, Priolo M, Dentici ML, Milone R, Novelli A
**Journal:** Hum Genomics (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40246-024-00600-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40246-024-00600-0)

## Content

1. Hum Genomics. 2024 Mar 22;18(1):29. doi: 10.1186/s40246-024-00600-0.

Structural rearrangements as a recurrent pathogenic mechanism for SETBP1 
haploinsufficiency.

Alesi V(1), Genovese S(2), Roberti MC(1), Sallicandro E(1), Di Tommaso S(1), 
Loddo S(1), Orlando V(1), Pompili D(1), Calacci C(1), Mei V(1), Pisaneschi E(1), 
Faggiano MV(1), Morgia A(1), Mammì C(3), Astrea G(4), Battini R(4)(5), Priolo 
M(3), Dentici ML(6), Milone R(#)(4), Novelli A(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Translational Cytogenomics Research Unit, 
Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, IRCCS, 00146, Rome, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Translational Cytogenomics Research Unit, 
Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, IRCCS, 00146, Rome, Italy. 
silvia.genovese@opbg.net.
(3)Operative Unit of Medical Genetics, Great Metropolitan Hospital of Reggio 
Calabria, 89100, Reggio Calabria, Italy.
(4)Department of Developmental Neuroscience, IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris, 
56125, Pisa, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, 56100, 
Pisa, Italy.
(6)Medical Genetics Unit, Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, IRCCS, 00146, Rome, 
Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

Chromosomal structural rearrangements consist of anomalies in genomic 
architecture that may or may not be associated with genetic material gain and 
loss. Evaluating the precise breakpoint is crucial from a diagnostic point of 
view, highlighting possible gene disruption and addressing to appropriate 
genotype-phenotype association. Structural rearrangements can either occur 
randomly within the genome or present with a recurrence, mainly due to peculiar 
genomic features of the surrounding regions. We report about three non-related 
individuals, harboring chromosomal structural rearrangements interrupting 
SETBP1, leading to gene haploinsufficiency. Two out of them resulted negative to 
Chromosomal Microarray Analysis (CMA), being the rearrangement balanced at a 
microarray resolution. The third one, presenting with a complex three-chromosome 
rearrangement, had been previously diagnosed with SETBP1 haploinsufficiency due 
to a partial gene deletion at one of the chromosomal breakpoints. We thoroughly 
characterized the rearrangements by means of Optical Genome Mapping (OGM) and 
Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS), providing details about the involved sequences 
and the underlying mechanisms. We propose structural variants as a recurrent 
event in SETBP1 haploinsufficiency, which may be overlooked by laboratory 
routine genomic analyses (CMA and Whole Exome Sequencing) or only partially 
determined when associated with genomic losses at breakpoints. We finally 
introduce a possible role of SETBP1 in a Noonan-like phenotype.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40246-024-00600-0
PMCID: PMC10960460
PMID: 38520002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.