---
reference_id: "PMID:38028610"
title: "Concepts of multi-level dynamical modelling: understanding mechanisms of squamous cell carcinoma development in Fanconi anemia."
authors:
- Velleuer E
- Domínguez-Hüttinger E
- Rodríguez A
- Harris LA
- Carlberg C
journal: Front Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1254966
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Concepts of multi-level dynamical modelling: understanding mechanisms of squamous cell carcinoma development in Fanconi anemia.
**Authors:** Velleuer E, Domínguez-Hüttinger E, Rodríguez A, Harris LA, Carlberg C
**Journal:** Front Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2023.1254966](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2023.1254966)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2023 Nov 2;14:1254966. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1254966.
eCollection  2023.

Concepts of multi-level dynamical modelling: understanding mechanisms of 
squamous cell carcinoma development in Fanconi anemia.

Velleuer E(1)(2), Domínguez-Hüttinger E(3), Rodríguez A(4)(5), Harris 
LA(6)(7)(8), Carlberg C(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cytopathology, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(2)Center for Child and Adolescent Health, Helios Klinikum, Krefeld, Germany.
(3)Departamento Düsseldorf Biología Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de 
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad 
México, Mexico.
(4)Departamento de Medicina Genómica y Toxicología Ambiental, Instituto de 
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad 
México, Mexico.
(5)Instituto Nacional de Pediatría, Ciudad México, Mexico.
(6)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, 
AR, United States.
(7)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Cell and Molecular Biology, University 
of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, United States.
(8)Cancer Biology Program, Winthrop P Rockefeller Cancer Institute, University 
of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States.
(9)Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of 
Sciences, Olsztyn, Poland.
(10)School of Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland, 
Kuopio, Finland.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare disease (incidence of 1:300,000) primarily based 
on the inheritance of pathogenic variants in genes of the FA/BRCA (breast 
cancer) pathway. These variants ultimately reduce the functionality of different 
proteins involved in the repair of DNA interstrand crosslinks and DNA 
double-strand breaks. At birth, individuals with FA might present with typical 
malformations, particularly radial axis and renal malformations, as well as 
other physical abnormalities like skin pigmentation anomalies. During the first 
decade of life, FA mostly causes bone marrow failure due to reduced capacity and 
loss of the hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. This often makes 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation necessary, but this therapy increases 
the already intrinsic risk of developing squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in early 
adult age. Due to the underlying genetic defect in FA, classical 
chemo-radiation-based treatment protocols cannot be applied. Therefore, 
detecting and treating the multi-step tumorigenesis process of SCC in an early 
stage, or even its progenitors, is the best option for prolonging the life of 
adult FA individuals. However, the small number of FA individuals makes 
classical evidence-based medicine approaches based on results from randomized 
clinical trials impossible. As an alternative, we introduce here the concept of 
multi-level dynamical modelling using large, longitudinally collected genome, 
proteome- and transcriptome-wide data sets from a small number of FA 
individuals. This mechanistic modelling approach is based on the "hallmarks of 
cancer in FA", which we derive from our unique database of the clinical history 
of over 750 FA individuals. Multi-omic data from healthy and diseased tissue 
samples of FA individuals are to be used for training constituent models of a 
multi-level tumorigenesis model, which will then be used to make experimentally 
testable predictions. In this way, mechanistic models facilitate not only a 
descriptive but also a functional understanding of SCC in FA. This approach will 
provide the basis for detecting signatures of SCCs at early stages and their 
precursors so they can be efficiently treated or even prevented, leading to a 
better prognosis and quality of life for the FA individual.

Copyright © 2023 Velleuer, Domínguez-Hüttinger, Rodríguez, Harris and Carlberg.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1254966
PMCID: PMC10652399
PMID: 38028610

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.