---
reference_id: "PMID:36542827"
title: "Predisposition to myeloid malignancies in Shwachman-Diamond syndrome: biological insights and clinical advances."
authors:
- Reilly CR
- Shimamura A
journal: Blood
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2022017739
keywords:
- Humans
- Shwachman-Diamond Syndrome
- "Bone Marrow Diseases/genetics, therapy, diagnosis"
- "Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency/genetics, therapy"
- "Lipomatosis/genetics, therapy"
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local"
- Myeloproliferative Disorders
- Disease Susceptibility
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predisposition to myeloid malignancies in Shwachman-Diamond syndrome: biological insights and clinical advances.
**Authors:** Reilly CR, Shimamura A
**Journal:** Blood (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2022017739](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2022017739)

## Content

1. Blood. 2023 Mar 30;141(13):1513-1523. doi: 10.1182/blood.2022017739.

Predisposition to myeloid malignancies in Shwachman-Diamond syndrome: biological 
insights and clinical advances.

Reilly CR(1), Shimamura A(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematological Malignancies, Department of Medical Oncology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA.
(2)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Dana-Farber/Boston Children's 
Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Boston, MA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2023 Mar 30;141(13):1509-1512. doi: 10.1182/blood.2023019846.

Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS) is an inherited multisystem ribosomopathy 
characterized by exocrine pancreatic deficiency, bone marrow failure, and 
predisposition to myeloid malignancies. The pathobiology of SDS results from 
impaired ribosomal maturation due to the deficiency of SBDS and the inability to 
evict the antiassociation factor eIF6 from the 60S ribosomal subunit. Clinical 
outcomes for patients with SDS who develop myeloid malignancies are extremely 
poor because of high treatment-related toxicities and a high rate of refractory 
disease/relapse even after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT). 
Registry data indicate that outcomes are improved for patients with SDS who 
undergo routine bone marrow surveillance and receive an HSCT before developing 
an overt malignancy. However, the optimal approach to hematologic surveillance 
and the timing of HSCT for patients with SDS is not clearly established. Recent 
studies have elucidated distinct patterns of somatic blood mutations in patients 
with SDS that either alleviate the ribosome defect via somatic rescue 
(heterozygous EIF6 inactivation) or disrupt cellular checkpoints, resulting in 
increased leukemogenic potential (heterozygous TP53 inactivation). Genomic 
analysis revealed that most myeloid malignancies in patients with SDS have 
biallelic loss-of-function TP53 mutations. Single-cell DNA sequencing of SDS 
bone marrow samples can detect premalignant biallelic TP53-mutated clones before 
clinical diagnosis, suggesting that molecular surveillance may enhance the 
detection of incipient myeloid malignancies when HSCT may be most effective. 
Here, we review the clinical, genetic, and biologic features of SDS. In 
addition, we present evidence supporting the hematologic surveillance for 
patients with SDS that incorporates clinical, pathologic, and molecular data to 
risk stratify patients and prioritize transplant evaluation for patients with 
SDS with high-risk features.

© 2023 by The American Society of Hematology. Licensed under Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), 
permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative use with attribution. All other 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2022017739
PMCID: PMC10082379
PMID: 36542827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: C.R.R. has 
provided consulting for RenBio. A.S. declares no competing financial interests.