---
reference_id: "PMID:31412221"
title: "Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome: Mechanisms and New Therapies."
authors:
- Mar PL
- Raj SR
journal: Annu Rev Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1146/annurev-med-041818-011630
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome: Mechanisms and New Therapies.
**Authors:** Mar PL, Raj SR
**Journal:** Annu Rev Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev-med-041818-011630](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-med-041818-011630)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Med. 2020 Jan 27;71:235-248. doi: 10.1146/annurev-med-041818-011630. 
Epub 2019 Aug 14.

Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome: Mechanisms and New Therapies.

Mar PL(1), Raj SR(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, St. Louis University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA; email: philip.mar@slu.edu.
(2)Libin Cardiovascular Institute of Alberta, Department of Cardiac Sciences, 
Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4Z6, 
Canada; email: satish.raj@ucalgary.ca.
(3)Autonomic Dysfunction Center, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) is a clinically heterogeneous 
disorder with multiple contributing pathophysiologic mechanisms manifesting as 
symptoms of orthostatic intolerance in the setting of orthostatic tachycardia 
(increase in heart rate by at least 30 beats per minute upon assuming an upright 
position) without orthostatic hypotension. The three major pathophysiologic 
mechanisms include partial autonomic neuropathy, hypovolemia, and 
hyperadrenergic state. Patients often will exhibit overlapping characteristics 
from more than one of these mechanisms. The approach to the treatment of POTS 
centers on treating the underlying pathophysiologic mechanism. Stockings, 
abdominal binders, and vasoconstrictors are used to enhance venous return in 
partial neuropathic POTS. Exercise and volume expansion are the main treatment 
strategies for hypo-volemic POTS. For hyperadrenergic POTS, beta-blockers and 
avoidance of norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors is important. Attempts should be 
made to discern which pathophysiologic mechanism(s) may be afflicting patients 
so that treatment regimens can be individualized.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-med-041818-011630
PMID: 31412221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]