---
reference_id: "PMID:38807759"
title: PARP inhibitor synthetic lethality in ATM biallelic mutant cancer cell lines is associated with BRCA1/2 and RAD51 downregulation.
authors:
- Muvaffak A
- Coleman KG
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2024.1380633
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PARP inhibitor synthetic lethality in ATM biallelic mutant cancer cell lines is associated with BRCA1/2 and RAD51 downregulation.
**Authors:** Muvaffak A, Coleman KG
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2024.1380633](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2024.1380633)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2024 May 14;14:1380633. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2024.1380633.
eCollection  2024.

PARP inhibitor synthetic lethality in ATM biallelic mutant cancer cell lines is
associated with BRCA1/2 and RAD51 downregulation.

Muvaffak A(1), Coleman KG(1).

Author information:
(1)Oncology, GlaxoSmithKline, Cambridge, MA, United States.

BACKGROUND: Ataxia telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) kinase is a central regulator of
the DNA damage response (DDR) signaling pathway, and its function is critical
for the maintenance of genomic stability in cells that coordinate a network of
cellular processes, including DNA replication, DNA repair, and cell cycle
progression. ATM is frequently mutated in human cancers, and approximately 3% of
lung cancers have biallelic mutations in ATM, i.e., including 3.5% of lung
adenocarcinomas (LUAD) and 1.4% of lung squamous cell carcinomas (LUSC).
METHODS: We investigated the potential of targeting the DDR pathway in lung
cancer as a potential therapeutic approach. In this context, we examined whether
ATM loss is synthetically lethal with niraparib monotherapy. This exploration
involved the use of hATM knockout (KO) isogenic cell lines containing hATM
homozygous (-/-) and heterozygous (+/-) generated via CRISPR/Cas9 gene knockout
technology in DLD-1, a human colorectal adenocarcinoma cell line. Subsequently,
we extended our investigation to non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patient
derived xenograft (PDX) models for further validation of poly ADP-ribose
polymerase inhibitor (PARPi) synthetic lethality in ATM mutant NSCLC models.
RESULTS: Here, we demonstared that biallelic hATM deletion (-/-) in DLD-1
impairs homologous recombination (HR) repair function and sensitizes cells to
the PARPi, niraparib. Niraparib also caused significant tumor regression in
one-third of the NSCLC PDX models harboring deleterious biallelic ATM mutations.
Loss of hATM (-/-) was concomitantly associated with low BRCA1 and BRCA2 protein
expression in both the hATM (-/-) DLD-1 cell line and PARPi-sensitive ATM mutant
NSCLC PDX models, suggesting a downstream effect on the impairment of
HR-mediated DNA checkpoint signaling. Further analysis revealed that loss of ATM
led to inhibition of phosphorylation of MRN (Mre11-Rad50-NBS1) complex proteins,
which are required for ATM-mediated downstream phosphorylation of p53, BRCA1,
and CHK2.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our findings highlight that the synthetic lethality
of niraparib in ATM-deficient tumors can be regulated through a subsequent
effect on the modulation of BRCA1/2 expression and its effect on HR function.

Copyright © 2024 Muvaffak and Coleman.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2024.1380633
PMCID: PMC11131418
PMID: 38807759

Conflict of interest statement: Both authors, AM and KC, are employees of and
hold ownership interest in GlaxoSmithKline.
