---
reference_id: "PMID:31138565"
title: "Echinocandins for the Treatment of Invasive Aspergillosis: from Laboratory to Bedside."
authors:
- Aruanno M
- Glampedakis E
- Lamoth F
journal: Antimicrob Agents Chemother
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1128/AAC.00399-19
keywords:
- "Antifungal Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Aspergillosis/drug therapy
- Aspergillus fumigatus/drug effects
- "Echinocandins/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- HSP90 Heat-Shock Proteins/metabolism
- Host-Pathogen Interactions/drug effects
- Humans
- Invasive Fungal Infections/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Echinocandins for the Treatment of Invasive Aspergillosis: from Laboratory to Bedside.
**Authors:** Aruanno M, Glampedakis E, Lamoth F
**Journal:** Antimicrob Agents Chemother (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1128/AAC.00399-19](https://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.00399-19)

## Content

1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019 Jul 25;63(8):e00399-19. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.00399-19. Print 2019 Aug.

Echinocandins for the Treatment of Invasive Aspergillosis: from Laboratory to 
Bedside.

Aruanno M(#)(1)(2), Glampedakis E(#)(1), Lamoth F(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Diseases Service, Department of Medicine, Lausanne University 
Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Microbiology, Department of Laboratories, Lausanne University 
Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Infectious Diseases Service, Department of Medicine, Lausanne University 
Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland 
frederic.lamoth@chuv.ch.
(#)Contributed equally

Echinocandins (caspofungin, micafungin, anidulafungin), targeting β-1,3-glucan 
synthesis of the cell wall, represent one of the three currently available 
antifungal drug classes for the treatment of invasive fungal infections. Despite 
their limited antifungal activity against Aspergillus spp., echinocandins are 
considered an alternative option for the treatment of invasive aspergillosis 
(IA). This drug class exhibits several advantages, such as excellent 
tolerability and its potential for synergistic interactions with some other 
antifungals. The objective of this review is to discuss the in vitro and 
clinical efficacy of echinocandins against Aspergillus spp., considering the 
complex interactions between the drug, the mold, and the host. The antifungal 
effect of echinocandins is not limited to direct inhibition of hyphal growth but 
also induces an immunomodulatory effect on the host's response. Moreover, 
Aspergillus spp. have developed important adaptive mechanisms of tolerance to 
survive and overcome the action of echinocandins, such as paradoxical growth at 
increased concentrations. This stress response can be abolished by several 
compounds that potentiate the activity of echinocandins, such as drugs targeting 
the heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90)-calcineurin axis, opening perspectives for 
adjuvant therapies. Finally, the present and future places of echinocandins as 
prophylaxis, monotherapy, or combination therapy of IA are discussed in view of 
the emergence of pan-azole resistance among Aspergillus fumigatus isolates, the 
occurrence of breakthrough IA, and the advent of new long-lasting echinocandins 
(rezafungin) or other β-1,3-glucan synthase inhibitors (ibrexafungerp).

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00399-19
PMCID: PMC6658788
PMID: 31138565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]