---
reference_id: "PMID:12477252"
title: Challenges for gene therapy of type 1 diabetes.
authors:
- Dong H
- Anthony K
- Morral N
journal: Curr Gene Ther
year: '2002'
doi: 10.2174/1566523023347689
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Challenges for gene therapy of type 1 diabetes.
**Authors:** Dong H, Anthony K, Morral N
**Journal:** Curr Gene Ther (2002)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1566523023347689](https://doi.org/10.2174/1566523023347689)

## Content

1. Curr Gene Ther. 2002 Dec;2(4):403-14. doi: 10.2174/1566523023347689.

Challenges for gene therapy of type 1 diabetes.

Dong H(1), Anthony K, Morral N.

Author information:
(1)Carl Icahn Institute for Gene Therapy and Molecular Medicine, Mount Sinai 
School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA. 
hengjiang.dong@mssm.edu

Type 1 or insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus is caused by autoimmune attack and 
selective destruction of the pancreatic beta cells. Despite the development of 
various insulin replacement therapies, insulin injection still remains the 
mainstay treatment for type 1 diabetes. However, exogenous insulin 
administration cannot achieve the same degree of glycemic control as provided by 
endogenous insulin produced from the pancreatic beta cells. Insulin gene 
transfer is being developed to improve the quality of glycemic control by 
restoring endogenous insulin production in type 1 diabetes. Nevertheless, 
attempts to achieve adequately regulated insulin production are stymied by the 
lack of appropriate surrogate cells that are able to detect blood glucose 
variations and release insulin in a glucose-dependent manner. Although limited 
success has been made to control insulin gene expression in ectopic cells using 
hormone/glucose-regulated expression systems, these transcriptionally regulated 
systems are relatively slow in the "on-" and "off"-kinetics of insulin 
production, raising a serious safety concern for clinical application. In this 
article, we will review recent advances made to address this concern and 
highlight the importance of insulin gene transfer to cell types that possess an 
intrinsic ability to kinetically mimic the pancreatic beta cells in terms of 
glucose-responsive insulin secretion.

DOI: 10.2174/1566523023347689
PMID: 12477252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]