---
reference_id: "PMID:22967964"
title: 2-Methylbutyrylglycine induces lipid oxidative damage and decreases the antioxidant defenses in rat brain.
authors:
- Knebel LA
- Zanatta Â
- Tonin AM
- Grings M
- Alvorcem Lde M
- Wajner M
- Leipnitz G
journal: Brain Res
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.08.039
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/metabolism"
- Animals
- Antioxidants/metabolism
- Butyrates/metabolism
- Cerebral Cortex/metabolism
- "Glycine/analogs & derivatives, metabolism"
- Lipid Peroxidation/physiology
- Male
- Oxidative Stress/physiology
- Rats
- "Rats, Wistar"
- Thiobarbituric Acid Reactive Substances
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 2-Methylbutyrylglycine induces lipid oxidative damage and decreases the antioxidant defenses in rat brain.
**Authors:** Knebel LA, Zanatta Â, Tonin AM, Grings M, Alvorcem Lde M, Wajner M, Leipnitz G
**Journal:** Brain Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.brainres.2012.08.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2012.08.039)

## Content

1. Brain Res. 2012 Oct 10;1478:74-82. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.08.039. Epub
2012 Aug 29.

2-Methylbutyrylglycine induces lipid oxidative damage and decreases the
antioxidant defenses in rat brain.

Knebel LA(1), Zanatta Â, Tonin AM, Grings M, Alvorcem Lde M, Wajner M, Leipnitz
G.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Ciências Básicas da Saúde,
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS 90035003, Brazil.

Short/branched chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SBCAD) deficiency is an autosomal
recessive disorder of isoleucine metabolism biochemically characterized by
accumulation of 2-methylbutyrylglycine (2MBG) and 2-methylbutyric acid (2MB).
Affected patients present predominantly neurological symptoms, whose
pathophysiology is not yet established. In the present study, we investigated
the in vitro effects of 2MBG and 2MB on important parameters of oxidative stress
in cerebral cortex of young rats and C6 glioma cells. 2MBG increased
thiobarbituric acid-reactive species (TBA-RS), indicating an increase of lipid
oxidation. 2MBG induced sulfhydryl oxidation in cortical supernatants and
decreased glutathione (GSH) in these brain preparations, as well as in C6 cells,
indicating a reduction of nonenzymatic brain antioxidant defenses. In contrast,
2MB did not alter any of these parameters and 2MBG and 2MB did not affect
carbonyl formation (protein damage). In addition, 2MBG-induced increase of
TBA-RS levels and decrease of GSH were prevented by free radical scavengers,
implying that reactive species were involved in these effects. Furthermore, the
decrease of GSH levels caused by 2MBG was not due to a direct oxidative action
since this metabolite did not alter sulfhydryl content from a commercial
solution of GSH. Nitric oxide production was not altered by 2MBG and 2MB,
suggesting that reactive oxygen species possibly underlie 2MBG effects. Finally,
we verified that 2MBG did not induce cell death in C6 cells. The present data
show that 2MBG induces lipid oxidative damage and reduces the antioxidant
defenses in rat brain. Therefore, it may be postulated that oxidative stress
induced by 2MBG is involved, at least in part, in the pathophysiology of the
brain damage found in SBCAD deficiency.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.08.039
PMID: 22967964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
