---
reference_id: "PMID:38201843"
title: "Long-Term Management of Patients with Mild Urea Cycle Disorders Identified through the Newborn Screening: An Expert Opinion for Clinical Practice."
authors:
- Burlina A
- Gasperini S
- la Marca G
- Pession A
- Siri B
- Spada M
- Ruoppolo M
- Tummolo A
journal: Nutrients
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/nu16010013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-Term Management of Patients with Mild Urea Cycle Disorders Identified through the Newborn Screening: An Expert Opinion for Clinical Practice.
**Authors:** Burlina A, Gasperini S, la Marca G, Pession A, Siri B, Spada M, Ruoppolo M, Tummolo A
**Journal:** Nutrients (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/nu16010013](https://doi.org/10.3390/nu16010013)

## Content

1. Nutrients. 2023 Dec 20;16(1):13. doi: 10.3390/nu16010013.

Long-Term Management of Patients with Mild Urea Cycle Disorders Identified 
through the Newborn Screening: An Expert Opinion for Clinical Practice.

Burlina A(1), Gasperini S(2), la Marca G(3), Pession A(4), Siri B(5), Spada 
M(6), Ruoppolo M(7)(8), Tummolo A(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Reference Centre for Expanded 
Newborn Screening, University Hospital of Padova, 35128 Padova, Italy.
(2)Inherited Metabolic Unit Disorders, Pediatric Department, Fondazione IRCCS 
San Gerardo dei Tintori, 20900 Monza, Italy.
(3)Newborn Screening Lab, IRCCS Meyer Children's Hospital, Department of 
Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, 50139 
Firenze, Italy.
(4)Pediatric Unit, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, 40138 
Bologna, Italy.
(5)Division of Metabolic Diseases and Hepatology, Bambino Gesù Children's 
Hospital, IRCCS, 00165 Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Turin, 10124 Turin, Italy.
(7)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of 
Naples, Federico II, 80138 Naples, Italy.
(8)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate S.C.A.R.L., 80145 Naples, Italy.
(9)Department of Metabolic Diseases and Clinical Genetics and Diabetology, 
Giovanni XXIII Children Hospital, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Consorziale, 
70126 Bari, Italy.

Urea cycle disorders (UCDs) are a group of rare inborn errors of metabolism 
caused by a deficiency in one of the six enzymes or one of the two transporters 
involved in the urea cycle. Current guidelines suggest that early diagnosis and 
treatment of mild UCDs may improve survival and prevent decompensation and 
neurocognitive impairment. Nevertheless, clinical studies are very difficult to 
carry out in this setting due to the rarity of the diseases, and high-level 
evidence is scant and insufficient to draw conclusions and provide clinical 
guidelines. With the early introduction of newborn screening, the Italian 
healthcare organization fostered an advancement in expertise in metabolic 
disease management and screening programs, by allocating resources, and favoring 
the expansion of newborn screening. A group of experts operating in Italian 
centers decided to share their experience and provide advice for the management 
of mild UCDs in clinical practice. A consensus was reached by the 
Estimate-Talk-Estimate (ETE) method. Five items were identified, and statements 
for each item were agreed. Briefly, the panel advised completing the diagnosis 
by expanded newborn screening (ENS) with biochemical and genetic confirmation 
and by following up with the patient during the first year of life, with a 
routine laboratory and metabolic profile as well as with clinical observation. 
Early initiation of therapy is advised and should be followed by therapy 
adjustment once the diagnostic profile is completed. The therapy should be based 
on a low-protein diet and nitrogen scavengers. The long-term follow-up is based 
on growth and nutritional assessment, clinical and neurocognitive evaluation, 
and laboratory and instrumental parameter monitoring.

DOI: 10.3390/nu16010013
PMCID: PMC10780676
PMID: 38201843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial or 
non-financial interests to disclose.