---
reference_id: "PMID:37858231"
title: "Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG): state of the art in 2022."
authors:
- Francisco R
- Brasil S
- Poejo J
- Jaeken J
- Pascoal C
- Videira PA
- Dos Reis Ferreira V
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02879-z
keywords:
- Humans
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/genetics, metabolism"
- Glycosylation
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- Phenotype
- Genotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG): state of the art in 2022.
**Authors:** Francisco R, Brasil S, Poejo J, Jaeken J, Pascoal C, Videira PA, Dos Reis Ferreira V
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02879-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02879-z)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Oct 19;18(1):329. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02879-z.

Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG): state of the art in 2022.

Francisco R(1)(2)(3), Brasil S(1)(2)(3), Poejo J(1), Jaeken J(4), Pascoal 
C(1)(2)(3), Videira PA(1)(2)(3), Dos Reis Ferreira V(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)CDG & Allies - Professionals and Patient Associations International Network 
(CDG & Allies-PPAIN), Department of Life Sciences, School of Science and 
Technology, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, 2819-516, Caparica, Portugal.
(2)UCIBIO - Applied Molecular Biosciences Unit, Department of Life Sciences, 
NOVA School of Science and Technology, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, 2819-516, 
Caparica, Portugal.
(3)Associate Laboratory i4HB, Institute for Health and Bioeconomy, NOVA School 
of Science and Technology, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, 2819-516, Caparica, 
Portugal.
(4)Center for Metabolic Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, KU Leuven, 3000, 
Louvain, Belgium.
(5)CDG & Allies - Professionals and Patient Associations International Network 
(CDG & Allies-PPAIN), Department of Life Sciences, School of Science and 
Technology, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, 2819-516, Caparica, Portugal. 
sindromecdg@gmail.com.
(6)UCIBIO - Applied Molecular Biosciences Unit, Department of Life Sciences, 
NOVA School of Science and Technology, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, 2819-516, 
Caparica, Portugal. sindromecdg@gmail.com.
(7)Portuguese Association for Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation (CDG), 
Department of Life Sciences, NOVA School of Science and Technology, Universidade 
NOVA de Lisboa, 2819-516, Caparica, Portugal. sindromecdg@gmail.com.

Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) are a complex and heterogeneous 
family of rare metabolic diseases. With a clinical history that dates back over 
40 years, it was the recent multi-omics advances that mainly contributed to the 
fast-paced and encouraging developments in the field. However, much remains to 
be understood, with targeted therapies' discovery and approval being the most 
urgent unmet need. In this paper, we present the 2022 state of the art of CDG, 
including glycosylation pathways, phenotypes, genotypes, inheritance patterns, 
biomarkers, disease models, and treatments. In light of our current knowledge, 
it is not always clear whether a specific disease should be classified as a CDG. 
This can create ambiguity among professionals leading to confusion and 
misguidance, consequently affecting the patients and their families. This review 
aims to provide the CDG community with a comprehensive overview of the recent 
progress made in this field.

© 2023. Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02879-z
PMCID: PMC10585812
PMID: 37858231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.