---
reference_id: "PMID:28585211"
title: Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease.
authors:
- Engin A
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-48382-5_19
keywords:
- Animals
- "Hepatocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Inflammation/metabolism
- Insulin Resistance/physiology
- Lipid Metabolism/physiology
- "Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease/metabolism, pathology"
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- Triglycerides/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease.
**Authors:** Engin A
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-319-48382-5_19](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-48382-5_19)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2017;960:443-467. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-48382-5_19.

Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease.

Engin A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of General Surgery, Gazi University, 
Besevler, Ankara, Turkey. dr.aengin@gmail.com.
(2), Mustafa Kemal Mah. 2137. Sok. 8/14, 06520, Cankaya, Ankara, Turkey. 
dr.aengin@gmail.com.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is in parallel with the obesity 
epidemic and it is the most common cause of liver diseases. The development of 
hepatic steatosis in majority of patients is linked to dietary fat ingestion. 
NAFLD is characterized by excess accumulation of triglyceride in the hepatocyte 
due to both increased inflow of free fatty acids and de novo hepatic 
lipogenesis. Insulin resistance with the deficiency of insulin receptor 
substrate-2 (IRS-2)-associated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) activity 
causes an increase in intracellular fatty acid-derived metabolites such as 
diacylglycerol, fatty acyl CoA or ceramides. Lipotoxicity-related mechanism of 
NAFLD could be explained still best by the "double-hit" hypothesis. Insulin 
resistance is the major mechanism in the development and progression of 
NAFLD/Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). Metabolic oxidative stress, 
autophagy, and inflammation induce NASH progression. In the "first hit" the 
hepatic concentrations of diacylglycerol increase with rising saturated liver 
fat content in human NAFLD. Activities of mitochondrial respiratory chain 
complexes are decreased in liver tissue of patients with NASH. Furthermore, 
hepatocyte lipoapoptosis is a critical feature of NASH. In "second hit" reduced 
glutathione levels due to oxidative stress lead to overactivation of c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase (JNK)/c-Jun signaling that induces cell death in the steatotic 
liver. Accumulation of toxic levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is caused 
by the ineffectual cycling of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) oxidoreductin 
(Ero1)-protein disulfide isomerase oxidation cycle through the downstream of the 
inner membrane mitochondrial oxidative metabolism and Kelch like-ECH-associated 
protein 1 (Keap1)- Nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2) pathway.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-48382-5_19
PMID: 28585211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]