---
reference_id: PMID:35216672
title: Multiple early factors anticipate post-acute COVID-19 sequelae.
authors:
- Su Y
- Yuan D
- Chen DG
- Ng RH
- Wang K
- Choi J
- Li S
- Hong S
- Zhang R
- Xie J
- Kornilov SA
- Scherler K
- Pavlovitch-Bedzyk AJ
- Dong S
- Lausted C
- Lee I
- Fallen S
- Dai CL
- Baloni P
- Smith B
- Duvvuri VR
- Anderson KG
- Li J
- Yang F
- Duncombe CJ
- McCulloch DJ
- Rostomily C
- Troisch P
- Zhou J
- Mackay S
- DeGottardi Q
- May DH
- Taniguchi R
- Gittelman RM
- Klinger M
- Snyder TM
- Roper R
- Wojciechowska G
- Murray K
- Edmark R
- Evans S
- Jones L
- Zhou Y
- Rowen L
- Liu R
- Chour W
- Algren HA
- Berrington WR
- Wallick JA
- Cochran RA
- Micikas ME
- ISB-Swedish COVID-19 Biobanking Unit
- Wrin T
- Petropoulos CJ
- Cole HR
- Fischer TD
- Wei W
- Hoon DSB
- Price ND
- Subramanian N
- Hill JA
- Hadlock J
- Magis AT
- Ribas A
- Lanier LL
- Boyd SD
- Bluestone JA
- Chu H
- Hood L
- Gottardo R
- Greenberg PD
- Davis MM
- Goldman JD
- Heath JR
journal: Cell
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.01.014
keywords:
- Adaptive Immunity/genetics
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- Blood Proteins/metabolism
- "CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- "COVID-19/complications, diagnosis, immunology, pathology, virology"
- Convalescence
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- "Immunity, Innate/genetics"
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Risk Factors
- "SARS-CoV-2/isolation & purification"
- Transcriptome
- Young Adult
- Post-Acute COVID-19 Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple early factors anticipate post-acute COVID-19 sequelae.
**Authors:** Su Y, Yuan D, Chen DG, Ng RH, Wang K, Choi J, Li S, Hong S, Zhang R, Xie J, Kornilov SA, Scherler K, Pavlovitch-Bedzyk AJ, Dong S, Lausted C, Lee I, Fallen S, Dai CL, Baloni P, Smith B, Duvvuri VR, Anderson KG, Li J, Yang F, Duncombe CJ, McCulloch DJ, Rostomily C, Troisch P, Zhou J, Mackay S, DeGottardi Q, May DH, Taniguchi R, Gittelman RM, Klinger M, Snyder TM, Roper R, Wojciechowska G, Murray K, Edmark R, Evans S, Jones L, Zhou Y, Rowen L, Liu R, Chour W, Algren HA, Berrington WR, Wallick JA, Cochran RA, Micikas ME, ISB-Swedish COVID-19 Biobanking Unit, Wrin T, Petropoulos CJ, Cole HR, Fischer TD, Wei W, Hoon DSB, Price ND, Subramanian N, Hill JA, Hadlock J, Magis AT, Ribas A, Lanier LL, Boyd SD, Bluestone JA, Chu H, Hood L, Gottardo R, Greenberg PD, Davis MM, Goldman JD, Heath JR
**Journal:** Cell (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2022.01.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.01.014)

## Content

1. Cell. 2022 Mar 3;185(5):881-895.e20. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.01.014. Epub
2022  Jan 25.

Multiple early factors anticipate post-acute COVID-19 sequelae.

Su Y(1), Yuan D(2), Chen DG(3), Ng RH(2), Wang K(4), Choi J(4), Li S(4), Hong 
S(4), Zhang R(2), Xie J(5), Kornilov SA(4), Scherler K(4), Pavlovitch-Bedzyk 
AJ(6), Dong S(7), Lausted C(4), Lee I(4), Fallen S(4), Dai CL(4), Baloni P(4), 
Smith B(4), Duvvuri VR(4), Anderson KG(8), Li J(6), Yang F(9), Duncombe CJ(10), 
McCulloch DJ(11), Rostomily C(4), Troisch P(4), Zhou J(12), Mackay S(12), 
DeGottardi Q(13), May DH(13), Taniguchi R(13), Gittelman RM(13), Klinger M(13), 
Snyder TM(13), Roper R(4), Wojciechowska G(14), Murray K(4), Edmark R(4), Evans 
S(4), Jones L(4), Zhou Y(4), Rowen L(4), Liu R(4), Chour W(4), Algren HA(15), 
Berrington WR(15), Wallick JA(15), Cochran RA(15), Micikas ME(15); ISB-Swedish 
COVID-19 Biobanking Unit(4); Wrin T(16), Petropoulos CJ(16), Cole HR(17), 
Fischer TD(17), Wei W(4), Hoon DSB(17), Price ND(4), Subramanian N(18), Hill 
JA(19), Hadlock J(4), Magis AT(4), Ribas A(20), Lanier LL(21), Boyd SD(9), 
Bluestone JA(7), Chu H(22), Hood L(23), Gottardo R(24), Greenberg PD(8), Davis 
MM(25), Goldman JD(26), Heath JR(27).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Vaccine and Infectious 
Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, 
USA; Clinical Research Division, Program in Immunology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer 
Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA. Electronic address: 
suyapeng.tju@gmail.com.
(2)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Department of 
Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105, USA.
(3)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Department of 
Microbiology and Department of Informatics, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA 98195, USA.
(4)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(5)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Molecular Engineering 
& Sciences Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105, USA.
(6)Institute for Immunity, Transplantation and Infection, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(7)Diabetes Center, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 
94143, USA.
(8)Clinical Research Division, Program in Immunology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer 
Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Departments of Immunology and Medicine, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(9)Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94304, USA.
(10)Division of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105, USA.
(11)Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(12)Isoplexis Corporation, Branford, CT 06405, USA.
(13)Adaptive Biotechnologies, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(14)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Medical University of 
Białystok, Białystok 15089, Poland.
(15)Swedish Center for Research and Innovation, Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, 
WA 98109, USA; Providence St. Joseph Health, Renton, WA 98057, USA.
(16)Monogram Biosciences, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
(17)St. John's Cancer Institute at Saint John's Health Center, Santa Monica, CA 
90404, USA.
(18)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Department of Global 
Heath and Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109, 
USA.
(19)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research 
Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 
Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(20)Department of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, and Parker 
Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(21)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San 
Francisco, and Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, San Francisco, CA 
94143, USA.
(22)Division of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105, USA; 
Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University 
of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(23)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Providence St. Joseph 
Health, Renton, WA 98057, USA.
(24)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research 
Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred 
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Department of 
Statistics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Biomedical Data 
Sciences, Lausanne University Hospital, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 1011, 
Switzerland.
(25)Institute for Immunity, Transplantation and Infection, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; The 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(26)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research 
Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 
Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; 
Swedish Center for Research and Innovation, Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, WA 
98109, USA; Providence St. Joseph Health, Renton, WA 98057, USA. Electronic 
address: jason.goldman@swedish.org.
(27)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Department of 
Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105, USA. Electronic 
address: jim.heath@isbscience.org.

Post-acute sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC) represent an emerging global crisis. 
However, quantifiable risk factors for PASC and their biological associations 
are poorly resolved. We executed a deep multi-omic, longitudinal investigation 
of 309 COVID-19 patients from initial diagnosis to convalescence (2-3 months 
later), integrated with clinical data and patient-reported symptoms. We resolved 
four PASC-anticipating risk factors at the time of initial COVID-19 diagnosis: 
type 2 diabetes, SARS-CoV-2 RNAemia, Epstein-Barr virus viremia, and specific 
auto-antibodies. In patients with gastrointestinal PASC, SARS-CoV-2-specific and 
CMV-specific CD8+ T cells exhibited unique dynamics during recovery from 
COVID-19. Analysis of symptom-associated immunological signatures revealed 
coordinated immunity polarization into four endotypes, exhibiting divergent 
acute severity and PASC. We find that immunological associations between PASC 
factors diminish over time, leading to distinct convalescent immune states. 
Detectability of most PASC factors at COVID-19 diagnosis emphasizes the 
importance of early disease measurements for understanding emergent chronic 
conditions and suggests PASC treatment strategies.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.01.014
PMCID: PMC8786632
PMID: 35216672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests J.R.H. and A.R. are 
founders and board members of PACT Pharma. J.R.H. is a board member of 
Isoplexis, and A.R. is the scientific advisor to Isoplexis. M.M.D. is a member 
of the Scientific Advisory Board of PACT Pharma. J.A.B. is a member of the 
Scientific Advisory Boards of Arcus, Solid, and VIR. J.A.B. is a member of the 
Board of Directors of Gilead and Provention. J.A.B. is the CEO of Sonoma 
Biotherapeutics. L.L.L. is on the scientific advisory boards of Alector, Atreca, 
Dragonfly, DrenBio, Nkarta, Obsidian Therapeutics, and SBI Biotech. R.G. has 
received consulting income from Juno Therapeutics, Takeda, Infotech Soft, 
Celgene, and Merck, has received research support from Janssen Pharmaceuticals 
and Juno Therapeutics, and declares ownership in CellSpace Biosciences. P.D.G. 
is on the Scientific Advisory Board of Celsius, Earli, Elpiscience, Immunoscape, 
Rapt, and Nextech, was a scientific founder of Juno Therapeutics, and receives 
research support from Lonza. J.D.G. declared contracted research with Gilead, 
Lilly, and Regeneron. J.A.H. received consulting fees or honoraria from Gilead 
Sciences, Amplyx, Allovir, Allogene therapeutics, CRISPR therapeutics, CSL 
Behring, OptumHealth, Octapharma, and Takeda and research funding from Takeda, 
Allovir, Karius, and Gilead Sciences. Q.D., D.H.M., R.T., R.M.G., M.K., and 
T.M.S. have employment and equity ownership with Adaptive Biotechnologies. The 
remaining authors declare no competing interests.