---
reference_id: "PMID:38801572"
title: Zoonotic and Zooanthroponotic Potential of Monkeypox.
authors:
- Atasoy MO
- Naggar RFE
- Rohaim MA
- Munir M
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-57165-7_5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Zoonotic and Zooanthroponotic Potential of Monkeypox.
**Authors:** Atasoy MO, Naggar RFE, Rohaim MA, Munir M
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-031-57165-7_5](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-57165-7_5)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2024;1451:75-90. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-57165-7_5.

Zoonotic and Zooanthroponotic Potential of Monkeypox.

Atasoy MO(1), Naggar RFE(1), Rohaim MA(1), Munir M(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medicine, 
Furness College, Lancaster University, Tower Ave, Bailrigg, LA1 4YG, UK.
(2)Division of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medicine, 
Furness College, Lancaster University, Tower Ave, Bailrigg, LA1 4YG, UK. 
muhammad.munir@lancaster.ac.uk.

The current multicounty outbreak of monkeypox virus (MPXV) posed an emerging and 
continued challenge to already strained public healthcare sector, around the 
globe. Since its first identification, monkeypox disease (mpox) remained 
enzootic in Central and West African countries where reports of human cases are 
sporadically described. Recent trends in mpox spread outside the Africa have 
highlighted increased incidence of spillover of the MPXV from animal to humans. 
While nature of established animal reservoirs remained undefined, several small 
mammals including rodents, carnivores, lagomorphs, insectivores, non-human 
primates, domestic/farm animals, and several species of wildlife are proposed to 
be carrier of the MPXV infection. There are established records of 
animal-to-human (zoonotic) spread of MPXV through close interaction of humans 
with animals by eating bushmeat, contracting bodily fluids or trading possibly 
infected animals. In contrast, there are reports and increasing possibilities of 
human-to-animal (zooanthroponotic) spread of the MPXV through petting and close 
interaction with pet owners and animal care workers. We describe here the 
rationales and molecular factors which predispose the spread of MPXV not only 
amongst humans but also from animals to humans. A range of continuing 
opportunities for the spread and evolution of MPXV are discussed to consider 
risks beyond the currently identified groups. With the possibility of MPXV 
establishing itself in animal reservoirs, continued and broad surveillance, 
investigation into unconventional transmissions, and exploration of spillover 
events are warranted.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-57165-7_5
PMID: 38801572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]