---
reference_id: "PMID:16684786"
title: "Periventricular heterotopia: phenotypic heterogeneity and correlation with Filamin A mutations."
authors:
- Parrini E
- Ramazzotti A
- Dobyns WB
- Mei D
- Moro F
- Veggiotti P
- Marini C
- Brilstra EH
- Dalla Bernardina B
- Goodwin L
- Bodell A
- Jones MC
- Nangeroni M
- Palmeri S
- Said E
- Sander JW
- Striano P
- Takahashi Y
- Van Maldergem L
- Leonardi G
- Wright M
- Walsh CA
- Guerrini R
journal: Brain
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awl125
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Brain/abnormalities
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Contractile Proteins/genetics
- Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome/genetics
- Female
- Filamins
- Fragile X Syndrome/genetics
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- Genotype
- Humans
- Hydrocephalus/genetics
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Microfilament Proteins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Periventricular heterotopia: phenotypic heterogeneity and correlation with Filamin A mutations.
**Authors:** Parrini E, Ramazzotti A, Dobyns WB, Mei D, Moro F, Veggiotti P, Marini C, Brilstra EH, Dalla Bernardina B, Goodwin L, Bodell A, Jones MC, Nangeroni M, Palmeri S, Said E, Sander JW, Striano P, Takahashi Y, Van Maldergem L, Leonardi G, Wright M, Walsh CA, Guerrini R
**Journal:** Brain (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awl125](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awl125)

## Content

1. Brain. 2006 Jul;129(Pt 7):1892-906. doi: 10.1093/brain/awl125. Epub 2006 May
9.

Periventricular heterotopia: phenotypic heterogeneity and correlation with
Filamin A mutations.

Parrini E(1), Ramazzotti A, Dobyns WB, Mei D, Moro F, Veggiotti P, Marini C,
Brilstra EH, Dalla Bernardina B, Goodwin L, Bodell A, Jones MC, Nangeroni M,
Palmeri S, Said E, Sander JW, Striano P, Takahashi Y, Van Maldergem L, Leonardi
G, Wright M, Walsh CA, Guerrini R.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute, I.R.C.C.S, Stella Maris Foundation, University of Pisa,
Italy.

Periventricular heterotopia (PH) occurs when collections of neurons lay along
the lateral ventricles or just beneath. Human Filamin A gene (FLNA) mutations
are associated with classical X-linked bilateral periventricular nodular
heterotopia (PNH), featuring contiguous heterotopic nodules, mega cisterna
magna, cardiovascular malformations and epilepsy. FLNA encodes an
F-actin-binding cytoplasmic phosphoprotein and is involved in early brain
neurogenesis and neuronal migration. A rare, recessive form of bilateral PNH
with microcephaly and severe delay is associated with mutations of the
ADP-ribosylation factor guanine nucleotide-exchange factor-2 (ARFGEF2) gene,
required for vesicle and membrane trafficking from the trans-Golgi. However, PH
is a heterogeneous disorder. We studied clinical and brain MRI of 182 patients
with PH and, based on its anatomic distribution and associated birth defects,
identified 15 subtypes. Classical bilateral PNH represented the largest group
(98 patients: 54%). The 14 additional phenotypes (84 patients: 46%) included PNH
with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), temporo-occipital PNH with hippocampal
malformation and cerebellar hypoplasia, PNH with fronto-perisylvian or
temporo-occipital polymicrogyria, posterior PNH with hydrocephalus, PNH with
microcephaly, PNH with frontonasal dysplasia, PNH with limb abnormalities, PNH
with fragile-X syndrome, PNH with ambiguous genitalia, micronodular PH,
unilateral PNH, laminar ribbon-like and linear PH. We performed mutation
analysis of FLNA in 120 patients, of whom 72 (60%) had classical bilateral PNH
and 48 (40%) other PH phenotypes, and identified 25 mutations in 40 individuals.
Sixteen mutations had not been reported previously. Mutations were found in 35
patients with classical bilateral PNH, in three with PNH with EDS and in two
with unilateral PNH. Twenty one mutations were nonsense and frame-shift and four
missense. The high prevalence of mutations causing protein truncations confirms
that loss of function is the major cause of the disorder. FLNA mutations were
found in 100% of familial cases with X-linked PNH (10 families: 8 with classical
bilateral PNH, 1 with EDS and 1 with unilateral PH) and in 26% of sporadic
patients with classical bilateral PNH. Overall, mutations occurred in 49% of
individuals with classical bilateral PNH irrespective of their being familial or
sporadic. However, the chances of finding a mutation were exceedingly gender
biased with 93% of mutations occurring in females and 7% in males. The
probability of finding FLNA mutations in other phenotypes was 4% but was limited
to the minor variants of PNH with EDS and unilateral PNH. Statistical analysis
considering all 42 mutations described so far identifies a hotspot region for
PNH in the actin-binding domain (P < 0.05).

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awl125
PMID: 16684786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
