---
reference_id: "PMID:28957470"
title: "Treatment of severe cholera: a review of strategies to reduce stool output and volumes of rehydration fluid."
authors:
- Butler T
journal: Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/trstmh/trx041
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of severe cholera: a review of strategies to reduce stool output and volumes of rehydration fluid.
**Authors:** Butler T
**Journal:** Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/trstmh/trx041](https://doi.org/10.1093/trstmh/trx041)

## Content

1. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2017 May 1;111(5):204-210. doi:
10.1093/trstmh/trx041.

Treatment of severe cholera: a review of strategies to reduce stool output and 
volumes of rehydration fluid.

Butler T(1).

Author information:
(1)Ross University School of Medicine, Portsmouth, Dominica, West Indies.

BACKGROUND: Severe cholera is a life-threatening illness of hypovolemic shock 
and metabolic acidosis due to rapid and profuse diarrheal fluid loss. Emergency 
life-saving therapy is i.v. saline, optionally supplemented with potassium and 
alkali to correct the fluid deficit, potassium losses and acidosis. After this 
initial rehydration, for the next 2 days ongoing stool losses are replaced with 
oral rehydration solution (ORS), which contains sodium chloride, potassium and 
alkali together with glucose or rice powder as a source of glucose to serve as a 
carrier for sodium.
RESULTS: In actual field trials, antibiotics are given to reduce fluid 
requirements, but large volumes averaging about 7 liters of i.v. fluid followed 
by about 14 liters of ORS have been given to adult patients. Disturbing trends 
during therapy have included overhydration, hyponatremia and polyuria.
CONCLUSIONS: It is suggested that stool output and fluid requirements could be 
reduced, if borne out in future research, by avoiding overhydration by 
restricting ORS intake to match stool output and promoting intestinal 
reabsorption of luminal fluid by early introduction of glucose without salts 
into the intestine, more gradual correction of dehydration, giving 
mineralocorticoid and vasopressin, and infusing glucose or short-chain fatty 
acids into the proximal colon.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Royal 
Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/trstmh/trx041
PMID: 28957470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]