---
reference_id: "PMID:30725285"
title: N/OFQ-NOP System and Airways.
authors:
- D'Agostino B
- Sgambato M
- Esposito R
- Spaziano G
journal: Handb Exp Pharmacol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/164_2018_202
content_type: abstract_only
---

# N/OFQ-NOP System and Airways.
**Authors:** D'Agostino B, Sgambato M, Esposito R, Spaziano G
**Journal:** Handb Exp Pharmacol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/164_2018_202](https://doi.org/10.1007/164_2018_202)

## Content

1. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2019;254:313-322. doi: 10.1007/164_2018_202.

N/OFQ-NOP System and Airways.

D'Agostino B(1), Sgambato M(2), Esposito R(2), Spaziano G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Pharmacology L. Donatelli, 
University of Campania "L. Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy. 
bruno.dagostino@unicampania.it.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Pharmacology L. Donatelli, 
University of Campania "L. Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.

Asthma is a heterogeneous chronic inflammatory disease of the airways. The most 
prevalent form is atopic asthma, which is initiated by the exposure to (inhaled) 
allergens. Intermittent attacks of breathlessness, airways hyperresponsiveness, 
wheezing, coughing, and resultant allergen-specific immune responses 
characterize the disease. Nociceptin/OFQ-NOP receptor system is able to combine 
anti-hyperresponsiveness and immunomodulatory actions. In particular, N/OFQ is 
able to inhibit airways microvascular leakage and bronchoconstriction through a 
presynaptic and non-opioid mechanism of action that blocks tachykinin release. 
Moreover, it also acts on allergenic sensitization because it is able to 
modulate the immune response that triggers the development of airway 
hyperresponsiveness through an interaction on cell membranes of dendritic cells 
(DCs) that are generally responsible to start and sustain allergic T helper 2 
(TH2)-cell responses to inhaled allergens in asthma. In asthmatic patients, 
sputum showed elevated N/OFQ levels that are related to increased eosinophil 
counts. The addition of exogenous N/OFQ in sputum obtained from patients with 
severe asthma attenuated eosinophils migration and release of inflammatory 
mediators. These observations confirmed that elevated endogenous N/OFQ levels in 
asthmatic sputum were lower than the ones required to exert beneficial effects, 
suggesting that supplementation with exogenous N/OFQ may need. In conclusion, 
the innovative role of N/OFQ in counteracting airways 
inflammation/hyperresponsiveness opens new potential targets/strategies in 
asthma treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/164_2018_202
PMID: 30725285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]