---
reference_id: "PMID:39623400"
title: "Prevalence and clinical characteristics of incontinentia pigmenti: a nationwide population-based study."
authors:
- Herlin LK
- Schmidt SAJ
- Mogensen TH
- Sommerlund M
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03480-8
keywords:
- Humans
- "Incontinentia Pigmenti/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Prevalence
- Male
- Denmark/epidemiology
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- I-kappa B Kinase/genetics
- Adult
- Adolescent
- Infant
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- Registries
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and clinical characteristics of incontinentia pigmenti: a nationwide population-based study.
**Authors:** Herlin LK, Schmidt SAJ, Mogensen TH, Sommerlund M
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03480-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03480-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Dec 2;19(1):454. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03480-8.

Prevalence and clinical characteristics of incontinentia pigmenti: a nationwide 
population-based study.

Herlin LK(1)(2), Schmidt SAJ(3)(4), Mogensen TH(5)(6), Sommerlund M(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Aarhus University Hospital, Palle Juul-Jensens 
Boulevard 67, Aarhus N, 8200, Denmark. laujoerg@rm.dk.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Building A, Palle 
Juul-Jensens Boulevard 99, Aarhus N, Denmark. laujoerg@rm.dk.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Aarhus University Hospital, Palle Juul-Jensens 
Boulevard 67, Aarhus N, 8200, Denmark.
(4)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Aarhus University Hospital and Aarhus 
University, Olof Palmes Allé 43-45, Aarhus N, 8200, Denmark.
(5)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases, Aarhus University Hospital, Palle 
Juul-Jensens Boulevard 67, Aarhus N, Denmark.
(7)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Building A, Palle 
Juul-Jensens Boulevard 99, Aarhus N, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Incontinentia pigmenti (IP) is an X-linked dominant multisystemic 
disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the IKBKG gene. Population-based 
research into the epidemiology of IP is lacking.
METHODS: This nationwide cross-sectional study from Jan 1st, 1995 to August 
25th, 2021, searched the Danish National Patient Registry (DNPR), the Danish 
National Database of Rare Genetic Diseases (RareDis) and the Danish 
Genodermatosis Database to identify patients recorded with a diagnosis of IP. 
This search was followed by diagnosis validation and collection of clinical data 
from patient medical records. We investigated the clinical characteristics and 
genetics of the final cohort of validated IP cases. We estimated the point 
prevalence in the Danish population, based on non-deceased IP patients currently 
living in Denmark. Furthermore, we estimated the birth prevalence from 1995 to 
2020, assuming a diagnostic delay of up to six months.
RESULTS: We identified a validated cohort of 75 IP patients, including 71 
(94.7%) females and 4 (5.3%) males. We estimated a birth prevalence of 2.37 (95% 
CI: 1.74-3.25) per 100,000 or 1 in 42,194. A total of 54 (72%) patients had a 
genetic diagnosis, including 39 (72.2%) with the recurrent exon 4-10 deletion 
and 10 (18.5%) with point mutations in IKBKG. A positive family history was 
reported in 53.3%. Besides the recognizable blaschkolinear skin lesions reported 
in 70 (93.3%) of the patients, commonly reported manifestations included the 
involvement of the teeth (58.7%), the central nervous system (30.7%), hair 
(26.7%), and eyes (22.6%), as well as nail dystrophy (16.0%).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified and characterized a nationwide population-based 
cohort of IP patients and report a birth prevalence of 2.37 per 100,000 live 
births, which is twice as high as previous estimates.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03480-8
PMCID: PMC11613904
PMID: 39623400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: The study was reported to the Danish Data Protection Agency 
(journal no.: 1-16-02-143-21). Central Denmark Region granted access to medical 
record data (journal no.: 1-45-70-76-21). Consent for publication: Written 
informed consent for the publication of clinical photos was collected for both 
patients and/or parents. Conflict of interest: The authors have no conflict of 
interest to declare.