---
reference_id: "PMID:38431278"
title: "CSF Biomarkers in Longitudinal Alzheimer Disease Cohorts: Pre-Analytic Challenges."
authors:
- Jonaitis EM
- Jeffers B
- VandenLangenberg M
- Ma Y
- Van Hulle C
- Langhough R
- Du L
- Chin NA
- Przybelski RJ
- Hogan KJ
- Christian BT
- Betthauser TJ
- Okonkwo OC
- Bendlin BB
- Asthana S
- Carlsson CM
- Johnson SC
journal: Clin Chem
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/clinchem/hvad221
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CSF Biomarkers in Longitudinal Alzheimer Disease Cohorts: Pre-Analytic Challenges.
**Authors:** Jonaitis EM, Jeffers B, VandenLangenberg M, Ma Y, Van Hulle C, Langhough R, Du L, Chin NA, Przybelski RJ, Hogan KJ, Christian BT, Betthauser TJ, Okonkwo OC, Bendlin BB, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, Johnson SC
**Journal:** Clin Chem (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/clinchem/hvad221](https://doi.org/10.1093/clinchem/hvad221)

## Content

1. Clin Chem. 2024 Mar 2;70(3):538-550. doi: 10.1093/clinchem/hvad221.

CSF Biomarkers in Longitudinal Alzheimer Disease Cohorts: Pre-Analytic 
Challenges.

Jonaitis EM(1)(2)(3), Jeffers B(1)(2)(3), VandenLangenberg M(2)(3), Ma Y(2), Van 
Hulle C(2), Langhough R(1)(2)(3), Du L(2)(4), Chin NA(3), Przybelski RJ(3), 
Hogan KJ(5), Christian BT(2)(6)(7), Betthauser TJ(2)(3), Okonkwo OC(2)(3), 
Bendlin BB(2)(3), Asthana S(8)(2), Carlsson CM(8)(1)(2), Johnson SC(8)(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Wisconsin Alzheimer's Institute, School of Medicine and Public Health, 
University of Wisconsin -Madison, Madison, WI, United States.
(2)Wisconsin Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, School of Medicine and Public 
Health, University of Wisconsin -Madison, Madison, WI, United States.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Geriatrics and Gerontology, School of 
Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin -Madison, Madison, WI, 
United States.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, School of Medicine and 
Public Health, University of Wisconsin -Madison, Madison, WI, United States.
(5)Department of Anesthesiology, School of Medicine and Public Health, 
University of Wisconsin -Madison, Madison, WI, United States.
(6)Department of Medical Physics, School of Medicine and Public Health, 
University of Wisconsin -Madison, Madison, WI, United States.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of 
Wisconsin -Madison, Madison, WI, United States.
(8)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center of the Wm. S. Middleton 
Memorial Veterans Hospital, Madison, WI, United States.

BACKGROUND: The sensitivity of amyloid to pre-analytic factors complicates 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) diagnostics for Alzheimer disease. We report 
reliability and validity evidence for automated immunoassays from frozen and 
fresh CSF samples in an ongoing, single-site research program.
METHODS: CSF samples were obtained from 2 Wisconsin cohorts (1256 measurements; 
727 participants). Levels of amyloid beta 1-42 (Aβ42), phosphorylated tau 181 
(pTau181), and total tau (tTau) were obtained using an Elecsys cobas e 601 
platform. Repeatability and fixed effects of storage tube type, extraction 
method, and freezing were assessed via mixed models. Concordance with amyloid 
positron emission tomography (PET) was investigated with 238 participants having 
a temporally proximal PET scan.
RESULTS: Repeatability was high with intraclass correlation (ICC) ≥0.9, but tube 
type strongly affected measurements. Discriminative accuracy for PET amyloid 
positivity was strong across tube types (area under the curve [AUC]: Aβ42, 0.87; 
pTau181Aβ42 , 0.96), although optimal thresholds differed.
CONCLUSIONS: Under real-world conditions, the Elecsys platform had high 
repeatability. However, strong effects of pre-analytic factors suggest caution 
in drawing longitudinal inferences.

© Association for Diagnostics & Laboratory Medicine 2024.

DOI: 10.1093/clinchem/hvad221
PMCID: PMC10908554
PMID: 38431278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Upon manuscript submission, all authors 
completed the author disclosure form.