---
reference_id: "PMID:40830897"
title: "Identification of a novel SACS gene mutation leading to spastic ataxia Charlevoix-Saguenay type: a case report."
authors:
- Raggio V
- Rey A
- Simoes C
- Birriel F
- Rodriguez S
- Bentancor K
- Tapié A
- Spangenberg L
journal: J Med Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13256-025-05480-z
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Muscle Spasticity/genetics, diagnosis, congenital"
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, congenital, diagnosis"
- Heat-Shock Proteins/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Mutation
- Exome Sequencing
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a novel SACS gene mutation leading to spastic ataxia Charlevoix-Saguenay type: a case report.
**Authors:** Raggio V, Rey A, Simoes C, Birriel F, Rodriguez S, Bentancor K, Tapié A, Spangenberg L
**Journal:** J Med Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13256-025-05480-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13256-025-05480-z)

## Content

1. J Med Case Rep. 2025 Aug 19;19(1):412. doi: 10.1186/s13256-025-05480-z.

Identification of a novel SACS gene mutation leading to spastic ataxia 
Charlevoix-Saguenay type: a case report.

Raggio V(1), Rey A(2), Simoes C(3)(4), Birriel F(5), Rodriguez S(1), Bentancor 
K(6), Tapié A(1), Spangenberg L(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la República, 
Gral. Flores 2125, 11800, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(2)Cátedra de Neuropediatría, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la República, 
Gral. Flores 2125, 11800, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(3)Bioinformatics Unit, Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Mataojo 2020, 11400, 
Montevideo, Uruguay.
(4)Departamento Básico de Medicina, Hospital de Clínicas, Facultad de Medicina, 
Universidad de la República, Av Italia S/N, 11600, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(5)Servicio de Resonancia Magnética la Asistencial Uruguay, Av. Andrés Ceberio 
649, San Carlos, Maldonado, Uruguay.
(6)Fundación Para la Investigación en Enfermedades Raras (FUPIER), 18 de Julio 
854 Apto. 258, 11300, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(7)Bioinformatics Unit, Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Mataojo 2020, 11400, 
Montevideo, Uruguay. lucia@pasteur.edu.uy.
(8)Departamento Básico de Medicina, Hospital de Clínicas, Facultad de Medicina, 
Universidad de la República, Av Italia S/N, 11600, Montevideo, Uruguay. 
lucia@pasteur.edu.uy.

BACKGROUND: Spastic ataxia Charlevoix-Saguenay is a rare autosomal recessive 
neurodegenerative disorder characterized by a combination of spasticity, ataxia, 
and peripheral neuropathy. Although predominantly affecting individuals of 
French-Canadian descent, the geographic distribution of spastic ataxia 
Charlevoix-Saguenay-associated cases is expanding.
CASE PRESENTATION: This study presents the case of a 3-year-old Uruguayan girl 
with suspected autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay, 
demonstrating the disease's presence in previously unreported locations. Exome 
sequencing analysis revealed two compound heterozygous variants in the sacsin 
molecular chaperone gene, one of which was novel.
CONCLUSION: This report highlights the genomic heterogeneity of spastic ataxia 
Charlevoix-Saguenay and emphasizes the importance of investigating the genetic 
landscape of the disease in diverse populations. Understanding the underlying 
genetic alterations and their geographic distribution contributes to improved 
diagnosis, management, and potentially targeted therapies for individuals 
affected by spastic ataxia Charlevoix-Saguenay worldwide.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13256-025-05480-z
PMCID: PMC12363115
PMID: 40830897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: This research was performed in accordance with the Declaration of 
Helsinki and has been approved by the ethics committee of the Institut Pasteur 
de Montevideo on the 12 July 2021, CEI-IP 002 2021. Written informed consent to 
participate in the study was obtained from the parents of the patient. Consent 
for publication: Written informed consent was obtained from the patients’s legal 
guardian for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy 
of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this 
journal. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.