---
reference_id: "PMID:25047749"
title: Biochemical and molecular characteristics of patients with organic acidaemias and urea cycle disorders identified through newborn screening.
authors:
- Barends M
- Pitt J
- Morrissy S
- Tzanakos N
- Boneh A
- Newborn Screening Laboratory Staff
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.07.003
keywords:
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation
- Neonatal Screening/methods
- Retrospective Studies
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, metabolism, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biochemical and molecular characteristics of patients with organic acidaemias and urea cycle disorders identified through newborn screening.
**Authors:** Barends M, Pitt J, Morrissy S, Tzanakos N, Boneh A, Newborn Screening Laboratory Staff
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.07.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.07.003)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2014 Sep-Oct;113(1-2):46-52. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.07.003.  Epub 2014 Jul 11.

Biochemical and molecular characteristics of patients with organic acidaemias
and urea cycle disorders identified through newborn screening.

Barends M(1), Pitt J(2), Morrissy S(3), Tzanakos N(3), Boneh A(2); Newborn
Screening Laboratory Staff.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Research, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, and Victorian
Clinical Genetics Services, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia;
Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Metabolic Research, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, and Victorian
Clinical Genetics Services, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia;
Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.
(3)Metabolic Research, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, and Victorian
Clinical Genetics Services, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.

BACKGROUND: In recent years it has become clear that newborn screening (NBS)
programmes using tandem mass spectrometry identify "patients" with "classical"
inborn errors of metabolism who are asymptomatic. This observation raises issues
regarding medicalization of "non-diseases," potentially unnecessary treatment
and unnecessary anxiety to parents.
AIMS: This study aims to identify possible markers that may assist in predicting
the need for treatment of infants with "classical" organic acidaemias (OA) and
urea cycle disorders (UCD) diagnosed through NBS.
METHODS: Medical records of all patients with classical OA and UCD detected
through the Victorian NBS programme from February 2002 to January 2014, or
diagnosed clinically between 1990 and January 2002 were retrospectively
reviewed.
RESULTS: Neonatal presentation did not always predict the need for on-going
strict treatment. Blood concentrations of amino acids and acyl-carnitines and
the changes thereof in follow-up samples correlated with severity in
citrullinaemia-I, possibly isovaleric acidaemia but not in argininosuccinic
aciduria or propionic acidaemia. Some specific mutations correlate with
"attenuated" citrullinaemia-I. Gender may affect clinical outcome in propionic
acidaemia.
CONCLUSIONS: Changes in blood concentration of certain metabolites (amino acids,
acyl-carnitines) in the first weeks of life may be predictive of the need for
treatment in some disorders but not in others. Mutation analysis may be
predictive in some disorders but whether or not this should be considered as
second-tier testing in NBS should be discussed separately.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.07.003
PMID: 25047749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
