---
reference_id: "PMID:27534434"
title: Antipsychotic drugs in Huntington's disease.
authors:
- Unti E
- Mazzucchi S
- Palermo G
- Bonuccelli U
- Ceravolo R
journal: Expert Rev Neurother
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/14737175.2016.1226134
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antipsychotic drugs in Huntington's disease.
**Authors:** Unti E, Mazzucchi S, Palermo G, Bonuccelli U, Ceravolo R
**Journal:** Expert Rev Neurother (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14737175.2016.1226134](https://doi.org/10.1080/14737175.2016.1226134)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Neurother. 2017 Mar;17(3):227-237. doi: 
10.1080/14737175.2016.1226134. Epub 2016 Aug 23.

Antipsychotic drugs in Huntington's disease.

Unti E(1), Mazzucchi S(1), Palermo G(1), Bonuccelli U(1), Ceravolo R(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine-Neurology Unit , 
University of Pisa , Pisa , Italy.

The aim of this review is to overview the pharmacological features of 
neuroleptics experienced in the treatment of Huntington's disease (HD) symptoms. 
Despite a large number of case reports, randomized controlled trials (RCT) and 
drug comparison studies are lacking. Areas covered: After evaluating current 
guidelines and clinical unmet needs we searched PubMed for the term 
'Huntington's disease' cross referenced with the terms 'Antipsychotic drugs' 
'Neuroleptic drugs' and single drug specific names. Expert commentary: In 
clinical practice antipsychotics represent the first choice in the management of 
chorea in the presence of psychiatric symptoms, when poor compliance is 
suspected or when there is an increased risk of adverse events due to 
tetrabenazine. Antipsychotics are considered valid strategies, with the second 
generation preferred to reduce extrapyramidal adverse events, however they may 
cause more metabolic side effects. In the future 'dopamine stabilizers', such as 
pridopidine, could replace antipsychotics modulating dopamine transmission.

DOI: 10.1080/14737175.2016.1226134
PMID: 27534434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]