---
reference_id: "PMID:18782775"
title: Obscurin targets ankyrin-B and protein phosphatase 2A to the cardiac M-line.
authors:
- Cunha SR
- Mohler PJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806050200
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Ankyrins/chemistry, deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Exons/genetics
- Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factors/metabolism
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Muscle Proteins/metabolism
- Mutation/genetics
- Myocardium/metabolism
- Protein Binding
- "Protein Isoforms/genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Phosphatase 2
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases
- RNA Splice Sites/genetics
- Rho Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factors
- Sequence Alignment
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Obscurin targets ankyrin-B and protein phosphatase 2A to the cardiac M-line.
**Authors:** Cunha SR, Mohler PJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M806050200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M806050200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Nov 14;283(46):31968-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806050200. Epub
2008 Sep 9.

Obscurin targets ankyrin-B and protein phosphatase 2A to the cardiac M-line.

Cunha SR(1), Mohler PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa Carver College of
Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA. shane-cunha@uiowa.edu

Ankyrin-B targets ion channels and transporters in excitable cells. Dysfunction
in ankyrin-B-based pathways results in defects in cardiac physiology. Despite a
wealth of knowledge regarding the role of ankyrin-B for cardiac function, little
is known regarding the mechanisms underlying ankyrin-B regulation. Moreover, the
pathways underlying ankyrin-B targeting in heart are unclear. We report that
alternative splicing regulates ankyrin-B localization and function in
cardiomyocytes. Specifically, we identify a novel exon (exon 43') in the
ankyrin-B regulatory domain that mediates interaction with the Rho-GEF obscurin.
Ankyrin-B transcripts harboring exon 43' represent the primary cardiac isoform
in human and mouse. We demonstrate that ankyrin-B and obscurin are co-localized
at the M-line of myocytes and co-immunoprecipitate from heart. We define the
structural requirements for ankyrin-B/obscurin interaction to two motifs in the
ankyrin-B regulatory domain and demonstrate that both are critical for
obscurin/ankyrin-B interaction. In addition, we demonstrate that interaction
with obscurin is required for ankyrin-B M-line targeting. Specifically, both
obscurin-binding motifs are required for the M-line targeting of a GFP-ankyrin-B
regulatory domain. Moreover, this construct acts as a dominant-negative by
competing with endogenous ankyrin-B for obscurin-binding at the M-line, thus
providing a powerful new tool to evaluate the function of obscurin/ankyrin-B
interactions. With this new tool, we demonstrate that the obscurin/ankyrin-B
interaction is critical for recruitment of PP2A to the cardiac M-line. Together,
these data provide the first evidence for the molecular basis of ankyrin-B and
PP2A targeting and function at the cardiac M-line. Finally, we report that
ankyrin-B R1788W is localized adjacent to the ankyrin-B obscurin-binding motif
and increases binding activity for obscurin. In summary, our new findings
demonstrate that ANK2 is subject to alternative splicing that gives rise to
unique polypeptides with diverse roles in cardiac function.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M806050200
PMCID: PMC2581558
PMID: 18782775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
