---
reference_id: "PMID:28303989"
title: "Frequency of worsening liver function in severe dengue hepatitis patients receiving paracetamol: A retrospective analysis of hospital data."
authors:
- Syed AA
- Aslam F
- Hakeem H
- Siddiqui F
- Nasir N
journal: J Pak Med Assoc
year: '2017'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequency of worsening liver function in severe dengue hepatitis patients receiving paracetamol: A retrospective analysis of hospital data.
**Authors:** Syed AA, Aslam F, Hakeem H, Siddiqui F, Nasir N
**Journal:** J Pak Med Assoc (2017)

## Content

1. J Pak Med Assoc. 2017 Mar;67(3):400-404.

Frequency of worsening liver function in severe dengue hepatitis patients 
receiving paracetamol: A retrospective analysis of hospital data.

Syed AA(1), Aslam F(1), Hakeem H(1), Siddiqui F(1), Nasir N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan.

Comment in
    J Pak Med Assoc. 2017 Jun;67(6):966.
    J Pak Med Assoc. 2017 Jun;67(6):967.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the frequency of worsening liver function among hospital 
in-patients with severe dengue hepatitis receiving paracetamol.
METHODS: This retrospective study was conducted at the Department of Medicine, 
Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi, and comprised records of dengue patients 
with severe hepatitis who received paracetamol for control of fever between June 
2007 and December 2014. Alanine aminotransferase at baseline and following 
paracetamol administration was noted, as well as dosage and duration of 
paracetamol, along with participants' demographic details. Frequency of patients 
who developed worsening or improvement of alanine aminotransferase was also 
noted. SPSS 19 was used for data analysis.
RESULTS: Of the 113 subjects, 73(64.6%) were male and 40(35.4%) were female. 
Overall improvement was observed in subsequent alanine aminotransferase levels 
(491 units per litre, IQR 356.5 TO 775 vs 151 units per litre, IQR 49.5 to 
299.5). Most commonly prescribed dose of paracetamol was 2g (IQR 1 to 5 grams), 
which was taken for a median duration of 1 day (IQR 1 to 3 days). Moreover, 
100(88.5 %) patients showed improvement in alanine aminotransferase. Only 
13(11.5 %) patients developed worsening of alanine aminotransferase. Of those 
with worsening liver function, 8(61.5 %) were discharged home with no clinical 
deterioration and 5(38.5 %) deaths were observed. However, causes of deaths were 
unrelated to liver dysfunction.
CONCLUSIONS: The frequency of worsening liver function following paracetamol 
administration in patients with severe dengue hepatitis was relatively low.

PMID: 28303989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]