---
reference_id: "PMID:39879936"
title: "Design, synthesis and evaluation of (E)-1-(4-(2-(1H-pyrazol-5-yl)vinyl)phenyl) derivatives as next generation selective RET inhibitors overcoming RET solvent front mutations (G810C/R)."
authors:
- Xu M
- Wu K
- He R
- He J
- Yang G
- Ma H
- Peng L
- Zhang S
- Tan L
- Zhang Z
- Cai Q
journal: Eur J Med Chem
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2025.117294
keywords:
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Drug Design
- "Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology, chemistry, chemical synthesis"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology, chemical synthesis, chemistry"
- Animals
- Mice
- Mutation
- Structure-Activity Relationship
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- "Pyrazoles/pharmacology, chemistry, chemical synthesis"
- Molecular Structure
- "Drug Screening Assays, Antitumor"
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Solvents/chemistry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Design, synthesis and evaluation of (E)-1-(4-(2-(1H-pyrazol-5-yl)vinyl)phenyl) derivatives as next generation selective RET inhibitors overcoming RET solvent front mutations (G810C/R).
**Authors:** Xu M, Wu K, He R, He J, Yang G, Ma H, Peng L, Zhang S, Tan L, Zhang Z, Cai Q
**Journal:** Eur J Med Chem (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmech.2025.117294](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmech.2025.117294)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Chem. 2025 Mar 15;286:117294. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2025.117294.
Epub  2025 Jan 23.

Design, synthesis and evaluation of (E)-1-(4-(2-(1H-pyrazol-5-yl)vinyl)phenyl)
derivatives as next generation selective RET inhibitors overcoming RET solvent
front mutations (G810C/R).

Xu M(1), Wu K(1), He R(2), He J(2), Yang G(3), Ma H(3), Peng L(4), Zhang S(5),
Tan L(6), Zhang Z(7), Cai Q(8).

Author information:
(1)College of Chemistry and Materials Science, Zhejiang Normal University, No.
688 Yingbin Road, Jinhua, Zhejiang Province, 321004, China; State Key Laboratory
of Bioactive Molecules and Druggability Assessment, School of Pharmacy, Jinan
University, Guangzhou, 510632, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Molecules and Druggability Assessment,
School of Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China; International
Cooperative Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Medicine Modernization and
Innovative Drug Discovery of Chinese Ministry of Education, Guangzhou City Key
Laboratory of Precision Chemical Drug Development, School of Pharmacy, Jinan
University, Guangzhou, 510632, China.
(3)College of Chemistry and Materials Science, Zhejiang Normal University, No.
688 Yingbin Road, Jinhua, Zhejiang Province, 321004, China.
(4)International Cooperative Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Medicine
Modernization and Innovative Drug Discovery of Chinese Ministry of Education,
Guangzhou City Key Laboratory of Precision Chemical Drug Development, School of
Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, Guangzhou Red Cross Hospital, Jinan University,
Guangzhou, 510632, China.
(6)College of Chemistry and Materials Science, Zhejiang Normal University, No.
688 Yingbin Road, Jinhua, Zhejiang Province, 321004, China. Electronic address:
tantanli@zjnu.edu.cn.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Molecules and Druggability Assessment,
School of Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China; International
Cooperative Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Medicine Modernization and
Innovative Drug Discovery of Chinese Ministry of Education, Guangzhou City Key
Laboratory of Precision Chemical Drug Development, School of Pharmacy, Jinan
University, Guangzhou, 510632, China; Department of Pharmacy, Guangzhou Red
Cross Hospital, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China. Electronic address:
zhang_zhang@jnu.edu.cn.
(8)College of Chemistry and Materials Science, Zhejiang Normal University, No.
688 Yingbin Road, Jinhua, Zhejiang Province, 321004, China. Electronic address:
caiqian@zjnu.edu.cn.

RET is a well-recognized drug target for cancer treatment. Despite the promising
efficacy of selective second-generation RET inhibitors Selpercatinib and
Pralsetinib, the clinical benefits have been compromised due to the quickly
developed resistance to these drugs. RET G810 mutations at the solvent front
site have been identified as the major on-target mutations contributing to
resistance against Selpercatinib and Pralsetinib. Therefore, there is an urgent
need for the development of next-generation RET inhibitors to overcome acquired
solvent-front resistance mutations. In this study, a series of
(E)-1-(4-(2-(1H-pyrazol-5-yl)vinyl)phenyl) derivatives have been identified as
selective next-generation RET inhibitors. The representative compound, CQ1373
exhibits potent cellular potency with IC50 values of 13.0, 25.7 and 28.4 nM
against BaF3 cells expressing CCDC6-RET, CCDC6-RET-G810C and CCDC6-RET-G810R,
respectively. A comprehensive selectivity profile across 89 kinases reveals that
CQ1373 demonstrates good selectivity toward wild-type RET and solvent front
mutants G810C/R with IC50 values of 4.2, 7.1 and 32.4 nM, respectively.
Furthermore, western blot analysis reveals that CQ1373 effectively inhibits RET
phosphorylation and downstream signaling through SHC. It also induces apoptosis
and cell cycle arrest in a dose-dependent manner in BaF3 cells harboring
CCDC6-RET, CCDC6-RET-G810C and CCDC6-RET-G810R fusions. More significantly,
CQ1373 exhibits promising in vivo anti-tumor efficacy in a CCDC6-RET-G810R mice
xenograft model, highlighting its potentials for RET-driven cancers treatment.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2025.117294
PMID: 39879936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
