---
reference_id: PMID:39673354
title: "Anti-VEGF drugs compared with laser photocoagulation for the treatment of diabetic retinopathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Simmonds M
- Llewellyn A
- Walker R
- Fulbright H
- Walton M
- Hodgson R
- Bojke L
- Stewart L
- Dias S
- Rush T
- Lawrenson JG
- Peto T
- Steel D
journal: Health Technol Assess
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3310/PCGV5709
keywords:
- Humans
- "Diabetic Retinopathy/therapy, drug therapy, surgery"
- Laser Coagulation/methods
- "Angiogenesis Inhibitors/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- "Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Ranibizumab/therapeutic use
- "Bevacizumab/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- "Receptors, Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor/therapeutic use"
- Recombinant Fusion Proteins/therapeutic use
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Visual Acuity
- "Technology Assessment, Biomedical"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-VEGF drugs compared with laser photocoagulation for the treatment of diabetic retinopathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Simmonds M, Llewellyn A, Walker R, Fulbright H, Walton M, Hodgson R, Bojke L, Stewart L, Dias S, Rush T, Lawrenson JG, Peto T, Steel D
**Journal:** Health Technol Assess (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3310/PCGV5709](https://doi.org/10.3310/PCGV5709)

## Content

1. Health Technol Assess. 2024 Dec;29(23):1-71. doi: 10.3310/PCGV5709.

Anti-VEGF drugs compared with laser photocoagulation for the treatment of 
diabetic retinopathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Simmonds M(1), Llewellyn A(1), Walker R(1), Fulbright H(1), Walton M(1), Hodgson 
R(1), Bojke L(2), Stewart L(1), Dias S(1), Rush T(3), Lawrenson JG(4), Peto 
T(5), Steel D(6).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, University of York, York, UK.
(2)Centre for Health Economics, University of York, York, UK.
(3)Patient Representative, Belfast, UK.
(4)Department of Optometry and Visual Sciences, City University of London, 
London, UK.
(5)Centre for Public Health, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, UK.
(6)Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

BACKGROUND: Diabetic retinopathy is a major cause of sight loss in people with 
diabetes. The most severe form, proliferative diabetic retinopathy, carries a 
high risk of vision loss, vitreous haemorrhage, macular oedema and other harms. 
Panretinal photocoagulation is the primary treatment for proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy. Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor drugs are used to treat 
various eye conditions and may be beneficial for people with diabetic 
retinopathy.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the efficacy and safety of anti-vascular endothelial 
growth factor therapy for the treatment of diabetic retinopathy when compared to 
panretinal photocoagulation.
METHODS: A systematic review and network meta-analysis of all published 
randomised controlled trials comparing anti-vascular endothelial growth factor 
(alone or in combination with panretinal photocoagulation) to panretinal 
photocoagulation in people with diabetic retinopathy. The database searches were 
updated in May 2023. Trials where the primary focus was treatment of macular 
oedema or vitreous haemorrhage were excluded.
RESULTS: A total of 14 trials were included: 3 of aflibercept, 5 of bevacizumab 
and 6 of ranibizumab. Two trials were of patients with non-proliferative 
diabetic retinopathy; all others were in proliferative diabetic retinopathy. 
Overall, anti-vascular endothelial growth factor was slightly better than 
panretinal photocoagulation at preventing vision loss, measured as best 
corrected visual acuity, at up to 2 years follow-up [mean difference in the 
logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution -0.089 (or 3.6 Early Treatment 
Diabetic Retinopathy Study letters), 95% confidence interval -0.180 to -0.019]. 
There was no clear evidence of any difference between the anti-vascular 
endothelial growth factors, but the potential for bias complicated the 
comparison. One trial found no benefit of anti-vascular endothelial growth 
factor over panretinal photocoagulation after 5 years. Anti-vascular endothelial 
growth factor was superior to panretinal photocoagulation at preventing macular 
oedema (relative risk 0.29, 95% confidence interval 0.18 to 0.49) and vitreous 
haemorrhage (relative risk 0.77, 95% confidence interval 0.61 to 0.99). There 
was no clear evidence that the effectiveness of anti-vascular endothelial growth 
factor varied over time.
CONCLUSIONS: Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor injections reduce vision 
loss when compared to panretinal photocoagulation, but the benefit is small and 
unlikely to be clinically meaningful. Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor 
may have greater benefits for preventing complications such as macular oedema. 
Observational studies extending follow-up beyond the 1-year duration of most 
trials are needed to investigate the longer-term effects of repeated 
anti-vascular endothelial growth factor injections.
FUNDING: This article presents independent research funded by the National 
Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) Health Technology Assessment 
programme as award number NIHR132948.

Plain Language Summary: People with diabetes are at risk of gradually losing 
their sight. This is because blood vessels in the part of the eye called the 
retina may become damaged, leading to sight loss. This condition is called 
diabetic retinopathy. People with a more severe type of retinopathy, called 
proliferative diabetic retinopathy, are usually offered laser treatment to 
reduce the risk of further sight loss. Recently, drugs called anti-vascular 
endothelial growth factor drugs, which are injected directly into the eye, have 
been used to treat other eye conditions, and might be useful to treat 
retinopathy. This project investigated whether anti-vascular endothelial growth 
factor therapy is effective by identifying and re-analysing all the clinical 
trials that used the three main anti-vascular endothelial growth factor drugs 
(called aflibercept, bevacizumab and ranibizumab) to treat diabetic retinopathy. 
We identified 14 relevant clinical trials, including approximately 1800 persons. 
Our analyses found that anti-vascular endothelial growth factor injections were 
slightly better than laser therapy at maintaining vision. After 1 year, people 
with proliferative retinopathy who received anti-vascular endothelial growth 
factor injections could, on average, read three or four more letters on a 
standard eye test chart than people who had received laser therapy. This 
difference may be too small to make anti-vascular endothelial growth factor 
injections worthwhile. People with less severe forms of retinopathy saw no 
benefit in vision after receiving anti-vascular endothelial growth factor 
therapy. We did find that people who received anti-vascular endothelial growth 
factor injections were substantially less likely to experience some of the more 
severe consequences of vision loss, including where vision is lost in the centre 
of the eye (called diabetic macular oedema), and where blood leaks into the eye 
(called vitreous haemorrhage). Most of the trials lasted for 1 year or less, so 
the long-term impact of using anti-vascular endothelial growth factor injections 
is still not well understood. This long-term impact of anti-vascular endothelial 
growth factor use requires further clinical research.

DOI: 10.3310/PCGV5709
PMCID: PMC12403683
PMID: 39673354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]