---
reference_id: "PMID:30057701"
title: "Proteomic Changes in Chick Brain Proteome Post Treatment with Lathyrus Sativus Neurotoxin, β-N-Oxalyl-L-α,β-Diaminopropionic Acid (L-ODAP): A Better Insight to Transient Neurolathyrism."
authors:
- Anil Kumar D
- Natarajan S
- Bin Omar NAM
- Singh P
- Bhimani R
- Singh SS
journal: Toxicol Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.5487/TR.2018.34.3.267
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proteomic Changes in Chick Brain Proteome Post Treatment with Lathyrus Sativus Neurotoxin, β-N-Oxalyl-L-α,β-Diaminopropionic Acid (L-ODAP): A Better Insight to Transient Neurolathyrism.
**Authors:** Anil Kumar D, Natarajan S, Bin Omar NAM, Singh P, Bhimani R, Singh SS
**Journal:** Toxicol Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.5487/TR.2018.34.3.267](https://doi.org/10.5487/TR.2018.34.3.267)

## Content

1. Toxicol Res. 2018 Jul;34(3):267-279. doi: 10.5487/TR.2018.34.3.267. Epub 2018 
Jul 15.

Proteomic Changes in Chick Brain Proteome Post Treatment with Lathyrus Sativus 
Neurotoxin, β-N-Oxalyl-L-α,β-Diaminopropionic Acid (L-ODAP): A Better Insight to 
Transient Neurolathyrism.

Anil Kumar D(1), Natarajan S(1), Bin Omar NAM(1), Singh P(2), Bhimani R(3), 
Singh SS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University College of Science, Osmania 
University, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(2)Bharati Vidyapeeth Medical College, Pune, Maharashtra, India.
(3)Hinduja Healthcare, Khar West, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

Neurolathyrism is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by spastic 
paraplegia resulting from the excessive consumption of Lathyrus sativus (Grass 
pea). β-N-Oxalyl-L-α,β-diaminopropionic acid (L-ODAP) is the primary neurotoxic 
component in this pea. The present study attempted to evaluate the proteome-wide 
alterations in chick brain 2 hr and 4 hr post L-ODAP treatment. Proteomic 
analysis of chick brain homogenates revealed several proteins involved in 
cytoskeletal structure, signaling, cellular metabolism, free radical scavenging, 
oxidative stress and neurodegenerative disorders were initially up-regulated at 
2 hr and later recovered to normal levels by 4 hr. Since L-ODAP mediated 
neurotoxicity is mainly by excitotoxicity and oxidative stress related 
dysfunctions, this study further evaluated the role of L-ODAP in apoptosis in 
vitro using human neuroblastoma cell line, IMR-32. The in vitro studies carried 
out at 200 μM L-ODAP for 4 hr indicate minimal intracellular ROS generation and 
alteration of mitochondrial membrane potential though not leading to apoptotic 
cell death. L-ODAP at low concentrations can be explored as a stimulator of 
various reactive oxygen species (ROS) mediated cell signaling pathways not 
detrimental to cells. Insights from our study may provide a platform to explore 
the beneficial side of L-ODAP at lower concentrations. This study is of 
significance especially in view of the Government of India lifting the ban on 
cultivation of low toxin Lathyrus varieties and consumption of this lentil.

DOI: 10.5487/TR.2018.34.3.267
PMCID: PMC6057293
PMID: 30057701

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare that 
there are no conflicts of interest.