---
reference_id: "PMID:35871872"
title: Genetically detoxified tetanus toxin as a vaccine and conjugate carrier protein.
authors:
- Chang MJ
- Ollivault-Shiflett M
- Schuman R
- Ngoc Nguyen S
- Kaltashov IA
- Bobst C
- Rajagopal SP
- Przedpelski A
- Barbieri JT
- Lees A
journal: Vaccine
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.07.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetically detoxified tetanus toxin as a vaccine and conjugate carrier protein.
**Authors:** Chang MJ, Ollivault-Shiflett M, Schuman R, Ngoc Nguyen S, Kaltashov IA, Bobst C, Rajagopal SP, Przedpelski A, Barbieri JT, Lees A
**Journal:** Vaccine (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.07.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.07.011)

## Content

1. Vaccine. 2022 Aug 19;40(35):5103-5113. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.07.011.
Epub  2022 Jul 22.

Genetically detoxified tetanus toxin as a vaccine and conjugate carrier protein.

Chang MJ(1), Ollivault-Shiflett M(1), Schuman R(2), Ngoc Nguyen S(3), Kaltashov 
IA(3), Bobst C(3), Rajagopal SP(4), Przedpelski A(5), Barbieri JT(5), Lees A(1).

Author information:
(1)Fina Biosolutions LLC, 9430 Key West Ave, Suite 200, Rockville, MD 20850, 
United States.
(2)Antibody and Immunoassay Consultants, 9430 Key West Ave, Suite 201, 
Rockville, MD 20850, United States.
(3)University of Massachusetts, 240 Thatcher Way, Life Science Laboratories 
N369, Amherst, MA 01003, United States.
(4)National Institute for Biological Standards and Control, Medicines and 
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, Blanche Lane, South Mimms, Potters Bar 
EN6 3QG, UK.
(5)Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Rd., Microbiology and 
Immunology BSB-2830, Milwaukee, WI 53226, United States.

Tetanus toxoid (TTxd), developed over 100 years ago, is a clinically effective, 
legacy vaccine against tetanus. Due to the extreme potency of native tetanus 
toxin, manufacturing and regulatory efforts often focus on TTxd production, 
standardization, and safety, rather than product modernization. Recently, a 
genetically detoxified, full-length tetanus toxin protein (8MTT) was reported as 
a tetanus vaccine alternative to TTxd (Przedpelski et al. mBio, 2020). Here we 
describe the production of 8MTT in Gor/MetTM E. coli, a strain engineered to 
have an oxidative cytoplasm, allowing for the expression of soluble, 
disulfide-bonded proteins. The strain was also designed to efficiently cleave 
N-terminal methionine, the obligatory start amino acid for E. coli expressed 
proteins. 8MTT was purified as a soluble protein from the cytoplasm in a 
two-column protocol to > 99 % purity, yielding 0.5 g of purified 8MTT/liter of 
fermentation broth with low endotoxin contamination, and antigenic purity of 
3500 Lf/mg protein nitrogen. Mouse immunizations showed 8MTT to be an 
immunogenic vaccine and effective as a carrier protein for peptide and 
polysaccharide conjugates. These studies validate 8MTT as commercially viable 
and, unlike the heterogenous tetanus toxoid, a uniform carrier protein for 
conjugate vaccines. The development of a recombinant, genetically detoxified 
toxin produced in E. coli aligns the tetanus vaccine with modern manufacturing, 
regulatory, standardization, and safety requirements.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.07.011
PMCID: PMC10336728
PMID: 35871872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.