---
reference_id: "PMID:37832567"
title: "HIV-1 drug resistance in people on dolutegravir-based antiretroviral therapy: a collaborative cohort analysis."
authors:
- Loosli T
- Hossmann S
- Ingle SM
- Okhai H
- Kusejko K
- Mouton J
- Bellecave P
- van Sighem A
- Stecher M
- "d'Arminio Monforte A"
- Gill MJ
- Sabin CA
- Maartens G
- Günthard HF
- Sterne JAC
- Lessells R
- Egger M
- Kouyos RD
journal: Lancet HIV
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/S2352-3018(23)00228-X
keywords:
- Humans
- HIV Infections/drug therapy
- HIV-1/genetics
- "HIV Integrase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Heterocyclic Compounds, 3-Ring/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Lamivudine/therapeutic use
- Cohort Studies
- HIV Seropositivity/drug therapy
- "Drug Resistance, Viral/genetics"
- Dolutegravir
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HIV-1 drug resistance in people on dolutegravir-based antiretroviral therapy: a collaborative cohort analysis.
**Authors:** Loosli T, Hossmann S, Ingle SM, Okhai H, Kusejko K, Mouton J, Bellecave P, van Sighem A, Stecher M, d'Arminio Monforte A, Gill MJ, Sabin CA, Maartens G, Günthard HF, Sterne JAC, Lessells R, Egger M, Kouyos RD
**Journal:** Lancet HIV (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2352-3018(23)00228-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2352-3018(23)00228-X)

## Content

1. Lancet HIV. 2023 Nov;10(11):e733-e741. doi: 10.1016/S2352-3018(23)00228-X.
Epub  2023 Oct 10.

HIV-1 drug resistance in people on dolutegravir-based antiretroviral therapy: a 
collaborative cohort analysis.

Loosli T(1), Hossmann S(2), Ingle SM(3), Okhai H(4), Kusejko K(1), Mouton J(5), 
Bellecave P(6), van Sighem A(7), Stecher M(8), d'Arminio Monforte A(9), Gill 
MJ(10), Sabin CA(4), Maartens G(5), Günthard HF(1), Sterne JAC(3), Lessells 
R(11), Egger M(12), Kouyos RD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Hospital Epidemiology, University 
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; Institute of Medical Virology, University 
of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine (ISPM), University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(3)Population Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School, University of Bristol, 
Bristol, UK.
(4)Institute for Global Health, University College London, London, UK.
(5)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, University of Cape 
Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(6)Virology Laboratory, University Hospital Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(7)Stichting HIV Monitoring, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(8)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner-Site Cologne-Bonn, 
Cologne, Germany; Department I of Internal Medicine, University Hospital 
Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(9)Italian Cohort Naive Antiretrovirals (ICONA), University of Milan, Milan, 
Italy.
(10)Southern Alberta Clinic, Calgary, AB, Canada; Department of Medicine, 
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(11)KwaZulu-Natal Research Innovation and Sequencing Platform (KRISP), 
University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa; Centre for the AIDS Programme 
of Research in South Africa (CAPRISA), Durban, South Africa.
(12)Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine (ISPM), University of Bern, 
Bern, Switzerland; Population Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School, 
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK; Centre for Infectious Disease Epidemiology 
and Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, 
South Africa. Electronic address: matthias.egger@unibe.ch.

Comment in
    Lancet HIV. 2023 Nov;10(11):e696-e698. doi: 10.1016/S2352-3018(23)00259-X.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2023 Apr 05:2023.04.05.23288183. doi: 10.1101/2023.04.05.23288183.

BACKGROUND: The widespread use of the integrase strand transfer inhibitor 
(INSTI) dolutegravir in first-line and second-line antiretroviral therapy (ART) 
might facilitate emerging resistance. The DTG RESIST study combined data from 
HIV cohorts to examine patterns of drug resistance mutations (DRMs) and identify 
risk factors for dolutegravir resistance.
METHODS: We included cohorts with INSTI resistance data from two collaborations 
(ART Cohort Collaboration, International epidemiology Databases to Evaluate AIDS 
in Southern Africa), and the UK Collaborative HIV Cohort. Eight cohorts from 
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Switzerland, South Africa, and 
the UK contributed data on individuals who were viraemic on dolutegravir-based 
ART and underwent genotypic resistance testing. Individuals with unknown 
dolutegravir initiation date were excluded. Resistance levels were categorised 
using the Stanford algorithm. We identified risk factors for resistance using 
mixed-effects ordinal logistic regression models.
FINDINGS: We included 599 people with genotypic resistance testing on 
dolutegravir-based ART between May 22, 2013, and Dec 20, 2021. Most had HIV-1 
subtype B (n=351, 59%), a third had been exposed to first-generation INSTIs 
(n=193, 32%), 70 (12%) were on dolutegravir dual therapy, and 18 (3%) were on 
dolutegravir monotherapy. INSTI DRMs were detected in 86 (14%) individuals; 20 
(3%) had more than one mutation. Most (n=563, 94%) were susceptible to 
dolutegravir, seven (1%) had potential low, six (1%) low, 17 (3%) intermediate, 
and six (1%) high-level dolutegravir resistance. The risk of dolutegravir 
resistance was higher on dolutegravir monotherapy (adjusted odds ratio [aOR] 
34·1, 95% CI 9·93-117) and dolutegravir plus lamivudine dual therapy (aOR 9·21, 
2·20-38·6) compared with combination ART, and in the presence of potential low 
or low (aOR 5·23, 1·32-20·7) or intermediate or high-level (aOR 13·4, 4·55-39·7) 
nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI) resistance.
INTERPRETATION: Among people with viraemia on dolutegravir-based ART, INSTI DRMs 
and dolutegravir resistance were rare. NRTI resistance substantially increased 
the risk of dolutegravir resistance, which is of concern, notably in 
resource-limited settings. Monitoring is important to prevent resistance at the 
individual and population level and ensure the long-term sustainability of ART.
FUNDING: US National Institutes of Health, Swiss National Science Foundation.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2352-3018(23)00228-X
PMCID: PMC10913014
PMID: 37832567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests SMI reports grant 
funding from the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) National Institute on 
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism for the work of ART-CC (payment to institution). 
AvS reports funding from the Dutch Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport for the 
maintenance of the ATHENA database, and grant funding from the European Centre 
for Disease Prevention and Control (payment to institution). MJG reports 
honoraria as an ad-hoc member of HIV National Advisory Boards from Merck, Gilead 
Sciences, and ViiV, and a leadership position as Medical Director of the 
Southern Alberta HIV Clinic. CAS has received funding from Gilead Sciences, ViiV 
Healthcare, and Janssen-Cilag for membership of Data Safety and Monitoring 
Committees and Advisory Committees and for preparation of educational material. 
HFG has received personal fees from Merck, Gilead Sciences, ViiV, GSK, Janssen, 
Johnson and Johnson, and Novartis, as an advisor or consultant or for Data 
Safety Monitoring Board membership, and has received a travel grant from Gilead. 
JACS reports funding for research in this publication from the NIH National 
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (payment to institution), UK National 
Institute for Health and Care Research (payment to institution), and the 
University of Bern (payment to institution). RL reports support for research in 
this publication by the NIH National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases under award number R01AI152772, and support from the NIH National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases under award number R01AI167699 for 
a separate project pertaining to HIV treatment strategies. ME reports funding 
for research in this publication from the Swiss National Science Foundation 
(32FP30-18949) and the NIH (Cooperative Agreement AI069924 and R01 AI152772-01). 
RDK reports funding for research in this publication from the Swiss National 
Science Foundation and the NIH National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, and reports grant funding from Gilead Sciences. All other authors 
declare no competing interests.