---
reference_id: "PMID:39829922"
title: Dose-dependent sensitivity of human 3D chromatin to a heart disease-linked transcription factor.
authors:
- Grant ZL
- Kuang S
- Zhang S
- Horrillo AJ
- Rao KS
- Kameswaran V
- Joubran C
- Lau PK
- Dong K
- Yang B
- Bartosik WM
- Zemke NR
- Ren B
- Kathiriya IS
- Pollard KS
- Bruneau BG
journal: bioRxiv
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1101/2025.01.09.632202
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dose-dependent sensitivity of human 3D chromatin to a heart disease-linked transcription factor.
**Authors:** Grant ZL, Kuang S, Zhang S, Horrillo AJ, Rao KS, Kameswaran V, Joubran C, Lau PK, Dong K, Yang B, Bartosik WM, Zemke NR, Ren B, Kathiriya IS, Pollard KS, Bruneau BG
**Journal:** bioRxiv (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1101/2025.01.09.632202](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.01.09.632202)

## Content

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2025 Jan 12:2025.01.09.632202. doi: 
10.1101/2025.01.09.632202.

Dose-dependent sensitivity of human 3D chromatin to a heart disease-linked 
transcription factor.

Grant ZL(1), Kuang S(1), Zhang S(1)(2), Horrillo AJ(1)(3), Rao KS(1), Kameswaran 
V(1), Joubran C(1), Lau PK(4)(5), Dong K(4)(5), Yang B(4)(5), Bartosik WM(4)(5), 
Zemke NR(4)(5), Ren B(4)(5), Kathiriya IS(1)(6), Pollard KS(1)(7)(8), Bruneau 
BG(1)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Gladstone Institutes; San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Bioinformatics Graduate Program, University of California, San Francisco; San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)TETRAD Graduate Program, University of California, San Francisco; San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego School of Medicine; La Jolla, CA, USA.
(5)Center for Epigenomics, University of California, San Diego School of 
Medicine; La Jolla, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care, University of California, 
San Francisco; San Francisco, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, University of California, San 
Francisco; San Francisco, CA, USA.
(8)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub; San Francisco, CA, USA.
(9)Roddenberry Center for Stem Cell Biology and Medicine at Gladstone, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Cardiovascular Research Institute, Institute for 
Human Genetics, and the Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regeneration Medicine 
and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San Francisco; San Francisco, 
CA, USA.

Dosage-sensitive transcription factors (TFs) underlie altered gene regulation in 
human developmental disorders, and cell-type specific gene regulation is linked 
to the reorganization of 3D chromatin during cellular differentiation. Here, we 
show dose-dependent regulation of chromatin organization by the congenital heart 
disease (CHD)-linked, lineage-restricted TF TBX5 in human cardiomyocyte 
differentiation. Genome organization, including compartments, topologically 
associated domains, and chromatin loops, are sensitive to reduced TBX5 dosage in 
a human model of CHD, with variations in response across individual cells. 
Regions normally bound by TBX5 are especially sensitive, while co-occupancy with 
CTCF partially protects TBX5-bound TAD boundaries and loop anchors. These 
results highlight the importance of lineage-restricted TF dosage in cell-type 
specific 3D chromatin dynamics, suggesting a new mechanism for TF-dependent 
disease.

DOI: 10.1101/2025.01.09.632202
PMCID: PMC11741296
PMID: 39829922

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: BGB and KSP hold stock in 
Tenaya Therapeutics. VK is a current employee of Genentech and shareholder of 
Roche. BR is a co-founder of Epigenome Technologies and has equity in Arima 
Genomics.