---
reference_id: "PMID:39287546"
title: INTRAVITREAL 0.18-mg FLUOCINOLONE ACETONIDE IMPLANT FOR PEDIATRIC UVEITIS.
authors:
- Wangyu S
- Jung JL
- Pecen PE
- Palestine AG
- Reddy AK
journal: Retina
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000004179
content_type: abstract_only
---

# INTRAVITREAL 0.18-mg FLUOCINOLONE ACETONIDE IMPLANT FOR PEDIATRIC UVEITIS.
**Authors:** Wangyu S, Jung JL, Pecen PE, Palestine AG, Reddy AK
**Journal:** Retina (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IAE.0000000000004179](https://doi.org/10.1097/IAE.0000000000004179)

## Content

1. Retina. 2024 Oct 1;44(10):1823-1827. doi: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000004179.

INTRAVITREAL 0.18-mg FLUOCINOLONE ACETONIDE IMPLANT FOR PEDIATRIC UVEITIS.

Wangyu S(1), Jung JL, Pecen PE, Palestine AG, Reddy AK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, 
Aurora, Colorado.

PURPOSE: This study reports the outcomes of the 0.18-mg intravitreal 
fluocinolone acetonide implant in the treatment of pediatric noninfectious 
uveitis.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was performed on patients under 18 years 
old who received fluocinolone acetonide implant between June 1, 2020 and March 
1, 2023. Data collected included demographics, uveitis diagnosis, use of 
anti-inflammatory therapy, visual acuity, intraocular pressure, and grading of 
uveitis activity. Uveitis recurrence was defined as increased inflammation that 
required additional anti-inflammatory therapy.
RESULTS: Eleven eyes from seven patients were included in this study. One 
patient (one eye) had a diagnosis of immune recovery uveitis and the remaining 
six patients (10 eyes) had pars planitis. The rate of remaining recurrence-free 
was 82% at 6 months, 60% at 12 months, and 60% at 24 months. Two of the six 
phakic eyes at baseline required cataract extraction during follow-up. Two of 
the four eyes that did not have intraocular pressure-lowering surgery before 
implantation required surgery in follow-up.
CONCLUSION: The 0.18-mg fluocinolone acetonide implant has a similar efficacy 
for the treatment of pediatric uveitis, particularly pars planitis, as in the 
adult population, although with higher rates of ocular hypertension requiring 
intervention.

DOI: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000004179
PMID: 39287546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]