---
reference_id: PMID:9183252
title: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A with 17p11.2 duplication. Clinical and electrophysiological phenotype study and factors influencing disease severity in 119 cases.
authors:
- Birouk N
- Gouider R
- Le Guern E
- Gugenheim M
- Tardieu S
- Maisonobe T
- Le Forestier N
- Agid Y
- Brice A
- Bouche P
journal: Brain
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1093/brain/120.5.813
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17"
- Disability Evaluation
- Electrophysiology
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multigene Family
- Mutation
- Myelin P0 Protein/genetics
- Nervous System/physiopathology
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A with 17p11.2 duplication. Clinical and electrophysiological phenotype study and factors influencing disease severity in 119 cases.
**Authors:** Birouk N, Gouider R, Le Guern E, Gugenheim M, Tardieu S, Maisonobe T, Le Forestier N, Agid Y, Brice A, Bouche P
**Journal:** Brain (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/120.5.813](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/120.5.813)

## Content

1. Brain. 1997 May;120 ( Pt 5):813-23. doi: 10.1093/brain/120.5.813.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A with 17p11.2 duplication. Clinical and 
electrophysiological phenotype study and factors influencing disease severity in 
119 cases.

Birouk N(1), Gouider R, Le Guern E, Gugenheim M, Tardieu S, Maisonobe T, Le 
Forestier N, Agid Y, Brice A, Bouche P.

Author information:
(1)Service d'Explorations Fonctionnelles, Neurologie, Hôpital de la Salpètrière, 
Paris, France.

A clinical and electrophysiological study was performed in 119 Type 1A 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT1A) patients with proven 17p11.2 duplication. 
Onset of the first functional manifestations was in the first decade in 50% of 
cases and before the age of 20 years in 70% of cases. The predominant clinical 
signs were muscle weakness and wasting in the lower limbs. None of the patients 
was normal on clinical examination and all presented at least pes cavus or ankle 
jerk areflexia. Motor nerve conduction velocity (MNCV) was uniformly reduced in 
all nerves, and was < or = 33 m/s in the median nerve for all patients. Sensory 
potentials were abnormal in all cases, even where there was no clinical sensory 
loss. Needle electromyography recruitment was reduced in distal muscles for all 
patients. MNCV slowing was fully consistent with the presence of duplication 
even in clinically asymptomatic individuals or in children, confirming the 
complete electrophysiological penetrance of 17p11.2 duplication and making 
median nerve MNCV a reliable tool for screening affected at-risk individuals. 
Functional disability was mild. Ninety-six percent of patients were autonomous; 
25% were asymptomatic and diagnosed by systematic family investigation 
especially on the basis of median nerve MNCV reduction. Early age at onset and 
greatly reduced median nerve MNCV were predictive of a more severe disease 
course; the earlier the onset the more reduced the median nerve MNCV and the 
higher the functional disability tended to be after an equivalent disease 
duration. Cross-sectional analysis of neurological deficit, functional deficit 
and MNCV according to disease duration showed that, regardless of age at onset, 
CMT1A disease with 17p11.2 duplication is a clinically progressive disorder. 
Neurological deficit and functional disability increased, whereas median nerve 
MNCV and compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude did not change with 
disease course. Intrafamilial phenotype variation between parents and children 
and between siblings was studied in large families. Functional disability and 
neurological deficit differed widely and the highest range of median nerve MNCV 
within a family reached 23 m/s. Clinical and electrophysiological data were 
compared with those of CMT1B patients with peripheral myelin P0 protein point 
mutation. CMT1A patients were found to be more severely affected with more 
prolonged distal motor latency and more reduced CMAP amplitude, whereas MNCV did 
not significantly differ, indicating that peripheral myelin P0 protein point 
mutation is not always associated with a severe phenotype. The same genetic 
defect (17p11.2 duplication) results in variable expression within the 
phenotype, even in siblings with variations in age at onset, clinical severity 
and MNCV slowing. This phenotypic variation could be due to additional genetic 
factors related to peripheral myelin protein 22 expression as well as to other 
endogenous or environmental factors.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/120.5.813
PMID: 9183252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]