---
reference_id: "PMID:27727131"
title: Culture is an imperfect and heterogeneous reference standard in pediatric tuberculosis.
authors:
- DiNardo AR
- Detjen A
- Ustero P
- Ngo K
- Bacha J
- Mandalakas AM
journal: Tuberculosis (Edinb)
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2016.09.021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Culture is an imperfect and heterogeneous reference standard in pediatric tuberculosis.
**Authors:** DiNardo AR, Detjen A, Ustero P, Ngo K, Bacha J, Mandalakas AM
**Journal:** Tuberculosis (Edinb) (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tube.2016.09.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tube.2016.09.021)

## Content

1. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2016 Dec;101S:S105-S108. doi:
10.1016/j.tube.2016.09.021.  Epub 2016 Sep 28.

Culture is an imperfect and heterogeneous reference standard in pediatric 
tuberculosis.

DiNardo AR(1), Detjen A(2), Ustero P(3), Ngo K(4), Bacha J(5), Mandalakas AM(6).

Author information:
(1)The Global Tuberculosis Program, Texas Children's Hospital, Global and 
Immigrant Health, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. Electronic 
address: Andrew.DiNardo@bcm.eduu.
(2)The International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease (The Union), 61 
Broadway, Suite 1720, New York, NY 10006, USA. Electronic address: 
adetjen@unicef.org.
(3)The Global Tuberculosis Program, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College of 
Medicine Children's Foundation-Swaziland, Baylor College of Medicine, Mbabane, 
Swaziland. Electronic address: PAlonso@bcm.edu.
(4)The Global Tuberculosis Program, Texas Children's Hospital, Global and 
Immigrant Health, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX, USA. Electronic address: Katherine.Ngo@bcm.edu.
(5)The Global Tuberculosis Program, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor 
International Pediatric AIDS Initiative, Baylor Tanzania Center of Excellence, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Mbeya, Tanzania. Electronic address: Bacha@bcm.edu.
(6)The Global Tuberculosis Program, Texas Children's Hospital, Global and 
Immigrant Health, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX, USA. Electronic address: Anna.Mandalakas@bcm.edu.

BACKGROUND: In pediatric tuberculosis (pTB), culture is the accepted reference 
standard for assessing new diagnostic tests despite culture only confirming 
10-50% of clinically diagnosed cases.
METHODS: Using the studies previously included in the systematic review of Gene 
Xpert, we evaluated the diagnostic yield of culture. Children with symptoms and 
signs suggestive of TB were considered to have a clinical diagnosis if they were 
1) culture positive or 2) followed clinically for at least one month and started 
on Anti-Tuberculosis Therapy (ATT).
RESULTS: Of 1989 children with presumptive pTB, 229 (11.5%) had 
culture-confirmation. Of the remaining 1760 culture negative children, 710 
(24.4) were classified as culture-negative clinical TB and 821 were classified 
as "not TB". Diagnostic yield of culture was 24.4% (median 28.7% IQR 
15.6%-42.4%; range 1.5%-65%).
CONCLUSION: Culture, the accepted reference standard for pediatric TB 
diagnostics, has a low and variable yield that impacts how diagnostic studies 
should be reported as well as everyday clinical care.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tube.2016.09.021
PMCID: PMC11967562
PMID: 27727131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests None declared.