---
reference_id: "PMID:38861625"
title: Postural Drainage and Vibration.
authors:
- Tripathi AK
- Sankari A
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Postural Drainage and Vibration.
**Authors:** Tripathi AK, Sankari A

## Content

1. Postural Drainage and Vibration.

Tripathi AK(1), Sankari A(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2024 Jun 8.

Author information:
(1)University of Kansas Medical Center
(2)Wayne State University

Chest physical therapy (CPT) utilizes mechanical methods, specifically chest 
percussion, postural drainage, and vibration, to assist in airway clearance of 
lung secretions. Airway clearance techniques (ACTs) are critical in managing 
respiratory conditions characterized by mucus hypersecretion and impaired 
clearance, such as cystic fibrosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), and various neuromuscular disorders. Postural drainage uses gravity by 
positioning the body to drain mucus from specific lung areas, while vibration 
applies rhythmic pressure to loosen mucus from the airway walls. 
Neglecting airway clearance can lead to a vicious cycle of infection, 
inflammation, and lung damage, resulting in the deterioration of a patient's 
respiratory health and overall quality of life. Regular and effective airway 
clearance is crucial for managing these conditions and preventing severe 
complications. This activity evaluates the efficacy, mechanisms of action, and 
clinical applications of various ACTs, including breathing exercises, mechanical 
insufflation-exsufflation (MI-E), high-frequency chest wall oscillation (HFCWO), 
manual chest physiotherapy (MCP), autogenic drainage (AD), oscillating positive 
expiratory pressure (OPEP), positive expiratory pressure (PEP), active cycle of 
breathing techniques (ACBT) and intrapulmonary percussive ventilation (IPV). 
This activity provides an in-depth analysis of the impact of ACTs on mucus 
clearance, lung function, and clinical outcomes. Furthermore, considerations for 
optimizing ACT implementation and future research directions are discussed to 
enhance respiratory care.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 38861625

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Alok Tripathi declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Abdulghani 
Sankari declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.