---
reference_id: "PMID:23650001"
title: Two mutations in one dystrophin gene.
authors:
- Zimowski J
- Fidziańska E
- Holding M
- Zaremba J
journal: Neurol Neurochir Pol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.5114/ninp.2013.34586
keywords:
- Dystrophin/genetics
- Female
- Fetal Diseases/genetics
- Gene Deletion
- Gene Duplication
- Humans
- Male
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Duchenne/diagnosis, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- Prenatal Diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two mutations in one dystrophin gene.
**Authors:** Zimowski J, Fidziańska E, Holding M, Zaremba J
**Journal:** Neurol Neurochir Pol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.5114/ninp.2013.34586](https://doi.org/10.5114/ninp.2013.34586)

## Content

1. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2013 Mar-Apr;47(2):131-7. doi: 10.5114/ninp.2013.34586.

Two mutations in one dystrophin gene.

Zimowski J(1), Fidziańska E, Holding M, Zaremba J.

Author information:
(1)Zakład Genetyki, Instytut Psychiatrii i Neurologii w Warszawie, Polska.
zimowski@ipin.edu.pl

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophies (DMD/BMD) lead to
progressive irreversible muscle deterioration caused by recessive mutations in
the dystrophin encoding gene (Xp21.1). Approximately 60% of mutations are
deletions, 10% are duplications and the remaining 30% are point mutations. The
aim of the study is to present the rare occurrence of two pathogenic mutations
(deletions or duplications) in one allele of the dystrophin gene.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: DNA of patients from 1364 DMD/ BMD families was tested.
Two techniques - PCR-multiplex and multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification - were used to search for mutations in the dystrophin gene.
RESULTS: Deletion was detected in 648 families and duplication was found in 74
families (analysis in progress). In two families, presence of two mutations in
one gene was documented - in the first family two deletions were found (exons
45-49 and 60-61), and in the second family two duplications were detected (exons
2-7 and 50-59). One of the deletions disrupted the reading frame, and the other
deletion retained the reading frame. Both duplications also retained the reading
frame of the gene but in both families the disease took a severe course (DMD).
In the family with two duplications prenatal diagnosis was also carried out, and
carriership of both mutations was discovered in the female fetus.
CONCLUSIONS: In the analyzed group of DMD/BMD families, the frequency of
combined occurrence of two mutations in one gene was 2 per 722 (0.3%). The
phenomenon of detected non-contiguous deletions and duplications is presented
together with 31 similar cases published so far.

DOI: 10.5114/ninp.2013.34586
PMID: 23650001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
