---
reference_id: "PMID:27999880"
title: "[Pathomechanisms and clinical aspects of frontotemporal lobar degeneration]."
authors:
- Bürger K
- Arzberger T
- Stephan J
- Levin J
- Edbauer D
journal: Nervenarzt
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s00115-016-0259-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Pathomechanisms and clinical aspects of frontotemporal lobar degeneration].
**Authors:** Bürger K, Arzberger T, Stephan J, Levin J, Edbauer D
**Journal:** Nervenarzt (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00115-016-0259-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00115-016-0259-x)

## Content

1. Nervenarzt. 2017 Feb;88(2):163-172. doi: 10.1007/s00115-016-0259-x.

[Pathomechanisms and clinical aspects of frontotemporal lobar degeneration].

[Article in German]

Bürger K(1)(2), Arzberger T(2)(3)(4), Stephan J(1)(3), Levin J(2)(5), Edbauer 
D(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Schlaganfall und Demenzforschung, Klinikum der Universität 
München, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, München, Deutschland.
(2)Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen (DZNE), 
Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17, 81377, München, Deutschland.
(3)Klinik für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie, Klinikum der Universität München, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, München, Deutschland.
(4)Zentrum für Neuropathologie und Prionforschung, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, München, Deutschland.
(5)Neurologische Klinik und Poliklinik, Klinikum der Universität München, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, München, Deutschland.
(6)Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen (DZNE), 
Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17, 81377, München, Deutschland. dieter.edbauer@dzne.de.
(7)Munich Cluster of Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität 
München, München, Deutschland. dieter.edbauer@dzne.de.

BACKGROUND: Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) includes a spectrum of 
heterogeneous clinical and neuropathological diseases. In a strict sense this 
includes the behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) and primary 
progressive aphasia (PPA) and both variants can be associated with amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (FTD-ALS). In a broader sense FTLD also includes progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP) and corticobasal syndrome (CBS). In recent years the 
strong genetic component of FTLD has become increasingly clear.
OBJECTIVE: The association between clinical presentation, neuropathology, 
genetics and pathophysiological mechanisms of FTLD are presented.
RESULTS: The diagnostic criteria and tools for the clinical differential 
diagnosis of FTLD are presented. At autopsy patients show neuronal and glial 
inclusions of Tau, TDP-43 or FUS. While Tau pathology is often associated with 
extrapyramidal symptoms, patients with TDP-43 and FUS inclusions often also show 
signs of ALS. Pathogenic mutations directly increase the aggregation propensity 
of these proteins or impair protein degradation through autophagy or the 
proteasome. Pathogenic mutations in most FTLD genes trigger cytoplasmic 
missorting and aggregation of the RNA-binding protein TDP-43 and thus lead to 
a nuclear loss of TDP-43 function. Microgliosis and mutations in GRN and TREM2 
suggest an important role of neuroinflammation in FTLD.
CONCLUSION: There is still no causal therapy for FTLD but preclinical studies 
focusing on pathogenic mutations in C9orf72, GRN and Tau may lead to clinical 
trials soon; therefore, establishing large well characterized patient cohorts is 
crucial for trial readiness.

DOI: 10.1007/s00115-016-0259-x
PMID: 27999880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]