---
reference_id: "PMID:38457179"
title: Incidence of Nonkeratinocyte Skin Cancer After Breast Cancer Radiation Therapy.
authors:
- Rezaei SJ
- Eid E
- Tang JY
- Kurian AW
- Kwong BY
- Linos E
journal: JAMA Netw Open
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2024.1632
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Aged
- "Breast Neoplasms/epidemiology, radiotherapy"
- Cohort Studies
- Melanoma/epidemiology
- Incidence
- Hemangiosarcoma
- "Skin Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence of Nonkeratinocyte Skin Cancer After Breast Cancer Radiation Therapy.
**Authors:** Rezaei SJ, Eid E, Tang JY, Kurian AW, Kwong BY, Linos E
**Journal:** JAMA Netw Open (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2024.1632](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2024.1632)

## Content

1. JAMA Netw Open. 2024 Mar 4;7(3):e241632. doi:
10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2024.1632.

Incidence of Nonkeratinocyte Skin Cancer After Breast Cancer Radiation Therapy.

Rezaei SJ(1)(2), Eid E(1), Tang JY(1), Kurian AW(3)(4), Kwong BY(1), Linos
E(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Stanford University, Stanford, California.
(2)Center for Digital Health, Stanford University, Stanford, California.
(3)Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, Stanford University,
Stanford, California.

IMPORTANCE: Previous studies have suggested that radiation therapy may
contribute to an increased risk of subsequent nonkeratinocyte (ie, not squamous
and basal cell) skin cancers.
OBJECTIVE: To test the hypothesis that radiation therapy for breast cancer
increases the risk of subsequent nonkeratinocyte skin cancers, particularly when
these cancers are localized to the skin of the breast or trunk.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This population-based cohort study used
longitudinal data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)
Program for January 1, 2000, to December 31, 2019. The SEER database includes
population-based cohort data from 17 registries. Patients with newly diagnosed
breast cancer were identified and were evaluated for subsequent nonkeratinocyte
skin cancer development. Data analysis was performed from January to August
2023.
EXPOSURES: Radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or surgery for breast cancer.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcomes were standardized incidence
ratios (SIRs) for subsequent nonkeratinocyte skin cancer development from 2000
to 2019 based on treatment type (radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or surgery),
skin cancer site on the body, and skin cancer subtype.
RESULTS: Among the 875 880 patients with newly diagnosed breast cancer included
in this study, 99.3% were women, 51.6% were aged older than 60 years, and 50.3%
received radiation therapy. A total of 11.2% patients identified as Hispanic,
10.1% identified as non-Hispanic Black, and 69.5% identified as non-Hispanic
White. From 2000 to 2019, there were 3839 patients with nonkeratinocyte skin
cancer, including melanoma (3419 [89.1%]), Merkel cell carcinoma (121 [3.2%]),
hemangiosarcoma (104 [2.7%]), and 32 other nonkeratinocyte skin cancers (195
[5.1%]), documented to occur after breast cancer treatment. The risk of
nonkeratinocyte skin cancer diagnosis after breast cancer treatment with
radiation was 57% higher (SIR, 1.57 [95% CI, 1.45-1.7]) than that of the general
population when considering the most relevant site: the skin of the breast or
trunk. When risk at this site was stratified by skin cancer subtype, the SIRs
for melanoma and hemangiosarcoma were both statistically significant at 1.37
(95% CI, 1.25-1.49) and 27.11 (95% CI, 21.6-33.61), respectively. Receipt of
radiation therapy was associated with a greater risk of nonkeratinocyte skin
cancer compared with chemotherapy and surgical interventions.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this study of patients with breast cancer, an
increased risk of melanoma and hemangiosarcoma after breast cancer treatment
with radiation therapy was observed. Although occurrences of nonkeratinocyte
skin cancers are rare, physicians should be aware of this elevated risk to help
inform follow-up care.

DOI: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2024.1632
PMCID: PMC10924238
PMID: 38457179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Kwong
reported receiving personal fees from Novocure, Genentech, and Novartis during
the conduct of the study. No other disclosures were reported.
