---
reference_id: "PMID:36081818"
title: Cognitive changes mediated by adenosine receptor blockade in a resveratrol-treated atherosclerosis-prone lupus mouse model.
authors:
- Kasselman LJ
- Renna HA
- Voloshyna I
- Pinkhasov A
- Gomolin IH
- Teboul I
- De Leon J
- Carsons SE
- Reiss AB
journal: J Tradit Complement Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtcme.2022.01.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cognitive changes mediated by adenosine receptor blockade in a resveratrol-treated atherosclerosis-prone lupus mouse model.
**Authors:** Kasselman LJ, Renna HA, Voloshyna I, Pinkhasov A, Gomolin IH, Teboul I, De Leon J, Carsons SE, Reiss AB
**Journal:** J Tradit Complement Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtcme.2022.01.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtcme.2022.01.006)

## Content

1. J Tradit Complement Med. 2022 Feb 1;12(5):447-454. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcme.2022.01.006. eCollection 2022 Sep.

Cognitive changes mediated by adenosine receptor blockade in a
resveratrol-treated atherosclerosis-prone lupus mouse model.

Kasselman LJ(1), Renna HA(2), Voloshyna I(2), Pinkhasov A(2), Gomolin IH(2),
Teboul I(2), De Leon J(2), Carsons SE(2), Reiss AB(2).

Author information:
(1)NYU Long Island School of Medicine, Foundations of Medicine, Mineola, NY,
USA.
(2)NYU Winthrop Hospital, Winthrop Research Institute, Department of Medicine,
Mineola, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Resveratrol is a bioactive molecule used in dietary
supplements and herbal medicines and consumed worldwide. Prior work showed that
resveratrol's anti-atherogenic properties are mediated in part through the
adenosine A2A receptor. The present study explores the potential contribution of
adenosine A2A receptor activation to neuroprotective action of resveratrol on
cognitive deficits in a model of atherosclerosis-prone systemic lupus
erythematosus.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE: Using behavioral analysis (open field, static rod, novel
object recognition) and QRT-PCR, this study measured working memory, anxiety,
motor coordination, and expression of mRNA in the brain.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Data indicate that resveratrol increases working memory,
on average but not statistically, and shows a trend towards improved motor
coordination (p = 0.07) in atherosclerosis-prone lupus mice. Additionally,
resveratrol tends to increase mRNA levels of SIRT1, decrease vascular
endothelial growth factor and CX3CL1 mRNA in the hippocampus. Istradefylline, an
adenosine A2A receptor antagonist, antagonizes the effects of resveratrol on
working memory (p = 0.04) and the expression of SIRT1 (p = 0.03), vascular
endothelial growth factor (p = 0.04), and CX3CL1 (p = 0.03) in the
hippocampus.This study demonstrates that resveratrol could potentially be a
therapeutic candidate in the modulation of cognitive dysfunction in
neuropsychiatric lupus, especially motor incoordination. Further human studies,
as well as optimization of resveratrol administration, could confirm whether
resveratrol may be an additional resource available to reduce the burden of
cognitive impairment associated with lupus. Additionally, further studies need
to address the role of A2A blockade in cognitive function among the autoimmune
population.
SECTION: 3. Dietary therapy/nutrients supplements.
TAXONOMY CLASSIFICATION BY EVISE: autoimmunity, inflammation, neurology.

© 2022 Center for Food and Biomolecules, National Taiwan University. Production
and hosting by Elsevier Taiwan LLC.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcme.2022.01.006
PMCID: PMC9446105
PMID: 36081818
