---
reference_id: "PMID:34804443"
title: "Pediatric Mastocytosis: An Update."
authors:
- Giona F
journal: Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.4084/MJHID.2021.069
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Mastocytosis: An Update.
**Authors:** Giona F
**Journal:** Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.4084/MJHID.2021.069](https://doi.org/10.4084/MJHID.2021.069)

## Content

1. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2021 Nov 1;13(1):e2021069. doi: 
10.4084/MJHID.2021.069. eCollection 2021.

Pediatric Mastocytosis: An Update.

Giona F(1).

Author information:
(1)Hematology, Department of Translational and Precision Medicine, Sapienza 
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Mastocytosis is a rare clonal disorder characterized by excessive proliferation 
and accumulation of mast cells (MC) in various organs and tissues. Cutaneous 
mastocytosis (CM), the most common form in children, is defined when MC 
infiltration is limited to the skin. In adults, the most common form is systemic 
mastocytosis (SM), characterized by MC proliferation and accumulation in organs, 
such as bone marrow, lymph nodes, liver, and spleen.1 Genetic aberrations, 
mainly the KIT D816V mutation, play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of 
mastocytosis, enhancing MC survival and subsequent accumulation in organs and 
tissues.2,3 CM includes three forms: solitary mastocytoma, maculopapular 
cutaneous mastocytosis (MPCM), and diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis (DCM). In most 
children with CM, skin lesions regress spontaneously around puberty; 
unfortunately, it is not always a self-limiting disease.4 Even if SM occurs 
occasionally, all children with mastocytosis require planned follow-up over 
time. Children with mastocytosis often suffer from MC mediator-related symptoms, 
the most common of which is itching, often triggered by rubbing the lesions. 
Management of pediatric mastocytosis is mainly based on strict avoidance of 
triggers. Treatment with H1 and H2 histamine receptor blockers on demand and the 
availability of epinephrine auto-injectors for the patients to use in case of 
severe anaphylactic reactions are recommended.

DOI: 10.4084/MJHID.2021.069
PMCID: PMC8577558
PMID: 34804443

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
conflict of Interest.