---
reference_id: "PMID:26271724"
title: "BRAF V600E and risk stratification of thyroid microcarcinoma: a multicenter pathological and clinical study."
authors:
- Tallini G
- de Biase D
- Durante C
- Acquaviva G
- Bisceglia M
- Bruno R
- Bacchi Reggiani ML
- Casadei GP
- Costante G
- Cremonini N
- Lamartina L
- Meringolo D
- Nardi F
- Pession A
- Rhoden KJ
- Ronga G
- Torlontano M
- Verrienti A
- Visani M
- Filetti S
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2015.92
keywords:
- Adult
- "Carcinoma, Papillary/genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Prognosis
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/genetics, mortality, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BRAF V600E and risk stratification of thyroid microcarcinoma: a multicenter pathological and clinical study.
**Authors:** Tallini G, de Biase D, Durante C, Acquaviva G, Bisceglia M, Bruno R, Bacchi Reggiani ML, Casadei GP, Costante G, Cremonini N, Lamartina L, Meringolo D, Nardi F, Pession A, Rhoden KJ, Ronga G, Torlontano M, Verrienti A, Visani M, Filetti S
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/modpathol.2015.92](https://doi.org/10.1038/modpathol.2015.92)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2015 Oct;28(10):1343-59. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2015.92. Epub 2015
 Aug 14.

BRAF V600E and risk stratification of thyroid microcarcinoma: a multicenter
pathological and clinical study.

Tallini G(1), de Biase D(1), Durante C(2), Acquaviva G(1), Bisceglia M(3), Bruno
R(4), Bacchi Reggiani ML(5), Casadei GP(6), Costante G(7), Cremonini N(8),
Lamartina L(2), Meringolo D(9), Nardi F(10), Pession A(11), Rhoden KJ(12), Ronga
G(2), Torlontano M(13), Verrienti A(2), Visani M(11), Filetti S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (DIMES), Anatomic Pathology Unit, Bellaria Hospital,
University of Bologna School of Medicine, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, University
'Sapienza', Rome, Italy.
(3)Anatomic Pathology Unit, School of Biomedical Sciences, Etromapmacs Pole,
Lesina, Italy.
(4)Endocrinology Unit, Tinchi-Pisticci Hospital, Matera, Italy.
(5)Department of Medicine (DIMES), Cardiology Unit, University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy.
(6)Anatomic Pathology Unit, AUSL Bologna-Maggiore Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
(7)Department of Health Science, University Magna Grecia di Catanzaro,
Catanzaro, Italy.
(8)Endocrinology Unit, AUSL Bologna-Maggiore Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
(9)Endocrinology Unit, AUSL Bologna-Bentivoglio Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
(10)Department of Experimental Medicine, Anatomic Pathology Unit, University
'Sapienza', Rome, Italy.
(11)Department of Pharmacology and Biotechnology (FaBiT), University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy.
(12)Department of Medicine (DIMEC), Medical Genetics Unit, University of
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(13)Department of Medical Science, Ospedale Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza-IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.

Studies from single institutions have analyzed BRAF in papillary
microcarcinomas, sometimes with contradictory results. Most of them have
provided limited integration of histological and clinical data. To obtain a
comprehensive picture of BRAF V600E-mutated microcarcinomas and to evaluate the
role of BRAF testing in risk stratification we performed a retrospective
multicenter analysis integrating microscopical, pathological, and clinical
information. Three hundred and sixty-five samples from 300 patients treated at
six medical institutions covering different geographical regions of Italy were
analyzed with central review of all cases. BRAF V600E statistical analysis was
conducted on 298 microcarcinomas from 264 patients after exclusion of those that
did not meet the required criteria. BRAF V600E was identified in 145/298 tumors
(49%) including the following subtypes: 35/37 (95%, P<0.0001) tall cell and
72/114 (64%, P<0.0001) classic; conversely 94/129 follicular variant papillary
microcarcinomas (73%, P<0.0001) were BRAF wild type. BRAF V600E-mutated
microcarcinomas were characterized by markedly infiltrative contours (P<0.0001)
with elongated strings of neoplastic cells departing from the tumor, and by
intraglandular tumor spread (P<0.0001), typically within 5 mm of the tumor
border. Multivariate analysis correlated BRAF V600E with specific microscopic
features (nuclear grooves, optically clear nuclei, tall cells within the tumor,
and tumor fibrosis), aggressive growth pattern (infiltrative tumor border,
extension into extrathyroidal tissues, and intraglandular tumor spread), higher
American Thyroid Association recurrence risk group, and non-incidental tumor
discovery. The following showed the strongest link to BRAF V600E: tall cell
subtype, many neoplastic cells with nuclear grooves or with optically clear
nuclei, infiltrative growth, intraglandular tumor spread, and a tumor discovery
that was non-incidental. BRAF V600E-mutated microcarcinomas represent a distinct
biological subtype. The mutation is associated with conventional
clinico-pathological features considered to be adverse prognostic factors for
papillary microcarcinoma, for which it could be regarded as a surrogate marker.
BRAF analysis may be useful to identify tumors (BRAF wild type) that have
negligible clinical risk.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2015.92
PMID: 26271724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
