---
reference_id: "PMID:37228960"
title: "Intestinal intussusception in a child with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: case report."
authors:
- Ovechkin D
- Awuah WA
- Wellington J
- Adebusoye FT
- Moskalenko R
- Dmytruk S
- Abdul-Rahman T
- Ovechkina Y
journal: Ann Med Surg (Lond)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/MS9.0000000000000675
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intestinal intussusception in a child with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: case report.
**Authors:** Ovechkin D, Awuah WA, Wellington J, Adebusoye FT, Moskalenko R, Dmytruk S, Abdul-Rahman T, Ovechkina Y
**Journal:** Ann Med Surg (Lond) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MS9.0000000000000675](https://doi.org/10.1097/MS9.0000000000000675)

## Content

1. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2023 Apr 14;85(5):2216-2220. doi: 
10.1097/MS9.0000000000000675. eCollection 2023 May.

Intestinal intussusception in a child with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: case report.

Ovechkin D(1), Awuah WA(1), Wellington J(2), Adebusoye FT(1), Moskalenko R(1), 
Dmytruk S(1), Abdul-Rahman T(1), Ovechkina Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Sumy State University, Sumy, Ukraine.
(2)Cardiff University School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Wales, UK.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS), an uncommon inherited autosomal dominant disorder, 
is distinguished by mucocutaneous pigmentations, many gastrointestinal 
hamartomatous polyps, and a higher incidence of gastrointestinal tract, 
genitourinary, and extracolonic malignancies. Recurrent acute intestinal 
obstruction, in particular intussusception in the young, is a serious sequalae 
of PJS.
CASE PRESENTATION: A clinical observation of a 5-year-old patient with a 
complicated course of PJS is presented. Emphasis on recurring episodes of acute 
abdomen, clinical diagnosis including polyp histopathology, and surgical 
management is emphasised.
CLINICAL FINDINGS AND INVESTIGATIONS: While an inpatient, bloodwork demonstrated 
severe iron deficiency anaemia (haemoglobin 72 g/l, red blood cell 3.1×1012/l) 
and multiple melanin pigmentations measuring 2-4 mm in size on the lip mucosa 
during a physical examination. Erosive duodenopathy and polyposis of the stomach 
were discovered via fibroesophagogastroduodenoscopy (multiple gastric polyps 
5-10 mm in size). Acute intussusception of the intestine was discovered by 
ultrasonography.
INTERVENTIONS AND OUTCOME: A mid-median laparotomy was performed alongside 
manual disinvagination with gut viability intact. Histopathology of excised 
polyps revealed smooth muscle hyperplasia and Ki67 protein (MIB-1) positivity 
with small intestinal hamartomatous polyps seen macroscopically. Conservative 
management was initiated for standard postoperative care and intestinal 
motility. Patient was discharged 9 days postoperatively.
RELEVANCE AND IMPACT: Based on literature data, modern ideas concerning 
aetiology, diagnosis, and management of patients with PJS are considered. 
Attention is focused on the high risk of developing cancer of various 
localisation in PJS, recommendations are given for cancer screening and clinical 
observation of patients with hereditary gastrointestinal syndromes in childhood.

Copyright © 2023 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MS9.0000000000000675
PMCID: PMC10205367
PMID: 37228960

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest reported.