---
reference_id: "PMID:23603762"
title: "Mutations in TUBG1, DYNC1H1, KIF5C and KIF2A cause malformations of cortical development and microcephaly."
authors:
- Poirier K
- Lebrun N
- Broix L
- Tian G
- Saillour Y
- Boscheron C
- Parrini E
- Valence S
- Pierre BS
- Oger M
- Lacombe D
- Geneviève D
- Fontana E
- Darra F
- Cances C
- Barth M
- Bonneau D
- Bernadina BD
- "N'guyen S"
- Gitiaux C
- Parent P
- des Portes V
- Pedespan JM
- Legrez V
- Castelnau-Ptakine L
- Nitschke P
- Hieu T
- Masson C
- Zelenika D
- Andrieux A
- Francis F
- Guerrini R
- Cowan NJ
- Bahi-Buisson N
- Chelly J
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/ng.2613
keywords:
- Animals
- COS Cells
- Cell Movement
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- Cytoplasmic Dyneins/genetics
- Exome
- Genetic Association Studies
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Humans
- Kinesins/genetics
- "Lissencephaly/genetics, pathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Malformations of Cortical Development/genetics, pathology"
- Mice
- "Microcephaly/genetics, pathology"
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Neuroimaging
- Pedigree
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Tubulin/genetics
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Mutations in TUBG1, DYNC1H1, KIF5C and KIF2A cause malformations of cortical development and microcephaly.
**Authors:** Poirier K, Lebrun N, Broix L, Tian G, Saillour Y, Boscheron C, Parrini E, Valence S, Pierre BS, Oger M, Lacombe D, Geneviève D, Fontana E, Darra F, Cances C, Barth M, Bonneau D, Bernadina BD, N'guyen S, Gitiaux C, Parent P, des Portes V, Pedespan JM, Legrez V, Castelnau-Ptakine L, Nitschke P, Hieu T, Masson C, Zelenika D, Andrieux A, Francis F, Guerrini R, Cowan NJ, Bahi-Buisson N, Chelly J
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.2613](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2613)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2013 Jun;45(6):639-47. doi: 10.1038/ng.2613. Epub 2013 Apr 21.

Mutations in TUBG1, DYNC1H1, KIF5C and KIF2A cause malformations of cortical
development and microcephaly.

Poirier K(1), Lebrun N, Broix L, Tian G, Saillour Y, Boscheron C, Parrini E,
Valence S, Pierre BS, Oger M, Lacombe D, Geneviève D, Fontana E, Darra F, Cances
C, Barth M, Bonneau D, Bernadina BD, N'guyen S, Gitiaux C, Parent P, des Portes
V, Pedespan JM, Legrez V, Castelnau-Ptakine L, Nitschke P, Hieu T, Masson C,
Zelenika D, Andrieux A, Francis F, Guerrini R, Cowan NJ, Bahi-Buisson N, Chelly
J.

Author information:
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris-Descartes, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique CNRS, UMR 8104, Paris, France.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2013 Aug;45(8):962.

The genetic causes of malformations of cortical development (MCD) remain largely
unknown. Here we report the discovery of multiple pathogenic missense mutations
in TUBG1, DYNC1H1 and KIF2A, as well as a single germline mosaic mutation in
KIF5C, in subjects with MCD. We found a frequent recurrence of mutations in
DYNC1H1, implying that this gene is a major locus for unexplained MCD. We
further show that the mutations in KIF5C, KIF2A and DYNC1H1 affect ATP
hydrolysis, productive protein folding and microtubule binding, respectively. In
addition, we show that suppression of mouse Tubg1 expression in vivo interferes
with proper neuronal migration, whereas expression of altered γ-tubulin proteins
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae disrupts normal microtubule behavior. Our data
reinforce the importance of centrosomal and microtubule-related proteins in
cortical development and strongly suggest that microtubule-dependent mitotic and
postmitotic processes are major contributors to the pathogenesis of MCD.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.2613
PMCID: PMC3826256
PMID: 23603762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

The formation of the complex architecture of the mammalian brain requires coordinated timing of proliferation, migration and layering, as well as differentiation of distinct neuronal populations1,2. Significant insights into these developmental processes have emerged through genetic and neurobiological investigations of the mechanisms underlying disorders of cortical development. These disorders include lissencephaly/pachygyria (LIS), polymicrogyria (PMG) and microcephaly3–7. Many are associated with severe intellectual disability and epilepsy, and have traditionally been classified based on which biological process (proliferation, migration and cortical organization) is likely to be affected5.

Genetic studies in humans and mice have identified a spectrum of mutations in genes involved in an array of crucial processes that often disrupt the development of the cerebral cortex and can lead to severe cortical malformations. Aside from genes such as ARX and WDR62 (reviewed in5), the predominant importance of genes encoding cytoskeletal proteins has become evident. For example, mutations in DCX and LIS1, both of which encode proteins involved in microtubule homeostasis, are associated with a large spectrum of neuronal migration disorders (reviewed in3). More recently, new syndromes have been described that are associated with mutations in α- or β-tubulin encoding genes such as TUBA1A, TUBB2B, TUBB3 and TUBB5. These tubulin-related cortical dysgeneses are thought to involve a combination of abnormal neuronal proliferation, migration, differentiation and axonal guidance8–10. The vanishing boundaries between disorders of neuronal migration, cortical organization and proliferation have been highlighted by the recent identification of mutations in WDR62 and its implication in a large spectrum of malformations that includes pachygyria, lissencephaly, PMG, schizencephaly, hippocampal and cerebellar abnormalities11,12. These findings, together with genetic and functional data, support the hypothesis that MCD-related genes are involved at multiple developmental stages, and that proliferation and migration are genetically and functionally interdependent.

Sporadic unexplained cases of MCD are by far the most common, and identification of causative mutations remains a challenging task, not least because many result from de novo mutations (reviewed in13). To extend the spectrum of genes involved in MCD, we used an exome sequencing approach and focused on variations in candidate genes encoding centrosomal and microtubule-related proteins.

We selected 16 patients with either lissencephaly/pachygyria (6 patients) or polymicrogyria (10 patients) associated with one of the following features: microcephaly (head circumferences more than 2–3 SD below the mean for age), dysgenesis of the cerebellum, brainstem or basal ganglia or agenesis/dysgenesis of the corpus callosum (Supplementary Table 1). Supplementary Figure 1 highlights the overall experimental workflow for detecting and prioritizing sequence variants and validation of the MCD-related genes detailed below. All families had a single affected member (sporadic cases), except one in which MCD was diagnosed in four individuals (P20, Fig. 1a). For all patients, mutations in known MCD genes (LIS1, DCX, TUBA1A, TUBB2B, TUBB3 and GPR56) and pathogenic CNVs had been previously excluded.

We applied whole-exome sequencing methodology and, in line with previous studies14,15, identified around 21,500 variations affecting essential splicing site and coding regions for each patient. After application of variant filtering using available genomic databases (dbSNP, 1k genome, EVS and a local Paris Descartes Bioinformatics platform database) and exclusion of all variants found with a frequency greater than 1%, an average of 390 variants per patient was identified (Supplementary Table 2).

At first glance, in family P20 (Fig. 1a) containing 4 affected boys with severe MCD and microcephaly, the apparent transmission of the recurrent phenotype through the mother suggests the segregation in this family of an X-linked disorder. However, we found no linkage between the disease and a large set of X-linked markers (Supplementary Fig. 2a and 2b). Exclusion of the X chromosome and the unlikely autosomal recessive inheritance of the disorder (because of its occurrence even when the progenitor father was different) led us to consider a mosaic germline mutation in the mother. We therefore performed whole exome sequencing (using DNA from patient III-1, Fig. 1a) and genome-wide SNP genotyping using high-density microarray (see Materials and Methods) of affected members and their mother to identify shared segments transmitted by the mother (Supplementary Table 3). Among the shared genomic regions, we found a region of 44 Mb on chromosome 2 (Supplementary Fig. 2c and 2d) which harbours a missense variant (c.710A>T, p.E237V) in the kinesin 5C gene (KIF5C) (Table 1). We tested the segregation of this variation in the family and found it to be present in all affected individuals, but absent in the mother’s DNA (derived from blood) and in the healthy son (Fig. 2b; see also Supplementary Fig. 2d and 2e). Also, in the case of the foetus corresponding to the most recent medical abortion, expression of KIF5C alleles was tested by RT-PCR using total RNA extracted from brain and lung; we found that both alleles were expressed to the same extent (see Supplementary Fig. 3a). Taken together, these data are consistent with a KIF5C germline mosaic mutation as the likely cause of the disease phenotype in the P20 family.

KIF5C encodes a member of the kinesin superfamily of proteins, most of which are ATP-dependent molecular motors involved in intracellular transport along microtubules16. The p.E237V mutation is located in the microtubule-interacting domain (Fig 1b), and 3D modelling shows a surface location of this residue within the motor domain (Fig. 1c). The mutation might be expected to affect conformational changes of the switch II loop, which is required for microtubule-dependent activation of the motor16.

To assess the consequences of the mutation on KIF5C function, we expressed and purified the motor domains of both wild type and mutant as recombinant proteins in E. coli (Supplementary Fig. 3b). The mutant protein behaved as a native species upon gel filtration (Supplementary Fig. 3c), eliminating the possibility that the mutation might result in a completely misfolded or aggregated protein. We first compared the ability of the wild type and mutant proteins to bind to microtubules, and found no significant difference (Fig. 1d). However, when we measured the ability of each KIF to hydrolyse ATP in a microtubule-dependent assay, we found a complete absence of measurable hydrolysis in the case of the mutant protein (Fig. 1e). This finding is consistent with the location of the mutated residue in the crystal structure, as well as with the deleterious effect of the mutation in the severe MCD diagnosed in P20 family (Supplementary Fig. 3d).

The consequences of the p.E237V mutation were also tested in vivo. We expressed wild type and mutant KIF5C proteins by transfection in COS-7 cells, and compared their distribution and localization by double label immunofluorescence. As previously reported17, we found a diffuse cytoplasmic distribution of wild type KIF5C with an enrichment, as fluorescent puncta, along microtubules and in cortical regions of the cell (Fig. 1f and Supplementary Fig. 3e). In contrast, we found that mutant KIF5C heavily co-localises with and decorates microtubules throughout the cell, but does not appear as puncta or accumulate in cortical clusters (Fig. 1f and Supplementary Fig. 3e). This result is consistent with the loss of ATPase activity shown by the in vitro assay and is also in agreement with earlier work concerning a non-motile mutant Kif5c (p.T93N) that binds to microtubules but inhibits ATP hydrolysis18. In the case of the mutation identified in this family, both KIF5C alleles are expressed. In common with most kinesins, KIF5C functions as a tetramer consisting of two heavy chains and two light chains. It is therefore possible that the mutant KIF5C could titrate out the wild type isoform and act via a dominant negative effect.

The identification of a KIF5C mutation prompted us to screen this gene in a cohort of 162 patients affected by various MCD (see Material and Methods), and analyse all other variations in kinesin genes revealed by WES and not reported in databases. Among 15 heterozygous variations, we found a single de novo missense change in KIF2A (c.961C>G, p.H321D) in a female patient (P462, Table 1) with frontal band heterotopia and posterior predominant pachygyria, severe congenital microcephaly and neonatal onset seizures (Fig. 2a and 2b, Table 1, Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary Table 4). We subsequently screened the KIF2A gene (coding exons and their flanking sequences) in the same cohort of patients and identified a second de novo KIF2A missense variation, c.950G>A, p.S317N (P147: Table 1 and Fig. 2a and 2b) in a girl affected by congenital microcephaly and posterior predominant agyria/pachygyria (Fig. 2a and Supplementary table 4).

KIF2A is a member of the M-kinesins (kinesin-13 family) in which the motor domain is located in the middle of the protein (Fig. 2b). Rather than a direct involvement in microtubule-based motility, KIF2A functions by driving the ATP-dependent depolymerization of microtubules19. In addition to a potential deleterious effect predicted by PolyPhen-2 and SIFT algorithms20,21 (Supplementary Table 5), inspection of the protein structure (PDB 2GRY, Fig. 2c) shows that both conserved residues p.S317 and p.H321 are located around the nucleotide binding pocket, suggesting that the ability of KIF2A mutants to bind and/or hydrolyse ATP is likely to be impaired. To investigate this possibility, we expressed the wild type and mutant ATP binding domains (amino acids 126 – 526) in E. coli as recombinant C-terminally His6-tagged proteins. We found that the wild type protein was present as a conspicuous Coomassie-stained band in soluble extracts of host cells (Fig. 2d, panel 1, lane 1, arrowed). However, the two mutant proteins expressed in parallel soluble extracts were not convincingly identifiable (Fig. 2d, panel 1, lanes 2 and 3); indeed, upon affinity purification, the mutant KIF2A proteins were recovered at a very substantially reduced level compared to the wild type control (Fig. 2d, panel 4 and corresponding Western blot), appearing instead at a higher level (relative to the wild type control) in the insoluble fraction following host cell lysis (Fig. 2d, panel 2). These data imply that the mutations lead to substantially reduced solubility as a result of misfolding, and therefore at a minimum result in a reduced yield of functional protein. We also transfected constructs engineered for the expression of these KIF2A mutations into COS-7 and human fibroblast cells, and analysed them by immunofluorescence. We consistently found that both overexpressed mutant KIF2A proteins (p.H321D and p.S317N) had an abnormal cellular localization (Fig. 2e and Supplementary Fig. 4a). We also examined endogenous mutant KIF2A in fibroblasts derived from the patient bearing the c.961C>G, p.H321D mutation and found similar results (Fig. 2f).

In view of the fact that both KIF2A alleles are expressed in patient fibroblasts (Supplementary Fig. 4b) and that the KIF2A molecule functions as a dimer22, our in vitro and in vivo data are consistent with a dominant-negative effect of these mutations.

We searched for the recurrence of mutations in the same gene in unrelated patients with similar phenotypes and identified two variations in DYNC1H1 (P122 and P398, Table 1, Supplementary Table 4 and Fig. 3) and two others in TUBG1 (P367 and P388, Table 1, Supplementary Table 4 and Fig. 4). The de novo mutations in DYNC1H1 were found in patients with complex MCD from group A (PMG group, Supplementary Table 1), while those in TUBG1 occurred in two patients with MCD from group B (agyria/pachygyria group, Supplementary Table 1). Because of the large spectrum of MCD associated with mutations in genes such as TUBA1A, TUBB2B and WDR6211,12,23, we analysed all variations detected in these two genes in either group and identified (and confirmed) one additional de novo variation in DYNC1H1 in a patient from Group B (P217, Table 1 and Fig. 3a). To confirm the involvement of DYNC1H1 and TUBG1 in complex MCD, we screened TUBG1 and DYNC1H1 coding exons in the cohort of 162 patients with MCD. Consistent with our exome sequencing findings, we identified a total of 6 additional DYNC1H1 mutations (Table 1 and Supplementary Table 5). The finding of the same mutation (p.R3344Q) in two unrelated patients with a similar phenotype strongly supports the involvement of DYNC1H1 in MCD. In the case of TUBG1, the screening revealed one additional mutation (P478, Table 1 and Fig. 4a). Whenever possible, analysis of parental DNAs demonstrated the de novo occurrence of these mutations, with the exception of DYNC1H1 p.K3241T, which we identified as a familial form of MCD (Table 1, Supplementary Fig. 5). Consistent with a pathogenic effect, interspecies sequence comparison and prediction showed a high degree of conservation and potential deleterious effect of all residues involved (Supplementary Table 5).

Among the 11 patients (8 sporadic cases, and two brothers and their mother) reported here, re-examination of MRI sequences identified a wide range of brain malformations (Fig. 3b, Supplementary Table 4 and Discussion). Because mutations in DYNC1H1 have been reported in families with dominant peripheral neuropathy and an axonal (type 2) form of Charcot Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2)24,25, we re-evaluated our patients and found clear clinical evidence of peripheral neuropathy in 3 cases. This was further confirmed in one patient by nerve conduction studies.

DYNC1H1 (cytoplasmic dynein 1 heavy chain 1) protein is a large (>530 kDa) critical subunit of the cytoplasmic dynein complex26,27. The C-terminal region (AA 1846–4646) is the motor domain complex; it is arranged as a heptameric ring with 7 AAA domains and a stalk from which protrudes a microtubule-binding domain (BD)26. Interestingly, 6 out of the 8 mutations identified in patients with MCD are located in either the stalk domain, in AAA1 or in the linker region; the remaining two are in the tail domain (Fig. 3a). One of these latter mutations is located outside of the homodimerization domain, while the second (leading to a deletion of 4 AA) is located in a region required for binding of the associated light chains DYNC1L and DYNC1LI (Fig. 3a). Homology modelling of DYNC1H1 mutations showed that 3 are located on the surface of the microtubule BD (Fig. 3c). We note that in vitro experiments have shown that a closely located mutation (p.R3384P) weakens microtubule binding (data from Carter and colleagues26; the residue is referenced as R3382).

We evaluated the effect of two of our newly discovered DYNC1H1 mutations on microtubule binding. Wild type and mutant (p.K3336N and p.R3384Q) sequences containing the DYNC1H1 microtubule BD were fused with the antiparallel coiled-coil side arm contained in the native structure of seryl-tRNA synthetase27 as C-terminally His6-tagged proteins. This chimeric arrangement fixes the alignment of the two strands of the coiled-coil in their native conformation such that their registry results in a relatively high microtubule binding affinity26. The recombinant proteins were expressed in E. coli, affinity purified and tested for their ability to co-sediment with taxol-polymerized microtubules through sucrose cushions. This experiment showed a significant reduction in microtubule binding affinity of both p.K3336N and p.R3384Q mutations compared to the wild type control (Fig. 3d).

Two patients with TUBG1 mutations (P367: c.1160T>C, p.L387P, P388: c.275A>G, p.Y92C) share a complex MCD combining posteriorly predominant pachygyria (or agyria) and severe microcephaly (-4SD). The third but less severe case (P478: c.991A>C, p.T331P) showed posterior pachygyria and laminar heterotopia with a thick and dysmorphic corpus callosum (Fig. 4b and Supplementary Table 4). TUBG1 is one of two human genes encoding γ-tubulin28 and is highly expressed in foetal brain. The protein is a structural component of the centrosome and associates with at least 6 other proteins to form the γ-tubulin ring complex (γTuRC), which functions in microtubule nucleation29. Two of the mutated residues (p.T331 and p.L387) are located in buried sites in two distinct α-helices (Fig. 4c); their mutation to proline residues is likely to destabilize these helices. One of these residues (p.T331) is located in the γ-γ interaction domain; the conserved mutated residue (p.Y92) is located in the vicinity of the GTP binding site (Fig. 4c)

The events leading to the assembly of the γTuRC are unknown. However, γ-tubulin, in common with the components of the α/β-tubulin heterodimer, requires facilitated folding by the cytosolic chaperonin CCT, and is discharged from it as a monomer30. We therefore assessed the effect of two of the γ-tubulin mutations (p.Y92C and p.L387P) on facilitated folding and on the structural stability of the monomer in vitro. The latter experiment showed that the integrity of the recombinant proteins is not significantly affected by either of the disease-associated mutations (Supplementary Fig. 6). On the other hand, we found a diminished yield of material migrating as monomeric γ-tubulin in the case of p.L387P with a corresponding increase (relative to wild type) of radioactivity migrating as an undischarged binary complex with CCT (Fig. 4d). These data suggest that the chaperonin-dependent folding (and hence the yield) of monomeric γ-tubulin is compromised by the p.L387P mutation. The effect of the p.Y92C mutation on facilitated folding via interaction with chaperonin is less evident (Fig. 4d), and it therefore seems likely that this mutation (and perhaps to some extent the others) exert their influence via the assembly and/or functional integrity of the γTuRC.

We analysed the consequences of our newly discovered disease-causing γ-tubulin mutations in vivo in two ways. First, we investigated the phenotype in yeast (S. cerevisiae) cells in which these mutations had been introduced into the conserved (although non-identical) residues in the single yeast γ-tubulin gene tub4 (Supplementary Fig. 7a). All our mutant heterozygous and homozygous strains were viable. However, although we found no change in microtubule plus-end dynamics (Supplementary Table 6), tub4-W92C cells displayed an enhancement in the number and average maximal length of astral microtubules, as well as a decrease in the frequency of nucleation of new microtubules from the spindle pole body (SPD) (Supplementary Table 7 and Supplementary Fig. 7b). Moreover, we found abnormal mitotic features in a significant number of cells (tub4-W92C, 23%; tub4-V387P, 8%), consistent with incorrect nuclear positioning and reflecting a defect in mitotic microtubule organization (Fig. 5a and Supplementary Table 7). These data are consistent with both the disease-causing γ-tubulin mutations having a deleterious effect on critical aspects of microtubule behaviour, and with the more severe clinical phenotype associated with the p.W92C mutation. Second, we used in utero RNA interference to analyse the consequences of Tubg1 downregulation on cortical radial neuronal migration in mice. We found that brain sections of E18.5 embryos that had been electroporated 4 days previously with shRNA targeting Tubg1 showed a significant fraction of RFP-positive cells in the subventricular zone/intermediate zone (SVZ/IZ), suggesting that Tubg1 down-regulation induced a significant arrest of migrating cells (Fig. 5b, shTubg1). In contrast, embryos transfected identically in utero with RFP alone showed strong labelling in the cortical plate (Fig. 5b, Tomato). Expression of scrambled-sh controls had no effect on migration (Fig. 5b, Scramble), while shRNAi-induced neuronal migration defects were significantly rescued by overexpression of a wild type human TUBG1 cDNA (Fig. 5b, Rescue)). Quantification of these effects is shown in Figure 5c. We repeated these in utero RNAi experiments using a second shRNA targeting the coding sequence, and found that it also affected neuronal radial migration, although the positions of misplaced cells appeared more disperse than with the first shRNA (data not shown). This observation is likely to be attributable to the fact that down-regulation of Tubg1 expression using the first shRNA is more efficient than in the case of the second shRNA (data not shown). We conclude that TUBG1 plays a critical role in neuronal migration during corticogenesis.

Among 16 patients analysed by WES, mutations in 4 genes, KIF5C, KIF2A, DYNC1H1 and TUBG1, encoding proteins that interact with microtubules were identified in a subset of 7 patients. The remaining 9 patients include (i) 4 in whom all tested variants were inherited from one of the healthy parents, and (ii) 5 with de novo events predicted to alter protein functions but with no clear link to microtubules (Supplementary Table 8). Further screening and re-evaluation of MRI data showed that mutations inKIF5C, KIF2A, DYNC1H1 and TUBG1, are involved in a wide range of cortical and gyral pattern abnormalities associated with microcephaly, callosal, cerebellum, or brainstem dysgenesis (summarized in Supplementary table 4). First, in the familial form of severe MCD, P20 (Fig. 1) described here, we obtained convincing evidence for the presence of a maternal mosaic germline mutation in KIF5C that is responsible for the recurrence of the disease in four male patients. There is now a wide range of disorders for which the occurrence of parental germline mosaicism has been reported31. Indeed, with the recent application of DNA sequencing to whole genomes and whole exomes, the frequency of somatic and germline mosaicism may turn out to be higher than is currently appreciated. Our results highlight both the contribution of germline mosaic mutational events in families with recurrent genetic disorders and the power of whole exome sequencing to resolve these situations. For KIF5C, we note that a recent report documented a de novo mutation in a sporadic patient with severe ID and microcephaly for whom MRI data were not available32. Second, patients with mutations in KIF2A and TUBG1 share microcephaly and a cortical gyration pattern that more severely affects the posterior cortex. This gyration pattern is reminiscent of the LIS-1 related cortical gyration pattern33. Third, mutations in DYNC1H1 are the cause of a wide spectrum of cortical malformations characterized mainly by posterior pachygyria (8/11, Supplementary Table 4). Some patients with mutations in DYNC1H1 had evidence of additional abnormalities including microcephaly, nodular heterotopia, hypoplasia of the corpus callosum and dysmorphy of the basal ganglia, as well as evidence of peripheral neuropathy (3/11). However, the most striking finding is the concomitant presence in two patients of both pachygyria and PMG patterns (Supplementary Table 4, P122 and P217 and Fig. 3), traditionally regarded as distinct entities. This association has also been reported in WDR62-related disorders11 that include patients with microcephaly, PMG and schizenccephaly.

Interestingly, missense mutations in DYNC1H1 have been primarily associated with neuropathy: an axonal dominant form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2)25, and a dominant form of spinal muscular atrophy24,34. More recently, Willemsen and colleagues reported de novo missense mutations in DYNC1H1 in two patients with intellectual disability and signs of cortical malformations32,35. Taken together, these data indicate that heterozygous missense mutations in DYNC1H1 underlie a broad phenotypic spectrum extending from peripheral neuropathies to cerebral malformations. However, DYNC1H1 is emerging as an important and principal locus for mutations responsible for MCD, and its screening should be recommended in unexplained and difficult to classify pachygyria/lissencephaly and PMG with or without microcephaly.

The data reported here extend the association between microtubule-based cellular processes and proper cortical development8,9,36,37 to γ-tubulin and the microtubule-dependent motor proteins KIF5C, KIF2A and DYNC1H1. As for α- and β-tubulin isotypes (TUBA1A, TUBB2B, TUBB3 and TUBB5), all mutations identified so far in the genes encoding these proteins are heterozygous missense mutations. In the absence of loss-of-function mutations (i.e., nonsense, frameshift, splice, or genomic deletions), such mutations favour dominant negative effects rather than haploinsufficiency as primary molecular mechanisms that cause disease. This hypothesis is further supported by our cellular data regarding the behaviour of mutant forms of KIF5C and KIF2A. It is nonetheless possible that haploinsufficiency could also contribute to functional defects of MCD-related proteins.

Our phenotypic evaluation of S. cerevisiae strains harbouring disease-causing mutations in Tub4 as well as our in utero suppression experiments suggest that adequate expression of Tubg1 is required for normal microtubule behaviour and proper neuronal migration. Previous studies - including analyses of kif2a−/− and Kif5c−/− mice19,38- imply that sufficient expression of functional KIF5C, KIF2A and DYNC1H1 proteins is also required for proper cortical development. In the case of DYNC1H1, inactivation of the mouse homologue is embryonic lethal39, while ENU-induced mouse mutants harbouring heterozygous missense mutations in the tail domain (Legs at odd angles (Loa, p.F580Y) and Cramping 1 (Cra1, p.Y1055C) mainly result in early onset progressive neurodegenerative diseases40. This analysis also revealed defects in retrograde axonal transport40 and defects in hippocampal neocortical lamination and neuronal migration41. In line with these results, Shu et al., reported that in vivo RNAi-mediated down-regulation of Dync1h1 impairs neuronal migration and positioning in the developing neocortex42.

Our data strongly suggest that the regulation of microtubule-dependent mitotic processes in progenitor cells, as well as the trafficking activities of the microtubule-dependent molecular motors KIF2A, KIF5C, and DYNC1H1 in post-mitotic neuronal cells, are collectively essential for correct neuronal development (Supplementary Fig. 8). In light of this conclusion, it is understandable that functional disruption of any of these genes can lead to devastating defects in neuronal polarization, migration and differentiation.

Patients and parents’ blood samples were obtained according to local institutional review boardsguidelines. 16 cases were selected with either LIS (6 patients) or PMG (10 patients) in association with at least one of the following features: microcephaly, dysgenesis of the cerebellum, brainstem, basal ganglia or corpus callosum. Patients with LIS included those with agyria, pachygyria or subcortical laminar heterotopia, and those with PMG included perisylvian, frontal, diffuse, and multifocal PMG.

An additional cohort of 162 patients comprising 80 patients with PMG, 58 with LIS and 24 with predominant posteror pachygyria, was used to perform extensive screening of candidate genes. It included 57 patients with microcephaly, 74 with dysgenesis or agenesis of the corpus callosum, 18 with dysmorphic basal ganglia, and 38 with cerebellar vermian and /or hemispheric hypoplasia or dysplasia.

All patients’ DNAs were analyzed by CGH-microarray using the NimbleGen chip 720,000-probes (720 K) array (Roche-NimbleGen, Madison, WI) to exclude potential pathogenic CNVs. Metabolic screening was performed to exclude metabolic disorders. Likewise, screening of the coding regions of DCX (RefSeq NM_181807), LIS1 (RefSeq NM_000430), ARX (RefSeq NM_139058), TUBA1A (RefSeq NM_006009), TUBB2B (RefSeq NM_178012), TUBB3 (RefSeq NM_006086) or GPR56 (RefSeq NM_201524)43–46 was performed to exclude pathogenic mutations.

High-throughput microarray genotyping of approximately 262,000 SNPs was performed using one array (version NspI) from the Affymetrix GeneChip® Human Mapping 500K Array set (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The recommended protocol as described in the Affymetrix manual was followed.

Library generation, exome enrichment and whole exome sequencing were performed at the French National Centre for Genotyping (CNG, Evry, France). Briefly, libraries were prepared from 3 μg genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood using an optimized SureSelect Human Exome kit (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Captured, purified and clonally amplified libraries targeting the exome were then sequenced on a HiSeq 2000 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Obtained sequence reads were aligned to the human genome (hg19) using BWA software15. Downstream processing was carried out with the Genome analysis toolkit (GATK47,48, SAMtools49 and Picard Tools (http://picard.sourceforge.net). Single-nucleotide variants and indels were subsequently called by the SAMtools suite (mpileup, bcftools, vcfutil). All calls with a read coverage ≤5x and a Phred-scaled SNP quality of ≤20 were filtered out. Substitution and variation calls were made with the SAMtools pipeline (mpileup). Variants were annotated with an in-house Paris Descartes bioinformatics platform pipeline based on the Ensembl database (release 67)50.

After exome analysis, each selected variant was confirmed by PCR and direct sequencing using parents and patient’s DNA. For each patient, the complete TUBG1 and KIF5C coding sequences (respectively RefSeq NM_001070 and NM_004522) and splice sites, as well as exons corresponding respectively to the AAA1 and the stalk domains of DYNC1H1 (RefSeq NM_001376), were amplified in independent PCR reactions from genomic DNA and sequenced using BigDye dideoxyterminator chemistry and a ABI3700 DNA analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Primer sequences and positions, PCR conditions and product sizes are available upon request.

Amino acid substitutions were plotted on solved protein structures for rat kinesin, the human KIF2A nucleotide binding domain, human TUBG1 and the mouse Dync1h1 stalk domain in fusion with seryl-tRNA synthetase from Thermus thermophilus using PyMOL software (http///www.pymol.org/). Models were built by homology modeling using Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics PDB codes: 3kin, 2gry, 3Cb2 and 3err. Images in Figure 1 to Figure 4 were rendered using PyMOL.

A plasmid containing the full-length sequence encoding KIF5C was provided by Pr F. A. Stephenson, School of Pharmacy, University of London. A sequence encoding the N-terminal 380 amino acids of KIF5C containing a C-terminal His6 tag was generated from this clone by PCR. Sequences encoding full-length human γ-tubulin were from Dr. B. R. Oakley30. A sequence encoding the DYNC1H1 MTBD was obtained by PCR using a human brain cDNA library (Clontech, Mountain View, CA, USA) as template and inserted into the seryl-tRNA synthetase 12 heptad-containing α-registry fusion construct described by Carter et al.26 (GeneBank Accession Number FJ039866). Mutations were introduced by site-directed mutagenesis using the QuickChange II kit (Stratagene, Santa Clara, CA, USA). For experiments requiring expression in vitro, sequences were inserted into the pET23b vector (Novagen, EMD Millipore Germany) and used to drive expression in either rabbit reticulocyte lysate (TNT, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) containing 35S-methionine, or in E. coli BL21DE3 pLysS in which synthesis of endogenous E. coli proteins was suppressed by incubation in the presence of rifampicin51. In bacterial expression experiments, lysis was effected 2 h post-induction with IPTG by two successive cycles of freezing and thawing, followed by incubation with DNAse I and centrifugation as previously described52. Affinity purification of His6-tagged proteins from the resulting supernatants was done using solid phase-bound Co++ beads using the protocol recommended by the manufacturer (Clontech, Mountain View, CA, USA). The purity of expressed proteins was checked by SDS-PAGE. In some experiments, the integrity of in vitro translated wild type and mutant forms of γ-tubulin was assessed by measuring its susceptibility to digestion with proteinase K as described53.

The migration properties of recombinant wild type and mutant forms of KIF5C sequences containing the motor domains and a portion of the stalk domain was assessed on a column (1.0 × 30cm) of Superose 6 via FPLC (GE, Uppsala, Sweden) run in 20 mM Na phosphate buffer, pH 7.2 containing 0.1M NaCl, 0.5 mM EGTA and 1 mM DTT (buffer K). The products of in vitro TNT reactions done in rabbit reticulocyte lysate (10 ul) were diluted with 0.1 ml of buffer K supplemented with 20 uM GTP, and centrifuged for 15 mins at 100,000 × g at 4°C to remove all particulate material. The resulting supernatant was applied to the Superose 6 column equilibrated and run in buffer K containing 20 uM GTP and 5% v/v glycerol. Radioactivity contained in 0.5 ml fractions were measured in 20 ul aliquots by scintillation counting, and further aliquots were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and autoradiography. Radioactivity contained in the band corresponding to γ-tubulin was quantified using a phosphorimager.

ATP hydrolysis by recombinant WT and p.E237V mutant KIF5C forms was measured in 20ul reactions containing 1.0 pmole of purified protein in 20 mM PIPES buffer, pH 6.9, 1.0 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM ATP and 1.0 mg (measured as total protein) of taxol-polymerized microtubules. Reaction mixtures were incubated at 30°C. At various intervals, aliquots (2.0 ul) were withdrawn and the Pi content measured using the malachite green phosphomolybdate assay54.

MTs purified from bovine brain55 were depolymerized in 20 mM Pipes, pH 6.9, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA by incubation on ice and cleared by centrifugation at 60,000 × g for 10 mins. Purified 35S-labeled KIF5C (in the range 0.2 – 6.9 nmoles) or 35S-labeled chimeric seryl-tRNA synthetase containing the DYNC1H1 MTBD were added to reactions containing 2.0 mg/ml depolymerized tubulin, 1 mM GTP, 0.5 mM AMP-PNP and 20 mM taxol and the mixtures incubated at 30°C for 20 mins. Reaction products were loaded onto cushions (0.25 ml) containing 1 M sucrose in 40 mM MES, pH 6.8, 0.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM EGTA, 0.5 mM GTP, 0.25 mM AMP-PNP and 10 mM taxol contained in 1.5 ml Eppendorff tubes, and centrifuged for 15 mins at 100,000 × g at 30°C in a Beckman TL-100 rotor. The protein and radioactivity content of the resulting MT pellets (in the case of reactions done with bacterially expressed KIF5C proteins) or pellets and supernatants (in the case of experiments done with in vitro translated KIF5C and dynein heavy chain fragments) was determined following SDS-PAGE.

Sequences spanning the centrally located nucleotide binding domain of human KIF2A (amino acids 126-526) were obtained by PCR using full-length cloned wild type (Origene, Rockville, MD, USA) or mutant-bearing cDNAs as template, and the products inserted in-frame with C-terminal His tag into the pET 23b vector using the Nde I and Not I sites. Proteins were expressed in E. coli BL21 DE3 cells following induction with 1.0 mM IPTG at an A600 of 1.0. 2.5 hours post induction, cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed by resuspension in 0.3M NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM ATP, 50 mM HEPES buffer pH 7.5, and lysed by three brief pulses of sonication at 0°C. A particle-free supernatant was obtained after two centrifugations at 30,000 and 200,000 × g, at 4°C. The supernatants were applied to columns of Talon cobalt affinity beads (Clontech, Mountain View, CA, USA); and eluted in imidazole-containing buffer. Samples were analyzed by 9% SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue. In some cases, the gel content was transferred to nitrocellulose and probed with a mouse anti-His monoclonal antibody.

PCMV6 plasmids containing either full length human KIF2A (SC117315) or KIF5C (RC218796) cDNAs were purchased from Origene. Mutations were introduced by site directed mutagenesis using a Quikchange II kit.

Constructs were transfected into COS-7 or human fibroblasts cells using a Neon transfection system (Lifetechnologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were then grown on glass coverslips in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium containing 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum. After paraformaldehyde fixation, immunostaining was performed with either a rabbit polyclonal anti-KIF2A (ab37005, Abcam Inc.) or an anti-KIF5C antibody (ARP54736, Avivasysbio, San Diego, CA, USA or ab5630, Abcam Cambridge, UK) (together with a mouse monoclonal anti-α-tubulin antibody (DM1A, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO).

Yeast strains used in this study were Y20000 (MATa/MATα; his3Δ 0/his3Δ 0; leu2Δ /leu2Δ 0; met15Δ 0/MET15; LYS2/lys2Δ 0; ura3Δ 0/ura3Δ 0), all provided by EUROSCARF. The W92C and V387P mutations were obtained by direct mutagenesis of the Tub4 gene carried by the plasmid pKanTUB4::LEU2, using the Quickchange II kit and following the manufacturer’s instructions.

Cells were seeded and grown overnight in SD complete media at 30°C foolowing by a reseed at 30°C to mid-log phase. Cells were pelleted, resuspended in SD complete media, imaged on an Axio Image MI (Zeiss, Germany) microscope with a 100x Plan Fluor 1.4 N.A. objective, and captured using a Coolsnap HQ camera (Photometrics). A typical acquisition protocol acquired five z-series fluorescent images at 0.5 mm axial steps and one differential interference contrast (DIC) image corresponding to the central fluorescent image. Time-lapse image series were acquired at 10 s intervals during 10 minutes.

We conducted RNAi experiments using shRNA constructs commercially designed and provided by Origene. Four different 29-mer sequences cloned in the pGFP-V-RS vector and targeting mouse Tubg1 (NM_134024) mRNA were used to identified the most efficient shRNA construct. A CAGGS-red fluorescent protein containing plasmid and a HuSH 29-mer non-effective (scrambled) were used as controls. Efficiency experiments were conducted in N2A cells, normalized by amplification of cyclophilin A and quantified by quantitative PCR using the SybrGreen master mix and a LC480 LightCycler instrument (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

Swiss mice (Janvier, Le Genest Saint Isle, France) were mated, maintained and used in our animal facilities in accordance with European Union and French legislation. Timed pregnant mice (E14.5) were anesthetized with isoflurane (2L/min 2/4% isoflurane; Minerve, Esternay, France). The uterine horns were exposed and a lateral ventricle of each embryo was injected via pulled glass capillaries and a microinjector (Picospritzer II; General Valve Corp) with Fast Green (2 μg/ml; Sigma) combined with the following DNA constructs: 0.5 mg/ml pCAGGS-red fluorescent protein (mRFP) either alone or together with 2 or 3μl of shRNA construct at 1.0 mg/ml targeting TUBG1 mRNA (or scramble, or wild type cDNA). Plasmids were further electroporated on the head of the embryo by discharging a 4500 mF capacitor charged to 45 V with a CUY21EDIT electroporator (Sonidel Ltd, Raheny, Dublin) in five electric pulses of 50ms at 950 ms intervals. Embryonic mice were electroporated at E14.5 then brains were harvested after 4 days of development (E18.5), sectioned in 80μm slices using a VT1000S vibratome (Leica Microsystems, Reuil Malmaison, France) and maintained in 0.01% Azide-PBS buffer.
