---
reference_id: "PMID:21963259"
title: XX ovarian dysgenesis is caused by a PSMC3IP/HOP2 mutation that abolishes coactivation of estrogen-driven transcription.
authors:
- Zangen D
- Kaufman Y
- Zeligson S
- Perlberg S
- Fridman H
- Kanaan M
- Abdulhadi-Atwan M
- Abu Libdeh A
- Gussow A
- Kisslov I
- Carmel L
- Renbaum P
- Levy-Lahad E
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.09.006
keywords:
- "Chromosomes, Human, X"
- Consanguinity
- Estrogens/metabolism
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Genetic Markers
- Genotype
- Gonadal Dysgenesis/genetics
- "Gonadal Dysgenesis, 46,XX/genetics"
- Haplotypes
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- Proteasome Endopeptidase Complex/metabolism
- Trans-Activators/genetics
- "Transcription, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# XX ovarian dysgenesis is caused by a PSMC3IP/HOP2 mutation that abolishes coactivation of estrogen-driven transcription.
**Authors:** Zangen D, Kaufman Y, Zeligson S, Perlberg S, Fridman H, Kanaan M, Abdulhadi-Atwan M, Abu Libdeh A, Gussow A, Kisslov I, Carmel L, Renbaum P, Levy-Lahad E
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.09.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.09.006)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Oct 7;89(4):572-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.09.006. Epub
2011 Sep 29.

XX ovarian dysgenesis is caused by a PSMC3IP/HOP2 mutation that abolishes
coactivation of estrogen-driven transcription.

Zangen D(1), Kaufman Y, Zeligson S, Perlberg S, Fridman H, Kanaan M,
Abdulhadi-Atwan M, Abu Libdeh A, Gussow A, Kisslov I, Carmel L, Renbaum P,
Levy-Lahad E.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Hadassah Hebrew University Medical
School, Jerusalem, Israel. zangend@hadassah.org.il

XX female gonadal dysgenesis (XX-GD) is a rare, genetically heterogeneous
disorder characterized by lack of spontaneous pubertal development, primary
amenorrhea, uterine hypoplasia, and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism as a result
of streak gonads. Most cases are unexplained but thought to be autosomal
recessive. We elucidated the genetic basis of XX-GD in a highly consanguineous
Palestinian family by using homozygosity mapping and candidate-gene and
whole-exome sequencing. Affected females were homozygous for a 3 bp deletion
(NM_016556.2, c.600_602del) in the PSMC3IP gene, leading to deletion of a
glutamic acid residue (p.Glu201del) in the highly conserved C-terminal acidic
domain. Proteasome 26S subunit, ATPase, 3-Interacting Protein (PSMC3IP)/Tat
Binding Protein Interacting Protein (TBPIP) is a nuclear, tissue-specific
protein with multiple functions. It is critical for meiotic recombination as
indicated by the known role of its yeast ortholog, Hop2. Through the C terminus
(not present in yeast), PSMC3IP also coactivates ligand-driven transcription
mediated by estrogen, androgen, glucocorticoid, progesterone, and thyroid
nuclear receptors. In cell lines, the p.Glu201del mutation abolished PSMC3IP
activation of estrogen-driven transcription. Impaired estrogenic signaling can
lead to ovarian dysgenesis both by affecting the size of the follicular pool
created during fetal development and by failing to counteract follicular atresia
during puberty. PSMC3IP joins previous genes known to be mutated in XX-GD, the
FSH receptor, and BMP15, highlighting the importance of hormonal signaling in
ovarian development and maintenance and suggesting a common pathway perturbed in
isolated XX-GD. By analogy to other XX-GD genes, PSMC3IP is also a candidate
gene for premature ovarian failure, and its role in folliculogenesis should be
further investigated.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.09.006
PMCID: PMC3188834
PMID: 21963259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
