---
reference_id: PMID:27125746
title: αKlotho and Chronic Kidney Disease.
authors:
- Neyra JA
- Hu MC
journal: Vitam Horm
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/bs.vh.2016.02.007
keywords:
- Animals
- Biomarkers
- Cardiovascular Diseases
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Fibroblast Growth Factor-23
- Fibroblast Growth Factors
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Glucuronidase/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- Humans
- Kidney/metabolism
- Klotho Proteins
- Minerals/metabolism
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/drug therapy, etiology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# αKlotho and Chronic Kidney Disease.
**Authors:** Neyra JA, Hu MC
**Journal:** Vitam Horm (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/bs.vh.2016.02.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.vh.2016.02.007)

## Content

1. Vitam Horm. 2016;101:257-310. doi: 10.1016/bs.vh.2016.02.007. Epub 2016 Mar
24.

αKlotho and Chronic Kidney Disease.

Neyra JA(1), Hu MC(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States; 
Charles and Jane Pak Center for Mineral Metabolism and Clinical Research, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States.
(2)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States; 
Charles and Jane Pak Center for Mineral Metabolism and Clinical Research, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States. 
Electronic address: ming-chang.hu@utsouthwestern.edu.

Alpha-Klotho (αKlotho) protein is encoded by the gene, Klotho, and functions as 
a coreceptor for endocrine fibroblast growth factor-23. The extracellular domain 
of αKlotho is cleaved by secretases and released into the circulation where it 
is called soluble αKlotho. Soluble αKlotho in the circulation starts to decline 
in chronic kidney disease (CKD) stage 2 and urinary αKlotho in even earlier CKD 
stage 1. Therefore soluble αKlotho is an early and sensitive marker of decline 
in kidney function. Preclinical data from numerous animal experiments support 
αKlotho deficiency as a pathogenic factor for CKD progression and extrarenal CKD 
complications including cardiac and vascular disease, hyperparathyroidism, and 
disturbed mineral metabolism. αKlotho deficiency induces cell senescence and 
renders cells susceptible to apoptosis induced by a variety of cellular insults 
including oxidative stress. αKlotho deficiency also leads to defective autophagy 
and angiogenesis and promotes fibrosis in the kidney and heart. Most 
importantly, prevention of αKlotho decline, upregulation of endogenous αKlotho 
production, or direct supplementation of soluble αKlotho are all associated with 
attenuation of renal fibrosis, retardation of CKD progression, improvement of 
mineral metabolism, amelioration of cardiac function and morphometry, and 
alleviation of vascular calcification in CKD. Therefore in rodents, αKlotho is 
not only a diagnostic and prognostic marker for CKD but the enhancement of 
endogenous or supplement of exogenous αKlotho are promising therapeutic 
strategies to prevent, retard, and decrease the comorbidity burden of CKD.

© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.vh.2016.02.007
PMCID: PMC5658019
PMID: 27125746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]