---
reference_id: "PMID:11283792"
title: The primary erythermalgia-susceptibility gene is located on chromosome 2q31-32.
authors:
- Drenth JP
- Finley WH
- Breedveld GJ
- Testers L
- Michiels JJ
- Guillet G
- Taieb A
- Kirby RL
- Heutink P
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1086/320107
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The primary erythermalgia-susceptibility gene is located on chromosome 2q31-32.
**Authors:** Drenth JP, Finley WH, Breedveld GJ, Testers L, Michiels JJ, Guillet G, Taieb A, Kirby RL, Heutink P
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1086/320107](https://doi.org/10.1086/320107)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 May;68(5):1277-82. doi: 10.1086/320107. Epub 2001 Mar 20.

The primary erythermalgia-susceptibility gene is located on chromosome 2q31-32.

Drenth JP(1), Finley WH, Breedveld GJ, Testers L, Michiels JJ, Guillet G, Taieb 
A, Kirby RL, Heutink P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, University Medical 
Center St. Radboud, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. joostphdrenth@CS.com

Primary erythermalgia is a rare disorder characterized by recurrent attacks of 
red, warm, and painful hands and/or feet. The symptoms are generally refractory 
to treatment and persist throughout life. Five kindreds with multiple cases of 
primary erythermalgia were identified, and the largest was subjected to a 
genomewide search. We detected strong evidence for linkage of the primary 
erythermalgia locus to markers from chromosome 2q. The highest LOD score (Z) was 
obtained with D2S2330 (Z(max) = 6.51). Analysis of recombination events 
identified D2S2370 and D2S1776 as flanking markers, on chromosome 2q31-32. This 
defines a critical interval of 7.94 cM that harbors the primary erythermalgia 
gene. Affected members within the additional families also shared a common 
haplotype on chromosome 2q31-32, supporting our linkage results. Identification 
of the primary erythermalgia gene will allow a better clinical classification of 
this pleomorphic group of disorders.

DOI: 10.1086/320107
PMCID: PMC1226108
PMID: 11283792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]