---
reference_id: "PMID:37353964"
title: Five siblings expand the spectrum of GPC6-related skeletal dysplasia.
authors:
- Crenshaw MM
- Meyers ML
- Brown K
- Slegesky V
- Duis J
- Elias ER
- Saenz M
- Shi W
- Filmus J
- Meeks NJL
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63337
keywords:
- Hedgehog Proteins
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, genetics, metabolism, congenital"
- Child
- Siblings
- Humans
- Dwarfism/genetics
- Glypicans/genetics
- Growth Disorders
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Five siblings expand the spectrum of GPC6-related skeletal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Crenshaw MM, Meyers ML, Brown K, Slegesky V, Duis J, Elias ER, Saenz M, Shi W, Filmus J, Meeks NJL
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63337](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63337)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2023 Oct;191(10):2571-2577. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63337. Epub 
2023 Jun 23.

Five siblings expand the spectrum of GPC6-related skeletal dysplasia.

Crenshaw MM(1), Meyers ML(2), Brown K(1), Slegesky V(1), Duis J(1), Elias ER(1), 
Saenz M(1), Shi W(3), Filmus J(3), Meeks NJL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, University of 
Colorado School of Medicine (CU-SOM), Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, CU-SOM, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Biophysics, Sunnybrook Research Institute, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Skeletal dysplasias broadly include disorders of cartilage or bone. 
Omodysplasia-1 is a type of skeletal dysplasia caused by biallelic loss of 
function variants in the GPC6 gene. GPC6 codes for the protein glypican 6 (GPC6) 
(OMIM *604404), which stimulates bone growth. We report a family in which five 
out of nine children were presented with a skeletal dysplasia characterized 
phenotypically by mild short stature and rhizomelia. All affected individuals 
were found to have homozygous missense variants in GPC6: c.511 C>T 
(p.Arg171Trp). Radiograph findings included rhizomelic foreshortening of all 
four extremities, coxa breva, and ulna minus deformity. Using a Hedgehog (Hh) 
reporter assay, we demonstrate that the variant found in this family results in 
significantly reduced stimulation of Hh activity when compared to the wild-type 
GPC6 protein, however protein function is still present. Thus, the milder 
phenotype seen in the family presented is hypothesized due to decreased GPC6 
protein activity versus complete loss of function as seen in omodysplasia-1. 
Given the unique phenotype and molecular mechanism, we propose that this 
family's findings widen the phenotypic spectrum of GPC6-related skeletal 
dysplasias.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63337
PMID: 37353964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]