---
reference_id: "PMID:35997361"
title: Relevance of Medullary Vein Sign in Neurosarcoidosis.
authors:
- Liberio R
- Kramer E
- Memon AB
- Reinbeau R
- Feizi P
- Joseph J
- Wu J
- Sriwastava S
journal: Neurol Int
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/neurolint14030052
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relevance of Medullary Vein Sign in Neurosarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Liberio R, Kramer E, Memon AB, Reinbeau R, Feizi P, Joseph J, Wu J, Sriwastava S
**Journal:** Neurol Int (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/neurolint14030052](https://doi.org/10.3390/neurolint14030052)

## Content

1. Neurol Int. 2022 Aug 14;14(3):638-647. doi: 10.3390/neurolint14030052.

Relevance of Medullary Vein Sign in Neurosarcoidosis.

Liberio R(1)(2), Kramer E(1)(2), Memon AB(3), Reinbeau R(1)(2), Feizi P(4),
Joseph J(4), Wu J(2), Sriwastava S(1)(2)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI 48202, USA.
(4)Department of Neuroradiology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506,
USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.
(6)West Virginia Clinical and Translational Science Institute, Morgantown, WV
26506, USA.

BACKGROUND: Central nervous system involvement is uncommon in patients with
sarcoidosis. It remains a diagnostic challenge for clinicians, as there is a
broad differential diagnosis that matches the presenting neurological signs.
Often, the imaging findings also overlap with other disease entities. One
understudied finding in patients with neurosarcoidosis is the presence of
medullary vein engorgement on SWI imaging, termed the "medullary vein sign",
which has been postulated to be a specific sign for neurosarcoidosis. This study
aims to provide an understanding of the diagnostic potential of the medullary
vein sign.
METHODS: Thirty-two patients who presented with neurologic signs concerning for
possible neurosarcoidosis were analyzed retrospectively for the presence of the
medullary vein sign.
RESULTS: Out of these cases, 7 cases of definitive neurosarcoidosis cases were
found based on other imaging signs, biopsy and CSF analysis; the remaining were
classified into groups as possible (16), probable (5) and (4) cases of other
infectious meningoencephalitis including 2 cases of autoimmune encephalitis.
Seven patients among all of these cases were found to have the medullary vein
sign on imaging, with five cases with confirmed and two cases from possible
neurosarcoidosis. The sensitivity of the medullary vein sign in this study was
71.4%, and the specificity was 92.3%.
DISCUSSION: The benefits of improving diagnostic criteria for neurosarcoidosis
include more rapid diagnosis leading to more prompt treatment, less exposure to
potentially harmful antibiotics or antifungals, and less long-term neurological
effects. Our results support that the medullary vein sign will potentially fill
in the diagnostic gaps that have challenged the timely diagnosis of
neurosarcoidosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support that the medullary vein sign has a high
specificity and should be included in the diagnostic criteria for
neurosarcoidosis.

DOI: 10.3390/neurolint14030052
PMCID: PMC9397064
PMID: 35997361

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
