---
reference_id: "PMID:40136445"
title: The Role of the Arcuate Nucleus in Regulating Hunger and Satiety in Prader-Willi Syndrome.
authors:
- Höybye C
- Petersson M
journal: Curr Issues Mol Biol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/cimb47030192
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of the Arcuate Nucleus in Regulating Hunger and Satiety in Prader-Willi Syndrome.
**Authors:** Höybye C, Petersson M
**Journal:** Curr Issues Mol Biol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cimb47030192](https://doi.org/10.3390/cimb47030192)

## Content

1. Curr Issues Mol Biol. 2025 Mar 14;47(3):192. doi: 10.3390/cimb47030192.

The Role of the Arcuate Nucleus in Regulating Hunger and Satiety in Prader-Willi 
Syndrome.

Höybye C(1)(2), Petersson M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Karolinska University Hospital, 171 76 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77 
Stockholm, Sweden.

Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a rare genetic disorder. The main characteristics 
are muscular hypotonia, failure to thrive and feeding problems in infancy, which 
switch to hyperphagia in early childhood and continue into adulthood. Due to 
hyperphagia, the risk of developing morbid obesity is high without treatment. 
PWS is considered a hypothalamic disease, and within the hypothalamus the 
arcuate nucleus (AC) is of central importance for controlling metabolism, 
hunger, and satiety. The AC has been studied in several animal models as well as 
in humans, including PWS. The function of AC is regulated by several 
neuropeptides and proteins produced within the central nervous system such as 
oxytocin, orexin, tachykinins as well as the hypothalamic hormones, regulating 
the adeno-hypophyseal hormones, also acting as neurotransmitters. Additionally, 
there are many peripheral hormones among which insulin, leptin, adiponectin, 
ghrelin, and glucagon-like peptide (GLP-1) are the most important. High levels 
of adiponectin and ghrelin have consistently been reported in PWS, but 
dysregulation and deviating levels of many other factors and hormones have also 
been demonstrated in both individuals with PWS and in animal models. In this 
review, we focus on the role of AC and peptides and proteins produced within the 
central nervous system in the regulation of hunger and satiety in PWS.

DOI: 10.3390/cimb47030192
PMCID: PMC11941671
PMID: 40136445

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.