---
reference_id: "PMID:12764216"
title: Life stress and cervical squamous intraepithelial lesions in women with human papillomavirus and human immunodeficiency virus.
authors:
- Pereira DB
- Antoni MH
- Danielson A
- Simon T
- Efantis-Potter J
- Carver CS
- Durán RE
- Ironson G
- Klimas N
- "O'Sullivan MJ"
journal: Psychosom Med
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1097/01.psy.0000041620.37866.89
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Life stress and cervical squamous intraepithelial lesions in women with human papillomavirus and human immunodeficiency virus.
**Authors:** Pereira DB, Antoni MH, Danielson A, Simon T, Efantis-Potter J, Carver CS, Durán RE, Ironson G, Klimas N, O'Sullivan MJ
**Journal:** Psychosom Med (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.psy.0000041620.37866.89](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.psy.0000041620.37866.89)

## Content

1. Psychosom Med. 2003 May-Jun;65(3):427-34. doi: 
10.1097/01.psy.0000041620.37866.89.

Life stress and cervical squamous intraepithelial lesions in women with human 
papillomavirus and human immunodeficiency virus.

Pereira DB(1), Antoni MH, Danielson A, Simon T, Efantis-Potter J, Carver CS, 
Durán RE, Ironson G, Klimas N, O'Sullivan MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida 
32610-0165, USA. dpereira@hp.ufl.edu

OBJECTIVE: Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected women are at risk for 
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) and cancer due to impaired 
immunosurveillance over human papillomavirus (HPV) infection. Life stress has 
been implicated in immune decrements in HIV-infected individuals and therefore 
may contribute to CIN progression over time. The purpose of this study was to 
determine whether life stress was associated with progression and/or persistence 
of squamous intraepithelial lesions (SIL), the cytologic diagnosis conferred by 
Papanicolaou smear, after 1-year follow-up among women co-infected with HIV and 
HPV.
METHOD: Thirty-two HIV-infected African-American and Caribbean-American women 
underwent a psychosocial interview, blood draw, colposcopy, and HPV cervical 
swab at study entry. Using medical chart review, we then abstracted SIL 
diagnoses at study entry and after 1-year follow-up.
RESULTS: Hierarchical logistic regression analysis revealed that higher life 
stress increased the odds of developing progressive/persistent SIL over 1 year 
by approximately seven-fold after covarying relevant biological and behavioral 
control variables.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that life stress may constitute an 
independent risk factor for SIL progression and/or persistence in HIV-infected 
women. Stress management interventions may decrease risk for SIL 
progression/persistence in women living with HIV.

DOI: 10.1097/01.psy.0000041620.37866.89
PMID: 12764216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]