---
reference_id: "PMID:21356350"
title: Kindlin-1 and -2 have overlapping functions in epithelial cells implications for phenotype modification.
authors:
- He Y
- Esser P
- Heinemann A
- Bruckner-Tuderman L
- Has C
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.11.053
keywords:
- "Blister/metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Adhesion
- Cell Communication
- Cell Line
- Cell Movement
- Cell Shape
- Cell Size
- Cell Survival
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa/metabolism, pathology"
- "Epithelial Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Focal Adhesions/metabolism
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- Integrins/metabolism
- "Keratinocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Neoplasm Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Periodontal Diseases/metabolism, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Photosensitivity Disorders/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kindlin-1 and -2 have overlapping functions in epithelial cells implications for phenotype modification.
**Authors:** He Y, Esser P, Heinemann A, Bruckner-Tuderman L, Has C
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.11.053](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.11.053)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 2011 Mar;178(3):975-82. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.11.053.

Kindlin-1 and -2 have overlapping functions in epithelial cells implications for
phenotype modification.

He Y(1), Esser P, Heinemann A, Bruckner-Tuderman L, Has C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany.

Kindlins are a novel family of intracellular adaptor proteins in
integrin-containing focal adhesions. Kindlin-1 and -2 are expressed in the skin,
but whether and how they cooperate in adult epithelial cells have remained
elusive. We uncovered the overlapping roles of kindlin-1 and -2 in maintaining
epithelial integrity and show that the phenotype of kindlin-1-deficient cells
can be modulated by regulating kindlin-2 gene expression and vice versa. The
experimental evidence is provided by use of human keratinocyte cell lines that
express both kindlins, just kindlin-1 or kindlin-2, or none of them. Double
deficiency of kindlin-1 and -2 had significant negative effects on focal
adhesion formation and actin cytoskeleton organization, cell adhesion, survival,
directional migration, and activation of β(1) integrin, whereas deficiency of
one kindlin only showed variable perturbation of these functions. Cell motility
and formation of cell-cell contacts were particularly affected by lack of
kindlin-2. These results predict that kindlin-1 and -2 can functionally
compensate for each other, at least in part. The high physiologic and pathologic
significance of the compensation was emphasized by the discovery of
environmental regulation of kindlin-2 expression. UV-B irradiation induced loss
of kindlin-2 in keratinocytes. This first example of environmental regulation of
kindlin expression has implications for phenotype modulation in Kindler
syndrome, a skin disorder caused by kindlin-1 deficiency.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.11.053
PMCID: PMC3069810
PMID: 21356350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
