---
reference_id: "PMID:38391932"
title: "Hereditary Ataxias: From Bench to Clinic, Where Do We Stand?"
authors:
- Pilotto F
- Del Bondio A
- Puccio H
journal: Cells
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cells13040319
keywords:
- Humans
- Spinocerebellar Degenerations
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/genetics, pathology"
- Ataxia/pathology
- Cerebellum/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary Ataxias: From Bench to Clinic, Where Do We Stand?
**Authors:** Pilotto F, Del Bondio A, Puccio H
**Journal:** Cells (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells13040319](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells13040319)

## Content

1. Cells. 2024 Feb 9;13(4):319. doi: 10.3390/cells13040319.

Hereditary Ataxias: From Bench to Clinic, Where Do We Stand?

Pilotto F(1), Del Bondio A(1), Puccio H(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut Neuromyogène, Pathophysiology and Genetics of Neuron and Muscle, 
Inserm U1315, CNRS-Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1 UMR5261, 69008 Lyon, France.

Cerebellar ataxias are a wide heterogeneous group of movement disorders. Within 
this broad umbrella of diseases, there are both genetics and sporadic forms. The 
clinical presentation of these conditions can exhibit a diverse range of 
symptoms across different age groups, spanning from pure cerebellar 
manifestations to sensory ataxia and multisystemic diseases. Over the last few 
decades, advancements in our understanding of genetics and molecular 
pathophysiology related to both dominant and recessive ataxias have propelled 
the field forward, paving the way for innovative therapeutic strategies aimed at 
preventing and arresting the progression of these diseases. Nevertheless, the 
rarity of certain forms of ataxia continues to pose challenges, leading to 
limited insights into the etiology of the disease and the identification of 
target pathways. Additionally, the lack of suitable models hampers efforts to 
comprehensively understand the molecular foundations of disease's 
pathophysiology and test novel therapeutic interventions. In the following 
review, we describe the epidemiology, symptomatology, and pathological 
progression of hereditary ataxia, including both the prevalent and less common 
forms of these diseases. Furthermore, we illustrate the diverse molecular 
pathways and therapeutic approaches currently undergoing investigation in both 
pre-clinical studies and clinical trials. Finally, we address the existing and 
anticipated challenges within this field, encompassing both basic research and 
clinical endeavors.

DOI: 10.3390/cells13040319
PMCID: PMC10886822
PMID: 38391932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.