---
reference_id: "PMID:23055849"
title: "Patent ductus arteriosus: an overview."
authors:
- Dice JE
- Bhatia J
journal: J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther
year: '2007'
doi: 10.5863/1551-6776-12.3.138
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patent ductus arteriosus: an overview.
**Authors:** Dice JE, Bhatia J
**Journal:** J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther (2007)
**DOI:** [10.5863/1551-6776-12.3.138](https://doi.org/10.5863/1551-6776-12.3.138)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther. 2007 Jul;12(3):138-46. doi: 
10.5863/1551-6776-12.3.138.

Patent ductus arteriosus: an overview.

Dice JE(1), Bhatia J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Children's Hospital of the King's Daughters, Norfolk, 
Virginia.

Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is one of the most common congenital heart 
defects, accounting for 5%-10% of all congenital heart disease in term infants. 
The occurrence of PDA is inversely related to gestational age and weight, with 
an even greater incidence in preterm infants. The maintenance of ductal patency 
is essential for the normal development of the fetus. In the neonate, however, 
persistent patency of the ductus arteriosus (DA) is associated with significant 
morbidity and mortality. Normally, at birth, the DA constricts, resulting in 
intraluminal ischemic hypoxia, which eventually leads to closure and remodeling 
of the ductus. PDA in term infants is usually associated with a functional 
defect, whereas in preterm infants it is associated with immaturity. Normal 
physiologic mechanisms contributing to closure - oxygen tension and decreased 
prostaglandins-are altered in prematurity. Clinical signs of ductal patency 
include murmur, tachycardia, bounding peripheral pulses, and congestive heart 
failure and associated symptoms. Symptoms are not always present; therefore, 
diagnostic imaging is critical if a PDA is suspected on clinical grounds. Three 
management strategies are currently available for PDA: fluid restriction and 
diuretics (as clinically appropriate), medical intervention, and surgical 
ligation. Pharmacologic closure can be achieved via administration of 
intravenous indomethacin or ibuprofen lysine. While both agents have shown 
similar efficacy, ibuprofen lysine has demonstrated an improved safety profile, 
particularly in terms of renal effects, compared to indomethacin.

DOI: 10.5863/1551-6776-12.3.138
PMCID: PMC3462096
PMID: 23055849