---
reference_id: "PMID:25228067"
title: Next generation sequencing uncovers a missense mutation in COL4A1 as the cause of familial retinal arteriolar tortuosity.
authors:
- Zenteno JC
- Crespí J
- Buentello-Volante B
- Buil JA
- Bassaganyas F
- Vela-Segarra JI
- Diaz-Cascajosa J
- Marieges MT
journal: Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s00417-014-2800-6
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Arterioles/abnormalities, pathology"
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Angiography
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pedigree
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Retinal Artery/abnormalities, pathology"
- Retinal Hemorrhage/genetics
- Retinal Telangiectasis/genetics
- Visual Acuity
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Next generation sequencing uncovers a missense mutation in COL4A1 as the cause of familial retinal arteriolar tortuosity.
**Authors:** Zenteno JC, Crespí J, Buentello-Volante B, Buil JA, Bassaganyas F, Vela-Segarra JI, Diaz-Cascajosa J, Marieges MT
**Journal:** Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00417-014-2800-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00417-014-2800-6)

## Content

1. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2014 Nov;252(11):1789-94. doi: 
10.1007/s00417-014-2800-6. Epub 2014 Sep 17.

Next generation sequencing uncovers a missense mutation in COL4A1 as the cause 
of familial retinal arteriolar tortuosity.

Zenteno JC(1), Crespí J, Buentello-Volante B, Buil JA, Bassaganyas F, 
Vela-Segarra JI, Diaz-Cascajosa J, Marieges MT.

Author information:
(1)Genetics Department and Research Unit, Institute of Ophthalmology "Conde de 
Valenciana" and Biochemistry Department, Faculty of Medicine, National 
Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM), Chimalpopoca 14, Col. Obrera, Mexico 
City, CP, 06800, Mexico, jczenteno@institutodeoftalmologia.org.

Erratum in
    Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2015 Aug;253(8):1417. doi: 
10.1007/s00417-015-3089-9.

OBJECTIVES: Our aim was to determine the molecular cause of autosomal dominant 
familial retinal arteriolar tortuosity (FRAT) in a family with three affected 
subjects.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Ophthalmologic evaluation included determination of 
best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), slit-lamp and dilated fundus inspection, 
applanation tonometry, fundus photography, and fluorescein retinal angiography 
(FA). Molecular methods included whole exome sequencing analysis and Sanger 
sequencing validation of putative causal mutation in DNA from affected 
individuals.
RESULTS: Typical signs of familial retinal arteriolar tortuosity were observed 
in all three patients. Exome sequencing identified a heterozygous c.1528G > A 
(p. Gly510Arg) mutation in COL4A1. Sanger sequencing confirmed that all three 
patients harbored the same pathogenetic mutation in COL4A1. The p. Gly510Arg 
variant in COL4A1 was absent in DNA from an available unaffected daughter, from 
a set of control alleles, and from publicly available databases.
CONCLUSIONS: The molecular basis of familial retinal arteriolar tortuosity was 
identified for the first time, thus expanding the human phenotypes linked to 
COL4A1 mutations. Interestingly, the COL4A1 p.Gly510Arg mutation has been 
previously identified in a family with HANAC (Hereditary Angiopathy with 
Nephropathy, Aneurysm and Cramps), a multisystemic disease featuring retinal 
arteriolar tortuosity. No cerebral, neurologic, renal, cardiac or vascular 
anomalies were recognized in the pedigree described here. These data indicate 
that identical mutations in COL4A1 can originate both eye-restricted and 
systemic phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00417-014-2800-6
PMID: 25228067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]