---
reference_id: "PMID:40915309"
title: Shigellosis.
authors:
- Hendrick J
- Raqib R
- Noor Z
- Faruque ASG
- Haque R
- Petri WA
journal: Lancet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(25)01033-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Shigellosis.
**Authors:** Hendrick J, Raqib R, Noor Z, Faruque ASG, Haque R, Petri WA
**Journal:** Lancet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(25)01033-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(25)01033-5)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2025 Oct 4;406(10511):1508-1519. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(25)01033-5. 
Epub 2025 Sep 4.

Shigellosis.

Hendrick J(1), Raqib R(2), Noor Z(3), Faruque ASG(2), Haque R(3), Petri WA(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. Electronic address: jms7uq@uvahealth.org.
(2)Nutrition Research Division, icddr,b, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(3)Infectious Disease Division, icddr,b, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA.

Shigella is a Gram-negative, facultative intracellular, gastric acid-resistant 
bacterium of the Enterobacteriaceae family, which includes four serogroups: 
Shigella dysenteriae, Shigella sonnei, Shigella flexneri, and Shigella boydii. 
Globally, shigellosis is the most common cause of invasive bloody diarrhoea in 
children younger than 5 years. Humans are the only natural reservoir and an 
inoculum of only 10-100 organisms is required for infection. Rising antibiotic 
resistance rates increasingly reduce the ability to adequately treat severe 
disease. The prevention of infection with vaccination and sanitation strategies 
remains a crucial step in reducing worldwide morbidity and mortality.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved, including those for text and 
data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(25)01033-5
PMCID: PMC12704457
PMID: 40915309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests JH was supported by the 
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the National Institutes 
of Health (UL1TR003015/KL2TR003016) and is currently supported by a Mentored 
Patient-Oriented Research Career Development Award (K23) from the National 
Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (K23AI187708). RR, ZN, ASGF, RH, 
and WAP declare no competing interests. Editorial note: The Lancet Group takes a 
neutral position with respect to territorial claims in published maps.