---
reference_id: "PMID:17202879"
title: "Surgical treatment of cervical kyphosis in Larsen syndrome: report of 3 cases and review of the literature."
authors:
- Sakaura H
- Matsuoka T
- Iwasaki M
- Yonenobu K
- Yoshikawa H
journal: Spine (Phila Pa 1976)
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1097/01.brs.0000250103.88392.8e
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical treatment of cervical kyphosis in Larsen syndrome: report of 3 cases and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Sakaura H, Matsuoka T, Iwasaki M, Yonenobu K, Yoshikawa H
**Journal:** Spine (Phila Pa 1976) (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.brs.0000250103.88392.8e](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.brs.0000250103.88392.8e)

## Content

1. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2007 Jan 1;32(1):E39-44. doi: 
10.1097/01.brs.0000250103.88392.8e.

Surgical treatment of cervical kyphosis in Larsen syndrome: report of 3 cases 
and review of the literature.

Sakaura H(1), Matsuoka T, Iwasaki M, Yonenobu K, Yoshikawa H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Osaka, Japan. sakaurah@ort.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

STUDY DESIGN: A retrospective case series.
OBJECTIVE: To review the surgical results for midcervical kyphosis in 3 cases 
with Larsen syndrome, and to discuss the choice of surgical treatments.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Cervical kyphosis is the most hazardous and serious 
manifestation of Larsen syndrome due to the risk of life-threatening paralysis, 
and thus usually requires surgical treatment. However, little information has 
been reported concerning surgical treatments for this challenging condition.
METHODS: Three patients with Larsen syndrome were surgically treated for 
midcervical kyphosis at our institution.
RESULTS: An infant with mild cervical kyphosis was successfully treated with 
posterior arthrodesis using a halo immobilization, and anterior vertebral growth 
with a mature posterior fusion mass resulted in spontaneous correction of the 
kyphosis. In the remaining 2 infants with myelopathic symptoms due to severe and 
structural kyphosis, anterior decompression and fusion via a lateral approach 
followed by posterior fusion with segmental spinal instrumentation and halo 
immobilization resulted in improved neurologic symptoms and solid fusion.
CONCLUSIONS: Posterior spinal fusion is only indicated for patients with mild 
and flexible cervical kyphosis, and anterior decompression and circumferential 
arthrodesis is required for patients with severe kyphotic deformity, who usually 
develop myelopathic symptoms. Anterior surgery for such a small patient with 
severe kyphosis involves much higher risk of spinal cord injury during 
decompression maneuvers and difficulty in stabilization of the reconstructed 
cervical spine. Therefore, all patients with Larsen syndrome should be screened 
with radiographs at the first visit to detect cervical kyphosis early so that 
posterior alone fusion is possible.

DOI: 10.1097/01.brs.0000250103.88392.8e
PMID: 17202879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]