---
reference_id: "PMID:24462369"
title: A founder mutation in PET100 causes isolated complex IV deficiency in Lebanese individuals with Leigh syndrome.
authors:
- Lim SC
- Smith KR
- Stroud DA
- Compton AG
- Tucker EJ
- Dasvarma A
- Gandolfo LC
- Marum JE
- McKenzie M
- Peters HL
- Mowat D
- Procopis PG
- Wilcken B
- Christodoulou J
- Brown GK
- Ryan MT
- Bahlo M
- Thorburn DR
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.12.015
keywords:
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 19/genetics"
- "Cyclooxygenase 2/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/complications, ethnology, genetics"
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/genetics, isolation & purification"
- Female
- Founder Effect
- Genetic Complementation Test
- Genetic Linkage
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Haplotypes
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Lebanon
- "Leigh Disease/complications, ethnology, genetics"
- Male
- "Mitochondria/genetics, metabolism"
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Proteomics
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A founder mutation in PET100 causes isolated complex IV deficiency in Lebanese individuals with Leigh syndrome.
**Authors:** Lim SC, Smith KR, Stroud DA, Compton AG, Tucker EJ, Dasvarma A, Gandolfo LC, Marum JE, McKenzie M, Peters HL, Mowat D, Procopis PG, Wilcken B, Christodoulou J, Brown GK, Ryan MT, Bahlo M, Thorburn DR
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.12.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.12.015)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2014 Feb 6;94(2):209-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.12.015. Epub
 2014 Jan 23.

A founder mutation in PET100 causes isolated complex IV deficiency in Lebanese 
individuals with Leigh syndrome.

Lim SC(1), Smith KR(2), Stroud DA(3), Compton AG(1), Tucker EJ(1), Dasvarma 
A(4), Gandolfo LC(5), Marum JE(4), McKenzie M(6), Peters HL(7), Mowat D(8), 
Procopis PG(9), Wilcken B(10), Christodoulou J(11), Brown GK(12), Ryan MT(3), 
Bahlo M(5), Thorburn DR(13).

Author information:
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, 
VIC 3052, Australia; Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia.
(2)Bioinformatics Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 
Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, La 
Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC 3086, Australia.
(4)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, 
VIC 3052, Australia.
(5)Bioinformatics Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 
Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia; Department of Mathematics and Statistics, 
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia.
(6)Centre for Genetic Diseases, Monash Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, 
VIC 3168, Australia.
(7)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, 
VIC 3052, Australia.
(8)Department of Medical Genetics, Sydney Children's Hospital, School of Women's 
and Children's Health, University of NSW, Sydney, NSW 2031, Australia.
(9)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, NSW 2145, 
Australia; Discipline of Paediatrics & Child Health, University of Sydney, 
Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.
(10)Discipline of Paediatrics & Child Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 
2006, Australia.
(11)Discipline of Paediatrics & Child Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 
2006, Australia; Genetic Metabolic Disorders Research Unit, Children's Hospital 
at Westmead, Sydney, NSW 2145, Australia; Discipline of Genetic Medicine, 
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.
(12)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford 
OX1 3QU, UK.
(13)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, 
VIC 3052, Australia; Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia; Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Royal 
Children's Hospital, Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia. Electronic address: 
david.thorburn@mcri.edu.au.

Leigh syndrome (LS) is a severe neurodegenerative disorder with characteristic 
bilateral lesions, typically in the brainstem and basal ganglia. It usually 
presents in infancy and is genetically heterogeneous, but most individuals with 
mitochondrial complex IV (or cytochrome c oxidase) deficiency have mutations in 
the biogenesis factor SURF1. We studied eight complex IV-deficient LS 
individuals from six families of Lebanese origin. They differed from individuals 
with SURF1 mutations in having seizures as a prominent feature. Complementation 
analysis suggested they had mutation(s) in the same gene but targeted massively 
parallel sequencing (MPS) of 1,034 genes encoding known mitochondrial proteins 
failed to identify a likely candidate. Linkage and haplotype analyses mapped the 
location of the gene to chromosome 19 and targeted MPS of the linkage region 
identified a homozygous c.3G>C (p.Met1?) mutation in C19orf79. Abolishing the 
initiation codon could potentially still allow initiation at a downstream 
methionine residue but we showed that this would not result in a functional 
protein. We confirmed that mutation of this gene was causative by 
lentiviral-mediated phenotypic correction. C19orf79 was recently renamed PET100 
and predicted to encode a complex IV biogenesis factor. We showed that it is 
located in the mitochondrial inner membrane and forms a ∼300 kDa subcomplex with 
complex IV subunits. Previous proteomic analyses of mitochondria had overlooked 
PET100 because its small size was below the cutoff for annotating bona fide 
proteins. The mutation was estimated to have arisen at least 520 years ago, 
explaining how the families could have different religions and different 
geographic origins within Lebanon.

Copyright © 2014 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.12.015
PMCID: PMC3928654
PMID: 24462369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]