---
reference_id: "PMID:27906200"
title: Evaluating the quality of Marfan genotype-phenotype correlations in existing FBN1 databases.
authors:
- Groth KA
- Von Kodolitsch Y
- Kutsche K
- Gaustadnes M
- Thorsen K
- Andersen NH
- Gravholt CH
journal: Genet Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/gim.2016.181
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluating the quality of Marfan genotype-phenotype correlations in existing FBN1 databases.
**Authors:** Groth KA, Von Kodolitsch Y, Kutsche K, Gaustadnes M, Thorsen K, Andersen NH, Gravholt CH
**Journal:** Genet Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/gim.2016.181](https://doi.org/10.1038/gim.2016.181)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2017 Jul;19(7):772-777. doi: 10.1038/gim.2016.181. Epub 2016 Dec 1.

Evaluating the quality of Marfan genotype-phenotype correlations in existing 
FBN1 databases.

Groth KA(1)(2), Von Kodolitsch Y(3), Kutsche K(4), Gaustadnes M(2), Thorsen 
K(2), Andersen NH(1), Gravholt CH(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(3)German Aorta Centre of Hamburg, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University 
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Genetic FBN1 testing is pivotal for confirming the clinical 
diagnosis of Marfan syndrome. In an effort to evaluate variant causality, FBN1 
databases are often used. We evaluated the current databases regarding FBN1 
variants and validated associated phenotype records with a new Marfan syndrome 
geno-phenotyping tool called the Marfan score.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We evaluated four databases (UMD-FBN1, ClinVar, the Human 
Gene Mutation Database (HGMD), and Uniprot) containing 2,250 FBN1 variants 
supported by 4,904 records presented in 307 references. The Marfan score 
calculated for phenotype data from the records quantified variant associations 
with Marfan syndrome phenotype. We calculated a Marfan score for 1,283 variants, 
of which we confirmed the database diagnosis of Marfan syndrome in 77.1%. This 
represented only 35.8% of the total registered variants; 18.5-33.3% (UMD-FBN1 
versus HGMD) of variants associated with Marfan syndrome in the databases could 
not be confirmed by the recorded phenotype.
CONCLUSION: FBN1 databases can be imprecise and incomplete. Data should be used 
with caution when evaluating FBN1 variants. At present, the UMD-FBN1 database 
seems to be the biggest and best curated; therefore, it is the most 
comprehensive database. However, the need for better genotype-phenotype curated 
databases is evident, and we hereby present such a database.Genet Med advance 
online publication 01 December 2016.

DOI: 10.1038/gim.2016.181
PMID: 27906200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]