---
reference_id: "PMID:33208891"
title: RIP1 kinase activity promotes steatohepatitis through mediating cell death and inflammation in macrophages.
authors:
- Tao L
- Yi Y
- Chen Y
- Zhang H
- Orning P
- Lien E
- Jie J
- Zhang W
- Xu Q
- Li Y
- Ding Z
- Wu C
- Ding Q
- Wang J
- Zhang J
- Weng D
journal: Cell Death Differ
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41418-020-00668-w
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Death/physiology
- "Diet, High-Fat/adverse effects"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Hepatocytes/metabolism
- Humans
- Inflammation/metabolism
- Liver/metabolism
- Macrophages/metabolism
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease/metabolism, pathology"
- Receptor-Interacting Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RIP1 kinase activity promotes steatohepatitis through mediating cell death and inflammation in macrophages.
**Authors:** Tao L, Yi Y, Chen Y, Zhang H, Orning P, Lien E, Jie J, Zhang W, Xu Q, Li Y, Ding Z, Wu C, Ding Q, Wang J, Zhang J, Weng D
**Journal:** Cell Death Differ (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41418-020-00668-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41418-020-00668-w)

## Content

1. Cell Death Differ. 2021 Apr;28(4):1418-1433. doi: 10.1038/s41418-020-00668-w. 
Epub 2020 Nov 18.

RIP1 kinase activity promotes steatohepatitis through mediating cell death and 
inflammation in macrophages.

Tao L(1), Yi Y(1), Chen Y(2), Zhang H(3), Orning P(4)(5), Lien E(4)(5), Jie 
J(1), Zhang W(1), Xu Q(1), Li Y(1), Ding Z(1), Wu C(6), Ding Q(3), Wang J(1), 
Zhang J(1), Weng D(7).

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Metabolism, Nanjing University of Science & Technology, 
200 Xiaolingwei Street, 210094, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing 
University Medical School, Nanjing, 210008, Jiangsu, China.
(3)CAS Key Laboratory of Nutrition, Metabolism and Food Safety, Shanghai 
Institute of Nutrition and Health, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, 
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100864, 
Shanghai, China.
(4)Program in Innate Immunity, Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious 
Diseases and Immunology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, 
MA, 01605, USA.
(5)Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research, Department of Clinical and 
Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 7491, 
Trondheim, Norway.
(6)Department of Infectious diseases, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing 
University Medical School, Nanjing, 210008, Jiangsu, China.
(7)Center for Molecular Metabolism, Nanjing University of Science & Technology, 
200 Xiaolingwei Street, 210094, Nanjing, China. danweng@njust.edu.cn.

Hepatocyte cell death and liver inflammation have been well recognized as 
central characteristics of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), however, the 
underlying molecular basis remains elusive. The kinase receptor-interacting 
protein 1 (RIP1) is a multitasking molecule with distinct functions in 
regulating apoptosis, necroptosis, and inflammation. Dissecting the role of RIP1 
distinct functions in different pathophysiology has absorbed huge research 
enthusiasm. Wild-type and RIP1 kinase-dead (Rip1K45A/K45A) mice were fed with 
high-fat diet (HFD) to investigate the role of RIP1 kinase activity in the 
pathogenesis of NASH. Rip1K45A/K45A mice exhibited significantly alleviated NASH 
phenotype of hepatic steatosis, liver damage, fibrosis as well as reduced 
hepatic cell death and inflammation compared to WT mice. Our results also 
indicated that both in vivo lipotoxicity and in vitro saturated fatty acids 
(palmitic acid) treatment were able to induce the kinase activation of RIP1 in 
liver macrophages. RIP1 kinase was required for mediating inflammasome 
activation, apoptotic and necrotic cell death induced by palmitic acid in both 
bone marrow-derived macrophage and mouse primary Kupffer cells. Results from 
chimeric mice established through lethal irradiation and bone marrow 
transplantation further confirmed that the RIP1 kinase in hematopoietic-derived 
macrophages contributed mostly to the disease progression in NASH. Consistent 
with murine models, we also found that RIP1 kinase was markedly activated in 
human NASH, and the kinase activation mainly occurred in liver macrophages as 
indicated by immunofluorescence double staining. In summary, our study indicated 
that RIP1 kinase was phosphorylated and activated mainly in liver macrophages in 
both experimental and clinical NASH. We provided direct genetic evidence that 
the kinase activity of RIP1 especially in hematopoietic-derived macrophages 
contributes to the pathogenesis of NASH, through mediating inflammasome 
activation and cell death induction. Macrophage RIP1 kinase represents a 
specific and potential therapeutic target for NASH.

DOI: 10.1038/s41418-020-00668-w
PMCID: PMC8027792
PMID: 33208891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.