---
reference_id: "PMID:15895462"
title: The phenotypic spectrum of COL2A1 mutations.
authors:
- Nishimura G
- Haga N
- Kitoh H
- Tanaka Y
- Sonoda T
- Kitamura M
- Shirahama S
- Itoh T
- Nakashima E
- Ohashi H
- Ikegawa S
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20179
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The phenotypic spectrum of COL2A1 mutations.
**Authors:** Nishimura G, Haga N, Kitoh H, Tanaka Y, Sonoda T, Kitamura M, Shirahama S, Itoh T, Nakashima E, Ohashi H, Ikegawa S
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20179](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20179)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2005 Jul;26(1):36-43. doi: 10.1002/humu.20179.

The phenotypic spectrum of COL2A1 mutations.

Nishimura G(1), Haga N, Kitoh H, Tanaka Y, Sonoda T, Kitamura M, Shirahama S, 
Itoh T, Nakashima E, Ohashi H, Ikegawa S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Tokyo Metropolitan Kiyose Children's Hospital, 
Tokyo, Japan.

Heterozygous mutations of COL2A1 create several clinical entities collectively 
termed type II collagenopathies. These disorders not only impair skeletal growth 
but also cause ocular and otolaryngological abnormalities. The classical 
phenotypes include the spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia (SED) spectrum with variable 
severity, Stickler dysplasia type I (STD-I), and Kniest dysplasia (KND). Most 
COL2A1 mutations occur in the triple helical region of alpha 1(II) chains: the 
SED spectrum is mostly attributed to missense mutations that substitute bulky 
amino acids for glycine residues, STD-I to haploinsufficiency of truncation 
mutations, and KND to exon skipping due to splice-site mutations. To further 
elucidate the genotype-phenotype relationship of type II collagenopathies, we 
examined COL2A1 mutations in 56 families that were suspected of having type II 
collagenopathies, and found 38 mutations in 41 families. Phenotypes for all 22 
missense mutations and one in-frame deletion in the triple helical region fell 
along the SED spectrum. Glycine to serine substitutions resulted in alternating 
zones that produce severer and milder skeletal phenotypes. Glycine to nonserine 
residue substitutions exclusively created more severe phenotypes. The gradient 
of the SED spectrum did not necessarily correlate with the occurrence of 
extraskeletal manifestations. All nine truncation or splice-site mutations in 
the triple helical or N-propeptide region caused STD-I or KND, and extraskeletal 
changes were inevitable in both phenotypes. All six C-propeptide mutations 
produced a range of atypical skeletal phenotypes and created ocular, but not 
otolaryngological, changes.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20179
PMID: 15895462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]