---
reference_id: "PMID:32413282"
title: Expansion of GGC Repeat in GIPC1 Is Associated with Oculopharyngodistal Myopathy.
authors:
- Deng J
- Yu J
- Li P
- Luan X
- Cao L
- Zhao J
- Yu M
- Zhang W
- Lv H
- Xie Z
- Meng L
- Zheng Y
- Zhao Y
- Gang Q
- Wang Q
- Liu J
- Zhu M
- Guo X
- Su Y
- Liang Y
- Liang F
- Hayashi T
- Maeda MH
- Sato T
- Ura S
- Oya Y
- Ogasawara M
- Iida A
- Nishino I
- Zhou C
- Yan C
- Yuan Y
- Hong D
- Wang Z
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.04.011
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Asian People/genetics
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 19/genetics"
- DNA Methylation
- Female
- Humans
- Lod Score
- Male
- "Muscle, Skeletal/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Muscular Dystrophies/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Pedigree
- RNA-Seq
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/metabolism
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expansion of GGC Repeat in GIPC1 Is Associated with Oculopharyngodistal Myopathy.
**Authors:** Deng J, Yu J, Li P, Luan X, Cao L, Zhao J, Yu M, Zhang W, Lv H, Xie Z, Meng L, Zheng Y, Zhao Y, Gang Q, Wang Q, Liu J, Zhu M, Guo X, Su Y, Liang Y, Liang F, Hayashi T, Maeda MH, Sato T, Ura S, Oya Y, Ogasawara M, Iida A, Nishino I, Zhou C, Yan C, Yuan Y, Hong D, Wang Z
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.04.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.04.011)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2020 Jun 4;106(6):793-804. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.04.011.
Epub  2020 May 14.

Expansion of GGC Repeat in GIPC1 Is Associated with Oculopharyngodistal 
Myopathy.

Deng J(1), Yu J(1), Li P(2), Luan X(3), Cao L(3), Zhao J(1), Yu M(1), Zhang 
W(1), Lv H(1), Xie Z(1), Meng L(1), Zheng Y(1), Zhao Y(1), Gang Q(1), Wang Q(1), 
Liu J(1), Zhu M(4), Guo X(2), Su Y(2), Liang Y(2), Liang F(2), Hayashi T(5), 
Maeda MH(6), Sato T(7), Ura S(8), Oya Y(9), Ogasawara M(10), Iida A(11), Nishino 
I(12), Zhou C(13), Yan C(14), Yuan Y(1), Hong D(15), Wang Z(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034, 
China.
(2)Grandomics Biosciences, Beijing 101312, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Rui Jin Hospital & Rui Jin Hospital North, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, Nanchang 330006, China.
(5)Department of Neurology, Toyama University Hospital, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.
(6)Department of Neurology, Federation of National Public Service Personnel 
Mutual Aid Associations Toranomon Hospital, Tokyo 105-8470, Japan.
(7)Department of Neurology, Hakodate Medical Association Hospital, Hakodate 
041-8522, Japan.
(8)Department of Neurology, Japanese Red Cross Asahikawa Hospital, Asahikawa 
070-8530, Japan.
(9)Department of Neurology, National Center Hospital, National Center of 
Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo 187-8551, Japan.
(10)Department of Neuromuscular Research, National Institute of Neuroscience, 
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo 187-8551, Japan.
(11)Department of Clinical Genome Analysis, Medical Genome Center, National 
Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo 187-8551, Japan.
(12)Department of Clinical Genome Analysis, Medical Genome Center, National 
Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo 187-8551, Japan; Department of 
Neuromuscular Research, National Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of 
Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo 187-8551, Japan.
(13)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, China.
(14)Research Institute of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Diseases and 
Department of Neurology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan 250012, 
China; Mitochondrial Medicine Laboratory, Qilu Hospital (Qingdao), Shandong 
University, Qingdao 266035, China; Brain Science Research Institute, Shandong 
University, Jinan 250012, China.
(15)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, Nanchang 330006, China. Electronic address: hongdaojun@hotmail.com.
(16)Department of Neurology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034, 
China. Electronic address: drwangzx@163.com.

Oculopharyngodistal myopathy (OPDM) is an adult-onset inherited neuromuscular 
disorder characterized by progressive ptosis, external ophthalmoplegia, and 
weakness of the masseter, facial, pharyngeal, and distal limb muscles. The 
myopathological features are presence of rimmed vacuoles (RVs) in the muscle 
fibers and myopathic changes of differing severity. Inheritance is variable, 
with either putative autosomal-dominant or autosomal-recessive pattern. Here, 
using a comprehensive strategy combining whole-genome sequencing (WGS), 
long-read whole-genome sequencing (LRS), linkage analysis, repeat-primed 
polymerase chain reaction (RP-PCR), and fluorescence amplicon length analysis 
polymerase chain reaction (AL-PCR), we identified an abnormal GGC repeat 
expansion in the 5' UTR of GIPC1 in one out of four families and three sporadic 
case subjects from a Chinese OPDM cohort. Expanded GGC repeats were further 
confirmed as the cause of OPDM in an additional 2 out of 4 families and 6 out of 
13 sporadic Chinese individuals with OPDM, as well as 7 out of 194 unrelated 
Japanese individuals with OPDM. Methylation, qRT-PCR, and western blot analysis 
indicated that GIPC1 mRNA levels were increased while protein levels were 
unaltered in OPDM-affected individuals. RNA sequencing indicated p53 signaling, 
vascular smooth muscle contraction, ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, and ribosome 
pathways were involved in the pathogenic mechanisms of OPDM-affected individuals 
with GGC repeat expansion in GIPC1. This study provides further evidence that 
OPDM is associated with GGC repeat expansions in distinct genes and highly 
suggests that expanded GGC repeat units are essential in the pathogenesis of 
OPDM, regardless of the genes in which the expanded repeats are located.

Copyright © 2020 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.04.011
PMCID: PMC7273532
PMID: 32413282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.