---
reference_id: "PMID:22863190"
title: "A single recurrent mutation in the 5'-UTR of IFITM5 causes osteogenesis imperfecta type V."
authors:
- Cho TJ
- Lee KE
- Lee SK
- Song SJ
- Kim KJ
- Jeon D
- Lee G
- Kim HN
- Lee HR
- Eom HH
- Lee ZH
- Kim OH
- Park WY
- Park SS
- Ikegawa S
- Yoo WJ
- Choi IH
- Kim JW
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.06.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A single recurrent mutation in the 5'-UTR of IFITM5 causes osteogenesis imperfecta type V.
**Authors:** Cho TJ, Lee KE, Lee SK, Song SJ, Kim KJ, Jeon D, Lee G, Kim HN, Lee HR, Eom HH, Lee ZH, Kim OH, Park WY, Park SS, Ikegawa S, Yoo WJ, Choi IH, Kim JW
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.06.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.06.005)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Aug 10;91(2):343-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.06.005. Epub
 2012 Aug 2.

A single recurrent mutation in the 5'-UTR of IFITM5 causes osteogenesis 
imperfecta type V.

Cho TJ(1), Lee KE, Lee SK, Song SJ, Kim KJ, Jeon D, Lee G, Kim HN, Lee HR, Eom 
HH, Lee ZH, Kim OH, Park WY, Park SS, Ikegawa S, Yoo WJ, Choi IH, Kim JW.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Orthopaedics, Seoul National University Children's 
Hospital, Seoul 110-744, Republic of Korea. tjcho@snu.ac.kr

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heterogenous group of genetic disorders of 
bone fragility. OI type V is an autosomal-dominant disease characterized by 
calcification of the forearm interosseous membrane, radial head dislocation, a 
subphyseal metaphyseal radiodense line, and hyperplastic callus formation; the 
causative mutation involved in this disease has not been discovered yet. Using 
linkage analysis in a four-generation family and whole-exome sequencing, we 
identified a heterozygous mutation of c.-14C>T in the 5'-untranslated region of 
a gene encoding interferon-induced transmembrane protein 5 (IFITM5). It 
completely cosegregated with the disease in three families and occurred de novo 
in five simplex individuals. Transfection of wild-type and mutant IFITM5 
constructs revealed that the mutation added five amino acids 
(Met-Ala-Leu-Glu-Pro) to the N terminus of IFITM5. Given that IFITM5 expression 
and protein localization is restricted to the skeletal tissue and IFITM5 
involvement in bone formation, we conclude that this recurrent mutation would 
have a specific effect on IFITM5 function and thus cause OI type V.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.06.005
PMCID: PMC3415533
PMID: 22863190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]