---
reference_id: "PMID:26937548"
title: FGFR1-Related Hartsfield Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Dhamija R
- Babovic-Vuksanovic D
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FGFR1-Related Hartsfield Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Dhamija R, Babovic-Vuksanovic D

## Content

1. FGFR1-Related Hartsfield Syndrome.

Dhamija R(1), Babovic-Vuksanovic D(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2016 Mar 3 [updated 2022 May 12].

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Phoenix, Arizona
(2)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: FGFR1-related Hartsfield syndrome comprises two core 
features: holoprosencephaly (HPE) spectrum disorder and ectrodactyly spectrum 
disorder. HPE spectrum disorder, resulting from failed or incomplete forebrain 
division early in gestation, includes alobar, semilobar, or lobar HPE. Other 
observed midline brain malformations include corpus callosum agenesis, absent 
septum pellucidum, absent olfactory bulbs and tracts, and vermian hypoplasia. 
Other findings associated with the HPE spectrum such as craniofacial 
dysmorphism, neurologic issues (developmental delay, spasticity, seizures, 
hypothalamic dysfunction), feeding problems, and endocrine issues 
(hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and central insipidus diabetes) are common. 
Ectrodactyly spectrum disorders are unilateral or bilateral malformations of the 
hands and/or feet characterized by a median cleft of hand or foot due to absence 
of the longitudinal central rays (also called split-hand/foot malformation). The 
number of digits on the right and left can vary. Polydactyly and syndactyly can 
also be seen.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of FGFR1-related Hartsfield syndrome is 
established in a proband with suggestive findings and either an FGFR1 
heterozygous pathogenic variant (in those with autosomal dominant inheritance) 
or FGFR1 biallelic pathogenic variants (in those with autosomal recessive 
inheritance) identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Diabetes insipidus may require 
treatment with desmopressin; temperature dysregulation can be managed by 
modifying the environment; disturbance of sleep-wake cycles can be managed with 
good sleep hygiene and, if needed, use of melatonin or other sleep aids such as 
clonidine. Medically refractory epilepsy typically requires multiple 
anti-seizure medications. Developmental delay is managed with an emphasis on 
early intervention and an individualized education plan and therapies as needed. 
Spasticity can be treated with physical and occupational therapy and bracing, as 
well as muscle relaxants (when moderate or severe). Some children may require a 
gastrostomy and/or tracheostomy for feeding issues. Cleft lip/palate surgical 
repair is performed under the direction of a craniofacial team. Hand and foot 
malformations are managed with therapy and adaptive devices; surgery may be 
needed to improve dexterity.
GENETIC COUNSELING: FGFR1-related Hartsfield syndrome is typically an autosomal 
dominant (AD) disorder. In two families reported to date, FGFR1-related 
Hartsfield syndrome was inherited in an autosomal recessive (AR) manner. AD 
inheritance. Most probands have a de novo FGFR1 pathogenic variant. Germline 
mosaicism has been observed in three unrelated families. AR inheritance. At 
conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of 
being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the FGFR1 pathogenic variant(s) have 
been identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation 
genetic testing for a pregnancy at increased risk are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 26937548