---
reference_id: "PMID:37937004"
title: "Dieulafoy's Lesion in a Duodenal Diverticulum: A Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Yahia ZA
- Almutawa SM
- Bantan BN
- Alghamdi MS
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.46584
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dieulafoy's Lesion in a Duodenal Diverticulum: A Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Yahia ZA, Almutawa SM, Bantan BN, Alghamdi MS
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.46584](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.46584)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Oct 6;15(10):e46584. doi: 10.7759/cureus.46584. eCollection 2023 
Oct.

Dieulafoy's Lesion in a Duodenal Diverticulum: A Case Report and Literature 
Review.

Yahia ZA(1), Almutawa SM(2), Bantan BN(2), Alghamdi MS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Alnoor Specialist Hospital, Makkah, SAU.
(2)College of Medicine, Umm Al-Qura University, Makkah, SAU.

This report presents a case of Dieulafoy's lesion (DL), a rare and serious 
gastrointestinal condition, which occurred unusually in a duodenal diverticulum 
and highlights the diagnostic and management complexities associated with it. A 
literature review of six similar cases revealed commonalities in presentation, 
diagnosis, and management, emphasizing the complexities in identifying and 
handling this rare manifestation of DL. The findings emphasize the need for 
clinical vigilance and further research into optimizing strategies for 
diagnosing and managing this rare condition.

Copyright © 2023, Yahia et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.46584
PMCID: PMC10627415
PMID: 37937004

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.