---
reference_id: "PMID:32482786"
title: Low-dose chest computed tomographic screening and invasive diagnosis of pulmonary nodules for lung cancer in never-smokers.
authors:
- Kim YW
- Kang HR
- Kwon BS
- Lim SY
- Lee YJ
- Park JS
- Cho YJ
- Yoon HI
- Lee KW
- Lee JH
- Lee CT
journal: Eur Respir J
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1183/13993003.00177-2020
keywords:
- Adult
- Early Detection of Cancer
- Humans
- Lung Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging
- Mass Screening
- Republic of Korea
- Smokers
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Low-dose chest computed tomographic screening and invasive diagnosis of pulmonary nodules for lung cancer in never-smokers.
**Authors:** Kim YW, Kang HR, Kwon BS, Lim SY, Lee YJ, Park JS, Cho YJ, Yoon HI, Lee KW, Lee JH, Lee CT
**Journal:** Eur Respir J (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1183/13993003.00177-2020](https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00177-2020)

## Content

1. Eur Respir J. 2020 Nov 12;56(5):2000177. doi: 10.1183/13993003.00177-2020.
Print  2020 Nov.

Low-dose chest computed tomographic screening and invasive diagnosis of
pulmonary nodules for lung cancer in never-smokers.

Kim YW(1)(2), Kang HR(1), Kwon BS(1)(2), Lim SY(1)(2), Lee YJ(1)(2), Park
JS(1)(2), Cho YJ(1)(2), Yoon HI(1)(2), Lee KW(3), Lee JH(1)(2), Lee CT(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Dept of Internal Medicine,
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Dept of Internal Medicine,
Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Republic of Korea.
(3)Dept of Radiology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam,
Republic of Korea.
(4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Dept of Internal Medicine,
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea
ctlee@snu.ac.kr.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2020 Nov 12;56(5):2002949. doi: 10.1183/13993003.02949-2020.

BACKGROUND: Although lung cancer screening using low-dose computed tomography
(LDCT) is now widely used in clinical practice, the characteristics and outcomes
of diagnostic procedures related to screen-detected nodules in never-smokers
remain unclear. We aimed to determine the incidence of nodules considered for
invasive biopsy and evaluate the final diagnoses and procedure-related
complications in never-smokers in comparison to ever-smokers who underwent LDCT
screening.
METHODS: We evaluated 37 436 asymptomatic adults (17 968 never-smokers and
19 468 ever-smokers) who underwent LDCT screening for lung cancer between
January 2009 and December 2018 at a tertiary centre in South Korea. The rates of
invasive diagnostic procedures for detected nodules and related complications,
and the diagnostic outcomes were determined in the never-smoker and ever-smoker
groups.
RESULTS: Among the never-smokers, 2908 (16.2%) out of 17 968 had positive
nodules. Overall, 139 (0.77%) out of 17 968 never-smokers and 194 (1.00%) out of
19 468 ever-smokers underwent invasive biopsy (p=0.022). Lung cancer was
diagnosed in 84 (0.47%) out of 17 968 never-smokers and 123 (0.63%) out of
19 468 ever-smokers (p=0.032). The proportions of participants diagnosed with
benign disease after invasive biopsy (false-positive) were 50 (0.28%) out of
17 968 and 69 (0.35%) out of 19 468 in the never-smoker and ever-smoker groups,
respectively (p=0.191). Multivariate analyses revealed no significant
associations of smoking with the risk of a false-positive diagnosis (OR 0.98,
95% CI 0.62-1.57) and complications (OR 1.33, 95% CI 0.65-3.73) after biopsy. Of
the 84 never-smokers with lung cancer, 82 (97.6%) had adenocarcinoma, and 75
(89.3%) were in stage I with a favourable prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: LDCT screening in never-smokers resulted in a notable detection
rate of lung nodules, which warranted invasive biopsy. The lung cancer detection
rate was lower in never-smokers than in ever-smokers. However, no significant
differences in the false-positive and complication rates were observed between
the two groups. Accordingly, a more specifically tailored management strategy is
needed for screen-detected nodules in Asian never-smokers.

Copyright ©ERS 2020.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.00177-2020
PMID: 32482786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: Y.W. Kim has nothing to
disclose. Conflict of interest: H-R. Kang has nothing to disclose. Conflict of
interest: B.S. Kwon has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: S.Y. Lim has
nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: Y.J. Lee has nothing to disclose.
Conflict of interest: J.S. Park has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest:
Y-J. Cho has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: H.I. Yoon has nothing to
disclose. Conflict of interest: K.W. Lee has nothing to disclose. Conflict of
interest: J.H. Lee has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: C-T. Lee has
nothing to disclose.
