---
reference_id: "PMID:32393158"
title: Blending Traditional Vocational Services and Individualized Placement and Support for Formerly Incarcerated Veterans.
authors:
- LePage JP
- Crawford AM
- Cipher DJ
- Anderson K
- Rock A
- Johnson JAP
- Washington EL
- Ottomanelli L
journal: Psychiatr Serv
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1176/appi.ps.201900421
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Blending Traditional Vocational Services and Individualized Placement and Support for Formerly Incarcerated Veterans.
**Authors:** LePage JP, Crawford AM, Cipher DJ, Anderson K, Rock A, Johnson JAP, Washington EL, Ottomanelli L
**Journal:** Psychiatr Serv (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1176/appi.ps.201900421](https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ps.201900421)

## Content

1. Psychiatr Serv. 2020 Aug 1;71(8):816-823. doi: 10.1176/appi.ps.201900421. Epub
 2020 May 12.

Blending Traditional Vocational Services and Individualized Placement and 
Support for Formerly Incarcerated Veterans.

LePage JP(1), Crawford AM(1), Cipher DJ(1), Anderson K(1), Rock A(1), Johnson 
JAP(1), Washington EL(1), Ottomanelli L(1).

Author information:
(1)U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) North Texas Health Care System, 
Dallas (LePage, Rock); Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas (LePage); Dallas VA Research Corporation, 
Dallas (Crawford, Parish Johnson, Washington); College of Nursing and Health 
Innovation, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington (Cipher); Department of 
Psychology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins (Anderson); James A. Haley 
Veterans Hospital, and Department of Rehabilitation and Mental Health 
Counseling, University of South Florida, Tampa (Ottomanelli).

OBJECTIVE: This study compared two vocational programs: the About Face 
Vocational Program (AFVP), a traditional group-based vocational program created 
for formerly incarcerated veterans, and a hybrid program combining the AFVP with 
principles of individual placement and support-supported employment.
METHODS: The study evaluated 111 veterans with at least one felony conviction 
who had a mental illness, substance use disorder, or both. Veterans were 
randomly assigned to either vocational condition.
RESULTS: Veterans in the hybrid condition, compared with the AFVP alone, were 
more likely to find employment, had higher rates of full-time employment, and 
earned significantly more money over the course of the study. A comparison of 
only participants who found employment showed higher rates of full-time 
employment for veterans in the hybrid condition but similarities between the two 
groups in other measures of employment success.
CONCLUSIONS: Blended models of vocational services for veterans with mental 
illness, substance use disorders, or both are effective at returning formerly 
incarcerated veterans to competitive employment.

DOI: 10.1176/appi.ps.201900421
PMID: 32393158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]