---
reference_id: "PMID:39903606"
title: "The role of cardiovascular multimodality imaging in the evaluation of Anderson-Fabry disease: from early diagnosis to therapy monitoring."
authors:
- Cameli M
- Pieroni M
- Pastore MC
- Brucato A
- Castelletti S
- Crotti L
- Dweck M
- Frustaci A
- Gimelli A
- Klingel K
- Kuchynka P
- Kuusisto J
- Lazaros G
- Mandoli GE
- Merlo M
- Moon J
- Muraru D
- Pantazis A
- Rigopoulos AG
- Ristic A
- Elif Sade L
- Sheppard MN
- Tschöpe C
- Petersen SE
- Imazio M
- Bohbot Y
- Cikes M
- Garg P
- Keenan N
- Petrescu A
- Stankovic I
- Szabo L
- Uusitalo V
journal: Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/ehjci/jeaf038
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of cardiovascular multimodality imaging in the evaluation of Anderson-Fabry disease: from early diagnosis to therapy monitoring.
**Authors:** Cameli M, Pieroni M, Pastore MC, Brucato A, Castelletti S, Crotti L, Dweck M, Frustaci A, Gimelli A, Klingel K, Kuchynka P, Kuusisto J, Lazaros G, Mandoli GE, Merlo M, Moon J, Muraru D, Pantazis A, Rigopoulos AG, Ristic A, Elif Sade L, Sheppard MN, Tschöpe C, Petersen SE, Imazio M, Bohbot Y, Cikes M, Garg P, Keenan N, Petrescu A, Stankovic I, Szabo L, Uusitalo V
**Journal:** Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ehjci/jeaf038](https://doi.org/10.1093/ehjci/jeaf038)

## Content

1. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2025 Apr 30;26(5):814-829. doi: 
10.1093/ehjci/jeaf038.

The role of cardiovascular multimodality imaging in the evaluation of 
Anderson-Fabry disease: from early diagnosis to therapy monitoring.

Cameli M(1), Pieroni M(2), Pastore MC(1), Brucato A(3), Castelletti S(4), Crotti 
L(4)(5), Dweck M(6), Frustaci A(7), Gimelli A(8), Klingel K(9), Kuchynka P(10), 
Kuusisto J(11), Lazaros G(12), Mandoli GE(1), Merlo M(13), Moon J(14), Muraru 
D(5)(15), Pantazis A(16), Rigopoulos AG(17), Ristic A(18), Elif Sade L(19), 
Sheppard MN(20), Tschöpe C(21), Petersen SE(22)(23), Imazio M(24), Bohbot Y, 
Cikes M, Garg P, Keenan N, Petrescu A, Stankovic I, Szabo L, Uusitalo V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnologies, Division of Cardiology, University of 
Siena, viale Bracci 16, 53100 Siena, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, 
Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Cardiology, IRCCS, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, San Luca 
Hospital, Cardiomyopathy Unit, Milan, Italy.
(5)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, 
Italy.
(6)British Heart Foundation Centre for Cardiovascular Science, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(7)IRCCS L.Spallanzani, Via Portuense 292, 00149Rome, Italy.
(8)Department of Cardiac Imaging, Fondazione Toscana G. Monasterio, Pisa, Italy.
(9)Cardiopathology, Institute for Pathology and Neuropathology, University 
Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
(10)2nd Department of Medicine, Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, First 
Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and General University 
Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
(11)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Internal Medicine, University of Eastern 
Finland, Kuopio, Finland.
(12)Unit for Inherited and Rare Cardiovascular Diseases, 1st Department of 
Cardiology, Hippokration Hospital, University of Athens Medical School, Athens, 
Greece.
(13)Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Cardiomyopathies, Cardiovascular 
Department, Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Giuliano-Isontina (ASUGI), 
University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.
(14)Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University College London, London, UK.
(15)IRCCS, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Department of Cardiology, San Luca 
Hospital, Imaging Unit, Milan, Italy.
(16)Cardiovascular Research Centre, Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Foundation 
Trust, London, UK.
(17)Department of Adult Cardiology, Mitera General Hospital, Hygeia Group, 
Athens, Greece.
(18)Department of Cardiac Surgery, University of Clinical Center of Serbia, 
Belgrade, Serbia.
(19)UPMC-Heart and Vascular Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 
USA.
(20)Department of Cardiovascular Pathology, Cardiovascular and Genetics Research 
Institute, St Georges Medical School, London, UK.
(21)Department of Cardiology, Charité-Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Campus 
Virchow-Klinikum, Augustenburger Platz 1, Berlin 13353, Germany.
(22)NIHR Barts Biomedical Research Centre, William Harvey Research Institute, 
Queen Mary University London, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ, UK.
(23)Barts Heart Centre, St Bartholomew's Hospital, Barts Health NHS Trust, West 
Smithfield, EC1A 7BE London, UK.
(24)Cardiothoracic Department, Santa Maria della Misericordia University 
Hospital, Udine, Italy.

Anderson-Fabry disease (AFD) is a rare genetic disease with X-linked 
transmission characterized by a defect in the enzyme alpha-galactosidase A, 
which impairs glycosphingolipid metabolism and leads to an excessive storage of 
globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) within lysosomes. AFD involves renal, cardiac, 
vascular, and nervous systems and is mainly observed in male patients with onset 
in childhood, although cardiac manifestation is often shown in adults. AFD 
cardiomyopathy is caused by the accumulation of Gb3 within myocytes first showed 
by left ventricular hypertrophy and diastolic dysfunction, leading to 
restrictive cardiomyopathy and systolic heart failure with biventricular 
involvement. The diagnosis of AFD cardiomyopathy may be insidious in the first 
stages and requires accurate differential diagnosis with other cardiomyopathies 
with hypertrophic phenotype. However, it is fundamental to promptly initiate 
specific therapies that have shown promising results, particularly for early 
treatment. A careful integration between clinical evaluation, genetic tests, and 
cardiac imaging is required to diagnose AFD with cardiac involvement. Basic and 
advanced echocardiography, cardiac magnetic resonance, and nuclear imaging may 
offer pivotal information for early diagnosis (Graphical Abstract), and the 
management of these patients is often limited to centres with high expertise in 
the field. This clinical consensus statement, developed by experts from the 
European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Working Group on Myocardial and Pericardial 
Diseases and the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging of the ESC, aims 
to provide practical advice for all clinicians regarding the use of 
multimodality imaging to simplify the diagnostic evaluation, prognostic 
stratification, and management of cardiac involvement in AFD.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, 
please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for 
reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service 
via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information 
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ehjci/jeaf038
PMID: 39903606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: A.G.R. received speaker 
fees from Pfizer. G.L. received honoraria from Pfizer and Menarini. J.K. 
received research grants for studying hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and Fabry 
disease (Academy of Finland, Finnish Foundation for Heart Research, Kuopio 
University Hospital, Shire, Sanofi, BMS); delivered an invited lecturer in 
meetings of the Finnish Cardiac Society, Society for Internist in Finland, 
European Society of Cardiology, Scandinavian Fabry Meeting, and drug companies; 
and was a sponsored delegate in conferences in cardiology and metabolic diseases 
and a temporary advisory board member of Sanofi, Amgen, Pfizer, Chiesi, and BMS. 
A.B.’s institution received funding from Kiniksa Pharmaceuticals, Ltd as an 
investigative site; unrestricted research grant from SOBI, KINIKSA, and ACARPIA; 
and travel and accommodation for advisory committee from SOBI and Kiniksa. K.K. 
received speaker fees from Pfizer. D.M. received consultancy and research 
support from GE Healthcare and Philips/TomTec and speakers’ fee from GE 
Healthcare, Philips/TomTec, and Bristol Myers Squibb. L.C. received speaker fees 
from Bristol Myers Squibb. S.E.P. was a consultant for Circle Cardiovascular 
Imaging, Inc., Calgary, Alberta, Canada.