---
reference_id: "PMID:25408859"
title: Diagnosis and subclassification of acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
authors:
- Chiaretti S
- Zini G
- Bassan R
journal: Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.4084/MJHID.2014.073
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and subclassification of acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
**Authors:** Chiaretti S, Zini G, Bassan R
**Journal:** Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.4084/MJHID.2014.073](https://doi.org/10.4084/MJHID.2014.073)

## Content

1. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2014 Nov 1;6(1):e2014073. doi: 
10.4084/MJHID.2014.073. eCollection 2014.

Diagnosis and subclassification of acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Chiaretti S(1), Zini G(2), Bassan R(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and 
Hematology, "Sapienza" University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(2)Hematology, Catholic University Sacred Heart Policlinico Gemelli, Rome, 
Italy.
(3)Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplant Unit, Ospedale dell'Angelo e SS. 
Giovanni e Paolo, Mestre-Venezia, Italy.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a disseminated malignancy of B- or 
T-lymphoblasts which imposes a rapid and accurate diagnostic process to support 
an optimal risk-oriented therapy and thus increase the curability rate. The need 
for a precise diagnostic algorithm is underlined by the awareness that both ALL 
therapy and related success rates may vary greatly between ALL subsets, from 
standard chemotherapy in patients with standard-risk ALL, to allotransplantation 
(SCT) and targeted therapy in high-risk patients and cases expressing suitable 
biological targets, respectively. This review summarizes how best to identify 
ALL and the most relevant ALL subsets.

DOI: 10.4084/MJHID.2014.073
PMCID: PMC4235437
PMID: 25408859