---
reference_id: "PMID:38455693"
title: "Pseudo-Ludwig's Angina: Spontaneous Sublingual Haematoma Elicited by Warfarin."
authors:
- Orhun N
- Ekin U
- Sanchez J
- Azzam MH
- Manickam R
journal: Eur J Case Rep Intern Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.12890/2024_004299
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pseudo-Ludwig's Angina: Spontaneous Sublingual Haematoma Elicited by Warfarin.
**Authors:** Orhun N, Ekin U, Sanchez J, Azzam MH, Manickam R
**Journal:** Eur J Case Rep Intern Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.12890/2024_004299](https://doi.org/10.12890/2024_004299)

## Content

1. Eur J Case Rep Intern Med. 2024 Feb 12;11(3):004299. doi:
10.12890/2024_004299.  eCollection 2024.

Pseudo-Ludwig's Angina: Spontaneous Sublingual Haematoma Elicited by Warfarin.

Orhun N(1), Ekin U(2), Sanchez J(2), Azzam MH(2), Manickam R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, St. Joseph's University Medical Center, 
Paterson, USA.
(2)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, St. Joseph's University 
Medical Center, Paterson, USA.

Spontaneous bleeding into the upper airways is a rare and potentially 
life-threatening complication of chronic anticoagulation. There are scarce cases 
in the literature demonstrating upper airway haematomas secondary to warfarin 
use, which is the predominant anticoagulant used by clinicians despite having a 
complex pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profile. We report a compelling case 
featuring warfarin-induced sublingual haematoma, managed conservatively through 
the reversal of anticoagulation using fresh frozen plasma complemented by 
vigilant monitoring within the Intensive Care Unit (ICU).
LEARNING POINTS: Sublingual haematomas, though uncommon, represent potentially 
serious complications arising from warfarin therapy.Distinguishing sublingual 
haematomas from infectious processes requires a high level of clinical suspicion 
and is crucial for prompt management.The preferred course of action involves 
reversing anticoagulation with a low threshold for implementing an artificial 
airway in cases of compromised airways.

© EFIM 2024.

DOI: 10.12890/2024_004299
PMCID: PMC10917414
PMID: 38455693

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interests: The Authors declare that 
there are no competing interests.