---
reference_id: PMID:25445411
title: "Biomarkers of activation of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in heart failure: how useful, how feasible?"
authors:
- Emdin M
- Fatini C
- Mirizzi G
- Poletti R
- Borrelli C
- Prontera C
- Latini R
- Passino C
- Clerico A
- Vergaro G
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2014.10.031
keywords:
- "Aldosterone/analysis, metabolism"
- "Angiotensins/analysis, metabolism"
- "Biomarkers/analysis, metabolism"
- "Heart Failure/diagnosis, drug therapy, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Renin/analysis, metabolism"
- Reproducibility of Results
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biomarkers of activation of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in heart failure: how useful, how feasible?
**Authors:** Emdin M, Fatini C, Mirizzi G, Poletti R, Borrelli C, Prontera C, Latini R, Passino C, Clerico A, Vergaro G
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2014.10.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2014.10.031)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2015 Mar 30;443:85-93. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2014.10.031. Epub
2014  Oct 25.

Biomarkers of activation of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in heart 
failure: how useful, how feasible?

Emdin M(1), Fatini C(2), Mirizzi G(3), Poletti R(4), Borrelli C(5), Prontera 
C(3), Latini R(6), Passino C(4), Clerico A(4), Vergaro G(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Medicine, Fondazione Toscana G. 
Monasterio, Pisa, Italy; Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, Italy. Electronic 
address: emdin@ftgm.it.
(2)Department of Medical and Surgical Critical Care, University of Florence, 
Italy.
(3)Division of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Medicine, Fondazione Toscana G. 
Monasterio, Pisa, Italy.
(4)Division of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Medicine, Fondazione Toscana G. 
Monasterio, Pisa, Italy; Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, Italy.
(5)Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, Italy.
(6)Istituto Mario Negri, Milan, Italy.

Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), participated by kidney, liver, 
vascular endothelium, and adrenal cortex, and counter-regulated by cardiac 
endocrine function, is a complex endocrine system regulating systemic functions, 
such as body salt and water homeostasis and vasomotion, in order to allow the 
accomplishment of physiological tasks, such as orthostasis, physical and 
emotional stimuli, and to react towards the hemorrhagic insult, in tight 
conjunction with other neurohormonal axes, namely the sympathetic nervous 
system, the endothelin and vasopressin systems. The systemic as well as the 
tissue RAAS are also dedicated to promote tissue remodeling, particularly 
relevant after damage, when chronic activation may configure as a maladaptive 
response, leading to fibrosis, hypertrophy and apoptosis, and organ dysfunction. 
RAAS activation is a fingerprint of systemic arterial hypertension, kidney 
dysfunction, vascular atherosclerotic disease, and is definitely an hallmark of 
heart failure, which rapidly shifts from organ disease to a disorder of 
neurohormonal regulatory systems. Chronic RAAS activation is an indirect or 
direct target of most effective pharmacological treatments in heart failure, 
such as beta-blockers, inhibitors of angiotensin converting enzyme, angiotensin 
receptor blockers, direct renin inhibitors, and mineralocorticoid receptor 
blockers. Biomarkers of RAAS activation are available, with different 
feasibility and accuracy, such as plasma renin activity, renin, angiotensin II, 
and aldosterone, which all accompany the increasing clinical severity of heart 
failure disease, and are well recognized prognostic factors, even in patients 
with optimal therapy. Polymorphisms influencing the expression and activity of 
RAAS pathways have been recognized as clinically relevant biomarkers, likely 
influencing either the individual clinical phenotype, or the response to drugs. 
This solid, growing evidence strongly suggests the rationale for the use of 
biomarkers of the RAAS activation, as a guide to tailor individual therapy in 
the current practice, and their implementation as a rule-in marker for future 
trials on novel drugs in the heart failure setting.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2014.10.031
PMID: 25445411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]