---
reference_id: "PMID:34459958"
title: "Kawasaki disease in children younger than 6 months of age: characteristics of a Spanish cohort."
authors:
- Grasa CD
- Fernández-Cooke E
- Sánchez-Manubens J
- Carazo-Gallego B
- Aracil-Santos J
- Anton J
- Lirola MJ
- Mercader B
- Villalobos E
- Bustillo M
- Giralt G
- Rocandio B
- Escribano LM
- Domínguez-Rodríguez S
- Calvo C
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-021-04215-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kawasaki disease in children younger than 6 months of age: characteristics of a Spanish cohort.
**Authors:** Grasa CD, Fernández-Cooke E, Sánchez-Manubens J, Carazo-Gallego B, Aracil-Santos J, Anton J, Lirola MJ, Mercader B, Villalobos E, Bustillo M, Giralt G, Rocandio B, Escribano LM, Domínguez-Rodríguez S, Calvo C
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-021-04215-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-021-04215-8)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2022 Feb;181(2):589-598. doi: 10.1007/s00431-021-04215-8. Epub 
2021 Aug 30.

Kawasaki disease in children younger than 6 months of age: characteristics of a 
Spanish cohort.

Grasa CD(1), Fernández-Cooke E(2)(3)(4), Sánchez-Manubens J(5), Carazo-Gallego 
B(6), Aracil-Santos J(7), Anton J(5), Lirola MJ(8), Mercader B(9), Villalobos 
E(10), Bustillo M(11), Giralt G(12), Rocandio B(13), Escribano LM(14), 
Domínguez-Rodríguez S(2)(3), Calvo C(7)(4)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Hospital Universitario La Paz, 
Pº Castellana, 261, 28046, Madrid, Spain. carlosgrasa@gmail.com.
(2)Pediatric Research and Clinical Trial Unit (UPIC), Pediatric Infectious 
Diseases Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Universitario, 12 Octubre, 
Madrid, Spain.
(3)imas2, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Hospital, 12 de Octubre, Madrid, 
Spain.
(4)RITIP, Spanish Network for the Research in Pediatric Infectious Diseases, 
Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(6)Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Hospital Regional Universitario, 
Malaga, Spain.
(7)Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Hospital Universitario La Paz, 
Pº Castellana, 261, 28046, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Instituto Hispalense de Pediatría, 
Seville, Spain.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Virgen de La Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain.
(11)Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Hospital Miguel Servet, 
Zaragoza, Spain.
(12)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Hospital Vall D'Hebron, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Universitario Donostia, San Sebastián, 
Spain.
(14)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Hospital General de Albacete, Albacete, 
Spain.
(15)IdiPaz, Institute for Health Research From La Paz Hospital, Madrid, Spain.

A retrospective study that compared children younger than 6 months versus older 
children of a Spanish cohort of patients diagnosed with Kawasaki disease between 
2011 and 2016 (Kawa-Race study). From the 598 patients recruited, 42 patients 
were younger than 6 months (7%) and presented more frequently with an incomplete 
diagnosis of Kawasaki disease (52.4 vs 27.9%, p = 0.001). Cardiac abnormalities 
detected by echocardiography were more common in younger patients (52.4 vs 30%, 
p = 0.002). These younger patients presented with a higher proportion of 
coronary aneurysms as well (19 vs 8.6%, p < 0.001). Shock at diagnosis (9.5 vs 
1.9%, p = 0.016) and admission to intensive care units (17.7 vs 4.1%, p = 0.003) 
were more frequent in patients younger than 6 months. There were no 
statistically significant differences in relation to infections, non-response to 
IVIG, or mid- or long-term outcomes.Conclusion: Data of the Spanish cohort are 
consistent with other American and Asian studies, although Spanish children 
younger than 6 months had a lower rate of non-response to IVIG and better 
clinical outcomes. A high index of suspicion should be considered for this 
population due to a higher risk of coronary abnormalities, presentation of 
shock, and admission to the intensive care unit. What is Known: •Children below 
6 months of age with Kawasaki disease (KD) have different features compared to 
older. •Younger patients usually have an incomplete form of KD and coronary 
artery abnormalities. What is New: •Younger than 6 months with KD presented with 
shock and required admission to PICU more frequently compared to older. 
•Infections play a similar role in KD despite the age of the patients.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-021-04215-8
PMID: 34459958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]