---
reference_id: "PMID:26842753"
title: "Autosomal Dominant Retinal Dystrophies Caused by a Founder Splice Site Mutation, c.828+3A>T, in PRPH2 and Protein Haplotypes in trans as Modifiers."
authors:
- Shankar SP
- Hughbanks-Wheaton DK
- Birch DG
- Sullivan LS
- Conneely KN
- Bowne SJ
- Stone EM
- Daiger SP
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.15-16965
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Dark Adaptation
- Disease Progression
- Electroretinography
- Female
- Founder Effect
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Peripherins/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- RNA Splice Sites/genetics
- Retina/physiopathology
- "Retinal Dystrophies/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Visual Fields/physiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal Dominant Retinal Dystrophies Caused by a Founder Splice Site Mutation, c.828+3A>T, in PRPH2 and Protein Haplotypes in trans as Modifiers.
**Authors:** Shankar SP, Hughbanks-Wheaton DK, Birch DG, Sullivan LS, Conneely KN, Bowne SJ, Stone EM, Daiger SP
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.15-16965](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.15-16965)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2016 Feb;57(2):349-59. doi: 10.1167/iovs.15-16965.

Autosomal Dominant Retinal Dystrophies Caused by a Founder Splice Site Mutation,
c.828+3A>T, in PRPH2 and Protein Haplotypes in trans as Modifiers.

Shankar SP(1), Hughbanks-Wheaton DK(2), Birch DG(2), Sullivan LS(3), Conneely
KN(4), Bowne SJ(3), Stone EM(5), Daiger SP(6).

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics Center, School of Public Health, University of Texas Health
Science Center, Houston, Texas, United States 2Department of Ophthalmology and
Visual Sciences, Carver College of Medicine, Stephen A. Wynn Institute for
Vision Research, Universit.
(2)Retina Foundation of the Southwest and Department of Ophthalmology,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, United States.
(3)Human Genetics Center, School of Public Health, University of Texas Health
Science Center, Houston, Texas, United States.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia, United States.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Carver College of Medicine,
Stephen A. Wynn Institute for Vision Research, University of Iowa, Iowa City,
Iowa, United States.
(6)Human Genetics Center, School of Public Health, University of Texas Health
Science Center, Houston, Texas, United States 5Ruiz Department of Ophthalmology
and Visual Science, University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, Texas,
United States.

PURPOSE: We determined the phenotypic variation, disease progression, and
potential modifiers of autosomal dominant retinal dystrophies caused by a splice
site founder mutation, c.828+3A>T, in the PRPH2 gene.
METHODS: A total of 62 individuals (19 families) harboring the PRPH2 c.828+3A>T
mutation, had phenotype analysis by fundus appearance, electrophysiology, and
visual fields. The PRPH2 haplotypes in trans were sequenced for potential
modifying variants and generalized estimating equations (GEE) used for
statistical analysis.
RESULTS: Several distinct phenotypes caused by the PRPH2 c.828+3A>T mutation
were observed and fell into two clinical categories: Group I (N = 44) with mild
pattern dystrophies (PD) and Group II (N = 18) with more severe cone-rod
dystrophy (CRD), retinitis pigmentosa (RP), and central areolar chorioretinal
dystrophy (CACD). The PRPH2 Gln304-Lys310-Asp338 protein haplotype in trans was
found in Group I only (29.6% vs. 0%), whereas the Glu304-Lys310-Gly338 haplotype
was predominant in Group II (94.4% vs. 70.4%). Generalized estimating equations
analysis for PD versus the CRD/CACD/RP phenotypes in individuals over 43 years
alone with the PRPH2 haplotypes in trans and age as predictors, adjusted for
correlation within families, confirmed a significant effect of haplotype on
severity (P = 0.03) with an estimated odds ratio of 7.16 (95% confidence
interval [CI] = [2.8, 18.4]).
CONCLUSIONS: The PRPH2 c.828+3A>T mutation results in multiple distinct
phenotypes likely modified by protein haplotypes in trans; the odds of having
the CACD/RP-like phenotype (versus the PD phenotype) are 7.16 times greater with
a Glu304-Lys310-Gly338 haplotype in trans. Further functional studies of the
modifying haplotypes in trans and PRPH2 splice variants may offer therapeutic
targets.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.15-16965
PMCID: PMC4736744
PMID: 26842753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
