---
reference_id: "PMID:38625125"
title: "Revisiting airway epithelial dysfunction and mechanisms in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the role of mitochondrial damage."
authors:
- He Q
- Li P
- Han L
- Yang C
- Jiang M
- Wang Y
- Han X
- Cao Y
- Liu X
- Wu W
journal: Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1152/ajplung.00362.2023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Revisiting airway epithelial dysfunction and mechanisms in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the role of mitochondrial damage.
**Authors:** He Q, Li P, Han L, Yang C, Jiang M, Wang Y, Han X, Cao Y, Liu X, Wu W
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajplung.00362.2023](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajplung.00362.2023)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2024 Jun 1;326(6):L754-L769. doi: 
10.1152/ajplung.00362.2023. Epub 2024 Apr 16.

Revisiting airway epithelial dysfunction and mechanisms in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease: the role of mitochondrial damage.

He Q(1), Li P(2), Han L(1), Yang C(1), Jiang M(1), Wang Y(2), Han X(1), Cao 
Y(1), Liu X(2), Wu W(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Exercise and Health, Shanghai University of Sport, Shanghai, China.
(2)School of Rehabilitation Science, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Chronic exposure to environmental hazards causes airway epithelial dysfunction, 
primarily impaired physical barriers, immune dysfunction, and repair or 
regeneration. Impairment of airway epithelial function subsequently leads to 
exaggerated airway inflammation and remodeling, the main features of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Mitochondrial damage has been identified 
as one of the mechanisms of airway abnormalities in COPD, which is closely 
related to airway inflammation and airflow limitation. In this review, we 
evaluate updated evidence for airway epithelial mitochondrial damage in COPD and 
focus on the role of mitochondrial damage in airway epithelial dysfunction. In 
addition, the possible mechanism of airway epithelial dysfunction mediated by 
mitochondrial damage is discussed in detail, and recent strategies related to 
airway epithelial-targeted mitochondrial therapy are summarized. Results have 
shown that dysregulation of mitochondrial quality and oxidative stress may lead 
to airway epithelial dysfunction in COPD. This may result from mitochondrial 
damage as a central organelle mediating abnormalities in cellular metabolism. 
Mitochondrial damage mediates procellular senescence effects due to 
mitochondrial reactive oxygen species, which effectively exacerbate different 
types of programmed cell death, participate in lipid metabolism abnormalities, 
and ultimately promote airway epithelial dysfunction and trigger COPD airway 
abnormalities. These can be prevented by targeting mitochondrial damage factors 
and mitochondrial transfer. Thus, because mitochondrial damage is involved in 
COPD progression as a central factor of homeostatic imbalance in airway 
epithelial cells, it may be a novel target for therapeutic intervention to 
restore airway epithelial integrity and function in COPD.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00362.2023
PMID: 38625125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]