---
reference_id: "PMID:29404747"
title: "Does Dientamoeba fragilis cause diarrhea? A systematic review."
authors:
- Wong ZW
- Faulder K
- Robinson JL
journal: Parasitol Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00436-018-5771-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Does Dientamoeba fragilis cause diarrhea? A systematic review.
**Authors:** Wong ZW, Faulder K, Robinson JL
**Journal:** Parasitol Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00436-018-5771-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00436-018-5771-4)

## Content

1. Parasitol Res. 2018 Apr;117(4):971-980. doi: 10.1007/s00436-018-5771-4. Epub 
2018 Feb 5.

Does Dientamoeba fragilis cause diarrhea? A systematic review.

Wong ZW(1), Faulder K(1), Robinson JL(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(2)University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. jr3@ualberta.ca.
(3), Edmonton, Canada. jr3@ualberta.ca.

It remains controversial whether Dientamoeba fragilis is a commensal parasite or 
a pathogen. The objective of this systematic review was to establish the 
strength of the evidence that Dientamoeba fragilis would cause diarrhea. A 
search was performed for studies that reported either the association between D. 
fragilis detection in stools and diarrhea or diarrhea outcomes with D. fragilis 
therapy or challenge. Data from seven studies of specific populations reported 
that 22% had D. fragilis in stools of which only 23% had diarrhea. Eleven 
studies of stool samples submitted to laboratories reported that 4.3% of 
individuals had D. fragilis of which 54% had diarrhea. Twelve studies reported 
that D. fragilis was detected from 1.6% of individuals with diarrhea and 9.6% of 
diarrheal stools. Five studies analyzed the prevalence of D. fragilis in 
individuals with and without diarrhea; the two with a statistically significant 
difference between groups had discordant results. The only cohort study with an 
appropriate control group reported diarrhea in a higher proportion of children 
with D. fragilis than in controls. No D. fragilis treatment studies included 
diarrhea as an outcome. There were only two challenge studies involving one 
person each. In conclusion, the evidence that D. fragilis would cause diarrhea 
or that treatment would hasten diarrhea resolution is inconclusive.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-018-5771-4
PMID: 29404747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]