---
reference_id: "PMID:27235212"
title: Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency and the Need for a Novel Treatment to Prevent Kernicterus.
authors:
- Cunningham AD
- Hwang S
- Mochly-Rosen D
journal: Clin Perinatol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.clp.2016.01.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency and the Need for a Novel Treatment to Prevent Kernicterus.
**Authors:** Cunningham AD, Hwang S, Mochly-Rosen D
**Journal:** Clin Perinatol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clp.2016.01.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clp.2016.01.010)

## Content

1. Clin Perinatol. 2016 Jun;43(2):341-54. doi: 10.1016/j.clp.2016.01.010. Epub
2016  Feb 28.

Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency and the Need for a Novel Treatment 
to Prevent Kernicterus.

Cunningham AD(1), Hwang S(1), Mochly-Rosen D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University, 269 Campus 
Drive, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(2)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University, 269 Campus 
Drive, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Electronic address: mochly@stanford.edu.

Hyperbilirubinemia occurs frequently in newborns, and in severe cases can 
progress to kernicterus and permanent developmental disorders. 
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, one of the most common 
human enzymopathies, is a major risk factor for hyperbilirubinemia and greatly 
increases the risk of kernicterus even in the developed world. Therefore, a 
novel treatment for kernicterus is needed, especially for G6PD-deficient 
newborns. Oxidative stress is a hallmark of bilirubin toxicity in the brain. We 
propose that the activation of G6PD via a small molecule chaperone is a 
potential strategy to increase endogenous defense against bilirubin-induced 
oxidative stress and prevent kernicterus.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clp.2016.01.010
PMCID: PMC8265784
PMID: 27235212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]