---
reference_id: "PMID:34735423"
title: "National Surveillance for Acute Flaccid Myelitis - United States, 2018-2020."
authors:
- Kidd S
- Yee E
- English R
- Rogers S
- Emery B
- Getachew H
- Routh JA
- Lopez AS
journal: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7044a2
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/epidemiology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Myelitis/epidemiology
- Neuromuscular Diseases/epidemiology
- Population Surveillance
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# National Surveillance for Acute Flaccid Myelitis - United States, 2018-2020.
**Authors:** Kidd S, Yee E, English R, Rogers S, Emery B, Getachew H, Routh JA, Lopez AS
**Journal:** MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.15585/mmwr.mm7044a2](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7044a2)

## Content

1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2021 Nov 5;70(44):1534-1538. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm7044a2.

National Surveillance for Acute Flaccid Myelitis - United States, 2018-2020.

Kidd S, Yee E, English R, Rogers S, Emery B, Getachew H, Routh JA, Lopez AS.

Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM), a recognized complication of certain viral
infections, is a serious neurologic condition that predominantly affects
previously healthy children and can progress rapidly, leading to respiratory
insufficiency and permanent paralysis. After national AFM surveillance began in
2014, peaks in AFM cases were observed in the United States in 2014, 2016, and
2018 (1). On the basis of this biennial pattern, an increase in AFM was
anticipated in 2020. To describe the epidemiology of confirmed AFM cases since
2018, demographic, clinical, and laboratory information collected as part of
national AFM surveillance was reviewed. In 2018, a total of 238 confirmed AFM
cases were reported to CDC, compared with 47 cases in 2019 and 32 in 2020.
Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68) was detected in specimens from 37 cases reported in
2018, one case in 2019 and none in 2020. Compared with 2018, cases reported
during 2019-2020 occurred in older children and were less frequently associated
with upper limb involvement, febrile or respiratory prodromal illness, or
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pleocytosis. These findings suggest that the
etiologies of AFM in 2019 and 2020 differed from those in 2018. The absence of
an increase in cases in 2020 reflects a deviation from the previously observed
biennial pattern, and it is unclear when the next increase in AFM should be
expected. Clinicians should continue to maintain vigilance and suspect AFM in
any child with acute flaccid limb weakness, particularly in the setting of
recent febrile or respiratory illness.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7044a2
PMCID: PMC8568096
PMID: 34735423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of
potential conflicts of interest. No potential conflicts of interest were
disclosed.
