---
reference_id: "PMID:22266302"
title: "Erythrokeratodermia variabilis: report of two cases and a novel missense variant in GJB4 encoding connexin 30.3."
authors:
- Kokotas H
- Papagiannaki K
- Grigoriadou M
- Petersen MB
- Katsarou A
journal: Eur J Dermatol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1684/ejd.2011.1617
keywords:
- Adult
- "Child, Preschool"
- Connexins/genetics
- "Erythrokeratodermia Variabilis/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Mutation, Missense"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Erythrokeratodermia variabilis: report of two cases and a novel missense variant in GJB4 encoding connexin 30.3.
**Authors:** Kokotas H, Papagiannaki K, Grigoriadou M, Petersen MB, Katsarou A
**Journal:** Eur J Dermatol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1684/ejd.2011.1617](https://doi.org/10.1684/ejd.2011.1617)

## Content

1. Eur J Dermatol. 2012 Mar-Apr;22(2):182-6. doi: 10.1684/ejd.2011.1617.

Erythrokeratodermia variabilis: report of two cases and a novel missense variant 
in GJB4 encoding connexin 30.3.

Kokotas H(1), Papagiannaki K, Grigoriadou M, Petersen MB, Katsarou A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Aghia Sophia Children's Hospital, Athens, Greece. 
hkokotas@yahoo.gr

Erythrokeratodermia variabilis (EKV) is characterized by migrating red patches 
resembling a geographical map, and by localized or generalized hyperkeratosis 
with scaling of the skin. The onset is usually at birth or during infancy, and 
the disease persists throughout life. EKV is mainly inherited as an autosomal 
dominant disease, although recessive transmission has occasionally been 
reported. Mutations associated with EKV have been identified in the connexin 
(Cx) genes GJB3 (Cx31) and GJB4 (Cx30.3), however, several cases of EKV have 
been tested negative for mutations in these two Cx genes. Here, we report our 
findings of the clinical, histological, and molecular examinations performed in 
two unrelated sporadic cases of EKV. The molecular screening involved 
bidirectional sequencing of the coding regions of the GJB3 and GJB4 genes and 
revealed the existence of a novel c.295G>A missense variant in the GJB4 gene 
found in homozygosity in one case. The substitution was found to result in a 
p.E99K change of the Cx30.3 protein, an alteration predicted to have a benign 
rather than a damaging effect on the protein function.

DOI: 10.1684/ejd.2011.1617
PMID: 22266302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]