---
reference_id: "PMID:31903881"
title: "Targeting Tau Hyperphosphorylation via Kinase Inhibition: Strategy to Address Alzheimer's Disease."
authors:
- Turab Naqvi AA
- Hasan GM
- Hassan MI
journal: Curr Top Med Chem
year: '2020'
doi: 10.2174/1568026620666200106125910
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting Tau Hyperphosphorylation via Kinase Inhibition: Strategy to Address Alzheimer's Disease.
**Authors:** Turab Naqvi AA, Hasan GM, Hassan MI
**Journal:** Curr Top Med Chem (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1568026620666200106125910](https://doi.org/10.2174/1568026620666200106125910)

## Content

1. Curr Top Med Chem. 2020;20(12):1059-1073. doi: 
10.2174/1568026620666200106125910.

Targeting Tau Hyperphosphorylation via Kinase Inhibition: Strategy to Address 
Alzheimer's Disease.

Turab Naqvi AA(1), Hasan GM(2), Hassan MI(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Basic Sciences, Jamia Millia 
Islamia, New Delhi - 110025, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Prince Sattam Bin Abdulaziz 
University, P.O. Box 173, Al-Kharj - 11942, Saudi Arabia.

Microtubule-associated protein tau is involved in the tubulin binding leading to 
microtubule stabilization in neuronal cells which is essential for stabilization 
of neuron cytoskeleton. The regulation of tau activity is accommodated by 
several kinases which phosphorylate tau protein on specific sites. In 
pathological conditions, abnormal activity of tau kinases such as glycogen 
synthase kinase-3 β (GSK3β), cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5), c-Jun N-terminal 
kinases (JNKs), extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) and 
microtubule affinity regulating kinase (MARK) lead to tau hyperphosphorylation. 
Hyperphosphorylation of tau protein leads to aggregation of tau into paired 
helical filaments like structures which are major constituents of 
neurofibrillary tangles, a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease. In this review, we 
discuss various tau protein kinases and their association with tau 
hyperphosphorylation. We also discuss various strategies and the advancements 
made in the area of Alzheimer's disease drug development by designing effective 
and specific inhibitors for such kinases using traditional in vitro/in vivo 
methods and state of the art in silico techniques.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1568026620666200106125910
PMID: 31903881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]