---
reference_id: "PMID:24039833"
title: SPAK deficiency corrects pseudohypoaldosteronism II caused by WNK4 mutation.
authors:
- Chu PY
- Cheng CJ
- Wu YC
- Fang YW
- Chau T
- Uchida S
- Sasaki S
- Yang SS
- Lin SH
journal: PLoS One
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072969
keywords:
- Animals
- Chlorides/urine
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Diuretics/pharmacology
- Gene Deletion
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genotype
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Phosphorylation
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Pseudohypoaldosteronism/genetics, metabolism"
- Sodium/urine
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 1/metabolism"
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 3/metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SPAK deficiency corrects pseudohypoaldosteronism II caused by WNK4 mutation.
**Authors:** Chu PY, Cheng CJ, Wu YC, Fang YW, Chau T, Uchida S, Sasaki S, Yang SS, Lin SH
**Journal:** PLoS One (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0072969](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0072969)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 11;8(9):e72969. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072969.
eCollection 2013.

SPAK deficiency corrects pseudohypoaldosteronism II caused by WNK4 mutation.

Chu PY(1), Cheng CJ, Wu YC, Fang YW, Chau T, Uchida S, Sasaki S, Yang SS, Lin
SH.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, National Defense Medical Center,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Stimulation of the OSR1 (Oxidative stress-responsive kinase-1)/SPAK [STE20
(sterile 20)/SPS1-related proline/alanine-rich kinase]-NCC (Na(+)-Cl(-)
cotransporter) signaling cascade plays an important role in the WNK
[With-No-Lysine (K)] kinase 4 D561A knock-in mouse model of
pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (PHA II) characterized by salt-sensitive
hypertension and hyperkalemia. The aim of this study was to investigate the
respective roles of Osr1 and Spak in the pathogenesis of PHA II in vivo. Wnk4
(D561A/+) mice were crossed with kidney tubule-specific (KSP) Osr1 knockout
(KSP-Osr1 (-/-)) and Spak knockout (Spak (-/-)) mice. Blood pressure, plasma and
urine biochemistries, and the relevant protein expression in the kidneys were
examined. Wnk4 (D561A/+), KSP-Osr1 (-/-), and Spak (-/-) mice recapitulated the
phenotypes of PHA II, Bartter-like syndrome, and Gitelman syndrome,
respectively. Wnk4 (D561A/+).KSP-Osr1 (-/-) remained phenotypically PHA II while
Wnk4 (D561A/+).Spak (-/-) mice became normotensive and lacked the PHA II
phenotype. Phosphorylated Spak and Ncc were similarly increased in both Wnk4
(D561A/+) and Wnk4 (D561A/+).KSP-Osr1 (-/-) mice while phosphorylated Ncc
normalized in Wnk4 (D561A/+).Spak (-/-) mice. Furthermore, Wnk4
(D561A/+).KSP-Osr1 (-/-) mice exhibited exaggerated salt excretion in response
to thiazide diuretics while Wnk4 (D561A/+).Spak (-/-) mice exhibited normal
responses. Wnk4(D561A/+).Spak (-/-).KSP-Osr1 (-/-) triple mutant mice had low
blood pressure and diminished phosphorylated Ncc. Both SPAK and OSR1 are
important in the maintenance of blood pressure but activation of SPAK-NCC plays
the dominant role in PHA II. SPAK may be a therapeutic target for disorders with
salt-sensitive hypertension related to WNK4 activation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072969
PMCID: PMC3770638
PMID: 24039833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
