---
reference_id: "PMID:11389485"
title: "Disorders of peroxisome biogenesis due to mutations in PEX1: phenotypes and PEX1 protein levels."
authors:
- Walter C
- Gootjes J
- Mooijer PA
- Portsteffen H
- Klein C
- Waterham HR
- Barth PG
- Epplen JT
- Kunau WH
- Wanders RJ
- Dodt G
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1086/321265
keywords:
- ATPases Associated with Diverse Cellular Activities
- "Adrenoleukodystrophy/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Alleles
- Base Sequence
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Exons/genetics
- Fibroblasts
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Introns/genetics
- "Membrane Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- "Peroxisomal Disorders/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- "Peroxisomes/enzymology, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- Protein Conformation
- Protein Folding
- "Zellweger Syndrome/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disorders of peroxisome biogenesis due to mutations in PEX1: phenotypes and PEX1 protein levels.
**Authors:** Walter C, Gootjes J, Mooijer PA, Portsteffen H, Klein C, Waterham HR, Barth PG, Epplen JT, Kunau WH, Wanders RJ, Dodt G
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1086/321265](https://doi.org/10.1086/321265)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Jul;69(1):35-48. doi: 10.1086/321265. Epub 2001 Jun 1.

Disorders of peroxisome biogenesis due to mutations in PEX1: phenotypes and PEX1
protein levels.

Walter C(1), Gootjes J, Mooijer PA, Portsteffen H, Klein C, Waterham HR, Barth
PG, Epplen JT, Kunau WH, Wanders RJ, Dodt G.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Physiologische Chemie, Abteilung für Zellbiochemie,
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Universitätsstrasse 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany.

Zellweger syndrome (ZS), neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy (NALD), and infantile
Refsum disease (IRD) are clinically overlapping syndromes, collectively called
"peroxisome biogenesis disorders" (PBDs), with clinical features being most
severe in ZS and least pronounced in IRD. Inheritance of these disorders is
autosomal recessive. The peroxisome biogenesis disorders are genetically
heterogeneous, having at least 12 different complementation groups (CGs). The
gene affected in CG1 is PEX1. Approximately 65% of the patients with PBD harbor
mutations in PEX1. In the present study, we used SSCP analysis to evaluate a
series of patients belonging to CG1 for mutations in PEX1 and studied
phenotype-genotype correlations. A complete lack of PEX1 protein was found to be
associated with severe ZS; however, residual amounts of PEX1 protein were found
in patients with the milder phenotypes, NALD and IRD. The majority of these
latter patients carried at least one copy of the common G843D allele. When
patient fibroblasts harboring this allele were grown at 30 degrees C, a two- to
threefold increase in PEX1 protein levels was observed, associated with a
recovery of peroxisomal function. This suggests that the G843D missense mutation
results in a misfolded protein, which is more stable at lower temperatures. We
conclude that the search for the factors and/or mechanisms that determine the
stability of mutant PEX1 protein by high-throughput procedures will be a first
step in the development of therapeutic strategies for patients with mild PBDs.

DOI: 10.1086/321265
PMCID: PMC1226046
PMID: 11389485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
