---
reference_id: "PMID:39293689"
title: Multiscale spatio-temporal dynamics of UBE3A gene in brain physiology and neurodevelopmental disorders.
authors:
- Biagioni M
- Baronchelli F
- Fossati M
journal: Neurobiol Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2024.106669
keywords:
- Humans
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics, metabolism"
- Brain/metabolism
- Animals
- Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics
- Angelman Syndrome/genetics
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15/genetics"
- Neurons/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiscale spatio-temporal dynamics of UBE3A gene in brain physiology and neurodevelopmental disorders.
**Authors:** Biagioni M, Baronchelli F, Fossati M
**Journal:** Neurobiol Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nbd.2024.106669](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2024.106669)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Dis. 2024 Oct 15;201:106669. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2024.106669. Epub
2024  Sep 16.

Multiscale spatio-temporal dynamics of UBE3A gene in brain physiology and
neurodevelopmental disorders.

Biagioni M(1), Baronchelli F(2), Fossati M(3).

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, via Manzoni 56, Rozzano 20089, MI, Italy.
(2)CNR - Institute of Neuroscience, Section of Milano, via Manzoni 56, Rozzano
20089, MI, Italy; Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, via
Rita Levi Montalcini, 20072 Pieve Emanuele, MI, Italy.
(3)IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, via Manzoni 56, Rozzano 20089, MI, Italy;
CNR - Institute of Neuroscience, Section of Milano, via Manzoni 56, Rozzano
20089, MI, Italy. Electronic address: matteo.fossati@cnr.it.

The UBE3A gene, located in the chromosomal region 15q11-13, is subject to
neuron-specific genomic imprinting and it plays a critical role in brain
development. Genetic defects of UBE3A cause severe neurodevelopmental disorders,
namely the Angelman syndrome (AS) and the 15q11.2-q13.3 duplication syndrome
(Dup15q). In the last two decades, the development of in vitro and in vivo
models of AS and Dup15q were fundamental to improve the understanding of UBE3A
function in the brain. However, the pathogenic mechanisms of these diseases
remain elusive and effective treatments are lacking. Recent evidence suggests
that UBE3A functions are both spatially and temporally specific, varying across
subcellular compartments, brain regions, and neuronal circuits. In the present
review, we summarize current knowledge on the role of UBE3A in neuronal
pathophysiology under this spatio-temporal perspective. Additionally, we propose
key research questions that will be instrumental to better understand the
pathogenic mechanisms underpinning AS and Dup15q disorders and provide the
rationale to develop novel therapies.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2024.106669
PMID: 39293689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no competing interests.
