---
reference_id: "PMID:22720333"
title: AIP Familial Isolated Pituitary Adenomas.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Korbonits M
- Hernández-Ramírez LC
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AIP Familial Isolated Pituitary Adenomas.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Korbonits M, Hernández-Ramírez LC

## Content

1. AIP Familial Isolated Pituitary Adenomas.

Korbonits M(1), Hernández-Ramírez LC(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2012 Jun 21 [updated 2025 Nov 20].

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Barts and the London School of Medicine, Queen
Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom
(2)Red de Apoyo a la Investigación, Coordinación de la Investigación Científica,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México e Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas
y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Mexico City, Mexico

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: AIP familial isolated pituitary adenoma (AIP-FIPA) is
characterized by an increased risk of pituitary neuroendocrine tumors (PitNETs,
also known as pituitary adenomas), including growth hormone (GH)-secreting
PitNETs (somatotropinomas), prolactin-secreting PitNETs (prolactinomas), GH and
prolactin cosecreting PitNETs (somatomammotropinomas), and clinically
nonfunctioning PitNETs (NF-PitNETs). Rarely, thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH)-secreting PitNETs (thyrotropinomas) are observed. Clinical findings result
from excess hormone secretion, lack of hormone secretion, and/or mass effects
(e.g., headaches, visual field loss). Within the same family, PitNETs can be of
the same or different type. Age of diagnosis in AIP-FIPA is usually in the
second or third decade.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of AIP-FIPA is established in a proband with a
PitNET by identification of a heterozygous germline pathogenic variant in AIP by
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: AIP-associated pituitary tumors are
usually treated in the same manner as those of unknown genetic cause. Standard
treatment of GH-producing microadenomas includes medical therapy (somatostatin
receptor ligands [SRLs], GH receptor antagonists, and dopamine agonists),
surgery, and/or radiotherapy. Large somatotropinomas are treated with
transsphenoidal surgery, medical therapy, and/or radiotherapy. Cardiovascular
and rheumatologic/orthopedic complications for individuals with acromegaly are
managed as in other individuals with acromegaly. Prolactinomas are treated with
dopamine agonist therapy or surgery. NF-PitNETs are treated with surgery and, if
necessary, radiotherapy. Management of hypopituitarism (due to tumoral
compression, surgery, or radiotherapy) should follow standard guidelines for
endocrine care. Persons on glucocorticoid replacement therapy need to increase
their steroid dose when ill or stressed. Surveillance: In asymptomatic
individuals: annual growth assessment and evaluation for signs/symptoms of
PitNETs and pubertal development from age four years until adulthood. Although
development of new disease in a previously clinically screened person has not
been observed in individuals age >30 years, 11 percent of individuals have been
diagnosed at age >30 years. Therefore, annual evaluation for signs and symptoms
of PitNETs should be carried out until age 30 years and then every five years
between ages 30 and 50 years. Annual pituitary function tests (serum IGF-1,
prolactin, estradiol/testosterone, LH, FSH, TSH, thyroxine) beginning at age
four years until age 30; pituitary MRI at age ten years and repeated (every 5
years has been suggested) or as necessary based on clinical and biochemical
parameters until age 30 years. Pituitary MRI can be done in those with clinical
or biochemical abnormality from age 30 to 50 years, but screening can be less
frequent if laboratory tests are normal. In symptomatic individuals: annual
clinical assessment and pituitary function tests (serum IGF-1, spot GH,
prolactin, estradiol/testosterone, LH, FSH, TSH, thyroxine, and morning
cortisol); if indicated, annual dynamic testing to evaluate for hormone excess
or deficiency (e.g., glucose tolerance test, insulin tolerance test); pituitary
MRI with frequency depending on clinical status, previous extent of the tumor,
and treatment modality. Clinical monitoring of secondary complications of the
tumor and/or its treatment (e.g., diabetes mellitus, hypertension,
osteoarthritis, hypogonadism, osteoporosis); in those with acromegaly,
colonoscopy at age 40 years and repeated every three to ten years depending on
the number of colorectal lesions and IGF-1 levels. Evaluation of relatives at
risk: Molecular genetic testing for the familial AIP pathogenic variant is
appropriate for all at-risk relatives. Apparently asymptomatic individuals found
to be heterozygous for a familial AIP pathogenic variant seem to benefit from
targeted surveillance: PitNETs identified in asymptomatic individuals are
significantly less invasive and are associated with better outcomes compared
with PitNETs diagnosed in symptomatic individuals.
GENETIC COUNSELING: AIP-FIPA is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner with
reduced penetrance. Almost all individuals reported to date with AIP-FIPA have a
parent who is also heterozygous for the AIP pathogenic variant; because clinical
penetrance of PitNETs in individuals with AIP pathogenic variants is
approximately 15%-30%, a heterozygous parent may or may not be affected. Each
child of an individual who is heterozygous for an AIP pathogenic variant has a
50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. Once the AIP pathogenic variant
has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation
genetic testing are possible. As AIP-FIPA demonstrates reduced penetrance, the
finding of an AIP pathogenic variant prenatally does not allow accurate
prediction of a tumor, the PitNET type, age of onset, prognosis, or availability
and/or outcome of treatment.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 22720333
