---
reference_id: "PMID:3799721"
title: de la Chapelle dysplasia.
authors:
- Whitley CB
- Burke BA
- Granroth G
- Gorlin RJ
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1986'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320250105
keywords:
- Belgium/ethnology
- Consanguinity
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Finland
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# de la Chapelle dysplasia.
**Authors:** Whitley CB, Burke BA, Granroth G, Gorlin RJ
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1986)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.1320250105](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.1320250105)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1986 Sep;25(1):29-39. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320250105.

de la Chapelle dysplasia.

Whitley CB, Burke BA, Granroth G, Gorlin RJ.

Since the description by de la Chapelle and colleagues of two sibs with a unique 
skeletal dysplasia, two additional cases have occurred, one in the original 
Finnish family and one sporadic patient born to unrelated parents of Belgian 
descent. The original Finnish family has later had a fourth child, a normal 
daughter who was found to be unaffected upon radiographic examination in the 
19th week of gestation. These additional findings are compatible with recessive 
inheritance. Physical features common to these four patients include cleft 
palate, small thorax, moderately severe micromelia with small hands, and 
equinovarus deformity. In each case, the ulnae and fibulae were reduced to an 
almost triangular osseous remnant. Other long bones were short and bowed. 
Neonatal death occurred in all cases and may be attributed to a consistent triad 
of respiratory tract malformations: laryngeal stenosis, tracheobronchomalacia, 
and pulmonary hypoplasia. Clinical and radiographic features are sufficiently 
unique to distinguish de la Chapelle dysplasia from other disorders in the 
spectrum of neonatal lethal osteochondrodysplasias. Lacunar halos were 
identified as a distinctive histopathologic feature also observed in 
achondrogenesis but not in several other skeletal dysplasias.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320250105
PMID: 3799721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]