---
reference_id: "PMID:22216280"
title: Dengue virus activates polyreactive, natural IgG B cells after primary and secondary infection.
authors:
- Balakrishnan T
- Bela-Ong DB
- Toh YX
- Flamand M
- Devi S
- Koh MB
- Hibberd ML
- Ooi EE
- Low JG
- Leo YS
- Gu F
- Fink K
journal: PLoS One
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029430
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue virus activates polyreactive, natural IgG B cells after primary and secondary infection.
**Authors:** Balakrishnan T, Bela-Ong DB, Toh YX, Flamand M, Devi S, Koh MB, Hibberd ML, Ooi EE, Low JG, Leo YS, Gu F, Fink K
**Journal:** PLoS One (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0029430](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0029430)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e29430. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029430. Epub 2011 Dec 
22.

Dengue virus activates polyreactive, natural IgG B cells after primary and 
secondary infection.

Balakrishnan T(1), Bela-Ong DB, Toh YX, Flamand M, Devi S, Koh MB, Hibberd ML, 
Ooi EE, Low JG, Leo YS, Gu F, Fink K.

Author information:
(1)Singapore Immunology Network, Agency for Science, Technology and Research 
A*STAR, Singapore, Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Dengue virus is transmitted by mosquitoes and has four serotypes. 
Cross-protection to other serotypes lasting for a few months is observed 
following infection with one serotype. There is evidence that low-affinity T 
and/or B cells from primary infections contribute to the severe syndromes often 
associated with secondary dengue infections. such pronounced immune-mediated 
enhancement suggests a dengue-specific pattern of immune cell activation. This 
study investigates the acute and early convalescent B cell response leading to 
the generation of cross-reactive and neutralizing antibodies following dengue 
infection.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We assayed blood samples taken from dengue 
patients with primary or secondary infection during acute disease and 
convalescence and compared them to samples from patients presenting with 
non-dengue related fever. Dengue induced massive early plasmablast formation, 
which correlated with the appearance of polyclonal, cross-reactive IgG for both 
primary and secondary infection. Surprisingly, the contribution of IgG to the 
neutralizing titer 4-7 days after fever onset was more than 50% even after 
primary infection.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Poly-reactive and virus serotype cross-reactive IgG 
are an important component of the innate response in humans during both primary 
and secondary dengue infection, and "innate specificities" seem to constitute 
part of the adaptive response in dengue. While of potential importance for 
protection during secondary infection, cross-reactive B cells will also compete 
with highly neutralizing B cells and possibly interfere with their development.

© 2011 Balakrishnan et al.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029430
PMCID: PMC3245273
PMID: 22216280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.