---
reference_id: "PMID:27057292"
title: "Atrial Fibrillation and Hypertension: Mechanistic, Epidemiologic, and Treatment Parallels."
authors:
- Ogunsua AA
- Shaikh AY
- Ahmed M
- McManus DD
journal: Methodist Debakey Cardiovasc J
year: '2015'
doi: 10.14797/mdcj-11-4-228
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atrial Fibrillation and Hypertension: Mechanistic, Epidemiologic, and Treatment Parallels.
**Authors:** Ogunsua AA, Shaikh AY, Ahmed M, McManus DD
**Journal:** Methodist Debakey Cardiovasc J (2015)
**DOI:** [10.14797/mdcj-11-4-228](https://doi.org/10.14797/mdcj-11-4-228)

## Content

1. Methodist Debakey Cardiovasc J. 2015 Oct-Dec;11(4):228-34. doi: 
10.14797/mdcj-11-4-228.

Atrial Fibrillation and Hypertension: Mechanistic, Epidemiologic, and Treatment 
Parallels.

Ogunsua AA(1), Shaikh AY(1), Ahmed M(1), McManus DD(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts.

Atrial fibrillation (AF) is an increasingly prevalent condition and the most 
common sustained arrhythmia encountered in ambulatory and hospital practice. 
Several clinical risk factors for AF include age, sex, valvular heart disease, 
obesity, sleep apnea, heart failure, and hypertension (HTN). Of all the risk 
factors, HTN is the most commonly encountered condition in patients with 
incident AF. Hypertension is associated with a 1.8-fold increase in the risk of 
developing new-onset AF and a 1.5-fold increase in the risk of progression to 
permanent AF. Hypertension predisposes to cardiac structural changes that 
influence the development of AF such as atrial remodeling. The renin angiotensin 
aldosterone system has been demonstrated to be a common mechanistic link in the 
pathogenesis of HTN and AF. Importantly, HTN is one of the few modifiable AF 
risk factors, and guideline-directed management of HTN may reduce the incidence 
of AF.

DOI: 10.14797/mdcj-11-4-228
PMCID: PMC4814009
PMID: 27057292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]