---
reference_id: "PMID:11607033"
title: Histone deacetylase inhibitors arrest polyglutamine-dependent neurodegeneration in Drosophila.
authors:
- Steffan JS
- Bodai L
- Pallos J
- Poelman M
- McCampbell A
- Apostol BL
- Kazantsev A
- Schmidt E
- Zhu YZ
- Greenwald M
- Kurokawa R
- Housman DE
- Jackson GR
- Marsh JL
- Thompson LM
journal: Nature
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/35099568
keywords:
- Acetylation
- Acetyltransferases/metabolism
- Animals
- "Animals, Genetically Modified"
- CREB-Binding Protein
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Drosophila/genetics, metabolism"
- "Drosophila Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- E1A-Associated p300 Protein
- Enzyme Inhibitors/metabolism
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Glutamine/metabolism
- Glutathione Transferase/metabolism
- Histone Acetyltransferases
- Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors
- Histone Deacetylases/metabolism
- Histones/metabolism
- Huntingtin Protein
- "Huntington Disease/enzymology, metabolism, prevention & control"
- Nerve Degeneration
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/drug therapy, enzymology, metabolism"
- "Nuclear Proteins/chemistry, metabolism"
- PC12 Cells
- Peptides/metabolism
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- Rats
- "Repetitive Sequences, Amino Acid"
- "Repressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins
- Sin3 Histone Deacetylase and Corepressor Complex
- Trans-Activators/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Histone deacetylase inhibitors arrest polyglutamine-dependent neurodegeneration in Drosophila.
**Authors:** Steffan JS, Bodai L, Pallos J, Poelman M, McCampbell A, Apostol BL, Kazantsev A, Schmidt E, Zhu YZ, Greenwald M, Kurokawa R, Housman DE, Jackson GR, Marsh JL, Thompson LM
**Journal:** Nature (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/35099568](https://doi.org/10.1038/35099568)

## Content

1. Nature. 2001 Oct 18;413(6857):739-43. doi: 10.1038/35099568.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors arrest polyglutamine-dependent neurodegeneration 
in Drosophila.

Steffan JS(1), Bodai L, Pallos J, Poelman M, McCampbell A, Apostol BL, Kazantsev 
A, Schmidt E, Zhu YZ, Greenwald M, Kurokawa R, Housman DE, Jackson GR, Marsh JL, 
Thompson LM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Gillespie 2121, University of 
California, Irvine, California 92697, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2001 Oct 18;413(6857):691, 693-4. doi: 10.1038/35099656.

Proteins with expanded polyglutamine repeats cause Huntington's disease and 
other neurodegenerative diseases. Transcriptional dysregulation and loss of 
function of transcriptional co-activator proteins have been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of these diseases. Huntington's disease is caused by expansion of a 
repeated sequence of the amino acid glutamine in the abnormal protein huntingtin 
(Htt). Here we show that the polyglutamine-containing domain of Htt, Htt exon 1 
protein (Httex1p), directly binds the acetyltransferase domains of two distinct 
proteins: CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300/CBP-associated factor (P/CAF). In 
cell-free assays, Httex1p also inhibits the acetyltransferase activity of at 
least three enzymes: p300, P/CAF and CBP. Expression of Httex1p in cultured 
cells reduces the level of the acetylated histones H3 and H4, and this reduction 
can be reversed by administering inhibitors of histone deacetylase (HDAC). In 
vivo, HDAC inhibitors arrest ongoing progressive neuronal degeneration induced 
by polyglutamine repeat expansion, and they reduce lethality in two Drosophila 
models of polyglutamine disease. These findings raise the possibility that 
therapy with HDAC inhibitors may slow or prevent the progressive 
neurodegeneration seen in Huntington's disease and other polyglutamine-repeat 
diseases, even after the onset of symptoms.

DOI: 10.1038/35099568
PMID: 11607033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]