---
reference_id: "PMID:39455522"
title: "Y-27632 targeting ROCK1&2 modulates cell growth, fibrosis and epithelial-mesenchymal transition in hyperplastic prostate by inhibiting β-catenin pathway."
authors:
- Shan S
- Su M
- Wang H
- Guo F
- Li Y
- Zhou Y
- Liu H
- Du L
- Zhang J
- Qiu J
- DiSanto ME
- Guo Y
- Zhang X
journal: Mol Biomed
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s43556-024-00216-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Y-27632 targeting ROCK1&2 modulates cell growth, fibrosis and epithelial-mesenchymal transition in hyperplastic prostate by inhibiting β-catenin pathway.
**Authors:** Shan S, Su M, Wang H, Guo F, Li Y, Zhou Y, Liu H, Du L, Zhang J, Qiu J, DiSanto ME, Guo Y, Zhang X
**Journal:** Mol Biomed (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s43556-024-00216-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s43556-024-00216-9)

## Content

1. Mol Biomed. 2024 Oct 26;5(1):52. doi: 10.1186/s43556-024-00216-9.

Y-27632 targeting ROCK1&2 modulates cell growth, fibrosis and 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in hyperplastic prostate by inhibiting 
β-catenin pathway.

Shan S(#)(1)(2), Su M(#)(3), Wang H(#)(1), Guo F(#)(1), Li Y(1), Zhou Y(1), Liu 
H(1), Du L(1), Zhang J(1), Qiu J(1), DiSanto ME(4), Guo Y(5), Zhang X(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Renal Transplatation, Guangdong Provincial People' Hospital 
(Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences), Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(3)Department of Gynecological Oncology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, China.
(4)Department of Surgery and Biomedical Sciences, Cooper Medical School of Rowan 
University, Camden, NJ, USA.
(5)Department of Urology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. 
guoyuming1990@whu.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Urology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. 
zhangxinhua@whu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is a prevalent condition affecting the male 
urinary system, with its molecular mechanisms of pathogenesis remaining unclear. 
Y-27632, a non-isoform-selective Rho kinase inhibitor, has shown therapeutic 
potential in various diseases but its effects on static factors and fibrosis in 
BPH remain unexplored. This study investigated human prostate tissues, human 
prostate cell lines, and BPH rat model using immunofluorescence, flow cytometry, 
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, western blotting, 
and cell counting kit-8. ROCK1 and ROCK2 were significantly up-regulated in BPH 
tissues, correlating with clinical parameters. Y-27632 targeted the inhibition 
of ROCK1 & ROCK2 expression and inhibited cell proliferation, fibrosis, 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), while induced cell apoptosis in a 
dose-dependent manner. Moreover, knockdown of either ROCK isoform inhibited 
fibrosis and EMT, induced apoptosis, while ROCK overexpression had the opposite 
effects. ROCK downregulation inhibited the β-catenin signaling pathway (such as 
C-MYC, Snail and Survivin) and decreased β-catenin protein stability, while 
inhibiting TGF-β/Smad2/3 signaling. At the in vivo level, Y-27632 reversed 
prostatic hyperplasia and fibrosis in BPH model rats to some extent. Our study 
sheds light on the therapeutic potential of Y-27632 in regulating prostate cell 
growth, fibrosis and EMT, and demonstrates for the first time the regulatory 
effect of ROCK isoforms on prostate cells, providing the basis for future 
research of ROCK isoform-selective inhibitors.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s43556-024-00216-9
PMCID: PMC11511810
PMID: 39455522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there were no competing 
interests associated with this research.