---
reference_id: "PMID:38405019"
title: "A First Case of Acute Flaccid Myelitis Related to Enterovirus D68 in Belgium: Case Report."
authors:
- Rodesch M
- Sculier C
- Lolli V
- Remiche G
- Delpire I
- Fricx C
- Vermeulen F
- Christiaens F
journal: Case Rep Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000535316
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A First Case of Acute Flaccid Myelitis Related to Enterovirus D68 in Belgium: Case Report.
**Authors:** Rodesch M, Sculier C, Lolli V, Remiche G, Delpire I, Fricx C, Vermeulen F, Christiaens F
**Journal:** Case Rep Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000535316](https://doi.org/10.1159/000535316)

## Content

1. Case Rep Neurol. 2024 Jan 31;16(1):41-47. doi: 10.1159/000535316. eCollection
2024 Jan-Dec.

A First Case of Acute Flaccid Myelitis Related to Enterovirus D68 in Belgium:
Case Report.

Rodesch M(1), Sculier C(2), Lolli V(3), Remiche G(4), Delpire I(1), Fricx C(1),
Vermeulen F(1), Christiaens F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hôpital Erasme, Université Libre de Bruxelles
(ULB), Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Department of Neuropediatrics, Hôpital Erasme, Université Libre de Bruxelles
(ULB), Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Department of Radiology, Hôpital Erasme, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB),
Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Centre de Référence Neuromusculaire, Department of Neurology, Hôpital Erasme,
Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium.

INTRODUCTION: We describe the first case of acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) related
to enterovirus D68 (EV-D68) infection in Belgium. The clinical and radiological
presentation of AFM associated with EV-D68 although well described currently
remains a challenging diagnosis. Through this interesting clinical case, we
aimed to review the differential diagnosis of acute flaccid palsy in a child and
discuss the specific point of interest related to AFM.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present the case of a 4-year-old girl with a torticollis
associated with an acute palsy of the right upper limb. The magnetic resonance
imaging revealed an increased T2 signal intensity of the entire central gray
matter of the cervical cord with involvement of the posterior brainstem. A
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) conducted on a nasopharyngeal swab was found
positive for EV-D68. The definition of AFM proposed by the Center for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) is an acute-onset flaccid weakness of one or more
limbs in the absence of a clear alternative diagnosis and the radiological
evidence of gray matter involvement on an MRI picture, and our case fits these
two criteria. A prompt and detailed workup is required to distinguish this
emergent disease from other forms of acute flaccid palsy. The functional
prognosis of AFM is poor, and there are no evidence-based treatment guidelines
so far.
CONCLUSION: AFM is an emerging pathology that requires the attention of
pediatricians to quickly rule out differential diagnoses and adequately manage
the patient. Further research is needed to optimize treatments, improve
outcomes, and provide scientifically based guidelines.

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000535316
PMCID: PMC10890805
PMID: 38405019

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest to
declare.
