---
reference_id: "PMID:39261601"
title: "Determinants of survival after first relapse of acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a Children's Oncology Group study."
authors:
- Rheingold SR
- Bhojwani D
- Ji L
- Xu X
- Devidas M
- Kairalla JA
- Shago M
- Heerema NA
- Carroll AJ
- Breidenbach H
- Borowitz M
- Wood BL
- Angiolillo AL
- Asselin BL
- Bowman WP
- Brown P
- Dreyer ZE
- Dunsmore KP
- Hilden JM
- Larsen E
- Maloney K
- Matloub Y
- Mattano LA
- Winter SS
- Gore L
- Winick NJ
- Carroll WL
- Hunger SP
- Raetz EA
- Loh ML
journal: Leukemia
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41375-024-02395-4
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- Female
- Male
- Infant
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Precursor Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia-Lymphoma/mortality, pathology, therapy, genetics"
- Prognosis
- Adolescent
- Recurrence
- Survival Rate
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/pathology, mortality"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Determinants of survival after first relapse of acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a Children's Oncology Group study.
**Authors:** Rheingold SR, Bhojwani D, Ji L, Xu X, Devidas M, Kairalla JA, Shago M, Heerema NA, Carroll AJ, Breidenbach H, Borowitz M, Wood BL, Angiolillo AL, Asselin BL, Bowman WP, Brown P, Dreyer ZE, Dunsmore KP, Hilden JM, Larsen E, Maloney K, Matloub Y, Mattano LA, Winter SS, Gore L, Winick NJ, Carroll WL, Hunger SP, Raetz EA, Loh ML
**Journal:** Leukemia (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41375-024-02395-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41375-024-02395-4)

## Content

1. Leukemia. 2024 Nov;38(11):2382-2394. doi: 10.1038/s41375-024-02395-4. Epub
2024  Sep 11.

Determinants of survival after first relapse of acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a 
Children's Oncology Group study.

Rheingold SR(#)(1), Bhojwani D(#)(2), Ji L(3), Xu X(4), Devidas M(5), Kairalla 
JA(6), Shago M(7), Heerema NA(8), Carroll AJ(9), Breidenbach H(10), Borowitz 
M(11), Wood BL(12), Angiolillo AL(13), Asselin BL(14), Bowman WP(15), Brown 
P(16), Dreyer ZE(17), Dunsmore KP(18), Hilden JM(19), Larsen E(20), Maloney 
K(19), Matloub Y(21), Mattano LA(22), Winter SS(23), Gore L(19), Winick NJ(24), 
Carroll WL(25), Hunger SP(26), Raetz EA(25), Loh ML(27).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and the Center for Childhood Cancer Research, 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. rheingold@chop.edu.
(2)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, 
Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center and Keck School of Medicine, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Population and Public Health Sciences, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Children's Oncology Group, Monrovia, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Global Pediatric Medicine, St Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.
(6)Department of Biostatistics, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(7)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(8)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(9)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 
USA.
(10)The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(11)Department of Pathology and Oncology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(12)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Childrens Hospital Los 
Angeles, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(13)Servier Pharmaceuticals, Boston, MA, USA.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, Golisano Children's Hospital, Wilmot Cancer Center 
at University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York, NY, USA.
(15)Cook Children's Medical Center, Fort Worth, TX, USA.
(16)Bristol Myers Squibb, Princeton, NJ, USA.
(17)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Hematology/Oncology, Texas Children's 
Hospital, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(18)Department of Pediatrics, University of Virginia School of Medicine, 
Charlottesville, VA, USA.
(19)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine and 
Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, 
USA.
(20)Department of Pediatrics, Maine Medical Center, Portland, ME, USA.
(21)Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, 
USA.
(22)HARP Pharma Consulting, Mystic, CT, USA.
(23)Cancer and Blood Disorders Program, Children's Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 
USA.
(24)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Childrens Health, Dallas, TX, USA.
(25)Perlmutter Cancer Center, Department of Pediatrics, NYU Grossman School of 
Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(26)Department of Pediatrics and the Center for Childhood Cancer Research, 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(27)Department of Pediatrics, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Limited prognostic factors have been associated with overall survival (OS) 
post-relapse in childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL). Patients enrolled 
on 12 Children's Oncology Group frontline ALL trials (1996-2014) were analyzed 
to assess for additional prognostic factors associated with OS post-relapse. 
Among 16,115 patients, 2053 (12.7%) relapsed. Relapse rates were similar for 
B-ALL (12.5%) and T-ALL (11.2%) while higher for infants (34.2%). Approximately 
50% of B-ALL relapses occurred late (≥36 months) and 72.5% involved the marrow. 
Conversely, 64.8% of T-ALL relapses occurred early (<18 months) and 47.1% 
involved the central nervous system. The 5-year OS post-relapse for the entire 
cohort was 48.9 ± 1.2%; B-ALL:52.5 ± 1.3%, T-ALL:35.5 ± 3.3%, and infant 
ALL:21.5 ± 3.9%. OS varied by early, intermediate and late time-to-relapse; 
25.8 ± 2.4%, 49.5 ± 2.2%, and 66.4 ± 1.8% respectively for B-ALL and 
29.8 ± 3.9%, 33.3 ± 7.6%, 58 ± 9.8% for T-ALL. Patients with ETV6::RUNX1 or 
Trisomy 4 + 10 had median time-to-relapse of 43 months and higher OS 
post-relapse 74.4 ± 3.1% and 70.2 ± 3.6%, respectively. Patients with 
hypodiploidy, KMT2A-rearrangement, and TCF3::PBX1 had short median 
time-to-relapse (12.5-18 months) and poor OS post-relapse (14.2 ± 6.1%, 
31.9 ± 7.7%, 36.8 ± 6.6%). Site-of-relapse varied by cytogenetic subtype. This 
large dataset provided the opportunity to identify risk factors for OS 
post-relapse to inform trial design and highlight populations with dismal 
outcomes post-relapse.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41375-024-02395-4
PMCID: PMC11518984
PMID: 39261601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.