---
reference_id: "PMID:35988962"
title: "Juvenile polyposis syndrome: An overview."
authors:
- Dal Buono A
- Gaiani F
- Poliani L
- Laghi L
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.bpg.2022.101799
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Juvenile polyposis syndrome: An overview.
**Authors:** Dal Buono A, Gaiani F, Poliani L, Laghi L
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bpg.2022.101799](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpg.2022.101799)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol. 2022 Jun-Aug;58-59:101799. doi: 
10.1016/j.bpg.2022.101799. Epub 2022 Apr 4.

Juvenile polyposis syndrome: An overview.

Dal Buono A(1), Gaiani F(2), Poliani L(3), Laghi L(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Gastroenterology, Humanitas 
Research Hospital - IRCCs, Rozzano, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(3)Gastroenterology and Endoscopy, IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Parma, Italy; 
Laboratory of Molecular Gastroenterology, Humanitas Clinical and Research 
Centre, Rozzano, Milan, Italy. Electronic address: 
luigiandreagiuseppe.laghi@unipr.it.

Juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS) is a rare precancerous condition that confers 
an increased risk of developing gastrointestinal cancers. The inheritance 
pattern is autosomal dominant. JPS should be clinically suspected when the other 
hamartomatous polyposis syndromes are excluded (i.e., Peutz- Jeghers and 
Cowden), in presence of numerous juvenile polyps in the colorectum or in other 
GI locations. Among the syndromic features, JPS can present with concomitant 
extra-intestinal manifestations, above all cutaneous manifestations such as 
telangiectasia, pigmented nevi, and skeletal stigmata. Pathogenic germline 
variants of either BMPR1A or SMAD4 cause the syndrome. In JPS a cumulative risk 
of CRC of 39-68% has been estimated. The oncological risk justifies and imposes 
prevention strategies that aim at the cancer risk reduction through endoscopic 
screening, as recommended by international scientific societies. The aim of this 
review is to summarize clinical and genetic features of JPS and to elucidate the 
steps of the clinical management from diagnosis to surveillance.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpg.2022.101799
PMID: 35988962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]