---
reference_id: "PMID:18953429"
title: "The neurofibromatosis 2 tumor suppressor gene product, merlin, regulates human meningioma cell growth by signaling through YAP."
authors:
- Striedinger K
- VandenBerg SR
- Baia GS
- McDermott MW
- Gutmann DH
- Lal A
journal: Neoplasia
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1593/neo.08642
keywords:
- "Arachnoid/cytology, metabolism"
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- Cell Line
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Proliferation
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- Cyclin E/metabolism
- "Genes, Neurofibromatosis 2"
- Humans
- "Meningioma/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Neurofibromin 2/genetics, metabolism"
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Oncogene Proteins/metabolism
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- RNA Interference
- Signal Transduction
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The neurofibromatosis 2 tumor suppressor gene product, merlin, regulates human meningioma cell growth by signaling through YAP.
**Authors:** Striedinger K, VandenBerg SR, Baia GS, McDermott MW, Gutmann DH, Lal A
**Journal:** Neoplasia (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1593/neo.08642](https://doi.org/10.1593/neo.08642)

## Content

1. Neoplasia. 2008 Nov;10(11):1204-12. doi: 10.1593/neo.08642.

The neurofibromatosis 2 tumor suppressor gene product, merlin, regulates human 
meningioma cell growth by signaling through YAP.

Striedinger K(1), VandenBerg SR, Baia GS, McDermott MW, Gutmann DH, Lal A.

Author information:
(1)Brain Tumor Research Center, Department of Neurological Surgery, University 
of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized 
by the occurrence of schwannomas and meningiomas. Several studies have examined 
the ability of the NF2 gene product, merlin, to function as a tumor suppressor 
in diverse cell types; however, little is known about merlin growth regulation 
in meningiomas. In Drosophila, merlin controls cell proliferation and apoptosis 
by signaling through the Hippo pathway to inhibit the function of the 
transcriptional coactivator Yorkie. The Hippo pathway is conserved in mammals. 
On the basis of these observations, we developed human meningioma cell lines 
matched for merlin expression to evaluate merlin growth regulation and 
investigate the relationship between NF2 status and Yes-associated protein 
(YAP), the mammalian homolog of Yorkie. NF2 loss in meningioma cells was 
associated with loss of contact-dependent growth inhibition, enhanced 
anchorage-independent growth and increased cell proliferation due to increased 
S-phase entry. In addition, merlin loss in both meningioma cell lines and 
primary tumors resulted in increased YAP expression and nuclear localization. 
Finally, siRNA-mediated reduction of YAP in NF2-deficient meningioma cells 
rescued the effects of merlin loss on cell proliferation and S-phase entry. 
Collectively, these results represent the first demonstration that merlin 
regulates cell growth in human cancer cells by suppressing YAP.

DOI: 10.1593/neo.08642
PMCID: PMC2570596
PMID: 18953429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]