---
reference_id: "PMID:33035459"
title: "Tazemetostat in advanced epithelioid sarcoma with loss of INI1/SMARCB1: an international, open-label, phase 2 basket study."
authors:
- Gounder M
- Schöffski P
- Jones RL
- Agulnik M
- Cote GM
- Villalobos VM
- Attia S
- Chugh R
- Chen TW
- Jahan T
- Loggers ET
- Gupta A
- Italiano A
- Demetri GD
- Ratan R
- Davis LE
- Mir O
- Dileo P
- Van Tine BA
- Pressey JG
- Lingaraj T
- Rajarethinam A
- Sierra L
- Agarwal S
- Stacchiotti S
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30451-4
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Benzamides/administration & dosage, adverse effects, pharmacokinetics"
- Biphenyl Compounds
- "Doxorubicin/administration & dosage, adverse effects, pharmacokinetics"
- Female
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Morpholines
- Progression-Free Survival
- "Pyridones/administration & dosage, adverse effects, pharmacokinetics"
- SMARCB1 Protein/genetics
- "Sarcoma/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tazemetostat in advanced epithelioid sarcoma with loss of INI1/SMARCB1: an international, open-label, phase 2 basket study.
**Authors:** Gounder M, Schöffski P, Jones RL, Agulnik M, Cote GM, Villalobos VM, Attia S, Chugh R, Chen TW, Jahan T, Loggers ET, Gupta A, Italiano A, Demetri GD, Ratan R, Davis LE, Mir O, Dileo P, Van Tine BA, Pressey JG, Lingaraj T, Rajarethinam A, Sierra L, Agarwal S, Stacchiotti S
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30451-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30451-4)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2020 Nov;21(11):1423-1432. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30451-4. 
Epub 2020 Oct 6.

Tazemetostat in advanced epithelioid sarcoma with loss of INI1/SMARCB1: an 
international, open-label, phase 2 basket study.

Gounder M(1), Schöffski P(2), Jones RL(3), Agulnik M(4), Cote GM(5), Villalobos 
VM(6), Attia S(7), Chugh R(8), Chen TW(9), Jahan T(10), Loggers ET(11), Gupta 
A(12), Italiano A(13), Demetri GD(14), Ratan R(15), Davis LE(16), Mir O(17), 
Dileo P(18), Van Tine BA(19), Pressey JG(20), Lingaraj T(21), Rajarethinam 
A(21), Sierra L(22), Agarwal S(21), Stacchiotti S(23).

Author information:
(1)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, NY, USA. Electronic address: gounderm@mskcc.org.
(2)Department of General Medical Oncology, and Laboratory of Experimental 
Oncology, University Hospitals Leuven, KU Leuven, Leuven Cancer Institute, 
Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Royal Marsden Hospital and Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.
(4)Robert H Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Anschutz Medical Campus, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO, USA; 
Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Spring House, PA, USA.
(7)Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(8)University of Michigan Rogel Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(9)National Taiwan University Hospital and Graduate Institute of Oncology, 
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(10)University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(11)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA.
(12)The Hospital for Sick Children and Princess Margaret Cancer Center, Toronto, 
ON, Canada.
(13)Institut Bergonie and University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(14)Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Ludwig Center at Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(15)MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(16)Oregon Health & Science University, Knight Cancer Institute, Portland, OR, 
USA.
(17)Gustave Roussy Cancer Institute, Paris, France.
(18)University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(19)School of Medicine, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO, USA.
(20)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA; Division of Oncology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital 
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(21)Epizyme, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(22)Epizyme, Cambridge, MA, USA; Bristol Myers Squibb, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(23)Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2020 Nov;21(11):1388-1390. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30530-1.

BACKGROUND: Epithelioid sarcoma is a rare and aggressive soft-tissue sarcoma 
subtype. Over 90% of tumours have lost INI1 expression, leading to oncogenic 
dependence on the transcriptional repressor EZH2. In this study, we report the 
clinical activity and safety of tazemetostat, an oral selective EZH2 inhibitor, 
in patients with epithelioid sarcoma.
METHODS: In this open-label, phase 2 basket study, patients were enrolled from 
32 hospitals and clinics in Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, 
Taiwan, the USA, and the UK into seven cohorts of patients with different 
INI1-negative solid tumours or synovial sarcoma. Patients eligible for the 
epithelioid sarcoma cohort (cohort 5) were aged 16 years or older with 
histologically confirmed, locally advanced or metastatic epithelioid sarcoma; 
documented loss of INI1 expression by immunohistochemical analysis or biallelic 
SMARCB1 (the gene that encodes INI1) alterations, or both; and an Eastern 
Cooperative Oncology Group performance status score of 0-2. Patients received 
800 mg tazemetostat orally twice per day in continuous 28-day cycles until 
disease progression, unacceptable toxicity, or withdrawal of consent. The 
primary endpoint was investigator-assessed objective response rate measured 
according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, version 1.1. 
Secondary endpoints were duration of response, disease control rate at 32 weeks, 
progression-free survival, overall survival, and pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic analyses (primary results reported elsewhere). Time to response 
was also assessed as an exploratory endpoint. Activity and safety were assessed 
in the modified intention-to-treat population (ie, patients who received one or 
more doses of tazemetostat). This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, 
NCT02601950, and is ongoing.
FINDINGS: Between Dec 22, 2015, and July 7, 2017, 62 patients with epithelioid 
sarcoma were enrolled in the study and deemed eligible for inclusion in this 
cohort. All 62 patients were included in the modified intention-to-treat 
analysis. Nine (15% [95% CI 7-26]) of 62 patients had an objective response at 
data cutoff (Sept 17, 2018). At a median follow-up of 13·8 months (IQR 
7·8-19·0), median duration of response was not reached (95% CI 9·2-not 
estimable). 16 (26% [95% CI 16-39]) patients had disease control at 32 weeks. 
Median time to response was 3·9 months (IQR 1·9-7·4). Median progression-free 
survival was 5·5 months (95% CI 3·4-5·9), and median overall survival was 19·0 
months (11·0-not estimable). Grade 3 or worse treatment-related adverse events 
included anaemia (four [6%]) and weight loss (two [3%]). Treatment-related 
serious adverse events occurred in two patients (one seizure and one 
haemoptysis). There were no treatment-related deaths.
INTERPRETATION: Tazemetostat was well tolerated and showed clinical activity in 
this cohort of patients with advanced epithelioid sarcoma characterised by loss 
of INI1/SMARCB1. Tazemetostat has the potential to improve outcomes in patients 
with advanced epithelioid sarcoma. A phase 1b/3 trial of tazemetostat plus 
doxorubicin in the front-line setting is currently underway (NCT04204941).
FUNDING: Epizyme.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30451-4
PMID: 33035459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]