---
reference_id: "PMID:40067386"
title: Oral Ketone β -Hydroxybutyrate Supplement Retards the Loss of GFR in Alport Mice on Dual Renin-Angiotensin System/Sodium-Glucose Transporter 2 Blockade.
authors:
- Schreier LP
- Zhu Z
- Kusunoki Y
- Li C
- Ku J
- Klaus M
- Anders HJ
journal: Kidney360
year: '2025'
doi: 10.34067/KID.0000000747
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oral Ketone β -Hydroxybutyrate Supplement Retards the Loss of GFR in Alport Mice on Dual Renin-Angiotensin System/Sodium-Glucose Transporter 2 Blockade.
**Authors:** Schreier LP, Zhu Z, Kusunoki Y, Li C, Ku J, Klaus M, Anders HJ
**Journal:** Kidney360 (2025)
**DOI:** [10.34067/KID.0000000747](https://doi.org/10.34067/KID.0000000747)

## Content

1. Kidney360. 2025 Mar 11;6(7):1085-1095. doi: 10.34067/KID.0000000747.

Oral Ketone β -Hydroxybutyrate Supplement Retards the Loss of GFR in Alport Mice
on Dual Renin-Angiotensin System/Sodium-Glucose Transporter 2 Blockade.

Schreier LP(1), Zhu Z(1)(2), Kusunoki Y(1)(3), Li C(1), Ku J(1), Klaus M(1),
Anders HJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine IV, Hospital of the
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Endocrinology, and Nephrology, Faculty of
Medicine and Graduate School of Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

Comment in
    doi: 10.34067/KID.0000000876.

KEY POINTS: There is an unmet medical need for testing novel CKD substances to
create more effective combination therapies. In our CKD mouse model, ketone
supplementation retards the loss of GFR beyond the current standard of care, but
no effect on lifespan was observed. Ketone supplementation suppresses kidney
inflammation and fibrosis.
BACKGROUND: Several studies suggest that dietary β-hydroxybutyrate (BHB)
supplementation delays the progression of CKD by suppressing inflammation and
fibrosis. We hypothesized that the oral supplementation with the BHB precursor
1,3-butanediol in addition to inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS)
and sodium-glucose transporter 2 (SGLT2) would be superior to dual RAS/SGLT2
blockade alone in attenuating the loss of GFR in Col4a3-deficient mice with
Alport nephropathy, a spontaneous model of progressive CKD.
METHODS: We performed a negative-controlled study in Col4a3-deficient mice with
Alport nephropathy. Treatment was initiated at a late stage of the disease at
the age of 6 weeks. Mice were fed food admixes of 10 μg/g ramipril plus 30 μg/g
empagliflozin with or without addition of 0.04 g/g 1,3-butanediol (concentration
per gram of bodyweight). The mice were monitored daily and sacrificed on
reaching renal failure. The GFR was measured at the start of the treatment and
after 1 and 4 weeks.
RESULTS: The addition of BHB significantly attenuated the loss of GFR beyond the
effect of dual RAS/SGLT2 blockade. The mean GFR after 4 weeks of treatment was 0
± 0 μl/min (vehicle), 57 ± 54 μl/min (renin-angiotensin system inhibitors +
sodium-glucose transporter 2 inhibitors), and 139 ± 69 μl/min (renin-angiotensin
system inhibitors + sodium-glucose transporter 2 inhibitors+1,3-butanediol). No
additional effects on lifespan could be observed. Kidney RNA sequencing revealed
significant protective effects on inflammation when adding the BHB precursor
1,3-butanediol to RAS/SGLT2 inhibition. In histopathology, antifibrotic effects
were seen on BHB addition.
CONCLUSIONS: The results in mice suggest that BHB supplementation improves the
GFR in Alport syndrome by suppressing inflammation and fibrosis. However, the
effects did not lead to a significant increase in lifespan. Furthermore, the
observed effects stay behind the effects of finerenone as a combination partner,
which was tested earlier in the same mouse model.

DOI: 10.34067/KID.0000000747
PMCID: PMC12338352
PMID: 40067386

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure forms, as provided by each author,
are available with the online version of the article at
http://links.lww.com/KN9/A947.
