---
reference_id: "PMID:30882951"
title: "The lysosomal storage disorders mucolipidosis type II, type III alpha/beta, and type III gamma: Update on GNPTAB and GNPTG mutations."
authors:
- Velho RV
- Harms FL
- Danyukova T
- Ludwig NF
- Friez MJ
- Cathey SS
- Filocamo M
- Tappino B
- Güneş N
- Tüysüz B
- Tylee KL
- Brammeier KL
- Heptinstall L
- Oussoren E
- van der Ploeg AT
- Petersen C
- Alves S
- Saavedra GD
- Schwartz IV
- Muschol N
- Kutsche K
- Pohl S
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/humu.23748
keywords:
- Exons
- Humans
- Introns
- "Lysosomal Storage Diseases, Nervous System/classification, genetics"
- "Mucolipidoses/classification, genetics"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Prognosis
- Protein Domains
- "Transferases (Other Substituted Phosphate Groups)/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The lysosomal storage disorders mucolipidosis type II, type III alpha/beta, and type III gamma: Update on GNPTAB and GNPTG mutations.
**Authors:** Velho RV, Harms FL, Danyukova T, Ludwig NF, Friez MJ, Cathey SS, Filocamo M, Tappino B, Güneş N, Tüysüz B, Tylee KL, Brammeier KL, Heptinstall L, Oussoren E, van der Ploeg AT, Petersen C, Alves S, Saavedra GD, Schwartz IV, Muschol N, Kutsche K, Pohl S
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23748](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23748)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2019 Jul;40(7):842-864. doi: 10.1002/humu.23748. Epub 2019 Apr 13.

The lysosomal storage disorders mucolipidosis type II, type III alpha/beta, and 
type III gamma: Update on GNPTAB and GNPTG mutations.

Velho RV(1), Harms FL(2), Danyukova T(1), Ludwig NF(3)(4), Friez MJ(5), Cathey 
SS(5), Filocamo M(6), Tappino B(6), Güneş N(7), Tüysüz B(7), Tylee KL(8), 
Brammeier KL(8), Heptinstall L(9), Oussoren E(10), van der Ploeg AT(10), 
Petersen C(2), Alves S(11), Saavedra GD(12), Schwartz IV(3)(4), Muschol N(13), 
Kutsche K(2), Pohl S(1).

Author information:
(1)Section Cell Biology of Rare Diseases, Department of Osteology and 
Biomechanics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Genetics, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto 
Alegre, Brazil.
(4)Post-Graduation Program in Genetics and Molecular Biology, Federal University 
of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(5)Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, South Carolina.
(6)Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare e Biobanche, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, 
Genova, Italy.
(7)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Istanbul University Cerrahpasa, Medicine 
School, Istanbul, Turkey.
(8)Willink Biochemical Genetics Unit, Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, 
Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Saint Mary's Hospital, Manchester, 
UK.
(9)Genomic Diagnostics Laboratory, Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, 
Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Saint Mary's Hospital, Manchester, 
UK.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Center for LyMannose phosphorylation in health and 
diseasesosomal and Metabolic Diseases, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(11)Department of Human Genetics, INSA, National Health Institute Doutor Ricardo 
Jorge, Porto, Portugal.
(12)División de Pediatría, Escuela de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad Católica 
de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(13)International Center for Lysosomal Disorders, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

Mutations in the GNPTAB and GNPTG genes cause mucolipidosis (ML) type II, type 
III alpha/beta, and type III gamma, which are autosomal recessively inherited 
lysosomal storage disorders. GNPTAB and GNPTG encode the α/β-precursor and the 
γ-subunit of N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc)-1-phosphotransferase, respectively, 
the key enzyme for the generation of mannose 6-phosphate targeting signals on 
lysosomal enzymes. Defective GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase results in missorting 
of lysosomal enzymes and accumulation of non-degradable macromolecules in 
lysosomes, strongly impairing cellular function. MLII-affected patients have 
coarse facial features, cessation of statural growth and neuromotor development, 
severe skeletal abnormalities, organomegaly, and cardiorespiratory insufficiency 
leading to death in early childhood. MLIII alpha/beta and MLIII gamma are 
attenuated forms of the disease. Since the identification of the GNPTAB and 
GNPTG genes, 564 individuals affected by MLII or MLIII have been described in 
the literature. In this report, we provide an overview on 258 and 50 mutations 
in GNPTAB and GNPTG, respectively, including 58 novel GNPTAB and seven novel 
GNPTG variants. Comprehensive functional studies of GNPTAB missense mutations 
did not only gain insights into the composition and function of the 
GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase, but also helped to define genotype-phenotype 
correlations to predict the clinical outcome in patients.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23748
PMID: 30882951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]