---
reference_id: "PMID:18083751"
title: "Focal white matter changes in spasmodic dysphonia: a combined diffusion tensor imaging and neuropathological study."
authors:
- Simonyan K
- Tovar-Moll F
- Ostuni J
- Hallett M
- Kalasinsky VF
- Lewin-Smith MR
- Rushing EJ
- Vortmeyer AO
- Ludlow CL
journal: Brain
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awm303
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Anisotropy
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- Brain Mapping/methods
- Diffusion Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Female
- Humans
- "Laryngismus/complications, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- "Microscopy, Electron, Scanning"
- Middle Aged
- "Putamen/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Speech Production Measurement
- "Voice Disorders/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Focal white matter changes in spasmodic dysphonia: a combined diffusion tensor imaging and neuropathological study.
**Authors:** Simonyan K, Tovar-Moll F, Ostuni J, Hallett M, Kalasinsky VF, Lewin-Smith MR, Rushing EJ, Vortmeyer AO, Ludlow CL
**Journal:** Brain (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awm303](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awm303)

## Content

1. Brain. 2008 Feb;131(Pt 2):447-59. doi: 10.1093/brain/awm303. Epub 2007 Dec 14.

Focal white matter changes in spasmodic dysphonia: a combined diffusion tensor 
imaging and neuropathological study.

Simonyan K(1), Tovar-Moll F, Ostuni J, Hallett M, Kalasinsky VF, Lewin-Smith MR, 
Rushing EJ, Vortmeyer AO, Ludlow CL.

Author information:
(1)Laryngeal and Speech Section, Medical Neurology Branch, National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, 10 Center 
Drive, Building 10, Room 5D38, Bethesda, MD 20892-1416, USA. 
simonyak@ninds.nih.gov

Spasmodic dysphonia is a neurological disorder characterized by involuntary 
spasms in the laryngeal muscles during speech production. Although the clinical 
symptoms are well characterized, the pathophysiology of this voice disorder is 
unknown. We describe here, for the first time to our knowledge, 
disorder-specific brain abnormalities in these patients as determined by a 
combined approach of diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and postmortem 
histopathology. We used DTI to identify brain changes and to target those brain 
regions for neuropathological examination. DTI showed right-sided decrease of 
fractional anisotropy in the genu of the internal capsule and bilateral increase 
of overall water diffusivity in the white matter along the 
corticobulbar/corticospinal tract in 20 spasmodic dysphonia patients compared to 
20 healthy subjects. In addition, water diffusivity was bilaterally increased in 
the lentiform nucleus, ventral thalamus and cerebellar white and grey matter in 
the patients. These brain changes were substantiated with focal 
histopathological abnormalities presented as a loss of axonal density and myelin 
content in the right genu of the internal capsule and clusters of mineral 
depositions, containing calcium, phosphorus and iron, in the parenchyma and 
vessel walls of the posterior limb of the internal capsule, putamen, globus 
pallidus and cerebellum in the postmortem brain tissue from one patient compared 
to three controls. The specificity of these brain abnormalities is confirmed by 
their localization, limited only to the corticobulbar/corticospinal tract and 
its main input/output structures. We also found positive correlation between the 
diffusivity changes and clinical symptoms of spasmodic dysphonia (r = 0.509, P = 
0.037). These brain abnormalities may alter the central control of voluntary 
voice production and, therefore, may underlie the pathophysiology of this 
disorder.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awm303
PMCID: PMC2376833
PMID: 18083751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]