---
reference_id: "PMID:35200557"
title: "ROS-1 Fusions in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: Evidence to Date."
authors:
- Gendarme S
- Bylicki O
- Chouaid C
- Guisier F
journal: Curr Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/curroncol29020057
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ROS-1 Fusions in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: Evidence to Date.
**Authors:** Gendarme S, Bylicki O, Chouaid C, Guisier F
**Journal:** Curr Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/curroncol29020057](https://doi.org/10.3390/curroncol29020057)

## Content

1. Curr Oncol. 2022 Jan 28;29(2):641-658. doi: 10.3390/curroncol29020057.

ROS-1 Fusions in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: Evidence to Date.

Gendarme S(1)(2), Bylicki O(3), Chouaid C(1)(2), Guisier F(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)INSERM, IMRB (Clinical Epidemiology and Ageing Unit), University Paris Est 
Créteil, F-94010 Créteil, France.
(2)Pneumology Department, Centre Hospitalier Intercommunal de Créteil, 40, 
Avenue de Verdun, F-94010 Créteil, France.
(3)Respiratory Disease Unit, HIA Sainte-Anne, 2, Boulevard Saint-Anne, F-83000 
Toulon, France.
(4)Department of Pneumology, Rouen University Hospital, 1 Rue de Germont, 
F-76000 Rouen, France.
(5)Clinical Investigation Center, Rouen University Hospital, CIC INSERM 1404, 1 
Rue de Germont, F-76000 Rouen, France.

The ROS-1 gene plays a major role in the oncogenesis of numerous tumors. ROS-1 
rearrangement is found in 0.9-2.6% of non-small-cell lung cancers (NSCLCs), 
mostly lung adenocarcinomas, with a significantly higher rate of women, 
non-smokers, and a tendency to a younger age. It has been demonstrated that 
ROS-1 is a true oncogenic driver, and tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) 
targeting ROS-1 can block tumor growth and provide clinical benefit for the 
patient. Since 2016, crizotinib has been the first-line reference therapy, with 
two-thirds of the patients' tumors responding and progression-free survival 
lasting ~20 months. More recently developed are ROS-1-targeting TKIs that are 
active against resistance mechanisms appearing under crizotinib and have better 
brain penetration. This review summarizes current knowledge on ROS-1 
rearrangement in NSCLCs, including the mechanisms responsible for ROS-1 
oncogenicity, epidemiology of ROS-1-positive tumors, methods for detecting 
rearrangement, phenotypic, histological, and molecular characteristics, and 
their therapeutic management. Much of this work is devoted to resistance 
mechanisms and the development of promising new molecules.

DOI: 10.3390/curroncol29020057
PMCID: PMC8870726
PMID: 35200557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.