---
reference_id: "PMID:38535127"
title: "Expanded Newborn Screening for Inborn Errors of Metabolism in Hong Kong: Results and Outcome of a 7 Year Journey."
authors:
- Belaramani KM
- Chan TCH
- Hau EWL
- Yeung MCW
- Kwok AMK
- Lo IFM
- Law THF
- Wu H
- Wong SSN
- Lam SW
- Ha GHY
- Lau TPY
- Wong TK
- Or VWC
- Wong RMS
- Ming WL
- Chow JCK
- Yau EKC
- Fu A
- Chong JSC
- Yau HC
- Poon GWK
- Ng KL
- Chan KT
- Lam YY
- Hui J
- Mak CM
- Fung CW
journal: Int J Neonatal Screen
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijns10010023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanded Newborn Screening for Inborn Errors of Metabolism in Hong Kong: Results and Outcome of a 7 Year Journey.
**Authors:** Belaramani KM, Chan TCH, Hau EWL, Yeung MCW, Kwok AMK, Lo IFM, Law THF, Wu H, Wong SSN, Lam SW, Ha GHY, Lau TPY, Wong TK, Or VWC, Wong RMS, Ming WL, Chow JCK, Yau EKC, Fu A, Chong JSC, Yau HC, Poon GWK, Ng KL, Chan KT, Lam YY, Hui J, Mak CM, Fung CW
**Journal:** Int J Neonatal Screen (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijns10010023](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijns10010023)

## Content

1. Int J Neonatal Screen. 2024 Mar 11;10(1):23. doi: 10.3390/ijns10010023.

Expanded Newborn Screening for Inborn Errors of Metabolism in Hong Kong: Results 
and Outcome of a 7 Year Journey.

Belaramani KM(1), Chan TCH(2), Hau EWL(3), Yeung MCW(2), Kwok AMK(1), Lo IFM(3), 
Law THF(1), Wu H(1), Wong SSN(4), Lam SW(1), Ha GHY(4), Lau TPY(2), Wong TK(2), 
Or VWC(2), Wong RMS(4), Ming WL(5), Chow JCK(6), Yau EKC(7), Fu A(7), Chong 
JSC(8), Yau HC(9), Poon GWK(10), Ng KL(11), Chan KT(12), Lam YY(13), Hui J(1), 
Mak CM(2), Fung CW(1).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Medicine Unit, Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 
Hong Kong Children's Hospital, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Newborn Screening Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Hong Kong Children's 
Hospital, Hong Kong, China.
(3)Clinical Genetics Service Unit, Hong Kong Children's Hospital, Hong Kong, 
China.
(4)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Hong Kong Children's 
Hospital, Hong Kong, China.
(5)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Tuen Mun Hospital, Hong 
Kong, China.
(6)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, 
Hong Kong, China.
(7)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Princess Margaret 
Hospital, Hong Kong, China.
(8)Department of Paediatrics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
China.
(9)Department of Paediatrics, Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong, China.
(10)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong 
Kong, China.
(11)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, United Christian 
Hospital, Hong Kong, China.
(12)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Pamela Youde Nethersole 
Eastern Hospital, Hong Kong, China.
(13)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Kwong Wah Hospital, Hong 
Kong, China.

Newborn screening (NBS) is an important public health program that aims to 
identify pre-symptomatic healthy babies that will develop significant disease if 
left undiagnosed and untreated. The number of conditions being screened globally 
is expanding rapidly in parallel with advances in technology, diagnosis, and 
treatment availability for these conditions. In Hong Kong, NBS for inborn errors 
of metabolism (NBSIEM) began as a pilot program in October 2015 and was 
implemented to all birthing hospitals within the public healthcare system in 
phases, with completion in October 2020. The number of conditions screened for 
increased from 21 to 24 in April 2016 and then to 26 in October 2019. The 
overall recruitment rate of the NBS program was 99.5%. In the period between 
October 2015 and December 2022, 125,688 newborns were screened and 295 were 
referred back for abnormal results. The recall rate was reduced from 0.26% to 
0.12% after the implementation of second-tier testing. An inherited metabolic 
disorder (IMD) was eventually confirmed in 47 infants, making the prevalence of 
IMD in Hong Kong 1 in 2674. At the time of the NBS result, 78.7% of the newborns 
with IMD were asymptomatic. There were two deaths reported: one newborn with 
methylmalonic acidemia cobalamin B type (MMACblB) died after the initial crisis 
and another case of carnitine palmitoyltransferase II deficiency (CPTII) died at 
18 months of age after metabolic decompensation. The most common IMD noted were 
disorders of fatty acid oxidation metabolism (40%, 19 cases), closely followed 
by disorders of amino acid metabolism (38%, 18 cases), with carnitine uptake 
defect (19.1%, 9 cases) and citrullinemia type II (17%, 8 cases) being the two 
most common IMD picked up by the NBSIEM in Hong Kong. Out of the all the IMDs 
identified, 19.1% belonged to diverse ethnic groups. False negative cases were 
reported for citrullinemia type II and congenital adrenal hyperplasia during 
this period.

DOI: 10.3390/ijns10010023
PMCID: PMC10970889
PMID: 38535127

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.