---
reference_id: "PMID:38343435"
title: "Genetic variations in NLRP3 and NLRP12 genes in adult-onset patients with autoinflammatory diseases: a comparative study."
authors:
- Yun M
- Deng Z
- Navetta-Modrov B
- Xin B
- Yang J
- Nomani H
- Aroniadis O
- Gorevic PD
- Yao Q
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1321370
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Child
- Female
- "NLR Family, Pyrin Domain-Containing 3 Protein/genetics"
- "Hereditary Autoinflammatory Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Cryopyrin-Associated Periodic Syndromes/genetics, diagnosis"
- Genetic Variation
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic variations in NLRP3 and NLRP12 genes in adult-onset patients with autoinflammatory diseases: a comparative study.
**Authors:** Yun M, Deng Z, Navetta-Modrov B, Xin B, Yang J, Nomani H, Aroniadis O, Gorevic PD, Yao Q
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1321370](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1321370)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Jan 26;14:1321370. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1321370. 
eCollection 2023.

Genetic variations in NLRP3 and NLRP12 genes in adult-onset patients with 
autoinflammatory diseases: a comparative study.

Yun M(1), Deng Z(2), Navetta-Modrov B(1), Xin B(3), Yang J(4), Nomani H(1), 
Aroniadis O(5), Gorevic PD(1), Yao Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, Stony Brook University 
Renaissance School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY, United States.
(2)Biodata Mining and Discovery Section, National Institute of Arthritis and 
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(3)Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, DDC Clinic for Special Needs Children, 
Middlefield, OH, United States.
(4)Department of Family, Population and Preventive Medicine, Stony Brook 
University Renaissance School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY, United States.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Stony Brook University 
Renaissance School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY, United States.

OBJECTIVES: Cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome or NLRP3-associated 
autoinflammatory disease (NLRP3-AID) and NLRP12-AID are both Mendelian disorders 
with autosomal dominant inheritance. Both diseases are rare, primarily reported 
in the pediatric population, and are thought to be phenotypically 
indistinguishable. We provide the largest cohort of adult-onset patients and 
compared these diseases and the gene variant frequency to population controls.
METHODS: A cohort of adult patients with AIDs were retrospectively studied. All 
underwent molecular testing for periodic fever syndrome gene panels after 
extensive and negative workups for systemic autoimmune and other related 
diseases. Patients were divided into Group 1- NLRP3-AID patients with NLRP3 
variants (N=15), Group 2- NLRP12-AID with NLRP12 variants (N=14) and Group 3- 
both NLRP3 and NLRP12 (N=9) variants. Exome sequence data of two large control 
populations including the ARIC study were used to compare gene variant 
distribution and frequency.
RESULTS: All 38 patients were Caucasian with women accounting for 82%. Median 
age at diagnosis was 41 ± 23 years and the disease duration at diagnosis was 14 
± 13 years. We identified statistically significant differences between the 
groups, notably that gastrointestinal symptoms as well as evaluations for same 
were significantly more frequent in patients with NLRP12 variants, and 
headaches/dizziness were less common among the NLRP12 patients. Livedo 
reticularis was noted in four patients, exclusively among NLRP12 carriers. Over 
50% of patients in Groups 1 and 2 carry low-frequency disease-associated 
variants, while the remaining carry rare variants. We unprecedently identified 
digenic variants, i.e., the coexistence of NLRP3 and NLRP12, which were either 
both low frequency or low frequency/rare. Allele frequencies of all variants 
identified in our cohort were either absent or significantly lower in the 
control populations, further strengthening the evidence of susceptibility of 
these variants to SAID phenotypes.
CONCLUSION: Our comparative study shows that both NLRP3-AID and NLRP12-AID share 
similar clinical phenotypes, yet there are significant differences between them 
with regard to gastrointestinal and neurological symptoms. A spectrum of high to 
low genetic variations in both genes can contribute to SAID individually or in 
combination.

Copyright © 2024 Yun, Deng, Navetta-Modrov, Xin, Yang, Nomani, Aroniadis, 
Gorevic and Yao.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1321370
PMCID: PMC10853347
PMID: 38343435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.