---
reference_id: "PMID:36662731"
title: Executive functioning in adolescents and adults with Silver-Russell syndrome.
authors:
- Burgevin M
- Lacroix A
- Ollivier F
- Bourdet K
- Coutant R
- Donadille B
- Faivre L
- Manouvrier-Hanu S
- Petit F
- Thauvin-Robinet C
- Toutain A
- Netchine I
- Odent S
journal: PLoS One
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0279745
keywords:
- Female
- Pregnancy
- Humans
- Silver-Russell Syndrome/genetics
- Executive Function
- Bayes Theorem
- Methylation
- Uniparental Disomy
- DNA Methylation
- Genomic Imprinting
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Executive functioning in adolescents and adults with Silver-Russell syndrome.
**Authors:** Burgevin M, Lacroix A, Ollivier F, Bourdet K, Coutant R, Donadille B, Faivre L, Manouvrier-Hanu S, Petit F, Thauvin-Robinet C, Toutain A, Netchine I, Odent S
**Journal:** PLoS One (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0279745](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0279745)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2023 Jan 20;18(1):e0279745. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0279745. 
eCollection 2023.

Executive functioning in adolescents and adults with Silver-Russell syndrome.

Burgevin M(1), Lacroix A(1), Ollivier F(2), Bourdet K(3), Coutant R(4), 
Donadille B(5), Faivre L(6)(7), Manouvrier-Hanu S(8)(9), Petit F(10), 
Thauvin-Robinet C(6)(7), Toutain A(11), Netchine I(12), Odent S(13).

Author information:
(1)Univ Rennes, LP3C (Laboratoire de Psychologie, Cognition, Comportement et 
Communication)-EA 1285, FHU GenOMedS, Rennes, France.
(2)Univ Angers, Nantes Université, LPPL, SFR CONFLUENCES, Angers, France.
(3)Service de Pédiatrie, CHRU Brest, Brest, France.
(4)Service Endocrinologie Pédiatrique, CHU Angers, Angers, France.
(5)Endocrinologie, Service du Pr Christin-Maitre, Hôpital Saint Antoine, 
Sorbonne Université, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(6)INSERM-University of Bourgogne Franche-Comté, UMR 1231 GAD Team, Genetics of 
Developmental Disorders, FHU TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France.
(7)CHU Dijon, Centre de Référence Maladies Rares Anomalies du Développement et 
Syndromes Malformatifs, Centre de Génétique, FHU TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, 
Dijon, France.
(8)CHU Lille, Centre de Référence Maladies Rares Labellisé Pour les Anomalies du 
Développement Nord-Ouest, Clinique de Génétique, Lille, France.
(9)Univ Lille, EA7364 -RADEME-Maladies Rares du Développement Embryonnaire et du 
Métabolisme : du Phénotype au Génotype et à la Fonction, Lille, France.
(10)CHU Lille, Clinique de Génétique Guy Fontaine, Lille, France.
(11)Service de Génétique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, UMR 1253, iBrain, 
Université de Tours, Inserm, FHU GenOMedS, Tours, France.
(12)Sorbonne Université, INSERM UMR_S 938, Centre de Recherche Saint Antoine, 
APHP, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Explorations Fonctionnelles Endocriniennes, 
Paris, France.
(13)Service de Génétique Clinique, Centre Référence Anomalies du Développement 
CLAD Ouest, Univ Rennes, CNRS, INSERM, IGDR (Institut de Génétique et 
Développement de Rennes), UMR 6290 ERL 1305, FHU GenOMedS, Rennes, France.

Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a rare imprinting disorder characterized by 
prenatal and postnatal growth retardation. The two principal causes of SRS are 
loss of methylation on chromosome 11p15 (11p15 LOM) and maternal uniparental 
disomy of chromosome 7 (UPD(7)mat). Knowledge of the neuropsychological profile 
of SRS remains sparse and incomplete even if several difficulties related to 
attention and learning have been reported both in the literature and by patients 
with SRS. These difficulties could be the result of troubles in different 
cognitive domains, but also of executive dysfunction. Nevertheless, executive 
functioning has never been investigated, even though executive functions play an 
essential role in psychological development, and are extensively involved in 
daily life. The present study explored the executive functioning of individuals 
with SRS due to UPD(7)mat or 11p15 LOM. A battery of executive tasks assessing 
cognitive flexibility, inhibitory control, and working memory, together with a 
task assessing sustained attention, was administered to 19 individuals with SRS 
(13-39 years) and 19 healthy controls. The Behavior Rating Inventory of 
Executive Function was also completed by the participants' families. The results 
showed that participants with SRS had similar performance (z-scores) to our 
controls, in a context of normal intellectual efficiency. Group comparisons with 
Bayesian statistics showed a single difference between the 11p15 LOM and control 
groups: the completion time for part A of the Trail Making Test appeared to be 
longer in the 11p15 LOM group than in the control group. However, at the 
clinical level, several participants with SRS had clinically significant scores 
on various measures of EFs. Thus, the cognitive phenotype of SRS did not appear 
to be characterized by executive dysfunction, but individuals with SRS could be 
at high risk of developing executive dysfunction or 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. These results provide new insights 
into the neuropsychological profile of individuals with SRS.

Copyright: © 2023 Burgevin et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0279745
PMCID: PMC9858375
PMID: 36662731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.