---
reference_id: "PMID:26287655"
title: "Zellweger spectrum disorders: clinical manifestations in patients surviving into adulthood."
authors:
- Berendse K
- Engelen M
- Ferdinandusse S
- Majoie CB
- Waterham HR
- Vaz FM
- Koelman JH
- Barth PG
- Wanders RJ
- Poll-The BT
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-015-9880-2
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- "White Matter/metabolism, pathology"
- Young Adult
- "Zellweger Syndrome/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Zellweger spectrum disorders: clinical manifestations in patients surviving into adulthood.
**Authors:** Berendse K, Engelen M, Ferdinandusse S, Majoie CB, Waterham HR, Vaz FM, Koelman JH, Barth PG, Wanders RJ, Poll-The BT
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-015-9880-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-015-9880-2)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2016 Jan;39(1):93-106. doi: 10.1007/s10545-015-9880-2.
Epub  2015 Aug 19.

Zellweger spectrum disorders: clinical manifestations in patients surviving into
adulthood.

Berendse K(1)(2), Engelen M(1), Ferdinandusse S(2), Majoie CB(3), Waterham
HR(2), Vaz FM(2), Koelman JH(4), Barth PG(1), Wanders RJ(2), Poll-The BT(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic
Medical Centre (AMC), University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Emma Children's Hospital, AMC,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Radiology, AMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology, AMC, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic
Medical Centre (AMC), University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. B.T.PollThe@amc.uva.nl.

INTRODUCTION: We describe the natural history of patients with a Zellweger
spectrum disorder (ZSD) surviving into adulthood.
METHODS: Retrospective cohort study in patients with a genetically confirmed
ZSD.
RESULTS: All patients (n = 19; aged 16-35 years) had a follow-up period of
1-24.4 years (mean 16 years). Seven patients had a progressive disease course,
while 12 remained clinically stable during follow-up. Disease progression
usually manifests in adolescence as a gait disorder, caused by central and/or
peripheral nervous system involvement. Nine were capable of living a partly
independent life with supported employment. Systematic MRI review revealed T2
hyperintense white matter abnormalities in the hilus of the dentate nucleus
and/or peridentate region in nine out of 16 patients. Biochemical analyses in
blood showed abnormal peroxisomal biomarkers in all patients in infancy and
childhood, whereas in adolescence/adulthood we observed normalization of some
metabolites.
CONCLUSIONS: The patients described here represent a distinct subgroup within
the ZSDs who survive into adulthood. Most remain stable over many years. Disease
progression may occur and is mainly due to cerebral and cerebellar white matter
abnormalities, and peripheral neuropathy.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-015-9880-2
PMCID: PMC4710674
PMID: 26287655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
