---
reference_id: "PMID:19079590"
title: Media ion composition controls regulatory and virulence response of Salmonella in spaceflight.
authors:
- Wilson JW
- Ott CM
- Quick L
- Davis R
- Höner zu Bentrup K
- Crabbé A
- Richter E
- Sarker S
- Barrila J
- Porwollik S
- Cheng P
- McClelland M
- Tsaprailis G
- Radabaugh T
- Hunt A
- Shah M
- Nelman-Gonzalez M
- Hing S
- Parra M
- Dumars P
- Norwood K
- Bober R
- Devich J
- Ruggles A
- CdeBaca A
- Narayan S
- Benjamin J
- Goulart C
- Rupert M
- Catella L
- Schurr MJ
- Buchanan K
- Morici L
- McCracken J
- Porter MD
- Pierson DL
- Smith SM
- Mergeay M
- Leys N
- Stefanyshyn-Piper HM
- Gorie D
- Nickerson CA
journal: PLoS One
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003923
keywords:
- Animals
- Culture Media/chemistry
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Bacterial"
- "Genes, Bacterial"
- Ions
- Lethal Dose 50
- Mice
- Phosphates/metabolism
- Proteomics
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Salmonella/genetics, growth & development, pathogenicity"
- Space Flight
- "Transcription, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Media ion composition controls regulatory and virulence response of Salmonella in spaceflight.
**Authors:** Wilson JW, Ott CM, Quick L, Davis R, Höner zu Bentrup K, Crabbé A, Richter E, Sarker S, Barrila J, Porwollik S, Cheng P, McClelland M, Tsaprailis G, Radabaugh T, Hunt A, Shah M, Nelman-Gonzalez M, Hing S, Parra M, Dumars P, Norwood K, Bober R, Devich J, Ruggles A, CdeBaca A, Narayan S, Benjamin J, Goulart C, Rupert M, Catella L, Schurr MJ, Buchanan K, Morici L, McCracken J, Porter MD, Pierson DL, Smith SM, Mergeay M, Leys N, Stefanyshyn-Piper HM, Gorie D, Nickerson CA
**Journal:** PLoS One (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0003923](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0003923)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2008;3(12):e3923. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003923. Epub 2008 Dec
12.

Media ion composition controls regulatory and virulence response of Salmonella 
in spaceflight.

Wilson JW(1), Ott CM, Quick L, Davis R, Höner zu Bentrup K, Crabbé A, Richter E, 
Sarker S, Barrila J, Porwollik S, Cheng P, McClelland M, Tsaprailis G, Radabaugh 
T, Hunt A, Shah M, Nelman-Gonzalez M, Hing S, Parra M, Dumars P, Norwood K, 
Bober R, Devich J, Ruggles A, CdeBaca A, Narayan S, Benjamin J, Goulart C, 
Rupert M, Catella L, Schurr MJ, Buchanan K, Morici L, McCracken J, Porter MD, 
Pierson DL, Smith SM, Mergeay M, Leys N, Stefanyshyn-Piper HM, Gorie D, 
Nickerson CA.

Author information:
(1)The Biodesign Institute, Center for Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, 
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United States of America.

The spaceflight environment is relevant to conditions encountered by pathogens 
during the course of infection and induces novel changes in microbial 
pathogenesis not observed using conventional methods. It is unclear how 
microbial cells sense spaceflight-associated changes to their growth environment 
and orchestrate corresponding changes in molecular and physiological phenotypes 
relevant to the infection process. Here we report that spaceflight-induced 
increases in Salmonella virulence are regulated by media ion composition, and 
that phosphate ion is sufficient to alter related pathogenesis responses in a 
spaceflight analogue model. Using whole genome microarray and proteomic analyses 
from two independent Space Shuttle missions, we identified evolutionarily 
conserved molecular pathways in Salmonella that respond to spaceflight under all 
media compositions tested. Identification of conserved regulatory paradigms 
opens new avenues to control microbial responses during the infection process 
and holds promise to provide an improved understanding of human health and 
disease on Earth.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003923
PMCID: PMC2592540
PMID: 19079590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.