---
reference_id: "PMID:28403440"
title: "Case Management of Dengue: Lessons Learned."
authors:
- Kalayanarooj S
- Rothman AL
- Srikiatkhachorn A
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiw609
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case Management of Dengue: Lessons Learned.
**Authors:** Kalayanarooj S, Rothman AL, Srikiatkhachorn A
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/jiw609](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiw609)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2017 Mar 1;215(suppl_2):S79-S88. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiw609.

Case Management of Dengue: Lessons Learned.

Kalayanarooj S(1), Rothman AL(2), Srikiatkhachorn A(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Dengue Unit, Queen Sirikit National Institute of Child Health, Bangkok, 
Thailand; and.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology and Institute for Immunology and 
Informatics, University of Rhode Island, Providence.
(3)Dengue Unit, Queen Sirikit National Institute of Child Health, Bangkok, 
Thailand ; and.

The global burden of dengue and its geographic distribution have increased over 
the past several decades. The introduction of dengue in new areas has often been 
accompanied by high case-fatality rates. Drawing on the experience in managing 
dengue cases at the Queen Sirikit National Institute of Child Health in Bangkok, 
Thailand, this article provides the authors' perspectives on key clinical 
lessons to improve dengue-related outcomes. Parallels between this clinical 
experience and outcomes reported in randomized controlled trials, results of 
efforts to disseminate practice recommendations, and suggestions for areas for 
further research are also discussed.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiw609
PMCID: PMC5853291
PMID: 28403440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]