---
reference_id: "PMID:35821352"
title: The pZRS non-coding regulatory mutation resulting in triphalangeal thumb-polysyndactyly syndrome changes the pattern of local interactions.
authors:
- Potuijt JWP
- Sowinska-Seidler A
- Bukowska-Olech E
- Nguyen P
- Jankowski A
- Magielsen F
- Matuszewska K
- van Nieuwenhoven CA
- Galjaard RH
- de Klein A
- Jamsheer A
journal: Mol Genet Genomics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00438-022-01921-2
keywords:
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Congenital Abnormalities/genetics
- "Enhancer Elements, Genetic"
- Hedgehog Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Mandibulofacial Dysostosis/genetics
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Polydactyly
- Thumb
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The pZRS non-coding regulatory mutation resulting in triphalangeal thumb-polysyndactyly syndrome changes the pattern of local interactions.
**Authors:** Potuijt JWP, Sowinska-Seidler A, Bukowska-Olech E, Nguyen P, Jankowski A, Magielsen F, Matuszewska K, van Nieuwenhoven CA, Galjaard RH, de Klein A, Jamsheer A
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00438-022-01921-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00438-022-01921-2)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomics. 2022 Sep;297(5):1343-1352. doi:
10.1007/s00438-022-01921-2.  Epub 2022 Jul 11.

The pZRS non-coding regulatory mutation resulting in triphalangeal 
thumb-polysyndactyly syndrome changes the pattern of local interactions.

Potuijt JWP(#)(1), Sowinska-Seidler A(#)(2), Bukowska-Olech E(3), Nguyen 
P(1)(4), Jankowski A(5), Magielsen F(4), Matuszewska K(3)(6), van Nieuwenhoven 
CA(1), Galjaard RH(4), de Klein A(4), Jamsheer A(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery and Hand Surgery, Erasmus 
MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 
Rokietnicka 8 Street, 60-806, Poznan, Poland. seidler@ump.edu.pl.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 
Rokietnicka 8 Street, 60-806, Poznan, Poland.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Faculty of Mathematics, Informatics and Mechanics, University of Warsaw, 
Warsaw, Poland.
(6)Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 
Rokietnicka 8 Street, 60-806, Poznan, Poland. jamsheer@wp.pl.
(8)Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland. jamsheer@wp.pl.
(#)Contributed equally

Herein, we report on a large Polish family presenting with a classical 
triphalangeal thumb-polysyndactyly syndrome (TPT-PS). This rare congenital limb 
anomaly is generally caused by microduplications encompassing the Sonic Hedgehog 
(SHH) limb enhancer, termed the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA) regulatory 
sequence (ZRS). Recently, a pathogenic variant in the pre-ZRS (pZRS), a 
conserved sequence located near the ZRS, has been described in a TPT-PS Dutch 
family. We performed targeted ZRS sequencing, array comparative genomic 
hybridization, and whole-exome sequencing. Next, we sequenced the recently 
described pZRS region. Finally, we performed a circular chromatin conformation 
capture-sequencing (4C-seq) assay on skin fibroblasts of one affected family 
member and control samples to examine potential alterations in the SHH 
regulatory domain and functionally characterize the identified variant. We found 
that all affected individuals shared a recently identified pathogenic point 
mutation in the pZRS region: NC_000007.14:g.156792782C>G (GRCh38/hg38), which is 
the same as in the Dutch family. The results of 4C-seq experiments revealed 
increased interactions within the whole SHH regulatory domain (SHH-LMBR1 TAD) in 
the patient compared to controls. Our study expands the number of TPT-PS 
families carrying a pathogenic alteration of the pZRS and underlines the 
importance of routine pZRS sequencing in the genetic diagnostics of patients 
with TPT-PS or similar phenotypes. The pathogenic mutation causative for TPT-PS 
in our patient gave rise to increased interactions within the SHH regulatory 
domain in yet unknown mechanism.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00438-022-01921-2
PMID: 35821352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]