---
reference_id: "PMID:11120618"
title: Tuberculosis as a cause of recurrent fever of unknown origin.
authors:
- Collazos J
- Guerra E
- Mayo J
- Martínez E
journal: J Infect
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1053/jinf.2000.0727
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tuberculosis as a cause of recurrent fever of unknown origin.
**Authors:** Collazos J, Guerra E, Mayo J, Martínez E
**Journal:** J Infect (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1053/jinf.2000.0727](https://doi.org/10.1053/jinf.2000.0727)

## Content

1. J Infect. 2000 Nov;41(3):269-72. doi: 10.1053/jinf.2000.0727.

Tuberculosis as a cause of recurrent fever of unknown origin.

Collazos J(1), Guerra E, Mayo J, Martínez E.

Author information:
(1)Section of Infectious Diseases, Hospital de Galdakao, Vizcaya, Spain.

Recurrent fever constitutes a diagnostic challenge for clinicians, due mainly to 
the intermittent nature of the fever that results in incomplete investigations. 
We describe three patients with recurrent fever thought to be due to 
tuberculosis, and review the 14 previously reported cases who fulfil the 
criteria of recurrent fever for at least 1 month's duration. The median duration 
of symptoms before diagnosis was 5 months, and the duration of the febrile bouts 
ranged from a few hours to 1 week. The most common complaints were 
constitutional symptoms and abdominal pain, and most patients had significant 
underlying conditions. The mortality rate was 31%, and was limited to the 
earlier cases. Routine laboratory studies are not very helpful for the diagnosis 
of this condition, and chest radiographs showed some alteration in half the 
cases at the time of diagnosis, although in some cases represented old, healed 
lesions. PPD testing was positive in most cases, particularly in those without 
underlying conditions. Empirical antituberculous therapy should be considered in 
cases of recurrent fever, especially in areas of high prevalence or in patients 
with predisposing conditions.

Copyright 2000 The British Infection Society.

DOI: 10.1053/jinf.2000.0727
PMID: 11120618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]