---
reference_id: "PMID:10518814"
title: Air pollution and asthma.
authors:
- Koenig JQ
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1016/s0091-6749(99)70280-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Air pollution and asthma.
**Authors:** Koenig JQ
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0091-6749(99)70280-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0091-6749(99)70280-0)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1999 Oct;104(4 Pt 1):717-22. doi: 
10.1016/s0091-6749(99)70280-0.

Air pollution and asthma.

Koenig JQ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Wash. 
98195, USA.

Asthma is a disease syndrome that has captured a great deal of attention for 
several years. One of the perplexing aspects to asthma is that the prevalence is 
increasing in most industrialized countries. The reasons for this widespread 
increase are largely unknown. Another aspect of industrialization is the 
persistence of air pollution in urban areas. Because much air pollution is due 
to vehicles, no solution appears in sight. The topic of this article is the 
association between air pollution and various signs and symptoms of asthma. Air 
pollution is convincingly associated with many signs of asthma aggravation. 
These include pulmonary function decrements, increased bronchial 
hyperresponsiveness, visits to emergency departments, hospital admissions, 
increased medication use and symptom reporting, inflammatory changes, 
interactions between air pollution and allergen challenges, and immune system 
changes. With the exception of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke, common 
air pollutants have not been shown to cause asthma. It seems prudent for 
clinicians to counsel their patients about the potential risks of asthma 
aggravation from common outdoor air pollutants.

DOI: 10.1016/s0091-6749(99)70280-0
PMID: 10518814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]