---
reference_id: "PMID:40240142"
title: An imbalance between proliferation and differentiation underlies the development of microRNA-defective pineoblastoma.
authors:
- Fraire CR
- Desai K
- Jagadeeswaran I
- Obalapuram UA
- Mendyka LK
- Rajaram V
- Sebastian T
- Wang Y
- Onel K
- Lee J
- Skapek SX
- Chen KS
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1101/gad.352485.124
keywords:
- "MicroRNAs/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- Cell Proliferation/genetics
- Mice
- "Ribonuclease III/genetics, metabolism"
- "Pinealoma/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- Pineal Gland/pathology
- "DEAD-box RNA Helicases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- "Transcription Factors/metabolism, genetics"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Brain Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An imbalance between proliferation and differentiation underlies the development of microRNA-defective pineoblastoma.
**Authors:** Fraire CR, Desai K, Jagadeeswaran I, Obalapuram UA, Mendyka LK, Rajaram V, Sebastian T, Wang Y, Onel K, Lee J, Skapek SX, Chen KS
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.352485.124](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.352485.124)

## Content

1. Genes Dev. 2025 Jun 2;39(11-12):727-750. doi: 10.1101/gad.352485.124.

An imbalance between proliferation and differentiation underlies the development
of microRNA-defective pineoblastoma.

Fraire CR(1), Desai K(2)(3), Jagadeeswaran I(1), Obalapuram UA(1), Mendyka
LK(4), Rajaram V(5), Sebastian T(1), Wang Y(6)(7), Onel K(8), Lee J(9), Skapek
SX(10), Chen KS(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.
(2)Division of Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
(3)University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
(4)Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire 03755,
USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z7, Canada.
(7)Department of Molecular Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Research Institute,
Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 0B4, Canada.
(8)Department of Cancer Prevention and Control, Roswell Park Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Buffalo, New York 14203, USA.
(9)Lyda Hill Department of Bioinformatics, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27710,
USA.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA; kenneth.chen@utsouthwestern.edu.
(12)Children's Medical Center Research Institute, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Oct 22:2024.04.23.590638. doi: 10.1101/2024.04.23.590638.

Mutations in the microRNA processing genes DROSHA and DICER1 drive several
cancers that resemble embryonic progenitors. To understand how microRNAs
regulate tumorigenesis, we ablated Drosha or Dicer1 in the developing pineal
gland to emulate the pathogenesis of pineoblastoma, a brain tumor that resembles
undifferentiated precursors of the pineal gland. Accordingly, these mice develop
pineal tumors marked by loss of microRNAs, particularly the let-7/miR-98-5p
family, and derepression of microRNA target genes. Pineal tumors driven by loss
of Drosha or Dicer1 mimic tumors driven by Rb1 loss, as they exhibit
upregulation of S-phase genes and homeobox transcription factors that regulate
pineal development. Blocking proliferation of these tumors facilitates
expression of pinealocyte maturation markers, with a concomitant reduction in
embryonic markers. Select embryonic markers remain elevated, however, as the
microRNAs that normally repress these target genes remain absent. One such
microRNA target gene is the oncofetal transcription factor Plagl2, which
regulates expression of progrowth genes, and inhibiting their signaling impairs
tumor growth. Thus, we demonstrate that tumors driven by loss of microRNA
processing may be therapeutically targeted by inhibiting downstream drivers of
proliferation.

© 2025 Fraire et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.352485.124
PMCID: PMC12128879
PMID: 40240142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
