---
reference_id: "PMID:24959826"
title: Single-nucleotide polymorphism array-based karyotyping of acute promyelocytic leukemia.
authors:
- Gómez-Seguí I
- Sánchez-Izquierdo D
- Barragán E
- Such E
- Luna I
- López-Pavía M
- Ibáñez M
- Villamón E
- Alonso C
- Martín I
- Llop M
- Dolz S
- Fuster O
- Montesinos P
- Cañigral C
- Boluda B
- Salazar C
- Cervera J
- Sanz MA
journal: PLoS One
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100245
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Chromosome Aberrations
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17"
- Female
- Humans
- Karyotyping
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, mortality"
- Loss of Heterozygosity
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Prognosis
- "Translocation, Genetic"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-nucleotide polymorphism array-based karyotyping of acute promyelocytic leukemia.
**Authors:** Gómez-Seguí I, Sánchez-Izquierdo D, Barragán E, Such E, Luna I, López-Pavía M, Ibáñez M, Villamón E, Alonso C, Martín I, Llop M, Dolz S, Fuster O, Montesinos P, Cañigral C, Boluda B, Salazar C, Cervera J, Sanz MA
**Journal:** PLoS One (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0100245](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0100245)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 24;9(6):e100245. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100245.
eCollection 2014.

Single-nucleotide polymorphism array-based karyotyping of acute promyelocytic
leukemia.

Gómez-Seguí I(1), Sánchez-Izquierdo D(2), Barragán E(3), Such E(1), Luna I(1),
López-Pavía M(1), Ibáñez M(1), Villamón E(1), Alonso C(1), Martín I(1), Llop
M(3), Dolz S(3), Fuster O(3), Montesinos P(1), Cañigral C(1), Boluda B(1),
Salazar C(1), Cervera J(4), Sanz MA(5).

Author information:
(1)Hematology Department, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic La Fe, Valencia,
Spain.
(2)Array's Unit. Instituto Investigación Sanitaria Fundación La Fe, Valencia,
Spain.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Department of Clinical Chemistry, University
Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain.
(4)Hematology Department, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic La Fe, Valencia,
Spain; Genetics Unit, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic La Fe, Valencia, Spain.
(5)Hematology Department, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic La Fe, Valencia,
Spain; Department of Medicine, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by the t(15;17)(q22;q21),
but additional chromosomal abnormalities (ACA) and other rearrangements can
contribute in the development of the whole leukemic phenotype. We hypothesized
that some ACA not detected by conventional techniques may be informative of the
onset of APL. We performed the high-resolution SNP array (SNP-A) 6.0
(Affymetrix) in 48 patients diagnosed with APL on matched diagnosis and
remission sample. Forty-six abnormalities were found as an acquired event in 23
patients (48%): 22 duplications, 23 deletions and 1 Copy-Neutral Loss of
Heterozygocity (CN-LOH), being a duplication of 8(q24) (23%) and a deletion of
7(q33-qter) (6%) the most frequent copy-number abnormalities (CNA). Four
patients (8%) showed CNAs adjacent to the breakpoints of the translocation. We
compared our results with other APL series and found that, except for dup(8q24)
and del(7q33-qter), ACA were infrequent (≤3%) but most of them recurrent (70%).
Interestingly, having CNA or FLT3 mutation were mutually exclusive events.
Neither the number of CNA, nor any specific CNA was associated significantly
with prognosis. This study has delineated recurrent abnormalities in addition to
t(15;17) that may act as secondary events and could explain leukemogenesis in up
to 40% of APL cases with no ACA by conventional cytogenetics.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100245
PMCID: PMC4069034
PMID: 24959826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
