---
reference_id: "PMID:19341754"
title: Historical perspectives on cadmium toxicology.
authors:
- Nordberg GF
journal: Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2009.03.015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Historical perspectives on cadmium toxicology.
**Authors:** Nordberg GF
**Journal:** Toxicol Appl Pharmacol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.taap.2009.03.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.taap.2009.03.015)

## Content

1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2009 Aug 1;238(3):192-200. doi: 
10.1016/j.taap.2009.03.015. Epub 2009 Mar 31.

Historical perspectives on cadmium toxicology.

Nordberg GF(1).

Author information:
(1)Environmental Medicine, Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, 
Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden. gunnar.nordberg@envmed.umu.se

The first health effects of cadmium (Cd) were reported already in 1858. 
Respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms occurred among persons using 
Cd-containing polishing agent. The first experimental toxicological studies are 
from 1919. Bone effects and proteinuria in humans were reported in the 1940's. 
After World War II, a bone disease with fractures and severe pain, the itai-itai 
disease, a form of Cd-induced renal osteomalacia, was identified in Japan. 
Subsequently, the toxicokinetics and toxicodynamics of Cd were described 
including its binding to the protein metallothionein. International warnings of 
health risks from Cd-pollution were issued in the 1970's. Reproductive and 
carcinogenic effects were studied at an early stage, but a quantitative 
assessment of these effects in humans is still subject to considerable 
uncertainty. The World Health Organization in its International Program on 
Chemical Safety, WHO/IPCS (1992) (Cadmium. Environmental Health Criteria 
Document 134, IPCS. WHO, Geneva, 1-280.) identified renal dysfunction as the 
critical effect and a crude quantitative evaluation was presented. In the 1990's 
and 2000 several epidemiological studies have reported adverse health effects, 
sometimes at low environmental exposures to Cd, in population groups in Japan, 
China, Europe and USA (reviewed in other contributions to the present volume). 
The early identification of an important role of metallothionein in cadmium 
toxicology formed the basis for recent studies using biomarkers of 
susceptibility to development of Cd-related renal dysfunction such as gene 
expression of metallothionein in peripheral lymphocytes and autoantibodies 
against metallothionein in blood plasma. Findings in these studies indicate that 
very low exposure levels to cadmium may give rise to renal dysfunction among 
sensitive subgroups of human populations such as persons with diabetes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2009.03.015
PMID: 19341754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]