---
reference_id: "PMID:33327837"
title: "Abnormal Liver Blood Tests in Patients with Hyperthyroidism: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Scappaticcio L
- Longo M
- Maiorino MI
- Pernice V
- Caruso P
- Esposito K
- Bellastella G
journal: Thyroid
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1089/thy.2020.0715
keywords:
- Alanine Transaminase/blood
- Alkaline Phosphatase/blood
- Antithyroid Agents/therapeutic use
- Aspartate Aminotransferases/blood
- Bilirubin/blood
- "Graves Disease/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Humans
- "Hyperthyroidism/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- "Liver Diseases/blood, epidemiology"
- Liver Function Tests
- Prevalence
- gamma-Glutamyltransferase/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal Liver Blood Tests in Patients with Hyperthyroidism: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Scappaticcio L, Longo M, Maiorino MI, Pernice V, Caruso P, Esposito K, Bellastella G
**Journal:** Thyroid (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1089/thy.2020.0715](https://doi.org/10.1089/thy.2020.0715)

## Content

1. Thyroid. 2021 Jun;31(6):884-894. doi: 10.1089/thy.2020.0715. Epub 2021 Jan 21.

Abnormal Liver Blood Tests in Patients with Hyperthyroidism: Systematic Review 
and Meta-Analysis.

Scappaticcio L(1)(2), Longo M(1), Maiorino MI(1)(2), Pernice V(2), Caruso P(2), 
Esposito K(2)(3), Bellastella G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, University of Campania "Luigi 
Vanvitelli," Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Campania "Luigi 
Vanvitelli," Naples, Italy.
(3)Diabetes Unit and University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli," Naples, Italy.

Background: Abnormal liver blood tests (LBTs) in hyperthyroid patients are not 
uncommonly encountered. One major adverse event of antithyroid drug (ATD) 
therapy is drug-induced hepatotoxicity. Abnormal LBT in the hyperthyroidism 
scenario is a main diagnostic and therapeutic dilemma. We aimed to assess the 
prevalence and the response to ATD therapy of LBT abnormalities in newly 
diagnosed and uncomplicated hyperthyroidism through a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Methods: A literature search was performed reporting LBTs at 
presentation and after ATD therapy in hyperthyroid patients. A proportion 
meta-analysis was performed with random-effects model. Pooled data were 
presented with 95% confidence intervals (CI). I2 statistic index was used to 
quantify the heterogeneity. Sensitivity analyses for prevalence of hyperthyroid 
patients with at least one abnormal LBT were performed. p-Value of <0.05 was 
regarded as significant. Results: The literature search yielded 2286 studies, of 
which 25 were included for systematic review and meta-analysis. The prevalence 
of untreated hyperthyroid and Graves' disease patients with at least one 
abnormal LBT was 55% ([CI 46-63%], I2 96%) and 60% ([CI 53-67%], I2 92%), 
respectively. The prevalence of alanine transaminase (ALT), aspartate 
transaminase (AST), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), total bilirubin (BIL), and 
γ-glutamyltransferase (GGT) abnormalities in hyperthyroid patients were 33% ([CI 
24-44%], I2 95%), 23% ([CI 17-29%], I2 89%), 44% ([CI 35-52%], I2 93%), 12% ([CI 
7-20%], I2 92%), and 24% ([CI 16-36%], I2 95%), respectively. ATD therapy, along 
with euthyroidism restoration, was accompanied by normalization of LBT 
abnormalities in the following percentage of cases: ALT 83% ([CI 72-90%], I2 
46%), AST 87% ([CI 74-94%], I2 2%), ALP 53% ([CI 32-73%], I2 76%), BIL 50% (CI 
cannot be calculated), and GGT 70% ([CI 47-87%], I2 74%). The sensitivity 
analyses showed similar results as those of the main analyses. The publication 
bias was not statistically significant for all outcomes, except for the 
prevalence of resolved BIL abnormalities that was not calculable. Conclusions: 
LBT abnormalities are common in newly diagnosed and untreated hyperthyroidism 
setting. A high chance of safely normalizing elevated transaminases, up to 
fivefold above the upper limit of normal, accompanies the use of ATDs in the 
treatment of hyperthyroidism.

DOI: 10.1089/thy.2020.0715
PMID: 33327837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]