---
reference_id: "PMID:10673253"
title: Effectiveness and limitations of beta-blocker therapy in congenital long-QT syndrome.
authors:
- Moss AJ
- Zareba W
- Hall WJ
- Schwartz PJ
- Crampton RS
- Benhorin J
- Vincent GM
- Locati EH
- Priori SG
- Napolitano C
- Medina A
- Zhang L
- Robinson JL
- Timothy K
- Towbin JA
- Andrews ML
journal: Circulation
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1161/01.cir.101.6.616
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Adrenergic beta-Antagonists/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Adult
- "Atenolol/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Long QT Syndrome/congenital, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Male
- "Metoprolol/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Nadolol/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Propranolol/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Survival Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effectiveness and limitations of beta-blocker therapy in congenital long-QT syndrome.
**Authors:** Moss AJ, Zareba W, Hall WJ, Schwartz PJ, Crampton RS, Benhorin J, Vincent GM, Locati EH, Priori SG, Napolitano C, Medina A, Zhang L, Robinson JL, Timothy K, Towbin JA, Andrews ML
**Journal:** Circulation (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.cir.101.6.616](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.101.6.616)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2000 Feb 15;101(6):616-23. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.101.6.616.

Effectiveness and limitations of beta-blocker therapy in congenital long-QT
syndrome.

Moss AJ(1), Zareba W, Hall WJ, Schwartz PJ, Crampton RS, Benhorin J, Vincent GM,
Locati EH, Priori SG, Napolitano C, Medina A, Zhang L, Robinson JL, Timothy K,
Towbin JA, Andrews ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Rochester School of Medicine and
Dentistry, NY 14642, USA. heartajm@heart.rochester.edu

Comment in
    Circulation. 2001 Jan 30;103(4):E24. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.103.4.e24.
    Rev Cardiovasc Med. 2001 Winter;2(1):26-8.

BACKGROUND: beta-blockers are routinely prescribed in congenital long-QT
syndrome (LQTS), but the effectiveness and limitations of beta-blockers in this
disorder have not been evaluated.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The study population comprised 869 LQTS patients treated
with beta-blockers. Effectiveness of beta-blockers was analyzed during matched
periods before and after starting beta-blocker therapy, and by survivorship
methods to determine factors associated with cardiac events while on prescribed
beta-blockers. After initiation of beta-blockers, there was a significant
(P<0.001) reduction in the rate of cardiac events in probands (0.97+/-1.42 to
0.31+/-0.86 events per year) and in affected family members (0. 26+/-0.84 to
0.15+/-0.69 events per year) during 5-year matched periods. On-therapy
survivorship analyses revealed that patients with cardiac symptoms before
beta-blockers (n=598) had a hazard ratio of 5.8 (95% CI, 3.7 to 9.1) for
recurrent cardiac events (syncope, aborted cardiac arrest, or death) during
beta-blocker therapy compared with asymptomatic patients; 32% of these
symptomatic patients will have another cardiac event within 5 years while on
prescribed beta-blockers. Patients with a history of aborted cardiac arrest
before starting beta-blockers (n=113) had a hazard ratio of 12.9 (95% CI, 4.7 to
35.5) for aborted cardiac arrest or death while on prescribed beta-blockers
compared with asymptomatic patients; 14% of these patients will have another
arrest (aborted or fatal) within 5 years on beta-blockers.
CONCLUSIONS: beta-blockers are associated with a significant reduction in
cardiac events in LQTS patients. However, syncope, aborted cardiac arrest, and
LQTS-related death continue to occur while patients are on prescribed
beta-blockers, particularly in those who were symptomatic before starting this
therapy.

DOI: 10.1161/01.cir.101.6.616
PMID: 10673253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
