---
reference_id: "PMID:15715116"
title: Choice of renal replacement therapy in patients with diabetic end stage renal disease.
authors:
- Giri M
journal: EDTNA ERCA J
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1111/j.1755-6686.2004.tb00353.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Choice of renal replacement therapy in patients with diabetic end stage renal disease.
**Authors:** Giri M
**Journal:** EDTNA ERCA J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1755-6686.2004.tb00353.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1755-6686.2004.tb00353.x)

## Content

1. EDTNA ERCA J. 2004 Jul-Sep;30(3):138-42. doi: 
10.1111/j.1755-6686.2004.tb00353.x.

Choice of renal replacement therapy in patients with diabetic end stage renal 
disease.

Giri M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetology, University Hospital of Ghent, 
Ghent, Belgium. mimi.giri@ugent.be

Diabetic nephropathy is becoming the leading cause of end-stage renal disease 
(ESRD) worldwide. Although the prognosis of patients with diabetes and ESRD 
receiving Renal Replacement Therapy (RRT) has improved greatly, the presence of 
pre-existing cardiovascular disease means that the survival and medical 
rehabilitation of diabetics continue to be inferior to that of non-diabetics. 
RRT should be initiated earlier in patients with diabetes than in non-diabetics 
and the main choices of modalities are: 1) haemodialysis (HD), 2) Peritoneal 
dialysis (PD), 3) Kidney transplantation alone (KTA) or 4) simultaneous kidney 
and pancreas transplantation (SPKT). The most common modality of RRT utilised in 
the diabetic patient remains HD but this method is associated with many clinical 
problems, in particular the managment of vascular access and frequent 
intradialytic hypotension. There is accumulating evidence demonstrating that 
both survival and medical rehabilitation of patients with diabetes and ESRD is 
superior after renal transplantation with or without pancreas transplantation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1755-6686.2004.tb00353.x
PMID: 15715116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]