---
reference_id: "PMID:27402091"
title: "GM2 gangliosidosis AB variant: novel mutation from India - a case report with a review."
authors:
- Sheth J
- Datar C
- Mistri M
- Bhavsar R
- Sheth F
- Shah K
journal: BMC Pediatr
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s12887-016-0626-6
keywords:
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- G(M2) Activator Protein/genetics
- Genetic Markers
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Tay-Sachs Disease, AB Variant/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GM2 gangliosidosis AB variant: novel mutation from India - a case report with a review.
**Authors:** Sheth J, Datar C, Mistri M, Bhavsar R, Sheth F, Shah K
**Journal:** BMC Pediatr (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12887-016-0626-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-016-0626-6)

## Content

1. BMC Pediatr. 2016 Jul 11;16:88. doi: 10.1186/s12887-016-0626-6.

GM2 gangliosidosis AB variant: novel mutation from India - a case report with a 
review.

Sheth J(1), Datar C(2), Mistri M(3), Bhavsar R(3), Sheth F(3), Shah K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemical and Molecular Genetics, FRIGE's Institute of Human 
Genetics, FRIGE House, Jodhpur Gam Road, Satellite, Ahmedabad, 380015, Gujarat, 
India. jshethad1@gmail.com.
(2)Sahyadari Medical Genetics and Tissue engineering facility (SMGTEF), Pune, 
411005, India.
(3)Department of Biochemical and Molecular Genetics, FRIGE's Institute of Human 
Genetics, FRIGE House, Jodhpur Gam Road, Satellite, Ahmedabad, 380015, Gujarat, 
India.

BACKGROUND: GM2 gangliosidosis-AB variants a rare autosomal recessive 
neurodegenerative disorder occurring due to deficiency of GM2 activator protein 
resulting from the mutation in GM2A gene. Only seven mutations in nine cases 
have been reported from different population except India.
CASE PRESENTATION: Present case is a one year old male born to 3rd degree 
consanguineous Indian parents from Maharashtra. He was presented with global 
developmental delay, hypotonia and sensitive to hyperacusis. Horizontal 
nystagmus and cherry red spot was detected during ophthalmic examination. MRI of 
brain revealed putaminal hyperintensity and thalamic hypointensity with some 
unmyelinated white matter in T2/T1 weighted images. Initially he was suspected 
having Tay-Sachs disease and finally diagnosed as GM2 gangliosidosis, AB variant 
due to truncated protein caused by nonsense mutation c.472 G > T (p.E158X) in 
GM2Agene.
CONCLUSION: Children with phenotypic presentation as GM2 gangliosidosis 
(Tay-Sachs or Sandhoff disease) and normal enzyme activity of β-hexosaminidase-A 
and -B in leucocytes need to be investigated for GM2 activator protein 
deficiency.

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-016-0626-6
PMCID: PMC4939586
PMID: 27402091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]