---
reference_id: "PMID:6761066"
title: Immunology of hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
authors:
- Stankus RP
- Morgan JE
- Salvaggio JE
journal: Crit Rev Toxicol
year: '1982'
doi: 10.3109/10408448209089847
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunology of hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
**Authors:** Stankus RP, Morgan JE, Salvaggio JE
**Journal:** Crit Rev Toxicol (1982)
**DOI:** [10.3109/10408448209089847](https://doi.org/10.3109/10408448209089847)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Toxicol. 1982;11(1):15-32. doi: 10.3109/10408448209089847.

Immunology of hypersensitivity pneumonitis.

Stankus RP, Morgan JE, Salvaggio JE.

Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (extrinsic allergic alveolitis) represents a 
spectrum of granulomatous, interstitial, and alveolar-filling lung disorders of 
which farmer's lung is a classic example. A major source of offending antigens 
in these diseases are thermophilic actinomycetes growing in moldy vegetable 
matter especially Micropolyspora faeni, and members of the Thermoactinomyces 
genus. Acutely, hypersensitivity pneumonitis presents as cough, dyspnea and 
fever, with crepitant rales, leucocytosis, diffuse interstitial and alveolar 
pulmonary infiltrates and a restrictive-type pulmonary functional deficit. 
Symptoms usually begin 4 to 6 hr after exposure to large quantities of causative 
organic dust. Chronically, these diseases may present with the gradual onset of 
cough, dyspnea on exertion, fatigue, anorexia, and weight loss which may 
progress to pulmonary fibrosis or severe pulmonary insufficiency. While early 
ideas on the pathogenesis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis support the role of 
Type III immune complex hypersensitivity, more recent evidence attests to the 
important and integral role of Type IV or delayed-type hypersensitivity. It is 
the purpose of this review, therefore, to describe those immune mechanisms 
relevant to the pathogenesis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis and stress the 
importance of "local" pulmonary immune responsiveness.

DOI: 10.3109/10408448209089847
PMID: 6761066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]