---
reference_id: "PMID:37305732"
title: Increased acylcarnitine ratio indices in newborn screening for carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency shows increased sensitivity and reduced false-positivity.
authors:
- Shi C
- Ao Z
- Liu B
- Xiao X
- Gu X
- Yang Q
- Hao H
- Cai Y
- Li S
journal: Transl Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.21037/tp-22-468
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased acylcarnitine ratio indices in newborn screening for carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency shows increased sensitivity and reduced false-positivity.
**Authors:** Shi C, Ao Z, Liu B, Xiao X, Gu X, Yang Q, Hao H, Cai Y, Li S
**Journal:** Transl Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.21037/tp-22-468](https://doi.org/10.21037/tp-22-468)

## Content

1. Transl Pediatr. 2023 May 30;12(5):871-881. doi: 10.21037/tp-22-468. Epub 2023 
Apr 13.

Increased acylcarnitine ratio indices in newborn screening for 
carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency shows increased sensitivity and 
reduced false-positivity.

Shi C(#)(1), Ao Z(#)(2), Liu B(#)(1)(3), Xiao X(1)(3), Gu X(1)(3), Yang Q(1)(3), 
Hao H(#)(1)(3), Cai Y(#)(1)(3), Li S(#)(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Inborn Errors of Metabolism Laboratory, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Neonatology, Maternal and Child Health Hospital of Heyuan City 
in Guangdong Province, Heyuan, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Transl Pediatr. 2023 Sep 18;12(9):1765-1766. doi: 10.21037/tp-23-371.

BACKGROUND: Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase (CACT) deficiency is a rare 
autosomal recessive metabolic disorder of mitochondrial long-chain fatty acid 
oxidation. Newborn screening via tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) technology 
enables early diagnosis. However, previous analyses of MS/MS data of patients 
showed that some results were misdiagnosed because they did not show typical 
acylcarnitine profiles of CACT deficiency. This study aimed to identify 
additional indices to assist the diagnosis of CACT deficiency.
METHODS: To evaluate the acylcarnitine profile and the acylcarnitine ratios of 
individuals with CACT deficiency, the MS/MS data of 15 patients diagnosed via 
genetic testing were retrospectively analysed. The sensitivity and 
false-positive rates of primary acylcarnitine markers and ratio indices were 
validated using the data from 28,261 newborns and 53 false-positive cases. 
Additionally, the MS/MS data of 20 newborns carrying the c.199-10T>G mutation in 
SLC25A20 and 40 normal controls were compared to verify whether the carriers had 
abnormal acylcarnitine concentrations.
RESULTS: The acylcarnitine profiles from 15 patients were classified into three 
categories using C12, C14, C16, C18, C16:1, C18:1, and C18:2 as the primary 
diagnostic markers. The first category represented a typical profile (P1-P6). 
The second category for patients P7 and P8 showed a significant decrease in the 
C0 level and a normal concentration of long-chain acylcarnitines. The third 
category for patients P9-P15 showed the presence of interfering acylcarnitines. 
The second and third categories may have been misdiagnosed. An acylcarnitine 
ratio analysis showed that C14/C3, C16/C2, C16/C3, C18/C3, C16:1/C3, and 
C16:1-OH/C3 were significantly increased in all 15 patients. The verification of 
28,261 newborn screening results showed that the false-positive rate of ratios, 
except for (C16 + C18)/C0, was lower than that of acylcarnitine indices 
(0.02-0.08% vs. 0.16-0.88%). None of the single long-chain acylcarnitines could 
separate patients from the false-positive cases; however, all ratios produced 
good discrimination between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the primary acylcarnitine markers alone, CACT deficiency 
can be misdiagnosed in newborn screening. The ratios of the primary markers (C16 
+ C18:1)/C2, C16/C2, C16:1/C3, and C16:1-OH/C3 can facilitate the diagnosis of 
CACT deficiency, thereby increasing sensitivity and reducing false-positivity.

2023 Translational Pediatrics. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tp-22-468
PMCID: PMC10248924
PMID: 37305732

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
https://tp.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/tp-22-468/coif). HH reports 
funding supported by the special project for the transformation of Scientific 
and Technological Achievements of Sun Yat-sen University (No. 88000-18843233). 
SL reports funding supported by the Guangdong Province Science and Technology 
Plan Project (No. 2020A1414010111), and the Science and Technology Foundation of 
Guangzhou, China (No. 202103000071). The other authors have no conflicts of 
interest to declare.