---
reference_id: "PMID:37080202"
title: Specific host metabolite and gut microbiome alterations are associated with bone loss during spaceflight.
authors:
- Bedree JK
- Kerns K
- Chen T
- Lima BP
- Liu G
- Ha P
- Shi J
- Pan HC
- Kim JK
- Tran L
- Minot SS
- Hendrickson EL
- Lamont EI
- Schulte F
- Hardt M
- Stephens D
- Patel M
- Kokaras A
- Stodieck L
- Shirazi-Fard Y
- Wu B
- Kwak JH
- Ting K
- Soo C
- McLean JS
- He X
- Shi W
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112299
keywords:
- Humans
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
- "RNA, Ribosomal, 16S/genetics"
- "Chromatography, Liquid"
- Travel
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry
- Space Flight
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Specific host metabolite and gut microbiome alterations are associated with bone loss during spaceflight.
**Authors:** Bedree JK, Kerns K, Chen T, Lima BP, Liu G, Ha P, Shi J, Pan HC, Kim JK, Tran L, Minot SS, Hendrickson EL, Lamont EI, Schulte F, Hardt M, Stephens D, Patel M, Kokaras A, Stodieck L, Shirazi-Fard Y, Wu B, Kwak JH, Ting K, Soo C, McLean JS, He X, Shi W
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112299](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112299)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2023 May 30;42(5):112299. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112299. Epub
2023  Apr 19.

Specific host metabolite and gut microbiome alterations are associated with bone 
loss during spaceflight.

Bedree JK(1), Kerns K(2), Chen T(3), Lima BP(4), Liu G(5), Ha P(6), Shi J(7), 
Pan HC(5), Kim JK(5), Tran L(5), Minot SS(8), Hendrickson EL(2), Lamont EI(2), 
Schulte F(9), Hardt M(9), Stephens D(10), Patel M(10), Kokaras A(11), Stodieck 
L(12), Shirazi-Fard Y(13), Wu B(14), Kwak JH(15), Ting K(15), Soo C(16), McLean 
JS(2), He X(3), Shi W(17).

Author information:
(1)Section of Oral Biology, Division of Oral Biology and Medicine, School of 
Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; 
Department of Microbiology, The Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. 
Electronic address: jkbedree@ucla.edu.
(2)Department of Periodontics, School of Dentistry, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, The Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; 
Department of Oral Medicine, Infection and Immunity, Harvard School of Dental 
Medicine, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(4)Department of Diagnostic and Biological Sciences, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
(5)Section of Oral Biology, Division of Oral Biology and Medicine, School of 
Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(6)Section of Orthodontics, Division of Growth & Development, School of 
Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; 
Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, School of Medicine, University 
of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(7)Section of Oral Biology, Division of Oral Biology and Medicine, School of 
Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; 
Department of Orthodontics and Pediatric Dentistry, School of Dentistry, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(8)Microbiome Research Initiative, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 
Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(9)Forsyth Center for Salivary Diagnostics, Department of Applied Oral Sciences, 
The Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Harvard School of Dental 
Medicine, Department of Developmental Biology, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(10)Multiplex Core, Department of Applied Oral Sciences, The Forsyth Institute, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(11)Department of Microbiology, The Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(12)BioServe Space Technologies, Department of Aerospace Engineering Sciences, 
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80303, USA.
(13)Bone and Signaling Laboratory, Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames 
Research Center, Mail Stop 288-2, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA.
(14)Department of Bioengineering, School of Engineering, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Division of Advanced 
Prosthodontics, School of Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(15)Section of Orthodontics, Division of Growth & Development, School of 
Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(16)Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Department of 
Orthopedic Surgery, School of Medicine, School of Dentistry, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(17)Department of Microbiology, The Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. 
Electronic address: wshi@forsyth.org.

Understanding the axis of the human microbiome and physiological homeostasis is 
an essential task in managing deep-space-travel-associated health risks. The 
NASA-led Rodent Research 5 mission enabled an ancillary investigation of the gut 
microbiome, varying exposure to microgravity (flight) relative to ground 
controls in the context of previously shown bone mineral density (BMD) loss that 
was observed in these flight groups. We demonstrate elevated abundance of 
Lactobacillus murinus and Dorea sp. during microgravity exposure relative to 
ground control through whole-genome sequencing and 16S rRNA analyses. Specific 
functionally assigned gene clusters of L. murinus and Dorea sp. capable of 
producing metabolites, lactic acid, leucine/isoleucine, and glutathione are 
enriched. These metabolites are elevated in the microgravity-exposed host serum 
as shown by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) 
metabolomic analysis. Along with BMD loss, ELISA reveals increases in 
osteocalcin and reductions in tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase 5b signifying 
additional loss of bone homeostasis in flight.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112299
PMCID: PMC10344367
PMID: 37080202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.