---
reference_id: "PMID:38502237"
title: Joubert syndrome-derived induced pluripotent stem cells show altered neuronal differentiation in vitro.
authors:
- De Mori R
- Tardivo S
- Pollara L
- Giliani SC
- Ali E
- Giordano L
- Leuzzi V
- Fischetto R
- Gener B
- Diprima S
- Morelli MJ
- Monti MC
- Sottile V
- Valente EM
journal: Cell Tissue Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00441-024-03876-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Joubert syndrome-derived induced pluripotent stem cells show altered neuronal differentiation in vitro.
**Authors:** De Mori R, Tardivo S, Pollara L, Giliani SC, Ali E, Giordano L, Leuzzi V, Fischetto R, Gener B, Diprima S, Morelli MJ, Monti MC, Sottile V, Valente EM
**Journal:** Cell Tissue Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00441-024-03876-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00441-024-03876-9)

## Content

1. Cell Tissue Res. 2024 May;396(2):255-267. doi: 10.1007/s00441-024-03876-9.
Epub  2024 Mar 19.

Joubert syndrome-derived induced pluripotent stem cells show altered neuronal 
differentiation in vitro.

De Mori R(#)(1), Tardivo S(#)(2), Pollara L(3), Giliani SC(4), Ali E(4), 
Giordano L(5), Leuzzi V(6), Fischetto R(7), Gener B(8), Diprima S(9), Morelli 
MJ(9), Monti MC(10), Sottile V(11), Valente EM(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Unit, IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, 
Italy.
(2)Neurogenetics Lab, IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy.
(3)Neurogenetics Research Unit, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(4)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia, 
Brescia, Italy.
(5)Paediatric Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, Spedali Civili Children's Hospital, 
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(6)Unit of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, Department of Human Neuroscience, 
University of Rome La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.
(7)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Pediatric Medicine, XXIII Children's 
Hospital, Bari, Giovanni, Italy.
(8)Department of Genetics, Cruces University Hospital, BioBizkaia Health 
Research Institute, 48903 Barakaldo, Cruces PlazaBizkaia, Spain.
(9)IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(10)Unit of Biostatistics and Clinical Epidemiology, Department of Public 
Health, Experimental and Forensic Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(11)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. 
virginie.sottile@unipv.it.
(12)Neurogenetics Research Unit, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy. 
enzamaria.valente@unipv.it.
(13)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. 
enzamaria.valente@unipv.it.
(#)Contributed equally

Joubert syndrome (JS) is a recessively inherited congenital ataxia characterized 
by hypotonia, psychomotor delay, abnormal ocular movements, intellectual 
disability, and a peculiar cerebellar and brainstem malformation, the "molar 
tooth sign." Over 40 causative genes have been reported, all encoding for 
proteins implicated in the structure or functioning of the primary cilium, a 
subcellular organelle widely present in embryonic and adult tissues. In this 
paper, we developed an in vitro neuronal differentiation model using 
patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), to evaluate possible 
neurodevelopmental defects in JS. To this end, iPSCs from four JS patients 
harboring mutations in distinct JS genes (AHI1, CPLANE1, TMEM67, and CC2D2A) 
were differentiated alongside healthy control cells to obtain mid-hindbrain 
precursors and cerebellar granule cells. Differentiation was monitored over 
31 days through the detection of lineage-specific marker expression by qRT-PCR, 
immunofluorescence, and transcriptomics analysis. All JS patient-derived iPSCs, 
regardless of the mutant gene, showed a similar impairment to differentiate into 
mid-hindbrain and cerebellar granule cells when compared to healthy controls. In 
addition, analysis of primary cilium count and morphology showed notable ciliary 
defects in all differentiating JS patient-derived iPSCs compared to controls. 
These results confirm that patient-derived iPSCs are an accessible and relevant 
in vitro model to analyze cellular phenotypes connected to the presence of JS 
gene mutations in a neuronal context.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00441-024-03876-9
PMCID: PMC11055696
PMID: 38502237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.