---
reference_id: "PMID:38867349"
title: "Efficacy of the Allosteric MEK Inhibitor Trametinib in Relapsed and Refractory Juvenile Myelomonocytic Leukemia: a Report from the Children's Oncology Group."
authors:
- Stieglitz E
- Lee AG
- Angus SP
- Davis C
- Barkauskas DA
- Hall D
- Kogan SC
- Meyer J
- Rhodes SD
- Tasian SK
- Xuei X
- Shannon K
- Loh ML
- Fox E
- Weigel BJ
journal: Cancer Discov
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-23-1376
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pyridones/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- "Pyrimidinones/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- "Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Juvenile/drug therapy"
- Male
- Female
- Infant
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Child
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm"
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/drug therapy"
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of the Allosteric MEK Inhibitor Trametinib in Relapsed and Refractory Juvenile Myelomonocytic Leukemia: a Report from the Children's Oncology Group.
**Authors:** Stieglitz E, Lee AG, Angus SP, Davis C, Barkauskas DA, Hall D, Kogan SC, Meyer J, Rhodes SD, Tasian SK, Xuei X, Shannon K, Loh ML, Fox E, Weigel BJ
**Journal:** Cancer Discov (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1158/2159-8290.CD-23-1376](https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-23-1376)

## Content

1. Cancer Discov. 2024 Sep 4;14(9):1590-1598. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-23-1376.

Efficacy of the Allosteric MEK Inhibitor Trametinib in Relapsed and Refractory
Juvenile Myelomonocytic Leukemia: a Report from the Children's Oncology Group.

Stieglitz E(1), Lee AG(1), Angus SP(2), Davis C(2), Barkauskas DA(3), Hall D(3),
Kogan SC(4), Meyer J(1), Rhodes SD(2)(5), Tasian SK(6), Xuei X(2), Shannon K(1),
Loh ML(#)(7), Fox E(#)(8), Weigel BJ(#)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Benioff Children's Hospitals, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(3)Children Oncology Group Operations and Data Center, Monrovia, California.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California San Francisco,
San Francisco, California.
(5)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(6)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Division of Oncology and Center for
Childhood Cancer Research and University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(7)Ben Towne Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Seattle Children's Research
Institute and Department Pediatrics, Seattle Children's Hospital, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(8)St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee.
(9)University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(#)Contributed equally

Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) is a hematologic malignancy of young
children caused by mutations that increase Ras signaling output. Hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is a potentially curative treatment, but
patients with relapsed or refractory (advanced) disease have dismal outcomes.
This phase II trial evaluated the safety and efficacy of trametinib, an oral
MEK1/2 inhibitor, in patients with advanced JMML. Ten infants and children were
enrolled, and the objective response rate was 50%. Four patients with refractory
disease proceeded to HSCT after receiving trametinib. Three additional patients
completed all 12 cycles permitted on study and continue to receive off-protocol
trametinib without HSCT. The remaining three patients had progressive disease
with two demonstrating molecular evolution by the end of cycle 2. Transcriptomic
and proteomic analyses provided novel insights into the mechanisms of response
and resistance to trametinib in JMML. ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier:
NCT03190915. Significance: Trametinib was safe and effective in young children
with relapsed or refractory JMML, a lethal disease with poor survival rates.
Seven of 10 patients completed the maximum 12 cycles of therapy or used
trametinib as a bridge to HSCT and are alive with a median follow-up of 24
months. See related commentary by Ben-Crentsil and Padron, p. 1574.

©2024 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-23-1376
PMCID: PMC11374478
PMID: 38867349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflicts of
interest.
