---
reference_id: "PMID:21425268"
title: Targeting oligodendrocyte protection and remyelination in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Zhang J
- Kramer EG
- Mahase S
- Dutta DJ
- Bonnamain V
- Argaw AT
- John GR
journal: Mt Sinai J Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/msj.20244
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting oligodendrocyte protection and remyelination in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Zhang J, Kramer EG, Mahase S, Dutta DJ, Bonnamain V, Argaw AT, John GR
**Journal:** Mt Sinai J Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/msj.20244](https://doi.org/10.1002/msj.20244)

## Content

1. Mt Sinai J Med. 2011 Mar-Apr;78(2):244-57. doi: 10.1002/msj.20244.

Targeting oligodendrocyte protection and remyelination in multiple sclerosis.

Zhang J(1), Kramer EG, Mahase S, Dutta DJ, Bonnamain V, Argaw AT, John GR.

Author information:
(1)Corinne Goldsmith Dickinson Center for Multiple Sclerosis, Mount Sinai School 
of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Multiple sclerosis is an inflammatory demyelinating disease of the brain and 
spinal cord with a presumed autoimmune etiology. Conduction block in 
demyelinated axons underlies early neurological symptoms, whereas axonal 
transection is believed responsible for more permanent later deficits. Approved 
treatments for the disease are immunoregulatory and reduce the rate of lesion 
formation and clinical exacerbation, but are only partially effective in 
preventing the onset of disability in multiple sclerosis patients. Approaches 
that directly protect myelin-producing oligodendrocytes and enhance 
remyelination may improve long-term outcomes and reduce the rate of axonal 
transection. Studies in genetically modified animals have improved our 
understanding of mechanisms underlying central nervous system pathology in 
multiple sclerosis models, and have identified pathways that regulate 
oligodendrocyte viability and myelin repair. However, although clinical trials 
are ongoing, many have been unsuccessful, and no treatments are yet approved 
that target these areas in multiple sclerosis. In this review, we examine 
avenues for oligodendrocyte protection and endogenous myelin repair in animal 
models of demyelination and remyelination, and their relevance as therapeutics 
in human patients.

© 2011 Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

DOI: 10.1002/msj.20244
PMCID: PMC3074606
PMID: 21425268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]