---
reference_id: "PMID:35483417"
title: The paradox of Myeloid Leukemia associated with Down syndrome.
authors:
- Gupte A
- Al-Antary ET
- Edwards H
- Ravindranath Y
- Ge Y
- Taub JW
journal: Biochem Pharmacol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2022.115046
keywords:
- Child
- Cytarabine
- "Down Syndrome/complications, drug therapy, genetics"
- "GATA1 Transcription Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/complications, drug therapy, genetics"
- "Leukemoid Reaction/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The paradox of Myeloid Leukemia associated with Down syndrome.
**Authors:** Gupte A, Al-Antary ET, Edwards H, Ravindranath Y, Ge Y, Taub JW
**Journal:** Biochem Pharmacol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bcp.2022.115046](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcp.2022.115046)

## Content

1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2022 Jul;201:115046. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2022.115046. Epub
2022 Apr 26.

The paradox of Myeloid Leukemia associated with Down syndrome.

Gupte A(1), Al-Antary ET(1), Edwards H(2), Ravindranath Y(3), Ge Y(2), Taub
JW(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital of Michigan,
Detroit, MI, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Oncology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit,
MI, USA; Molecular Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute,
Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.
(3)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital of Michigan,
Detroit, MI, USA.
(4)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital of Michigan,
Detroit, MI, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA; Molecular Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos
Cancer Institute, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA;
Discipline of Pediatrics, Central Michigan University, Saginaw, MI, USA.
Electronic address: jtaub@med.wayne.edu.

Children with Down syndrome constitute a distinct genetic population who has a
greater risk of developing acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) compared to their non-Down syndrome counterparts. The risk for
developing solid tumors is also distinct from the non-Down syndrome population.
In the case of myeloid leukemias, the process of leukemogenesis in Trisomy 21
begins in early fetal life where genetic drivers including GATA1 mutations lead
to the development of the preleukemic condition, transient abnormal myelopoiesis
(TAM). Various other mutations in genes encoding cohesin, epigenetic regulators
and RAS pathway can result in subsequent progression to Myeloid Leukemia
associated with Down Syndrome (ML-DS). The striking paradoxical feature in the
Down syndrome population is that even though there is a higher predisposition to
developing AML, they are also very sensitive to chemotherapy agents,
particularly cytarabine, thus accounting for the very high cure rates for ML-DS
compared to AML in children without Down syndrome. Current clinical trials for
ML-DS attempt to balance effective curative therapies while trying to reduce
treatment-associated toxicities including infections by de-intensifying
chemotherapy doses, if possible. The small proportion of patients with relapsed
ML-DS have an extremely poor prognosis and require the development of new
therapies.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2022.115046
PMID: 35483417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
