---
reference_id: "PMID:15992684"
title: "Molecular genetics of biotin metabolism: old vitamin, new science."
authors:
- Gravel RA
- Narang MA
journal: J Nutr Biochem
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2005.03.020
keywords:
- Animals
- Biotin/metabolism
- "Biotinidase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Carbon-Nitrogen Ligases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cell Nucleus/genetics, metabolism"
- "Escherichia coli Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Histones/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Repressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular genetics of biotin metabolism: old vitamin, new science.
**Authors:** Gravel RA, Narang MA
**Journal:** J Nutr Biochem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jnutbio.2005.03.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnutbio.2005.03.020)

## Content

1. J Nutr Biochem. 2005 Jul;16(7):428-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2005.03.020.

Molecular genetics of biotin metabolism: old vitamin, new science.

Gravel RA(1), Narang MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1. rgravel@ucalgary.ca

Biotin is a water-soluble vitamin that participates as a cofactor in
gluconeogenesis, fatty acid synthesis and branched chain amino acid catabolism.
It functions as the carboxyl carrier for biotin-dependent carboxylases. Its
covalent attachment to carboxylases is catalyzed by holocarboxylase synthetase.
Our interest in biotin has been through the genetic disease, "biotin-responsive
multiple carboxylase deficiency," caused by deficient activity of
holocarboxylase synthetase. As part of these studies, we made the unexpected
findings that the enzyme also targets to the nucleus and that it catalyzes the
attachment of biotin to histones. We found that patients with holocarboxylase
synthetase deficiency have a much reduced level of biotinylated histones, yet
the importance of this process is unknown. The dual nature of biotin, as the
carboxyl-carrier cofactor of carboxylases and as a ligand of unknown function
attached to histones, is an enigma that suggests a much more involved role for
biotin than anticipated. It may change our outlook on the optimal nutritional
intake of biotin and its importance in biological processes such as development,
cellular homeostasis and regulation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2005.03.020
PMID: 15992684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
