---
reference_id: "PMID:16086360"
title: "SALL4 mutations in Okihiro syndrome (Duane-radial ray syndrome), acro-renal-ocular syndrome, and related disorders."
authors:
- Kohlhase J
- Chitayat D
- Kotzot D
- Ceylaner S
- Froster UG
- Fuchs S
- Montgomery T
- Rösler B
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20215
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Amino Acid Motifs
- Duane Retraction Syndrome/genetics
- Exons
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Zinc Fingers
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SALL4 mutations in Okihiro syndrome (Duane-radial ray syndrome), acro-renal-ocular syndrome, and related disorders.
**Authors:** Kohlhase J, Chitayat D, Kotzot D, Ceylaner S, Froster UG, Fuchs S, Montgomery T, Rösler B
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20215](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20215)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2005 Sep;26(3):176-83. doi: 10.1002/humu.20215.

SALL4 mutations in Okihiro syndrome (Duane-radial ray syndrome),
acro-renal-ocular syndrome, and related disorders.

Kohlhase J(1), Chitayat D, Kotzot D, Ceylaner S, Froster UG, Fuchs S, Montgomery
T, Rösler B.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Human Genetics and Anthropology, Universität Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany. juergen.kohlhase@uniklinik-freiburg.de

Okihiro/Duane-radial ray syndrome (DRRS) is an autosomal dominant condition
characterized by radial ray defects and Duane anomaly (a form of strabismus).
Other abnormalities reported in this condition are anal, renal, cardiac, ear,
and foot malformations, and hearing loss. The disease is the result of a
mutation in the SALL4 gene, a human gene related to the developmental regulator
spalt (sal) of Drosophila melanogaster. SALL4 mutations may also cause
acro-renal-ocular syndrome (AROS), which differs from DRRS by the presence of
structural eye anomalies, and phenotypes similar to thalidomide embryopathy and
Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS). The SALL4 gene product is a zinc finger protein that
is thought to act as a transcription factor. It contains three highly conserved
C2H2 double zinc finger domains, which are evenly distributed. A single C2H2
motif is attached to the second domain, and at the amino terminus SALL4 contains
a C2HC motif. Seventeen of the 22 SALL4 mutations known to date (five of which
are presented here for the first time) are located in exon 2, and five are
located in exon 3. These are nonsense mutations, short duplications, and short
deletions. All of the mutations lead to preterminal stop codons and are thought
to cause the phenotype via haploinsufficiency. This assumption is supported by
the detection of six larger deletions involving the whole gene or single exons.
This article summarizes the current knowledge about SALL4 defects and associated
syndromes, and describes the clinical distinctions with similar phenotypes
caused by other gene defects.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20215
PMID: 16086360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
