---
reference_id: "PMID:38030818"
title: Germline PTEN genotype-dependent phenotypic divergence during the early neural developmental process of forebrain organoids.
authors:
- Kang SC
- Sarn NB
- Venegas J
- Tan Z
- Hitomi M
- Eng C
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-02325-3
keywords:
- "PTEN Phosphohydrolase/genetics, metabolism"
- Organoids/metabolism
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- Germ-Line Mutation/genetics
- Prosencephalon/metabolism
- Autism Spectrum Disorder/genetics
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- Neurons/metabolism
- Genotype
- Phenotype
- Neurogenesis/genetics
- "Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Germline PTEN genotype-dependent phenotypic divergence during the early neural developmental process of forebrain organoids.
**Authors:** Kang SC, Sarn NB, Venegas J, Tan Z, Hitomi M, Eng C
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41380-023-02325-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-023-02325-3)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2024 Jun;29(6):1767-1781. doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-02325-3.
Epub  2023 Nov 29.

Germline PTEN genotype-dependent phenotypic divergence during the early neural 
developmental process of forebrain organoids.

Kang SC(#)(1), Sarn NB(#)(1), Venegas J(#)(1), Tan Z(1)(2), Hitomi M(1)(2), Eng 
C(3)(4)(5)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, OH, 44195, USA.
(2)Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH, 44195, USA.
(3)Genomic Medicine Institute, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, OH, 44195, USA. engc@ccf.org.
(4)Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH, 44195, USA. engc@ccf.org.
(5)Center for Personalized Genetic Healthcare, Medical Specialties Institute, 
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, 44195, USA. engc@ccf.org.
(6)Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University School of 
Medicine, Cleveland, OH, 44106, USA. engc@ccf.org.
(7)Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH, 44195, 
USA. engc@ccf.org.
(8)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, 44106, USA. engc@ccf.org.
(#)Contributed equally

PTEN germline mutations account for ~0.2-1% of all autism spectrum disorder 
(ASD) cases, as well as ~17% of ASD patients with macrocephaly, making it one of 
the top ASD-associated risk genes. Individuals with germline PTEN mutations 
receive the molecular diagnosis of PTEN Hamartoma Tumor Syndrome (PHTS), an 
inherited cancer predisposition syndrome, about 20-23% of whom are diagnosed 
with ASD. We generated forebrain organoid cultures from gene-edited isogenic 
human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) harboring a PTENG132D (ASD) or 
PTENM134R (cancer) mutant allele to model how these mutations interrupt 
neurodevelopmental processes. Here, we show that the PTENG132D allele disrupts 
early neuroectoderm formation during the first several days of organoid 
generation, and results in deficient electrophysiology. While organoids 
generated from PTENM134R hiPSCs remained morphologically similar to wild-type 
organoids during this early stage in development, we observed disrupted neuronal 
differentiation, radial glia positioning, and cortical layering in both 
PTEN-mutant organoids at the later stage of 72+ days of development. Perifosine, 
an AKT inhibitor, reduced over-activated AKT and partially corrected the 
abnormalities in cellular organization observed in PTENG132D organoids. Single 
cell RNAseq analyses on early-stage organoids revealed that genes related to 
neural cell fate were decreased in PTENG132D mutant organoids, and AKT 
inhibition was capable of upregulating gene signatures related to neuronal cell 
fate and CNS maturation pathways. These findings demonstrate that different PTEN 
missense mutations can have a profound impact on neurodevelopment at diverse 
stages which in turn may predispose PHTS individuals to ASD. Further study will 
shed light on ways to mitigate pathological impact of PTEN mutants on 
neurodevelopment by stage-specific manipulation of downstream PTEN signaling 
components.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-023-02325-3
PMID: 38030818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]