---
reference_id: "PMID:39056372"
title: Visible Light in the Treatment of Acne Vulgaris.
authors:
- Akuffo-Addo E
- Ramsay K
- Mohsen S
- Boisvert J
- Mukovozov I
journal: J Cutan Med Surg
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/12034754241265697
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Visible Light in the Treatment of Acne Vulgaris.
**Authors:** Akuffo-Addo E, Ramsay K, Mohsen S, Boisvert J, Mukovozov I
**Journal:** J Cutan Med Surg (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/12034754241265697](https://doi.org/10.1177/12034754241265697)

## Content

1. J Cutan Med Surg. 2024 Nov-Dec;28(6):567-571. doi: 10.1177/12034754241265697. 
Epub 2024 Jul 26.

Visible Light in the Treatment of Acne Vulgaris.

Akuffo-Addo E(1), Ramsay K(1), Mohsen S(1), Boisvert J(2), Mukovozov I(3).

Author information:
(1)Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Faculty of Arts and Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Toronto Dermatology Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Acne vulgaris, a prevalent dermatological disorder, frequently affects 
individuals' self-perception and general psychosocial functioning. The growing 
demand for home-based light therapy devices prompted a systematic review to 
assess the efficacy of visible light in acne treatment. Overall, 35 studies were 
included, representing 1185 cases of acne vulgaris (mean age: 23.7 years; sex: 
63% female). A total of 69% of the included studies were level 2 evidence. 
Overall, 92% of patients achieved partial remission of their acne lesions using 
visible light therapy. Among the patients who experienced a partial remission of 
their acne, 46% experienced a reduction of 0% to 50% in their acne lesions, 
while 33% and 12% experienced reductions of 51% to 74% and 75% to 99%, 
respectively. Notably, blue light emerged as the predominant treatment modality 
in this context, used in around 64% of the cases. A total of 95% of the patients 
who were treated with blue light experienced a partial clearance of acne 
lesions; 44% experienced a reduction of 0% to 50% in their acne lesions, while 
42% and 9% experienced reductions of 51% to 74% and 75% to 99%, respectively. 
Overall, the average total lesion count improved by 43% at week 4 compared to 
the baseline. The average number of treatment sessions was 22 (range 1-112 
sessions). On average, treated patients responded within a period of 4 weeks. 
Commonly reported side effects included skin irritation and erythema. This 
review highlights the potential of visible light therapy in acne treatment. 
Head-to-head studies are needed to compare the efficacy of visible light 
compared to existing therapies for the treatment of acne.

DOI: 10.1177/12034754241265697
PMCID: PMC11585190
PMID: 39056372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.