---
reference_id: "PMID:36831055"
title: "Molecular Targets in Salivary Gland Cancers: A Comprehensive Genomic Analysis of 118 Mucoepidermoid Carcinoma Tumors."
authors:
- Bou Zerdan M
- Kumar PA
- Zaccarini D
- Ross J
- Huang R
- Sivapiragasam A
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11020519
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Targets in Salivary Gland Cancers: A Comprehensive Genomic Analysis of 118 Mucoepidermoid Carcinoma Tumors.
**Authors:** Bou Zerdan M, Kumar PA, Zaccarini D, Ross J, Huang R, Sivapiragasam A
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines11020519](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines11020519)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2023 Feb 10;11(2):519. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11020519.

Molecular Targets in Salivary Gland Cancers: A Comprehensive Genomic Analysis of 
118 Mucoepidermoid Carcinoma Tumors.

Bou Zerdan M(1), Kumar PA(2), Zaccarini D(3), Ross J(4)(5), Huang R(3), 
Sivapiragasam A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, 
NY 13210, USA.
(2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, SUNY Upstate Medical 
University, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY 13210, 
USA.
(4)Foundation Medicine, Inc., Morrisville, NC 27560, USA.
(5)Departments of Pathology and Urology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, 
Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Salivary gland carcinomas (SGC) are histologically diverse cancers 
and next-generation sequencing (NGS) to identify key molecular targets is an 
important aspect in the management of advanced cases.
METHODS: DNA was extracted from paraffin embedded tissues of advanced SGC and 
comprehensive genomic profiling (CGP) was carried out to evaluate for base 
substitutions, short insertions, deletions, copy number changes, gene fusions 
and rearrangements. Tumor mutation burden (TMB) was calculated on approximately 
1.25 Mb. Some 324 genes in the FoundationOne CDX panel were analyzed.
RESULTS: Mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MECa) mutations were assessed. CDKN2A and 
CDKN2B GA were common in mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MECa) (52.5 and 30.5%). 
PIK3CA was also common in MECa (16.9%). ERBB2 amplification/short variants 
(amp/SV) were found in MECa (5.9/0%). HRAS GA was common in MECa (14.4%) as 
well. Other targets, including BAP1, PTEN, and KRAS, were noted but had a low 
incidence. In terms of immunotherapy (IO)-predictive markers, TMB > 10 was more 
common in MECa (16.9%). PDL1 high was also seen in MECa (4.20%).
CONCLUSION: SGC are rare tumors with no FDA-approved treatment options. This 
large dataset reveals many opportunities for IO and targeted therapy 
contributing to the continuously increased precision in the selection of 
treatment for these patients.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines11020519
PMCID: PMC9953533
PMID: 36831055

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.