---
reference_id: "PMID:34018852"
title: Transthyretin amyloid fibrils alter primary fibroblast structure, function, and inflammatory gene expression.
authors:
- Dittloff KT
- Iezzi A
- Zhong JX
- Mohindra P
- Desai TA
- Russell B
journal: Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00073.2021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transthyretin amyloid fibrils alter primary fibroblast structure, function, and inflammatory gene expression.
**Authors:** Dittloff KT, Iezzi A, Zhong JX, Mohindra P, Desai TA, Russell B
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpheart.00073.2021](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00073.2021)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2021 Jul 1;321(1):H149-H160. doi: 
10.1152/ajpheart.00073.2021. Epub 2021 May 21.

Transthyretin amyloid fibrils alter primary fibroblast structure, function, and 
inflammatory gene expression.

Dittloff KT(1), Iezzi A(2), Zhong JX(3)(4), Mohindra P(3)(4), Desai TA(3)(4)(5), 
Russell B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, Illinois.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois.
(3)UC Berkeley-UCSF Graduate Program in Bioengineering, University of 
California, San Francisco, California.
(4)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of 
California, San Francisco, California.
(5)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, California.

Age-related wild-type transthyretin amyloidosis (wtATTR) is characterized by 
systemic deposition of amyloidogenic fibrils of misfolded transthyretin (TTR) in 
the connective tissue of many organs. In the heart, this leads to cardiac 
dysfunction, which is a significant cause of age-related heart failure. The 
hypothesis tested is that TTR affects cardiac fibroblasts in ways that may 
contribute to fibrosis. When primary cardiac fibroblasts were cultured on 
TTR-deposited substrates, the F-actin cytoskeleton was disorganized, focal 
adhesion formation was decreased, and nuclear shape was flattened. Fibroblasts 
had faster collective and single-cell migration velocities on TTR-deposited 
substrates. In addition, fibroblasts cultured on microposts with TTR deposition 
had reduced attachment and increased proliferation above untreated. 
Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of fibroblasts grown on glass covered with 
TTR showed significant upregulation of inflammatory genes after 48 h, indicative 
of progression in TTR-based diseases. Together, results suggest that TTR 
deposited in tissue extracellular matrix may affect the structure, function, and 
gene expression of cardiac fibroblasts. As therapies for wtATTR are 
cost-prohibitive and only slow disease progression, better understanding of 
cellular maladaptation may elucidate novel therapeutic targets.NEW & NOTEWORTHY 
Transthyretin (TTR) cardiac amyloidosis involves deposition of fibrils of 
misfolded TTR in the aging human heart, leading to cardiac dysfunction and heart 
failure. Our novel in vitro studies show that TTR fibrils alter primary cardiac 
fibroblast cytoskeletal and nuclear structure and focal adhesion formation. 
Furthermore, both fibrillar and tetrameric TTR significantly increased cellular 
migration velocity and caused upregulation of inflammatory genes determined by 
transcriptomic RNA and protein analysis. These findings may suggest new 
therapeutic approaches.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00073.2021
PMCID: PMC8321815
PMID: 34018852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest, financial or 
otherwise, are declared by the authors.