---
reference_id: "PMID:25034484"
title: Interferon therapy of chronic hepatitis B.
authors:
- Brunetto MR
- Bonino F
journal: Intervirology
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1159/000360941
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interferon therapy of chronic hepatitis B.
**Authors:** Brunetto MR, Bonino F
**Journal:** Intervirology (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000360941](https://doi.org/10.1159/000360941)

## Content

1. Intervirology. 2014;57(3-4):163-70. doi: 10.1159/000360941. Epub 2014 Jul 15.

Interferon therapy of chronic hepatitis B.

Brunetto MR(1), Bonino F.

Author information:
(1)Liver Unit, Reference Centre for Chronic Liver Disease and Hepatocellular 
Carcinoma of the Tuscany Region, University Hospital of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

Chronic hepatitis B (CHB) results from the inability of the host's immune system 
to control viral replication. Interferon-α (IFN-α) therapy can convert CHB into 
inactive hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection in 20-30% of the treated patients. In 
spite of the low response rate, IFN-α therapy has the advantage of having a 
limited duration and being effective even after therapy, as demonstrated by a 
much higher incidence of HBsAg clearance in responders to IFN-α than in 
naturally occurring inactive HBsAg carriers. IFN-α has multiple antiviral, 
antiproliferative, and immunomodulatory activities and targets: cellular genes 
(IFN-stimulated genes) activating different pathways of antiviral defense in 
infected and noninfected cells, HBV replication blocking the RNA-containing core 
particle formation and accelerating their decay, degrading pregenomic RNA, and 
modulating the nuclear viral minichromosome (covalently closed circular DNA) 
activity by targeting its epigenetic regulation and both innate and adaptive 
immune response. The interference of viral heterogeneity and genetic 
polymorphisms of the host on IFN-α susceptibility is under investigation. Only a 
better understanding of the complex interplay between the different activities 
of IFN-α would warrant the amelioration of current therapeutic strategies and 
the design of new therapeutic approaches. The study of on-treatment dynamics of 
HBV infection by means of combined quantitative monitoring of serum HBV DNA and 
HBsAg warrant tailoring treatment at the single-patient level and can help to 
make treatment more cost-effective by using the different combinations of 
currently available antivirals, including IFN, more appropriately. Integrated 
molecular and clinical knowledge in a systems medicine fashion is mandatory to 
further improve antiviral therapy in CHB.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000360941
PMID: 25034484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]