---
reference_id: "PMID:38651851"
title: Skin Changes in Suspected Lyme Disease.
authors:
- Vržogić P
- Perica A
journal: Acta Dermatovenerol Croat
year: '2023'
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lyme Disease/diagnosis, therapy, epidemiology"
- Female
- Middle Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skin Changes in Suspected Lyme Disease.
**Authors:** Vržogić P, Perica A
**Journal:** Acta Dermatovenerol Croat (2023)

## Content

1. Acta Dermatovenerol Croat. 2023 Dec;31(4):225-228.

Skin Changes in Suspected Lyme Disease.

Vržogić P(1), Perica A.

Author information:
(1)Pero Vržogić, MD, Naftalan Special Hospital for Medical Rehabilitation, 
Ivanić Grad, Croatia; p.vrzogic@gmail.com.

Dear Editor, Ticks carry many diseases, bacteria, and viruses and represent a 
very important healthcare issue both in Croatia and globally. Although most 
ticks are not infected with pathogens dangerous to humans, some ticks can 
transmit infectious diseases with significant morbidity and mortality. This is 
caused by the increasing incidence of many tick-borne diseases over a growing 
geographical area. Many factors influence which species of ticks are present in 
a given geographical area, as well as the density of their population and the 
risk of human exposure to infected ticks. The average morbidity from Lyme 
borreliosis in the Republic of Croatia is 6.51 infected per 100,000 inhabitants. 
There can be no Lyme borreliosis without ticks infected by Borrelia burgdorferi 
(1,2). In Europe, Lyme borreliosis (LB) is caused by the Borrelia burgdorferi 
sensu lato complex genotype. There are three skin manifestations of LB: erythema 
migrans (EM), borrelial lymphocytoma (BL), and acrodermatitis chronica 
atrophicans (ACA) (3,4). Herein we describe a female patient with a diagnosis of 
Lyme disease based on the non-specific clinical picture and laboratory 
diagnostics, in whom successful treatment led to complete regression of all skin 
manifestations. The patient was a 58-year-old woman with no previous history of 
severe illness. Notably, the patient history showed that, eight months prior to 
presenting for the dermatological exam, the patient had observed the appearance 
of edema and demarcated macular exanthema around both ankles and subsequently on 
the dorsum of the right hand, which spread to the left hand and with gradual 
spread to both lower legs and the lower extremities, with more pronounced 
changes on the left leg. The initial dermatological examination found pronounced 
skin changes on both legs, especially the left leg, with erythematous changes in 
the form of figurate erythema forming confluences up to the size of a smaller 
palm; the skin of the left leg was partially mottled with normal turgor and 
elasticity (Figure 1a and Figure 1b). Inguinal lymph nodes were enlarged and 
painless on palpation. Changes were minimal and discrete on the right leg and 
were absent on the torso, upper extremities, and skin. Subjectively, there was 
no itching, burning, or tingling sensation in the affected areas of the skin. 
The patient subjectively reported feeling well. Family history showed that the 
patient's father had died from prostate cancer and that the mother had died from 
melanoma. Laboratory findings were as follows: hematological, biochemical, and 
immunological parameters were normal. Venous and arterial ultrasound of both 
legs was normal, with the presence of reactively enlarged left inguinal lymph 
nodes. Lyme disease was suspected based on the clinical picture, with a 
differential diagnosis of possible livedo reticularis. A biopsy of the skin 
changes was also performed, with the results showing that the histological 
picture in the examined material could be compatible with the provisional 
clinical diagnosis of livedo reticularis. IgM and IgG specific for Borrelia 
burgdorferi was also performed: IgG was borderline, whereas IgM was positive at 
218 U/mL. Over the next 3 weeks, Amoxil 500 mg thrice daily was introduced to 
the treatment. After completion of the treatment, there was a gradual regression 
of all skin changes without the appearance of new lesions (Figure 2a and Figure 
2b) (Figure 3a and Figure 3b). Patient follow-up over the next year did not find 
any recurrence of similar skin changes. Herein we have described the case of a 
patient with atypical skin changes in which the presence of antibodies for 
Borrelia burgdorferi was demonstrated, in which regression of all skin 
manifestations was achieved after diagnosis and adequate antibiotic treatment. 
Lyme disease has a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations that can generally 
be observed in three stages: the early localized stage, the early disseminated 
stage, and the late stage of the disease. However, it is also possible for the 
different stages to overlap and even for the late stage to manifest without any 
signs and symptoms of the earlier stages. Early localized stage. Characterized 
by skin changes - erythema migrans (EM) - usually manifests within a month of 
the tick bite (usually 7-14 days after the bite) (Figure 4 and Figure 5). EM 
manifests in approximately 80% of patients, but only 25% of patients can recall 
the tick bite. The skin changes are usually localized in the axilla, the groin, 
the cubital area, or around the waist. The changes are generally not painful, 
but can itch or be warm to the touch. They gradually spread over days or weeks 
and can grow to a radius of up to 20 cm. Initially, the coloration can be 
uniform for several days, after which the redness disappears around a central 
zone (4-6). Multiple skin changes are a sign of spirochetemia and not the result 
of multiple tick bites. Due to timely antimicrobial treatment, multiple skin 
changes are much rarer today. In the initial days or weeks after infection, 
patients with early, localized, or disseminated Lyme disease often present with 
non-specific signs and symptoms resembling a viral infection: fatigue, headache, 
loss of appetite, joint pain, and regional lymphadenopathy. Fever can be present 
in approximately 20% of patients. Laboratory findings in this phase are 
non-specific. Erythrocyte sedimentation can be slightly increased, leukocyte 
counts are mostly normal, and anemia and thrombocytopenia are present only 
rarely (7,8). Early disseminated stage. This stage is marked by numerous EM 
lesions (that generally appear days or weeks after the infection) and/or 
neurological and/or cardiac manifestations (occurring weeks or months after 
infection). Some of these patients have no data on the presence of early 
localized Lyme disease. The most common triad of neurological manifestations are 
meningitis, neuropathy (usually of the facial nerve) and motor or sensory 
radiculopathy (Bannwarth syndrome). All these manifestations can appear 
individually. Cranial nerve neuropathies can often be bilateral. Late-stage Lyme 
disease. Characterized by intermittent or permanent arthritis in one joint or 
several large joints, most commonly the knees, and/or more rarely by 
neurological symptoms such as discrete encephalopathy or polyneuropathy. 
Late-stage Lyme disease can develop several years after primary infection, and 
arthritis can be the first manifestation of the disease, with the early 
localized and early disseminated stages not manifesting at all. In Europe, 
patients with late-stage Lyme disease can present with chronic skin changes 
(acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans), which is not observed in the USA. It is 
caused by B. afzelii and is typically localized to the extensor surfaces of the 
hands and feet. It is most common in women >40 years of age but can also present 
in younger populations. However, due to early antimicrobial treatment of the 
earlier stages of the disease, late-stage manifestations are rare (9). The 
discovery of the etiology of this disease showed that some well-known clinical 
entities were also a manifestation of Borrelia infection. The etiology of other 
dermatologic diseases was thus determined, such as lymphocytoma (or 
lymphadenosis cutis benigna), which was recognized as an entity as early as 
1884, as well as acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans, described in 1888, 
erythema chronicum migrans (Afzelius-Lipschütz), and the neurological disease 
called Bannwarth syndrome, the symptoms of which were described as early as 1922 
(10,11). LB and all its dermatological manifestations occur in almost all 
European countries, predominantly in the central part of the continent. The 
annual incidence is between 9.4 cases per 100,000 inhabitants in France to 120 
cases per 100,000 inhabitants in northeastern Poland, 130 cases per 100,000 
inhabitants in Austria, and 155 cases per 100,000 inhabitants in Slovenia (12). 
The total prevalence of ACA in all European patients with LB is 1-10%, depending 
on the region. For example, BL and ACA comprise 0.3% of LB cases in Bulgaria. In 
Norway, ACA comprises 5% of all clinical LB cases, and in northern Italy that 
number is 2.5%. Establishing a diagnosis of ACA is much more difficult than 
diagnosing EM or benign lymphocytoma (BL) because the clinical manifestations of 
ACA can vary. Acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans is probably the most common 
late and chronic manifestation of LB that can be observed in European patients. 
The skin changes in our patient were fairly non-specific, based on descriptions 
from the literature, but positivity for IgM antibodies was important for 
establishing the diagnosis, along with the very good response to antibiotics 
regarding regression of skin changes as well as the histological analysis that, 
according to the pathohistological diagnosis, indicated livedo reticularis, 
which is in turn also described in the literature as a possible form of ACA 
depending on the stage of the disease. Skin changes on the lower extremities are 
often incorrectly interpreted as vascular insufficiency, e.g. chronic venous 
insufficiency, superficial thrombophlebitis, hypostatic eczema, obliterative 
arterial disease, acrocyanosis, livedo reticularis, or lymphoedema, but they can 
also be the result of ACA, as in our case (13-15). In cases such as the one we 
have described, clinical manifestations of Lyme disease can very often vary and 
differ greatly from the typical clinical picture. This is demonstrated by our 
case, which also shows that LB and its idiosyncratic manifestations can lead 
physicians astray in a condition where failing to establish a timely diagnosis 
can be fatal for the patient. This case report also serves as a reminder that 
Lyme disease should be considered whenever atypical skin changes are 
encountered. Given that ACA is a disease in the late stage of Lyme disease and 
that the changes in our patient were noticed at the very beginning, the disease 
did not develop to the later stage.

PMID: 38651851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]