---
reference_id: "PMID:8758132"
title: Sputum induction for the diagnosis of tuberculosis.
authors:
- Shata AM
- Coulter JB
- Parry CM
- Ching'ani G
- Broadhead RL
- Hart CA
journal: Arch Dis Child
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1136/adc.74.6.535
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sputum induction for the diagnosis of tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Shata AM, Coulter JB, Parry CM, Ching'ani G, Broadhead RL, Hart CA
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1136/adc.74.6.535](https://doi.org/10.1136/adc.74.6.535)

## Content

1. Arch Dis Child. 1996 Jun;74(6):535-7. doi: 10.1136/adc.74.6.535.

Sputum induction for the diagnosis of tuberculosis.

Shata AM(1), Coulter JB, Parry CM, Ching'ani G, Broadhead RL, Hart CA.

Author information:
(1)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, University of Liverpool.

Confirmation of tuberculosis in young children is difficult as they seldom 
expectorate sputum. Gastric aspirates are invasive and stressful and like 
laryngeal swabs are seldom smear positive. Induction of sputum by nebulised 
hypertonic saline (3%) was attempted in 30 Malawian children aged 3-15 years and 
was successful in 29. Four sputa were smear positive and Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis was cultured from three of them. A further four sputa were culture 
positive though smear negative. In all, the diagnosis of tuberculosis was 
confirmed in eight (28%) of 29 children. The presence of polymorphonuclear cells 
in the specimen was indicative of sputum, in contrast to epithelial cells which 
originate from saliva. A predominance of polymorphonuclear cells in specimens 
was more common in older children and these specimens were more likely to be 
smear positive or culture positive. Sputum induction is a useful method for the 
confirmation of tuberculosis and is possible in young children.

DOI: 10.1136/adc.74.6.535
PMCID: PMC1511555
PMID: 8758132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]