---
reference_id: "PMID:40579207"
title: "Ludwig's angina in an otherwise healthy adult."
authors:
- Karanth T
- Lal N
- Anand V
- Raina S
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2024-263024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ludwig's angina in an otherwise healthy adult.
**Authors:** Karanth T, Lal N, Anand V, Raina S
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2024-263024](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2024-263024)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2025 Jun 27;18(6):e263024. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2024-263024.

Ludwig's angina in an otherwise healthy adult.

Karanth T(1), Lal N(2), Anand V(3), Raina S(4).

Author information:
(1)ENT-HNS, Military Hospital Prayagraj, Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh, India 
karanthtk@gmail.com.
(2)ENT-HNS, Military Hospital Prayagraj, Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(3)Radiodiagnosis, Military Hospital Prayagraj, Prayagraj, India.
(4)Command Hospital Lucknow, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.

Ludwig angina (LA) is a diagnosis made clinically when a patient with brawny 
oedema of the submandibular region and inflammatory oedema of the floor of mouth 
is encountered. This report describes a middle-aged man who developed 
progressive swelling of the submandibular region and neck. He had restricted 
mouth opening and pharyngolaryngeal oedema on examination. CT imaging revealed 
diffuse oedema in all neck compartments with airway narrowing. He improved after 
medical management with intravenous antibiotics and steroids. Even after 
thorough investigation, the source of infection remained unidentified. The case 
highlights the need to manage the airway in all cases clinically diagnosed with 
LA, and to keep in mind that it may occur in an otherwise healthy adult with no 
comorbidities.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2025. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2024-263024
PMID: 40579207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.