---
reference_id: "PMID:36418753"
title: "Characterization of sebaceous and non-sebaceous cutaneous manifestations in patients with lynch syndrome: a systematic review."
authors:
- Aziz S
- O'Sullivan H
- Heelan K
- Alam A
- McVeigh TP
journal: Fam Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10689-022-00319-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of sebaceous and non-sebaceous cutaneous manifestations in patients with lynch syndrome: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Aziz S, O'Sullivan H, Heelan K, Alam A, McVeigh TP
**Journal:** Fam Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10689-022-00319-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10689-022-00319-8)

## Content

1. Fam Cancer. 2023 Apr;22(2):167-175. doi: 10.1007/s10689-022-00319-8. Epub 2022
 Nov 23.

Characterization of sebaceous and non-sebaceous cutaneous manifestations in 
patients with lynch syndrome: a systematic review.

Aziz S(1)(2), O'Sullivan H(3), Heelan K(3), Alam A(4), McVeigh TP(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Sulaymaniyah, Sulaymaniyah, Iraq. 
shahram.aziz@univsul.edu.iq.
(2)Komar University of Science and Technology, Sulaymaniyah, Iraq. 
shahram.aziz@univsul.edu.iq.
(3)The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Imperial College London & Chelsea and Westminster 
Hospital, London, UK.

A subset of patients with Lynch Syndrome demonstrates cutaneous manifestations 
of the disorder. Characterization of these Lynch-related skin lesions could help 
in early recognition of patients with Lynch Syndrome. A broad search of the 
literature on OVID Medline and Embase was carried out to capture papers 
reporting cutaneous manifestations in Lynch Syndrome patients. The results were 
uploaded into Mendeley reference management software. The PRISMA workflow was 
used in the literature selection process. In this systematic review, data were 
collected from 961 cases from 413 studies, including 380 molecularly confirmed 
Lynch Syndrome cases. The main skin lesions were: Sebaceous adenomas (43%), 
sebaceous carcinomas (27%), keratoacanthomas (16%), sebaceomas (13%), squamous 
cell carcinomas (23%), and basal cell carcinomas (10%). MSH2 variants were the 
most common underlying genotype (72%). Assessment of mismatch repair by 
immunohistochemistry, microsatellite instability analysis, or both were 
performed on 328 skin lesions from 220 (58%) molecularly confirmed cases. In 
those skin lesions, 95% of Immunohistochemistry and 90% of the microsatellite 
instability test results were concordant with the underlying genotype. Sebaceous 
skin lesions are well-recognised phenotypic features of Lynch Syndrome. Our 
results show that squamous and basal cell carcinomas are relatively common in 
patients with Lynch syndrome; however, available evidence cannot confirm that 
Lynch syndrome is causal. Immunohistochemistry and/or microsatellite instability 
testing of skin tumours in patients with a family history of Lynch 
Syndrome-associated cancers may be a useful approach in identifying patients 
requiring referral to Clinical Genetics and/or consideration of germline genetic 
testing for Lynch Syndrome.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10689-022-00319-8
PMCID: PMC10020322
PMID: 36418753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests. The 
authors have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose.