---
reference_id: "PMID:30006632"
title: "Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of variants in PDE4D/PRKAR1A: from acrodysostosis to acroscyphodysplasia."
authors:
- Michot C
- Le Goff C
- Blair E
- Blanchet P
- Capri Y
- Gilbert-Dussardier B
- Goldenberg A
- Henderson A
- Isidor B
- Kayserili H
- Kinning E
- Le Merrer M
- Lyonnet S
- Odent S
- Simsek-Kiper PO
- Quelin C
- Savarirayan R
- Simon M
- Splitt M
- Verhagen JMA
- Verloes A
- Munnich A
- Baujat G
- Cormier-Daire V
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-018-0135-1
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinase RIalpha Subunit/genetics
- "Cyclic Nucleotide Phosphodiesterases, Type 4/genetics"
- "Dysostoses/genetics, pathology"
- "Epiphyses/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Exostoses, Multiple Hereditary/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- "Knee/abnormalities, pathology"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of variants in PDE4D/PRKAR1A: from acrodysostosis to acroscyphodysplasia.
**Authors:** Michot C, Le Goff C, Blair E, Blanchet P, Capri Y, Gilbert-Dussardier B, Goldenberg A, Henderson A, Isidor B, Kayserili H, Kinning E, Le Merrer M, Lyonnet S, Odent S, Simsek-Kiper PO, Quelin C, Savarirayan R, Simon M, Splitt M, Verhagen JMA, Verloes A, Munnich A, Baujat G, Cormier-Daire V
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-018-0135-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-018-0135-1)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2018 Nov;26(11):1611-1622. doi: 10.1038/s41431-018-0135-1.
Epub  2018 Jul 13.

Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of variants in PDE4D/PRKAR1A: from 
acrodysostosis to acroscyphodysplasia.

Michot C(1), Le Goff C(1), Blair E(2), Blanchet P(3), Capri Y(4), 
Gilbert-Dussardier B(5), Goldenberg A(6), Henderson A(7), Isidor B(8), Kayserili 
H(9), Kinning E(10), Le Merrer M(1), Lyonnet S(1), Odent S(11), Simsek-Kiper 
PO(12), Quelin C(11), Savarirayan R(13), Simon M(14), Splitt M(7), Verhagen 
JMA(15), Verloes A(3), Munnich A(1), Baujat G(1), Cormier-Daire V(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, INSERM UMR 1163, Paris Descartes-Sorbonne 
Paris Cité University, IMAGINE Institute, Necker Enfants Malades Hospital, 
Paris, France.
(2)Oxford Centre for Genomic Medicine ACE Building, Nuffield Orthopaedic Centre 
Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Headington, Oxford, OX3 7LE, 
UK.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, CHRU de Montpellier-Arnaud de Villeneuve 
Hospital, Montpellier, France.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, INSERM U676, Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, 
France.
(5)Department of Genetics, C.H.U. La Milétrie, Poitiers, France, Poitiers 
University, EA3808, Poitiers, France.
(6)Department of Genetics, CHU de Rouen, Centre of Medical Genomics and of 
Personalized Medicine of Normandy, Rouen, France.
(7)Northern Genetics Service, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, UK.
(8)Department of Medical Genetics, C.H.U. de Nantes, Nantes, France.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of 
Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
(10)The Ferguson-Smith Centre for Clinical Genetics Royal Hospital for Sick 
Children, Glasgow, UK.
(11)Department of Clinical Genetics, CHU de Rennes, Rennes University, CNRS IGDR 
(institut de génétique et développement de Rennes), UMR6290, Rennes, France.
(12)Pediatric Genetics Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Hacettepe University 
Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
(13)Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Murdoch Children's Research Institute 
and University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(14)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands.
(15)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(16)Department of Medical Genetics, INSERM UMR 1163, Paris Descartes-Sorbonne 
Paris Cité University, IMAGINE Institute, Necker Enfants Malades Hospital, 
Paris, France. valerie.cormier-daire@inserm.fr.

Acrodysostosis (MIM 101800) is a dominantly inherited condition associating (1) 
skeletal features (short stature, facial dysostosis, and brachydactyly with 
cone-shaped epiphyses), (2) resistance to hormones and (3) possible intellectual 
disability. Acroscyphodysplasia (MIM 250215) is characterized by growth 
retardation, brachydactyly, and knee epiphyses embedded in cup-shaped 
metaphyses. We and others have identified PDE4D or PRKAR1A variants in 
acrodysostosis; PDE4D variants have been reported in three cases of 
acroscyphodysplasia. Our study aimed at reviewing the clinical and molecular 
findings in a cohort of 27 acrodysostosis and 5 acroscyphodysplasia cases. Among 
the acrodysostosis cases, we identified 9 heterozygous de novo PRKAR1A variants 
and 11 heterozygous PDE4D variants. The 7 patients without variants presented 
with symptoms of acrodysostosis (brachydactyly and cone-shaped epiphyses), but 
none had the characteristic facial dysostosis. In the acroscyphodysplasia cases, 
we identified 2 PDE4D variants. For 2 of the 3 negative cases, medical records 
revealed early severe infection, which has been described in some reports of 
acroscyphodysplasia. Subdividing our series of acrodysostosis based on the 
disease-causing gene, we confirmed genotype-phenotype correlations. Hormone 
resistance was consistently observed in patients carrying PRKAR1A variants, 
whereas no hormone resistance was observed in 9 patients with PDE4D variants. 
All patients with PDE4D variants shared characteristic facial features (midface 
hypoplasia with nasal hypoplasia) and some degree of intellectual disability. 
Our findings of PDE4D variants in two cases of acroscyphodysplasia support that 
PDE4D may be responsible for this severe skeletal dysplasia. We eventually 
emphasize the importance of some specific assessments in the long-term follow 
up, including cardiovascular and thromboembolic risk factors.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-018-0135-1
PMCID: PMC6189044
PMID: 30006632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.