---
reference_id: "PMID:19846810"
title: Immunophenotypic variations in mantle cell lymphoma.
authors:
- Gao J
- Peterson L
- Nelson B
- Goolsby C
- Chen YH
journal: Am J Clin Pathol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1309/AJCPV8LN5ENMZOVY
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antigens, CD/biosynthesis"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- Cyclin D1/genetics
- Female
- Flow Cytometry
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin Heavy Chains/genetics
- Immunohistochemistry
- Immunophenotyping
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Ki-67 Antigen/metabolism
- "Lymphoma, Mantle-Cell/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mitotic Index
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunophenotypic variations in mantle cell lymphoma.
**Authors:** Gao J, Peterson L, Nelson B, Goolsby C, Chen YH
**Journal:** Am J Clin Pathol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1309/AJCPV8LN5ENMZOVY](https://doi.org/10.1309/AJCPV8LN5ENMZOVY)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Pathol. 2009 Nov;132(5):699-706. doi: 10.1309/AJCPV8LN5ENMZOVY.

Immunophenotypic variations in mantle cell lymphoma.

Gao J(1), Peterson L, Nelson B, Goolsby C, Chen YH.

Author information:
(1)Dept of Pathology, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) expresses pan-B-cell antigens and is usually 
CD5+/CD10-/CD23-/FMC7+. In this study, we evaluated 52 patients with confirmed 
diagnoses of MCL and identified variant immunophenotypes in 21 patients (19/48 
classical and 2/4 variant MCLs), including CD5- in 6 (12%) of 52, CD10+ in 4 
(8%) of 50, CD23+ in 10 (21%) of 48, and FMC7- in 4 (11%) of 37 cases. Three 
cases showed variations in 2 antigens, including CD5-/CD23+, CD10+/FMC7-, and 
CD23+/FMC7-; they were all classical MCLs. One blastoid variant MCL was CD23+, 
and one was FMC7-. Evaluation for proliferation index by immunohistochemical 
analysis for Ki-67 demonstrated no significant difference between MCLs with 
variant immunophenotypes and MCLs with typical immunophenotypes. The high 
proliferation index (>60%) was exclusively seen in the blastoid and pleomorphic 
variants. Our results indicate that immunophenotypic variations are common in 
MCL, and recognizing the variability is important for accurate subclassification 
of B-cell lymphoma.

DOI: 10.1309/AJCPV8LN5ENMZOVY
PMID: 19846810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]