---
reference_id: "PMID:34920148"
title: "Prevalence of Sialorrhea Among Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Patients: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Wang Y
- Yang X
- Han Q
- Liu M
- Zhou C
journal: J Pain Symptom Manage
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2021.12.005
keywords:
- "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/complications, epidemiology"
- Humans
- Prevalence
- Quality of Life
- Salivation
- "Sialorrhea/epidemiology, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of Sialorrhea Among Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Patients: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Yang X, Han Q, Liu M, Zhou C
**Journal:** J Pain Symptom Manage (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2021.12.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2021.12.005)

## Content

1. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2022 Apr;63(4):e387-e396. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2021.12.005. Epub 2021 Dec 15.

Prevalence of Sialorrhea Among Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Patients: A 
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Wang Y(1), Yang X(2), Han Q(3), Liu M(2), Zhou C(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, (Y.W., X.Y., M.L.) The Affiliated Hospital of 
Qingdao University, Qingdao, Shandong Province, China. Electronic address: 
inspirit0318@163.com.
(2)Department of Neurology, (Y.W., X.Y., M.L.) The Affiliated Hospital of 
Qingdao University, Qingdao, Shandong Province, China.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, (Q.H.) Xianggong Central Health Center, Linyi, 
Shandong Province, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, (Y.W., X.Y., M.L.) The Affiliated Hospital of 
Qingdao University, Qingdao, Shandong Province, China. Electronic address: 
zhch0532@sina.com.

Comment in
    Neurol Sci. 2023 Sep;44(9):3083-3085. doi: 10.1007/s10072-023-06881-y.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal 
neurodegenerative motor neuron disease (MND), and sialorrhea is a known symptom 
in patients with ALS, which may cause a social embarrassment and discomfort. 
However, people do not pay attention to sialorrhea up to now. This study is 
aimed at conducting a systematic review and meta-analysis of the pooled 
prevalence of sialorrhea in ALS patients all around the world and raising 
awareness of salivation.
METHODS: We searched PubMed and EMBASE databases to obtain the comprehensive 
literatures which reported the prevalence of sialorrhea. We used AHRQ and NOS to 
evaluate the literature quality. Subgroup analyses were performed based on 
screening instruments and severity of sialorrhea. At the meantime, sensitivity 
analyses was also conducted to identify the source of heterogeneity.
RESULTS: A total of 17 eligible studies which included 21 groups of data 
reported prevalence of sialorrhea. The pooled prevalence of sialorrhea among ALS 
patients was 30.8% (95% CI: 20.0%-44.2%). For studies using ALSFRS-R, direct 
questioning, postal survey, and ALSSoL average and ALSFRS-R, the pooled 
prevalence of sialorrhea was 22.7%, 25.8%, 29.8% and 52.0% respectively. 
According to the severity of sialorrhea, the prevalence of mild, moderate, and 
severe sialorrhea were 25.1%, 11.2%, and 10.5%, respectively. And none of the 
studies alone had a significant effect on the overall prevalence of sialorrhea 
after we eliminated each study separately in sensitivity analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: Sialorrhea is a relatively common symptom in ALS patients with a 
comparatively high prevalence. In our study, we found that the prevalence of 
sialorrhea in ALS patients is relatively higher than the results based on direct 
questioning or postal survey. Therefore, we deduced that sialorrhea should be 
evaluated by more complex professional assessment scales to improve the quality 
of life and improve early prognosis of disease.

Copyright © 2021 American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine. Published 
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2021.12.005
PMID: 34920148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]