---
reference_id: "PMID:28515156"
title: Anti-Glomerular Basement Membrane Disease.
authors:
- McAdoo SP
- Pusey CD
journal: Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.2215/CJN.01380217
keywords:
- Animals
- "Anti-Glomerular Basement Membrane Disease/diagnosis, epidemiology, immunology, therapy"
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Autoimmunity
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- "Kidney Glomerulus/drug effects, immunology, pathology"
- Kidney Transplantation
- Plasma Exchange
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Recurrence
- Risk Factors
- Steroids/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-Glomerular Basement Membrane Disease.
**Authors:** McAdoo SP, Pusey CD
**Journal:** Clin J Am Soc Nephrol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.2215/CJN.01380217](https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.01380217)

## Content

1. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017 Jul 7;12(7):1162-1172. doi: 10.2215/CJN.01380217.
Epub 2017 May 17.

Anti-Glomerular Basement Membrane Disease.

McAdoo SP(1), Pusey CD.

Author information:
(1)Renal and Vascular Inflammation Section, Department of Medicine, Imperial
College London, London, United Kingdom.

Anti-glomerular basement membrane (anti-GBM) disease is a rare small vessel
vasculitis that affects the capillary beds of the kidneys and lungs. It is an
archetypic autoimmune disease, caused by the development of directly pathogenic
autoantibodies targeting a well characterized autoantigen expressed in the
basement membranes of these organs, although the inciting events that induce the
autoimmune response are not fully understood. The recent confirmation of spatial
and temporal clustering of cases suggests that environmental factors, including
infection, may trigger disease in genetically susceptible individuals. The
majority of patients develop widespread glomerular crescent formation,
presenting with features of rapidly progressive GN, and 40%-60% will have
concurrent alveolar hemorrhage. Treatment aims to rapidly remove pathogenic
autoantibody, typically with the use of plasma exchange, along with steroids and
cytotoxic therapy to prevent ongoing autoantibody production and tissue
inflammation. Retrospective cohort studies suggest that when this combination of
treatment is started early, the majority of patients will have good renal
outcome, although presentation with oligoanuria, a high proportion of glomerular
crescents, or kidney failure requiring dialysis augur badly for renal prognosis.
Relapse and recurrent disease after kidney transplantation are both uncommon,
although de novo anti-GBM disease after transplantation for Alport syndrome is a
recognized phenomenon. Copresentation with other kidney diseases such as
ANCA-associated vasculitis and membranous nephropathy seems to occur at a higher
frequency than would be expected by chance alone, and in addition atypical
presentations of anti-GBM disease are increasingly reported. These observations
highlight the need for future work to further delineate the immunopathogenic
mechanisms of anti-GBM disease, and how to better refine and improve treatments,
particularly for patients presenting with adverse prognostic factors.

Copyright © 2017 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.01380217
PMCID: PMC5498345
PMID: 28515156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
