---
reference_id: "PMID:25486201"
title: "Juxta-articular joint-capsule mineralization in CD73 deficient mice: similarities to patients with NT5E mutations."
authors:
- Li Q
- Price TP
- Sundberg JP
- Uitto J
journal: Cell Cycle
year: '2014'
doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.943567
keywords:
- "5'-Nucleotidase/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- Calcinosis/metabolism
- "GPI-Linked Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Joint Capsule/metabolism
- Joint Diseases/metabolism
- "Joints/metabolism, pathology"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- Vascular Diseases/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Juxta-articular joint-capsule mineralization in CD73 deficient mice: similarities to patients with NT5E mutations.
**Authors:** Li Q, Price TP, Sundberg JP, Uitto J
**Journal:** Cell Cycle (2014)
**DOI:** [10.4161/15384101.2014.943567](https://doi.org/10.4161/15384101.2014.943567)

## Content

1. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(16):2609-15. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.943567.

Juxta-articular joint-capsule mineralization in CD73 deficient mice: 
similarities to patients with NT5E mutations.

Li Q(1), Price TP, Sundberg JP, Uitto J.

Author information:
(1)a Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology ; Sidney Kimmel Medical 
College; Thomas Jefferson University ; Philadelphia , PA USA.

Arterial calcification due to CD73 deficiency (ACDC), an autosomal recessive 
disorder, manifests with extensive mineralization of the lower-extremity 
arteries as well as of hand and foot joint-capsules. This disease is caused by 
mutations in the NT5E gene which encodes CD73, a membrane-bound 
ecto-5'-nucleotidase hydrolyzing 5'-AMP into adenosine and Pi. To gain insight 
into the pathophysiologic details of ACDC, we have characterized a Nt5e(-/-) 
knock out mouse (Nt5e(tm1Jgsc)) deficient in CD73. These mice, when maintained 
on appropriate strain background, demonstrated stiffening of the joints and 
micro CT revealed distinct changes in the thoracic skeletal structure with 
evidence of mineralization at the costochondral junctions. Mineralization was 
also noted in the juxta-articular spaces of the lower extremities as well as of 
ligaments and capsules adjacent to the bony structures. No evidence of vascular 
mineralization was noted either by CT or by microdissection of arteries in the 
thoracic area or in lower extremities. The Nt5e(-/-) mutant mice demonstrated 
significantly increased Pi levels in the serum and significantly reduced PPi 
concentration in the heparinized plasma, resulting in markedly increased Pi/PPi 
ratio, thus creating a pro-mineralization environment. In conclusion, the 
Nt5e(-/-) targeted mutant mice recapitulate some, but not all, features of ACDC 
and serve as a model system to study pharmacologic interventions for ectopic 
mineralization. Collectively, this mouse model deficient in CD73, with other 
targeted mutant mice with vascular mineralization, attests to the presence of a 
complex pro-mineralization/anti-mineralization network that under physiologic 
homeostatic conditions prevents ectopic tissue mineralization.

DOI: 10.4161/15384101.2014.943567
PMCID: PMC4614381
PMID: 25486201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]