---
reference_id: "PMID:38961911"
title: "Craniopharyngioma: A comprehensive review of the clinical presentation, radiological findings, management, and future Perspective."
authors:
- Alboqami MN
- Khalid S Albaiahy A
- Bukhari BH
- Alkhaibary A
- Alharbi A
- Khairy S
- Alassiri AH
- AlSufiani F
- Alkhani A
- Aloraidi A
journal: Heliyon
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e32112
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Craniopharyngioma: A comprehensive review of the clinical presentation, radiological findings, management, and future Perspective.
**Authors:** Alboqami MN, Khalid S Albaiahy A, Bukhari BH, Alkhaibary A, Alharbi A, Khairy S, Alassiri AH, AlSufiani F, Alkhani A, Aloraidi A
**Journal:** Heliyon (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e32112](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e32112)

## Content

1. Heliyon. 2024 May 31;10(11):e32112. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e32112. 
eCollection 2024 Jun 15.

Craniopharyngioma: A comprehensive review of the clinical presentation, 
radiological findings, management, and future Perspective.

Alboqami MN(1)(2), Khalid S Albaiahy A(1)(2), Bukhari BH(1)(2), Alkhaibary 
A(1)(2)(3), Alharbi A(1)(2)(3), Khairy S(1)(2)(3), Alassiri AH(1)(2)(4), 
AlSufiani F(2)(4), Alkhani A(2)(3), Aloraidi A(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, King Abdulaziz Medical City, 
Ministry of National Guard - Health Affairs, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, King Abdulaziz Medical City, 
Ministry of National Guard - Health Affairs, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Craniopharyngioma (CP) is a rare intracranial tumor arising from the epithelial 
remnants of Rathke's pouch, most frequently originating in the sellar/parasellar 
region. Histologically, CP is a benign low-grade tumor (WHO grade 1) with two 
distinct phenotypes: adamantinomatous CP (ACP) and papillary CP (PCP). 
Craniopharyngioma constitutes 1-3% of all primary intracranial tumors in adults 
and 5-10 % of intracranial tumors in children. The annual incidence ranges from 
0.13 to 2 per 100,000 population per year with no gender predilection. Due to 
its unique anatomical locations, the most frequently reported clinical 
manifestations are headache, visual impairment, nausea/vomiting, and endocrine 
deficiencies resulting in sexual dysfunction in adults and growth failure in 
children. Growth hormone deficiency is the most predominant endocrinological 
disturbance associated with craniopharyngioma. Computed tomography (CT) is gold 
standard to detect calcifications in CP tissue (found in 90 % of these tumors). 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) further characterizes craniopharyngiomas and 
helps to narrow down the differential diagnoses. In almost all craniopharyngioma 
cases, surgery is indicated to: establish the diagnosis, relieve mass-related 
symptoms, and remove as much tumor as is safely possible. Recent neurosurgical 
technical advances, including innovative surgical approaches, detailed 
radiotherapy protocols, targeted therapy, replacement of lost hormonal functions 
and quality of life all have the potential to improve the outcome of patients 
with craniopharyngioma. In this article, we present extensive literature on 
craniopharyngioma clinical presentation, radiological findings, management, and 
future prospective. The present article helps to identify further research areas 
that set the basis for the management of such a complex tumor.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e32112
PMCID: PMC11219339
PMID: 38961911

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.