---
reference_id: "PMID:37555011"
title: "The genotype-phenotype correlations of the CACNA1A-related neurodevelopmental disorders: a small case series and literature reviews."
authors:
- Kessi M
- Chen B
- Pang N
- Yang L
- Peng J
- He F
- Yin F
journal: Front Mol Neurosci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2023.1222321
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The genotype-phenotype correlations of the CACNA1A-related neurodevelopmental disorders: a small case series and literature reviews.
**Authors:** Kessi M, Chen B, Pang N, Yang L, Peng J, He F, Yin F
**Journal:** Front Mol Neurosci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnmol.2023.1222321](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnmol.2023.1222321)

## Content

1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2023 Jul 24;16:1222321. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2023.1222321. 
eCollection 2023.

The genotype-phenotype correlations of the CACNA1A-related neurodevelopmental 
disorders: a small case series and literature reviews.

Kessi M(1)(2)(3), Chen B(1)(2)(3), Pang N(1)(2)(3), Yang L(1)(2)(3), Peng 
J(1)(2)(3), He F(1)(2)(3), Yin F(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, China.
(2)Hunan Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Center, 
Pediatrics, Changsha, China.
(3)Clinical Research Center for Children's Neurodevelopmental Disabilities of 
Hunan Province, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China.

BACKGROUND: Genotype-phenotype correlations of the CACNA1A-related 
neurodevelopmental disorders such as global developmental delay 
(GDD)/intellectual disability (ID), epileptic encephalopathy (EE), and autism 
spectrum disorder (ASD) are unknown. We aimed to summarize genotype-phenotype 
correlations and potential treatment for CACNA1A-related neurodevelopmental 
disorders.
METHODS: Six children diagnosed with CACNA1A-related neurodevelopmental 
disorders at Xiangya Hospital, Central South University from April 2018 to July 
2021 were enrolled. The PubMed database was systematically searched for all 
reported patients with CACNA1A-related neurodevelopmental disorders until 
February 2023. Thereafter, we divided patients into several groups for 
comparison.
RESULTS: Six patients were recruited from our hospital. Three cases presented 
with epilepsy, five with GDD/ID, five with ataxia, and two with ASD. The 
variants included p.G701R, p.R279C, p.D1644N, p.Y62C, p.L1422Sfs*8, and p. 
R1664Q [two gain-of-function (GOF) and four loss-of-function (LOF) variants]. 
About 187 individuals with GDD/ID harboring 123 variants were found (case series 
plus data from literature). Of those 123 variants, p.A713T and p.R1664* were 
recurrent, 37 were LOF, and 7 were GOF. GOF variants were linked with 
severe-profound GDD/ID while LOF variants were associated with mild-moderate 
GDD/ID (p = 0.001). The p.A713T variant correlated with severe-profound GDD/ID 
(p = 0.003). A total of 130 epileptic patients harboring 83 variants were 
identified. The epileptic manifestations included status epilepticus (n = 64), 
provoked seizures (n = 49), focal seizures (n = 37), EE (n = 29), absence 
seizures (n = 26), and myoclonic seizures (n = 10). About 49 (42.20%) patients 
had controlled seizures while 67 (57.80%) individuals remained with refractory 
seizures. Status epilepticus correlated with variants located on S4, S5, and S6 
(p = 0.000). Among the 83 epilepsy-related variants, 23 were recurrent, 32 were 
LOF, and 11 were GOF. Status epilepticus was linked with GOF variants (p 
= 0.000). LOF variants were associated with absence seizures (p = 0.000). Six 
patients died at an early age (3 months to ≤5 years). We found 18 children with 
ASD. Thirteen variants including recurrent ones were identified in those 18 
cases. GOF changes were more linked to ASD.
CONCLUSION: The p.A713T variant is linked with severe-profound GDD/ID. More than 
half of CACNA1A-related epilepsy is refractory. The most common epileptic 
manifestation is status epilepticus, which correlates with variants located on 
S4, S5, and S6.

Copyright © 2023 Kessi, Chen, Pang, Yang, Peng, He and Yin.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2023.1222321
PMCID: PMC10406136
PMID: 37555011

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.