---
reference_id: "PMID:31683054"
title: "A novel NFKBIA variant substituting serine 36 of IκBα causes immunodeficiency with warts, bronchiectasis and juvenile rheumatoid arthritis in the absence of ectodermal dysplasia."
authors:
- Sogkas G
- Adriawan IR
- Ringshausen FC
- Baumann U
- Schröder C
- Klemann C
- von Hardenberg S
- Schmidt G
- Bernd A
- Jablonka A
- Ernst D
- Schmidt RE
- Atschekzei F
journal: Clin Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2019.108269
keywords:
- Adult
- "Arthritis, Juvenile"
- Azithromycin/therapeutic use
- Bronchiectasis
- Cell Proliferation
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- Ectodermal Dysplasia
- Gain of Function Mutation/genetics
- Gentamicins/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Leukocytes, Mononuclear/immunology"
- Male
- "Meningitis, Bacterial/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- NF-KappaB Inhibitor alpha/genetics
- Neisseria meningitidis/physiology
- Papillomaviridae/physiology
- Pedigree
- "Pseudomonas Infections/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Pseudomonas aeruginosa/physiology
- "Virus Diseases/diagnosis, immunology"
- Warts
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel NFKBIA variant substituting serine 36 of IκBα causes immunodeficiency with warts, bronchiectasis and juvenile rheumatoid arthritis in the absence of ectodermal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Sogkas G, Adriawan IR, Ringshausen FC, Baumann U, Schröder C, Klemann C, von Hardenberg S, Schmidt G, Bernd A, Jablonka A, Ernst D, Schmidt RE, Atschekzei F
**Journal:** Clin Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clim.2019.108269](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clim.2019.108269)

## Content

1. Clin Immunol. 2020 Jan;210:108269. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2019.108269. Epub 2019 
Nov 1.

A novel NFKBIA variant substituting serine 36 of IκBα causes immunodeficiency 
with warts, bronchiectasis and juvenile rheumatoid arthritis in the absence of 
ectodermal dysplasia.

Sogkas G(1), Adriawan IR(2), Ringshausen FC(3), Baumann U(4), Schröder C(2), 
Klemann C(4), von Hardenberg S(5), Schmidt G(5), Bernd A(5), Jablonka A(2), 
Ernst D(2), Schmidt RE(2), Atschekzei F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Hannover Medical School, 
Hannover, Germany. Electronic address: sogkas.georgios@mh-hannover.de.
(2)Department of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Hannover Medical School, 
Hannover, Germany.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany; Biomedical Research in End-stage and Obstructive Lung Disease (BREATH), 
German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Hannover, Germany.
(4)Department of Pediatric Pneumology, Allergy and Neonatology, Hannover Medical 
School, Hannover, Germany.
(5)Depertment of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical University, Hannover, Germany.

Genetic studies have led to identification of an increasing number of monogenic 
primary immunodeficiency disorders. Monoallelic pathogenic gain-of-function 
(GOF) variants in NFKBIA, the gene encoding IκBα, result in an immunodeficiency 
disorder, typically accompanied by anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (EDA). So 
far, 14 patients with immunodeficiency due to NFKBIA GOF mutations have been 
reported. In this study we report three patients from the same family with 
immunodeficiency, presenting with recurrent respiratory tract infections, 
bronchiectasis and viral skin conditions due to a novel pathogenic NFKBIA 
variant (c.106 T > G, p.Ser36Ala), which results in reduced IκBα degradation. 
Immunological investigations revealed inadequate antibody responses against 
vaccine antigens, despite hypergammaglobulinemia. Interestingly, none of the 
studied patients displayed features of EDA. Therefore, missense NFKBIA variants 
substituting serine 36 of IκBα, differ from the rest of pathogenic GOF NFKBIA 
variants in that they cause combined immunodeficiency, even in the absence of 
EDA.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2019.108269
PMID: 31683054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no conflicts of interest.