---
reference_id: "PMID:35781866"
title: Predictive prognostic value of glomerular C3 deposition in IgA nephropathy.
authors:
- Xie M
- Zhu Y
- Wang X
- Ren J
- Guo H
- Huang B
- Wang S
- Wang P
- Liu Y
- Liu Y
- Zhang J
journal: J Nephrol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s40620-022-01363-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predictive prognostic value of glomerular C3 deposition in IgA nephropathy.
**Authors:** Xie M, Zhu Y, Wang X, Ren J, Guo H, Huang B, Wang S, Wang P, Liu Y, Liu Y, Zhang J
**Journal:** J Nephrol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40620-022-01363-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40620-022-01363-4)

## Content

1. J Nephrol. 2023 Mar;36(2):495-505. doi: 10.1007/s40620-022-01363-4. Epub 2022 
Jul 4.

Predictive prognostic value of glomerular C3 deposition in IgA nephropathy.

Xie M(1)(2), Zhu Y(1)(2), Wang X(1)(2), Ren J(1)(2), Guo H(1)(2), Huang B(1)(2), 
Wang S(1)(2), Wang P(1)(2), Liu Y(1)(2), Liu Y(1)(2), Zhang J(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.
(2)Research Institute of Nephrology, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, 
China.
(3)Department of Nephrology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China. fcczhangjj1@zzu.edu.cn.
(4)Research Institute of Nephrology, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, 
China. fcczhangjj1@zzu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: IgAN is the most common primary glomerulonephritis worldwide. 
However, the pathogenesis of IgAN remains unknown. Currently, there is evidence 
that C3 deposition plays a role in disease development. This study aimed to 
investigate clinical, pathological features, and prognosis of adult IgAN 
patients with C3 deposition, as well as explore the role of complement 
activation in disease progression.
METHODS: A total of 821 patients with biopsy-proven IgAN were included in this 
study. Patients were divided into three different groups according to their C3 
deposition intensity. Clinical and pathological characteristics were compared 
between groups. Logistic analysis was used to estimate the relationship between 
C3 deposition and the Oxford scoring system. Univariate and multivariate Cox 
proportional hazard regression models were used to analyze the effect of the 
presence of C3 deposits on the prognosis of patients with IgA nephropathy. 
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis was used to evaluate the cumulative incidence of 
renal progression between groups.
RESULTS: Patients with C3 deposition exhibited more severe clinical and 
pathological features and had a higher score according to the Oxford scoring 
system. With the increasing intensity of C3 deposition, patients present more 
hematuria, crescents, heavier interstitial inflammatory cell infiltration and a 
higher score on segmental sclerosis lesions. Logistic regression identified a 
positive relationship between C3 deposition and histopathology. Univariate and 
multivariate Cox regression indicated that C3 deposition was an independent risk 
factor for IgAN severity. The Kaplan-Meier survival curves indicated that 
patients with positive C3 deposition had a worse prognosis compared to those 
without C3 deposition.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with positive glomerular C3 deposition presented with more 
severe clinical and histopathological characteristics and a higher score on the 
Oxford scoring system. With the increasing intensity of C3 deposition, IgAN 
patients were more likely to present with high level of microscopic hematuria, 
fibrous crescents, interstitial inflammatory cell infiltration, and a higher 
score on segmental sclerosis lesions. C3 deposition at the time of renal biopsy 
is likely an independent risk factor for IgA nephropathy severity and 
progression.

© 2022. The Author(s) under exclusive licence to Italian Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1007/s40620-022-01363-4
PMID: 35781866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]