---
reference_id: "PMID:38607364"
title: Proteogenomic Characterization Reveals Estrogen Signaling as a Target for Never-Smoker Lung Adenocarcinoma Patients without EGFR or ALK Alterations.
authors:
- Park SJ
- Ju S
- Goh SH
- Yoon BH
- Park JL
- Kim JH
- Lee S
- Lee SJ
- Kwon Y
- Lee W
- Park KC
- Lee GK
- Park SY
- Kim S
- Kim SY
- Han JY
- Lee C
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-23-1551
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Adenocarcinoma of Lung/genetics, drug therapy, pathology, metabolism"
- "Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- "ErbB Receptors/genetics, metabolism"
- Estrogens/metabolism
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, drug therapy, metabolism, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Non-Smokers/statistics & numerical data"
- Prognosis
- Proteogenomics/methods
- Signal Transduction/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proteogenomic Characterization Reveals Estrogen Signaling as a Target for Never-Smoker Lung Adenocarcinoma Patients without EGFR or ALK Alterations.
**Authors:** Park SJ, Ju S, Goh SH, Yoon BH, Park JL, Kim JH, Lee S, Lee SJ, Kwon Y, Lee W, Park KC, Lee GK, Park SY, Kim S, Kim SY, Han JY, Lee C
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-23-1551](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-23-1551)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 2024 May 2;84(9):1491-1503. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-23-1551.

Proteogenomic Characterization Reveals Estrogen Signaling as a Target for
Never-Smoker Lung Adenocarcinoma Patients without EGFR or ALK Alterations.

Park SJ(#)(1)(2), Ju S(#)(3), Goh SH(#)(4), Yoon BH(#)(1)(5), Park JL(1), Kim
JH(1), Lee S(3)(6), Lee SJ(4), Kwon Y(3), Lee W(4), Park KC(1)(2), Lee GK(4),
Park SY(4), Kim S(4), Kim SY(1)(2)(5), Han JY(4), Lee C(#)(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon, Republic
of Korea.
(2)Department of Bioscience, University of Science and Technology (UST),
Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(3)Chemical and Biological Integrative Research Center, Korea Institute of
Science and Technology, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)National Cancer Center, Goyang, Republic of Korea.
(5)Korea Bioinformation Center (KOBIC), Korea Research Institute of Bioscience
and Biotechnology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(6)Division of Bio-Medical Science and Technology, KIST School, University of
Science and Technology, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(#)Contributed equally

Never-smoker lung adenocarcinoma (NSLA) is prevalent in Asian populations,
particularly in women. EGFR mutations and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)
fusions are major genetic alterations observed in NSLA, and NSLA with these
alterations have been well studied and can be treated with targeted therapies.
To provide insights into the molecular profile of NSLA without EGFR and ALK
alterations (NENA), we selected 141 NSLA tissues and performed proteogenomic
characterization, including whole genome sequencing (WGS), transcriptomic,
methylation EPIC array, total proteomic, and phosphoproteomic analyses. Forty
patients with NSLA harboring EGFR and ALK alterations and seven patients with
NENA with microsatellite instability were excluded. Genome analysis revealed
that TP53 (25%), KRAS (22%), and SETD2 (11%) mutations and ROS1 fusions (14%)
were the most frequent genetic alterations in NENA patients. Proteogenomic
impact analysis revealed that STK11 and ERBB2 somatic mutations had broad
effects on cancer-associated genes in NENA. DNA copy number alteration analysis
identified 22 prognostic proteins that influenced transcriptomic and proteomic
changes. Gene set enrichment analysis revealed estrogen signaling as the key
pathway activated in NENA. Increased estrogen signaling was associated with
proteogenomic alterations, such as copy number deletions in chromosomes 14 and
21, STK11 mutation, and DNA hypomethylation of LLGL2 and ST14. Finally,
saracatinib, an Src inhibitor, was identified as a potential drug for targeting
activated estrogen signaling in NENA and was experimentally validated in vitro.
Collectively, this study enhanced our understanding of NENA NSLA by elucidating
the proteogenomic landscape and proposed saracatinib as a potential treatment
for this patient population that lacks effective targeted therapies.
SIGNIFICANCE: The proteogenomic landscape in never-smoker lung cancer without
known driver mutations reveals prognostic proteins and enhanced estrogen
signaling that can be targeted as a potential therapeutic strategy to improve
patient outcomes.

©2024 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-23-1551
PMID: 38607364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
