---
reference_id: "PMID:25266678"
title: Autologous antibodies to outer retina in acute zonal occult outer retinopathy.
authors:
- Tagami M
- Matsumiya W
- Imai H
- Kusuhara S
- Honda S
- Azumi A
journal: Jpn J Ophthalmol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s10384-014-0347-z
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Animals
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Autoantigens/immunology
- "Autoimmune Diseases/diagnosis, immunology, physiopathology"
- "Blotting, Western"
- Child
- "Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel"
- Electroretinography
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Scotoma/diagnosis, immunology, physiopathology"
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Visual Fields/physiology
- White Dot Syndromes
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autologous antibodies to outer retina in acute zonal occult outer retinopathy.
**Authors:** Tagami M, Matsumiya W, Imai H, Kusuhara S, Honda S, Azumi A
**Journal:** Jpn J Ophthalmol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10384-014-0347-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10384-014-0347-z)

## Content

1. Jpn J Ophthalmol. 2014 Nov;58(6):462-72. doi: 10.1007/s10384-014-0347-z. Epub
2014 Oct 1.

Autologous antibodies to outer retina in acute zonal occult outer retinopathy.

Tagami M(1), Matsumiya W, Imai H, Kusuhara S, Honda S, Azumi A.

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmology Department, Kobe Kaisei Hospital, 3-11-15 Shinoharakita-Machi,
Nada-Ku, Kobe, Japan, mizuki1979feb@yahoo.co.jp.

PURPOSE: Our aim was to use molecular biological methods to study evidence of
autoimmune disease in five patients with acute zonal occult outer retinopathy
(AZOOR).
METHODS: Ophthalmologic data and sera were collected from all patients, who
underwent visual field (VF) examination, optical coherence tomography (OCT), and
multifocal electroretinogram (mfERG) recording. Serum was prepared from each
patient's blood and analyzed for antiretinal antibody activity using
immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis on mouse and human retinas. We
also searched for antigen proteins using mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: Symptoms were blurred vision in three patients and VF defects in two;
all had enlargement of the Mariotte blind spot by VF testing. OCT findings in
areas corresponding to the scotoma revealed disruptions of junction borders
between inner and outer segment lines. mfERGs amplitudes were reduced in each
corresponding scotoma area. Immunohistochemical serum staining revealed the
target antigen was present in all photoreceptors of the mouse sensory retina.
Western blot analysis using patient serum samples revealed some possible
candidate antigens. Mass spectrometry could not determine the causative antigen;
however, a list of candidates was discovered.
CONCLUSION: We determined that AZOOR could be an autoimmune disease. All AZOOR
patients tested using molecular biological methods had antiretinal antigens.

DOI: 10.1007/s10384-014-0347-z
PMID: 25266678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
