---
reference_id: PMID:34112038
title: Therapies in preclinical and clinical development for Angelman syndrome.
authors:
- Markati T
- Duis J
- Servais L
journal: Expert Opin Investig Drugs
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/13543784.2021.1939674
keywords:
- "Angelman Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- Animals
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy/methods
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- Humans
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapies in preclinical and clinical development for Angelman syndrome.
**Authors:** Markati T, Duis J, Servais L
**Journal:** Expert Opin Investig Drugs (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13543784.2021.1939674](https://doi.org/10.1080/13543784.2021.1939674)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2021 Jul;30(7):709-720. doi: 
10.1080/13543784.2021.1939674. Epub 2021 Jun 28.

Therapies in preclinical and clinical development for Angelman syndrome.

Markati T(1)(2), Duis J(3), Servais L(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)MDUK Oxford Neuromuscular Center, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)Section of Genetics & Inherited Metabolic Disease, Department of Pediatrics, 
Children's Hospital Colorado, University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, CO, USA.
(4)Division of Child Neurology, Centre De Références Des Maladies 
Neuromusculaires, Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Liège & 
University of Liège, Belgium.

Introduction: Angelman syndrome is a rare genetic neurodevelopmental disorder, 
caused by deficiency or abnormal function of the maternal ubiquitin 
protein-ligase E3A, known as UBE3A, in the central nervous system. There is no 
disease-modifying treatment available, but the therapeutic pipeline of Angelman 
syndrome includes at least 15 different approaches at preclinical or clinical 
development. In the coming years, several clinical trials will be enrolling 
patients, which prompted this comprehensive review.Areas covered: We summarize 
and critically review the different therapeutic approaches. Some approaches 
attempt to restore the missing or nonfunctional UBE3A protein in the neurons via 
gene replacement or enzyme replacement therapies. Other therapies aim to induce 
expression of the normal paternal copy of the UBE3A gene by targeting a long 
non-coding RNA, the UBE3A-ATS, which interferes with its own expression. Another 
therapeutic category includes compounds that target molecular pathways and 
effector proteins known to be involved in Angelman syndrome 
pathophysiology.Expert opinion: We believe that by 2022-2023, more than five 
disease-modifying treatments will be simultaneously at clinical testing. 
However, the are several challenges with regards to safety and efficacy, which 
need to be addressed. Additionally, there is still a significant unmet need for 
clinical trial readiness.

DOI: 10.1080/13543784.2021.1939674
PMID: 34112038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]