---
reference_id: "PMID:35628171"
title: Ganglioside GM3 Synthase Deficiency in Mouse Models and Human Patients.
authors:
- Inamori KI
- Inokuchi JI
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms23105368
keywords:
- Animals
- Deafness/enzymology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Epilepsy/enzymology
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Sialyltransferases/deficiency, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ganglioside GM3 Synthase Deficiency in Mouse Models and Human Patients.
**Authors:** Inamori KI, Inokuchi JI
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms23105368](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23105368)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 May 11;23(10):5368. doi: 10.3390/ijms23105368.

Ganglioside GM3 Synthase Deficiency in Mouse Models and Human Patients.

Inamori KI(1), Inokuchi JI(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Glycopathology, Institute of Molecular Biomembrane and
Glycobiology, Tohoku Medical and Pharmaceutical University, Sendai 981-8558,
Miyagi, Japan.
(2)Forefront Research Center, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University,
Toyonaka 560-0043, Osaka, Japan.

Gangliosides (glycosphingolipids containing one or more sialic acids) are highly
expressed in neural tissues in vertebrates, and four species (GM1a, GD1a, GD1b,
GT1b) are predominant in mammalian brains. GM3 is the precursor of each of these
four species and is the major ganglioside in many nonneural tissues. GM3
synthase (GM3S), encoded by ST3GAL5 gene in humans, is a sialyltransferase
responsible for synthesis of GM3 from its precursor, lactosylceramide. ST3GAL5
mutations cause an autosomal recessive form of severe infantile-onset
neurological disease characterized by progressive microcephaly, intellectual
disability, dyskinetic movements, blindness, deafness, intractable seizures, and
pigment changes. Some of these clinical features are consistently present in
patients with ST3GAL5 mutations, whereas others have variable expression. GM3S
knockout (KO) mice have deafness and enhanced insulin sensitivity, but otherwise
do not display the above-described neurological defects reported in ST3GAL5
patients. The authors present an overview of physiological functions and
pathological aspects of gangliosides based on findings from studies of GM3S KO
mice and discuss differential phenotypes of GM3S KO mice versus human
GM3S-deficiency patients.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23105368
PMCID: PMC9141422
PMID: 35628171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
financial interests or personal relationships that could influence the findings
described in this article.
