---
reference_id: "PMID:18752446"
title: Twenty-four novel mutations identified in a cohort of 85 patients by direct sequencing of the SLC3A1 and SLC7A9 cystinuria genes.
authors:
- Di Perna M
- Louizou E
- Fischetti L
- Dedoussis GV
- Stanziale P
- Michelakakis H
- Zelante L
- Pras E
- Bisceglia L
journal: Genet Test
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1089/gte.2007.0113
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Transport Systems, Basic/genetics"
- "Amino Acid Transport Systems, Neutral/genetics"
- Cohort Studies
- Cystinuria/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Humans
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Twenty-four novel mutations identified in a cohort of 85 patients by direct sequencing of the SLC3A1 and SLC7A9 cystinuria genes.
**Authors:** Di Perna M, Louizou E, Fischetti L, Dedoussis GV, Stanziale P, Michelakakis H, Zelante L, Pras E, Bisceglia L
**Journal:** Genet Test (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1089/gte.2007.0113](https://doi.org/10.1089/gte.2007.0113)

## Content

1. Genet Test. 2008 Sep;12(3):351-5. doi: 10.1089/gte.2007.0113.

Twenty-four novel mutations identified in a cohort of 85 patients by direct
sequencing of the SLC3A1 and SLC7A9 cystinuria genes.

Di Perna M(1), Louizou E, Fischetti L, Dedoussis GV, Stanziale P, Michelakakis
H, Zelante L, Pras E, Bisceglia L.

Author information:
(1)Servizio di Genetica Medica, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.

Mutations in the SLC3A1 and SLC7A9 genes cause cystinuria (OMIM 220100), an
autosomal recessive disorder of amino acid transport and reabsorption in the
proximal renal tubule and in the epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract.
In an attempt to characterize the molecular defect in the SLC3A1 and SLC7A9
genes, we analyzed a cohort of 85 unrelated subjects clinically diagnosed as
affected by cystinuria on the basis of stone formation, prevalently of Italian
and Greek origin. Analysis of all coding region and exon-intron junctions of the
SLC3A1 and SLC7A9 genes by using direct sequencing method allowed us to identify
62 different mutations in 83 out of 85 patients accounting for 90.5% of all
affected chromosomes. Twenty-four out of 62 are novel mutations, 9 in SLC3A1 and
15 in SLC7A9. In conclusion, this report expands the spectrum of SLC3A1 and
SLC7A9 mutations and confirms the heterogeneity of this disorder.

DOI: 10.1089/gte.2007.0113
PMID: 18752446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
