---
reference_id: "PMID:18371931"
title: "Loss of nephrocystin-3 function can cause embryonic lethality, Meckel-Gruber-like syndrome, situs inversus, and renal-hepatic-pancreatic dysplasia."
authors:
- Bergmann C
- Fliegauf M
- Brüchle NO
- Frank V
- Olbrich H
- Kirschner J
- Schermer B
- Schmedding I
- Kispert A
- Kränzlin B
- Nürnberg G
- Becker C
- Grimm T
- Girschick G
- Lynch SA
- Kelehan P
- Senderek J
- Neuhaus TJ
- Stallmach T
- Zentgraf H
- Nürnberg P
- Gretz N
- Lo C
- Lienkamp S
- Schäfer T
- Walz G
- Benzing T
- Zerres K
- Omran H
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.02.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of nephrocystin-3 function can cause embryonic lethality, Meckel-Gruber-like syndrome, situs inversus, and renal-hepatic-pancreatic dysplasia.
**Authors:** Bergmann C, Fliegauf M, Brüchle NO, Frank V, Olbrich H, Kirschner J, Schermer B, Schmedding I, Kispert A, Kränzlin B, Nürnberg G, Becker C, Grimm T, Girschick G, Lynch SA, Kelehan P, Senderek J, Neuhaus TJ, Stallmach T, Zentgraf H, Nürnberg P, Gretz N, Lo C, Lienkamp S, Schäfer T, Walz G, Benzing T, Zerres K, Omran H
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.02.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.02.017)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Apr;82(4):959-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.02.017. Epub 
2008 Mar 27.

Loss of nephrocystin-3 function can cause embryonic lethality, 
Meckel-Gruber-like syndrome, situs inversus, and renal-hepatic-pancreatic 
dysplasia.

Bergmann C(1), Fliegauf M, Brüchle NO, Frank V, Olbrich H, Kirschner J, Schermer 
B, Schmedding I, Kispert A, Kränzlin B, Nürnberg G, Becker C, Grimm T, Girschick 
G, Lynch SA, Kelehan P, Senderek J, Neuhaus TJ, Stallmach T, Zentgraf H, 
Nürnberg P, Gretz N, Lo C, Lienkamp S, Schäfer T, Walz G, Benzing T, Zerres K, 
Omran H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, RWTH Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany. 
cbergmann@ukaachen.de

Many genetic diseases have been linked to the dysfunction of primary cilia, 
which occur nearly ubiquitously in the body and act as solitary cellular 
mechanosensory organelles. The list of clinical manifestations and affected 
tissues in cilia-related disorders (ciliopathies) such as nephronophthisis is 
broad and has been attributed to the wide expression pattern of ciliary 
proteins. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms leading to 
this dramatic diversity of phenotypes. We recently reported hypomorphic NPHP3 
mutations in children and young adults with isolated nephronophthisis and 
associated hepatic fibrosis or tapetoretinal degeneration. Here, we chose a 
combinatorial approach in mice and humans to define the phenotypic spectrum of 
NPHP3/Nphp3 mutations and the role of the nephrocystin-3 protein. We demonstrate 
that the pcy mutation generates a hypomorphic Nphp3 allele that is responsible 
for the cystic kidney disease phenotype, whereas complete loss of Nphp3 function 
results in situs inversus, congenital heart defects, and embryonic lethality in 
mice. In humans, we show that NPHP3 mutations can cause a broad clinical 
spectrum of early embryonic patterning defects comprising situs inversus, 
polydactyly, central nervous system malformations, structural heart defects, 
preauricular fistulas, and a wide range of congenital anomalies of the kidney 
and urinary tract (CAKUT). On the functional level, we show that nephrocystin-3 
directly interacts with inversin and can inhibit like inversin canonical Wnt 
signaling, whereas nephrocystin-3 deficiency leads in Xenopus laevis to typical 
planar cell polarity defects, suggesting a role in the control of canonical and 
noncanonical (planar cell polarity) Wnt signaling.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.02.017
PMCID: PMC2427297
PMID: 18371931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]