---
reference_id: "PMID:29995837"
title: "Diagnosis and management of Cornelia de Lange syndrome: first international consensus statement."
authors:
- Kline AD
- Moss JF
- Selicorni A
- Bisgaard AM
- Deardorff MA
- Gillett PM
- Ishman SL
- Kerr LM
- Levin AV
- Mulder PA
- Ramos FJ
- Wierzba J
- Ajmone PF
- Axtell D
- Blagowidow N
- Cereda A
- Costantino A
- Cormier-Daire V
- FitzPatrick D
- Grados M
- Groves L
- Guthrie W
- Huisman S
- Kaiser FJ
- Koekkoek G
- Levis M
- Mariani M
- McCleery JP
- Menke LA
- Metrena A
- "O'Connor J"
- Oliver C
- Pie J
- Piening S
- Potter CJ
- Quaglio AL
- Redeker E
- Richman D
- Rigamonti C
- Shi A
- Tümer Z
- Van Balkom IDC
- Hennekam RC
journal: Nat Rev Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41576-018-0031-0
keywords:
- "De Lange Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- Genetic Association Studies
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and management of Cornelia de Lange syndrome: first international consensus statement.
**Authors:** Kline AD, Moss JF, Selicorni A, Bisgaard AM, Deardorff MA, Gillett PM, Ishman SL, Kerr LM, Levin AV, Mulder PA, Ramos FJ, Wierzba J, Ajmone PF, Axtell D, Blagowidow N, Cereda A, Costantino A, Cormier-Daire V, FitzPatrick D, Grados M, Groves L, Guthrie W, Huisman S, Kaiser FJ, Koekkoek G, Levis M, Mariani M, McCleery JP, Menke LA, Metrena A, O'Connor J, Oliver C, Pie J, Piening S, Potter CJ, Quaglio AL, Redeker E, Richman D, Rigamonti C, Shi A, Tümer Z, Van Balkom IDC, Hennekam RC
**Journal:** Nat Rev Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41576-018-0031-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41576-018-0031-0)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Genet. 2018 Oct;19(10):649-666. doi: 10.1038/s41576-018-0031-0.

Diagnosis and management of Cornelia de Lange syndrome: first international
consensus statement.

Kline AD(1), Moss JF(2), Selicorni A(3), Bisgaard AM(4), Deardorff MA(5),
Gillett PM(6), Ishman SL(7), Kerr LM(8), Levin AV(9), Mulder PA(10), Ramos
FJ(11), Wierzba J(12), Ajmone PF(13), Axtell D(14), Blagowidow N(15), Cereda
A(16), Costantino A(13), Cormier-Daire V(17), FitzPatrick D(18), Grados M(19),
Groves L(2), Guthrie W(20), Huisman S(21), Kaiser FJ(22), Koekkoek G(23), Levis
M(24), Mariani M(25), McCleery JP(20), Menke LA(21), Metrena A(26), O'Connor
J(27), Oliver C(2), Pie J(11), Piening S(10), Potter CJ(28), Quaglio AL(29),
Redeker E(30), Richman D(31), Rigamonti C(13), Shi A(32), Tümer Z(4), Van Balkom
IDC(10)(33), Hennekam RC(34).

Author information:
(1)Harvey Institute of Human Genetics, Greater Baltimore Medical Centre,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Cerebra Centre for Neurodevelopmental Disorders, School of Psychology,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, Presidio S. Femro, ASST Lariana, Como, Italy.
(4)Kennedy Centre, Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine,
Rigshospitalet, Glostrup, Denmark.
(5)Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, and
Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)GI Department, Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.
(7)Departments of Otolaryngology and Pulmonary Medicine, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Centre, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(8)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Paediatrics, University of
Utah Medical Centre, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(9)Paediatric Ophthalmology and Ocular Genetics, Wills Eye Hospital, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(10)Jonx Department of Youth Mental Health and Autism, Lentis Psychiatric
Institute, Groningen, Netherlands.
(11)Unit of Clinical Genetics, Paediatrics, University Clinic Hospital 'Lozano
Blesa' CIBERER-GCV02 and ISS-Aragón, Department of Pharmacology-Physiology and
Paediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain.
(12)Department of Paediatrics, Haematology and Oncology, Department of General
Nursery, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland.
(13)Child and Adolescent Neuropsychiatric Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(14)CdLS Foundation UK and Ireland, The Tower, North Stifford, Grays, Essex, UK.
(15)Harvey Institute of Human Genetics, Greater Baltimore Medical Center,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(16)Department of Paediatrics, ASST Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy.
(17)Department of Genetics, INSERM UMR1163, Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne
Paris Cité, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.
(18)Human Genetics Unit, Medical and Developmental Genetics, University of
Edinburgh Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.
(19)Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, John Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(20)Centre for Autism Research, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(21)Department of Paediatrics, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(22)Section for Functional Genetics, Institute for Human Genetics, University of
Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(23)CdLS World Federation's, Hertogenbosch, Netherlands.
(24)Wicomico County Board of Education, Salisbury, MD, USA.
(25)Clinical Paediatric Genetics Unit, Paediatrics Clinics, MBBM Foundation, S.
Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy.
(26)Danbury Public Schools, Danbury, CT, USA.
(27)Kennedy Krieger Institute, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD,
USA.
(28)Department of Gastroenterology, Nationwide Children's, Columbus, OH, USA.
(29)Genética Médica, Hospital del Este, Eva Perón, Tucumán, Argentina.
(30)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(31)Department of Educational Psychology and Leadership, Texas Tech University,
Lubbock, TX, USA.
(32)The Sidney Kimmel Medical College of Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(33)Rob Giel Research Centre, Department of Psychiatry, University Medical
Centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
(34)Department of Paediatrics, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, Netherlands. r.c.hennekam@amc.uva.nl.

Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is an archetypical genetic syndrome that is
characterized by intellectual disability, well-defined facial features, upper
limb anomalies and atypical growth, among numerous other signs and symptoms. It
is caused by variants in any one of seven genes, all of which have a structural
or regulatory function in the cohesin complex. Although recent advances in
next-generation sequencing have improved molecular diagnostics, marked
heterogeneity exists in clinical and molecular diagnostic approaches and care
practices worldwide. Here, we outline a series of recommendations that document
the consensus of a group of international experts on clinical diagnostic
criteria, both for classic CdLS and non-classic CdLS phenotypes, molecular
investigations, long-term management and care planning.

DOI: 10.1038/s41576-018-0031-0
PMCID: PMC7136165
PMID: 29995837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
