---
reference_id: "PMID:16845398"
title: "Mutations in the gene encoding the 3'-5' DNA exonuclease TREX1 cause Aicardi-Goutières syndrome at the AGS1 locus."
authors:
- Crow YJ
- Hayward BE
- Parmar R
- Robins P
- Leitch A
- Ali M
- Black DN
- van Bokhoven H
- Brunner HG
- Hamel BC
- Corry PC
- Cowan FM
- Frints SG
- Klepper J
- Livingston JH
- Lynch SA
- Massey RF
- Meritet JF
- Michaud JL
- Ponsot G
- Voit T
- Lebon P
- Bonthron DT
- Jackson AP
- Barnes DE
- Lindahl T
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1038/ng1845
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- DNA/genetics
- "Exodeoxyribonucleases/deficiency, genetics"
- "Heredodegenerative Disorders, Nervous System/enzymology, genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- "Immunity, Innate"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Phosphoproteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Proteins/genetics
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the gene encoding the 3'-5' DNA exonuclease TREX1 cause Aicardi-Goutières syndrome at the AGS1 locus.
**Authors:** Crow YJ, Hayward BE, Parmar R, Robins P, Leitch A, Ali M, Black DN, van Bokhoven H, Brunner HG, Hamel BC, Corry PC, Cowan FM, Frints SG, Klepper J, Livingston JH, Lynch SA, Massey RF, Meritet JF, Michaud JL, Ponsot G, Voit T, Lebon P, Bonthron DT, Jackson AP, Barnes DE, Lindahl T
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1845](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1845)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2006 Aug;38(8):917-20. doi: 10.1038/ng1845. Epub 2006 Jul 16.

Mutations in the gene encoding the 3'-5' DNA exonuclease TREX1 cause
Aicardi-Goutières syndrome at the AGS1 locus.

Crow YJ(1), Hayward BE, Parmar R, Robins P, Leitch A, Ali M, Black DN, van
Bokhoven H, Brunner HG, Hamel BC, Corry PC, Cowan FM, Frints SG, Klepper J,
Livingston JH, Lynch SA, Massey RF, Meritet JF, Michaud JL, Ponsot G, Voit T,
Lebon P, Bonthron DT, Jackson AP, Barnes DE, Lindahl T.

Author information:
(1)Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Leeds, St. James's
University Hospital, Leeds LS9 7TF, UK. yanickcrow@mac.com

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2006 Aug;38(8):866-7. doi: 10.1038/ng0806-866.

Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS) presents as a severe neurological brain disease
and is a genetic mimic of the sequelae of transplacentally acquired viral
infection. Evidence exists for a perturbation of innate immunity as a primary
pathogenic event in the disease phenotype. Here, we show that TREX1, encoding
the major mammalian 3' --> 5' DNA exonuclease, is the AGS1 gene, and AGS-causing
mutations result in abrogation of TREX1 enzyme activity. Similar loss of
function in the Trex1(-/-) mouse leads to an inflammatory phenotype. Our
findings suggest an unanticipated role for TREX1 in processing or clearing
anomalous DNA structures, failure of which results in the triggering of an
abnormal innate immune response.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1845
PMID: 16845398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
