---
reference_id: "PMID:20556892"
title: TP63-Related Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Sutton VR
- van Bokhoven H
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TP63-Related Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Sutton VR, van Bokhoven H

## Content

1. TP63-Related Disorders.

Sutton VR(1), van Bokhoven H(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2010 Jun 8 [updated 2021 Apr 1].

Author information:
(1)Professor, Department of Molecular and Human Genetics Baylor College of 
Medicine; Texas Children's Hospital Houston, Texas
(2)Professor, Molecular Neurogenetics Department of Human Genetics Radboud 
University Medical Center Nijmegen, the Netherlands

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The TP63-related disorders comprise six overlapping 
phenotypes: Ankyloblepharon-ectodermal defects-cleft lip/palate (AEC) syndrome 
(which includes Rapp-Hodgkin syndrome). Acro-dermo-ungual-lacrimal-tooth (ADULT) 
syndrome. Ectrodactyly, ectodermal dysplasia, cleft lip/palate syndrome 3 
(EEC3). Limb-mammary syndrome. Split-hand/foot malformation type 4 (SHFM4). 
Isolated cleft lip/cleft palate (orofacial cleft 8). Individuals typically have 
varying combinations of ectodermal dysplasia (hypohidrosis, nail dysplasia, 
sparse hair, tooth abnormalities), cleft lip/palate, split-hand/foot 
malformation/syndactyly, lacrimal duct obstruction, hypopigmentation, 
hypoplastic breasts and/or nipples, and hypospadias. Findings associated with a 
single phenotype include ankyloblepharon filiforme adnatum (tissue strands that 
completely or partially fuse the upper and lower eyelids), skin erosions 
especially on the scalp associated with areas of scarring, and alopecia, 
trismus, and excessive freckling.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a TP63-related disorder is established in a 
proband with suggestive findings and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in TP63 
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: A multidisciplinary team of specialists 
in clinical genetics, dermatology, ophthalmology, otolaryngology, audiology, 
dentistry and prosthodontics, plastic surgery, nutrition/gastroenterology, and 
psychology is recommended. Skin erosions are treated with gentle wound care and 
periodic, dilute bleach soaks to prevent secondary infection, and infants with 
severe skin erosions are monitored and treated aggressively for dehydration, 
electrolyte imbalances, malnutrition, and infection. Wigs can be used for sparse 
hair and alopecia; dentures may be considered in early childhood and dental 
implants in the teens or early adulthood. Cleft lip/palate is managed per 
routine protocols; limb malformations are treated with occupational therapy and 
surgery as needed to optimize function. Surveillance: Regular attention to 
dental needs and possible hearing loss.
GENETIC COUNSELING: The TP63-related disorders are inherited in an autosomal 
dominant manner. Approximately 30% of individuals diagnosed with a TP63-related 
disorder have an affected parent. The proportion of individuals with a 
TP63-related disorder caused by a de novo TP63 pathogenic variant is 
approximately 70%. If a parent of the proband is affected and/or is known to 
have the pathogenic variant identified in the proband, the risk to the sibs is 
50%. Once the TP63 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family 
member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20556892