---
reference_id: "PMID:29184105"
title: "Estimating the incubation period of hand, foot and mouth disease for children in different age groups."
authors:
- Yang Z
- Zhang Q
- Cowling BJ
- Lau EHY
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-16705-7
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age Factors
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease Outbreaks
- Female
- "Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease/epidemiology, virology"
- Hong Kong/epidemiology
- Humans
- Infectious Disease Incubation Period
- Male
- Schools
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estimating the incubation period of hand, foot and mouth disease for children in different age groups.
**Authors:** Yang Z, Zhang Q, Cowling BJ, Lau EHY
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-017-16705-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-16705-7)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2017 Nov 28;7(1):16464. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-16705-7.

Estimating the incubation period of hand, foot and mouth disease for children in 
different age groups.

Yang Z(1), Zhang Q(1), Cowling BJ(1), Lau EHY(2).

Author information:
(1)WHO Collaborating Centre for Infectious Disease Epidemiology and Control, 
School of Public Health, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China.
(2)WHO Collaborating Centre for Infectious Disease Epidemiology and Control, 
School of Public Health, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China. ehylau@hku.hk.

Hand, foot and mouth disease (HFMD) is a childhood disease causing large 
outbreaks frequently in Asia and occasionally in Europe and the US. The 
incubation period of HFMD was typically described as about 3-7 days but 
empirical evidence is lacking. In this study, we estimated the incubation period 
of HFMD from school outbreaks in Hong Kong, utilizing information on symptom 
onset and sick absence dates of students diagnosed with HFMD. A total of 99 HFMD 
cases from 12 schools were selected for analysis. We fitted parametric models 
accounting for interval censoring. Based on the best-fitted distributions, the 
estimated median incubation periods were 4.4 (95% CI 3.8-5.1) days, 4.7 (95% CI 
4.5-5.1) days and 5.7 (95% CI 4.6-7.0) days for children in kindergartens, 
primary schools and secondary schools respectively. From the fitted 
distribution, the estimated incubation periods can be longer than 10 days for 
8.8% and 23.2% of the HFMD cases in kindergarten and secondary schools 
respectively. Our results show that the incubation period of HFMD for secondary 
schools students can be longer than the ranges commonly described. An extended 
period of enhanced personal hygiene practice and disinfection of the environment 
may be needed to control outbreaks.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-16705-7
PMCID: PMC5705633
PMID: 29184105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: B.J.C. has received research funding from 
MedImmune Inc. and Sanofi Pasteur, and consults for Crucell N.V. The authors 
report no other potential conflicts of interest.