---
reference_id: "PMID:20943326"
title: "Targeting glutamate mediated excitotoxicity in Huntington's disease: neural progenitors and partial glutamate antagonist--memantine."
authors:
- Anitha M
- Nandhu MS
- Anju TR
- Jes P
- Paulose CS
journal: Med Hypotheses
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2010.09.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting glutamate mediated excitotoxicity in Huntington's disease: neural progenitors and partial glutamate antagonist--memantine.
**Authors:** Anitha M, Nandhu MS, Anju TR, Jes P, Paulose CS
**Journal:** Med Hypotheses (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mehy.2010.09.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mehy.2010.09.003)

## Content

1. Med Hypotheses. 2011 Jan;76(1):138-40. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2010.09.003. Epub 
2010 Oct 12.

Targeting glutamate mediated excitotoxicity in Huntington's disease: neural 
progenitors and partial glutamate antagonist--memantine.

Anitha M(1), Nandhu MS, Anju TR, Jes P, Paulose CS.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neurobiology and Cell Biology Unit, Center for Neuroscience, 
Department of Biotechnology, Cochin University of Science and Technology, Cochin 
682 022, Kerala, India.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a fatal progressive neurodegenerative disorder with 
autosomal dominant inheritance. In humans mutated huntingtin (htt) induces a 
preferential loss of medium spiny neurons (MSN) of the striatum and causes 
motor, cognitive and emotional deficits. One of the proposed cellular mechanism 
underlying medium spiny neurons degeneration is excitotoxic pathways mediated by 
glutamate receptors. The hypothesis proposed is restoration of medium spiny 
neurons in Huntington's disease using neural progenitor cell implantation and 
attenuation of glutamate mediated excitotoxicity using a partial glutamate 
antagonist - Memantine. Memantine can block the NMDA receptors and will prevent 
excess calcium influx into the neurons decreases the vulnerability of medium 
spiny neurons to glutamate mediated excitotoxicity. Neural progenitor cell 
implantation can enhance endogenous neurogenesis process replacing the 
degenerated medium spiny neurons in the striatum. This has immense significance 
in the management of Huntington's disease.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2010.09.003
PMID: 20943326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]