---
reference_id: "PMID:22483252"
title: A general theory of acute and chronic heart failure.
authors:
- MacIver DH
- Dayer MJ
- Harrison AJ
journal: Int J Cardiol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2012.03.093
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Animals
- Cardiac Output/physiology
- Chronic Disease
- "Heart Failure/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Models, Cardiovascular"
- Stroke Volume/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A general theory of acute and chronic heart failure.
**Authors:** MacIver DH, Dayer MJ, Harrison AJ
**Journal:** Int J Cardiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijcard.2012.03.093](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2012.03.093)

## Content

1. Int J Cardiol. 2013 Apr 30;165(1):25-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2012.03.093.
Epub  2012 Apr 6.

A general theory of acute and chronic heart failure.

MacIver DH(1), Dayer MJ, Harrison AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Taunton & Somerset Hospital, Musgrove Park, Taunton
TA1 5DA, UK. david.maciver@tst.nhs.uk

Current concepts of heart failure propose multiple heterogeneous
pathophysiological mechanisms. Recently a theoretical framework for
understanding chronic heart failure was suggested. This paper develops this
framework to include acute heart failure syndromes. We propose that all acute
heart failure syndromes may be understood in terms of a relative fall in left
ventricular stroke volume. The initial compensatory mechanism is frequently a
tachycardia often resulting in a near normal cardiac output. In more severe
forms a fall in cardiac output causes hypotension or cardiogenic shock. In
chronic heart failure the stroke volume and cardiac output is returned to normal
predominantly through ventricular remodeling or dilatation. Ejection fraction is
simply the ratio of stroke volume and end-diastolic volume. The resting stroke
volume is predetermined by the tissue's needs; therefore, if the ejection
fraction changes, the end-diastolic volume must change in a reciprocal manner.
The potential role of the right heart in influencing the presentation of left
heart disease is examined. We propose that acute pulmonary edema occurs when the
right ventricular stroke volume exceeds left ventricular stroke volume leading
to fluid accumulation in the alveoli. The possible role of the right heart in
determining pulmonary hypertension and raised filling pressures in left-sided
heart disease are discussed. Different clinical scenarios are presented to help
clarify these proposed mechanisms and the clinical implications of these
theories are discussed. Finally an alternative definition of heart failure is
proposed.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2012.03.093
PMID: 22483252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
