---
reference_id: "PMID:30296521"
title: "IDH mutation status in a series of 88 head and neck chondrosarcomas: different profile between tumors of the skull base and tumors involving the facial skeleton and the laryngotracheal tract."
authors:
- Tallegas M
- Miquelestorena-Standley É
- Labit-Bouvier C
- Badoual C
- Francois A
- Gomez-Brouchet A
- Aubert S
- Collin C
- Tallet A
- de Pinieux G
journal: Hum Pathol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2018.09.015
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Bone Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Chondrosarcoma/genetics, pathology"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Facial Bones/pathology
- Female
- Humans
- Isocitrate Dehydrogenase/genetics
- Laryngeal Cartilages/pathology
- "Laryngeal Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Skull Base Neoplasms/pathology
- "Tracheal Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IDH mutation status in a series of 88 head and neck chondrosarcomas: different profile between tumors of the skull base and tumors involving the facial skeleton and the laryngotracheal tract.
**Authors:** Tallegas M, Miquelestorena-Standley É, Labit-Bouvier C, Badoual C, Francois A, Gomez-Brouchet A, Aubert S, Collin C, Tallet A, de Pinieux G
**Journal:** Hum Pathol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.humpath.2018.09.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humpath.2018.09.015)

## Content

1. Hum Pathol. 2019 Feb;84:183-191. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2018.09.015. Epub 2018
 Oct 5.

IDH mutation status in a series of 88 head and neck chondrosarcomas: different
profile between tumors of the skull base and tumors involving the facial
skeleton and the laryngotracheal tract.

Tallegas M(1), Miquelestorena-Standley É(2), Labit-Bouvier C(3), Badoual C(4),
Francois A(5), Gomez-Brouchet A(6), Aubert S(7), Collin C(8), Tallet A(8), de
Pinieux G(9).

Author information:
(1)CHRU de Tours, Service d'Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, Tours, France.
(2)CHRU de Tours, Service d'Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, Tours, France;
Université de Tours, Faculté de Médecine, Tours, France.
(3)CHU de Marseille, Service d'Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, Marseille,
France.
(4)Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Service d'Anatomie Pathologique, APHP,
Paris, France; Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris-Cité, Paris, France.
(5)CHU de Rouen, Service d'Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, Rouen, France.
(6)CHU de Toulouse, Service d'Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, Toulouse,
France.
(7)CHU de Lille, Service d'Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, Lille, France.
(8)CHRU de Tours, Plateforme de Génétique Moléculaire des Cancers, Tours,
France.
(9)CHRU de Tours, Service d'Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, Tours, France;
Université de Tours, Faculté de Médecine, Tours, France; Laboratoire d'étude des
sarcomes osseux et remodelage des tissus calcifiés, PhyOS-INSERM UMR 1238,
Faculté de Médecine de Nantes, Université de Nantes, 44034 Nantes cedex 1,
France. Electronic address: depinieux@med.univ-tours.fr.

Chondrosarcomas are rare primary malignant bone tumors that involve the head and
neck region in 1% to 12% of cases. Central conventional chondrosarcoma is the
most common subtype and is associated with isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2
(IDH1 and IDH2) gene mutations in 50% to 60% of cases. We aimed to define the
frequency of IDH1 and IDH2 gene mutations in a multicenter series of 88 cases of
chondrosarcoma of the head and neck, including tumors involving the base of the
skull (n = 30), the facial skeleton (n = 11), and the laryngeal and tracheal
cartilages (n = 47). Petrous bone and cricoid cartilage were the most frequently
involved sites for chondrosarcomas of the skull base and laryngotracheal tract
(43.3% and 31.9%, respectively). Overall, 64.9% of craniofacial chondrosarcomas
featured IDH mutations, with a high rate for skull base tumors (85.7%) but no
IDH mutations in tumors of the facial skeleton. This different mutational
profile could be related to the type of ossification, the bones of the base of
the skull mainly resulting from endochondral ossification, and those of the face
from intramembranous ossification. Conversely, mutation was infrequent in
chondrosarcomas involving the laryngeal and tracheal cartilages (11.8% of 47
cases). Evaluation of IDH mutation status may be a useful diagnostic tool for
bone tumors of the skull base, which are most often assessable with only small
biopsy samples. The low rate of IDH mutations observed in laryngotracheal
chondrosarcomas suggests a different mode of tumorigenesis needing further
exploration.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2018.09.015
PMID: 30296521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
