---
reference_id: "PMID:21540567"
title: Chromosomal variants in klinefelter syndrome.
authors:
- Frühmesser A
- Kotzot D
journal: Sex Dev
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1159/000327324
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chromosomal variants in klinefelter syndrome.
**Authors:** Frühmesser A, Kotzot D
**Journal:** Sex Dev (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000327324](https://doi.org/10.1159/000327324)

## Content

1. Sex Dev. 2011;5(3):109-23. doi: 10.1159/000327324. Epub 2011 Apr 29.

Chromosomal variants in klinefelter syndrome.

Frühmesser A(1), Kotzot D.

Author information:
(1)Division for Human Genetics, Department for Medical Genetics, Molecular and 
Clinical Pharmacology, Innsbruck Medical University, Austria.

Klinefelter syndrome (KS) describes the phenotype of the most common sex 
chromosome abnormality in humans and occurs in one of every 600 newborn males. 
The typical symptoms are a tall stature, narrow shoulders, broad hips, sparse 
body hair, gynecomastia, small testes, absent spermatogenesis, normal to 
moderately reduced Leydig cell function, increased secretion of 
follicle-stimulating hormone, androgen deficiency, and normal to slightly 
decreased verbal intelligence. Apart from that, amongst others, osteoporosis, 
varicose veins, thromboembolic disease, or diabetes mellitus are observed. Some 
of the typical features can be very weakly pronounced so that the affected men 
often receive the diagnosis only at the adulthood by their infertility. With a 
frequency of 4%, KS is described to be the most common genetic reason for male 
infertility. The most widespread karyotype in affected patients is 47,XXY. Apart 
from that, various other karyotypes have been described, including 46,XX in 
males, 47,XXY in females, 47,XX,der(Y), 47,X,der(X),Y, or other numeric sex 
chromosome abnormalities (48,XXXY, 48,XXYY, and 49,XXXXY). The focus of this 
review was to abstract the different phenotypes, which come about by the various 
karyotypes and to compare them to those with a 'normal' KS karyotype. For that 
the patients have been divided into 6 different groups: Klinefelter patients 
with an additional isochromosome Xq, with additional rearrangements on 1 of the 
2 X chromosomes or accordingly on the Y chromosome, as well as XX males and true 
hermaphrodites, 47,XXY females and Klinefelter patients with other numeric sex 
chromosome abnormalities. In the latter, an almost linear increase in height and 
developmental delay was observed. Men with an additional isochromosome Xq show 
infertility and other minor features of 'normal' KS but not an increased height. 
Aside from the infertility, in male patients with other der(X) as well as der(Y) 
rearrangements and in XXY women no specific phenotype is recognizable amongst 
others due to the small number of cases. The phenotype of XX males depends on 
the presence of SRY (sex-determining region Y) and the level of X inactivation 
at which SRY-negative patients are generally rarely observed.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000327324
PMID: 21540567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]