---
reference_id: "PMID:28645928"
title: Molecular mechanisms in cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Dadson K
- Hauck L
- Billia F
journal: Clin Sci (Lond)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1042/CS20160170
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular mechanisms in cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Dadson K, Hauck L, Billia F
**Journal:** Clin Sci (Lond) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1042/CS20160170](https://doi.org/10.1042/CS20160170)

## Content

1. Clin Sci (Lond). 2017 Jul 1;131(13):1375-1392. doi: 10.1042/CS20160170.

Molecular mechanisms in cardiomyopathy.

Dadson K(1), Hauck L(1), Billia F(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Toronto General Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario Canada, 100 College St., 
M5G 1L7.
(2)Toronto General Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario Canada, 100 College St., 
M5G 1L7 phyllis.billia@uhn.ca.
(3)Division of Cardiology, University Health Network (UHN), 200 Elizabeth St., 
Toronto, Ontario Canada, M5G 2C4.
(4)Heart and Stroke Richard Lewar Centre of Excellence, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario Canada 15G 1L7.
(5)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, 1 King's College Circle, 
Toronto, Ontario Canada M5G 1A8.

Cardiomyopathies represent a heterogeneous group of diseases that negatively 
affect heart function. Primary cardiomyopathies specifically target the 
myocardium, and may arise from genetic [hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia (ARVC/D), 
mitochondrial cardiomyopathy] or genetic and acquired [dilated cardiomyopathy 
(DCM), restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM)] etiology. Modern genomics has 
identified mutations that are common in these populations, while in vitro and 
in vivo experimentation with these mutations have provided invaluable insight 
into the molecular mechanisms native to these diseases. For example, increased 
myosin heavy chain (MHC) binding and ATP utilization lead to the 
hypercontractile sarcomere in HCM, while abnormal protein-protein interaction 
and impaired Ca2+ flux underlie the relaxed sarcomere of DCM. Furthermore, 
expanded access to genetic testing has facilitated identification of potential 
risk factors that appear through inheritance and manifest sometimes only in the 
advanced stages of the disease. In this review, we discuss the genetic and 
molecular abnormalities unique to and shared between these primary 
cardiomyopathies and discuss some of the important advances made using more 
traditional basic science experimentation.

© 2017 The Author(s). published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the 
Biochemical Society.

DOI: 10.1042/CS20160170
PMID: 28645928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]