---
reference_id: "PMID:39098175"
title: "Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: A case series."
authors:
- Pandit N
- Neupane D
- Deo KB
journal: Int J Surg Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2024.110117
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: A case series.
**Authors:** Pandit N, Neupane D, Deo KB
**Journal:** Int J Surg Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijscr.2024.110117](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijscr.2024.110117)

## Content

1. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2024 Sep;122:110117. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2024.110117.
Epub  2024 Aug 3.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: A case series.

Pandit N(1), Neupane D(2), Deo KB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Gastroenterology, Birat Medical College Teaching 
Hospital, Morang, Nepal. Electronic address: narendrapandit111@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Surgical Gastroenterology, BP Koirala Institute of Health 
Sciences, Dharan, Nepal.

INTRODUCTION: Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is a rare hereditary disorder 
characterized by gastrointestinal hamartomatous polyps, due to mutation of the 
STK11/LKB1 gene located on chromosome 19p. The polyps are most commonly found in 
the small bowel followed by colon.
CASE PRESENTATION: Our case series includes 4 patients, three being male and one 
female. Each of them either presented with abdominal pain and other associated 
symptoms. Oral cavity and lip melanin pigmentation were common. CT abdomen 
revealed multiple large jejunal, ileal, gastric and colon polyps. Cancer was 
found in one patient. Different surgical approaches were adopted. All recovered 
well.
DISCUSSION: PJS is an autosomal dominant disorder with an estimated incidence of 
1:50,000 to 1:200,000 cases with a significant family history. Mostly found in 
small bowel followed by colon, it can also occur in a rare organ like gall 
bladder as evident in our case. PJS carries a substantial risk for 
gastrointestinal cancer. The treatment modality depends on the site of polyp, 
mode of presentation and availability of the expertise.
CONCLUSION: PJS is a common disease in our part which is usually observed in 
teen age groups male. They have a varied presentation, from intestinal 
obstruction (due to intussusception) to GI bleeding. Colonic malignancy at young 
age may be the first presentation of the disease. Observation of melanin 
pigmentations on lips helps diagnose the disease; and one should always look at 
this findings in a young patient with pain abdomen or in intestinal obstruction 
to confirm/exclude the disease.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2024.110117
PMCID: PMC11345572
PMID: 39098175

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement None.