---
reference_id: "PMID:7958907"
title: Targeted deletion of the TGF-beta 1 gene causes rapid progression to squamous cell carcinoma.
authors:
- Glick AB
- Lee MM
- Darwiche N
- Kulkarni AB
- Karlsson S
- Yuspa SH
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1101/gad.8.20.2429
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- Cell Division
- Cocarcinogenesis
- DNA Primers/genetics
- "DNA, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Gene Deletion
- Gene Expression
- "Genes, p53"
- "Genes, ras"
- Keratinocytes/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Nude"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- "Skin Neoplasms/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- Skin Transplantation
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted deletion of the TGF-beta 1 gene causes rapid progression to squamous cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Glick AB, Lee MM, Darwiche N, Kulkarni AB, Karlsson S, Yuspa SH
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.8.20.2429](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.8.20.2429)

## Content

1. Genes Dev. 1994 Oct 15;8(20):2429-40. doi: 10.1101/gad.8.20.2429.

Targeted deletion of the TGF-beta 1 gene causes rapid progression to squamous
cell carcinoma.

Glick AB(1), Lee MM, Darwiche N, Kulkarni AB, Karlsson S, Yuspa SH.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Carcinogenesis and Tumor Promotion, National Institute
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892.

To study the contribution of autocrine and paracrine TGF-beta 1 to tumor
progression in a well-defined system of multistage carcinogenesis, keratinocytes
with a targeted deletion of the TGF-beta 1 gene were initiated in vitro with the
v-rasHa oncogene and their in vivo tumorigenic properties were determined by
skin grafting initiated cells onto athymic mice in combination with either
wild-type or null dermal fibroblasts. Grafts of v-rasHa-initiated null
keratinocytes progressed rapidly to multifocal squamous cell carcinomas within
dysplastic papillomas irrespective of the fibroblast genotype, whereas the
initiated control genotypes formed well-differentiated papillomas. Malignant
progression was not associated with mutations in the c-rasHa gene, alterations
in p53 protein, or loss of responsiveness to TGF-beta 1. The tumor cell labeling
index was elevated in grafts of initiated null keratinocytes with wild-type
fibroblasts compared to tumors of other genotypes. However, labeling index in
all tumors was reduced when TGF-beta 1 null fibroblasts formed the stroma. The
null tumor cells could not accumulate TGF-beta 1 from the host, but grafts of
uninitiated null keratinocytes, which formed a normal epidermis, became TGF-beta
1 positive even though they did not express TGF-beta 1 mRNA. These results
demonstrate that autocrine TGF-beta 1 suppresses the frequency and rate of
malignant progression, and that autocrine and paracrine TGF-beta 1 can have
opposing effects on tumor cell proliferation. The lack of paracrine inhibition
of tumor cell progression appears to result from the inability of tumor cells to
localize host-derived TGF-beta 1 by a mechanism that operates in normal cells.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.8.20.2429
PMID: 7958907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
