---
reference_id: "PMID:40658480"
title: "Primary Aldosteronism: An Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline."
authors:
- Adler GK
- Stowasser M
- Correa RR
- Khan N
- Kline G
- McGowan MJ
- Mulatero P
- Murad MH
- Touyz RM
- Vaidya A
- Williams TA
- Yang J
- Young WF
- Zennaro MC
- Brito JP
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgaf284
keywords:
- "Hyperaldosteronism/diagnosis, therapy, complications"
- Humans
- Aldosterone/blood
- "Hypertension/etiology, diagnosis, therapy"
- Endocrinology/standards
- Renin/blood
- "Societies, Medical/standards"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary Aldosteronism: An Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline.
**Authors:** Adler GK, Stowasser M, Correa RR, Khan N, Kline G, McGowan MJ, Mulatero P, Murad MH, Touyz RM, Vaidya A, Williams TA, Yang J, Young WF, Zennaro MC, Brito JP
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgaf284](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgaf284)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2025 Aug 7;110(9):2453-2495. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgaf284.

Primary Aldosteronism: An Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline.

Adler GK(1), Stowasser M(2), Correa RR(3), Khan N(4), Kline G(5), McGowan MJ(6), 
Mulatero P(7), Murad MH(8), Touyz RM(9), Vaidya A(1), Williams TA(10), Yang 
J(11)(12), Young WF(8), Zennaro MC(13)(14), Brito JP(8)(15).

Author information:
(1)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Endocrine Hypertension Research Centre, University of Queensland, Princess 
Alexandra Hospital, QLD 4102, Brisbane, Australia.
(3)The Cleveland Clinic, Lerner College of Medicine, OH 44195, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, T2T 
5C7  Canada.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, T2T 5C7  Canada.
(6)Primary Aldosteronism Foundation, 3533 E Ahwatukee Ct, Phoenix, AZ 85044, 
USA.
(7)Division of Internal Medicine and Hypertension, Department of Medical 
Sciences, University of Torino, Torino 10126, Italy.
(8)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, Metabolism and Nutrition, Department of 
Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(9)Research Institute of McGill University Health Centre, McGill University, 
Montreal, H4A 3J1  Canada.
(10)Department of Medicine IV, Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, Munich 
80336, Germany.
(11)Centre for Endocrinology and Reproductive Health, Hudson Institute of 
Medical Research, Victoria 3168, Australia.
(12)Department of Medicine, Monash University, Victoria 3168, Australia.
(13)Université Paris Cité, Inserm, PARCC, Paris F-75015, France.
(14)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, 
Service de Génétique, Paris F-75015, France.
(15)Knowledge and Evaluation Research Unit, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, 
Metabolism and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA.

Erratum in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2025 Oct 16;110(11):e3933-e3934. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgaf472.

BACKGROUND: Primary aldosteronism (PA), a primary adrenal disorder leading to 
excessive aldosterone production by one or both adrenal glands, is a common 
cause of hypertension. It is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular 
complications compared with primary hypertension. Despite effective methods for 
diagnosing and treating PA, it remains markedly underdiagnosed and undertreated.
OBJECTIVE: To develop an updated guideline that provides a practical, clinical 
approach to identifying and managing PA to improve diagnosis rates and encourage 
targeted treatment.
METHODS: The Guideline Development Panel (GDP), composed of a multidisciplinary 
panel of clinical experts and experts in systemic review methodology, used the 
Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) 
approach to define 10 questions related to the diagnosis and treatment of PA. 
Systematic reviews were conducted for each question. The GDP used the GRADE 
Evidence to Decision (EtD) framework to consider contextual factors, such as 
stakeholder values and preferences, costs and required resources, 
cost-effectiveness, acceptability, feasibility, and the potential impact on 
health equity.
RESULTS: We suggest that all individuals with hypertension be screened for PA by 
measuring aldosterone and renin and determining the aldosterone to renin ratio, 
and that subsequent clinical care be guided by the results. We suggest that 
individuals with PA receive PA-specific therapy, either medical or surgical. In 
individuals who screen positive for PA, we suggest (1) commencement of 
PA-specific medical therapy in individuals who do not desire or are not 
candidates for surgery and in situations where the probability of lateralizing 
PA (excess aldosterone produced by one adrenal) is low based on screening 
results; and (2) aldosterone suppression testing in situations when screening 
results indicate an intermediate probability for lateralizing PA and 
individualized decision making confirms a desire to pursue eligibility for 
surgical therapy. In those who test positive by aldosterone suppression testing, 
and in those in whom screening results show a high probability of lateralizing 
PA (obviating the need for aldosterone suppression testing), we suggest adrenal 
lateralization with computed tomography scanning and adrenal venous sampling 
prior to deciding the treatment approach (medical vs surgical). In all 
individuals with PA and an adrenal adenoma, we suggest performing a 1-mg 
overnight dexamethasone suppression test. We suggest the use of 
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRAs) over epithelial sodium-channel 
(ENaC) inhibitors in the medical treatment of PA. We suggest the use of 
spironolactone over other MRAs, given its lower cost and greater availability; 
however, all MRAs, when titrated to equivalent potencies, are anticipated to 
have similar efficacy in treating PA. Thus, MRAs with greater mineralocorticoid 
receptor specificity and fewer androgen/progesterone receptor-mediated side 
effects may be preferred in some situations. In individuals receiving MRA 
therapy, we suggest monitoring renin and, in those whose hypertension remains 
uncontrolled and renin is suppressed, titrating the MRA to increase renin.
CONCLUSION: These recommendations provide a practical framework for the 
diagnosis and treatment of PA. They are based on currently available literature 
and take into consideration outcomes that are important to key stakeholders. The 
goal is to increase identification of individuals with PA and, by initiating 
PA-specific medical or surgical therapy, improve blood pressure control and 
reduce PA-associated adverse cardiovascular events. The guidelines also 
highlight important knowledge gaps in PA diagnosis and management.

© The Endocrine Society 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
the Endocrine Society. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, please 
contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for reprints. All 
other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service via the 
Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information please 
contact journals.permissions@oup.com. See the journal About page for additional 
terms.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgaf284
PMID: 40658480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]