---
reference_id: "PMID:31337416"
title: "Wolfram syndrome, a rare neurodegenerative disease: from pathogenesis to future treatment perspectives."
authors:
- Pallotta MT
- Tascini G
- Crispoldi R
- Orabona C
- Mondanelli G
- Grohmann U
- Esposito S
journal: J Transl Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12967-019-1993-1
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1/complications, diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Disease Progression
- Drug Development
- Drug Repositioning
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Infant
- Interdisciplinary Communication
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/complications, diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Prognosis
- Quality of Life
- "Wolfram Syndrome/complications, diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wolfram syndrome, a rare neurodegenerative disease: from pathogenesis to future treatment perspectives.
**Authors:** Pallotta MT, Tascini G, Crispoldi R, Orabona C, Mondanelli G, Grohmann U, Esposito S
**Journal:** J Transl Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12967-019-1993-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-019-1993-1)

## Content

1. J Transl Med. 2019 Jul 23;17(1):238. doi: 10.1186/s12967-019-1993-1.

Wolfram syndrome, a rare neurodegenerative disease: from pathogenesis to future
treatment perspectives.

Pallotta MT(1), Tascini G(2), Crispoldi R(2), Orabona C(1), Mondanelli G(1),
Grohmann U(1), Esposito S(3).

Author information:
(1)Pharmacology Section, Department of Experimental Medicine, Università degli
Studi di Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(2)Pediatric Clinic, Department of Surgical and Biomedical Sciences, Università
degli Studi di Perugia, Piazza Menghini 1, 06129, Perugia, Italy.
(3)Pediatric Clinic, Department of Surgical and Biomedical Sciences, Università
degli Studi di Perugia, Piazza Menghini 1, 06129, Perugia, Italy.
susanna.esposito@unimi.it.

BACKGROUND: Wolfram syndrome (WS), a rare genetic disorder, is considered the
best prototype of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) diseases. Classical WS features are
childhood-onset diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, deafness, diabetes insipidus,
neurological signs, and other abnormalities. Two causative genes (WFS1 and WFS2)
have been identified. The transmission of the disease takes place in an
autosomal recessive mode but autosomal dominant mutations responsible for
WS-related disorders have been described. Prognosis is poor, death occurs at the
median age of 39 years with a major cause represented by respiratory failure as
a consequence of brain stem atrophy and neurodegeneration. The aim of this
narrative review is to focus on etiology, pathogenesis and natural history of WS
for an adequate patient management and for the discussion of future therapeutic
interventions.
MAIN BODY: WS requires a multidisciplinary approach in order to be successfully
treated. A prompt diagnosis decreases morbidity and mortality through prevention
and treatment of complications. Being a monogenic pathology, WS represents a
perfect model to study the mechanisms of ER stress and how this condition leads
to cell death, in comparison with other prevalent diseases in which multiple
factors interact to produce the disease manifestations. WS is also an important
disease prototype to identify drugs and molecules associated with ER
homeostasis. Evidence indicates that specific metabolic diseases (type 1 and
type 2 diabetes), neurodegenerative diseases, atherosclerosis, inflammatory
pathologies and also cancer are closely related to ER dysfunction.
CONCLUSIONS: Therapeutic strategies in WS are based on drug repurposing (i.e.,
investigation of approved drugs for novel therapeutic indications) with the aim
to stop the progression of the disease by reducing the endoplasmic reticulum
stress. An extensive understanding of WS from pathophysiology to therapy is
fundamental and more studies are necessary to better manage this devastating
disease and guarantee the patients a better quality of life and longer life
expectancy.

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-019-1993-1
PMCID: PMC6651977
PMID: 31337416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
