---
reference_id: "PMID:40483170"
title: Genome-wide association study in chondrocalcinosis reveals ENPP1 as a candidate therapeutic target in calcium pyrophosphate deposition disease.
authors:
- Takei R
- Rosenthal A
- Pascart T
- Reynolds RJ
- Neogi T
- Terkeltaub R
- Tedeschi SK
- Merriman TR
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ard.2025.04.002
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Chondrocalcinosis/genetics
- Crystal Arthropathies/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Pyrophosphatases/genetics
- White/genetics
- Black or African American/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide association study in chondrocalcinosis reveals ENPP1 as a candidate therapeutic target in calcium pyrophosphate deposition disease.
**Authors:** Takei R, Rosenthal A, Pascart T, Reynolds RJ, Neogi T, Terkeltaub R, Tedeschi SK, Merriman TR
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ard.2025.04.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ard.2025.04.002)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2025 Jun;84(6):1023-1032. doi: 10.1016/j.ard.2025.04.002. Epub
2025 May 28.

Genome-wide association study in chondrocalcinosis reveals ENPP1 as a candidate
therapeutic target in calcium pyrophosphate deposition disease.

Takei R(1), Rosenthal A(2), Pascart T(3), Reynolds RJ(1), Neogi T(4), Terkeltaub
R(5), Tedeschi SK(6), Merriman TR(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA; Birmingham Department of Veterans Affairs
Health Care System, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(2)Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA; Zablocki Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Lille Catholic University, Saint-Philibert
Hospital, Lille, France.
(4)Section of Rheumatology, Boston University Chobanian & Avedisian School of
Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Division of Rheumatology, Autoimmunity and Inflammation, UC San Diego, La
Jolla, CA, USA.
(6)Division of Rheumatology, Inflammation and Immunity, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Division of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA; Birmingham Department of Veterans Affairs
Health Care System, Birmingham, AL, USA; Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. Electronic address:
tony.merriman@otago.ac.nz.

OBJECTIVES: The genetic basis of calcium pyrophosphate deposition (CPPD) disease
is unknown. This limits the development of therapeutic strategies. We aimed to
analyse a genome-wide association study (GWAS) on a large administrative
database to identify new candidate causal genes for CPPD disease.
METHODS: We used publicly available GWAS summary statistics for Phecode-defined
chondrocalcinosis and crystal arthropathy from the Veterans Affairs Million
Veteran Program in people of African (AFR) and European (EUR) ancestry. Included
were 3004 (536 AFR and 2468 EUR) cases for chondrocalcinosis and 3766 (700 AFR
and 3066 EUR) cases for crystal arthropathy (operationally interpreted as
calcium crystal arthropathy). Our primary analysis was in chondrocalcinosis,
with secondary analysis in crystal arthropathy. We tested for colocalisation of
chondrocalcinosis genetic association signals with genetic control of gene
expression.
RESULTS: There were 2 genome-wide significant loci for chondrocalcinosis in both
AFR and EUR cases, both on chromosome 6 (signals within the ENPP1 and RNF144B
genes). Findings were supported by analysis of the crystal arthropathy cohort.
Colocalisation analysis of chondrocalcinosis genetic association signals with
genetic control of gene expression and alternative splicing further supported
ENPP1 and RNF144B as candidate casual genes. At ENPP1, the allele that increases
the risk for chondrocalcinosis was associated with increased ENPP1 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: ENPP1 encodes ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase
family member 1 (NPP1) that produces adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and inorganic
pyrophosphate which, together with calcium ions, leads to the formation of
calcium pyrophosphate crystals. Selective NPP1 inhibitors developed for
infectious disease and cancer could be tested as treatment for CPPD disease.

Copyright © 2025 European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology (EULAR).
Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ard.2025.04.002
PMCID: PMC12248263
PMID: 40483170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests TP declares consulting fees
from Avalo Therapeutics. TN declares consulting fees for Novartis unrelated to
the content of this study. RTe declares membership, fees and stock options
related to service on the Scientific Advisory Board of Inozyme, which develops
therapeutics for pathologic calcification. SKT declares consulting fees for
Novartis, Avalo Therapeutics, Merck, Kyowa Kirin, Alexion and Fresenius Kabi
unrelated to the content of this study. TRM declares consulting fees from
Variantbio unrelated to the content of this study. RTa, AR, and RJR declare no
conflict of interest.
