---
reference_id: "PMID:33989548"
title: Mechanisms and disease consequences of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
authors:
- Loomba R
- Friedman SL
- Shulman GI
journal: Cell
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.015
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/pathology"
- Humans
- Liver/pathology
- Liver Cirrhosis/pathology
- Liver Neoplasms/pathology
- Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms and disease consequences of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
**Authors:** Loomba R, Friedman SL, Shulman GI
**Journal:** Cell (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.015)

## Content

1. Cell. 2021 May 13;184(10):2537-2564. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.015.

Mechanisms and disease consequences of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.

Loomba R(1), Friedman SL(2), Shulman GI(3).

Author information:
(1)NAFLD Research Center, Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, 
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Electronic 
address: roloomba@ucsd.edu.
(2)Division of Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic address: 
scott.friedman@mssm.edu.
(3)Departments of Internal Medicine and Cellular & Molecular Physiology, Yale 
Diabetes Research Center, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. 
Electronic address: gerald.shulman@yale.edu.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the leading chronic liver disease 
worldwide. Its more advanced subtype, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), 
connotes progressive liver injury that can lead to cirrhosis and hepatocellular 
carcinoma. Here we provide an in-depth discussion of the underlying pathogenetic 
mechanisms that lead to progressive liver injury, including the metabolic 
origins of NAFLD, the effect of NAFLD on hepatic glucose and lipid metabolism, 
bile acid toxicity, macrophage dysfunction, and hepatic stellate cell 
activation, and consider the role of genetic, epigenetic, and environmental 
factors that promote fibrosis progression and risk of hepatocellular carcinoma 
in NASH.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.015
PMCID: PMC12168897
PMID: 33989548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests R.L. serves as a 
consultant for Anylam/Regeneron, Amgen, Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals, AstraZeneca, 
Bristol Myers Squibb, CohBar, Eli Lilly, Galmed, Gilead, Glympse bio, Inipharm, 
Intercept, Ionis, Janssen, Madrigal, Metacrine, NGM Biopharmaceuticals, 
Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, Sagimet, 89 bio, and Viking Therapeutics. In 
addition, his institution has received grant support from Allergan, Astrazeneca, 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly, Galectin Therapeutics, 
Galmed Pharmaceuticals, Genfit, Gilead, Intercept, Inventiva, Janssen, Madrigal 
Pharmaceuticals, Merck, NGM Biopharmaceuticals, Pfizer, and Siemens. He is also 
co-founder of Liponexus; S.L.F. is a consultant to 89 Bio, Amgen, Axcella 
Health, Blade Therapeutics, Bristol Myers Squibb, Can-Fite Biopharma, Casma 
Therapeutics, ChemomAb, Escient Pharmaceuticals, Forbion, Galmed, Gordian 
Biotechnology, Glycotest, Glympse Bio, In sitro, Morphic Therapeutics, North Sea 
Therapeutics, Novartis, Ono Pharmaceuticals, Pfizer Pharmaceuticals, Scholar 
Rock, and Surrozen and has stock options (all less than 1% of company value) in 
Blade Therapeutics, Escient, Galectin, Galmed, Genfit, Glympse, Hepgene, 
Lifemax, Metacrine, Morphic Therapeutics, Nimbus, North Sea Therapeutics, 
Scholar Rock, and Surrozen. G.I.S. serves on the scientific advisory boards for 
Merck, Novo Nordisk, AstraZeneca, Gilead Sciences, Esperion, Generian, Levels, 
89bio, and Janseen Research and Development. G.I.S. receives 
investigator-initiated support from AstraZeneca, Gilead Sciences, and Merck. 
G.I.S. is an inventor on Yale patents for liver-targeted mitochondrial 
uncoupling agents and controlled-release mitochondrial uncoupling agents for the 
treatment of NAFLD, NASH, T2D, and related metabolic disorders and is a 
scientific-cofounder of TLC.