---
reference_id: "PMID:24398796"
title: Variability in dentofacial phenotypes in four families with WNT10A mutations.
authors:
- Vink CP
- Ockeloen CW
- ten Kate S
- Koolen DA
- Ploos van Amstel JK
- Kuijpers-Jagtman AM
- van Heumen CC
- Kleefstra T
- Carels CE
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.300
keywords:
- Adult
- "Anodontia/diagnosis, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Dentofacial Deformities/diagnosis, genetics"
- Eccrine Glands/abnormalities
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Eyelid Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Variation
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Hypotrichosis/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Wnt Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variability in dentofacial phenotypes in four families with WNT10A mutations.
**Authors:** Vink CP, Ockeloen CW, ten Kate S, Koolen DA, Ploos van Amstel JK, Kuijpers-Jagtman AM, van Heumen CC, Kleefstra T, Carels CE
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2013.300](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2013.300)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Sep;22(9):1063-70. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.300. Epub 2014
 Jan 8.

Variability in dentofacial phenotypes in four families with WNT10A mutations.

Vink CP(1), Ockeloen CW(2), ten Kate S(3), Koolen DA(3), Ploos van Amstel JK(4), 
Kuijpers-Jagtman AM(5), van Heumen CC(6), Kleefstra T(2), Carels CE(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthodontics and Craniofacial Biology, Radboud University 
Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)1] Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands [2] Radboud Center for Cleft Palate and Craniofacial Anomalies, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands.
(5)1] Department of Orthodontics and Craniofacial Biology, Radboud University 
Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands [2] Radboud Center for Cleft Palate 
and Craniofacial Anomalies, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(6)1] Radboud Center for Cleft Palate and Craniofacial Anomalies, Radboud 
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands [2] Center for Special 
Dental Care, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)1] Department of Orthodontics and Craniofacial Biology, Radboud University 
Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands [2] Radboud Center for Cleft Palate 
and Craniofacial Anomalies, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands [3] Department of Oral Health Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

This article describes the inter- and intra-familial phenotypic variability in 
four families with WNT10A mutations. Clinical characteristics of the patients 
range from mild to severe isolated tooth agenesis, over mild symptoms of 
ectodermal dysplasia, to more severe syndromic forms like odonto-onycho-dermal 
dysplasia (OODD) and Schöpf-Schulz-Passarge syndrome (SSPS). Recurrent WNT10A 
mutations were identified in all affected family members and the associated 
symptoms are presented with emphasis on the dentofacial phenotypes obtained with 
inter alia three-dimensional facial stereophotogrammetry. A comprehensive 
overview of the literature regarding WNT10A mutations, associated conditions and 
developmental defects is presented. We conclude that OODD and SSPS should be 
considered as variable expressions of the same WNT10A genotype. In all affected 
individuals, a dished-in facial appearance was observed which might be helpful 
in the clinical setting as a clue to the underlying genetic etiology.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.300
PMCID: PMC4135412
PMID: 24398796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]