---
reference_id: "PMID:30850326"
title: Update on twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome.
authors:
- Bamberg C
- Hecher K
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2018.12.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome.
**Authors:** Bamberg C, Hecher K
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2018.12.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2018.12.011)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol. 2019 Jul;58:55-65. doi: 
10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2018.12.011. Epub 2019 Jan 5.

Update on twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome.

Bamberg C(1), Hecher K(2).

Author information:
(1)University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Department of Obstetrics and 
Fetal Medicine, Hamburg, Germany. Electronic address: c.bamberg@uke.de.
(2)University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Department of Obstetrics and 
Fetal Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.

Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) is a serious complication that affects 
10-15% of monochorionic multiple pregnancies. Communicating placental vessels on 
the chorionic plate between the donor and recipient twin are responsible for the 
imbalance of blood flow. There is evidence for the superiority of fetoscopic 
laser ablation over serial amnioreductions regarding survival and neurological 
outcome for stages II-IV TTTS. However, the optimal management of stage I is 
still debated. The "Solomon" technique showed a significant reduction in 
recurrent TTTS and post laser twin anemia-polycythemia sequence (TAPS) in 
comparison to the selective laser method without improvement in perinatal 
mortality or neonatal morbidity. Survival rates after fetoscopic laser surgery 
have significantly increased over the last 25 years. High volume centers report 
up to 70% double survival and at least one survivor in >90%. Long-term 
neurodevelopmental impairment occurs in about 10% of children after laser 
surgery. In this review we discuss the optimal management, innovations in laser 
technique, long-term neurodevelopmental outcome, and future aspects of TTTS 
treatment.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2018.12.011
PMID: 30850326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]