---
reference_id: "PMID:39685583"
title: "Lights and Shadows of Long COVID: Are Latent Infections the Real Hidden Enemy?"
authors:
- Serapide F
- Talarico M
- Rotundo S
- Pascale V
- Serraino R
- Trecarichi EM
- Russo A
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13237124
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lights and Shadows of Long COVID: Are Latent Infections the Real Hidden Enemy?
**Authors:** Serapide F, Talarico M, Rotundo S, Pascale V, Serraino R, Trecarichi EM, Russo A
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13237124](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13237124)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Nov 25;13(23):7124. doi: 10.3390/jcm13237124.

Lights and Shadows of Long COVID: Are Latent Infections the Real Hidden Enemy?

Serapide F(1), Talarico M(2), Rotundo S(1), Pascale V(2), Serraino R(1),
Trecarichi EM(1)(3), Russo A(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche, Università "Magna Graecia",
88100 Catanzaro, Italy.
(2)Unità Operativa di Cardiologia, Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Renato
Dulbecco, 88100 Catanzaro, Italy.
(3)Unità Operativa Complessa di Malattie Infettive e Tropicali, Azienda
Ospedaliera Universitaria Renato Dulbecco, 88100 Catanzaro, Italy.

Long COVID-19 (LC) is a poorly understood, multifactorial condition that
persists for at least three months following SARS-CoV-2 infection. The
underlying pathophysiological mechanisms responsible for the wide range of
associated symptoms-including fatigue, brain fog, and respiratory issues-remain
unclear. However, emerging evidence suggests that the reactivation of latent
viral infections, such as Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, and
varicella-zoster virus, may significantly contribute to the complexity of LC.
These latent viruses can be reactivated by SARS-CoV-2, contributing to a chronic
inflammatory state that prolongs symptomatology. This review confirms the
potential involvement of latent viral infections in LC and examines whether
these infections play an independent role or act synergistically with other
factors. In addition, recent studies have highlighted viral persistence and
immune dysregulation as key elements in LC. Our findings suggest that
preventative strategies, including vaccination and antiviral treatments during
the acute phase of COVID-19, show potential in reducing LC risk by preventing
viral reactivation. However, tailored diagnostic and therapeutic strategies
targeting these latent infections are urgently needed. Identifying biomarkers of
viral reactivation, particularly for high-risk populations, could be considered
another effective strategy to mitigate LC severity. Further research is crucial
to better understand the interactions between SARS-CoV-2 and latent infections,
and to improve the prevention and treatment of LC.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13237124
PMCID: PMC11641947
PMID: 39685583

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
