---
reference_id: "PMID:15306833"
title: "The reality of glycaemic control in insulin treated diabetes: defining the clinical challenges."
authors:
- Davies M
journal: Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/sj.ijo.0802745
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The reality of glycaemic control in insulin treated diabetes: defining the clinical challenges.
**Authors:** Davies M
**Journal:** Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.ijo.0802745](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ijo.0802745)

## Content

1. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2004 Sep;28 Suppl 2:S14-22. doi: 
10.1038/sj.ijo.0802745.

The reality of glycaemic control in insulin treated diabetes: defining the 
clinical challenges.

Davies M(1).

Author information:
(1)Leicester Royal Infirmary, Infirmary Square, Leicester, UK.

The benefits of good glycaemic control in both type I and type II diabetes 
mellitus are undoubtedly proven. Most national bodies have recommended glycaemic 
targets, with an HbA(1c) to achieve between 6.5 and 7.5%. However, it is well 
known that even in clinical trials, and routinely in clinical practice, the 
majority of patients fail to achieve optimal glycaemic control. The reasons for 
this failure are complex and multifactorial. Healthcare providers often delay 
the initiation and intensification of insulin unnecessarily. This stems from a 
fear of causing hypoglycaemia or weight gain in patients, from doubts about 
patients' self-care abilities and/or from inadequate resources to provide the 
necessary structured education to support patient self-management. Patients may 
be poorly adherent to treatment advice-particularly behavioural aspects such as 
self-monitoring, diet and exercise-although this may itself derive from 
inadequate access to effective diabetes education. There is, however, a limit to 
what can be achieved with existing exogenous insulin therapies due to their 
imperfect pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profiles. Prominent among these 
imperfections is the problem of variability of effect from injection to 
injection with basal insulin formulations. Improvements in this area should 
benefit control and tolerability.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ijo.0802745
PMID: 15306833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]