---
reference_id: "PMID:36972026"
title: Dostarlimab for Primary Advanced or Recurrent Endometrial Cancer.
authors:
- Mirza MR
- Chase DM
- Slomovitz BM
- dePont Christensen R
- Novák Z
- Black D
- Gilbert L
- Sharma S
- Valabrega G
- Landrum LM
- Hanker LC
- Stuckey A
- Boere I
- Gold MA
- Auranen A
- Pothuri B
- Cibula D
- McCourt C
- Raspagliesi F
- Shahin MS
- Gill SE
- Monk BJ
- Buscema J
- Herzog TJ
- Copeland LJ
- Tian M
- He Z
- Stevens S
- Zografos E
- Coleman RL
- Powell MA
- RUBY Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2216334
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Carboplatin/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- DNA Mismatch Repair
- Double-Blind Method
- "Endometrial Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, mortality, pathology"
- "Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Microsatellite Instability
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/drug therapy, etiology"
- "Paclitaxel/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dostarlimab for Primary Advanced or Recurrent Endometrial Cancer.
**Authors:** Mirza MR, Chase DM, Slomovitz BM, dePont Christensen R, Novák Z, Black D, Gilbert L, Sharma S, Valabrega G, Landrum LM, Hanker LC, Stuckey A, Boere I, Gold MA, Auranen A, Pothuri B, Cibula D, McCourt C, Raspagliesi F, Shahin MS, Gill SE, Monk BJ, Buscema J, Herzog TJ, Copeland LJ, Tian M, He Z, Stevens S, Zografos E, Coleman RL, Powell MA, RUBY Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2216334](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2216334)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2023 Jun 8;388(23):2145-2158. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2216334. Epub 
2023 Mar 27.

Dostarlimab for Primary Advanced or Recurrent Endometrial Cancer.

Mirza MR(1), Chase DM(1), Slomovitz BM(1), dePont Christensen R(1), Novák Z(1), 
Black D(1), Gilbert L(1), Sharma S(1), Valabrega G(1), Landrum LM(1), Hanker 
LC(1), Stuckey A(1), Boere I(1), Gold MA(1), Auranen A(1), Pothuri B(1), Cibula 
D(1), McCourt C(1), Raspagliesi F(1), Shahin MS(1), Gill SE(1), Monk BJ(1), 
Buscema J(1), Herzog TJ(1), Copeland LJ(1), Tian M(1), He Z(1), Stevens S(1), 
Zografos E(1), Coleman RL(1), Powell MA(1); RUBY Investigators.

Collaborators: Pishchyk M, Gennigens C, Huygh G, Gilbert L, Samouelian V, 
Weberpals J, Sebastianelli A, Voutsadakis I, Cibula D, Mirza M, Luczak AA, 
Raaschou-Jensen N, Jørgensen TL, Weber-Vestermark L, Herrstedt J, Auranen A, 
Hietanen S, Anttila M, Tuppurainen M, Gropp-Meier M, Hartkopf A, Grischke EM, 
Hanker L, Lehnert A, Bauerschlag D, Denschlag D, Ataseven B, Papathemelis T, 
Fountzilas G, Bagaméri A, Tsoref D, Safra T, Meirovitz M, Segev Y, Breuer S, 
Raspagliesi F, Ronzino G, Valabrega G, Geuna E, Savarese A, Artioli F, Lombardo 
L, Zavallone L, Nicolini M, Angioli R, Boere I, Lalisang R, Reyners A, Wymenga 
M, Thijs A, Bjørge L, Lindemann K, Berge Nilsen E, Bentzen AG, Aune G, 
Cymbaluk-Płoska A, Maćkowiak-Matejczyk B, Lundgren C, Frödin-Bolling M, 
Kristeleit R, Koliadi A, Lindahl G, Demirkiran F, Hacibekiroglu I, Salman MC, 
Yasar L, Sukhin V, Zub O, Ang JE, Eminowicz G, Herbertson R, Waggoner S, 
Armstrong A, Morris R, Gogoi R, Bender D, Cantuaria G, Chu C, Callahan M, Shahin 
MS, Braly P, Myers T, Mathews C, Holloway R, Ring K, Nevadunsky N, Pothuri B, 
Driver E, Berek J, Gill S, Schlumbrecht M, Yeku O, Bouberhan S, Powell M, 
Pennington K, Secord A, Sharma S, Teneriello M, Eshed H, Miller R, Fleming E, 
Matthews C, Sawyer B, Iglesias D, Miller E, Billingsley C, Barlin J, Black D, 
Schink J, Buttin B, Schneider K, Boone J, Gold MA, Schilder J, Mayor P, Landrum 
L, Nowicki P, Ghamande S, Chase D, Buscema J, Cloven N, Diaz J, Mendivil A, 
Podzielinski I, Trinidad J, Backes F.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Oncology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University 
Hospital, and the Nordic Society of Gynaecological Oncology-Clinical Trial Unit, 
Copenhagen (M.R.M.), and the Research Unit for General Practice, University of 
Southern Denmark, Institute of Public Health, Odense (R.C.) - all in Denmark; 
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles (D.M.C.); the Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Mount Sinai Medical 
Center, and the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Florida International 
University, Miami Beach (B.M.S.); the Department of Gynecology, Hungarian 
National Institute of Oncology, Budapest, Hungary (Z.N.); the Department of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Louisiana State University Health Shreveport, and 
Willis-Knighton Physician Network, Shreveport (D.B.); the Division of 
Gynecologic Oncology, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal (L.G.); the 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, AMITA Adventist Hinsdale Hospital, 
Hinsdale, IL (S.S.); the University of Turin, A.O. Ordine Mauriziano, Turin 
(G.V.), and the Gynecologic Oncology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale 
Tumori-Milano, University of Milan, Milan (F.R.) - both in Italy; Indiana 
University Health Simon Cancer Center, Indianapolis (L.M.L.); the Department of 
Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus 
Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany (L.C.H.); Women and Infants Hospital, Providence, RI 
(A.S.); the Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC Cancer Center, Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands (I.B.); Oklahoma Cancer Specialists and Research Institute, 
Tulsa (M.A.G.); Tays Cancer Center and FICAN Mid, Tampere University and Tampere 
University Hospital, Tampere, Finland (A.A.); New York University Langone 
Health, New York (B.P.); the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, General 
University Hospital in Prague, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, 
Prague, Czech Republic (D.C.); the Division of Gynecologic Oncology (C.M.) and 
National Cancer Institute-sponsored NRG Oncology (M.A.P.), Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis; Hanjani Institute for Gynecologic Oncology, 
Abington Hospital-Jefferson Health, Asplundh Cancer Pavilion, Sidney Kimmel 
Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, Willow Grove (M.S.S.), and GSK, 
Collegeville (M.T., Z.H.) - both in Pennsylvania; the Division of Gynecologic 
Oncology, Nancy N. and J.C. Lewis Cancer and Research Pavilion, Savannah, GA 
(S.E.G.); HonorHealth Research Institute, University of Arizona College of 
Medicine, and Creighton University School of Medicine, Phoenix (B.J.M.), and the 
Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Arizona Oncology, Tucson (J.B.); the 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Cincinnati Cancer Center, 
Cincinnati (T.J.H.), and Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Hillard (L.J.C.); GSK, London (S.S., E.Z.); and US Oncology Research, the 
Woodlands, TX (R.L.C.).

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2023 Jun;20(6):353. doi: 10.1038/s41571-023-00763-0.
    N Engl J Med. 2023 Aug 31;389(9):866. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2308037.
    N Engl J Med. 2023 Aug 31;389(9):866-867. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2308037.
    N Engl J Med. 2023 Aug 31;389(9):867. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2308037.
    N Engl J Med. 2023 Aug 31;389(9):867-868. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2308037.
    CA Cancer J Clin. 2023 Sep-Oct;73(5):445-447. doi: 10.3322/caac.21809.

BACKGROUND: Dostarlimab is an immune-checkpoint inhibitor that targets the 
programmed cell death 1 receptor. The combination of chemotherapy and 
immunotherapy may have synergistic effects in the treatment of endometrial 
cancer.
METHODS: We conducted a phase 3, global, double-blind, randomized, 
placebo-controlled trial. Eligible patients with primary advanced stage III or 
IV or first recurrent endometrial cancer were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio 
to receive either dostarlimab (500 mg) or placebo, plus carboplatin (area under 
the concentration-time curve, 5 mg per milliliter per minute) and paclitaxel 
(175 mg per square meter of body-surface area), every 3 weeks (six cycles), 
followed by dostarlimab (1000 mg) or placebo every 6 weeks for up to 3 years. 
The primary end points were progression-free survival as assessed by the 
investigator according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST), 
version 1.1, and overall survival. Safety was also assessed.
RESULTS: Of the 494 patients who underwent randomization, 118 (23.9%) had 
mismatch repair-deficient (dMMR), microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) 
tumors. In the dMMR-MSI-H population, estimated progression-free survival at 24 
months was 61.4% (95% confidence interval [CI], 46.3 to 73.4) in the dostarlimab 
group and 15.7% (95% CI, 7.2 to 27.0) in the placebo group (hazard ratio for 
progression or death, 0.28; 95% CI, 0.16 to 0.50; P<0.001). In the overall 
population, progression-free survival at 24 months was 36.1% (95% CI, 29.3 to 
42.9) in the dostarlimab group and 18.1% (95% CI, 13.0 to 23.9) in the placebo 
group (hazard ratio, 0.64; 95% CI, 0.51 to 0.80; P<0.001). Overall survival at 
24 months was 71.3% (95% CI, 64.5 to 77.1) with dostarlimab and 56.0% (95% CI, 
48.9 to 62.5) with placebo (hazard ratio for death, 0.64; 95% CI, 0.46 to 0.87). 
The most common adverse events that occurred or worsened during treatment were 
nausea (53.9% of the patients in the dostarlimab group and 45.9% of those in the 
placebo group), alopecia (53.5% and 50.0%), and fatigue (51.9% and 54.5%). 
Severe and serious adverse events were more frequent in the dostarlimab group 
than in the placebo group.
CONCLUSIONS: Dostarlimab plus carboplatin-paclitaxel significantly increased 
progression-free survival among patients with primary advanced or recurrent 
endometrial cancer, with a substantial benefit in the dMMR-MSI-H population. 
(Funded by GSK; RUBY ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03981796.).

Copyright © 2023 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2216334
PMID: 36972026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]