---
reference_id: PMID:32017015
title: Consensus reclassification of inherited epidermolysis bullosa and other disorders with skin fragility.
authors:
- Has C
- Bauer JW
- Bodemer C
- Bolling MC
- Bruckner-Tuderman L
- Diem A
- Fine JD
- Heagerty A
- Hovnanian A
- Marinkovich MP
- Martinez AE
- McGrath JA
- Moss C
- Murrell DF
- Palisson F
- Schwieger-Briel A
- Sprecher E
- Tamai K
- Uitto J
- Woodley DT
- Zambruno G
- Mellerio JE
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.18921
keywords:
- Blister
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa/diagnosis, genetics"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Skin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Consensus reclassification of inherited epidermolysis bullosa and other disorders with skin fragility.
**Authors:** Has C, Bauer JW, Bodemer C, Bolling MC, Bruckner-Tuderman L, Diem A, Fine JD, Heagerty A, Hovnanian A, Marinkovich MP, Martinez AE, McGrath JA, Moss C, Murrell DF, Palisson F, Schwieger-Briel A, Sprecher E, Tamai K, Uitto J, Woodley DT, Zambruno G, Mellerio JE
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.18921](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.18921)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2020 Oct;183(4):614-627. doi: 10.1111/bjd.18921. Epub 2020 Mar 
11.

Consensus reclassification of inherited epidermolysis bullosa and other 
disorders with skin fragility.

Has C(1), Bauer JW(2), Bodemer C(3), Bolling MC(4), Bruckner-Tuderman L(1), Diem 
A(2), Fine JD(5), Heagerty A(6), Hovnanian A(7), Marinkovich MP(8), Martinez 
AE(9), McGrath JA(10), Moss C(11), Murrell DF(12), Palisson F(13), 
Schwieger-Briel A(14), Sprecher E(15), Tamai K(16), Uitto J(17), Woodley DT(18), 
Zambruno G(19), Mellerio JE(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Faculty 
of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Allergology and EB Haus Austria University 
Hospital of the Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Austria.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Necker Hospital des Enfants Malades, University 
Paris-Centre APHP 5, Paris, France.
(4)University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the 
Netherlands.
(5)Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA; National 
Epidermolysis Bullosa Registry, Nashville, TN, USA.
(6)Heart of England Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(7)INSERM UMR1163, Imagine Institute, Department of Genetics, Necker hospital 
for sick children, Paris University, Paris, France.
(8)Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, Palo Alto Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center CA, USA.
(9)Dermatology Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(10)St John's Institute of Dermatology, King's College London and Guy's and St 
Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(11)Birmingham Children's Hospital and University of Birmingham, UK.
(12)St George Hospital and University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
(13)DEBRA Chile, Facultad de Medicina Clinica Alemana-Universidad del 
Desarrollo, Santiago, Chile.
(14)Department of Pediatric Dermatology, University Children's Hospital Zürich, 
Zürich, Switzerland.
(15)Division of Dermatology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center and Sackler 
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(16)Dermatology Department, University of Osaka, Osaka, Japan.
(17)Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(18)University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(19)Dermatology Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2020 Oct;183(4):603. doi: 10.1111/bjd.19125.

BACKGROUND: Several new genes and clinical subtypes have been identified since 
the publication in 2014 of the report of the last International Consensus 
Meeting on Epidermolysis Bullosa (EB).
OBJECTIVES: We sought to reclassify disorders with skin fragility, with a focus 
on EB, based on new clinical and molecular data.
METHODS: This was a consensus expert review.
RESULTS: In this latest consensus report, we introduce the concept of genetic 
disorders with skin fragility, of which classical EB represents the prototype. 
Other disorders with skin fragility, where blisters are a minor part of the 
clinical picture or are not seen because skin cleavage is very superficial, are 
classified as separate categories. These include peeling skin disorders, erosive 
disorders, hyperkeratotic disorders, and connective tissue disorders with skin 
fragility. Because of the common manifestation of skin fragility, these 
'EB-related' disorders should be considered under the EB umbrella in terms of 
medical and socioeconomic provision of care.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed classification scheme should be of value both to 
clinicians and researchers, emphasizing both clinical and genetic features of 
EB. What is already known about this topic? Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is a 
group of genetic disorders with skin blistering. The last updated 
recommendations on diagnosis and classification were published in 2014. What 
does this study add? We introduce the concept of genetic disorders with skin 
fragility, of which classical EB represents the prototype. Clinical and genetic 
aspects, genotype-phenotype correlations, disease-modifying factors and natural 
history of EB are reviewed. Other disorders with skin fragility, e.g. peeling 
skin disorders, erosive disorders, hyperkeratotic disorders, and connective 
tissue disorders with skin fragility are classified as separate categories; 
these 'EB-related' disorders should be considered under the EB umbrella in terms 
of medical and socioeconomic provision of care. Linked Comment: Pope. Br J 
Dermatol 2020; 183:603.

© 2020 The Authors. British Journal of Dermatology published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.18921
PMID: 32017015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]