---
reference_id: "PMID:24183449"
title: WDR34 mutations that cause short-rib polydactyly syndrome type III/severe asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia reveal a role for the NF-κB pathway in cilia.
authors:
- Huber C
- Wu S
- Kim AS
- Sigaudy S
- Sarukhanov A
- Serre V
- Baujat G
- Le Quan Sang KH
- Rimoin DL
- Cohn DH
- Munnich A
- Krakow D
- Cormier-Daire V
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.10.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# WDR34 mutations that cause short-rib polydactyly syndrome type III/severe asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia reveal a role for the NF-κB pathway in cilia.
**Authors:** Huber C, Wu S, Kim AS, Sigaudy S, Sarukhanov A, Serre V, Baujat G, Le Quan Sang KH, Rimoin DL, Cohn DH, Munnich A, Krakow D, Cormier-Daire V
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.10.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.10.007)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Nov 7;93(5):926-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.10.007. Epub
 2013 Oct 31.

WDR34 mutations that cause short-rib polydactyly syndrome type III/severe 
asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia reveal a role for the NF-κB pathway in cilia.

Huber C(1), Wu S, Kim AS, Sigaudy S, Sarukhanov A, Serre V, Baujat G, Le Quan 
Sang KH, Rimoin DL, Cohn DH, Munnich A, Krakow D, Cormier-Daire V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, INSERM U781, Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne 
Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades (AP-HP), Paris 
75015, France.

Short-rib polydactyly (SRP) syndrome type III, or Verma-Naumoff syndrome, is an 
autosomal-recessive chondrodysplasia characterized by short ribs, a narrow 
thorax, short long bones, an abnormal acetabulum, and numerous extraskeletal 
malformations and is lethal in the perinatal period. Presently, mutations in two 
genes, IFT80 and DYNC2H1, have been identified as being responsible for SRP type 
III. Via homozygosity mapping in three affected siblings, a locus for the 
disease was identified on chromosome 9q34.11, and homozygosity for three 
missense mutations in WDR34 were found in three independent families, as well as 
compound heterozygosity for mutations in one family. WDR34 encodes a member of 
the WD repeat protein family with five WD40 domains, which acts as a 
TAK1-associated suppressor of the IL-1R/TLR3/TLR4-induced NF-κB activation 
pathway. We showed, through structural modeling, that two of the three mutations 
altered specific structural domains of WDR34. We found that primary cilia in 
WDR34 mutant fibroblasts were significantly shorter than normal and had a 
bulbous tip. This report expands on the pathogenesis of SRP type III and 
demonstrates that a regulator of the NF-κB activation pathway is involved in the 
pathogenesis of the skeletal ciliopathies.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.10.007
PMCID: PMC3824112
PMID: 24183449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]