---
reference_id: "PMID:11121146"
title: Mutant loricrin is not crosslinked into the cornified cell envelope but is translocated into the nucleus in loricrin keratoderma.
authors:
- Ishida-Yamamoto A
- Kato H
- Kiyama H
- Armstrong DK
- Munro CS
- Eady RA
- Nakamura S
- Kinouchi M
- Takahashi H
- Iizuka H
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.2000.00163.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutant loricrin is not crosslinked into the cornified cell envelope but is translocated into the nucleus in loricrin keratoderma.
**Authors:** Ishida-Yamamoto A, Kato H, Kiyama H, Armstrong DK, Munro CS, Eady RA, Nakamura S, Kinouchi M, Takahashi H, Iizuka H
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1523-1747.2000.00163.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1523-1747.2000.00163.x)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2000 Dec;115(6):1088-94. doi: 
10.1046/j.1523-1747.2000.00163.x.

Mutant loricrin is not crosslinked into the cornified cell envelope but is 
translocated into the nucleus in loricrin keratoderma.

Ishida-Yamamoto A(1), Kato H, Kiyama H, Armstrong DK, Munro CS, Eady RA, 
Nakamura S, Kinouchi M, Takahashi H, Iizuka H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Asahikawa Medical College, Asahikawa, Japan. 
akemi@mail.asahikawa-med.ac.jp

Loricrin is a major constituent of the epidermal cornified cell envelope. We 
have recently identified heterozygous loricrin gene mutations in two dominantly 
inherited skin diseases, the ichthyotic variant of Vohwinkel syndrome and 
progressive symmetric erythrokeratoderma, collectively termed loricrin 
keratoderma. In order to see whether the mutant loricrin molecules predicted by 
DNA sequencing are expressed in vivo and to define their pathologic effects, we 
raised antibodies against synthetic peptides corresponding to the mutated 
sequences of loricrin. Immunoblotting of horny cell extracts from loricrin 
keratoderma patients showed specific bands for mutant loricrin. 
Immunohistochemistry of loricrin keratoderma skin biopsies showed positive 
immunoreactivity to the mutant loricrin antibodies in the nuclei of 
differentiated epidermal keratinocytes. The immunostaining was localized to the 
nucleoli of the lower granular cell layer. As keratinocyte differentiation 
progressed the immunoreactivity moved gradually into the nucleoplasm leaving 
nucleoli mostly nonimmunoreactive. No substantial staining was observed along 
the cornified cell envelope. This study confirmed that mutant loricrin was 
expressed in the loricrin keratoderma skin. Mutant loricrin, as a dominant 
negative disrupter, is not likely to affect cornified cell envelope crosslinking 
directly, but seems to interfere with nuclear/nucleolar functions of 
differentiating keratinocytes. In addition, detection of the mutant loricrin in 
scraped horny layer could provide a simple noninvasive screening test for 
loricrin keratoderma. J Invest Dermatol 115:1088-1094 2000

DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.2000.00163.x
PMID: 11121146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]