---
reference_id: "PMID:33421193"
title: "Disrupted nocturnal melatonin in autism: Association with tumor necrosis factor and sleep disturbances."
authors:
- da Silveira Cruz-Machado S
- Guissoni Campos LM
- Fadini CC
- Anderson G
- Markus RP
- Pinato L
journal: J Pineal Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/jpi.12715
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Autistic Disorder/complications, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Biomarkers/metabolism, urine"
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Circadian Rhythm
- Female
- Humans
- Interleukin-6/metabolism
- Male
- "Melatonin/analogs & derivatives, metabolism, urine"
- "Pineal Gland/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Saliva/metabolism
- Sleep
- "Sleep Disorders, Circadian Rhythm/etiology, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Time Factors
- Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disrupted nocturnal melatonin in autism: Association with tumor necrosis factor and sleep disturbances.
**Authors:** da Silveira Cruz-Machado S, Guissoni Campos LM, Fadini CC, Anderson G, Markus RP, Pinato L
**Journal:** J Pineal Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jpi.12715](https://doi.org/10.1111/jpi.12715)

## Content

1. J Pineal Res. 2021 Apr;70(3):e12715. doi: 10.1111/jpi.12715. Epub 2021 Jan 26.

Disrupted nocturnal melatonin in autism: Association with tumor necrosis factor 
and sleep disturbances.

da Silveira Cruz-Machado S(1), Guissoni Campos LM(2), Fadini CC(3), Anderson 
G(4), Markus RP(1), Pinato L(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Chronopharmacology, Department of Physiology, Institute of 
Biosciences, University of São Paulo (USP), São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, University of Marilia (UNIMAR), 
Marília, Brazil.
(3)Department of Speech, Language and Hearing Sciences, São Paulo State 
University (UNESP), Marilia, Brazil.
(4)CRC Scotland & London, London, UK.

Sleep disturbances, abnormal melatonin secretion, and increased inflammation are 
aspects of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) pathophysiology. The present study 
evaluated the daily urinary 6-sulfatoxymelatonin (aMT6s) excretion profile and 
the salivary levels of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) in 
20 controls and 20 ASD participants, as well as correlating these measures with 
sleep disturbances. Although 60% of ASD participants showed a significant 
night-time rise in aMT6s excretion, this rise was significantly attenuated, 
compared to controls (P < .05). The remaining 40% of ASD individuals showed no 
significant increase in nocturnal aMT6s. ASD individuals showed higher nocturnal 
levels of saliva TNF, but not IL-6. Dysfunction in the initiation and 
maintenance of sleep, as indicated by the Sleep Disturbance Scale for Children, 
correlated with night-time aMT6s excretion (r = -.28, P < .05). Dysfunction in 
sleep breathing was inversely correlated with aMT6s (r = -.31, P < .05) and 
positively associated with TNF level (r = .42, P < .01). Overall such data 
indicate immune-pineal axis activation, with elevated TNF but not IL-6 levels 
associated with disrupted pineal melatonin release and sleep dysfunction in ASD. 
It is proposed that circadian dysregulation in ASD is intimately linked to 
heightened immune-inflammatory activity. Such two-way interactions of the 
immune-pineal axis may underpin many aspects of ASD pathophysiology, including 
sleep disturbances, as well as cognitive and behavioral alterations.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jpi.12715
PMID: 33421193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]