---
reference_id: "PMID:33579859"
title: "DNA Repair in Huntington's Disease and Spinocerebellar Ataxias: Somatic Instability and Alternative Hypotheses."
authors:
- Maiuri T
- Hung CLK
- Suart C
- Begeja N
- Barba-Bazan C
- Peng Y
- Savic N
- Wong T
- Truant R
journal: J Huntingtons Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3233/JHD-200414
keywords:
- DNA Repair/genetics
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Genomic Instability/genetics
- Humans
- Huntington Disease/genetics
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DNA Repair in Huntington's Disease and Spinocerebellar Ataxias: Somatic Instability and Alternative Hypotheses.
**Authors:** Maiuri T, Hung CLK, Suart C, Begeja N, Barba-Bazan C, Peng Y, Savic N, Wong T, Truant R
**Journal:** J Huntingtons Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JHD-200414](https://doi.org/10.3233/JHD-200414)

## Content

1. J Huntingtons Dis. 2021;10(1):165-173. doi: 10.3233/JHD-200414.

DNA Repair in Huntington's Disease and Spinocerebellar Ataxias: Somatic 
Instability and Alternative Hypotheses.

Maiuri T(1), Hung CLK(1), Suart C(1), Begeja N(1), Barba-Bazan C(1), Peng Y(1), 
Savic N(1), Wong T(1), Truant R(1).

Author information:
(1)McMaster University, Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

The use of genome wide association studies (GWAS) in Huntington's disease (HD) 
research, driven by unbiased human data analysis, has transformed the focus of 
new targets that could affect age at onset. While there is a significant depth 
of information on DNA damage repair, with many drugs and drug targets, most of 
this development has taken place in the context of cancer therapy. DNA damage 
repair in neurons does not rely on DNA replication correction mechanisms. 
However, there is a strong connection between DNA repair and neuronal 
metabolism, mediated by nucleotide salvaging and the poly ADP-ribose (PAR) 
response, and this connection has been implicated in other age-onset 
neurodegenerative diseases. Validation of leads including the mismatch repair 
protein MSH3, and interstrand cross-link repair protein FAN1, suggest the 
mechanism is driven by somatic CAG instability, which is supported by the 
protective effect of CAA substitutions in the CAG tract. We currently do not 
understand: how somatic instability is triggered; the state of DNA damage within 
expanding alleles in the brain; whether this damage induces mismatch repair and 
interstrand cross-link pathways; whether instability mediates toxicity, and how 
this relates to human ageing. We discuss DNA damage pathways uncovered by HD 
GWAS, known roles of other polyglutamine disease proteins in DNA damage repair, 
and a panel of hypotheses for pathogenic mechanisms.

DOI: 10.3233/JHD-200414
PMCID: PMC7990435
PMID: 33579859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RT is member of SAB and shareholder, Mitokinin 
Inc. No other authors have a conflict of interest to report.