---
reference_id: "PMID:22952805"
title: Genome-wide association study of African and European Americans implicates multiple shared and ethnic specific loci in sarcoidosis susceptibility.
authors:
- Adrianto I
- Lin CP
- Hale JJ
- Levin AM
- Datta I
- Parker R
- Adler A
- Kelly JA
- Kaufman KM
- Lessard CJ
- Moser KL
- Kimberly RP
- Harley JB
- Iannuzzi MC
- Rybicki BA
- Montgomery CG
journal: PLoS One
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043907
keywords:
- Black or African American/genetics
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Female
- Genetic Loci/genetics
- "Genetic Predisposition to Disease/ethnology, genetics"
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- Major Histocompatibility Complex/genetics
- Male
- Meta-Analysis as Topic
- Pedigree
- Reproducibility of Results
- Sarcoidosis/genetics
- White People/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide association study of African and European Americans implicates multiple shared and ethnic specific loci in sarcoidosis susceptibility.
**Authors:** Adrianto I, Lin CP, Hale JJ, Levin AM, Datta I, Parker R, Adler A, Kelly JA, Kaufman KM, Lessard CJ, Moser KL, Kimberly RP, Harley JB, Iannuzzi MC, Rybicki BA, Montgomery CG
**Journal:** PLoS One (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0043907](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0043907)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43907. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043907. Epub 2012 Aug
27.

Genome-wide association study of African and European Americans implicates 
multiple shared and ethnic specific loci in sarcoidosis susceptibility.

Adrianto I(1), Lin CP, Hale JJ, Levin AM, Datta I, Parker R, Adler A, Kelly JA, 
Kaufman KM, Lessard CJ, Moser KL, Kimberly RP, Harley JB, Iannuzzi MC, Rybicki 
BA, Montgomery CG.

Author information:
(1)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research 
Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(9). 
doi:10.1371/annotation/800aa394-fb39-471b-b5c5-b648079921a4.

Sarcoidosis is a systemic inflammatory disease characterized by the formation of 
granulomas in affected organs. Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) of this 
disease have been conducted only in European population. We present the first 
sarcoidosis GWAS in African Americans (AAs, 818 cases and 1,088 related 
controls) followed by replication in independent sets of AAs (455 cases and 557 
controls) and European Americans (EAs, 442 cases and 2,284 controls). We 
evaluated >6 million SNPs either genotyped using the Illumina Omni1-Quad array 
or imputed from the 1000 Genomes Project data. We identified a novel 
sarcoidosis-associated locus, NOTCH4, that reached genome-wide significance in 
the combined AA samples (rs715299, P(AA-meta) = 6.51 × 10(-10)) and demonstrated 
the independence of this locus from others in the MHC region in the same sample. 
We replicated previous European GWAS associations within HLA-DRA, HLA-DRB5, 
HLA-DRB1, BTNL2, and ANXA11 in both our AA and EA datasets. We also confirmed 
significant associations to the previously reported HLA-C and HLA-B regions in 
the EA but not AA samples. We further identified suggestive associations with 
several other genes previously reported in lung or inflammatory diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043907
PMCID: PMC3428296
PMID: 22952805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: CGM is a PLoS ONE Editorial 
Board member. This does not alter the authors’ adherence to all the PLoS ONE 
policies on sharing data and materials. The authors declare no competing 
financial interests.