---
reference_id: "PMID:24992143"
title: "The inflammasome and lupus: another innate immune mechanism contributing to disease pathogenesis?"
authors:
- Kahlenberg JM
- Kaplan MJ
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000088
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The inflammasome and lupus: another innate immune mechanism contributing to disease pathogenesis?
**Authors:** Kahlenberg JM, Kaplan MJ
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0000000000000088](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0000000000000088)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2014 Sep;26(5):475-81. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000088.

The inflammasome and lupus: another innate immune mechanism contributing to 
disease pathogenesis?

Kahlenberg JM(1), Kaplan MJ.

Author information:
(1)aDivision of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan bSystemic Autoimmunity Branch, Intramural Research 
Program, National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Disorders, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The role of innate immunity in systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE) has been a rapidly expanding area of research over the last decade. 
Included in this rubric is the concept that activation of the inflammasome, a 
molecular complex that activates caspase-1 and in turn the cytokines IL-1β and 
IL-18, is important in lupus pathogenesis. This review will summarize the recent 
discoveries exploring the role of the inflammasome machinery in SLE.
RECENT FINDINGS: Immune complexes can activate the NLRP3 inflammasome, and 
SLE-derived macrophages are hyper-responsive to innate immune stimuli, leading 
to enhanced activation of the inflammasome and production of inflammatory 
cytokines. Work in several murine models suggests an important role for the 
NLRP3 inflammasome in mediating lupus nephritis. Caspase-1, the central enzyme 
of the inflammasome, is essential for the development of type I interferon 
responses, autoantibody production, and nephritis in the pristane model of 
lupus. The absence of melanoma 2 inflammasome may have protective and pathogenic 
roles in SLE.
SUMMARY: Recent evidence suggests that the inflammasome machinery is 
dysregulated in SLE, plays an important role in promotion of organ damage, and 
may mediate cross-talk between environmental triggers and the development of 
lupus. Further research should focus on whether inhibition of inflammasome 
components may serve as a viable target for therapeutic development in SLE.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000088
PMCID: PMC4153426
PMID: 24992143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]