---
reference_id: "PMID:38286821"
title: Obesity causes mitochondrial fragmentation and dysfunction in white adipocytes due to RalA activation.
authors:
- Xia W
- Veeragandham P
- Cao Y
- Xu Y
- Rhyne TE
- Qian J
- Hung CW
- Zhao P
- Jones Y
- Gao H
- Liddle C
- Yu RT
- Downes M
- Evans RM
- Rydén M
- Wabitsch M
- Wang Z
- Hakozaki H
- Schöneberg J
- Reilly SM
- Huang J
- Saltiel AR
journal: Nat Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s42255-024-00978-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Obesity causes mitochondrial fragmentation and dysfunction in white adipocytes due to RalA activation.
**Authors:** Xia W, Veeragandham P, Cao Y, Xu Y, Rhyne TE, Qian J, Hung CW, Zhao P, Jones Y, Gao H, Liddle C, Yu RT, Downes M, Evans RM, Rydén M, Wabitsch M, Wang Z, Hakozaki H, Schöneberg J, Reilly SM, Huang J, Saltiel AR
**Journal:** Nat Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s42255-024-00978-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-024-00978-0)

## Content

1. Nat Metab. 2024 Feb;6(2):273-289. doi: 10.1038/s42255-024-00978-0. Epub 2024
Jan  29.

Obesity causes mitochondrial fragmentation and dysfunction in white adipocytes 
due to RalA activation.

Xia W(1), Veeragandham P(1), Cao Y(1), Xu Y(1), Rhyne TE(1), Qian J(1), Hung 
CW(1), Zhao P(1)(2), Jones Y(3), Gao H(4), Liddle C(5), Yu RT(6), Downes M(6), 
Evans RM(6), Rydén M(7), Wabitsch M(8), Wang Z(9)(10), Hakozaki H(9)(10), 
Schöneberg J(9)(10), Reilly SM(1)(11), Huang J(6), Saltiel AR(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, University 
of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Structural Biology, University of Texas Health 
Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(3)Electron Microscopy Core, Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of 
California San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(5)Storr Liver Centre, Westmead Institute for Medical Research and Westmead 
Hospital, University of Sydney School of Medicine, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(6)Gene Expression Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, San Diego, 
CA, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine (H7), Karolinska Institute (C2-94), Karolinska 
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Division of Pediatric 
Endocrinology and Diabetes, Ulm University Medical Center, Ulm, Germany.
(9)Department of Pharmacology, University of California San Diego, San Diego, 
CA, USA.
(10)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California San 
Diego, San Diego, CA, USA.
(11)Weill Center for Metabolic Health, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and 
Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(12)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, University 
of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA. asaltiel@health.ucsd.edu.
(13)Department of Pharmacology, University of California San Diego, San Diego, 
CA, USA. asaltiel@health.ucsd.edu.

Update of
    Res Sq. 2023 Jun 02:rs.3.rs-2923510. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-2923510/v1.

Mitochondrial dysfunction is a characteristic trait of human and rodent obesity, 
insulin resistance and fatty liver disease. Here we show that high-fat diet 
(HFD) feeding causes mitochondrial fragmentation in inguinal white adipocytes 
from male mice, leading to reduced oxidative capacity by a process dependent on 
the small GTPase RalA. RalA expression and activity are increased in white 
adipocytes after HFD. Targeted deletion of RalA in white adipocytes prevents 
fragmentation of mitochondria and diminishes HFD-induced weight gain by 
increasing fatty acid oxidation. Mechanistically, RalA increases fission in 
adipocytes by reversing the inhibitory Ser637 phosphorylation of the fission 
protein Drp1, leading to more mitochondrial fragmentation. Adipose tissue 
expression of the human homolog of Drp1, DNM1L, is positively correlated with 
obesity and insulin resistance. Thus, chronic activation of RalA plays a key 
role in repressing energy expenditure in obese adipose tissue by shifting the 
balance of mitochondrial dynamics toward excessive fission, contributing to 
weight gain and metabolic dysfunction.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s42255-024-00978-0
PMCID: PMC10896723
PMID: 38286821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.