---
reference_id: "PMID:30743080"
title: "Rituximab therapy for primary central nervous system vasculitis: A 6 patient experience and review of the literature."
authors:
- Salvarani C
- Brown RD Jr
- Muratore F
- Christianson TJH
- Galli E
- Pipitone N
- Cassone G
- Huston J III
- Giannini C
- Warrington K
- Hunder GG
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2018.12.002
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Female
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Rituximab/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/drug therapy, immunology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rituximab therapy for primary central nervous system vasculitis: A 6 patient experience and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Salvarani C, Brown RD Jr, Muratore F, Christianson TJH, Galli E, Pipitone N, Cassone G, Huston J III, Giannini C, Warrington K, Hunder GG
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2018.12.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2018.12.002)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2019 Apr;18(4):399-405. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2018.12.002. Epub
 2019 Feb 10.

Rituximab therapy for primary central nervous system vasculitis: A 6 patient 
experience and review of the literature.

Salvarani C(1), Brown RD Jr(2), Muratore F(3), Christianson TJH(4), Galli E(5), 
Pipitone N(3), Cassone G(5), Huston J III(6), Giannini C(7), Warrington K(8), 
Hunder GG(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Azienda USL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, 
Italy; Università di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. Electronic address: 
salvarani.carlo@ausl.re.it.
(2)Department of Neurology, the Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Azienda USL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, the Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, United States.
(5)Division of Rheumatology, Azienda USL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, 
Italy; Università di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(6)Department of Radiology, the Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.
(7)Department of Anatomic Pathology, the Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United 
States.
(8)Division of Rheumatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.

OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of Rituximab (RTX) in adult 
primary central nervous system vasculitis (PCNSV).
METHODS: We retrospectively assessed the effect of RTX in 6 patients with PCNSV. 
Five of the 6 were refractory to high dose glucocorticoids (GCs) and/or 
conventional immunosuppressants (IS). The sixth was newly diagnosed and received 
RTX in combination with GCs. Clinical evaluation, laboratory tests, and imaging 
modalities were performed at initial RTX administration and during the 
follow-up. Treatment response was assessed using the treating physician's global 
opinion regarding response and the degree of disability using the modified 
Rankin scale (mRS). We also performed a literature review for previous use of 
RTX in PCNSV using PubMed, Ovid Medline, and the Cochrane library.
RESULTS: The six patients (3 females) had a median age at diagnosis of 
50.5 years (range 17-68 years). All had active disease when RTX was started. In 
4 patients, RTX administration was associated with a marked reduction in the 
number of flares (from 18 before starting RTX to 3 after). One patient, after an 
initial improvement, had 2 flares when B cells were depleted and he was not able 
to reduce prednisone below 20 mg/day. A 6th patient had a flare when B cells 
recovered and retreatment with RTX re-induced and maintained remission. The 
median mRS score at last visit (median: 2; range 0-4) was lower than that prior 
to treatment (median 3; range 1-5). The median prednisone daily dose before RTX 
administration was significantly higher than that at last follow-up (p = .006). 
In the literature review, we identified 5 papers describing 7 patients treated 
with RTX. Six patients responded to RTX with clinical and MRI improvement with 
no reported flares after RTX treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data support a potential role for RTX treatment in selected 
patients with PCNSV.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2018.12.002
PMID: 30743080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]