---
reference_id: "PMID:28281457"
title: "Evaluation of the effect of sildenafil on the microvascular blood flow in patients with systemic sclerosis: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study."
authors:
- Andrigueti FV
- Ebbing PCC
- Arismendi MI
- Kayser C
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2017'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of the effect of sildenafil on the microvascular blood flow in patients with systemic sclerosis: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
**Authors:** Andrigueti FV, Ebbing PCC, Arismendi MI, Kayser C
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2017)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2017 Sep-Oct;35 Suppl 106(4):151-158. Epub 2017 Mar 9.

Evaluation of the effect of sildenafil on the microvascular blood flow in 
patients with systemic sclerosis: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
study.

Andrigueti FV(1), Ebbing PCC(1), Arismendi MI(1), Kayser C(2).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology Division, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de 
São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Rheumatology Division, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de 
São Paulo, Brazil. cristiane.kayser@unifesp.br.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effect of sildenafil as add-on therapy on the 
microvascular blood flow in patients with Raynaud's phenomenon (RP) secondary to 
systemic sclerosis (SSc).
METHODS: In this double-blind, placebo-controlled study, 41 patients with RP 
secondary to SSc were randomly assigned to receive oral sildenafil 100 mg/day 
(21 patients, mean age 47.2 years) or placebo (20 patients, mean age 41.6 years) 
for 8 weeks. Patients were evaluated at baseline, 8 weeks after treatment, and 2 
weeks after the end of the treatment. The primary outcome measures were the mean 
changes in finger blood flow (FBF) measured using laser Doppler imaging before 
and after cold stimulus at 8 weeks of treatment. Secondary endpoints included 
frequency and duration of RP attacks, Visual Analog Scale (VAS) score for RP 
severity, Raynaud's condition score, and serum levels of VEGF and endothelial 
progenitor cells (EPCs).
RESULTS: After 8 weeks of treatment, the sildenafil group presented a 
significantly higher mean percentage change from baseline in FBF before cold 
stimulus (p=0.026), and in FBF after cold stimulus (p=0.028) compared with the 
placebo group. There was a significant improvement in the duration of RP and in 
the percentage change from baseline to week 8 in the RP VAS score in sildenafil 
compared with placebo. There were no changes in EPCs and VEGF levels after 
treatment in either group.
CONCLUSIONS: Sildenafil improved digital blood flow and RP symptoms in SSc 
patients after 8 weeks of treatment, and might be a good therapeutic option for 
secondary RP.

PMID: 28281457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]