---
reference_id: "PMID:29846843"
title: "Efficacy and safety of Velmanase alfa in the treatment of patients with alpha-mannosidosis: results from the core and extension phase analysis of a phase III multicentre, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled trial."
authors:
- Borgwardt L
- Guffon N
- Amraoui Y
- Dali CI
- De Meirleir L
- Gil-Campos M
- Heron B
- Geraci S
- Ardigò D
- Cattaneo F
- Fogh J
- Van den Hout JMH
- Beck M
- Jones SA
- Tylki-Szymanska A
- Haugsted U
- Lund AM
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-018-0185-0
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Double-Blind Method
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy
- Europe
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Quality of Life
- "Recombinant Proteins/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
- "alpha-Mannosidase/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "alpha-Mannosidosis/enzymology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of Velmanase alfa in the treatment of patients with alpha-mannosidosis: results from the core and extension phase analysis of a phase III multicentre, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled trial.
**Authors:** Borgwardt L, Guffon N, Amraoui Y, Dali CI, De Meirleir L, Gil-Campos M, Heron B, Geraci S, Ardigò D, Cattaneo F, Fogh J, Van den Hout JMH, Beck M, Jones SA, Tylki-Szymanska A, Haugsted U, Lund AM
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-018-0185-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-018-0185-0)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2018 Nov;41(6):1215-1223. doi: 10.1007/s10545-018-0185-0.
 Epub 2018 May 30.

Efficacy and safety of Velmanase alfa in the treatment of patients with
alpha-mannosidosis: results from the core and extension phase analysis of a
phase III multicentre, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled trial.

Borgwardt L(1)(2)(3), Guffon N(4), Amraoui Y(5), Dali CI(6), De Meirleir L(7),
Gil-Campos M(8), Heron B(9), Geraci S(10), Ardigò D(10), Cattaneo F(10), Fogh
J(11), Van den Hout JMH(12), Beck M(13), Jones SA(14), Tylki-Szymanska A(15),
Haugsted U(16), Lund AM(6)(17).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Centre for Inherited
Metabolic Diseases, Copenhagen, Denmark. Line.Gutte.Borgwardt@regionh.dk.
(2)Center for Genomic Medicine, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet,
Copenhagen, Denmark. Line.Gutte.Borgwardt@regionh.dk.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Line.Gutte.Borgwardt@regionh.dk.
(4)Centre de Référence des Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme, Hôpital Femme
Mère Enfant, Lyon, France.
(5)Center for Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center
Mainz, Villa Metabolica, Mainz, Germany.
(6)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Centre for Inherited
Metabolic Diseases, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Paediatric Neurology and Metabolism, Universitair Ziekenhuis, Brussel,
Belgium.
(8)Unidad de Metabolismo e Investigación Pediátrica, Hospital Universitario
Reina Sofía, IMIBIC, Universidad de Córdoba, CIBERObn, Córdoba, Spain.
(9)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Reference Center for Lysosomal Diseases,
Trousseau Hospital, APHP, and GRC ConCer-LD, Sorbonne Universities, UPMC
University 06, Paris, France.
(10)Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A, Parma, Italy.
(11)Zymenex A/S, Hillerød, Denmark.
(12)Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases (Department of Pediatrics),
Erasmus MC University Medical Center - Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands.
(13)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center, Mainz, Germany.
(14)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester University
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(15)Department of Paediatric, Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases, The Children's
Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
(16)Department of Occupational Therapy and Physiotherapy, Copenhagen University
Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(17)Department of Clinical Genetics, Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.

INTRODUCTION: This phase III, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled trial
(and extension phase) was designed to assess the efficacy and safety of
velmanase alfa (VA) in alpha-mannosidosis (AM) patients.
METHODS: Twenty-five patients were randomised to weekly 1 mg/kg VA or placebo
for 52 weeks. At study conclusion, placebo patients switched to VA; 23 patients
continued receiving VA in compassionate-use/follow-on studies and were evaluated
in the extension phase [last observation (LO)]. Co-primary endpoints were
changes in serum oligosaccharide (S-oligo) and in the 3-min stair-climb test
(3MSCT).
RESULTS: Mean relative change in S-oligo in the VA arm was -77.6% [95%
confidence interval (CI) -81.6 to -72.8] at week 52 and -62.9% (95% CI -85.8 to
-40.0) at LO; mean relative change in the placebo arm was -24.1% (95% CI -40.3
to -3.6) at week 52 and -55.7% (95% CI -76.4 to -34.9) at LO after switch to
active treatment. Mean relative change in 3MSCT at week 52 was -1.1% (95% CI
-9.0 to 7.6) and - % (95% CI -13.4 to 6.5) for VA and placebo, respectively. At
LO, the mean relative change was 3.9% (95% CI -5.5 to 13.2) in the VA arm and
9.0% (95% CI -10.3 to 28.3) in placebo patients after switch to active
treatment. Similar improvement pattern was observed in secondary parameters. A
post hoc analysis investigated whether some factors at baseline could account
for treatment outcome; none of those factors were predictive of the response to
VA, besides age.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings support the utility of VA for the treatment of AM,
with more evident benefit over time and when treatment is started in the
paediatric age.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-018-0185-0
PMCID: PMC6326984
PMID: 29846843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AML, LDM, MGC, NG, BH and MB were investigators
of the rhLAMAN05 study sponsored by Zymenx A/S. The trial was part of the
ALPHA-MAN project funded by EU. AML and NG have received investigator’s fees
from Zymenex and Chiesi as principal investigators in the rhLAMAN-07 or − 09
studies. FC, DA and SG are employees of Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A. JF is an
employee and board member of Zymenex A/S. YA has received consulting fees from
Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A. SAJ has received consulting fees from Genzyme, Shire,
Biomarin, Alexion, Ultragenyx and Orchard Therapeutics. LB received travel
reimbursement from Chiesi for participation in two congresses when presenting
the study data. CID, JMPVdH, ATS, and UH have no competing interests to
disclose.
