---
reference_id: "PMID:38251565"
title: "Autoantibody-negative rheumatoid arthritis: still a challenge for the rheumatologist."
authors:
- Bugatti S
- De Stefano L
- Gandolfo S
- Ciccia F
- Montecucco C
journal: Lancet Rheumatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/S2665-9913(23)00242-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoantibody-negative rheumatoid arthritis: still a challenge for the rheumatologist.
**Authors:** Bugatti S, De Stefano L, Gandolfo S, Ciccia F, Montecucco C
**Journal:** Lancet Rheumatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2665-9913(23)00242-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2665-9913(23)00242-4)

## Content

1. Lancet Rheumatol. 2023 Dec;5(12):e743-e755. doi:
10.1016/S2665-9913(23)00242-4.  Epub 2023 Oct 30.

Autoantibody-negative rheumatoid arthritis: still a challenge for the 
rheumatologist.

Bugatti S(1), De Stefano L(2), Gandolfo S(3), Ciccia F(4), Montecucco C(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Therapeutics, Università di Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy; Division of Rheumatology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, 
Italy. Electronic address: serena.bugatti@unipv.it.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine and Therapeutics, Università di Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy; Division of Rheumatology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, 
Italy.
(3)UOSD di Reumatologia, Ospedale San Giovanni Bosco, Naples, Italy.
(4)Dipartimento di Medicina di Precisione, Università della Campania L 
Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy.
(5)Division of Rheumatology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, 
Italy.

Increased research over the past 30 years has greatly improved the understanding 
of the pathophysiological mechanisms and clinical aspects of 
autoantibody-positive rheumatoid arthritis, resulting in improved management and 
outcomes. In contrast, the subset of rheumatoid arthritis that does not have 
autoantibodies (such as rheumatoid factor and anti-citrullinated protein 
autoantibodies) remains less well defined in its pathogenic mechanisms. 
Autoantibody-negative rheumatoid arthritis continues to pose diagnostic 
challenges, might respond differently to therapies, and appears to be burdened 
with different comorbidities and outcomes. The clear separation of rheumatoid 
arthritis according to serotypes is still a subject of uncertainty and 
controversy, and studies specifically focused on comparing rheumatoid arthritis 
and rheumatoid arthritis-like arthritides that do not have autoantibodies remain 
scarce. The purpose of this Review is to summarise the peculiarities that make 
autoantibody-negative rheumatoid arthritis different from its 
autoantibody-positive counterpart, with the aim of generating debate and 
stimulating further research on this challenging condition.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2665-9913(23)00242-4
PMID: 38251565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests SB reports grant or 
research support from Pfizer, and personal fees and speaking honoraria from 
AbbVie, Alfasigma, Bristol Myers Squibb, Fresenius Kabi, Lilly, and Pfizer. FC 
reports consulting fees and speaking honoraria from AbbVie, Astra Zeneca, 
Galapagos, GSK, Janssen, Lilly, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, and UCB. CM reports 
consulting fees and speaking honoraria from AbbVie, Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, 
Galapagos, Janssen, Lilly, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, and Roche. All other authors 
report no competing interests.