---
reference_id: "PMID:26301204"
title: Immunotherapy of Childhood Sarcomas.
authors:
- Roberts SS
- Chou AJ
- Cheung NK
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00181
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunotherapy of Childhood Sarcomas.
**Authors:** Roberts SS, Chou AJ, Cheung NK
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2015.00181](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2015.00181)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2015 Aug 7;5:181. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00181. eCollection 2015.

Immunotherapy of Childhood Sarcomas.

Roberts SS(1), Chou AJ(1), Cheung NK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center , New York,
NY , USA.

Pediatric sarcomas are a heterogeneous group of malignant tumors of bone and
soft tissue origin. Although more than 100 different histologic subtypes have
been described, the majority of pediatric cases belong to the Ewing's family of
tumors, rhabdomyosarcoma and osteosarcoma. Most patients that present with
localized stage are curable with surgery and/or chemotherapy; however, those
with metastatic disease at diagnosis or those who experience a relapse continue
to have a very poor prognosis. New therapies for these patients are urgently
needed. Immunotherapy is an established treatment modality for both liquid and
solid tumors, and in pediatrics, most notably for neuroblastoma and
osteosarcoma. In the past, immunomodulatory agents such as interferon,
interleukin-2, and liposomal-muramyl tripeptide phosphatidyl-ethanolamine have
been tried, with some activity seen in subsets of patients; additionally,
various cancer vaccines have been studied with possible benefit. Monoclonal
antibody therapies against tumor antigens such as disialoganglioside GD2 or
immune checkpoint targets such as CTLA-4 and PD-1 are being actively explored in
pediatric sarcomas. Building on the success of adoptive T cell therapy for
EBV-related lymphoma, strategies to redirect T cells using chimeric antigen
receptors and bispecific antibodies are rapidly evolving with potential for the
treatment of sarcomas. This review will focus on recent preclinical and clinical
developments in targeted agents for pediatric sarcomas with emphasis on the
immunobiology of immune checkpoints, immunoediting, tumor microenvironment,
antibody engineering, cell engineering, and tumor vaccines. The future
integration of antibody-based and cell-based therapies into an overall treatment
strategy of sarcoma will be discussed.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00181
PMCID: PMC4528283
PMID: 26301204
