---
reference_id: "PMID:16254181"
title: Recurrent fusion of TMPRSS2 and ETS transcription factor genes in prostate cancer.
authors:
- Tomlins SA
- Rhodes DR
- Perner S
- Dhanasekaran SM
- Mehra R
- Sun XW
- Varambally S
- Cao X
- Tchinda J
- Kuefer R
- Lee C
- Montie JE
- Shah RB
- Pienta KJ
- Rubin MA
- Chinnaiyan AM
journal: Science
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1126/science.1117679
keywords:
- Androgens/metabolism
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Gene Rearrangement
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Prostatic Neoplasms/genetics
- Serine Endopeptidases/genetics
- Trans-Activators/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Transcriptional Regulator ERG
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent fusion of TMPRSS2 and ETS transcription factor genes in prostate cancer.
**Authors:** Tomlins SA, Rhodes DR, Perner S, Dhanasekaran SM, Mehra R, Sun XW, Varambally S, Cao X, Tchinda J, Kuefer R, Lee C, Montie JE, Shah RB, Pienta KJ, Rubin MA, Chinnaiyan AM
**Journal:** Science (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1117679](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1117679)

## Content

1. Science. 2005 Oct 28;310(5748):644-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1117679.

Recurrent fusion of TMPRSS2 and ETS transcription factor genes in prostate 
cancer.

Tomlins SA(1), Rhodes DR, Perner S, Dhanasekaran SM, Mehra R, Sun XW, Varambally 
S, Cao X, Tchinda J, Kuefer R, Lee C, Montie JE, Shah RB, Pienta KJ, Rubin MA, 
Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, 1301 
Catherine Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0602, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2005 Oct 28;310(5748):603. doi: 10.1126/science.310.5748.603a.
    Eur Urol. 2007 May;51(5):1443-4. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2007.02.021.

Recurrent chromosomal rearrangements have not been well characterized in common 
carcinomas. We used a bioinformatics approach to discover candidate oncogenic 
chromosomal aberrations on the basis of outlier gene expression. Two ETS 
transcription factors, ERG and ETV1, were identified as outliers in prostate 
cancer. We identified recurrent gene fusions of the 5' untranslated region of 
TMPRSS2 to ERG or ETV1 in prostate cancer tissues with outlier expression. By 
using fluorescence in situ hybridization, we demonstrated that 23 of 29 prostate 
cancer samples harbor rearrangements in ERG or ETV1. Cell line experiments 
suggest that the androgen-responsive promoter elements of TMPRSS2 mediate the 
overexpression of ETS family members in prostate cancer. These results have 
implications in the development of carcinomas and the molecular diagnosis and 
treatment of prostate cancer.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1117679
PMID: 16254181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]