---
reference_id: "PMID:35055657"
title: "Wolfram Syndrome Type 2: A Systematic Review of a Not Easily Identifiable Clinical Spectrum."
authors:
- Rosanio FM
- Di Candia F
- Occhiati L
- Fedi L
- Malvone FP
- Foschini DF
- Franzese A
- Mozzillo E
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph19020835
keywords:
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/complications"
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/complications, genetics"
- Mutation
- "Optic Atrophy/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- "Wolfram Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wolfram Syndrome Type 2: A Systematic Review of a Not Easily Identifiable Clinical Spectrum.
**Authors:** Rosanio FM, Di Candia F, Occhiati L, Fedi L, Malvone FP, Foschini DF, Franzese A, Mozzillo E
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph19020835](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19020835)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022 Jan 12;19(2):835. doi:
10.3390/ijerph19020835.

Wolfram Syndrome Type 2: A Systematic Review of a Not Easily Identifiable
Clinical Spectrum.

Rosanio FM(1), Di Candia F(1), Occhiati L(1), Fedi L(1), Malvone FP(1), Foschini
DF(1), Franzese A(1), Mozzillo E(1).

Author information:
(1)Regional Center of Pediatric Diabetes, Department of Translational Medical
Sciences, Section of Pediatrics, Federico II University, Via Sergio Pansini 5,
80131 Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Wolfram syndrome (WS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that is
characterized by the presence of diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy and hearing
loss, all of which are crucial elements for the diagnosis. WS is variably
associated with diabetes insipidus, neurological disorders, urinary tract
anomalies, endocrine dysfunctions and many other systemic manifestations. Since
Wolfram and Wagener first described WS in 1938, new phenotypic/genotypic
variants of the syndrome have been observed and the clinical picture has been
significantly enriched. To date, two main subtypes of WS that associated with
two different mutations are known: WS type 1 (WS1), caused by the mutation of
the wolframine gene (WS1; 606201), and WS type 2 (WS2), caused by the mutation
of the CISD2 gene (WS2; 604928).
METHODS: A systematic review of the literature was describe the phenotypic
characteristics of WS2 in order to highlight the key elements that differentiate
it from the classic form.
CONCLUSION: WS2 is the rarest and most recently identified subtype of WS; its
clinical picture is partially overlapping with that of WS1, from which it
traditionally differs by the absence of diabetes insipidus and the presence of
greater bleeding tendency and peptic ulcers.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph19020835
PMCID: PMC8776149
PMID: 35055657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
