---
reference_id: PMID:20301367
title: Oral-Facial-Digital Syndrome Type I.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Franco B
- Bruel AL
- Thauvin-Robinet C
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oral-Facial-Digital Syndrome Type I.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Franco B, Bruel AL, Thauvin-Robinet C

## Content

1. Oral-Facial-Digital Syndrome Type I.

Franco B(1), Bruel AL(2), Thauvin-Robinet C(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2002 Jul 24 [updated 2023 May 11].

Author information:
(1)Principal Investigator, Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine;, 
Professor, Medical Genetics, Department of Translational Medical Sciences, 
University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy
(2)Research Engineer, Genetics of Disorders of Development Team, University of 
Burgundy, Dijon, France
(3)Assistant and Research Investigator, University Hospital Federation - 
Translational Medicine and Developmental Anomalies;, Professor, Medical 
Genetics, Children's Hospital Genetic Center, Genetics of Disorders of 
Development Team, University of Burgundy, Dijon, France

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Oral-facial-digital syndrome type I (OFD1) is usually 
male lethal during gestation and predominantly affects females. OFD1 is 
characterized by the following: oral features (lobulated tongue, tongue nodules, 
cleft of the hard or soft palate, accessory gingival frenulae, hypodontia, and 
other dental abnormalities); facial features (widely spaced eyes, telecanthus, 
hypoplasia of the alae nasi, median cleft or pseudocleft of the upper lip, 
micrognathia); digital features (brachydactyly, syndactyly, clinodactyly of the 
fifth finger, duplicated great toe); polycystic kidney disease; brain MRI 
findings (intracerebral cysts, agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar 
agenesis with or without Dandy-Walker malformation); and intellectual disability 
(in approximately 50% of affected individuals).
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of OFD1 is established in a female proband with 
suggestive findings and a heterozygous OFD1 pathogenic variant identified by 
molecular genetic testing. The diagnosis of OFD1 is established in a male 
proband with suggestive findings and a hemizygous pathogenic variant in OFD1 
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Surgery for cleft lip/palate, tongue 
nodules, accessory frenulae, syndactyly, and polydactyly; speech therapy and 
aggressive treatment of otitis media as needed; removal of accessory teeth; 
orthodontia for malocclusion; routine treatment for seizures and kidney disease; 
early intervention and individualized education plan as needed; standard 
treatments for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and/or autistic 
features; hearing aids and community hearing services as needed. Surveillance: 
Annual audiology evaluation and assessment of speech development in children 
with cleft lip and/or cleft palate; annual dental evaluation or as recommended 
by the dentist; assessment for new seizures or changes in seizures as 
recommended by neurologist in those with brain involvement. Annual blood 
pressure; serum creatinine; and kidney, liver, pancreas, and ovarian ultrasound 
for cystic disease beginning at age ten years. Assess developmental progress, 
educational needs, and behavioral manifestations at each visit. Evaluation of 
relatives at risk: It is appropriate to evaluate the genetic status of 
apparently asymptomatic female relatives (even in the absence of oral, facial, 
and digital anomalies) to determine if they are at risk for kidney disease. 
Pregnancy management: Careful monitoring of blood pressure and kidney function 
during pregnancy is warranted.
GENETIC COUNSELING: OFD1 is inherited in an X-linked manner with, typically, 
male lethality. The full OFD1 phenotype has not been described in males beyond 
the perinatal period. Approximately 75% of affected females represent simplex 
cases (i.e., the occurrence of OFD1 in a single family member) and have a de 
novo pathogenic variant; approximately 25% of females diagnosed with OFD1 have 
an affected mother (mildly affected females may be diagnosed after the 
identification of a severely affected individual). If the mother of the proband 
has an OFD1 pathogenic variant, the chance of transmitting the pathogenic 
variant in each pregnancy is 50%; however, most male conceptuses with the OFD1 
pathogenic variant miscarry. It is possible for an affected male to be born 
alive, though this is exceedingly rare. Thus, at delivery the expected sex ratio 
of offspring is: 33% unaffected females; 33% affected females; 33% unaffected 
males. Once the OFD1 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected 
family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301367