---
reference_id: "PMID:40086646"
title: High-throughput assay for predicting diarrhea risk using a 2D human intestinal stem cell-derived model.
authors:
- Pike CM
- Levi JA
- Boone LA
- Peddibhotla S
- Johnson J
- Zwarycz B
- Bunger MK
- Thelin W
- Boazak EM
journal: Toxicol In Vitro
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2025.106040
keywords:
- Humans
- Diarrhea/chemically induced
- Stem Cells/drug effects
- Intestines/cytology
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- High-Throughput Screening Assays
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Antineoplastic Agents/toxicity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High-throughput assay for predicting diarrhea risk using a 2D human intestinal stem cell-derived model.
**Authors:** Pike CM, Levi JA, Boone LA, Peddibhotla S, Johnson J, Zwarycz B, Bunger MK, Thelin W, Boazak EM
**Journal:** Toxicol In Vitro (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tiv.2025.106040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tiv.2025.106040)

## Content

1. Toxicol In Vitro. 2025 Jun;106:106040. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2025.106040. Epub
2025  Mar 12.

High-throughput assay for predicting diarrhea risk using a 2D human intestinal
stem cell-derived model.

Pike CM(1), Levi JA(1), Boone LA(1), Peddibhotla S(1), Johnson J(1), Zwarycz
B(1), Bunger MK(1), Thelin W(1), Boazak EM(2).

Author information:
(1)Altis Biosystems, Durham, NC, 27709, USA.
(2)Altis Biosystems, Durham, NC, 27709, USA. Electronic address:
liz@altisbiosystems.com.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Aug 28:2024.08.28.610072. doi: 10.1101/2024.08.28.610072.

Gastrointestinal toxicities (GITs) in clinical trials often lead to
dose-limitations that reduce drug efficacy and delay treatment optimization.
Preclinical animal models do not accurately replicate human physiology, leaving
few options for early detection of GITs, such as diarrhea, before human studies.
Chemotherapeutic agents, known to cause clinical diarrhea, frequently target
mitotic cells. Therefore, we hypothesized a model utilizing proliferative cell
populations derived from human intestinal crypts would predict clinical diarrhea
occurrence with high accuracy. Here, we describe the development of a diarrhea
prediction assay utilizing RepliGut® Planar, a primary intestinal stem
cell-derived platform. To evaluate the ability of this model to predict clinical
diarrhea risk, we assessed toxicity of 30 marketed drugs by measuring cell
proliferation (EdU incorporation), cell abundance (nuclei quantification), and
barrier formation (TEER) in cells derived from three human donors. Dose response
curves were generated for each drug, and the IC15 to Cmax ratio was used to
identify a threshold for assay positivity. This model accurately predicted
diarrhea potential, achieving an accuracy of 91 % for proliferation, 90 % for
abundance, and 88 % for barrier formation. In vitro toxicity screening using
primary proliferative cells may reduce clinical diarrhea and ultimately lead to
safer and more effective treatments for patients.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tiv.2025.106040
PMCID: PMC12412184
PMID: 40086646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Elizabeth
Boazak reports financial support was provided by National Institutes of Health.
William Thelin reports financial support was provided by National Institutes of
Health. Elizabeth Boazak reports a relationship with Altis Biosystems that
includes: employment. Colleen Pike reports a relationship with Altis Biosystems
that includes: employment. James Levi reports a relationship with Altis
Biosystems that includes: employment. Swetha Peddibhotla reports a relationship
with Altis Biosystems that includes: employment. Lauren Boone reports a
relationship with Altis Biosystems that includes: employment. Jacob Johnson
reports a relationship with Altis Biosystems that includes: employment. Bailey
Zwarycza reports a relationship with Altis Biosystems that includes: employment.
Maureen Bunger reports a relationship with Altis Biosystems that includes:
employment. William Thelin reports a relationship with Altis Biosystems that
includes: employment. If there are other authors, they declare that they have no
known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
