---
reference_id: "PMID:22863391"
title: "Subclinical Cushing's syndrome."
authors:
- De Leo M
- Cozzolino A
- Colao A
- Pivonello R
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.beem.2012.02.001
keywords:
- "Adrenal Gland Neoplasms/complications, diagnosis, surgery"
- Adrenalectomy
- "Cushing Syndrome/diagnosis, etiology, surgery"
- Humans
- Hypothalamo-Hypophyseal System/physiopathology
- Pituitary-Adrenal System/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Subclinical Cushing's syndrome.
**Authors:** De Leo M, Cozzolino A, Colao A, Pivonello R
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.beem.2012.02.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beem.2012.02.001)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Aug;26(4):497-505. doi:
10.1016/j.beem.2012.02.001. Epub 2012 May 22.

Subclinical Cushing's syndrome.

De Leo M(1), Cozzolino A, Colao A, Pivonello R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Clinical Endocrinology and Oncology, Federico II
University, Via Sergio Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy.

The routine use of abdominal procedure has significantly increased the
incidental finding of adrenal masses. The prevalence of these tumors, commonly
defined as adrenal incidentalomas, ranges between 2-3% in autopsy and 4% in
radiological series, reaching 5-8% in oncological studies and increasing with
patients age. Although clinically silent, in 5-20% of cases, adrenal
incidentalomas are responsible for a subtle cortisol overproduction, commonly
defined as "subclinical Cushing's syndrome" (SCS). This term is used to describe
autonomous cortisol secretion in patients who don't have the typical signs and
symptoms of hypercortisolism. The optimal strategy for identification and
management of SCS is unknown; the standard biochemical tests used to screen for
overt Cushing's syndrome are generally ill-suited to the assessment of patients
who have no, or only very mild signs of cortisol excess, then many tests aimed
to study the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA) axis do not have
sufficient sensitivity to recognize very mild degree of cortisol excess. An
increased frequency of hypertension, central obesity, impaired glucose tolerance
or diabetes, hyperlipemia and osteoporosis has been described in patients with
SCS since patients are exposed to a chronic albeit slight, cortisol excess;
however, there is not evidence-based demonstration of long term complications
and, consequently, the management of this condition is largely empirical.
Adrenalectomy or medical management of associated disease has been indicated as
therapeutic options due to lack of data demonstrating the superiority of a
surgical or non-surgical treatment.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.beem.2012.02.001
PMID: 22863391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
