---
reference_id: "PMID:27631835"
title: "CDH23 Related Hearing Loss: A New Genetic Risk Factor for Semicircular Canal Dehiscence?"
authors:
- Noonan KY
- Russo J
- Shen J
- Rehm H
- Halbach S
- Hopp E
- Noon S
- Hoover J
- Eskey C
- Saunders JE
journal: Otol Neurotol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000001210
keywords:
- Alleles
- Cadherin Related Proteins
- Cadherins/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Ear Diseases/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Prevalence
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- "Semicircular Canals/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CDH23 Related Hearing Loss: A New Genetic Risk Factor for Semicircular Canal Dehiscence?
**Authors:** Noonan KY, Russo J, Shen J, Rehm H, Halbach S, Hopp E, Noon S, Hoover J, Eskey C, Saunders JE
**Journal:** Otol Neurotol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MAO.0000000000001210](https://doi.org/10.1097/MAO.0000000000001210)

## Content

1. Otol Neurotol. 2016 Dec;37(10):1583-1588. doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000001210.

CDH23 Related Hearing Loss: A New Genetic Risk Factor for Semicircular Canal 
Dehiscence?

Noonan KY(1), Russo J, Shen J, Rehm H, Halbach S, Hopp E, Noon S, Hoover J, 
Eskey C, Saunders JE.

Author information:
(1)*Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, 
Lebanon, New Hampshire†Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York‡Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, Cambridge; and Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts§Department of 
Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Illinois||Division of Radiology and 
Nuclear Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Norway¶Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania#Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, 
University of Pittsburg Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania**Radiology, 
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, New Hampshire.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the prevalence and relative risk of semicircular canal 
dehiscence (SCD) in pediatric patients with CDH23 pathogenic variants (Usher 
syndrome or non-syndromic deafness) compared with age-matched controls.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
SETTING: Multi-institutional study.
PATIENTS: Pediatric patients (ages 0-5 years) were compared based on the 
presence of biallelic pathogenic variants in CDH23 with pediatric controls who 
underwent computed tomography (CT) temporal bone scan for alternative purposes.
INTERVENTIONS: Retrospective review of diagnostic high resolution CT temporal 
bone scans and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for evaluation of SCD.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Superior and posterior semicircular canals were evaluated 
by a neuroradiologist for presence of SCD or abnormal development.
RESULTS: Forty-two CT scans were reviewed for SCD. Eighty-six percent of the 
CDH23 variant group had abnormalities in at least one canal compared with only 
12% in age-matched controls. In the CDH23 variant group there were four patients 
with superior SCD (57%, RR = 10.0) and three patients with posterior canal 
abnormalities (43%, RR = 7.5) compared with two, and two patients, respectively, 
in the control population. Four CDH23 variant children had bilateral 
abnormalities. One child had thinning or dehiscence in both the superior and 
posterior canals. Relative risk of SCD in children with CDH23 pathogenic 
variants is 7.5 (p < 0.001) compared with the pediatric control population.
CONCLUSIONS: Children with a CDH23 pathogenic variants are at significantly 
increased risk of having SCD and this may be a contributing factor to the 
vestibular dysfunction in Usher syndrome type 1D patient population.

DOI: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000001210
PMID: 27631835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]