---
reference_id: "PMID:35359645"
title: "Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis: The Multifaceted Approach to the Clinical Issues, an Overview."
authors:
- Simonati A
- Williams RE
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.811686
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis: The Multifaceted Approach to the Clinical Issues, an Overview.
**Authors:** Simonati A, Williams RE
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2022.811686](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2022.811686)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2022 Mar 11;13:811686. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.811686.
eCollection  2022.

Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis: The Multifaceted Approach to the Clinical 
Issues, an Overview.

Simonati A(1)(2), Williams RE(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Surgery, Dentistry, Paediatrics, and Gynaecology, School of 
Medicine, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, AOUI-VR, Verona, Italy.
(3)Department of Children's Neuroscience, Evelina London Children's Hospital, 
London, United Kingdom.

The main aim of this review is to summarize the current state-of-art in the 
field of childhood Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis (NCL), a group of rare 
neurodegenerative disorders. These are genetic diseases associated with the 
formation of toxic endo-lysosomal storage. Following a brief historical review 
of the evolution of NCL definition, a clinically-oriented approach is used 
describing how the early symptoms and signs affecting motor, visual, cognitive 
domains, and including seizures, may lead clinicians to a rapid molecular 
diagnosis, avoiding the long diagnostic odyssey commonly observed. We go on to 
focus on recent advances in NCL research and summarize contributions to 
knowledge of the pathogenic mechanisms underlying NCL. We describe the large 
variety of experimental models which have aided this research, as well as the 
most recent technological developments which have shed light on the main 
mechanisms involved in the cellular pathology, such as apoptosis and autophagy. 
The search for innovative therapies is described. Translation of experimental 
data into therapeutic approaches is being established for several of the NCLs, 
and one drug is now commercially available. Lastly, we show the importance of 
palliative care and symptomatic treatments which are still the main therapeutic 
interventions.

Copyright © 2022 Simonati and Williams.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.811686
PMCID: PMC8961688
PMID: 35359645

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.