---
reference_id: PMID:38813755
title: "Guillain-Barré syndrome: a comprehensive review."
authors:
- Bellanti R
- Rinaldi S
journal: Eur J Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/ene.16365
keywords:
- "Guillain-Barre Syndrome/therapy, physiopathology, diagnosis, immunology"
- Humans
- Plasma Exchange/methods
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Guillain-Barré syndrome: a comprehensive review.
**Authors:** Bellanti R, Rinaldi S
**Journal:** Eur J Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ene.16365](https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.16365)

## Content

1. Eur J Neurol. 2024 Aug;31(8):e16365. doi: 10.1111/ene.16365. Epub 2024 May 30.

Guillain-Barré syndrome: a comprehensive review.

Bellanti R(1), Rinaldi S(1).

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK.

Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is a potentially devastating yet treatable 
disorder. A classically postinfectious, immune-mediated, monophasic 
polyradiculoneuropathy, it is the leading global cause of acquired neuromuscular 
paralysis. In most cases, the immunopathological process driving nerve injury is 
ill-defined. Diagnosis of GBS relies on clinical features, supported by 
laboratory findings and electrophysiology. Although previously divided into 
primary demyelinating or axonal variants, this dichotomy is increasingly 
challenged, and is not endorsed by the recent European Academy of Neurology 
(EAN)/Peripheral Nerve Society (PNS) guidelines. Intravenous immunoglobulin and 
plasma exchange remain the primary modalities of treatment, regardless of the 
electrophysiological subtype. Most patients recover, but approximately one-third 
require mechanical ventilation, and 5% die. Disease activity and treatment 
response are currently monitored through interval neurological examination and 
outcome measures, and the potential role of fluid biomarkers is under ongoing 
scrutiny. Novel potential therapies for GBS are being explored but none have yet 
modified clinical practice. This review provides a comprehensive update on the 
pathological and clinical aspects of GBS for clinicians and scientists.

© 2024 The Author(s). European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.16365
PMCID: PMC11235944
PMID: 38813755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: On behalf of all the authors, the corresponding 
author states that there are no conflicts of interest.