---
reference_id: "PMID:29722891"
title: Management of Crohn's Disease and Complications in Patients With Ostomies.
authors:
- Wang X
- Shen B
journal: Inflamm Bowel Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/ibd/izy025
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of Crohn's Disease and Complications in Patients With Ostomies.
**Authors:** Wang X, Shen B
**Journal:** Inflamm Bowel Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ibd/izy025](https://doi.org/10.1093/ibd/izy025)

## Content

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2018 May 18;24(6):1167-1184. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izy025.

Management of Crohn's Disease and Complications in Patients With Ostomies.

Wang X(1), Shen B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Center for Inflammatory Bowel Diseases, Digestive Disease and Surgery 
Institute, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio.

Fecal diversion with ostomy construction can be a temporary or definitive 
surgical measure for the treatment of refractory inflammatory bowel disease 
(IBD). However, the fecal diversion surgery is associated with various stoma, 
peristomal complications, and recurrence or occurrence of de novo small bowel 
Crohn's disease (CD). Stoma complications often need enterostomal therapy or 
surgical revision. Peristomal cutaneous lesions, such as pyoderma gangrenosum, 
usually require immunomodulator or biological therapy. Routine monitoring for 
occurrence or recurrence of CD with endoscopy or imaging should be performed, 
and prophylaxis with mesalamines, antibiotics, immunomodulators, or anti-TNFα or 
anti-integrin agents is needed for patients at risk. Those agents, along with 
corticosteroids, may also be used for the treatment of CD of the neo-small 
intestine, particularly inflammatory and fistulizing phenotypes. Endoscopic 
balloon dilation or endoscopic stricturotomy via stoma is safe and feasible to 
treat short (<4-5 cm), straight strictures in the neo-small intestine. Medically 
or endoscopically refractory fibrostenotic disease usually requires surgical 
intervention, with bowel-sparing stricturoplasty being the surgical treatment of 
choice.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izy025
PMID: 29722891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]