---
reference_id: "PMID:30993253"
title: Microbiomes of Inflammatory Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms Due to Giant Cell Arteritis and Clinically Isolated Aortitis Differ From Those of Non-Inflammatory Aneurysms.
authors:
- Getz TM
- Hoffman GS
- Padmanabhan R
- Villa-Forte A
- Roselli EE
- Blackstone E
- Johnston D
- Pettersson G
- Soltesz E
- Svensson LG
- Calabrese LH
- Clifford AH
- Eng C
journal: Pathog Immun
year: '2019'
doi: 10.20411/pai.v4i1.269
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microbiomes of Inflammatory Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms Due to Giant Cell Arteritis and Clinically Isolated Aortitis Differ From Those of Non-Inflammatory Aneurysms.
**Authors:** Getz TM, Hoffman GS, Padmanabhan R, Villa-Forte A, Roselli EE, Blackstone E, Johnston D, Pettersson G, Soltesz E, Svensson LG, Calabrese LH, Clifford AH, Eng C
**Journal:** Pathog Immun (2019)
**DOI:** [10.20411/pai.v4i1.269](https://doi.org/10.20411/pai.v4i1.269)

## Content

1. Pathog Immun. 2019 Mar 15;4(1):105-123. doi: 10.20411/pai.v4i1.269.
eCollection  2019.

Microbiomes of Inflammatory Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms Due to Giant Cell
Arteritis and Clinically Isolated Aortitis Differ From Those of Non-Inflammatory
Aneurysms.

Getz TM(1), Hoffman GS(2), Padmanabhan R(1), Villa-Forte A(2), Roselli EE(3),
Blackstone E(3), Johnston D(3), Pettersson G(3), Soltesz E(3), Svensson LG(3),
Calabrese LH(2), Clifford AH(2)(4), Eng C(1)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute; Lerner Research Institute; Cleveland Clinic;
Cleveland, Ohio.
(2)Center for Vasculitis Care and Research; Department of Rheumatic and
Immunologic Diseases; Cleveland Clinic; Cleveland, Ohio.
(3)Center for Aortic Diseases; Heart Vascular Institute; Cleveland Clinic;
Cleveland, Ohio.
(4)Division of Rheumatology; Department of Medicine; University of Alberta;
Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2R7, Canada.
(5)Taussig Cancer Institute; Cleveland Clinic; Cleveland, Ohio.
(6)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences; Case Western Reserve University
School of Medicine; Cleveland, Ohio.
(7)Germline High Risk Focus Group; CASE Comprehensive Cancer Center; Case
Western Reserve University School of Medicine; Cleveland, Ohio.

OBJECTIVE: We sought to characterize microbiomes of thoracic aortas from
patients with non-infectious aortitis due to giant cell arteritis (GCA) and
clinically isolated aortitis (CIA) and to compare them to non-inflammatory aorta
aneurysm controls. We also compared microbiomes from concurrently processed and
separately reported temporal arteries (TA) and aortas.
METHODS: From 220 prospectively enrolled patients undergoing surgery for
thoracic aorta aneurysm, 49 were selected. Inflammatory and non-inflammatory
cases were selected based on ability to match for age (+/-10 years), gender, and
race. Biopsies were collected under aseptic conditions and snap-frozen.
Taxonomic classification of bacterial sequences was performed to the genus level
and relative abundances were calculated. Microbiome differential abundances were
analyzed by principal coordinates analysis.
RESULTS: Forty-nine patients with thoracic aortic aneurysms (12 CIA, 14 GCA, 23
non-inflammatory aneurysms) were enrolled. Alpha (P=0.018) and beta (P=0.024)
diversity differed between specimens from aortitis cases and controls. There
were no significant differences between CIA and GCA (P>0.7). The largest
differential abundances between non-infectious aortitis and non-inflammatory
control samples included Enterobacteriaceae, Phascolarctobacterium,
Acinetobactor, Klebsiella, and Prevotella. Functional metagenomic predictions
with PICRUSt revealed enrichment of oxidative phosphorylation and porphyrin
metabolism pathways and downregulation of transcription factor pathways in
aortitis compared to controls. Microbiomes of aortic samples differed
significantly from temporal artery samples from a companion study, in both
control and GCA groups (P=0.0002).
CONCLUSION: Thoracic aorta aneurysms, far from being sterile, contain unique
microbiomes that differ from those found in temporal arteries. The aorta
microbiomes are most similar between aneurysms that were associated with
inflammation, GCA, and CIA, but differed from those associated with
non-inflammatory etiologies. These findings are promising in that they indicate
that microbes may play a role in the pathogenesis of aortitis-associated
aneurysms or non-inflammatory aneurysms by promoting or protecting against
inflammation. However, we cannot rule out that these changes are related to
alterations in tissue substrate that favor secondary changes in microbial
communities.

DOI: 10.20411/pai.v4i1.269
PMCID: PMC6438704
PMID: 30993253

Conflict of interest statement: Gary S. Hoffman and Leonard H. Calabrese are
associate editors for Pathogens and Immunity. They did not participate in any
aspect of the review or editorial process of this submitted manuscript.
