---
reference_id: "PMID:37739329"
title: Hypertension, coronary artery disease and myocardial ischemic syndromes.
authors:
- Volpe M
- Gallo G
journal: Vascul Pharmacol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.vph.2023.107230
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertension, coronary artery disease and myocardial ischemic syndromes.
**Authors:** Volpe M, Gallo G
**Journal:** Vascul Pharmacol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.vph.2023.107230](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vph.2023.107230)

## Content

1. Vascul Pharmacol. 2023 Dec;153:107230. doi: 10.1016/j.vph.2023.107230. Epub
2023  Sep 20.

Hypertension, coronary artery disease and myocardial ischemic syndromes.

Volpe M(1), Gallo G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, 
Via di Grottarossa 1035-1039, Rome 00189, Italy; IRCCS San Raffaele, Via della 
Pisana 235, Rome 00163, Italy. Electronic address: massimo.volpe@uniroma1.it.
(2)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, 
Via di Grottarossa 1035-1039, Rome 00189, Italy.

Hypertension represents a major contributor to the development of coronary 
artery disease. The pathophysiological mechanisms underlying the link between 
hypertension and CAD are complex and include overactivation of neurohormones, 
accelerated development of the atherosclerotic plaque, endothelial dysfunction, 
altered intramyocardial coronary circulation, hypertension-mediated cardiac and 
vascular damage and the relationship between arterial stiffness and coronary 
perfusion. Blood pressure (BP) reduction is associated with a significant 
decrease of the risk of coronary events. Therapeutic interventions targeted to 
reduce BP and to improve endothelial function and coronary microvascular 
dysfunction, as well as to prevent left ventricular hypertrophy and dysfunction, 
contribute to reduce the burden of coronary disease and its acute ischemic 
manifestations.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vph.2023.107230
PMID: 37739329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Massimo Volpe 
reports personal fees for speaker bureau and/or consulting in Advisory Board 
from. Amgen, Astra Zeneca, Daiichi-Sankyo, Menarini Int, MSD, Novartis Pharma, 
Novo Nordisk. Giovanna Gallo does not report conflicts of interest.