---
reference_id: "PMID:31449710"
title: "Twenty years on: Myoclonus-dystonia and ε-sarcoglycan - neurodevelopment, channel, and signaling dysfunction."
authors:
- Menozzi E
- Balint B
- Latorre A
- Valente EM
- Rothwell JC
- Bhatia KP
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/mds.27822
keywords:
- Calcium/metabolism
- Cytoskeletal Proteins/metabolism
- Dystonia/genetics
- "Dystonic Disorders/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Homeostasis/physiology
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- Myoclonus/metabolism
- Nerve Net/metabolism
- Phenotype
- "Sarcoglycans/genetics, metabolism"
- "Signal Transduction/drug effects, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Twenty years on: Myoclonus-dystonia and ε-sarcoglycan - neurodevelopment, channel, and signaling dysfunction.
**Authors:** Menozzi E, Balint B, Latorre A, Valente EM, Rothwell JC, Bhatia KP
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.27822](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.27822)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2019 Nov;34(11):1588-1601. doi: 10.1002/mds.27822. Epub 2019 Aug
26.

Twenty years on: Myoclonus-dystonia and ε-sarcoglycan - neurodevelopment,
channel, and signaling dysfunction.

Menozzi E(1)(2), Balint B(2)(3), Latorre A(2)(4), Valente EM(5)(6), Rothwell
JC(2), Bhatia KP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural Sciences, University-Hospital
of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical and Movement Neurosciences, UCL Queen Square Institute
of Neurology, London, UK.
(3)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Human Neurosciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(6)Neurogenetics Unit, IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy.

Myoclonus-dystonia is a clinical syndrome characterized by a typical childhood
onset of myoclonic jerks and dystonia involving the neck, trunk, and upper
limbs. Psychiatric symptomatology, namely, alcohol dependence and phobic and
obsessive-compulsive disorder, is also part of the clinical picture. Zonisamide
has demonstrated effectiveness at reducing both myoclonus and dystonia, and deep
brain stimulation seems to be an effective and long-lasting therapeutic option
for medication-refractory cases. In a subset of patients, myoclonus-dystonia is
associated with pathogenic variants in the epsilon-sarcoglycan gene, located on
chromosome 7q21, and up to now, more than 100 different pathogenic variants of
the epsilon-sarcoglycan gene have been described. In a few families with a
clinical phenotype resembling myoclonus-dystonia associated with distinct
clinical features, variants have been identified in genes involved in novel
pathways such as calcium channel regulation and neurodevelopment. Because of
phenotypic similarities with epsilon-sarcoglycan gene-related
myoclonus-dystonia, these conditions can be collectively classified as
"myoclonus-dystonia syndromes." In the present article, we present
myoclonus-dystonia caused by epsilon-sarcoglycan gene mutations, with a focus on
genetics and underlying disease mechanisms. Second, we review those conditions
falling within the spectrum of myoclonus-dystonia syndromes, highlighting their
genetic background and involved pathways. Finally, we critically discuss the
normal and pathological function of the epsilon-sarcoglycan gene and its
product, suggesting a role in the stabilization of the dopaminergic membrane via
regulation of calcium homeostasis and in the neurodevelopmental process
involving the cerebello-thalamo-pallido-cortical network. © 2019 International
Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

© 2019 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.27822
PMID: 31449710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
