---
reference_id: "PMID:23110709"
title: "Hearing impairment in Stickler syndrome: a systematic review."
authors:
- Acke FR
- Dhooge IJ
- Malfait F
- De Leenheer EM
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-84
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hearing impairment in Stickler syndrome: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Acke FR, Dhooge IJ, Malfait F, De Leenheer EM
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-7-84](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-7-84)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2012 Oct 30;7:84. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-84.

Hearing impairment in Stickler syndrome: a systematic review.

Acke FR(1), Dhooge IJ, Malfait F, De Leenheer EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, 1P1, Ghent University / Ghent University 
Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, Ghent 9000, Belgium. frederic.acke@ugent.be

BACKGROUND: Stickler syndrome is a connective tissue disorder characterized by 
ocular, skeletal, orofacial and auditory defects. It is caused by mutations in 
different collagen genes, namely COL2A1, COL11A1 and COL11A2 (autosomal dominant 
inheritance), and COL9A1 and COL9A2 (autosomal recessive inheritance). The 
auditory phenotype in Stickler syndrome is inconsistently reported. Therefore we 
performed a systematic review of the literature to give an up-to-date overview 
of hearing loss in Stickler syndrome, and correlated it with the genotype.
METHODS: English-language literature was reviewed through searches of PubMed and 
Web of Science, in order to find relevant articles describing auditory features 
in Stickler patients, along with genotype. Prevalences of hearing loss are 
calculated and correlated with the different affected genes and type of 
mutation.
RESULTS: 313 patients (102 families) individually described in 46 articles were 
included. Hearing loss was found in 62.9%, mostly mild to moderate when 
reported. Hearing impairment was predominantly sensorineural (67.8%). Conductive 
(14.1%) and mixed (18.1%) hearing loss was primarily found in young patients or 
patients with a palatal defect. Overall, mutations in COL11A1 (82.5%) and 
COL11A2 (94.1%) seem to be more frequently associated with hearing impairment 
than mutations in COL2A1 (52.2%).
CONCLUSIONS: Hearing impairment in patients with Stickler syndrome is common. 
Sensorineural hearing loss predominates, but also conductive hearing loss, 
especially in children and patients with a palatal defect, may occur. The 
distinct disease-causing collagen genes are associated with a different 
prevalence of hearing impairment, but still large phenotypic variation exists. 
Regular auditory follow-up is strongly advised, particularly because many 
Stickler patients are visually impaired.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-84
PMCID: PMC3551705
PMID: 23110709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]