---
reference_id: "PMID:28146442"
title: Comparison of EX-PRESS Shunt and Trabeculectomy With Mitomycin-C in Congenital and Juvenile Glaucoma.
authors:
- Nash DL
- Crouch ER
- Crouch ER Jr
journal: J Glaucoma
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1097/IJG.0000000000000547
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Alkylating Agents/administration & dosage"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Female
- "Glaucoma/etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Glaucoma Drainage Implants
- Humans
- "Hydrophthalmos/etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Intraocular Pressure/physiology
- Male
- "Mitomycin/administration & dosage"
- Postoperative Period
- Prosthesis Implantation
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tonometry, Ocular"
- Trabeculectomy/methods
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of EX-PRESS Shunt and Trabeculectomy With Mitomycin-C in Congenital and Juvenile Glaucoma.
**Authors:** Nash DL, Crouch ER, Crouch ER Jr
**Journal:** J Glaucoma (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IJG.0000000000000547](https://doi.org/10.1097/IJG.0000000000000547)

## Content

1. J Glaucoma. 2017 Feb;26(2):e58-e63. doi: 10.1097/IJG.0000000000000547.

Comparison of EX-PRESS Shunt and Trabeculectomy With Mitomycin-C in Congenital 
and Juvenile Glaucoma.

Nash DL(1), Crouch ER, Crouch ER Jr.

Author information:
(1)*Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN†Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA.

PURPOSE: To compare efficacy and safety of EX-PRESS mini glaucoma shunt (Alcon) 
and trabeculectomy with mitomycin-C (MMC) in the management of pediatric 
glaucoma.
METHODS: The authors retrospectively reviewed patients from a single pediatric 
ophthalmology practice with either congenital or juvenile glaucoma who underwent 
surgical treatment with either trabeculectomy or EX-PRESS shunt insertion with 
MMC. Postoperative intraocular pressure at 6, 18, and 36 months, medication 
requirements, visual acuities, postoperative interventions, complications, and 
noncompliance with medications or follow-up was reviewed.
RESULTS: A total of 42 cases of glaucoma with either trabeculectomy or EX-PRESS 
shunt were identified for review (n trabeculectomy=25, n EX-PRESS=17). At 6 
months, 62.5% of trabeculectomies and 94.1% of EX-PRESS shunts met criteria for 
success (P=0.0281). At 18 months, 38.1% of trabeculectomies and 81.3% of 
EX-PRESS shunts met criteria for success (P=0.0178). At 36 months, 
trabeculectomies had a success rate of 33.3% versus 66.7% for EX-PRESS shunts 
(P=0.321). The average decrease in medications postoperatively was 0.375 and 
1.63 for trabeculectomy and EX-PRESS shunt, respectively (P=0.06). Preoperative 
visual acuities compared with postoperative best-corrected visual acuities 
before additional surgery demonstrated a slight average worsening of 0.11 logMAR 
in trabeculectomy patients and an average improvement of 0.56 logMAR in EX-PRESS 
shunt patients (P=0.0037).
CONCLUSIONS: In this review, patients with pediatric glaucoma managed with 
EX-PRESS shunt with MMC compared with trabeculectomy with MMC appear to have 
better intraocular pressure control, better visual acuities, and fewer 
complications and reoperations.

DOI: 10.1097/IJG.0000000000000547
PMID: 28146442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]