---
reference_id: "PMID:27860293"
title: Thrombocytopenia in chronic liver disease.
authors:
- Peck-Radosavljevic M
journal: Liver Int
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/liv.13317
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thrombocytopenia in chronic liver disease.
**Authors:** Peck-Radosavljevic M
**Journal:** Liver Int (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/liv.13317](https://doi.org/10.1111/liv.13317)

## Content

1. Liver Int. 2017 Jun;37(6):778-793. doi: 10.1111/liv.13317. Epub 2016 Dec 27.

Thrombocytopenia in chronic liver disease.

Peck-Radosavljevic M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, Endocrinology and Nephrology, 
Klinikum Klagenfurt am Wörthersee, Klagenfurt, Austria.

Thrombocytopenia is a common haematological disorder in patients with chronic 
liver disease. It is multifactorial and severity of liver disease is the most 
influential factor. As a result of the increased risk of bleeding, 
thrombocytopenia may impact upon medical procedures, such as surgery or liver 
biopsy. The pathophysiology of thrombocytopenia in chronic liver disease has 
long been associated with the hypothesis of hypersplenism, where portal 
hypertension causes pooling and sequestration of all corpuscular elements of the 
blood, predominantly thrombocytes, in the enlarged and congested spleen. Other 
mechanisms of importance include bone marrow suppression by toxic substances, 
such as alcohol or viral infection, and immunological removal of platelets from 
the circulation. However, insufficient platelet recovery after relief of portal 
hypertension by shunt procedures or minor and transient recovery after splenic 
artery embolization have caused many to question the importance and relative 
contribution of this mechanism to thrombocytopenia. The discovery of the 
cytokine thrombopoietin has led to the elucidation of a central mechanism. 
Thrombopoietin is predominantly produced by the liver and is reduced when liver 
cell mass is severely damaged. This leads to reduced thrombopoiesis in the bone 
marrow and consequently to thrombocytopenia in the peripheral blood of patients 
with advanced-stage liver disease. Restoration of adequate thrombopoietin 
production post-liver transplantation leads to prompt restoration of platelet 
production. A number of new treatments that substitute thrombopoietin activity 
are available or in development.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/liv.13317
PMID: 27860293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]