---
reference_id: "PMID:24028811"
title: "[Lyme arthritis in children: a diagnostic trap]."
authors:
- Leroux J
- Vivier PH
- Grall M
- Foulongne E
- Ould Slimane M
- Abu Amara S
- Lechevallier J
journal: Arch Pediatr
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.arcped.2013.07.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Lyme arthritis in children: a diagnostic trap].
**Authors:** Leroux J, Vivier PH, Grall M, Foulongne E, Ould Slimane M, Abu Amara S, Lechevallier J
**Journal:** Arch Pediatr (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.arcped.2013.07.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcped.2013.07.005)

## Content

1. Arch Pediatr. 2013 Oct;20(10):1139-42. doi: 10.1016/j.arcped.2013.07.005. Epub
 2013 Sep 9.

[Lyme arthritis in children: a diagnostic trap].

[Article in French]

Leroux J(1), Vivier PH, Grall M, Foulongne E, Ould Slimane M, Abu Amara S, 
Lechevallier J.

Author information:
(1)Clinique chirurgicale infantile, université de Rouen, CHU de Rouen, 1, rue de 
Germont, 76031 Rouen cedex, France. Electronic address: 
julien.leroux@chu-rouen.fr.

Lyme disease incidence is diverse in France. It is rare in many regions but very 
frequent in Central and Eastern France. Arthritis is a late manifestation of 
Lyme disease. In children, the clinical and biological picture often resembles 
that of septic arthritis and juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, which are more 
frequent. This explains why diagnosis may be delayed, especially when patient 
lives in a region of low incidence. We report the case of an 8-year old girl 
with knee arthritis treated as septic arthritis in a region where Lyme disease 
is rare. Six days later, clinical and biological worsening suggested that the 
diagnosis had to be reconsidered. Lyme arthritis was confirmed by serology. 
Treatment was adapted and the progression was positive. This case reminds us 
that, in children, Lyme arthritis may look alike septic arthritis or juvenile 
rheumatoid arthritis and must be considered as a possible diagnosis, even in 
low-incidence areas.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arcped.2013.07.005
PMID: 24028811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]