---
reference_id: "PMID:26453240"
title: "Global incidence of serogroup B invasive meningococcal disease: a systematic review."
authors:
- Sridhar S
- Greenwood B
- Head C
- Plotkin SA
- Sáfadi MA
- Saha S
- Taha MK
- Tomori O
- Gessner BD
journal: Lancet Infect Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00217-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global incidence of serogroup B invasive meningococcal disease: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Sridhar S, Greenwood B, Head C, Plotkin SA, Sáfadi MA, Saha S, Taha MK, Tomori O, Gessner BD
**Journal:** Lancet Infect Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00217-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00217-0)

## Content

1. Lancet Infect Dis. 2015 Nov;15(11):1334-46. doi:
10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00217-0.  Epub 2015 Oct 6.

Global incidence of serogroup B invasive meningococcal disease: a systematic 
review.

Sridhar S(1), Greenwood B(2), Head C(3), Plotkin SA(4), Sáfadi MA(5), Saha S(6), 
Taha MK(7), Tomori O(8), Gessner BD(9).

Author information:
(1)Agence de Médecine Préventive, Ferney-Voltaire, France.
(2)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Disease, London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(3)Meningitis Research Foundation, Bristol, UK.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Pediatrics Department, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas Santa Casa de São Paulo, 
São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Child Health Research Foundation, Department of Microbiology, Dhaka Shishu 
Hospital, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(7)Institut Pasteur, Invasive Bacterial Infections Unit, Paris, France.
(8)Department of Microbiology, College of Natural Sciences, Redeemer's 
University, Lagos, Nigeria.
(9)Agence de Médecine Préventive, Paris, France. Electronic address: 
bgessner@aamp.org.

Use of recently licensed vaccines against Neisseria meningitidis serogroup B 
(NmB) will depend partly on disease burden estimates. We systematically reviewed 
NmB incidence and mortality worldwide between January, 2000, and March, 2015, 
incorporating data from 37 articles and 12 websites. Most countries had a yearly 
invasive NmB incidence of less than 2 per 100,000 people. Within these 
relatively low incidence rates (compared with common causes of invasive 
bacterial diseases), substantial variation was detected between countries, with 
a notably higher incidence in Australia, Europe, North America, and South 
America. China and India had reports only of sporadic cases, and except for 
South Africa, sub-Saharan Africa showed a near absence of disease. In countries 
with consistently collected data, NmB incidence has tended to decrease, even as 
the proportion of invasive meningococcal disease cases caused by serogroup B has 
increased. With few exceptions, case-fatality ratios were fairly consistent, 
ranging between 3% and 10%. In high-income countries, incidence rates of NmB 
were relatively low compared with other vaccine-preventable diseases and might 
be decreasing. High case-fatality ratios, substantial disease-related morbidity, 
and the threat of outbreaks could nevertheless make NmB an attractive target for 
preventive and reactive immunisation programmes. The low availability of data 
from low-income and middle-income countries suggests the need for improved 
surveillance before vaccination strategies are designed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00217-0
PMID: 26453240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]