---
reference_id: PMID:36257382
title: The advances of calcium oxalate calculi associated drugs and targets.
authors:
- Lai Y
- Zheng H
- Sun X
- Lin J
- Li Q
- Huang H
- Hou Y
- Zhong H
- Zhang D
- Fucai T
- He Z
journal: Eur J Pharmacol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2022.175324
keywords:
- Humans
- Calcium Oxalate
- Crystallization
- "Kidney Calculi/drug therapy, chemistry, etiology"
- Kidney
- Oxalates
- Calcium
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The advances of calcium oxalate calculi associated drugs and targets.
**Authors:** Lai Y, Zheng H, Sun X, Lin J, Li Q, Huang H, Hou Y, Zhong H, Zhang D, Fucai T, He Z
**Journal:** Eur J Pharmacol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejphar.2022.175324](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejphar.2022.175324)

## Content

1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2022 Nov 15;935:175324. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2022.175324.
Epub  2022 Oct 17.

The advances of calcium oxalate calculi associated drugs and targets.

Lai Y(1), Zheng H(2), Sun X(3), Lin J(4), Li Q(5), Huang H(6), Hou Y(7), Zhong 
H(8), Zhang D(9), Fucai T(10), He Z(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Shenzhen Shockwave Lithotripsy Research Institute, The 
Eighth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 
518033, China. Electronic address: laiych8@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(2)Department of Urology, Shenzhen Shockwave Lithotripsy Research Institute, The 
Eighth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 
518033, China. Electronic address: zhenghx28@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(3)Department of Urology, Shenzhen Shockwave Lithotripsy Research Institute, The 
Eighth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 
518033, China. Electronic address: sunx35@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(4)School of Medicine, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, 
518107, China. Electronic address: 2838562620@qq.com.
(5)School of Medicine, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, 
518107, China. Electronic address: 2277545020@qq.com.
(6)School of Medicine, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, 
518107, China. Electronic address: 1213752096@qq.com.
(7)School of Medicine, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, 
518107, China. Electronic address: 1345761110@qq.com.
(8)Department of Urology, Shenzhen Shockwave Lithotripsy Research Institute, The 
Eighth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 
518033, China. Electronic address: zhonghzh6@mail2.sysu.edu.cn.
(9)Department of Urology, Shenzhen Shockwave Lithotripsy Research Institute, The 
Eighth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 
518033, China. Electronic address: 751421019@qq.com.
(10)Department of Urology, Shenzhen Shockwave Lithotripsy Research Institute, 
The Eighth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 
518033, China. Electronic address: tangfc@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(11)Department of Urology, Shenzhen Shockwave Lithotripsy Research Institute, 
The Eighth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 
518033, China. Electronic address: hechh9@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Kidney stones constitute a disease of the urinary system of high incidence that 
has only a few available stone dissolving drugs as treatment options. The 
mechanism of calcium oxalate stone formation is still largely unclear. Various 
aspects and theories for initiation and formation of the renal stones have been 
suggested, and the complex multistep formation process of the kidney stones 
includes supersaturation, nucleation, growth and aggregation of a crystal, and 
crystal retention in cells after adhesion. During the initial stage of crystal 
formation, high concentrations of oxalate exposure may damage the renal tubular 
cells and cause oxidative stress after which the cells may be attached to the 
crystal thus supporting the oxalate-induced injury as the driving factor of 
crystal precipitation and cellular adhesion. However, at present, although 
various drugs targeting kidney stones have been proposed and evaluated both in 
vitro and in vivo, clinical drugs for stone dissolution have rarely been 
explored. Moreover, numerous advances in renal calcium oxalate stone associated 
target and drugs warrant their summarization until now, which could be further 
discussed and may provide potential ideas or options for exploration of renal 
calcium oxalate stone treatment targets and drugs.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2022.175324
PMID: 36257382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no competing interests related to this work.