---
reference_id: "PMID:24569570"
title: Mutations of isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.
authors:
- Grassian AR
- Pagliarini R
- Chiang DY
journal: Curr Opin Gastroenterol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1097/MOG.0000000000000050
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations of isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Grassian AR, Pagliarini R, Chiang DY
**Journal:** Curr Opin Gastroenterol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOG.0000000000000050](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOG.0000000000000050)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2014 May;30(3):295-302. doi: 
10.1097/MOG.0000000000000050.

Mutations of isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 in intrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinoma.

Grassian AR(1), Pagliarini R, Chiang DY.

Author information:
(1)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Exome sequencing studies have recently expanded the genetic 
characterization of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas. Among a number of novel 
genes, isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) is recurrently mutated in intrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinomas. We review the effects of these mutations on several 
biochemical pathways, as well as potential changes to downstream signaling 
pathways.
RECENT FINDINGS: Hotspot mutations in IDH isoforms 1 or 2 occur in approximately 
15% of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas. These mutations result in elevated 
levels of an oncometabolite, 2-hydroxyglutarate, which is associated with higher 
DNA CpG methylation and altered histone methylation that accompany a block in 
cellular differentiation. Exploratory studies have suggested additional 
phenotypes associated with IDH1/2 mutations.
SUMMARY: Tumors with IDH1 or IDH2 mutations may represent a distinct subtype of 
cholangiocarcinomas. Further studies are required to elucidate the exact role 
that mutant IDH1/2 and 2-hydroxyglutarate play in tumorigenesis, and what are 
the best strategies to target these tumor types.

DOI: 10.1097/MOG.0000000000000050
PMID: 24569570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]