---
reference_id: "PMID:26403254"
title: "The importance of assessment and management of morning stiffness in Asian patients with rheumatoid arthritis: Recommendations from an expert panel."
authors:
- Mok CC
- Cha HS
- Hidayat R
- Nguyen LT
- Perez EC
- Ramachandran R
- Tsay GJ
- Yoo DH
- Asia Pacific Morning Stiffness in Rheumatoid Arthritis Expert Panel
journal: Int J Rheum Dis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.12755
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The importance of assessment and management of morning stiffness in Asian patients with rheumatoid arthritis: Recommendations from an expert panel.
**Authors:** Mok CC, Cha HS, Hidayat R, Nguyen LT, Perez EC, Ramachandran R, Tsay GJ, Yoo DH, Asia Pacific Morning Stiffness in Rheumatoid Arthritis Expert Panel
**Journal:** Int J Rheum Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1756-185X.12755](https://doi.org/10.1111/1756-185X.12755)

## Content

1. Int J Rheum Dis. 2016 Jan;19(1):30-7. doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.12755. Epub 2015 
Sep 25.

The importance of assessment and management of morning stiffness in Asian 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis: Recommendations from an expert panel.

Mok CC(1), Cha HS(2), Hidayat R(3), Nguyen LT(4), Perez EC(5), Ramachandran 
R(6), Tsay GJ(7), Yoo DH(8); Asia Pacific Morning Stiffness in Rheumatoid 
Arthritis Expert Panel.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Tuen Mun Hospital, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Dr Ciptomangunkusumo Hospital, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(4)Hanoi Medical University, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(5)De la Salle University Medical Center, Health Science Institute, Cavite, 
Philippines.
(6)Sime Darby Medical Centre, Subang Jaya, Malaysia.
(7)Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(8)Hanyang University, Seoul, South Korea.

OBJECTIVE: In patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), morning stiffness is 
linked more to functional disability and pain than disease activity, as assessed 
by joint counts and markers of inflammation. As part of the Asia Pacific Morning 
Stiffness in Rheumatoid Arthritis Expert Panel, a group of eight rheumatologists 
met to formulate consensus points and develop recommendations for the assessment 
and management of morning stiffness in RA.
METHODS: On the basis of a systematic literature review and expert opinion, a 
panel of Asian rheumatologists formulated recommendations for the assessment and 
medical treatment of RA.
RESULTS: The panel agreed upon 10 consensus statements on morning stiffness, its 
assessment and treatment. Specifically, the panel recommended that morning 
stiffness, pain and impaired morning function should be routinely assessed in 
clinical practice. Although there are currently no validated tools for these 
parameters, they should be assessed as part of the patients' reported outcomes 
in RA. The panel also agreed on the benefits of low-dose glucocorticoids in RA, 
particularly for the improvement of morning stiffness.
CONCLUSIONS: These recommendations serve to guide rheumatologists and other 
stakeholders on the assessment and management of morning stiffness, and help 
implement the treat-to-target principle in the management of RA.

© 2015 Asia Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and Wiley Publishing 
Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1756-185X.12755
PMID: 26403254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]