---
reference_id: "PMID:35224703"
title: Validation of the simplified cough symptom score in non-small cell lung cancer patients after surgery.
authors:
- Lin R
- Zhu L
- Pan X
journal: Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s11748-022-01791-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Validation of the simplified cough symptom score in non-small cell lung cancer patients after surgery.
**Authors:** Lin R, Zhu L, Pan X
**Journal:** Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11748-022-01791-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11748-022-01791-w)

## Content

1. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2022 Aug;70(8):735-739. doi: 
10.1007/s11748-022-01791-w. Epub 2022 Feb 28.

Validation of the simplified cough symptom score in non-small cell lung cancer 
patients after surgery.

Lin R(1), Zhu L(2), Pan X(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Dongjie No.134, 
Fuzhou, 350000, China.
(2)Department of Gynecology, Fujian Provincial Maternity and Children's 
Hospital, Daoshanlu NO.18, Fuzhou, 350000, China.
(3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Dongjie No.134, 
Fuzhou, 350000, China. panxiaojie_fjsl@126.com.

BACKGROUND: The simplified Cough Symptom Score (sCSS) is a practical and simple 
tool for measuring cough severity. However, the sCSS is a consensus of experts, 
and has not been strictly validated among the non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
patients. We used the sCSS and investigated the validity, reliability, and 
repeatability of this instrument.
METHODS: A total of 219 NSCLC patients completed the sCSS, Leicester Cough 
Questionnaire in Mandarin-Chinese (LCQ-MC) and cough Visual Analog Scale (VAS). 
60 patients completed the LCQ and Global Rating of Change (GRC) at follow-up 
visits after 2-4 weeks. Concurrent validity, internal consistency, and 
repeatability were assessed.
RESULTS: Analyses of concurrent validity showed significant correlations between 
the sCSS and the LCQ-MC (r = - 0.356 to - 0.580) and cough VAS (r = 0.555). The 
correlation of the nighttime score with the LCQ-MC and cough VAS was more 
closely than that of the daytime score (r = - 0.364 to - 0.545 and r = 0.502 vs. 
r = - 0.233 to - 0.449 and r = 0.450). Internal consistency was acceptable 
(Cronbach's α of 0.74-0.90). The internal consistency of the sCSS between the 
nighttime and daytime scores was 0.428. The repeatability was high (intraclass 
correlation coefficients of 0.760).
CONCLUSION: The sCSS is a reliable, valid instrument for assessing postoperative 
cough in NSCLC patients.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to The Japanese Association for 
Thoracic Surgery.

DOI: 10.1007/s11748-022-01791-w
PMID: 35224703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]