---
reference_id: "PMID:23877438"
title: CD74-ROS1 fusion transcripts in resected non-small cell lung carcinoma.
authors:
- Matsuura S
- Shinmura K
- Kamo T
- Igarashi H
- Maruyama K
- Tajima M
- Ogawa H
- Tanahashi M
- Niwa H
- Funai K
- Kohno T
- Suda T
- Sugimura H
journal: Oncol Rep
year: '2013'
doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2630
keywords:
- "Antigens, Differentiation, B-Lymphocyte/genetics"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, metabolism"
- Class I Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Female
- Histocompatibility Antigens Class II/genetics
- Humans
- Kinesins/genetics
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)
- "Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter Proteins, Type IIb/genetics"
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
- ras Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CD74-ROS1 fusion transcripts in resected non-small cell lung carcinoma.
**Authors:** Matsuura S, Shinmura K, Kamo T, Igarashi H, Maruyama K, Tajima M, Ogawa H, Tanahashi M, Niwa H, Funai K, Kohno T, Suda T, Sugimura H
**Journal:** Oncol Rep (2013)
**DOI:** [10.3892/or.2013.2630](https://doi.org/10.3892/or.2013.2630)

## Content

1. Oncol Rep. 2013 Oct;30(4):1675-80. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2630. Epub 2013 Jul
19.

CD74-ROS1 fusion transcripts in resected non-small cell lung carcinoma.

Matsuura S(1), Shinmura K, Kamo T, Igarashi H, Maruyama K, Tajima M, Ogawa H,
Tanahashi M, Niwa H, Funai K, Kohno T, Suda T, Sugimura H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Tumor Pathology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine,
Hamamatsu, Shizuoka 431-3192, Japan.

The recent discovery of fusion oncokinases in a subset of non-small cell lung
carcinomas (NSCLCs) is of considerable clinical interest, since NSCLCs that
express such fusion oncokinases are reportedly sensitive to kinase inhibitors.
To better understand the role of recently identified ROS1 and RET fusion
oncokinases in pulmonary carcinogenesis, we examined 114 NSCLCs for
SLC34A2-ROS1, EZR-ROS1, CD74-ROS1 and KIF5B-RET fusion transcripts using
RT-polymerase chain reaction and subsequent sequencing analyses. Although the
expression of SLC34A2-ROS1, EZR-ROS1, or KIF5B-RET fusion transcripts was not
detected in any of the cases, the expression of CD74-ROS1 fusion transcripts was
detected in one (0.9%) of the 114 NSCLCs. The fusion occurred between exon 6 of
CD74 and exon 34 of ROS1 and was an in-frame alteration. The mutation was
detected in a woman without a history of smoking. Histologically, the carcinoma
was an adenocarcinoma with a predominant acinar pattern; notably, a mucinous
cribriform pattern and a solid signet-ring cell pattern were also observed in
part of the adenocarcinoma. ROS1 protein overexpression was
immunohistochemically detected in a cancer-specific manner in both the primary
cancer and the lymph node metastatic cancer. No somatic mutations were detected
in the mutation cluster regions of the KRAS, EGFR, BRAF and PIK3CA genes and the
entire coding region of p53 in the carcinoma, and the expression of ALK fusion
was negative. The above results suggest that CD74-ROS1 fusion is involved in the
carcinogenesis of a subset of NSCLCs and may contribute to the elucidation of
the characteristics of ROS1 fusion-positive NSCLC in the future.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2013.2630
PMID: 23877438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
