---
reference_id: "PMID:31796950"
title: "An epidemiology report for primary central nervous system tumors in adolescents and young adults: a nationwide population-based study in France, 2008-2013."
authors:
- Ng S
- Zouaoui S
- Bessaoud F
- Rigau V
- Roux A
- Darlix A
- Bauchet F
- Mathieu-Daudé H
- Trétarre B
- Figarella-Branger D
- Pallud J
- Frappaz D
- Roujeau T
- Bauchet L
journal: Neuro Oncol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noz227
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Distribution
- Brain Neoplasms/epidemiology
- Central Nervous System Neoplasms/epidemiology
- Europe
- Female
- France/epidemiology
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An epidemiology report for primary central nervous system tumors in adolescents and young adults: a nationwide population-based study in France, 2008-2013.
**Authors:** Ng S, Zouaoui S, Bessaoud F, Rigau V, Roux A, Darlix A, Bauchet F, Mathieu-Daudé H, Trétarre B, Figarella-Branger D, Pallud J, Frappaz D, Roujeau T, Bauchet L
**Journal:** Neuro Oncol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/neuonc/noz227](https://doi.org/10.1093/neuonc/noz227)

## Content

1. Neuro Oncol. 2020 Jun 9;22(6):851-863. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noz227.

An epidemiology report for primary central nervous system tumors in adolescents 
and young adults: a nationwide population-based study in France, 2008-2013.

Ng S(1), Zouaoui S(1), Bessaoud F(2), Rigau V(3), Roux A(4)(5), Darlix 
A(6)(7)(8), Bauchet F(8), Mathieu-Daudé H(8)(9), Trétarre B(2), 
Figarella-Branger D(10)(11), Pallud J(4)(5), Frappaz D(12), Roujeau T(1), 
Bauchet L(1)(8)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Gui de Chauliac Hospital, University Hospital 
Center (CHU) Montpellier, Montpellier University Medical Center, Montpellier, 
France.
(2)Tumor Registry of the Hérault, Institut du Cancer de Montpellier, 
Montpellier, France.
(3)Department of Neuropathology, Gui de Chauliac Hospital, CHU Montpellier, 
Montpellier University Medical Center, Montpellier, France.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Group Paris, Sainte-Anne 
Hospital, Paris, France.
(5)Paris Descartes University, Imaging Biomarkers of Brain Disorders, Institute 
of Psychiatry and Neurosciences of Paris, Paris, France.
(6)Department of Medical Oncology, Institut du Cancer de Montpellier, 
Montpellier, France.
(7)University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(8)Neuro-Oncology Group of Languedoc Roussillon, Institut du Cancer de 
Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(9)Department of Medical Informatics, Institut du Cancer de Montpellier, 
Montpellier, France.
(10)Aix-Marseille University, National Center for Scientific Research, Institute 
of Neuro-Physiopathology, Marseille, France.
(11)Department of Pathology and Neuropathology, Timone Hospital, Marseille, 
France.
(12)Institute of Pediatric Onco-Hematology, Lyon, France.
(13)National Institute of Health and Medical Research unit 1051, Montpellier, 
France.

Comment in
    Neuro Oncol. 2020 Jun 9;22(6):752-753. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noaa079.

BACKGROUND: Primary central nervous system tumors (PCNST) among adolescents and 
young adults (AYA, 15-39 y) have rarely been reported. We present a nationwide 
report of PCNST histologically confirmed in the French AYA population between 
2008 and 2013.
METHODS: Patients were identified through the French Brain Tumor Database 
(FBTDB), a national dataset that includes prospectively all histologically 
confirmed cases of PCNST in France. Patients aged 15 to 39 years with 
histologically confirmed PCNST diagnosed between 2008 and 2013 were included. 
For each of the 143 histological subtypes of PCNST, crude rates, sex, surgery, 
and age distribution were provided. To enable international comparisons, 
age-standardized incidence rates were adjusted to the world-standard, European, 
and USA populations.
RESULTS: For 6 years, 9661 PCNST (males/females: 4701/4960) were histologically 
confirmed in the French AYA population. The overall crude rate was 8.15 per 
100 000 person-years. Overall, age-standardized incidence rates were (per 
100 000 person-years, population of reference: world/Europe/USA): 
7.64/8.07/8.21, respectively. Among patients aged 15-24 years, the crude rate 
was 5.13 per 100 000. Among patients aged 25-39 years, the crude rate was 10.10 
per 100 000. Age-standardized incidence rates were reported for each of the 143 
histological subtypes. Moreover, for each histological subtype, data were 
detailed by sex, age, type of surgery (surgical resection or biopsy), and 
cryopreserved samples.
CONCLUSION: These data represent an exhaustive report of all histologically 
confirmed cases of PCNST with their frequency and distribution in the French AYA 
population in 2008-2013. For the first time in this age group, complete 
histological subtypes and rare tumor identification are detailed.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/neuonc/noz227
PMCID: PMC7283028
PMID: 31796950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]