---
reference_id: "PMID:17151339"
title: "Recombinant human acid [alpha]-glucosidase: major clinical benefits in infantile-onset Pompe disease."
authors:
- Kishnani PS
- Corzo D
- Nicolino M
- Byrne B
- Mandel H
- Hwu WL
- Leslie N
- Levine J
- Spencer C
- McDonald M
- Li J
- Dumontier J
- Halberthal M
- Chien YH
- Hopkin R
- Vijayaraghavan S
- Gruskin D
- Bartholomew D
- van der Ploeg A
- Clancy JP
- Parini R
- Morin G
- Beck M
- De la Gastine GS
- Jokic M
- Thurberg B
- Richards S
- Bali D
- Davison M
- Worden MA
- Chen YT
- Wraith JE
journal: Neurology
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000251268.41188.04
keywords:
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Europe/epidemiology
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type II/drug therapy, mortality"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Israel/epidemiology
- "Palliative Care/statistics & numerical data"
- Risk Assessment/methods
- Survival Analysis
- Survival Rate
- Taiwan/epidemiology
- "Terminal Care/statistics & numerical data"
- Treatment Outcome
- United States/epidemiology
- "alpha-Glucosidases/administration & dosage"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recombinant human acid [alpha]-glucosidase: major clinical benefits in infantile-onset Pompe disease.
**Authors:** Kishnani PS, Corzo D, Nicolino M, Byrne B, Mandel H, Hwu WL, Leslie N, Levine J, Spencer C, McDonald M, Li J, Dumontier J, Halberthal M, Chien YH, Hopkin R, Vijayaraghavan S, Gruskin D, Bartholomew D, van der Ploeg A, Clancy JP, Parini R, Morin G, Beck M, De la Gastine GS, Jokic M, Thurberg B, Richards S, Bali D, Davison M, Worden MA, Chen YT, Wraith JE
**Journal:** Neurology (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1212/01.wnl.0000251268.41188.04](https://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000251268.41188.04)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2007 Jan 9;68(2):99-109. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000251268.41188.04.
Epub 2006 Dec 6.

Recombinant human acid [alpha]-glucosidase: major clinical benefits in
infantile-onset Pompe disease.

Kishnani PS(1), Corzo D, Nicolino M, Byrne B, Mandel H, Hwu WL, Leslie N, Levine
J, Spencer C, McDonald M, Li J, Dumontier J, Halberthal M, Chien YH, Hopkin R,
Vijayaraghavan S, Gruskin D, Bartholomew D, van der Ploeg A, Clancy JP, Parini
R, Morin G, Beck M, De la Gastine GS, Jokic M, Thurberg B, Richards S, Bali D,
Davison M, Worden MA, Chen YT, Wraith JE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Box 3528, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA. kishn001@mc.duke.edu

Erratum in
    Neurology. 2008 Nov 18;71(21):1748.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2007 Jan 9;68(2):88-9. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000253226.13795.40.

BACKGROUND: Pompe disease is a progressive metabolic neuromuscular disorder
resulting from deficiency of lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA).
Infantile-onset Pompe disease is characterized by cardiomyopathy, respiratory
and skeletal muscle weakness, and early death. The safety and efficacy of
recombinant human (rh) GAA were evaluated in 18 patients with rapidly
progressing infantile-onset Pompe disease.
METHODS: Patients were diagnosed at 6 months of age and younger and exhibited
severe GAA deficiency and cardiomyopathy. Patients received IV infusions of
rhGAA at 20 mg/kg (n = 9) or 40 mg/kg (n = 9) every other week. Analyses were
performed 52 weeks after the last patient was randomized to treatment.
RESULTS: All patients (100%) survived to 18 months of age. A Cox proportional
hazards analysis demonstrated that treatment reduced the risk of death by 99%,
reduced the risk of death or invasive ventilation by 92%, and reduced the risk
of death or any type of ventilation by 88%, as compared to an untreated
historical control group. There was no clear advantage of the 40-mg/kg dose with
regard to efficacy. Eleven of the 18 patients experienced 164
infusion-associated reactions; all were mild or moderate in intensity.
CONCLUSIONS: Recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase is safe and effective for
treatment of infantile-onset Pompe disease. Eleven patients experienced adverse
events related to treatment, but none discontinued. The young age at which these
patients initiated therapy may have contributed to their improved response
compared to previous trials with recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase in
which patients were older.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000251268.41188.04
PMID: 17151339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
