---
reference_id: "PMID:21722892"
title: "Human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome and infertility: emerging problems in the era of highly active antiretrovirals."
authors:
- Kushnir VA
- Lewis W
journal: Fertil Steril
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2011.05.094
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome and infertility: emerging problems in the era of highly active antiretrovirals.
**Authors:** Kushnir VA, Lewis W
**Journal:** Fertil Steril (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.fertnstert.2011.05.094](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2011.05.094)

## Content

1. Fertil Steril. 2011 Sep;96(3):546-53. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2011.05.094. 
Epub 2011 Jun 30.

Human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome and infertility: 
emerging problems in the era of highly active antiretrovirals.

Kushnir VA(1), Lewis W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 
30312, USA. vitalykushnir@emory.edu

OBJECTIVE: To review the effects of human immunodeficiency virus/acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) in terms of its associated comorbid 
conditions and the side effects of antiretroviral treatment on fertility.
DESIGN: PubMed computer search to identify relevant articles.
SETTING: Research institution.
PATIENT(S): None.
INTERVENTION(S): None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): None.
RESULT(S): Biological alterations in reproductive physiology may account for 
subfertility in patients infected with HIV. Psychosocial factors in patients 
with HIV infection may affect their reproductive desires and outcomes. 
Antiretroviral medications may have direct toxicity on gametes and embryos. 
Available evidence indicates that fertility treatments can be a safe option for 
couples with HIV-discordant infection status, although the potential risk of 
viral transmission cannot be completely eliminated.
CONCLUSION(S): Because their potential reproductive desires are increasingly 
becoming a concern in the health care of young HIV-infected patients, additional 
data are needed to address the effect of HIV and its treatments on their 
fertility and reproductive outcomes.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2011.05.094
PMCID: PMC3165097
PMID: 21722892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]