---
reference_id: "PMID:22987684"
title: "Grange syndrome: an identifiable cause of stroke in young adults."
authors:
- Volonghi I
- Frigerio M
- Mardighian D
- Gasparotti R
- Del Zotto E
- Giossi A
- Costa P
- Poli L
- Jeannin G
- Gregorini GA
- Padovani A
- Pezzini A
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35593
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Grange syndrome: an identifiable cause of stroke in young adults.
**Authors:** Volonghi I, Frigerio M, Mardighian D, Gasparotti R, Del Zotto E, Giossi A, Costa P, Poli L, Jeannin G, Gregorini GA, Padovani A, Pezzini A
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.35593](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.35593)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Nov;158A(11):2894-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35593. Epub
2012  Sep 17.

Grange syndrome: an identifiable cause of stroke in young adults.

Volonghi I(1), Frigerio M, Mardighian D, Gasparotti R, Del Zotto E, Giossi A, 
Costa P, Poli L, Jeannin G, Gregorini GA, Padovani A, Pezzini A.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche, Clinica Neurologica, 
Università degli Studi di Brescia, Brescia, Italy. irene.volonghi@hotmail.it

Grange syndrome is a disorder characterized by arterial occlusive disease, 
hypertension, congenital cardiac defects, bone fragility, brachysyndactyly, and 
learning disabilities. It was first described in four members of the same family 
and in two sporadic cases thereafter, suggesting the possibility of various 
patterns of inheritance. We report on the case of an 18-year-old female 
presenting with subarachnoid hemorrhage due to the rupture of a basilar artery 
aneurysm, and with distinctive systemic features including extensive 
vasculopathy, facial dysmorphisms and brachysyndactyly, consistent with the 
diagnosis of Grange syndrome. Although rare and not fully characterized, Grange 
syndrome should be included in the differential diagnosis of stroke at young 
age.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35593
PMID: 22987684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]