---
reference_id: "PMID:29506472"
title: A case of anterior spinal cord syndrome in a patient with unruptured thoracic aortic aneurysm with a mural thrombus.
authors:
- Yogendranathan N
- Herath HMMTB
- Jayamali WD
- Matthias AT
- Pallewatte A
- Kulatunga A
journal: BMC Cardiovasc Disord
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12872-018-0786-4
keywords:
- "Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome/diagnostic imaging, etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Aortic Aneurysm, Thoracic/complications, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology, therapy"
- Aortography/methods
- Computed Tomography Angiography
- Humans
- "Infarction/diagnostic imaging, etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Regional Blood Flow
- Spinal Cord/blood supply
- "Thrombosis/complications, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of anterior spinal cord syndrome in a patient with unruptured thoracic aortic aneurysm with a mural thrombus.
**Authors:** Yogendranathan N, Herath HMMTB, Jayamali WD, Matthias AT, Pallewatte A, Kulatunga A
**Journal:** BMC Cardiovasc Disord (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12872-018-0786-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12872-018-0786-4)

## Content

1. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2018 Mar 5;18(1):48. doi: 10.1186/s12872-018-0786-4.

A case of anterior spinal cord syndrome in a patient with unruptured thoracic
aortic aneurysm with a mural thrombus.

Yogendranathan N(1), Herath HMMTB(2), Jayamali WD(2), Matthias AT(2), Pallewatte
A(2), Kulatunga A(2).

Author information:
(1)National hospital, Colombo, Sri Lanka. ynilu6@gmail.com.
(2)National hospital, Colombo, Sri Lanka.

BACKGROUND: Spinal cord infarction is an uncommon condition. Anterior cord
syndrome present with paraparesis or quadriparesis with sparing of vibration and
proprioceptive senses. The common causes of anterior cord syndrome are aortic
dissection and aortic surgical interventions. Spontaneous unruptured
nondissected aortic aneurysms with intramural thrombus can rarely cause anterior
cord infarctions.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a case of anterior spinal cord syndrome due to
aneurysm of the thoracic aorta with a mural thrombus. A 64 year old male
presented with sudden onset paraparesis with a sensory level at T1 with
preserved sense of proprioception and vibration. The MRI panspine revealed
increased T2 intensity in the anterior portion of the spinal cord from C5 to T10
level with characteristic 'owl eye' appearance on axial imaging. The CT
aortogram detected aneurysmal dilatation of the ascending aortic, arch and
descending thoracic aorta with significant intimal irregularities, calcified
atherosclerotic plaques and a small mural thrombus.
CONCLUSION: The possible mechanisms postulated are occlusion of ostia of
radicular arteries by the atherosclerotic plaques and mural thrombus or
thromboembolism to the anterior spinal artery. Nondissected atherosclerotic
aortic aneurysms should be considered in patients presenting with spinal cord
infarctions especially in the presence of vascular risk factors and smoking.

DOI: 10.1186/s12872-018-0786-4
PMCID: PMC5839003
PMID: 29506472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Written informed consent was obtained from
the relatives of the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by
the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare
that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains
neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations.
