---
reference_id: "PMID:40927449"
title: "Antimicrobial susceptibility profiles of thermophilic Campylobacter species from human, pig, and chicken feces in Rwanda."
authors:
- Gahamanyi N
- Habimana AM
- Harerimana JP
- Mukayisenga J
- Ntwali S
- Umuhoza A
- Nsengiyumva E
- Irimaso E
- Bosco Shimirwa J
- Pan CH
- Komba EV
- Muvunyi CM
- Rujeni N
- Amachawadi RG
journal: Front Microbiol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2025.1570290
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antimicrobial susceptibility profiles of thermophilic Campylobacter species from human, pig, and chicken feces in Rwanda.
**Authors:** Gahamanyi N, Habimana AM, Harerimana JP, Mukayisenga J, Ntwali S, Umuhoza A, Nsengiyumva E, Irimaso E, Bosco Shimirwa J, Pan CH, Komba EV, Muvunyi CM, Rujeni N, Amachawadi RG
**Journal:** Front Microbiol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmicb.2025.1570290](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2025.1570290)

## Content

1. Front Microbiol. 2025 Aug 25;16:1570290. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2025.1570290. 
eCollection 2025.

Antimicrobial susceptibility profiles of thermophilic Campylobacter species from 
human, pig, and chicken feces in Rwanda.

Gahamanyi N(1)(2), Habimana AM(1), Harerimana JP(1), Mukayisenga J(1), Ntwali 
S(1), Umuhoza A(3), Nsengiyumva E(3), Irimaso E(4), Bosco Shimirwa J(1), Pan 
CH(5), Komba EV(6), Muvunyi CM(2), Rujeni N(#)(3), Amachawadi RG(#)(7).

Author information:
(1)Biology Department, School of Science, College of Science and Technology, 
University of Rwanda, Kigali, Rwanda.
(2)Rwanda Biomedical Centre, Kigali, Rwanda.
(3)School of Health Sciences, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
University of Rwanda, Kigali, Rwanda.
(4)School of Veterinary Medicine, College of Agriculture, Animal Sciences, and 
Veterinary Medicine, University of Rwanda, Nyagatare, Rwanda.
(5)Natural Product Informatics Research Center, KIST Gangneung Institute of 
Natural Products, Gangneung, Republic of Korea.
(6)Tanzania Livestock Research Institute, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(7)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State 
University, Manhattan, KS, Unites States.
(#)Contributed equally

Globally, Campylobacter jejuni and C. coli have been associated with human 
gastroenteritis. More importantly, there are increasing reports of Campylobacter 
strains that are resistant to commonly used antimicrobials. In Rwanda, the 
prevalence and the antimicrobial susceptibility profiles of thermophilic 
Campylobacter strains remain underexplored. Since human campylobacteriosis is a 
foodborne disease with chicken and pigs being among their major reservoirs, this 
study aimed to determine the prevalence and antimicrobial susceptibility 
profiles of thermophilic Campylobacter species from human, chicken, and pig 
feces in Rwanda. A total of 385, 337, and 359 human, pig and chicken feces, 
respectively, were investigated for the presence of Campylobacter species. 
Isolation was done by culture and presumptive colonies were confirmed by the 
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR). The Kirby-Bauer disc diffusion method was 
employed to determine the susceptibility profiles of obtained isolates against 
six (06) antimicrobials, namely erythromycin (ERY), ciprofloxacin (CIP), 
streptomycin (STR), gentamicin (GEN), tetracycline (TET), and chloramphenicol 
(CHL). The used antimicrobials include drugs of choice or alternative treatment 
for human campylobacteriosis. The overall prevalence of thermophilic 
Campylobacter was 7.0% (27/385) in humans, 7.1% (24/337) in pigs, and 32.0% 
(115/359) in chicken. C. jejuni was the predominant species in all hosts with 
detection frequencies of 92.6%, 66.7%, and 73.9% in humans, pigs, and poultry, 
respectively. Increased resistance rates to ERY (70.1-92.4%) and STR 
(68.2-88.0%) were observed particularly among chicken isolates. Multi-drug 
resistance (MDR) was observed among the isolates, with the highest rates 
observed in chicken isolates (88.0%). Proportions of MDR among pig (40.9%) and 
human (40.7%) isolates were more or less similar. These findings highlight the 
presence of thermophilic Campylobacter strains in humans and livestock which are 
resistant to commonly used antimicrobials. Based on the potential of 
interspecies transmission, it is recommended to adopt a One Health approach to 
curb antimicrobial resistance. Further genomic analysis will shed more light on 
the transmission and drug resistance patterns.

Copyright © 2025 Gahamanyi, Habimana, Harerimana, Mukayisenga, Ntwali, Umuhoza, 
Nsengiyumva, Irimaso, Bosco Shimirwa, Pan, Komba, Muvunyi, Rujeni and 
Amachawadi.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2025.1570290
PMCID: PMC12414969
PMID: 40927449

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.