---
reference_id: "PMID:40643487"
title: Neurofilament Light Chain in Serum and CSF as a Potential Biomarker for Primary Angiitis of the Central Nervous System.
authors:
- Krüger C
- Pinnschmidt H
- Wilmes M
- Dargvainiene J
- Leypoldt F
- Seiler A
- Berg D
- Magnus T
- Deb-Chatterji M
journal: Cells
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/cells14130966
keywords:
- Humans
- "Biomarkers/blood, cerebrospinal fluid"
- "Neurofilament Proteins/blood, cerebrospinal fluid"
- Female
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, diagnosis"
- Adult
- Aged
- Case-Control Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurofilament Light Chain in Serum and CSF as a Potential Biomarker for Primary Angiitis of the Central Nervous System.
**Authors:** Krüger C, Pinnschmidt H, Wilmes M, Dargvainiene J, Leypoldt F, Seiler A, Berg D, Magnus T, Deb-Chatterji M
**Journal:** Cells (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells14130966](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells14130966)

## Content

1. Cells. 2025 Jun 24;14(13):966. doi: 10.3390/cells14130966.

Neurofilament Light Chain in Serum and CSF as a Potential Biomarker for Primary 
Angiitis of the Central Nervous System.

Krüger C(1), Pinnschmidt H(2), Wilmes M(1), Dargvainiene J(3), Leypoldt F(3)(4), 
Seiler A(4), Berg D(4), Magnus T(1), Deb-Chatterji M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246 
Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Medical Biometry and Epidemiology, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Neuroimmunology Section, Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical 
Center Schleswig-Holstein, 24105 Kiel, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, 24105 
Kiel, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Primary angiitis of the central nervous system (PACNS) is a rare 
vasculitis affecting CNS blood vessels, posing diagnostic challenges due to the 
limited specificity of the established diagnostic tools. Neurofilament light 
chain (NfL) might be a promising biomarker in PACNS.
METHODS: NfL in serum and CSF was measured in 33 PACNS patients (25 active 
[aPACNS], 8 in remission [rPACNS]) enrolled between 2014 and 2022 and compared 
to controls (serum: n = 303; CSF: n = 68); Results: Serum NfL was significantly 
elevated in aPACNS (median: 45.77 pg/mL) versus rPACNS (6.68 pg/mL; p < 0.001) 
and healthy controls (6.05 pg/mL; p < 0.001). Similarly, CSF NfL was 
significantly elevated in aPACNS (median: 4914.58 pg/mL) compared to rPACNS 
(301.19 pg/mL; p = 0.002) and controls (262.83 pg/mL; p < 0.001). Serum and CSF 
NfL were significantly correlated (r = 0.90, p < 0.001). Additionally, an 
association between elevated NfL and ischemic lesions was observed (serum: r = 
0.59, p = 0.006; CSF: r = 0.43, p = 0.032). A subgroup analysis excluding stroke 
patients still revealed elevated NfL in 90% (CSF) and 50% (serum), with 
diminishing discriminatory power with older age.
CONCLUSIONS: NfL holds potential as a biomarker for PACNS, in particular in 
younger patients.

DOI: 10.3390/cells14130966
PMCID: PMC12249180
PMID: 40643487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: T.M. has received personal fees from 
Merck-Serono, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb/Pfizer, Novartis, 
Biogen, Grifols, and CSL-Behring and grants from the European Union (FP-7, 
ERA-NET), German Research Foundation, Herrmann and Lilly Schilling Foundation, 
Fielmann Foundation, and Werner-Otto Foundation. M.D.-C. has received research 
grants from the Werner Otto Foundation and speakers’ honoraria from AstraZeneca 
and was funded by the Faculty of Medicine, University of Kiel, Germany, through 
its Advanced Clinician Scientist Programme, all outside the submitted work. F.L. 
is supported by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research 
(CONNECT-GENERATE grant no. 01GM1908A and 01GM2208), E-Rare Joint Transnational 
research support (ERA-Net, LE3064/2-1), European Joint Program for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (EJPRD) IGNITEMIND (01ED2506B), ERA-Net MICE-AE 
(01EW2507B), Stiftung Pathobiochemie of the German Society for Laboratory 
Medicine, and HORIZON MSCA 2022 Doctoral Network 101119457-IgG4-TREAT; discloses 
speaker honoraria from Grifols, Teva, Biogen, Bayer, Roche, Novartis, and 
Fresenius; travel funding from Merck, Grifols, and Bayer; and serves on advisory 
boards for Roche, Biogen, and Alexion. H.P., M.W. and C.K.: no conflicts of 
interest to declare.