---
reference_id: "PMID:40705830"
title: BBK32 attenuates antibody-dependent complement-mediated killing of infectious Borreliella burgdorferi isolates.
authors:
- Powell-Pierce AD
- Booth CE Jr
- Smith PG
- Shapiro BL
- Allen SS
- Garcia BL
- Skare JT
journal: PLoS Pathog
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1013361
keywords:
- "Borrelia burgdorferi/immunology, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Lyme Disease/immunology, microbiology"
- "Bacterial Proteins/immunology, metabolism"
- "Antibodies, Bacterial/immunology"
- Immune Evasion/immunology
- Complement Activation/immunology
- "Fibronectins/metabolism, immunology"
- Complement System Proteins/immunology
- "Complement C1/immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BBK32 attenuates antibody-dependent complement-mediated killing of infectious Borreliella burgdorferi isolates.
**Authors:** Powell-Pierce AD, Booth CE Jr, Smith PG, Shapiro BL, Allen SS, Garcia BL, Skare JT
**Journal:** PLoS Pathog (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.ppat.1013361](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1013361)

## Content

1. PLoS Pathog. 2025 Jul 24;21(7):e1013361. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1013361. 
eCollection 2025 Jul.

BBK32 attenuates antibody-dependent complement-mediated killing of infectious 
Borreliella burgdorferi isolates.

Powell-Pierce AD(1), Booth CE Jr(2), Smith PG(1), Shapiro BL(1), Allen SS(1), 
Garcia BL(2)(3), Skare JT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis and Immunology, College of Medicine, 
Texas A&M University, Bryan/College Station, Texas, United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine, East 
Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina, United States of America.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Kansas State University, 
Manhattan, Kansas, United States of America.

Borreliella burgdorferi, the causative agent of Lyme disease, has evolved unique 
complement evasion proteins that promote its ability to establish and maintain 
infection in mammalian hosts. Among these is B. burgdorferi BBK32, a 
multifunctional surface lipoprotein that binds extracellular matrix (ECM) 
components, including fibronectin (Fn). In addition to its ECM-binding 
functions, BBK32 binds to C1r, the initiator protease of the classical pathway 
of complement, and protects B. burgdorferi from complement-mediated killing 
following exposure to normal human serum. The disparate functions of BBK32 in 
adhesion and complement evasion have previously been studied in isolation. 
Herein we demonstrate that full-length BBK32 binds both Fn and C1 concurrently, 
indicating that binding of these macromolecules do not sterically hinder their 
simultaneous interaction. Given the link of antibody dependence to the classical 
pathway, we tested how the presence of BBK32 would protect infectious B. 
burgdorferi from borrelial-specific antibodies in a complement-dependent manner. 
BBK32 provided protection against complement activation in the presence of 
borrelial-specific antibodies in vitro. We also demonstrated, using both flow 
cytometry and fluorescence microscopy, that BBK32 results in the reduction of C4 
deposition on the surface of borrelial cells. This work demonstrates that BBK32 
can simultaneously bind to both C1r and Fn and contributes to the broader 
understanding of the ability of B. burgdorferi to evade antibody-dependent 
complement-mediated killing. These observations are significant as they suggest 
that BBK32 plays a dual role in adhesion and dissemination in infectious B. 
burgdorferi, as well as immune evasion activities, which ostensibly promotes its 
pathogenic potential.

Copyright: © 2025 Powell-Pierce et al. This is an open access article 
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which 
permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided 
the original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1013361
PMCID: PMC12316396
PMID: 40705830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.