---
reference_id: PMID:33905855
title: CLOVES Syndrome Diagnosis and Treatment in an Adult Patient.
authors:
- Ferreira J
- Gutiérrez JCL
- Carneiro A
- Araújo A
- Sousa PP
- Braga S
- Simões JC
- Carrilho C
- Mesquita A
journal: Ann Vasc Surg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.avsg.2021.03.044
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CLOVES Syndrome Diagnosis and Treatment in an Adult Patient.
**Authors:** Ferreira J, Gutiérrez JCL, Carneiro A, Araújo A, Sousa PP, Braga S, Simões JC, Carrilho C, Mesquita A
**Journal:** Ann Vasc Surg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.avsg.2021.03.044](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avsg.2021.03.044)

## Content

1. Ann Vasc Surg. 2021 Aug;75:533.e5-533.e9. doi: 10.1016/j.avsg.2021.03.044.
Epub  2021 Apr 24.

CLOVES Syndrome Diagnosis and Treatment in an Adult Patient.

Ferreira J(1), Gutiérrez JCL(2), Carneiro A(3), Araújo A(4), Sousa PP(5), Braga 
S(5), Simões JC(5), Carrilho C(5), Mesquita A(5).

Author information:
(1)Life and Health Science Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Science, 
University of Minho; Serviço de Cirurgia Vascular e Centro Académico do Hospital 
da Senhora da Oliveira Guimarães, Portugal. Electronic address: 
joana222@gmail.com.
(2)Vascular Anomalies Center, Department of Pediatric Surgery, La Paz Children's 
Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Centro Hospital de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal.
(4)Pharmaceutical, Hospital da Senhora da Oliveira Guimarães, Portugal.
(5)Life and Health Science Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Science, 
University of Minho; Serviço de Cirurgia Vascular e Centro Académico do Hospital 
da Senhora da Oliveira Guimarães, Portugal.

CLOVES syndrome is a rare, nonheritable sporadic overgrowth disorder. In the 
world 130-200 cases have been reported. This is the first case of CLOVES 
described in Portugal, which had been not been diagnosed for the last 36 years. 
With this paper, the authors look to highlight the clinical features of this 
syndrome so that it does not go unrecognized in daily practice. The authors also 
underline the efficacy and safety of sirolimus, and that this treatment should 
not be denied, even in adult patients.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2021.03.044
PMID: 33905855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.