---
reference_id: "PMID:39282079"
title: A GLB1 transgene with enhanced therapeutic potential for the preclinical development of ex-vivo gene therapy to treat mucopolysaccharidosis type IVB.
authors:
- Crippa S
- Alberti G
- Passerini L
- Savoia EO
- Mancino M
- De Ponti G
- Santi L
- Berti M
- Testa M
- Hernandez RJ
- Quaranta P
- Ceriotti S
- Visigalli I
- Morrone A
- Paoli A
- Forni C
- Scala S
- Degano M
- Staiano L
- Gregori S
- Aiuti A
- Bernardo ME
journal: Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.omtm.2024.101313
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A GLB1 transgene with enhanced therapeutic potential for the preclinical development of ex-vivo gene therapy to treat mucopolysaccharidosis type IVB.
**Authors:** Crippa S, Alberti G, Passerini L, Savoia EO, Mancino M, De Ponti G, Santi L, Berti M, Testa M, Hernandez RJ, Quaranta P, Ceriotti S, Visigalli I, Morrone A, Paoli A, Forni C, Scala S, Degano M, Staiano L, Gregori S, Aiuti A, Bernardo ME
**Journal:** Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.omtm.2024.101313](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtm.2024.101313)

## Content

1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2024 Aug 6;32(3):101313. doi: 
10.1016/j.omtm.2024.101313. eCollection 2024 Sep 12.

A GLB1 transgene with enhanced therapeutic potential for the preclinical 
development of ex-vivo gene therapy to treat mucopolysaccharidosis type IVB.

Crippa S(1), Alberti G(1), Passerini L(1), Savoia EO(1), Mancino M(1), De Ponti 
G(1), Santi L(1), Berti M(1), Testa M(2), Hernandez RJ(1), Quaranta P(1), 
Ceriotti S(1), Visigalli I(3), Morrone A(4)(5), Paoli A(4), Forni C(6), Scala 
S(1), Degano M(7)(8), Staiano L(2)(9), Gregori S(1), Aiuti A(1)(8)(10), Bernardo 
ME(1)(8)(10).

Author information:
(1)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-TIGET), IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy.
(2)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), 80078 Naples, Italy.
(3)GLP - San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-TIGET), IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Neurometabolic Diseases, Neuroscience 
Department, Meyer Children's Hospital IRCCS, 50139 Florence, Italy.
(5)Department of Neurosciences, Psychology, Drug Research and Child Health 
(NEUROFARBA), University of Florence, 50139 Florence, Italy.
(6)Telethon Foundation, 00185 Rome, Italy.
(7)Biocrystallography Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 
Milan, Italy.
(8)Università Vita-Salute San Raffaele, 20132 Milan, Italy.
(9)Institute for Genetic and Biomedical Research, National Research Council 
(CNR), 20138 Milan, Italy.
(10)Pediatric Immunohematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type IVB (MPSIVB) is a lysosomal storage disorder caused 
by β-galactosidase (β-GAL) deficiency characterized by severe skeletal and 
neurological alterations without approved treatments. To develop hematopoietic 
stem progenitor cell (HSPC) gene therapy (GT) for MPSIVB, we designed lentiviral 
vectors (LVs) encoding human β-GAL to achieve supraphysiological release of the 
therapeutic enzyme in human HSPCs and metabolic correction of diseased cells. 
Transduced HSPCs displayed proper colony formation, proliferation, and 
differentiation capacity, but their progeny failed to release the enzyme 
at supraphysiological levels. Therefore, we tested alternative LVs to 
overexpress an enhanced β-GAL deriving from murine (LV-enhGLB1) and human 
selectively mutated GLB1 sequences (LV-mutGLB1). Only human HSPCs transduced 
with LV-enhGLB1 overexpressed β-GAL in vitro and in vivo without evidence of 
overexpression-related toxicity. Their hematopoietic progeny efficiently 
released β-GAL, allowing the cross-correction of defective cells, including 
skeletal cells. We found that the low levels of human GLB1 mRNA in human 
hematopoietic cells and the improved stability of the enhanced β-GAL contribute 
to the increased efficacy of LV-enhGLB1. Importantly, the enhanced β-GAL enzyme 
showed physiological lysosomal trafficking in human cells and was not associated 
with increased immunogenicity in vitro. These results support the use of 
LV-enhGLB1 for further HSPC-GT development and future clinical translation to 
treat MPSIVB multisystem disease.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2024.101313
PMCID: PMC11399592
PMID: 39282079

Conflict of interest statement: A.A., M.E.B., S.C., S.S., and P.Q. are inventors 
of an international patent application related to this work filed on 8th August 
2023 (PCT/IB2023/057998).