---
reference_id: "PMID:8896560"
title: Identification and mutation analysis of the complete gene for Chediak-Higashi syndrome.
authors:
- Nagle DL
- Karim MA
- Woolf EA
- Holmgren L
- Bork P
- Misumi DJ
- McGrail SH
- Dussault BJ Jr
- Perou CM
- Boissy RE
- Duyk GM
- Spritz RA
- Moore KJ
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1038/ng1196-307
keywords:
- Adult
- Alternative Splicing
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Chediak-Higashi Syndrome/genetics
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Endosomal Sorting Complexes Required for Transport
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Male
- Mice
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Open Reading Frames
- Protein Conformation
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
- "Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Vacuolar Sorting Protein VPS15
- Vesicular Transport Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification and mutation analysis of the complete gene for Chediak-Higashi syndrome.
**Authors:** Nagle DL, Karim MA, Woolf EA, Holmgren L, Bork P, Misumi DJ, McGrail SH, Dussault BJ Jr, Perou CM, Boissy RE, Duyk GM, Spritz RA, Moore KJ
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1196-307](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1196-307)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1996 Nov;14(3):307-11. doi: 10.1038/ng1196-307.

Identification and mutation analysis of the complete gene for Chediak-Higashi 
syndrome.

Nagle DL(1), Karim MA, Woolf EA, Holmgren L, Bork P, Misumi DJ, McGrail SH, 
Dussault BJ Jr, Perou CM, Boissy RE, Duyk GM, Spritz RA, Moore KJ.

Author information:
(1)Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1996 Nov;14(3):242-5. doi: 10.1038/ng1196-242.

Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS) is a rare, autosomal recessive disorder 
characterized by hypopigmentation, severe immunologic deficiency with 
neutropenia and lack of natural killer (NK) cells, a bleeding tendency and 
neurologic abnormalities. Most patients die in childhood. The CHS hallmark is 
the occurrence of giant inclusion bodies and organelles in a variety of cell 
types, and protein sorting defects into these organelles. Similar abnormalities 
occur in the beige mouse, the proposed model for human CHS. Two groups have 
recently reported the identification of the beige gene, however the two cDNAs 
were not at all similar. Here we describe the sequence of a human cDNA 
homologous to mouse beige, identify pathologic mutations and clarify the 
discrepancies of the previous reports. Analysis of the CHS polypeptide 
demonstrates that its modular architecture is similar to the yeast vacuolar 
sorting protein, VPS15.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1196-307
PMID: 8896560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]