---
reference_id: PMID:31747995
title: Mobile Lower Body Negative Pressure Suit as an Integrative Countermeasure for Spaceflight.
authors:
- Petersen LG
- Hargens A
- Bird EM
- Ashari N
- Saalfeld J
- Petersen JCG
journal: Aerosp Med Hum Perform
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3357/AMHP.5408.2019
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aerospace Medicine
- Biomechanical Phenomena
- Equipment Design
- Female
- Fluid Shifts/physiology
- Gravity Suits
- Hemodynamics/physiology
- Humans
- Lower Body Negative Pressure/instrumentation
- Male
- Space Flight/instrumentation
- Supine Position/physiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mobile Lower Body Negative Pressure Suit as an Integrative Countermeasure for Spaceflight.
**Authors:** Petersen LG, Hargens A, Bird EM, Ashari N, Saalfeld J, Petersen JCG
**Journal:** Aerosp Med Hum Perform (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3357/AMHP.5408.2019](https://doi.org/10.3357/AMHP.5408.2019)

## Content

1. Aerosp Med Hum Perform. 2019 Dec 1;90(12):993-999. doi:
10.3357/AMHP.5408.2019.

Mobile Lower Body Negative Pressure Suit as an Integrative Countermeasure for 
Spaceflight.

Petersen LG, Hargens A, Bird EM, Ashari N, Saalfeld J, Petersen JCG.

BACKGROUND: Persistent headward fluid shift and mechanical unloading cause 
neuro-ocular, cardiovascular, and musculoskeletal deconditioning during 
long-term spaceflight. Lower body negative pressure (LBNP) reintroduces footward 
fluid shift and mechanical loading.METHODS: We designed, built, and tested a 
wearable, mobile, and flexible LBNP device (GravitySuit) consisting of 
pressurized trousers with built-in shoes to support ground reaction forces (GRF) 
and a thoracic vest to distribute load to the entire axial length of the body. 
In eight healthy subjects we recorded GRF under the feet and over the shoulders 
(Tekscan) while assessing cardiovascular response (Nexfin) and footward fluid 
shift from internal jugular venous cross-sectional area (IJVa) using ultrasound 
(Terason).RESULTS: Relative to normal bodyweight (BW) when standing upright, 
increments of 10 mmHg LBNP from 0 to 40 mmHg while supine induced axial loading 
corresponding to 0%, 13 ± 3%, 41 ± 5%, 75 ± 11%, and 125 ± 22% BW, respectively. 
Furthermore, LBNP reduced IJVa from 1.12 ± 0.3 cm² to 0.67 ± 0.2, 0.50 ± 0.1, 
0.35 ± 0.1, and 0.31 ± 0.1 cm², respectively. LBNP of 30 and 40 mmHg reduced 
cardiac stroke volume and increased heart rate while cardiac output and mean 
arterial pressure were unaffected. During 2 h of supine rest at 20 mmHg LBNP, 
temperature and humidity inside the suit were unchanged (23 ± 1°C; 47 ± 3%, 
respectively).DISCUSSION: The flexible GravitySuit at 20 mmHg LBNP comfortably 
induced mechanical loading and desired fluid displacement while maintaining the 
mobility of hips and knee joints. The GravitySuit may provide a feasible method 
to apply low-level, long-term LBNP without interfering with daily activity 
during spaceflight to provide an integrative countermeasure.Petersen LG, Hargens 
A, Bird EM, Ashari N, Saalfeld J, Petersen JCG. Mobile lower body negative 
pressure suit as an integrative countermeasure for spaceflight. Aerosp Med Hum 
Perform. 2019; 90(12):993-999.

DOI: 10.3357/AMHP.5408.2019
PMID: 31747995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]