---
reference_id: "PMID:40893393"
title: "Navigating Rare Presentations: Recurrent Burkitt Lymphoma Presenting as a Jejunal Mass."
authors:
- Nikumbh T
- Garg A
- Mongia H
- Abhinav T
- Yadav N
- Asija U
- Huang J
- Nadeem D
- Kumar K
- Sohagia A
journal: Clin Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/ccr3.70763
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Navigating Rare Presentations: Recurrent Burkitt Lymphoma Presenting as a Jejunal Mass.
**Authors:** Nikumbh T, Garg A, Mongia H, Abhinav T, Yadav N, Asija U, Huang J, Nadeem D, Kumar K, Sohagia A
**Journal:** Clin Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ccr3.70763](https://doi.org/10.1002/ccr3.70763)

## Content

1. Clin Case Rep. 2025 Aug 28;13(9):e70763. doi: 10.1002/ccr3.70763. eCollection 
2025 Sep.

Navigating Rare Presentations: Recurrent Burkitt Lymphoma Presenting as a 
Jejunal Mass.

Nikumbh T(1), Garg A(2), Mongia H(1), Abhinav T(1), Yadav N(1), Asija U(1), 
Huang J(3), Nadeem D(3), Kumar K(3), Sohagia A(3).

Author information:
(1)The Wright Center for Graduate Medical Education Scranton Pennsylvania United 
States.
(2)St Peter's University Hospital New Brunswick New Jersey United States.
(3)Geisinger Community Medical Center Scranton Pennsylvania United States.

Burkitt lymphoma (BL) is an aggressive B-cell malignancy characterized by rapid 
progression and MYC gene translocations. Jejunal involvement in BL is rare 
compared to more common sites like the lymph nodes and central nervous system. 
Diagnosing BL in the jejunum is particularly challenging as it can mimic other 
gastrointestinal conditions, necessitating a high index of suspicion and 
histopathological confirmation. We present the case of a 37-year-old male with a 
history of stage III non-seminomatous testicular carcinoma, BL, deep venous 
thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, and hypogammaglobulinemia, who presented with 
abdominal pain and nausea. Imaging revealed peritoneal carcinomatosis and a left 
hemiabdomen mass concerning malignancy. Given his medical history of previously 
diagnosed BL in the gastrohepatic ligament lymph node and imaging findings, BL 
relapse was suspected. Push enteroscopy with biopsy confirmed the recurrence of 
BL in the jejunum, with positive markers for CD45, CD20, BCL6, and c-Myc. 
Despite aggressive supportive care, the patient succumbed to his disease. This 
case highlights the importance of early recognition of BL, particularly in rare 
extra-nodal sites like the jejunum. Further research is needed to improve early 
detection and treatment outcomes for patients with relapsed or refractory BL.

© 2025 The Author(s). Clinical Case Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ccr3.70763
PMCID: PMC12394064
PMID: 40893393

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.