---
reference_id: "PMID:15276416"
title: Understanding arsenic carcinogenicity by the use of animal models.
authors:
- Wanibuchi H
- Salim EI
- Kinoshita A
- Shen J
- Wei M
- Morimura K
- Yoshida K
- Kuroda K
- Endo G
- Fukushima S
journal: Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2003.10.032
keywords:
- Animals
- Arsenic Poisoning/metabolism
- Carcinogens
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Liver Neoplasms, Experimental/chemically induced"
- Mice
- Rats
- "Rats, Inbred F344"
- Urinary Bladder Neoplasms/chemically induced
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding arsenic carcinogenicity by the use of animal models.
**Authors:** Wanibuchi H, Salim EI, Kinoshita A, Shen J, Wei M, Morimura K, Yoshida K, Kuroda K, Endo G, Fukushima S
**Journal:** Toxicol Appl Pharmacol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.taap.2003.10.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.taap.2003.10.032)

## Content

1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2004 Aug 1;198(3):366-76. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2003.10.032.

Understanding arsenic carcinogenicity by the use of animal models.

Wanibuchi H(1), Salim EI, Kinoshita A, Shen J, Wei M, Morimura K, Yoshida K,
Kuroda K, Endo G, Fukushima S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Osaka City University Medical School, Osaka
545-8585, Japan. wani@med.osaka-cu.ac.jp

Although numerous epidemiological studies have indicated that human arsenic
exposure is associated with increased incidences of bladder, liver, skin, and
lung cancers, limited attempts have been made to understand mechanisms of
carcinogenicity using animal models. Dimethylarsinic acid (DMA), an organic
arsenic compound, is a major metabolite of ingested inorganic arsenics in
mammals. Recent in vitro studies have proven DMA to be a potent clastogenic
agent, capable of inducing DNA damage including double strand breaks and
cross-link formation. In our attempts to clarify DMA carcinogenicity, we have
recently shown carcinogenic effects of DMA and its related metabolites using
various experimental protocols in rats and mice: (1) a multi-organ promotion
bioassay in rats; (2) a two-stage promotion bioassay by DMA of rat urinary
bladder and liver carcinogenesis; (3) a 2-year carcinogenicity test of DMA in
rats; (4) studies on the effects of DMA on lung carcinogenesis in rats; (5)
promotion of skin carcinogenesis by DMA in keratin (K6)/ornithine decarboxylase
(ODC) transgenic mice; (6) carcinogenicity of DMA in p53(+/-) knockout and
Mmh/8-OXOG-DNA glycolase (OGG1) mutant mice; (7) promoting effects of DMA and
related organic arsenicals in rat liver; (8) promoting effects of DMA and
related organic arsenicals in a rat multi-organ carcinogenesis test; and (9)
2-year carcinogenicity tests of monomethylarsonic acid (MMA) and trimethylarsine
oxide (TMAO) in rats. The results revealed that the adverse effects of arsenic
occurred either by promoting and initiating carcinogenesis. These data, as
covered in the present review, suggest that several mechanisms may be involved
in arsenic carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2003.10.032
PMID: 15276416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
