---
reference_id: "PMID:22936282"
title: Inner ear anomalies seen on CT images in people with Down syndrome.
authors:
- Intrapiromkul J
- Aygun N
- Tunkel DE
- Carone M
- Yousem DM
journal: Pediatr Radiol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/s00247-012-2490-3
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Comorbidity
- "Down Syndrome/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
- "Ear, Inner/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Female
- "Hearing Loss, Conductive/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
- Humans
- Male
- Maryland/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Reproducibility of Results
- Risk Assessment
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed/methods"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inner ear anomalies seen on CT images in people with Down syndrome.
**Authors:** Intrapiromkul J, Aygun N, Tunkel DE, Carone M, Yousem DM
**Journal:** Pediatr Radiol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00247-012-2490-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00247-012-2490-3)

## Content

1. Pediatr Radiol. 2012 Dec;42(12):1449-55. doi: 10.1007/s00247-012-2490-3. Epub 
2012 Aug 31.

Inner ear anomalies seen on CT images in people with Down syndrome.

Intrapiromkul J(1), Aygun N, Tunkel DE, Carone M, Yousem DM.

Author information:
(1)The Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Sciences, The 
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, 600 N. Wolfe St., Phipps B100F, Baltimore, 
MD 21287, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although dysplasia of inner ear structures in Down syndrome has been 
reported in several histopathological studies, the imaging findings have not 
been widely studied.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the prevalence and clinical significance of inner ear 
anomalies detected on CT images in patients with Down syndrome.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The temporal bone CT images of patients with Down 
syndrome were assessed for inner ear anomalies; clinical notes and audiograms 
were reviewed for hearing loss. Logistic regression models were employed to 
identify which CT findings were associated with sensorineural hearing loss 
(SNHL).
RESULTS: Inner ear anomalies were observed in 74.5% (38/51) of patients. 
Malformed bone islands of lateral semicircular canal (LSCC), narrow internal 
auditory canals (IACs), cochlear nerve canal stenoses, semicircular canal 
dehiscence (SCCD), and enlarged vestibular aqueducts were detected in 52.5% 
(53/101), 24.5% (25/102), 21.4% (21/98), 8.8% (9/102) and 2% (2/101) of 
patients' ears, respectively. IAC stenosis had the highest odds ratio 
(OR = 5.37, 95% CI: 1.0-28.9, P = 0.05) for SNHL.
CONCLUSION: Inner ear anomalies occurred in 74.5% of our population, with 
malformed (<3 mm) bone island of LSCC being the most common (52.5%) anomaly. 
Narrow IAC was seen in 24.5% of patients with Down syndrome and in 57.1% of ears 
with SNHL. High-resolution CT is a valuable for assessing the cause of hearing 
loss in people with Down syndrome.

DOI: 10.1007/s00247-012-2490-3
PMID: 22936282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]