---
reference_id: "PMID:24743686"
title: Sleep-disordered breathing increases the risk of arrhythmias.
authors:
- Padeletti M
- Zacà V
- Mondillo S
- Jelic S
journal: J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown)
year: '2014'
doi: 10.2459/JCM.0000000000000019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sleep-disordered breathing increases the risk of arrhythmias.
**Authors:** Padeletti M, Zacà V, Mondillo S, Jelic S
**Journal:** J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown) (2014)
**DOI:** [10.2459/JCM.0000000000000019](https://doi.org/10.2459/JCM.0000000000000019)

## Content

1. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2014 May;15(5):411-6. doi: 
10.2459/JCM.0000000000000019.

Sleep-disordered breathing increases the risk of arrhythmias.

Padeletti M(1), Zacà V, Mondillo S, Jelic S.

Author information:
(1)aDepartment of Cardiovascular Diseases, University of Siena, Siena, Italy 
bDivision of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Columbia University 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, USA.

Sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) has been consistently associated with increased 
risk for cardiovascular diseases, including arrhythmias. The purpose of this 
review is to elucidate the several pathophysiologic pathways such as repetitive 
hypoxia and reoxygenation, increased oxidative stress, inflammation and 
sympathetic activation that may underlie the increased incidence of arrhythmias 
in SDB patients. We discuss in particular the incidence of ventricular 
arrhythmias, atrial fibrillation and bradyarrhythmias in SDB patients. In 
addition, we discuss the electrocardiographic alteration such as ST-T changes 
during apneic events and QT dispersion induced by SDB that may trigger complex 
ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. Finally, we consider also the 
therapeutic interventions such as continuous positive airways pressure therapy, 
a standard treatment for SDB, that may reduce the incidence and recurrence of 
supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias in patients with SDB.

DOI: 10.2459/JCM.0000000000000019
PMCID: PMC4654124
PMID: 24743686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]