---
reference_id: "PMID:22408195"
title: Nitric oxide in primary ciliary dyskinesia.
authors:
- Walker WT
- Jackson CL
- Lackie PM
- Hogg C
- Lucas JS
journal: Eur Respir J
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1183/09031936.00176111
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nitric oxide in primary ciliary dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Walker WT, Jackson CL, Lackie PM, Hogg C, Lucas JS
**Journal:** Eur Respir J (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1183/09031936.00176111](https://doi.org/10.1183/09031936.00176111)

## Content

1. Eur Respir J. 2012 Oct;40(4):1024-32. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00176111. Epub
2012  Mar 9.

Nitric oxide in primary ciliary dyskinesia.

Walker WT(1), Jackson CL, Lackie PM, Hogg C, Lucas JS.

Author information:
(1)Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Diagnostic and Research Team (MP 803) NIHR 
Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit, Southampton University Hospitals NHS 
Trust, Tremona Road, Southampton, SO16 6YD, UK.

Nitric oxide is continually synthesised in the respiratory epithelium and is 
upregulated in response to infection or inflammation. Primary ciliary dyskinesia 
(PCD) is characterised by recurrent sinopulmonary infections due to impaired 
mucociliary clearance. Despite chronic infections, nasal nitric oxide in such 
patients is markedly reduced and is used as a screening test for this condition. 
These low levels were first described >15 yrs ago but the underlying mechanisms 
have yet to be fully elucidated. We review epithelial nitric oxide synthesis, 
release and measurement in the upper airways with particular reference to PCD. 
The key hypotheses that have been proposed to explain the low nitric oxide 
levels in this condition are explored and the potential benefits of augmenting 
airway nitric oxide levels are considered. Further work in these patients 
clarifying both whether the respiratory epithelium is able to biosynthesise 
normal levels of nitric oxide and the role played by abnormalities in the 
anatomy of the paranasal sinuses is essential. While nitric oxide augmentation 
is unlikely to be beneficial in common PCD phenotypes, it has potential in the 
treatment of secondary dyskinesias and may also improve treatment of bacterial 
infections, particularly where biofilms are implicated.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00176111
PMID: 22408195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]