---
reference_id: "PMID:28131213"
title: "Gene dosage effect in spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 homozygotes: A clinical and neuropathological study."
authors:
- Soga K
- Ishikawa K
- Furuya T
- Iida T
- Yamada T
- Ando N
- Ota K
- Kanno-Okada H
- Tanaka S
- Shintaku M
- Eishi Y
- Mizusawa H
- Yokota T
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2016.12.051
keywords:
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Brain/pathology
- Calcium Channels/genetics
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Gene Dosage
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene dosage effect in spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 homozygotes: A clinical and neuropathological study.
**Authors:** Soga K, Ishikawa K, Furuya T, Iida T, Yamada T, Ando N, Ota K, Kanno-Okada H, Tanaka S, Shintaku M, Eishi Y, Mizusawa H, Yokota T
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jns.2016.12.051](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2016.12.051)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 2017 Feb 15;373:321-328. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2016.12.051. Epub
2016  Dec 27.

Gene dosage effect in spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 homozygotes: A clinical and 
neuropathological study.

Soga K(1), Ishikawa K(2), Furuya T(3), Iida T(4), Yamada T(5), Ando N(6), Ota 
K(1), Kanno-Okada H(7), Tanaka S(8), Shintaku M(9), Eishi Y(6), Mizusawa H(10), 
Yokota T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurological Science, Graduate School of Medical 
and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology and Neurological Science, Graduate School of Medical 
and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan; The Center for Personalized Medicine for 
Healthy Aging, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, 
Tokyo 113-8519, Japan. Electronic address: pico.nuro@tmd.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Neurology, Kawaguchi Kogyo General Hospital, 1-18-15 Aoki, 
Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0031, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, 
Japan; Department of Cellular Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine and 
Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 
113-0033, Japan.
(5)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, 
Japan; Laboratory of Pathology, Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, 
Bunkyo Gakuin University Graduate School of Health Care Science, 2-4-1 
Mukogaoka, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0023, Japan.
(6)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, 
Japan.
(7)Department of Cancer Pathology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of 
Medicine, North 15, West 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Hokkaido, Japan; 
Department of Surgical Pathology, Hokkaido University Hospital, Hokkaido 
University, North 14, West 5, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8648, Hokkaido, Japan.
(8)Department of Cancer Pathology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of 
Medicine, North 15, West 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Hokkaido, Japan.
(9)Department of Pathology, Shiga Medical Center for Adults, 5-4-30 Moriyama, 
Moriyama, Shiga 524-8524, Japan.
(10)Department of Neurology and Neurological Science, Graduate School of Medical 
and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan; The National Center Hospital, National Center 
of Neurology and Psychiatry, 4-1-1 Ogawa-Higashi, Kodaira, Tokyo 187-8551, 
Japan.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative 
disorder. However, it remains unclear whether SCA6 shows a gene dosage effect, 
defined by earlier age-of-onset in homozygotes than heterozygotes. Herein, we 
retrospectively analyzed four homozygous SCA6 subjects from our single 
institution cohort of 120 SCA6 subjects. We also performed a neuropathological 
investigation into an SCA6 individual with compound heterozygous expansions. In 
the 116 heterozygotes, there was an inverse correlation of age-of-onset with the 
number of CAG repeats in the expanded allele, and with the total number of CAG 
repeats, in both normal and expanded alleles. The age-of-onset in the four 
homozygotes was within the 95% confidence interval of the age-of-onset versus 
the repeat-lengths correlations determined in the 116 heterozygotes. 
Nevertheless, all homozygotes had earlier onset than their parents, and showed 
rapid disease progression. Neuropathology revealed neuronal loss, as well as 
α1A-calcium channel protein aggregates in Purkinje cells, a few α1A-calcium 
channel protein aggregates in the neocortex and basal ganglia, and neuronal loss 
in Clarke's column and the globus pallidus not seen in heterozygotes. These data 
suggest a mild clinical and neuropathological gene dosage effect in SCA6 
subjects.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2016.12.051
PMID: 28131213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]