---
reference_id: "PMID:38795459"
title: "Clinical treatment patterns, molecular characteristics and survival outcomes of ROS1-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer: A large multicenter retrospective study."
authors:
- Huang Z
- Zhang Y
- Xu Q
- Song L
- Li Y
- Guo W
- Lin S
- Jiang W
- Wang Z
- Deng L
- Qin H
- Zhang X
- Tong F
- Zhang R
- Liu Z
- Zhang L
- Yu J
- Dong X
- Gong Q
- Deng J
- Chen X
- Wang J
- Zhang G
- Yang N
- Zeng L
- Zhang Y
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2024.107827
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Male
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Gene Rearrangement
- Aged
- Crizotinib/therapeutic use
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Adult
- Survival Rate
- Prognosis
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Pyrazoles/therapeutic use
- China/epidemiology
- Aminopyridines
- "Antigens, Differentiation, B-Lymphocyte"
- Histocompatibility Antigens Class II
- Lactams
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical treatment patterns, molecular characteristics and survival outcomes of ROS1-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer: A large multicenter retrospective study.
**Authors:** Huang Z, Zhang Y, Xu Q, Song L, Li Y, Guo W, Lin S, Jiang W, Wang Z, Deng L, Qin H, Zhang X, Tong F, Zhang R, Liu Z, Zhang L, Yu J, Dong X, Gong Q, Deng J, Chen X, Wang J, Zhang G, Yang N, Zeng L, Zhang Y
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2024.107827](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2024.107827)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2024 Jun;192:107827. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2024.107827. Epub
2024  May 21.

Clinical treatment patterns, molecular characteristics and survival outcomes of
ROS1-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer: A large multicenter retrospective
study.

Huang Z(1), Zhang Y(1), Xu Q(2), Song L(3), Li Y(4), Guo W(5), Lin S(6), Jiang
W(4), Wang Z(4), Deng L(4), Qin H(1), Zhang X(1), Tong F(7), Zhang R(7), Liu
Z(8), Zhang L(9), Yu J(10), Dong X(7), Gong Q(11), Deng J(12), Chen X(12), Wang
J(12), Zhang G(13), Yang N(1), Zeng L(14), Zhang Y(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Lung Cancer and Gastrointestinal Unit, Hunan
Cancer Hospital/The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine,
Central South University, Changsha, 410013 China; Graduate Collaborative
Training Base of Hunan Cancer Hospital, Hengyang Medical School, University of
South China, Hengyang, Hunan 421001, China.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Qinghai Provincial People's Hospital, Xining
810000, China.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Lung Cancer and Gastrointestinal Unit, Hunan
Cancer Hospital/The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine,
Central South University, Changsha, 410013 China; Graduate Collaborative
Training Base of Hunan Cancer Hospital, Hengyang Medical School, University of
South China, Hengyang, Hunan 421001, China; Department of Medical Oncology,
Yiyang Central Hospital, Yiyang 413000, China.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Lung Cancer and Gastrointestinal Unit, Hunan
Cancer Hospital/The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine,
Central South University, Changsha, 410013 China.
(5)Department of Pathology, Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 20025, China.
(6)Department of Medical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Hunan
University of Medicine, Huaihua 418000, China.
(7)Cancer Center, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022, China.
(8)Department of Medical Oncology, the Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya
School of Medicine, Central South University/Hunan Cancer Hospital, Changsha,
Hunan 410008, China.
(9)Department of Radiotherapy, the Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School
of Medicine, Central South University/Hunan Cancer Hospital, Changsha Hunan
410008, China.
(10)Department of Medical Oncology, Zhangjiajie People's Hospital, Zhangjiajie,
Hunan 410008, China.
(11)Department of Good Clinical Trials, the Affiliated Cancer Hospital of
Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University/Hunan Cancer Hospital,
Changsha, Hunan 410008, China.
(12)Early Clinical Trails Center, the Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya
School of Medicine, Central South University/Hunan Cancer Hospital, Changsha,
Hunan 410008, China.
(13)Faculty of Dentistry, The University of Hong Kong, 34 Hospital Road, Sai
Ying Pun 999077, Hong Kong, China.
(14)Department of Medical Oncology, Lung Cancer and Gastrointestinal Unit, Hunan
Cancer Hospital/The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine,
Central South University, Changsha, 410013 China. Electronic address:
530490930@qq.com.
(15)Department of Medical Oncology, Lung Cancer and Gastrointestinal Unit, Hunan
Cancer Hospital/The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine,
Central South University, Changsha, 410013 China; Graduate Collaborative
Training Base of Hunan Cancer Hospital, Hengyang Medical School, University of
South China, Hengyang, Hunan 421001, China; Early Clinical Trails Center, the
Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University/Hunan Cancer Hospital, Changsha, Hunan 410008, China; Furong
Laboratory, Changsha, Hunan 410000, China. Electronic address:
zhangyongchang@csu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring ROS1 rearrangements is
a molecular subset that exhibits favorable responses to tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) treatment than chemotherapy. This study investigated real-world
treatment patterns and survival outcomes among patients with ROS1-rearranged
advanced NSCLC.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective analysis of patients with ROS1-rearranged
advanced NSCLC treated in four different hospitals in China from August 2018 to
March 2022. The study analyzed gene fusion distribution, resistance patterns,
and survival outcomes.
RESULTS: ROS1 rearrangement occurs in 1.8 % (550/31,225) of our study cohort.
CD74 was the most common ROS1 fusion partner, accounting for 45.8 %. Crizotinib
was used in 73.9 % of patients in the first-line treatment, and an increased use
of chemotherapy, ceritinib, and lorlatinib was seen in the second-line setting.
Lung (43.2 %) and brain (27.6 %) were the most common sites of progression in
first-line setting, while brain progression (39.2 %) was the most common site of
progression in second-line. Median overall survival was 46 months (95 %
confidence intervals: 39.6-52.4). First-line crizotinib use yielded
significantly superior survival outcomes over chemotherapy in terms of
progression-free (18.5 vs. 6.0; p < 0.001) and overall survival (49.8 vs. 37;
p = 0.024). The choice of treatment in the latter line also had survival
implications, wherein survival outcomes were better when first-line crizotinib
was followed by sequential TKI therapy than first-line chemotherapy followed by
TKI therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provided insights into the real-world treatment, drug
resistance patterns, and survival outcomes among patients with ROS1-rearranged
NSCLC. This information serves as a valuable reference for guiding the treatment
of this molecular subset of NSCLC.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2024.107827
PMID: 38795459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
