---
reference_id: "PMID:31629998"
title: "Non-pharmacological interventions for cognitive difficulties in ADHD: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Lambez B
- Harwood-Gross A
- Golumbic EZ
- Rassovsky Y
journal: J Psychiatr Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2019.10.007
keywords:
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/complications, physiopathology, therapy"
- Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
- "Cognitive Dysfunction/etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Cognitive Remediation
- Executive Function/physiology
- Exercise Therapy
- Humans
- "Inhibition, Psychological"
- Neurofeedback
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Non-pharmacological interventions for cognitive difficulties in ADHD: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Lambez B, Harwood-Gross A, Golumbic EZ, Rassovsky Y
**Journal:** J Psychiatr Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpsychires.2019.10.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychires.2019.10.007)

## Content

1. J Psychiatr Res. 2020 Jan;120:40-55. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2019.10.007.
Epub  2019 Oct 12.

Non-pharmacological interventions for cognitive difficulties in ADHD: A
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Lambez B(1), Harwood-Gross A(2), Golumbic EZ(3), Rassovsky Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Bar Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel.
(2)Department of Psychology, Bar Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel; Herman Dana
Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Hadassah Hospital, Jerusalem,
Israel.
(3)Leslie and Susan Gonda (Goldschmied) Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center,
Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel.
(4)Department of Psychology, Bar Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel; Leslie and
Susan Gonda (Goldschmied) Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar-Ilan
University, Ramat-Gan, Israel; Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral
Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), California, USA.
Electronic address: yurir@biu.ac.il.

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is the most common
neurodevelopmental disorder in children and is associated with significant risk
of educational failure, interpersonal problems, mental illness, and delinquency.
Despite a number of comparative and comprehensive reviews on the effects of ADHD
treatments on ADHD core symptoms, evidence synthesizing the effects of ADHD
interventions on cognitive difficulties is limited. In this meta-analysis, the
neuropsychological effects of non-pharmacological interventions for ADHD were
examined across studies published between 1980 and 2017. Data were extracted
from studies that used objective cognitive measures (either computerized or
pencil-and-paper), and multiple meta-analyses were conducted to compare the
effectiveness across these interventions. Publication bias was assessed, as well
as quality of the evidence, using Cochrane risk of bias tool for randomized
control trials studies. Our final meta-analysis included 18 studies with
interventions that were categorized into four categories: neurofeedback,
cognitive-behavioral therapy, cognitive training, and physical exercises.
Physical exercises demonstrated the highest average effect size (Morris
d = 0.93). A further evaluation of cognitive functions yielded 49 effect sizes
for the five categories, including attention, inhibition, flexibility, and
working memory. Analyses demonstrated a homogenous, medium to large, effect size
of improvement across interventions, with inhibition demonstrating the largest
average effect size (Morris d = 0.685). This study highlights the positive
effect of psychological interventions on ADHD cognitive symptomology and
supports the inclusion of non-pharmacological interventions in conjunction with
the commonly used pharmacological treatments.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2019.10.007
PMID: 31629998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
