---
reference_id: PMID:17675531
title: Deletions or duplications in KCNQ2 can cause benign familial neonatal seizures.
authors:
- Heron SE
- Cox K
- Grinton BE
- Zuberi SM
- Kivity S
- Afawi Z
- Straussberg R
- Berkovic SF
- Scheffer IE
- Mulley JC
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2007.051938
keywords:
- Adult
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Epilepsy/genetics
- "Epilepsy, Benign Neonatal/genetics"
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Gene Duplication
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "KCNQ2 Potassium Channel/chemistry, deficiency, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nucleic Acid Amplification Techniques
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction/methods
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deletions or duplications in KCNQ2 can cause benign familial neonatal seizures.
**Authors:** Heron SE, Cox K, Grinton BE, Zuberi SM, Kivity S, Afawi Z, Straussberg R, Berkovic SF, Scheffer IE, Mulley JC
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2007.051938](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2007.051938)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2007 Dec;44(12):791-6. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2007.051938. Epub 2007
Aug  3.

Deletions or duplications in KCNQ2 can cause benign familial neonatal seizures.

Heron SE, Cox K, Grinton BE, Zuberi SM, Kivity S, Afawi Z, Straussberg R, 
Berkovic SF, Scheffer IE, Mulley JC.

BACKGROUND: Benign familial neonatal seizures are most often caused by mutations 
in the voltage-gated potassium channel subunit gene KCNQ2. More than 60 
mutations have been described in BFNS families, approximately half of which lead 
to protein truncation. The hypothesis of this study was that deletion or 
duplication of >or=1 exons of KCNQ2 could cause BFNS in cases without coding or 
splicing mutations.
METHODS: Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) was used to 
test a group of 21 unrelated patients with clinical features consistent with 
either BFNS, benign familial neonatal-infantile seizures or sporadic neonatal 
seizures, for exonic deletions and duplications.
RESULTS: Three deletions and one duplication mutation were identified in four 
familial cases and cascade testing of their available family members showed that 
the mutations segregated with the phenotype in each family. The junction 
fragment for one of the deletions was amplified by PCR and sequenced to 
characterise the breakpoint and verify that a deletion had occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: Submicroscopic deletions or duplications of KCNQ2 are seen in a 
significant proportion of BFNS families: four of nine (44%) cases previously 
testing negative for coding or splice site mutation by sequencing KCNQ2 and 
KCNQ3. MLPA is an efficient second-tier testing strategy for KCNQ2 to identify 
pathogenic intragenic mutations not detectable by conventional DNA sequencing 
methods.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2007.051938
PMCID: PMC2652819
PMID: 17675531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: none declared.