---
reference_id: "PMID:35479831"
title: "ANCA Associated Vasculitis Subtypes: Recent Insights and Future Perspectives."
authors:
- Austin K
- Janagan S
- Wells M
- Crawshaw H
- McAdoo S
- Robson JC
journal: J Inflamm Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2147/JIR.S284768
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ANCA Associated Vasculitis Subtypes: Recent Insights and Future Perspectives.
**Authors:** Austin K, Janagan S, Wells M, Crawshaw H, McAdoo S, Robson JC
**Journal:** J Inflamm Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2147/JIR.S284768](https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S284768)

## Content

1. J Inflamm Res. 2022 Apr 21;15:2567-2582. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S284768. eCollection
 2022.

ANCA Associated Vasculitis Subtypes: Recent Insights and Future Perspectives.

Austin K(#)(1), Janagan S(#)(2), Wells M(3), Crawshaw H(4), McAdoo S(5), Robson 
JC(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Royal National Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, 
Bath, UK.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Bristol Royal Infirmary, University Hospitals 
Bristol and Weston NHS Foundation Trust, Bristol, UK.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, UK.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, Gloucestershire Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Gloucester, UK.
(5)Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(6)Faculty of Health and Applied Sciences, University of the West of England, 
Bristol, UK.
(#)Contributed equally

The ANCA associated vasculitides (AAVs) affect a range of internal organs 
including ear nose and throat, respiratory tract, kidneys, skin and nervous 
system. They include granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA), eosinophilic 
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA) and microscopic polyangiitis (MPA). The 
AAVs are treated with high dose glucocorticoids, immunosuppressants, and 
targeted biological medications. Since the 1990s classification criteria for the 
AAVs have been based on clinical features, laboratory tests and basic imaging; 
an initiative to update the classification criteria incorporating newer tests, 
for example, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) and novel imaging 
techniques will be published this year. There is also evidence for 
classification of patients based on ANCA subtype; those with anti-proteinase 3 
antibodies (PR3) or anti-myeloperoxidase antibodies (MPO) have differences in 
response to treatment and clinical outcomes. An update is described within this 
review. The pathogenesis of AAV involves necrotizing inflammation of small to 
medium blood vessels involving multiple immunological pathways. We present an 
update on emerging evidence related to auto-antibodies, complement and 
lymphocyte pathways. This review describes emerging treatment regimens, 
including evidence for plasma exchange in severe disease and the inhibitor of 
the complement C5a receptor (C5aR) inhibitor, Avacopan. Lastly, patient reported 
outcomes are key secondary outcomes in randomised controlled trials and 
increasingly clinical practice, we report development in disease specific and 
glucocorticoid-specific PROs.

© 2022 Austin et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JIR.S284768
PMCID: PMC9037725
PMID: 35479831

Conflict of interest statement: Keziah Austin and Shalini Janagan are co-first 
authors for this study. Dr Joanna C Robson reports grants and/or personal fees 
from Vifor Pharma, Vifor Pharma, and Vifor Pharma, outside the submitted work; 
and led the development of the AAV PRO, GCA PRO and Steroid PRO. The authors 
report no other conflicts of interest in this work.