---
reference_id: "PMID:14569090"
title: "The fine specificity and cytokine profile of T-helper cells responsive to the alpha3 chain of type IV collagen in Goodpasture's disease."
authors:
- Cairns LS
- Phelps RG
- Bowie L
- Hall AM
- Saweirs WW
- Rees AJ
- Barker RN
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1097/01.asn.0000091588.80007.0e
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Anti-Glomerular Basement Membrane Disease/immunology, metabolism"
- Autoantigens/immunology
- Cell Culture Techniques
- Collagen Type IV/immunology
- Cytokines/metabolism
- Epitope Mapping
- "Epitopes, T-Lymphocyte/immunology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- T-Cell Antigen Receptor Specificity/immunology
- "T-Lymphocytes, Helper-Inducer/immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The fine specificity and cytokine profile of T-helper cells responsive to the alpha3 chain of type IV collagen in Goodpasture's disease.
**Authors:** Cairns LS, Phelps RG, Bowie L, Hall AM, Saweirs WW, Rees AJ, Barker RN
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.asn.0000091588.80007.0e](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.asn.0000091588.80007.0e)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2003 Nov;14(11):2801-12. doi: 
10.1097/01.asn.0000091588.80007.0e.

The fine specificity and cytokine profile of T-helper cells responsive to the 
alpha3 chain of type IV collagen in Goodpasture's disease.

Cairns LS(1), Phelps RG, Bowie L, Hall AM, Saweirs WW, Rees AJ, Barker RN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, 
United Kingdom.

Comment in
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2003 Nov;14(11):2988-9. doi: 
10.1097/01.asn.0000096785.86791.68.

Goodpasture's disease is a severe nephritis characterized by autoantibodies to 
the alpha3 chain of type IV collagen, alpha3(IV)NC1, in the glomerular basement 
membrane. The disease is very strongly associated with HLA-DR15, the affinities 
of alpha3(IV)NC1 peptides for DR15 are known, and elution experiments have 
identified major naturally processed sequences. Here, the fine specificity and 
cytokine profile of alpha3(IV)NC1-reactive T cells from patients with 
Goodpasture's disease is defined. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 
patients at diagnosis proliferated in response to significantly more peptides 
(chi(2) = 8.6, P = 0.004) from a panel spanning the sequence of alpha3(IV)NC1 
than did those from control DR15-positive donors and were highly focused (P = 
0.0002, binomial distribution) on two peptides, alpha3(71-90) and 
alpha3(131-150). Some peptides induced interferon-gamma, but none induced IL-4. 
Resolution of disease was accompanied by a striking deviation of the responses 
from proliferation to secretion of the T-regulatory cytokine IL-10, and addition 
of neutralizing antibody confirmed that such IL-10 production was suppressive. 
The affinity of the peptides for DR15 molecules was positively correlated 
(chi(2) = 14.6, P = 0.00067) with the ability to elicit proliferation. However, 
unlike foreign antigens, this hierarchy is not due to responses against the 
major naturally processed peptides, which rarely stimulated proliferation and 
which have only intermediate affinity for DR15 molecules. It is inferred that 
the helper response to alpha3(IV)NC1 in Goodpasture's disease is dominated by 
epitopes that are normally inefficiently presented because of processing 
constraints.

DOI: 10.1097/01.asn.0000091588.80007.0e
PMID: 14569090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]