---
reference_id: PMID:10933638
title: "Flucytosine: a review of its pharmacology, clinical indications, pharmacokinetics, toxicity and drug interactions."
authors:
- Vermes A
- Guchelaar HJ
- Dankert J
journal: J Antimicrob Chemother
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1093/jac/46.2.171
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antifungal Agents/adverse effects, pharmacokinetics, pharmacology, therapeutic use, toxicity"
- Drug Interactions
- "Flucytosine/adverse effects, pharmacokinetics, pharmacology, therapeutic use, toxicity"
- Fungi/drug effects
- Humans
- "Mycoses/drug therapy, microbiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Flucytosine: a review of its pharmacology, clinical indications, pharmacokinetics, toxicity and drug interactions.
**Authors:** Vermes A, Guchelaar HJ, Dankert J
**Journal:** J Antimicrob Chemother (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jac/46.2.171](https://doi.org/10.1093/jac/46.2.171)

## Content

1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2000 Aug;46(2):171-9. doi: 10.1093/jac/46.2.171.

Flucytosine: a review of its pharmacology, clinical indications, 
pharmacokinetics, toxicity and drug interactions.

Vermes A(1), Guchelaar HJ, Dankert J.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Clinical Pharmacy and Medical Microbiology, Academic Medical 
Centre, University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.

Flucytosine (5-FC) is a synthetic antimycotic compound, first synthesized in 
1957. It has no intrinsic antifungal capacity, but after it has been taken up by 
susceptible fungal cells, it is converted into 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), which is 
further converted to metabolites that inhibit fungal RNA and DNA synthesis. 
Monotherapy with 5-FC is limited because of the frequent development of 
resistance. In combination with amphotericin B, 5-FC can be used to treat severe 
systemic mycoses, such as cryptococcosis, candidosis, chromoblastomycosis and 
aspergillosis. Recently, 5-FC has been combined with newer azole antifungal 
agents; it also plays an important role in a new approach to the treatment of 
cancer. The severe side effects of 5-FC include hepatotoxicity and bone-marrow 
depression. In most patients, these side effects are concentration dependent, 
predictable, possibly avoidable with close monitoring to maintain 5-FC 
concentrations at <100 mg/L, and reversible with drug discontinuation or 
reduction of dose. 5-FC is well absorbed after oral administration, penetrates 
into body tissues well and is excreted mainly by the kidneys. In renal failure, 
major dose adjustments have to be made. The most important drug interaction of 
5-FC occurs with concomitant administration of 5-FC and nephrotoxic drugs, 
especially amphotericin B. Owing to the crucial role of glomerular filtration in 
5-FC elimination, drugs that impair this mechanism will decrease the elimination 
of 5-FC and thus prolong its half-life.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/46.2.171
PMID: 10933638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]