---
reference_id: "PMID:39956531"
title: Potential therapeutic substances for hand-foot-and-mouth disease in the interplay of enteroviruses and type I interferon.
authors:
- Wang X
- Wang Z
- Qi Z
- Zhu Y
journal: Int J Antimicrob Agents
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2025.107464
keywords:
- "Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease/drug therapy, virology, immunology"
- Humans
- "Interferon Type I/immunology, metabolism"
- "Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- "Enterovirus/drug effects, physiology, immunology"
- Virus Replication/drug effects
- "Immunity, Innate"
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Potential therapeutic substances for hand-foot-and-mouth disease in the interplay of enteroviruses and type I interferon.
**Authors:** Wang X, Wang Z, Qi Z, Zhu Y
**Journal:** Int J Antimicrob Agents (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2025.107464](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2025.107464)

## Content

1. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2025 May;65(5):107464. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2025.107464. Epub 2025 Feb 15.

Potential therapeutic substances for hand-foot-and-mouth disease in the 
interplay of enteroviruses and type I interferon.

Wang X(1), Wang Z(2), Qi Z(3), Zhu Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, First Hospital of Naval Medical 
University, Shanghai, China.
(2)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Naval Medical University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Naval Medical University, Shanghai, China. 
Electronic address: qizt@smmu.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Naval Medical University, Shanghai, China. 
Electronic address: zhuyz@smmu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVES: Hand-foot-and-mouth disease (HFMD) is widespread in the world. 
Severe HFMD can lead to complications like pneumonia, encephalitis, myocarditis, 
transverse myelitis and even death. Since HFMD is caused by at least 20 types of 
enteroviruses, there is an urgent need for broad-spectrum antiviral drugs to 
help control the spread of HFMD outbreaks.
METHODS: Type I interferon (IFN), as an indispensable part of the immune 
response, plays a key role in the inhibition of the enterovirus replication 
cycle without species specificity, and regulation of the innate immune system by 
inducing the activation of the IFN-stimulated genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, the interplay of enteroviruses and type I IFN was 
systematically summarized, including pathways for the activation and evasion of 
type I IFN. Besides, we proposed promising anti-enterovirus agents with 
therapeutic potential.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2025.107464
PMID: 39956531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interests None 
declared.