---
reference_id: "PMID:31840744"
title: Allogeneic HSCT for adult-onset leukoencephalopathy with spheroids and pigmented glia.
authors:
- Gelfand JM
- Greenfield AL
- Barkovich M
- Mendelsohn BA
- Van Haren K
- Hess CP
- Mannis GN
journal: Brain
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awz390
keywords:
- Brain/physiopathology
- "Cognition Disorders/pathology, physiopathology"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- "Leukoencephalopathies/genetics, therapy"
- Male
- Microglia/pathology
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- Neuroglia/cytology
- "Receptors, Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Allogeneic HSCT for adult-onset leukoencephalopathy with spheroids and pigmented glia.
**Authors:** Gelfand JM, Greenfield AL, Barkovich M, Mendelsohn BA, Van Haren K, Hess CP, Mannis GN
**Journal:** Brain (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awz390](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awz390)

## Content

1. Brain. 2020 Feb 1;143(2):503-511. doi: 10.1093/brain/awz390.

Allogeneic HSCT for adult-onset leukoencephalopathy with spheroids and pigmented 
glia.

Gelfand JM(1), Greenfield AL(1), Barkovich M(2), Mendelsohn BA(3), Van Haren 
K(4), Hess CP(1)(2), Mannis GN(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Division of Neuroimmunology and Glial Biology, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, Division of Neuroradiology, University of 
California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(5)Hematology and Blood and Marrow Transplantation, University of California, 
San Francisco, CA, USA.

Adult-onset leukoencephalopathy with spheroids and pigmented glia (ALSP) is an 
autosomal dominant leukoencephalopathy caused by mutations in colony stimulating 
factor 1 receptor (CSF1R). Here we report clinical and imaging outcomes 
following allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) in two 
patients with ALSP at the University of California, San Francisco between 
January 2016 and December 2017. Patient 1 proceeded to transplantation at age 53 
with a haplo-identical sibling donor. Patient 2, whose sister and mother had 
died of the disease, proceeded to transplantation at age 49 with a 12/12 human 
leukocyte antigen-matched unrelated donor. Both patients received reduced 
intensity conditioning regimens. At 28 and 26 months post-HSCT, respectively, 
both patients were alive, without evidence of graft-versus-host disease, with 
major infection at 1 year in one and new-onset seizures in the other. In both 
cases, neurological worsening continued post-HSCT; however, the progression in 
cognitive deficits, overall functional status and gait impairment gradually 
stabilized. There was continued progression of parkinsonism in both patients. On 
brain MRI, within 1 year there was stabilization of T2/FLAIR abnormalities, and 
after 2 years there was complete resolution of abnormal multifocal reduced 
diffusion. In summary, after >2 years of follow-up, allogeneic HSCT in ALSP led 
to interval resolution of diffusion MRI abnormalities, stabilization of T2/FLAIR 
MRI abnormalities, and partial clinical stabilization, supportive of treatment 
response. Allogeneic HSCT may be beneficial in ALSP by providing a supply of 
bone marrow-derived brain-engrafting myeloid cells with donor wild-type CSF1R to 
repopulate the microglial niche.

© The Author(s) (2019). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awz390
PMID: 31840744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]