---
reference_id: "PMID:35006617"
title: The international WAO/EAACI guideline for the management of hereditary angioedema-The 2021 revision and update.
authors:
- Maurer M
- Magerl M
- Betschel S
- Aberer W
- Ansotegui IJ
- Aygören-Pürsün E
- Banerji A
- Bara NA
- Boccon-Gibod I
- Bork K
- Bouillet L
- Boysen HB
- Brodszki N
- Busse PJ
- Bygum A
- Caballero T
- Cancian M
- Castaldo A
- Cohn DM
- Csuka D
- Farkas H
- Gompels M
- Gower R
- Grumach AS
- Guidos-Fogelbach G
- Hide M
- Kang HR
- Kaplan AP
- Katelaris C
- Kiani-Alikhan S
- Lei WT
- Lockey R
- Longhurst H
- Lumry WR
- MacGinnitie A
- Malbran A
- Martinez Saguer I
- Matta JJ
- Nast A
- Nguyen D
- Nieto-Martinez SA
- Pawankar R
- Peter J
- Porebski G
- Prior N
- Reshef A
- Riedl M
- Ritchie B
- Rafique Sheikh F
- Smith WB
- Spaeth PJ
- Stobiecki M
- Toubi E
- Varga LA
- Weller K
- Zanichelli A
- Zhi Y
- Zuraw B
- Craig T
journal: Allergy
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/all.15214
keywords:
- "Angioedemas, Hereditary/prevention & control, therapy"
- Child
- "Complement C1 Inhibitor Protein/genetics, therapeutic use"
- Consensus
- Female
- Humans
- Pregnancy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The international WAO/EAACI guideline for the management of hereditary angioedema-The 2021 revision and update.
**Authors:** Maurer M, Magerl M, Betschel S, Aberer W, Ansotegui IJ, Aygören-Pürsün E, Banerji A, Bara NA, Boccon-Gibod I, Bork K, Bouillet L, Boysen HB, Brodszki N, Busse PJ, Bygum A, Caballero T, Cancian M, Castaldo A, Cohn DM, Csuka D, Farkas H, Gompels M, Gower R, Grumach AS, Guidos-Fogelbach G, Hide M, Kang HR, Kaplan AP, Katelaris C, Kiani-Alikhan S, Lei WT, Lockey R, Longhurst H, Lumry WR, MacGinnitie A, Malbran A, Martinez Saguer I, Matta JJ, Nast A, Nguyen D, Nieto-Martinez SA, Pawankar R, Peter J, Porebski G, Prior N, Reshef A, Riedl M, Ritchie B, Rafique Sheikh F, Smith WB, Spaeth PJ, Stobiecki M, Toubi E, Varga LA, Weller K, Zanichelli A, Zhi Y, Zuraw B, Craig T
**Journal:** Allergy (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/all.15214](https://doi.org/10.1111/all.15214)

## Content

1. Allergy. 2022 Jul;77(7):1961-1990. doi: 10.1111/all.15214. Epub 2022 Feb 3.

The international WAO/EAACI guideline for the management of hereditary
angioedema-The 2021 revision and update.

Maurer M(1)(2), Magerl M(1)(2), Betschel S(3), Aberer W(4), Ansotegui IJ(5),
Aygören-Pürsün E(6), Banerji A(7), Bara NA(8), Boccon-Gibod I(9), Bork K(10),
Bouillet L(9), Boysen HB(11), Brodszki N(12), Busse PJ(13), Bygum A(14)(15),
Caballero T(16), Cancian M(17), Castaldo A(11), Cohn DM(18), Csuka D(19), Farkas
H(19), Gompels M(20), Gower R(21), Grumach AS(22), Guidos-Fogelbach G(23), Hide
M(24)(25), Kang HR(26), Kaplan AP(27), Katelaris C(28), Kiani-Alikhan S(29), Lei
WT(30), Lockey R(31), Longhurst H(32), Lumry WR(33), MacGinnitie A(34), Malbran
A(35), Martinez Saguer I(36), Matta JJ(37), Nast A(38), Nguyen D(39),
Nieto-Martinez SA(40), Pawankar R(41), Peter J(42)(43), Porebski G(44), Prior
N(45), Reshef A(46), Riedl M(47), Ritchie B(48), Rafique Sheikh F(49), Smith
WB(50), Spaeth PJ(51), Stobiecki M(44), Toubi E(52), Varga LA(19), Weller
K(1)(2), Zanichelli A(53), Zhi Y(54), Zuraw B(55), Craig T(56).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Allergology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate
member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.
(2)Fraunhofer Institute for Translational Medicine and Pharmacology ITMP,
Immunology and Allergology, Berlin, Germany.
(3)University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(5)Department of Allergy & Immunology, Hospital Quironsalud Bizkaia, Bilbao,
Spain.
(6)Center for Children and Adolescents, University Hospital Frankfurt,
Frankfurt, Germany.
(7)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Romanian Hereditary Angioedema Expertise Centre, Mediquest Clinical Research
Center, Sangeorgiu de Mures, Romania.
(9)National Reference Center for Angioedema (CREAK), Angioedema Center of
Reference and Excellence (ACARE), Grenoble Alpes University Hospital, Grenoble,
France.
(10)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg
University, Mainz, Germany.
(11)HAE International (HAEi), Skanderborg, Denmark.
(12)Department of Pediatric Immunology, Childrens Hospital, Skåne University
Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(13)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(14)Clinical Institute, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(15)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark.
(16)Allergy Department, Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPaz, CIBERER U754,
Madrid, Spain.
(17)Department of Systems Medicine, University Hospital of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(18)Department of Vascular Medicine, Amsterdam UMC/University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(19)Department of Internal Medicine and Haematology, Hungarian Angioedema Center
of Reference and Excellence, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(20)Clinical Immunology, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, UK.
(21)Marycliff Clinical Research, Principle Research Solutions, Spokane,
Washington, USA.
(22)Clinical Immunology, Centro Universitario FMABC, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(23)Instituto Politécnico Nacional SEPI-ENMH, Mexico City, Mexico.
(24)Department of Dermatology, Hiroshima Citizens Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.
(25)Department of Dermatology, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.
(26)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(27)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Immunology, Medical
university of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, USA.
(28)Department of Medicine, Campbelltown Hospital and Western Sydney University,
Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(29)Department of Immunology, Barts Health NHS Trust, London, UK.
(30)Division of Allergy, Immunology, and Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics,
Mackay Memorial Hospital, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(31)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine, Morsani
College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(32)Department of Immunology, Auckland District Health Board and Department of
Medicine, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(33)Internal Medicine, Allergy Division, University of Texas Health Science
Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(34)Division of Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Boston Children's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(35)Unidad de Alergia, Asma e Inmunología Clínica, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(36)Pediatrics, Haemophilia Centre Rhine Main (HZRM), Moerfelden-Walldorf,
Germany.
(37)H. Especialidades C.M.N.SXXI, I.M.S.S., México City, Mexico.
(38)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Division of
Evidence-Based Medicine Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member
of Free University of Berlin, Humboldt University of Berlin, and Berlin
Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(39)Respiratory, Allergy and Clinical Immunology Unit, Internal Medicine
Department, Vinmec Healthcare System, College of Health Sciences, VinUniversity,
Hanoi, Vietnam.
(40)Genetic Unit of Nutrition, National Institute of Pediatrics, Mexico City,
Mexico.
(41)Department of Pediatrics, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.
(42)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of Cape Town, Cape
Town, South Africa.
(43)Allergy and Immunology Unit, University of Cape Town Lung Institute, Cape
Town, South Africa.
(44)Department of Clinical and Environmental Allergology, Jagiellonian
University Medical College, Krakow, Poland.
(45)Allergy, Hospital Universitario Severo Ochoa, Madrid, Spain.
(46)Angioderma Center, Barzilai University Medical Center, Ashkelon, Israel.
(47)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, University of California
San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(48)Departments of Medicine and Medical Oncology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(49)Section of Adult Allergy & Immunology, Department of Medicine, King Faisal
Specialist Hospital & Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(50)Clinical Immunology and Allergy, Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, SA,
Australia.
(51)Institute of Pharmacology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(52)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Bnai Zion Medical Center,
Affiliated with Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(53)Department of Internal Medicine, ASST Fatebenefratelli Sacco, Ospedale Luigi
Sacco-University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(54)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Bejing Union Medical College
Hospital & Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Bejing, China.
(55)University of California, San Diego, San Diego, California, USA.
(56)Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics, Penn State University, Hershey,
Pennsylvania, USA.

Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is a rare and disabling disease for which early
diagnosis and effective therapy are critical. This revision and update of the
global WAO/EAACI guideline on the diagnosis and management of HAE provides
up-to-date guidance for the management of HAE. For this update and revision of
the guideline, an international panel of experts reviewed the existing evidence,
developed 28 recommendations, and established consensus by an online DELPHI
process. The goal of these recommendations and guideline is to help physicians
and their patients in making rational decisions in the management of HAE with
deficient C1 inhibitor (type 1) and HAE with dysfunctional C1 inhibitor (type
2), by providing guidance on common and important clinical issues, such as: (1)
How should HAE be diagnosed? (2) When should HAE patients receive prophylactic
on top of on-demand treatment and what treatments should be used? (3) What are
the goals of treatment? (4) Should HAE management be different for special HAE
patient groups such as children or pregnant/breast-feeding women? and (5) How
should HAE patients monitor their disease activity, impact, and control? It is
also the intention of this guideline to help establish global standards for the
management of HAE and to encourage and facilitate the use of recommended
diagnostics and therapies for all patients.

© 2022 The Authors. Allergy published by European Academy of Allergy and
Clinical Immunology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/all.15214
PMID: 35006617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
