---
reference_id: "PMID:30794807"
title: β-Catenin and Yes-Associated Protein 1 Cooperate in Hepatoblastoma Pathogenesis.
authors:
- Min Q
- Molina L
- Li J
- Adebayo Michael AO
- Russell JO
- Preziosi ME
- Singh S
- Poddar M
- Matz-Soja M
- Ranganathan S
- Bell AW
- Gebhardt R
- Gaunitz F
- Yu J
- Tao J
- Monga SP
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2019.02.002
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics, metabolism"
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Proliferation
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- Mutation
- Prognosis
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
- YAP-Signaling Proteins
- "beta Catenin/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# β-Catenin and Yes-Associated Protein 1 Cooperate in Hepatoblastoma Pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Min Q, Molina L, Li J, Adebayo Michael AO, Russell JO, Preziosi ME, Singh S, Poddar M, Matz-Soja M, Ranganathan S, Bell AW, Gebhardt R, Gaunitz F, Yu J, Tao J, Monga SP
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajpath.2019.02.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2019.02.002)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 2019 May;189(5):1091-1104. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2019.02.002.
Epub  2019 Feb 19.

β-Catenin and Yes-Associated Protein 1 Cooperate in Hepatoblastoma Pathogenesis.

Min Q(1), Molina L(2), Li J(3), Adebayo Michael AO(2), Russell JO(2), Preziosi 
ME(2), Singh S(2), Poddar M(2), Matz-Soja M(4), Ranganathan S(5), Bell AW(6), 
Gebhardt R(7), Gaunitz F(4), Yu J(8), Tao J(9), Monga SP(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Division of Experimental Pathology, Department of Pathology, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(3)Department of Gynecology, Shiyan Taihe Hospital, Affiliated Hospital of Hubei 
University of Medicine, Shiyan, China.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Division of Pediatric Pathology, Department of Pathology, Children's 
Hospital, Pittburgh, Pennsylvania; Pittsburgh Liver Research Center, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania.
(6)Division of Experimental Pathology, Department of Pathology, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Pittsburgh Liver 
Research Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(7)Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Leipzig, 
Leipzig, Germany.
(8)Department of Oncology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China; 
Department of Radiation Oncology, Shandong Cancer Hospital Affiliated to 
Shandong University, Shandong Academy of Medical Science, Jinan, China. 
Electronic address: sdyujinming@163.com.
(9)Department of Gynecology, Shiyan Taihe Hospital, Affiliated Hospital of Hubei 
University of Medicine, Shiyan, China; Pittsburgh Liver Research Center, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(10)Department of Gynecology, Shiyan Taihe Hospital, Affiliated Hospital of 
Hubei University of Medicine, Shiyan, China; Pittsburgh Liver Research Center, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Electronic address: smonga@pitt.edu.

Erratum in
    Am J Pathol. 2019 Aug;189(8):1680. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2019.06.003.

Hepatoblastoma (HB), the most common pediatric primary liver neoplasm, shows 
nuclear localization of β-catenin and yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1) in almost 
80% of the cases. Co-expression of constitutively active S127A-YAP1 and ΔN90 
deletion-mutant β-catenin (YAP1-ΔN90-β-catenin) causes HB in mice. Because 
heterogeneity in downstream signaling is being identified owing to mutational 
differences even in the β-catenin gene alone, we investigated if co-expression 
of point mutants of β-catenin (S33Y or S45Y) with S127A-YAP1 led to similar 
tumors as YAP1-ΔN90-β-catenin. Co-expression of S33Y/S45Y-β-catenin and 
S127A-YAP1 led to activation of Yap and Wnt signaling and development of HB, 
with 100% mortality by 13 to 14 weeks. Co-expression with 
YAP1-S45Y/S33Y-β-catenin of the dominant-negative T-cell factor 4 or 
dominant-negative transcriptional enhanced associate domain 2, the respective 
surrogate transcription factors, prevented HB development. Although 
histologically similar, HB in YAP1-S45Y/S33Y-β-catenin, unlike 
YAP1-ΔN90-β-catenin HB, was glutamine synthetase (GS) positive. However, both 
ΔN90-β-catenin and point-mutant β-catenin comparably induced GS-luciferase 
reporter in vitro. Finally, using a previously reported 16-gene signature, it 
was shown that YAP1-ΔN90-β-catenin HB tumors exhibited genetic similarities with 
more proliferative, less differentiated, GS-negative HB patient tumors, whereas 
YAP1-S33Y/S45Y-β-catenin HB exhibited heterogeneity and clustered with both 
well-differentiated GS-positive and proliferative GS-negative patient tumors. 
Thus, we demonstrate that β-catenin point mutants can also collaborate with YAP1 
in HB development, albeit with a distinct molecular profile from the deletion 
mutant, which may have implications in both biology and therapy.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2019.02.002
PMCID: PMC6521893
PMID: 30794807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]