---
reference_id: "PMID:12150846"
title: The immune response to Plasmodium falciparum malaria.
authors:
- Malaguarnera L
- Musumeci S
journal: Lancet Infect Dis
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s1473-3099(02)00344-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The immune response to Plasmodium falciparum malaria.
**Authors:** Malaguarnera L, Musumeci S
**Journal:** Lancet Infect Dis (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1473-3099(02)00344-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1473-3099(02)00344-4)

## Content

1. Lancet Infect Dis. 2002 Aug;2(8):472-8. doi: 10.1016/s1473-3099(02)00344-4.

The immune response to Plasmodium falciparum malaria.

Malaguarnera L(1), Musumeci S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Catania, Italy. 
lucmal@mbox.unict.it

Malaria is still a major cause of severe disease which is responsible for 
millions of deaths, mostly in children under 5 years old, in tropical countries, 
especially sub-Saharan Africa. Complications of severe anaemia and cerebral 
malaria are thought to be the major cause of morbidity and mortality but recent 
evidence suggests that the host's immunological response could also contribute 
to the pathophysiology of the disease in human beings. Intensive studies of the 
immune response to malaria parasites in human beings have provided a wealth of 
information about the cells and cytokines implicated in the pathophysiology of 
survival and fatal outcome in severe infections. This review focuses on the 
pivotal role of macrophages and other important cellular effectors, molecules, 
and cytokines involved in the activation of the immune response at the different 
stages of human falciparum malaria. Our understanding of the putative mechanisms 
by which cytokines may mediate beneficial and harmful effects, through 
activation of phagocytic cells, could help to develop new treatment strategies, 
regardless of the emergence of parasite multidrug resistance.

DOI: 10.1016/s1473-3099(02)00344-4
PMID: 12150846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]