---
reference_id: "PMID:21537345"
title: Indian hedgehog mutations causing brachydactyly type A1 impair Hedgehog signal transduction at multiple levels.
authors:
- Ma G
- Yu J
- Xiao Y
- Chan D
- Gao B
- Hu J
- He Y
- Guo S
- Zhou J
- Zhang L
- Gao L
- Zhang W
- Kang Y
- Cheah KS
- Feng G
- Guo X
- Wang Y
- Zhou CZ
- He L
journal: Cell Res
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/cr.2011.76
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Indian hedgehog mutations causing brachydactyly type A1 impair Hedgehog signal transduction at multiple levels.
**Authors:** Ma G, Yu J, Xiao Y, Chan D, Gao B, Hu J, He Y, Guo S, Zhou J, Zhang L, Gao L, Zhang W, Kang Y, Cheah KS, Feng G, Guo X, Wang Y, Zhou CZ, He L
**Journal:** Cell Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/cr.2011.76](https://doi.org/10.1038/cr.2011.76)

## Content

1. Cell Res. 2011 Sep;21(9):1343-57. doi: 10.1038/cr.2011.76. Epub 2011 May 3.

Indian hedgehog mutations causing brachydactyly type A1 impair Hedgehog signal 
transduction at multiple levels.

Ma G(1), Yu J, Xiao Y, Chan D, Gao B, Hu J, He Y, Guo S, Zhou J, Zhang L, Gao L, 
Zhang W, Kang Y, Cheah KS, Feng G, Guo X, Wang Y, Zhou CZ, He L.

Author information:
(1)Bio-X Center, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and 
Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, Shanghai 200030, China.

Brachydactyly type A1 (BDA1), the first recorded Mendelian autosomal dominant 
disorder in humans, is characterized by a shortening or absence of the middle 
phalanges. Heterozygous missense mutations in the Indian Hedgehog (IHH) gene 
have been identified as a cause of BDA1; however, the biochemical consequences 
of these mutations are unclear. In this paper, we analyzed three BDA1 mutations 
(E95K, D100E, and E131K) in the N-terminal fragment of Indian Hedgehog (IhhN). 
Structural analysis showed that the E95K mutation changes a negatively charged 
area to a positively charged area in a calcium-binding groove, and that the 
D100E mutation changes the local tertiary structure. Furthermore, we showed that 
the E95K and D100E mutations led to a temperature-sensitive and 
calcium-dependent instability of IhhN, which might contribute to an enhanced 
intracellular degradation of the mutant proteins via the lysosome. Notably, all 
three mutations affected Hh binding to the receptor Patched1 (PTC1), reducing 
its capacity to induce cellular differentiation. We propose that these are 
common features of the mutations that cause BDA1, affecting the Hh tertiary 
structure, intracellular fate, binding to the receptor/partners, and binding to 
extracellular components. The combination of these features alters signaling 
capacity and range, but the impact is likely to be variable and 
mutation-dependent. The potential variation in the signaling range is 
characterized by an enhanced interaction with heparan sulfate for IHH with the 
E95K mutation, but not the E131K mutation. Taken together, our results suggest 
that these IHH mutations affect Hh signaling at multiple levels, causing 
abnormal bone development and abnormal digit formation.

© 2011 IBCB, SIBS, CAS All rights reserved

DOI: 10.1038/cr.2011.76
PMCID: PMC3193471
PMID: 21537345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]