---
reference_id: "PMID:34167121"
title: "Paediatric Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis Disease: Long-Term Sequelae in the Hypothalamic Endocrine System."
authors:
- Vaiani E
- Felizzia G
- Lubieniecki F
- Braier J
- Belgorosky A
journal: Horm Res Paediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1159/000517040
keywords:
- Child
- "Diabetes Insipidus, Neurogenic/etiology"
- "Histiocytosis, Langerhans-Cell/complications"
- Humans
- Hypopituitarism/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Paediatric Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis Disease: Long-Term Sequelae in the Hypothalamic Endocrine System.
**Authors:** Vaiani E, Felizzia G, Lubieniecki F, Braier J, Belgorosky A
**Journal:** Horm Res Paediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000517040](https://doi.org/10.1159/000517040)

## Content

1. Horm Res Paediatr. 2021;94(1-2):9-17. doi: 10.1159/000517040. Epub 2021 Jun
24.

Paediatric Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis Disease: Long-Term Sequelae in the 
Hypothalamic Endocrine System.

Vaiani E(1), Felizzia G(2), Lubieniecki F(3), Braier J(2), Belgorosky A(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Department, Hospital de Pediatría J.P. Garrahan, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(2)Hemato-Oncology Department, Hospital de Pediatría J.P. Garrahan, Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(3)Pathology Department, Hospital de Pediatría J.P. Garrahan, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(4)Endocrine Department, Research Council of Argentina, Unidad de Investigación 
Garrahan - CONICET, Hospital de Pediatría Garrahan, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a disorder of the mononuclear phagocyte 
system that can affect almost any organ and system. The most common central 
nervous system (CNS) manifestation in LCH is the infiltration of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary region leading to destruction and neurodegeneration of 
CNS tissue. The latter causes the most frequent endocrinological manifestation, 
that is, central diabetes insipidus (CDI), and less often anterior pituitary 
hormone deficiency (APD). The reported incidence of CDI is estimated between 
11.5 and 24% and is considered a risk factor for neurodegenerative disease and 
APD. Three risk factors for development of CDI are recognized in the majority of 
the studies: (1) multisystem disease, (2) the occurrence of reactivations or 
active disease for a prolonged period, and (3) the presence of craniofacial bone 
lesions. Since CDI may occur as the first manifestation of LCH, differential 
diagnosis of malignant diseases like germ cell tumours must be made. APD is 
almost always associated with CDI and can appear several years after the 
diagnosis of CDI. Growth hormone is the most commonly affected anterior 
pituitary hormone. Despite significant advances in the knowledge of LCH in 
recent years, little progress has been made in preventing long-term sequelae 
such as those affecting the hypothalamic-pituitary system.

© 2021 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000517040
PMID: 34167121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]