---
reference_id: "PMID:30866985"
title: "Angioedema due to acquired C1-inhibitor deficiency: spectrum and treatment with C1-inhibitor concentrate."
authors:
- Bork K
- Staubach-Renz P
- Hardt J
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1043-3
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Angioedema/drug therapy, etiology, genetics"
- "Angioedemas, Hereditary/complications, pathology"
- Complement C1 Inhibitor Protein/therapeutic use
- Female
- Germany
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Angioedema due to acquired C1-inhibitor deficiency: spectrum and treatment with C1-inhibitor concentrate.
**Authors:** Bork K, Staubach-Renz P, Hardt J
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-019-1043-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-019-1043-3)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2019 Mar 13;14(1):65. doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1043-3.

Angioedema due to acquired C1-inhibitor deficiency: spectrum and treatment with 
C1-inhibitor concentrate.

Bork K(1), Staubach-Renz P(2), Hardt J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Johannes Gutenberg University, Langenbeckstr. 1, 
55131, Mainz, Germany. konrad.bork@unimedizin-mainz.de.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Johannes Gutenberg University, Langenbeckstr. 1, 
55131, Mainz, Germany.
(3)Department of Medical Psychology and Medical Sociology, Johannes Gutenberg 
University, Mainz, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Acquired angioedema due to C1-inhibitor (C1-INH) deficiency 
(AAE-C1-INH) is a serious condition that may result in life-threatening 
asphyxiation due to laryngeal edema. It is associated with malignant B-cell 
lymphoma and other disorders. The purpose of this study was to describe the 
characteristics and associated disorders of patients with AAE-C1-INH and assess 
the efficacy of plasma-derived C1-INH concentrate (pdC1-INH) in the treatment of 
AAE-C1-INH. Forty-four patients with AAE-C1-INH from the Angioedema Outpatient 
Service of Mainz were assessed for associated disorders. In 32 of these 
patients, the duration of swelling attacks was measured before and after 
treatment with pdC1-INH (Berinert® (CSL Behring, Marburg, Germany)). The time 
between injection and complete resolution of symptoms and treatment 
effectiveness was provided by the patients.
RESULTS: The following underlying disorders were present: monoclonal gammopathy 
of undetermined significance (47.7%), non-Hodgkin lymphoma (27.3%), anti-C1-INH 
autoantibodies alone (11.4%), and other conditions (4.5%). In 9.1% patients, no 
associated disorder could be found. AAE-C1-INH led to the detection of lymphoma 
in 75% of patients with the malignancy. Treatment with pdC1-INH shortened 
attacks by an average (SD) 54.4 (± 32.8) hours (P < 0.0001). The earlier the 
attack was treated, the shorter the time between injection and resolution of 
symptoms (P = 0.0149). A total of 3553 (97.7%) of the 3636 attacks were 
effectively treated with pdC1-INH as assessed by the patient. The mean (SD) dose 
per-attack was 787 (± 442) U. pdC1-INH was effective in 1246 (93.8%) of 1329 
attacks in 8 patients with anti-C1-INH autoantibodies and in 344 (99.4%) of 346 
attacks in 6 patients without autoantibodies. The average (SD) dose per 
effectively treated attack was 1238.4 (± 578.2) U in patients with anti-C1-INH 
autoantibodies and 510.2 (± 69.1) U in patients without autoantibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: pdC1-INH is highly effective in treating AAE-C1-INH patients and is 
also effective in the vast majority of attacks in patients with anti-C1-INH 
autoantibodies. It is fast-acting and reduces attack duration.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-019-1043-3
PMCID: PMC6417199
PMID: 30866985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Landesärztekammer 
Rheinland-Pfalz, 837.413.13 (9098-F). All patients gave their informed consent 
to participate in the study. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING 
INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.