---
reference_id: "PMID:40598206"
title: "Molecular characterization, clinical phenotype, and neurological outcome of twelve Palestinian children with beta-ketothiolase deficiency: report of two novel variants in the ACAT1 gene."
authors:
- Dweikat IM
- Abdul-Hafez HA
- Zayed A
- Kanaan M
- Kasem H
- Bzour R
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s12920-025-02175-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular characterization, clinical phenotype, and neurological outcome of twelve Palestinian children with beta-ketothiolase deficiency: report of two novel variants in the ACAT1 gene.
**Authors:** Dweikat IM, Abdul-Hafez HA, Zayed A, Kanaan M, Kasem H, Bzour R
**Journal:** BMC Med Genomics (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12920-025-02175-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-025-02175-8)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genomics. 2025 Jul 1;18(1):106. doi: 10.1186/s12920-025-02175-8.

Molecular characterization, clinical phenotype, and neurological outcome of 
twelve Palestinian children with beta-ketothiolase deficiency: report of two 
novel variants in the ACAT1 gene.

Dweikat IM(1), Abdul-Hafez HA(2), Zayed A(2), Kanaan M(3), Kasem H(4), Bzour 
R(5).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Department, Arab American University, P.O.BOX 240, 13 Zababdeh, 
Jenin, Palestine. imad.dweikat@aaup.edu.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, An-Najah National University, 
Nablus, Palestine.
(3)Molecular Genetic Lab, Bethlehem University, Bethlehem, Palestine.
(4)Molecular Genetics Lab, Istishari Arab Hospital, Ramallah, Palestine.
(5)Pediatric Department, Istishari Arab Hospital, Ramallah, Palestine.

BACKGROUND: Beta-ketothiolase deficiency (mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA 
thiolase, T2) deficiency (OMIM #203750, *607809) is an autosomal recessive 
disorder of isoleucine catabolism and ketone body utilization. It is caused by 
mutations in the ACAT1 gene and characterized by intermittent ketoacidosis 
episodes triggered by ketogenic stresses, with no clinical symptoms between the 
episodes. Neurological complications, particularly extrapyramidal signs may 
occur as sequelae of the ketoacidosis episodes but may also occur without or 
before any apparent metabolic crisis. T2 deficiency is characterized by the 
accumulation of isoleucine metabolites, 2methylacetoacetate, 
2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyrate, and tiglylglycine, detected in urine organic acids 
and blood acylcarnitines with or without hypoglycemia.
METHODS: This study presents data from twelve patients with T2 deficiency, 
diagnosed between 7 months and 22 months of age at two tertiary care centers in 
Palestine. The clinical, biochemical, molecular genetic data, and neurological 
outcomes are reviewed.
RESULTS: We report on twelve patients (6 females and 6 males) from eight 
families in four different regions of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. All patients 
were offspring of consanguineous marriages. Ketoacidotic episodes were the 
predominant manifestations in all patients, and each episode was triggered by 
either acute gastroenteritis or upper respiratory infections. One patient 
initially presented with hypotonia and psychomotor delay, later developing a 
ketoacidotic episode a few months afterward. The characteristic laboratory 
finding in all patients was the increased urinary excretion of 
2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyrate and tiglylglycine. Ten of the twelve patients had 
favorable outcomes, while two unfortunately passed away at the time of the 
study. Molecular genetic analysis of the ACAT1 gene was conducted on nine 
patients from six families, revealing four different variants, two of which were 
novel. Additionally, a founder mutation was identified in six patients from 
three families.
CONCLUSIONS: The study underscores the critical role of genetic research in 
unraveling the complexities of beta-ketothiolase deficiency and related 
disorders. By identifying haplotype blocks, founder mutations, and novel 
pathogenic variants, researchers can significantly improve diagnostic precision, 
enhance genetic counseling, and lay the groundwork for developing targeted 
therapies. We identified two novel variants and a founder mutation, thereby 
broadening the genetic spectrum of this rare disease.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-025-02175-8
PMCID: PMC12211740
PMID: 40598206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at 
the Arab American University, Palestine (registration number at FWA IORG0011491) 
and by the Palestinian Health Research Council (PHRC/HC/ 518/19). Informed 
consent to participate was obtained from all participants and the parents/legal 
guardians of minors. The study adhered to the Declaration of Helsinki to this 
effect. Consent for publication: Written informed consent was obtained from the 
patients/or their parents for publication of their clinical and genetic details. 
We explained that the patients’ names would not be attached and no pictures or 
videos would be obtained. The consent was delivered directly to the study 
coordinators during the preparation of the manuscript. Competing interests: The 
authors declare no competing interests.