---
reference_id: "PMID:27386845"
title: Characterization of CDH3-Related Congenital Hypotrichosis With Juvenile Macular Dystrophy.
authors:
- Hull S
- Arno G
- Robson AG
- Broadgate S
- Plagnol V
- McKibbin M
- Halford S
- Michaelides M
- Holder GE
- Moore AT
- Khan KN
- Webster AR
journal: JAMA Ophthalmol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2016.2089
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Cadherins/genetics, metabolism"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Disease Progression
- Electroretinography
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Fundus Oculi
- Humans
- "Hypotrichosis/congenital, diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- "Macular Degeneration/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Retina
- Retinal Pigment Epithelium/pathology
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Visual Acuity
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of CDH3-Related Congenital Hypotrichosis With Juvenile Macular Dystrophy.
**Authors:** Hull S, Arno G, Robson AG, Broadgate S, Plagnol V, McKibbin M, Halford S, Michaelides M, Holder GE, Moore AT, Khan KN, Webster AR
**Journal:** JAMA Ophthalmol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2016.2089](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2016.2089)

## Content

1. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2016 Sep 1;134(9):992-1000. doi: 
10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2016.2089.

Characterization of CDH3-Related Congenital Hypotrichosis With Juvenile Macular 
Dystrophy.

Hull S(1), Arno G(1), Robson AG(1), Broadgate S(2), Plagnol V(3), McKibbin M(4), 
Halford S(2), Michaelides M(1), Holder GE(1), Moore AT(5), Khan KN(6), Webster 
AR(1).

Author information:
(1)UCL (University College of London) Institute of Ophthalmology, London, 
England2Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, England.
(2)Nuffield Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Nuffield Department of Clinical 
Neuroscience, University of Oxford, Oxford, England.
(3)UCL Genetics Institute, London, England.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, St James's University Hospital, Leeds, England.
(5)UCL (University College of London) Institute of Ophthalmology, London, 
England2Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, England6Department of Ophthalmology, 
University of California, San Francisco, Medical Center.
(6)UCL (University College of London) Institute of Ophthalmology, London, 
England2Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, England5Department of Ophthalmology, St 
James's University Hospital, Leeds, England.

IMPORTANCE: Congenital hypotrichosis with juvenile macular dystrophy (HJMD) is a 
rare disorder presenting in childhood and adolescence with central visual 
disturbance and sparse scalp hair. Reported retinal imaging is lacking, and 
whether the condition is progressive remains unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate a series of patients with HJMD due to biallelic 
mutations in CDH3 and thereby characterize the disorder.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Ten patients from 10 families underwent 
detailed clinical assessment, including serial retinal imaging and 
electrophysiologic evaluation, at Moorfields Eye Hospital, St James's University 
Hospital, and Calderdale Royal Infirmary. Patients ranged in age from 3 to 17 
years at onset and 5 to 57 years at last assessment. The molecular genetic 
investigation included bidirectional Sanger sequencing of all exons and 
intron-exon boundaries of CDH3 and whole-exome sequencing in 2 patients. The 
study was conducted from June 5, 2013, to January 15, 2016, with final follow-up 
completed on December 15, 2015.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Results of clinical assessment and molecular genetic 
testing.
RESULTS: All 10 patients (7 male and 3 female) presented with central visual 
disturbance in childhood and had lifelong sparse scalp hair with normal facial 
hair. Fundus examination revealed chorioretinal atrophy of the posterior pole 
contiguous with the disc in all but 1 patient that was associated with marked 
loss of autofluorescence on fundus autofluorescence imaging. Optical coherence 
tomography (OCT) demonstrated variable degrees of atrophy of the outer retina, 
retinal pigment epithelium, and choroid, with outer retinal tubulations 
frequently observed. One patient had mild disruption of the inner segment 
ellipsoid band on OCT and additional mild digit abnormalities. 
Electrophysiologic evaluation in 5 patients demonstrated macular dysfunction 
with additional mild, generalized retinal dysfunction in 2 patients. Eight 
patients had more than 1 evaluation; of these, 5 patients showed deterioration 
of visual acuity over time, 1 patient remained stable, and 2 patients had severe 
visual loss at presentation that precluded assessment of visual deterioration. 
The area of atrophy did not progress with time, but retinal thickness decreased 
on OCT. Electrophysiologic evaluation in 1 patient found deterioration of 
macular function after 13 years of follow-up, but the mild, generalized 
photoreceptor dysfunction remained stable. Biallelic mutations were identified 
in all patients, including 6 novel mutations.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: These results suggest that CDH3-related disease is 
characterized by a childhood-onset, progressive chorioretinal atrophy confined 
to the posterior pole. The disease is readily distinguished from other juvenile 
macular dystrophies by the universally thin and sparse scalp hair. Patients may 
have additional limb abnormalities.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2016.2089
PMID: 27386845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]