---
reference_id: "PMID:17582575"
title: Micronutrients and diarrheal disease.
authors:
- Fischer Walker CL
- Black RE
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1086/518152
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Micronutrients and diarrheal disease.
**Authors:** Fischer Walker CL, Black RE
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1086/518152](https://doi.org/10.1086/518152)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2007 Jul 15;45 Suppl 1:S73-7. doi: 10.1086/518152.

Micronutrients and diarrheal disease.

Fischer Walker CL(1), Black RE.

Author information:
(1)Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Diarrhea is a leading cause of death among children <5 years of age and can be 
exacerbated by micronutrient malnutrition. Vitamin A supplementation given every 
6 months reduces the mortality rate by 23% among children 6-59 months of age and 
reduces the severity of diarrhea, but it does not affect overall 
diarrhea-associated morbidity. When given for the treatment of diarrhea, vitamin 
A appears to have no effect on the duration of the diarrheal episode and is not 
recommended for routine treatment of diarrhea. Regular zinc supplementation has 
been shown to reduce diarrhea prevalence and mortality, yet global programmatic 
recommendations regarding prophylactic zinc supplementation have not been made. 
Short-course daily zinc supplementation shortens the duration (a 15%-24% 
reduction) and severity of the episode and is now recommended for the treatment 
of all episodes of diarrhea occurring among children <5 years of age. Folic acid 
supplementation does not appear to be effective in the prevention or treatment 
of diarrheal disease.

DOI: 10.1086/518152
PMID: 17582575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]