---
reference_id: "PMID:16613685"
title: "[Clinical features of 89 patients with primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the tonsil]."
authors:
- Qin Y
- Shi YK
- He XH
- Yang JL
- Yang S
- Yu YX
- Li B
- Wang QL
- Zhou LQ
- Sun Y
journal: Ai Zheng
year: '2006'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Clinical features of 89 patients with primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the tonsil].
**Authors:** Qin Y, Shi YK, He XH, Yang JL, Yang S, Yu YX, Li B, Wang QL, Zhou LQ, Sun Y
**Journal:** Ai Zheng (2006)

## Content

1. Ai Zheng. 2006 Apr;25(4):481-5.

[Clinical features of 89 patients with primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the 
tonsil].

[Article in Chinese]

Qin Y(1), Shi YK, He XH, Yang JL, Yang S, Yu YX, Li B, Wang QL, Zhou LQ, Sun Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Hospital/Cancer Institute, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100021, P. 
R. China.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Head and neck lymphoma develops predominantly in the 
tonsil. This study was to investigate the clinical features of primary 
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) of the tonsil, and to explore possible ways to 
improve the prognosis and quality of life of the patients after treatment.
METHODS: Clinical data of 89 naive patients with NHL of the tonsil, treated from 
May 1990 to Jan. 2003, were retrospectively reviewed. All patients were 
confirmed pathologically and classified according to revised European-American 
Lymphoid Neoplasms and World Health Organization Classification, and staged 
according to the Ann Arbor classification. Stage I-II patients received 
radiochemotherapy-predominant treatment, whereas stage III-IV patients received 
chemotherapy-predominant treatment.
RESULTS: Of the 89 cases, 60 (67%) were diffuse large B-cell subtype, 11 (12%) 
were peripheral T-cell subtype, 5 (6%) were indolent lymphoma, 1 was anaplastic 
large T-cell lymphoma, and 1 was T lymphoblastic lymphoma; 81 (91%) were stage 
I-II disease. Of the 89 patients, 58 (72%) received radiochemotherapy, 19 (21%) 
received radiotherapy alone, 3 received chemotherapy alone, and 1 received 
radiochemotherapy combined with rituximab. The 5-year overall survival rate was 
80%, that of stage I-II patients was 84%. Cox regression multivariate analysis 
showed that the survival rate was correlated to the value of international 
prognostic index (IPI), and whether the patient had primary refractory or 
relapsed disease, but was not correlated to sex, age, pathologic subtype, B 
symptoms, and bulky disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Most patients with NHL of the tonsil are at early stages, with good 
prognosis. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is the most common pathologic subtype. 
Primary refractory, relapse, and IPI>1 are independent prognostic factors.

PMID: 16613685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]