---
reference_id: "PMID:28145000"
title: Filamin B Loss-of-Function Mutation in Dimerization Domain Causes Autosomal-Recessive Spondylocarpotarsal Synostosis Syndrome with Rib Anomalies.
authors:
- Yang CF
- Wang CH
- "Siong H'ng W"
- Chang CP
- Lin WD
- Chen YT
- Wu JY
- Tsai FJ
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/humu.23186
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Filamin B Loss-of-Function Mutation in Dimerization Domain Causes Autosomal-Recessive Spondylocarpotarsal Synostosis Syndrome with Rib Anomalies.
**Authors:** Yang CF, Wang CH, Siong H'ng W, Chang CP, Lin WD, Chen YT, Wu JY, Tsai FJ
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23186](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23186)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2017 May;38(5):540-547. doi: 10.1002/humu.23186. Epub 2017 Feb 27.

Filamin B Loss-of-Function Mutation in Dimerization Domain Causes 
Autosomal-Recessive Spondylocarpotarsal Synostosis Syndrome with Rib Anomalies.

Yang CF(1), Wang CH(2)(3), Siong H'ng W(1), Chang CP(1), Lin WD(4)(5), Chen 
YT(1), Wu JY(1), Tsai FJ(4)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital of China Medical 
University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(3)School of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, 
Taiwan.
(5)School of Post Baccalaureate Chinese Medicine, China Medical University, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, 
Taiwan.
(7)School of Chinese Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(8)Division of Pediatric Genetics, Endocrinology & Metabolism, China Medical 
University Children's Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.

Spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome (SCT) is a distinct group of disorders 
characterized by short stature, disrupted vertebral segmentation with vertebral 
fusion, scoliosis, lordosis, carpal/tarsal synostosis, and lack of rib 
anomalies. Mutations in filamin B (FLNB) and MYH3 have been reported for 
autosomal-recessive and autosomal-dominant SCT, respectively. We present a 
family with two patients suffering from autosomal-recessive SCT with rib 
anomalies, including malalignment, crowding, and uneven size and shape of ribs. 
Whole-exome sequencing revealed a novel p.S2542Lfs* 82 (c.7621dup) frameshift 
mutation in FLNB. This frameshift mutation lies in the C-terminal-most domain 
involved in FLNB dimerization and resulted in a 20-residue elongation, with 
complete familial segregation and absence in 376 normal controls. The mutant 
p.S2542Lfs* 82 FLNB demonstrated a complete loss of ability to form a functional 
dimer in transiently transfected HEK293T cells. The p.S2542Lfs* 82 mutation also 
led to significantly reduced protein levels and accumulation of the mutant 
protein in the Golgi apparatus. This is the first identified mutation in the 
dimerization domain of FLNB. This loss-of-function frameshift mutation in FLNB 
causes autosomal-recessive SCT with rarely reported rib anomalies. This report 
demonstrates the involvement of rib anomaly in SCT and its causative mutation in 
the dimerization domain of FLNB.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23186
PMID: 28145000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]