---
reference_id: "PMID:33741806"
title: Practical management strategies for benign hypermobility syndromes.
authors:
- Minhas D
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000798
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Practical management strategies for benign hypermobility syndromes.
**Authors:** Minhas D
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0000000000000798](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0000000000000798)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2021 May 1;33(3):249-254. doi: 
10.1097/BOR.0000000000000798.

Practical management strategies for benign hypermobility syndromes.

Minhas D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Patients with symptomatic hypermobility syndrome such as 
hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (hEDS) and hypermobility spectrum disorders 
(HSD) commonly present to rheumatologists with joint pain and functional 
disability. Providers often have difficulty with diagnosis due to a lack of 
knowledge on the range of associated manifestations and the available 
therapeutic modalities. This review will discuss recent updates on diagnostic 
measures and treatment options for rheumatologists to help patients navigate 
hEDS/HSD.
RECENT FINDINGS: This article describes newer diagnostic measures and assessment 
of hEDS/HSD manifestations. Evidence supporting physical therapy and 
occupational therapy is provided, as well as recent updates on assistive 
devices, compressive garments, orthoses, and surgical interventions. Given 
patient heterogeneity specific guidance about the amount and type of therapies 
required to produce a beneficial effect is lacking. Treatment should be 
individualized, and many of the studies focus on regional joint complaints 
rather than a whole-body approach.
SUMMARY: Physical therapy and occupational therapy remain the cornerstone of 
treatment.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000798
PMID: 33741806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]