---
reference_id: "PMID:38927689"
title: "Rare Pathogenic Variants in Pooled Whole-Exome Sequencing Data Suggest Hyperammonemia as a Possible Cause of Dementia Not Classified as Alzheimer's Disease or Frontotemporal Dementia."
authors:
- Karachanak-Yankova S
- Serbezov D
- Antov G
- Stancheva M
- Mihaylova M
- Hadjidekova S
- Toncheva D
- Pashov A
- Belejanska D
- Zhelev Y
- Petrova M
- Mehrabian S
- Traykov L
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/genes15060753
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rare Pathogenic Variants in Pooled Whole-Exome Sequencing Data Suggest Hyperammonemia as a Possible Cause of Dementia Not Classified as Alzheimer's Disease or Frontotemporal Dementia.
**Authors:** Karachanak-Yankova S, Serbezov D, Antov G, Stancheva M, Mihaylova M, Hadjidekova S, Toncheva D, Pashov A, Belejanska D, Zhelev Y, Petrova M, Mehrabian S, Traykov L
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes15060753](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes15060753)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2024 Jun 7;15(6):753. doi: 10.3390/genes15060753.

Rare Pathogenic Variants in Pooled Whole-Exome Sequencing Data Suggest 
Hyperammonemia as a Possible Cause of Dementia Not Classified as Alzheimer's 
Disease or Frontotemporal Dementia.

Karachanak-Yankova S(1)(2), Serbezov D(1), Antov G(3), Stancheva M(2), Mihaylova 
M(1), Hadjidekova S(1), Toncheva D(1)(4), Pashov A(5), Belejanska D(6), Zhelev 
Y(6), Petrova M(6), Mehrabian S(6), Traykov L(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical University-Sofia, 
1431 Sofia, Bulgaria.
(2)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biology, Sofia University 'St. Kliment 
Ohridski', 1164 Sofia, Bulgaria.
(3)Institute of Plant Physiology and Genetics, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, 
1113 Sofia, Bulgaria.
(4)Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, 1000 Sofia, Bulgaria.
(5)Department of Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, Bulgarian Academy of 
Sciences, 1113 Sofia, Bulgaria.
(6)Department of Neurology, University Hospital 'Alexandrovska', 1431 Sofia, 
Bulgaria.

The genetic bases of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) 
have been comprehensively studied, which is not the case for atypical cases not 
classified into these diagnoses. In the present study, we aim to contribute to 
the molecular understanding of the development of non-AD and non-FTD dementia 
due to hyperammonemia caused by mutations in urea cycle genes. The analysis was 
performed by pooled whole-exome sequencing (WES) of 90 patients and by searching 
for rare pathogenic variants in autosomal genes for enzymes or transporters of 
the urea cycle pathway. The survey returned two rare pathogenic coding mutations 
leading to citrullinemia type I: rs148918985, p.Arg265Cys, C>T; and rs121908641, 
p.Gly390Arg, G>A in the argininosuccinate synthase 1 (ASS1) gene. The 
p.Arg265Cys variant leads to enzyme deficiency, whereas p.Gly390Arg renders the 
enzyme inactive. These variants found in simple or compound heterozygosity can 
lead to the late-onset form of citrullinemia type I, associated with high 
ammonia levels, which can lead to cerebral dysfunction and thus to the 
development of dementia. The presence of urea cycle disorder-causing mutations 
can be used for the early initiation of antihyperammonemia therapy in order to 
prevent the neurotoxic effects.

DOI: 10.3390/genes15060753
PMCID: PMC11202446
PMID: 38927689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.