---
reference_id: "PMID:9283913"
title: "Aplastic anemia in eosinophilic fasciitis: responses to immunosuppression and marrow transplantation."
authors:
- Kim SW
- Rice L
- Champlin R
- Udden MM
journal: Haematologia (Budap)
year: '1997'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Anemia, Aplastic/complications, physiopathology, therapy"
- Bone Marrow Transplantation
- "Eosinophilia/complications, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Fasciitis/complications, physiopathology, therapy"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aplastic anemia in eosinophilic fasciitis: responses to immunosuppression and marrow transplantation.
**Authors:** Kim SW, Rice L, Champlin R, Udden MM
**Journal:** Haematologia (Budap) (1997)

## Content

1. Haematologia (Budap). 1997;28(3):131-7.

Aplastic anemia in eosinophilic fasciitis: responses to immunosuppression and 
marrow transplantation.

Kim SW(1), Rice L, Champlin R, Udden MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Eosinophilic fasciitis (EF) is a rare connective tissue disorder which is 
frequently associated with hematologic disorders, especially aplastic anemia 
(AA) and variants (amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia). The prognosis for AA with 
EF has generally been poor, but a few reports suggest a role for 
immunosuppressive therapy. We have seen four cases of AA complicating EF. All 
received corticosteroids and anti-thymocyte globulin without any benefit. One 
patient died of bleeding and infection. A second achieved unmaintained partial 
remission after two courses of cyclosporine A, although he had difficulty with 
side effects. Two patients received bone marrow transplants and both initially 
engrafted well. One had received marrow from a phenotypically HLA-matched parent 
and died of late graft failure. The second transplanted patient appears to be 
the only reported case of long term cure of both the AA and EF. Our four 
patients constitute the largest reported series of AA with EF and shed light on 
clinical aspects of the disease, and on the pathogenesis, particularly on 
responsiveness to different therapies; furthermore, there are implications to 
the treatment of AA in general.

PMID: 9283913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]