---
reference_id: "PMID:38891820"
title: Macrophage Polarization and Functions in Pathogenesis of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.
authors:
- Kim GD
- Lim EY
- Shin HS
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25115631
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Macrophage Polarization and Functions in Pathogenesis of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.
**Authors:** Kim GD, Lim EY, Shin HS
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25115631](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25115631)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 May 22;25(11):5631. doi: 10.3390/ijms25115631.

Macrophage Polarization and Functions in Pathogenesis of Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease.

Kim GD(1), Lim EY(1), Shin HS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Food Functionality Research, Korea Food Research Institute 
(KFRI), Wanju 55365, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Food Biotechnology, Korea University of Science and Technology 
(UST), Daejeon 34113, Republic of Korea.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), the major leading cause of 
mortality worldwide, is a progressive and irreversible respiratory condition 
characterized by peripheral airway and lung parenchymal inflammation, 
accompanied by fibrosis, emphysema, and airflow limitation, and has multiple 
etiologies, including genetic variance, air pollution, and repetitive exposure 
to harmful substances. However, the precise mechanisms underlying the 
pathogenesis of COPD have not been identified. Recent multiomics-based evidence 
suggests that the plasticity of alveolar macrophages contributes to the onset 
and progression of COPD through the coordinated modulation of numerous 
transcription factors. Therefore, this review focuses on understanding the 
mechanisms and functions of macrophage polarization that regulate lung 
homeostasis in COPD. These findings may provide a better insight into the 
distinct role of macrophages in COPD pathogenesis and perspective for developing 
novel therapeutic strategies targeting macrophage polarization.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25115631
PMCID: PMC11172060
PMID: 38891820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.