---
reference_id: "PMID:20301409"
title: Isolated Methylmalonic Acidemia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Manoli I
- Sloan JL
- Venditti CP
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isolated Methylmalonic Acidemia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Manoli I, Sloan JL, Venditti CP

## Content

1. Isolated Methylmalonic Acidemia.

Manoli I(1), Sloan JL(1), Venditti CP(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2005 Aug 16 [updated 2022 Sep 8].

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Medicine Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: For this GeneReview, the term "isolated methylmalonic
acidemia" refers to a group of inborn errors of metabolism associated with
elevated methylmalonic acid (MMA) concentration in the blood and urine that
result from the failure to isomerize (convert) methylmalonyl-coenzyme A (CoA)
into succinyl-CoA during propionyl-CoA metabolism in the mitochondrial matrix,
without hyperhomocysteinemia or homocystinuria, hypomethioninemia, or variations
in other metabolites, such as malonic acid. Isolated MMA is caused by complete
or partial deficiency of the enzyme methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (mut0 enzymatic
subtype or mut– enzymatic subtype, respectively), a defect in the transport or
synthesis of its cofactor, 5-deoxy-adenosyl-cobalamin (cblA, cblB, or cblD-MMA),
or deficiency of the enzyme methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase. Prior to the advent of
newborn screening, common phenotypes included: Infantile/non-B12-responsive form
(mut0 enzymatic subtype, cblB), the most common phenotype, associated with
infantile-onset lethargy, tachypnea, hypothermia, vomiting, and dehydration on
initiation of protein-containing feeds. Without appropriate treatment, the
infantile/non-B12-responsive phenotype could rapidly progress to coma due to
hyperammonemic encephalopathy. Partially deficient or B12-responsive phenotypes
(mut– enzymatic subtype, cblA, cblB [rare], cblD-MMA), in which symptoms occur
in the first few months or years of life and are characterized by feeding
problems, failure to thrive, hypotonia, and developmental delay marked by
episodes of metabolic decompensation. Methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase deficiency, in
which findings range from complete absence of symptoms to severe metabolic
acidosis. Affected individuals can also develop ataxia, dysarthria, hypotonia,
mild spastic paraparesis, and seizures. In those individuals diagnosed by
newborn screening and treated from an early age, there appears to be decreased
early mortality, less severe symptoms at diagnosis, favorable short-term
neurodevelopmental outcome, and lower incidence of movement disorders and
irreversible cerebral damage. However, secondary complications may still occur
and can include intellectual disability, tubulointerstitial nephritis with
progressive impairment of renal function, "metabolic stroke" (bilateral lacunar
infarction of the basal ganglia during acute metabolic decompensation),
pancreatitis, growth failure, functional immune impairment, bone marrow failure,
optic nerve atrophy, arrhythmias and/or cardiomyopathy (dilated or
hypertrophic), liver steatosis/fibrosis/cancer, and renal cancer.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of isolated MMA is established in a proband by
identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in MCEE, MMAA, MMAB, MMADHC, or
MMUT or (in some instances) by significantly reduced activity of one of the
following enzymes: methylmalonyl-CoA mutase, methylmalonyl-CoA mutase enzyme
cofactor 5'-deoxyadenosylcobalamin, or methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase. Because of
its relatively high sensitivity, easier accessibility, and noninvasive nature,
molecular genetic testing can obviate the need for enzymatic testing in most
instances.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations / Prevention of primary manifestations:
When isolated MMA is suspected during the diagnostic evaluation due to elevated
propionylcarnitine (C3) on a newborn blood spot, metabolic treatment should be
initiated immediately, while the suspected diagnosis is being confirmed.
Development and evaluation of treatment plans, training and education of
affected individuals and their families, and avoidance of side effects of
dietary treatment (i.e., malnutrition, growth failure) require a
multidisciplinary approach by experienced subspecialists from a specialized
metabolic center. The main principles of treatment are to provide supplemental
vitamin B12 to those who are known to be vitamin B12 responsive; restrict
natural protein, particularly of propiogenic amino acid precursors, while
maintaining a high-calorie diet; address feeding difficulties, recurrent
vomiting, and growth failure; provide supplemental carnitine to those with
carnitine deficiency; reduce propionate production from gut flora; and provide
emergency treatment during episodes of acute decompensation with the goal of
averting catabolism and minimizing central nervous system injury. In those with
significant metabolic instability and/or renal failure, liver and/or renal
transplantation may be considered. Prevention of secondary complications:
MedicAlert® bracelets and up-to-date, easily accessed, detailed emergency
treatment and presurgical protocols to facilitate care. Surveillance: Regular
evaluations by a metabolic specialist and metabolic dietician; screening
laboratory testing, including plasma amino acids, plasma and urine MMA levels,
serum acylcarnitine profile and free and total carnitine levels, blood
chemistries, and complete blood count at least every six months to one year, or
more frequently in infants or in those who are unstable or require frequent
changes in dietary management; measurement of renal function at least annually
or as clinically indicated; assessment for liver disease at least annually or as
clinically indicated; assessment of developmental progress and for signs of
movement disorder at each visit; ophthalmology evaluation to monitor for optic
atrophy at least annually or as clinically indicated; audiology evaluation at
least annually in childhood and adolescence or as clinically indicated.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Fasting, stress, increased dietary protein,
supplementation with the individual propiogenic amino acids valine and
isoleucine, nephrotoxic medications or agents, and agents that prolong QTc in
the EKG. Evaluation of relatives at risk: For at-risk newborn sibs when prenatal
testing was not performed: in parallel with newborn screening, measure serum
methylmalonic acid, urine organic acids, plasma acylcarnitine profile, plasma
amino acids, and serum B12; test for the familial isolated methylmalonic
acidemia-causing pathogenic variants if biochemistry is abnormal. Pregnancy
management for an affected mother: Monitor for complications including acute
decompensation or hyperammonemia, deterioration of renal function, and obstetric
complications including preeclampsia and preterm delivery. Pregnancy management
for an unaffected mother with an affected fetus: Oral and intramuscular vitamin
B12 has been administered to women pregnant with a fetus with vitamin
B12-responsive MMA, resulting in decreased maternal MMA urine output; however,
further study of this treatment is needed.
GENETIC COUNSELING: All forms of isolated MMA are inherited in an autosomal
recessive manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an isolated
MMA-causing pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual has at
conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic
carrier, and a 25% chance of inheriting neither of the familial pathogenic
variants. Once the isolated MMA-causing pathogenic variants have been identified
in an affected family member, molecular genetic carrier testing and
prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301409
