---
reference_id: "PMID:32209048"
title: A novel variant of IHH in a Chinese family with brachydactyly type 1.
authors:
- Yang Q
- Wang J
- Tian X
- Shen F
- Lan J
- Zhang Q
- Fan X
- Yi S
- Li M
- Shen Y
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s12881-020-01000-6
keywords:
- Adult
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Aspartic Acid/genetics
- "Brachydactyly/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- China
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Family
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Glycine/genetics
- Hedgehog Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Exome Sequencing
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel variant of IHH in a Chinese family with brachydactyly type 1.
**Authors:** Yang Q, Wang J, Tian X, Shen F, Lan J, Zhang Q, Fan X, Yi S, Li M, Shen Y
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12881-020-01000-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12881-020-01000-6)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2020 Mar 24;21(1):60. doi: 10.1186/s12881-020-01000-6.

A novel variant of IHH in a Chinese family with brachydactyly type 1.

Yang Q(1), Wang J(1), Tian X(2), Shen F(1), Lan J(3), Zhang Q(1), Fan X(1), Yi 
S(1), Li M(1), Shen Y(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Genetic and Metabolic Central Laboratory, Birth Defect Prevention Research 
Institute, Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Children's Hospital of Guangxi 
Zhuang Autonomous Region, Nanning, 530002, China.
(2)Department of Ultrasonography, Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Children's 
Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, Nanning, 530002, China.
(3)Department of Gynaecology, Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Children's 
Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, Nanning, 530002, China.
(4)Genetic and Metabolic Central Laboratory, Birth Defect Prevention Research 
Institute, Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Children's Hospital of Guangxi 
Zhuang Autonomous Region, Nanning, 530002, China. 
Yiping.shen@childrens.harvard.edu.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Shanghai 
Children's Medical Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, 200127, China. Yiping.shen@childrens.harvard.edu.
(6)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital; Department of 
Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. 
Yiping.shen@childrens.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: Brachydactyly type A1(BDA-1) is an autosomal dominant disorder which 
is caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in a specific region of the 
N-terminal active fragment of Indian Hedgehog (IHH). The disorder is mainly 
characterized by shortening or missing of the middle phalanges. In this study, 
Our purpose is to identify the pathogenic variations associated with BDA-1 
involved in a five-generation Chinese family.
METHODS: A BDA-1 family with 8 affected and 14 unaffected family members was 
recruited. Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed to identify the pathogenic 
variant in the proband, and which was later confirmed and segregated by Sanger 
sequencing. The significance of variants were assessed using several molecular 
and bioinformatics analysis methods.
RESULTS: We uncovered a novel heterozygous missense variant c.299A > G (p.D100G) 
at the mutational hotspot of IHH gene following whole-exome sequencing of a 
Chinese family with BDA-1. The variant co-segregated with BDA-1 in the pedigree, 
showed 100% penetrance for phalange phenotype with variable expressivity.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, this study reports a five-generation Chinese family 
with BDA-1 due to a novel pathogenic variant (c.299A > G (p.D100G)) of IHH and 
expands the clinical and genetic spectrum of BDA-1.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-020-01000-6
PMCID: PMC7092535
PMID: 32209048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.