---
reference_id: "PMID:37113550"
title: Etiology of anxious and fearful behavior in juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (CLN3 disease).
authors:
- Ostergaard JR
journal: Front Psychiatry
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1059082
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Etiology of anxious and fearful behavior in juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (CLN3 disease).
**Authors:** Ostergaard JR
**Journal:** Front Psychiatry (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1059082](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1059082)

## Content

1. Front Psychiatry. 2023 Apr 11;14:1059082. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1059082.
eCollection 2023.

Etiology of anxious and fearful behavior in juvenile neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis (CLN3 disease).

Ostergaard JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child and Adolescence, Centre for Rare Diseases, Aarhus
University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (JNCL, CLN3) is a
childhood-onset neurodegenerative disease with prominent symptoms comprising a
pediatric dementia syndrome. As in adult dementia, behavioral symptoms like mood
disturbances and anxiety are common. In contrast to in adult dementia, however,
the anxious behavioral symptoms increase during the terminal phase of JNCL
disease. In the present study, the current understanding of the neurobiological
mechanisms of anxiety and anxious behavior in general is addressed as will a
discussion of the mechanism of the anxious behavior seen in young JNCL patients.
Based on developmental behavioral points of view, known neurobiological
mechanisms, and the clinical presentation of the anxious behavior, a theory of
its etiology is described.
RESULT AND DISCUSSION: During the terminal phase, the cognitive developmental
age of JNCL patients is below 2 years. At this stage of mental development
individuals act primarily from a concrete world of consciousness and do not have
the cognitive ability to encounter a normal anxiety response. Instead, they
experience the evolutionary basic emotion of fear, and as the episodes typically
are provoked when the adolescent JNCL patient is exposed to either loud sounds,
is lifted from the ground, or separated from the mother/known caregiver, the
fear can best be perceived as the developmental natural fear-response that
appears in children 0-2 years of age. The efferent pathways of the neural fear
circuits are mediated through autonomic, neuroendocrine, and skeletal-motor
responses. The autonomic activation occurs early, is mediated through the
sympathetic and parasympathetic neural systems, and as JNCL patients beyond
puberty have an autonomic imbalance with a significant sympathetic
hyperactivity, the activation of the autonomic nervous system results in a
disproportionate high sympathetic activity resulting in tachycardia, tachypnea,
excessive sweating, hyperthermia, and an increased atypical muscle activity. The
episodes are thus phenotypically similar to what is seen as Paroxysmal
Sympathetic Hyperactivity (PSH) following an acute traumatic brain injury. As in
PSH, treatment is difficult and so far, no consensus of a treatment algorithm
exists. Use of sedative and analgesic medication and minimizing or avoiding
provocative stimuli may partly reduce the frequency and intensity of the
attacks. Transcutaneous vagal nerve stimulation might be an option worth to
investigate rebalancing the sympathetic-parasympathetic disproportion.

Copyright © 2023 Ostergaard.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1059082
PMCID: PMC10126397
PMID: 37113550

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
