---
reference_id: "PMID:10839351"
title: Autoimmunity to gephyrin in Stiff-Man syndrome.
authors:
- Butler MH
- Hayashi A
- Ohkoshi N
- Villmann C
- Becker CM
- Feng G
- De Camilli P
- Solimena M
journal: Neuron
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)81165-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmunity to gephyrin in Stiff-Man syndrome.
**Authors:** Butler MH, Hayashi A, Ohkoshi N, Villmann C, Becker CM, Feng G, De Camilli P, Solimena M
**Journal:** Neuron (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0896-6273(00)81165-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896-6273(00)81165-4)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2000 May;26(2):307-12. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)81165-4.

Autoimmunity to gephyrin in Stiff-Man syndrome.

Butler MH(1), Hayashi A, Ohkoshi N, Villmann C, Becker CM, Feng G, De Camilli P, 
Solimena M.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA.

Stiff-Man syndrome (SMS) is a rare disease of the central nervous system (CNS) 
characterized by chronic rigidity, spasms, and autoimmunity directed against 
synaptic antigens, most often the GABA-synthesizing enzyme glutamic acid 
decarboxylase (GAD). In a subset of cases, SMS has an autoimmune paraneoplastic 
origin. We report here the identification of high-titer autoantibodies directed 
against gephyrin in a patient with clinical features of SMS and mediastinal 
cancer. Gephyrin is a cytosolic protein selectively concentrated at the 
postsynaptic membrane of inhibitory synapses, where it is associated with 
GABA(A) and glycine receptors. Our findings provide new evidence for a close 
link between autoimmunity directed against components of inhibitory synapses and 
neurological conditions characterized by chronic rigidity and spasms.

DOI: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)81165-4
PMID: 10839351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]