---
reference_id: "PMID:3968786"
title: "An outbreak of Pontiac fever related to whirlpool use, Michigan 1982."
authors:
- Mangione EJ
- Remis RS
- Tait KA
- McGee HB
- Gorman GW
- Wentworth BB
- Baron PA
- Hightower AW
- Barbaree JM
- Broome CV
journal: JAMA
year: '1985'
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antibodies, Bacterial/analysis"
- "Bacterial Infections/epidemiology, etiology"
- Baths/adverse effects
- Disease Outbreaks/epidemiology
- Female
- Humans
- "Legionella/immunology, isolation & purification"
- Male
- Michigan
- Risk
- Water Microbiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An outbreak of Pontiac fever related to whirlpool use, Michigan 1982.
**Authors:** Mangione EJ, Remis RS, Tait KA, McGee HB, Gorman GW, Wentworth BB, Baron PA, Hightower AW, Barbaree JM, Broome CV
**Journal:** JAMA (1985)

## Content

1. JAMA. 1985 Jan 25;253(4):535-9.

An outbreak of Pontiac fever related to whirlpool use, Michigan 1982.

Mangione EJ, Remis RS, Tait KA, McGee HB, Gorman GW, Wentworth BB, Baron PA, 
Hightower AW, Barbaree JM, Broome CV.

Fourteen of 23 female members of a church group experienced an acute 
self-limited illness characterized by chills, fever, chest pain, cough, and 
nausea, consistent with the diagnosis of Pontiac fever. All 14 affected women 
had used a whirlpool located in the women's locker room during a racquetball 
party. Legionella pneumophila serogroup 6 was isolated from the women's 
whirlpool. Nine of 14 cases showed a seroconversion to heat-fixed antigen 
prepared from the L pneumophila serogroup 6 isolate. Aerosol size studies show 
that the whirlpool aerator produced water droplets small enough to travel deep 
into the tracheobronchial tree but large enough to transport L pneumophila. This 
outbreak demonstrated that Pontiac fever may be associated with L pneumophila 
serogroup 6, that whirlpools can serve as a reservoir for these organisms, and 
that seroconversion can occur in the absence of illness.

PMID: 3968786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]