---
reference_id: "PMID:36604361"
title: "The changing epidemiology of monkeypox and preventive measures: an update."
authors:
- Sabeena S
journal: Arch Virol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00705-022-05677-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The changing epidemiology of monkeypox and preventive measures: an update.
**Authors:** Sabeena S
**Journal:** Arch Virol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00705-022-05677-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00705-022-05677-3)

## Content

1. Arch Virol. 2023 Jan 5;168(1):31. doi: 10.1007/s00705-022-05677-3.

The changing epidemiology of monkeypox and preventive measures: an update.

Sabeena S(1).

Author information:
(1)Allure Residency, Near the British School, Kathmandu, 44600, Nepal. 
sabeenauthradam@gmail.com.

Monkeypox is a systemic exanthematous viral disease presenting with fever, 
lymphadenopathy, and vesicular rash. The zoonotic virus causing this disease is 
endemic to many sub-Saharan African countries, where a steady rise in cases has 
been witnessed for the past 30 years. However, monkeypox re-emerged as the 
largest outbreak of the West African clade (clade II) of monkeypox virus in 
Nigeria in 2017. This poxvirus received only minimal global attention until 
recently, when cases emerged in Europe and rapidly spread globally in certain 
sections of the community, such as men having sex with men or bisexuals, with 
human-to-human transmission. Monkeypox virus has established its presence in 
humans, crossing geographical boundaries, and clusters of infections may occur 
among individuals in close contact. All six WHO regions have reported monkeypox 
cases without any epidemiological association with endemic regions. The ongoing 
multicountry outbreak suggests that silent human-to-human transmission has been 
happening in Europe and the United States for a while. For containment of the 
outbreak, active surveillance and rapid identification of new cases are 
essential. The availability of vaccines is currently limited. Policymakers must 
focus on awareness programmes, primary preventive or post-exposure vaccination, 
and treatment with antivirals to control the ongoing outbreak.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Austria, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-022-05677-3
PMID: 36604361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]