---
reference_id: "PMID:39043672"
title: "Occlusion of vertebral artery and anterior spinal artery in cervical facet dislocation: a prospective study using computed tomography angiography."
authors:
- Zhang Z
journal: Spinal Cord Ser Cases
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41394-024-00664-z
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Prospective Studies
- Computed Tomography Angiography/methods
- "Vertebral Artery/diagnostic imaging, injuries"
- Aged
- "Cervical Vertebrae/diagnostic imaging, blood supply"
- Adult
- Joint Dislocations/diagnostic imaging
- Vertebrobasilar Insufficiency/diagnostic imaging
- Arterial Occlusive Diseases/diagnostic imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Occlusion of vertebral artery and anterior spinal artery in cervical facet dislocation: a prospective study using computed tomography angiography.
**Authors:** Zhang Z
**Journal:** Spinal Cord Ser Cases (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41394-024-00664-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41394-024-00664-z)

## Content

1. Spinal Cord Ser Cases. 2024 Jul 23;10(1):50. doi: 10.1038/s41394-024-00664-z.

Occlusion of vertebral artery and anterior spinal artery in cervical facet
dislocation: a prospective study using computed tomography angiography.

Zhang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Xinqiao Hospital, Army Medical University,
Chongqing, 400037, China. zhangz3@126.com.

STUDY DESIGN: A prospective study.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the incidence of vertebral artery (VA) occlusion and
whether anterior spinal artery (ASA) is occluded in cervical facet dislocation.
SETTING: University hospital, China.
METHODS: During a 2-year period, 21 conventional patients with cervical facet
dislocation were prospectively enrolled. All patients received computed
tomography angiography (CTA) to assess the patency of the VA, anterior
radiculomedullary arteries (ARAs), and ASA at the time of injury. Clinical data
were documented, including demographics, symptomatic vertebrobasilar ischemia,
American Spinal Injury Association Impairment Scale (ASIA) grades, and ASA and
VA radiological characteristics.
RESULTS: VA unilateral occlusion occurred in 5 of 21 patients (24%), including 2
with unilateral facet dislocation and 3 with bilateral facet dislocation. No ASA
occlusion was found in all 21 patients, including 5 with VA unilateral
occlusion. No patients had symptomatic vertebrobasilar ischemia.
CONCLUSIONS: VA occlusion occurs in approximately one-fourth of cervical facet
dislocations, with infrequent symptomatic vertebrobasilar ischemia. ASA is not
occluded following cervical facet dislocation, even with unilateral VA
occlusion.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to International Spinal Cord
Society.

DOI: 10.1038/s41394-024-00664-z
PMCID: PMC11266586
PMID: 39043672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no competing interests.
