---
reference_id: "PMID:29709101"
title: Genotype-phenotype relationship and risk stratification in loss-of-function SCN5A mutation carriers.
authors:
- Robyns T
- Nuyens D
- Vandenberk B
- Kuiperi C
- Corveleyn A
- Breckpot J
- Garweg C
- Ector J
- Willems R
journal: Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/anec.12548
keywords:
- Adult
- Belgium
- "Brugada Syndrome/epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/epidemiology"
- Electrocardiography/methods
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- NAV1.5 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel/genetics
- Phenotype
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Assessment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-phenotype relationship and risk stratification in loss-of-function SCN5A mutation carriers.
**Authors:** Robyns T, Nuyens D, Vandenberk B, Kuiperi C, Corveleyn A, Breckpot J, Garweg C, Ector J, Willems R
**Journal:** Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/anec.12548](https://doi.org/10.1111/anec.12548)

## Content

1. Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol. 2018 Sep;23(5):e12548. doi:
10.1111/anec.12548.  Epub 2018 Apr 30.

Genotype-phenotype relationship and risk stratification in loss-of-function 
SCN5A mutation carriers.

Robyns T(1)(2), Nuyens D(3), Vandenberk B(1)(2), Kuiperi C(4), Corveleyn A(4), 
Breckpot J(4), Garweg C(1)(2), Ector J(1)(2), Willems R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Ziekenhuis Oost Limburg, Genk, Belgium.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

INTRODUCTION: Loss-of-function (LoF) mutations in the SCN5A gene cause multiple 
phenotypes including Brugada Syndrome (BrS) and a diffuse cardiac conduction 
defect. Markers of increased risk for sudden cardiac death (SCD) in LoF SCN5A 
mutation carriers are ill defined. We hypothesized that late potentials and 
fragmented QRS would be more prevalent in SCN5A mutation carriers compared to 
SCN5A-negative BrS patients and evaluated risk markers for SCD in SCN5A mutation 
carriers.
METHODS: We included all SCN5A loss-of-function mutation carriers and 
SCN5A-negative BrS patients from our center. A combined arrhythmic endpoint was 
defined as appropriate ICD shock or SCD.
RESULTS: Late potentials were more prevalent in 79 SCN5A mutation carriers 
compared to 39 SCN5A-negative BrS patients (66% versus 44%, p = .021), while 
there was no difference in the prevalence of fragmented QRS. PR interval 
prolongation was the only parameter that predicted the presence of a SCN5A 
mutation in BrS (OR 1.08; p < .001). Four SCN5A mutation carriers, of whom three 
did not have a diagnostic type 1 ECG either spontaneously or after provocation 
with a sodium channel blocker, reached the combined arrhythmic endpoint during a 
follow-up of 44 ± 52 months resulting in an annual incidence rate of 1.37%.
CONCLUSION: LP were more frequently observed in SCN5A mutation carriers, while 
fQRS was not. In SCN5A mutation carriers, the annual incidence rate of SCD was 
non-negligible, even in the absence of a spontaneous or induced type 1 ECG. 
Therefore, proper follow-up of SCN5A mutation carriers without Brugada syndrome 
phenotype is warranted.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/anec.12548
PMCID: PMC7313243
PMID: 29709101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No relevant conflicts of interest regarding this 
manuscript for any of the authors.