---
reference_id: "PMID:34630689"
title: "Comprehensive review on the pathophysiology, clinical variants and management of pemphigus (Review)."
authors:
- Costan VV
- Popa C
- Hâncu MF
- Porumb-Andrese E
- Toader MP
journal: Exp Ther Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3892/etm.2021.10770
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive review on the pathophysiology, clinical variants and management of pemphigus (Review).
**Authors:** Costan VV, Popa C, Hâncu MF, Porumb-Andrese E, Toader MP
**Journal:** Exp Ther Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3892/etm.2021.10770](https://doi.org/10.3892/etm.2021.10770)

## Content

1. Exp Ther Med. 2021 Nov;22(5):1335. doi: 10.3892/etm.2021.10770. Epub 2021 Sep 
20.

Comprehensive review on the pathophysiology, clinical variants and management of 
pemphigus (Review).

Costan VV(1), Popa C(2), Hâncu MF(3), Porumb-Andrese E(4), Toader MP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, 'Grigore T. Popa' University of 
Medicine and Pharmacy, 700115 Iași, Romania.
(2)Department of Oral Medicine and Oral Dermatology, 'Grigore T. Popa' 
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 700115 Iași, Romania.
(3)Department of Dermatology, 'Sf. Spiridon' Clinical Emergency County Hospital, 
700111 Iași, Romania.
(4)Department of Dermatology, 'Grigore T. Popa' University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, 700115 Iași, Romania.

Pemphigus represents a group of chronic inflammatory disorders characterized by 
autoantibodies that target components of desmosomes, leading to the loss of 
intercellular adhesion between keratinocytes and causing intraepithelial 
blistering. The pemphigus group consists of four main clinical types with 
several variants: pemphigus vulgaris (with pemphigus vegetans and pemphigus 
herpetiformis as variants), pemphigus foliaceus, paraneoplastic pemphigus and 
IgA pemphigus (with two clinical variants: intraepidermal neutrophilic IgA 
dermatosis and subcorneal pustular dermatosis). Genetic factors are involved in 
the pathogenesis, with HLA-DR4 (DRB1*0402) and HLA-DRw6 (DQB1*0503) allele more 
common in patients with pemphigus vulgaris, HLA class II DRB1*0344 and HLA 
Cw*1445 correlated with paraneoplastic pemphigus, and HLA-DRB1*04:01, 
HLA-DRB1*04:06, HLA-DRB1*01:01, HLA-DRB1*14, associated with a higher risk of 
developing pemphigus foliaceus. Autoantibodies are conducted against structural 
desmosomal proteins in the skin and mucous membranes, mainly desmogleins, 
desmocollins and plakins. Cell-mediated immunity may also play a role, 
especially in paraneoplastic pemphigus. Patients may present erythema, blisters, 
erosions, and ulcers that may affect the skin, as well as mucosal surfaces of 
the oral cavity, eyes, nose, leading to severe complaints including pain, 
dysphagia, and fetor. Oral mucosal postbullous erosive lesions are frequently 
the first sign of disease in pemphigus vulgaris and in paraneoplastic pemphigus, 
without skin involvement, making the diagnosis difficult. Treatment options 
classically include immunosuppressive agents, such as corticosteroids and 
corticosteroid-sparing agents such as azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil, 
cyclophosphamide, methotrexate or dapsone. Newer therapies focus on blocking 
cell signaling events induced by pathogenic autoantibodies and/or targeting 
specific autoantibodies. The disease evolution is conditioned by the treatment 
with maximum doses of corticosteroids and the side effects associated with 
long-term immunosuppressive therapy, which is why patients need a 
multidisciplinary approach in following the treatment. In this review, we 
provide a comprehensive overview of the epidemiology, pathophysiology, clinical 
aspect, diagnosis and management of the main intraepidermal blistering diseases 
from the pemphigus group.

Copyright: © Costan et al.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2021.10770
PMCID: PMC8495539
PMID: 34630689

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests and they have no financial relationships to disclose.