---
reference_id: "PMID:25284770"
title: Clinical and genetic aspects of the TGFBI-associated corneal dystrophies.
authors:
- Lakshminarayanan R
- Chaurasia SS
- Anandalakshmi V
- Chai SM
- Murugan E
- Vithana EN
- Beuerman RW
- Mehta JS
journal: Ocul Surf
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtos.2013.12.002
keywords:
- Cornea/metabolism
- "Corneal Dystrophies, Hereditary/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Extracellular Matrix Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Transforming Growth Factor beta/genetics, metabolism"
- betaIG-H3 Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic aspects of the TGFBI-associated corneal dystrophies.
**Authors:** Lakshminarayanan R, Chaurasia SS, Anandalakshmi V, Chai SM, Murugan E, Vithana EN, Beuerman RW, Mehta JS
**Journal:** Ocul Surf (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtos.2013.12.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtos.2013.12.002)

## Content

1. Ocul Surf. 2014 Oct;12(4):234-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jtos.2013.12.002. Epub 2014
Jul  18.

Clinical and genetic aspects of the TGFBI-associated corneal dystrophies.

Lakshminarayanan R(1), Chaurasia SS(2), Anandalakshmi V(3), Chai SM(4), Murugan 
E(3), Vithana EN(2), Beuerman RW(2), Mehta JS(5).

Author information:
(1)Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore; SRP Neuroscience and Behavioral 
Disorders, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore.
(2)Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore; SRP Neuroscience and Behavioral 
Disorders, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore; Department of 
Ophthalmology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore.
(4)Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore; Singapore National Eye Centre, 
Singapore.
(5)Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore; Department of Ophthalmology, 
Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore; 
Singapore National Eye Centre, Singapore; Department of Clinical Sciences, 
Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore. Electronic address: 
jodmehta@gmail.com.

Corneal dystrophies are a group of inherited disorders localized to various 
layers of the cornea that affect corneal transparency and visual acuity. The 
deposition of insoluble protein materials in the form of extracellular deposits 
or intracellular cysts is pathognomic. Mutations in TGFBI are responsible for 
superficial and stromal corneal dystrophies. The gene product, transforming 
growth factor β induced protein (TGFBIp) accumulates as insoluble deposits in 
various forms. The severity, clinicopathogenic variations, age of the onset, and 
location of the deposits depend on the type of amino acid alterations in the 
protein. Until 2006, 38 different pathogenic mutants were reported for the 
TGFBI-associated corneal dystrophies. This number has increased to 63 mutants, 
reported in more than 30 countries. There is no effective treatment to prevent, 
halt, or reverse the deposition of TGFBIp. This review presents a complete 
mutation update, classification of phenotypes, comprehensive reported incidents 
of various mutations, and current treatment options and their shortcomings. 
Future research directions and possible approaches to inhibiting disease 
progression are discussed.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtos.2013.12.002
PMID: 25284770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]