---
reference_id: "PMID:14643120"
title: Azoospermia in patients heterozygous for a mutation in SYCP3.
authors:
- Miyamoto T
- Hasuike S
- Yogev L
- Maduro MR
- Ishikawa M
- Westphal H
- Lamb DJ
journal: Lancet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(03)14845-3
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 12"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Mutation
- NIH 3T3 Cells
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- "Oligospermia/genetics, pathology"
- Sequence Deletion
- Synaptonemal Complex/genetics
- Testis/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Azoospermia in patients heterozygous for a mutation in SYCP3.
**Authors:** Miyamoto T, Hasuike S, Yogev L, Maduro MR, Ishikawa M, Westphal H, Lamb DJ
**Journal:** Lancet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(03)14845-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(03)14845-3)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2003 Nov 22;362(9397):1714-9. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(03)14845-3.

Azoospermia in patients heterozygous for a mutation in SYCP3.

Miyamoto T(1), Hasuike S, Yogev L, Maduro MR, Ishikawa M, Westphal H, Lamb DJ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institute of Child 
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Many cases of male infertility are diagnosed as idiopathic, 
reflecting poor understanding of the molecular defects underlying the 
abnormality. As more gene mutations causing male infertility in mice become 
known, there are improving prospects that knowledge about the genetic aetiology 
of human male infertility can be expanded. Sycp3 encodes a component of the 
synaptonemal complex. A null mutation of Sycp3 in mice causes azoospermia with 
meiotic arrest. We tested the hypothesis that mutation of the human 
testis-specific SYCP3 is associated with human non-obstructive azoospermia.
METHODS: Human SYCP3 was isolated on the basis of homology between mouse Sycp3 
cDNA and human genome sequences at the aminoacid level. Tissue-specific 
expression of SYCP3 was analysed by PCR of human cDNA. Samples of DNA from 19 
azoospermic patients with maturation arrest and 75 normal fertile control men 
were screened for mutations in the SYCP3 gene by sequence analysis of the gene. 
The functional significance of the mutations found was analysed by a protein 
interaction study of the wild-type and truncated SYCP3 proteins.
FINDINGS: We identified in two patients a 1 bp deletion (643delA) that results 
in a premature stop codon and truncation of the C-terminal, coiled-coil-forming 
region of the SYCP3 protein. The mutant protein showed greatly reduced 
interaction with the wild-type protein in vitro and interfered with SYCP3 fibre 
formation in cultured cells.
INTERPRETATION: We suggest that SYCP3 has an essential meiotic function in human 
spermatogenesis that is compromised by the mutant protein via dominant negative 
interference.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(03)14845-3
PMID: 14643120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]