---
reference_id: "PMID:33970139"
title: "Imaging of Podocytic Proteins Nephrin, Actin, and Podocin with Expansion Microscopy."
authors:
- Königshausen E
- Schmitz CT
- Rump LC
- Sellin L
journal: J Vis Exp
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3791/62079
keywords:
- Actins/metabolism
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique/methods
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/metabolism
- Microscopy/methods
- Podocytes/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imaging of Podocytic Proteins Nephrin, Actin, and Podocin with Expansion Microscopy.
**Authors:** Königshausen E, Schmitz CT, Rump LC, Sellin L
**Journal:** J Vis Exp (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3791/62079](https://doi.org/10.3791/62079)

## Content

1. J Vis Exp. 2021 Apr 23;(170). doi: 10.3791/62079.

Imaging of Podocytic Proteins Nephrin, Actin, and Podocin with Expansion 
Microscopy.

Königshausen E(#)(1), Schmitz CT(#)(1), Rump LC(1), Sellin L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University; 
Lorenz.Sellin@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.
(#)Contributed equally

Disruption of the glomerular filter composed of the glomerular endothelium, 
glomerular basement membrane and podocytes, results in albuminuria. Podocyte 
foot processes contain actin bundles that bind to cytoskeletal adaptor proteins 
such as podocin. Those adaptor proteins, such as podocin, link the backbone of 
the glomerular slit diaphragm, such as nephrin, to the actin cytoskeleton. 
Studying the localization and function of these and other podocytic proteins is 
essential for the understanding of the glomerular filter's role in health and 
disease. The presented protocol enables the user to visualize actin, podocin, 
and nephrin in cells with super resolution imaging on a conventional microscope. 
First, cells are stained with a conventional immunofluorescence technique. All 
proteins within the sample are then covalently anchored to a swellable hydrogel. 
Through digestion with proteinase K, structural proteins are cleaved allowing 
isotropical swelling of the gel in the last step. Dialysis of the sample in 
water results in a 4-4.5-fold expansion of the sample and the sample can be 
imaged via a conventional fluorescence microscope, rendering a potential 
resolution of 70 nm.

DOI: 10.3791/62079
PMID: 33970139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]