---
reference_id: "PMID:9204065"
title: Antiphospholipid syndrome and the skin.
authors:
- Gibson GE
- Su WP
- Pittelkow MR
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1016/s0190-9622(97)80283-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiphospholipid syndrome and the skin.
**Authors:** Gibson GE, Su WP, Pittelkow MR
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0190-9622(97)80283-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0190-9622(97)80283-6)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1997 Jun;36(6 Pt 1):970-82. doi: 
10.1016/s0190-9622(97)80283-6.

Antiphospholipid syndrome and the skin.

Gibson GE(1), Su WP, Pittelkow MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

The antiphospholipid syndrome is an acquired multisystem disorder of 
hypercoagulation, which may be primary or secondary to underlying diseases. 
Serologic markers for the syndrome are the lupus anticoagulant and 
anticardiolipin antibodies. Clinical features include recurrent thrombotic 
events (arterial or venous), repeated fetal loss, and thrombocytopenia. 
Cutaneous manifestations may occur as the first sign of antiphospholipid 
syndrome. These include livedo reticularis, necrotizing vasculitis, livedoid 
vasculitis, thrombophlebitis, cutaneous ulceration and necrosis, erythematous 
macules, purpura, ecchymoses, painful skin nodules, and subungual splinter 
hemorrhages. Antiphospholipid syndrome may also be associated rarely with 
anetoderma, discoid lupus erythematosus, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, or disorders 
that closely resemble Sneddon or Degos syndromes. Noninflammatory vascular 
thrombosis is the most frequent histopathologic feature observed. Prophylaxis 
and treatment of thrombosis in patients with antiphospholipid syndrome relies 
principally on anticoagulant and antiplatelet agents.

DOI: 10.1016/s0190-9622(97)80283-6
PMID: 9204065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]