---
reference_id: "PMID:30247930"
title: "Pegvaliase: a novel treatment option for adults with phenylketonuria."
authors:
- Mahan KC
- Gandhi MA
- Anand S
journal: Curr Med Res Opin
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1080/03007995.2018.1528215
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pegvaliase: a novel treatment option for adults with phenylketonuria.
**Authors:** Mahan KC, Gandhi MA, Anand S
**Journal:** Curr Med Res Opin (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1080/03007995.2018.1528215](https://doi.org/10.1080/03007995.2018.1528215)

## Content

1. Curr Med Res Opin. 2019 Apr;35(4):647-651. doi: 10.1080/03007995.2018.1528215.
 Epub 2018 Oct 25.

Pegvaliase: a novel treatment option for adults with phenylketonuria.

Mahan KC(1), Gandhi MA(1), Anand S(1).

Author information:
(1)a St. John Fisher College Wegmans School of Pharmacy , Rochester , NY , USA.

OBJECTIVE: In May 2018, the US Food and Drug Administration approved 
pegvaliase-pqpz (Palynziq*), the first enzyme substitution therapy for the 
treatment of phenylketonuria (PKU). This article provides an overview of the 
mechanism of action, pharmacokinetic properties, clinical efficacy, and the 
safety and tolerability profile of pegvaliase.
METHODS: Relevant information was identified through a comprehensive literature 
search of several databases using the keywords pegvaliase, rAvPAL-PEG, and 
phenylketonuria. Additional information was gathered from the pegvaliase package 
insert, posters presented at scientific meetings, and materials provided from 
the manufacturer, BioMarin.
RESULTS: Pegvaliase is effective in decreasing blood phenylalanine levels, and 
is associated with a manageable side-effect profile. Phase III clinical trial 
data demonstrated that 60.7% of patients were able to achieve blood 
phenylalanine levels less than the guideline recommended 360 µmol/L at 24 
months. Brief sub-studies also showed the improvement in inattention symptoms in 
patients treated with pegvaliase, compared to placebo.
CONCLUSION: Pegvaliase is a promising new treatment option for adults living 
with PKU. Further studies are warranted to determine long-term safety and 
clinical efficacy in sub-populations.

DOI: 10.1080/03007995.2018.1528215
PMID: 30247930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]