---
reference_id: "PMID:10888601"
title: "Human adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL), cloning and characterization of full-length cDNA and its isoform, gene structure and molecular basis for ADSL deficiency in six patients."
authors:
- Kmoch S
- Hartmannová H
- Stibůrková B
- Krijt J
- Zikánová M
- Sebesta I
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/9.10.1501
keywords:
- "Adenylosuccinate Lyase/biosynthesis, chemistry, deficiency, genetics"
- Alternative Splicing
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- "DNA, Complementary/metabolism"
- Escherichia coli/metabolism
- Exons
- Female
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- Kinetics
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Protein Isoforms
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Temperature
- Tissue Distribution
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL), cloning and characterization of full-length cDNA and its isoform, gene structure and molecular basis for ADSL deficiency in six patients.
**Authors:** Kmoch S, Hartmannová H, Stibůrková B, Krijt J, Zikánová M, Sebesta I
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/9.10.1501](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/9.10.1501)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2000 Jun 12;9(10):1501-13. doi: 10.1093/hmg/9.10.1501.

Human adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL), cloning and characterization of full-length
cDNA and its isoform, gene structure and molecular basis for ADSL deficiency in
six patients.

Kmoch S(1), Hartmannová H, Stibůrková B, Krijt J, Zikánová M, Sebesta I.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Department of Clinical
Biochemistry, Charles University 1st School of Medicine and General Faculty
Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. skmoch@lf1.cuni.cz

Adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL) is a bifunctional enzyme acting in de novo purine
synthesis and purine nucleotide recycling. ADSL deficiency is a selectively
neuronopathic disorder with psychomotor retardation and epilepsy as leading
traits. Both dephosphorylated enzyme substrates,
succinylaminoimidazole-carboxamide riboside (SAICAr) and succinyladenosine
(S-Ado), accumulate in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of affected individuals
with S-Ado/SAICAr concentration ratios proportional to the phenotype severity.
We studied the disorder at various levels in a group of six patients with ADSL
deficiency. We identified the complete ADSL cDNA and its alternatively spliced
isoform resulting from exon 12 skipping. Both mRNA isoforms were expressed in
all the tissues studied with the non-spliced form 10-fold more abundant. Both
cDNAs were expressed in Escherichia coli and functionally characterized at the
protein level. The results showed only the unspliced ADSL to be active. The gene
consists of 13 exons spanning 23 kb. The promotor region shows typical features
of the housekeeping gene. Eight mutations were identified in a group of six
patients. The expression studies of the mutant proteins carried out in an
attempt to study genotype-phenotype correlation showed that the level of
residual enzyme activity correlates with the severity of the clinical phenotype.
All the mutant enzymes studied in vitro displayed a proportional decrease in
activity against both of their substrates. However, this was not concordant with
strikingly different concentration ratios in the CSF of individual patients.
This suggests either different in vivo enzyme activities against each of the
substrates and/or their different turnover across the CSF-blood barrier, which
may be decisive in determining disease severity.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/9.10.1501
PMID: 10888601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
