---
reference_id: "PMID:36232798"
title: Genotype and Phenotype Differences in CADASIL from an Asian Perspective.
authors:
- Kim Y
- Bae JS
- Lee JY
- Song HK
- Lee JH
- Lee M
- Kim C
- Lee SH
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms231911506
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype and Phenotype Differences in CADASIL from an Asian Perspective.
**Authors:** Kim Y, Bae JS, Lee JY, Song HK, Lee JH, Lee M, Kim C, Lee SH
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms231911506](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms231911506)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Sep 29;23(19):11506. doi: 10.3390/ijms231911506.

Genotype and Phenotype Differences in CADASIL from an Asian Perspective.

Kim Y(1), Bae JS(1), Lee JY(1), Song HK(1), Lee JH(1), Lee M(2), Kim C(3), Lee 
SH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kangdong Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University 
College of Medicine, Seoul 05355, Korea.
(2)Department of Neurology, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym 
University College of Medicine, Anyang 14068, Korea.
(3)Department of Neurology, Chuncheon Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University 
College of Medicine, Chuncheon 24253, Korea.

Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and 
leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is a hereditary cerebral small-vessel disease 
caused by mutations in the NOTCH3 gene. Classical pathogenic mechanisms are 
associated with cysteine gain or loss, but recent studies suggest that 
cysteine-sparing mutations might have a potential role as a pathogen. In 
comparison with CADASIL patients in Western countries, there are several 
differences in Asian patients: (1) prevalent locus of NOTCH3 mutations (exons 
2-6 [particularly exon 4] vs. exon 11), (2) age at symptom onset, (3) prevalence 
of cerebral microbleeds and hemorrhagic stroke, (4) clinical symptoms, and (5) 
severity of white matter hyperintensities and typical involvement of the 
anterior temporal pole in magnetic resonance imaging. Both ethnicity and founder 
effects contribute to these differences in the clinical NOTCH3 spectrum in 
different cohorts. More functional investigations from diverse races are needed 
to clarify unknown but novel variants of NOTCH3 mutations. This review may 
broaden the spectrum of NOTCH3 variants from an Asian perspective and draw 
attention to the hidden pathogenic roles of NOTCH3 variants.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms231911506
PMCID: PMC9569740
PMID: 36232798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.