---
reference_id: PMID:27814620
title: "Mucopolysaccharidosis VI: pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment."
authors:
- Harmatz P
- Shediac R
journal: Front Biosci (Landmark Ed)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.2741/4490
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- Disease Progression
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy
- Female
- Glycosaminoglycans/metabolism
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- Male
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis VI/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Mutation
- N-Acetylgalactosamine-4-Sulfatase/genetics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucopolysaccharidosis VI: pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment.
**Authors:** Harmatz P, Shediac R
**Journal:** Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.2741/4490](https://doi.org/10.2741/4490)

## Content

1. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2017 Jan 1;22(3):385-406. doi: 10.2741/4490.

Mucopolysaccharidosis VI: pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment.

Harmatz P(1), Shediac R(2).

Author information:
(1)UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland, 747 52nd St., Oakland, CA 94609, 
United States of America, pharmatz@mail.cho.org.
(2)BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, CA, USA.

Mucopolysaccharidosis VI (MPS VI), or Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome, is an autosomal 
recessive lysosomal storage disorder caused by deficient activity of the enzyme 
arylsulfatase B (ASB). Progressive accumulation of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) in 
organs and tissues leads to the development of multisystem clinical 
manifestations. The presentation of MPS VI is genotypically and phenotypically 
diverse, with a large number of potential disease-causing mutations and a 
phenotypic spectrum ranging from very slowly to very rapidly progressing 
disease. Diagnosis of MPS VI relies on presence of clinical features, increased 
GAG levels in urine or low ASB activity in dried blood spots, and measurement of 
enzyme activity levels in leukocytes or fibroblasts. The management of MPS VI 
involves enzyme replacement therapy and medical and surgical treatment of 
disease manifestations. Liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry of 
GAG-derived disaccharides in blood or urine is emerging as a valuable method in 
the diagnosis, prognosis and assessment of therapeutic efficacy in MPS VI.

DOI: 10.2741/4490
PMID: 27814620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]