---
reference_id: "PMID:31301625"
title: Sympathetic arousal in children with oppositional defiant disorder and its relation to emotional dysregulation.
authors:
- Tonacci A
- Billeci L
- Calderoni S
- Levantini V
- Masi G
- Milone A
- Pisano S
- Muratori P
journal: J Affect Disord
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2019.07.046
keywords:
- Arousal/physiology
- "Attention Deficit and Disruptive Behavior Disorders/physiopathology, psychology"
- Checklist
- Child
- Emotional Regulation/physiology
- Galvanic Skin Response/physiology
- Humans
- Male
- Psychiatric Status Rating Scales
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sympathetic arousal in children with oppositional defiant disorder and its relation to emotional dysregulation.
**Authors:** Tonacci A, Billeci L, Calderoni S, Levantini V, Masi G, Milone A, Pisano S, Muratori P
**Journal:** J Affect Disord (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jad.2019.07.046](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2019.07.046)

## Content

1. J Affect Disord. 2019 Oct 1;257:207-213. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2019.07.046. Epub
2019 Jul 5.

Sympathetic arousal in children with oppositional defiant disorder and its
relation to emotional dysregulation.

Tonacci A(1), Billeci L(2), Calderoni S(3), Levantini V(4), Masi G(4), Milone
A(4), Pisano S(5), Muratori P(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Physiology, National Research Council of Italy, (CNR),
Via Moruzzi 1, 56124, Pisa, Italy.
(2)Institute of Clinical Physiology, National Research Council of Italy, (CNR),
Via Moruzzi 1, 56124, Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: lucia.billeci@ifc.cnr.it.
(3)Department of Developmental Neuroscience, IRCCS Stella Maris, Pisa, Italy;
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa,
Italy.
(4)IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris, Scientific Institute of Child Neurology and
Psychiatry, Pisa, Italy.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, AORN Santobono-Pausilipon, Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Emotional dysregulation (ED) is a trans-nosographical condition
characterized by mood instability, severe irritability, aggression, temper
outburst, and hyper-arousal. Pathophysiology of emotional dysregulation and its
potential biomarkers are an emerging field of interest. A Child Behaviour
Checklist (CBCL) profile, defined as Dysregulation Profile (DP), has been
correlated to ED in youth. We examined the association between the CBCL-DP and
indices of sympathetic arousal in children with Oppositional Defiant Disorder
(ODD) and healthy controls.
METHOD: The current study sought to compare the arousal level measured via
electrodermal activity in response to emotional stimuli in three non-overlapping
groups of children: (1) ODD+CBCL-DP (n = 28), (2) ODD without CBCL-DP (n = 35),
and (3) typically developing controls (n = 25).
RESULTS: Analyses revealed a distinct electrodermal activity profile in the
three groups. Specifically, children with ODD+CBCL-DP presented higher levels of
sympathetic arousal for anger and sadness stimuli compared to the other two
groups.
LIMITATIONS: The relatively small sample and the lack of assessing causality
limit the generalizability of this study which results need to be replicated in
larger, different samples.
CONCLUSION: The CBCL-DP was associated to higher levels of arousal for negative
emotions, consistently with previous reports in individuals with depression and
anxiety. Further work may identify potential longitudinal relationships between
this profile and clinical outcomes.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2019.07.046
PMID: 31301625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
