---
reference_id: "PMID:38025195"
title: Severe Hypernatremia as Presentation of Netherton Syndrome.
authors:
- Di Nora A
- Consentino MC
- Messina G
- Timpanaro T
- Smilari P
- Pavone P
journal: Glob Med Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1055/s-0043-1776983
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe Hypernatremia as Presentation of Netherton Syndrome.
**Authors:** Di Nora A, Consentino MC, Messina G, Timpanaro T, Smilari P, Pavone P
**Journal:** Glob Med Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0043-1776983](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0043-1776983)

## Content

1. Glob Med Genet. 2023 Nov 22;10(4):335-338. doi: 10.1055/s-0043-1776983. 
eCollection 2023 Dec.

Severe Hypernatremia as Presentation of Netherton Syndrome.

Di Nora A(1), Consentino MC(1), Messina G(1), Timpanaro T(1), Smilari P(1), 
Pavone P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Catania, 
Catania CT, Italy.

Netherton syndrome is a rare, multisystem, autosomal recessive genodermatosis 
characterized by a triad of manifestations: congenital ichthyosis, immune 
dysregulation, and scalp anomalies. We report the case of a 1-month-old male 
infant evaluated for failure to thrive and feeding difficulties. At birth, the 
infant was admitted to intensive care for severe hypernatremia (natremia 
186 mg/dL). Upon entering the ward, the general conditions were poor. He 
presented with diffuse erythrodermia. A dermatological evaluation showed 
evidence of "invaginated trichuriasis," a typical sign of Netherton syndrome. 
Netherton syndrome is caused by a genetic mutation causing loss of function of 
the SPINK5 gene it encodes for the LEKTI protein, normally expressed in 
epithelia. Loss of LEKTI induces severe skin barrier defect. The history of the 
disease is characterized by serious potential complications in the first months 
of life, such as the risk of hypernatremic dehydration induced by high skin 
permeability, recurrent and/or severe infections, and growth retardation.

The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Thieme under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, permitting unrestricted use, 
distribution, and reproduction so long as the original work is properly cited. ( 
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-1776983
PMCID: PMC10665120
PMID: 38025195

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None declared.