---
reference_id: "PMID:20493745"
title: Epilepsy caused by CDKL5 mutations.
authors:
- Castrén M
- Gaily E
- Tengström C
- Lähdetie J
- Archer H
- Ala-Mello S
journal: Eur J Paediatr Neurol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2010.04.005
keywords:
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/enzymology, genetics"
- Child
- "Codon, Nonsense/genetics"
- "Developmental Disabilities/enzymology, genetics"
- "Epilepsy/enzymology, etiology, genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/enzymology, genetics"
- Male
- Phenotype
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
- Sequence Deletion/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epilepsy caused by CDKL5 mutations.
**Authors:** Castrén M, Gaily E, Tengström C, Lähdetie J, Archer H, Ala-Mello S
**Journal:** Eur J Paediatr Neurol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejpn.2010.04.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpn.2010.04.005)

## Content

1. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2011 Jan;15(1):65-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2010.04.005. 
Epub 2010 May 20.

Epilepsy caused by CDKL5 mutations.

Castrén M(1), Gaily E, Tengström C, Lähdetie J, Archer H, Ala-Mello S.

Author information:
(1)Rinnekoti Foundation, Rinnekodintie 10, FIN-02980 Espoo, Finland. 
maija.castren@rinnekoti.fi

Mutations in the cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 gene (CDKL5) have been 
identified in female patients with early onset epileptic encephalopathy and 
severe mental retardation with a Rett-like phenotype. Subsequently CDKL5 
mutations were shown to be associated with more diverse phenotypes including 
mild epilepsy and autism without epilepsy. Furthermore, CDKL5 mutations were 
found in patients with Angelman-like phenotype. The severity of epilepsy 
associated with CDKL5 mutations was recently shown to correlate with the type of 
CDKL5 mutations and epilepsy was identified to involve three distinct sequential 
stages. Here, we describe the phenotype of a severe form of neurodevelopmental 
disease in a female patient with a de novo nonsense mutation of the CDKL5 gene 
c.175C > T (p.R59X) affecting the catalytic domain of CDKL5 protein. Mutations 
in the CDKL5 gene are less common in males and can be associated with a genomic 
deletion as found in our male patient with a deletion of 0.3 Mb at Xp22.13 
including the CDKL5 gene. We review phenotypes associated with CDKL5 mutations 
and examine putative relationships between the clinical epilepsy phenotype and 
the type of the mutation in the CDKL5 gene.

© 2010 European Paediatric Neurology Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2010.04.005
PMID: 20493745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]