---
reference_id: "PMID:39483457"
title: Meta-analysis of natural killer cell cytotoxicity in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome.
authors:
- Baraniuk JN
- Eaton-Fitch N
- Marshall-Gradisnik S
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1440643
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cytotoxicity, Immunologic"
- "Fatigue Syndrome, Chronic/immunology"
- "Killer Cells, Natural/immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meta-analysis of natural killer cell cytotoxicity in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome.
**Authors:** Baraniuk JN, Eaton-Fitch N, Marshall-Gradisnik S
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1440643](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1440643)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Oct 17;15:1440643. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1440643. 
eCollection 2024.

Meta-analysis of natural killer cell cytotoxicity in myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome.

Baraniuk JN(1)(2), Eaton-Fitch N(2), Marshall-Gradisnik S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, United States.
(2)National Centre for Neuroimmunology and Emerging Diseases, Griffith 
University, Gold Coast, QLD, Australia.

Reduced natural killer (NK) cell cytotoxicity is the most consistent immune 
finding in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). 
Meta-analysis of the published literature determined the effect size of the 
decrement in ME/CFS. Databases were screened for papers comparing NK cell 
cytotoxicity in ME/CFS and healthy controls. A total of 28 papers and 55 
effector:target cell ratio (E:T) data points were collected. Cytotoxicity in 
ME/CFS was significantly reduced to about half of healthy control levels, with 
an overall Hedges' g of 0.96 (0.75-1.18). Heterogeneity was high but was 
explained by the range of E:T ratios, different methods, and potential outliers. 
The outcomes confirm reproducible NK cell dysfunction in ME/CFS and will guide 
studies using the NK cell model system for pathomechanistic investigations.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/, identifier 
CRD42024542140.

Copyright © 2024 Baraniuk, Eaton-Fitch and Marshall-Gradisnik.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1440643
PMCID: PMC11524851
PMID: 39483457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.