---
reference_id: "PMID:28510626"
title: Outcome Measures for Clinical Trials of Leber Congenital Amaurosis Caused by the Intronic Mutation in the CEP290 Gene.
authors:
- Jacobson SG
- Cideciyan AV
- Sumaroka A
- Roman AJ
- Charng J
- Lu M
- Choi W
- Sheplock R
- Swider M
- Kosyk MS
- Schwartz SB
- Stone EM
- Fishman GA
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.17-21560
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Antigens, Neoplasm/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electroretinography
- Female
- Humans
- "Leber Congenital Amaurosis/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Neoplasm Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care"
- "Retinal Cone Photoreceptor Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcome Measures for Clinical Trials of Leber Congenital Amaurosis Caused by the Intronic Mutation in the CEP290 Gene.
**Authors:** Jacobson SG, Cideciyan AV, Sumaroka A, Roman AJ, Charng J, Lu M, Choi W, Sheplock R, Swider M, Kosyk MS, Schwartz SB, Stone EM, Fishman GA
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.17-21560](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.17-21560)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2017 May 1;58(5):2609-2622. doi: 
10.1167/iovs.17-21560.

Outcome Measures for Clinical Trials of Leber Congenital Amaurosis Caused by the 
Intronic Mutation in the CEP290 Gene.

Jacobson SG(1), Cideciyan AV(1), Sumaroka A(1), Roman AJ(1), Charng J(1), Lu 
M(1), Choi W(1), Sheplock R(1), Swider M(1), Kosyk MS(1), Schwartz SB(1), Stone 
EM(2), Fishman GA(3).

Author information:
(1)Scheie Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Carver College of Medicine, 
Stephen A. Wynn Institute for Vision Research, University of Iowa, Iowa City, 
Iowa, United States.
(3)Pangere Center for Hereditary Retinal Diseases, The Chicago Lighthouse, 
Chicago, Illinois, United States.

PURPOSE: To determine efficacy outcome measures for clinical trials of Leber 
congenital amaurosis (LCA) associated with a common intronic mutation in the 
CEP290 gene.
METHODS: CEP290-LCA patients (ages 5-48) with the intronic mutation 
(c.2991+1655A>G) were studied as a retrospective observational case series using 
clinical methods and with full-field sensitivity testing (FST), optical 
coherence tomography (OCT), autofluorescence imaging (NIR-RAFI), transient 
pupillary light reflex (TPLR), oculomotor control and instability (OCI), a 
mobility course, and a questionnaire (NEI-VFQ). Patients were investigated 
cross-sectionally but a subset was able to be followed longitudinally.
RESULTS: With FST, there was no rod function; cone sensitivities had a wide 
range from not detectable to near normal. OCT analyses indicated retained 
central photoreceptors with abnormal distal laminae. Based on OCT and FST, most 
patients had dissociation of structure and function. TPLR was nondetectable in 
the majority of patients, with responders demonstrating severe losses in light 
sensitivity. OCI was abnormal in most patients. NEI-VFQ scores had a similar 
range to those of other severe retinopathies. Mobility scores were consistent 
with FST sensitivities. In patients examined with FST, OCT, and NIR-RAFI over 
long-term intervals (7-10 years), there was limited but detectable disease 
progression.
CONCLUSIONS: Efficacy would be a quantitative change in foveal cone function and 
possibly distal laminar structure. FST provides a subjective photoreceptor-based 
outcome; OCT and NIR-RAFI can assess photoreceptor and RPE structure. TPLR and 
OCI can provide objective measures of postretinal transmission. Minimal change 
over a decade indicates that there is no practical value in natural history 
studies.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.17-21560
PMID: 28510626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]