---
reference_id: "PMID:9713119"
title: "[Prevalence study of biotinidase deficiency in newborns]."
authors:
- Pinto AL
- Raymond KM
- Bruck I
- Antoniuk SA
journal: Rev Saude Publica
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1590/s0034-89101998000200007
keywords:
- "Amidohydrolases/deficiency, metabolism"
- Biotinidase
- Costs and Cost Analysis
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/epidemiology, therapy"
- Neonatal Screening
- Prevalence
- Prospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Prevalence study of biotinidase deficiency in newborns].
**Authors:** Pinto AL, Raymond KM, Bruck I, Antoniuk SA
**Journal:** Rev Saude Publica (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1590/s0034-89101998000200007](https://doi.org/10.1590/s0034-89101998000200007)

## Content

1. Rev Saude Publica. 1998 Apr;32(2):148-52. doi:
10.1590/s0034-89101998000200007.

[Prevalence study of biotinidase deficiency in newborns].

[Article in Portuguese]

Pinto AL(1), Raymond KM, Bruck I, Antoniuk SA.

Author information:
(1)Departmento de Pediatria, Universidade Federal do Paraná (UFPr), Curitiba, 
PR, Brasil.

INTRODUCTION: Biotinidase deficiency is an inheritable disorder of biotin 
metabolism. This disorder fulfills major criteria for consideration for newborn 
screening: the affected children do no show clinical signs in the newborn 
period; the disease is highly disabling; treatment is effective in preventing 
neurological sequelae if undertaken promptly.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Screening of 125,000 infants born in Paraná State was 
carried out to establish the prevalence of biotinidase deficiency. A simple 
colorimetric procedure was used to detect two infants with biotinidase 
deficiency (1:62,500), one of them with profound deficiency (1:125,000) and the 
other with partial deficiency (1:125,000) of the enzyme.
RESULTS: There were no known false-negative test results and 0.12% were 
false-positive, defined by further blood samples which were negative upon 
repeated testing. Sensitivity was 100% and specificity was 99.88%. Repeat blood 
samples could not be obtained in 63 (30%) suspected cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Newborn screening for biotinidase is useful in identifying affected 
children, is inexpensive and allows early intervention, which may prevent 
irreversible neurological damage.

DOI: 10.1590/s0034-89101998000200007
PMID: 9713119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]