---
reference_id: "PMID:23032552"
title: "Mexiletine for symptoms and signs of myotonia in nondystrophic myotonia: a randomized controlled trial."
authors:
- Statland JM
- Bundy BN
- Wang Y
- Rayan DR
- Trivedi JR
- Sansone VA
- Salajegheh MK
- Venance SL
- Ciafaloni E
- Matthews E
- Meola G
- Herbelin L
- Griggs RC
- Barohn RJ
- Hanna MG
- Consortium for Clinical Investigation of Neurologic Channelopathies
journal: JAMA
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2012.12607
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Anti-Arrhythmia Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Cross-Over Studies
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Mexiletine/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Middle Aged
- "Muscle, Skeletal/physiopathology"
- Myotonia/drug therapy
- "Pain/drug therapy, etiology"
- Quality of Life
- Severity of Illness Index
- Sodium Channels/drug effects
- Young Adult
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Mexiletine for symptoms and signs of myotonia in nondystrophic myotonia: a randomized controlled trial.
**Authors:** Statland JM, Bundy BN, Wang Y, Rayan DR, Trivedi JR, Sansone VA, Salajegheh MK, Venance SL, Ciafaloni E, Matthews E, Meola G, Herbelin L, Griggs RC, Barohn RJ, Hanna MG, Consortium for Clinical Investigation of Neurologic Channelopathies
**Journal:** JAMA (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2012.12607](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2012.12607)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2012 Oct 3;308(13):1357-65. doi: 10.1001/jama.2012.12607.

Mexiletine for symptoms and signs of myotonia in nondystrophic myotonia: a
randomized controlled trial.

Statland JM(1), Bundy BN, Wang Y, Rayan DR, Trivedi JR, Sansone VA, Salajegheh
MK, Venance SL, Ciafaloni E, Matthews E, Meola G, Herbelin L, Griggs RC, Barohn
RJ, Hanna MG; Consortium for Clinical Investigation of Neurologic
Channelopathies.

Collaborators: Barohn RJ, Wang Y, Statland J, Dimachkie M, Herbelin L, Miller J,
Pimental R, Trivedi J, Gorham N, McLin R, Gonzales V, Salajegheh MK, Amato AA,
Roe K, Chused S, Kayd E, Venance S, Hahn A, Koopman W, Verheyden J, Ten Haaf A,
Piechowicz C, Griggs RC, Ciafaloni E, Twydell P, Aronson K, Hart K, Smith P,
Herr B, Eichinger K, Pandya S, Bean S, Puwanant A, Ke Q, Scheltz J, Whitesell L,
Hanna M, Rayan DL, Matthews E, Barreto G, Tan V, Burge J, Dewar E, Lopez-Begum
D, Sud R, Haworth A, McCall S, Sansone V, Meola G, Zanolini A, Ciocca M, Bundy
B, Krischer J, Ruhlig H, Gomes J, Richesson R, Leduc R, Pilger J, Day JW,
Leshner RT, Mackenzie TA, Wagner K, Odenkirchen JC, Stewart R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester,
New York, USA.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2012 Oct 3;308(13):1377-8. doi: 10.1001/jama.2012.12906.

CONTEXT: Nondystrophic myotonias (NDMs) are rare diseases caused by mutations in
skeletal muscle ion channels. Patients experience delayed muscle relaxation
causing functionally limiting stiffness and pain. Mexiletine-induced sodium
channel blockade reduced myotonia in small studies; however, as is common in
rare diseases, larger studies of safety and efficacy have not previously been
considered feasible.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the effects of mexiletine for symptoms and signs of
myotonia in patients with NDMs.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled 2-period crossover study at 7 neuromuscular referral centers
in 4 countries of 59 patients with NDMs conducted between December 23, 2008, and
March 30, 2011, as part of the National Institutes of Health-funded Rare Disease
Clinical Research Network.
INTERVENTION: Oral 200-mg mexiletine or placebo capsules 3 times daily for 4
weeks, followed by the opposite intervention for 4 weeks, with 1-week washout in
between.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Patient-reported severity score of stiffness recorded on
an interactive voice response (IVR) diary (scale of 1 = minimal to 9 = worst
ever experienced). Secondary end points included IVR-reported changes in pain,
weakness, and tiredness; clinical myotonia assessment; quantitative measure of
handgrip myotonia; and Individualized Neuromuscular Quality of Life summary
quality of life score (INQOL-QOL, percentage of maximal detrimental impact).
RESULTS: Mexiletine significantly improved patient-reported severity score
stiffness on the IVR diary. Because of a statistically significant interaction
between treatment and period for this outcome, primary end point is presented by
period (period 1 means were 2.53 for mexiletine and 4.21 for placebo;
difference, -1.68; 95% CI, -2.66 to -0.706; P < .001; period 2 means were 1.60
for mexiletine and 5.27 for placebo; difference, -3.68; 95% CI, -3.85 to -0.139;
P = .04). Mexiletine improved the INQOL-QOL score (mexiletine, 14.0 vs placebo,
16.7; difference, -2.69; 95% CI, -4.07 to -1.30; P < .001) and decreased
handgrip myotonia on clinical examination (mexiletine, 0.164 seconds vs placebo,
0.494 seconds; difference, -0.330; 95% CI, -0.633 to -0.142; P < .001). The most
common adverse effect was gastrointestinal (9 mexiletine and 1 placebo). Two
participants experienced transient cardiac effects that did not require stopping
the study (1 in each group). One serious adverse event was determined to be not
study related.
CONCLUSION: In this preliminary study of patients with NDMs, the use of
mexiletine compared with placebo resulted in improved patient-reported stiffness
over 4 weeks of treatment, despite some concern about the maintenance of
blinding.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00832000.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2012.12607
PMCID: PMC3564227
PMID: 23032552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

The non-dystrophic myotonias (NDM) are rare disorders (prevalence 1:100,0001) caused by mutations in skeletal muscle chloride and sodium channels with the common clinical feature of myotonia without muscle wasting2. Myotonia causes functionally limiting stiffness, pain, fatigue and weakness. Data on treatment of NDM is largely anecdotal, consisting of case series and a single blind controlled trial of quinine3, procainamide3,4, phenytoin4, tocainide5, and mexiletine6,7. A 2006 Cochrane review concluded there was not sufficient data to consider any treatment safe and effective for myotonia8.

Mexiletine is a class 1b antiarrhythmic medication with a high affinity for muscle sodium channels. In vitro and animal models suggest mexiletine reduces muscle fiber excitability caused by common NDM mutations9–12. A recent randomized controlled crossover study showed mexiletine to be effective for reducing myotonia in patients with myotonic dystrophy type 113. A major impediment to randomized controlled trials in NDM is its rarity. The NIH-funded Rare Disease Clinical Research Network (RDCRN) was designed to provide centralized infrastructure for investigations of rare diseases. In a natural history study we used a novel interactive voice response(IVR) diary of patient symptoms and found stiffness was the most common and severe symptom reported in NDM regardless of mutation14. Here we report a phase II international randomized, placebo-controlled crossover study of mexiletine in NDM utilizing the RDCRN and patient reported stiffness on the IVR as the primary outcome.

We conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, two-period cross-over trial at 7 centers in 4 countries. Treatment periods were 4 weeks in duration separated by a 1 week washout period. The trial was approved by institutional review boards and written and informed consent was obtained from all participants. The National Institutes of Health established a Data Safety Monitoring Board which met every 6 months.

Eligible participants were at least 16 years of age, had clinical symptoms or signs of NDM, and myotonic potentials on electromyography. Participants were either enrolled in the CINCH NDM Natural History Study, or a new patient with genetically confirmed NDM, or with clinical features of NDM but negative myotonic dystrophy DNA testing. Patients taking anti-myotonic agents were required to discontinue medications for a wash-out period equal to 7 times the half-life of elimination prior to their baseline visit. Participants were ineligible if they has specific contraindications to taking mexiletine (cardiac conduction defects, hepatic or renal disease, or heart failure).

The trial was registered with clinicaltrials.gov (NCT 00721942) in July 2008. Due to a duplicate registration number, records were consolidated in January 2009 (NCT 00832000). The study was conducted between December 23, 2008 and March 30, 2011 (first patient enrolled December 23, 2008) at the following RDCRN/CINCH sites: University of Kansas Medical Center, University of Rochester Medical Center, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, University of Texas Southwestern, London Health Sciences Center, MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases UCL Institute of Neurology, and the University of Milan IRCCS Policlinico San Donato.

Participants were randomized to mexiletine 200 mg capsules three times a day (TID) or placebo 200 mg capsules TID for 4 weeks. After a 1 week wash-out period, they were placed on the opposite intervention for 4 weeks.

Mexiletine was purchased from TEVA Pharmaceutical. The placebo was Microcrystalline Cellulose (Avicel PH 102). The mexiletine and placebo were encapsulated at the University of Iowa Research Pharmacy with Swedish Orange Capsule. A Qualified Person from Brecon inspected TEVA and the University of Iowa Research Pharmacy for the purpose of the European Directive. Mexiletine drug level testing was performed at Mayo Medical Laboratory. Random drug levels were collected prior to study visits at baseline, the end of weeks 4, 5, and 9.

Baseline characteristics included gender, age, and self-reported race and ethnicity. For the Interactive Voice Response Diary (IVR) calls were made daily for the entire 9 week study. All other outcomes measurements were performed at baseline, the end of each treatment period, and the end of washout.

The primary endpoint was defined as the severity score of stiffness reported by participants during the 3rd and 4th week of each treatment period via the IVR. Participants called in to report symptom severity on a 1–9 scale, 1 being minimal and 9 the worst ever experienced (no symptom = 0 for analysis, eFigure 1)14.

1) Participant-assessed pain, weakness, and tiredness as measured by the IVR from daily calls made over the last two weeks of each period14. 2) Clinical myotonia bedside assessment: participants were asked to squeeze their eyes closed for 5 seconds then rapidly open them; and make a tight fist for 5 seconds then rapidly open. Five trials of each maneuver were performed in sequence at each visit and the time measured on a stopwatch. 3) A quantitative measure of handgrip myotonia was obtained using a commercially available grip dynamometer and computerized capture system. Maximum voluntary contractions following forced right hand grip were recorded and the time to relax from 90% to 5% of maximal force was determined using automated analysis software15,16. 4) The maximal post-exercise decrement in compound muscle action potential (CMAP) after short and long exercise was determined as previously described17,18. 5) Myotonia on needle electromyography was graded on a 1+ to 3+ scale in the right abductor digiti minimi and right tibialis anterior19. 6) Patients filled out the SF-36 and the Individualized Quality of Life questionnaire for neuromuscular disorders (INQoL).20–22 The INQoL is comprised of 10 sections (muscle locking, weakness, pain, fatigue, activities, social relationships, independence, emotions, body image, and effects of treatment) and a summary quality of life score.

The sample size goal was set to 54 participants with available primary endpoint measurements for both treatment periods. This sample size, determined by computer simulation, provided at least 93% power to detect an effect size of one-quarter of a standard deviation (within participant) in the primary endpoint with a 2-sided hypothesis test and an alpha level to 0.05. The variation in power was due to varying the degree of between-participant standard deviation; larger standard deviations lowered the power since the effect in the active treatment period for low severity scores cannot be less than 0. The simulations were based on 500 Monte Carlo realizations, a mean for the placebo group of 3, a within-participant standard deviation of 1.5 and a between-participant standard deviation ranging from 1.5 to 3.0. The effect size of one-quarter of a standard deviation was chosen to be conservative given the tentative assumptions in the simulation, to compensate for the unknown degree of participant compliance to treatment, and the smaller sample size available for the secondary IVR endpoints where some participants do not have the symptom.

Participants were randomly assigned the order of the two treatments in a 1:1 ratio, stratified by institution. Randomization was done centrally at the Data Management Coordinating Center (University of South Florida) using a computer generated permuted block structure, initially with a block size of four then towards the end of the trial, switching to a block size of two. Each participant was assigned a ‘Kit’ number. In this kit, there were only two bottles of medication (‘A’ for period 1 and ‘B’ for period 2). Only one bottle was dispensed at a time. Participants, physicians, and evaluators were blinded to medication assignment.

This study utilized the intention-to-treat principle modified to remove missing values. Missing values were assumed to be missing at random. All treatment effect analysis employed the linear mixed-effects model (random effect for participant, independent and identically distributed random errors within participant) in order to adjust for any period effect and include data from dropouts23–25. One assumption required to produce valid Wald Tests is that the residuals be normally distributed. To fulfill this assumption the daily reported IVR severity scores (involving the four endpoints: stiffness, pain, tiredness, and weakness) were replaced with the weekly means and QQ plots confirmed that this assumption was satisfied. Another assumption when modeling crossover study data and including only the main effects for period and treatment is that the treatment effect is the same across periods. The lack of consistency is often referred to as a “carryover” effect, although this term can be a misnomer26. For the primary endpoint the Wald test of the treatment-sequence group variable (treatment group) was significant (estimate: 0.997, P = 0.04). This result does not necessarily indicate that the second period data are invalid and should be ignored25,27. However, it may indicate that the treatment effect in the period 2 is biased and that the additive model may yield biased estimates. A fair presentation of the results is to include an interaction term for period 2 and treatment, in order to present the treatment effect estimates separately by period. The test for “carryover” effect was considered significant if the P < 0.1024. Significance was detected for 4 of the subscales of the SF-36, specifically, Vitality, Emotional Role, Mental Health, and Mental Composite. Thus these results and stiffness are displayed by period. The significance level displayed for period 2 is from the Wald test associated with the interaction term of period 2 and mexiletine and not the entire treatment effect while the significance level displayed for period 1 is from the test of the main effect term for treatment variable. Most of the confidence intervals displayed in Table 2 were computed in the usual way using the standard error of the estimate taken from the model results; the exceptions were the endpoints requiring a log transformation for which a boot-strap confidence interval was computed. The effect size, displayed in Table 2, was the treatment effect estimate divided by the within-participant standard deviation.

In order to test whether the overall treatment effect varies within mutation class, we employed the log likelihood test contrasting the model with versus without the treatment and mutation class interaction terms as a homogeneity test.

For the electrographic myotonia assessment the score was converted to a numeric value as follows: absent = 0, 1+ = 1, 2+ = 2, and 3+ = 3. The endpoint was the sum of the numerical scores of the two muscles. Although the mixed model was used to provide mean estimates, the Paired Wilcoxon test was used to test the treatment effect hypothesis. To fulfill the normality assumption for the clinical handgrip and eye closure times we applied the following transformation: log (ti + 0.1). Similarly, Quantitative handgrip myometry required a log (ti) transformation; the model included a linear term for grip sequence number and a nested random effect for trial number. All p-values are two-sided, and 0.05 is considered the threshold of statistical significance for all tests except for the carryover effect. Since this trial identified a primary endpoint, all other p-values presented were for secondary endpoints and are not adjusted for multiple testing. Analysis was performed using TIBCO Spotfire S+ version 8.1.

Eligible participants were recruited between December 23, 2008 and January 25, 2011. Of 62 participants recruited, 3 were ineligible: 1 had a prolonged QTc at screening visit, 1 had an elevated transaminase, and 1 had no clinical myotonia on examination. Fifty-nine participants were randomized to receive study medication or placebo. Two particpants did not make expected phone calls to the IVR system during weeks 3–4 of either period. There were 3 dropouts: 1 secondary to migraine headaches, 1 secondary to gastric discomfort, and 1 for failure to comply with study visits. An additional 2 participants did not make calls to the IVR system during weeks 3–4 of the second period, so only provided data for period 1 (Figure 1).

We studied 33 men and 26 women, mean age 42.9 years (16 to 68 years). Participants were predominately white (57/59) and non-Hispanic (46/59). Thirty-four participants had chloride channel mutations, 21 had sodium channel mutations, and 4 had no mutation identified. Seventeen participants were taking medications for myotonia prior to the start of the study, including 13 (22%) taking mexiletine (Table 1). Randomization between groups was balanced with the exception of more men in the placebo followed by mexiletine group.

Data from 57 participants who made calls to the IVR in weeks 3–4 of period 1 or 2 were included in analysis (Figure 1). Compliance for the primary endpoint, stiffness on the IVR, was 74.3% of possible calls (78.6% in period 1, and 70% in period 2).

Pill compliance was similar between treatments (means for the ratio of the number of pills ‘taken’ to the number of pills distributed were for period 1: mexiletine 90.2%, placebo 92.7%; period 2: mexiletine 93.0%, placebo 92.7%). Mexiletine levels at baseline, the end of wash-out, and the end of both placebo arms were not detectible. The mean mexiletine level at the end of mexiletine treatment periods was 0.54 μg/mL, SD 0.35 (reference anti-arrhythmic therapeutic range for 600–1200 mg/day: 0.5–2.0 μg/mL).

Mexiletine was associated with significantly improved stiffness as reported on the IVR in both treatment periods. As explained in the Methods section, we estimated the treatment effect for each period separately: period 1 mexiletine 2.53 versus placebo 4.21 (difference −1.68, 95% confidence interval [CI] −2.66, −0.706, P<0.001); period 2 mexiletine 1.60 versus placebo 5.27 (difference −3.68, 95% CI −3.85, −0.139, P=0.04) (Table 2, Figure 2A).

There were significant improvements with mexiletine in almost all other outcomes in the study, including patient-reported outcomes, quality of life scales, and quantitative measures of myotonia (Table 2). Mexiletine improved the SF-36 physical composite score (mexiletine 44.8, placebo 39.2, difference 5.58, 95% CI 3.44, 7.72, P<0.001) and INQoL summary QOL score (mexiletine 14.0, placebo 16.7, difference −2.69, 95% CI −4.07, −1.30, P<0.001).

Mexiletine improved myotonia as measured on clinical exam (hand grip seconds: mexiletine 0.164, placebo 0.494, difference −0.330, 95% CI −0.608, −0.124, P<0.001, Figure 2B), and quantitative handgrip 90% to 5% relaxation times (seconds: mexiletine 0.321, placebo 0.429, difference −0.109, 95% CI −0.177, −0.0560, P<0.001). Electrophysiological measures of myotonia showed a mixed response. Mexiletine significantly improved the severity of graded myotonia on electromyography (abductor digiti minimi: difference −0.568, 95% CI −0.812, −0.325, P<0.001, Figure 2C). There was no statistically significant association with mexiletine and electrophysiological exercise testing.

The reduction in the severity of stiffness was more pronounced for participants with chloride mutations than sodium mutations in period 2 (chloride −4.18, 95% CI −5.25, −3.12; sodium −2.67, 95% CI −3.84, −1.51, P=0.003, eTable 1) but the reverse in period 1 (chloride −1.67, 95% CI −2.73, −0.614; sodium −2.11, 95% CI −3.28, −0.933). In addition the decrease in the clinical handgrip myotonia assessment was greater for participants with chloride mutations than sodium mutations (seconds: chloride −1.24, 95% CI −1.77, −0.711; sodium −0.355, 95% CI −1.03, 0.316, P=0.04).

There was one serious adverse event determined to be not study related (narcotic withdrawal). The most common adverse event was gastrointestinal in (9 mexiletine, 1 placebo, Table 3). There were 2 reported cardiac adverse events both found incidentally on EKG at the end of week 4: one patient had bradycardia (mexiletine) that resolved on follow up EKG; the other had premature ventricular complexes (placebo). Neither necessitated stopping the study.

A survey performed after the completion of each study period asked participants to guess their treatment allocation during the preceding period. The number of participants that guessed correctly was: period 1 mexiletine 18 (64%) and placebo 20 (69%); period 2 mexiletine 23 (79%) and placebo 20 (80%).

This study provides preliminary evidence of the effectiveness of mexiletine for symptoms and signs of myotonia in NDM. There was a significant increase in IVR treatment effect for stiffness in period 2 compared with period 1. This so called “carryover” effect is contrary to usual definition of ‘the persistence of a treatment applied in one period in a subsequent period of treatment’27. There was no evidence for a lingering effect of mexiletine into period 2. Wash-out of mexiletine was effective (drug levels zero or not detectible after washout). Nor was there evidence of an unbalanced effect based on group assignment. The aggregate within participant difference between mexiletine and placebo was similar whether participants received mexiletine followed by placebo (−2.55) or placebo followed by mexiletine (−2.62). It is possible that unintentional unblinding of participants was associated with this increase. The cause-effect mechanism can be explained in one of two ways: 1) unintentional unblinding was due to a true treatment effect which suggests that additional benefit detected in the second period is attributable to mexiletine; or 2) the side effects of mexiletine (or the absence of side effects for those receiving placebo) in the second period lead to exaggerating the score to a lower (or higher) value. It is not possible to tease out from the data which explanation is correct. The effect for period 1 confirms its significance (P<0.001) and represents the lower bound of the treatment effect in this trial. The fairest interpretation we can propose is that the treatment effect lies somewhere between the estimates from period 1 (−1.68) and 2 (−3.68).

The clinical significance of the improvement in stiffness on the IVR is supported by the broad improvement in clinical, quantitative, and electrophysiological measures of myotonia. Although patient-reported outcomes might be susceptible to exaggeration by participants who had guessed their treatment assignment, quantitative measures are not: mexiletine decreased myotonia on both quantitative handgrip testing and electromyography. Overall most effect sizes were greater than 0.5, which in the literature corresponds to moderate responsiveness, and greater than 0.8, which corresponds to large responsiveness, for many outcomes (stiffness, weakness, and pain on the IVR, SF-36 physical composite score, clinical eye closure myotonia, and electrophysiological myotonia grades, Table 2)28–31. Many studies have suggested that statistically an effect size of 0.5 corresponds well to minimally clinically important differences in health-related quality of life instruments32–35.

Mexiletine was well tolerated in this study. Gastrointestinal discomfort was the most common adverse event, and there were no serious study-related adverse events.

Limitations to our study include the short duration of treatment, limited power for detecting adverse events, and the inclusion of participants with both chloride and sodium channel mutations in a single group to obtain necessary study power. Although there was an indication mexiletine resulted in greater improvement in stiffness for chloride participants versus sodium in period 2, the opposite was true in period 1. The clinical implications for this are not clear. Both groups appear to have improved with mexiletine, and the study is not powered to determine relative effectiveness by mutation.

In conclusion this study provides preliminary evidence of the effectiveness of mexiletine for patients with myotonia. The RDCRN provided common data elements and the centralized infrastructure necessary for such a broad international collaboration, and serves as a model for future rare diseases research.
