---
reference_id: "PMID:24091809"
title: "Hyperosteoidosis and hypermineralization in the same bone: bone tissue analyses in a boy with a homozygous BMP1 mutation."
authors:
- Hoyer-Kuhn H
- Semler O
- Schoenau E
- Roschger P
- Klaushofer K
- Rauch F
journal: Calcif Tissue Int
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s00223-013-9799-2
keywords:
- Bone Density
- Bone Matrix
- Bone Morphogenetic Protein 1/genetics
- "Bone and Bones/metabolism, pathology"
- "Calcification, Physiologic/genetics"
- Child
- Diphosphonates/chemistry
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Hyperostosis/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics
- Reference Values
- "Scattering, Radiation"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperosteoidosis and hypermineralization in the same bone: bone tissue analyses in a boy with a homozygous BMP1 mutation.
**Authors:** Hoyer-Kuhn H, Semler O, Schoenau E, Roschger P, Klaushofer K, Rauch F
**Journal:** Calcif Tissue Int (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00223-013-9799-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00223-013-9799-2)

## Content

1. Calcif Tissue Int. 2013 Dec;93(6):565-70. doi: 10.1007/s00223-013-9799-2. Epub
 2013 Oct 4.

Hyperosteoidosis and hypermineralization in the same bone: bone tissue analyses 
in a boy with a homozygous BMP1 mutation.

Hoyer-Kuhn H(1), Semler O, Schoenau E, Roschger P, Klaushofer K, Rauch F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital 
Cologne, Kerpenerstr. 62, 50924, Cologne, Germany, 
heike-katharina.hoyer-kuhn@uk-koeln.de.

Recently, homozygous mutations in BMP1 were identified as a cause of bone 
fragility in children with high areal bone mineral density. We examined iliac 
bone tissue from a 12-year-old boy with a homozygous mutation that leads to a 
p.Gly12Arg change in the signal peptide of BMP1, an enzyme that cleaves 
C-propeptide off the procollagen type I molecule. Histomorphometric analyses 
revealed marked hyperosteoidosis, with osteoid volume per bone volume at 
approximately 11 SD above the mean value for controls. At the same time, 
quantitative backscattered electron imaging showed drastic hypermineralization 
of mineralized bone matrix. CaPeak, representing the most frequently observed 
calcium content of mineralized matrix in trabecular bone, was 9 SD above the 
mean for the control population, corresponding to a 21 % higher calcium content 
in the patient specimen than in the average control sample. These results are 
similar to those that were previously reported in an individual who had a 
mutation in the C-propeptide cleavage site of procollagen type I. It thus 
appears that disturbed C-propeptide cleavage impairs mineralization in two ways: 
first, the onset of mineralization is delayed, leading to an increased amount of 
unmineralized osteoid, and second, once mineralization starts, too much mineral 
is incorporated into the bone matrix, resulting in hypermineralization.

DOI: 10.1007/s00223-013-9799-2
PMID: 24091809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]