---
reference_id: "PMID:16049492"
title: The Lyme disease agent exploits a tick protein to infect the mammalian host.
authors:
- Ramamoorthi N
- Narasimhan S
- Pal U
- Bao F
- Yang XF
- Fish D
- Anguita J
- Norgard MV
- Kantor FS
- Anderson JF
- Koski RA
- Fikrig E
journal: Nature
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1038/nature03812
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antigens, Bacterial/metabolism"
- Bacterial Outer Membrane Proteins/metabolism
- "Borrelia burgdorferi/pathogenicity, physiology"
- "Ixodes/genetics, metabolism, microbiology"
- "Lyme Disease/microbiology, transmission"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C3H"
- Protein Binding
- RNA Interference
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- "Salivary Glands/metabolism, microbiology"
- "Salivary Proteins and Peptides/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Lyme disease agent exploits a tick protein to infect the mammalian host.
**Authors:** Ramamoorthi N, Narasimhan S, Pal U, Bao F, Yang XF, Fish D, Anguita J, Norgard MV, Kantor FS, Anderson JF, Koski RA, Fikrig E
**Journal:** Nature (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature03812](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03812)

## Content

1. Nature. 2005 Jul 28;436(7050):573-7. doi: 10.1038/nature03812.

The Lyme disease agent exploits a tick protein to infect the mammalian host.

Ramamoorthi N(1), Narasimhan S, Pal U, Bao F, Yang XF, Fish D, Anguita J, 
Norgard MV, Kantor FS, Anderson JF, Koski RA, Fikrig E.

Author information:
(1)Sections of Rheumatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 06520, USA.

The Lyme disease agent, Borrelia burgdorferi, is maintained in a tick-mouse 
cycle. Here we show that B. burgdorferi usurps a tick salivary protein, Salp15 
(ref. 3), to facilitate the infection of mice. The level of salp15 expression 
was selectively enhanced by the presence of B. burgdorferi in Ixodes scapularis, 
first indicating that spirochaetes might use Salp15 during transmission. Salp15 
was then shown to adhere to the spirochaete, both in vitro and in vivo, and 
specifically interacted with B. burgdorferi outer surface protein C. The binding 
of Salp15 protected B. burgdorferi from antibody-mediated killing in vitro and 
provided spirochaetes with a marked advantage when they were inoculated into 
naive mice or animals previously infected with B. burgdorferi. Moreover, RNA 
interference-mediated repression of salp15 in I. scapularis drastically reduced 
the capacity of tick-borne spirochaetes to infect mice. These results show the 
capacity of a pathogen to use a secreted arthropod protein to help it colonize 
the mammalian host.

DOI: 10.1038/nature03812
PMCID: PMC4306560
PMID: 16049492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]