---
reference_id: "PMID:35215808"
title: The Reservoir of Persistent Human Papillomavirus Infection; Strategies for Elimination Using Anti-Viral Therapies.
authors:
- Zheng K
- Egawa N
- Shiraz A
- Katakuse M
- Okamura M
- Griffin HM
- Doorbar J
journal: Viruses
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/v14020214
keywords:
- Alphapapillomavirus/drug effects
- "Antiviral Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Drug Development
- "Epithelium/drug effects, pathology, virology"
- Homeostasis/drug effects
- Humans
- "Oncogene Proteins, Viral/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Papillomavirus Infections/drug therapy, pathology, virology"
- "Persistent Infection/drug therapy, pathology, virology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Reservoir of Persistent Human Papillomavirus Infection; Strategies for Elimination Using Anti-Viral Therapies.
**Authors:** Zheng K, Egawa N, Shiraz A, Katakuse M, Okamura M, Griffin HM, Doorbar J
**Journal:** Viruses (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v14020214](https://doi.org/10.3390/v14020214)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2022 Jan 22;14(2):214. doi: 10.3390/v14020214.

The Reservoir of Persistent Human Papillomavirus Infection; Strategies for 
Elimination Using Anti-Viral Therapies.

Zheng K(1), Egawa N(1), Shiraz A(1), Katakuse M(2), Okamura M(2), Griffin HM(1), 
Doorbar J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QP, UK.
(2)Kyoto R&D Centre, Maruho Co., Ltd., Kyoto 600-8813, Japan.

Human Papillomaviruses have co-evolved with their human host, with each of the 
over 200 known HPV types infecting distinct epithelial niches to cause diverse 
disease pathologies. Despite the success of prophylactic vaccines in preventing 
high-risk HPV infection, the development of HPV anti-viral therapies has been 
hampered by the lack of enzymatic viral functions, and by difficulties in 
translating the results of in vitro experiments into clinically useful treatment 
regimes. In this review, we discuss recent advances in anti-HPV drug 
development, and highlight the importance of understanding persistent HPV 
infections for future anti-viral design. In the infected epithelial basal layer, 
HPV genomes are maintained at a very low copy number, with only limited viral 
gene expression; factors which allow them to hide from the host immune system. 
However, HPV gene expression confers an elevated proliferative potential, a 
delayed commitment to differentiation, and preferential persistence of the 
infected cell in the epithelial basal layer, when compared to their uninfected 
neighbours. To a large extent, this is driven by the viral E6 protein, which 
functions in the HPV life cycle as a modulator of epithelial homeostasis. By 
targeting HPV gene products involved in the maintenance of the viral reservoir, 
there appears to be new opportunities for the control or elimination of chronic 
HPV infections.

DOI: 10.3390/v14020214
PMCID: PMC8876702
PMID: 35215808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.