---
reference_id: "PMID:10499116"
title: Conductive hearing loss in individuals with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
authors:
- Levy CE
- Lash AT
- Janoff HB
- Kaplan FS
journal: Am J Audiol
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1044/1059-0889(1999/011)
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Audiometry, Pure-Tone"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Hearing Loss, Conductive/diagnosis, etiology"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Myositis Ossificans/complications
- Severity of Illness Index
- Surveys and Questionnaires
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Conductive hearing loss in individuals with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
**Authors:** Levy CE, Lash AT, Janoff HB, Kaplan FS
**Journal:** Am J Audiol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1044/1059-0889(1999/011)](https://doi.org/10.1044/1059-0889(1999/011))

## Content

1. Am J Audiol. 1999 Jun;8(1):29-33. doi: 10.1044/1059-0889(1999/011).

Conductive hearing loss in individuals with fibrodysplasia ossificans
progressiva.

Levy CE(1), Lash AT, Janoff HB, Kaplan FS.

Author information:
(1)Ohio State University, Columbus, USA. levy.28@osu.edu

Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) is a very rare genetic disorder that
is characterized by progressive heterotopic ossification of soft tissues and
congenital malformation of the great toes. Although previous case studies have
reported hearing loss in individuals with FOP, there have been no large-scale
studies regarding the nature or cause of the hearing loss. Here, we report the
findings of a two-part study. In Part I, we report the findings of a postal
survey regarding hearing loss that was sent to 102 individuals with FOP. In Part
II, we report the findings of on-site hearing evaluations of eight individuals
with FOP. The findings of both studies indicate that individuals with FOP are at
risk for hearing loss and that the type of loss is predominantly conductive in
nature, similar to that seen in individuals who have otosclerosis.

DOI: 10.1044/1059-0889(1999/011)
PMID: 10499116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
