---
reference_id: "PMID:37309906"
title: Exertional leg pain represents a severe disease phenotype in childhood familial Mediterranean fever.
authors:
- Aydın F
- Özçakar ZB
- Avar Aydın PÖ
- Mekik Akar E
- Çakar N
journal: Postgrad Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/00325481.2023.2224649
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exertional leg pain represents a severe disease phenotype in childhood familial Mediterranean fever.
**Authors:** Aydın F, Özçakar ZB, Avar Aydın PÖ, Mekik Akar E, Çakar N
**Journal:** Postgrad Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00325481.2023.2224649](https://doi.org/10.1080/00325481.2023.2224649)

## Content

1. Postgrad Med. 2023 Aug;135(6):588-592. doi: 10.1080/00325481.2023.2224649.
Epub  2023 Jun 20.

Exertional leg pain represents a severe disease phenotype in childhood familial 
Mediterranean fever.

Aydın F(1), Özçakar ZB(2), Avar Aydın PÖ(1), Mekik Akar E(3), Çakar N(1).

Author information:
(1)Ankara University School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Division of 
Pediatric Rheumatology, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Ankara University School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Division of 
Pediatric Rheumatology and Nephrology, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Ankara University School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Ankara, 
Turkey.

OBJECTIVES: Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is the most common monogenic 
autoinflammatory disease. Recurrent fever, serositis, and arthritis are common 
findings of the disease. In addition, musculoskeletal complaints such as 
exertional leg pain can be overlooked, although they are common and affect 
patients' quality of life. The aim of this study was to evaluate the frequency 
of exertional leg pain in pediatric FMF patients and to analyze the association 
of this finding with other characteristics of FMF.
METHODS: The files of FMF patients were retrospectively evaluated. The clinical 
characteristics and disease severity of the patients with exertional leg pain 
were compared with the patients without exertional leg pain. International 
severity scoring system for FMF (ISSF) and Mor severity score were used for 
assessment.
RESULTS: The study included 541 FMF patients (287 females), 149 (27.5%) with 
exertional leg pain. The median colchicine dosage was significantly higher in 
patients with exertional leg pain (p = 0.02), arthritis (p = 0.001) and 
arthralgia (p˂0.001) were encountered more frequently in the attacks of these 
patients. The median disease severity scores calculated by both Mor severity 
scale and ISSF were significantly higher in patients with exertional leg pain 
compared to those without (p˂0.001). In the group of patients with exertional 
leg pain, the M694V mutation, either in one allele or in two alleles, was found 
to be significantly more common (p = 0.006 and p˂0.001, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Exertional leg pain in pediatric FMF patients is the component of 
moderate-to-severe disease course, and this may be considerably associated with 
the presence of M694V mutation.

DOI: 10.1080/00325481.2023.2224649
PMID: 37309906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]