---
reference_id: "PMID:39693084"
title: Clinical and Imaging Characteristics of PRPH2 Retinopathies in a Longitudinal Cohort and Diagnostic Implications.
authors:
- Seddon JM
- De D
- Grunenkovaite L
- Ferrara D
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.65.14.31
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Peripherins/genetics
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Aged
- Pedigree
- Young Adult
- Adolescent
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Retinal Dystrophies/genetics, diagnosis"
- Fluorescein Angiography/methods
- Genetic Association Studies
- Mutation
- Child
- Multimodal Imaging
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- DNA/genetics
- Longitudinal Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Imaging Characteristics of PRPH2 Retinopathies in a Longitudinal Cohort and Diagnostic Implications.
**Authors:** Seddon JM, De D, Grunenkovaite L, Ferrara D
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.65.14.31](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.65.14.31)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2024 Dec 2;65(14):31. doi: 10.1167/iovs.65.14.31.

Clinical and Imaging Characteristics of PRPH2 Retinopathies in a Longitudinal 
Cohort and Diagnostic Implications.

Seddon JM(1), De D(1), Grunenkovaite L(1), Ferrara D(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Massachusetts 
Chan Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, United States.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States.
(3)Roche Personalized Healthcare, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, 
California, United States.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to define genotypic-phenotypic 
correlations related to PRPH2-associated retinopathies in an observational 
longitudinal cohort and to improve diagnostic accuracy.
METHODS: Individuals with PRPH2 variants were identified by genetic sequencing 
of 263 individuals (including 59 families). Ocular examinations with multimodal 
imaging were evaluated.
RESULTS: Two pathogenic/likely pathogenic PRPH2 variants were identified in 22 
individuals with retinopathies, low genetic susceptibility to age-related 
macular degeneration (AMD) and younger age of onset. The mean follow-up was 14 
years. One family and 4 independent cases (n = 7) were heterozygous for the 
variant rs121918563 L185P (p.Leu185Pro). The individuals developed retinopathy 
compatible with autosomal dominant pattern dystrophy (PD), including adult-onset 
vitelliform macular dystrophy and butterfly macular dystrophy in their fourth to 
fifth decades of life, evolving to retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) 
irregularities and central macular atrophy 20 years later. Two families and an 
independent case (n = 15) had the rs281865373 splice-site variant c.828+3A>T 
(IVS2+3A>T) presenting as retinal flecks consistent with adult-onset fundus 
flavimaculatus with macular dystrophy and diffuse RPE atrophy consistent with 
central areolar chorioretinal dystrophy (CACD) in the fifth decade of life 
progressing to extensive atrophy in the sixth to eighth decades. The L185P 
variant was associated with better visual acuity (VA) during follow-up versus 
c.828+3A>T variant. Some individuals were initially misdiagnosed with geographic 
atrophy secondary to AMD.
CONCLUSIONS: Individuals with the L185P variant had less severe disease with 
clinical manifestation typical of PD and better VA. More advanced disease with 
CACD and worse VA were associated with the c.828+3A>T variant. Results 
contribute to knowledge about genotypic-phenotypic associations of PRPH2 
retinopathies and inform clinical and therapeutic end points.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.65.14.31
PMCID: PMC11668351
PMID: 39693084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: J.M. Seddon, Gemini Therapeutics 
(I), Apellis Pharmaceuticals (I), Laboratoires Théa, Inc. (C); D. De, None; L. 
Grunenkovaite, None; D. Ferrara, Roche (I), Genentech, Inc. (E)