---
reference_id: "PMID:31769878"
title: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) for stroke recovery.
authors:
- Legg LA
- Tilney R
- Hsieh CF
- Wu S
- Lundström E
- Rudberg AS
- Kutlubaev MA
- Dennis M
- Soleimani B
- Barugh A
- Hackett ML
- Hankey GJ
- Mead GE
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD009286.pub3
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antidepressive Agents, Tricyclic/therapeutic use"
- "Depression/drug therapy, etiology"
- Fluoxetine/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Quality of Life
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Stroke/drug therapy, psychology"
- Stroke Rehabilitation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) for stroke recovery.
**Authors:** Legg LA, Tilney R, Hsieh CF, Wu S, Lundström E, Rudberg AS, Kutlubaev MA, Dennis M, Soleimani B, Barugh A, Hackett ML, Hankey GJ, Mead GE
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD009286.pub3](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD009286.pub3)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019 Nov 26;2019(11):CD009286. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD009286.pub3.

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) for stroke recovery.

Legg LA(1), Tilney R(2), Hsieh CF(3), Wu S(4), Lundström E(5), Rudberg AS(6)(7),
Kutlubaev MA(8), Dennis M(9), Soleimani B(10)(11), Barugh A(12), Hackett ML(13),
Hankey GJ(14), Mead GE(9).

Author information:
(1)NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde Health Board, Royal Alexandra Hospital,
Paisley, UK, PA2 9PN.
(2)Mater Dei Hospital, Department of Medicine, Msida, Malta.
(3)Kaohsiung Medical University, Division of Geriatrics and Gerontology,
Department of Internal Medicine and Department of Neurology, Kaohsiung Medical
University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(4)West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Department of Neurology, Chengdu,
China.
(5)Uppsala University, Department of Neuroscience, Neurology, Uppsala, Sweden.
(6)Karolinska Institutet, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(7)Danderyd Hospital, Department of Neurology, Danderyd, Sweden.
(8)Bashkir State Medical University, Department of Neurology, Neurosurgery and
Medical Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
(9)University of Edinburgh, Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, Edinburgh, UK.
(10)Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, Department of Stroke Medicine, 51 Little
France Crescent, Edinburgh, UK, EH16 4SA.
(11)Borders General Hospital, Department of General Medicine, Melrose, Scotland,
UK.
(12)University of Edinburgh, Department of Geriatric Medicine, Edinburgh, UK.
(13)The University of Sydney, Sydney School of Public Health, Faculty of
Medicine and Health, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 2050.
(14)The University of Western Australia, Medical School, Faculty of Health and
Medical Sciences,, 6 Verdun Street, Nedlands, Perth, Western Australia,
Australia, 6009.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021 Nov 15;11:CD009286. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD009286.pub4.

Comment in
    PM R. 2020 Jun;12(6):628-630. doi: 10.1002/pmrj.12394.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012 Nov 14;11:CD009286. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD009286.pub2.

BACKGROUND: Stroke is a major cause of adult disability. Selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) have been used for many years to manage depression
and other mood disorders after stroke. The 2012 Cochrane Review of SSRIs for
stroke recovery demonstrated positive effects on recovery, even in people who
were not depressed at randomisation. A large trial of fluoxetine for stroke
recovery (fluoxetine versus placebo under supervision) has recently been
published, and it is now appropriate to update the evidence.
OBJECTIVES: To determine if SSRIs are more effective than placebo or usual care
at improving outcomes in people less than 12 months post-stroke, and to
determine whether treatment with SSRIs is associated with adverse effects.
SEARCH METHODS: For this update, we searched the Cochrane Stroke Group Trials
Register (last searched 16 July 2018), the Cochrane Controlled Trials Register
(CENTRAL, Issue 7 of 12, July 2018), MEDLINE (1946 to July 2018), Embase (1974
to July 2018), CINAHL (1982 July 2018), PsycINFO (1985 to July 2018), AMED (1985
to July 2018), and PsycBITE March 2012 to July 2018). We also searched grey
literature and clinical trials registers.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that
recruited ischaemic or haemorrhagic stroke survivors at any time within the
first year. The intervention was any SSRI, given at any dose, for any period,
and for any indication. We excluded drugs with mixed pharmacological effects.
The comparator was usual care or placebo. To be included, trials had to collect
data on at least one of our primary (disability score or independence) or
secondary outcomes (impairments, depression, anxiety, quality of life, fatigue,
healthcare cost, death, adverse events and leaving the trial early).
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We extracted data on demographics, type of stroke,
time since stroke, our primary and secondary outcomes, and sources of bias. Two
review authors independently extracted data from each trial. We used
standardised mean differences (SMDs) to estimate treatment effects for
continuous variables, and risk ratios (RRs) for dichotomous effects, with their
95% confidence intervals (CIs). We assessed risks of bias and applied GRADE
criteria.
MAIN RESULTS: We identified a total of 63 eligible trials recruiting 9168
participants, most of which provided data only at end of treatment and not at
follow-up. There was a wide age range. About half the trials required
participants to have depression to enter the trial. The duration, drug, and dose
varied between trials. Only three of the included trials were at low risk of
bias across the key 'Risk of bias' domains. A meta-analysis of these three
trials found little or no effect of SSRI on either disability score: SMD -0.01
(95% CI -0.09 to 0.06; P = 0.75; 2 studies, 2829 participants; moderate-quality
evidence) or independence: RR 1.00 (95% CI 0.91 to 1.09; P = 0.99; 3 studies,
3249 participants; moderate-quality evidence). We downgraded both these outcomes
for imprecision. SSRIs reduced the average depression score (SMD 0.11 lower,
0.19 lower to 0.04 lower; 2 trials, 2861 participants; moderate-quality
evidence), but there was a higher observed number of gastrointestinal side
effects among participants treated with SSRIs compared to placebo (RR 2.19, 95%
CI 1.00 to 4.76; P = 0.05; 2 studies, 148 participants; moderate-quality
evidence), with no evidence of heterogeneity (I2 = 0%). For seizures there was
no evidence of a substantial difference. When we included all trials in a
sensitivity analysis, irrespective of risk of bias, SSRIs appeared to reduce
disability scores but not dependence. One large trial (FOCUS) dominated the
results. We identified several ongoing trials, including two large trials that
together will recruit more than 3000 participants.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We found no reliable evidence that SSRIs should be used
routinely to promote recovery after stroke. Meta-analysis of the trials at low
risk of bias indicate that SSRIs do not improve recovery from stroke. We
identified potential improvements in disability only in the analyses which
included trials at high risk of bias. A further meta-analysis of large ongoing
trials will be required to determine the generalisability of these findings.

Copyright © 2019 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD009286.pub3
PMCID: PMC6953348
PMID: 31769878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Lynn A Legg: none known. Russel Tilney: none
known. Cheng‐Fang Hsieh: none known. Simiao Wu: none known. Erik Lundström: none
known. Ann‐Sofie Rudberg: none known. Mansur A Kutlubaev: none known. Martin
Dennis: none known. Babak Soleimani: none known. Amanda Barugh: none known.
Maree L Hackett: during the completion of this work Maree Hackett was supported
by a National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia Career
Development Fellowship, Population Health (Level 2), APP1141328
(1/1/18‐31/12/21) Graeme J Hankey: in the past three years, GJH has a project
grant from the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia to lead
a trial of fluoxetine for stroke recovery (AFFINITY trial). He has also received
honoraria from the American Heart Assocaition for serving as an associated
editor of the journal CIrculation, and from AC Immune for chairing the data
safety monitoring committee of two clinical trials of vaccines for Alzheimer's
disease. Gillian E Mead: has developed a course on exercise after stroke which
was licensed to Later Life Training, who pay royalties for the course. These
royalties are used to support further research in this area. She has received
expenses for speaking at conferences on exercise and fatigue after stroke.
Gillian Mead, Martin Dennis, Maree Hackett, Erik Lundstrom and Graeme Hankey are
investigators on the FOCUS trial (Fluoxetine or control under supervision) in
the UK, the AFFINITY (Assessment of fluoxetine in stroke recovery) trial in
Australia (Hankey 2011), and the EFFECTs trial in Sweden designed to assess the
impact of fluoxetine on disability and dependency after stroke (Lundström 2014).
None of these review authors extracted data from FOCUS Trial Collaboration 2018.
