---
reference_id: "PMID:39382871"
title: "Current and Future Directions in Developing Effective Treatments for PRPH2-Associated Retinal Diseases: A Workshop Report."
authors:
- Ayyagari R
- Borooah S
- Durham T
- Gelfman C
- Bowman A
journal: Transl Vis Sci Technol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1167/tvst.13.10.16
keywords:
- Humans
- "Peripherins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Retinal Diseases/genetics, therapy"
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current and Future Directions in Developing Effective Treatments for PRPH2-Associated Retinal Diseases: A Workshop Report.
**Authors:** Ayyagari R, Borooah S, Durham T, Gelfman C, Bowman A
**Journal:** Transl Vis Sci Technol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1167/tvst.13.10.16](https://doi.org/10.1167/tvst.13.10.16)

## Content

1. Transl Vis Sci Technol. 2024 Oct 1;13(10):16. doi: 10.1167/tvst.13.10.16.

Current and Future Directions in Developing Effective Treatments for 
PRPH2-Associated Retinal Diseases: A Workshop Report.

Ayyagari R(1), Borooah S(1), Durham T(2), Gelfman C(2), Bowman A(2).

Author information:
(1)Shiley Eye Institute, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(2)Foundation Fighting Blindness, Columbia, MD, USA.

PURPOSE AND METHODS: A workshop of affected individuals and their families, 
clinicians, researchers, and industry representatives was convened in March 2023 
to define the knowledge landscape of peripherin 2 (PRPH2) biology and identify 
challenges and opportunities towards developing PRPH2-associated inherited 
retinal disease (IRD) treatments.
RESULTS: The results of an online survey and presentations from affected 
individuals and their family members revealed disease characteristics and 
impacts on daily living. Scientific sessions highlighted the significant 
heterogeneity in clinical presentation of PRPH2-related retinopathy; PRPH2's 
crucial function in rod and cone outer segment formation and maintenance; the 
usefulness of existing animal and cellular models for understanding disease 
pathophysiology; and possible therapeutic approaches for autosomal dominant 
PRPH2-associated IRDs, including gene-specific therapies and gene-agnostic 
approaches. Priority gaps identified by the workshop included having a more 
complete understanding of PRPH2's fundamental biology and factors contributing 
to PRPH2-related disease phenotypic diversity, establishing genotype-phenotype 
correlations, and creating additional models to probe the functional 
consequences of PRPH2 variants and to test therapies. Additionally, a natural 
history study involving a large number of participants is required to more fully 
characterize PRPH2-related disease progression, aiding in interventional 
clinical trial design.
CONCLUSIONS: Because PRPH2-associated IRDs are rare, maximizing opportunities 
for communication and collaboration among stakeholders, such as that provided by 
the workshop, is crucial to overcome the challenges to developing effective 
treatments and improve the lives of affected individuals.
TRANSLATIONAL RELEVANCE: Fostering communication among stakeholders to identify 
knowledge gaps, therapeutic challenges, and potential opportunities toward 
developing effective treatments for PRPH2-related IRDs.

DOI: 10.1167/tvst.13.10.16
PMCID: PMC11469193
PMID: 39382871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: R. Ayyagari, Opus Genetics (C), 
Navega Therapeutics (C), Foundation Fighting Blindness (C); S. Borooah, Meira 
GTx UK II Limited (F), Editas Medicines, Inc. (F), Ocugen, Inc. (F), Ionis 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (F), ProQR Therapeutics IV B.V. (F); T. Durham, None; C. 
Gelfman, None; A. Bowman, None