---
reference_id: "PMID:40788430"
title: First clinical diagnosis of FAME3 via commercial Long-Read sequencing reveals mosaic repeat expansion in MARCHF6 gene.
authors:
- Perera BLA
- Stewart R
- Furuta Y
- Ezell KM
- Rives L
- Nunley B
- McMinn A
- Krokosky A
- Neumann S
- Koziura ME
- Undiagnosed Diseases Network
- Hamid R
- Cogan JD
- Cassini TA
- Gamazon ER
- Phillips Iii JA
- Tinker RJ
journal: Neurogenetics
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s10048-025-00835-6
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Middle Aged
- DNA Repeat Expansion/genetics
- Mosaicism
- Pedigree
- "Epilepsies, Myoclonic/genetics, diagnosis"
- Alleles
- Genetic Testing
- Whole Genome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# First clinical diagnosis of FAME3 via commercial Long-Read sequencing reveals mosaic repeat expansion in MARCHF6 gene.
**Authors:** Perera BLA, Stewart R, Furuta Y, Ezell KM, Rives L, Nunley B, McMinn A, Krokosky A, Neumann S, Koziura ME, Undiagnosed Diseases Network, Hamid R, Cogan JD, Cassini TA, Gamazon ER, Phillips Iii JA, Tinker RJ
**Journal:** Neurogenetics (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10048-025-00835-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10048-025-00835-6)

## Content

1. Neurogenetics. 2025 Aug 11;26(1):61. doi: 10.1007/s10048-025-00835-6.

First clinical diagnosis of FAME3 via commercial Long-Read sequencing reveals 
mosaic repeat expansion in MARCHF6 gene.

Perera BLA(1), Stewart R(2), Furuta Y(3), Ezell KM(3), Rives L(3), Nunley B(3), 
McMinn A(3), Krokosky A(3), Neumann S(3), Koziura ME(3); Undiagnosed Diseases 
Network; Hamid R(3), Cogan JD(3), Cassini TA(3), Gamazon ER(4), Phillips Iii 
JA(3), Tinker RJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA. blakshitha.perera@vumc.org.
(2)Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics and Genomic Medicine, 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(4)Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics and Genomic Medicine, 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA. rory.tinker@vumc.org.

Familial Adult Myoclonic Epilepsy type 3 (FAME3) is a rare autosomal dominant 
disorder characterized by cortical tremor and epilepsy, caused by a noncoding 
pentanucleotide repeat expansion (TTTTA/TTTCA)n in the MARCHF6 gene. 
Conventional genetic testing often fails to detect this expansion due to its 
repetitive structure and intronic location. We evaluated a 61-year-old woman 
with refractory myoclonic and generalized tonic-clonic seizures, whose prior 
genetic testing-including exome and genome sequencing-was non-diagnostic. Using 
PacBio HiFi long-read whole-genome sequencing and the tandem repeat genotyping 
tool TRGT, we identified a pathogenic MARCHF6 intronic expansion. The proband 
harbored one allele with 15 TTTTA repeats and a second allele with a compound 
expansion of 661 TTTTA and 12 TTTCA repeats. Three affected relatives shared 
similarly expanded alleles, but with increasing repeat size in the latter 
generations. Importantly, analysis using TRGT-instability revealed repeat 
mosaicism in all affected individuals, reflected by variability in motif counts 
across individual sequencing reads. This somatic heterogeneity may contribute to 
the phenotypic penetrance, variable expressivity and pleiotropism seen in FAME3 
disease expression. To our knowledge, this is the first clinical diagnosis of 
FAME3 using a commercially available long-read sequencing platform, underscoring 
its diagnostic utility in resolving complex repeat expansion disorders and 
uncovering biologically relevant mosaicism.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10048-025-00835-6
PMCID: PMC12339610
PMID: 40788430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical approval: VUMC UDN IRB 
Number 172005. Disclosures: E.R.G. has performed consulting for Thryv 
Therapeutics. E.R.G. is a co-inventor on patents for molecular signatures of 
cardiovascular phenotypes and metabolic health, use of RNAs as therapeutics and 
biomarkers in disease, and methods in metabolomics. R.S. was previously an 
employee of Singular Genomics, a genomics device manufacturer. R.S. holds 
company stock options from this employment. R.S. has not received compensation 
from or performed work for this company since July 2022. Competing interests: 
The authors declare no competing interests.