---
reference_id: "PMID:2404712"
title: Pathology of chronic airflow obstruction.
authors:
- Thurlbeck WM
journal: Chest
year: '1990'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathology of chronic airflow obstruction.
**Authors:** Thurlbeck WM
**Journal:** Chest (1990)

## Content

1. Chest. 1990 Feb;97(2 Suppl):6S-10S.

Pathology of chronic airflow obstruction.

Thurlbeck WM(1).

Author information:
(1)University of British Columbia, Faculty of Medicine, Vancouver, Canada.

Classification of chronic airflow obstruction may be based on the site of the 
obstructing lesions. It is seldom that only one type of lesion is present, but 
one may often dominate. In chronic bronchitis, the major disease of large 
airways, chronic mucus hypersecretion, is reflected by an increase in size of 
bronchial mucous glands. This may be a factor in airway narrowing, especially 
with coexisting edema of the airway wall. Excess intralumenal mucus compounds 
the obstruction. Increased airways reactivity is present in 15 to 70 percent of 
patients with chronic airflow obstruction. Increased airway muscle and cartilage 
atrophy are features of chronic bronchitis, but the association of increased 
muscle with increased airway reactivity is poor. Inflammation of the small 
airways (bronchiolitis) is a significant complication for cigarette smokers and 
is an important cause of mild chronic airflow obstruction. Goblet cell 
metaplasia is a reflection of chronic small airways inflammation and, together 
with intralumenal mucus, is an important feature. Permanent narrowing of the 
small airways presumably results from inflammation with consequent fibrosis, 
while functional narrowing results from release of mediators of inflammation. 
Increased muscle mass is present in some cases. Distortion and irregularity of 
small airways related to emphysema are major factors in severe obstruction. 
Lesser degrees of emphysema may be associated with a diminished number of 
alveolar attachments and mild chronic airflow obstruction. Emphysema, the 
dominant lesion in patients with severe chronic airflow obstruction, results 
from parenchymal lesions. Centrilobular emphysema, in which the respiratory 
bronchioles are selectively or dominantly involved, is the most common 
form.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2404712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]