---
reference_id: "PMID:36110924"
title: Nationwide survey of Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome in Japan.
authors:
- Yoshikawa H
- Adachi Y
- Nakamura Y
- Kuriyama N
- Murai H
- Nomura Y
- Sakai Y
- Iwasa K
- Furukawa Y
- Kuwabara S
- Matsui M
journal: BMJ Neurol Open
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1136/bmjno-2022-000291
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nationwide survey of Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome in Japan.
**Authors:** Yoshikawa H, Adachi Y, Nakamura Y, Kuriyama N, Murai H, Nomura Y, Sakai Y, Iwasa K, Furukawa Y, Kuwabara S, Matsui M
**Journal:** BMJ Neurol Open (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmjno-2022-000291](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjno-2022-000291)

## Content

1. BMJ Neurol Open. 2022 Sep 5;4(2):e000291. doi: 10.1136/bmjno-2022-000291. 
eCollection 2022.

Nationwide survey of Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome in Japan.

Yoshikawa H(1), Adachi Y(1), Nakamura Y(2), Kuriyama N(3)(4), Murai H(5), Nomura 
Y(6), Sakai Y(7), Iwasa K(8), Furukawa Y(9), Kuwabara S(10), Matsui M(11).

Author information:
(1)Health Service Center, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.
(2)Public Health, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan.
(3)Department of Social Health Medicine, Shizuoka Graduate University of Public 
Health, Shizuoka, Japan.
(4)Department of Epidemiology for Community Health and Medicine, Kyoto 
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(5)Neurology, International University of Health and Welfare, Otawara, Tochigi, 
Japan.
(6)Pediatric Neurology, Yoshiko Nomura Neurological Clinic for Children, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(8)Health Science, Ishikawa Prefectural Nursing University, Kahoku-gun, 
Ishikawa, Japan.
(9)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University, 
Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.
(10)Neurology, Chiba University Graduate School of Medicine School of Medicine, 
Chiba, Japan.
(11)Neurology, Kanazawa Medical University, Kahoku-gun, Ishikawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: There was no nationwide epidemiological study of Lambert-Eaton 
myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) in Japan; therefore, we conducted a nationwide 
survey.
METHODS: For the first survey, we sent survey sheets to randomly selected 
medical departments (n=7545) to obtain the number of LEMS who visited medical 
departments between 1 January 2017 and 31 December 2017. For the second survey, 
we sent survey sheets to the corresponding medical departments to obtain 
clinical information on LEMS.
RESULTS: We received 2708 responses (recovery rate: 35.9%) to the first survey. 
We estimated the number of LEMS as 348 (95% CI 247 to 449). The prevalence was 
2.7 (95% CI 1.9 to 3.5) in 1 000 000 population. As a result of the second 
survey, we obtained 30 case records of 16 men and 14 women. Fourteen patients 
(46.7%) had a tumour, and 10 out of 14 tumours were small-cell lung carcinoma 
(71.4%). There was a predominance of men in the LEMS with tumour (paraneoplastic 
LEMS, P-LEMS) (n=11, 78.6%) and women in the LEMS without tumour (a primary 
autoimmune form of LEMS, AI-LEMS) (n=11, 68.8%) (p=0.0136). The onset age (mean 
(SD)) for the P-LEMS was 67.1 (9.0), and that for AI-LEMS was 57.8 (11.2) years 
old (p=0.0103). The disease duration (median) for P-LEMS was 2 years, and for 
AI-LEMS was 7.5 years (p=0.0134).
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of LEMS in Japan is similar to that in other 
countries. There are predominances of men in P-LEMS and women in AI-LEMS.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjno-2022-000291
PMCID: PMC9445827
PMID: 36110924

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.