---
reference_id: "PMID:38339361"
title: "Prognostic Factors and Nomogram for Choroid Plexus Tumors: A Population-Based Retrospective Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Database Analysis."
authors:
- Bhutada AS
- Adhikari S
- Cuoco JA
- In A
- Rogers CM
- Jane JA Jr
- Marvin EA
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cancers16030610
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic Factors and Nomogram for Choroid Plexus Tumors: A Population-Based Retrospective Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Database Analysis.
**Authors:** Bhutada AS, Adhikari S, Cuoco JA, In A, Rogers CM, Jane JA Jr, Marvin EA
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers16030610](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16030610)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2024 Jan 31;16(3):610. doi: 10.3390/cancers16030610.

Prognostic Factors and Nomogram for Choroid Plexus Tumors: A Population-Based
Retrospective Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Database Analysis.

Bhutada AS(1), Adhikari S(1)(2)(3), Cuoco JA(1)(2)(3), In A(1), Rogers
CM(1)(2)(3), Jane JA Jr(1)(2)(3), Marvin EA(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Virginia Tech Carilion School of Medicine, 2 Riverside Circle, Roanoke, VA
24016, USA.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Carilion Clinic, 1906 Belleview Avenue, Roanoke,
VA 24014, USA.
(3)School of Neuroscience, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University,
Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.

Background: Choroid plexus tumors (CPTs) are rare neoplasms found in the central
nervous system, comprising 1% of all brain tumors. These tumors include choroid
plexus papilloma (CPP), atypical choroid plexus papilloma (aCPP), and choroid
plexus carcinoma (CPC). Although gross total resection for choroid plexus
papillomas (CPPs) is associated with long-term survival, there is a scarcity of
prospective data concerning the role and sequence of neoadjuvant therapy in
treating aCPP and CPC. Methods: From the years 2000 to 2019, 679 patients with
CPT were identified from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Result (SEER)
database. Among these patients, 456 patients had CPP, 75 patients had aCPP, and
142 patients had CPC. Univariate and multivariable Cox proportional hazard
models were run to identify variables that had a significant impact on the
primary endpoint of overall survival (OS). A predictive nomogram was built for
patients with CPC to predict 5-year and 10-year survival probability. Results:
Histology was a significant predictor of OS, with 5-year OS rates of 90, 79, and
61% for CPP, aCPP, and CPC, respectively. Older age and African American race
were prognostic for worse OS for patients with CPP. Older age was also
associated with reduced OS for patients with aCPP. American Indian/Alaskan
Native race was linked to poorer OS for patients with CPC. Overall, treatment
with gross total resection or subtotal resection had no difference in OS in
patients with CPP or aCPP. Meanwhile, in patients with CPC, gross total
resection (GTR) was associated with significantly better OS than subtotal
resection (STR) only. However, there is no difference in OS between patients
that receive GTR and patients that receive STR with adjuvant therapy. The
nomogram for CPC considers types of treatments received. It demonstrates
acceptable accuracy in estimating survival probability at 5-year and 10-year
intervals, with a C-index of 0.608 (95% CI of 0.446 to 0.77). Conclusions: This
is the largest study on CPT to date and highlights the optimal treatment
strategies for these rare tumors. Overall, there is no difference in OS with GTR
vs. STR in CPP or aCPP. Furthermore, OS is equivalent for CPC with GTR and STR
plus adjuvant therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers16030610
PMCID: PMC10854689
PMID: 38339361

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
