---
reference_id: "PMID:32848094"
title: Antisense oligonucleotides increase Scn1a expression and reduce seizures and SUDEP incidence in a mouse model of Dravet syndrome.
authors:
- Han Z
- Chen C
- Christiansen A
- Ji S
- Lin Q
- Anumonwo C
- Liu C
- Leiser SC
- Meena
- Aznarez I
- Liau G
- Isom LL
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaz6100
keywords:
- Animals
- "Epilepsies, Myoclonic/genetics"
- Incidence
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- NAV1.1 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel/genetics
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense"
- Seizures/genetics
- Sudden Unexpected Death in Epilepsy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antisense oligonucleotides increase Scn1a expression and reduce seizures and SUDEP incidence in a mouse model of Dravet syndrome.
**Authors:** Han Z, Chen C, Christiansen A, Ji S, Lin Q, Anumonwo C, Liu C, Leiser SC, Meena, Aznarez I, Liau G, Isom LL
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.aaz6100](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aaz6100)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2020 Aug 26;12(558):eaaz6100. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.aaz6100.

Antisense oligonucleotides increase Scn1a expression and reduce seizures and 
SUDEP incidence in a mouse model of Dravet syndrome.

Han Z(1), Chen C(2), Christiansen A(1), Ji S(1), Lin Q(1), Anumonwo C(2), Liu 
C(2), Leiser SC(3), Meena(1), Aznarez I(1), Liau G(1), Isom LL(4).

Author information:
(1)Stoke Therapeutics Inc., Bedford, MA 01730, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(3)PsychoGenics Inc., Paramus, NJ 07652, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. 
lisom@umich.edu.

Comment in
    Epilepsy Curr. 2020 Dec 4;21(1):60-61. doi: 10.1177/1535759720975750.

Dravet syndrome (DS) is an intractable developmental and epileptic 
encephalopathy caused largely by de novo variants in the SCN1A gene, resulting 
in haploinsufficiency of the voltage-gated sodium channel α subunit NaV1.1. 
Here, we used Targeted Augmentation of Nuclear Gene Output (TANGO) technology, 
which modulates naturally occurring, nonproductive splicing events to increase 
target gene and protein expression and ameliorate disease phenotype in a mouse 
model. We identified antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) that specifically 
increase the expression of productive Scn1a transcript in human cell lines, as 
well as in mouse brain. We show that a single intracerebroventricular dose of a 
lead ASO at postnatal day 2 or 14 reduced the incidence of electrographic 
seizures and sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) in the F1:129S-Scn1a 
+/- × C57BL/6J mouse model of DS. Increased expression of productive Scn1a 
transcript and NaV1.1 protein was confirmed in brains of treated mice. Our 
results suggest that TANGO may provide a unique, gene-specific approach for the 
treatment of DS.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaz6100
PMID: 32848094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]