---
reference_id: "PMID:20510334"
title: Uptake of wetting method in Africa to reduce cyanide poisoning and konzo from cassava.
authors:
- Bradbury JH
- Cliff J
- Denton IC
journal: Food Chem Toxicol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2010.04.049
keywords:
- Africa
- Cameroon
- Consumer Health Information
- "Cyanides/analysis, poisoning"
- "Food Contamination/prevention & control"
- Food Handling/methods
- Humans
- "Manihot/chemistry, poisoning"
- Mozambique
- Nitriles/poisoning
- "Paralysis/chemically induced, prevention & control"
- Posters as Topic
- Tanzania
- beta-Glucosidase/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Uptake of wetting method in Africa to reduce cyanide poisoning and konzo from cassava.
**Authors:** Bradbury JH, Cliff J, Denton IC
**Journal:** Food Chem Toxicol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.fct.2010.04.049](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2010.04.049)

## Content

1. Food Chem Toxicol. 2011 Mar;49(3):539-42. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2010.04.049. Epub
 2010 May 25.

Uptake of wetting method in Africa to reduce cyanide poisoning and konzo from 
cassava.

Bradbury JH(1), Cliff J, Denton IC.

Author information:
(1)Botany and Zoology, Research School of Biology, Australian National 
University, Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia. howard.bradbury@anu.edu.au

Cassava contains cyanogenic glucosides which are hydrolysed by an enzyme 
linamarase to produce cyanohydrins which breakdown to toxic cyanide. Cyanide 
ingestion from bitter cassava can cause cyanide poisoning sometimes leading to 
death and also konzo, an irreversible paralysis of the legs which occurs mainly 
in children and young women. In 2005 we developed a simple wetting method that 
reduces the total cyanide content of cassava flour 3-6-fold. It involves wetting 
the flour, spreading it in a thin layer in the shade for 5h and using it the 
same day to make traditional thick porridge (ugali). The method was readily 
accepted by rural women and requires no additional equipment or water. 
Laminated, illustrated posters describing the method are available for free in 
ten languages, see http://online.anu.edu.au/BoZo/CCDN/. An equally effective 
treatment method is to expose wet flour in a thin layer in the sun for 2h. 
Projects for rehabilitation and prevention of konzo occurred in Mozambique in 
2007 and in 2008-2009 in Tanzania, funded by AusAID. The Ministry of Health in 
Mozambique is now using our posters in Macua. In Uvira DRC, the wetting method 
has been taught in many villages and over 1200 posters distributed.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fct.2010.04.049
PMID: 20510334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]