---
reference_id: "PMID:11912187"
title: Loss of function of axonemal dynein Mdnah5 causes primary ciliary dyskinesia and hydrocephalus.
authors:
- Ibañez-Tallon I
- Gorokhova S
- Heintz N
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.6.715
keywords:
- Animals
- Axons/enzymology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Dyneins/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- "Hydrocephalus/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- "Kartagener Syndrome/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Inbred CBA"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutagenesis, Insertional"
- Transgenes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of function of axonemal dynein Mdnah5 causes primary ciliary dyskinesia and hydrocephalus.
**Authors:** Ibañez-Tallon I, Gorokhova S, Heintz N
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/11.6.715](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/11.6.715)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Mar 15;11(6):715-21. doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.6.715.

Loss of function of axonemal dynein Mdnah5 causes primary ciliary dyskinesia and 
hydrocephalus.

Ibañez-Tallon I(1), Gorokhova S, Heintz N.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, The 
Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), also known as Kartagener's syndrome, is a 
human syndrome that results from ciliary dysfunction. This syndrome is 
characterized by recurrent respiratory infections, situs inversus and 
infertility. In some cases, hydrocephalus is also observed. We have 
characterized an insertional mutation in a mouse axonemal dynein heavy chain 
gene (Mdnah5) that reproduces most of the classical features of PCD, including 
recurrent respiratory infections, situs inversus and ciliary immotility. These 
mice also suffer from hydrocephalus and die perinatally. Electron microscopic 
studies demonstrate the loss of axonemal outer arms. These results show that 
mutations in Mdnah5 are a primary cause of PCD and provide direct evidence that 
mutations in an axonemal dynein can cause hydrocephalus. Mutations in the human 
DNAH5 have recently been identified in PCD patients. Comparison of the mouse 
model and the human data suggests that the degree of ciliary dysfunction is 
causally related to the severity of human PCD, particularly the presence of 
hydrocephalus.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/11.6.715
PMID: 11912187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]