---
reference_id: "PMID:33822054"
title: "mTOR inhibitors reduce enteropathy, intestinal bleeding and colectomy rate in patients with juvenile polyposis of infancy with PTEN-BMPR1A deletion."
authors:
- Taylor H
- Yerlioglu D
- Phen C
- Ballauff A
- Nedelkopoulou N
- Spier I
- Loverdos I
- Busoni VB
- Heise J
- Dale P
- de Meij T
- Sweet K
- Cohen MC
- Fox VL
- Mas E
- Aretz S
- Eng C
- Buderus S
- Thomson M
- Rojas I
- Uhlig HH
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab094
keywords:
- "Bone Morphogenetic Protein Receptors, Type I"
- Colectomy
- Gastrointestinal Hemorrhage
- Humans
- Intestinal Polyposis/congenital
- MTOR Inhibitors
- "Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary/genetics, pathology, surgery"
- PTEN Phosphohydrolase/genetics
- TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# mTOR inhibitors reduce enteropathy, intestinal bleeding and colectomy rate in patients with juvenile polyposis of infancy with PTEN-BMPR1A deletion.
**Authors:** Taylor H, Yerlioglu D, Phen C, Ballauff A, Nedelkopoulou N, Spier I, Loverdos I, Busoni VB, Heise J, Dale P, de Meij T, Sweet K, Cohen MC, Fox VL, Mas E, Aretz S, Eng C, Buderus S, Thomson M, Rojas I, Uhlig HH
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddab094](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddab094)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2021 Jun 26;30(14):1273-1282. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab094.

mTOR inhibitors reduce enteropathy, intestinal bleeding and colectomy rate in 
patients with juvenile polyposis of infancy with PTEN-BMPR1A deletion.

Taylor H(1), Yerlioglu D(2), Phen C(3), Ballauff A(4), Nedelkopoulou N(5), Spier 
I(6)(7), Loverdos I(8), Busoni VB(9), Heise J(4), Dale P(10), de Meij T(11), 
Sweet K(12), Cohen MC(13), Fox VL(14), Mas E(15), Aretz S(6)(7), Eng C(16)(17), 
Buderus S(18), Thomson M(5), Rojas I(3), Uhlig HH(19)(20)(21).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, London SW7 2BX, 
UK.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Fatih 34093, Turkey.
(3)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(4)Zentrum für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin Gastroenterology, HELIOS Klinikum 
Krefeld, Krefeld, Nordrhein-Westfalen 47805, Germany.
(5)Pediatric Gastroenterology, Sheffield Children's Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust, Sheffield, Yorkshire S10 2TH, UK.
(6)Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, Bonn, 
Nordrhein-Westfalen 53012, Germany.
(7)National Centre for Hereditary Tumor Syndromes, University Hospital Bonn, 
Bonn, Nordrhein-Westfalen 53126, Germany.
(8)Pediatric Gastroenterology Hepatology and Nutrition Unit, Parc Taulí Hospital 
Universitari, Institut d'Investigació i Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Sabadell, Catalonia comunidad 08208, Spain.
(9)Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Liver-Intestine Transplantation 
Division, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(10)Royal Gwent Hospital, Newport NP20 2UB, UK.
(11)VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam 1081, The Netherlands.
(12)Division of Human Genetics, Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(13)Histopathology Department, Sheffield Children's Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust, Sheffield, Yorkshire S10 2TH, UK.
(14)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(15)Unité de Gastroentérologie, Hépatologie, Nutrition, Diabétologie et Maladies 
Héréditaires du Métabolisme, Hôpital des Enfants, CHU de Toulouse, and IRSD, 
Université de Toulouse, INSERM, INRA, ENVT, UPS, Toulouse, Occitanie 31300, 
France.
(16)Genomic Medicine Institute, Lerner Research Institute, and Taussig Cancer 
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
(17)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, and CASE Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, 
USA.
(18)GFO-Kliniken Bonn, St. Marien-Hospital, Bonn, Nordrhein-Westfalen 53115, 
Germany.
(19)Translational Gastroenterology Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
Oxfordshire OX3 9DU, UK.
(20)Department of Pediatrics, University of Oxford, Oxford, Oxfordshire OX3 9DU, 
UK.
(21)Biomedical Research Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, Oxfordshire OX4 
2PG, UK.

Ultra-rare genetic disorders can provide proof of concept for efficacy of 
targeted therapeutics and reveal pathogenic mechanisms relevant to more common 
conditions. Juvenile polyposis of infancy (JPI) is caused by microdeletions in 
chromosome 10 that result in haploinsufficiency of two tumor suppressor genes: 
phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) and bone 
morphogenetic protein receptor type IA (BMPR1A). Loss of PTEN and BMPR1A results 
in a much more severe phenotype than deletion of either gene alone, with 
infantile onset pan-enteric polyposis and a high mortality rate. No effective 
pharmacological therapy exists. A multi-center cohort analysis was performed to 
characterize phenotype and investigate the therapeutic effect of mammalian 
target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibition (adverse events, disease progression, time 
to colectomy and mortality) in patients with JPI. Among 25 JPI patients 
identified (mean age of onset 13 months), seven received mTOR inhibitors 
(everolimus, n = 2; or sirolimus, n = 5). Treatment with an mTOR inhibitor 
reduced the risk of colectomy (hazard ratio = 0.27, 95% confidence interval = 
0.07-0.954, P = 0.042) and resulted in significant improvements in the serum 
albumin level (mean increase = 16.3 g/l, P = 0.0003) and hemoglobin (mean 
increase = 2.68 g/dl, P = 0.0077). Long-term mTOR inhibitor treatment was well 
tolerated over an accumulated follow-up time of 29.8 patient years. No serious 
adverse events were reported. Early therapy with mTOR inhibitors offers 
effective, pathway-specific and personalized treatment for patients with JPI. 
Inhibition of the phosphoinositol-3-kinase-AKT-mTOR pathway mitigates the 
detrimental synergistic effects of combined PTEN-BMPR1A deletion. This is the 
first effective pharmacological treatment identified for a hamartomatous 
polyposis syndrome.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddab094
PMCID: PMC8804886
PMID: 33822054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]