---
reference_id: "PMID:11471164"
title: "SHH mutation is associated with solitary median maxillary central incisor: a study of 13 patients and review of the literature."
authors:
- Nanni L
- Ming JE
- Du Y
- Hall RK
- Aldred M
- Bankier A
- Muenke M
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '2001'
doi: "10.1002/1096-8628(20010722)102:1<1::aid-ajmg1336>3.0.co;2-u"
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Choanal Atresia/pathology
- "Constriction, Pathologic"
- "DNA/chemistry, genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Family Health
- Female
- Growth Disorders/pathology
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/pathology"
- Hedgehog Proteins
- Holoprosencephaly/pathology
- Humans
- Incisor/abnormalities
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- Proteins/genetics
- Syndrome
- Trans-Activators
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SHH mutation is associated with solitary median maxillary central incisor: a study of 13 patients and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Nanni L, Ming JE, Du Y, Hall RK, Aldred M, Bankier A, Muenke M
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1096-8628(20010722)102:1<1::aid-ajmg1336>3.0.co;2-u](https://doi.org/10.1002/1096-8628(20010722)102:1<1::aid-ajmg1336>3.0.co;2-u)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Jul 22;102(1):1-10. doi: 
10.1002/1096-8628(20010722)102:1<1::aid-ajmg1336>3.0.co;2-u.

SHH mutation is associated with solitary median maxillary central incisor: a 
study of 13 patients and review of the literature.

Nanni L(1), Ming JE, Du Y, Hall RK, Aldred M, Bankier A, Muenke M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University 
of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Solitary median maxillary central incisor (SMMCI) or single central incisor is a 
rare dental anomaly. It has been reported in holoprosencephaly (HPE) cases with 
severe facial anomalies or as a microform in autosomal dominant HPE (ADHPE). In 
our review of the literature, we note that SMMCI may also occur as an isolated 
finding or in association with other systemic abnormalities. These anomalies 
include short stature, pituitary insufficiency, microcephaly, choanal atresia, 
midnasal stenosis, and congenital nasal pyriform aperture stenosis. SMMCI can 
also be a feature of recognized syndromes or associations or a finding in 
patients with specific chromosomal abnormalities. We performed a molecular study 
on a cohort of 13 SMMCI patients who did not have HPE. We studied two genes, 
Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) and SIX3, in which mutations have been reported in patients 
showing SMMCI as part of the HPE spectrum. A new missense mutation in SHH 
(I111F), segregating in one SMMCI family, was identified. Our results suggest 
that this mutation may be specific for the SMMCI phenotype since it has not been 
found in the HPE population or in normal controls. Published 2001 Wiley-Liss, 
Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/1096-8628(20010722)102:1<1::aid-ajmg1336>3.0.co;2-u
PMID: 11471164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]