---
reference_id: "PMID:24904092"
title: "Imaging classification of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease: a simple model for selecting patients for clinical trials."
authors:
- Irazabal MV
- Rangel LJ
- Bergstralh EJ
- Osborn SL
- Harmon AJ
- Sundsbak JL
- Bae KT
- Chapman AB
- Grantham JJ
- Mrug M
- Hogan MC
- El-Zoghby ZM
- Harris PC
- Erickson BJ
- King BF
- Torres VE
- CRISP Investigators
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013101138
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Humans
- "Image Processing, Computer-Assisted"
- Kidney/pathology
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/diagnosis, mortality, pathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Patient Selection
- "Polycystic Kidney, Autosomal Dominant/diagnosis, mortality, pathology"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imaging classification of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease: a simple model for selecting patients for clinical trials.
**Authors:** Irazabal MV, Rangel LJ, Bergstralh EJ, Osborn SL, Harmon AJ, Sundsbak JL, Bae KT, Chapman AB, Grantham JJ, Mrug M, Hogan MC, El-Zoghby ZM, Harris PC, Erickson BJ, King BF, Torres VE, CRISP Investigators
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2013101138](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2013101138)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015 Jan;26(1):160-72. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013101138. Epub
2014  Jun 5.

Imaging classification of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease: a simple
model for selecting patients for clinical trials.

Irazabal MV(1), Rangel LJ(2), Bergstralh EJ(2), Osborn SL(1), Harmon AJ(1),
Sundsbak JL(1), Bae KT(3), Chapman AB(4), Grantham JJ(5), Mrug M(6), Hogan
MC(1), El-Zoghby ZM(1), Harris PC(1), Erickson BJ(7), King BF(7), Torres VE(8);
CRISP Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension.
(2)Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, and.
(3)University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania;
(4)Division of Nephrology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia;
(5)The Kidney Institute, Department of Internal Medicine, Kansas University
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas; and.
(6)Division of Nephrology, University of Alabama and Department of Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Birmingham, Alabama.
(7)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester,
Minnesota;
(8)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, torres.vicente@mayo.edu.

The rate of renal disease progression varies widely among patients with
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), necessitating optimal
patient selection for enrollment into clinical trials. Patients from the Mayo
Clinic Translational PKD Center with ADPKD (n=590) with computed
tomography/magnetic resonance images and three or more eGFR measurements over ≥6
months were classified radiologically as typical (n=538) or atypical (n=52).
Total kidney volume (TKV) was measured using stereology (TKVs) and ellipsoid
equation (TKVe). Typical patients were randomly partitioned into development and
internal validation sets and subclassified according to height-adjusted TKV
(HtTKV) ranges for age (1A-1E, in increasing order). Consortium for Radiologic
Imaging Study of PKD (CRISP) participants (n=173) were used for external
validation. TKVe correlated strongly with TKVs, without systematic
underestimation or overestimation. A longitudinal mixed regression model to
predict eGFR decline showed that log2HtTKV and age significantly interacted with
time in typical patients, but not in atypical patients. When 1A-1E
classifications were used instead of log2HtTKV, eGFR slopes were significantly
different among subclasses and, except for 1A, different from those in healthy
kidney donors. The equation derived from the development set predicted eGFR in
both validation sets. The frequency of ESRD at 10 years increased from subclass
1A (2.4%) to 1E (66.9%) in the Mayo cohort and from 1C (2.2%) to 1E (22.3%) in
the younger CRISP cohort. Class and subclass designations were stable. An easily
applied classification of ADPKD based on HtTKV and age should optimize patient
selection for enrollment into clinical trials and for treatment when one becomes
available.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2013101138
PMCID: PMC4279733
PMID: 24904092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
