---
reference_id: "PMID:35308511"
title: "PEAC: An Ultrasensitive and Cost-Effective MRD Detection System in Non-small Cell Lung Cancer Using Plasma Specimen."
authors:
- Xu J
- Pu Y
- Lin R
- Xiao S
- Fu Y
- Wang T
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.822200
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PEAC: An Ultrasensitive and Cost-Effective MRD Detection System in Non-small Cell Lung Cancer Using Plasma Specimen.
**Authors:** Xu J, Pu Y, Lin R, Xiao S, Fu Y, Wang T
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2022.822200](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2022.822200)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2022 Mar 3;9:822200. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.822200.
eCollection 2022.

PEAC: An Ultrasensitive and Cost-Effective MRD Detection System in Non-small
Cell Lung Cancer Using Plasma Specimen.

Xu J(1)(2), Pu Y(3), Lin R(3), Xiao S(3), Fu Y(3), Wang T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Research and Development, Hangzhou Repugene Technology Co.,
Ltd., Hangzhou, China.

Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA), a tumor-derived fraction of cell-free DNA
(cfDNA), has emerged as a promising marker in targeted therapy, immunotherapy,
and minimal residual disease (MRD) monitoring in postsurgical patients. However,
ctDNA level in early-stage cancers and postsurgical patients is very low, which
posed many technical challenges to improve the detection rate and sensitivity,
especially in the clinical practice of MRD detection. These challenges usually
include insufficient DNA input amount, limit of detection (LOD), and high
experimental costs. To resolve these challenges, we developed an ultrasensitive
ctDNA MRD detection system in this study, namely PErsonalized Analysis of Cancer
(PEAC), to simultaneously detect up to 37 mutations, which account for 70-80%
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) driver mutations from low plasma sample
volume and enables LOD of 0.01% at a single-site level. We demonstrated the high
performance achieved by PEAC on both cfDNA reference standards and clinical
plasma samples from three NSCLC patient cohorts. For cfDNA reference standards,
PEAC achieved a specificity of 99% and a sensitivity of 87% for the mutations at
0.01% allele fraction. In the second cohort, PEAC showed 100% concordance rate
between ddPCR and Next-generation sequencing (NGS) among 29 samples. In the
third cohort, 22 of 59 patients received EGFR TKI treatment. Among them, three
in four patients identified low level actionable gene mutations only by PEAC had
partial responses after targeted therapy, demonstrating high ctDNA detection
ability of PEAC. Overall, the developed PEAC system can detect the majority of
NSCLC driver mutations using 8-10 ml plasma samples, and has the advantages of
high detection sensitivity and lower costs compared with the existing
technologies such as ddPCR and NGS. These advantages make the PEAC system quite
appropriate for ctDNA and MRD detection in early-stage NSCLC and postsurgical
recurrence monitoring.

Copyright © 2022 Xu, Pu, Lin, Xiao, Fu and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2022.822200
PMCID: PMC8928926
PMID: 35308511

Conflict of interest statement: YP, RL, SX, YF, and TW are employees of Hangzhou
Repugene Technology. The remaining author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
