---
reference_id: "PMID:31034129"
title: "How patients adjust psychologically to the experience of head and neck cancer: A grounded theory."
authors:
- Calver L
- Tickle A
- Biswas S
- Moghaddam N
journal: Eur J Cancer Care (Engl)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/ecc.13068
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Cancer Survivors/psychology
- Choice Behavior
- Comprehension
- Emotional Adjustment
- Emotions
- Female
- Grounded Theory
- Head and Neck Neoplasms/psychology
- Humans
- Interpersonal Relations
- Life Style
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Social Support
- "Stress, Psychological/prevention & control"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How patients adjust psychologically to the experience of head and neck cancer: A grounded theory.
**Authors:** Calver L, Tickle A, Biswas S, Moghaddam N
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer Care (Engl) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ecc.13068](https://doi.org/10.1111/ecc.13068)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer Care (Engl). 2019 Jul;28(4):e13068. doi: 10.1111/ecc.13068. Epub 
2019 Apr 29.

How patients adjust psychologically to the experience of head and neck cancer: A 
grounded theory.

Calver L(1), Tickle A(1), Biswas S(2), Moghaddam N(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychiatry & Applied Psychology, University of Nottingham, 
Nottingham, UK.
(2)Nottinghamshire Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, King's Mill Hospital, 
Sutton-in-Ashfield, UK.
(3)Trent DClinPsy Programme, University of Lincoln, Lincoln, UK.

Numerous physical and psychological challenges are recognised as consequences of 
head and neck cancer and its treatment, but little is known about how patients 
adjust psychologically to these experiences. This study aimed to develop a 
theoretical understanding of the processes patients engage in when adjusting to 
head and neck cancer. Twelve patients participated in semi-structured interviews 
conducted individually and transcribed verbatim. Data were analysed using 
grounded theory methodology. Analysis generated a core category of "modifying my 
relationship to the changes cancer brings," which encompassed 11 processes 
patients engaged in throughout their adjustment: "survive mode," "instrumental 
support from others," "making a choice," "developing own understanding," 
"acceptance," "talking with others," "making changes," "redefining or regaining 
normality," "managing emotions/distressing thoughts," "putting things into 
perspective" and "barriers to progress." Contrasting findings are discussed, and 
a model of psychological adjustment to head and neck cancer is proposed. The 
study found that patients engage in a series of processes throughout adjustment 
to head and neck cancer, which broadly map on to the cancer treatment 
trajectory, though these processes did not appear to be specific to head and 
neck cancer. The proposed model may be used as a framework to guide 
psychological interventions.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ecc.13068
PMID: 31034129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]