---
reference_id: "PMID:36308673"
title: "Cutaneous Small Vessel Vasculitis: A Practical Guide to Diagnosis and Management."
authors:
- Micheletti RG
journal: Am J Clin Dermatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s40257-022-00736-6
keywords:
- Humans
- Skin
- "Skin Diseases, Vascular/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Systemic Vasculitis/complications
- "Vasculitis/complications, diagnosis"
- "Vasculitis, Leukocytoclastic, Cutaneous/diagnosis, etiology"
- Guidelines as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous Small Vessel Vasculitis: A Practical Guide to Diagnosis and Management.
**Authors:** Micheletti RG
**Journal:** Am J Clin Dermatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40257-022-00736-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40257-022-00736-6)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2023 Jan;24(1):89-95. doi: 10.1007/s40257-022-00736-6.
Epub  2022 Oct 29.

Cutaneous Small Vessel Vasculitis: A Practical Guide to Diagnosis and
Management.

Micheletti RG(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Dermatology and Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Civic Center Blvd, PCAM 7 South, Room 724,
Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. Robert.micheletti@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

Cutaneous vasculitis may be a cutaneous manifestation of systemic vasculitis, a
skin-limited variant of systemic vasculitis, or a type of single-organ
vasculitis limited to the skin. Careful evaluation is necessary to distinguish
these possibilities, differentiate skin-limited from systemic disease, and
identify important underlying conditions, if present. Appropriate management
depends on disease type and severity. In the case of cutaneous small vessel
vasculitis (CSVV), treatment is primarily based on case reports and expert
opinion, using a range of immunomodulatory or immunosuppressive therapies. This
manuscript presents a systematic and stepwise approach to the evaluation of
patients presenting with cutaneous vasculitis, as well as the management of
those diagnosed with CSVV, using best available evidence. Studies relevant to
the classification, evaluation, and management of skin vasculitis are ongoing.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40257-022-00736-6
PMID: 36308673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
