---
reference_id: "PMID:30181172"
title: "International, evidence-based consensus treatment guidelines for idiopathic multicentric Castleman disease."
authors:
- van Rhee F
- Voorhees P
- Dispenzieri A
- Fosså A
- Srkalovic G
- Ide M
- Munshi N
- Schey S
- Streetly M
- Pierson SK
- Partridge HL
- Mukherjee S
- Shilling D
- Stone K
- Greenway A
- Ruth J
- Lechowicz MJ
- Chandrakasan S
- Jayanthan R
- Jaffe ES
- Leitch H
- Pemmaraju N
- Chadburn A
- Lim MS
- Elenitoba-Johnson KS
- Krymskaya V
- Goodman A
- Hoffmann C
- Zinzani PL
- Ferrero S
- Terriou L
- Sato Y
- Simpson D
- Wong R
- Rossi JF
- Nasta S
- Yoshizaki K
- Kurzrock R
- Uldrick TS
- Casper C
- Oksenhendler E
- Fajgenbaum DC
journal: Blood
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2018-07-862334
content_type: abstract_only
---

# International, evidence-based consensus treatment guidelines for idiopathic multicentric Castleman disease.
**Authors:** van Rhee F, Voorhees P, Dispenzieri A, Fosså A, Srkalovic G, Ide M, Munshi N, Schey S, Streetly M, Pierson SK, Partridge HL, Mukherjee S, Shilling D, Stone K, Greenway A, Ruth J, Lechowicz MJ, Chandrakasan S, Jayanthan R, Jaffe ES, Leitch H, Pemmaraju N, Chadburn A, Lim MS, Elenitoba-Johnson KS, Krymskaya V, Goodman A, Hoffmann C, Zinzani PL, Ferrero S, Terriou L, Sato Y, Simpson D, Wong R, Rossi JF, Nasta S, Yoshizaki K, Kurzrock R, Uldrick TS, Casper C, Oksenhendler E, Fajgenbaum DC
**Journal:** Blood (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2018-07-862334](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2018-07-862334)

## Content

1. Blood. 2018 Nov 15;132(20):2115-2124. doi: 10.1182/blood-2018-07-862334. Epub 
2018 Sep 4.

International, evidence-based consensus treatment guidelines for idiopathic 
multicentric Castleman disease.

van Rhee F(1), Voorhees P(2), Dispenzieri A(3), Fosså A(4), Srkalovic G(5), Ide 
M(6), Munshi N(7), Schey S(8), Streetly M(8), Pierson SK(9), Partridge HL(9), 
Mukherjee S(10), Shilling D(9), Stone K(1), Greenway A(1), Ruth J(11), Lechowicz 
MJ(12), Chandrakasan S(13), Jayanthan R(14), Jaffe ES(15), Leitch H(16), 
Pemmaraju N(17), Chadburn A(18), Lim MS(19), Elenitoba-Johnson KS(19), Krymskaya 
V(20), Goodman A(21), Hoffmann C(22)(23), Zinzani PL(24), Ferrero S(25), Terriou 
L(26), Sato Y(27), Simpson D(28), Wong R(29), Rossi JF(30), Nasta S(31), 
Yoshizaki K(32), Kurzrock R(33), Uldrick TS(34), Casper C(35), Oksenhendler 
E(36), Fajgenbaum DC(9).

Author information:
(1)Myeloma Center, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR.
(2)Department of Hematologic Oncology and Blood Disorders, Levine Cancer 
Institute, Atrium Health, Charlotte, NC.
(3)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(4)Department of Oncology, Oslo University Hospital-Norwegian Radium Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway.
(5)Herbert-Herman Cancer Center, Michigan State University College of Human 
Medicine, Lansing, MI.
(6)Department of Hematology, Takamatsu Red Cross Hospital, Takamatsu, Kagawa, 
Japan.
(7)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, VA Boston Healthcare System, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA.
(8)Guys and St. Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(9)Division of Translational Medicine and Human Genetics, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
(10)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Taussig Cancer Institute, 
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH.
(11)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA.
(12)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, and.
(13)Aflac Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, 
Emory University, Atlanta, GA.
(14)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.
(15)National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(16)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, St. Paul's Hospital, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(17)Division of Cancer Medicine, Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.
(18)Department of Pathology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY.
(19)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, and.
(20)Penn Center for Pulmonary Biology, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care 
Division, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA.
(21)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of 
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA.
(22)University of Schleswig Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(23)ICH Study Center, Hamburg, Germany.
(24)Institute of Hematology "L. e A. Seràgnoli," University of Bologna, Bologna, 
Italy.
(25)Division of Hematology, Department of Molecular Biotechnologies and Health 
Sciences University of Torino/AOU "Città della Salute e della Scienza di 
Torino," Turin, Italy.
(26)Department of Internal Medicine-Hematology, Hôpital Claude Huriez-CHRU 
Lille, Lille, France.
(27)Division of Pathophysiology, Okayama University Graduate School of Health 
Sciences, Okayama, Japan.
(28)North Shore Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.
(29)Sir Y. K. Pao Centre for Cancer and Department of Medicine & Therapeutics, 
Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(30)Department of Hematology, CHU de Montpellier, INSERM U1040, Université 
Montpellier I, Montpellier, France.
(31)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
(32)Department of Organic Fine Chemicals, The Institute of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(33)Center for Personalized Therapy and Clinical Trials Office, UC San Diego 
Moore's Cancer Center, La Jolla, CA.
(34)Fred Hutch Global Oncology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
WA.
(35)Infectious Disease Research Institute, Departments of Medicine and Global 
Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA; and.
(36)Department of Clinical Immunology, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Blood. 2018 Nov 15;132(20):2109-2110. doi: 10.1182/blood-2018-09-875112.

Castleman disease (CD) describes a group of heterogeneous hematologic disorders 
with characteristic histopathological features. CD can present with unicentric 
or multicentric (MCD) regions of lymph node enlargement. Some cases of MCD are 
caused by human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8), whereas others are 
HHV-8-negative/idiopathic (iMCD). Treatment of iMCD is challenging, and outcomes 
can be poor because no uniform treatment guidelines exist, few systematic 
studies have been conducted, and no agreed upon response criteria have been 
described. The purpose of this paper is to establish consensus, evidence-based 
treatment guidelines based on the severity of iMCD to improve outcomes. An 
international Working Group of 42 experts from 10 countries was convened by the 
Castleman Disease Collaborative Network to establish consensus guidelines for 
the management of iMCD based on published literature, review of treatment 
effectiveness for 344 cases, and expert opinion. The anti-interleukin-6 
monoclonal antibody siltuximab (or tocilizumab, if siltuximab is not available) 
with or without corticosteroids is the preferred first-line therapy for iMCD. In 
the most severe cases, adjuvant combination chemotherapy is recommended. 
Additional agents are recommended, tailored by disease severity, as second- and 
third-line therapies for treatment failures. Response criteria were formulated 
to facilitate the evaluation of treatment failure or success. These guidelines 
should help treating physicians to stratify patients based on disease severity 
in order to select the best available therapeutic option. An international 
registry for patients with CD (ACCELERATE, #NCT02817997) was established in 
October 2016 to collect patient outcomes to increase the evidence base for 
selection of therapies in the future.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2018-07-862334
PMCID: PMC6238190
PMID: 30181172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: F.v.R. has 
received research funding from Bristol Myers-Squibb and Janssen Pharmaceuticals 
and has served on advisory boards from Janssen Pharmaceuticals. D.C.F. has 
received research funding from Janssen Pharmaceuticals. R.W. and C.C. have 
received research funding from Janssen Pharmaceuticals and served on advisory 
boards for Janssen Pharmaceuticals. P.V. has served on advisory boards for 
Janssen Pharmaceuticals. S.F. has received consultancy fees and speaker 
honoraria and served on advisory boards for Janssen Pharmaceuticals. A.F. has 
received honoraria from Janssen Pharmaceuticals. T.S.U. has received research 
funding Genentech, Merck, and Celgene via Cooperative Research and Development 
Agreements with the National Cancer Institute and has a patent for an 
immunomodulatory compound for KSHV malignancies (Inst). R.K. has received 
research funding from Incyte, Genentech, Merck Serono, Pfizer, Sequenom, 
Foundation Medicine, Guardant Health, and Konica Minolta, consultant fees from 
LOXO, Actuate Therapeutics, Genentech, and NeoMed, as well as speaker fees from 
Roche, and has an ownership interest in Curematch, Inc. D. Simpson has received 
honoraria and research funding from Janssen Pharmaceuticals. The remaining 
authors declare no competing financial interests.