---
reference_id: "PMID:35170402"
title: "Clinical and molecular characteristics of myotonia congenita in China: Case series and a literature review."
authors:
- Li Y
- Li M
- Wang Z
- Yang F
- Wang H
- Bai X
- Sun B
- Chen S
- Huang X
journal: Channels (Austin)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/19336950.2022.2041292
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chloride Channels/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Myotonia/genetics
- "Myotonia Congenita/diagnosis, genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and molecular characteristics of myotonia congenita in China: Case series and a literature review.
**Authors:** Li Y, Li M, Wang Z, Yang F, Wang H, Bai X, Sun B, Chen S, Huang X
**Journal:** Channels (Austin) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/19336950.2022.2041292](https://doi.org/10.1080/19336950.2022.2041292)

## Content

1. Channels (Austin). 2022 Dec;16(1):35-46. doi: 10.1080/19336950.2022.2041292.

Clinical and molecular characteristics of myotonia congenita in China: Case
series and a literature review.

Li Y(1), Li M(2), Wang Z(1), Yang F(2), Wang H(2), Bai X(1), Sun B(1), Chen
S(1), Huang X(2).

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Neurological Department of the Second Medical Center & National
Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Diseases, Chinese Pla General Hospital,
Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Neurology of the First Medical Center, Chinese Pla General
Hospital, Beijing, China.

Myotonia congenita (MC) is a rare genetic disease caused by mutations in the
skeletal muscle chloride channel gene (CLCN1), encoding the voltage-gated
chloride channel ClC-1 in skeletal muscle. Our study reported the clinical and
molecular characteristics of six patients with MC and systematically review the
literature on Chinese people. We retrospectively analyzed demographics, clinical
features, family history, creatine kinase (CK), electromyography (EMG),
treatment, and genotype data of our patients and reviewed the clinical data and
CLCN1 mutations in literature. The median ages at examination and onset were
26.5 years (range 11-50 years) and 6.5 years (range 1.5-11 years), respectively,
in our patients, and 21 years (range 3.5-65 years, n = 45) and 9 years (range
0.5-26 years, n = 50), respectively, in literature. Similar to previous reports,
myotonia involved limb, lids, masticatory, and trunk muscles to varying degrees.
Warm-up phenomenon (5/6), percussion myotonia (3/5), and grip myotonia (6/6)
were common. Menstruation triggered myotonia in females, not observed in Chinese
patients before. The proportion of abnormal CK levels (4/5) was higher than data
from literature. Electromyography performed in six patients revealed myotonic
changes (100%). Five novel CLCN1 mutations, including a splicing mutation
(c.853 + 4A>G), a deletion mutation (c.2010_2014del), and three missense
mutations (c.2527C>T, c.1727C>T, c.2017 G > C), were identified. The c.892 G > A
(p.A298T) mutation was the most frequent mutation in the Chinese population. Our
study expanded the clinical and genetic spectrum of patients with MC in the
China. The MC phenotype in Chinese people is not different from that found in
the West, while the genotype is different.

DOI: 10.1080/19336950.2022.2041292
PMCID: PMC8855856
PMID: 35170402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported
by the author(s).
