---
reference_id: "PMID:39343084"
title: "Immunopathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus: An update."
authors:
- Arnaud L
- Chasset F
- Martin T
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2024.103648
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/immunology, etiology"
- Animals
- "Immunity, Innate"
- Autoimmunity/immunology
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Adaptive Immunity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunopathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus: An update.
**Authors:** Arnaud L, Chasset F, Martin T
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2024.103648](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2024.103648)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2024 Oct;23(10):103648. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2024.103648. Epub
 2024 Sep 27.

Immunopathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus: An update.

Arnaud L(1), Chasset F(2), Martin T(3).

Author information:
(1)Service de Rhumatologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Centre
National de Référence des Maladies Systémiques Auto-immunes Rares Est Sud-Ouest,
INSERM UMRS-1109, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France. Electronic
address: laurent.arnaud@chru-strasbourg.fr.
(2)Sorbonne Université, Faculté de Médecine, AP-HP, Service de Dermatologie et
Allergologie, Hôpital Tenon, INSERM U1135, CIMI, Paris, France.
(3)Service d'immunologie Clinique et de médecine interne, Hôpitaux
Universitaires de Strasbourg, Centre National de Référence des Maladies
Systémiques Auto-immunes Rares, Strasbourg, France.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic systemic autoimmune disease
characterized by dysregulated immune responses leading to widespread
inflammation and damage in various organs. Environmental factors such as
infections, hormonal influences and exposure to ultraviolet light can trigger
the disease in genetically predisposed individuals. Genome-wide association
studies have identified over 100 susceptibility loci linked to immune
regulation, interferon (IFN) signaling and antigen presentation in SLE. In
addition, rare cases of monogenic lupus have been instrumental in understanding
critical underlying disease mechanisms. Several immunological abnormalities
contribute to the loss of self-tolerance and the perpetuation of autoimmune
responses in SLE. In particular, defective clearance of apoptotic cells due to
defective phagocytosis and complement activation leads to accumulation of
self-antigens. Dysregulated innate immune responses activate the adaptive immune
system, amplifying the inflammatory response with an important role for type I
IFNs. Abnormalities in B cell development and activation lead to the production
of autoreactive antibodies, forming immune complexes that cause tissue damage.
Similarly, disturbances in T-cell compartments, altered regulatory T-cell
functions and altered cytokine production, particularly IFN-α, contribute to
tissue damage. Understanding of the immunopathogenesis of SLE is evolving
rapidly, with ongoing research identifying new molecular pathways and potential
therapeutic targets. Future classifications of SLE are likely to be based on
underlying biological pathways rather than clinical and serological signs alone.
This review aims to provide a detailed update on the most recent findings
regarding the immunopathogenesis of SLE, focusing on the variability of
biological pathways and the implications for future therapeutic strategies, in
particular chimeric antigen receptor T (CAR T) cells.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2024.103648
PMID: 39343084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest
