---
reference_id: "PMID:39823143"
title: "Unveiling the Molecular Mechanisms of Rosacea: Insights From Transcriptomics and In Vitro Experiments."
authors:
- Chen L
- Wang J
journal: J Cosmet Dermatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/jocd.16753
keywords:
- Humans
- "Rosacea/genetics, immunology, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Toll-Like Receptor 2/metabolism, genetics"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Cell Proliferation/genetics
- "Calgranulin B/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Movement/genetics
- Female
- Transcriptome
- HaCaT Cells
- Up-Regulation
- Adult
- Male
- Middle Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unveiling the Molecular Mechanisms of Rosacea: Insights From Transcriptomics and In Vitro Experiments.
**Authors:** Chen L, Wang J
**Journal:** J Cosmet Dermatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jocd.16753](https://doi.org/10.1111/jocd.16753)

## Content

1. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2025 Jan;24(1):e16753. doi: 10.1111/jocd.16753.

Unveiling the Molecular Mechanisms of Rosacea: Insights From Transcriptomics and 
In Vitro Experiments.

Chen L(1), Wang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery, Hubei Provincial Hospital of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, The Affiliated Hospital of Hubei University of 
Chinese Medicine, Wuhan, China.

Erratum in
    J Cosmet Dermatol. 2025 Oct;24(10):e70165. doi: 10.1111/jocd.70165.

BACKGROUND: Rosacea is a prevalent inflammatory skin condition, but its 
molecular mechanisms and treatment responses remain poorly understood.
AIMS: This study aims to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying rosacea 
and explore drug response through transcriptomic analysis and in vitro 
experiments.
PATIENTS/METHODS: We performed high-throughput RNA sequencing to analyze gene 
expression patterns in rosacea patients. In vitro experiments, including 
RT-qPCR, Western blot, ELISA, scratch, and Transwell assays, were used to 
evaluate gene and protein expression and cell behavior in HaCaT cells under 
simulated rosacea conditions.
RESULTS: Transcriptomic analysis revealed significantly elevated expression of 
inflammatory-related genes in rosacea patients. In vitro, HaCaT cells exhibited 
enhanced proliferation and migration abilities, accompanied by increased 
expression of pro-inflammatory genes and proteins. Specifically, Toll-like 
receptor 2 (TLR2) and S100A9 proteins were upregulated, potentially promoting 
these processes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study elucidates the molecular mechanisms of rosacea, 
highlighting the role of inflammatory pathways and altered cell behavior in the 
disease. TLR2 and S100A9 may contribute to disease progression, offering 
potential targets for future therapeutic strategies.

© 2025 The Author(s). Journal of Cosmetic Dermatology published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/jocd.16753
PMCID: PMC11739675
PMID: 39823143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.