---
reference_id: "PMID:23411950"
title: "[A novel genetic disorder of Lynch syndrome - EPCAM gene deletion]."
authors:
- Tomita N
- Yamano T
- Matsubara N
- Tamura K
journal: Gan To Kagaku Ryoho
year: '2013'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [A novel genetic disorder of Lynch syndrome - EPCAM gene deletion].
**Authors:** Tomita N, Yamano T, Matsubara N, Tamura K
**Journal:** Gan To Kagaku Ryoho (2013)

## Content

1. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2013 Feb;40(2):143-7.

[A novel genetic disorder of Lynch syndrome - EPCAM gene deletion].

[Article in Japanese]

Tomita N(1), Yamano T, Matsubara N, Tamura K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Lower GI, Dept. of Surgery, Hyogo College of Medicine, 
Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan.

Lynch syndrome, also known as hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer, HNPCC, 
is a cancer-predisposing autosomal-dominant hereditary disorder caused by 
defects of the mismatch repair(MMR)system during DNA replication. Not only 
colorectal cancer, but malignancies in various organs, e.g., endometrium, 
stomach, small intestine, and urinary tract, occur in people of a relatively 
young age and accumulate in the family; therefore, this syndrome is considered 
to be a very important clinical entity with regard to the cancer treatment 
strategy. Germline mutations of 4 MMR genes, e.g., MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2, 
had been identified as the cause of this disease, however, a novel mechanism, 
epigenetic inactivation of MSH2 gene due to hypermethylation of promotor region 
by the deletion of 3'part of epithelial cell adhesion molecule(EPCAM) gene which 
is located upstream of the MSH2 gene, has been reported in recent years. 
Therefore, it should be kept in mind in genetic testing and/or counseling for 
Lynch syndrome case with MSH2 defect that there might be a deletion of the EPCAM 
gene. In this review, the significance of the EPCAM gene defect in the 
management for Lynch syndrome is briefly introduced.

PMID: 23411950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]