---
reference_id: "PMID:16099835"
title: Genetic ablation of Cyclin D1 abrogates genesis of rhabdoid tumors resulting from Ini1 loss.
authors:
- Tsikitis M
- Zhang Z
- Edelman W
- Zagzag D
- Kalpana GV
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0505300102
keywords:
- Animals
- "Blotting, Western"
- "Cell Cycle/genetics, physiology"
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone"
- "Crosses, Genetic"
- Cyclin D1/genetics
- DNA Primers
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Deletion
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/genetics"
- Gene Targeting
- Immunohistochemistry
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Rhabdoid Tumor/genetics
- SMARCB1 Protein
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic ablation of Cyclin D1 abrogates genesis of rhabdoid tumors resulting from Ini1 loss.
**Authors:** Tsikitis M, Zhang Z, Edelman W, Zagzag D, Kalpana GV
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0505300102](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0505300102)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Aug 23;102(34):12129-34. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0505300102. Epub 2005 Aug 12.

Genetic ablation of Cyclin D1 abrogates genesis of rhabdoid tumors resulting 
from Ini1 loss.

Tsikitis M(1), Zhang Z, Edelman W, Zagzag D, Kalpana GV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, 
NY 10461, USA.

Rhabdoid tumors are aggressive pediatric malignancies for which, currently, 
there are no effective or standard treatment strategies. Rhabdoid tumors arise 
because of the loss of the tumor suppressor gene INI1. We have previously 
demonstrated that INI1 represses Cyclin D1 transcription in rhabdoid cells by 
directly recruiting histone deacetylase 1 complex to its promoter, leading to 
G(0)-G(1) arrest. Expression of Cyclin D1 overcomes cell cycle arrest mediated 
by INI1 and Cyclin D1 overexpression in human rhabdoid tumors is a common 
phenomenon. However, it is not clear whether Cyclin D1 is a critical downstream 
target of INI1 in vivo and whether the derepression of this gene is essential 
for rhabdoid tumorigenesis. To determine the requirement of Cyclin D1 for 
genesis of rhabdoid tumors in vivo, we developed Ini1 heterozygous mice by 
targeted disruption. We found that the tumors developed in these Ini1+/- mice 
are rhabdoid, defective for Ini1 protein, and like the human tumors, express 
Cyclin D1. We crossed Ini1+/- mice to Cyclin D1-/- mice and found that Ini1+/- 
mice with Cyclin D1 deficiency did not develop any spontaneous tumors, in 
contrast to the parental Ini1+/- mice. These results strongly support the 
hypothesis that Cyclin D1 is a key mediator in the genesis of rhabdoid tumors. 
Our results provide an in vivo proof of concept that drugs that target Cyclin D1 
expression or activity could be potentially effective as novel therapeutic 
agents for rhabdoid tumors.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0505300102
PMCID: PMC1189334
PMID: 16099835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]