---
reference_id: "PMID:38995350"
title: "Anti-VEGF therapy for the long-term management of diabetic macular edema: a treat-to-target strategy based on macular morphology."
authors:
- Nakao S
- Kusuhara S
- Murakami T
journal: Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00417-024-06558-y
keywords:
- Humans
- "Macular Edema/drug therapy, diagnosis, etiology"
- "Diabetic Retinopathy/drug therapy, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- "Angiogenesis Inhibitors/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Intravitreal Injections
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Visual Acuity
- Macula Lutea/pathology
- Disease Management
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-VEGF therapy for the long-term management of diabetic macular edema: a treat-to-target strategy based on macular morphology.
**Authors:** Nakao S, Kusuhara S, Murakami T
**Journal:** Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00417-024-06558-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00417-024-06558-y)

## Content

1. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2024 Dec;262(12):3749-3759. doi: 
10.1007/s00417-024-06558-y. Epub 2024 Jul 12.

Anti-VEGF therapy for the long-term management of diabetic macular edema: a 
treat-to-target strategy based on macular morphology.

Nakao S(1), Kusuhara S(2), Murakami T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Division of Ophthalmology, Department of Surgery, Kobe University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan. kusu@med.kobe-u.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Kyoto University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

In an aging population, the prevalence and burden of diabetes mellitus, diabetic 
retinopathy, and vision-threatening diabetic macular edema (DME) are only 
expected to rise around the world. Similarly to other complications of diabetes 
mellitus, DME requires long-term management. This article aims to review the 
current challenges associated with the long-term management of DME, 
opportunities to improve outcomes for patients, and to develop a treat-to-target 
strategy based on macular morphology. At present, intravitreal anti-vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) therapy is the standard of care for the 
management of DME; however, best-achievable vision outcomes with treatment are 
reliant on frequent injections and close monitoring, which are difficult to 
maintain in current clinical practice because of the burden this imposes on 
patients. Achieving and maintaining good vision with treatment are the most 
important factors for patients with DME. Landmark trials have shown that vision 
gains with anti-VEGF therapy are typically accompanied by anatomical 
improvements (e.g., reductions in retinal thickness); therefore, multimodal 
imaging measures of macular morphology are often used in patients with DME to 
guide real-world treatment decisions. We would like to propose a hypothetical 
treat-to-target algorithm to guide physicians on treatment strategies for the 
long-term management of DME. Alternative measures of retinal fluid (e.g., 
persistence, stability, location) may be stronger predictors of visual acuity in 
DME, although further research is required to confirm whether alternate 
quantifiable biomarkers such as subretinal fluid and intraretinal fluid volumes 
can be used as a biomarker of clinical improvement. Identifying novel biomarkers 
and treatments that target neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration, improving 
patient-physician communication around treatment adherence, and using 
treat-to-target measures may help to ensure that the long-term benefits of 
treatment are realized.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00417-024-06558-y
PMCID: PMC11608304
PMID: 38995350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical approval: This review 
article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals 
performed by any of the authors. Consent to participate: Not applicable. Consent 
for publication: Not applicable. Conflict of interest: Shintaro Nakao reports 
consulting fees from Chugai Pharmaceutical, Boehringer Ingelheim, Kowa, 
Novartis, and Riverfield; and travel reimbursements and speaker fees from Alcon, 
Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Canon, Chugai Pharmaceutical, HOYA, JFC Sales Plan, 
Kowa, Machida, Mitsubishi Tanabe, MSD, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Otsuka, Santen, 
Senju, and Wakamoto. Sentaro Kusuhara reports payment for lectures or 
supervision from AbbVie Japan, Bayer Yakuhin, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chugai, 
Eisai, Kowa, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Nippon Kayaku, Novartis Pharma K.K., Santen, and 
Senju; grants from AMO Japan and Bayer Yakuhin; receipt of drugs from Clinigen 
K.K.; and patent royalties from Charmant. Although Sentaro Kusuhara is an 
editorial board member of Graefe’s Archive for Clinical and Experimental 
Ophthalmology, he had no involvement in the peer review process for this 
article. Tomoaki Murakami reports payment for lectures or supervision from Bayer 
Yakuhin, Chugai Pharmaceutical, HOYA, Kowa, Novartis Pharma K.K., Santen, and 
Senju; and consulting fees from Boehringer Ingelheim.