---
reference_id: "PMID:38696651"
title: "The Genetic Pathophysiology and Clinical Management of the TADopathy, X-Linked Acrogigantism."
authors:
- Daly AF
- Beckers A
journal: Endocr Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1210/endrev/bnae014
keywords:
- Humans
- "Gigantism/genetics, therapy"
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/genetics, metabolism"
- "Human Growth Hormone/metabolism, genetics"
- "Acromegaly/genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Genetic Pathophysiology and Clinical Management of the TADopathy, X-Linked Acrogigantism.
**Authors:** Daly AF, Beckers A
**Journal:** Endocr Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1210/endrev/bnae014](https://doi.org/10.1210/endrev/bnae014)

## Content

1. Endocr Rev. 2024 Sep 12;45(5):737-754. doi: 10.1210/endrev/bnae014.

The Genetic Pathophysiology and Clinical Management of the TADopathy, X-Linked
Acrogigantism.

Daly AF(1), Beckers A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Liège,
University of Liège, Domaine Universitaire Sart Tilman, 4000 Liège, Belgium.

Pituitary gigantism is a rare manifestation of chronic growth hormone (GH)
excess that begins before closure of the growth plates. Nearly half of patients
with pituitary gigantism have an identifiable genetic cause. X-linked
acrogigantism (X-LAG; 10% of pituitary gigantism) typically begins during
infancy and can lead to the tallest individuals described. In the 10 years since
its discovery, about 40 patients have been identified. Patients with X-LAG
usually develop mixed GH and prolactin macroadenomas with occasional hyperplasia
that secrete copious amounts of GH, and frequently prolactin. Circulating
GH-releasing hormone is also elevated in a proportion of patients. X-LAG is
caused by constitutive or sporadic mosaic duplications at chromosome Xq26.3 that
disrupt the normal chromatin architecture of a topologically associating domain
(TAD) around the orphan G-protein-coupled receptor, GPR101. This leads to the
formation of a neo-TAD in which GPR101 overexpression is driven by ectopic
enhancers ("TADopathy"). X-LAG has been seen in 3 families due to transmission
of the duplication from affected mothers to sons. GPR101 is a constitutively
active receptor with an unknown natural ligand that signals via multiple G
proteins and protein kinases A and C to promote GH/prolactin hypersecretion.
Treatment of X-LAG is challenging due to the young patient population and
resistance to somatostatin analogs; the GH receptor antagonist pegvisomant is
often an effective option. GH, insulin-like growth factor 1, and prolactin
hypersecretion and physical overgrowth can be controlled before definitive adult
gigantism occurs, often at the cost of permanent hypopituitarism.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Endocrine Society. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, please contact
reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for reprints. All other
permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service via the Permissions
link on the article page on our site—for further information please contact
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1210/endrev/bnae014
PMID: 38696651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
