---
reference_id: "PMID:36689495"
title: "Efficacy and safety of Oleogel-S10 (birch triterpenes) for epidermolysis bullosa: results from the phase III randomized double-blind phase of the EASE study."
authors:
- Kern JS
- Sprecher E
- Fernandez MF
- Schauer F
- Bodemer C
- Cunningham T
- Löwe S
- Davis C
- Sumeray M
- Bruckner AL
- Murrell DF
- EASE investigators
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljac001
keywords:
- Humans
- Betula
- Double-Blind Method
- Epidermolysis Bullosa
- Epidermolysis Bullosa Dystrophica
- Triterpenes
- Organic Chemicals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of Oleogel-S10 (birch triterpenes) for epidermolysis bullosa: results from the phase III randomized double-blind phase of the EASE study.
**Authors:** Kern JS, Sprecher E, Fernandez MF, Schauer F, Bodemer C, Cunningham T, Löwe S, Davis C, Sumeray M, Bruckner AL, Murrell DF, EASE investigators
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bjd/ljac001](https://doi.org/10.1093/bjd/ljac001)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2023 Jan 23;188(1):12-21. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljac001.

Efficacy and safety of Oleogel-S10 (birch triterpenes) for epidermolysis 
bullosa: results from the phase III randomized double-blind phase of the EASE 
study.

Kern JS(1)(2), Sprecher E(3)(4), Fernandez MF(5), Schauer F(6), Bodemer C(7), 
Cunningham T(8), Löwe S(9), Davis C(9), Sumeray M(8), Bruckner AL(10), Murrell 
DF(11); EASE investigators.

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Department, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Health Science, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Alfred Hospital, Central Clinical School, Monash 
University, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Division of Dermatology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(4)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(5)Fundacion Respirar, Centro Medico Dra. De Salvo, Capital Federal, Argentina.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Expert Centre for Genodermatoses (MAGEC) 
Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, University Paris Centre, Paris, France.
(8)Amryt Research Limited, Dublin, Ireland.
(9)CSD Biostatistics Inc., Oro Valley, AZ, USA.
(10)University of Colorado School of Medicine, Department of Dermatology, 
Aurora, CO, USA.
(11)Department of Dermatology, St. George Hospital, University of New South 
Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2023 Jan 23;188(1):10-11. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljac034.
    Br J Dermatol. 2023 Jan 23;188(1):e4. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljac156.

BACKGROUND: Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is a heterogeneous group of rare, 
difficult-to-treat, inherited multisystem diseases affecting epithelial 
integrity. Patients with EB are affected by mechanical fragility of epithelial 
surfaces including the skin and, as a result, extensive recurrent blistering is 
a characteristic of the condition. Chronic wounds predispose patients with EB to 
the development of squamous cell carcinoma, which is a major cause of premature 
death.
OBJECTIVES: EASE was a double-blind, randomized, vehicle-controlled, phase III 
study to determine the efficacy and safety of the topical gel Oleogel-S10 (birch 
triterpenes) in EB. EASE was funded by Amryt Research Limited.
METHODS: Patients with dystrophic EB, junctional EB or Kindler EB and a target 
partial-thickness wound lasting ≥ 21 days and < 9 months that was 10-50 cm2, 
were enrolled and randomized via computer-generated allocation tables 1 : 1 to 
Oleogel-S10 or control gel - both with standard-of-care dressings. Study gel was 
applied to all wounds at least every 4 days. The primary endpoint was the 
proportion of patients with first complete closure of target wound within 45 
days.
RESULTS: A total of 223 patients were enrolled and treated (109 treated with 
Oleogel-S10, 114 with control gel). The primary endpoint was met; Oleogel-S10 
resulted in 41·3% of patients with first complete target wound closure within 45 
days, compared with 28·9% in the control gel arm (relative risk 1·44, 95% 
confidence interval (CI) 1·01-2·05; P = 0·013). Adverse events (AEs) occurred 
with similar frequency for Oleogel-S10 (81·7%) compared with control gel 
(80·7%). AEs were predominantly of mild-to-moderate intensity (4·6% were 
severe).
CONCLUSIONS: Oleogel-S10 is the first therapy to demonstrate accelerated wound 
healing in EB. Oleogel-S10 was well -tolerated.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of British 
Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1093/bjd/ljac001
PMID: 36689495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: J.S.K. has received 
grants and/or fees for consultancy in the last 12 months from Amryt. E.S. has 
received grants for consultancy in the last 12 months from Amryt, Kamari Pharma 
Ltd, and BiomX, and as CMO of Sol-Gel Technologies Ltd. F.S., C.B. and M.F.F. 
have received grants and/or fees for consultancy in the last 12 months from 
Amryt. T.C., S.L. and M.S. are employees of Amryt Research Ltd. C.D. is a paid 
contractor for Amryt Research Ltd. A.L.B. has received grants and/or fees for 
consultancy in the last 12 months from Amryt, Amicus/Scioderm, Castle Creek, 
Fibrocell, ProQR/Wings and Phoenix Tissue Repair. D.F.M. has received grants 
and/or fees for consultancy in the last 12 months from Amryt and Amicus, and is 
a co-owner of the patent for topical sirolimus for epidermolysis bullosa 
simplex. A complete list of investigators in the EASE trial is provided in the 
Supporting Information.