---
reference_id: "PMID:38267579"
title: Redefining the treponemal history through pre-Columbian genomes from Brazil.
authors:
- Majander K
- Pla-Díaz M
- du Plessis L
- Arora N
- Filippini J
- Pezo-Lanfranco L
- Eggers S
- González-Candelas F
- Schuenemann VJ
journal: Nature
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06965-x
keywords:
- Humans
- "Brazil/epidemiology, ethnology"
- Europe/epidemiology
- "Evolution, Molecular"
- "Genome, Bacterial/genetics"
- "History, 15th Century"
- "History, Ancient"
- "Syphilis/epidemiology, history, microbiology, transmission"
- "Treponema pallidum/classification, genetics, isolation & purification"
- "Treponemal Infections/epidemiology, history, microbiology, transmission"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Redefining the treponemal history through pre-Columbian genomes from Brazil.
**Authors:** Majander K, Pla-Díaz M, du Plessis L, Arora N, Filippini J, Pezo-Lanfranco L, Eggers S, González-Candelas F, Schuenemann VJ
**Journal:** Nature (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-023-06965-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06965-x)

## Content

1. Nature. 2024 Mar;627(8002):182-188. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06965-x. Epub 2024
 Jan 24.

Redefining the treponemal history through pre-Columbian genomes from Brazil.

Majander K(#)(1)(2)(3), Pla-Díaz M(#)(4)(5), du Plessis L(6)(7), Arora N(8),
Filippini J(9), Pezo-Lanfranco L(9)(10), Eggers S(9)(11), González-Candelas
F(12)(13), Schuenemann VJ(14)(15)(16)(17).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Evolutionary Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. kerttu.majander@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Evolutionary Anthropology, University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria. kerttu.majander@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Environmental Sciences, University of Basel, Basel,
Switzerland. kerttu.majander@gmail.com.
(4)Unidad Mixta Infección y Salud Pública, FISABIO/Universidad de
Valencia-I2SysBio, Valencia, Spain.
(5)CIBER in Epidemiology and Public Health, Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
Madrid, Spain.
(6)Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zürich, Basel,
Switzerland.
(7)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Quartier Sorge, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(8)Zurich Institute of Forensic Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
(9)Department of Genetic and Evolutionary Biology, University of São Paulo, São
Paulo, Brazil.
(10)Institute of Environmental Science and Technology (ICTA) and Prehistory
Department, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain.
(11)Department of Anthropology, Natural History Museum Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(12)Unidad Mixta Infección y Salud Pública, FISABIO/Universidad de
Valencia-I2SysBio, Valencia, Spain. fernando.gonzalez@uv.es.
(13)CIBER in Epidemiology and Public Health, Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
Madrid, Spain. fernando.gonzalez@uv.es.
(14)Institute of Evolutionary Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. verena.schuenemann@iem.uzh.ch.
(15)Department of Evolutionary Anthropology, University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria. verena.schuenemann@iem.uzh.ch.
(16)Department of Environmental Sciences, University of Basel, Basel,
Switzerland. verena.schuenemann@iem.uzh.ch.
(17)Human Evolution and Archaeological Sciences (HEAS), University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria. verena.schuenemann@iem.uzh.ch.
(#)Contributed equally

The origins of treponemal diseases have long remained unknown, especially
considering the sudden onset of the first syphilis epidemic in the late 15th
century in Europe and its hypothesized arrival from the Americas with Columbus'
expeditions1,2. Recently, ancient DNA evidence has revealed various treponemal
infections circulating in early modern Europe and colonial-era
Mexico3-6. However, there has been to our knowledge no genomic evidence of
treponematosis recovered from either the Americas or the Old World that can be
reliably dated to the time before the first trans-Atlantic contacts. Here, we
present treponemal genomes from nearly 2,000-year-old human remains from Brazil.
We reconstruct four ancient genomes of a prehistoric treponemal pathogen, most
closely related to the bejel-causing agent Treponema pallidum endemicum.
Contradicting the modern day geographical niche of bejel in the arid regions of
the world, the results call into question the previous palaeopathological
characterization of treponeme subspecies and showcase their adaptive potential.
A high-coverage genome is used to improve molecular clock date estimations,
placing the divergence of modern T. pallidum subspecies firmly in pre-Columbian
times. Overall, our study demonstrates the opportunities within archaeogenetics
to uncover key events in pathogen evolution and emergence, paving the way to new
hypotheses on the origin and spread of treponematoses.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-023-06965-x
PMCID: PMC10917687
PMID: 38267579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
