---
reference_id: "PMID:27638438"
title: "Phototherapy: The vitiligo management pillar."
authors:
- Esmat S
- Mostafa W
- Hegazy RA
- Shalaby S
- Sheth V
- Youssef R
- El-Mofty M
journal: Clin Dermatol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2016.05.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phototherapy: The vitiligo management pillar.
**Authors:** Esmat S, Mostafa W, Hegazy RA, Shalaby S, Sheth V, Youssef R, El-Mofty M
**Journal:** Clin Dermatol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clindermatol.2016.05.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clindermatol.2016.05.009)

## Content

1. Clin Dermatol. 2016 Sep-Oct;34(5):594-602. doi: 
10.1016/j.clindermatol.2016.05.009. Epub 2016 May 20.

Phototherapy: The vitiligo management pillar.

Esmat S(1), Mostafa W(2), Hegazy RA(2), Shalaby S(2), Sheth V(3), Youssef R(2), 
El-Mofty M(2).

Author information:
(1)Phototherapy Unit, Dermatology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo 
University, Egypt. Electronic address: Samiaesmat@yahoo.com.
(2)Phototherapy Unit, Dermatology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo 
University, Egypt.
(3)Newton-Wellesley Dermatology Associates, Wellesley, MA.

Phototherapy has been the mainstay of vitiligo therapy for several decades. A 
variety of wavelengths and modalities are available, but narrowband ultraviolet 
B remains the safest and most commonly used treatment. Acting on multiple steps 
in vitiligo pathogenesis, narrowband ultraviolet B is one of the few therapies 
that can effectively induce stabilization and stimulate repigmentation. 
Achievement of optimal results involves using a combination of appropriate 
treatment protocols, careful patient selection, and patient education to set 
expectations. Individual patient characteristics, including disease activity, 
vitiligo phenotype, lesion location, and skin phototype, should all be 
considered, along with combination therapies.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2016.05.009
PMID: 27638438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]