---
reference_id: "PMID:38142265"
title: Cancer predisposition signaling in Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome drives Wilms tumor development.
authors:
- Nirgude S
- Naveh NSS
- Kavari SL
- Traxler EM
- Kalish JM
journal: Br J Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41416-023-02538-x
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome/genetics
- DNA Methylation
- Wilms Tumor/genetics
- Genotype
- Kidney Neoplasms/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cancer predisposition signaling in Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome drives Wilms tumor development.
**Authors:** Nirgude S, Naveh NSS, Kavari SL, Traxler EM, Kalish JM
**Journal:** Br J Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41416-023-02538-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-023-02538-x)

## Content

1. Br J Cancer. 2024 Mar;130(4):638-650. doi: 10.1038/s41416-023-02538-x. Epub
2023  Dec 23.

Cancer predisposition signaling in Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome drives Wilms 
tumor development.

Nirgude S(#)(1), Naveh NSS(#)(1), Kavari SL(1), Traxler EM(1), Kalish JM(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics and Center for Childhood Cancer Research, 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
(2)Division of Human Genetics and Center for Childhood Cancer Research, 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. 
kalishj@chop.edu.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics and Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine at the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. kalishj@chop.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Wilms tumor (WT) exhibits structural and epigenetic changes at 
chromosome 11p15, which also cause Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome (BWS). Children 
diagnosed with BWS have increased risk for WT. The aim of this study is to 
identify the molecular signaling signatures in BWS driving these tumors.
METHODS: We performed whole exome sequencing, methylation array analysis, and 
gene expression analysis on BWS-WT samples. Our data were compared to publicly 
available nonBWS data. We categorized WT from BWS and nonBWS patients by 
assessment of 11p15 methylation status and defined 5 groups- control kidney, 
BWS-nontumor kidney, BWS-WT, normal-11p15 nonBWS-WT, altered-11p15 nonBWS-WT.
RESULTS: BWS-WT samples showed single nucleotide variants in BCORL1, ASXL1, ATM 
and AXL but absence of recurrent gene mutations associated with sporadic WT. We 
defined a narrow methylation range stratifying nonBWS-WT samples. BWS-WT and 
altered-11p15 nonBWS-WT showed enrichment of common and unique molecular 
signatures based on global differential methylation and gene expression 
analysis. CTNNB1 overexpression and broad range of interactions were seen in the 
BWS-WT interactome study.
CONCLUSION: While WT predisposition in BWS is well-established, as are 11p15 
alterations in nonBWS-WT, this study focused on stratifying tumor genomics by 
11p15 status. Further investigation of our findings may identify novel 
therapeutic targets in WT oncogenesis.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41416-023-02538-x
PMCID: PMC10876704
PMID: 38142265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.