---
reference_id: "PMID:38808024"
title: Cognitive Decline and Other Late-Stage Neurologic Complications in Cockayne Syndrome.
authors:
- Rajamani G
- Stafki SA
- Daugherty AL
- Mantyh WG
- Littel HR
- Bruels CC
- Pacak CA
- Robbins PD
- Niedernhofer LJ
- Abiona A
- Giunti P
- Mohammed S
- Laugel V
- Kang PB
journal: Neurol Clin Pract
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1212/CPJ.0000000000200309
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cognitive Decline and Other Late-Stage Neurologic Complications in Cockayne Syndrome.
**Authors:** Rajamani G, Stafki SA, Daugherty AL, Mantyh WG, Littel HR, Bruels CC, Pacak CA, Robbins PD, Niedernhofer LJ, Abiona A, Giunti P, Mohammed S, Laugel V, Kang PB
**Journal:** Neurol Clin Pract (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1212/CPJ.0000000000200309](https://doi.org/10.1212/CPJ.0000000000200309)

## Content

1. Neurol Clin Pract. 2024 Aug;14(4):e200309. doi: 10.1212/CPJ.0000000000200309. 
Epub 2024 May 16.

Cognitive Decline and Other Late-Stage Neurologic Complications in Cockayne 
Syndrome.

Rajamani G(1), Stafki SA(1), Daugherty AL(1), Mantyh WG(1), Littel HR(1), Bruels 
CC(1), Pacak CA(1), Robbins PD(1), Niedernhofer LJ(1), Abiona A(1), Giunti P(1), 
Mohammed S(1), Laugel V(1), Kang PB(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Minnesota Medical School (GR); Greg Marzolf Jr. Muscular 
Dystrophy Center (SAS, ALD, HRL, CCB, CAP, PBK); Department of Neurology (SAS, 
ALD, WGM, HRL, CCB, CAP, PBK), University of Minnesota Medical School; Institute 
on the Biology of Aging and Metabolism (PDR, LJN), University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis; Clinical Genetics (AA, PG, SM), Guy's and St. Thomas' NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom; Department of Pediatric 
Neurology/Centre d'investigation Clinique (CIC) (VL), Strasbourg University 
Hospital, France; and Institute for Translational Neuroscience (PBK), University 
of Minnesota, Minneapolis.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Cockayne syndrome (CS) is an ultra-rare, autosomal 
recessive, premature aging disorder characterized by impaired growth, 
neurodevelopmental delays, neurodegeneration, polyneuropathy, and other 
multiorgan system complications. The anatomic aspects of CS neurodegeneration 
have long been known from postmortem examinations and MRI studies, but the 
clinical features of this neurodegeneration are not well characterized, 
especially at later stages of the disease.
METHODS: This was a retrospective observational study in which individuals with 
CS who survived beyond 18 years were ascertained at 3 centers in the United 
States, France, and the United Kingdom. Medical records were examined to 
determine the frequencies and features of the following neurologic 
complications: neurocognitive/neuropsychiatric decline (8 symptoms), tremors, 
neuropathy, seizures, and strokes.
RESULTS: Among 18 individuals who met inclusion criteria, all but one (94.4%) 
experienced at least one symptom of neurocognitive/neuropsychiatric decline, 
with most individuals experiencing at least half of those symptoms. Most 
participants experienced tremors and peripheral neuropathy, with a few 
experiencing seizures and strokes. For individuals with available data, 100.0% 
were reported to have gait ataxia and neuroimaging showed that 85.7% had 
generalized cerebral atrophy on MRI while 78.6% had white matter changes.
DISCUSSION: Symptoms of neurocognitive/neuropsychiatric decline are nearly 
universal in our cohort of adults with CS, suggesting that these individuals are 
at risk of developing neurocognitive/neuropsychiatric decline, with symptoms 
related to but not specific to dementia. Considering the prominent role of DNA 
repair defects in CS disease mechanisms and emerging evidence for increased DNA 
damage in neurodegenerative disease, impaired genome maintenance may be a shared 
pathway underlying multiple forms of neurocognitive/neuropsychiatric decline. 
Components of the DNA damage response mechanism may bear further study as 
potential therapeutic targets that could alleviate 
neurocognitive/neuropsychiatric symptoms in CS and other neurodegenerative 
disorders.

© 2024 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/CPJ.0000000000200309
PMCID: PMC11129329
PMID: 38808024

Conflict of interest statement: G. Rajamani reports no disclosures relevant to 
the study. S.A. Stafki reports no disclosures relevant to the study. A.L. 
Daugherty reports no disclosures relevant to the study. W.G. Mantyh has received 
personal compensation for serving on the clinical advisory board for 
Genentech/Roche. H.R. Littel reports no disclosures relevant to the study. C.C. 
Bruels reports no disclosures relevant to the study. C.A. Pacak reports no 
disclosures relevant to the study. P.D. Robbins is a co-founder of Genascence 
and Itasca Therapeutics and serves on the advisory boards for Unictye Gmbh, L&J 
Bioscience, Innate Biologics and EmCell Bahamas. L.J. Niedernhofer is a 
co-founder of Itasca Therapeutics and serves on the advisory board for Innate 
Biologics. A. Abiona reports no disclosures relevant to the study. P. Giunti 
reports no disclosures relevant to the study. S. Mohammed reports no disclosures 
relevant to the study. V. Laugel reports no disclosures relevant to the study. 
P.B. Kang reports no disclosures relevant to the study. Full disclosure form 
information provided by the authors is available with the full text of this 
article at Neurology.org/cp.