---
reference_id: "PMID:32748411"
title: A founder noncoding GALT variant interfering with splicing causes galactosemia.
authors:
- Latchman K
- Brown J
- Sineni CJ
- Ragin-Dames L
- Guo S
- Huang J
- Thorson W
- Hacker S
- Barbouth D
- Tekin M
- Bademci G
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12293
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Family Health
- Female
- "Galactosemias/blood, diagnosis, genetics"
- Genetic Testing
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation
- Neonatal Screening
- "UTP-Hexose-1-Phosphate Uridylyltransferase/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A founder noncoding GALT variant interfering with splicing causes galactosemia.
**Authors:** Latchman K, Brown J, Sineni CJ, Ragin-Dames L, Guo S, Huang J, Thorson W, Hacker S, Barbouth D, Tekin M, Bademci G
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12293](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12293)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2020 Nov;43(6):1199-1204. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12293. Epub 
2020 Aug 21.

A founder noncoding GALT variant interfering with splicing causes galactosemia.

Latchman K(1), Brown J(2), Sineni CJ(2), Ragin-Dames L(1), Guo S(2), Huang J(1), 
Thorson W(1), Hacker S(1), Barbouth D(1), Tekin M(1)(2), Bademci G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical and Translational Genetics, Dr. John T. Macdonald 
Foundation Department of Human Genetics, University of Miami Miller School of 
Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA.
(2)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA.

Galactosemia is a rare, treatable hereditary disorder of carbohydrate 
metabolism. We investigated the etiology of decreased GALT enzyme activity in a 
cohort of newborns referred by the Florida Newborn Screening Program with no 
detectable GALT variants in diagnostic molecular tests. Six affected individuals 
from four families with Guatemalan heritage were included. GALT enzyme activity 
ranged from 20% to 34% of normal. Clinical findings were unremarkable except for 
speech delay in two children. Via genome sequencing followed by Sanger 
confirmation we showed that all affected individuals were homozygous for a deep 
intronic GALT variant, c.1059+390A>G, which segregated as an autosomal recessive 
trait in all families. The intronic variant disrupts splicing and leads to a 
premature termination and is associated with a single haplotype flanking GALT, 
suggesting a founder effect. In conclusion, we present a deep intronic GALT 
variant leading to a biochemical variant form of galactosemia. This variant 
remains undiagnosed until it is specifically targeted in molecular testing.

© 2020 SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12293
PMID: 32748411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]