---
reference_id: "PMID:40544542"
title: "Variable phenotypes and outcomes associated with the MMACHC c.1A>G variant in Chinese patients with combined methylmalonic acidemia and homocystinuria cblC type."
authors:
- Hao L
- Deng Y
- Ding S
- Qiu W
- Zhang H
- Liang L
- Zhan X
- Chen T
- Gu X
- Han L
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109182
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, pathology, diagnosis"
- China
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Homocystinuria/genetics, pathology, diagnosis"
- Mutation
- Neonatal Screening
- Oxidoreductases/genetics
- Phenotype
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- East Asian People/genetics
- Vitamin B 12 Deficiency/congenital
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variable phenotypes and outcomes associated with the MMACHC c.1A>G variant in Chinese patients with combined methylmalonic acidemia and homocystinuria cblC type.
**Authors:** Hao L, Deng Y, Ding S, Qiu W, Zhang H, Liang L, Zhan X, Chen T, Gu X, Han L
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109182](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109182)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2025 Aug;145(4):109182. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109182.
Epub  2025 Jun 18.

Variable phenotypes and outcomes associated with the MMACHC c.1A>G variant in
Chinese patients with combined methylmalonic acidemia and homocystinuria cblC
type.

Hao L(1), Deng Y(1), Ding S(1), Qiu W(1), Zhang H(1), Liang L(1), Zhan X(1),
Chen T(1), Gu X(1), Han L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Genetic Metabolism, Xinhua
Hospital, Shanghai Institute for Pediatric Research, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, China.
(2)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Genetic Metabolism, Xinhua
Hospital, Shanghai Institute for Pediatric Research, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, China. Electronic address:
hanlianshu@xinhuamed.com.cn.

BACKGROUND: Combined methylmalonic acidemia and homocystinuria cblC type (cblC)
is a multisystemic disease with diverse clinical presentations and known
genotype-phenotype correlations. This study aims to define and explain the
phenotypes and outcomes associated with the MMACHC variant c.1A>G (p.M1V),
previously reported in several cases.
METHODS: A retrospective review of 54 Chinese patients with cblC carrying the
MMACHC c.1A>G variant was conducted. Clinical features, including onset age,
initial symptoms, biochemical index and prognosis were analyzed and compared
with 100 cblC patients without this variant. The variant's pathogenicity was
investigated by in vitro experiments.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine (54 %) of 54 individuals with the c.1A>G variant were
diagnosed via newborn screening (NBS) and 23 (79 %) remained asymptomatic. Among
19 symptomatic patients, 12 (63 %) developed symptoms after 1 year of age, with
cognitive decline being the most common initial symptom (55 %). Before
treatment, all analyzed biochemical indexes except homocysteine showed reduced
levels in the c.1A>G group compared to the Control group. Post-treatment, the
poor prognosis rate and some metabolite levels in the c.1A>G group were
significantly decreased compared to those in the Control group. Western blotting
indicated that c.1A>G significantly reduced MMACHC protein expression, and
co-immunoprecipitation provided evidence for impaired interaction between the
variant MMACHC and methionine synthase (MTR).
CONCLUSIONS: The c.1A>G variant in MMACHC is associated with later-onset
disease, milder phenotypes and improved clinical outcomes in cblC patients.
Functional studies suggest that this variant reduces MMACHC translation
efficiency and disrupts its interaction with MTR. Our findings underscore the
utility of NBS for early diagnosis and better management in c.1A>G-associated
cblC.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109182
PMID: 40544542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest No financial
or non-financial benefits have been received or will be received from any party
related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article.
