---
reference_id: "PMID:21229317"
title: "Neonatal cholestasis: an uncommon presentation of hyperargininemia."
authors:
- Gomes Martins E
- Santos Silva E
- Vilarinho S
- Saudubray JM
- Vilarinho L
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-010-9263-7
keywords:
- "Amino Acids, Essential/therapeutic use"
- "Arginase/genetics, metabolism"
- Arginine/blood
- Biomarkers/blood
- Child
- Child Development
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cholestasis/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- "Diet, Protein-Restricted"
- Disease Progression
- End Stage Liver Disease/etiology
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Hyperargininemia/complications, diagnosis, enzymology, genetics, therapy"
- "Hypertension, Portal/etiology"
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Liver Cirrhosis, Biliary/etiology"
- Liver Transplantation
- Neonatal Screening
- Phenotype
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neonatal cholestasis: an uncommon presentation of hyperargininemia.
**Authors:** Gomes Martins E, Santos Silva E, Vilarinho S, Saudubray JM, Vilarinho L
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-010-9263-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-010-9263-7)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2010 Dec;33 Suppl 3:S503-6. doi:
10.1007/s10545-010-9263-7.  Epub 2011 Jan 13.

Neonatal cholestasis: an uncommon presentation of hyperargininemia.

Gomes Martins E(1), Santos Silva E, Vilarinho S, Saudubray JM, Vilarinho L.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Unit, Hospital de Crianças Maria Pia, Rua da Boavista 827, 4050-111
Porto, Portugal. esmeralda.g.martins@gmail.com

Hyperargininemia is a rare inborn error of metabolism due to arginase
deficiency, which is inherited in an autossomal recessive manner. Arginase is
the final enzyme of the urea cycle and catalyzes the conversion of arginine to
urea and ornithine. This condition typically presents in early childhood
(between 2 and 4 years of age) with developmental delay associated with
progressive spastic paraparesis. Neonatal presentation is very uncommon with a
poorly described outcome. Here, we discuss two cases of neonatal cholestasis as
initial clinical presentation of hyperargininemia. In case 1, diagnosis was
established at 2 months of age upon investigation of the etiology of cholestatic
injury pattern and hepatosplenomegaly, and treatment was then initiated at when
the patient was 3 months old. Unfortunately, the patient had progressive biliary
cirrhosis to end-stage liver disease complicated with portal hypertension for
which she underwent successful orthotopic liver transplant at 7 years of age. In
case 2, hyperargininemia was identified through newborn screening and treatment
was started when patient was 21 days old. Cholestasis was only identified in the
patient's further evaluation and it resolved 2 weeks into treatment. The patient
is currently 18 months old and her development and neurological examination
remain unremarkable. Neonatal cholestasis as first presentation of
hyperargininemia is rare, but this disorder should be included in the
differential diagnosis of unexplained cholestasis in the neonate. In fact, these
two cases suggest that arginase deficiency may be the cause of cholestatic liver
disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-010-9263-7
PMID: 21229317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
