---
reference_id: "PMID:23638644"
title: Cellular and molecular mechanisms of goblet cell metaplasia in the respiratory airways.
authors:
- Boucherat O
- Boczkowski J
- Jeannotte L
- Delacourt C
journal: Exp Lung Res
year: '2013'
doi: 10.3109/01902148.2013.791733
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cellular and molecular mechanisms of goblet cell metaplasia in the respiratory airways.
**Authors:** Boucherat O, Boczkowski J, Jeannotte L, Delacourt C
**Journal:** Exp Lung Res (2013)
**DOI:** [10.3109/01902148.2013.791733](https://doi.org/10.3109/01902148.2013.791733)

## Content

1. Exp Lung Res. 2013 May-Jun;39(4-5):207-16. doi: 10.3109/01902148.2013.791733. 
Epub 2013 May 3.

Cellular and molecular mechanisms of goblet cell metaplasia in the respiratory 
airways.

Boucherat O(1), Boczkowski J, Jeannotte L, Delacourt C.

Author information:
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, Québec, Canada.

The mucociliary system, consisting of mucus-secreting goblet cells and ciliated 
cells, generates a constant overturning layer of protective mucus that lines the 
airway epithelium. Mucus hypersecretion and the pathophysiological changes 
associated are hallmarks of many pulmonary diseases including asthma, chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, and cystic fibrosis. Excessive mucus production 
leads to airway obstruction and, because there is currently no effective 
treatment, contributes to morbidity and mortality of many patients. Goblet cell 
differentiation and mucus production are subject to extensive control. An 
emerging concept is that not all goblet cells are phenotypically identical 
suggesting that specific molecular pathways orchestrate mucin overproduction. 
This paper attempts to describe the cellular and molecular mechanisms governing 
the differentiation of goblet cells in pulmonary diseases, a prerequisite for 
the development of new therapeutic agents.

DOI: 10.3109/01902148.2013.791733
PMID: 23638644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]