---
reference_id: "PMID:38790011"
title: "Brachytherapy in craniopharyngiomas: a systematic review and meta-analysis of long-term follow-up."
authors:
- Zhang LY
- Guo W
- Du HZ
- Pan H
- Sun YC
- Zhu HJ
- Song SH
- Guo XY
- Jiang Y
- Sun QQ
journal: BMC Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12885-024-12397-1
keywords:
- Humans
- "Brachytherapy/methods, adverse effects"
- Craniopharyngioma/radiotherapy
- Follow-Up Studies
- Pituitary Neoplasms/radiotherapy
- Progression-Free Survival
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brachytherapy in craniopharyngiomas: a systematic review and meta-analysis of long-term follow-up.
**Authors:** Zhang LY, Guo W, Du HZ, Pan H, Sun YC, Zhu HJ, Song SH, Guo XY, Jiang Y, Sun QQ
**Journal:** BMC Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12885-024-12397-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-024-12397-1)

## Content

1. BMC Cancer. 2024 May 24;24(1):637. doi: 10.1186/s12885-024-12397-1.

Brachytherapy in craniopharyngiomas: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 
long-term follow-up.

Zhang LY(#)(1), Guo W(#)(2), Du HZ(#)(1), Pan H(3), Sun YC(4), Zhu HJ(1), Song 
SH(1), Guo XY(1), Jiang Y(1), Sun QQ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Endocrinology of National 
Health Commission, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare Diseases, 
Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100730, China.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Hebei Province Cangzhou Hospital of 
Integrated Traditional and Western Medicine, Cangzhou Hebei, Hebei, 061000, 
China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Endocrinology of National 
Health Commission, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare Diseases, 
Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100730, China. panhui20111111@163.com.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Hebei Province Cangzhou Hospital of 
Integrated Traditional and Western Medicine, Cangzhou Hebei, Hebei, 061000, 
China. doctorsunyc@126.com.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, The ninth Hospital of Xingtai, Xingtai, Hebei, 
055250, China.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: Brachytherapy has been indicated as an alternative option for 
treating cystic craniopharyngiomas (CPs). The potential benefits of 
brachytherapy for CPs have not yet been clarified. The purpose of this work was 
to conduct a meta-analysis to analyze the long-term efficacy and adverse 
reactions profile of brachytherapy for CPs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The relevant databases were searched to collect the 
clinical trials on brachytherapy in patients with CPs. Included studies were 
limited to publications in full manuscript form with at least 5-year median 
follow-up, and adequate reporting of treatment outcomes and adverse reactions 
data. Stata 12.0 was used for data analysis.
RESULTS: According to the inclusion and exclusion criteria, a total of 6 
clinical trials involving 266 patients with CPs were included in this 
meta-analysis. The minimum average follow-up was 5 years. The results of the 
meta-analysis showed that 1-year, 2-3 years and 5 years progression free 
survival rates (PFS) are 75% (95%CI: 66-84%), 62% (95%CI: 52-72%) and 57% 
(95%CI: 22-92%), respectively. At the last follow-up, less than 16% of patients 
with visual outcomes worser than baseline in all included studies. While, for 
endocrine outcomes, less than 32% of patients worser than baseline level.
CONCLUSION: In general, based on the above results, brachytherapy should be 
considered as a good choice for the treatment of CP.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-024-12397-1
PMCID: PMC11127349
PMID: 38790011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.