---
reference_id: "PMID:19879441"
title: "Corticosteroid treatment in chronic rhinosinusitis: the possibilities and the limits."
authors:
- Mullol J
- Obando A
- Pujols L
- Alobid I
journal: Immunol Allergy Clin North Am
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.iac.2009.07.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Corticosteroid treatment in chronic rhinosinusitis: the possibilities and the limits.
**Authors:** Mullol J, Obando A, Pujols L, Alobid I
**Journal:** Immunol Allergy Clin North Am (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.iac.2009.07.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iac.2009.07.001)

## Content

1. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am. 2009 Nov;29(4):657-68. doi: 
10.1016/j.iac.2009.07.001.

Corticosteroid treatment in chronic rhinosinusitis: the possibilities and the 
limits.

Mullol J(1), Obando A, Pujols L, Alobid I.

Author information:
(1)Unitat de Rinologia & Clínica de l'Olfacte, Department of 
Otorhinolaryngology, Hospital Clínic, c/Villarroel, 170 Barcelona 08036, 
Catalonia, Spain. jmullol@clinic.ub.es

Chronic rhinosinusitis, including nasal polyps, is an inflammatory disease of 
the nose and sinuses. The medical treatment, mainly topical intranasal and oral 
corticosteroids, constitutes its first line of therapy. Long-term treatment with 
corticosteroid nasal spray reduces inflammation and nasal polyp size, and 
improves nasal symptoms such as nasal blockage, rhinorrea, and the loss of 
smell. Corticosteroid intranasal drops may be used when intranasal spray fails 
to demonstrate efficacy. Short courses of oral steroids are recommended in 
severe chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps or when a rapid symptomatic 
improvement is needed. Endoscopic sinus surgery is only recommended when the 
medical treatment fails. Intranasal corticosteroids should be continued 
postoperatively. When using intranasal corticosteroids, care should be taken in 
selected populations such as children, pregnant women, and elderly patients; 
especially in those patients with comorbid conditions such as asthma, in which 
the overall steroid intake can be high due to the administration of both 
intranasal and inhaled corticosteroids.

DOI: 10.1016/j.iac.2009.07.001
PMID: 19879441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]