---
reference_id: "PMID:36371577"
title: Aberrant splicing caused by exonic single nucleotide variants positioned 2nd or 3rd to the last nucleotide in the COL4A5 gene.
authors:
- Okada E
- Aoto Y
- Horinouchi T
- Yamamura T
- Ichikawa Y
- Tanaka Y
- Ueda C
- Kitakado H
- Kondo A
- Sakakibara N
- Suzuki R
- Usui J
- Yamagata K
- Iijima K
- Nozu K
journal: Clin Exp Nephrol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10157-022-02294-x
keywords:
- Humans
- Nucleotides
- RNA Splicing
- Exons
- RNA Splice Sites
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- Mutation
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aberrant splicing caused by exonic single nucleotide variants positioned 2nd or 3rd to the last nucleotide in the COL4A5 gene.
**Authors:** Okada E, Aoto Y, Horinouchi T, Yamamura T, Ichikawa Y, Tanaka Y, Ueda C, Kitakado H, Kondo A, Sakakibara N, Suzuki R, Usui J, Yamagata K, Iijima K, Nozu K
**Journal:** Clin Exp Nephrol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10157-022-02294-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10157-022-02294-x)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Nephrol. 2023 Mar;27(3):218-226. doi: 10.1007/s10157-022-02294-x.
Epub  2022 Nov 12.

Aberrant splicing caused by exonic single nucleotide variants positioned 2nd or
3rd to the last nucleotide in the COL4A5 gene.

Okada E(1)(2), Aoto Y(3), Horinouchi T(3), Yamamura T(3), Ichikawa Y(3), Tanaka
Y(3), Ueda C(3), Kitakado H(3), Kondo A(3), Sakakibara N(3), Suzuki R(4), Usui
J(5), Yamagata K(5), Iijima K(6)(7), Nozu K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1
Kusunoki-Cho, Chuo-Ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0017, Japan. s2030356@s.tsukuba.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Japan. s2030356@s.tsukuba.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1
Kusunoki-Cho, Chuo-Ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0017, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan.
(5)Department of Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Japan.
(6)Hyogo Prefectural Kobe Children's Hospital, Kobe, Japan.
(7)Department of Advanced Pediatric Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The evident genotype-phenotype correlation shown by
the X-linked Alport syndrome warrants the assessment of the impact of identified
gene variants on aberrant splicing. We previously reported that single
nucleotide variants (SNVs) in the last nucleotide of exons in COL4A5 cause
aberrant splicing. It is known that the nucleotides located 2nd and 3rd to the
last nucleotides of exons can also play an essential role in the first step of
the splicing process. In this study, we aimed to investigate whether SNVs
positioned 2nd or 3rd to the last nucleotide of exons in COL4A5 resulted in
aberrant splicing.
METHODS: We selected eight candidate variants: six from the Human Gene Variant
Database Professional and two from our cohort. We performed an in-vitro splicing
assay and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for messenger
RNA obtained from patients, if available.
RESULTS: The candidate variants were initially classified into the following
groups: three nonsense, two missense, and three synonymous variants. Splicing
assays and RT-PCR for messenger RNA revealed that six of the eight variants
caused aberrant splicing. Four variants, initially classified as non-truncating
variants, were found to be truncating ones, which usually show relatively more
severe phenotypes.
CONCLUSION: We revealed that exonic SNVs positioned 2nd or 3rd to the last
nucleotide of exons in the COL4A5 were responsible for aberrant splicing. The
results of our study suggest that attention should be paid when interpreting the
pathogenicity of exonic SNVs near the 5' splice site.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10157-022-02294-x
PMCID: PMC9950164
PMID: 36371577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All the authors have declared no competing
interest.
