---
reference_id: "PMID:30643806"
title: "Cutaneous Malignancy due to Arsenicosis in Bangladesh: 12-Year Study in Tertiary Level Hospital."
authors:
- Choudhury MIM
- Shabnam N
- Ahsan T
- Ahsan SMA
- Kabir MS
- Khan RM
- Miah MA
- Uddin MK
- Liton MAR
journal: Biomed Res Int
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1155/2018/4678362
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Arsenic/toxicity
- Arsenic Poisoning/epidemiology
- Bangladesh
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prospective Studies
- Sex Factors
- "Skin Neoplasms/chemically induced, epidemiology"
- Socioeconomic Factors
- Tertiary Care Centers
- Time Factors
- "Water Pollutants, Chemical/toxicity"
- "Water Pollution, Chemical/adverse effects"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous Malignancy due to Arsenicosis in Bangladesh: 12-Year Study in Tertiary Level Hospital.
**Authors:** Choudhury MIM, Shabnam N, Ahsan T, Ahsan SMA, Kabir MS, Khan RM, Miah MA, Uddin MK, Liton MAR
**Journal:** Biomed Res Int (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2018/4678362](https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/4678362)

## Content

1. Biomed Res Int. 2018 Dec 16;2018:4678362. doi: 10.1155/2018/4678362.
eCollection  2018.

Cutaneous Malignancy due to Arsenicosis in Bangladesh: 12-Year Study in Tertiary
Level Hospital.

Choudhury MIM(1), Shabnam N(2), Ahsan T(3), Ahsan SMA(4), Kabir MS(5), Khan
RM(6), Miah MA(7), Uddin MK(8), Liton MAR(9).

Author information:
(1)Assistant Professor, Plastic Surgery Unit, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical
University (BSMMU), Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(2)Assistant Professor, Department of Surgery, BIRDEM Hospital and Ibrahim
Medical College, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(3)Honorary Medical Officer, Department of Surgery, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib
Medical University (BSMMU), Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(4)Associate Professor and Head of the Department of Surgery, Ad-din Sakina
Medical College, Jessore, Bangladesh.
(5)Professor and Head of Department of Dermatology and Venereology, National
Medical College and Hospital, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(6)Professor and Head of the Department of Dermatology & VD, Dhaka Medical
College Hospital, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(7)Assistant Professor, Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Centre for
Medical Education, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(8)Senior Consultant, Department of Dermatology, 250 bedded General Hospital,
Gopalganj, Bangladesh.
(9)Assistant Professor, Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Holy Family
Red Crescent Medical College and Hospital, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Bangladesh is grappling with the largest mass poisoning of a population in the
world due to contamination of drinking water with naturally occurring inorganic
arsenic. It is estimated that 75 million people of 59 (out of 64) districts are
at risk of drinking contaminated water with arsenic above 50μg/L. Long term
exposure to arsenic causes cancers, including skin, lung, and bladder. This is a
randomized prospective study to see the prevalence of skin cancer from arsenic
affected area of Bangladesh, as well as their variation by geographical area,
age, gender, location on the body, and socioeconomic conditions, in outpatient
department of plastic surgery unit of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical
University (BSMMU). A total of 960 patients with skin cancers comprised of 528
males and 432 females were selected for the study from January 2004 to December
2015. In this 12-year study, we found squamous cell carcinoma, basal cell
carcinoma, melanoma, and Merkel cell carcinoma to be associated with the
ingestion of arsenic contaminated ground water. This is a reflection of a small
part of the total national scenario of devastating result of arsenic mediated
cancer in terms of skin malignancy. This study will help the future researchers
who are contemplating to work on arsenic induced health problem.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/4678362
PMCID: PMC6311317
PMID: 30643806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
