---
reference_id: "PMID:1030853"
title: Chronic industrial exposure to lead in 63 subjects. I. Clinical and erythrokinetic findings.
authors:
- Hwang YF
- Strickland GT
- Chang NK
- Beckner WM
journal: Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health
year: '1976'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Bone and Bones/diagnostic imaging
- Chronic Disease
- Coproporphyrins/urine
- Environmental Exposure
- Erythrocyte Aging/drug effects
- Gingival Diseases/chemically induced
- Humans
- Iron/blood
- Lead/urine
- "Lead Poisoning/blood, diagnosis, urine"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Radiography
- Taiwan
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic industrial exposure to lead in 63 subjects. I. Clinical and erythrokinetic findings.
**Authors:** Hwang YF, Strickland GT, Chang NK, Beckner WM
**Journal:** Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health (1976)

## Content

1. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 1976 Dec;7(4):559-68.

Chronic industrial exposure to lead in 63 subjects. I. Clinical and 
erythrokinetic findings.

Hwang YF, Strickland GT, Chang NK, Beckner WM.

Clinical, biochemical, haematological and erythrokinetic studies were performed 
on 63 adult males with prolonged lead exposure. Their most common symptoms and 
findings were abdominal pain (62%), gingival lead lines (48%), headache and/or 
dizziness (33%), muscle cramps (32%), anaemia (19%), and fatigue (18%). Colicky 
abdominal pain (27%) and gingival lead lines correlated with urinary lead 
excretion. Anaemia was mild, but more frequent in the subjects with the greatest 
urinary lead excretion. Other associated findings were: higher reticulocyte 
counts and more basophilic stippling of the RBCs, more sideroblasts and greater 
erythroid hyperplasia of the bone marrow, more reduction in 51Cr-tagged RBC 
survival time, smaller RBC mass, a more rapid plasma iron clearance, a greater 
plasma iron turnover and greater utilization of 59Fe in subjects with urinary 
lead excretion of greater than 100 microng/day in comparison with the remainder 
and normal controls. These findings suggest that minimal chronic exposure to 
lead causes an increased haemolysis with resulting increased production of 
erythrocytes.

PMID: 1030853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]