---
reference_id: "PMID:34584230"
title: "Glutamatergic and GABAergic metabolite levels in schizophrenia-spectrum disorders: a meta-analysis of (1)H-magnetic resonance spectroscopy studies."
authors:
- Nakahara T
- Tsugawa S
- Noda Y
- Ueno F
- Honda S
- Kinjo M
- Segawa H
- Hondo N
- Mori Y
- Watanabe H
- Nakahara K
- Yoshida K
- Wada M
- Tarumi R
- Iwata Y
- Plitman E
- Moriguchi S
- de la Fuente-Sandoval C
- Uchida H
- Mimura M
- Graff-Guerrero A
- Nakajima S
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41380-021-01297-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glutamatergic and GABAergic metabolite levels in schizophrenia-spectrum disorders: a meta-analysis of (1)H-magnetic resonance spectroscopy studies.
**Authors:** Nakahara T, Tsugawa S, Noda Y, Ueno F, Honda S, Kinjo M, Segawa H, Hondo N, Mori Y, Watanabe H, Nakahara K, Yoshida K, Wada M, Tarumi R, Iwata Y, Plitman E, Moriguchi S, de la Fuente-Sandoval C, Uchida H, Mimura M, Graff-Guerrero A, Nakajima S
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41380-021-01297-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-021-01297-6)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2022 Jan;27(1):744-757. doi: 10.1038/s41380-021-01297-6. Epub 
2021 Sep 28.

Glutamatergic and GABAergic metabolite levels in schizophrenia-spectrum 
disorders: a meta-analysis of (1)H-magnetic resonance spectroscopy studies.

Nakahara T(#)(1), Tsugawa S(#)(2), Noda Y(3), Ueno F(1)(4), Honda S(1), Kinjo 
M(1), Segawa H(1), Hondo N(1), Mori Y(1), Watanabe H(1), Nakahara K(1), Yoshida 
K(1)(5)(6), Wada M(1), Tarumi R(1), Iwata Y(1), Plitman E(7), Moriguchi S(1), de 
la Fuente-Sandoval C(8), Uchida H(1), Mimura M(1), Graff-Guerrero A(4), Nakajima 
S(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan. sakiko.tsugawa@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan. yoshi-tms@keio.jp.
(4)Multimodal Imaging Group, Research Imaging Centre, Centre for Addiction and 
Mental Health (CAMH), Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)Tanenbaum Centre for Pharmacogenetics, Campbell Family Mental Health Research 
Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(6)Azrieli Adult Neurodevelopmental Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental 
Health, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(8)Laboratory of Experimental Psychiatry & Neuropsychiatry Department, Instituto 
Nacional de Neurología y Neurocirugía, Mexico City, Mexico.
(9)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan. shinichiro_nakajima@hotmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The glutamate (Glu) and gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) hypotheses of 
schizophrenia were proposed in the 1980s. However, current findings on those 
metabolite levels in schizophrenia have been inconsistent, and the relationship 
between their abnormalities and the pathophysiology of schizophrenia remains 
unclear. To summarize the nature of the alterations of glutamatergic and 
GABAergic systems in schizophrenia, we conducted meta-analyses of proton 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-MRS) studies examining these metabolite 
levels.
METHODS: A systematic literature search was conducted using Embase, Medline, 
PsycINFO, and PubMed. Original studies that compared four metabolite levels 
(Glu, glutamine [Gln], Glx [Glu+Gln], and GABA), as measured by 1H-MRS, between 
individuals at high risk for psychosis, patients with first-episode psychosis, 
or patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls (HC) were included. A 
random-effects model was used to calculate the effect sizes for group 
differences in these metabolite levels of 18 regions of interest between the 
whole group or schizophrenia group and HC. Subgroup analysis and meta-regression 
were performed based on the status of antipsychotic treatment, illness stage, 
treatment resistance, and magnetic field strength.
RESULTS: One-hundred-thirty-four studies met the eligibility criteria, totaling 
7993 participants with SZ-spectrum disorders and 8744 HC. 14 out of 18 ROIs had 
enough numbers of studies to examine the group difference in the metabolite 
levels. In the whole group, Glx levels in the basal ganglia (g = 0.32; 95% CIs: 
0.18-0.45) were elevated. Subgroup analyses showed elevated Glx levels in the 
hippocampus (g = 0.47; 95% CIs: 0.21-0.73) and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
(g = 0.25; 95% CIs: 0.05-0.44) in unmedicated patients than HC. GABA levels in 
the MCC were decreased in the first-episode psychosis group compared with HC 
(g = -0.40; 95% CIs: -0.62 to -0.17). Treatment-resistant schizophrenia (TRS) 
group had elevated Glx and Glu levels in the MCC (Glx: g = 0.7; 95% CIs: 
0.38-1.01; Glu: g = 0.63; 95% CIs: 0.31-0.94) while MCC Glu levels were 
decreased in the patient group except TRS (g = -0.17; 95% CIs: -0.33 to -0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Increased glutamatergic metabolite levels and reduced GABA levels 
indicate that the disruption of excitatory/inhibitory balance may be related to 
the pathophysiology of schizophrenia-spectrum disorders.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-021-01297-6
PMID: 34584230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]