---
reference_id: "PMID:23599389"
title: Defects in the striatal neuropeptide Y system in X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism.
authors:
- Goto S
- Kawarai T
- Morigaki R
- Okita S
- Koizumi H
- Nagahiro S
- Munoz EL
- Lee LV
- Kaji R
journal: Brain
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awt084
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Corpus Striatum/metabolism, pathology"
- "Dystonic Disorders/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neuropeptide Y/biosynthesis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defects in the striatal neuropeptide Y system in X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism.
**Authors:** Goto S, Kawarai T, Morigaki R, Okita S, Koizumi H, Nagahiro S, Munoz EL, Lee LV, Kaji R
**Journal:** Brain (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awt084](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt084)

## Content

1. Brain. 2013 May;136(Pt 5):1555-67. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt084. Epub 2013 Apr
18.

Defects in the striatal neuropeptide Y system in X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism.

Goto S(1), Kawarai T, Morigaki R, Okita S, Koizumi H, Nagahiro S, Munoz EL, Lee 
LV, Kaji R.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson’s Disease and Dystonia Research Centre, Tokushima University 
Hospital, University of Tokushima, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan. 
sgoto@clin.med.tokushima-u.ac.jp

Comment in
    Brain. 2013 May;136(Pt 5):1341-4. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt096.

Neuropeptide Y is a novel bioactive substance that plays a role in the 
modulation of neurogenesis and neurotransmitter release, and thereby exerts a 
protective influence against neurodegeneration. Using a sensitive 
immunohistochemical method with a tyramide signal amplification protocol, we 
performed a post-mortem analysis to determine the striatal localization profile 
of neuropeptide Y in neurologically normal individuals and in patients with 
X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism, a major representative of the neurodegenerative 
diseases that primarily involve the striatum. All of the patients examined were 
genetically verified as having X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism. In normal 
individuals, we found a scattered distribution of neuropeptide Y-positive 
neurons and numerous nerve fibres labelled for neuropeptide Y in the striatum. 
Of particular interest was a differential localization of neuropeptide Y 
immunoreactivity in the striatal compartments, with a heightened density of 
neuropeptide Y labelling in the matrix compartment relative to the striosomes. 
In patients with X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism, we found a significant decrease 
in the number of neuropeptide Y-positive cells accompanied by a marked loss of 
their nerve fibres in the caudate nucleus and putamen. The patients with 
X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism also showed a lack of neuropeptide Y labelling in 
the subventricular zone, where a marked loss of progenitor cells that express 
proliferating cell nuclear antigen was found. Our results indicate a neostriatal 
defect of the neuropeptide Y system in patients with X-linked 
dystonia-parkinsonism, suggesting its possible implication in the mechanism by 
which a progressive loss of striatal neurons occurs in X-linked 
dystonia-parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt084
PMID: 23599389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]