---
reference_id: "PMID:22959135"
title: Analysis of novel ARG1 mutations causing hyperargininemia and correlation with arginase I activity in erythrocytes.
authors:
- Carvalho DR
- Brand GD
- Brum JM
- Takata RI
- Speck-Martins CE
- Pratesi R
journal: Gene
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.08.003
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amino Acid Substitution
- "Arginase/blood, chemistry, genetics"
- Arginine/blood
- Brazil
- Catalytic Domain/genetics
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Enzyme Activation/genetics
- Erythrocytes/enzymology
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- "Hyperargininemia/blood, enzymology, genetics"
- Male
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutant Proteins/blood, chemistry, genetics"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Protein Conformation
- Protein Folding
- Protein Multimerization/genetics
- "Protein Structure, Quaternary/genetics"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of novel ARG1 mutations causing hyperargininemia and correlation with arginase I activity in erythrocytes.
**Authors:** Carvalho DR, Brand GD, Brum JM, Takata RI, Speck-Martins CE, Pratesi R
**Journal:** Gene (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gene.2012.08.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2012.08.003)

## Content

1. Gene. 2012 Nov 1;509(1):124-30. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.08.003. Epub 2012 Aug
 16.

Analysis of novel ARG1 mutations causing hyperargininemia and correlation with
arginase I activity in erythrocytes.

Carvalho DR(1), Brand GD, Brum JM, Takata RI, Speck-Martins CE, Pratesi R.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Unit, SARAH Rehabilitation Hospital, SMHS Quadra 501 Conj. A,
Brasilia, Distrito Federal, 70335-901, Brazil. danielcarvalho@sarah.br

Hyperargininemia (HA) is an autosomal recessive disease that typically has a
clinical presentation that is distinct from other urea cycle disorders. It is
caused by the deficient activity of the enzyme arginase I, encoded by the gene
ARG1. We screened for ARG1 mutations and measured erythrocyte enzyme activity in
a series of 16 Brazilian HA patients. Novel mutations, in addition to previously
described missense mutations, were analysed for their effect on the structure,
stability and/or function of arginase I (ARG1) using bioinformatics tools. Three
previously reported mutations were found (p.R21X; p.I11T and p.W122X), and five
novel mutations were identified (p.G27D; p.G74V; p.T134I; p.R308Q; p.I174fs179).
The p.T134I mutation was the most frequent in the Brazilian population. Patients
carrying the p.R308Q mutation had higher residual ARG1 decreased activity, but
presented no distinguishable phenotype compared to the other patients.
Bioinformatics analyses revealed that missense mutations (1) affect the ARG1
active site, (2) interfere with the stability of the ARG1 folded conformation or
(3) alter the quaternary structure of the ARG1. Our study reinforced the role of
Arg308 residue for assembly of the ARG1 homotrimer. The panel of heterogeneous
ARG1 mutations that cause HA was expanded, nevertheless a clear
genotype-phenotype correlation was not observed in our series.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.08.003
PMID: 22959135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
