---
reference_id: "PMID:28643203"
title: Nonhuman Primate Models of Ebola Virus Disease.
authors:
- Bennett RS
- Huzella LM
- Jahrling PB
- Bollinger L
- Olinger GG Jr
- Hensley LE
journal: Curr Top Microbiol Immunol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/82_2017_20
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nonhuman Primate Models of Ebola Virus Disease.
**Authors:** Bennett RS, Huzella LM, Jahrling PB, Bollinger L, Olinger GG Jr, Hensley LE
**Journal:** Curr Top Microbiol Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/82_2017_20](https://doi.org/10.1007/82_2017_20)

## Content

1. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2017;411:171-193. doi: 10.1007/82_2017_20.

Nonhuman Primate Models of Ebola Virus Disease.

Bennett RS(1), Huzella LM(1), Jahrling PB(1), Bollinger L(1), Olinger GG Jr(2), 
Hensley LE(3).

Author information:
(1)Integrated Research Facility, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Frederick, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, National Emerging Infectious Diseases Laboratories, 
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Integrated Research Facility, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Frederick, MD, USA. 
lisa.hensley@nih.gov.

Ebola virus disease (EVD) in humans is associated with four ebolaviruses: Ebola 
virus (EBOV), Sudan virus (SUDV), Bundibugyo virus (BDBV), and Taï Forest virus. 
To date, no documented cases of human disease have been associated with Reston 
virus. Here, we describe the nonhuman primate (NHP) models that currently serve 
as gold standards for testing ebolavirus vaccines and therapeutic agents and 
elucidating underlying mechanisms of pathogenesis. Although multiple models have 
been explored over the past 50 years, the predominance of published work has 
been performed in macaque models. This chapter will focus on the most commonly 
used models.

DOI: 10.1007/82_2017_20
PMID: 28643203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]