---
reference_id: "PMID:12373570"
title: "Glycogen storage disease type I: pathophysiology of liver adenomas."
authors:
- Lee PJ
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-002-1002-0
keywords:
- "Adenoma/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Glycogen Storage Disease Type I/complications
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glycogen storage disease type I: pathophysiology of liver adenomas.
**Authors:** Lee PJ
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-002-1002-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-002-1002-0)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2002 Oct;161 Suppl 1:S46-9. doi: 10.1007/s00431-002-1002-0.
Epub  2002 Jul 12.

Glycogen storage disease type I: pathophysiology of liver adenomas.

Lee PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)The Charles Dent Metabolic Unit, The National Hospital for Neurology and
Neurosurgery, London WC1N 3BG, UK. philip.lee@uclh.org

Of the many complications associated with glycogen storage disease type I,
hepatic tumours cause great concern because of their malignant potential and the
current difficulties in monitoring them. Hepatic adenomas occur in 22%-75% of
affected adults, according to the population studied, and from those reported in
the literature are thought to have an approximately 10% risk of undergoing
malignant transformation. Their aetiology is unclear, but they occur generally
in post-pubertal patients, and can be either single or multiple. This article
discusses theories of their aetiology, methods of detection and monitoring, and
treatment options.
CONCLUSION: the incidence of liver tumours in younger adults seems less than in
older ones, suggesting that better dietary treatment, and thus improved
metabolic control, may be protective. Surgery (partial hepatectomy or orthotopic
liver transplantation) is the definitive therapy for these tumours, but the
timing of this intervention is difficult to determine and it is not without its
own hazards.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-002-1002-0
PMID: 12373570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
