---
reference_id: "PMID:29069505"
title: "Lung, Bladder, and Kidney Cancer Mortality 40 Years After Arsenic Exposure Reduction."
authors:
- Smith AH
- Marshall G
- Roh T
- Ferreccio C
- Liaw J
- Steinmaus C
journal: J Natl Cancer Inst
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/jnci/djx201
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Arsenic/adverse effects
- "Arsenic Poisoning/epidemiology, mortality"
- Chile/epidemiology
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Kidney Neoplasms/chemically induced, epidemiology, mortality"
- "Lung Neoplasms/chemically induced, epidemiology, mortality"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Population Surveillance
- Prognosis
- Survival Rate
- "Urinary Bladder Neoplasms/chemically induced, epidemiology, mortality"
- Water Supply
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lung, Bladder, and Kidney Cancer Mortality 40 Years After Arsenic Exposure Reduction.
**Authors:** Smith AH, Marshall G, Roh T, Ferreccio C, Liaw J, Steinmaus C
**Journal:** J Natl Cancer Inst (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jnci/djx201](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djx201)

## Content

1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2018 Mar 1;110(3):241-249. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djx201.

Lung, Bladder, and Kidney Cancer Mortality 40 Years After Arsenic Exposure
Reduction.

Smith AH(1), Marshall G(2), Roh T(1), Ferreccio C(3), Liaw J(1), Steinmaus C(1).

Author information:
(1)Arsenic Health Effects Research Group, School of Public Health, University of
California, Berkeley, CA.
(2)Departamento de Estadística, Facultad de Matemáticas, Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Advanced Center for Chronic Diseases, Escuela de Medicina, Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

BACKGROUND: Region II in northern Chile (population 442 570) experienced a
sudden major increase in arsenic water concentrations in 1958 in the main city
of Antofagasta, followed by a major reduction in exposure when an arsenic
removal plant was installed in 1970. It provides a unique opportunity to study
latency effects of exposure to arsenic, and this is the first study with
mortality data up to 40 years after exposure reduction.
METHODS: We previously identified high mortality rates in Region II up to the
year 2000. Here we present rate ratios (RRs) for Region II compared with all the
rest of Chile from 2001 to 2010, and with unexposed Region V (population
1 539 852) for all years from 1950 to 2010. All statistical tests were
one-sided.
RESULTS: From 2001 to 2010, comparing Region II with the rest of Chile, lung and
bladder mortality were still greatly elevated (RR = 3.38, 95% confidence
interval [CI] = 3.19 to 3.58, P < .001 for lung cancer in men; RR = 2.41, 95%
CI = 2.20 to 2.64, P < .001 for lung cancer in women; RR = 4.79, 95% CI = 4.20
to 5.46, P < .001 for bladder cancer in men; RR = 6.43, 95% CI = 5.49 to 7.54, P
< .001 for bladder cancer in women). Kidney cancer mortality was also elevated
(RR = 1.75, 95% CI = 1.49 to 2.05, P < .001 for men; RR = 2.09, 95% CI = 1.69 to
2.57, P < .001 for women). Earlier short latency acute myocardial infarction
mortality increases had subsided.
CONCLUSIONS: Lung, bladder, and kidney cancer mortality due to arsenic exposure
have very long latencies, with increased risks manifesting 40 years after
exposure reduction. Our findings suggest that arsenic in drinking water may
involve one of the longest cancer latencies for a human carcinogen.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djx201
PMCID: PMC6059241
PMID: 29069505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
