---
reference_id: "PMID:37252957"
title: Glial dysregulation in the human brain in fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome.
authors:
- Dias CM
- Issac B
- Sun L
- Lukowicz A
- Talukdar M
- Akula SK
- Miller MB
- Walsh K
- Rockowitz S
- Walsh CA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2300052120
keywords:
- Humans
- Fragile X Syndrome/pathology
- Tremor/genetics
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
- "Fragile X Messenger Ribonucleoprotein 1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ataxia/genetics, pathology"
- Brain/metabolism
- Astrocytes/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glial dysregulation in the human brain in fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome.
**Authors:** Dias CM, Issac B, Sun L, Lukowicz A, Talukdar M, Akula SK, Miller MB, Walsh K, Rockowitz S, Walsh CA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2300052120](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2300052120)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 Jun 6;120(23):e2300052120. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2300052120. Epub 2023 May 30.

Glial dysregulation in the human brain in fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia 
syndrome.

Dias CM(1)(2)(3)(4), Issac B(5), Sun L(5), Lukowicz A(4), Talukdar M(2)(6), 
Akula SK(2)(7), Miller MB(2)(8), Walsh K(2), Rockowitz S(2)(5), Walsh 
CA(2)(3)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Developmental Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 
02115.
(2)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, 
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Developmental Pediatrics, Section of 
Genetics and Metabolism, and Denver Fragile X Clinic and Research Center, 
Children's Hospital Colorado, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, CO 80045.
(5)Research Computing, Department of Information Technology, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115.
(6)Harvard-Massachusetts Institute of Technology MD/PhD Program, Program in 
Bioinformatics & Integrative Genomics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.
(7)Harvard-Massachusetts Institute of Technology MD/PhD Program, Program in 
Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.
(8)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115.
(9)HHMI, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115.
(10)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.

Short trinucleotide expansions at the FMR1 locus are associated with the 
late-onset condition fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS), which 
shows very different clinical and pathological features from fragile X syndrome 
(associated with longer expansions), with no clear molecular explanation for 
these marked differences. One prevailing theory posits that the shorter, 
premutation expansion uniquely causes extreme neurotoxic increases in FMR1 mRNA 
(i.e., four to eightfold increases), but evidence to support this hypothesis is 
largely derived from analysis of peripheral blood. We applied single-nucleus RNA 
sequencing to postmortem frontal cortex and cerebellum from 7 individuals with 
premutation and matched controls (n = 6) to assess cell type-specific molecular 
neuropathology. We found only modest upregulation (~1.3-fold) of FMR1 in some 
glial populations associated with premutation expansions. In premutation cases, 
we also identified decreased astrocyte proportions in the cortex. Differential 
expression and gene ontology analysis demonstrated altered neuroregulatory roles 
of glia. Using network analyses, we identified cell type-specific and 
region-specific patterns of FMR1 protein target gene dysregulation unique to 
premutation cases, with notable network dysregulation in the cortical 
oligodendrocyte lineage. We used pseudotime trajectory analysis to determine how 
oligodendrocyte development was altered and identified differences in early gene 
expression in oligodendrocyte trajectories in premutation cases specifically, 
implicating early cortical glial developmental perturbations. These findings 
challenge dogma regarding extremely elevated FMR1 increases in FXTAS and 
implicate glial dysregulation as a critical facet of premutation 
pathophysiology, representing potential unique therapeutic targets directly 
derived from the human condition.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2300052120
PMCID: PMC10265985
PMID: 37252957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.