---
reference_id: PMID:34179686
title: Spaceflight decelerates the epigenetic clock orchestrated with a global alteration in DNA methylome and transcriptome in the mouse retina.
authors:
- Chen Z
- Stanbouly S
- Nishiyama NC
- Chen X
- Delp MD
- Qiu H
- Mao XW
- Wang C
journal: Precis Clin Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/pcmedi/pbab012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spaceflight decelerates the epigenetic clock orchestrated with a global alteration in DNA methylome and transcriptome in the mouse retina.
**Authors:** Chen Z, Stanbouly S, Nishiyama NC, Chen X, Delp MD, Qiu H, Mao XW, Wang C
**Journal:** Precis Clin Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/pcmedi/pbab012](https://doi.org/10.1093/pcmedi/pbab012)

## Content

1. Precis Clin Med. 2021 May 17;4(2):93-108. doi: 10.1093/pcmedi/pbab012. 
eCollection 2021 Jun.

Spaceflight decelerates the epigenetic clock orchestrated with a global 
alteration in DNA methylome and transcriptome in the mouse retina.

Chen Z(1), Stanbouly S(1), Nishiyama NC(2), Chen X(1), Delp MD(3), Qiu H(4), Mao 
XW(2), Wang C(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genomics, School of Medicine, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, 
CA 92350, USA.
(2)Division of Radiation Research, Department of Basic Sciences, School of 
Medicine, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA 92354, USA.
(3)Department of Nutrition and Integrative Physiology, Florida State University, 
Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA.
(4)Center for Molecular and Translational Medicine, Institute of Biomedical 
Science, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA.

Astronauts exhibit an assortment of clinical abnormalities in their eyes during 
long-duration spaceflight. The purpose of this study was to determine whether 
spaceflight induces epigenomic and transcriptomic reprogramming in the retina or 
alters the epigenetic clock. The mice were flown for 37 days in animal enclosure 
modules on the International Space Station; ground-based control animals were 
maintained under similar housing conditions. Mouse retinas were isolated and 
both DNA methylome and transcriptome were determined by deep sequencing. We 
found that a large number of genes were differentially methylated with 
spaceflight, whereas there were fewer differentially expressed genes at the 
transcriptome level. Several biological pathways involved in retinal diseases 
such as macular degeneration were significantly altered. Our results indicated 
that spaceflight decelerated the retinal epigenetic clock. This study 
demonstrates that spaceflight impacts the retina at the epigenomic and 
transcriptomic levels, and such changes could be involved in the etiology of 
eye-related disorders among astronauts.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the West 
China School of Medicine & West China Hospital of Sichuan University.

DOI: 10.1093/pcmedi/pbab012
PMCID: PMC8220224
PMID: 34179686