---
reference_id: "PMID:9481650"
title: "Thanatophoric dysplasia type I: new radiologic, morphologic, and histologic aspects toward the exact definition of the disorder."
authors:
- Weber M
- Johannissón T
- Thomsen M
- Rehder H
- Niethard FU
journal: J Pediatr Orthop B
year: '1998'
keywords:
- Bone and Bones/diagnostic imaging
- Cartilage/pathology
- Female
- Growth Plate/pathology
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Ossification, Heterotopic"
- Osteogenesis
- Radiography
- "Spine/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Thanatophoric Dysplasia/classification, diagnostic imaging, embryology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thanatophoric dysplasia type I: new radiologic, morphologic, and histologic aspects toward the exact definition of the disorder.
**Authors:** Weber M, Johannissón T, Thomsen M, Rehder H, Niethard FU
**Journal:** J Pediatr Orthop B (1998)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Orthop B. 1998 Jan;7(1):1-9.

Thanatophoric dysplasia type I: new radiologic, morphologic, and histologic 
aspects toward the exact definition of the disorder.

Weber M(1), Johannissón T, Thomsen M, Rehder H, Niethard FU.

Author information:
(1)Orthopaedic University Hospital, Rheinische Westfäliche Technische Hochschule 
Aachen, Germany.

A comprehensive seven-step study on THANATOPHORIC DYSPLASIA without cloverleaf 
skull (TD Type I) was carried out postmortem on three aborted fetuses of 19, 
26-27, and 34 weeks and one preterm neonate of 35 weeks gestation, respectively. 
The characteristic x-ray configuration of the spine in TD Type I presenting with 
H-, U- or reversed U-shape vertebrae were shown to correlate with the 
inclination or reclination of the vertebral bodies within a kyphotic or lordotic 
segment. The bowing of the tubular bones in TD Type I is explained by a 
diminished mechanical stability that is causally related to a specific cartilage 
structure. The perichondral spurs are defined by their morphologic structure, 
and their origin is attributed to a normal perichondral ossification in the 
presence of an impaired enchondral ossification. Impairment of enchondral 
ossification was more evident in the periphery than in the center of the 
metaphyses leading to a tongue-shaped osseous cone directed toward the 
epiphysis. The perichondral spurs and the linguiform enchondral growth plate 
resulted in a three-phase maple leaf-like contour of the metaphyses of tubular 
bones and acetabular roof. The nature of the perichondral fibrous bands, the 
fibrovascular bundles, and the fibrovascular bands of the growth plate and their 
significance in atypical ossification processes are discussed in detail. It is 
suggested that the diminished longitudinal growth of the skeleton is caused by a 
reduced mitotic activity of cartilage cells in the proliferative zone leading to 
a reduction of cell numbers in the columnar zone transversely oriented spongiosa 
bars resulting from desmal ossification of the metaphyseal fibrovascular 
structures.

PMID: 9481650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]