---
reference_id: "PMID:39707895"
title: Sexually transmitted shigellosis.
authors:
- Pirš M
journal: Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Pannonica Adriat
year: '2024'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sexually transmitted shigellosis.
**Authors:** Pirš M
**Journal:** Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Pannonica Adriat (2024)

## Content

1. Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Pannonica Adriat. 2024 Dec;33(4):199-203.

Sexually transmitted shigellosis.

Pirš M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Shigellae can be transmitted through sexual contact, especially among gay, 
bisexual, and other men who have sex with men (gbMSM). The dynamics and factors 
contributing to sexual transmission of shigellosis are not yet fully understood. 
Shigella spp. are intestinal pathogens with a low infectious dose, making them 
more likely to spread through sexual contact. Asymptomatic carriage may also 
contribute to its transmission through sexual activity. Recommendations for 
prevention of sexual transmission of shigellosis include less risky sexual 
behavior, the use of protective measures, thorough cleaning of sex toys, and 
good personal hygiene. If a partner has diarrhea, it is recommended to avoid 
sexual contact during and for at least 1 to 2 weeks after the symptoms have 
resolved, and to refrain from oral-anal contact for 4 to 6 weeks. Globally, the 
burden of shigellosis is highest in low- and middle-income countries, 
particularly among young children. In high-income countries, international 
travelers and gbMSM are considered the main risk groups for shigellosis. Raising 
awareness about the possible sexual transmission of shigellosis among at-risk 
groups is necessary. Increasing awareness among clinicians about the potential 
for sexual transmission of shigellosis is vital to ensure appropriate counseling 
and patient management.

PMID: 39707895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]