---
reference_id: "PMID:23706366"
title: "Early neonatal death and congenital left coronary abnormalities: ostial atresia, stenosis and anomalous aortic origin."
authors:
- Laux D
- Bessières B
- Houyel L
- Bonnière M
- Magny JF
- Bajolle F
- Boudjemline Y
- Bonnet D
journal: Arch Cardiovasc Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.acvd.2013.01.002
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Aorta/abnormalities
- Autopsy
- Coronary Angiography/methods
- "Coronary Stenosis/congenital, diagnostic imaging, pathology, therapy"
- "Coronary Vessel Anomalies/complications, diagnostic imaging, pathology, therapy"
- "Coronary Vessels/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- Heart Arrest/etiology
- Heart Failure/etiology
- Humans
- Infant Mortality
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early neonatal death and congenital left coronary abnormalities: ostial atresia, stenosis and anomalous aortic origin.
**Authors:** Laux D, Bessières B, Houyel L, Bonnière M, Magny JF, Bajolle F, Boudjemline Y, Bonnet D
**Journal:** Arch Cardiovasc Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.acvd.2013.01.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acvd.2013.01.002)

## Content

1. Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 2013 Apr;106(4):202-8. doi: 10.1016/j.acvd.2013.01.002. 
Epub 2013 Mar 9.

Early neonatal death and congenital left coronary abnormalities: ostial atresia, 
stenosis and anomalous aortic origin.

Laux D(1), Bessières B, Houyel L, Bonnière M, Magny JF, Bajolle F, Boudjemline 
Y, Bonnet D.

Author information:
(1)Centre de référence malformations cardiaques congénitales 
complexes-M3C-Necker, hôpital Necker enfants-malades, assistance publique des 
hôpitaux de Paris, université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris-Cité, Paris, 
France. daniela.laux@nck.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND: Congenital left coronary artery abnormalities such as ostial 
stenosis or atresia are extremely rare. Diagnosis in the neonate has not been 
reported.
AIMS: To describe five neonates with left coronary artery orifice abnormalities 
and discuss pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment options, with a focus on 
the importance of autopsy in unexpected neonatal death.
METHODS: Retrospective assessment of medical files of neonates with left 
coronary abnormalities seen during a 12-year period (2000-2012).
RESULTS: Three neonates with anatomical (n=2) and functional (n=1) left coronary 
stenosis and two neonates with ostial atresia were identified. The three infants 
with coronary stenosis died within minutes to days after birth because of 
cardiac failure refractory to intensive care treatment; at autopsy, left 
coronary ostial stenosis (n=2) and high take-off with acute angle origin and 
tangential vertical course (n=1) were diagnosed. The fourth neonate was in 
cardiac failure due to critical aortic stenosis; left coronary ostial atresia 
was diagnosed during an emergency catheter procedure and the infant died after 
aortic valve dilatation. The fifth infant had a cardiac arrest on the third day 
of life; she was diagnosed with left coronary ostial atresia by coronary 
angiography and died during attempted revascularization surgery at 2 weeks of 
life.
CONCLUSION: Congenital coronary ostial abnormalities can lead to severe heart 
failure and unexpected neonatal death. Systematic examination of the coronary 
arteries should be part of any neonatal autopsy. Coronary angiography remains 
the diagnostic method of choice despite advances in non-invasive imaging. 
Revascularization surgery seems indicated in symptomatic children based on small 
patient series.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.acvd.2013.01.002
PMID: 23706366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]