---
reference_id: "PMID:36427515"
title: "Online mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for fatigue in patients with sarcoidosis (TIRED): a randomised controlled trial."
authors:
- Kahlmann V
- Moor CC
- van Helmondt SJ
- Mostard RLM
- van der Lee ML
- Grutters JC
- Wijsenbeek MS
- Veltkamp M
journal: Lancet Respir Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(22)00387-3
keywords:
- Humans
- Mindfulness
- Prospective Studies
- Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
- "Fatigue/etiology, therapy"
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Online mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for fatigue in patients with sarcoidosis (TIRED): a randomised controlled trial.
**Authors:** Kahlmann V, Moor CC, van Helmondt SJ, Mostard RLM, van der Lee ML, Grutters JC, Wijsenbeek MS, Veltkamp M
**Journal:** Lancet Respir Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2213-2600(22)00387-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(22)00387-3)

## Content

1. Lancet Respir Med. 2023 Mar;11(3):265-272. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(22)00387-3.
 Epub 2022 Nov 22.

Online mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for fatigue in patients with
sarcoidosis (TIRED): a randomised controlled trial.

Kahlmann V(1), Moor CC(1), van Helmondt SJ(2), Mostard RLM(3), van der Lee
ML(4), Grutters JC(5), Wijsenbeek MS(6), Veltkamp M(5).

Author information:
(1)Center of Excellence for Interstitial Lung Diseases and Sarcoidosis,
Department of Respiratory Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center-University Medical
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(2)ILD Center of Excellence, Department of Pulmonology, St Antonius Hospital,
Nieuwegein, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Zuyderland Medical Center, Heerlen,
Netherlands; Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical
Center (MUMC+), Maastricht, Netherlands.
(4)Scientific Research Department, Helen Dowling Institute, Bilthoven,
Netherlands; Department of Medical and Clinical Psychology, Center of Research
on Psychology in Somatic diseases (CoRPS), Tilburg University, Tilburg,
Netherlands.
(5)ILD Center of Excellence, Department of Pulmonology, St Antonius Hospital,
Nieuwegein, Netherlands; Division of Heart and Lungs, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(6)Center of Excellence for Interstitial Lung Diseases and Sarcoidosis,
Department of Respiratory Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center-University Medical
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Electronic address:
m.wijsenbeek-lourens@erasmusmc.nl.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2023 Mar;11(3):219-220. doi:
10.1016/S2213-2600(22)00448-9.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2023 Jul;11(7):e66. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(23)00149-2.

BACKGROUND: Sarcoidosis-associated fatigue is highly prevalent and is often
reported as the most burdensome symptom of sarcoidosis. Management of fatigue is
challenging, and evidence-based therapies are lacking. In this TIRED trial, we
aimed to assess the effects of a 12-week online mindfulness-based cognitive
therapy (eMBCT) on fatigue.
METHODS: This study was a prospective, open-label, multicentre randomised
controlled trial, conducted at three centres in the Netherlands. Eligible
patients were 18 years or older, had stable sarcoidosis, and a score of more
than 21 points on the Fatigue Assessment Scale (FAS). Patients were randomised
into either the eMBCT or the control group. Participants completed
patient-reported outcome measures at baseline, after intervention (T1), and 12
weeks after completion of eMBCT (T2). The primary outcome was the change in FAS
score at T1 in the eMBCT group compared with the control group, assessed with
the independent students't test in all patients who started the study. Secondary
outcomes included within-group difference in FAS score at T1 and T2,
between-group difference in FAS score at T2, and changes in the Hospital Anxiety
and Depression Scale, the Freiburg Mindfulness Inventory-Short Form, and the
Kings Sarcoidosis Questionnaire. The study was registered at the Netherlands
Trial Register, NL7816.
FINDINGS: Between June 5, 2019, and Oct 28, 2021, 99 patients were randomly
assigned to the eMBCT (n=52) or the control (n=47) groups. Six patients withdrew
consent after psychological screening before the start of eMBCT. Baseline FAS
score was similar in both groups (34·57 [SD 6·07] for 46 patients in the eMBCT
group and 35·51 [4·65] for 47 patients in the control group). Mean change in FAS
score at T1 was -4·53 (SD 5·77; p<0·0001) in the eMBCT group and -1·28 (3·80;
p=0·026) in the control group (between-group difference 3·26 [95% CI 1·18 to
5·33; p=0·0025]). Furthermore, the eMBCT group had a significant improvement in
anxiety (mean between-group difference 1·69, 95% CI 0·22-3·16; p=0·025),
depressive symptoms (1·52, 0·08-2·95; p=0·039), mindfulness (3·1, 0·70-5·49;
p=0·022), and general health status (6·28, 2·51-10·06; p=0·002) at T1, compared
with the control group.
INTERPRETATION: 12 week eMBCT improves fatigue, anxiety, depression,
mindfulness, and health status in patients with sarcoidosis-associated fatigue.
FUNDING: Dutch Sarcoidosis Patient Association (Sarcoidose.nl).
TRANSLATION: For the Dutch translation of the summary see Supplementary
Materials section.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(22)00387-3
PMID: 36427515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests MLvdL works at the
Helen Dowling Institute but has no financial interest. All other authors declare
no competing interests.
