---
reference_id: "PMID:33073587"
title: Mitochondrial dysfunction and the AKI-to-CKD transition.
authors:
- Jiang M
- Bai M
- Lei J
- Xie Y
- Xu S
- Jia Z
- Zhang A
journal: Am J Physiol Renal Physiol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.00285.2020
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/complications, metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- Disease Progression
- Energy Metabolism
- Humans
- "Kidney/metabolism, pathology"
- "Mitochondria/metabolism, pathology"
- Mitochondrial Dynamics
- Mitophagy
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial dysfunction and the AKI-to-CKD transition.
**Authors:** Jiang M, Bai M, Lei J, Xie Y, Xu S, Jia Z, Zhang A
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Renal Physiol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajprenal.00285.2020](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajprenal.00285.2020)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2020 Dec 1;319(6):F1105-F1116. doi: 
10.1152/ajprenal.00285.2020. Epub 2020 Oct 19.

Mitochondrial dysfunction and the AKI-to-CKD transition.

Jiang M(1)(2), Bai M(1)(2)(3), Lei J(1)(2), Xie Y(1)(2), Xu S(1)(2), Jia 
Z(2)(3), Zhang A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Children's Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Pediatrics, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 
China.
(3)Nanjing Key Lab of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) has been widely recognized as an important risk factor 
for the occurrence and development of chronic kidney disease (CKD). Even milder 
AKI has adverse consequences and could progress to renal fibrosis, which is the 
ultimate common pathway for various terminal kidney diseases. Thus, it is urgent 
to develop a strategy to hinder the transition from AKI to CKD. Some mechanisms 
of the AKI-to-CKD transition have been revealed, such as nephron loss, cell 
cycle arrest, persistent inflammation, endothelial injury with vascular 
rarefaction, and epigenetic changes. Previous studies have elucidated the 
pivotal role of mitochondria in acute injuries and demonstrated that the fitness 
of this organelle is a major determinant in both the pathogenesis and recovery 
of organ function. Recent research has suggested that damage to mitochondrial 
function in early AKI is a crucial factor leading to tubular injury and 
persistent renal insufficiency. Dysregulation of mitochondrial homeostasis, 
alterations in bioenergetics, and organelle stress cross talk contribute to the 
AKI-to-CKD transition. In this review, we focus on the pathophysiology of 
mitochondria in renal recovery after AKI and progression to CKD, confirming that 
targeting mitochondria represents a potentially effective therapeutic strategy 
for the progression of AKI to CKD.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.00285.2020
PMID: 33073587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]