---
reference_id: "PMID:22192934"
title: "[Renal involvement in systemic lupus erythematosus]."
authors:
- Karras A
journal: Presse Med
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2011.11.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Renal involvement in systemic lupus erythematosus].
**Authors:** Karras A
**Journal:** Presse Med (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lpm.2011.11.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lpm.2011.11.006)

## Content

1. Presse Med. 2012 Mar;41(3 Pt 1):260-6. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2011.11.006. Epub
2011  Dec 20.

[Renal involvement in systemic lupus erythematosus].

[Article in French]

Karras A(1).

Author information:
(1)AP-HP, hôpital européen Georges-Pompidou, service de néphrologie, 75015 
Paris, France. alexandre.karras@egp.aphp.fr

Renal involvement is frequent (20 to 50% of cases) during the course of systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE). It significantly influences the functional prognosis 
and the patient survival. Glomerulopathy is the usual renal lesion in SLE and 
the clinical presentation can be very polymorphic, ranging from isolated 
proteinuria to nephrotic syndrome or rapidly progressive renal failure. The 
severity of the renal disease and the overall prognosis can vary according to 
the patient's ethnicity but the main prognostic factor is the response of the 
disease to the initial immunosuppressive therapy. Renal biopsy is essential for 
classifying the glomerular lesions, establish the prognosis and guide the 
clinician in the choice of the right therapeutic scheme. The induction therapy 
of lupus proliferative glomerulonephritis asssociates high-dose corticosteroids 
and an immunosuppressive treatment. Cyclophosphamide and mycophenolate mofetil 
(MMF) are the most used immunosuppressive drugs in this setting. After 
remission, the treatment is classically switched to a combination of low-dose 
corticosteroids and oral immunosuppression with azathioprine or MMF, combined 
with long-term hydroxychloroquine prophylaxis.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lpm.2011.11.006
PMID: 22192934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]