---
reference_id: "PMID:24014519"
title: "Faciobrachial dystonic seizures: the influence of immunotherapy on seizure control and prevention of cognitive impairment in a broadening phenotype."
authors:
- Irani SR
- Stagg CJ
- Schott JM
- Rosenthal CR
- Schneider SA
- Pettingill P
- Pettingill R
- Waters P
- Thomas A
- Voets NL
- Cardoso MJ
- Cash DM
- Manning EN
- Lang B
- Smith SJ
- Vincent A
- Johnson MR
journal: Brain
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awt212
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Antibodies/therapeutic use
- "Cognition Disorders/prevention & control"
- Electroencephalography/methods
- Female
- Humans
- "Limbic Encephalitis/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Phenotype
- Prospective Studies
- "Seizures/drug therapy, immunology, physiopathology"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Faciobrachial dystonic seizures: the influence of immunotherapy on seizure control and prevention of cognitive impairment in a broadening phenotype.
**Authors:** Irani SR, Stagg CJ, Schott JM, Rosenthal CR, Schneider SA, Pettingill P, Pettingill R, Waters P, Thomas A, Voets NL, Cardoso MJ, Cash DM, Manning EN, Lang B, Smith SJ, Vincent A, Johnson MR
**Journal:** Brain (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awt212](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt212)

## Content

1. Brain. 2013 Oct;136(Pt 10):3151-62. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt212. Epub 2013 Sep
6.

Faciobrachial dystonic seizures: the influence of immunotherapy on seizure 
control and prevention of cognitive impairment in a broadening phenotype.

Irani SR(1), Stagg CJ, Schott JM, Rosenthal CR, Schneider SA, Pettingill P, 
Pettingill R, Waters P, Thomas A, Voets NL, Cardoso MJ, Cash DM, Manning EN, 
Lang B, Smith SJ, Vincent A, Johnson MR.

Author information:
(1)1 Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, UK.

Comment in
    Brain. 2013 Oct;136(Pt 10):2933-5. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt256.

Voltage-gated potassium channel complex antibodies, particularly those directed 
against leucine-rich glioma inactivated 1, are associated with a common form of 
limbic encephalitis that presents with cognitive impairment and seizures. 
Faciobrachial dystonic seizures have recently been reported as 
immunotherapy-responsive, brief, frequent events that often predate the 
cognitive impairment associated with this limbic encephalitis. However, these 
observations were made from a retrospective study without serial cognitive 
assessments. Here, we undertook the first prospective study of faciobrachial 
dystonic seizures with serial assessments of seizure frequencies, cognition and 
antibodies in 10 cases identified over 20 months. We hypothesized that (i) 
faciobrachial dystonic seizures would show a differential response to 
anti-epileptic drugs and immunotherapy; and that (ii) effective treatment of 
faciobrachial dystonic seizures would accelerate recovery and prevent the 
development of cognitive impairment. The 10 cases expand both the known age at 
onset (28 to 92 years, median 68) and clinical features, with events of longer 
duration, simultaneously bilateral events, prominent automatisms, sensory aura, 
and post-ictal fear and speech arrest. Ictal epileptiform 
electroencephalographic changes were present in three cases. All 10 cases were 
positive for voltage-gated potassium channel-complex antibodies (346-4515 pM): 
nine showed specificity for leucine-rich glioma inactivated 1. Seven cases had 
normal clinical magnetic resonance imaging, and the cerebrospinal fluid 
examination was unremarkable in all seven tested. Faciobrachial dystonic 
seizures were controlled more effectively with immunotherapy than anti-epileptic 
drugs (P = 0.006). Strikingly, in the nine cases who remained anti-epileptic 
drug refractory for a median of 30 days (range 11-200), the addition of 
corticosteroids was associated with cessation of faciobrachial dystonic seizures 
within 1 week in three and within 2 months in six cases. Voltage-gated potassium 
channel-complex antibodies persisted in the four cases with relapses of 
faciobrachial dystonic seizures during corticosteroid withdrawal. Time to 
recovery of baseline function was positively correlated with time to 
immunotherapy (r = 0.74; P = 0.03) but not time to anti-epileptic drug 
administration (r = 0.55; P = 0.10). Of 10 cases, the eight cases who received 
anti-epileptic drugs (n = 3) or no treatment (n = 5) all developed cognitive 
impairment. By contrast, the two who did not develop cognitive impairment 
received immunotherapy to treat their faciobrachial dystonic seizures (P = 
0.02). In eight cases without clinical magnetic resonance imaging evidence of 
hippocampal signal change, cross-sectional volumetric magnetic resonance imaging 
post-recovery, after accounting for age and head size, revealed cases (n = 8) 
had smaller brain volumes than healthy controls (n = 13) (P < 0.001). In 
conclusion, faciobrachial dystonic seizures can be prospectively identified as a 
form of epilepsy with an expanding phenotype. Immunotherapy is associated with 
excellent control of the frequently anti-epileptic drug refractory seizures, 
hastens time to recovery, and may prevent the subsequent development of 
cognitive impairment observed in this study.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt212
PMID: 24014519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]