---
reference_id: "PMID:37465909"
title: Evidence and Recommendation for Guanidinoacetate Methyltransferase Deficiency Newborn Screening.
authors:
- Ream MA
- Lam WKK
- Grosse SD
- Ojodu J
- Jones E
- Prosser LA
- Rose AM
- Comeau AM
- Tanksley S
- Powell CM
- Kemper AR
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2023-062100
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence and Recommendation for Guanidinoacetate Methyltransferase Deficiency Newborn Screening.
**Authors:** Ream MA, Lam WKK, Grosse SD, Ojodu J, Jones E, Prosser LA, Rose AM, Comeau AM, Tanksley S, Powell CM, Kemper AR
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2023-062100](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2023-062100)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2023 Aug 1;152(2):e2023062100. doi: 10.1542/peds.2023-062100.

Evidence and Recommendation for Guanidinoacetate Methyltransferase Deficiency 
Newborn Screening.

Ream MA(1), Lam WKK(2), Grosse SD(3), Ojodu J(4), Jones E(4), Prosser LA(5), 
Rose AM(5), Comeau AM(6), Tanksley S(7), Powell CM(8), Kemper AR(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Child Neurology, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio.
(2)Duke Clinical and Translational Science Institute, Duke University School of 
Medicine, Durham, North Carolina.
(3)National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.
(4)Association of Public Health Laboratories, Silver Spring, Maryland.
(5)Susan B. Meister Child Health Evaluation and Research Center, Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(6)New England Newborn Screening Program, Department of Pediatrics, UMass Chan 
School of Medicine, Worcester, Massachusetts.
(7)Texas Department of State Health Services, Laboratory Services Section, 
Austin, Texas.
(8)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, School of 
Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina.
(9)Division of Primary Care Pediatrics, Nationwide Children's Hospital, 
Columbus, Ohio.

Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase (GAMT) deficiency is an autosomal recessive 
disorder of creatine biosynthesis due to pathogenic variants in the GAMT gene 
that lead to cerebral creatine deficiency and neurotoxic levels of 
guanidinoacetate. Untreated, GAMT deficiency is associated with hypotonia, 
significant intellectual disability, limited speech development, recurrent 
seizures, behavior problems, and involuntary movements. The birth prevalence of 
GAMT deficiency is likely between 0.5 and 2 per million live births. On the 
basis of small case series and sibling data, presymptomatic treatment with oral 
supplements of creatine, ornithine, and sodium benzoate, and a 
protein-restricted diet to reduce arginine intake, appear to substantially 
improve health and developmental outcomes. Without newborn screening, diagnosis 
typically happens after the development of significant impairment, when 
treatment has limited utility. GAMT deficiency newborn screening can be 
incorporated into the tandem-mass spectrometry screening that is already 
routinely used for newborn screening, with about 1 per 100 000 newborns 
screening positive. After a positive screen, diagnosis is established by finding 
an elevated guanidinoacetate concentration and low creatine concentration in the 
blood. Although GAMT deficiency is significantly more rare than other conditions 
included in newborn screening, the feasibility of screening, the low number of 
positive results, the relative ease of diagnosis, and the expected benefit of 
presymptomatic dietary therapy led to a recommendation from the Advisory 
Committee on Heritable Disorders in Newborns and Children to the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services that GAMT deficiency be added to the Recommended 
Uniform Screening Panel. This recommendation was accepted in January 2023.

Copyright © 2023 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2023-062100
PMCID: PMC10527896
PMID: 37465909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES: The authors 
have indicated they have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.