---
reference_id: "PMID:38854224"
title: "Unveiling a Rare Case: Madras Motor Neuron Disease in an 18-Year-Old Patient."
authors:
- Saboo K
- Acharya S
- Kumar S
- Sarode R
- Gemnani R
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.59812
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unveiling a Rare Case: Madras Motor Neuron Disease in an 18-Year-Old Patient.
**Authors:** Saboo K, Acharya S, Kumar S, Sarode R, Gemnani R
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.59812](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.59812)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 May 7;16(5):e59812. doi: 10.7759/cureus.59812. eCollection 2024 
May.

Unveiling a Rare Case: Madras Motor Neuron Disease in an 18-Year-Old Patient.

Saboo K(1), Acharya S(1), Kumar S(1), Sarode R(1), Gemnani R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe 
Institute of Higher Education and Research, Wardha, IND.

Madras motor neuron disease (MMND) is a rare childhood or juvenile motor neuron 
disease. Herein, we present a unique case of MMND in an 18-year-old patient, 
which challenges the conventional understanding of the disease's onset and 
progression. The patient, a previously healthy adolescent, presented with 
insidious onset and gradually progressive weakness of all four limbs, wasting, 
tongue fasciculation, and bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. Neurological 
examination revealed signs consistent with lower motor neuron involvement. 
Electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction studies (NCS) supported the 
diagnosis of MMND. The patient's clinical course exhibited rapid deterioration, 
leading to significant functional impairment within a short timeframe. Treatment 
modalities, including supportive care and symptomatic management, were 
implemented; however, disease progression remained relentless. This case 
highlights the significance of considering MMND in the differential diagnosis of 
motor neuron diseases, even in young individuals. It highlights the importance 
of conducting more studies to comprehend the underlying mechanisms and consider 
potential therapeutic strategies for this uncommon ailment.

Copyright © 2024, Saboo et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.59812
PMCID: PMC11156576
PMID: 38854224

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.