---
reference_id: "PMID:24062871"
title: The role of inflammation in the pathology of acne.
authors:
- Tanghetti EA
journal: J Clin Aesthet Dermatol
year: '2013'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of inflammation in the pathology of acne.
**Authors:** Tanghetti EA
**Journal:** J Clin Aesthet Dermatol (2013)

## Content

1. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2013 Sep;6(9):27-35.

The role of inflammation in the pathology of acne.

Tanghetti EA(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Dermatology and Laser Surgery, Sacramento, California.

The conventional perspective of acne pathogenesis holds that Propionibacterium 
acnes colonizes the duct of the sebaceous follicle, causing an innate immune 
response and the progression from a so-called noninflammatory comedo to an 
inflammatory papule, pustule, or nodule. However, this viewpoint has come under 
increasing scrutiny over the last decade, as evidence has emerged supporting a 
role for inflammation at all stages of acne lesion development, perhaps 
subclinically even before comedo formation. The immunochemical pathways 
underlying the initiation and propagation of the inflammation in acne are 
complex and still being elucidated, but may involve Propionibacterium acnes as 
well as several inflammatory mediators and their target receptors, including 
cytokines, defensins, peptidases, sebum lipids, and neuropeptides. This review 
presents evidence to support the notion that acne is primarily an inflammatory 
disease, challenging the current nomenclature of noninflammatory versus 
inflammatory acne lesions and suggesting that the nomenclature is outdated and 
incorrect. The evidence in support of acne as an inflammatory disease also has 
clinical implications, in that anti-inflammatory drugs used to treat the disease 
can be expected to exert effects against all lesion stages, albeit via distinct 
mechanisms of anti-inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3780801
PMID: 24062871