---
reference_id: "PMID:39188588"
title: "Newborn screening and genetic diagnosis of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency in Quanzhou,China."
authors:
- Lin W
- Wang K
- Chen Y
- Zheng Z
- Lin Y
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101127
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Newborn screening and genetic diagnosis of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency in Quanzhou,China.
**Authors:** Lin W, Wang K, Chen Y, Zheng Z, Lin Y
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101127](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101127)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2024 Aug 2;40:101127. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101127.
eCollection 2024 Sep.

Newborn screening and genetic diagnosis of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase
deficiency in Quanzhou,China.

Lin W(1)(2), Wang K(3), Chen Y(1)(2), Zheng Z(4), Lin Y(4).

Author information:
(1)The School of Clinical Medicine, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian
Province 350004, China.
(2)Department of Child Health Care, Quanzhou Maternity and Children's Hospital,
700 Fengze Street, Quanzhou, Fujian Province 362000, China.
(3)Integrated Technical Service Center, Quanzhou Customs, Quanzhou, Fujian
Province 362000, China.
(4)Neonatal Disease Screening Center, Quanzhou Maternity and Children's
Hospital, 700 Fengze Street, Quanzhou, Fujian Province 362000, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: 3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency (3-MCCD) is an
autosomal recessive leucine catabolism condition caused by 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA
carboxylase (3-MCC) deficiency due to MCCC1/MCCC2 variants. We investigated its
incidence and features in Quanzhou, China.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We screened 643,606 newborns (January 2014 to December
2022) for elevated 3-hydroxyisovalerylcarnitine (C5OH) levels using tandem mass
spectrometry (MS/MS). Molecular analyses identified MCCC1/MCCC2 variants in
suspected 3-MCCD cases.
RESULTS: Seventeen neonates, two maternal patients, and one paternal patient had
3-MCCD. Its incidence in the Quanzhou study population was 1/37,859 newborns.
All patients and neonates with 3-MCCD exhibited increased C5OH concentrations.
Most patients [76.5%(13/17)] had increased urinary 3-methylcrotonylglycine
(3-MCG) and 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid (3-HIVA) levels. Eight neonates and all
adults with 3-MCCD had secondary carnitine deficiency. We identified seventeen
variants, including 6 novel ones.MCCC1and MCCC2 variants were found in 47.1% and
52.9% of patients,with c.1331G > A (31.3%) and c.351_353delTGG (50.0%) being the
most prevalent, respectively. Clinical symptoms were observed in 11.8% of
patients.
CONCLUSION: We identified six new MCCC1/MCCC2 variants, enhancing our
understanding of the 3-MCCD molecular profile. Secondary carnitine deficiency
occurred in eight neonates and all adult patients. Although clinical symptoms
were observed in 11.8% of patients, whether they were related to 3-MCCD remain
unclear. Therefore, further studies are required to decide whether 3-MCCD and
C5OH indicators should continue to be used.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101127
PMCID: PMC11345313
PMID: 39188588

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
