---
reference_id: "PMID:15765186"
title: Chondrocyte-specific knockout of the G protein G(s)alpha leads to epiphyseal and growth plate abnormalities and ectopic chondrocyte formation.
authors:
- Sakamoto A
- Chen M
- Kobayashi T
- Kronenberg HM
- Weinstein LS
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1359/JBMR.041210
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone and Bones/abnormalities
- Cell Differentiation/physiology
- "Chondrocytes/chemistry, cytology, metabolism"
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gs/genetics, physiology"
- "Genes, Lethal"
- "Growth Plate/abnormalities, growth & development"
- Hedgehog Proteins
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Parathyroid Hormone-Related Protein/analysis, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- "Trans-Activators/analysis, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chondrocyte-specific knockout of the G protein G(s)alpha leads to epiphyseal and growth plate abnormalities and ectopic chondrocyte formation.
**Authors:** Sakamoto A, Chen M, Kobayashi T, Kronenberg HM, Weinstein LS
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1359/JBMR.041210](https://doi.org/10.1359/JBMR.041210)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2005 Apr;20(4):663-71. doi: 10.1359/JBMR.041210. Epub 2004
Dec  6.

Chondrocyte-specific knockout of the G protein G(s)alpha leads to epiphyseal and
growth plate abnormalities and ectopic chondrocyte formation.

Sakamoto A(1), Chen M, Kobayashi T, Kronenberg HM, Weinstein LS.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive, and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

G(s)alpha is a ubiquitously expressed G protein alpha-subunit that couples
receptors to adenylyl cyclase. Mice with chondrocyte-specific ablation of the
G(s)alpha gene had severe epiphyseal and growth plate abnormalities and ectopic
cartilage formation within the metaphyseal region of the tibia. These results
show that G(s)alpha negatively regulates chondrocyte differentiation and is the
critical signaling mediator of the PTH/PTH-rP receptor in growth plate
chondrocytes.
INTRODUCTION: G(s)alpha is a ubiquitously expressed G protein alpha-subunit that
mediates signaling through G protein-coupled receptors to activate the
cAMP/protein kinase A signaling pathway. Although studies suggest an important
role for G(s)alpha in regulating growth plate development, direct in vivo
results examining this role are lacking.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The G(s)alpha gene was ablated in murine cartilage by
mating mice with loxP sites surrounding the G(s)alpha promoter and first exon
with collagen 2a1 promoter-Cre recombinase transgenic mice. Skeletal tissues
were studied by gross and microscopic pathology, and gene expression was
determined by in situ hybridization.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Mice with complete chondrocyte-specific G(s)alpha
deficiency (homozygotes) died within minutes after birth and had severe
epiphyseal and growth plate defects with shortening of the proliferative zone
and accelerated hypertrophic differentiation of growth plate chondrocytes, a
phenotype similar to that of PTH/PTH-related peptide (PTHrP) receptor knockout
mice. Indian hedgehog and PTH/PTHrP receptor expression in prehypertrophic
chondrocytes was unaffected in mutant mice. PTHrP expression in periarticular
cartilage was increased in the mutant mice, probably because of the closer
proximity of Ihh-secreting chondrocytes to the periarticular zone. In addition,
these mice developed ectopic cartilage at the anterior side of the metaphyseal
region in the tibia. Mice with partial G(s)alpha deficiency (heterozygotes)
exhibited no phenotype. These results show that G(s)alpha negatively regulates
chondrocyte differentiation and is the critical signaling mediator of the
PTH/PTHrP receptor in epiphyseal and growth plate chondrocytes.

DOI: 10.1359/JBMR.041210
PMID: 15765186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
