---
reference_id: "PMID:35170355"
title: Intestinal secretory mechanisms and diarrhea.
authors:
- Keely SJ
- Barrett KE
journal: Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1152/ajpgi.00316.2021
keywords:
- Diarrhea/metabolism
- Humans
- Intestinal Absorption
- Intestinal Mucosa/metabolism
- Intestinal Secretions
- Intestines
- Water
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intestinal secretory mechanisms and diarrhea.
**Authors:** Keely SJ, Barrett KE
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpgi.00316.2021](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpgi.00316.2021)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2022 Apr 1;322(4):G405-G420. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00316.2021. Epub 2022 Feb 16.

Intestinal secretory mechanisms and diarrhea.

Keely SJ(1), Barrett KE(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, Royal College of Surgeons in
Ireland, University of Medicine and Health Sciences, Dublin, Ireland.
(2)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, California.
(3)Department of Physiology and Membrane Biology, School of Medicine, University
of California, Davis, Davis, California.

One of the primary functions of the intestinal epithelium is to transport fluid
and electrolytes to and from the luminal contents. Under normal circumstances,
absorptive and secretory processes are tightly regulated such that absorption
predominates, thereby enabling conservation of the large volumes of water that
pass through the intestine each day. However, in conditions of secretory
diarrhea, this balance becomes dysregulated, so that fluid secretion, driven
primarily by Cl- secretion, overwhelms absorptive capacity, leading to increased
loss of water in the stool. Secretory diarrheas are common and include those
induced by pathogenic bacteria and viruses, allergens, and disruptions to bile
acid homeostasis, or as a side effect of many drugs. Here, we review the
cellular and molecular mechanisms by which Cl- and fluid secretion in the
intestine are regulated, how these mechanisms become dysregulated in conditions
of secretory diarrhea, currently available and emerging therapeutic approaches,
and how new strategies to exploit intestinal secretory mechanisms are
successfully being used in the treatment of constipation.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00316.2021
PMCID: PMC8917926
PMID: 35170355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest, financial or
otherwise, are declared by the authors.
