---
reference_id: "PMID:20301614"
title: "Blepharophimosis, Ptosis, and Epicanthus Inversus Syndrome."
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Verdin H
- Matton C
- De Baere E
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Blepharophimosis, Ptosis, and Epicanthus Inversus Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Verdin H, Matton C, De Baere E

## Content

1. Blepharophimosis, Ptosis, and Epicanthus Inversus Syndrome.

Verdin H(1), Matton C(2), De Baere E(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2004 Jul 8 [updated 2022 Mar 10].

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics Ghent University Hospital Ghent, Belgium
(2)Department of Biomolecular Medicine Ghent University Ghent, Belgium
(3)Center for Medical Genetics Ghent University Hospital; Department of
Biomolecular Medicine Ghent University Ghent, Belgium

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Blepharophimosis, ptosis, and epicanthus inversus
syndrome (BPES) is defined by a complex eyelid malformation characterized by
four major features, all present at birth: blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthus
inversus, and telecanthus. BPES type I includes the four major features and
primary ovarian insufficiency; BPES type II includes only the four major
features. Other ophthalmic manifestations that can be associated with BPES
include dysplastic eyelids, lacrimal duct anomalies, strabismus, refractive
errors, and amblyopia. Other craniofacial features may include a broad nasal
bridge and low-set ears.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of BPES is established in a proband with
suggestive findings and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in FOXL2 or its
regulatory domain identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management requires the input of a
multidisciplinary team of specialists. Eyelid surgery traditionally involves a
medial canthoplasty for correction of the blepharophimosis, epicanthus inversus,
and telecanthus at age three to five years, typically followed a year later by
ptosis correction. Primary ovarian insufficiency is managed by hormone
replacement therapy; fertility is addressed with reproductive technologies such
as embryo donation, egg donation, and cryopreservation strategies. Surveillance:
Ophthalmic follow up depends on age, procedures performed in the past, and
results of visual acuity testing. Endocrinologic and gynecologic follow up are
advised for affected females. Psychological follow up is recommended.
GENETIC COUNSELING: BPES is almost always inherited in an autosomal dominant
manner. More than half of individuals diagnosed with BPES have the disorder as
the result of a pathogenic variant inherited from an affected parent. Each child
of an individual with BPES has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic
variant. Once the BPES-causing pathogenic variant has been identified in an
affected family member, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk and
preimplantation genetic testing for BPES are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301614
