---
reference_id: "PMID:38576642"
title: "Congenital Erythropoietic Porphyria: A Rare Inherited Disorder."
authors:
- Saikrishna P
- Palaniswamy G
- Pillikunte Doddareddy N
- Ishfaq L
- Zargar MN
- Wafa Eranhikkal F
- Sahu S
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.55558
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital Erythropoietic Porphyria: A Rare Inherited Disorder.
**Authors:** Saikrishna P, Palaniswamy G, Pillikunte Doddareddy N, Ishfaq L, Zargar MN, Wafa Eranhikkal F, Sahu S
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.55558](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.55558)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Mar 5;16(3):e55558. doi: 10.7759/cureus.55558. eCollection 2024 
Mar.

Congenital Erythropoietic Porphyria: A Rare Inherited Disorder.

Saikrishna P(1), Palaniswamy G(2), Pillikunte Doddareddy N(3), Ishfaq L(4), 
Zargar MN(5), Wafa Eranhikkal F(6), Sahu S(7).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology, Guntur Medical College, Guntur, IND.
(2)Medicine, Saveetha Medical College and Hospital, Chennai, IND.
(3)Internal Medicine, Bangalore Medical College and Research Institute, 
Bengaluru, IND.
(4)Medicine, Directorate of Health Services Kashmir, Srinagar, IND.
(5)Medicine, Fatima Jinnah Medical University, Lahore, PAK.
(6)Dermatology, Teaching University of Geomedi, Tablisi, GEO.
(7)Surgery, Jagadguru Jayadeva Murugarajendra (JJM) Medical College, Davanagere, 
IND.

Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP), also known as Gunther's disease, is 
an uncommon autosomal recessive disorder caused by a mutation in the 
uroporphyrinogen III synthase gene. This mutation results in reduced enzyme 
levels in heme synthesis and the accumulation of pathogenic porphyrin isomers, 
uroporphyrin I and coproporphyrin I, leading to the clinical manifestations of 
CEP. Typically, CEP manifests shortly after birth with severe cutaneous 
photosensitivity, blistering, ulceration, and scarring. Erythrodontia, 
acro-osteolysis, and skeletal abnormalities are frequently present in 
conjunction with it. It can even manifest in utero as hydrops fetalis, with pink 
or red diaper staining as an early diagnostic clue. In this case, we present a 
17-year-old male with complaints of discharge over the left foot, blisters upon 
sunlight exposure, extensive mottled pigmentation, excessive facial hair, 
mutilated fingers, and verrucous growth over the toes. Using a Wood's lamp 
revealed pink fluorescence of teeth and ulcers on the foot. Laboratory 
investigations demonstrated anemia, leukocytopenia, thrombocytopenia, and 
elevated urine uroporphyrin 1 and coproporphyrin 1 levels. Current treatment 
approaches include sun protection to avoid further skin damage, beta-carotene to 
reduce oxidative stress, and blood transfusions to manage anemia. Stem cell 
transplantation remains the sole curative therapy for this exceedingly rare 
condition. This case report underscores the rarity and complexity of CEP and 
emphasizes the challenges in its management.

Copyright © 2024, Saikrishna et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.55558
PMCID: PMC10993765
PMID: 38576642

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.