---
reference_id: "PMID:17274935"
title: "Basal cell carcinoma: review of epidemiology, pathogenesis, and associated risk factors."
authors:
- Lear W
- Dahlke E
- Murray CA
journal: J Cutan Med Surg
year: '2007'
doi: 10.2310/7750.2007.00011
keywords:
- Apoptosis/physiology
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/epidemiology, etiology, pathology, surgery"
- DNA Damage
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Incidence
- Risk Factors
- "Skin Neoplasms/etiology, pathology, surgery"
- Sunlight
- Ultraviolet Rays/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Basal cell carcinoma: review of epidemiology, pathogenesis, and associated risk factors.
**Authors:** Lear W, Dahlke E, Murray CA
**Journal:** J Cutan Med Surg (2007)
**DOI:** [10.2310/7750.2007.00011](https://doi.org/10.2310/7750.2007.00011)

## Content

1. J Cutan Med Surg. 2007 Jan-Feb;11(1):19-30. doi: 10.2310/7750.2007.00011.

Basal cell carcinoma: review of epidemiology, pathogenesis, and associated risk
factors.

Lear W(1), Dahlke E, Murray CA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Dermatology, University of Toronto, Women's College Hospital,
Toronto, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is extremely common, and its incidence
continues to rise.
OBJECTIVE: This review presents the literature pertaining to the epidemiology,
pathogenesis, and risk factors associated with BCC.
CONCLUSIONS: The risk of developing BCC depends on both genetic predisposition
and exposure to risk. Fair-skinned people account for the overwhelming majority
of patients, beyond what would be expected by skin phototype alone. Damage to
multiple lines of defense appears to be necessary for cancer development and
spread. This damage distorts the concerted effort of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
repair, immunosurveillance, and cellular growth regulation to protect against
malignant progression. Ultraviolet light exposure is the most critical
modifiable factor determining early expression and frequency of BCC development.

DOI: 10.2310/7750.2007.00011
PMID: 17274935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
