---
reference_id: "PMID:19343240"
title: Solid phase synthesis and structural analysis of novel A-chain dicarba analogs of human relaxin-3 (INSL7) that exhibit full biological activity.
authors:
- Hossain MA
- Rosengren KJ
- Zhang S
- Bathgate RA
- Tregear GW
- van Lierop BJ
- Robinson AJ
- Wade JD
journal: Org Biomol Chem
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1039/b821882j
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Solid phase synthesis and structural analysis of novel A-chain dicarba analogs of human relaxin-3 (INSL7) that exhibit full biological activity.
**Authors:** Hossain MA, Rosengren KJ, Zhang S, Bathgate RA, Tregear GW, van Lierop BJ, Robinson AJ, Wade JD
**Journal:** Org Biomol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1039/b821882j](https://doi.org/10.1039/b821882j)

## Content

1. Org Biomol Chem. 2009 Apr 21;7(8):1547-53. doi: 10.1039/b821882j. Epub 2009
Feb  24.

Solid phase synthesis and structural analysis of novel A-chain dicarba analogs 
of human relaxin-3 (INSL7) that exhibit full biological activity.

Hossain MA(1), Rosengren KJ, Zhang S, Bathgate RA, Tregear GW, van Lierop BJ, 
Robinson AJ, Wade JD.

Author information:
(1)Howard Florey Institute, University of Melbourne, Victoria, 3010, Australia.

Replacement of disulfide bonds with non-reducible isosteres can be a useful 
means of increasing the in vivo stability of a protein. We describe the 
replacement of the A-chain intramolecular disulfide bond of human relaxin-3 (H3 
relaxin, INSL7), an insulin-like peptide that has potential applications in the 
treatment of stress and obesity, with the physiologically stable dicarba bond. 
Solid phase peptide synthesis was used to prepare an A-chain analogue in which 
the two cysteine residues that form the intramolecular bond were replaced with 
allylglycine. On-resin microwave-mediated ring closing metathesis was then 
employed to generate the dicarba bridge. Subsequent cleavage of the peptide from 
the solid support, purification of two isomers and their combination with the 
B-chain via two intermolecular disulfide bonds, then furnished two isomers of 
dicarba-H3 relaxin. These were characterized by CD spectroscopy, which suggested 
a structural similarity to the native peptide. Additional analysis by solution 
NMR spectroscopy also identified the likely cis/trans form of the analogs. Both 
peptides demonstrated binding affinities that were equivalent to native H3 
relaxin on RXFP1 and RXFP3 expressing cells. However, although the cAMP activity 
of the analogs on RXFP3 expressing cells was similar to the native peptide, the 
potency on RXFP1 expressing cells was slightly lower. The data confirmed the use 
of a dicarba bond as a useful isosteric replacement of the disulfide bond.

DOI: 10.1039/b821882j
PMID: 19343240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]