---
reference_id: PMID:37534975
title: Chymotrypsin-like Elastase-1 Mediates Progressive Emphysema in Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.
authors:
- Devine AJ
- Smith NJ
- Joshi R
- Fan Q
- Borchers MT
- Clair GC
- Adkins JN
- Varisco BM
journal: Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.15326/jcopdf.2023.0416
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chymotrypsin-like Elastase-1 Mediates Progressive Emphysema in Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.
**Authors:** Devine AJ, Smith NJ, Joshi R, Fan Q, Borchers MT, Clair GC, Adkins JN, Varisco BM
**Journal:** Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.15326/jcopdf.2023.0416](https://doi.org/10.15326/jcopdf.2023.0416)

## Content

1. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2023 Oct 26;10(4):380-391. doi: 
10.15326/jcopdf.2023.0416.

Chymotrypsin-like Elastase-1 Mediates Progressive Emphysema in Alpha-1 
Antitrypsin Deficiency.

Devine AJ(1), Smith NJ(2), Joshi R(1), Fan Q(1), Borchers MT(1)(3), Clair GC(4), 
Adkins JN(4), Varisco BM(1)(2)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Critical Care Medicine, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States.
(2)University of Cincinnati School of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Cincinnati, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, United States.
(4)Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Washington, United States.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, Arkansas, United States.
(6)Arkansas Children's Research Institute, Little Rock, Arkansas, United States.

Update of
    Res Sq. 2023 Feb 23:rs.3.rs-2617812. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-2617812/v1.

Chymotrypsin-like elastase 1 (CELA1) is a serine protease that is neutralized by 
alpha-1antitrypsin (AAT) and prevents emphysema in a murine antisense 
oligonucleotide model of AAT-deficient emphysema. Mice with genetic ablation of 
AAT do not have emphysema at baseline but develop emphysema with injury and 
aging. We tested the role of the CELA1 gene in emphysema development in this 
genetic model of AAT-deficiency following tracheal lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 10 
months of cigarette smoke exposure, aging, and a low-dose tracheal porcine 
pancreatic elastase (LD-PPE) model we developed. In this last model, we 
performed proteomic analysis to understand differences in lung protein 
composition. We were unable to show that AAT-deficient mice developed more 
emphysema than wild type with escalating doses of LPS. In the LD-PPE model, 
AAT-deficient mice developed significant and progressive emphysema from which 
Cela1-/- & AAT-deficient mice were protected. Cela1-/-& AAT-deficient lungs had 
more matrix-associated proteins than AAT-deficientlungs but also had more 
leukocyte-associated proteases. With cigarette smoke exposure, Cela1-/- 
&AAT-deficient mice had more emphysema than AAT-deficient mice but had less 
myeloperoxidase activity. Cela1-/-&AAT-deficient mice had less age-related 
airspace simplification than AAT-deficient and were comparable to wild type. 
While CELA1 promotes inflammation-independent emphysema progression and its 
absence preserves the lung matrix in multiple models of AAT-deficient emphysema, 
for unclear reasons Cela1 deficiency is associated with increased emphysema with 
cigarette smoke. While anti-CELA1 therapies could potentially be used to prevent 
emphysema progression in AAT deficiency after smoking cessation, an 
understanding of why and how cigarette smoke exacerbates emphysema in Cela1 
deficiency and whether AAT replacement therapy mitigates this effect is needed 
first.

JCOPDF © 2023.

DOI: 10.15326/jcopdf.2023.0416
PMCID: PMC10699485
PMID: 37534975

Conflict of interest statement: BMV and Cincinnati Children’s Hospital hold 
patent PCT/US2020/061774 titled “CELA-1 Inhibition for Treatment of Lung 
Disease.” None of the other auhors have any conflicts to declare.