---
reference_id: "PMID:30302938"
title: "Concise Review: The Current State of Human In Vitro Cardiac Disease Modeling: A Focus on Gene Editing and Tissue Engineering."
authors:
- Hoes MF
- Bomer N
- van der Meer P
journal: Stem Cells Transl Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/sctm.18-0052
keywords:
- Gene Editing/methods
- "Heart Diseases/metabolism, therapy"
- Heart Failure/therapy
- Humans
- Stem Cells/cytology
- Tissue Engineering/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Concise Review: The Current State of Human In Vitro Cardiac Disease Modeling: A Focus on Gene Editing and Tissue Engineering.
**Authors:** Hoes MF, Bomer N, van der Meer P
**Journal:** Stem Cells Transl Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/sctm.18-0052](https://doi.org/10.1002/sctm.18-0052)

## Content

1. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2019 Jan;8(1):66-74. doi: 10.1002/sctm.18-0052. Epub
2018  Oct 9.

Concise Review: The Current State of Human In Vitro Cardiac Disease Modeling: A 
Focus on Gene Editing and Tissue Engineering.

Hoes MF(1), Bomer N(1), van der Meer P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, RB, The Netherlands.

Until recently, in vivo and ex vivo experiments were the only means to determine 
factors and pathways involved in disease pathophysiology. After the generation 
of characterized human embryonic stem cell lines, human diseases could readily 
be studied in an extensively controllable setting. The introduction of 
human-induced pluripotent stem cells, a decade ago, allowed the investigation of 
hereditary diseases in vitro. In the field of cardiology, diseases linked to 
known genes have successfully been studied, revealing novel disease mechanisms. 
The direct effects of various mutations leading to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
dilated cardiomyopathy, arrythmogenic cardiomyopathy, or left ventricular 
noncompaction cardiomyopathy are discovered as a result of in vitro disease 
modeling. Researchers are currently applying more advanced techniques to unravel 
more complex phenotypes, resulting in state-of-the-art models that better mimic 
in vivo physiology. The continued improvement of tissue engineering techniques 
and new insights into epigenetics resulted in more reliable and feasible 
platforms for disease modeling and the development of novel therapeutic 
strategies. The introduction of CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing granted the ability to 
model diseases in vitro independent of induced pluripotent stem cells. In 
addition to highlighting recent developments in the field of human in vitro 
cardiomyopathy modeling, this review also aims to emphasize limitations that 
remain to be addressed; including residual somatic epigenetic signatures induced 
pluripotent stem cells, and modeling diseases with unknown genetic causes. Stem 
Cells Translational Medicine 2019;8:66-74.

© 2018 The Authors. Stem Cells Translational Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1002/sctm.18-0052
PMCID: PMC6312446
PMID: 30302938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]