---
reference_id: "PMID:30360290"
title: Effects of human mobility, temperature and mosquito control on the spatiotemporal transmission of dengue.
authors:
- Zhu G
- Liu T
- Xiao J
- Zhang B
- Song T
- Zhang Y
- Lin L
- Peng Z
- Deng A
- Ma W
- Hao Y
journal: Sci Total Environ
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.09.182
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of human mobility, temperature and mosquito control on the spatiotemporal transmission of dengue.
**Authors:** Zhu G, Liu T, Xiao J, Zhang B, Song T, Zhang Y, Lin L, Peng Z, Deng A, Ma W, Hao Y
**Journal:** Sci Total Environ (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.09.182](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.09.182)

## Content

1. Sci Total Environ. 2019 Feb 15;651(Pt 1):969-978. doi: 
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.09.182. Epub 2018 Sep 21.

Effects of human mobility, temperature and mosquito control on the 
spatiotemporal transmission of dengue.

Zhu G(1), Liu T(2), Xiao J(2), Zhang B(2), Song T(3), Zhang Y(3), Lin L(3), Peng 
Z(3), Deng A(3), Ma W(4), Hao Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Statistics and Epidemiology, School of Public Health, 
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China; Department of Mathematics and 
Computing Science, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin 541004, 
China; Guangdong Provincial Institute of Public Health, Guangdong Provincial 
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Guangzhou 511430, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Institute of Public Health, Guangdong Provincial Center 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Guangzhou 511430, China.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Guangzhou, 
511430, China.
(4)Guangdong Provincial Institute of Public Health, Guangdong Provincial Center 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Guangzhou 511430, China. Electronic address: 
mawj@gdiph.org.cn.
(5)Department of Medical Statistics and Epidemiology, School of Public Health, 
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China. Electronic address: 
haoyt@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Dengue transmission exhibits evident geographic variations and seasonal 
differences. Such heterogeneity is caused by various impact factors, in which 
temperature and host/vector behaviors could drive its spatiotemporal 
transmission, but mosquito control could stop its progression. These factors 
together contribute to the observed distributions of dengue incidence from 
surveillance systems. To effectively and efficiently monitor and response to 
dengue outbreak, it would be necessary to systematically model these factors and 
their impacts on dengue transmission. This paper introduces a new modeling 
framework with consideration of multi-scale factors and surveillance data to 
clarify the hidden dynamics accounting for dengue spatiotemporal transmission. 
The model is based on compartmental system which takes into account the 
biting-based interactions among humans, viruses and mosquitoes, as well as the 
essential impacts of human mobility, temperature and mosquito control. This 
framework was validated with real epidemic data by applying retrospectively to 
the 2014 dengue epidemic in the Pearl River Delta (PRD) in southern China. The 
results indicated that suitable condition of temperature could be responsible 
for the explosive dengue outbreak in the PRD, and human mobility could be the 
causal factor leading to its spatial transmission across different cities. It 
was further found that mosquito intervention has significantly reduced dengue 
incidence, where a total of 52,770 (95% confidence interval [CI]: 29,231-76,308) 
dengue cases were prevented in the PRD in 2014. The findings can offer new 
insights for improving the predictability and risk assessment of dengue 
epidemics. The model also can be readily extended to investigate the 
transmission dynamics of other mosquito-borne diseases.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.09.182
PMID: 30360290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]