---
reference_id: "PMID:38070096"
title: "Variable phenotypes and outcomes associated with the MMACHC c.482G > A mutation: follow-up in a large CblC disease cohort."
authors:
- Wu SN
- E HS
- Yu Y
- Ling SY
- Liang LL
- Qiu WJ
- Zhang HW
- Shuai RX
- Wei HY
- Yang CJ
- Xu P
- Chen XG
- Zou H
- Feng JZ
- Niu TT
- Hu HL
- Zhang KC
- Lu DY
- Gong ZW
- Zhan X
- Ji WJ
- Gu XF
- Chen YX
- Han LS
journal: World J Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12519-023-00770-2
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Retrospective Studies
- Phenotype
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Infant
- Mutation
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics"
- China/epidemiology
- Child
- Oxidoreductases/genetics
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Cohort Studies
- Neonatal Screening
- Adolescent
- Homocystinuria
- Vitamin B 12 Deficiency/congenital
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variable phenotypes and outcomes associated with the MMACHC c.482G > A mutation: follow-up in a large CblC disease cohort.
**Authors:** Wu SN, E HS, Yu Y, Ling SY, Liang LL, Qiu WJ, Zhang HW, Shuai RX, Wei HY, Yang CJ, Xu P, Chen XG, Zou H, Feng JZ, Niu TT, Hu HL, Zhang KC, Lu DY, Gong ZW, Zhan X, Ji WJ, Gu XF, Chen YX, Han LS
**Journal:** World J Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12519-023-00770-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12519-023-00770-2)

## Content

1. World J Pediatr. 2024 Aug;20(8):848-858. doi: 10.1007/s12519-023-00770-2. Epub
 2023 Dec 9.

Variable phenotypes and outcomes associated with the MMACHC c.482G > A mutation:
follow-up in a large CblC disease cohort.

Wu SN(1), E HS(2), Yu Y(3), Ling SY(4), Liang LL(4), Qiu WJ(4), Zhang HW(4),
Shuai RX(5), Wei HY(1), Yang CJ(6), Xu P(6), Chen XG(6), Zou H(7), Feng JZ(8),
Niu TT(9), Hu HL(10), Zhang KC(4), Lu DY(4), Gong ZW(4), Zhan X(4), Ji WJ(4), Gu
XF(4), Chen YX(11), Han LS(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Henan Key Laboratory of
Children's Genetics and Metabolic Diseases, Children's Hospital Affiliated to
Zhengzhou University, Henan Children's Hospital, Zhengzhou Children's Hospital,
No. 255 Gangdu Street, Zhengzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Genetics, Fujian Children's
Hospital, Fuzhou, China.
(3)The Center for Pediatric Liver Diseases, Children's Hospital, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology/Genetics, Shanghai Institute for
Pediatric Research, Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, No. 1665 Kongjiang Road, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Second Affiliated Hospital of Naval Medical
University, Shanghai, China.
(6)Center of Neonatal Disease Screening, Jining Maternal and Child Health Care
Hospital, Jining, China.
(7)Center of Neonatal Disease Screening, Jinan Maternal and Child Health Care
Hospital, Jinan, China.
(8)Center of Neonatal Disease Screening, Shijiazhuang Maternal and Child Health
Care Hospital, Shijiazhuang, China.
(9)Center of Neonatal Disease Screening, Shandong Maternal and Child Health Care
Hospital, Jinan, China.
(10)Center of Neonatal Disease Screening, Hefei Maternal and Child Health Care
Hospital, Hefei, China.
(11)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Henan Key Laboratory of
Children's Genetics and Metabolic Diseases, Children's Hospital Affiliated to
Zhengzhou University, Henan Children's Hospital, Zhengzhou Children's Hospital,
No. 255 Gangdu Street, Zhengzhou, China. cyx75@126.com.
(12)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology/Genetics, Shanghai Institute for
Pediatric Research, Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, No. 1665 Kongjiang Road, Shanghai, China.
hanlianshu@xinhuamed.com.cn.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to characterize the variable phenotypes
and outcomes associated with the methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria type
C protein gene (MMACHC) c.482G > A mutation in 195 Chinese cases with CblC
disease.
METHODS: We carried out a national, retrospective multicenter study of 195
Chinese patients with CblC disease attributable to the MMACHC c.482G > A variant
either in a homozygous or compound heterozygous state. The control group
consisted of 200 patients diagnosed with CblC disease who did not possess the
c.482G > A mutation. Clinical features, including disease onset, symptoms,
biochemical metabolites, gene mutation, and follow-up outcomes were reviewed and
analyzed in detail. The median follow-up period spanned 3 years and 8 months,
with a range of 1 year and 2 months to 12 years and 10 months.
RESULTS: Among 195 patients carrying the c.482G > A variant, 125 (64.1%) cases
were diagnosed by newborn screening (NBS), 60 (30.8%) cases were detected due to
disease onset, and 10 (5.1%) cases were identified from sibling diagnoses. One
hundred and seventeen (93.6%) individuals who were diagnosed by NBS, and nine
patients who came from sibling diagnoses remained asymptomatic in this study.
From 69 symptomatic patients of the c.482G > A group, more patients presented
with later onset, and the top six common clinical symptoms at disease onset were
developmental delay (59.4%), lower limb weakness and poor exercise tolerance
(50.7%), cognitive decline (37.7%), gait instability and abnormal posture
(36.2%), seizures (26.1%), and psychiatric and behavioral disturbances (24.6%).
In the 159 symptomatic patients lacking c.482G > A variants, the most frequently
observed clinical manifestations at disease onset included developmental delay
(81.8%), lethargy and feeding difficulty (62.9%), lower limb weakness and poor
exercise tolerance (54.7%), prolonged neonatal jaundice (51.6%), vomiting
(47.2%), and seizures (32.7%). Before treatment, the levels of blood
propionylcarnitine, propionylcarnitine/acetylcarnitine ratio, and homocysteine
in the c.482G > A group were significantly lower (P < 0.05) than those in the
non-c.482G > A group, while the concentration of urinary methylmalonic acid was
slightly lower (P > 0.05). The degree of decline in the above metabolites after
treatment in different groups significantly differed in both plasma total
homocysteine values and urinary methylmalonic acid levels (P < 0.05). In
patients carrying the c.482G > A variant compared with the non-c.428G > A group,
there were markedly lower rates of mortality (0.5% vs. 2.0%) and developmental
delay (20.5% vs. 65.5%). When compared with individuals diagnosed due to disease
onset, those identified through NBS in either group exhibited a reduced
proportion of disease onset (6.7% vs. 100% in the c.482G > A group, 54.4% vs.
100% in the non-c.482G > A group), lower mortality (0.0% vs. 1.7% in the
c.482G > A group, 0.0% vs. 3.6% in the non-c.482G > A group), and had a higher
percentage of patients exhibiting normal psychomotor and language development
(99.3% vs. 33.3% in the c.482G > A group, 58.9% vs. 10.9% in the non-c.482G > A
group).
CONCLUSIONS: The c.482G > A variant in MMACHC is associated with late-onset and
milder phenotypes of CblC disease. Patients with this mutation tend to have a
relatively better response to hydroxocobalamin, better metabolic control, and
more favorable neurological outcomes. NBS and other appropriate pre-symptomatic
treatments seem to be helpful in early diagnosis, resulting in favorable
clinical outcomes. Video Abstract (MP4 136794 kb).

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12519-023-00770-2
PMCID: PMC11402842
PMID: 38070096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No financial or non-financial benefits have been
received or will be received from any party related directly or indirectly to
the subject of this article. Author Xue-Fan Gu is a member of the Editorial
Board for World Journal of Pediatrics. The paper was handled by the other Editor
and has undergone rigorous peer review process. Author Xue-Fan Gu was not
involved in the journal's review of, or decisions related to, this manuscript.
The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.
