---
reference_id: "PMID:33129925"
title: Valproic acid up-regulates the whole NO-citrulline cycle for potent iNOS-NO signaling to promote neuronal differentiation of adipose tissue-derived stem cells.
authors:
- Hayashi D
- Okubo T
- Suzuki T
- Miyazaki Y
- Tanaka K
- Usami M
- Takizawa T
journal: Nitric Oxide
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.niox.2020.10.006
keywords:
- Adipose Tissue/cytology
- Animals
- Arginine/pharmacology
- "Argininosuccinate Synthase/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Cell Differentiation/drug effects
- Citrulline/metabolism
- Enzyme Inhibitors/pharmacology
- Male
- "N-Methylaspartate/analogs & derivatives, pharmacology"
- Neurons/metabolism
- Nitric Oxide/metabolism
- Nitric Oxide Synthase Type II/metabolism
- "Rats, Wistar"
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- Stem Cells/metabolism
- Up-Regulation/drug effects
- Valproic Acid/pharmacology
- Rats
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Valproic acid up-regulates the whole NO-citrulline cycle for potent iNOS-NO signaling to promote neuronal differentiation of adipose tissue-derived stem cells.
**Authors:** Hayashi D, Okubo T, Suzuki T, Miyazaki Y, Tanaka K, Usami M, Takizawa T
**Journal:** Nitric Oxide (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.niox.2020.10.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.niox.2020.10.006)

## Content

1. Nitric Oxide. 2021 Jan 1;106:35-44. doi: 10.1016/j.niox.2020.10.006. Epub 2020
 Oct 28.

Valproic acid up-regulates the whole NO-citrulline cycle for potent iNOS-NO
signaling to promote neuronal differentiation of adipose tissue-derived stem
cells.

Hayashi D(1), Okubo T(1), Suzuki T(1), Miyazaki Y(1), Tanaka K(1), Usami M(2),
Takizawa T(3).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine, Azabu University, Fuchinobe, Chuo-ku,
Sagamihara, 252-5201, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine, Azabu University, Fuchinobe, Chuo-ku,
Sagamihara, 252-5201, Japan; Division of Pharmacology, National Institute of
Health Sciences, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, 210-9501, Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine, Azabu University, Fuchinobe, Chuo-ku,
Sagamihara, 252-5201, Japan. Electronic address: takizawa@azabu-u.ac.jp.

Valproic acid (VPA) remarkably promotes the differentiation of adipose
tissue-derived stem cells (ASCs) to mature neuronal cells through nitric oxide
(NO) signaling due to up-regulated inducible NO synthase (iNOS) as early as
within 3 days. Here, we investigated mechanisms of VPA-promoted neuronal
differentiation of ASCs concerning the NO-citrulline cycle, the metabolic cycle
producing NO. Cultured rat ASCs were differentiated to mature neuronal cells
rich in dendrites and expressing a neuronal marker by treatments with VPA at
2 mM for 3 days and subsequently with the neuronal induction medium for 2 h.
Inhibitor (α-methyl-d, l-aspartic acid, MDLA) of arginosuccinate synthase (ASS),
a key enzyme of the NO-citrulline cycle, abolishes intracellular NO increase and
VPA-promoted neuronal differentiation in ASCs. l-Arginine, the substrate of
iNOS, restores the promotion effect of VPA, being against MDLA.
Immunocytochemistry showed that ASS and iNOS were increased in ASCs expressing
neurofilament medium polypeptide (NeFM), a neuronal marker, by VPA and NIM
synergistically. Real-time RT-PCR analysis showed that mRNAs of Ass and
arginosuccinate lyase (Asl) in the NO-citrulline cycle were increased by VPA.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay indicated that Ass and Asl were up-regulated
by VPA through the acetylation of their associated histone. From these results,
it was considered that VPA up-regulated the whole NO-citrulline cycle, which
enabled continuous NO production by iNOS in large amounts for potent iNOS-NO
signaling to promote neuronal differentiation of ASCs. This may also indicate a
mechanism enabling short-lived NO to function conveniently as a potent signaling
molecule that can disappear quickly after its role.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.niox.2020.10.006
PMID: 33129925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
