---
reference_id: "PMID:36443464"
title: Dutch pharmacogenetics working group (DPWG) guideline for the gene-drug interaction between UGT1A1 and irinotecan.
authors:
- Hulshof EC
- Deenen MJ
- Nijenhuis M
- Soree B
- de Boer-Veger NJ
- Buunk AM
- Houwink EJF
- Risselada A
- Rongen GAPJM
- van Schaik RHN
- Touw DJ
- van der Weide J
- van Westrhenen R
- Deneer VHM
- Guchelaar HJ
- Swen JJ
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-022-01243-2
keywords:
- Humans
- Irinotecan/therapeutic use
- Camptothecin/adverse effects
- Pharmacogenetics
- Genotype
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Drug Interactions
- UGT1A1 Enzyme
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dutch pharmacogenetics working group (DPWG) guideline for the gene-drug interaction between UGT1A1 and irinotecan.
**Authors:** Hulshof EC, Deenen MJ, Nijenhuis M, Soree B, de Boer-Veger NJ, Buunk AM, Houwink EJF, Risselada A, Rongen GAPJM, van Schaik RHN, Touw DJ, van der Weide J, van Westrhenen R, Deneer VHM, Guchelaar HJ, Swen JJ
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-022-01243-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-022-01243-2)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2023 Sep;31(9):982-987. doi: 10.1038/s41431-022-01243-2. Epub
 2022 Nov 28.

Dutch pharmacogenetics working group (DPWG) guideline for the gene-drug 
interaction between UGT1A1 and irinotecan.

Hulshof EC(#)(1)(2), Deenen MJ(#)(1)(2), Nijenhuis M(3), Soree B(4), de 
Boer-Veger NJ(5), Buunk AM(6), Houwink EJF(7)(8), Risselada A(9), Rongen 
GAPJM(10)(11), van Schaik RHN(12), Touw DJ(13)(14), van der Weide J(15), van 
Westrhenen R(16)(17)(18), Deneer VHM(19)(20), Guchelaar HJ(2), Swen JJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Catharina Hospital, Eindhoven, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Toxicology, Leiden University Medical 
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)Royal Dutch Pharmacists Association (KNMP), The Hague, The Netherlands. 
M.Nijenhuis@knmp.nl.
(4)Royal Dutch Pharmacists Association (KNMP), The Hague, The Netherlands.
(5)Pharmacy Boterdiep, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(6)Pharmacy De Katwijkse Apotheek, Katwijk, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Public Health and Primary Care (PHEG), Leiden University 
Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(8)National eHealth Living Lab (NELL), Leiden, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Wilhelmina Hospital, Assen, The Netherlands.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(11)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Radboud University Medical 
Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(12)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Erasmus University Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(13)Department of Clinical Pharmacy & Pharmacology, University of Groningen, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(14)Department of PharmacoTherapy, -Epidemiology & -Economics, Groningen 
Research Institute of Pharmacy, University of Groningen, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(15)Department of Clinical Chemistry, St. Jansdal Hospital, Harderwijk, The 
Netherlands.
(16)Department of Psychiatry, Parnassia Group, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(17)Department of Psychiatry and Neuropsychology, Faculty of Health, Medicine 
and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(18)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience (IoPPN), King's College 
London, London, UK.
(19)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Division Laboratories, Pharmacy and 
Biomedical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(20)Division of Pharmacoepidemiology and Clinical Pharmacology, Utrecht 
Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences (UIPS), Department of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2023 Sep;31(9):1088-1089. doi: 10.1038/s41431-023-01315-x.

Comment in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2023 Sep;31(9):980-981. doi: 10.1038/s41431-023-01306-y.

The Dutch Pharmacogenetics Working Group (DPWG) aims to facilitate PGx 
implementation by developing evidence-based pharmacogenetics guidelines to 
optimize pharmacotherapy. This guideline describes the starting dose 
optimization of the anti-cancer drug irinotecan to decrease the risk of severe 
toxicity, such as (febrile) neutropenia or diarrhoea. Uridine diphosphate 
glucuronosyl transferase 1A1 (UGT1A1 encoded by the UGT1A1 gene) enzyme 
deficiency increases risk of irinotecan-induced toxicity. Gene variants leading 
to UGT1A1 enzyme deficiency (e.g. UGT1A1*6, *28 and *37) can be used to optimize 
an individual's starting dose thereby preventing carriers from toxicity. 
Homozygous or compound heterozygous carriers of these allele variants are 
defined as UGT1A1 poor metabolisers (PM). DPWG recommends a 70% starting dose in 
PM patients and no dose reduction in IM patients who start treatment with 
irinotecan. Based on the DPWG clinical implication score, UGT1A1 genotyping is 
considered "essential", indicating that UGT1A1 testing must be performed prior 
to initiating irinotecan treatment.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to European Society of Human 
Genetics.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-022-01243-2
PMCID: PMC10474017
PMID: 36443464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.