---
reference_id: "PMID:31086325"
title: A complex human gut microbiome cultured in an anaerobic intestine-on-a-chip.
authors:
- Jalili-Firoozinezhad S
- Gazzaniga FS
- Calamari EL
- Camacho DM
- Fadel CW
- Bein A
- Swenor B
- Nestor B
- Cronce MJ
- Tovaglieri A
- Levy O
- Gregory KE
- Breault DT
- Cabral JMS
- Kasper DL
- Novak R
- Ingber DE
journal: Nat Biomed Eng
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41551-019-0397-0
keywords:
- Anaerobiosis
- "Bacteria/classification, growth & development"
- Bacteroidetes
- Biodiversity
- Caco-2 Cells
- Cell Culture Techniques/methods
- Epithelial Cells
- Feces/microbiology
- Bacillota
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome/physiology
- Host Microbial Interactions/physiology
- Humans
- Hypoxia
- In Vitro Techniques
- Intestinal Mucosa/microbiology
- Lab-On-A-Chip Devices
- Microbiota/physiology
- Microfluidic Analytical Techniques/methods
- Mucus
- Oxygen
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A complex human gut microbiome cultured in an anaerobic intestine-on-a-chip.
**Authors:** Jalili-Firoozinezhad S, Gazzaniga FS, Calamari EL, Camacho DM, Fadel CW, Bein A, Swenor B, Nestor B, Cronce MJ, Tovaglieri A, Levy O, Gregory KE, Breault DT, Cabral JMS, Kasper DL, Novak R, Ingber DE
**Journal:** Nat Biomed Eng (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41551-019-0397-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-019-0397-0)

## Content

1. Nat Biomed Eng. 2019 Jul;3(7):520-531. doi: 10.1038/s41551-019-0397-0. Epub
2019  May 13.

A complex human gut microbiome cultured in an anaerobic intestine-on-a-chip.

Jalili-Firoozinezhad S(1)(2), Gazzaniga FS(1)(3), Calamari EL(1), Camacho DM(1),
Fadel CW(1), Bein A(1), Swenor B(1), Nestor B(1), Cronce MJ(1), Tovaglieri
A(1)(4), Levy O(1), Gregory KE(5)(6), Breault DT(6)(7)(8), Cabral JMS(2), Kasper
DL(3), Novak R(1), Ingber DE(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University,
Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering and Institute for Bioengineering and
Biosciences, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon,
Portugal.
(3)Department of Immunology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
(5)Department of Pediatric Newborn Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Endocrinology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(8)Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(9)Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University,
Boston, MA, USA. don.ingber@wyss.harvard.edu.
(10)Vascular Biology Program and Department of Surgery, Boston Children's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
don.ingber@wyss.harvard.edu.
(11)Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
Cambridge, MA, USA. don.ingber@wyss.harvard.edu.

Erratum in
    Nat Biomed Eng. 2019 Jul;3(7):583. doi: 10.1038/s41551-019-0428-x.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019 Jul;16(7):390. doi:
10.1038/s41575-019-0162-6.
    Nat Methods. 2019 Jul;16(7):578. doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0489-5.

The diverse bacterial populations that comprise the commensal microbiome of the
human intestine play a central role in health and disease. A method that
sustains complex microbial communities in direct contact with living human
intestinal cells and their overlying mucus layer in vitro would thus enable the
investigation of host-microbiome interactions. Here, we show the extended
coculture of living human intestinal epithelium with stable communities of
aerobic and anaerobic human gut microbiota, using a microfluidic
intestine-on-a-chip that permits the control and real-time assessment of
physiologically relevant oxygen gradients. When compared to aerobic coculture
conditions, the establishment of a transluminal hypoxia gradient in the chip
increased intestinal barrier function and sustained a physiologically relevant
level of microbial diversity, consisting of over 200 unique operational
taxonomic units from 11 different genera and an abundance of obligate anaerobic
bacteria, with ratios of Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes similar to those observed
in human faeces. The intestine-on-a-chip may serve as a discovery tool for the
development of microbiome-related therapeutics, probiotics and nutraceuticals.

DOI: 10.1038/s41551-019-0397-0
PMCID: PMC6658209
PMID: 31086325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
