---
reference_id: "PMID:22189565"
title: "The MFN2 gene is responsible for mitochondrial DNA instability and optic atrophy 'plus' phenotype."
authors:
- Rouzier C
- Bannwarth S
- Chaussenot A
- Chevrollier A
- Verschueren A
- Bonello-Palot N
- Fragaki K
- Cano A
- Pouget J
- Pellissier JF
- Procaccio V
- Chabrol B
- Paquis-Flucklinger V
journal: Brain
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awr323
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- DNA Damage
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- "GTP Phosphohydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mitochondrial Myopathies/complications, genetics, metabolism"
- "Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Optic Atrophy/complications, genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The MFN2 gene is responsible for mitochondrial DNA instability and optic atrophy 'plus' phenotype.
**Authors:** Rouzier C, Bannwarth S, Chaussenot A, Chevrollier A, Verschueren A, Bonello-Palot N, Fragaki K, Cano A, Pouget J, Pellissier JF, Procaccio V, Chabrol B, Paquis-Flucklinger V
**Journal:** Brain (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awr323](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awr323)

## Content

1. Brain. 2012 Jan;135(Pt 1):23-34. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr323. Epub 2011 Dec 20.

The MFN2 gene is responsible for mitochondrial DNA instability and optic atrophy 
'plus' phenotype.

Rouzier C(1), Bannwarth S, Chaussenot A, Chevrollier A, Verschueren A, 
Bonello-Palot N, Fragaki K, Cano A, Pouget J, Pellissier JF, Procaccio V, 
Chabrol B, Paquis-Flucklinger V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, National Centre for Mitochondrial Diseases, 
Nice Teaching Hospital, 06200, France.

Comment in
    Brain. 2012 Jan;135(Pt 1):9-11. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr352.
    Brain. 2012 Aug;135(Pt 8):e219, 1-3; author reply e220, 1-3. doi: 
10.1093/brain/aws049.
    Brain. 2012 Aug;135(Pt 8):e223, 1-4; author reply e224, 1-3. doi: 
10.1093/brain/aws111.

MFN2 and OPA1 genes encode two dynamin-like GTPase proteins involved in the 
fusion of the mitochondrial membrane. They have been associated with 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2A and autosomal dominant optic atrophy, 
respectively. We report a large family with optic atrophy beginning in early 
childhood, associated with axonal neuropathy and mitochondrial myopathy in adult 
life. The clinical presentation looks like the autosomal dominant optic atrophy 
'plus' phenotype linked to OPA1 mutations but is associated with a novel MFN2 
missense mutation (c.629A>T, p.D210V). Multiple mitochondrial DNA deletions were 
found in skeletal muscle and this observation makes MFN2 a novel gene associated 
with 'mitochondrial DNA breakage' syndrome. Contrary to previous studies in 
patients with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2A, fibroblasts carrying the MFN2 
mutation present with a respiratory chain deficiency, a fragmentation of the 
mitochondrial network and a significant reduction of MFN2 protein expression. 
Furthermore, we show for the first time that impaired mitochondrial fusion is 
responsible for a deficiency to repair stress-induced mitochondrial DNA damage. 
It is likely that defect in mitochondrial DNA repair is due to variability in 
repair protein content across the mitochondrial population and is at least 
partially responsible for mitochondrial DNA instability.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awr323
PMID: 22189565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]