---
reference_id: "PMID:32841162"
title: "Impaired glucose homeostasis and a novel HLCS pathogenic variant in holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency: a report of two cases and brief review."
authors:
- Wu HR
- Chen KJ
- Hsiao HP
- Chao MC
journal: J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1515/jpem-2020-0106
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impaired glucose homeostasis and a novel HLCS pathogenic variant in holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency: a report of two cases and brief review.
**Authors:** Wu HR, Chen KJ, Hsiao HP, Chao MC
**Journal:** J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1515/jpem-2020-0106](https://doi.org/10.1515/jpem-2020-0106)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2020 Nov 26;33(11):1481-1486. doi: 
10.1515/jpem-2020-0106.

Impaired glucose homeostasis and a novel HLCS pathogenic variant in 
holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency: a report of two cases and brief review.

Wu HR(1), Chen KJ(1), Hsiao HP(2), Chao MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Changhua Christian Medical Foundation Changhua Christian Hospital, Division 
of Pediatric Genetics and Metabolism, Changhua, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Medical University Chung Ho Memorial 
Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Objectives Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency (HCSD) (OMIM #253270) is a rare 
inborn error of metabolism with an estimated annual incidence of 1 in 200,000 
people. Typical manifestations of HCSD include eczema, alopecia, lactic acidosis 
and hyperammonemia. Diagnosis is made through genetic analysis. Case 
presentation Patient 1 was a 7-year-old girl with normal growth and development, 
presenting with severe hypoglycemia and metabolic acidosis. Her family reported 
that she was diagnosed as having ketotic hypoglycemia; she had five episodes of 
hypoglycemia and metabolic acidosis in past 4 years when her oral intake 
decreased during acute illness. Patient 2 was a 6-month-old female infant with 
normal growth and development, presenting with progressive generalized eczema 
and metabolic acidosis for the first time. We found that they both had 
hyperammonemia, hyperlactatemia, hyperketonemia, organic acids detected in urine 
and elevated C5OH acylcarnitine level by tandem mass spectrometry. HLCS gene 
analysis showed a homozygous pathogenic variant p.V363D in patient 1 and a 
pathogenic variant p.R508W compound with a novel splice site pathogenic variant 
c.2010-1G>A in patient 2. They have been on biotin treatment (10 mg/day for both 
of them) for more than 2 years and no more symptoms have occurred. Conclusions 
HCSD is a rare disease, and it can be fatal if severe metabolic acidosis occurs 
without timely management. Once the diagnosis is made, most of the patients with 
HCSD have good prognosis and normal life expectancy with biotin treatment.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem-2020-0106
PMID: 32841162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]