---
reference_id: "PMID:32747535"
title: Modeling SHH-driven medulloblastoma with patient iPS cell-derived neural stem cells.
authors:
- Susanto E
- Marin Navarro A
- Zhou L
- Sundström A
- van Bree N
- Stantic M
- Moslem M
- Tailor J
- Rietdijk J
- Zubillaga V
- Hübner JM
- Weishaupt H
- Wolfsberger J
- Alafuzoff I
- Nordgren A
- Magnaldo T
- Siesjö P
- Johnsen JI
- Kool M
- Tammimies K
- Darabi A
- Swartling FJ
- Falk A
- Wilhelm M
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1920521117
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modeling SHH-driven medulloblastoma with patient iPS cell-derived neural stem cells.
**Authors:** Susanto E, Marin Navarro A, Zhou L, Sundström A, van Bree N, Stantic M, Moslem M, Tailor J, Rietdijk J, Zubillaga V, Hübner JM, Weishaupt H, Wolfsberger J, Alafuzoff I, Nordgren A, Magnaldo T, Siesjö P, Johnsen JI, Kool M, Tammimies K, Darabi A, Swartling FJ, Falk A, Wilhelm M
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1920521117](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1920521117)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Aug 18;117(33):20127-20138. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1920521117. Epub 2020 Aug 3.

Modeling SHH-driven medulloblastoma with patient iPS cell-derived neural stem 
cells.

Susanto E(1), Marin Navarro A(1), Zhou L(1), Sundström A(2), van Bree N(1), 
Stantic M(1), Moslem M(3), Tailor J(4)(5), Rietdijk J(1), Zubillaga V(1), Hübner 
JM(6)(7), Weishaupt H(2), Wolfsberger J(1), Alafuzoff I(2), Nordgren A(8)(9), 
Magnaldo T(10), Siesjö P(11)(12), Johnsen JI(13), Kool M(6)(7), Tammimies K(13), 
Darabi A(12), Swartling FJ(2), Falk A(14), Wilhelm M(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell biology (MTC), Karolinska 
Institutet, 171 65 Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Immunology, Genetics, and Pathology, Science For Life 
Laboratory, Uppsala University, 751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, 171 65 Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Program, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON M5G 0A4, Canada.
(5)Division of Neurosurgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada.
(6)Hopp Children's Cancer Center (KiTZ), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 
and German Cancer Research Consortium (DKTK), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(8)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Center for Molecular Medicine, 
Karolinska Institutet, 171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.
(9)Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, 171 76 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(10)Institute for Research on Cancer and Aging, CNRS UMR 7284, INSERM U1081, 
University of Nice Sophia Antipolis, Nice, France.
(11)Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Clinical Sciences, Skane University 
Hospital, 221 85 Lund, Sweden.
(12)Glioma Immunotherapy Group, Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Clinical 
Sciences, Lund University, 221 85 Lund, Sweden.
(13)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, 171 76 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(14)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, 171 65 Stockholm, Sweden; 
margareta.wilhelm@ki.se anna.falk@ki.se.
(15)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell biology (MTC), Karolinska 
Institutet, 171 65 Stockholm, Sweden; margareta.wilhelm@ki.se anna.falk@ki.se.

Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor in children. Here we 
describe a medulloblastoma model using Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) 
cell-derived human neuroepithelial stem (NES) cells generated from a Gorlin 
syndrome patient carrying a germline mutation in the sonic hedgehog (SHH) 
receptor PTCH1. We found that Gorlin NES cells formed tumors in mouse cerebellum 
mimicking human medulloblastoma. Retransplantation of tumor-isolated NES (tNES) 
cells resulted in accelerated tumor formation, cells with reduced growth factor 
dependency, enhanced neurosphere formation in vitro, and increased sensitivity 
to Vismodegib. Using our model, we identified LGALS1 to be a GLI target gene 
that is up-regulated in both Gorlin tNES cells and SHH-subgroup of 
medulloblastoma patients. Taken together, we demonstrate that NES cells derived 
from Gorlin patients can be used as a resource to model medulloblastoma 
initiation and progression and to identify putative targets.

Copyright © 2020 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1920521117
PMCID: PMC7443968
PMID: 32747535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.