---
reference_id: "PMID:16166933"
title: Immunology of endometriosis.
authors:
- Ulukus M
- Arici A
journal: Minerva Ginecol
year: '2005'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunology of endometriosis.
**Authors:** Ulukus M, Arici A
**Journal:** Minerva Ginecol (2005)

## Content

1. Minerva Ginecol. 2005 Jun;57(3):237-48.

Immunology of endometriosis.

Ulukus M(1), Arici A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ege University School of Medicine, 
Bornova, Izmir, Turkey.

Endometriosis is classically described as the presence of both endometrial 
glandular and stromal cells outside the uterine cavity, mainly in the pelvis. 
The pathogenesis of this enigmatic disorder still remains controversial despite 
extensive research. Although multiple theories have been put forth to explain 
the pathophysiology and pathogenesis of endometriosis, the retrograde 
menstruation theory of Sampson is the most widely accepted. However, since 
retrograde menstruation occurs in most of the reproductive age women, it is 
clear that there must be other factors which may contribute to the implantation 
of endometrial cells and their subsequent development into endometriotic 
disease. There is substantial evidence to support that the alterations in both 
cell-mediated and humoral immunity contribute to the pathogenesis of 
endometriosis. Increased number and activation of peritoneal macrophages, 
decreased T cell and natural killer (NK) cell cytotoxicities are the alterations 
in cellular immunity and result in inadequate removal of ectopic endometrial 
cells from the peritoneal cavity. Moreover, increased levels of several 
cytokines and growth factors which are secreted by either immune and endometrial 
cells seem to promote implantation and growth of ectopic endometrium by inducing 
proliferation and angiogenesis. In addition to the impaired capacity of the 
immune cells to mediate endometrial cell removal, inherent resistance of the 
ectopic endometrial cells against immune cells is another interesting concept in 
the pathogenesis of endometriosis. Endometriosis has also been considered to be 
an autoimmune disease, since it is often associated with the presence of 
autoantibodies, other autoimmune diseases, and possibly with recurrent 
immune-mediated abortion.

PMID: 16166933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]