---
reference_id: "PMID:16908931"
title: Somatic activation of KIT in distinct subtypes of melanoma.
authors:
- Curtin JA
- Busam K
- Pinkel D
- Bastian BC
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2006.06.2984
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Benzamides
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/metabolism"
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Humans
- Imatinib Mesylate
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Microarray Analysis
- Middle Aged
- Nucleic Acid Hybridization
- Piperazines/therapeutic use
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit/metabolism
- Pyrimidines/therapeutic use
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Somatic activation of KIT in distinct subtypes of melanoma.
**Authors:** Curtin JA, Busam K, Pinkel D, Bastian BC
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2006.06.2984](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2006.06.2984)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2006 Sep 10;24(26):4340-6. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2006.06.2984. Epub
2006 Aug 14.

Somatic activation of KIT in distinct subtypes of melanoma.

Curtin JA(1), Busam K, Pinkel D, Bastian BC.

Author information:
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0808, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2007 Mar 1;25(7):e9. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2006.08.9664.

PURPOSE: Melanomas on mucosal membranes, acral skin (soles, palms, and nail
bed), and skin with chronic sun-induced damage have infrequent mutations in BRAF
and NRAS, genes within the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway
commonly mutated in melanomas on intermittently sun-exposed skin. This raises
the question of whether other aberrations are occurring in the MAP kinase
cascade in the melanoma types with infrequent mutations of BRAF and NRAS.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analyzed array comparative genomic hybridization data
from 102 primary melanomas (38 from mucosa, 28 from acral skin, and 18 from skin
with and 18 from skin without chronic sun-induced damage) for DNA copy number
aberrations specific to melanoma subtypes where mutations in BRAF and NRAS are
infrequent. A narrow amplification on 4q12 was found, and candidate genes within
it were analyzed.
RESULTS: Oncogenic mutations in KIT were found in three of seven tumors with
amplifications. Examination of all 102 primary melanomas found mutations and/or
copy number increases of KIT in 39% of mucosal, 36% of acral, and 28% of
melanomas on chronically sun-damaged skin, but not in any (0%) melanomas on skin
without chronic sun damage. Seventy-nine percent of tumors with mutations and
53% of tumors with multiple copies of KIT demonstrated increased KIT protein
levels.
CONCLUSION: KIT is an important oncogene in melanoma. Because the majority of
the KIT mutations we found in melanoma also occur in imatinib-responsive cancers
of other types, imatinib may offer an immediate therapeutic benefit for a
significant proportion of the global melanoma burden.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2006.06.2984
PMID: 16908931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
