---
reference_id: "PMID:34821546"
title: "Meckel Gruber and Joubert Syndrome Diagnosed Prenatally: Allelism between the Two Ciliopathies, Complexities of Mutation Types and Digenic Inheritance."
authors:
- Srivastava S
- Manisha R
- Dwivedi A
- Agarwal H
- Saxena D
- Agrawal V
- Mandal K
journal: Fetal Pediatr Pathol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/15513815.2021.2007434
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meckel Gruber and Joubert Syndrome Diagnosed Prenatally: Allelism between the Two Ciliopathies, Complexities of Mutation Types and Digenic Inheritance.
**Authors:** Srivastava S, Manisha R, Dwivedi A, Agarwal H, Saxena D, Agrawal V, Mandal K
**Journal:** Fetal Pediatr Pathol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15513815.2021.2007434](https://doi.org/10.1080/15513815.2021.2007434)

## Content

1. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2022 Dec;41(6):1041-1051. doi: 
10.1080/15513815.2021.2007434. Epub 2021 Nov 25.

Meckel Gruber and Joubert Syndrome Diagnosed Prenatally: Allelism between the 
Two Ciliopathies, Complexities of Mutation Types and Digenic Inheritance.

Srivastava S(1), Manisha R(1), Dwivedi A(1), Agarwal H(1), Saxena D(1), Agrawal 
V(1), Mandal K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of 
Medical Science, Lucknow, India.

Background: Antenatally detected occipital encephalocele and polycystic kidneys 
are a common presentation of ciliopathies like Joubert syndrome and Meckel 
Gruber syndrome which have considerable genetic and phenotypic overlap. Case 
reports: We describe 3 cases of antenatally diagnosed occipital encephalocele 
and enlarged kidneys with fetal autopsy, histopathology & exome sequencing 
results. A novel nonsense variant in the CEP290 gene was reported in first case 
(Meckel syndrome). The second case shows the importance of fetal exome where the 
parents were carriers for 2 ciliopathy genes (TMEM138 & SDCCAG8). Diagnosis in 
this case was confirmed by fetal exome sequencing (Joubert syndrome). Multiexon 
deletion in TMEM67 and KIF14 present in trans was identified in the third case 
(Meckel syndrome), likely resulting in digenic inheritance. Conclusion: We 
report 2 cases of Meckel syndrome with a novel variant and multiexon deletion, 
and 1 case of Joubert syndrome which depicts the limitations of preconceptional 
carrier screening in ciliopathies due to overlapping phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1080/15513815.2021.2007434
PMID: 34821546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]