---
reference_id: "PMID:33417209"
title: Heimler Syndrome.
authors:
- Mechaussier S
- Perrault I
- Dollfus H
- Bloch-Zupan A
- Loundon N
- Jonard L
- Marlin S
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heimler Syndrome.
**Authors:** Mechaussier S, Perrault I, Dollfus H, Bloch-Zupan A, Loundon N, Jonard L, Marlin S
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_7](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_7)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2020;1299:81-87. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_7.

Heimler Syndrome.

Mechaussier S(1), Perrault I(1), Dollfus H(2)(3), Bloch-Zupan A(4)(5)(6), 
Loundon N(7)(8), Jonard L(8), Marlin S(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics in Ophthalmology (LGO), INSERM UMR1163, Institute of 
Genetic Diseases, Imagine and Paris University, Paris, France.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Medical Genetics of Alsace 
(IGMA), Strasbourg University Hospitals - Hautepierre Hospital, Strasbourg, 
France.
(3)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, INSERM U1112, Institute of Medical Genetics 
of Alsace (IGMA), Strasbourg University, Strasbourg, France.
(4)Strasbourg University, Faculty of Dental Medicine, Institute for Advanced 
Study (USIAS), Strasbourg, France.
(5)Strasbourg University Hospitals (HUS), Oral Surgery and Oral Medecine Unit, 
Dental Clinic, Civil Hospital, Reference Center for Rare Oral and Dental 
Diseases, O-Rares, Filière Santé Maladies rares TETE COU, European Reference 
Network ERN CRANIO, Strasbourg, France.
(6)Strasbourg University, Institute of Genetics and Molecular and Cellular 
Biology (IGBMC), Illkirch, France.
(7)Pediatric ENT Department, Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France.
(8)Reference Center for Rare Diseases "Genetic deafness", Filière Santé Maladies 
rares SENSGENE, European Reference Network ERN CRANIO, Federation of Genetic, 
Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France.
(9)Reference Center for Rare Diseases "Genetic deafness", Filière Santé Maladies 
rares SENSGENE, European Reference Network ERN CRANIO, Federation of Genetic, 
Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France. sandrine.marlin@aphp.fr.
(10)Laboratory of Embryology and Genetics of Malformations, INSERM UMR 1163, 
Institute of Genetic Diseases, Imagine and Paris University, Paris, France. 
sandrine.marlin@aphp.fr.

Heimler syndrome is a rare syndrome associating sensorineural hearing loss with 
retinal dystrophy and amelogenesis imperfecta due to PEX1 or PEX6 biallelic 
pathogenic variations. This syndrome is one of the less severe forms of 
peroxisome biogenesis disorders. In this chapter, we will review clinical, 
biological, and genetic knowledges about the Heimler syndrome.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_7
PMID: 33417209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]