---
reference_id: "PMID:16972238"
title: "Involuntary painful muscle contractions in Satoyoshi syndrome: a surface electromyographic study."
authors:
- Drost G
- Verrips A
- van Engelen BG
- Stegeman DF
- Zwarts MJ
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/mds.21088
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Involuntary painful muscle contractions in Satoyoshi syndrome: a surface electromyographic study.
**Authors:** Drost G, Verrips A, van Engelen BG, Stegeman DF, Zwarts MJ
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.21088](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.21088)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2006 Nov;21(11):2015-8. doi: 10.1002/mds.21088.

Involuntary painful muscle contractions in Satoyoshi syndrome: a surface 
electromyographic study.

Drost G(1), Verrips A, van Engelen BG, Stegeman DF, Zwarts MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Institute of Neurology, Radboud 
University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. 
g.drost@neuro.umcn.nl

We report a child with Satoyoshi syndrome manifested by involuntary painful 
muscle contractions and alopecia. Although an autoimmune origin of Satoyoshi 
syndrome seems likely, its exact etiology remains as yet unknown, as is the 
origin of the involuntary contractions. To gain a better understanding of the 
electrophysiological characteristics of the involuntary contractions, we 
performed a surface electromyographic (EMG) study. We investigated muscle 
contractions in the legs using two noninvasive techniques: high-density surface 
EMG (HD-sEMG) recordings on one muscle, and polymyographic surface EMG (sEMG) 
recordings on various muscles. During the involuntary contractions, HD-sEMG 
showed a fourfold increase in amplitude compared to maximal voluntary 
contractions. These high potentials were widely distributed across the whole 
muscle and showed a pronounced oscillatory behavior with a frequency around 45 
Hz. Polymyographic sEMG revealed that the involuntary contractions often occur 
simultaneously in various muscles or showed a switch of activity from one muscle 
to another. These findings point to hyperactivity or a disinhibition at the 
alpha motor neuron level, originating probably at that level, although a central 
origin cannot be excluded. (c) 2006 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21088
PMID: 16972238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]