---
reference_id: "PMID:35421611"
title: Hmgcs2-mediated ketogenesis modulates high-fat diet-induced hepatosteatosis.
authors:
- Asif S
- Kim RY
- Fatica T
- Sim J
- Zhao X
- Oh Y
- Denoncourt A
- Cheung AC
- Downey M
- Mulvihill EE
- Kim KH
journal: Mol Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2022.101494
keywords:
- Animals
- "Diet, High-Fat/adverse effects"
- Humans
- "Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Synthase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ketone Bodies/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ketosis/genetics, metabolism"
- Lipids
- Mice
- "Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease/etiology, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hmgcs2-mediated ketogenesis modulates high-fat diet-induced hepatosteatosis.
**Authors:** Asif S, Kim RY, Fatica T, Sim J, Zhao X, Oh Y, Denoncourt A, Cheung AC, Downey M, Mulvihill EE, Kim KH
**Journal:** Mol Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molmet.2022.101494](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmet.2022.101494)

## Content

1. Mol Metab. 2022 Jul;61:101494. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2022.101494. Epub 2022
Apr  12.

Hmgcs2-mediated ketogenesis modulates high-fat diet-induced hepatosteatosis.

Asif S(1), Kim RY(2), Fatica T(2), Sim J(3), Zhao X(2), Oh Y(1), Denoncourt
A(4), Cheung AC(5), Downey M(4), Mulvihill EE(6), Kim KH(7).

Author information:
(1)University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, ON, K1Y 4W7, Canada; Department
of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, ON, K1H 8M5, Canada.
(2)University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, ON, K1Y 4W7, Canada.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa,
ON, K1H 8M5, Canada.
(4)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, K1H 8M5, Canada; Ottawa Institute of Systems
Biology, Ottawa, ON, K1H 8M5, Canada.
(5)Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital,
Ottawa, ON, K1H 8M5, Canada; The Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Chronic
Disease Program, Ottawa, ON, K1Y 4E9, Canada.
(6)University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, ON, K1Y 4W7, Canada; Department
of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, K1H 8M5, Canada.
(7)University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, ON, K1Y 4W7, Canada; Department
of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, ON, K1H 8M5, Canada. Electronic address: hkim@ottawaheart.ca.

OBJECTIVE: Aberrant ketogenesis is correlated with the degree of steatosis in
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) patients, and an inborn error of
ketogenesis (mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase deficiency) is commonly associated
with the development of the fatty liver. Here we aimed to determine the impact
of Hmgcs2-mediated ketogenesis and its modulations on the development and
treatment of fatty liver disease.
METHODS: Loss- and gain-of-ketogenic function models, achieved by Hmgcs2
knockout and overexpression, respectively, were utilized to investigate the role
of ketogenesis in the hepatic lipid accumulation during postnatal development
and in a high-fat diet-induced NAFLD mouse model.
RESULTS: Ketogenic function was decreased in NAFLD mice with a reduction in
Hmgcs2 expression. Mice lacking Hmgcs2 developed spontaneous fatty liver
phenotype during postnatal development, which was rescued by a shift to a
low-fat dietary composition via early weaning. Hmgcs2 heterozygous adult mice,
which exhibited lower ketogenic activity, were more susceptible to diet-induced
NAFLD development, whereas HMGCS2 overexpression in NAFLD mice improved
hepatosteatosis and glucose homeostasis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study adds new knowledge to the field of ketone body metabolism
and shows that Hmgcs2-mediated ketogenesis modulates hepatic lipid regulation
under a fat-enriched nutritional environment. The regulation of hepatic
ketogenesis may be a viable therapeutic strategy in the prevention and treatment
of hepatosteatosis.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmet.2022.101494
PMCID: PMC9039870
PMID: 35421611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
