---
reference_id: "PMID:27159433"
title: Healthy cognitive aging and dementia prevention.
authors:
- Smith GE
journal: Am Psychol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1037/a0040250
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Healthy cognitive aging and dementia prevention.
**Authors:** Smith GE
**Journal:** Am Psychol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1037/a0040250](https://doi.org/10.1037/a0040250)

## Content

1. Am Psychol. 2016 May-Jun;71(4):268-75. doi: 10.1037/a0040250.

Healthy cognitive aging and dementia prevention.

Smith GE(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Florida.

Behavioral prevention strategies can help maintain high levels of cognition and 
functional integrity, and can reduce the social, medical, and economic burden 
associated with cognitive aging and age-associated neurodegenerative diseases. 
Interventions involving physical exercise and cognitive training have 
consistently shown positive effects on cognition in older adults. "Brain 
fitness" interventions have now been shown to have sustained effects lasting 10 
years or more. A meta-analysis suggests these physical exercise and brain 
fitness exercises produce nearly identical impact on formal measures of 
cognitive function. Behavioral interventions developed and deployed by 
psychologists are key in supporting healthy cognitive aging. The National 
Institutes of Health should expand research on cognitive health and behavioral 
and social science to promote healthy aging and to develop and refine ways to 
prevent and treat dementia. Funding for adequately powered, large-scale trials 
is needed. Congress must maintain support for crucial dementia-related 
initiatives like the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Healthy Brain 
Initiative and fund training programs to insure there is a work force with 
skills to provide high quality care for older adults. Insurers must provide 
better coverage for behavioral interventions. Better coverage is needed so there 
can be increased access to evidence-based disease prevention and health 
promotion services with the potential for reducing dementia risk. (PsycINFO 
Database Record

(c) 2016 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/a0040250
PMID: 27159433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]