---
reference_id: "PMID:40262923"
title: Rare co-occurrence of severe vitamin A deficiency in an early adolescent girl with Bartter syndrome.
authors:
- Tahir MS
- Riazat MI
- Huggard D
- Abbas M
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2025-265159
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Bartter Syndrome/complications, diagnosis"
- "Vitamin A Deficiency/complications, drug therapy, diagnosis, etiology"
- Adolescent
- "Vitamin A/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Xerophthalmia/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rare co-occurrence of severe vitamin A deficiency in an early adolescent girl with Bartter syndrome.
**Authors:** Tahir MS, Riazat MI, Huggard D, Abbas M
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2025-265159](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2025-265159)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2025 Apr 22;18(4):e265159. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2025-265159.

Rare co-occurrence of severe vitamin A deficiency in an early adolescent girl
with Bartter syndrome.

Tahir MS(1)(2), Riazat MI(3), Huggard D(3), Abbas M(3).

Author information:
(1)Paediatrics, University Hospital Waterford, Waterford, County Waterford,
Ireland sikandartahirhashmi@gmail.com.
(2)Paediatrics, HSE, Waterford, Waterford, Ireland.
(3)Paediatrics, University Hospital Waterford, Waterford, County Waterford,
Ireland.

We report a rare case of an early adolescent girl with Bartter syndrome
presenting with severe vitamin A deficiency, characterised by decreased visual
acuity, xerophthalmia and corneal ulceration. The deficiency appears to have
resulted from poor nutritional intake due to a restricted diet, unhealthy
dietary choices compounded by gastrointestinal discomfort and the challenges
posed by Bartter syndrome.The patient, diagnosed in her early infancy with
Bartter syndrome, exhibited features typical of this inherited renal tubular
disorder, including electrolyte imbalance, polyuria and failure to thrive. Her
long-standing gastrointestinal discomfort, likely related to high-dose
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (indomethacin) and oral potassium
supplements, further compromised her nutritional intake.She was managed with
high-dose vitamin A supplementation, resulting in partial visual recovery. This
case underscores the importance of monitoring fat-soluble vitamin levels in
Bartter syndrome patients, who are at risk for malabsorption and dietary
deficiencies. We suggest that routine screening for Vitamin A deficiency in
patients with Barter syndrome may be beneficial, though this recommendation is
derived from our observation from this case rather than established evidence.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2025. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2025-265159
PMID: 40262923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
