---
reference_id: "PMID:24781756"
title: "Mitochondrial complex IV deficiency, caused by mutated COX6B1, is associated with encephalomyopathy, hydrocephalus and cardiomyopathy."
authors:
- Abdulhag UN
- Soiferman D
- Schueler-Furman O
- Miller C
- Shaag A
- Elpeleg O
- Edvardson S
- Saada A
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.85
keywords:
- "Cardiomyopathies/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics, metabolism"
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Humans
- "Hydrocephalus/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Mitochondria, Muscle/metabolism"
- "Mitochondrial Encephalomyopathies/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- Mutation
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial complex IV deficiency, caused by mutated COX6B1, is associated with encephalomyopathy, hydrocephalus and cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Abdulhag UN, Soiferman D, Schueler-Furman O, Miller C, Shaag A, Elpeleg O, Edvardson S, Saada A
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2014.85](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2014.85)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Feb;23(2):159-64. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.85. Epub 2014
Apr  30.

Mitochondrial complex IV deficiency, caused by mutated COX6B1, is associated 
with encephalomyopathy, hydrocephalus and cardiomyopathy.

Abdulhag UN(1), Soiferman D(2), Schueler-Furman O(3), Miller C(2), Shaag A(2), 
Elpeleg O(2), Edvardson S(4), Saada A(2).

Author information:
(1)1] Monique and Jacques Roboh Department of Genetic Research, Hadassah-Hebrew 
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel [2] Department of Pediatrics, 
Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Monique and Jacques Roboh Department of Genetic Research, Hadassah-Hebrew 
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Institute for Medical 
Research Israel-Canada, Hadassah Medical School, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(4)1] Monique and Jacques Roboh Department of Genetic Research, Hadassah-Hebrew 
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel [2] Pediatric Neurology Unit, 
Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.

Isolated cytochrome c oxidase (COX) deficiency is a prevalent cause of 
mitochondrial disease and is mostly caused by nuclear-encoded mutations in 
assembly factors while rarely by mutations in structural subunits. We hereby 
report a case of isolated COX deficiency manifesting with encephalomyopathy, 
hydrocephalus and hypertropic cardiomyopathy due to a missense p.R20C mutation 
in the COX6B1 gene, which encodes an integral, nuclear-encoded COX subunit. This 
novel mutation was predicted to be severe in silico. In accord, enzymatic 
activity was undetectable in muscle and fibroblasts, was severely decreased in 
lymphocytes and the COX6B1 protein was barely detectable in patient's muscle 
mitochondria. Complementation with the wild-type cDNA by a lentiviral construct 
restored COX activity, and mitochondrial function was improved by 
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide, resveratrol and ascorbate in the 
patient's fibroblasts. We suggest that genetic analysis of COX6B1should be 
included in the investigation of isolated COX deficiency, including patients 
with cardiac defects. Initial measurement of COX activity in lymphocytes may be 
useful as it might circumvent the need for invasive muscle biopsy. The 
evaluation of ascorbate supplementation to patients with mutated COX6B1 is 
warranted.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.85
PMCID: PMC4297913
PMID: 24781756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]