---
reference_id: "PMID:26802173"
title: Characterising the phenotype and progression of sporadic adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy.
authors:
- Tiosano L
- Grunin M
- Hagbi-Levi S
- Banin E
- Averbukh E
- Chowers I
journal: Br J Ophthalmol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2015-307658
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Follow-Up Studies
- Fundus Oculi
- Humans
- "Macula Lutea/blood supply, diagnostic imaging"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Phenotype
- Retinal Vessels/diagnostic imaging
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Visual Acuity
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/diagnosis, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterising the phenotype and progression of sporadic adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy.
**Authors:** Tiosano L, Grunin M, Hagbi-Levi S, Banin E, Averbukh E, Chowers I
**Journal:** Br J Ophthalmol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bjophthalmol-2015-307658](https://doi.org/10.1136/bjophthalmol-2015-307658)

## Content

1. Br J Ophthalmol. 2016 Nov;100(11):1476-1481. doi: 
10.1136/bjophthalmol-2015-307658. Epub 2016 Jan 22.

Characterising the phenotype and progression of sporadic adult-onset 
foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy.

Tiosano L(1), Grunin M(1), Hagbi-Levi S(1), Banin E(1), Averbukh E(1), Chowers 
I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center and 
the Hebrew University School of Medicine, Jerusalem, Israel.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy (AFVD) is a 
relatively common macular degeneration which might lead to substantial visual 
loss. Our purpose was to describe the natural course of genetically evaluated 
patients with sporadic AFVD.
METHODS: A retrospective, consecutive, cohort study included 95 eyes of 51 
patients. Mutations in genes previously associated with AFVD (PRPH2, BEST1, 
IMPG-1 and IMPG-2) were evaluated. Demographics, clinical characteristics, and 
spectral domain optical coherence tomography features were analysed. Main 
outcome measures were changes in the best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and 
lesion morphology during the follow-up.
RESULTS: The mean age (±SD) at diagnosis was 73.8±10.7 years. Mean (±SD) 
follow-up period was 30.4±16.3 months (range 0-44 months; median 25 months). All 
patients were genotyped negative for the evaluated mutations. Fifty-three of the 
eyes were followed for at least 36 months. At baseline these eyes had a mean 
BCVA (±SD) of 0.27±0.35 LogMAR, and at 36-months BCVA decreased to 0.38±0.35 
(p=0.02). At baseline, 23 of these 53 eyes (43.4%) had the vitelliform stage, 
while only 10 eyes (18.9%) remained at this stage at 36 months (p=0.01). 
Ellipsoid zone alterations progressed during the follow-up (n=53 eyes) and 
showed correlation with BCVA reduction (Pearson's correlation coefficient=0.7, 
p=0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Sporadic AFVD is a slowly progressing macular degeneration of older 
people. It is associated with visual decline at the rate of approximately one 
ETDRS line during 3 years. Patients with sporadic AFVD are usually negative for 
the known mutations previously associated with this phenotype, and present at an 
age that is higher than described for monogenic AFVD.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/.

DOI: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2015-307658
PMID: 26802173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]