---
reference_id: "PMID:31399898"
title: "Differences in distribution of anterior segmental medullary arteries in the cervical and thoracolumbar spinal cord: the \"inseln\" were characteristics in the cervical spinal cord."
authors:
- Kanazawa J
- Yan J
- Hitomi J
journal: Anat Sci Int
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s12565-019-00498-y
keywords:
- "Arteries/anatomy & histology"
- Cervical Vertebrae/blood supply
- Female
- Humans
- Lumbar Vertebrae/blood supply
- Spinal Cord/blood supply
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differences in distribution of anterior segmental medullary arteries in the cervical and thoracolumbar spinal cord: the "inseln" were characteristics in the cervical spinal cord.
**Authors:** Kanazawa J, Yan J, Hitomi J
**Journal:** Anat Sci Int (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12565-019-00498-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12565-019-00498-y)

## Content

1. Anat Sci Int. 2020 Jan;95(1):97-103. doi: 10.1007/s12565-019-00498-y. Epub
2019  Aug 9.

Differences in distribution of anterior segmental medullary arteries in the
cervical and thoracolumbar spinal cord: the "inseln" were characteristics in the
cervical spinal cord.

Kanazawa J(1), Yan J(2), Hitomi J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, Iwate Medical University, 1-1-1
Idaidori, Yahaba-cho, Shiwa, Iwate, 028-3694, Japan. kanajun@iwate-med.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, Iwate Medical University, 1-1-1
Idaidori, Yahaba-cho, Shiwa, Iwate, 028-3694, Japan.

Anterior segmental medullary arteries cause spinal cord infarction due to
circulatory disturbance, but are difficult to identify in diagnostic images.
This study investigated the arterial distribution from the cervical to lumbar
segments of the dissecting spinal cord in 100 cadavers. The 488 arteries were
distributed from C2 to L2, of which 252 arteries from C2 to C8 were slightly
dominant on the right side, but 236 arteries from Th1 to L2 were obviously
dominant on the left side. This change occurred at the C8 and Th1 segments. Of
the 252 arteries, 37.30% (94 arteries) were divided into ascending and
descending branches. Both branches formed loops by anastomosis with the anterior
spinal arteries. The loops, called "insel", have an unclear distribution and
form. We focused on the features of inseln and found 63 of them in the cervical
spinal cord of 45 cadavers. Their numbers and forms differed depending on
whether the 94 arteries were bilateral (type A) or unilateral (type B), but the
long axis of the insel was limited to one cervical segment. 90.63% of type A
were bilateral at the same level, and 70% of type B were on the right side. The
former always formed the insel. Further, 94 arteries were distributed from C2 to
C7, 82.98% of which were concentrated at C3-C5. Therefore, the arterial blood
supply of the spinal cord may differ between the cervical spinal cord and the
thoracolumbar cord.

DOI: 10.1007/s12565-019-00498-y
PMCID: PMC6942566
PMID: 31399898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that they have no conflicts
of interest.
