---
reference_id: "PMID:35773442"
title: Incomplete recovery of bone strength and trabecular microarchitecture at the distal tibia 1 year after return from long duration spaceflight.
authors:
- Gabel L
- Liphardt AM
- Hulme PA
- Heer M
- Zwart SR
- Sibonga JD
- Smith SM
- Boyd SK
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-13461-1
keywords:
- "Absorptiometry, Photon"
- Biomarkers
- Bone Density
- Bone and Bones/diagnostic imaging
- Humans
- Male
- Space Flight
- Tibia/diagnostic imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incomplete recovery of bone strength and trabecular microarchitecture at the distal tibia 1 year after return from long duration spaceflight.
**Authors:** Gabel L, Liphardt AM, Hulme PA, Heer M, Zwart SR, Sibonga JD, Smith SM, Boyd SK
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-022-13461-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-13461-1)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2022 Jun 30;12(1):9446. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-13461-1.

Incomplete recovery of bone strength and trabecular microarchitecture at the 
distal tibia 1 year after return from long duration spaceflight.

Gabel L(1)(2), Liphardt AM(3), Hulme PA(2), Heer M(4), Zwart SR(5), Sibonga 
JD(6), Smith SM(6), Boyd SK(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Human Performance Laboratory, Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Canada.
(2)McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, 3280 
Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, AB, T2N 4Z6, Canada.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Rheumatology and Immunology, German Centre 
for Immune Therapy, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg and 
Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
(4)IU International University of Applied Sciences Erfurt and Department of 
Nutrition and Food Science, Nutritional Physiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, 
Germany.
(5)Department of Preventive Medicine and Population Health, University of Texas 
Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA.
(6)Human Heath and Performance Directorate, NASA Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, 
Houston, USA.
(7)McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, 3280 
Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, AB, T2N 4Z6, Canada. skboyd@ucalgary.ca.
(8)Department of Radiology, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Canada. skboyd@ucalgary.ca.

Determining the extent of bone recovery after prolonged spaceflight is important 
for understanding risks to astronaut long-term skeletal health. We examined bone 
strength, density, and microarchitecture in seventeen astronauts (14 males; mean 
47 years) using high-resolution peripheral quantitative computed tomography 
(HR-pQCT; 61 μm). We imaged the tibia and radius before spaceflight, at return 
to Earth, and after 6- and 12-months recovery and assessed biomarkers of bone 
turnover and exercise. Twelve months after flight, group median tibia bone 
strength (F.Load), total, cortical, and trabecular bone mineral density (BMD), 
trabecular bone volume fraction and thickness remained - 0.9% to - 2.1% reduced 
compared with pre-flight (p ≤ 0.001). Astronauts on longer missions (> 6-months) 
had poorer bone recovery. For example, F.Load recovered by 12-months post-flight 
in astronauts on shorter (< 6-months; - 0.4% median deficit) but not longer 
(- 3.9%) missions. Similar disparities were noted for total, trabecular, and 
cortical BMD. Altogether, nine of 17 astronauts did not fully recover tibia 
total BMD after 12-months. Astronauts with incomplete recovery had higher 
biomarkers of bone turnover compared with astronauts whose bone recovered. Study 
findings suggest incomplete recovery of bone strength, density, and trabecular 
microarchitecture at the weight-bearing tibia, commensurate with a decade or 
more of terrestrial age-related bone loss.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-13461-1
PMCID: PMC9247070
PMID: 35773442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.