---
reference_id: "PMID:40347095"
title: Genetic etiologies with a large NGS panel in a monocentric cohort of 1000 patients with pediatric onset epilepsies.
authors:
- Barcia G
- Chemaly N
- Gobin-Limballe S
- Losito E
- Aubart M
- Sarda E
- Assouline Z
- Plante-Bordeneuve P
- Hully M
- Barrois R
- Barnerias C
- Sareidaki D
- Zeitoun DC
- Eisermann M
- Fourrage C
- Hanein S
- Rio M
- Boddaert N
- Desguerre I
- Kaminska A
- Steffann J
- Nabbout R
journal: Epilepsia Open
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/epi4.70057
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Infant
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing/methods
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- Genetic Testing/methods
- "Epilepsy/genetics, diagnosis, etiology"
- Cohort Studies
- Adolescent
- "Spasms, Infantile/genetics"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Age of Onset
- "Epilepsies, Myoclonic/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic etiologies with a large NGS panel in a monocentric cohort of 1000 patients with pediatric onset epilepsies.
**Authors:** Barcia G, Chemaly N, Gobin-Limballe S, Losito E, Aubart M, Sarda E, Assouline Z, Plante-Bordeneuve P, Hully M, Barrois R, Barnerias C, Sareidaki D, Zeitoun DC, Eisermann M, Fourrage C, Hanein S, Rio M, Boddaert N, Desguerre I, Kaminska A, Steffann J, Nabbout R
**Journal:** Epilepsia Open (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/epi4.70057](https://doi.org/10.1002/epi4.70057)

## Content

1. Epilepsia Open. 2025 Aug;10(4):1065-1073. doi: 10.1002/epi4.70057. Epub 2025
May  10.

Genetic etiologies with a large NGS panel in a monocentric cohort of 1000 
patients with pediatric onset epilepsies.

Barcia G(1)(2)(3), Chemaly N(3)(4), Gobin-Limballe S(1), Losito E(3)(4)(5), 
Aubart M(4), Sarda E(4), Assouline Z(1)(2), Plante-Bordeneuve P(1)(2), Hully 
M(4), Barrois R(3)(4)(5), Barnerias C(4), Sareidaki D(3)(4), Zeitoun DC(3)(5), 
Eisermann M(3)(5), Fourrage C(1), Hanein S(2), Rio M(1), Boddaert N(6), 
Desguerre I(4), Kaminska A(3)(5), Steffann J(1)(2), Nabbout R(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Service de Médecine Génomique, Necker Enfants-Malades Hospital, APHP, 
Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(2)INSERM U1163, Imagine Institute for Rare Diseases, Université de Paris, 
Paris, France.
(3)Necker Enfants-Malades Hospital, Membre of EPICARE, Reference Center for Rare 
Epilepsies, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Necker Enfants-Malades Hospital Université 
de Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Necker Enfants-Malades Hospital, 
APHP, Paris, France.
(6)Department of Pediatric Radiology, Necker Enfants-Malades Hospital, APHP, 
Paris, France.

OBJECTIVE: Genetic testing is now included in the diagnostic assessment of 
childhood onset epilepsies. We evaluated the yield of a targeted next generation 
sequencing (TNGS) panel dedicated to pediatric epilepsies.
METHODS: We tested by TNGS panel 1000 consecutive patients presenting with 
childhood onset epilepsies and including mainly patients with early onset 
epilepsies (under 2 years, 61%).
RESULTS: Causal variants were identified in 31% of patients, spanning 78 
different genes. Patients with benign familial neonatal/infantile epilepsy 
(BFN/IS) exhibited the highest rate of positive findings (82%). Developmental 
and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs) had a global diagnostic yield of 37%, with 
epilepsy of infancy with migrating focal seizures (EIMFSI) and Dravet syndrome 
(DS) presenting the highest yield in this group (78%) and early infantile DEE 
(EIDEE) laying next with a yield of 43%. The lowest rates of genetic diagnosis 
were observed in infantile epileptic spasms syndrome (IESS, 17%), epilepsy with 
myoclonic-atonic seizures (EMAtS, 19%), and DEE-SWAS (14%). Patients with GEFS+ 
had a yield of 16%. Among patients with developmental encephalopathies and 
refractory seizures with onset after 2 years, TNGS yielded a 33% diagnostic 
rate. Atypical absences yielded 16%, focal epilepsy yielded 18%, and generalized 
epilepsies with refractory seizures yielded 13%. These groups exhibited a high 
genetic heterogeneity.
SIGNIFICANCE: TNGS is an effective first-step genetic screening in patients with 
high diagnostic yields (BFN/IS, EIMFS, DS, EIDEE) and for epilepsy syndromes 
associated with one or a few major genes (BFN/IS, EIMFS, DS, GEFS+, DEE-SWAS). 
Whole exome or genome sequencing (WES/WGS) should be considered as a second step 
in these groups with a probably relevant Mendelian inheritance. WES/WGS could be 
proposed as first-tier analysis in patients with IESS, EMAtS, generalized or 
focal epilepsies refractory to ASMs, and developmental encephalopathies with 
seizure onset after 2 years. However, the lower diagnostic yield obtained in 
these groups may suggest a complex inheritance.
PLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY: This study emphasizes the importance of accurately 
identifying different types of epilepsy and epilepsy syndromes to improve 
genetic testing strategies. We suggest that a targeted gene panel can be a good 
first step for some genetic conditions, such as benign familial 
neonatal/infantile epilepsy, Dravet syndrome, and epilepsy of infancy with 
migrating focal seizures.

© 2025 The Author(s). Epilepsia Open published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1002/epi4.70057
PMCID: PMC12362157
PMID: 40347095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors has any conflict of interest 
to disclose. We confirm that we have read the Journal's position on issues 
involved in ethical publication and affirm that this report is consistent with 
those guidelines.