---
reference_id: "PMID:33750945"
title: Critical role of the BAF chromatin remodeling complex during murine neural crest development.
authors:
- Bi-Lin KW
- Seshachalam PV
- Tuoc T
- Stoykova A
- Ghosh S
- Singh MK
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009446
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- Cell Proliferation
- Chromatin Assembly and Disassembly
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Embryonic Development/genetics
- Gene Deletion
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Gene Regulatory Networks
- "Genes, Reporter"
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Neural Crest/embryology, metabolism"
- Neurogenesis/genetics
- Organ Specificity
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Transcription, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Critical role of the BAF chromatin remodeling complex during murine neural crest development.
**Authors:** Bi-Lin KW, Seshachalam PV, Tuoc T, Stoykova A, Ghosh S, Singh MK
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1009446](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1009446)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2021 Mar 22;17(3):e1009446. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009446. 
eCollection 2021 Mar.

Critical role of the BAF chromatin remodeling complex during murine neural crest 
development.

Bi-Lin KW(1), Seshachalam PV(1), Tuoc T(2)(3), Stoykova A(4), Ghosh S(1), Singh 
MK(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Program in Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disorders, Duke-NUS Medical School 
Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Ruhr University of Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
(3)Institute of Neuroanatomy, University Medical Center, Georg-August-University 
Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany.
(4)Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Goettingen, Germany.
(5)National Heart Research Institute Singapore, National Heart Center Singapore, 
Singapore.

The BAF complex plays an important role in the development of a wide range of 
tissues by modulating gene expression programs at the chromatin level. However, 
its role in neural crest development has remained unclear. To determine the role 
of the BAF complex, we deleted BAF155/BAF170, the core subunits required for the 
assembly, stability, and functions of the BAF complex in neural crest cells 
(NCCs). Neural crest-specific deletion of BAF155/BAF170 leads to embryonic 
lethality due to a wide range of developmental defects including craniofacial, 
pharyngeal arch artery, and OFT defects. RNAseq and transcription factor 
enrichment analysis revealed that the BAF complex modulates the expression of 
multiple signaling pathway genes including Hippo and Notch, essential for the 
migration, proliferation, and differentiation of the NCCs. Furthermore, we 
demonstrated that the BAF complex is essential for the Brg1-Yap-Tead-dependent 
transcription of target genes in NCCs. Together, our results demonstrate an 
important role of the BAF complex in modulating the gene regulatory network 
essential for neural crest development.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009446
PMCID: PMC8016319
PMID: 33750945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.