---
reference_id: "PMID:36962714"
title: Findings of a community screening programme for human cystic echinococcosis in a non-endemic area.
authors:
- Mutwiri T
- Magambo J
- Zeyhle E
- Muigai AWT
- Alumasa L
- Amanya F
- Fèvre EM
- Falzon LC
journal: PLOS Glob Public Health
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgph.0000235
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Findings of a community screening programme for human cystic echinococcosis in a non-endemic area.
**Authors:** Mutwiri T, Magambo J, Zeyhle E, Muigai AWT, Alumasa L, Amanya F, Fèvre EM, Falzon LC
**Journal:** PLOS Glob Public Health (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgph.0000235](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0000235)

## Content

1. PLOS Glob Public Health. 2022 Aug 15;2(8):e0000235. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pgph.0000235. eCollection 2022.

Findings of a community screening programme for human cystic echinococcosis in a 
non-endemic area.

Mutwiri T(1)(2)(3), Magambo J(4), Zeyhle E(4), Muigai AWT(1), Alumasa L(2), 
Amanya F(2), Fèvre EM(2)(5), Falzon LC(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology, Nairobi, Kenya.
(2)International Livestock Research Institute, Nairobi, Kenya.
(3)Kenya Methodist University, Nairobi, Kenya.
(4)Meru University of Science and Technology, Meru, Kenya.
(5)Institute of Infection, Veterinary and Ecological Sciences, University of 
Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

Cystic Echinococcosis (CE) is a zoonosis caused by infection with the larval 
stages of the taeniid cestodes of the species complex Echinococcus granulosus 
sensu lato. It is prevalent among transhumant communities in East Africa, 
including those residing in northern Kenya. The movement of livestock from these 
regions of high incidence to areas of low incidence creates an indirect risk of 
disease spill-over to humans. To assess possible establishment of the CE life 
cycle outside known endemic regions, we used a portable ultrasound scanner to 
screen for the presence of human CE in Bungoma County of western Kenya, an area 
which imports substantial numbers of cattle for slaughter from neighbouring 
pastoralist regions. Eight sentinel sites were purposively selected based on 
their proximity to slaughterhouses handling animals introduced from pastoralist 
regions, and necessary permissions to conduct the study were sought. Regression 
analyses were conducted to identify risk factors associated with the presence of 
abdominal and cystic lesions (CL). In total, 1002 participants were screened; of 
these, 654 (65.3%) were female and the median age was 43. Farming (n = 403; 
43.4%) was the most frequent occupation, followed by professional (i.e. on 
regular salary) (n = 215; 23.1%), and business (n = 207; 22.3%) categories. 
Sixty-seven participants (6.7%) had abnormal ultrasound findings, of these, 7 
(1.1%) had simple liver cysts/CL, as per WHO classification. As such, their 
outcome was inconclusive and they were not put on treatment but advised to 
attend follow-up investigations in a referral health facility. Other abnormal 
findings included splenomegaly (n = 14), ovarian cysts (n = 14), uterine 
fibroids (n = 10), polycystic kidneys (n = 6), and benign prostatic hyperplasia 
(n = 6). Age was unconditionally associated with the presence of presumptive CL. 
These results contribute to CE baseline data while providing insights on the 
implementation of ultrasound diagnosis in the field, as recommended by the WHO 
for targeted control of echinococcosis by 2030.

Copyright: © 2022 Mutwiri et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgph.0000235
PMCID: PMC10022381
PMID: 36962714

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.