---
reference_id: "PMID:34718620"
title: Variations of C14ORF39 and SYCE1 Identified in Idiopathic Premature Ovarian Insufficiency and Nonobstructive Azoospermia.
authors:
- Hou D
- Yao C
- Xu B
- Luo W
- Ke H
- Li Z
- Qin Y
- Guo T
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgab777
keywords:
- Adult
- "Azoospermia/genetics, pathology"
- Biopsy
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Female
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Male
- Mutagenesis
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/genetics
- Recombinant Proteins/genetics
- Testis/pathology
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variations of C14ORF39 and SYCE1 Identified in Idiopathic Premature Ovarian Insufficiency and Nonobstructive Azoospermia.
**Authors:** Hou D, Yao C, Xu B, Luo W, Ke H, Li Z, Qin Y, Guo T
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgab777](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgab777)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2022 Feb 17;107(3):724-734. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgab777.

Variations of C14ORF39 and SYCE1 Identified in Idiopathic Premature Ovarian 
Insufficiency and Nonobstructive Azoospermia.

Hou D(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7), Yao C(8), Xu B(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Luo W(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), 
Ke H(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Li Z(8), Qin Y(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Guo T(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong 
University, Jinan 250012, Shandong, China.
(2)National Research Center for Assisted Reproductive Technology and 
Reproductive Genetics, Shandong University, Jinan 250012, Shandong, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Reproductive Endocrinology of Ministry of Education, 
Shandong University, Jinan 250012, Shandong, China.
(4)Shandong Provincial Clinical Medicine Research Center for Reproductive 
Health, Shandong University, Jinan 250012, Shandong, China.
(5)Reproductive Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan 250001, 
Shandong, China.
(6)School of Medicine, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan 
250012, China.
(7)Suzhou Research Institute, Shandong University, Suzhou 215123, Jiangsu, 
China.
(8)Department of Andrology, Center for Men's Health, Shanghai General Hospital; 
Department of ART, Institute of Urology, Urologic Medical Center, Shanghai 
General Hospital; Shanghai Key Lab of Reproductive Medicine; Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200080, China.

CONTEXT: Premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) and nonobstructive azoospermia 
(NOA) are the most severe diseases causing irreversible infertility in females 
and males, respectively. The contribution of synaptonemal complex (SC) gene 
variations in the pathogenesis of sporadic patients with POI and NOA has not 
been systematically illustrated.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of SC genes in the pathogenesis of sporadic 
POI and NOA.
DESIGN: Genetic and functional study.
SETTING: University-based reproductive medicine center.
PATIENT(S): A total of 1030 patients with sporadic POI and 400 patients with 
sporadic NOA.
INTERVENTION(S): The variations of SC genes were filtered in the in-house 
database of whole exome sequencing performed in 1030 patients with sporadic POI 
and 400 patients with sporadic NOA. The pathogenic or likely pathogenic 
variations following recessive inheritance mode were selected according to 
American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines and 
confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The pathogenic effects of the variations were 
verified by functional studies.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): ACMG classification and functional characteristics.
RESULT(S): Two homozygous variations of C14ORF39 and 2 recessive variations of 
SYCE1 were first identified in sporadic patients with POI and NOA, respectively. 
Functional studies showed the C14ORF39 variations significantly accelerated the 
protein degradation and the variations in SYCE1 disrupted its interaction with 
SYCP1 or C14ORF39, both of which affected SC assembly and meiosis.
CONCLUSION(S): Our study identified novel pathogenic variations of C14ORF39 and 
SYCE1 in sporadic patients with POI or NOA, highlighting the essential role of 
SC genes in the maintenance of ovarian and testicular function.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgab777
PMID: 34718620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]