---
reference_id: "PMID:40080499"
title: "YAP1 is a key regulator of EWS::FLI1-dependent malignant transformation upon IGF-1-mediated reprogramming of bone mesenchymal stem cells."
authors:
- Noorizadeh R
- Sax B
- Javaheri T
- Radic-Sarikas B
- Fock V
- Suresh V
- Kauer M
- Bykov A
- Kurija D
- Schlederer M
- Kenner L
- Weber G
- Mikulits W
- Halbritter F
- Moriggl R
- Kovar H
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2025.115381
keywords:
- "Mesenchymal Stem Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- "Proto-Oncogene Protein c-fli-1/metabolism, genetics"
- YAP-Signaling Proteins
- "Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/metabolism, pharmacology"
- "RNA-Binding Protein EWS/metabolism, genetics"
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/metabolism, pathology, genetics"
- Mice
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/metabolism, genetics"
- Humans
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/pathology, metabolism, genetics"
- Transcription Factors/metabolism
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/metabolism, genetics"
- Cellular Reprogramming/drug effects
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- Phosphoproteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# YAP1 is a key regulator of EWS::FLI1-dependent malignant transformation upon IGF-1-mediated reprogramming of bone mesenchymal stem cells.
**Authors:** Noorizadeh R, Sax B, Javaheri T, Radic-Sarikas B, Fock V, Suresh V, Kauer M, Bykov A, Kurija D, Schlederer M, Kenner L, Weber G, Mikulits W, Halbritter F, Moriggl R, Kovar H
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2025.115381](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2025.115381)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2025 Mar 25;44(3):115381. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2025.115381. Epub
2025  Mar 12.

YAP1 is a key regulator of EWS::FLI1-dependent malignant transformation upon
IGF-1-mediated reprogramming of bone mesenchymal stem cells.

Noorizadeh R(1), Sax B(2), Javaheri T(2), Radic-Sarikas B(3), Fock V(4), Suresh
V(4), Kauer M(4), Bykov A(4), Kurija D(5), Schlederer M(6), Kenner L(7), Weber
G(8), Mikulits W(8), Halbritter F(4), Moriggl R(9), Kovar H(10).

Author information:
(1)St. Anna Children's Cancer Research Institute (CCRI), 1090 Vienna, Austria;
Center for Cancer Research, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Medical University of
Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(2)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(3)St. Anna Children's Cancer Research Institute (CCRI), 1090 Vienna, Austria;
Department of Pediatric Surgery, Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna,
Austria.
(4)St. Anna Children's Cancer Research Institute (CCRI), 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(5)Department of Neurophysiology, Center for Brain Research, Medical University
of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(6)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, 1090 Vienna, Austria;
Department of Pathology, Department for Experimental and Laboratory Animal
Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(7)Department of Pathology, Department for Experimental and Laboratory Animal
Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria; Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria; Unit of
Laboratory Animal Pathology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, 1210
Vienna, Austria; Christian Doppler Laboratory for Applied Metabolomics, Medical
University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria; Center for Biomarker Research in
Medicine (CBmed), 8010 Graz, Austria.
(8)Center for Cancer Research, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Medical University
of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(9)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, 1090 Vienna, Austria;
Department of Biosciences and Medical Biology, Paris Lodron University of
Salzburg, 5020 Salzburg, Austria; Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics,
University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, 1210 Vienna, Austria.
(10)St. Anna Children's Cancer Research Institute (CCRI), 1090 Vienna, Austria;
Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
Electronic address: heinrich.kovar@ccri.at.

Ewing sarcoma (EwS) is an aggressive cancer of adolescents in need of effective
treatment. Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1 is an autocrine growth factor for
EwS, but only 10% of patients respond to IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R) blockade.
Although EwS is presumed to originate from mesenchymal progenitors during bone
development, targeting of the EwS driver oncogene EWS::FLI1 to the mesenchymal
lineage in a mouse model does not result in tumor formation but in skeletal
malformations and perinatal death. We report that transient exposure to IGF-1
concentrations mimicking serum levels during puberty reprograms limb-derived
mesenchymal cells of EWS::FLI1-mutant mice to stable transformation and
tumorigenicity. We identify a modular mechanism of IGF-1-driven tumor promotion
in the early steps of EwS pathogenesis, in which Yap1 plays a central role.
Pharmacologic Yap1/Tead inhibition reverses the transformed phenotype of
EWS::FLI1-expressing cells. Our data provide a rationale for combined IGF-1R and
YAP/TEAD inhibition in the treatment of EwS patients.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2025.115381
PMCID: PMC11936874
PMID: 40080499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
