---
reference_id: "PMID:28784301"
title: "Hashimoto encephalopathy in pediatric patients: Homogeneity in clinical presentation and heterogeneity in antibody titers."
authors:
- Lee J
- Yu HJ
- Lee J
journal: Brain Dev
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2017.07.008
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- "Autoantibodies/blood, immunology"
- Autoantigens/immunology
- Brain/pathology
- "Brain Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Child
- Electroencephalography/methods
- "Encephalitis/diagnosis, immunology, physiopathology"
- Female
- "Hashimoto Disease/diagnosis, immunology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Iodide Peroxidase/blood, immunology"
- Iron-Binding Proteins/immunology
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Seizures/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hashimoto encephalopathy in pediatric patients: Homogeneity in clinical presentation and heterogeneity in antibody titers.
**Authors:** Lee J, Yu HJ, Lee J
**Journal:** Brain Dev (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.braindev.2017.07.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.braindev.2017.07.008)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 2018 Jan;40(1):42-48. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2017.07.008. Epub
2017  Aug 4.

Hashimoto encephalopathy in pediatric patients: Homogeneity in clinical 
presentation and heterogeneity in antibody titers.

Lee J(1), Yu HJ(2), Lee J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Hanllym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Anyang, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: 
jhlee0101@skku.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Hashimoto encephalopathy is an autoimmune encephalopathy 
characterized by elevated antithyroid antibodies and a favorable response to 
corticosteroid. This study delineated the clinical characteristics of pediatric 
Hashimoto encephalopathy and the significance of low antithyroid antibody titers 
in diagnosis and treatment.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Clinical manifestations, antibody titers, and treatment 
responses were retrospectively reviewed in six consecutive children diagnosed 
with Hashimoto encephalopathy between August 2008 and July 2016.
RESULTS: Age at diagnosis was 10-17years. Presenting symptoms were seizures, 
altered consciousness, behavioral changes, psychosis, tremor, and dystonia. 
Thyroid function was normal in five patients, and one had hypothyroidism prior 
to the encephalopathy. Antithyroid antibody titer was increased at presentation 
in five patients and one week later in the other. Antibody levels were extremely 
varied (anti-thyroglobulin, 20.5-2318.0U/ml; anti-thyroid peroxidase, 
12.5-2231.0U/ml; reference range, <60U/ml) and <180U/ml in two patients. 
Electroencephalogram was abnormal in five patients. Brain magnetic resonance 
imaging was unremarkable. Four patients responded to high-dose corticosteroid 
and one improved with additional intravenous immunoglobulin. The remaining 
patient did not respond to both treatments and normalized after plasmapheresis. 
Autoantibody titers decreased with treatment response in the acute stage. Two 
patients with low antibody titers showed similar clinical presentations and 
responses.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical presentations and treatment responses in Hashimoto 
encephalopathy were similar, irrespective of antithyroid antibody titer. Because 
the initial antithyroid antibody titers can be normal or mildly-elevated, 
follow-up testing of antithyroid antibodies is required in patients who are 
clinically suspect for Hashimoto encephalopathy.

Copyright © 2017 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2017.07.008
PMID: 28784301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]