---
reference_id: "PMID:16416046"
title: "Sarcomeric proteins and familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: linking mutations in structural proteins to complex cardiovascular phenotypes."
authors:
- Tardiff JC
journal: Heart Fail Rev
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1007/s10741-005-5253-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sarcomeric proteins and familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: linking mutations in structural proteins to complex cardiovascular phenotypes.
**Authors:** Tardiff JC
**Journal:** Heart Fail Rev (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10741-005-5253-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10741-005-5253-5)

## Content

1. Heart Fail Rev. 2005 Sep;10(3):237-48. doi: 10.1007/s10741-005-5253-5.

Sarcomeric proteins and familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: linking mutations 
in structural proteins to complex cardiovascular phenotypes.

Tardiff JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics and the Department of Medicine 
(Cardiology), Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. 
tardiff@aecom.yu.edu

Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a relatively common primary cardiac 
disorder defined as the presence of a hypertrophied left ventricle in the 
absence of any other diagnosed etiology. HCM is the most common cause of sudden 
cardiac death in young people which often occurs without precedent symptoms. The 
overall clinical phenotype of patients with HCM is broad, ranging from a 
complete lack of cardiovascular symptoms to exertional dyspnea, chest pain, and 
sudden death, often due to arrhythmias. To date, 270 independent mutations in 
nine sarcomeric protein genes have been linked to Familial Hypertrophic 
Cardiomyopathy (FHC), thus the clinical variability is matched by significant 
genetic heterogeneity. While the final clinical phenotype in patients with FHC 
is a result of multiple factors including modifier genes, environmental 
influences and genotype, initial screening studies had suggested that individual 
gene mutations could be linked to specific prognoses. Given that the sarcomeric 
genes linked to FHC encode proteins with known functions, a vast array of 
biochemical, biophysical and physiologic experimental approaches have been 
applied to elucidate the molecular mechanisms that underlie the pathogenesis of 
this complex cardiovascular disorder. In this review, to illustrate the basic 
relationship between protein dysfunction and disease pathogenesis we focus on 
representative gene mutations from each of the major structural components of 
the cardiac sarcomere: the thick filament (beta MyHC), the thin filament (cTnT 
and Tm) and associated proteins (MyBP-C). The results of these studies will lead 
to a better understanding of FHC and eventually identify targets for therapeutic 
intervention.

DOI: 10.1007/s10741-005-5253-5
PMID: 16416046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]