---
reference_id: "PMID:15659606"
title: "Altered neuronal mitochondrial coenzyme A synthesis in neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation caused by abnormal processing, stability, and catalytic activity of mutant pantothenate kinase 2."
authors:
- Kotzbauer PT
- Truax AC
- Trojanowski JQ
- Lee VM
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4265-04.2005
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Catalysis
- Cell Line
- Coenzyme A/biosynthesis
- Enzyme Stability/genetics
- Half-Life
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Mitochondria/enzymology
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Neurons/enzymology
- "Pantothenate Kinase-Associated Neurodegeneration/enzymology, genetics"
- "Phosphotransferases (Alcohol Group Acceptor)/genetics, metabolism"
- Point Mutation
- Protein Isoforms
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Altered neuronal mitochondrial coenzyme A synthesis in neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation caused by abnormal processing, stability, and catalytic activity of mutant pantothenate kinase 2.
**Authors:** Kotzbauer PT, Truax AC, Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4265-04.2005](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4265-04.2005)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2005 Jan 19;25(3):689-98. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4265-04.2005.

Altered neuronal mitochondrial coenzyme A synthesis in neurodegeneration with 
brain iron accumulation caused by abnormal processing, stability, and catalytic 
activity of mutant pantothenate kinase 2.

Kotzbauer PT(1), Truax AC, Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Mutations in the pantothenate kinase 2 (PANK2) gene have been identified in 
patients with neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA; formerly 
Hallervorden-Spatz disease). However, the mechanisms by which these mutations 
cause neurodegeneration are unclear, especially given the existence of multiple 
pantothenate kinase genes in humans and multiple PanK2 transcripts with 
potentially different subcellular localizations. We demonstrate that PanK2 
protein is localized to mitochondria of neurons in human brain, distinguishing 
it from other pantothenate kinases that do not possess mitochondrial-targeting 
sequences. PanK2 protein translated from the most 5' start site is sequentially 
cleaved at two sites by the mitochondrial processing peptidase, generating a 
long-lived 48 kDa mature protein identical to that found in human brain 
extracts. The mature protein catalyzes the initial step in coenzyme A (CoA) 
synthesis but displays feedback inhibition in response to species of acyl CoA 
rather than CoA itself. Some, but not all disease-associated point mutations 
result in significantly reduced catalytic activity. The most common mutation, 
G521R, results in marked instability of the intermediate PanK2 isoform and 
reduced production of the mature isoform. These results suggest that NBIA is 
caused by altered neuronal mitochondrial lipid metabolism caused by mutations 
disrupting PanK2 protein levels and catalytic activity.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4265-04.2005
PMCID: PMC6725318
PMID: 15659606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]