---
reference_id: PMID:31080562
title: Intrinsic factor recognition promotes T helper 17/T helper 1 autoimmune gastric inflammation in patients with pernicious anemia.
authors:
- Troilo A
- Grassi A
- Petrone L
- Cianchi F
- Benagiano M
- Bella CD
- Capitani N
- Bitetti J
- "D'Elios S"
- Tapinassi S
- Azzurri A
- Alnwaisri H
- Romagnoli J
- Bizzaro N
- Bergman M
- Baldari CT
- "D'Elios MM"
journal: Oncotarget
year: '2019'
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.26874
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intrinsic factor recognition promotes T helper 17/T helper 1 autoimmune gastric inflammation in patients with pernicious anemia.
**Authors:** Troilo A, Grassi A, Petrone L, Cianchi F, Benagiano M, Bella CD, Capitani N, Bitetti J, D'Elios S, Tapinassi S, Azzurri A, Alnwaisri H, Romagnoli J, Bizzaro N, Bergman M, Baldari CT, D'Elios MM
**Journal:** Oncotarget (2019)
**DOI:** [10.18632/oncotarget.26874](https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.26874)

## Content

1. Oncotarget. 2019 Apr 23;10(30):2921-2929. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.26874. 
eCollection 2019 Apr 23.

Intrinsic factor recognition promotes T helper 17/T helper 1 autoimmune gastric 
inflammation in patients with pernicious anemia.

Troilo A(#)(1), Grassi A(#)(1), Petrone L(2), Cianchi F(3), Benagiano M(1), 
Bella CD(1), Capitani N(4), Bitetti J(1), D'Elios S(5), Tapinassi S(1), Azzurri 
A(6), Alnwaisri H(1), Romagnoli J(7), Bizzaro N(8), Bergman M(9), Baldari CT(4), 
D'Elios MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, 
Florence, Italy.
(2)Endocrinology Unit, Careggi Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Surgery, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy.
(6)Toscana Centro Hospital, Firenze-Prato, Italy.
(7)Surgery Unit, Rome Catholic University, Italy.
(8)San Antonio Hospital, Tolmezzo, Italy.
(9)Amsterdam Institute for Molecules, Medicines and Systems, Vrije University, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(#)Contributed equally

The intrinsic factor is the major humoral autoantigen in pernicious 
anemia/autoimmune gastritis. Although many studies have examined the 
autoantibody response to intrinsic factor and H+,K+-ATPase, no information is 
available on possible pathogenic mechanisms mediated by intrinsic factor - 
specific gastric T cells. Aim of this study was to investigate intrinsic 
factor-specific T cells in the gastric mucosa of pernicious anemia patients and 
define their functional properties. For the first time we provide evidence that 
gastric mucosa of pernicious anemia patients harbour a high proportion (20%) of 
autoreactive activated CD4+ T-cell clones that specifically recognize intrinsic 
factor. Most of these clones (94%) showed a T helper 17 or T helper 1 profile. 
All intrinsic factor-specific clones produced tumor necrosis factor-α, 
interleukin-21 and provided substantial help for B-cell immunoglobulin 
production. Most mucosa-derived intrinsic factor-specific T-cell clones 
expressed cytotoxicity against target cells. Our results indicate that 
activation of intrinsic factor-specific T helper 17 and T helper 1 T cells in 
the gastric mucosa represent a key effector mechanism in pernicious anemia 
suggesting that the T helper 17/T helper 1 pathway may represent a novel target 
for the prevention and treatment of the disease.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.26874
PMCID: PMC6499598
PMID: 31080562

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare that 
the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be considered as a potential conflict of interest.