---
reference_id: "PMID:29157397"
title: "Progressive Forms of Multiple Sclerosis: Distinct Entity or Age-Dependent Phenomena."
authors:
- Zeydan B
- Kantarci OH
journal: Neurol Clin
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ncl.2017.08.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progressive Forms of Multiple Sclerosis: Distinct Entity or Age-Dependent Phenomena.
**Authors:** Zeydan B, Kantarci OH
**Journal:** Neurol Clin (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ncl.2017.08.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ncl.2017.08.006)

## Content

1. Neurol Clin. 2018 Feb;36(1):163-171. doi: 10.1016/j.ncl.2017.08.006.

Progressive Forms of Multiple Sclerosis: Distinct Entity or Age-Dependent 
Phenomena.

Zeydan B(1), Kantarci OH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, 200 First Street, 
Southwest, Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic and 
Foundation, 200 First Street, Southwest, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, 200 First Street, 
Southwest, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. Electronic address: 
kantarci.orhun@mayo.edu.

In multiple sclerosis (MS), disease course is defined by a subclinical or 
clinical relapsing remitting phase, a progressive phase, and the overlapping 
phase in-between. Each phase can have intermittently active or inactive periods. 
Subclinical activity in radiologically isolated syndrome evolving to 
primary-progressive MS is mostly indistinguishable from relapsing-remitting MS 
evolving to secondary-progressive MS. The onset of progressive-phase MS is 
age-dependent but time and pre-progressive phase agnostic. Pathologic hallmarks 
of progressive MS onset also appear to be age-dependent but pre-progressive 
phase agnostic. Onset of progressive MS is characterized by a peak in smoldering 
plaques.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ncl.2017.08.006
PMID: 29157397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]