---
reference_id: PMID:38785509
title: The Molecular Mechanisms Underlying the Systemic Effects Mediated by Parathormone in the Context of Chronic Kidney Disease.
authors:
- Maranduca MA
- Cozma CT
- Clim A
- Pinzariu AC
- Tudorancea I
- Popa IP
- Lazar CI
- Moscalu R
- Filip N
- Moscalu M
- Constantin M
- Scripcariu DV
- Serban DN
- Serban IL
journal: Curr Issues Mol Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cimb46050241
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Molecular Mechanisms Underlying the Systemic Effects Mediated by Parathormone in the Context of Chronic Kidney Disease.
**Authors:** Maranduca MA, Cozma CT, Clim A, Pinzariu AC, Tudorancea I, Popa IP, Lazar CI, Moscalu R, Filip N, Moscalu M, Constantin M, Scripcariu DV, Serban DN, Serban IL
**Journal:** Curr Issues Mol Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cimb46050241](https://doi.org/10.3390/cimb46050241)

## Content

1. Curr Issues Mol Biol. 2024 Apr 25;46(5):3877-3905. doi: 10.3390/cimb46050241.

The Molecular Mechanisms Underlying the Systemic Effects Mediated by 
Parathormone in the Context of Chronic Kidney Disease.

Maranduca MA(1), Cozma CT(1), Clim A(1), Pinzariu AC(1), Tudorancea I(1), Popa 
IP(1), Lazar CI(1), Moscalu R(2), Filip N(3), Moscalu M(4), Constantin M(5), 
Scripcariu DV(6), Serban DN(1), Serban IL(1).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Physiology, Department of Morpho-Functional Sciences II, 
Grigore T. Popa University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 700115 Iasi, Romania.
(2)Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological 
Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, 
Manchester M13 9PL, UK.
(3)Discipline of Biochemistry, Department of Morpho-Functional Sciences II, 
Grigore T. Popa University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 700115 Iasi, Romania.
(4)Department of Preventive Medicine and Interdisciplinarity, Grigore T. Popa 
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 700115 Iasi, Romania.
(5)Internal Medicine Department, Faculty of Medicine, Grigore T. Popa University 
of Medicine and Pharmacy, 700115 Iasi, Romania.
(6)Department of Surgery, Grigore T. Popa University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
16 University Str., 700115 Iasi, Romania.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) stands as a prominent non-communicable ailment, 
significantly impacting life expectancy. Physiopathology stands mainly upon the 
triangle represented by parathormone-Vitamin D-Fibroblast Growth Factor-23. 
Parathormone (PTH), the key hormone in mineral homeostasis, is one of the less 
easily modifiable parameters in CKD; however, it stands as a significant marker 
for assessing the risk of complications. The updated "trade-off hypothesis" 
reveals that levels of PTH spike out of the normal range as early as stage G2 
CKD, advancing it as a possible determinant of systemic damage. The present 
review aims to review the effects exhibited by PTH on several organs while 
linking the molecular mechanisms to the observed actions in the context of CKD. 
From a diagnostic perspective, PTH is the most reliable and accessible 
biochemical marker in CKD, but its trend bears a higher significance on a 
patient's prognosis rather than the absolute value. Classically, PTH acts in a 
dichotomous manner on bone tissue, maintaining a balance between formation and 
resorption. Under the uremic conditions of advanced CKD, the altered intestinal 
microbiota majorly tips the balance towards bone lysis. Probiotic treatment has 
proven reliable in animal models, but in humans, data are limited. Regarding 
bone status, persistently high levels of PTH determine a reduction in mineral 
density and a concurrent increase in fracture risk. Pharmacological manipulation 
of serum PTH requires appropriate patient selection and monitoring since 
dangerously low levels of PTH may completely inhibit bone turnover. Moreover, 
the altered mineral balance extends to the cardiovascular system, promoting 
vascular calcifications. Lastly, the involvement of PTH in the 
Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone axis highlights the importance of opting for the 
appropriate pharmacological agent should hypertension develop.

DOI: 10.3390/cimb46050241
PMCID: PMC11120161
PMID: 38785509

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.