---
reference_id: "PMID:29710196"
title: Long-term Outcomes of Pediatric-Onset Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy and Age-Specific Risk Factors for Lethal Arrhythmic Events.
authors:
- Maurizi N
- Passantino S
- Spaziani G
- Girolami F
- Arretini A
- Targetti M
- Pollini I
- Tomberli A
- Pradella S
- Calabri GB
- Vinattieri V
- Bertaccini B
- Leone O
- De Simone L
- Rapezzi C
- Marchionni N
- Cecchi F
- Favilli S
- Olivotto I
journal: JAMA Cardiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2018.0789
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term Outcomes of Pediatric-Onset Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy and Age-Specific Risk Factors for Lethal Arrhythmic Events.
**Authors:** Maurizi N, Passantino S, Spaziani G, Girolami F, Arretini A, Targetti M, Pollini I, Tomberli A, Pradella S, Calabri GB, Vinattieri V, Bertaccini B, Leone O, De Simone L, Rapezzi C, Marchionni N, Cecchi F, Favilli S, Olivotto I
**Journal:** JAMA Cardiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamacardio.2018.0789](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamacardio.2018.0789)

## Content

1. JAMA Cardiol. 2018 Jun 1;3(6):520-525. doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2018.0789.

Long-term Outcomes of Pediatric-Onset Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy and 
Age-Specific Risk Factors for Lethal Arrhythmic Events.

Maurizi N(1)(2), Passantino S(1), Spaziani G(3), Girolami F(1)(4), Arretini 
A(1), Targetti M(1), Pollini I(3), Tomberli A(1), Pradella S(5), Calabri GB(3), 
Vinattieri V(6), Bertaccini B(6), Leone O(7), De Simone L(3), Rapezzi C(7), 
Marchionni N(2), Cecchi F(2)(8), Favilli S(3), Olivotto I(1).

Author information:
(1)Cardiomyopathy Unit, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Florence, 
Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Meyer Children's Hospital, Florence, 
Italy.
(4)Cytogenetic and Genetic Unit, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(5)Department of Diagnostic Radiology 2, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, 
Italy.
(6)Department of Statistics, Informatics and Application (DiSia), University of 
Florence, Florence, Italy.
(7)Department of Pathology, Sant'Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(8)Arcard Foundation, Florence, Italy.

Comment in
    JAMA Cardiol. 2018 Jun 1;3(6):526. doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2018.0819.

IMPORTANCE: Predictors of lethal arrhythmic events (LAEs) after a pediatric 
diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) are unresolved. Existing 
algorithms for risk stratification are limited to patients older than 16 years 
because of a lack of data on younger individuals.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the long-term outcome of pediatric-onset HCM and identify 
age-specific arrhythmic risk factors.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This study assessed patients with 
pediatric-onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy diagnosed from 1974 to 2016 in 2 
national referral centers for cardiomyopathies in Florence, Italy. Patients with 
metabolic and syndromic disease were excluded.
EXPOSURES: Patients were assessed at 1-year intervals, or more often, if their 
clinical condition required.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Lethal arrhythmic events (LAEs) and death related to 
heart failure.
RESULTS: Of 1644 patients with HCM, 100 (6.1%) were 1 to 16 years old at 
diagnosis (median [interquartile range], 12.2 [7.3-14.1] years). Of these, 63 
(63.0%) were boys. Forty-two of the 100 patients (42.0%) were symptomatic 
(defined as an New York Heart Association classification higher than 1 or a Ross 
score greater than 2). The yield of sarcomere gene testing was 55 of 70 patients 
(79%). During a median of 9.2 years during which a mean of 1229 patients were 
treated per year, 24 of 100 patients (24.0%) experienced cardiac events (1.9% 
per year), including 19 LAEs and 5 heart failure-related events (3 deaths and 2 
heart transplants). Lethal arrhythmic events occurred at a mean (SD) age of 23.1 
(11.5) years. Two survivors of LAEs with symptoms of heart failure experienced 
recurrent cardiac arrest despite an implantable cardioverter defibrillator. Risk 
of LAE was associated with symptoms at onset (hazard ratio [HR], 8.2; 95% CI, 
1.5-68.4; P = .02) and Troponin I or Troponin T gene mutations (HR, 4.1; 95% CI, 
0.9-36.5; P = .06). Adult HCM risk predictors performed poorly in this 
population. Data analysis occurred from December 2016 to October 2017.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Pediatric-onset HCM is rare and associated with 
adverse outcomes driven mainly by arrhythmic events. Risk extends well beyond 
adolescence, which calls for unchanged clinical surveillance into adulthood. In 
this study, predictors of adverse outcomes differ from those of adult 
populations with HCM. In secondary prevention, the implantable cardioverter 
defibrillator did not confer absolute protection in the presence of limiting 
symptoms of heart failure.

DOI: 10.1001/jamacardio.2018.0789
PMCID: PMC6128509
PMID: 29710196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors 
have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential 
Conflicts of Interest. No disclosures were reported.