---
reference_id: "PMID:35456511"
title: The Role of Epigenetic Modifications in Late Complications in Type 1 Diabetes.
authors:
- Čugalj Kern B
- Trebušak Podkrajšek K
- Kovač J
- Šket R
- Jenko Bizjan B
- Tesovnik T
- Debeljak M
- Battelino T
- Bratina N
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes13040705
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of Epigenetic Modifications in Late Complications in Type 1 Diabetes.
**Authors:** Čugalj Kern B, Trebušak Podkrajšek K, Kovač J, Šket R, Jenko Bizjan B, Tesovnik T, Debeljak M, Battelino T, Bratina N
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes13040705](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13040705)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Apr 15;13(4):705. doi: 10.3390/genes13040705.

The Role of Epigenetic Modifications in Late Complications in Type 1 Diabetes.

Čugalj Kern B(1)(2), Trebušak Podkrajšek K(1)(2), Kovač J(1)(2), Šket R(1), 
Jenko Bizjan B(1)(2), Tesovnik T(1), Debeljak M(1)(2), Battelino T(1)(2), 
Bratina N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)University Children's Hospital, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Zaloška 
Cesta 2, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Vrazov Trg 2, 1000 Ljubljana, 
Slovenia.

Type 1 diabetes is a chronic autoimmune disease in which the destruction of 
pancreatic β cells leads to hyperglycemia. The prevention of hyperglycemia is 
very important to avoid or at least postpone the development of micro- and 
macrovascular complications, also known as late complications. These include 
diabetic retinopathy, chronic renal failure, diabetic neuropathy, and 
cardiovascular diseases. The impact of long-term hyperglycemia has been shown to 
persist long after the normalization of blood glucose levels, a phenomenon known 
as metabolic memory. It is believed that epigenetic mechanisms such as DNA 
methylation, histone modifications, and microRNAs, play an important role in 
metabolic memory. The aim of this review is to address the impact of long-term 
hyperglycemia on epigenetic marks in late complications of type 1 diabetes.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13040705
PMCID: PMC9029845
PMID: 35456511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.