---
reference_id: "PMID:26178430"
title: "Revisited HLA and non-HLA genetics of Takayasu arteritis--where are we?"
authors:
- Terao C
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.87
keywords:
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Giant Cell Arteritis/genetics
- HLA Antigens/genetics
- Humans
- Takayasu Arteritis/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Revisited HLA and non-HLA genetics of Takayasu arteritis--where are we?
**Authors:** Terao C
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jhg.2015.87](https://doi.org/10.1038/jhg.2015.87)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2016 Jan;61(1):27-32. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.87. Epub 2015 Jul 16.

Revisited HLA and non-HLA genetics of Takayasu arteritis--where are we?

Terao C(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genomic Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Center for the Promotion of Interdisciplinary Education and Research, Kyoto, 
Japan.
(3)Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(5)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Takayasu arteritis (TAK) is an immune-mediated vasculitis affecting large 
arteries first reported in 1908 from Japan. Case reports of familial onset of 
TAK from Japan and other countries indicated genetic contribution to TAK onset 
beyond ethnicity. Genetic studies of TAK have been performed mainly addressing 
the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) locus. HLA genetic studies of TAK that have 
previously been reported are reviewed in this manuscript. HLA-B*52:01 is 
associated with TAK beyond population. Many of the associations other than 
HLA-B*52:01 can be explained by a haplotype with HLA-B*52:01. HLA-B*67:01 is a 
novel susceptibility HLA-B allele to TAK confirmed in the Japanese population. 
Further independent associations are suggested in the HLA locus. Involvement of 
the 171st and 67th amino acid residues with TAK onset has been indicated. The 
67th amino acid may explain the difference in susceptibility effects to TAK and 
Behçet's disease between HLA-B*52:01 and *51:01. HLA-B*52:01 is associated not 
only with TAK susceptibility but also with clinical phenotypes. Recent 
genome-wide association studies of TAK revealed multiple non-HLA susceptibility 
genes. In particular, the IL12B region seems to have a central role in TAK onset 
and its progression. Whether TAK and giant cell arteritis (GCA), the other 
vasculitis affecting large arteries, are the same disease is an interesting 
question to address in spite of different clinical manifestations between the 
two diseases. GCA is associated with HLA-DR4, which is not associated with TAK. 
GCA is not associated with HLA-Bw52. These two diseases seem not to share 
non-HLA susceptibility loci based on the recent genetic studies.

DOI: 10.1038/jhg.2015.87
PMID: 26178430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]