---
reference_id: "PMID:28154935"
title: "[Role of genetics in familial Mediterranean fever]."
authors:
- Kallinich T
- Orak B
- Wittkowski H
journal: Z Rheumatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s00393-017-0265-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Role of genetics in familial Mediterranean fever].
**Authors:** Kallinich T, Orak B, Wittkowski H
**Journal:** Z Rheumatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00393-017-0265-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00393-017-0265-9)

## Content

1. Z Rheumatol. 2017 May;76(4):303-312. doi: 10.1007/s00393-017-0265-9.

[Role of genetics in familial Mediterranean fever].

[Article in German]

Kallinich T(1)(2), Orak B(3)(4), Wittkowski H(5).

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Pädiatrie m.S. Pneumologie und Immunologie, Charité 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353, Berlin, Deutschland. 
tilmann.kallinich@charite.de.
(2)Interdisziplinäres Sozialpädiatrisches Zentrum, Charité Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Deutschland. tilmann.kallinich@charite.de.
(3)Klinik für Pädiatrie m.S. Pneumologie und Immunologie, Charité 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353, Berlin, Deutschland.
(4)Interdisziplinäres Sozialpädiatrisches Zentrum, Charité Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Deutschland.
(5)Klinik für Pädiatrische Rheumatologie und Immunologie, Universitätsklinikum 
Münster, Münster, Deutschland.

Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is caused by mutations within the 
Mediterranean fever (MEFV) gene. These gain of function mutations lead to an 
increased activation of the inflammasome pyrin with a subsequent disproportional 
proinflammatory reaction. Classically, in FMF patients two pathogenic mutations 
affecting both alleles are found in the molecular genetic analysis; however, it 
is well known that the phenotype can also be caused either by mutations with 
lower penetrance or unknown significance. Furthermore, in a significant number 
of patients only one or even no MEFV mutations can be detected. Heterozygous 
mutation carriers who do not suffer from classical FMF, can also present with 
other signs of inflammation, e. g. subclinical increased inflammation markers, 
associated inflammatory diseases or unclassified symptoms. Thus, FMF does not 
follow a classical autosomal recessive inheritance and a variable gene dose 
effect has to be considered, which is furthermore modulated by other mostly 
unknown genetic variants and environmental factors. This article summarizes the 
broad spectrum of clinical presentations associated with MEFV mutations and 
analyzes the effect of the gene dose on the phenotypical expression. 
Furthermore, the impact of the molecular genetic analysis on the diagnostics of 
a patient and on the individualized management of the disease is discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00393-017-0265-9
PMID: 28154935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]