---
reference_id: "PMID:26088929"
title: Transcription and methylation analyses of preleukemic promyelocytes indicate a dual role for PML/RARA in leukemia initiation.
authors:
- Gaillard C
- Tokuyasu TA
- Rosen G
- Sotzen J
- Vitaliano-Prunier A
- Roy R
- Passegué E
- de Thé H
- Figueroa ME
- Kogan SC
journal: Haematologica
year: '2015'
doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.123018
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antigens, CD34/metabolism"
- Cell Proliferation
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics, metabolism"
- Cluster Analysis
- DNA Methylation
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Leukemic"
- "Granulocyte Precursor Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Immunophenotyping
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Neoplastic Stem Cells/metabolism
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- "Transcription, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcription and methylation analyses of preleukemic promyelocytes indicate a dual role for PML/RARA in leukemia initiation.
**Authors:** Gaillard C, Tokuyasu TA, Rosen G, Sotzen J, Vitaliano-Prunier A, Roy R, Passegué E, de Thé H, Figueroa ME, Kogan SC
**Journal:** Haematologica (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3324/haematol.2014.123018](https://doi.org/10.3324/haematol.2014.123018)

## Content

1. Haematologica. 2015 Aug;100(8):1064-75. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.123018.
Epub  2015 Jun 18.

Transcription and methylation analyses of preleukemic promyelocytes indicate a
dual role for PML/RARA in leukemia initiation.

Gaillard C(1), Tokuyasu TA(2), Rosen G(3), Sotzen J(4), Vitaliano-Prunier A(5),
Roy R(2), Passegué E(6), de Thé H(5), Figueroa ME(4), Kogan SC(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco,
CA, USA Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Université Paris-Diderot UMR
944/7212, France.
(2)Computational Biology Core, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Phoenix Children's Hospital, AZ, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(5)Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Université Paris-Diderot UMR 944/7212,
France.
(6)Department of Medicine, Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine
and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco,
CA, USA scott.Kogan@ucsf.edu.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia is an aggressive malignancy characterized by the
accumulation of promyelocytes in the bone marrow. PML/RARA is the primary
abnormality implicated in this pathology, but the mechanisms by which this
chimeric fusion protein initiates disease are incompletely understood.
Identifying PML/RARA targets in vivo is critical for comprehending the road to
pathogenesis. Utilizing a novel sorting strategy, we isolated highly purified
promyelocyte populations from normal and young preleukemic animals, carried out
microarray and methylation profiling analyses, and compared the results from the
two groups of animals. Surprisingly, in the absence of secondary lesions,
PML/RARA had an overall limited impact on both the transcriptome and methylome.
Of interest, we did identify down-regulation of secondary and tertiary granule
genes as the first step engaging the myeloid maturation block. Although
initially not sufficient to arrest terminal granulopoiesis in vivo, such
alterations set the stage for the later, complete differentiation block seen in
leukemia. Further, gene set enrichment analysis revealed that PML/RARA
promyelocytes exhibit a subtle increase in expression of cell cycle genes, and
we show that this leads to both increased proliferation of these cells and
expansion of the promyelocyte compartment. Importantly, this proliferation
signature was absent from the poorly leukemogenic p50/RARA fusion model,
implying a critical role for PML in the altered cell-cycle kinetics and ability
to initiate leukemia. Thus, our findings challenge the predominant model in the
field and we propose that PML/RARA initiates leukemia by subtly shifting cell
fate decisions within the promyelocyte compartment.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2014.123018
PMCID: PMC5004423
PMID: 26088929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
