---
reference_id: "PMID:29931474"
title: "How much of the predisposition to Hashimoto's thyroiditis can be explained based on previously reported associations?"
authors:
- Jabrocka-Hybel A
- Skalniak A
- Piątkowski J
- Turek-Jabrocka R
- Vyhouskaya P
- Ludwig-Słomczyńska A
- Machlowska J
- Kapusta P
- Małecki M
- Pach D
- Trofimiuk-Müldner M
- Lizis-Kolus K
- Hubalewska-Dydejczyk A
journal: J Endocrinol Invest
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s40618-018-0910-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How much of the predisposition to Hashimoto's thyroiditis can be explained based on previously reported associations?
**Authors:** Jabrocka-Hybel A, Skalniak A, Piątkowski J, Turek-Jabrocka R, Vyhouskaya P, Ludwig-Słomczyńska A, Machlowska J, Kapusta P, Małecki M, Pach D, Trofimiuk-Müldner M, Lizis-Kolus K, Hubalewska-Dydejczyk A
**Journal:** J Endocrinol Invest (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40618-018-0910-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40618-018-0910-4)

## Content

1. J Endocrinol Invest. 2018 Dec;41(12):1409-1416. doi:
10.1007/s40618-018-0910-4.  Epub 2018 Jun 21.

How much of the predisposition to Hashimoto's thyroiditis can be explained based 
on previously reported associations?

Jabrocka-Hybel A(1), Skalniak A(2), Piątkowski J(3), Turek-Jabrocka R(1), 
Vyhouskaya P(4), Ludwig-Słomczyńska A(5), Machlowska J(5), Kapusta P(5), Małecki 
M(6), Pach D(1), Trofimiuk-Müldner M(1), Lizis-Kolus K(7), Hubalewska-Dydejczyk 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Medical Faculty, Jagiellonian University Medical 
College, Krakow, Poland.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, University Hospital in Krakow, ul. Kopernika 17, 
31-501, Krakow, Poland. anna.skalniak@uj.edu.pl.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, University Hospital in Krakow, ul. Kopernika 17, 
31-501, Krakow, Poland.
(4)Department of Medical Diagnostics, Pharmacy Faculty, Jagiellonian University 
Medical College, Krakow, Poland.
(5)Center for Medical Genomics OMICRON, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 
Krakow, Poland.
(6)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Medical Faculty, Jagiellonian University 
Medical College, Krakow, Poland.
(7)Endocrinology Department-Oncology Center, Kielce, Poland.

PURPOSE: Our insight in the genetics of Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT) has become 
clearer through information provided by genome-wide association studies and 
candidate gene studies, but remains still not fully understood. Our aim was to 
assess how many different genetic risk variants contribute to the development of 
HT.
METHODS: 147 HT cases (10.2% men) and 147 controls (13.6% men) were qualified 
for the analysis. Intrinsic and environmental factors were controlled for. 
Polymorphisms (SNP) were chosen based on the literature and included markers of 
the genes PTPN22, CTLA4, TG, TPO among others, and of genomic regions pointed by 
GWAS studies. SNP were typed on a microarray. Variants in the HLA-DRB1 gene were 
identified by Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: Multivariate predisposition to HT was modeled. Based on the 
investigated group, a model of seven variables was obtained. The variability 
explained by this model was assessed at only 5.4821% (p = 2 × 10-6), which 
indicates that many dozens of factors are required simultaneously to explain HT 
predisposition.
CONCLUSIONS: We analyzed genetic regions commonly and most significantly 
associated with autoimmune thyroid disorders in the literature, on a carefully 
selected cohort. Our results indicated a lack of possibility to predict the risk 
of HT development, even with a multivariate model. We therefore conclude that 
strong associations of single genetic regions with HT should be interpreted with 
great caution. We believe that a change in the attitude towards genetic 
association analyses of HT predisposition is necessary. Studies including 
multiple factors simultaneously are needed to unravel the intricacies of genetic 
associations with HT.

DOI: 10.1007/s40618-018-0910-4
PMCID: PMC6244553
PMID: 29931474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: On behalf of all authors, 
the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest. ETHICAL 
APPROVAL: The study was approved by the Bioethical Committee of the Jagiellonian 
University in Krakow (No. KBET/68/B/2011). INFORMED CONSENT: All patients were 
informed about the reasons of the investigation and gave their written informed 
consent prior to participation in the study.