---
reference_id: "PMID:37994247"
title: Pentanucleotide Repeat Insertions in RAI1 Cause Benign Adult Familial Myoclonic Epilepsy Type 8.
authors:
- Yeetong P
- Dembélé ME
- Pongpanich M
- Cissé L
- Srichomthong C
- Maiga AB
- Dembélé K
- Assawapitaksakul A
- Bamba S
- Yalcouyé A
- Diarra S
- Mefoung SE
- Rakwongkhachon S
- Traoré O
- Tongkobpetch S
- Fischbeck KH
- Gahl WA
- Guinto CO
- Shotelersuk V
- Landouré G
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/mds.29654
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- "Epilepsies, Myoclonic/genetics"
- Introns
- Microsatellite Repeats
- RNA
- Seizures/genetics
- Trans-Activators
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pentanucleotide Repeat Insertions in RAI1 Cause Benign Adult Familial Myoclonic Epilepsy Type 8.
**Authors:** Yeetong P, Dembélé ME, Pongpanich M, Cissé L, Srichomthong C, Maiga AB, Dembélé K, Assawapitaksakul A, Bamba S, Yalcouyé A, Diarra S, Mefoung SE, Rakwongkhachon S, Traoré O, Tongkobpetch S, Fischbeck KH, Gahl WA, Guinto CO, Shotelersuk V, Landouré G
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.29654](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.29654)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2024 Jan;39(1):164-172. doi: 10.1002/mds.29654. Epub 2023 Nov 22.

Pentanucleotide Repeat Insertions in RAI1 Cause Benign Adult Familial Myoclonic 
Epilepsy Type 8.

Yeetong P(1), Dembélé ME(2), Pongpanich M(3)(4), Cissé L(5), Srichomthong 
C(6)(7), Maiga AB(2), Dembélé K(8), Assawapitaksakul A(6)(7), Bamba S(2), 
Yalcouyé A(2), Diarra S(2)(9)(10), Mefoung SE(2), Rakwongkhachon S(6)(7), Traoré 
O(2), Tongkobpetch S(6)(7), Fischbeck KH(10), Gahl WA(11), Guinto CO(2)(5), 
Shotelersuk V(6)(7), Landouré G(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Botany, Faculty of Science, 
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Faculté de Médecine et d'Odontostomatologie, USTTB, Bamako, Mali.
(3)Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Faculty of Science, 
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Omics Sciences and Bioinformatics Center, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Service de Neurologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire du Point G, Bamako, 
Mali.
(6)Center of Excellence for Medical Genomics, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty 
of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(7)Excellence Center for Genomics and Precision Medicine, King Chulalongkorn 
Memorial Hospital, the Thai Red Cross Society, Bangkok, Thailand.
(8)Hôpital du District de la Commune IV, Bamako, Mali.
(9)Pediatric Genomics Discovery Program, Department of Pediatrics, Yale 
University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(10)Neurogenetics Branch, NINDS, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(11)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

BACKGROUND: Benign adult familial myoclonic epilepsy (BAFME) is an autosomal 
dominant disorder characterized by cortical tremors and seizures. Six types of 
BAFME, all caused by pentanucleotide repeat expansions in different genes, have 
been reported. However, several other BAFME cases remain with no molecular 
diagnosis.
OBJECTIVES: We aim to characterize clinical features and identify the mutation 
causing BAFME in a large Malian family with 10 affected members.
METHODS: Long-read whole genome sequencing, repeat-primed polymerase chain 
reaction and RNA studies were performed.
RESULTS: We identified TTTTA repeat expansions and TTTCA repeat insertions in 
intron 4 of the RAI1 gene that co-segregated with disease status in this family. 
TTTCA repeats were absent in 200 Malian controls. In the affected individuals, 
we found a read with only nine TTTCA repeat units and somatic instability. The 
RAI1 repeat expansions cause the only BAFME type in which the disease-causing 
repeats are in a gene associated with a monogenic disorder in the 
haploinsufficiency state (ie, Smith-Magenis syndrome [SMS]). Nevertheless, none 
of the Malian patients exhibited symptoms related to SMS. Moreover, leukocyte 
RNA levels of RAI1 in six Malian BAFME patients were no different from controls.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings establish a new type of BAFME, BAFME8, in an African 
family and suggest that haploinsufficiency is unlikely to be the main 
pathomechanism of BAFME. © 2023 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder 
Society. This article has been contributed to by U.S. Government employees and 
their work is in the public domain in the USA.

© 2023 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society. This article has 
been contributed to by U.S. Government employees and their work is in the public 
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.29654
PMCID: PMC10872918
PMID: 37994247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.