---
reference_id: "PMID:32435800"
title: "Treatment of Human Plague: A Systematic Review of Published Aggregate Data on Antimicrobial Efficacy, 1939-2019."
authors:
- Godfred-Cato S
- Cooley KM
- Fleck-Derderian S
- Becksted HA
- Russell Z
- Meaney-Delman D
- Mead PS
- Nelson CA
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/cid/ciz1230
keywords:
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Fluoroquinolones
- Humans
- Lung
- "Plague/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Yersinia pestis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of Human Plague: A Systematic Review of Published Aggregate Data on Antimicrobial Efficacy, 1939-2019.
**Authors:** Godfred-Cato S, Cooley KM, Fleck-Derderian S, Becksted HA, Russell Z, Meaney-Delman D, Mead PS, Nelson CA
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cid/ciz1230](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciz1230)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2020 May 21;70(70 Suppl 1):S11-S19. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciz1230.

Treatment of Human Plague: A Systematic Review of Published Aggregate Data on
Antimicrobial Efficacy, 1939-2019.

Godfred-Cato S(1), Cooley KM(2), Fleck-Derderian S(3)(4), Becksted HA(3)(4),
Russell Z(3)(5), Meaney-Delman D(1), Mead PS(4), Nelson CA(4).

Author information:
(1)Infant Outcomes Monitoring, Research and Prevention Branch, Division of Birth
Defects and Infant Disorders, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)Synergy America, contracting agency for Bacterial Diseases Branch, Division
of Vector-Borne Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Fort
Collins, CO, USA.
(3)Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education CDC Fellowship Program, Fort
Collins, Colorado, USA.
(4)Bacterial Diseases Branch, Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.
(5)Emergency Preparedness and Response Branch, Division of Preparedness and
Emerging Infections, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA.

BACKGROUND: Plague, caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis, has killed millions
in historic pandemics and continues to cause sporadic outbreaks. Numerous
antimicrobials are considered effective for treating plague; however,
well-defined information on the relative efficacy of various treatments is
lacking. We conducted a systematic review of published data on antimicrobial
treatment of plague reported in aggregate.
METHODS: We searched databases including Embase, Medline, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and others for publications with terms related to plague and
antimicrobials. Articles were included if they contained 1) a group of patients
treated for plague, with outcomes reported by antimicrobial regimen, and 2)
laboratory evidence of Y. pestis infection or an epidemiologic link to patients
with laboratory evidence of Y. pestis. Case fatality rate by antimicrobial
regimen was calculated.
RESULTS: In total, 5837 articles were identified; among these, 26 articles
published between 1939 and 2008 met inclusion criteria. A total of 2631 cases of
human plague reported within these articles were included. Among cases
classified by primary clinical form of plague, 93.6% were bubonic, 5.9%
pneumonic, and 0.5% septicemic with associated case fatalities of 14.2%, 31.1%,
and 20.0%, respectively. Case fatality rate among patients who received
monotherapy with tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, aminoglycosides, or
sulfonamides was 1.3%, 1.4%, 7.5%, and 20.2%, respectively. Fluoroquinolones
were only given as part of combination therapy. Penicillin was associated with a
case fatality rate of 75%.
CONCLUSIONS: Tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, and aminoglycosides were associated
with the lowest case fatality rates of all antimicrobials used for treatment of
plague. Additional research is needed to determine the efficacy of
fluoroquinolones as monotherapy.

Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society of
America 2020.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciz1230
PMID: 32435800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
