---
reference_id: PMID:35508906
title: Biochemistry of Eye Lens in the Norm and in Cataractogenesis.
authors:
- Muranov KO
- Ostrovsky MA
journal: Biochemistry (Mosc)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1134/S0006297922020031
keywords:
- Antioxidants/metabolism
- Cataract/etiology
- "Crystallins/analysis, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Lens, Crystalline/metabolism"
- Molecular Chaperones/metabolism
- Oxygen/metabolism
- "alpha-Crystallins/analysis, chemistry, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biochemistry of Eye Lens in the Norm and in Cataractogenesis.
**Authors:** Muranov KO, Ostrovsky MA
**Journal:** Biochemistry (Mosc) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1134/S0006297922020031](https://doi.org/10.1134/S0006297922020031)

## Content

1. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2022 Feb;87(2):106-120. doi: 10.1134/S0006297922020031.

Biochemistry of Eye Lens in the Norm and in Cataractogenesis.

Muranov KO(1), Ostrovsky MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Emanuel Institute of Biochemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Moscow, 119334, Russia. k.muranov@sky.chph.ras.ru.
(2)Emanuel Institute of Biochemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Moscow, 119334, Russia.

The absence of cellular organelles in fiber cells and very high cytoplasmic 
protein concentration (up to 900 mg/ml) minimize light scattering in the lens 
and ensure its transparency. Low oxygen concentration, powerful defense systems 
(antioxidants, antioxidant enzymes, chaperone-like protein alpha-crystallin, 
etc.) maintain lens transparency. On the other hand, the ability of crystallins 
to accumulate age-associated post-translational modifications, which reduce the 
resistance of lens proteins to oxidative stress, is an important factor 
contributing to the cataract formation. Here, we suggest a mechanism of 
cataractogenesis common for the action of different cataractogenic factors, such 
as age, radiation, ultraviolet light, diabetes, etc. Exposure to these factors 
leads to the damage and death of lens epithelium, which allows oxygen to 
penetrate into the lens through the gaps in the epithelial layer and cause 
oxidative damage to crystallins, resulting in protein denaturation, aggregation, 
and formation of multilamellar bodies (the main cause of lens opacification). 
The review discusses various approaches to the inhibition of lens opacification 
(cataract development), in particular, a combined use of antioxidants and 
compounds enhancing the chaperone-like properties of alpha-crystallin. We also 
discuss the paradox of high efficiency of anti-cataract drugs in laboratory 
settings with the lack of their clinical effect, which might be due to the late 
use of the drugs at the stage, when the opacification has already formed. A 
probable solution to this situation will be development of new diagnostic 
methods that will allow to predict the emergence of cataract long before the 
manifestation of its clinical signs and to start early preventive treatment.

DOI: 10.1134/S0006297922020031
PMID: 35508906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]