---
reference_id: "PMID:31629885"
title: Cost-effectiveness of Active Identification and Subsequent Colonoscopy Surveillance of Lynch Syndrome Cases.
authors:
- Peterse EFP
- Naber SK
- Daly C
- Pollett A
- Paszat LF
- Spaander MCW
- Aronson M
- Gryfe R
- Rabeneck L
- Lansdorp-Vogelaar I
- Baxter NN
journal: Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2019.10.021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cost-effectiveness of Active Identification and Subsequent Colonoscopy Surveillance of Lynch Syndrome Cases.
**Authors:** Peterse EFP, Naber SK, Daly C, Pollett A, Paszat LF, Spaander MCW, Aronson M, Gryfe R, Rabeneck L, Lansdorp-Vogelaar I, Baxter NN
**Journal:** Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cgh.2019.10.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2019.10.021)

## Content

1. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020 Nov;18(12):2760-2767.e12. doi: 
10.1016/j.cgh.2019.10.021. Epub 2019 Oct 17.

Cost-effectiveness of Active Identification and Subsequent Colonoscopy 
Surveillance of Lynch Syndrome Cases.

Peterse EFP(1), Naber SK(2), Daly C(3), Pollett A(4), Paszat LF(5), Spaander 
MCW(6), Aronson M(7), Gryfe R(8), Rabeneck L(9), Lansdorp-Vogelaar I(2), Baxter 
NN(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands. Electronic address: e.peterse@erasmusmc.nl.
(2)Department of Public Health, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands.
(3)Strategy Division, Canadian Partnership Against Cancer, Toronto, Canada.
(4)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada; 
Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(5)Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, Canada.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus University Medical 
Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(7)Zane Cohen Centre for Digestive Diseases, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, 
Canada.
(8)Zane Cohen Centre for Digestive Diseases, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, 
Canada; Department of Surgery, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada.
(9)Prevention and Cancer Control, Cancer Care Ontario and Department of 
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(10)Department of Surgery, LiKaShing Knowledge Institute, St Michael's Hospital, 
Toronto, Canada.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The province of Ontario, Canada is considering 
immunohistochemical followed by cascade analyses of all patients who received a 
diagnosis of colorectal cancer (CRC) at an age younger than 70 years to identify 
individuals with Lynch syndrome. We evaluated the costs and benefits of testing 
for Lynch syndrome and determined the optimal surveillance interval for 
first-degree relatives (FDRs) found to have Lynch syndrome.
METHODS: We developed a patient flow diagram to determine costs and yield of 
immunohistochemical testing for Lynch syndrome in CRC cases and, for those found 
to have Lynch syndrome, their FDRs, accounting for realistic uptake. 
Subsequently, we used the MISCAN-colon model to compare costs and benefits of 
annual, biennial, and triennial surveillance in FDRs identified with Lynch 
syndrome vs colonoscopy screening every 10 years (usual care for individuals 
without a diagnosis of Lynch syndrome).
RESULTS: Testing 1000 CRC cases was estimated to identify 20 CRC index cases and 
29 FDRs with Lynch syndrome at a cost of $310,274. Despite the high cost of 
Lynch syndrome tests, offering the FDRs with Lynch syndrome biennial colonoscopy 
surveillance was cost-effective at $8785 per life-year gained compared with 
usual care because of a substantial increase in life-years gained (+122%) and 
cost savings in CRC care. Triennial surveillance was more costly and less 
effective, and annual surveillance showed limited additional benefit compared 
with biennial surveillance.
CONCLUSIONS: Immunohistochemical testing for Lynch syndrome in persons younger 
than 70 years who received a diagnosis of CRC and then testing FDRs of those 
found to have Lynch syndrome provide a good balance between costs and long-term 
benefits. Colonoscopy surveillance every 2 years is the optimal surveillance 
interval for patients with Lynch syndrome.

Copyright © 2020 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cgh.2019.10.021
PMCID: PMC7162709
PMID: 31629885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors have nothing to 
disclose.