---
reference_id: "PMID:40163757"
title: Spatial transcriptomics of progression gene signature and tumor microenvironment leading to progression in mycosis fungoides.
authors:
- Choi ME
- Kim G
- Shin HJ
- Won CH
- Chang SE
- Lee MW
- Lee WJ
journal: Blood Adv
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2024014495
keywords:
- Humans
- "Mycosis Fungoides/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- Tumor Microenvironment/genetics
- Disease Progression
- Transcriptome
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Female
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- Aged
- "Skin Neoplasms/pathology, genetics"
- Neoplasm Staging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spatial transcriptomics of progression gene signature and tumor microenvironment leading to progression in mycosis fungoides.
**Authors:** Choi ME, Kim G, Shin HJ, Won CH, Chang SE, Lee MW, Lee WJ
**Journal:** Blood Adv (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1182/bloodadvances.2024014495](https://doi.org/10.1182/bloodadvances.2024014495)

## Content

1. Blood Adv. 2025 Jun 24;9(12):2871-2885. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2024014495.

Spatial transcriptomics of progression gene signature and tumor microenvironment
leading to progression in mycosis fungoides.

Choi ME(1), Kim G(1)(2), Shin HJ(3), Won CH(1), Chang SE(1), Lee MW(1), Lee
WJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College
of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Asan Medical Institute of Convergence
Science and Technology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Mycosis fungoides (MF) is characterized by stepwise evolution from patch to
plaque and sometimes to tumor. Identifying patients with early-stage MF who
could progress to an advanced stage is challenging. This study investigated
changes in transcriptomic expression and the tumor microenvironment associated
with MF progression. Spatially resolved transcriptomic profiling was conducted
using CD3, CD4, and CD30 morphology markers. In the lymphoma cell area, genes
linked to collagen fibril assembly and regulation of interleukin-4 were
upregulated as the disease progressed from patch- to plaque-stage MF. Genes
involved in the cell cycle and glutamate catabolism were upregulated during the
transition from plaque- to tumor-stage MF. Forty-six significant genes that
consistently increased in expression during progression were identified.
Patients with stage I MF with high-progression signatures showed significantly
increased cancer-associated fibroblast (CAF; P = .008) and were more likely to
progress (P < .001) and receive radiation (P = .023) during follow-up.
Furthermore, M2 macrophages significantly increased in lymphoma cell areas (P <
.001) and immune cell areas (P = .031) in plaque-stage MF compared with
patch-stage MF. CD163 expression was significantly correlated with most of the
progression signatures and T-cell exhaustion markers (lymphocyte activation
gene-3, T cell immunoglobulin and mucin-domain containing-3).
Immunohistochemical staining revealed that several CAF markers and CD163
significantly increased during progression, and these markers were more
frequently observed in progressive stage I MF compared with indolent stage I MF.
In conclusion, this study identified significant transcriptomic changes during
MF progression and found that tumor microenvironment, particularly M2
macrophages and CAFs, could contribute to progression in early-stage MF.

© 2025 American Society of Hematology. Published by Elsevier Inc. Licensed under
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC
BY-NC-ND 4.0), permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative use with
attribution. All other rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2024014495
PMCID: PMC12180985
PMID: 40163757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no
competing financial interests.
