---
reference_id: "PMID:37450244"
title: "The Molecular Link Between TDP-43, Endogenous Retroviruses and Inflammatory Neurodegeneration in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: a Potential Target for Triumeq, an Antiretroviral Therapy."
authors:
- Dubowsky M
- Theunissen F
- Carr JM
- Rogers ML
journal: Mol Neurobiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s12035-023-03472-y
keywords:
- Humans
- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/genetics
- Endogenous Retroviruses
- Motor Neuron Disease/pathology
- Motor Neurons/metabolism
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- HIV Infections/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Molecular Link Between TDP-43, Endogenous Retroviruses and Inflammatory Neurodegeneration in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: a Potential Target for Triumeq, an Antiretroviral Therapy.
**Authors:** Dubowsky M, Theunissen F, Carr JM, Rogers ML
**Journal:** Mol Neurobiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12035-023-03472-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-023-03472-y)

## Content

1. Mol Neurobiol. 2023 Nov;60(11):6330-6345. doi: 10.1007/s12035-023-03472-y.
Epub  2023 Jul 14.

The Molecular Link Between TDP-43, Endogenous Retroviruses and Inflammatory 
Neurodegeneration in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: a Potential Target for 
Triumeq, an Antiretroviral Therapy.

Dubowsky M(1), Theunissen F(2)(3), Carr JM(4), Rogers ML(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine and Public Health and Flinders Health and Medical 
Research Institute, Flinders University, Bedford Park, SA, Australia. 
megan.dubowsky@flinders.edu.au.
(2)Perron Institute for Neurological and Translational Science, Nedlands, WA, 
Australia.
(3)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Innovative Therapeutics, Murdoch 
University, Murdoch, WA, Australia.
(4)College of Medicine and Public Health and Flinders Health and Medical 
Research Institute, Flinders University, Bedford Park, SA, Australia.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), also known as motor neuron disease (MND), 
is a progressive neurological disorder, characterised by the death of upper and 
lower motor neurons. The aetiology of ALS remains unknown, and treatment options 
are limited. Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs), specifically human endogenous 
retrovirus type K (HERV-K), have been proposed to be involved in the propagation 
of neurodegeneration in ALS. ERVs are genomic remnants of ancient viral 
infection events, with most being inactive and not retaining the capacity to 
encode a fully infectious virus. However, some ERVs retain the ability to be 
activated and transcribed, and ERV transcripts have been found to be elevated 
within the brain tissue of MND patients. A hallmark of ALS pathology is altered 
localisation of the transactive response (TAR) DNA binding protein 43 kDa 
(TDP-43), which is normally found within the nucleus of neuronal and glial cells 
and is involved in RNA regulation. In ALS, TDP-43 aggregates within the 
cytoplasm and facilitates neurodegeneration. The involvement of ERVs in ALS 
pathology is thought to occur through TDP-43 and neuroinflammatory mediators. In 
this review, the proposed involvement of TDP-43, HERV-K and immune regulators on 
the onset and progression of ALS will be discussed. Furthermore, the evidence 
supporting a therapy based on targeting ERVs in ALS will be reviewed.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-023-03472-y
PMCID: PMC10533598
PMID: 37450244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.