---
reference_id: "PMID:28452685"
title: "Interactions of Giardia sp. with the intestinal barrier: Epithelium, mucus, and microbiota."
authors:
- Allain T
- Amat CB
- Motta JP
- Manko A
- Buret AG
journal: Tissue Barriers
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/21688370.2016.1274354
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interactions of Giardia sp. with the intestinal barrier: Epithelium, mucus, and microbiota.
**Authors:** Allain T, Amat CB, Motta JP, Manko A, Buret AG
**Journal:** Tissue Barriers (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21688370.2016.1274354](https://doi.org/10.1080/21688370.2016.1274354)

## Content

1. Tissue Barriers. 2017 Jan 2;5(1):e1274354. doi: 10.1080/21688370.2016.1274354.
 Epub 2017 Jan 3.

Interactions of Giardia sp. with the intestinal barrier: Epithelium, mucus, and 
microbiota.

Allain T(1)(2)(3), Amat CB(1)(2)(3), Motta JP(1)(2)(3), Manko A(1)(2)(3), Buret 
AG(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Biological Sciences , University of Calgary , Calgary , AB , 
Canada.
(2)b Inflammation Research Network, University of Calgary , Calgary , AB , 
Canada.
(3)c Host-Parasite Interactions, University of Calgary , Calgary , AB , Canada.

Understanding how intestinal enteropathogens cause acute and chronic alterations 
has direct animal and human health perspectives. Significant advances have been 
made on this field by studies focusing on the dynamic crosstalk between the 
intestinal protozoan parasite model Giardia duodenalis and the host intestinal 
mucosa. The concept of intestinal barrier function is of the highest importance 
in the context of many gastrointestinal diseases such as infectious enteritis, 
inflammatory bowel disease, and post-infectious gastrointestinal disorders. This 
crucial function relies on 3 biotic and abiotic components, first the commensal 
microbiota organized as a biofilm, then an overlaying mucus layer, and finally 
the tightly structured intestinal epithelium. Herein we review multiple 
strategies used by Giardia parasite to circumvent these 3 components. We will 
summarize what is known and discuss preliminary observations suggesting how such 
enteropathogen directly and/ or indirectly impairs commensal microbiota biofilm 
architecture, disrupts mucus layer and damages host epithelium physiology and 
survival.

DOI: 10.1080/21688370.2016.1274354
PMCID: PMC5362998
PMID: 28452685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]