---
reference_id: "PMID:28919885"
title: "Trypanosoma cruzi Evades the Complement System as an Efficient Strategy to Survive in the Mammalian Host: The Specific Roles of Host/Parasite Molecules and Trypanosoma cruzi Calreticulin."
authors:
- Ramírez-Toloza G
- Ferreira A
journal: Front Microbiol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01667
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trypanosoma cruzi Evades the Complement System as an Efficient Strategy to Survive in the Mammalian Host: The Specific Roles of Host/Parasite Molecules and Trypanosoma cruzi Calreticulin.
**Authors:** Ramírez-Toloza G, Ferreira A
**Journal:** Front Microbiol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmicb.2017.01667](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2017.01667)

## Content

1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Sep 1;8:1667. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01667. eCollection
 2017.

Trypanosoma cruzi Evades the Complement System as an Efficient Strategy to 
Survive in the Mammalian Host: The Specific Roles of Host/Parasite Molecules and 
Trypanosoma cruzi Calreticulin.

Ramírez-Toloza G(1), Ferreira A(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Parasitology, Department of Animal Preventive Medicine, Faculty 
of Veterinary Medicine and Livestock Sciences, University of ChileSantiago, 
Chile.
(2)Program of Immunology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of ChileSantiago, Chile.

American Trypanosomiasis is an important neglected reemerging tropical 
parasitism, infecting about 8 million people worldwide. Its agent, Trypanosoma 
cruzi, exhibits multiple mechanisms to evade the host immune response and infect 
host cells. An important immune evasion strategy of T. cruzi infective stages is 
its capacity to inhibit the complement system activation on the parasite 
surface, avoiding opsonizing, immune stimulating and lytic effects. 
Epimastigotes, the non-infective form of the parasite, present in triatomine 
arthropod vectors, are highly susceptible to complement-mediated lysis while 
trypomastigotes, the infective form, present in host bloodstream, are resistant. 
Thus T. cruzi susceptibility to complement varies depending on the parasite 
stage (amastigote, trypomastigotes or epimastigote) and on the T. cruzi strain. 
To avoid complement-mediated lysis, T. cruzi trypomastigotes express on the 
parasite surface a variety of complement regulatory proteins, such as 
glycoprotein 58/68 (gp58/68), T. cruzi complement regulatory protein (TcCRP), 
trypomastigote decay-accelerating factor (T-DAF), C2 receptor inhibitor 
trispanning (CRIT) and T. cruzi calreticulin (TcCRT). Alternatively, or 
concomitantly, the parasite captures components with complement regulatory 
activity from the host bloodstream, such as factor H (FH) and plasma 
membrane-derived vesicles (PMVs). All these proteins inhibit different steps of 
the classical (CP), alternative (AP) or lectin pathways (LP). Thus, TcCRP 
inhibits the CP C3 convertase assembling, gp58/68 inhibits the AP C3 convertase, 
T-DAF interferes with the CP and AP convertases assembling, TcCRT inhibits the 
CP and LP, CRIT confers ability to resist the CP and LP, FH is used by 
trypomastigotes to inhibit the AP convertases and PMVs inhibit the CP and LP C3 
convertases. Many of these proteins have similar molecular inhibitory 
mechanisms. Our laboratory has contributed to elucidate the role of TcCRT in the 
host-parasite interplay. Thus, we have proposed that TcCRT is a pleiotropic 
molecule, present not only in the parasite endoplasmic reticulum, but also on 
the trypomastigote surface, participating in key processes to establish T. cruzi 
infection, such as inhibition of the complement system and serving as an 
important virulence factor. Additionally, TcCRT interaction with key complement 
components, participates as an anti-angiogenic and anti-tumor molecule, 
inhibiting at least in important part, tumor growth in infected animals.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01667
PMCID: PMC5585158
PMID: 28919885