---
reference_id: "PMID:7829510"
title: A COL2A1 mutation in achondrogenesis type II results in the replacement of type II collagen by type I and III collagens in cartilage.
authors:
- Chan D
- Cole WG
- Chow CW
- Mundlos S
- Bateman JF
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1995'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A COL2A1 mutation in achondrogenesis type II results in the replacement of type II collagen by type I and III collagens in cartilage.
**Authors:** Chan D, Cole WG, Chow CW, Mundlos S, Bateman JF
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1995)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jan 27;270(4):1747-53.

A COL2A1 mutation in achondrogenesis type II results in the replacement of type 
II collagen by type I and III collagens in cartilage.

Chan D(1), Cole WG, Chow CW, Mundlos S, Bateman JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.

An autosomal dominant mutation in the COL2A1 gene was identified in a fetus with 
achondrogenesis type II. A transition of G2853 to A in exon 41 produced a 
substitution of Gly769 by Ser within the triple helical domain of the alpha 
1(II) chain of type II collagen, interrupting the mandatory Gly-X-Y triplet 
sequence required for the normal formation of stable triple helical type II 
collagen molecules, resulting in the complete absence of type II collagen in the 
cartilage, which had a gelatinous composition. Type I and III collagens were the 
major species found in cartilage tissue and synthesized by cultured chondrocytes 
along with cartilage type XI collagen. However, cultured chondrocytes produced a 
trace amount of type II collagen, which was retained within the cells and not 
secreted. In situ hybridization of cartilage sections showed that the 
chondrocytes produced both type II and type I collagen mRNA. As a result, it is 
likely that the chondrocytes produced type II collagen molecules, which were 
then degraded. The close proximity of the Gly769 substitution by Ser to the 
mammalian collagenase cleavage site at Gly775-Leu776 may have produced an 
unstable domain that was highly susceptible to proteolysis. The type I and III 
collagens that replaced type II collagen were unable to maintain the normal 
structure of the hyaline cartilage but did support chondrocyte maturation, 
evidenced by the expression of type X collagen in the hypertrophic zone of the 
growth plate cartilage.

PMID: 7829510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]