---
reference_id: "PMID:18541085"
title: "Visual rehabilitation of patients with Stargardt's disease."
authors:
- Shah M
- Zaman M
- Khan MT
- Khan MD
journal: J Coll Physicians Surg Pak
year: '2008'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Blindness/epidemiology, etiology, rehabilitation"
- Child
- Disability Evaluation
- Electroretinography
- Eyeglasses/standards
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Follow-Up Studies
- Fundus Oculi
- Humans
- "Macular Degeneration/complications, physiopathology, rehabilitation"
- Male
- Pakistan/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- "Vision, Low/epidemiology, etiology, rehabilitation"
- Visual Acuity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Visual rehabilitation of patients with Stargardt's disease.
**Authors:** Shah M, Zaman M, Khan MT, Khan MD
**Journal:** J Coll Physicians Surg Pak (2008)

## Content

1. J Coll Physicians Surg Pak. 2008 May;18(5):294-8.

Visual rehabilitation of patients with Stargardt's disease.

Shah M(1), Zaman M, Khan MT, Khan MD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Khyber Institute of Ophthalmic Medical Sciences, 
Hayatabad Medical Complex, Peshawar, Pakistan. mufarriq1@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To assess the role of low vision devices in visual rehabilitation of 
patients with Stargardt's disease.
STUDY DESIGN: Descriptive study.
PLACE AND DURATION OF STUDY: The Khyber Institute of Ophthalmic Medical 
Sciences, Hayatabad Medical Complex, Peshawar, Pakistan, from June 2003 to June 
2005.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients diagnosed as having Stargardt's disease and 
confirmed by two senior ophthalmologists clinically and after fluorescein fundus 
angiography and Electro-Retinogram (ERG) when needed, were included in the 
study. Patients with fundus pathologies other than Stargardt's disease were 
excluded. Each subject underwent an ophthalmic examination. Visual acuity was 
tested with a logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution chart; Feinbloom 
chart and Snellen type. Low vision assessment was performed on all individuals. 
SPSS version 10 was used for analysis of the data regarding the severity of 
visual impairment, visual acuity and devices used for aiding vision. Chi-square 
test was used for comparison of proportions.
RESULTS: Of this cohort of 64 patients, 72% were aged between 7 to 15 years and 
28% were 16 to 32 years. Using WHO low vision criteria, the percentage of 
visually impaired, severe visually impaired and blind (at the time of 
presentation) were 56.3%; 31.3% and 9.4% respectively. Among those patients, 
3.1% had distance visual acuity of 6/18 or better in the better eye and 53% had 
normal near visual acuity of 1M (0.8 print size). Telescopes were prescribed to 
53% patients for enhancement of distance visual acuity to meet their needs.
CONCLUSION: Stargardt's patients respond well to magnification. Simple bifocal 
glasses may be used in the early stages. Visual rehabilitation can help 
Stargardt's patients to learn independence in their activities of daily living.

PMID: 18541085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]