---
reference_id: "PMID:37928238"
title: "CEP55-associated lethal fetal syndrome: a case report of a Chinese family."
authors:
- Wang Y
- Sheng F
- Ying L
- Lou Q
- Yu Z
- Wang K
- Wang H
journal: Front Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1267241
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CEP55-associated lethal fetal syndrome: a case report of a Chinese family.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Sheng F, Ying L, Lou Q, Yu Z, Wang K, Wang H
**Journal:** Front Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2023.1267241](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2023.1267241)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2023 Oct 20;14:1267241. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1267241. 
eCollection 2023.

CEP55-associated lethal fetal syndrome: a case report of a Chinese family.

Wang Y(1)(2), Sheng F(1), Ying L(2), Lou Q(3), Yu Z(4)(5), Wang K(2), Wang 
H(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Jinhua Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital, Jinhua, China.
(2)Jinhua Municipal Central Hospital, Jinhua, China.
(3)Wuyi County First People's Hospital, Jinhua, China.
(4)Medical School of Tianjin University, Tianjin, China.
(5)Hangzhou D. A. Medical Laboratory, Hangzhou, China.
(6)Precision Diagnosis and Treatment Center of Jinhua City, Jinhua, China.

Background: Research on fetal loss related to germline mutations in single genes 
remains limited. Disruption of CEP55 has recently been established in 
association with perinatal deaths characterized by hydranencephaly, renal 
dysplasia, oligohydramnios, and characteristic dysmorphisms. We herein present a 
Chinese family with recurrent fetal losses due to compound heterozygous nonsense 
CEP55 variants. Case presentations: The Chinese couple had a history of five 
pregnancies, with four of them proceeding abnormally. Two stillbirths (II:3 and 
II:4) sequentially occurred in the third and fourth pregnancy. Prenatal 
ultrasound scans revealed phenotypic similarities between fetuses II:3 and II:4, 
including oligohydramnios, bilateral renal dysplasia and 
hydrocephalus/hydranencephaly. Clubfoot and syndactyly were also present in both 
stillborn babies. Fetus II:3 presented with endocardial cushion defects while 
fetus II:4 did not. With the product of conception in the fourth pregnancy, 
whole exome sequencing (WES) on fetus II:4 identified compound heterozygous 
nonsense CEP55 variants comprised of c.190C>T(p.Arg64*) and c.208A>T(p.Lys70*). 
Both variants were expected to result in lack of the TSG101 and ALIX binding 
domain. Sanger sequencing confirmed the presence and cosegregation of both 
variants. Conclusion: This is the fifth reported family wherein biallelic CEP55 
variants lead to multiple perinatal deaths. Our findings, taken together with 
previously described phenotypically similar cases and even those with a milder 
and viable phenotype, broaden the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of 
CEP55-associated lethal fetal syndrome, highlighting the vital biomolecular 
function of CEP55.

Copyright © 2023 Wang, Sheng, Ying, Lou, Yu, Wang and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1267241
PMCID: PMC10623345
PMID: 37928238

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.