---
reference_id: "PMID:11741829"
title: "Albers-Schönberg disease (autosomal dominant osteopetrosis, type II) results from mutations in the ClCN7 chloride channel gene."
authors:
- Cleiren E
- Bénichou O
- Van Hul E
- Gram J
- Bollerslev J
- Singer FR
- Beaverson K
- Aledo A
- Whyte MP
- Yoneyama T
- deVernejoul MC
- Van Hul W
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.25.2861
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Albers-Schönberg disease (autosomal dominant osteopetrosis, type II) results from mutations in the ClCN7 chloride channel gene.
**Authors:** Cleiren E, Bénichou O, Van Hul E, Gram J, Bollerslev J, Singer FR, Beaverson K, Aledo A, Whyte MP, Yoneyama T, deVernejoul MC, Van Hul W
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/10.25.2861](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/10.25.2861)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Dec 1;10(25):2861-7. doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.25.2861.

Albers-Schönberg disease (autosomal dominant osteopetrosis, type II) results 
from mutations in the ClCN7 chloride channel gene.

Cleiren E(1), Bénichou O, Van Hul E, Gram J, Bollerslev J, Singer FR, Beaverson 
K, Aledo A, Whyte MP, Yoneyama T, deVernejoul MC, Van Hul W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Belgium.

Albers-Schönberg disease, or autosomal dominant osteopetrosis, type II (ADO II), 
is the most common form of osteopetrosis, a group of conditions characterized by 
an increased skeletal mass due to impaired bone and cartilage resorption. 
Following the assignment of the gene causing ADO II to chromosome 16p13.3, we 
now report seven different mutations in the gene encoding the ClCN7 chloride 
channel in all 12 ADO II families analysed. Additionally, a patient with the 
severe, autosomal recessive, infantile form of osteopetrosis (ARO) was 
identified as being homozygous for a ClCN7 mutation. From genotype-phenotype 
correlations, it seems that ADO II reflects a dominant negative effect, whereas 
loss-of-function mutations in ClCN7 do not cause abnormalities in heterozygous 
individuals. Because some ARO patients have mutations in both copies of the 
ClCN7 gene, ADO II is allelic with a subset of ARO cases.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/10.25.2861
PMID: 11741829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]