---
reference_id: "PMID:29178913"
title: "Identification of multiple cancer-associated myositis-specific autoantibodies in idiopathic inflammatory myopathies: a large longitudinal cohort study."
authors:
- Yang H
- Peng Q
- Yin L
- Li S
- Shi J
- Zhang Y
- Lu X
- Shu X
- Zhang S
- Wang G
journal: Arthritis Res Ther
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13075-017-1469-8
keywords:
- Adult
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Autoantigens/immunology
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Myositis/complications, immunology"
- Neoplasms/epidemiology
- Paraneoplastic Syndromes/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of multiple cancer-associated myositis-specific autoantibodies in idiopathic inflammatory myopathies: a large longitudinal cohort study.
**Authors:** Yang H, Peng Q, Yin L, Li S, Shi J, Zhang Y, Lu X, Shu X, Zhang S, Wang G
**Journal:** Arthritis Res Ther (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13075-017-1469-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13075-017-1469-8)

## Content

1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2017 Nov 25;19(1):259. doi: 10.1186/s13075-017-1469-8.

Identification of multiple cancer-associated myositis-specific autoantibodies in 
idiopathic inflammatory myopathies: a large longitudinal cohort study.

Yang H(1)(2), Peng Q(1), Yin L(1), Li S(1), Shi J(1), Zhang Y(1), Lu X(1), Shu 
X(1), Zhang S(3), Wang G(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Beijing Key Lab for Immune-Mediated Inflammatory 
Diseases, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, 2 Yinhua Road, Chaoyang District, 
Beijing, 100029, China.
(2)Graduate School of Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100730, China.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Lanzhou University Second Hospital, Gansu 
province, 730046, China.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, Beijing Key Lab for Immune-Mediated Inflammatory 
Diseases, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, 2 Yinhua Road, Chaoyang District, 
Beijing, 100029, China. guochunwang@hotmail.com.
(5)Graduate School of Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100730, China. 
guochunwang@hotmail.com.

Erratum in
    Arthritis Res Ther. 2018 Apr 11;20(1):71. doi: 10.1186/s13075-018-1549-4.

BACKGROUND: Cancer is a significant complication contributing to increased 
mortality in idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (IIMs), and the association 
between IIMs and cancer has been extensively reported. Myositis-specific 
autoantibodies (MSAs) can help to stratify patients into more homogeneous groups 
and may be used as a biomarker for cancer-associated myositis. In this study, we 
aimed to systematically define the cancer-associated MSAs in IIMs.
METHODS: Serum from 627 patients with IIMs was tested for MSAs. The cancer risk 
with different MSAs was estimated by standardized incidence ratio (SIR). 
Paraneoplastic manifestation, such as the close temporal relationship between 
myositis onset and cancer diagnoses in patients with different MSAs, was also 
evaluated.
RESULTS: Compared with the general Chinese population, patients with IIMs and 
anti-transcriptional intermediary factor (TIF1)-γ antibodies (SIR = 17.28, 95% 
CI 11.94 to 24.14), anti-nuclear matrix protein (NXP2) antibodies (SIR = 8.14, 
95% CI 1.63 to 23.86), or anti-SAE1 antibodies (SIR = 12.92, 95% CI 3.23 to 
32.94), or who were MSAs-negative (SIR = 3.99, 95% CI 1.96 to 7.14) faced 
increased risk of cancer. There was no association between specific MSAs 
subtypes and certain types of cancer. Paraneoplastic manifestations were 
observed in the patients carrying anti-TIF1-γ, as well as other MSAs. There were 
no prognostic differences among the patients with cancer-associated myositis 
(CAM) from different MSAs subgroups. However, in comparison to those with cancer 
unrelated to myositis, CAM had a worse prognosis, with an age-adjusted and 
sex-adjusted Cox hazard ratio (HR) of 10.8 (95% CI 1.38-84.5, p = 0.02) for 
all-cause mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates in what is, to our knowledge, the largest 
population examined to date, that anti-SAE1, and previously reported anti-TIF1-γ 
and anti-NXP2 antibodies, are all associated with an increased risk of cancer in 
patients with IIMs. Moreover, our data suggest that in some cases, anti-HMGCR, 
anti-Jo-1 and anti-PL-12 antibody production might also be driven by malignancy. 
This can aid in the etiologic research of paraneoplastic myositis and clinical 
management.

DOI: 10.1186/s13075-017-1469-8
PMCID: PMC5702134
PMID: 29178913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: This 
study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Institutional Review Board at 
the China-Japan Friendship Hospital (reference number: 2013-6), and written 
informed consent was obtained from all the subjects. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: 
Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no 
competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.