---
reference_id: "PMID:31682730"
title: Mutations in the stromal antigen 3 (STAG3) gene cause male infertility due to meiotic arrest.
authors:
- van der Bijl N
- Röpke A
- Biswas U
- Wöste M
- Jessberger R
- Kliesch S
- Friedrich C
- Tüttelmann F
journal: Hum Reprod
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/humrep/dez204
keywords:
- Azoospermia/genetics
- Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics
- Chromosomes/ultrastructure
- Exome
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Infertility, Male/genetics"
- Karyotyping
- Male
- Meiosis
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Probability
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Spermatocytes/metabolism
- Testis/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the stromal antigen 3 (STAG3) gene cause male infertility due to meiotic arrest.
**Authors:** van der Bijl N, Röpke A, Biswas U, Wöste M, Jessberger R, Kliesch S, Friedrich C, Tüttelmann F
**Journal:** Hum Reprod (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/humrep/dez204](https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/dez204)

## Content

1. Hum Reprod. 2019 Nov 1;34(11):2112-2119. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dez204.

Mutations in the stromal antigen 3 (STAG3) gene cause male infertility due to 
meiotic arrest.

van der Bijl N(1), Röpke A(1), Biswas U(2), Wöste M(3), Jessberger R(2), Kliesch 
S(4), Friedrich C(1), Tüttelmann F(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany.
(2)Institute of Physiological Chemistry, TU Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(3)Institute of Medical Informatics, University of Münster, 48149 Münster, 
Germany.
(4)Centre of Reproductive Medicine and Andrology, Department of Clinical and 
Surgical Andrology, University Hospital Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany.

STUDY QUESTION: Are sequence variants in the stromal antigen 3 (STAG3) gene a 
cause for non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) in infertile human males?
SUMMARY ANSWER: Sequence variants affecting protein function of STAG3 cause male 
infertility due to meiotic arrest.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: In both women and men, STAG3 encodes for a 
meiosis-specific protein that is crucial for the functionality of meiotic 
cohesin complexes. Sequence variants in STAG3 have been reported to cause 
meiotic arrest in male and female mice and premature ovarian failure in human 
females, but not in infertile human males so far.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: The full coding region of STAG3 was sequenced 
directly in a cohort of 28 men with NOA due to meiotic arrest. In addition, a 
larger group of 275 infertile men that underwent whole-exome sequencing (WES) 
was screened for potential STAG3 sequence variants. Furthermore, meiotic 
spreads, immunohistochemistry, WES and population sampling probability (PSAP) 
have been conducted in the index case.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: This study included 28 infertile but 
otherwise healthy human males who underwent Sanger sequencing of the full coding 
region of STAG3. Additionally, WES data of 275 infertile human males with 
different infertility phenotypes have been screened for relevant STAG3 variants. 
All participants underwent karyotype analysis and azoospermia factor (AZF) 
screening in advance. In the index patient, segregation analysis, WES data, 
PSAP, lab parameters, testis histology and nuclear spreads have been added to 
suplort the findings.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Two compound-heterozygous variants in STAG3 
(c.[1262T>G];[1312C>T], p.[(Leu421Arg)];[(Arg438Ter)]) have been found to cause 
male infertility due to complete bilateral meiotic arrest in an otherwise 
healthy human male. Compound heterozygosity was confirmed by Sanger sequencing 
of the parents and the patient's brother. Other variants which may affect 
spermatogenesis have been ruled out through analysis of the patient's WES data 
and application of the PSAP pipeline. As expected from Stag3 knockout-mice 
meiotic spreads, germ cells did not develop further than zygotene and showed 
drastic chromosome aberrations. No rare variants in STAG3 were found in the 275 
infertile males with other phenotypes. Our results indicate that STAG3 variants 
that negatively affect its protein function are a rare cause of NOA (<1% of 
cases).
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: We identified only one patient with 
compound-heterozygous variants in STAG3 causing NOA due to meiotic arrest. 
Future studies should evaluate STAG3 variants in larger cohorts to support this 
finding.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Identification of STAG3 sequence variants in 
infertile human males should improve genetic counselling as well as diagnostics 
and treatment. Especially before testicular sperm extraction (TESE) for ICSI, 
STAG3 variants should be ruled out to prevent unnecessary interventions with 
frustrating outcomes for both patients and clinicians.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S): This work was carried out within the frame 
of the German Research Foundation (DFG) Clinical Research Unit 'Male Germ Cells: 
from Genes to Function' (CRU326). Work in the laboratory of R.J. is supported by 
a grant of the European Union H2020 program GermAge. The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: Not applicable.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/humrep/dez204
PMID: 31682730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]