---
reference_id: "PMID:36993810"
title: "Cutaneous angiosarcoma: A review of current evidence for treatment with checkpoint inhibitors."
authors:
- Guan L
- Palmeri M
- Groisberg R
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1090168
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous angiosarcoma: A review of current evidence for treatment with checkpoint inhibitors.
**Authors:** Guan L, Palmeri M, Groisberg R
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2023.1090168](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2023.1090168)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2023 Mar 13;10:1090168. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1090168. 
eCollection 2023.

Cutaneous angiosarcoma: A review of current evidence for treatment with 
checkpoint inhibitors.

Guan L(1), Palmeri M(1), Groisberg R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, Robert Wood 
Johnson Medical School, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, United States.

Cutaneous angiosarcoma (cAS) is a rare and aggressive subtype of soft tissue 
sarcoma with poor prognosis and suboptimal treatment options. Clinical 
presentation is variable, but cAS often arises from the head and neck. The most 
widely accepted current approach, surgical excision with adjuvant radiotherapy, 
is associated with high recurrence rates and can leave patients with profound 
disfigurement. Chemotherapy and targeted therapy alternatives have had limited 
success. Thus, there is a significant unmet need to address the absence of 
durable treatments for advanced and metastatic cAS. Like melanoma and cutaneous 
squamous cell carcinoma, tumor types with known response to immunotherapy, cAS 
harbors immune biomarkers, such as tumor mutational burden high (TMB-H), PD-L1 
positivity, ultraviolet signature expression, and tertiary lymphoid structures. 
While data on the use and efficacy of immunotherapy in cAS is limited, the 
biomarkers suggest a promising advancement in future treatment options. This 
review aims to summarize and discuss current data from case reports, case 
series, retrospective studies and clinical trials regarding immunotherapy 
treatment and outcomes for cAS.

Copyright © 2023 Guan, Palmeri and Groisberg.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1090168
PMCID: PMC10040781
PMID: 36993810

Conflict of interest statement: RG is an employee of Merck, Sharp & Dohme LLC, 
Rahway, NJ, United States. The remaining authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.