---
reference_id: "PMID:39493950"
title: Invasive Evaluation for Coronary Vasospasm.
authors:
- Huang J
- Steinberg R
- Brown MJ
- Rinfret S
- Toleva O
journal: US Cardiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.15420/usc.2022.33
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Invasive Evaluation for Coronary Vasospasm.
**Authors:** Huang J, Steinberg R, Brown MJ, Rinfret S, Toleva O
**Journal:** US Cardiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.15420/usc.2022.33](https://doi.org/10.15420/usc.2022.33)

## Content

1. US Cardiol. 2023 Jun 9;17:e07. doi: 10.15420/usc.2022.33. eCollection 2023.

Invasive Evaluation for Coronary Vasospasm.

Huang J(1), Steinberg R(1), Brown MJ(2), Rinfret S(2)(3), Toleva O(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine Atlanta, GA.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Emory University School of Medicine Atlanta, GA.
(3)Emory Heart and Vascular, Emory University School of Medicine Atlanta, GA.

Vasospastic angina (VSA) occurs at rest and on exertion, with transient 
electrocardiographic ischemic changes. VSA presents with spontaneous coronary 
artery spasm (CAS); it has been associated with stable angina, acute coronary 
syndromes, and sudden cardiac death. CAS can be identified in normal arteries or 
non-obstructive coronary atherosclerosis, but is also prevalent in patients with 
coronary artery disease. The diagnosis is made with invasive coronary reactivity 
testing with provocation using acetylcholine (Ach). Epicardial spasms can be 
visualized through coronary angiography as a reversible epicardial vessel 
narrowing, while the diagnosis of microvascular spasm can be made when angina 
symptoms and ECG changes happen following intracoronary Ach without epicardial 
spasm. Identification of CAS allows for risk stratification and specific 
therapies targeting endothelial dysfunction and paradoxical vascular smooth 
muscle cell constriction. Therapies include calcium channel blockers as 
monotherapy or in a combination of a dihydropyridine and non-dihydropyridine. 
Short-acting nitrates offer acute symptomatic relief but long-acting nitrates 
should be used sparingly. This current update on invasive evaluation of VSA 
discusses unified Ach protocols.

Copyright © The Author(s), 2023. Published by Radcliffe Group Ltd.

DOI: 10.15420/usc.2022.33
PMCID: PMC11526482
PMID: 39493950

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to declare.