---
reference_id: "PMID:23075321"
title: The broad clinical phenotype of Type 1 diabetes at presentation.
authors:
- Merger SR
- Leslie RD
- Boehm BO
journal: Diabet Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/dme.12048
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The broad clinical phenotype of Type 1 diabetes at presentation.
**Authors:** Merger SR, Leslie RD, Boehm BO
**Journal:** Diabet Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dme.12048](https://doi.org/10.1111/dme.12048)

## Content

1. Diabet Med. 2013 Feb;30(2):170-8. doi: 10.1111/dme.12048.

The broad clinical phenotype of Type 1 diabetes at presentation.

Merger SR(1), Leslie RD, Boehm BO.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Ulm University Medical 
Center, Ulm, Germany.

Immune-mediated (auto-immune) Type 1 diabetes mellitus is not a homogenous 
entity, but nonetheless has distinctive characteristics. In children, it may 
present with classical insulin deficiency and ketoacidosis at disease onset, 
whereas autoimmune diabetes in adults may not always be insulin dependent. 
Indeed, as the adult-onset form of autoimmune diabetes may resemble Type 2 
diabetes, it is imperative to test for diabetes-associated autoantibodies to 
establish the correct diagnosis. The therapeutic response can be predicted by 
measuring the levels of autoantibodies to various islet cell autoantigens, such 
as islet cell antibodies (ICA), glutamate decarboxylase 65 (GAD65), insulin, 
tyrosine phosphatase (IA-2) and IA-2β, and zinc transporter 8 (ZnT8) and 
evaluating β-cell function. A high risk of progression to insulin dependency is 
associated with particular genetic constellations, such as human leukocyte 
antigen risk alleles, young age at onset, the presence of multiple 
autoantibodies, including high titres of anti-GAD antibodies; such patients 
should be offered early insulin replacement therapy, as they respond poorly to 
diet and oral hypoglycaemic drug therapy. Hence, considering the broad spectrum 
of phenotypes seen in adult-onset diabetes, treatment targets can only be 
reached by identification of immune-mediated cases, as their management differs 
from those with classical Type 2 diabetes.

© 2012 The Authors. Diabetic Medicine © 2012 Diabetes UK.

DOI: 10.1111/dme.12048
PMID: 23075321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]