---
reference_id: "PMID:39313810"
title: Redefining the phenotype of alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR) deficiency.
authors:
- Klouwer FCC
- Roosendaal SD
- Hollak CEM
- Langeveld M
- Poll-The BT
- Sorge AJV
- Wolf NI
- Knaap MSV
- Engelen M
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03358-9
keywords:
- Humans
- "Racemases and Epimerases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Adult
- Female
- Child
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- "Child, Preschool"
- Phenotype
- Young Adult
- Adolescent
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Redefining the phenotype of alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR) deficiency.
**Authors:** Klouwer FCC, Roosendaal SD, Hollak CEM, Langeveld M, Poll-The BT, Sorge AJV, Wolf NI, Knaap MSV, Engelen M
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03358-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03358-9)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Sep 23;19(1):350. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03358-9.

Redefining the phenotype of alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR) deficiency.

Klouwer FCC(1), Roosendaal SD(2), Hollak CEM(3), Langeveld M(3), Poll-The BT(4), 
Sorge AJV(5), Wolf NI(4)(6), Knaap MSV(4)(6), Engelen M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam 
University Medical Centers, Amsterdam Leukodystrophy Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. f.c.klouwer@amsterdamumc.nl.
(2)Department of Radiology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, and Amsterdam Gastroenterology 
Endocrinology and Metabolism research institute, Amsterdam University Medical 
Centers, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam 
University Medical Centers, Amsterdam Leukodystrophy Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(6)Amsterdam Neuroscience, Cellular & Molecular Mechanisms, Vrije Universiteit, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR) deficiency is a rare 
peroxisomal enzyme deficiency caused by biallelic variants in the AMACR gene. 
This deficiency leads to the accumulation of toxic bile acid intermediates 
(R)-trihydroxycholestenoic acid (THCA) and (R)-dihydroxycholestenoic acid (DHCA) 
and pristanic acid. With less than 20 patients described in literature, the 
phenotype of AMACR deficiency is poorly defined and no data on the natural 
history are available.
RESULTS: Here we describe a cohort of 12 patients (9 adults and 3 children) with 
genetically confirmed AMACR deficiency (median age at diagnosis 56 years, range 
3-69), followed for an average of 6 years (between 2015 and 2023). Five novel 
pathogenic variants are described. In 5/9 adult patients, retinitis pigmentosa 
was detected at a median age of 45 years (range 30-61). The median delay to 
diagnosis of AMACR deficiency after the diagnosis of retinitis pigmentosa was 24 
years (range 0-33). All adult patients subsequently developed neurological signs 
and symptoms after the age of 40 years; most frequently neuropathy, ataxia and 
cognitive decline with prior normal cognitive functioning. One patient presented 
with a stroke-like episode. All adult patients showed a typical MRI pattern 
involving the thalami and gray matter structures of the pons and midbrain. One 
patient had a hepatocellular carcinoma at the time of the AMACR deficiency 
diagnosis and two patients suffered from gallstones. All three included children 
had elevated liver transaminases as single presenting sign and showed no brain 
MRI abnormalities.
CONCLUSION: AMACR deficiency can be considered as an adult slowly progressive 
disease with a predominant neurological phenotype. The main signs comprise 
retinitis pigmentosa, neuropathy, ataxia and cognitive decline; stroke-like 
episodes may occur. Recognition of typical MRI abnormalities may facilitate 
prompt diagnosis. In addition, there is a risk of liver fibrosis/cirrhosis and 
hepatocellular carcinoma in these patients, requiring active monitoring.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03358-9
PMCID: PMC11421175
PMID: 39313810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.