---
reference_id: "PMID:37449597"
title: "Gut-microbiome-brain axis: the crosstalk between the vagus nerve, alpha-synuclein and the brain in Parkinson's disease."
authors:
- Claudino Dos Santos JC
- Oliveira LF
- Noleto FM
- Gusmão CTP
- Brito GAC
- Viana GSB
journal: Neural Regen Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.373673
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gut-microbiome-brain axis: the crosstalk between the vagus nerve, alpha-synuclein and the brain in Parkinson's disease.
**Authors:** Claudino Dos Santos JC, Oliveira LF, Noleto FM, Gusmão CTP, Brito GAC, Viana GSB
**Journal:** Neural Regen Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4103/1673-5374.373673](https://doi.org/10.4103/1673-5374.373673)

## Content

1. Neural Regen Res. 2023 Dec;18(12):2611-2614. doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.373673.

Gut-microbiome-brain axis: the crosstalk between the vagus nerve, 
alpha-synuclein and the brain in Parkinson's disease.

Claudino Dos Santos JC(1), Oliveira LF(2), Noleto FM(3), Gusmão CTP(4), Brito 
GAC(5), Viana GSB(6).

Author information:
(1)Christus University Center - UNICHRISTUS, Fortaleza; Postgraduate Program in 
Morphofunctional Sciences, Federal University of Ceará - UFC, Fortaleza, CE, 
Brazil.
(2)Universidade Católica de Brasília - UCB, Brasília, DF, Brasil.
(3)Christus University Center - UNICHRISTUS, Fortaleza, CE, Brazil.
(4)Postgraduate Program in Physiology and Pharmacology Department of the Federal 
University of Ceará - UFC, Fortaleza, CE, Brazil.
(5)Postgraduate Program in Morphofunctional Sciences, Federal University of 
Ceará - UFC; Physiology and Pharmacology Department of the Federal University of 
Ceará - UFC, Fortaleza, CE, Brazil, Fortaleza.
(6)Physiology and Pharmacology Department of the Federal University of Ceará - 
UFC, Fortaleza, CE, Brazil.

This critical review of the literature shows that there is a close link between 
the microbiome, the gut, and the brain in Parkinson's disease. The vagus nerve, 
the main component of the parasympathetic nervous system, is involved in the 
regulation of immune response, digestion, heart rate, and control of mood. It 
can detect microbiota metabolites through its afferents, transferring this gut 
information to the central nervous system. Preclinical and clinical studies have 
shown the important role played by the gut microbiome and gut-related factors in 
disease development and progression, as well as treatment responses. These 
findings suggest that the gut microbiome may be a valuable target for new 
therapeutic strategies for Parkinson's disease. More studies are needed to 
better understand the underlying biology and how this axis can be modulated for 
the patient's benefit.

DOI: 10.4103/1673-5374.373673
PMCID: PMC10358673
PMID: 37449597

Conflict of interest statement: None