---
reference_id: "PMID:11839795"
title: Interaction of Huntington disease protein with transcriptional activator Sp1.
authors:
- Li SH
- Cheng AL
- Zhou H
- Lam S
- Rao M
- Li H
- Li XJ
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.5.1277-1287.2002
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Compartmentation
- Humans
- Huntingtin Protein
- "Huntington Disease/etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Peptides/genetics
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Protein Binding
- "Receptors, Nerve Growth Factor/genetics"
- Recombinant Fusion Proteins/metabolism
- Sp1 Transcription Factor/metabolism
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interaction of Huntington disease protein with transcriptional activator Sp1.
**Authors:** Li SH, Cheng AL, Zhou H, Lam S, Rao M, Li H, Li XJ
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.22.5.1277-1287.2002](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.22.5.1277-1287.2002)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Mar;22(5):1277-87. doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.5.1277-1287.2002.

Interaction of Huntington disease protein with transcriptional activator Sp1.

Li SH(1), Cheng AL, Zhou H, Lam S, Rao M, Li H, Li XJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia 30322, USA.

Polyglutamine expansion causes Huntington disease (HD) and at least seven other 
neurodegenerative diseases. In HD, N-terminal fragments of huntingtin with an 
expanded glutamine tract are able to aggregate and accumulate in the nucleus. 
Although intranuclear huntingtin affects the expression of numerous genes, the 
mechanism of this nuclear effect is unknown. Here we report that huntingtin 
interacts with Sp1, a transcription factor that binds to GC-rich elements in 
certain promoters and activates transcription of the corresponding genes. In 
vitro binding and immunoprecipitation assays show that polyglutamine expansion 
enhances the interaction of N-terminal huntingtin with Sp1. In HD transgenic 
mice (R6/2) that express N-terminal-mutant huntingtin, Sp1 binds to the soluble 
form of mutant huntingtin but not to aggregated huntingtin. Mutant huntingtin 
inhibits the binding of nuclear Sp1 to the promoter of nerve growth factor 
receptor and suppresses its transcriptional activity in cultured cells. 
Overexpression of Sp1 reduces the cellular toxicity and neuritic extension 
defects caused by intranuclear mutant huntingtin. These findings suggest that 
the soluble form of mutant huntingtin in the nucleus may cause cellular 
dysfunction by binding to Sp1 and thus reducing the expression of Sp1-regulated 
genes.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.22.5.1277-1287.2002
PMCID: PMC134707
PMID: 11839795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]