---
reference_id: "PMID:22578325"
title: Smith-Magenis syndrome results in disruption of CLOCK gene transcription and reveals an integral role for RAI1 in the maintenance of circadian rhythmicity.
authors:
- Williams SR
- Zies D
- Mullegama SV
- Grotewiel MS
- Elsea SH
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.04.013
keywords:
- Animals
- CLOCK Proteins/metabolism
- Circadian Rhythm
- Female
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Hypothalamus/metabolism
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Oscillometry/methods
- Phenotype
- "RNA, Small Interfering/metabolism"
- "Smith-Magenis Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- Trans-Activators/metabolism
- Transcription Factors/metabolism
- "Transcription, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Smith-Magenis syndrome results in disruption of CLOCK gene transcription and reveals an integral role for RAI1 in the maintenance of circadian rhythmicity.
**Authors:** Williams SR, Zies D, Mullegama SV, Grotewiel MS, Elsea SH
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.04.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.04.013)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Jun 8;90(6):941-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.04.013. Epub 
2012 May 10.

Smith-Magenis syndrome results in disruption of CLOCK gene transcription and 
reveals an integral role for RAI1 in the maintenance of circadian rhythmicity.

Williams SR(1), Zies D, Mullegama SV, Grotewiel MS, Elsea SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University 
School of Medicine, Richmond, 23298, USA.

Haploinsufficiency of RAI1 results in Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS), a disorder 
characterized by intellectual disability, multiple congenital anomalies, 
obesity, neurobehavioral abnormalities, and a disrupted circadian sleep-wake 
pattern. An inverted melatonin rhythm (i.e., melatonin peaks during the day 
instead of at night) and associated sleep-phase disturbances in individuals with 
SMS, as well as a short-period circadian rhythm in mice with a chromosomal 
deletion of Rai1, support SMS as a circadian-rhythm-dysfunction disorder. 
However, the molecular cause of the circadian defect in SMS has not been 
described. The circadian oscillator temporally orchestrates metabolism, 
physiology, and behavior largely through transcriptional modulation. Data 
support RAI1 as a transcriptional regulator, but the genes it might regulate are 
largely unknown. Investigation into the role that RAI1 plays in the regulation 
of gene transcription and circadian maintenance revealed that RAI1 regulates the 
transcription of circadian locomotor output cycles kaput (CLOCK), a key 
component of the mammalian circadian oscillator that transcriptionally regulates 
many critical circadian genes. Data further show that haploinsufficiency of RAI1 
and Rai1 in SMS fibroblasts and the mouse hypothalamus, respectively, results in 
the transcriptional dysregulation of the circadian clock and causes altered 
expression and regulation of multiple circadian genes, including PER2, PER3, 
CRY1, BMAL1, and others. These data suggest that heterozygous mutation of RAI1 
and Rai1 leads to a disrupted circadian rhythm and thus results in an abnormal 
sleep-wake cycle, which can contribute to an abnormal feeding pattern and 
dependent cognitive performance. Finally, we conclude that RAI1 is a positive 
transcriptional regulator of CLOCK, pinpointing a novel and important role for 
this gene in the circadian oscillator.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.04.013
PMCID: PMC3370274
PMID: 22578325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]