---
reference_id: "PMID:16896579"
title: Seroepidemiology of Varicella zoster in Israel prior to large-scale use of varicella vaccines.
authors:
- Cohen DI
- Davidovici BB
- Smetana Z
- Balicer RD
- Klement E
- Mendelson E
- Green MS
journal: Infection
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1007/s15010-006-6604-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seroepidemiology of Varicella zoster in Israel prior to large-scale use of varicella vaccines.
**Authors:** Cohen DI, Davidovici BB, Smetana Z, Balicer RD, Klement E, Mendelson E, Green MS
**Journal:** Infection (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s15010-006-6604-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s15010-006-6604-4)

## Content

1. Infection. 2006 Aug;34(4):208-13. doi: 10.1007/s15010-006-6604-4.

Seroepidemiology of Varicella zoster in Israel prior to large-scale use of 
varicella vaccines.

Cohen DI(1), Davidovici BB, Smetana Z, Balicer RD, Klement E, Mendelson E, Green 
MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, Tel Aviv University, 
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv, Israel. dancohen@post.tau.ac.il

OBJECTIVES: This large-scale study provides up-to-date estimates of Varicella 
zoster virus (VZV) age-specific seroprevalence and characteristics of VZV 
transmission in a representative sample of the Israeli population.
METHODS: In 2000-2001, 1,642 sera collected from an agestratified general 
population sample were tested for VZV antibodies using an indirect IgG ELISA 
system.
RESULTS: The age-weighted VZV overall estimate was 90.2%. Seropositivity 
increased rapidly with age, from 68.9% at age 4 to 94.4% at age 7 and 96.6% at 
age 12 years. The highest force of infection was in the 4-5 years age group 
(0.548 per susceptible year) followed by the 6-9 years age group. Multivariate 
analysis revealed that VZV seroprevalence estimates were significantly 
associated with age and place of origin. The highest seroprevalence estimate was 
found among subjects of Eastern origin.
CONCLUSIONS: The seroepidemiology of VZV in Israel shows a pattern corresponding 
to that described for developed European countries. This study indicates that 
the highest force of infection is in pre-school children. Knowledge of 
pre-vaccination seroepidemiology is important to evaluate the effect of 
vaccination programs on the epidemiology of the disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s15010-006-6604-4
PMID: 16896579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]