---
reference_id: "PMID:38633948"
title: "Navigating Treatment Dilemmas: Recalcitrant Pemphigus and the Burden of Multiple Comorbidities."
authors:
- Garg P
- Lakhey K
- Mishra N
- Buccha Y
- Deo KS
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.56357
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Navigating Treatment Dilemmas: Recalcitrant Pemphigus and the Burden of Multiple Comorbidities.
**Authors:** Garg P, Lakhey K, Mishra N, Buccha Y, Deo KS
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.56357](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.56357)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Mar 18;16(3):e56357. doi: 10.7759/cureus.56357. eCollection 2024 
Mar.

Navigating Treatment Dilemmas: Recalcitrant Pemphigus and the Burden of Multiple 
Comorbidities.

Garg P(1), Lakhey K(2), Mishra N(1), Buccha Y(1), Deo KS(1).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology, Dr. D. Y. Patil Medical College, Hospital and Research Centre, 
Pune, IND.
(2)Dermatology, Venereology, and Leprosy, Dr. D. Y. Patil Medical College, 
Hospital and Research Centre, Pune, IND.

Pemphigus vulgaris is a chronic autoimmune disease of the skin caused by the 
production of autoantibodies targeting desmogleins 1 and 3 usually presenting in 
individuals with an average age of onset of approximately 40 years. A 
35-year-old obese, diabetic woman presented with fluid-filled lesions over her 
body for three months along with erosions and painful ulcers in her mouth and 
genital area for two months. Based on clinical and histopathological studies, 
the patient was diagnosed as a case of pemphigus vulgaris. She was started on 
conventional treatment with oral corticosteroids followed by pulse therapy and 
mycophenolate mofetil. Rituximab infusion was scheduled but could not be 
administered due to elevated D-dimer values. The patient underwent screening for 
deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and received subcutaneous enoxaparin and oral 
rivaroxaban. She developed severe sepsis for which she was treated with systemic 
antibiotics. She subsequently developed acute renal failure and underwent 
hemodialysis. The patient's clinical condition further deteriorated, which 
necessitated therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE). Collagen, colloidal silver, and 
silicone foam dressings were done to hasten wound healing. Two distinct 
approaches were employed to eliminate the pseudomembrane on the wounds. One 
portion was treated with hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), while the other was with 
hyaluronidase. The hyaluronidase treatment resulted in considerable improvement 
of the lesions. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) infusion was scheduled. 
However, the treatment could not be administered as the patient succumbed to 
death due to pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE) secondary to DVT.

Copyright © 2024, Garg et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.56357
PMCID: PMC11022114
PMID: 38633948

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.