---
reference_id: "PMID:36069759"
title: Highly efficient generation of isogenic pluripotent stem cell models using prime editing.
authors:
- Li H
- Busquets O
- Verma Y
- Syed KM
- Kutnowski N
- Pangilinan GR
- Gilbert LA
- Bateup HS
- Rio DC
- Hockemeyer D
- Soldner F
journal: Elife
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.79208
keywords:
- Humans
- Gene Editing/methods
- Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- "Deoxyribonuclease I/genetics, metabolism"
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- RNA-Directed DNA Polymerase
- Ribonucleoproteins/metabolism
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
- "RNA, Guide, CRISPR-Cas Systems"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Highly efficient generation of isogenic pluripotent stem cell models using prime editing.
**Authors:** Li H, Busquets O, Verma Y, Syed KM, Kutnowski N, Pangilinan GR, Gilbert LA, Bateup HS, Rio DC, Hockemeyer D, Soldner F
**Journal:** Elife (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.79208](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.79208)

## Content

1. Elife. 2022 Sep 7;11:e79208. doi: 10.7554/eLife.79208.

Highly efficient generation of isogenic pluripotent stem cell models using prime
editing.

Li H(#)(1)(2)(3), Busquets O(#)(3)(4), Verma Y(1)(3), Syed KM(1)(3), Kutnowski
N(1), Pangilinan GR(1)(3), Gilbert LA(3)(5)(6)(7), Bateup HS(1)(3)(8)(9), Rio
DC(1)(3), Hockemeyer D(1)(2)(3)(8), Soldner F(3)(4)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, United States.
(2)Innovative Genomics Institute, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley,
United States.
(3)Aligning Science Across Parkinson's (ASAP) Collaborative Research Network,
Chevy Chase, United States.
(4)Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, The Bronx, United States.
(5)Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, United States.
(6)Department of Urology, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, United States.
(7)Arc Institute, Palo Alto, United States.
(8)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, United States.
(9)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, United States.
(10)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, The Bronx,
United States.
(11)Ruth L. and David S. Gottesman Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative
Medicine Research, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, The Bronx, United
States.
(#)Contributed equally

The recent development of prime editing (PE) genome engineering technologies has
the potential to significantly simplify the generation of human pluripotent stem
cell (hPSC)-based disease models. PE is a multicomponent editing system that
uses a Cas9-nickase fused to a reverse transcriptase (nCas9-RT) and an extended
PE guide RNA (pegRNA). Once reverse transcribed, the pegRNA extension functions
as a repair template to introduce precise designer mutations at the target site.
Here, we systematically compared the editing efficiencies of PE to conventional
gene editing methods in hPSCs. This analysis revealed that PE is overall more
efficient and precise than homology-directed repair of site-specific
nuclease-induced double-strand breaks. Specifically, PE is more effective in
generating heterozygous editing events to create autosomal dominant
disease-associated mutations. By stably integrating the nCas9-RT into hPSCs we
achieved editing efficiencies equal to those reported for cancer cells,
suggesting that the expression of the PE components, rather than cell-intrinsic
features, limit PE in hPSCs. To improve the efficiency of PE in hPSCs, we
optimized the delivery modalities for the PE components. Delivery of the
nCas9-RT as mRNA combined with synthetically generated, chemically-modified
pegRNAs and nicking guide RNAs improved editing efficiencies up to 13-fold
compared with transfecting the PE components as plasmids or ribonucleoprotein
particles. Finally, we demonstrated that this mRNA-based delivery approach can
be used repeatedly to yield editing efficiencies exceeding 60% and to correct or
introduce familial mutations causing Parkinson's disease in hPSCs.

Plain Language Summary: From muscles to nerves, our body is formed of many kinds
of cells which can each respond slightly differently to the same harmful genetic
changes. Understanding the exact relationship between mutations and cell-type
specific function is essential to better grasp how conditions such as
Parkinson’s disease or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis progress and can be
treated. Stem cells could be an important tool in that effort, as they can be
directed to mature into many cell types in the laboratory. Yet it remains
difficult to precisely introduce disease-relevant mutations in these cells. To
remove this obstacle, Li et al. focused on prime editing, a cutting-edge ‘search
and replace’ approach which can introduce new genetic information into a
specific DNA sequence. However, it was unclear whether this technique could be
used to efficiently create stem cell models of human diseases. A first set of
experiments showed that prime editing is superior to conventional approaches
when generating mutated genes in stem cells. Li et al. then further improved the
efficiency and precision of the method by tweaking how prime editing components
are delivered into the cells. The refined approach could be harnessed to quickly
generate large numbers of stem cells carrying mutations associated with
Parkinson’s disease; crucially, prime editing could then also be used to revert
a mutated gene back to its healthy form. The improved prime editing approach
developed by Li et al. removes a major hurdle for scientists hoping to use stem
cells to study genetic diseases. This could potentially help to unlock progress
in how we understand and ultimately treat these conditions.

© 2022, Li, Busquets et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.79208
PMCID: PMC9584603
PMID: 36069759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: HL, OB, YV, KS, NK, GP, LG, HB, DR, DH, FS No
competing interests declared
