---
reference_id: "PMID:30928582"
title: Clinical Assessment of Patients with Bilateral Superior Semicircular Canal Dehiscence.
authors:
- Jacky Chen CH
- Nguyen T
- Udawatta M
- Duong C
- Romiyo P
- Sheppard JP
- Gopen Q
- Yang I
journal: World Neurosurg
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2019.03.205
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Dizziness/etiology, therapy"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Labyrinth Diseases/surgery
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Otologic Surgical Procedures/methods
- Postoperative Complications/epidemiology
- Retrospective Studies
- "Semicircular Canals/abnormalities, surgery"
- "Tinnitus/etiology, therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Assessment of Patients with Bilateral Superior Semicircular Canal Dehiscence.
**Authors:** Jacky Chen CH, Nguyen T, Udawatta M, Duong C, Romiyo P, Sheppard JP, Gopen Q, Yang I
**Journal:** World Neurosurg (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.wneu.2019.03.205](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2019.03.205)

## Content

1. World Neurosurg. 2019 Jun;126:e1549-e1552. doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2019.03.205.
Epub  2019 Mar 28.

Clinical Assessment of Patients with Bilateral Superior Semicircular Canal 
Dehiscence.

Jacky Chen CH(1), Nguyen T(1), Udawatta M(1), Duong C(1), Romiyo P(1), Sheppard 
JP(1), Gopen Q(2), Yang I(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.
(2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, University of California, Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California, USA; Department of Head and Neck Surgery, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA; Department of Radiation 
Oncology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA; 
Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA; University 
of California, Los Angeles, David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, 
California, USA; Department of Neurosurgery, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, 
Torrance, California, USA; Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute, 
Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, California, USA. Electronic address: 
iyang@mednet.ucla.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Superior semicircular canal dehiscence (SSCD) is caused by a 
deformity in the arcuate eminence, leading to various vestibular and auditory 
symptoms that can manifest unilaterally or bilaterally. The aim of the present 
study was to distinguish the differences in symptoms, treatment options, and 
outcomes between patients with unilateral and bilateral SSCD.
METHODS: A retrospective medical record analysis was conducted to identify 
patients with SSCD treated at a tertiary care center from March 2011 to May 
2017. The patient demographic data, preoperative symptom presentation, and 
postoperative outcomes were extracted. Statistical analyses were performed using 
IBM SPSS Statistics. Fisher's exact tests were computed to investigate the 
relationships between binary variables, with a significance level of P < 0.05.
RESULTS: A total of 99 patients with SSCD had been treated at our institution 
from March 2011 to May 2017. Of these 99 patients, 41 (41.4%) had a diagnosis of 
bilateral SSCD. Of the 41 patients with bilateral SSCD, 27 (65.9%) were women, 
and the mean age was 53.6 ± 10.9 years (range, 31.7-73.9). The most common 
presenting symptom was tinnitus (n = 33; 80.4%) and dizziness (n = 33; 80.4%). 
Previous trauma to the head correlated with a bilateral SSCD presentation (P = 
0.04). Trends were reported between female sex and bilateral SSCD [r(35) = 
0.32379; P = 0.0506]. Postoperatively, trends were also found, with greater 
rates of dizziness in patients with bilateral SSCD compared with those with 
unilateral SSCD (odds ratio, 3.81; P = 0.0659), and less improvement in 
dizziness (odds ratio, 0.186; P = 0.0627). No other significant differences were 
found between the symptoms or clinical outcomes and improvements between the 
bilateral and unilateral cohorts.
CONCLUSION: Bilateral SSCD might result in different clinical symptoms that are 
more prevalent compared with unilateral SSCD. The findings from the present 
series of patients with bilateral SSCD suggest that patient symptoms and history 
are important in the diagnosis of bilateral SSCD and deciding whether 1 or both 
dehiscences requires surgical intervention.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2019.03.205
PMID: 30928582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]