---
reference_id: "PMID:2680057"
title: Mycobacterial disease, immunosuppression, and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
authors:
- Collins FM
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1128/CMR.2.4.360
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mycobacterial disease, immunosuppression, and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
**Authors:** Collins FM
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CMR.2.4.360](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.2.4.360)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 1989 Oct;2(4):360-77. doi: 10.1128/CMR.2.4.360.

Mycobacterial disease, immunosuppression, and acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome.

Collins FM(1).

Author information:
(1)Trudeau Institute, Inc., Saranac Lake, New York 12983.

The mycobacteria are an important group of acid-fast pathogens ranging from 
obligate intracellular parasites such as Mycobacterium leprae to environmental 
species such as M. gordonae and M. fortuitum. The latter may behave as 
opportunistic human pathogens if the host defenses have been depleted in some 
manner. The number and severity of such infections have increased markedly with 
the emergence of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) epidemic. These 
nontuberculous mycobacteria tend to be less virulent for humans than M. 
tuberculosis, usually giving rise to self-limiting infections involving the 
cervical and mesenteric lymph nodes of young children. However, the more 
virulent serovars of M. avium complex can colonize the bronchial and intestinal 
mucosal surfaces of healthy individuals, becoming virtual members of the 
commensal gut microflora and thus giving rise to low levels of skin 
hypersensitivity to tuberculins prepared from M. avium and M. intracellulare. 
Systemic disease develops when the normal T-cell-mediated defenses become 
depleted as a result of old age, cancer chemotherapy, or infection with human 
immunodeficiency virus. As many as 50% of human immunodeficiency virus 
antibody-positive individuals develop mycobacterial infections at some time 
during their disease. Most isolates of M. avium complex from AIDS patients fall 
into serotypes 4 and 8. The presence of these drug-resistant mycobacteria in the 
lungs of the AIDS patient makes their effective clinical treatment virtually 
impossible. More effective chemotherapeutic, prophylactic, and immunotherapeutic 
reagents are urgently needed to treat this rapidly increasing patient 
population.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.2.4.360
PMCID: PMC358130
PMID: 2680057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]