---
reference_id: "PMID:35155779"
title: Suicidal thoughts in patients with empty nose syndrome.
authors:
- Huang CC
- Wu PW
- Lee CC
- Chang PH
- Huang CC
- Lee TJ
journal: Laryngoscope Investig Otolaryngol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/lio2.730
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Suicidal thoughts in patients with empty nose syndrome.
**Authors:** Huang CC, Wu PW, Lee CC, Chang PH, Huang CC, Lee TJ
**Journal:** Laryngoscope Investig Otolaryngol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lio2.730](https://doi.org/10.1002/lio2.730)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope Investig Otolaryngol. 2022 Jan 19;7(1):22-28. doi: 
10.1002/lio2.730. eCollection 2022 Feb.

Suicidal thoughts in patients with empty nose syndrome.

Huang CC(1)(2)(3), Wu PW(1)(4), Lee CC(5)(6), Chang PH(1)(2)(3), Huang 
CC(1)(2)(3), Lee TJ(1)(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rhinology, Department of Otolaryngology Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital and Chang Gung University Taoyuan Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang 
Gung University Taoyuan Taiwan.
(3)School of Medicine, Chang Gung University Taoyuan Taiwan.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital and Chang Gung University Keelung Taiwan.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkou Taoyuan 
Taiwan.
(6)Department of Biomedical Engineering National Taiwan University Taipei 
Taiwan.
(7)Department of Otolaryngology Xiamen Chang Gung Hospital Xiamen China.

OBJECTIVES: Patients with empty nose syndrome (ENS) suffer from paradoxical 
nasal obstruction with a patent objective nasal airway. ENS may result from the 
excessive surgical reduction of the turbinate tissue. ENS patients also 
experience significant psychological symptoms such as anxiety and depression. In 
this study, we aimed to evaluate the prevalence of suicidal thoughts in ENS 
patients and to characterize these patients for early identification.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective case series.
METHODS: Patients with ENS were prospectively recruited for this study. The 
Sino-Nasal Outcome Test-25 (SNOT-25), Empty Nose Syndrome 6-item Questionnaire 
(ENS6Q), Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI), and Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) 
were used to assess ENS patients before and 6 months after nasal reconstruction 
surgery.
RESULTS: Sixty-two patients with ENS were enrolled. Suicidal thoughts were 
identified in 23 ENS patients preoperatively and in four patients 
postoperatively. ENS patients with suicidal thoughts rated significantly higher 
in the SNOT-25, ENS6Q, BDI-II, and BAI total scores than those without suicidal 
thoughts (all P < .05). "Nose feels too open" was the item in ENS6Q that was 
significantly more severe in ENS patients with suicidal thoughts than those 
without suicidal thoughts (P < .001).
CONCLUSIONS: Suicidal thoughts are frequently identified in patients with ENS. 
ENS patients with suicidal thoughts experienced significantly more severe 
symptoms, impaired quality of life, and psychological burden than those without 
suicidal thoughts. Recognizing individuals who may carry suicidal thoughts and 
provide appropriate psychological interventions is critical to prevent tragedy.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 4.

© 2022 The Authors. Laryngoscope Investigative Otolaryngology published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of The Triological Society.

DOI: 10.1002/lio2.730
PMCID: PMC8823180
PMID: 35155779

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.