---
reference_id: "PMID:29528978"
title: "CLINICAL AND GENETIC CHARACTERISTICS OF MALE PATIENTS WITH RPGR-ASSOCIATED RETINAL DYSTROPHIES: A Long-Term Follow-up Study."
authors:
- Talib M
- van Schooneveld MJ
- Thiadens AA
- Fiocco M
- Wijnholds J
- Florijn RJ
- Schalij-Delfos NE
- van Genderen MM
- Putter H
- Cremers FPM
- Dagnelie G
- Ten Brink JB
- Klaver CCW
- van den Born LI
- Hoyng CB
- Bergen AA
- Boon CJF
journal: Retina
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000002125
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Disease Progression
- Electroretinography
- "Eye Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Forecasting
- Genetic Association Studies
- Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factors
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Retinal Dystrophies/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Visual Acuity
- Visual Fields
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CLINICAL AND GENETIC CHARACTERISTICS OF MALE PATIENTS WITH RPGR-ASSOCIATED RETINAL DYSTROPHIES: A Long-Term Follow-up Study.
**Authors:** Talib M, van Schooneveld MJ, Thiadens AA, Fiocco M, Wijnholds J, Florijn RJ, Schalij-Delfos NE, van Genderen MM, Putter H, Cremers FPM, Dagnelie G, Ten Brink JB, Klaver CCW, van den Born LI, Hoyng CB, Bergen AA, Boon CJF
**Journal:** Retina (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IAE.0000000000002125](https://doi.org/10.1097/IAE.0000000000002125)

## Content

1. Retina. 2019 Jun;39(6):1186-1199. doi: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000002125.

CLINICAL AND GENETIC CHARACTERISTICS OF MALE PATIENTS WITH RPGR-ASSOCIATED 
RETINAL DYSTROPHIES: A Long-Term Follow-up Study.

Talib M(1), van Schooneveld MJ(2), Thiadens AA(3), Fiocco M(4)(5), Wijnholds 
J(1), Florijn RJ(6), Schalij-Delfos NE(1), van Genderen MM(7), Putter H(4), 
Cremers FPM(8), Dagnelie G(9), Ten Brink JB(6), Klaver CCW(3)(10)(11), van den 
Born LI(12), Hoyng CB(11), Bergen AA(6)(13), Boon CJF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medical Statistics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
the Netherlands.
(5)Mathematical Institute, Leiden University, Leiden, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(7)Bartiméus, Diagnostic Centre for Complex Visual Disorders, Zeist, the 
Netherlands.
(8)Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(9)Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland.
(10)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(11)Department of Ophthalmology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
the Netherlands.
(12)Rotterdam Eye Hospital, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(13)The Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience (NIN-KNAW), Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands.

PURPOSE: To describe the phenotype and clinical course of patients with 
RPGR-associated retinal dystrophies, and to identify genotype-phenotype 
correlations.
METHODS: A multicenter medical records review of 74 male patients with 
RPGR-associated retinal dystrophies.
RESULTS: Patients had retinitis pigmentosa (RP; n = 52; 70%), cone dystrophy 
(COD; n = 5; 7%), or cone-rod dystrophy (CORD; n = 17; 23%). The median 
follow-up time was 11.6 years (range 0-57.1). The median age at symptom onset 
was 5.0 years (range 0-14 years) for patients with RP and 23.0 years (range 0-60 
years) for patients with COD/CORD. The probability of being blind 
(best-corrected visual acuity <0.05) at the age of 40 was 20% and 55% in 
patients with RP and COD/CORD, respectively. RPGR-ORF15 mutations were 
associated with high myopia (P = 0.01), which led to a faster best-corrected 
visual acuity decline in patients with RP (P < 0.001) and COD/CORD (P = 0.03). 
Patients with RP with RPGR-ORF15 mutations had a faster visual field decline (P 
= 0.01) and thinner central retina (P = 0.03) than patients with mutations in 
exon 1 to 14.
CONCLUSION: Based on best-corrected visual acuity survival probabilities, the 
intervention window for gene therapy for RPGR-associated retinal dystrophies is 
relatively broad in patients with RP. RPGR-ORF15 mutations were associated with 
COD/CORD and with a more severe phenotype in RP. High myopia is a risk factor 
for faster best-corrected visual acuity decline.

DOI: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000002125
PMID: 29528978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]