---
reference_id: "PMID:15968464"
title: Chromosome 13 dementias.
authors:
- Rostagno A
- Tomidokoro Y
- Lashley T
- Ng D
- Plant G
- Holton J
- Frangione B
- Revesz T
- Ghiso J
journal: Cell Mol Life Sci
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1007/s00018-005-5092-5
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- "Amyloid/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy/genetics, pathology"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 13/genetics"
- "Dementia/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Inflammation/genetics, metabolism"
- Membrane Glycoproteins
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Protein Subunits/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chromosome 13 dementias.
**Authors:** Rostagno A, Tomidokoro Y, Lashley T, Ng D, Plant G, Holton J, Frangione B, Revesz T, Ghiso J
**Journal:** Cell Mol Life Sci (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00018-005-5092-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-005-5092-5)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2005 Aug;62(16):1814-25. doi: 10.1007/s00018-005-5092-5.

Chromosome 13 dementias.

Rostagno A(1), Tomidokoro Y, Lashley T, Ng D, Plant G, Holton J, Frangione B,
Revesz T, Ghiso J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York
10016, USA. rostaa02@popmail.med.nyu.edu

The importance of cerebral amyloid deposition in the mechanism of
neurodegeneration is still debatable. Classic arguments are usually centered on
amyloid beta(Abeta) and its role in the neuronal loss characteristic of
Alzheimer's disease, the most common form of human cerebral amyloidosis. Two
non-Abeta cerebral amyloidoses, familial British and Danish dementias (FBD and
FDD), share many aspects of Alzheimer's disease, including the presence of
neurofibrillary tangles, parenchymal preamyloid and amyloid deposits, cerebral
amyloid angiopathy and a variety of amyloid-associated proteins and inflammatory
components. Both early-onset conditions are linked to specific mutations at or
near the stop codon of the chromosome 13 gene BRI2 that cause generation of
longer-than-normal protein products. Furin-like processing of these longer
precursors releases two de novo-created peptides, ABri and ADan, which deposit
as amyloid fibrils in FBD and FDD, respectively. Due to the similar pathology
generated by completely unrelated amyloid subunits, FBD and FDD, collectively
referred to as chromosome 13 dementias, constitute alternative models for
studying the role of amyloid deposition in the mechanism of neuronal cell death.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-005-5092-5
PMCID: PMC11139122
PMID: 15968464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
