---
reference_id: "PMID:8001158"
title: "A missense mutation of the endothelin-B receptor gene in multigenic Hirschsprung's disease."
authors:
- Puffenberger EG
- Hosoda K
- Washington SS
- Nakao K
- deWit D
- Yanagisawa M
- Chakravart A
journal: Cell
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(94)90016-7
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- CHO Cells
- Calcium/metabolism
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 13"
- Cricetinae
- Hirschsprung Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Linkage Disequilibrium
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- "Receptor, Endothelin B"
- "Receptors, Endothelin/genetics"
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A missense mutation of the endothelin-B receptor gene in multigenic Hirschsprung's disease.
**Authors:** Puffenberger EG, Hosoda K, Washington SS, Nakao K, deWit D, Yanagisawa M, Chakravart A
**Journal:** Cell (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(94)90016-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(94)90016-7)

## Content

1. Cell. 1994 Dec 30;79(7):1257-66. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(94)90016-7.

A missense mutation of the endothelin-B receptor gene in multigenic
Hirschsprung's disease.

Puffenberger EG(1), Hosoda K, Washington SS, Nakao K, deWit D, Yanagisawa M,
Chakravart A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine
and University Hospitals of Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4955.

Hirschsprung's disease (HSCR) is characterized by an absence of enteric ganglia
in the distal colon and a failure of innervation in the gastrointestinal tract.
We recently mapped a recessive susceptibility locus (HSCR2) to human chromosome
13q22, which we now demonstrate to be the endothelin-B receptor gene (EDNRB). We
identified in HSCR patients a G-->T missense mutation in EDNRB exon 4 that
substitutes the highly conserved Trp-276 residue in the fifth transmembrane
helix of the G protein-coupled receptor with a Cys residue (W276C). The mutant
W276C receptor exhibited a partial impairment of ligand-induced Ca2+ transient
levels in transfected cells. The mutation is dosage sensitive, in that W276C
homozygotes and heterozygotes have a 74% and a 21% risk, respectively, of
developing HSCR. Genotype analysis of patients in a Mennonite pedigree shows
HSCR to be a multigenic disorder.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(94)90016-7
PMID: 8001158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
