---
reference_id: "PMID:1281363"
title: "The endemic treponematoses: not yet eradicated."
authors:
- Meheus A
- Antal GM
journal: World Health Stat Q
year: '1992'
keywords:
- Africa/epidemiology
- Americas/epidemiology
- "Asia, Southeastern/epidemiology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle East/epidemiology
- Pacific Islands/epidemiology
- Syphilis/epidemiology
- Syphilis Serodiagnosis
- Yaws/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The endemic treponematoses: not yet eradicated.
**Authors:** Meheus A, Antal GM
**Journal:** World Health Stat Q (1992)

## Content

1. World Health Stat Q. 1992;45(2-3):228-37.

The endemic treponematoses: not yet eradicated.

Meheus A(1), Antal GM.

Author information:
(1)Sexually Transmitted Diseases, World Health Organization, Geneva.

The endemic treponematoses which comprise yaws, endemic syphilis (bejel) and
pinta constitute a group of potentially disabling and disfiguring infections
which primarily afflict children in tropical and subtropical areas. Foci where
these diseases are now endemic have a patchy distribution and are typically
confined to underprivileged communities living in remote rural areas, with
little or no access to health services and removed from the mainstream of
socioeconomic development. A drastic decline in the prevalence of these
infections was brought about by the implementation of mass treatment campaigns
with penicillin under the technical guidance of WHO and with material support
from UNICEF in the 1950s and 1960s. These worldwide campaigns against the
endemic treponematoses halted disease transmission in many areas and held the
promise of complete eradication if intensive surveillance could be continued for
some time with the increasing involvement of the basic health services. National
campaigns were so successful that relatively low priority was given to the
preparation of the rural health services for this new task. The failure of many
countries to integrate active control measures into the functions of the rural
health services led to the gradual build-up and extension of treponemal
reservoirs and the resurgence of foci of increased disease transmission
particularly in communities where standards of hygiene and health care had
remained low. In a number of former endemic foci only low-level transmission
persisted; in a few areas disease prevalence increased dramatically to reach
pre-campaign levels. The lack of technical and financial resources limited the
success of renewed national control activities in the most affected areas.
Today, with waning interest in these diseases confined to remote, and thus
silent, population groups, and a decreasing ability of health staff to identify
cases, data collected by countries need to be supplemented by information from
other sources in order to arrive at a more valid assessment of the situation
concerning the endemic treponematoses. Central and West Africa are most severely
affected by the resurgence of the endemic treponematoses. In recent years a
number of countries (e.g. Ghana, Côte d'Ivoire and Mali) have launched renewed
control efforts, often combining yaws or endemic syphilis control with other
public health programmes. In Central Africa itinerant pygmy groups are still
highly affected by yaws and are an important source of infection for the
sedentary population with which they come into contact. In Chad, Sudan and
Ethiopia, there is some evidence of persistent foci of endemic treponematoses;
the epidemiological situation in Southern Africa is not well
established.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 1281363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
