---
reference_id: "PMID:16342836"
title: Prevention of meningococcal disease.
authors:
- Kimmel SR
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2005'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevention of meningococcal disease.
**Authors:** Kimmel SR
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2005)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2005 Nov 15;72(10):2049-56.

Prevention of meningococcal disease.

Kimmel SR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Medical University of Ohio, Toledo, Ohio 
43614, USA. skimmel@meduohio.edu

Comment in
    Am Fam Physician. 2005 Nov 15;72(10):1978, 1980.

Invasive disease caused by Neisseria meningitidis has an average annual 
incidence of one case per 100,000 in the United States. The disease can be 
rapidly fatal or result in severe neurologic and vascular sequelae despite 
antibiotic therapy. Antibiotic chemoprophylaxis with rifampin, ciprofloxacin, or 
ceftriaxone is required for household and other close contacts. Although the 
majority of cases of meningococcal disease are sporadic, outbreaks can occur, 
and vaccination of the affected population often is necessary. Serogroup B 
accounts for the highest incidence of disease in young infants but is not 
contained in any vaccine licensed in the United States. Adolescents and young 
adults 15 to 24 years of age have a higher incidence of disease and a higher 
fatality rate than other populations. Because 70 to 80 percent of these 
infections in the United States are caused by meningococcal serogroups C, Y, and 
W-135, which are contained in the tetravalent meningococcal vaccines, they are 
potentially preventable. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration recently approved 
a meningococcal conjugate vaccine containing serogroups A, C, Y, and W-135. This 
T-cell-dependent vaccine induces bactericidal antibody production and promotes 
immunologic memory that should result in a longer duration of immunity. The 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommends that this vaccine be 
given to 11- and 12-year-old adolescents, to adolescents entering high school, 
and to college freshmen living in dormitories. The vaccine also may be given to 
persons 11 to 55 years of age who belong to certain high-risk groups.

PMID: 16342836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]