---
reference_id: "PMID:21338381"
title: "Th17 cell, the new player of neuroinflammatory process in multiple sclerosis."
authors:
- Jadidi-Niaragh F
- Mirshafiey A
journal: Scand J Immunol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2011.02536.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Th17 cell, the new player of neuroinflammatory process in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Jadidi-Niaragh F, Mirshafiey A
**Journal:** Scand J Immunol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-3083.2011.02536.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3083.2011.02536.x)

## Content

1. Scand J Immunol. 2011 Jul;74(1):1-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2011.02536.x.

Th17 cell, the new player of neuroinflammatory process in multiple sclerosis.

Jadidi-Niaragh F(1), Mirshafiey A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Public Health, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease characterized by recurrent 
episodes of demyelination and axonal lesion mediated by CD4(+) T cells with a 
proinflammatory Th1 and Th17 phenotype, macrophages, and soluble inflammatory 
mediators. Identification of Th17 cells led to breaking the dichotomy of Th1/Th2 
axis in immunopathogenesis of autoimmune diseases such as MS, and its 
experimental model, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Th17 cells 
are characterized by expression of retinoic acid-related orphan receptor (ROR)γt 
and signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) factors. 
Th17-produced cytokine profile including interleukin (IL)-17, IL-6, IL-21, 
IL-22, IL-23 and tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α, which have proinflammatory 
functions, suggests it as an important factor in immunopathogenesis of MS, 
because the main feature of MS pathophysiology is the neuroinflammatory 
reaction. The blood brain barrier (BBB) disruption is an early and central event 
in MS pathogenesis. Autoreactive Th17 cells can migrate through the BBB by the 
production of cytokines such as IL-17 and IL-22, which disrupt tight junction 
proteins in the central nervous system (CNS) endothelial cells. Consistent with 
this observation and regarding the wide range production of proinflammatory 
cytokines and chemokines by Th17 cells, it is expected that Th17 cell to be as a 
potent pathogenic factor in disease immunopathophysiology. Th17-mediated 
inflammation is characterized by neutrophil recruitment into the CNS and neurons 
killing. However, the majority of our knowledge about the role of Th17 in MS 
pathogenesis is resulted in investigation into EAE animal models. In this 
review, we intend to focus on the newest information regarding the precise role 
of Th17 cells in immunopathogenesis of MS, and its animal model, EAE.

© 2011 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology © 2011 Blackwell 
Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2011.02536.x
PMID: 21338381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]