---
reference_id: "PMID:7631493"
title: "Gastrointestinal absorption of inorganic arsenic (V): The effect of concentration and interactions with phosphate and dichromate."
authors:
- Gonzalez MJ
- Aguilar MV
- Martinez Para MC
journal: Vet Hum Toxicol
year: '1995'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gastrointestinal absorption of inorganic arsenic (V): The effect of concentration and interactions with phosphate and dichromate.
**Authors:** Gonzalez MJ, Aguilar MV, Martinez Para MC
**Journal:** Vet Hum Toxicol (1995)

## Content

1. Vet Hum Toxicol. 1995 Apr;37(2):131-6.

Gastrointestinal absorption of inorganic arsenic (V): The effect of 
concentration and interactions with phosphate and dichromate.

Gonzalez MJ(1), Aguilar MV, Martinez Para MC.

Author information:
(1)Dpto Nutricion y Bromatologia, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad de Alcala de 
Henares, Madrid, Spain.

The absorption of inorganic pentavalent arsenic (As) by the rat small intestine 
was investigated using 2 different procedures: In vivo determination of overall 
extent of gastrointestinal absorption; and an intestinal perfusion technique. 
The aim was to determine the effect of concentration and the interaction with 
phosphate and dichromate anions on gastrointestinal absorption of As to 
understand the mechanism of As absorption at intestinal level. The results 
indicate there is a direct relationship, although not proportional, between the 
received dose and the absorbed amount of As. Intestinal absorption of As appears 
carried out by a saturable transport process. The phosphate produces a 
pronounced decrease in the intestinal absorption of As due to the fact that 
phosphate and As can share the same transport mechanism which is an active 
secondary carrier-mediated system depending on Na+ and H+ gradient. Addition of 
dichromate to perfusion buffers significantly (p > 0.05) increased As 
absorption. Several hypothesis may explain this fact: Dichromate produces pH 
modifications at the intracellular level, providing an adequate H(+)-gradient 
for As absorption; dichromate exerts a caustic effect, which damages the 
intestinal wall at the microvilli level. This allows free diffusion of As 
through the resulting openings.

PMID: 7631493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]