---
reference_id: "PMID:20538597"
title: Genetic depletion of the malin E3 ubiquitin ligase in mice leads to lafora bodies and the accumulation of insoluble laforin.
authors:
- DePaoli-Roach AA
- Tagliabracci VS
- Segvich DM
- Meyer CM
- Irimia JM
- Roach PJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.148668
keywords:
- Animals
- "Blotting, Western"
- Brain/metabolism
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Dual-Specificity Phosphatases/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Lafora Disease/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Muscles/metabolism
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases, Non-Receptor/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic depletion of the malin E3 ubiquitin ligase in mice leads to lafora bodies and the accumulation of insoluble laforin.
**Authors:** DePaoli-Roach AA, Tagliabracci VS, Segvich DM, Meyer CM, Irimia JM, Roach PJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.148668](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.148668)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Aug 13;285(33):25372-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.148668. Epub
2010 Jun 10.

Genetic depletion of the malin E3 ubiquitin ligase in mice leads to lafora
bodies and the accumulation of insoluble laforin.

DePaoli-Roach AA(1), Tagliabracci VS, Segvich DM, Meyer CM, Irimia JM, Roach PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School
of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5122, USA. adepaoli@iupui.edu

Approximately 90% of cases of Lafora disease, a fatal teenage-onset progressive
myoclonus epilepsy, are caused by mutations in either the EPM2A or the EPM2B
genes that encode, respectively, a glycogen phosphatase called laforin and an E3
ubiquitin ligase called malin. Lafora disease is characterized by the formation
of Lafora bodies, insoluble deposits containing poorly branched glycogen or
polyglucosan, in many tissues including skeletal muscle, liver, and brain.
Disruption of the Epm2b gene in mice resulted in viable animals that, by 3
months of age, accumulated Lafora bodies in the brain and to a lesser extent in
heart and skeletal muscle. Analysis of muscle and brain of the Epm2b(-/-) mice
by Western blotting indicated no effect on the levels of glycogen synthase, PTG
(type 1 phosphatase-targeting subunit), or debranching enzyme, making it
unlikely that these proteins are targeted for destruction by malin, as has been
proposed. Total laforin protein was increased in the brain of Epm2b(-/-) mice
and, most notably, was redistributed from the soluble, low speed supernatant to
the insoluble low speed pellet, which now contained 90% of the total laforin.
This result correlated with elevated insolubility of glycogen and glycogen
synthase. Because up-regulation of laforin cannot explain Lafora body formation,
we conclude that malin functions to maintain laforin associated with soluble
glycogen and that its absence causes sequestration of laforin to an insoluble
polysaccharide fraction where it is functionally inert.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.148668
PMCID: PMC2919100
PMID: 20538597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
