---
reference_id: "PMID:37924827"
title: Malaria.
authors:
- Poespoprodjo JR
- Douglas NM
- Ansong D
- Kho S
- Anstey NM
journal: Lancet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01249-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malaria.
**Authors:** Poespoprodjo JR, Douglas NM, Ansong D, Kho S, Anstey NM
**Journal:** Lancet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01249-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01249-7)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2023 Dec 16;402(10419):2328-2345. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01249-7. 
Epub 2023 Nov 2.

Malaria.

Poespoprodjo JR(1), Douglas NM(2), Ansong D(3), Kho S(4), Anstey NM(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Child Health and Department of Child Health, Faculty of Medicine, 
Public Health and Nursing, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, Indonesia; 
Timika Malaria Research Facility, Papuan Health and Community Development 
Foundation, Timika, Indonesia; Mimika District Hospital and District Health 
Authority, Timika, Indonesia; Global and Tropical Health Division, Menzies 
School of Health Research, Charles Darwin University, Darwin, NT, Australia. 
Electronic address: didot2266@yahoo.com.
(2)Global and Tropical Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research, 
Charles Darwin University, Darwin, NT, Australia; Department of Infectious 
Diseases, Christchurch Hospital, Te Whatu Ora Waitaha, Christchurch, New 
Zealand; Department of Medicine, University of Otago, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(3)School of Medicine and Dentistry, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and 
Technology, Kumasi, Ghana.
(4)Timika Malaria Research Facility, Papuan Health and Community Development 
Foundation, Timika, Indonesia; Global and Tropical Health Division, Menzies 
School of Health Research, Charles Darwin University, Darwin, NT, Australia.
(5)Global and Tropical Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research, 
Charles Darwin University, Darwin, NT, Australia; Department of Infectious 
Diseases, Royal Darwin Hospital, Darwin, NT, Australia.

Malaria is resurging in many African and South American countries, exacerbated 
by COVID-19-related health service disruption. In 2021, there were an estimated 
247 million malaria cases and 619 000 deaths in 84 endemic countries. Plasmodium 
falciparum strains partly resistant to artemisinins are entrenched in the 
Greater Mekong region and have emerged in Africa, while Anopheles mosquito 
vectors continue to evolve physiological and behavioural resistance to 
insecticides. Elimination of Plasmodium vivax malaria is hindered by impractical 
and potentially toxic antirelapse regimens. Parasitological diagnosis and 
treatment with oral or parenteral artemisinin-based therapy is the mainstay of 
patient management. Timely blood transfusion, renal replacement therapy, and 
restrictive fluid therapy can improve survival in severe malaria. Rigorous use 
of intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy and infancy and seasonal 
chemoprevention, potentially combined with pre-erythrocytic vaccines endorsed by 
WHO in 2021 and 2023, can substantially reduce malaria morbidity. Improved 
surveillance, better access to effective treatment, more labour-efficient vector 
control, continued drug development, targeted mass drug administration, and 
sustained political commitment are required to achieve targets for malaria 
reduction by the end of this decade.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01249-7
PMID: 37924827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests We declare no competing 
interests.