---
reference_id: "PMID:37325288"
title: "Scalp Seborrheic Dermatitis: What We Know So Far."
authors:
- Leroy AK
- Cortez de Almeida RF
- Obadia DL
- Frattini S
- Melo DF
journal: Skin Appendage Disord
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1159/000529854
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Scalp Seborrheic Dermatitis: What We Know So Far.
**Authors:** Leroy AK, Cortez de Almeida RF, Obadia DL, Frattini S, Melo DF
**Journal:** Skin Appendage Disord (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000529854](https://doi.org/10.1159/000529854)

## Content

1. Skin Appendage Disord. 2023 Jun;9(3):160-164. doi: 10.1159/000529854. Epub
2023  Apr 5.

Scalp Seborrheic Dermatitis: What We Know So Far.

Leroy AK(1), Cortez de Almeida RF(1), Obadia DL(1), Frattini S(2), Melo DF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Rio de Janeiro State University (UERJ), Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)The Mole Clinic, Private Practice, Ancaster, Ontario, Canada.

Scalp seborrheic dermatitis (SSD) is a prevalent chronic, relapsing inflammatory 
skin disease. The etiology is related to sebum production, bacterial 
proliferation - Staphylococcus sp., Streptococcus, and M. restricta - and host 
immunity factors - NK1+, CD16+ cells, IL-1, and IL-8. Trichoscopy features 
include mostly arborizing vessels and yellowish scales. New trichoscopic 
findings were described to guide the diagnosis as dandelion vascular 
conglomerate, "cherry blossom" vascular pattern, and intrafollicular oily 
material. Antifungals and corticosteroids constitute the essential therapy, but 
new treatments have been described. This article aims to review and discuss the 
etiology, pathophysiology, trichoscopy, histopathologic findings, main 
differential diagnoses, and therapeutic options of SSD.

Copyright © 2023 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000529854
PMCID: PMC10264915
PMID: 37325288

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
declare.