---
reference_id: "PMID:32319946"
title: "[Value of the syndromic approach for the diagnosis of an imported case of cholera]."
authors:
- Chalmin S
- Lièvre N
- Mérillon C
- Gallienne E
- Leroux V
- Léonard PY
- Quilici ML
- Pérez B
journal: Ann Biol Clin (Paris)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1684/abc.2020.1539
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Value of the syndromic approach for the diagnosis of an imported case of cholera].
**Authors:** Chalmin S, Lièvre N, Mérillon C, Gallienne E, Leroux V, Léonard PY, Quilici ML, Pérez B
**Journal:** Ann Biol Clin (Paris) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1684/abc.2020.1539](https://doi.org/10.1684/abc.2020.1539)

## Content

1. Ann Biol Clin (Paris). 2020 Apr 1;78(2):181-186. doi: 10.1684/abc.2020.1539.

[Value of the syndromic approach for the diagnosis of an imported case of 
cholera].

[Article in French]

Chalmin S(1), Lièvre N(2), Mérillon C(3), Gallienne E(1), Leroux V(1), Léonard 
PY(1), Quilici ML(4), Pérez B(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Laborizon Maine Anjou, Le Mans, France.
(2)Laboratoire Laborizon Bretagne, Saint-Nazaire, France.
(3)Médecin généraliste, Herbignac, France.
(4)Institut Pasteur, Centre national de référence des vibrions et du choléra, 
Paris, France.

A 70-year-old woman with no relevant medical history presented banal clinical 
signs of infectious gastroenteritis on her return from a trip to the Republic of 
the Union of Myanmar. The appearance of her stools and clinical findings were 
not suggestive of a typical case of cholera, but Vibrio cholerae was 
nevertheless isolated from her stools in the laboratory. The National reference 
center (NRC) for vibrios and cholera identified a Vibrio cholerae serogroup O1 
(serotype Inaba) strain. The health authorities were notified of an imported 
case of cholera, identified on the basis of clinical, biological and 
epidemiological data. The diagnostic strategy used in the laboratory was based 
on a two-step algorithm involving molecular biological screening followed by 
culture on selective media for species identification. It was this approach, 
benefiting from the complementarity of the different techniques, that made it 
possible to reach a reliable rapid biological diagnosis of this atypical, but 
frequent form of the disease. The diagnosis of imported cases is of the utmost 
importance, because the mandatory signaling and notification of cases trigger 
investigations to check for additional cases among other exposed individuals or 
contacts of the patient, even though the risk of secondary transmission appears 
to be low in France. It also supplies data to international surveillance 
networks for cholera, which remains a serious disease and a major problem 
globally. This case highlights the importance of interactions between the 
various biological personnel and clinicians.

DOI: 10.1684/abc.2020.1539
PMID: 32319946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]