---
reference_id: "PMID:26351221"
title: "Pediatric cerebellar astrocytoma: a review."
authors:
- Bonfield CM
- Steinbok P
journal: Childs Nerv Syst
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00381-015-2719-1
keywords:
- "Astrocytoma/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Cerebellar Neoplasms/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Databases, Bibliographic/statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
- Neurosurgery/methods
- Pediatrics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric cerebellar astrocytoma: a review.
**Authors:** Bonfield CM, Steinbok P
**Journal:** Childs Nerv Syst (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00381-015-2719-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00381-015-2719-1)

## Content

1. Childs Nerv Syst. 2015 Oct;31(10):1677-85. doi: 10.1007/s00381-015-2719-1.
Epub  2015 Sep 9.

Pediatric cerebellar astrocytoma: a review.

Bonfield CM(1), Steinbok P(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, BC Children's Hospital and
University of British Columbia, 4480 Oak Street, Vancouver, BC, V6H 3 V4,
Canada. bonfieldcm@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, BC Children's Hospital and
University of British Columbia, 4480 Oak Street, Vancouver, BC, V6H 3 V4,
Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Cerebellar astrocytomas (CA) are one of the most common posterior
fossa tumors in children. The vast majority is low grade, and prognosis for
long-term survival is excellent.
METHODS: Recent literature about CA was reviewed to provide an up to date
overview of the epidemiology, pathology, molecular and cell biology, diagnosis,
presentation, management, and long-term outcomes.
RESULTS: Surgical resection remains the first-line treatment with complete
removal of the tumor the goal. However, even when only subtotal resection has
been achieved, there is a significant chance that the tumor will remain stable
or will regress spontaneously. Adjuvant chemotherapy is reserved for those
tumors that progress despite surgery, and more personalized chemotherapy is
being pursued with better understanding of the molecular genetics of this tumor.
Radiotherapy has generally not been recommended, but stereotactic radiotherapy
and conformal proton beam radiotherapy may be reasonable options in the setting
of relapse or progression. In the long term, permanent neurologic deficits,
mainly cerebellar dysfunction, are common, but quality of life and cognitive
function are generally good.
CONCLUSIONS: Low-grade CA remains primarily a surgical disease, with excellent
survival rates. Care must be taken with surgery and adjuvant treatments to
preserve neurologic function to allow for optimal outcomes in the long term.

DOI: 10.1007/s00381-015-2719-1
PMID: 26351221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
