---
reference_id: "PMID:38106765"
title: "Potentially Fatal Ludwig's Angina: A Case Report."
authors:
- Sonar PR
- Panchbhai A
- Lande AN
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.48885
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Potentially Fatal Ludwig's Angina: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Sonar PR, Panchbhai A, Lande AN
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.48885](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.48885)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Nov 16;15(11):e48885. doi: 10.7759/cureus.48885. eCollection 2023
 Nov.

Potentially Fatal Ludwig's Angina: A Case Report.

Sonar PR(1), Panchbhai A(1), Lande AN(2).

Author information:
(1)Oral Medicine and Radiology, Sharad Pawar Dental College and Hospital, Datta 
Meghe Institute of Higher Education and Research, Wardha, IND.
(2)Dentistry, Datta Meghe Institute of Higher Education and Research, Wardha, 
IND.

Ludwig's angina is a condition that could be fatal, causing severe diffuse 
cellulitis bilaterally that affects the submandibular, sublingual, and submental 
areas. It has an acute onset and progresses rapidly. A common and potentially 
deadly complication is airway impairment. Prompt diagnosis and treatment 
planning have the opportunity to save lives. An elective tracheostomy is 
recommended for the patient to maintain an open airway, followed by addressing 
potential affected spaces due to a widespread odontogenic infection. This 
infection has extended to the neck, causing elevation of the ventral surface of 
the tongue and floor of the mouth, leading to airway obstruction and the 
manifestation of stridor. In the latter stages of the illness, additional 
attention should be paid to maintaining the airway before surgical decompression 
and antibiotic treatment. In advanced cases, the usual protocol of care still 
includes surgical drainage of the infection, judicious administration of 
parenteral antibiotics, and airway management. A case report's objectives are to 
improve clinical knowledge, facilitate better diagnosis and treatment, and add 
to the body of medical research by offering a thorough and educational 
description of a particular patient's experience with this illness.

Copyright © 2023, Sonar et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.48885
PMCID: PMC10724867
PMID: 38106765

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.