---
reference_id: "PMID:7527990"
title: Thyroxine excess and pregnancy.
authors:
- Lazarus JH
journal: Acta Med Austriaca
year: '1994'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thyroxine excess and pregnancy.
**Authors:** Lazarus JH
**Journal:** Acta Med Austriaca (1994)

## Content

1. Acta Med Austriaca. 1994;21(2):53-6.

Thyroxine excess and pregnancy.

Lazarus JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff, 
United Kingdom.

Pregnancy is characterised by a physiological increase in bound thyroxine but 
normal values of free hormone. Human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG may stimulate 
the thyroid to produce hyperemesis gravidarum (with mild to moderate 
hyperthyroidism) or result in high thyroid hormone levels associated with 
gestational trophoblastic disease. Hyperthyroidism occurring during pregnancy is 
usually due to Graves' disease and must be treated to prevent congenital 
anomalies, low birth weight and premature labour. Thionamide drugs should be 
used with a preference for propylthiouracil (PTU) and continued in low doses up 
to labour. Breast feeding is possible in patients on low dose PTU. In the 
management of hypothyroidism during pregnancy thyroxine dose may require to be 
increased but excess dosage should be avoided because of its unwanted effects on 
foetal cerebral maturation. Neonatal hyperthyroidism due to transplacental 
passage of thyroid stimulating antibodies (TsAb) should be checked for in 
pregnant patients with autoimmune thyroid disease. As antithyroid drugs cross 
the placenta they may be used as therapy in this condition. Prevention of 
neonatal goitre is vital. Postpartum development of hyperthyroidism may be due 
to an exacerbation of pre-existing Graves' disease, development of new Graves' 
hyperthyroidism or postpartum thyroiditis with transient hyperthyroidism. 
Differentiation by measurement of TsAb and thyroidal iodine uptake is important 
because of therapeutic considerations.

PMID: 7527990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]