---
reference_id: "PMID:2822180"
title: Viral diseases involving the liver.
authors:
- Tandon BN
- Acharya SK
journal: Baillieres Clin Gastroenterol
year: '1987'
doi: 10.1016/0950-3528(87)90002-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Viral diseases involving the liver.
**Authors:** Tandon BN, Acharya SK
**Journal:** Baillieres Clin Gastroenterol (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0950-3528(87)90002-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/0950-3528(87)90002-9)

## Content

1. Baillieres Clin Gastroenterol. 1987 Apr;1(2):211-30. doi: 
10.1016/0950-3528(87)90002-9.

Viral diseases involving the liver.

Tandon BN, Acharya SK.

Even though HAV, HBV and HNANB viruses are responsible for most of the viral 
hepatitis cases, many other viruses have been reported to cause hepatic injury. 
These viruses may involve the liver, either as part of a systemic illness (e.g. 
EBV, CMV, HSV) or as the primary target organ (e.g. yellow fever virus, Lassa 
fever virus, Ebola virus). Clinically overt hepatocellular dysfunction is rare 
in such viral infections. Biochemical disturbance of hepatic functions shown, 
for example, by rises in AST and ALT, is a frequent event and indicates hepatic 
damage. Morphological changes of the liver include varying degrees of hepatic 
necrosis with a paucity of inflammatory activities. Intranuclear or cytoplasmic 
inclusion bodies may be characteristic findings in these diseases. Laboratory 
diagnosis depends upon serology and liver histology. Treatment is still largely 
supportive in most of these diseases, although recent trials of antiviral agents 
show promise against some viruses. Chronic sequelae, such as cirrhosis or 
hepatocellular cancer, are not encountered. More work is needed to elucidate the 
pathogenesis of hepatic injury in these illnesses.

DOI: 10.1016/0950-3528(87)90002-9
PMID: 2822180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]