---
reference_id: "PMID:23671347"
title: "Child neurology: Zellweger syndrome."
authors:
- Lee PR
- Raymond GV
journal: Neurology
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182929f8e
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Child neurology: Zellweger syndrome.
**Authors:** Lee PR, Raymond GV
**Journal:** Neurology (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182929f8e](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182929f8e)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2013 May 14;80(20):e207-10. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182929f8e.

Child neurology: Zellweger syndrome.

Lee PR(1), Raymond GV.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. Paul.lee@nih.gov

Zellweger syndrome (ZS) is a severe manifestation of disease within the spectrum 
of peroxisome biogenesis disorders that includes neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy, 
infantile Refsum disease, and rhizomelic chondroplasia punctata. Patients with 
ZS present in the neonatal period with a characteristic phenotype of distinctive 
facial stigmata, pronounced hypotonia, poor feeding, hepatic dysfunction, and 
often seizures and boney abnormalities. In patients with ZS, a mutation in one 
of the PEX genes coding for a peroxin (a peroxisome assembly protein) creates 
functionally incompetent organelles causing an accumulation of very long chain 
fatty acids (VLCFA), among other complications. Despite an absence of treatment 
options, prompt diagnosis of ZS is important for providing appropriate 
symptomatic care, definitive genetic testing, and counseling regarding family 
planning.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182929f8e
PMCID: PMC3908348
PMID: 23671347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]