---
reference_id: "PMID:29670635"
title: "Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia B-Cell Normal Cellular Counterpart: Clues From a Functional Perspective."
authors:
- Darwiche W
- Gubler B
- Marolleau JP
- Ghamlouch H
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00683
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia B-Cell Normal Cellular Counterpart: Clues From a Functional Perspective.
**Authors:** Darwiche W, Gubler B, Marolleau JP, Ghamlouch H
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2018.00683](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2018.00683)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2018 Apr 4;9:683. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00683. eCollection 
2018.

Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia B-Cell Normal Cellular Counterpart: Clues From a 
Functional Perspective.

Darwiche W(1)(2), Gubler B(1)(3), Marolleau JP(1)(4), Ghamlouch H(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)EA 4666 Lymphocyte Normal - Pathologique et Cancers, HEMATIM, Université de 
Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, France.
(2)Laboratoire d'Hématologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Amiens-Picardie, 
Amiens, France.
(3)Laboratoire d'Oncobiologie Moléculaire, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire 
Amiens-Picardie, Amiens, France.
(4)Service d'Hématologie Clinique et Thérapie cellulaire, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire Amiens-Picardie, Amiens, France.
(5)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U1170, 
Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(6)Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(7)Université Paris-Sud, Faculté de Médecine, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is characterized by the clonal expansion of 
small mature-looking CD19+ CD23+ CD5+ B-cells that accumulate in the blood, bone 
marrow, and lymphoid organs. To date, no consensus has been reached concerning 
the normal cellular counterpart of CLL B-cells and several B-cell types have 
been proposed. CLL B-cells have remarkable phenotypic and gene expression 
profile homogeneity. In recent years, the molecular and cellular biology of CLL 
has been enriched by seminal insights that are leading to a better understanding 
of the natural history of the disease. Immunophenotypic and molecular approaches 
(including immunoglobulin heavy-chain variable gene mutational status, 
transcriptional and epigenetic profiling) comparing the normal B-cell subset and 
CLL B-cells provide some new insights into the normal cellular counterpart. 
Functional characteristics (including activation requirements and propensity for 
plasma cell differentiation) of CLL B-cells have now been investigated for 
50 years. B-cell subsets differ substantially in terms of their functional 
features. Analysis of shared functional characteristics may reveal similarities 
between normal B-cell subsets and CLL B-cells, allowing speculative assignment 
of a normal cellular counterpart for CLL B-cells. In this review, we summarize 
current data regarding peripheral B-cell differentiation and human B-cell 
subsets and suggest possibilities for a normal cellular counterpart based on the 
functional characteristics of CLL B-cells. However, a definitive normal cellular 
counterpart cannot be attributed on the basis of the available data. We discuss 
the functional characteristics required for a cell to be logically considered to 
be the normal counterpart of CLL B-cells.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00683
PMCID: PMC5893869
PMID: 29670635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]