---
reference_id: "PMID:20938027"
title: Phenotypic spectrum of patients with PLA2G6 mutation and PARK14-linked parkinsonism.
authors:
- Yoshino H
- Tomiyama H
- Tachibana N
- Ogaki K
- Li Y
- Funayama M
- Hashimoto T
- Takashima S
- Hattori N
journal: Neurology
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181f73649
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- DNA Mutational Analysis/methods
- Female
- Frontotemporal Dementia/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Group VI Phospholipases A2/genetics
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- "Parkinsonian Disorders/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Phenotype
- "Tomography, Emission-Computed, Single-Photon/methods"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic spectrum of patients with PLA2G6 mutation and PARK14-linked parkinsonism.
**Authors:** Yoshino H, Tomiyama H, Tachibana N, Ogaki K, Li Y, Funayama M, Hashimoto T, Takashima S, Hattori N
**Journal:** Neurology (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181f73649](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181f73649)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2010 Oct 12;75(15):1356-61. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181f73649.

Phenotypic spectrum of patients with PLA2G6 mutation and PARK14-linked
parkinsonism.

Yoshino H(1), Tomiyama H, Tachibana N, Ogaki K, Li Y, Funayama M, Hashimoto T,
Takashima S, Hattori N.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute for Diseases of Old Age, Juntendo University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: PLA2G6 is the causative gene for infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy,
neurodegeneration associated with brain iron accumulation, and Karak syndrome.
Based on previous reports, patients with PLA2G6 mutations could show axonal
dystrophy, dystonia, dementia, and cerebellar signs. Recently, PLA2G6 was also
reported as the causative gene for early-onset PARK14-linked
dystonia-parkinsonism.
METHODS: To clarify the role of PLA2G6 mutation in parkinsonism, we conducted
mutation analysis in 29 selected patients with very early-onset (≤ 30, mean 21.2
± 8.4 years, ± SD) parkinsonism. These patients had other clinical features
(e.g., mental retardation/dementia [14/29], psychosis [15/29], dystonia [11/29],
and hyperreflexia [11/29]).
RESULTS: Two novel compound heterozygous PLA2G6 mutations were detected (patient
A: p.F72L/p.R635Q; patients B1 and B2: p.Q452X/p.R635Q). All 3 patients had
early-onset l-dopa-responsive parkinsonism with dementia and frontotemporal
lobar atrophy. Disease progression was relatively rapid. SPECT in patient B1
showed frontotemporal lobar hypoperfusion. MRI in patient A showed iron
accumulation in the substantia nigra and striatum.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the clinical presentation of PLA2G6-associated
neurodegeneration was reported to be homogeneous, our findings suggest patients
with PLA2G6 mutation could show heterogeneous phenotype such as
dystonia-parkinsonism, dementia, frontotemporal atrophy/hypoperfusion, with or
without brain iron accumulation. Based on the clinical heterogeneity, the
functional roles of PLA2G6 and the roles of PLA2G6 variants including single
heterozygous mutations should be further elucidated in patients with atypical
parkinsonism, dementia, or Parkinson disease. PLA2G6 mutations should be
considered in patients with early-onset l-dopa-responsive parkinsonism and
dementia with frontotemporal lobar atrophy.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181f73649
PMID: 20938027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
