---
reference_id: "PMID:20301448"
title: Hepatic Veno-Occlusive Disease with Immunodeficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Wong M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatic Veno-Occlusive Disease with Immunodeficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Wong M

## Content

1. Hepatic Veno-Occlusive Disease with Immunodeficiency.

Wong M(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2007 Feb 21 [updated 2025 Jan 23].

Author information:
(1)Clinical Immunologist and Immunopathologist, The Children's Hospital at 
Westmead, Sydney, Australia

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Hepatic veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency 
(VODI) is characterized by (1) combined immunodeficiency and (2) terminal 
hepatic lobular vascular occlusion and hepatic fibrosis manifesting as 
hepatomegaly and/or hepatic failure. Onset is usually before age six months. The 
immunodeficiency comprises severe hypogammaglobulinemia, clinical evidence of 
T-cell immunodeficiency with normal numbers of circulating T and B cells, absent 
lymph node germinal centers, and absent tissue plasma cells. Bacterial and 
opportunistic infections including Pneumocystis jirovecii infection, 
mucocutaneous candidiasis, and enteroviral or cytomegalovirus infections occur. 
In the past the prognosis for affected individuals was poor, with 100% mortality 
in the first year of life if unrecognized and untreated with intravenous or 
subcutaneous immunoglobulin (IVIG/SCIG) and Pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis. 
However, with early recognition and treatment, including the more recent use of 
defibrotide, there is a marked improvement in prognosis. Early hematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation (HSCT) using non-hepatoxic drugs in conditioning and 
prophylactic defibrotide is potentially curative.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of VODI is established in a proband who meets 
clinical diagnostic criteria or by identification of biallelic pathogenic 
variants in SP110 on molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: IVIG/SCIG; defibrotide for acute hepatic 
disease; HSCT with non-hepatotoxic conditioning therapy, preferably with 
defibrotide prophylaxis. Supportive care: Pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis; 
prompt treatment of infections with antibacterials, antivirals, or antifungals 
as indicated; standard treatment for complications of liver disease; consider 
liver transplantation, although rate of complications may be high. Surveillance: 
Assess growth every three to six months; measurement of immunoglobulin 
concentrations every three to six months; bronchoalveolar lavage to diagnose 
Pneumocystis jirovecii infection; viral and bacterial cultures and PCR as 
needed; serum aminotransferases, bilirubin, albumin, complete blood count, and 
platelet count every three to six months; pulmonary function studies annually 
once able to perform reliably; cerebrospinal imaging to identify leukodystrophy 
or other central nervous system pathology when clinically indicated. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Agents known to predispose to hepatic 
veno-occlusive disease including cyclophosphamide and Senecio alkaloids / bush 
teas. Evaluation of relatives at risk: If both pathogenic variants in the family 
are known, it is appropriate to evaluate via molecular genetic testing sibs of a 
proband who are younger than age 12 months in order to identify those who would 
benefit from initiation of IVIG or SCIG treatment, Pneumocystis jirovecii 
prophylaxis, and consideration of preemptive HSCT.
GENETIC COUNSELING: VODI is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for an SP110 pathogenic variant, each sib 
of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 
50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being 
unaffected and not a carrier. Once the SP110 pathogenic variants have been 
identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives 
and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing for VODI are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301448