---
reference_id: "PMID:8237919"
title: "A study of the physical, behavioral, and medical phenotype, including anthropometric measures, of females with fragile X syndrome."
authors:
- Hull C
- Hagerman RJ
journal: Am J Dis Child
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1001/archpedi.1993.02160350110017
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Anthropometry
- Cytosine Nucleotides
- DNA/analysis
- Female
- "Fragile X Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology, psychology"
- Gene Amplification
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Intelligence Tests
- Medical History Taking
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- Physical Examination
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A study of the physical, behavioral, and medical phenotype, including anthropometric measures, of females with fragile X syndrome.
**Authors:** Hull C, Hagerman RJ
**Journal:** Am J Dis Child (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archpedi.1993.02160350110017](https://doi.org/10.1001/archpedi.1993.02160350110017)

## Content

1. Am J Dis Child. 1993 Nov;147(11):1236-41. doi:
10.1001/archpedi.1993.02160350110017.

A study of the physical, behavioral, and medical phenotype, including
anthropometric measures, of females with fragile X syndrome.

Hull C(1), Hagerman RJ.

Author information:
(1)Child Development Unit, Children's Hospital, Denver, CO 80218.

The physical features of fragile X, including a long face, prominent ears, and
hyperextensible joints, are present in affected males and females.
Cytogenetically negative heterozygotes have been considered to be unaffected by
the fragile X mental retardation-1 (FMR-1) gene. This study investigated the
penetrance of the FMR-1 gene in cytogenetically negative but DNA-positive
heterozygotes with a premutation (cytosine guanine guanine [CGG] amplification
in the 50 to 200 repeat range), compared with carriers with a full mutation (>
200 CGG repeats) and control subjects. One hundred thirty-nine women with normal
IQs between the ages of 18 and 45 years were studied. All underwent cytogenetic
and DNA testing to determine their fragile X carrier status. A medical
history-taking and a physical examination, including selected anthropometric
measurements, were performed. Results indicate that the FMR-1 mutation mildly
affects the physical phenotype of individuals even in the premutation state,
although less dramatically than more affected heterozygotes. Carriers with a
premutation differed significantly from control subjects in overall physical
index score and in the anthropometric measure of ear prominence. These results
suggest a phenotypic impact of the FMR-1 mutation even at the 50 to 200 CGG
repeat length.

DOI: 10.1001/archpedi.1993.02160350110017
PMID: 8237919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
