---
reference_id: "PMID:38169386"
title: Expression of NELL2/NICOL-ROS1 lumicrine signaling-related molecules in the human male reproductive tract.
authors:
- Kiyozumi D
journal: Reprod Biol Endocrinol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12958-023-01175-6
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Animals
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- Ligands
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/metabolism
- Semen
- Testis/metabolism
- Epididymis/metabolism
- Spermatozoa/metabolism
- Nerve Tissue Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expression of NELL2/NICOL-ROS1 lumicrine signaling-related molecules in the human male reproductive tract.
**Authors:** Kiyozumi D
**Journal:** Reprod Biol Endocrinol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12958-023-01175-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12958-023-01175-6)

## Content

1. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2024 Jan 2;22(1):3. doi: 10.1186/s12958-023-01175-6.

Expression of NELL2/NICOL-ROS1 lumicrine signaling-related molecules in the
human male reproductive tract.

Kiyozumi D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Japan Science and Technology Agency, 7, Gobancho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo,
102-0076, Japan. kiyozumi.daiji.m6@f.mail.nagoya-u.ac.jp.
(2)Research Institute of Environmental Medicine, Nagoya University, Furo-cho,
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8601, Japan. kiyozumi.daiji.m6@f.mail.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

The maturation of spermatozoa is a regulated process, influenced by genes
expressing essential secreted proteins in the proximal epididymis. Recent
genetic studies in rodents have identified the non-sex steroidal molecular
signals that regulate gene expression in the proximal epididymis. Germ cells in
the testis secrete ligand proteins into the seminiferous tubule lumen The ligand
proteins travel through the male reproductive tract lumen to the epididymis,
where they bind to receptors, triggering the differentiation of the luminal
epithelium for sperm maturation. It is, however, not fully unveiled if such a
testis-epididymis trans-luminal signaling mechanism exists in other species,
especially humans. In the present study, the rodent-type testis-epididymis
trans-luminal signaling in the human male reproductive tract was evaluated in a
step-by-step manner by analyzing testis and epididymis gene expression and
signaling mediator protein function. There was a significant correlation between
the epididymal expressions of mouse genes upregulated by the trans-luminal
signaling and those of their human orthologs, as evaluated by the correlation
coefficient of 0.604. The transcript expression of NELL2 and NICOL encoding
putative ligand proteins was also observed in human testicular cells. In vitro
experiments demonstrated that purified recombinant human NELL2 and NICOL formed
a molecular complex with similar properties to rodent proteins, which was
evaluated by a dissociation equilibrium constant of 110 nM. Recombinant human
NELL2 also specifically bound to its putative receptor human ROS1 in vitro.
Collectively, these findings suggest that the rodent-type testis-epididymis
secreted signaling mechanism is also possible in the human male reproductive
tract.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12958-023-01175-6
PMCID: PMC10759339
PMID: 38169386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
