---
reference_id: "PMID:17354266"
title: Autosomal dominant anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasias at the EDARADD locus.
authors:
- Bal E
- Baala L
- Cluzeau C
- El Kerch F
- Ouldim K
- Hadj-Rabia S
- Bodemer C
- Munnich A
- Courtois G
- Sefiani A
- Smahi A
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20500
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- DNA Primers
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia 1, Anhidrotic/genetics"
- Edar Receptor/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal dominant anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasias at the EDARADD locus.
**Authors:** Bal E, Baala L, Cluzeau C, El Kerch F, Ouldim K, Hadj-Rabia S, Bodemer C, Munnich A, Courtois G, Sefiani A, Smahi A
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20500](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20500)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2007 Jul;28(7):703-9. doi: 10.1002/humu.20500.

Autosomal dominant anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasias at the EDARADD locus.

Bal E(1), Baala L, Cluzeau C, El Kerch F, Ouldim K, Hadj-Rabia S, Bodemer C, 
Munnich A, Courtois G, Sefiani A, Smahi A.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U781 et Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 
Paris, France.

Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (EDA) is a disorder of ectodermal 
differentiation characterized by sparse hair, abnormal or missing teeth, and 
inability to sweat. X-linked EDA is the most common form, caused by mutations in 
the EDA gene, which encodes ectodysplasin, a member of the tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF) family. Autosomal dominant and recessive forms of EDA have been also 
described and are accounted for by two genes. Mutations in EDAR, encoding a TNF 
receptor (EDAR) cause both dominant and recessive forms. In addition, mutations 
in a recently identified gene, EDARADD, encoding EDAR-associated death domain 
(EDARADD) have been shown to cause autosomal recessive EDA. Here, we report a 
large Moroccan family with an autosomal dominant EDA. We mapped the disease gene 
to chromosome 1q42.2-q43, and identified a novel missense mutation in the 
EDARADD gene (c.335T>G, p.Leu112Arg). Thus, the EDARADD gene accounts for both 
recessive and dominant EDA. EDAR is activated by its ligand, ectodysplasin, and 
uses EDARADD to build an intracellular complex and activate nuclear factor kappa 
B (NF-kB). We compared the functional consequences of the dominant (p.Leu112Arg) 
and recessive mutation (p.Glu142Lys), which both occurred in the death domain 
(DD) of EDARADD. We demonstrated that the p.Leu112Arg mutation completely 
abrogated NF-kB activation, whereas the p.Glu142Lys retained the ability to 
significantly activate the NF-kB pathway. The p.Leu112Arg mutation is probably a 
dominant negative form as its cotransfection impaired the wild-type EDARADD's 
ability to activate NF-kB. Our results confirm that NF-kB activation is impaired 
in EDA and support the role of EDARADD DD as a downstream effector of EDAR 
signaling.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20500
PMID: 17354266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]