---
reference_id: "PMID:20407316"
title: "Global status of Haemophilus influenzae type b and pneumococcal conjugate vaccines: evidence, policies, and introductions."
authors:
- Levine OS
- Knoll MD
- Jones A
- Walker DG
- Risko N
- Gilani Z
journal: Curr Opin Infect Dis
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1097/QCO.0b013e328338c135
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global status of Haemophilus influenzae type b and pneumococcal conjugate vaccines: evidence, policies, and introductions.
**Authors:** Levine OS, Knoll MD, Jones A, Walker DG, Risko N, Gilani Z
**Journal:** Curr Opin Infect Dis (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1097/QCO.0b013e328338c135](https://doi.org/10.1097/QCO.0b013e328338c135)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2010 Jun;23(3):236-41. doi:
10.1097/QCO.0b013e328338c135.

Global status of Haemophilus influenzae type b and pneumococcal conjugate 
vaccines: evidence, policies, and introductions.

Levine OS(1), Knoll MD, Jones A, Walker DG, Risko N, Gilani Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, International Vaccine Access Center, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. 
olevine@jhsph.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The leading causes of bacterial meningitis and pneumonia in 
children, Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) and Streptococcus pneumoniae, are 
vaccine preventable. This study reviews the status of vaccine use globally and 
the evidence base that supports policy recommendations for use of these vaccines 
in children.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recently, there have been substantial increases in the uptake 
of Hib and pneumococcal vaccines worldwide. These programs are supported by 
recent policy recommendations by the World Health Organization and an evidence 
base that includes recently published country-specific disease burden estimates, 
meta-analyses of vaccine efficacy, and cost-effectiveness analyses.
SUMMARY: The introduction of Hib and pneumococcal vaccines is progressing 
worldwide and at a rate generally faster than that observed with hepatitis B 
vaccines. Efforts to expand the serotype coverage of pneumococcal vaccines and 
to monitor the impact of Hib and pneumococcal vaccines and to assure financing 
obstacles, especially in lower middle-income countries, are required.

DOI: 10.1097/QCO.0b013e328338c135
PMID: 20407316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]