---
reference_id: "PMID:18698630"
title: The population-based prevalence of achondroplasia and thanatophoric dysplasia in selected regions of the US.
authors:
- Waller DK
- Correa A
- Vo TM
- Wang Y
- Hobbs C
- Langlois PH
- Pearson K
- Romitti PA
- Shaw GM
- Hecht JT
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32485
keywords:
- Achondroplasia/epidemiology
- Adult
- Confidence Intervals
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Odds Ratio
- Paternal Age
- Prevalence
- Sentinel Surveillance
- Texas/epidemiology
- Thanatophoric Dysplasia/epidemiology
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The population-based prevalence of achondroplasia and thanatophoric dysplasia in selected regions of the US.
**Authors:** Waller DK, Correa A, Vo TM, Wang Y, Hobbs C, Langlois PH, Pearson K, Romitti PA, Shaw GM, Hecht JT
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.32485](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.32485)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Sep 15;146A(18):2385-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32485.

The population-based prevalence of achondroplasia and thanatophoric dysplasia in 
selected regions of the US.

Waller DK(1), Correa A, Vo TM, Wang Y, Hobbs C, Langlois PH, Pearson K, Romitti 
PA, Shaw GM, Hecht JT.

Author information:
(1)Houston Health Science Center, The University of Texas, Houston, Texas 77030, 
USA. kim.waller@uth.tmc.edu

There have been no large population-based studies of the prevalence of 
achondroplasia and thanatophroic dysplasia in the United States. This study 
compared data from seven population-based birth defects monitoring programs in 
the United States. We also present data on the association between older 
paternal age and these birth defects, which has been described in earlier 
studies. The prevalence of achondroplasia ranged from 0.36 to 0.60 per 10,000 
livebirths (1/27,780-1/16,670 livebirths). The prevalence of thanatophoric 
dysplasia ranged from 0.21 to 0.30 per 10,000 livebirths (1/33,330-1/47,620 
livebirths). In Texas, fathers that were 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, and > or =40 years 
of age had significantly increased rates of de novo achondroplasia among their 
offspring compared with younger fathers. The adjusted prevalence odds ratios 
were 2.8 (95% CI; 1.2, 6.7), 2.8 (95% CI; 1.0, 7.6), 4.9 (95% CI; 1.7, 14.3), 
and 5.0 (95% CI; 1.5, 16.1), respectively. Using the same age categories, the 
crude prevalence odds ratios for de novo cases of thanatophoric dysplasia in 
Texas were 5.8 (95% CI; 1.7, 9.8), 3.9 (95% CI; 1.1, 6.7), 6.1 (95% CI; 1.6, 
10.6), and 10.2 (95% CI; 2.6, 17.8), respectively. These data suggest that 
thanatophoric dysplasia is one-third to one-half as frequent as achondroplasia. 
The differences in the prevalence of these conditions across monitoring programs 
were consistent with random fluctuation. Birth defects monitoring programs may 
be a good source of ascertainment for population-based studies of achondroplasia 
and thanatophoric dysplasia, provided that diagnoses are confirmed by review of 
medical records.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32485
PMCID: PMC6034636
PMID: 18698630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]