---
reference_id: "PMID:24200689"
title: Antibodies against low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 4 induce myasthenia gravis.
authors:
- Shen C
- Lu Y
- Zhang B
- Figueiredo D
- Bean J
- Jung J
- Wu H
- Barik A
- Yin DM
- Xiong WC
- Mei L
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1172/JCI66039
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antibodies against low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 4 induce myasthenia gravis.
**Authors:** Shen C, Lu Y, Zhang B, Figueiredo D, Bean J, Jung J, Wu H, Barik A, Yin DM, Xiong WC, Mei L
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI66039](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI66039)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2013 Dec;123(12):5190-202. doi: 10.1172/JCI66039. Epub 2013 Nov
 8.

Antibodies against low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 4 induce 
myasthenia gravis.

Shen C, Lu Y, Zhang B, Figueiredo D, Bean J, Jung J, Wu H, Barik A, Yin DM, 
Xiong WC, Mei L.

Myasthenia gravis (MG) is the most common disorder affecting the neuromuscular 
junction (NMJ). MG is frequently caused by autoantibodies against acetylcholine 
receptor (AChR) and a kinase critical for NMJ formation, MuSK; however, a 
proportion of MG patients are double-negative for anti-AChR and anti-MuSK 
antibodies. Recent studies in these subjects have identified autoantibodies 
against low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 4 (LRP4), an agrin 
receptor also critical for NMJ formation. LRP4 autoantibodies have not 
previously been implicated in MG pathogenesis. Here we demonstrate that mice 
immunized with the extracellular domain of LRP4 generated anti-LRP4 antibodies 
and exhibited MG-associated symptoms, including muscle weakness, reduced 
compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs), and compromised neuromuscular 
transmission. Additionally, fragmented and distorted NMJs were evident at both 
the light microscopic and electron microscopic levels. We found that anti-LRP4 
sera decreased cell surface LRP4 levels, inhibited agrin-induced MuSK activation 
and AChR clustering, and activated complements, revealing potential 
pathophysiological mechanisms. To further confirm the pathogenicity of LRP4 
antibodies, we transferred IgGs purified from LRP4-immunized rabbits into naive 
mice and found that they exhibited MG-like symptoms, including reduced CMAP and 
impaired neuromuscular transmission. Together, these data demonstrate that LRP4 
autoantibodies induce MG and that LRP4 contributes to NMJ maintenance in 
adulthood.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI66039
PMCID: PMC3859418
PMID: 24200689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]