---
reference_id: "PMID:26372225"
title: XBP1-Independent UPR Pathways Suppress C/EBP-β Mediated Chondrocyte Differentiation in ER-Stress Related Skeletal Disease.
authors:
- Cameron TL
- Bell KM
- Gresshoff IL
- Sampurno L
- Mullan L
- Ermann J
- Glimcher LH
- Boot-Handford RP
- Bateman JF
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005505
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone Diseases/pathology
- "CCAAT-Enhancer-Binding Protein-beta/antagonists & inhibitors, physiology"
- Cell Differentiation/physiology
- Chondrocytes/pathology
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress/physiology
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Regulatory Factor X Transcription Factors
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, physiology"
- Unfolded Protein Response/physiology
- X-Box Binding Protein 1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# XBP1-Independent UPR Pathways Suppress C/EBP-β Mediated Chondrocyte Differentiation in ER-Stress Related Skeletal Disease.
**Authors:** Cameron TL, Bell KM, Gresshoff IL, Sampurno L, Mullan L, Ermann J, Glimcher LH, Boot-Handford RP, Bateman JF
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1005505](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1005505)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2015 Sep 15;11(9):e1005505. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005505. 
eCollection 2015 Sep.

XBP1-Independent UPR Pathways Suppress C/EBP-β Mediated Chondrocyte 
Differentiation in ER-Stress Related Skeletal Disease.

Cameron TL(1), Bell KM(1), Gresshoff IL(1), Sampurno L(1), Mullan L(2), Ermann 
J(3), Glimcher LH(4), Boot-Handford RP(2), Bateman JF(5).

Author information:
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Faculty of Life Sciences, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public 
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(4)Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, New York, New York, United 
States of America.
(5)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia (MCDS) involves dwarfism and growth plate 
cartilage hypertrophic zone expansion resulting from dominant mutations in the 
hypertrophic zone collagen, Col10a1. Mouse models phenocopying MCDS through the 
expression of an exogenous misfolding protein in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
in hypertrophic chondrocytes have demonstrated the central importance of ER 
stress in the pathology of MCDS. The resultant unfolded protein response (UPR) 
in affected chondrocytes involved activation of canonical ER stress sensors, 
IRE1, ATF6, and PERK with the downstream effect of disrupted chondrocyte 
differentiation. Here, we investigated the role of the highly conserved 
IRE1/XBP1 pathway in the pathology of MCDS. Mice with a MCDS collagen X p.N617K 
knock-in mutation (ColXN617K) were crossed with mice in which Xbp1 was 
inactivated specifically in cartilage (Xbp1CartΔEx2), generating the compound 
mutant, C/X. The severity of dwarfism and hypertrophic zone expansion in C/X did 
not differ significantly from ColXN617K, revealing surprising redundancy for the 
IRE1/XBP1 UPR pathway in the pathology of MCDS. Transcriptomic analyses of 
hypertrophic zone cartilage identified differentially expressed gene cohorts in 
MCDS that are pathologically relevant (XBP1-independent) or pathologically 
redundant (XBP1-dependent). XBP1-independent gene expression changes included 
large-scale transcriptional attenuation of genes encoding secreted proteins and 
disrupted differentiation from proliferative to hypertrophic chondrocytes. 
Moreover, these changes were consistent with disruption of C/EBP-β, a master 
regulator of chondrocyte differentiation, by CHOP, a transcription factor 
downstream of PERK that inhibits C/EBP proteins, and down-regulation of C/EBP-β 
transcriptional co-factors, GADD45-β and RUNX2. Thus we propose that the 
pathology of MCDS is underpinned by XBP1 independent UPR-induced dysregulation 
of C/EBP-β-mediated chondrocyte differentiation. Our data suggest that 
modulation of C/EBP-β activity in MCDS chondrocytes may offer therapeutic 
opportunities.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005505
PMCID: PMC4651170
PMID: 26372225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.