---
reference_id: "PMID:9463328"
title: Van Buchem disease (hyperostosis corticalis generalisata) maps to chromosome 17q12-q21.
authors:
- Van Hul W
- Balemans W
- Van Hul E
- Dikkers FG
- Obee H
- Stokroos RJ
- Hildering P
- Vanhoenacker F
- Van Camp G
- Willems PJ
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1086/301721
keywords:
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17"
- Consanguinity
- Family
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Markers
- Genotype
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- "Hyperostosis, Cortical, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- Lod Score
- Male
- Microsatellite Repeats
- Netherlands
- Nuclear Family
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- "Sclerosis/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Van Buchem disease (hyperostosis corticalis generalisata) maps to chromosome 17q12-q21.
**Authors:** Van Hul W, Balemans W, Van Hul E, Dikkers FG, Obee H, Stokroos RJ, Hildering P, Vanhoenacker F, Van Camp G, Willems PJ
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1086/301721](https://doi.org/10.1086/301721)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Feb;62(2):391-9. doi: 10.1086/301721.

Van Buchem disease (hyperostosis corticalis generalisata) maps to chromosome 
17q12-q21.

Van Hul W(1), Balemans W, Van Hul E, Dikkers FG, Obee H, Stokroos RJ, Hildering 
P, Vanhoenacker F, Van Camp G, Willems PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. 
vhul@uia.ua.ac.be

Van Buchem disease (hyperostosis corticalis generalisata; OMIM 239100 
[http://www3.ncbi.nlm.nih. gov:80/htbin-post/Omim/dispmim?239100]) is an 
autosomal recessive disorder characterized by hyperostosis of the skull, 
mandible, clavicles, ribs, and diaphyseal cortices of the long bones. The most 
striking clinical features are the enlargement of the jaw and the thickness of 
the skull, which may lead to facial nerve palsy, hearing loss, and optic 
atrophy. Increased formation, by osteoblasts, of qualitatively normal bone has 
been proposed as the underlying pathological mechanism, but the molecular defect 
is unknown. We studied 11 van Buchem patients and their highly inbred family, 
who live in The Netherlands in a small ethnic isolate, that had a common 
ancestor approximately 9 generations ago. A genomewide search with highly 
polymorphic microsatellite markers showed linkage to marker D17S1299 on 
chromosome 17q12-21 (maximum LOD score of 8.82 at a recombination fraction 
[straight theta] of .01). Analysis of additional markers from that region 
delineated a candidate region of <1 cM, between markers D17S1787 and D17S934. 
Interestingly, the only marker not showing recombination with the disease locus 
was an intragenic marker of the thyroid-hormone receptor alpha1 (THRA1) gene, 
which generated a LOD score of 12.84 at straight theta=.00. Since thyroid 
hormones are known to stimulate bone resorption, the THRA1 gene might be 
involved in the etiology and pathogenesis of van Buchem disease. Unraveling the 
underlying mechanism for this disorder could contribute to the understanding of 
the regulatory processes conditioning bone density and the underlying 
pathological processes.

DOI: 10.1086/301721
PMCID: PMC1376897
PMID: 9463328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]