---
reference_id: "PMID:23432645"
title: "Rhabdoid tumors: an initial clue to the role of chromatin remodeling in cancer."
authors:
- Lee RS
- Roberts CW
journal: Brain Pathol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/bpa.12021
keywords:
- "Brain Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics, pathology"
- Chromatin Assembly and Disassembly
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/genetics"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Rhabdoid Tumor/genetics, pathology"
- SMARCB1 Protein
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rhabdoid tumors: an initial clue to the role of chromatin remodeling in cancer.
**Authors:** Lee RS, Roberts CW
**Journal:** Brain Pathol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bpa.12021](https://doi.org/10.1111/bpa.12021)

## Content

1. Brain Pathol. 2013 Mar;23(2):200-5. doi: 10.1111/bpa.12021.

Rhabdoid tumors: an initial clue to the role of chromatin remodeling in cancer.

Lee RS(1), Roberts CW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02215, USA.

The discovery of biallelic, inactivating SMARCB1 mutations in rhabdoid tumors
(RTs) over a decade ago represented the first recognized link between chromatin
remodeling and tumor suppression. SMARCB1 is a core subunit of the SWI/SNF
chromatin remodeling complex, and the recent emergence of frequent mutations in
genes that encode subunits of this complex across a wide variety of cancers
suggests that perturbation of this chromatin remodeling complex constitutes a
key driver of cancer formation. Despite the highly aggressive nature of RTs,
they are genetically simple cancers that appear to lack chromosomal instability
and contain very few mutations. Indeed, the mutation rate in RTs is among the
lowest of all cancers sequenced, with loss of SMARCB1 as essentially the sole
recurrent event. Given the genetic simplicity of this disease, understanding the
chromatin dysregulation caused by SMARCB1 loss may provide more general insight
into how epigenetic alterations can contribute to oncogenic transformation and
may reveal opportunities for targeted therapy not only of RT but also the
variety of other SWI/SNF mutant cancers.

© 2013 The Authors; Brain Pathology © 2013 International Society of
Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/bpa.12021
PMCID: PMC8029057
PMID: 23432645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
