---
reference_id: "PMID:33306411"
title: Economic analyses of immune-checkpoint inhibitors to treat lung cancer.
authors:
- Vergnenegre A
- Chouaid C
journal: Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/14737167.2021.1863790
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Economic analyses of immune-checkpoint inhibitors to treat lung cancer.
**Authors:** Vergnenegre A, Chouaid C
**Journal:** Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14737167.2021.1863790](https://doi.org/10.1080/14737167.2021.1863790)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2021 Jun;21(3):365-371. doi: 
10.1080/14737167.2021.1863790. Epub 2020 Dec 24.

Economic analyses of immune-checkpoint inhibitors to treat lung cancer.

Vergnenegre A(1), Chouaid C(2).

Author information:
(1)Unité d'Oncologie Thoracique Et Cutanée, Hôpital Universitaire, Limoges 
Cedex, France.
(2)Service De Pathologie Respiratoire, Centre Hospitalier Intercommunal De 
Créteil, Créteil Cedex, France.

Introduction: Total lung-cancer-management costs are increasing dramatically. 
The widespread use of immune-checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) explains this rise in 
large part and financially impacts healthcare systems. Economic assessment has 
been adapted to this new challenge.Areas covered: This review provides an 
overview of the economic literature on the use of ICIs to treat lung cancer. 
Numerous papers have been published over the last few years. Cancers analyzed 
were non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), squamous NSCLC, locally 
advanced NSCLC, or small-cell lung cancer.Expert commentary: For the majority of 
patients, ICIs are cost-effective for lung cancer management. However, these 
results are influenced by the threshold chosen by each of the different 
countries. Patient selection, treatment duration, and factors predictive of 
efficacy are mandatory to decrease costs.

DOI: 10.1080/14737167.2021.1863790
PMID: 33306411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]