---
reference_id: "PMID:40489011"
title: "High Density Lipoprotein Particle Composition, Functionality, Deficiency, and Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease Risk: A Review."
authors:
- Schaefer EJ
- Asztalos BF
- Vaisar T
- Diffenderfer MR
- Brewer HB Jr
- Stock EO
- Kane JP
journal: Curr Atheroscler Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s11883-025-01308-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High Density Lipoprotein Particle Composition, Functionality, Deficiency, and Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease Risk: A Review.
**Authors:** Schaefer EJ, Asztalos BF, Vaisar T, Diffenderfer MR, Brewer HB Jr, Stock EO, Kane JP
**Journal:** Curr Atheroscler Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11883-025-01308-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11883-025-01308-9)

## Content

1. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2025 Jun 9;27(1):62. doi: 10.1007/s11883-025-01308-9.

High Density Lipoprotein Particle Composition, Functionality, Deficiency, and 
Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease Risk: A Review.

Schaefer EJ(1)(2), Asztalos BF(3), Vaisar T(4), Diffenderfer MR(5)(3), Brewer HB 
Jr(6), Stock EO(7), Kane JP(7).

Author information:
(1)Boston Heart Diagnostics, Framingham, MA, 01702, USA. 
ernst.schaefer@bostonheart.eurofinsus.com.
(2)The Dyslipidemia Foundation, Natick, MA, USA. 
ernst.schaefer@bostonheart.eurofinsus.com.
(3)Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging, 
Tufts University, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)UW Medicine Diabetes Institute, Department of Medicine, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(5)Boston Heart Diagnostics, Framingham, MA, 01702, USA.
(6)HDL Therapeutics, Vero Beach, FL, USA.
(7)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Medicine, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Decreased serum high-density-lipoprotein-cholesterol (HDL-C), 
HDL particles, and cell-cholesterol-efflux-capacity have all been associated 
with increased atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) risk. Our goals 
are to summarize recent findings with regard to these topics.
RECENT FINDINGS: Apolipoprotein (apo) A1 containing HDL particles have been 
characterized by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and apoA1 immunoblotting 
and range from very small preβ-1 HDL, small α-4 HDL, medium α-3 HDL to large and 
very large α-2 and α-1 HDL. Preβ-1 HDL are most efficient in serving as 
acceptors of free cholesterol and phospholipid from cells via ATP binding 
cassette transporter A1, while α-2 and α-1 HDL are most efficient in delivering 
cholesteryl-ester to the liver via scavenger receptor-B1 or to triglyceride-rich 
lipoproteins (TRL) in exchange for triglycerides via cholesteryl ester transfer 
protein (CETP). Recent research on the relationships of the lipid and protein 
composition, function, metabolism and levels of HDL particles to ASCVD risk will 
be reviewed, as will advances in potential therapeutic options. HDL particles 
are by far the most abundant lipoproteins in plasma and contain 110 proteins 
involved in lipid metabolism and immune function. ApoA1, apoA2, and all lipid 
classes are found in all HDL particles. Low levels of large and very large α-HDL 
and increased levels of very small preβ-1 HDL have been associated with 
increased ASCVD risk. The best therapeutic options for ASCVD risk reduction in 
patients with low HDL-C is optimizing other risk factors including 
low-density-lipoprotein (LDL)-C, small-dense LDL-C, plasma-glucose, 
body-mass-index, blood pressure, and the promotion of smoking cessation.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11883-025-01308-9
PMID: 40489011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Human Subjects, Animal Studies, 
and Informed Consent: This manuscript is a review article so there are no 
concerns with regard to these issues. Competing Interests: E.J.S. and M.R.D. are 
employees of Boston Heart Diagnostics, Framingham, MA, USA.None of the other 
authors has any competing financial and/or non-financial interests to declare.