---
reference_id: "PMID:39069333"
title: Respiratory Aspects of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.
authors:
- De Jesús-Rojas W
- Shapiro AJ
- Shoemark A
journal: Clin Chest Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2024.02.020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Respiratory Aspects of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.
**Authors:** De Jesús-Rojas W, Shapiro AJ, Shoemark A
**Journal:** Clin Chest Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccm.2024.02.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccm.2024.02.020)

## Content

1. Clin Chest Med. 2024 Sep;45(3):717-728. doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2024.02.020. Epub 
2024 Mar 28.

Respiratory Aspects of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.

De Jesús-Rojas W(1), Shapiro AJ(2), Shoemark A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics & Basic Science, Ponce Health Sciences University, 
Ponce, Puerto Rico, PR 00716, USA.
(2)The Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, 2155, rue Guy, 
5e étage, Montreal, QC, Canada H3H 2R9.
(3)Division of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, University of Dundee, Ninewells 
Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, UK; PCD Service, Royal Brompton Hospital, 
London, UK. Electronic address: a.shoemark@dundee.ac.uk.

This review article explores the respiratory aspects of primary ciliary 
dyskinesia (PCD), a rare, heterogenous, genetic disorder characterized by 
impaired motile ciliary function. It discusses the clinical diagnosis and 
management strategies for PCD-related respiratory disease, including chronic 
sinusitis, otitis media with effusion, recurrent pneumonia, and bronchiectasis. 
The review emphasizes the need for a multidisciplinary approach to optimize care 
and clinical trials to improve outcomes in individuals with PCD, highlighting 
the importance of accurate diagnosis.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccm.2024.02.020
PMID: 39069333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors declare no conflicts of 
interest related to this article.