---
reference_id: "PMID:37602640"
title: "A Case Series of Cat-Scratch Disease with Ocular Manifestations: Clinical Findings and Treatment Approach."
authors:
- Acar A
- Çakar Özdal P
- Başarır B
- Özdemir Yalçınsoy K
- Altan Ç
- Budakoğlu Ö
journal: Turk J Ophthalmol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4274/tjo.galenos.2022.44692
keywords:
- Female
- Male
- Humans
- "Cat-Scratch Disease/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Retrospective Studies
- Retina
- "Retinitis/diagnosis, etiology"
- Chorioretinitis
- Retinal Artery Occlusion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Case Series of Cat-Scratch Disease with Ocular Manifestations: Clinical Findings and Treatment Approach.
**Authors:** Acar A, Çakar Özdal P, Başarır B, Özdemir Yalçınsoy K, Altan Ç, Budakoğlu Ö
**Journal:** Turk J Ophthalmol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4274/tjo.galenos.2022.44692](https://doi.org/10.4274/tjo.galenos.2022.44692)

## Content

1. Turk J Ophthalmol. 2023 Aug 19;53(4):226-233. doi: 
10.4274/tjo.galenos.2022.44692.

A Case Series of Cat-Scratch Disease with Ocular Manifestations: Clinical 
Findings and Treatment Approach.

Acar A(1), Çakar Özdal P(1), Başarır B(2), Özdemir Yalçınsoy K(1), Altan Ç(2), 
Budakoğlu Ö(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Health Sciences Türkiye Ulucanlar Eye Training and Research 
Hospital, Ankara, Türkiye.
(2)University of Health Sciences Türkiye Beyoğlu Eye Training and Research 
Hospital, İstanbul, Türkiye.
(3)Erzincan Dr. Binali Yıldırım University Faculty of Medicine, Department of 
Ophthalmology, Erzincan, Türkiye.

OBJECTIVES: To present the clinical and demographic characteristics, imaging 
findings, diagnosis and treatment approach in cases of cat scratch disease (CSD) 
with ocular involvement.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The records of 19 patients followed-up and treated 
between 2010 and 2020, including detailed ophthalmological examinations, imaging 
findings, and treatment approach, were evaluated retrospectively.
RESULTS: Twenty-three eyes of 19 patients, 7 female (37%) and 12 male (63%), 
were included in the study. The mean age was 34.1±13.3 (range: 11-56) years, and 
the mean follow-up duration was 12.6±18.0 (range: 1-81) months. Unilateral 
involvement was observed in 15 cases (79%). Cat contact was reported in 14 cases 
(74%). In 6 cases (32%), flu-like symptoms were present before the ocular 
complaints. The mean visual acuity (VA) at presentation was 0.42±0.36 (range: 
0.001-1.0). Anterior uveitis was observed in 3 eyes (13%). Posterior segment 
findings included neuroretinitis in 14 (61%), superficial retinal infiltrate(s) 
in 8 (35%), papillitis in 3 (13%), branch retinal artery occlusion in 2 (8%), 
and cilioretinal artery occlusion in 1 (4%) of the eyes. All cases were positive 
for Bartonella henselae immunglobulin (Ig)M and/or IgG. Systemic antibiotic 
therapy was administered to all patients. Intravenous pulse or oral 
corticosteroids were given, especially in cases with optic disc involvement. The 
mean final VA was 0.80±0.25 (range: 0.01-1.0).
CONCLUSION: CSD may present with different ocular involvement patterns. Apart 
from the classical neuroretinitis and macular star appearance, patients may 
present with isolated optic disc edema, branch retinal artery occlusion, and 
retinal infiltrations. In such patients, cat contact history and Bartonella 
serology should be evaluated to differentiate CSD.

©Copyright 2023 by the Turkish Ophthalmological Association / Turkish Journal of 
Ophthalmology published by Galenos Publishing House.

DOI: 10.4274/tjo.galenos.2022.44692
PMCID: PMC10442748
PMID: 37602640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: No conflict of interest 
was declared by the authors.