---
reference_id: "PMID:11809165"
title: "Preservation of nigral neurons in Pick's disease with Pick bodies: a clinicopathological and morphometric study of five autopsy cases."
authors:
- Yokota O
- Ishizu H
- Terada S
- Tsuchiya K
- Haraguchi T
- Nose S
- Kawai K
- Ikeda K
- Kuroda S
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s0022-510x(01)00671-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preservation of nigral neurons in Pick's disease with Pick bodies: a clinicopathological and morphometric study of five autopsy cases.
**Authors:** Yokota O, Ishizu H, Terada S, Tsuchiya K, Haraguchi T, Nose S, Kawai K, Ikeda K, Kuroda S
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0022-510x(01)00671-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-510x(01)00671-2)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 2002 Feb 15;194(1):41-8. doi: 10.1016/s0022-510x(01)00671-2.

Preservation of nigral neurons in Pick's disease with Pick bodies: a 
clinicopathological and morphometric study of five autopsy cases.

Yokota O(1), Ishizu H, Terada S, Tsuchiya K, Haraguchi T, Nose S, Kawai K, Ikeda 
K, Kuroda S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
Okayama University, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, 700-8558, Okayama, Japan. 
terada_1@cc.okayama-u.ac.jp

Many reports have described loss of neurons in the substantia nigra in Pick's 
disease (PiD). In those reports, however, "Pick's disease" includes PiD without 
Pick bodies (PB), and there is only limited data available on regional nigral 
pathology in PiD with PB. To elucidate the pathological changes of the 
substantia nigra in PiD with PB, we examined five cases and 12 age-matched 
controls by morphometry. The number and size of pigmented and nonpigmented 
neurons, as well as the area of the substantia nigra were examined. The area of 
the substantia nigra was significantly reduced in PiD with PB. The pigmented and 
nonpigmented neuron counts in PiD with PB were not statistically different from 
those in controls. There was a significant reduction in the size of pigmented 
neurons in PiD with PB to 82% with that in the controls. In addition, after 
reviewing 48 cases of PiD with PB reported in the literature, we found that none 
of the cases with typical frontotemporal lobe symptoms exhibited parkinsonism 
until the terminal stage. These data are useful for discriminating PiD with PB 
from other diseases showing frontotemporal characteristics, including the 
frontal lobe degeneration type and the motor neuron disease type of 
frontotemporal dementia.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-510x(01)00671-2
PMID: 11809165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]