---
reference_id: "PMID:28142064"
title: Cannabis use, COMT, BDNF and age at first-episode psychosis.
authors:
- Mané A
- Bergé D
- Penzol MJ
- Parellada M
- Bioque M
- Lobo A
- González-Pinto A
- Corripio I
- Cabrera B
- Sánchez-Torres AM
- Saiz-Ruiz J
- Bernardo M
- PEPs Group
journal: Psychiatry Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2017.01.045
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cannabis use, COMT, BDNF and age at first-episode psychosis.
**Authors:** Mané A, Bergé D, Penzol MJ, Parellada M, Bioque M, Lobo A, González-Pinto A, Corripio I, Cabrera B, Sánchez-Torres AM, Saiz-Ruiz J, Bernardo M, PEPs Group
**Journal:** Psychiatry Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.psychres.2017.01.045](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2017.01.045)

## Content

1. Psychiatry Res. 2017 Apr;250:38-43. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2017.01.045. Epub 
2017 Jan 19.

Cannabis use, COMT, BDNF and age at first-episode psychosis.

Mané A(1), Bergé D(2), Penzol MJ(3), Parellada M(4), Bioque M(5), Lobo A(6), 
González-Pinto A(7), Corripio I(8), Cabrera B(5), Sánchez-Torres AM(9), 
Saiz-Ruiz J(10), Bernardo M(5); PEPs Group(11).

Author information:
(1)Hospital del Mar, Medical Research Institute (IMIM), Department of 
Neurosciences and Psychiatry, Barcelona, Spain; Centro de Investigación en Red 
de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Spain. Electronic address: manesantacana@yahoo.es.
(2)Hospital del Mar, Medical Research Institute (IMIM), Department of 
Neurosciences and Psychiatry, Barcelona, Spain; Centro de Investigación en Red 
de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigación en Red de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Spain; Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry Department, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio 
Marañón, IiSGM, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Centro de Investigación en Red de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Spain; Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry Department, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio 
Marañón, IiSGM, Madrid, Spain; School of Medicine, Universidad Complutense, 
Madrid, Spain.
(5)Centro de Investigación en Red de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Spain; Barcelona 
Clinic Schizophrenia Unit, Hospital Clinic Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Centro de Investigación en Red de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Spain; Department 
of Psychiatry, Zaragoza University: IIS Aragón, Zaragoza, Spain.
(7)Centro de Investigación en Red de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Spain; Department 
of Psychiatry, University Hospital of Alava-Santiago, University of the Basque 
Country, Vitoria, Spain.
(8)Centro de Investigación en Red de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Spain; Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, Spain; Department of Psychiatry, 
Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica-Sant Pau (IIB-SANT PAU), Hospital de la Santa 
Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Department of Psychiatry, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; 
IdiSNA, Navarra Institute for Health Research, Pamplona, Spain.
(10)Centro de Investigación en Red de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Spain; IRYCIS, 
Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Ramon y Cajal, Universidad de Alcala, Madrid, 
Spain.
(11)Centro de Investigación en Red de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Spain.

Although an interaction between COMT Val158Met and BDNF Val66Met polymorphisms 
with cannabis use has been proposed with respect to the risk of psychosis 
emergence, findings remain inconclusive. The aim of the present study was to 
evaluate the different possible associations between these polymorphisms and 
early cannabis use and the age at the first episode of psychosis. The 
relationship between age at psychosis onset and COMT Val158Met and BDNF Val66Met 
polymorphisms with early cannabis use as well as those factors associated with 
early cannabis use were investigated. Among 260 Caucasian first-episode 
psychosis patients, early cannabis use and the presence of the met-allele from 
the BDNF Val66Met polymorphism were significantly associated with age at 
psychosis onset. Furthermore, early cannabis use was significantly associated 
with male gender in the logistic regression analysis. These findings provide 
evidence of the important role of early cannabis use and the Val66Met BDNF 
polymorphism on age at psychosis onset and they point out to sex-specific 
differences in cannabis use patterns.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2017.01.045
PMID: 28142064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]