---
reference_id: "PMID:23574375"
title: "Regional differences in the frequency of the c.985A>G ACADM mutation: findings from a meta-regression of genotyping and screening studies."
authors:
- Leal J
- Ades AE
- Wordsworth S
- Dezateux C
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1111/cge.12157
keywords:
- "Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase/deficiency, genetics"
- Alleles
- Europe
- Gene Frequency
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Genetic Testing
- Genotype
- Genotyping Techniques
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation
- Neonatal Screening
- Odds Ratio
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Regional differences in the frequency of the c.985A>G ACADM mutation: findings from a meta-regression of genotyping and screening studies.
**Authors:** Leal J, Ades AE, Wordsworth S, Dezateux C
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.12157](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.12157)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2014 Mar;85(3):253-9. doi: 10.1111/cge.12157. Epub 2013 May 3.

Regional differences in the frequency of the c.985A>G ACADM mutation: findings
from a meta-regression of genotyping and screening studies.

Leal J(1), Ades AE, Wordsworth S, Dezateux C.

Author information:
(1)Health Economics Research Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Several countries include medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency,
a rare autosomal recessive disease, in their newborn screening programmes
despite prevalence uncertainty. We estimated the frequency of its most common
mutation, c.985A>G, tested for regional differences and compared screening and
genotype frequencies. We identified 43 studies reporting the frequency of
c.985A>G over 10 million individuals, and pooled frequency data using a novel
Bayesian approach. We found significant variation in the frequency of the
mutation across regions supporting a reported founder effect. The proportion of
c.985A>G homozygotes was highest in Western Europe with 4.1 (95%CI: 2.8-5.6) per
100,000 individuals, then the New World (3.2, 95%CI: 2.0-4.7), Southern (1.2,
95%CI: 0.6-2.0) and Eastern European regions (0.9, 95%CI: 0.5-1.7). No cases
with the mutation were identified in Asian and Middle Eastern regions.
Significant differences were found in some countries between the genotype and
screening allele frequency of c.985A>G. Our predictions could inform the
frequency of the mutation by region and our approach could apply to other
genetic conditions.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.12157
PMID: 23574375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
