---
reference_id: "PMID:32064578"
title: "European Society for Immunodeficiencies (ESID) and European Reference Network on Rare Primary Immunodeficiency, Autoinflammatory and Autoimmune Diseases (ERN RITA) Complement Guideline: Deficiencies, Diagnosis, and Management."
authors:
- Brodszki N
- Frazer-Abel A
- Grumach AS
- Kirschfink M
- Litzman J
- Perez E
- Seppänen MRJ
- Sullivan KE
- Jolles S
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-020-00754-1
keywords:
- "Autoimmune Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Complement System Proteins/genetics
- Disease Susceptibility
- Europe
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Infections
- "Inflammation/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Mutation/genetics
- Patient Education as Topic
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- "Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Societies, Medical"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# European Society for Immunodeficiencies (ESID) and European Reference Network on Rare Primary Immunodeficiency, Autoinflammatory and Autoimmune Diseases (ERN RITA) Complement Guideline: Deficiencies, Diagnosis, and Management.
**Authors:** Brodszki N, Frazer-Abel A, Grumach AS, Kirschfink M, Litzman J, Perez E, Seppänen MRJ, Sullivan KE, Jolles S
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-020-00754-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-020-00754-1)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2020 May;40(4):576-591. doi: 10.1007/s10875-020-00754-1. Epub 
2020 Feb 17.

European Society for Immunodeficiencies (ESID) and European Reference Network on 
Rare Primary Immunodeficiency, Autoinflammatory and Autoimmune Diseases (ERN 
RITA) Complement Guideline: Deficiencies, Diagnosis, and Management.

Brodszki N(1), Frazer-Abel A(2), Grumach AS(3), Kirschfink M(4), Litzman J(5), 
Perez E(6), Seppänen MRJ(7), Sullivan KE(8), Jolles S(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital, Skåne University Hospital, 
Lund, Sweden.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado 
School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)Clinical Immunology, Reference Center on Rare Diseases, University Center 
Health ABC, Santo Andre, SP, Brazil.
(4)Institute of Immunology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Department of Clinical Immunology and Allergology, St Anne's University 
Hospital, and Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
(6)Allergy Associates of the Palm Beaches, North Palm Beach, FL, USA.
(7)Rare Disease Center, Children's Hospital, and Adult Primary Immunodeficiency 
Outpatient Clinic, Inflammation Center, University of Helsinki and Helsinki 
University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(8)Division of Allergy and Immunology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(9)Immunodeficiency Centre for Wales, Cardiff University & University Hospital 
of Wales, Cardiff, UK. jollessr@cardiff.ac.uk.

This guideline aims to describe the complement system and the functions of the 
constituent pathways, with particular focus on primary immunodeficiencies (PIDs) 
and their diagnosis and management. The complement system is a crucial part of 
the innate immune system, with multiple membrane-bound and soluble components. 
There are three distinct enzymatic cascade pathways within the complement 
system, the classical, alternative and lectin pathways, which converge with the 
cleavage of central C3. Complement deficiencies account for ~5% of PIDs. The 
clinical consequences of inherited defects in the complement system are protean 
and include increased susceptibility to infection, autoimmune diseases (e.g., 
systemic lupus erythematosus), age-related macular degeneration, renal disorders 
(e.g., atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome) and angioedema. Modern complement 
analysis allows an in-depth insight into the functional and molecular basis of 
nearly all complement deficiencies. However, therapeutic options remain 
relatively limited for the majority of complement deficiencies with the 
exception of hereditary angioedema and inhibition of an overactivated complement 
system in regulation defects. Current management strategies for complement 
disorders associated with infection include education, family testing, 
vaccinations, antibiotics and emergency planning.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-020-00754-1
PMCID: PMC7253377
PMID: 32064578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. N. Brodszki has acted on advisory boards and 
as a speaker or participated in projects with CSL Behring, Baxter/Baxalta, 
Shire, Octapharma and Meda. Dr. A.S. Grumach has taken part in educative 
programs and consulting for Shire/Takeda and CSL Behring. Dr. A.S. Grumach has 
received a grant of researcher initiative from Shire/Takeda (IST-BRA-000778). 
Dr. E. Perez has acted as a consultant and speaker for Shire/Takeda, CSL Behring 
and Genentech. Recently, Dr. E. Perez has acted as a principal 
investigator/co-principal investigator for Green Cross, Therapure, Aimmune, 
Kedrion, CSL Behring and Prometic. Dr. K. Sullivan receives funds from the 
Immune Deficiency Foundation as a consultant, UpToDate as an editor and Elsevier 
as royalties. Prof S. Jolles has received support from CSL Behring, Takeda, 
Shire, Octapharma, Pharming, Biotest, SOBI, LFB, Grifols, BPL, Sanofi, GSK, UCB 
Pharma, The Binding Site, Weatherden and Zarodex for projects, meetings, 
advisory boards and clinical trials. Prof. M. Kirschfink has acted as consultant 
and speaker for Alexion, Novartis, Roche, Biotest, Ionis and Eurodiagnostica. 
Dr. A. Frazer-Abel, Dr. J. Litzman and Dr. M.R.J. Seppänen report no conflicts 
of interest. Administrative support for the writing group from Meridian 
HealthComms Ltd. with an unrestricted educational grant from ESID.