---
reference_id: "PMID:34842303"
title: An MDS Evidence-Based Review on Treatments for Huntington's Disease.
authors:
- Ferreira JJ
- Rodrigues FB
- Duarte GS
- Mestre TA
- Bachoud-Levi AC
- Bentivoglio AR
- Burgunder JM
- Cardoso F
- Claassen DO
- Landwehrmeyer GB
- Kulisevsky J
- Nirenberg MJ
- Rosser A
- Roth J
- Seppi K
- Slawek J
- Furr-Stimming E
- Tabrizi SJ
- Walker FO
- Vandenberghe W
- Costa J
- Sampaio C
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/mds.28855
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An MDS Evidence-Based Review on Treatments for Huntington's Disease.
**Authors:** Ferreira JJ, Rodrigues FB, Duarte GS, Mestre TA, Bachoud-Levi AC, Bentivoglio AR, Burgunder JM, Cardoso F, Claassen DO, Landwehrmeyer GB, Kulisevsky J, Nirenberg MJ, Rosser A, Roth J, Seppi K, Slawek J, Furr-Stimming E, Tabrizi SJ, Walker FO, Vandenberghe W, Costa J, Sampaio C
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.28855](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.28855)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2022 Jan;37(1):25-35. doi: 10.1002/mds.28855. Epub 2021 Nov 29.

An MDS Evidence-Based Review on Treatments for Huntington's Disease.

Ferreira JJ(1)(2)(3), Rodrigues FB(2)(3)(4), Duarte GS(1)(2)(5)(6), Mestre 
TA(7), Bachoud-Levi AC(8)(9)(10), Bentivoglio AR(11)(12), Burgunder JM(13)(14), 
Cardoso F(15), Claassen DO(16), Landwehrmeyer GB(17), Kulisevsky J(18)(19)(20), 
Nirenberg MJ(21), Rosser A(22), Roth J(23), Seppi K(24), Slawek J(25)(26), 
Furr-Stimming E(27), Tabrizi SJ(4)(28)(29), Walker FO(30), Vandenberghe 
W(31)(32), Costa J(1)(2)(5), Sampaio C(2)(33).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Faculdade de Medicina, 
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Instituto de Medicina Molecular João Lobo Antunes, Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)CNS - Campus Neurológico, Torres Vedras, Portugal.
(4)UCL Huntington's Disease Centre, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, 
University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Centro de Estudos de Medicina Baseada na Evidência, Faculdade de Medicina, 
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(6)Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, Lisbon, Portugal.
(7)Parkinson disease and Movement Disorders Centre, Division of Neurology, 
Department of Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, The University 
of Ottawa Brain and Mind Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(8)National Centre of Reference for Huntington's Disease, Neurology Department, 
Henri Mondor Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Créteil, France.
(9)Neuropsychologie Interventionelle Lab, INSERM U955 E01B, PSL University, 
Paris, France.
(10)Université Paris Est Créteil, Créteil, France.
(11)Istituto di Neurologia, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.
(12)Movement Disorder Unit, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli 
IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(13)Swiss Huntington Center, Neurozentrum Siloah AG, Muri bei Bern, Switzerland.
(14)Department of Neurology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(15)Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Service, Internal Medicine Department of 
the Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(16)Department of Neurology, Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Neurology, 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(17)Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(18)Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Department, Hospital de la Santa Creu i 
Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
(19)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques Sant Pau (IIB-Sant Pau), Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, Spain.
(20)Centro de Investigación en Red Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), 
Madrid, Spain.
(21)Department of Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
New York, USA.
(22)Neuroscience and Mental Health Research Institute (Brain Research And 
Intracranial Neurotherapeutics Unit), Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(23)Department of Neurology and Center of Clinical Neuroscience, 1st Faculty of 
Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, 
Czech Republic.
(24)Department of Neurology, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(25)Division of Psychiatric-Neurological Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland.
(26)Neurology and Stroke Department, St. Adalbert Hospital, Gdansk, Poland.
(27)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Health Science Center at 
Houston, McGovern Medical School, Houston, Texas, USA.
(28)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, Queen Square Institute of 
Neurology, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(29)UK Dementia Research Institute, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(30)Division of Neuromuscular Disorders, Department of Neurology, Wake Forest 
School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.
(31)Department of Neurology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(32)Department of Neurosciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(33)CHDI Management/CHDI Foundation, Princeton, New Jersey, USA.

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2022 Jul;37(7):1566-1567. doi: 10.1002/mds.29059.
    Mov Disord. 2022 Jul;37(7):1567-1568. doi: 10.1002/mds.29060.

BACKGROUND: Huntington's disease (HD) is a rare neurodegenerative disorder with 
protean clinical manifestations. Its management is challenging, consisting 
mainly of off-label treatments.
OBJECTIVES: The International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society 
commissioned a task force to review and evaluate the evidence of available 
therapies for HD gene expansion carriers.
METHODS: We followed the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and 
Evaluation (GRADE) approach. Eligible randomized controlled trials were 
identified via an electronic search of the CENTRAL, MEDLINE, and EMBASE 
databases. All eligible trials that evaluated one or more of 33 predetermined 
clinical questions were included. Risk of bias was evaluated using the Cochrane 
Risk of Bias tool. A framework was adapted to allow for efficacy and safety 
conclusions to be drawn from the balance between the GRADE level of evidence and 
the importance of the benefit/harm of the intervention.
RESULTS: Twenty-two eligible studies involving 17 interventions were included, 
providing data to address 8 clinical questions. These data supported a likely 
effect of deutetrabenazine on motor impairment, chorea, and dystonia and of 
tetrabenazine on chorea. The data did not support a disease-modifying effect for 
premanifest and manifest HD. There was no eligible evidence to support the use 
of specific treatments for depression, psychosis, irritability, apathy, or 
suicidality. Similarly, no evidence was eligible to support the use of 
physiotherapy, occupational therapy, exercise, dietary, or surgical treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: Data for therapeutic interventions in HD are limited and support 
only the use of VMAT2 inhibitors for specific motor symptoms. © 2021 
International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

© 2021 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.28855
PMID: 34842303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]