---
reference_id: "PMID:11063735"
title: "Recessive mutation in desmoplakin disrupts desmoplakin-intermediate filament interactions and causes dilated cardiomyopathy, woolly hair and keratoderma."
authors:
- Norgett EE
- Hatsell SJ
- Carvajal-Huerta L
- Cabezas JC
- Common J
- Purkis PE
- Whittock N
- Leigh IM
- Stevens HP
- Kelsell DP
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/9.18.2761
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Cardiomyopathy, Dilated/genetics, physiopathology"
- Cell Adhesion
- Child
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- "Codon, Terminator/genetics"
- "Cytoskeletal Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Desmoplakins
- Ecuador
- Epidermis/pathology
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Haplotypes/genetics
- Heart Ventricles/physiopathology
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Intermediate Filaments/metabolism
- Keratinocytes/pathology
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recessive mutation in desmoplakin disrupts desmoplakin-intermediate filament interactions and causes dilated cardiomyopathy, woolly hair and keratoderma.
**Authors:** Norgett EE, Hatsell SJ, Carvajal-Huerta L, Cabezas JC, Common J, Purkis PE, Whittock N, Leigh IM, Stevens HP, Kelsell DP
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/9.18.2761](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/9.18.2761)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2000 Nov 1;9(18):2761-6. doi: 10.1093/hmg/9.18.2761.

Recessive mutation in desmoplakin disrupts desmoplakin-intermediate filament 
interactions and causes dilated cardiomyopathy, woolly hair and keratoderma.

Norgett EE(1), Hatsell SJ, Carvajal-Huerta L, Cabezas JC, Common J, Purkis PE, 
Whittock N, Leigh IM, Stevens HP, Kelsell DP.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, St Bartholomews' and Royal London School of 
Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary and Westfield College, 2 Newark Street, 
London E1 2AT, UK.

Desmosomes are major cell adhesion junctions, particularly prominent in the 
epidermis and cardiac tissue and are important for the rigidity and strength of 
the cells. The desmosome consists of several proteins, of which desmoplakin is 
the most abundant. Here, we describe the first recessive human mutation, 
7901delG, in the desmoplakin gene which causes a generalized striate keratoderma 
particularly affecting the palmoplantar epidermis, woolly hair and a dilated 
left ventricular cardiomyopathy. A number of the patients with this syndromic 
disorder suffer heart failure in their teenage years, resulting in early 
morbidity. All tested affected members of three families from Ecuador were 
homozygous for this mutation which produces a premature stop codon leading to a 
truncated desmoplakin protein missing the C domain of the tail region. Histology 
of the skin revealed large intercellular spaces and clustering of desmosomes at 
the infrequent sites of keratinocyte adhesion. Immunohistochemistry of skin from 
the patients showed a perinuclear localization of keratin in suprabasal 
keratinocytes, suggesting a collapsed intermediate filament network. This study 
demonstrates the importance of desmoplakin in the attachment of intermediate 
filaments to the desmosome. In contrast to null DESMOPLAKIN: mice which die in 
early development, the truncated protein due to the homozygous 7901delG mutation 
in humans is not embryonic lethal. This suggests that the tail domain of 
desmoplakin is not required for establishing tissue architecture during 
development.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/9.18.2761
PMID: 11063735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]