---
reference_id: "PMID:27032764"
title: Impact on CYP19A1 activity by mutations in NADPH cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase.
authors:
- Flück CE
- Pandey AV
journal: J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2016.03.031
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact on CYP19A1 activity by mutations in NADPH cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase.
**Authors:** Flück CE, Pandey AV
**Journal:** J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jsbmb.2016.03.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsbmb.2016.03.031)

## Content

1. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2017 Jan;165(Pt A):64-70. doi: 
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2016.03.031. Epub 2016 Mar 23.

Impact on CYP19A1 activity by mutations in NADPH cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase.

Flück CE(1), Pandey AV(2).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Endocrinology, Diabetology and Metabolism, University Children's 
Hospital Bern, and Department of Clinical Research, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(2)Pediatric Endocrinology, Diabetology and Metabolism, University Children's 
Hospital Bern, and Department of Clinical Research, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland. Electronic address: amit@pandeylab.org.

Cytochrome P450 aromatase (CYP19A1), in human placenta metabolizes androgens to 
estrogens and uses reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate through 
cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase (POR) for the energy requirements of its 
metabolic activities. Mutations in the human POR lead to congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia due to loss of activities of several steroid metabolizing enzymatic 
reactions conducted by the cytochrome P450 proteins located in the endoplasmic 
reticulum. Effect of POR mutations on different P450 activities depend on 
individual partner proteins. In this report we have studied the impact of 
mutations found in the POR on the enzymatic activity of CYP19A1. We expressed 
wild type as well mutant human POR proteins in bacteria and purified the 
recombinant proteins, which were then used in an in vitro reconstitution system 
in combination with CYP19A1 and lipids for enzymatic analysis. We found that 
several mutations as well as polymorphisms in human POR can cause reduction of 
CYP19A1 activity. This would affect metabolism of estrogens in people with 
variations of POR allele. The POR mutants Y181D and R616X were found to have no 
activity in supporting CYP19A1 reactions. The POR mutations Y607C and delF646 
showed a loss of 60-90% activity and two polymorphic forms of POR, R316W and 
G413S showed similar to WT activity. One POR variant, Q153R had almost double 
the activity of WT. Loss of CYP19A1 activity may contribute to disordered 
steroidogenesis in female patients with POR mutations as well as in mothers with 
POR variants carrying a male child.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2016.03.031
PMID: 27032764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]