---
reference_id: "PMID:40062063"
title: "Atypical Anti-glomerular Basement Membrane Disease in a 16-Year-Old Male Child: A Case Report."
authors:
- Singh D
- Pugmire B
- Sukumaran S
journal: Cureus
year: '2025'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.78644
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical Anti-glomerular Basement Membrane Disease in a 16-Year-Old Male Child: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Singh D, Pugmire B, Sukumaran S
**Journal:** Cureus (2025)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.78644](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.78644)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2025 Feb 6;17(2):e78644. doi: 10.7759/cureus.78644. eCollection 2025 
Feb.

Atypical Anti-glomerular Basement Membrane Disease in a 16-Year-Old Male Child: 
A Case Report.

Singh D(1), Pugmire B(2), Sukumaran S(3).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Rheumatology, Valley Children's Healthcare, Madera, USA.
(2)Radiology, Valley Children's Healthcare, Madera, USA.
(3)Pediatrics, Valley Children's Healthcare, Madera, USA.

Anti-glomerular basement membrane (anti-GBM) disease is an extremely rare small 
vessel vasculitis, which typically presents as rapidly progressive 
glomerulonephritis with or without pulmonary hemorrhage. Atypical anti-GBM 
disease varies in its clinical and laboratory presentation with insidious onset 
of symptoms. We present the case of a 16-year-old male child who presented with 
a two-week history of fever, weight loss, cough, hemoptysis, shortness of 
breath, and a five-year history of intermittent emesis. A computerized 
tomography of the chest demonstrated diffuse miliary pulmonary nodules with a 
"tree-in-bud" pattern. Serologic evaluation was negative for anti-nuclear, 
double-stranded, and anti-neutrophilic cytoplasmic antibodies. Urinalysis was 
negative for hematuria and proteinuria, but anti-GBM antibodies were elevated. 
Kidney biopsy demonstrated linear immunofluorescence staining of glomerular 
basement membrane with immunoglobulin G (IgG) without active crescent formation 
or necrosis. Lung biopsy demonstrated occasional hemosiderin-laden macrophages, 
patchy peribronchial and interstitial lymphocytic inflammation, interstitial and 
alveolar septal fibrosis, and emphysema. The patient was diagnosed with atypical 
anti-GBM disease based on the circulating and tissue-bound antibodies on kidney 
and lung biopsy and chronic alveolar bleeding, and improved with treatment with 
intravenous steroids, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab. This case report 
highlights the importance of a high index of suspicion for this disease and the 
need to perform a renal biopsy even in the absence of hematuria or proteinuria. 
Additionally, this case was unusual as the patient presented primarily with 
pulmonary and gastrointestinal symptoms and normal renal functions. His 
pathology was limited to linear immunofluorescence without active crescent 
formation, and this has not been previously reported, to our knowledge.

Copyright © 2025, Singh et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.78644
PMCID: PMC11890164
PMID: 40062063

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent for treatment and open 
access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this study. 
Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all 
authors declare the following: Payment/services info: All authors have declared 
that no financial support was received from any organization for the submitted 
work. Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they have no 
financial relationships at present or within the previous three years with any 
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other 
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships 
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.