---
reference_id: "PMID:38826421"
title: Complimentary vertebrate Wac models exhibit phenotypes relevant to DeSanto-Shinawi Syndrome.
authors:
- Lee KH
- Stafford AM
- Pacheco-Vergara M
- Cichewicz K
- Canales CP
- Seban N
- Corea M
- Rahbarian D
- Bonekamp KE
- Gillie GR
- Cruz DP
- Gill AM
- Hwang HE
- Uhl KL
- Jager TE
- Shinawi M
- Li X
- Obenaus A
- Crandall S
- Jeong J
- Nord A
- Kim CH
- Vogt D
journal: bioRxiv
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1101/2024.05.26.595966
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complimentary vertebrate Wac models exhibit phenotypes relevant to DeSanto-Shinawi Syndrome.
**Authors:** Lee KH, Stafford AM, Pacheco-Vergara M, Cichewicz K, Canales CP, Seban N, Corea M, Rahbarian D, Bonekamp KE, Gillie GR, Cruz DP, Gill AM, Hwang HE, Uhl KL, Jager TE, Shinawi M, Li X, Obenaus A, Crandall S, Jeong J, Nord A, Kim CH, Vogt D
**Journal:** bioRxiv (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1101/2024.05.26.595966](https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.26.595966)

## Content

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2025 Aug 28:2024.05.26.595966. doi: 
10.1101/2024.05.26.595966.

Complimentary vertebrate Wac models exhibit phenotypes relevant to 
DeSanto-Shinawi Syndrome.

Lee KH(1), Stafford AM(2), Pacheco-Vergara M(3), Cichewicz K(4)(5), Canales 
CP(4)(5), Seban N(4)(5), Corea M(4)(5), Rahbarian D(4)(5), Bonekamp KE(6), 
Gillie GR(6), Cruz DP(2)(7), Gill AM(2), Hwang HE(1), Uhl KL(2), Jager TE(8), 
Shinawi M(9), Li X(2), Obenaus A(10), Crandall S(6)(7), Jeong J(3), Nord 
A(4)(5), Kim CH(1), Vogt D(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 34134, Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Human Development, College of Human Medicine, 
Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, 49503, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Pathology, New York University College of Dentistry, 
New York, NY 10010, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of California 
Davis, Davis 95618, USA.
(5)Department of Neurobiology, Physiology and Behavior, University of California 
Davis, Davis 95618, USA.
(6)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, 
USA.
(7)Neuroscience Program, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.
(8)Corewell Health, Grand Rapids, MI, 49503, USA.
(9)Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA.
(10)Director, Preclinical and Translational Imaging Center, School of Medicine, 
University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Monogenic syndromes are associated with neurodevelopmental changes that result 
in cognitive impairments, neurobehavioral phenotypes including autism and 
seizures. Limited studies and resources are available to make meaningful headway 
into the underlying molecular mechanisms that result in these symptoms. One such 
example is DeSanto-Shinawi Syndrome (DESSH), a rare disorder caused by 
pathogenic variants in the WAC gene. Individuals with DESSH syndrome exhibit a 
recognizable craniofacial gestalt, developmental delay/intellectual disability, 
neurobehavioral symptoms that include autism, ADHD, behavioral difficulties and 
seizures. However, no thorough studies from a vertebrate model exist to 
understand how these changes occur. To overcome this, we developed both murine 
and zebrafish Wac/wac deletion mutants and studied whether their phenotypes 
recapitulate those described in individuals with DESSH syndrome. We first show 
that the two Wac models exhibit craniofacial and behavioral changes, reminiscent 
of abnormalities found in DESSH syndrome. In addition, each model revealed 
impacts to GABAergic neurons and further studies showed that the mouse mutants 
are susceptible to seizures, changes in brain volumes that are different between 
sexes and relevant behaviors. Finally, we uncovered transcriptional impacts of 
Wac loss of function in mice that will pave the way for future molecular studies 
into DESSH. These studies present two new animals that begin to uncover some 
biological underpinnings of DESSH syndrome and elucidate the biology of Wac.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.05.26.595966
PMCID: PMC11142245
PMID: 38826421

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests The authors report that 
they have no conflict of interests.