---
reference_id: "PMID:36998945"
title: "Spontaneous conus infarction with \"snake-eye appearance\" on magnetic resonance imaging: A case report and literature review."
authors:
- Zhang QY
- Xu LY
- Wang ML
- Cao H
- Ji XF
journal: World J Clin Cases
year: '2023'
doi: 10.12998/wjcc.v11.i9.2074
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spontaneous conus infarction with "snake-eye appearance" on magnetic resonance imaging: A case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Zhang QY, Xu LY, Wang ML, Cao H, Ji XF
**Journal:** World J Clin Cases (2023)
**DOI:** [10.12998/wjcc.v11.i9.2074](https://doi.org/10.12998/wjcc.v11.i9.2074)

## Content

1. World J Clin Cases. 2023 Mar 26;11(9):2074-2083. doi:
10.12998/wjcc.v11.i9.2074.

Spontaneous conus infarction with "snake-eye appearance" on magnetic resonance
imaging: A case report and literature review.

Zhang QY(1)(2), Xu LY(1), Wang ML(1), Cao H(1), Ji XF(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, Dalian 116011, Liaoning Province, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Nanchuan People's Hospital Affiliated to Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing 408400, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, Dalian 116011, Liaoning Province, China. jixiaofei1979@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Infarction of the conus medullaris is a rare form of spinal cord
infarction. The first symptom is usually acute non-characteristic lumbar pain,
followed by lower limb pain, saddle numbness, fecal incontinence, and sexual
dysfunction. Spontaneous conus infarction with "snake-eye appearance" on
magnetic resonance imaging has rarely been reported.
CASE SUMMARY: We report a 79-year-old male patient with spontaneous conus
infarction who had acute lower extremity pain and dysuria as the first symptoms.
He did not have any recent history of aortic surgery and trauma. Magnetic
resonance imaging revealed a rare "snake-eye appearance." In addition, we
reviewed the literature on 23 similar cases and summarized the clinical features
and magnetic resonance manifestations of common diseases related to the
"snake-eye sign" to explore the etiology, imaging findings, and prognosis of
spontaneous conus infarction.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that acute onset of conus medullaris syndrome combined
with "snake-eye appearance" should be strongly suspected as conus medullaris
infarction caused by anterior spinal artery ischemia. This special imaging
manifestation is helpful in the early diagnosis and treatment of conus
infarction.

©The Author(s) 2023. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v11.i9.2074
PMCID: PMC10044943
PMID: 36998945

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors
declare that they have no conflict of interest to disclose.
