---
reference_id: "PMID:33566311"
title: "Alström syndrome: an ultra-rare monogenic disorder as a model for insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes mellitus and obesity."
authors:
- Dassie F
- Favaretto F
- Bettini S
- Parolin M
- Valenti M
- Reschke F
- Danne T
- Vettor R
- Milan G
- Maffei P
journal: Endocrine
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s12020-021-02643-y
keywords:
- Alstrom Syndrome/genetics
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/complications, genetics"
- Humans
- Insulin Resistance/genetics
- "Obesity/complications, genetics"
- Rare Diseases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alström syndrome: an ultra-rare monogenic disorder as a model for insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes mellitus and obesity.
**Authors:** Dassie F, Favaretto F, Bettini S, Parolin M, Valenti M, Reschke F, Danne T, Vettor R, Milan G, Maffei P
**Journal:** Endocrine (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12020-021-02643-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12020-021-02643-y)

## Content

1. Endocrine. 2021 Mar;71(3):618-625. doi: 10.1007/s12020-021-02643-y. Epub 2021
Feb 10.

Alström syndrome: an ultra-rare monogenic disorder as a model for insulin
resistance, type 2 diabetes mellitus and obesity.

Dassie F(1), Favaretto F(1), Bettini S(1), Parolin M(1), Valenti M(2), Reschke
F(3), Danne T(3), Vettor R(1), Milan G(1), Maffei P(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (DIMED), Clinica Medica 3, Padua University Hospital,
Padua, Italy.
(2)Italian Association of Alström Syndrome Patients-ASS.A.I., Endo-ERN ePAG,
Padua, Italy.
(3)Department of General Pediatrics, Endocrinology/Diabetology and Clinical
Research, Children's Hospital Auf der Bult, Hannover, Germany.
(4)Department of Medicine (DIMED), Clinica Medica 3, Padua University Hospital,
Padua, Italy. pietro.maffei@aopd.veneto.it.

BACKGROUND: Alström syndrome (ALMS) is a monogenic ultra-rare disorder with a
prevalence of one per million inhabitants caused by pathogenic variants of ALMS1
gene. ALMS1 is located on chromosome 2p13, spans 23 exons and encodes a
predicted 461.2-kDa protein of 4169 amino acids. The infantile cone-rod
dystrophy with nystagmus and severe visual impairment is the earliest and most
consistent clinical manifestation of ALMS. In addition, infantile transient
cardiomyopathy, early childhood obesity with hyperphagia, deafness, insulin
resistance (IR), type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), systemic fibrosis and
progressive renal or liver dysfunction are common findings. ALMS1 encodes a
large ubiquitously expressed protein that is associated with the centrosome and
the basal body of primary cilium.
CURRENT RESEARCH: The localisation of ALMS1 to the ciliary basal body suggests
its contribution to ciliogenesis and/or normal ciliary function, or centriolar
stability. ALMS1 regulate glucose transport through the actin cytoskeleton,
which plays an important role in insulin-stimulated GLUT4 transport. Both
extreme IR and β-cell failure are the two determinant factors responsible for
the development of glucose metabolism alterations in ALMS.
TREATMENT: Currently, there is no known cure for ALMS other than managing the
underlying systemic diseases. When possible, individuals with ALMS and families
should be referred to a centre of expertise and followed by a multidisciplinary
team. Lifestyle modification, aerobic exercise and dietary induced weight loss
are highly recommended as primary treatment for ALMS patients with T2DM and
obesity.
CONCLUSION: Managing a rare disease requires not only medical care but also a
support network including patient associations.

DOI: 10.1007/s12020-021-02643-y
PMID: 33566311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
