---
reference_id: "PMID:22194652"
title: A novel p.Gly603Arg mutation in CACNA1F causes Åland island eye disease and incomplete congenital stationary night blindness phenotypes in a family.
authors:
- Vincent A
- Wright T
- Day MA
- Westall CA
- Héon E
journal: Mol Vis
year: '2011'
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "Calcium Channels, L-Type/genetics"
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electroretinography
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary"
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/complications, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Myopia/complications, genetics, metabolism"
- "Night Blindness/complications, genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Retinal Rod Photoreceptor Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Visual Field Tests
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel p.Gly603Arg mutation in CACNA1F causes Åland island eye disease and incomplete congenital stationary night blindness phenotypes in a family.
**Authors:** Vincent A, Wright T, Day MA, Westall CA, Héon E
**Journal:** Mol Vis (2011)

## Content

1. Mol Vis. 2011;17:3262-70. Epub 2011 Dec 15.

A novel p.Gly603Arg mutation in CACNA1F causes Åland island eye disease and
incomplete congenital stationary night blindness phenotypes in a family.

Vincent A(1), Wright T, Day MA, Westall CA, Héon E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, The Hospital for Sick
Children, University of Toronto, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

PURPOSE: To report, for the first time, that X-linked incomplete congenital
stationary night blindness (CSNB2A) and Åland island eye disease (AIED)
phenotypes coexist in a molecularly confirmed pedigree and to present novel
phenotypic characteristics of calcium channel alpha-1F subunit gene
(CACNA1F)-related disease.
METHODS: Two affected subjects (the proband and his maternal grandfather) and an
unaffected obligate carrier (the proband's mother) underwent detailed
ophthalmological evaluation, fundus autofluorescence imaging, and
spectral-domain optical coherence tomography. Goldmann visual field assessment
and full-field electroretinogram (ERG) were performed in the two affected
subjects, and multichannel flash visual evoked potential was performed on the
proband. Scotopic 15 Hz flicker ERG series were performed in both affected
subjects to evaluate the function of the slow and fast rod pathways. Haplotype
analysis using polymorphic microsatellite markers flanking CACNA1F was performed
in all three family members. The proband's DNA was sequenced for mutations in
the coding sequence of CACNA1F and nyctalopin (NYX) genes. Segregation analysis
was performed in the family.
RESULTS: Both affected subjects had symptoms of nonprogressive nyctalopia since
childhood, while the proband also had photophobia. Both cases had a distance
visual acuity of 20/50 or better in each eye, normal contrast sensitivity, and
an incomplete type of Schubert-Bornschein ERGs. The proband also had high
myopia, a mild red-green color deficit, hypopigmented fundus, and foveal
hypoplasia with no evidence of chiasmal misrouting. Spectral-domain optical
coherence tomography confirmed the presence of foveal hypoplasia in the proband.
The clinical phenotype of the proband and his maternal grandfather fit the
clinical description of AIED and CSNB2A, respectively. The fundus
autofluorescence and the visual fields were normal in both cases; the scotopic
15 Hz flicker ERG demonstrated only fast rod pathway activity in both. Both
affected cases shared the same haplotype across CACNA1F. The proband carried a
novel hemizygous c.1807G>C mutation (p.G603R) in the CACNA1F gene. The change
segregated with the disease phenotypes and was not identified in 360 control
chromosomes. No mutations were identified in NYX.
CONCLUSIONS: This report of a missense mutation in CACNA1F causing AIED and
CSNB2A phenotypes in a family confirms that both diseases are allelic and that
other genetic or environmental modifiers influence the expression of CACNA1F.
This is the first report to suggest that in CACNA1F-related disease, the rod
system activity is predominantly from the fast rod pathways.

PMCID: PMC3244487
PMID: 22194652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
