---
reference_id: "PMID:37992390"
title: Dermatoscopic Patterns in Vitiligo.
authors:
- Godínez-Chaparro JA
- Roldán-Marín R
- Vidaurri-de la Cruz H
- Soto-Mota LA
- Férez K
journal: Dermatol Pract Concept
year: '2023'
doi: 10.5826/dpc.1304a197
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dermatoscopic Patterns in Vitiligo.
**Authors:** Godínez-Chaparro JA, Roldán-Marín R, Vidaurri-de la Cruz H, Soto-Mota LA, Férez K
**Journal:** Dermatol Pract Concept (2023)
**DOI:** [10.5826/dpc.1304a197](https://doi.org/10.5826/dpc.1304a197)

## Content

1. Dermatol Pract Concept. 2023 Oct 1;13(4):e2023197. doi: 10.5826/dpc.1304a197.

Dermatoscopic Patterns in Vitiligo.

Godínez-Chaparro JA(1)(2), Roldán-Marín R(3), Vidaurri-de la Cruz H(4), 
Soto-Mota LA(5), Férez K(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Dermatology Service, High Specialty Medical Unit of the Dr. 
Gaudencio González Garza General Hospital, La Raza National Medical Center, 
Mexican Social Security Institute, Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Postgraduate Studies and Research Section, Escuela Superior de Medicina, 
Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico City, Mexico.
(3)Onocodermatology Clinic in the Experimental Medicine Unit of the Faculty of 
Medicine, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.
(4)Pediatric Dermatology Service, General Hospital of Mexico Dr. Eduardo 
Liceaga, Ministry of Health. Mexico City, Mexico.
(5)National Institute of Medical Sciences and Nutrition Salvador Zubirán, 
Mexico's Ministry of Health, Mexico City, Mexico.
(6)Mexican Foundation for Vitiligo and Skin Diseases, Mexico City, Mexico.

Vitiligo is a chronic, acquired autoimmune pigmentary skin disease, most times 
it can be diagnosed clinically. Dermoscopy can confirm vitiligo in a 
non-invasive way. It is a diagnostic technique that visualizes sub-macroscopic 
morphological structures which correspond with specific histological structures. 
It detects subtle changes in the pigment pattern, evaluates vitiligo activity, 
attempts of re-pigmentation, leucotrichia, and differentiates it from other hypo 
pigmentary disorders. Most dermatoscopic clues used to assess vitiligo activity 
are found at the perifollicular level in the center and edge of the lesion. 
Perifollicular pigmentation is present in both active lesions and treated 
pigmented lesions with treatment. However, perifollicular depigmentation 
represents poor response, in treated lesions, and poor prognosis in untreated 
ones. The center of the lesion has reduced and/or absent pigment network, in 
active and stable lesions. If on dermoscopy the center of the lesion shows 
islands of pigment, erythema, or telangiectasias, re-pigmentation is suggested. 
At the periphery of the lesion, unstable vitiligo usually shows up as a diffuse 
border, trichrome pattern, micro-Koebner/comet tail phenomenon, satellite 
lesions, or a tapioca sago pattern. In stable lesions it is more frequent to 
find well defined or trichromic border. Pigmented lesions commonly present sharp 
borders and marginal or perilesional hyperpigmentation.

DOI: 10.5826/dpc.1304a197
PMCID: PMC10656144
PMID: 37992390

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: None.