---
reference_id: "PMID:36673562"
title: "The Evaluation of Clinical Signs and Symptoms of Malignant Tumors Involving the Maxillary Sinus: Recommendation of an Examination Sieve and Risk Alarm Score."
authors:
- Bashir A
- Khan ZA
- Maqsood A
- Prabhu N
- Saleem MM
- Alzarea BK
- Issrani R
- Khan SR
- Ahmed N
- Abbasi MS
- Marya A
- Sghaireen MG
- Heboyan A
journal: Healthcare (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/healthcare11020194
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Evaluation of Clinical Signs and Symptoms of Malignant Tumors Involving the Maxillary Sinus: Recommendation of an Examination Sieve and Risk Alarm Score.
**Authors:** Bashir A, Khan ZA, Maqsood A, Prabhu N, Saleem MM, Alzarea BK, Issrani R, Khan SR, Ahmed N, Abbasi MS, Marya A, Sghaireen MG, Heboyan A
**Journal:** Healthcare (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/healthcare11020194](https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare11020194)

## Content

1. Healthcare (Basel). 2023 Jan 9;11(2):194. doi: 10.3390/healthcare11020194.

The Evaluation of Clinical Signs and Symptoms of Malignant Tumors Involving the 
Maxillary Sinus: Recommendation of an Examination Sieve and Risk Alarm Score.

Bashir A(1)(2), Khan ZA(3), Maqsood A(4), Prabhu N(3), Saleem MM(5), Alzarea 
BK(6), Issrani R(7), Khan SR(8), Ahmed N(9)(10), Abbasi MS(10), Marya A(11)(12), 
Sghaireen MG(6), Heboyan A(13).

Author information:
(1)Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Unit, Cork University Hospital, T12 DC4A Cork, 
Ireland.
(2)Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Department, Dental Section, King Saud 
Hospital, Unaizah 56437, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery and Diagnostic Sciences, College 
of Dentistry, Jouf University, Sakaka 72345, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Oral Pathology, Bahria University Dental College, Karachi 
74400, Pakistan.
(5)Consultant Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon Yanbu General Hospital, Yanbu 
46411, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Prosthetic Dental Science, College of Dentistry, Jouf 
University, Sakaka 72345, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Department of Preventive Dentistry, College of Dentistry, Jouf University, 
Sakaka 72345, Saudi Arabia.
(8)Oral and Maxillofacial Unit, King Salman Hospital, Hail 55471, Saudi Arabia.
(9)Prosthodontic Unit, School of Dental Sciences, Health Campus, Universiti 
Sains Kota Bharu, Kubang Kerian 16150, Malaysia.
(10)Department of Prosthodontics, Altamash Institute of Dental Medicine, Karachi 
75500, Pakistan.
(11)Department of Orthodontics, Faculty of Dentistry, University of Puthisastra, 
Phnom Penh 12211, Cambodia.
(12)Center for Transdisciplinary Research, Saveetha Dental College, Saveetha 
Institute of Medical and Technical Science, Saveetha University, Chennai 600077, 
India.
(13)Department of Prosthodontics, Faculty of Stomatology, Yerevan State Medical 
University after Mkhitar Heratsi, Str. Koryun 2, Yerevan 0025, Armenia.

This observational study was conducted to evaluate the clinical signs and 
symptoms of maxillary sinus tumors and to propose a clinical examination sieve 
and a unique risk alarm score to be used for timely patient referral and 
vigilance. The study consisted of 70 patients between 20 to 82 years of age from 
both sexes. The clinical information gained was collected from the upper 
dentoalveolar segment, orbit, and nasal sites. Regarding the early clinical sign 
and symptoms of patients, nasal obstruction was found in 67 patients (95.7%), 
facial swelling in 69 patients (98.6%), paresthesia in 41 patients (58.6%), and 
epistaxis in 50 patients (71.4%). Furthermore, in terms of the late signs and 
symptoms, a palpable mass in buccal sulcus was observed in 65 (92.9%) of the 
patients, lymphadenopathy in 24 (34.3%), paresthesia in 38 (54.3%), and diplopia 
in 22 (31.4%). Furthermore, general sign and symptoms like exophthalmos was 
present in 35 patients (50%), anosmia was observed in 37 patients (52.9%), and 
oroantral fistula was noted in 37 patients (55.9%). Additionally, 67 (95.7%) of 
the patients complained of nasal obstruction. Similarly, facial asymmetry was 
observed in 69 (98.6%) of the patients and double vision was observed in 24 
(34.4%). Tumors of the maxillary sinus have a very insidious course of spread 
and uncertain clinical signs and symptoms. What makes diagnosis worse is the 
fact that the symptoms of these tumors are so well hidden in the sponge-like 
nature of the midfacial region that they are easily misinterpreted by patients. 
Therefore, diagnoses must be made early, dentists must be vigilant, and patients 
must be fully investigated at the slightest suspicion of a tumor, albeit benign.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare11020194
PMCID: PMC9859382
PMID: 36673562

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.