---
reference_id: "PMID:20650971"
title: "Gitelman syndrome: pathophysiological and clinical aspects."
authors:
- Graziani G
- Fedeli C
- Moroni L
- Cosmai L
- Badalamenti S
- Ponticelli C
journal: QJM
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcq123
keywords:
- Adult
- Alkalosis/genetics
- Animals
- Calcium/metabolism
- Child
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Gitelman Syndrome/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Hypokalemia/genetics
- Magnesium/metabolism
- Mice
- Mutation
- Potassium Chloride/therapeutic use
- Prognosis
- "Renal Tubular Transport, Inborn Errors/etiology"
- Sodium Chloride Symporters/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gitelman syndrome: pathophysiological and clinical aspects.
**Authors:** Graziani G, Fedeli C, Moroni L, Cosmai L, Badalamenti S, Ponticelli C
**Journal:** QJM (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/qjmed/hcq123](https://doi.org/10.1093/qjmed/hcq123)

## Content

1. QJM. 2010 Oct;103(10):741-8. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcq123. Epub 2010 Jul 22.

Gitelman syndrome: pathophysiological and clinical aspects.

Graziani G(1), Fedeli C, Moroni L, Cosmai L, Badalamenti S, Ponticelli C.

Author information:
(1)Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, IRCCS Istituto Clinico Humanitas, Rozzano,
Milano, Italy. giorgio.graziani@humanitas.it

Giltelman syndrome (GS) is a recessive salt-losing tubulopathy of children or
young adults caused by a mutation of genes encoding the human sodium chloride
cotransporters and magnesium channels in the thiazide-sensitive segments of the
distal convoluted tubule. The plasma biochemical picture is characterized by
hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, hypocalciuria, metabolic alkalosis and
hypereninemic hyperaldosteronism. However, patients with GS present some
clinical and biochemical alterations resembling that observed in thiazide
diuretics abuse. On the pathophysiological point of view, GS represents a useful
and interesting human model to better understand the clinical consequences of
plasma hydro-electrolytes and acid-base derangements, associated with multiple
hormonal alterations. The impact of this complex disorder involves
cardiovascular, muscle-skeletal and some other physiological functions,
adversely affecting the patient's quality of life. This review tries to
summarize and better explain the linkage between the electrolytes, neurohormonal
derangements and clinical picture. Moreover, the differential diagnosis between
other similar electrolyte-induced clinical disorders and GS is also discussed.

DOI: 10.1093/qjmed/hcq123
PMID: 20650971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
