---
reference_id: "PMID:35105974"
title: Identification of neoantigens for individualized therapeutic cancer vaccines.
authors:
- Lang F
- Schrörs B
- Löwer M
- Türeci Ö
- Sahin U
journal: Nat Rev Drug Discov
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41573-021-00387-y
keywords:
- "Antigens, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Cancer Vaccines
- Humans
- Immunotherapy
- "Neoplasms/genetics, therapy"
- T-Lymphocytes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of neoantigens for individualized therapeutic cancer vaccines.
**Authors:** Lang F, Schrörs B, Löwer M, Türeci Ö, Sahin U
**Journal:** Nat Rev Drug Discov (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41573-021-00387-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41573-021-00387-y)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2022 Apr;21(4):261-282. doi: 10.1038/s41573-021-00387-y. 
Epub 2022 Feb 1.

Identification of neoantigens for individualized therapeutic cancer vaccines.

Lang F(1)(2), Schrörs B(1), Löwer M(1), Türeci Ö(3), Sahin U(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)TRON Translational Oncology, Mainz, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Biology, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(3)BioNTech, Mainz, Germany.
(4)BioNTech, Mainz, Germany. sahin@uni-mainz.de.
(5)University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany. 
sahin@uni-mainz.de.

Erratum in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2024 Feb;23(2):156. doi: 10.1038/s41573-023-00873-5.

Somatic mutations in cancer cells can generate tumour-specific neoepitopes, 
which are recognized by autologous T cells in the host. As neoepitopes are not 
subject to central immune tolerance and are not expressed in healthy tissues, 
they are attractive targets for therapeutic cancer vaccines. Because the vast 
majority of cancer mutations are unique to the individual patient, harnessing 
the full potential of this rich source of targets requires individualized 
treatment approaches. Many computational algorithms and machine-learning tools 
have been developed to identify mutations in sequence data, to prioritize those 
that are more likely to be recognized by T cells and to design tailored vaccines 
for every patient. In this Review, we fill the gaps between the understanding of 
basic mechanisms of T cell recognition of neoantigens and the computational 
approaches for discovery of somatic mutations and neoantigen prediction for 
cancer immunotherapy. We present a new classification of neoantigens, 
distinguishing between guarding, restrained and ignored neoantigens, based on 
how they confer proficient antitumour immunity in a given clinical context. Such 
context-based differentiation will contribute to a framework that connects 
neoantigen biology to the clinical setting and medical peculiarities of cancer, 
and will enable future neoantigen-based therapies to provide greater clinical 
benefit.

© 2022. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41573-021-00387-y
PMCID: PMC7612664
PMID: 35105974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interest F.L. has nothing to disclose. 
B.S., M.L., Ö.T. and U.S. are inventors on patents related to some of the 
technologies described in this article. Ö.T. is shareholder and CMO at BioNTech 
SE. U.S. is co-founder, shareholder and CEO at BioNTech SE.