---
reference_id: "PMID:36745557"
title: "Factors associated with depression, anxiety and severe mental illness among adults with atopic eczema or psoriasis: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Adesanya EI
- Matthewman J
- Schonmann Y
- Hayes JF
- Henderson A
- Mathur R
- Mulick AR
- Smith CH
- Langan SM
- Mansfield KE
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljac132
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Adult
- "Dermatitis, Atopic/epidemiology"
- "Arthritis, Psoriatic"
- "Psoriasis/complications, drug therapy"
- "Anxiety/epidemiology, etiology"
- Mental Disorders
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Factors associated with depression, anxiety and severe mental illness among adults with atopic eczema or psoriasis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Adesanya EI, Matthewman J, Schonmann Y, Hayes JF, Henderson A, Mathur R, Mulick AR, Smith CH, Langan SM, Mansfield KE
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bjd/ljac132](https://doi.org/10.1093/bjd/ljac132)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2023 Mar 30;188(4):460-470. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljac132.

Factors associated with depression, anxiety and severe mental illness among 
adults with atopic eczema or psoriasis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Adesanya EI(1), Matthewman J(1), Schonmann Y(2)(3), Hayes JF(4), Henderson A(1), 
Mathur R(1), Mulick AR(1), Smith CH(5), Langan SM(1)(6), Mansfield KE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Non-Communicable Disease Epidemiology, London School of Hygiene 
& Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(2)Siaal Research Center for Family Medicine and Primary Care, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(3)Department of Quality Measurements and Research, Clalit Health Services, Tel 
Aviv, Israel.
(4)Division of Psychiatry, University College London, London, UK.
(5)St John's Institute of Dermatology, Guys and St Thomas' Foundation Trust and 
King's College London, London, UK.
(6)Health Data Research UK, London, UK.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2023 Mar 30;188(4):458-459. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljad009.
    Br J Dermatol. 2023 Mar 30;188(4):e27. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljad046.

BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests an association between atopic eczema (AE) or 
psoriasis and mental illness; however, the factors associated with mental 
illness are unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To synthesize and evaluate all available evidence on factors 
associated with depression, anxiety and severe mental illness (SMI) among adults 
with AE or psoriasis.
METHODS: We searched electronic databases, grey literature databases and 
clinical trial registries from inception to February 2022 for studies of adults 
with AE or psoriasis. Eligible studies included randomized controlled trials 
(RCTs), cohort, cross-sectional or case-control studies where effect estimates 
of factors associated with depression, anxiety or SMI were reported. We did not 
apply language or geographical restrictions. We assessed risk of bias using the 
Quality in Prognosis Studies tool. We synthesized results narratively, and if at 
least two studies were sufficiently homogeneous, we pooled effect estimates in a 
random effects meta-analysis.
RESULTS: We included 21 studies (11 observational, 10 RCTs). No observational 
studies in AE fulfilled our eligibility criteria. Observational studies in 
people with psoriasis mostly investigated factors associated with depression or 
anxiety - one cross-sectional study investigated factors associated with 
schizophrenia. Pooled effect estimates suggest that female sex and psoriatic 
arthritis were associated with depression [female sex: odds ratio (OR) 1.62, 95% 
confidence interval (CI) 1.09-2.40, 95% prediction intervals (PIs) 0.62-4.23, I2 
= 24.90%, τ2 = 0.05; psoriatic arthritis: OR 2.26, 95% CI 1.56-3.25, 95% PI 
0.21-24.23, I2 = 0.00%, τ2 = 0.00] and anxiety (female sex: OR 2.59, 95% CI 
1.32-5.07, 95% PI 0.00-3956.27, I2 = 61.90%, τ2 = 0.22; psoriatic arthritis: OR 
1.98, 95% CI 1.33-2.94, I2 = 0.00%, τ2 = 0.00). Moderate/severe psoriasis was 
associated with anxiety (OR 1.14, 95% CI 1.05-1.25, I2 0.00%, τ2 = 0.00), but 
not depression. Evidence from RCTs suggested that adults with AE or psoriasis 
given placebo had higher depression and anxiety scores compared with comparators 
given targeted treatment (e.g. biologic agents).
CONCLUSIONS: Our review highlights limited existing research on factors 
associated with depression, anxiety and SMI in adults with AE or psoriasis. 
Observational evidence on factors associated with depression or anxiety in 
people with psoriasis was conflicting or from single studies, but some 
identified factors were consistent with those in the general population. 
Evidence on factors associated with SMIs in people with AE or psoriasis was 
particularly limited. Evidence from RCTs suggested that AE and psoriasis treated 
with placebo was associated with higher depression and anxiety scores compared 
with skin disease treated with targeted therapy; however, follow-up was limited. 
Therefore, long-term effects on mental health are unclear.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of British 
Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1093/bjd/ljac132
PMID: 36745557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest J.F.H. has received 
consultancy fees from Wellcome Trust and juli Health. R.M. has received 
consultancy fees from AMGEN.