---
reference_id: "PMID:37568880"
title: "The C55A Single Nucleotide Polymorphism in CTLA-4 Gene, a New Possible Biomarker in Thyroid Autoimmune Pathology Such as Hashimoto's Thyroiditis."
authors:
- Chiorean AD
- Vica ML
- Bâlici Ș
- Nicula GZ
- Răcătăianu N
- Bordea MA
- Simon LM
- Matei HV
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics13152517
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The C55A Single Nucleotide Polymorphism in CTLA-4 Gene, a New Possible Biomarker in Thyroid Autoimmune Pathology Such as Hashimoto's Thyroiditis.
**Authors:** Chiorean AD, Vica ML, Bâlici Ș, Nicula GZ, Răcătăianu N, Bordea MA, Simon LM, Matei HV
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics13152517](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics13152517)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2023 Jul 28;13(15):2517. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics13152517.

The C55A Single Nucleotide Polymorphism in CTLA-4 Gene, a New Possible Biomarker 
in Thyroid Autoimmune Pathology Such as Hashimoto's Thyroiditis.

Chiorean AD(1)(2), Vica ML(1)(3), Bâlici Ș(1), Nicula GZ(1), Răcătăianu N(4), 
Bordea MA(5), Simon LM(5), Matei HV(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, "Iuliu 
Hațieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 400349 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(2)Clinical Laboratory, Emergency Clinical Hospital for Children, 400370 
Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(3)Institute of Legal Medicine Cluj-Napoca, 400006 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(4)Integrated Ambulatory of Endocrinology, Infectious Diseases Clinical 
Hospital, 400000 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, "Iuliu Hațieganu" University 
of Medicine and Pharmacy, 400349 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.

Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT) is a chronic autoimmune disorder characterized by 
the production of autoantibodies against the thyroid gland. Different studies 
have shown that several genes may be associated with HT, which explains why 
patients often have family members with thyroiditis or other autoimmune 
diseases. The aim of this case-control study was to evaluate the correlation 
between polymorphisms at the level of exon 1 from the CTLA-4 gene and the 
susceptibility to developing HT. In this study, we found that there is no 
statistically significant association between the polymorphism rs231775 (A22G in 
exon 1) of the CTLA-4 gene and a genetic predisposition to HT. In contrast, a 
strong association was discovered for the first time between C55A in exon 1 of 
the CTLA-4 gene and HT. Our findings suggest that there is a genetic 
relationship between the CTLA-4 (+55A/C) genotype and the seropositivity against 
thyroid autoantigens, such as anti-thyroid peroxidase (ATPO) and 
anti-thyroglobulin antibodies (ATG).

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics13152517
PMCID: PMC10417055
PMID: 37568880

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.