---
reference_id: "PMID:28844072"
title: Update in diagnosis and management of primary aldosteronism.
authors:
- Dick SM
- Queiroz M
- Bernardi BL
- "Dall'Agnol A"
- Brondani LA
- Silveiro SP
journal: Clin Chem Lab Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1515/cclm-2017-0217
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hyperaldosteronism/diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update in diagnosis and management of primary aldosteronism.
**Authors:** Dick SM, Queiroz M, Bernardi BL, Dall'Agnol A, Brondani LA, Silveiro SP
**Journal:** Clin Chem Lab Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1515/cclm-2017-0217](https://doi.org/10.1515/cclm-2017-0217)

## Content

1. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2018 Feb 23;56(3):360-372. doi: 10.1515/cclm-2017-0217.

Update in diagnosis and management of primary aldosteronism.

Dick SM(1), Queiroz M(1), Bernardi BL(1), Dall'Agnol A(1), Brondani LA(1), 
Silveiro SP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Medical Sciences: Endocrinology, Universidade Federal do 
Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(2)Serviço de Endocrinologia, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre (HCPA), Rua 
Ramiro Barcelos, 2350 - Prédio 12, 4° andar, Porto Alegre, RS 90035-903, Brazil, 
Phone: +55.51.33598127.

Comment in
    Clin Chem Lab Med. 2018 Oct 25;56(11):251-252. doi: 10.1515/cclm-2018-0245.
    Clin Chem Lab Med. 2018 Oct 25;56(11):253-254. doi: 10.1515/cclm-2018-0318.

Primary aldosteronism (PA) is a group of disorders in which aldosterone is 
excessively produced. These disorders can lead to hypertension, hypokalemia, 
hypervolemia and metabolic alkalosis. The prevalence of PA ranges from 5% to 12% 
around the globe, and the most common causes are adrenal adenoma and adrenal 
hyperplasia. The importance of PA recognition arises from the fact that it can 
have a remarkably adverse cardiovascular and renal impact, which can even result 
in death. The aldosterone-to-renin ratio (ARR) is the election test for 
screening PA, and one of the confirmatory tests, such as oral sodium loading 
(OSL) or saline infusion test (SIT), is in general necessary to confirm the 
diagnosis. The distinction between adrenal hyperplasia (AH) or 
aldosterone-producing adenoma (APA) is essential to select the appropriate 
treatment. Therefore, in order to identify the subtype of PA, imaging exams such 
as computed tomography or magnetic ressonance imaging, and/or invasive 
investigation such as adrenal catheterization must be performed. According to 
the subtype of PA, optimal treatment - surgical for APA or pharmacological for 
AH, with drugs like spironolactone and amiloride - must be offered.

DOI: 10.1515/cclm-2017-0217
PMID: 28844072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]