---
reference_id: "PMID:19633174"
title: Nkcc1 (Slc12a2) is required for the regulation of endolymph volume in the otic vesicle and swim bladder volume in the zebrafish larva.
authors:
- Abbas L
- Whitfield TT
journal: Development
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1242/dev.034215
keywords:
- "Air Sacs/anatomy & histology, metabolism"
- Alternative Splicing
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Body Patterning/physiology
- Bumetanide/metabolism
- "Ear, Inner/anatomy & histology, metabolism"
- "Embryo, Nonmammalian/anatomy & histology, physiology"
- Endolymph/metabolism
- Furosemide/metabolism
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Homeostasis
- In Situ Hybridization
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/genetics, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- "Protein Isoforms/genetics, metabolism"
- Sodium Potassium Chloride Symporter Inhibitors/metabolism
- "Sodium-Potassium-Chloride Symporters/genetics, metabolism"
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 2"
- "Zebrafish/embryology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Zebrafish Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nkcc1 (Slc12a2) is required for the regulation of endolymph volume in the otic vesicle and swim bladder volume in the zebrafish larva.
**Authors:** Abbas L, Whitfield TT
**Journal:** Development (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.034215](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.034215)

## Content

1. Development. 2009 Aug;136(16):2837-48. doi: 10.1242/dev.034215.

Nkcc1 (Slc12a2) is required for the regulation of endolymph volume in the otic 
vesicle and swim bladder volume in the zebrafish larva.

Abbas L(1), Whitfield TT.

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics and Department of 
Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.

Endolymph is the specialised extracellular fluid present inside the inner ear. 
In mammals, disruptions to endolymph homeostasis can result in either collapse 
or distension of the endolymphatic compartment in the cochlea, with concomitant 
hearing loss. The zebrafish little ears (lte) mutant shows a collapse of the 
otic vesicle in the larva, apparently owing to a loss of endolymphatic fluid in 
the ear, together with an over-inflation of the swim bladder. Mutant larvae 
display signs of abnormal vestibular function by circling and swimming upside 
down. The two available alleles of lte are homozygous lethal: mutant larvae fail 
to thrive beyond 6 days post-fertilisation. Patterning of the otic vesicle is 
apparently normal. However, the expression of several genes thought to play a 
role in endolymph production is downregulated, including the 
sodium-potassium-chloride cotransporter gene nkcc1 (slc12a2) and several 
Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase channel subunit genes. We show here that lte mutations 
correspond to lesions in nkcc1. Each allele has a point mutation that disrupts 
splicing, leading to frame shifts in the coding region that predict the 
generation of truncated products. Endolymph collapse in the lte/nkcc1 mutant 
shows distinct parallels to that seen in mouse Nkcc1 mutants, validating 
zebrafish as a model for the study of endolymph disorders. The collapse in ear 
volume can be ameliorated in the to27d allele of lte by injection of a 
morpholino that blocks splicing at an ectopic site introduced by the mutation. 
This exemplifies the use of morpholinos as potential therapeutic agents for 
genetic disease.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.034215
PMCID: PMC2730410
PMID: 19633174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]