---
reference_id: "PMID:2472426"
title: Circumvention of defective neutral amino acid transport in Hartnup disease using tryptophan ethyl ester.
authors:
- Jonas AJ
- Butler IJ
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1172/JCI114141
keywords:
- "Amino Acids/blood, metabolism"
- Animals
- Biological Transport
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Hartnup Disease/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Humans
- Hydrolysis
- Hydroxyindoleacetic Acid/cerebrospinal fluid
- Male
- Niacinamide/therapeutic use
- Rats
- "Rats, Inbred Strains"
- Serotonin/cerebrospinal fluid
- "Tryptophan/analogs & derivatives, blood, cerebrospinal fluid, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Circumvention of defective neutral amino acid transport in Hartnup disease using tryptophan ethyl ester.
**Authors:** Jonas AJ, Butler IJ
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI114141](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI114141)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 1989 Jul;84(1):200-4. doi: 10.1172/JCI114141.

Circumvention of defective neutral amino acid transport in Hartnup disease using
tryptophan ethyl ester.

Jonas AJ(1), Butler IJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance 90502.

Tryptophan ethyl ester, a lipid-soluble tryptophan derivative, was used to
bypass defective gastrointestinal neutral amino acid transport in a child with
Hartnup disease. The child's baseline tryptophan concentrations in serum (20 +/-
6 microM) and cerebrospinal fluid (1.0 +/- 0.2 microM) were persistently less
than 50% of normal values. Cerebrospinal fluid 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid
(5-HIAA), a serotonin metabolite, was also less than 50% of normal (21 +/- 2
ng/ml). Serum tryptophan concentrations increased only modestly and briefly
after an oral challenge with 200 mg/kg of oral L-tryptophan, reflecting the
absorptive defect. An oral challenge with 200 mg/kg of tryptophan ethyl ester
resulted in a prompt increase in serum tryptophan to a peak of 555 microM.
Sustained treatment with 20 mg/kg q6h resulted in normalization of serum (66 +/-
15 microM) and cerebrospinal fluid tryptophan concentrations (mean = 2.3
microM). Cerebrospinal fluid 5-HIAA increased to more normal concentrations
(mean = 33 ng/ml). No toxicity was observed over an 8-mo period of treatment,
chronic diarrhea resolved, and body weight, which had remained unchanged for 7
mo before ester therapy, increased by approximately 26%. We concluded that
tryptophan ethyl ester is effective at circumventing defective gastrointestinal
neutral amino acid transport and may be useful in the treatment of Hartnup
disease.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI114141
PMCID: PMC303970
PMID: 2472426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
