---
reference_id: "PMID:41219045"
title: "Integrating Pathogenic Variants, Polygenic Risk Score, and Family History for Prostate Cancer Risk Estimation in Men of African Ancestry."
authors:
- Chen F
- Sheng X
- Wang A
- Xu Y
- Hughley R
- Xiong W
- Pooler L
- Wan P
- Gundell SM
- Kigozi G
- Nakigozi G
- Nalugoda F
- Kagaayi J
- Kigozi GN
- Mugamba S
- Kyasanku E
- Nkale J
- Olwa VO
- Lubwama A
- Daama A
- Nakajugo R
- Adusei B
- Jalloh M
- Gueye SM
- Adjei AA
- Mensah J
- Fernandez PW
- Adebiyi AO
- Olufemi Ogunbiyi J
- Aisuodionoe-Shadrach OI
- Petersen L
- Chen WC
- McBride J
- Bensen JT
- Mohler JL
- Taylor JA
- Andrews C
- Kigongo M
- Colline A
- Kiddu V
- Namugambe J
- Owamaani S
- Job K
- Masaba BJ
- Asiimwe F
- Muwanga P
- Namulondo J
- Nagawa F
- Kayiraba C
- Ogwang M
- Okidi R
- Oweka D
- Kitara E
- Obonyo J
- Lajul D
- Matovu P
- Muheki PA
- Natumanya J
- Agaba E
- Aculokin E
- Twongyeirwe A
- Mutema G
- Bitamazire D
- Butler EN
- Ingles SA
- Rybicki BA
- Stanford JL
- Zheng W
- Berndt SI
- Chanock SJ
- Huff CD
- Lachance J
- Multigner L
- Darst BF
- Rebbeck TR
- Brureau L
- Watya S
- Conti DV
- Haiman CA
journal: Eur Urol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2025.09.4161
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Integrating Pathogenic Variants, Polygenic Risk Score, and Family History for Prostate Cancer Risk Estimation in Men of African Ancestry.
**Authors:** Chen F, Sheng X, Wang A, Xu Y, Hughley R, Xiong W, Pooler L, Wan P, Gundell SM, Kigozi G, Nakigozi G, Nalugoda F, Kagaayi J, Kigozi GN, Mugamba S, Kyasanku E, Nkale J, Olwa VO, Lubwama A, Daama A, Nakajugo R, Adusei B, Jalloh M, Gueye SM, Adjei AA, Mensah J, Fernandez PW, Adebiyi AO, Olufemi Ogunbiyi J, Aisuodionoe-Shadrach OI, Petersen L, Chen WC, McBride J, Bensen JT, Mohler JL, Taylor JA, Andrews C, Kigongo M, Colline A, Kiddu V, Namugambe J, Owamaani S, Job K, Masaba BJ, Asiimwe F, Muwanga P, Namulondo J, Nagawa F, Kayiraba C, Ogwang M, Okidi R, Oweka D, Kitara E, Obonyo J, Lajul D, Matovu P, Muheki PA, Natumanya J, Agaba E, Aculokin E, Twongyeirwe A, Mutema G, Bitamazire D, Butler EN, Ingles SA, Rybicki BA, Stanford JL, Zheng W, Berndt SI, Chanock SJ, Huff CD, Lachance J, Multigner L, Darst BF, Rebbeck TR, Brureau L, Watya S, Conti DV, Haiman CA
**Journal:** Eur Urol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eururo.2025.09.4161](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eururo.2025.09.4161)

## Content

1. Eur Urol. 2025 Nov 5:S0302-2838(25)04720-7. doi:
10.1016/j.eururo.2025.09.4161.  Online ahead of print.

Integrating Pathogenic Variants, Polygenic Risk Score, and Family History for
Prostate Cancer Risk Estimation in Men of African Ancestry.

Chen F(1), Sheng X(1), Wang A(2), Xu Y(1), Hughley R(1), Xiong W(1), Pooler
L(1), Wan P(1), Gundell SM(1), Kigozi G(3), Nakigozi G(3), Nalugoda F(3),
Kagaayi J(3), Kigozi GN(3), Mugamba S(3), Kyasanku E(3), Nkale J(3), Olwa VO(3),
Lubwama A(3), Daama A(3), Nakajugo R(3), Adusei B(4), Jalloh M(5), Gueye SM(6),
Adjei AA(7), Mensah J(8), Fernandez PW(9), Adebiyi AO(10), Olufemi Ogunbiyi
J(11), Aisuodionoe-Shadrach OI(12), Petersen L(13), Chen WC(14), McBride J(15),
Bensen JT(16), Mohler JL(17), Taylor JA(18), Andrews C(19), Kigongo M(20),
Colline A(20), Kiddu V(20), Namugambe J(20), Owamaani S(21), Job K(22), Masaba
BJ(23), Asiimwe F(23), Muwanga P(23), Namulondo J(23), Nagawa F(23), Kayiraba
C(23), Ogwang M(24), Okidi R(24), Oweka D(24), Kitara E(24), Obonyo J(24), Lajul
D(24), Matovu P(25), Muheki PA(25), Natumanya J(25), Agaba E(25), Aculokin
E(25), Twongyeirwe A(25), Mutema G(26), Bitamazire D(27), Butler EN(28), Ingles
SA(29), Rybicki BA(30), Stanford JL(31), Zheng W(32), Berndt SI(33), Chanock
SJ(33), Huff CD(34), Lachance J(35), Multigner L(36), Darst BF(37), Rebbeck
TR(38), Brureau L(39), Watya S(40), Conti DV(1), Haiman CA(41).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Population and Public Health
Sciences, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Center for Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Population and Public Health
Sciences, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA; Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public
Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Africa Medical and Behavioural Sciences Organization, Wakiso, Uganda.
(4)37 Military Hospital, Accra, Ghana.
(5)Department of Urology, University Cheikh Anta Diop de Dakar, Dakar, Senegal.
(6)Hôpital Général de Grand Yoff, Dakar, Senegal.
(7)Department of Pathology, University of Ghana Medical School College of Health
Sciences Korle Bu Accra Ghana, Accra, Ghana.
(8)Department of surgery, Division of Urology, Korle-Bu Hospital, Accra, Ghana.
(9)Division of Urology, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(10)University College Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria.
(11)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, University of Ibadan, Ibadan,
Nigeria.
(12)College of Health Sciences, University of Abuja & University of Abuja
Teaching Hospital, Abuja, Nigeria; Cancer Science Centre, Abuja, Nigeria.
(13)Mediclinic Precise, Cape Town, South Africa.
(14)Strengthening Oncology Services Research Unit, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa; Sydney Brenner
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa; National Cancer Registry, a
Division of the National Institute for Communicable Diseases, National Health
Laboratory Service, South Africa.
(15)Center for Proteomic & Genomic Research, Cape Town, South Africa.
(16)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(17)Department of Urology, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo,
NY, USA.
(18)Epidemiology Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences,
Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(19)Medical Oncology, Population Sciences, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
MA, USA.
(20)Uro Care Hospital, Kampala, Uganda.
(21)Nikao Medical Center, Kampala, Uganda.
(22)Mulago Hospital, Nikao Medical Center, Kampala, Uganda.
(23)Mulago Hospital, Kampala, Uganda.
(24)Lacor Hospital, Gulu, Uganda.
(25)Kisiizi Hospital, Rukungiri, Uganda.
(26)Surgipath, Kampala, Uganda.
(27)Hoima Regional Referral Hospital, Hoima, Uganda.
(28)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(29)Department of Population and Public Health Sciences, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(30)Department of Public Health Sciences, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA.
(31)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, WA, USA.
(32)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(33)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(34)Department of Epidemiology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA.
(35)School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA,
USA.
(36)Univ Rennes, Inserm, EHESP, Irset (Institut de recherche en santé,
environnement et travail), Rennes, France.
(37)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle,
WA, USA.
(38)Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health and Division of Population Sciences,
Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(39)CHU de Pointe-à-Pitre, Univ Antilles, Univ Rennes, Inserm, EHESP, Irset
(Institut de recherche en santé, environnement et travail), Pointe-à-Pitre,
Guadeloupe, France.
(40)Uro Care Hospital, Kampala, Uganda; Africa Medical and Behavioural Sciences
Organization (AMBSO), Wakiso, Uganda.
(41)Center for Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Population and Public Health
Sciences, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: haiman@usc.edu.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The impact of germline pathogenic variants (PVs) in
cancer predisposition genes on risk of prostate cancer (PCa) remains
understudied in large populations of African ancestry. This study aims to
characterize the range of genetic risk of PCa and aggressive disease phenotypes
in men of African ancestry.
METHODS: We analyzed 7176 PCa cases and 4873 controls from seven countries
across North America and Africa to assess the association between PVs in 37
cancer predisposition genes and the risk of overall, aggressive, and metastatic
PCa. Genes significantly associated with PCa risk were used to estimate lifetime
absolute risk based on family history, polygenic risk score (PRS), and PV
carrier status.
KEY FINDINGS AND LIMITATIONS: PVs in ATM, BRCA2, CHEK2, HOXB13, and PALB2 were
presented in 4% of aggressive/metastatic PCa cases and were significantly
associated with an increased risk of aggressive PCa (odds ratio 2.18-5.96,
p < 0.05). Lifetime absolute risk varied widely depending on PV carrier status,
PRS, and family history, ranging from 3.0% to 74% for overall PCa, 0.6% to 41%
for aggressive PCa, and 0.2% to 37% for metastatic PCa. PV carriers with a
positive family history and a PRS in the 90th percentile had seven, 18, and 34
times the risks of overall, aggressive, and metastatic PCa, respectively,
compared with average-risk individuals. Oversampling of aggressive cases may
limit the generalizability of these findings to screening populations.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Integration of PV status, PRS, and family
history enables more refined PCa risk estimates. The wide range of PCa risk
observed among men of African ancestry in our study supports future prospective
studies in the development of risk-stratified cancer screening programs to
identify high-risk individuals who may benefit from screening at an earlier age.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eururo.2025.09.4161
PMCID: PMC12767500
PMID: 41219045

Conflict of interest statement: Financial disclosures: Christopher A. Haiman
certifies that all conflicts of interest, including specific financial interests
and relationships and affiliations relevant to the subject matter or materials
discussed in the manuscript (eg, employment/affiliation, grants or funding,
consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership or options, expert testimony,
royalties, or patents filed, received, or pending), are the following: None.
