---
reference_id: "PMID:20301732"
title: Donnai-Barrow Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Longoni M
- Kantarci S
- Donnai D
- Pober BR
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Donnai-Barrow Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Longoni M, Kantarci S, Donnai D, Pober BR

## Content

1. Donnai-Barrow Syndrome.

Longoni M(1), Kantarci S(2), Donnai D(3), Pober BR(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2008 Aug 28 [updated 2018 Nov 21].

Author information:
(1)Assistant Professor of Surgery, Harvard Medical School, Assistant,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
(2)Cytogenetics and Genomics, Quest Diagnostics Nichols Institute, Cytogenetics
and Genomics, San Juan Capistrano, California
(3)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, University of Manchester, St Mary's
Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom
(4)Pediatrician, Mass General Hospital for Children, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Donnai-Barrow syndrome (DBS) is characterized by
typical craniofacial features (large anterior fontanelle, wide metopic suture,
widow's peak, markedly widely spaced eyes, enlarged globes, downslanted
palpebral fissures, posteriorly rotated ears, depressed nasal bridge, and short
nose. Ocular complications include high myopia, retinal detachment, retinal
dystrophy, and progressive vision loss. Additional common features include
agenesis of the corpus callosum, sensorineural hearing loss, intellectual
disability, and congenital diaphragmatic hernia and/or omphalocele. Both inter-
and intrafamilial phenotypic variability are observed.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of DBS is established in a proband with: the
characteristic clinical features and a distinctive pattern of
low-molecular-weight proteinuria; and/or biallelic pathogenic variants in LRP2
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Surgical repair of diaphragmatic hernia
and/or omphalocele; corrective lenses for myopia; preventive treatments for
retinal detachment; hearing aids and/or cochlear implants for hearing loss;
antiepileptic drugs for seizures; supplementation as needed for low serum
vitamins A and D; education tailored to degree of intellectual, visual, and
hearing abilities. Surveillance: Ophthalmologic surveillance to monitor for
retinal detachment; serial audiologic examinations; serial measurement of kidney
function including blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine concentrations,
urinalysis, and serum vitamin A and D; monitor developmental progress and
educational needs.
GENETIC COUNSELING: DBS is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. In
general, the parents of an affected child are obligate heterozygotes with each
carrying one pathogenic variant; one instance of uniparental disomy has been
reported. When both parents are known to be carriers of a pathogenic variant,
each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being affected, a 50%
chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected
and not a carrier. If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, carrier
testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal testing of a pregnancy at increased
risk are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301732
