---
reference_id: "PMID:37641994"
title: "Hypothyroidism in Older Adults: A Narrative Review."
authors:
- Fiore V
- Barucca A
- Barraco S
- Triggiani D
- Carbotta G
- Giagulli VA
- Piazzolla G
- Lisco G
- Triggiani V
journal: Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2174/1871530323666230828110153
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hypothyroidism/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Aged
- "Hormone Replacement Therapy/adverse effects, methods"
- Aging/physiology
- Thyroxine/therapeutic use
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Thyrotropin/blood
- "Thyroid Gland/drug effects, metabolism, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypothyroidism in Older Adults: A Narrative Review.
**Authors:** Fiore V, Barucca A, Barraco S, Triggiani D, Carbotta G, Giagulli VA, Piazzolla G, Lisco G, Triggiani V
**Journal:** Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1871530323666230828110153](https://doi.org/10.2174/1871530323666230828110153)

## Content

1. Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets. 2024;24(8):879-884. doi: 
10.2174/1871530323666230828110153.

Hypothyroidism in Older Adults: A Narrative Review.

Fiore V(1), Barucca A(1), Barraco S(1), Triggiani D(2), Carbotta G(1), Giagulli 
VA(2), Piazzolla G(2), Lisco G(2), Triggiani V(2).

Author information:
(1)UOSD Diabetologia – Endocrinologia, ASL RM5, Rome, Italy
(2)Interdisciplinary Department of Medicine, University of Bari A. Moro, Bari, 
Italy

The prevalence of hypothyroidism increases along with aging, resulting in one of 
the most common comorbidities among patients over 75 years. The leading causes 
of hypothyroidism in older adults are iatrogenic, Hashimoto's thyroiditis, and 
medications. The narrative review aimed to discuss the clinical characteristics 
of hypothyroidism in older adults and the impact of hormonal replacement therapy 
on survival rates. Thyroid function declines over time due to physiological 
changes in the thyroid stimulating hormone signaling, iodine absorption and 
metabolism, thyroid hormone metabolism, and activity at peripheral sites. A 
serum TSH value over the upper limit of the normal reference range is not 
necessarily attributable to hypothyroidism. However, an appropriate diagnostic 
work-up is required to rule out true hypothyroidism and discriminate the 
etiology (i.e., thyroid autoimmune diseases, iodine deficiency, drug-induced 
hypothyroidism). Levothyroxine treatment should be considered in cases of overt 
hypothyroidism. A complete risk-to-benefit assessment, particularly considering 
the overall health status, life expectancy, cognitive function, mood, and 
cardiovascular and neurological background, should be considered before treating 
subclinical hypothyroidism with more potential benefits in patients under 75 
years old. Levothyroxine formulations facilitating hormone absorption and 
increasing compliance to long-term treatment should be preferred. TSH target 
should usually be set over 3 mIU/ml. Defining optimal diagnostic approaches and 
targeted therapeutic strategies should be considered in the personalized 
management of aged patients with hypothyroidism.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1871530323666230828110153
PMID: 37641994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]