---
reference_id: "PMID:38951502"
title: A dataset of riverine nitrogen yield across watersheds in the Conterminous United States.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Zhang X
- Zhao K
journal: Sci Data
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41597-024-03552-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A dataset of riverine nitrogen yield across watersheds in the Conterminous United States.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Zhang X, Zhao K
**Journal:** Sci Data (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41597-024-03552-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-024-03552-1)

## Content

1. Sci Data. 2024 Jun 29;11(1):712. doi: 10.1038/s41597-024-03552-1.

A dataset of riverine nitrogen yield across watersheds in the Conterminous 
United States.

Wang Y(1), Zhang X(2), Zhao K(3).

Author information:
(1)Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education, Oak Ridge, TN, 37830, USA.
(2)Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education, Oak Ridge, TN, 37830, USA. 
Xuesong.Zhang@usda.gov.
(3)Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center, School of Environment and 
Natural Resources, The Ohio State University, Wooster, OH, 44691, USA.

Riverine nitrogen is a pivotal determinant influencing water quality in inland 
and coastal waters. Despite the recognized utility, no spatially-explicit data 
on riverine nitrogen yield is available for large parts of the world, thus 
hindering our ability to identify the contributors to riverine nitrogen and 
understand aquatic nitrogen cycling. To fill the data gap for the United States, 
here we (1) compiled 294,996 total nitrogen (TN), 225,827 nitrate (NO3-), 
204,015 ammonium (NH4+), and 158,837 total organic nitrogen (TON) 
concentrations, with concurrent streamflow data, across the Conterminous United 
States (CONUS), (2) estimated riverine nitrogen loads for over 1,800 
hydrological stations, (3) derived the spatial distribution of annual riverine 
nitrogen yield by leveraging river and catchment connectivity information 
contained in the National Hydrography Dataset plus (NHDPlus), and (4) 
characterized nonpoint-source TN loads by excluding point-source loads. This new 
spatial dataset quantifies spatial sources of nitrogen yield from point and 
non-point sources (e.g., up to 36% from point sources across the U.S.) and 
serves as ground-truthing to validate water quality models.

© 2024. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the 
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1038/s41597-024-03552-1
PMCID: PMC11217459
PMID: 38951502

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.