---
reference_id: "PMID:31853307"
title: "Temtamy syndrome caused by a new C12orf57 variant in a Chinese boy, including pedigree analysis and literature review."
authors:
- Wang Y
- Li M
- Luo Y
- Zhao X
- Liao S
- Jiang L
- Li X
- Zhong M
journal: Exp Ther Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3892/etm.2019.8183
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Temtamy syndrome caused by a new C12orf57 variant in a Chinese boy, including pedigree analysis and literature review.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Li M, Luo Y, Zhao X, Liao S, Jiang L, Li X, Zhong M
**Journal:** Exp Ther Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3892/etm.2019.8183](https://doi.org/10.3892/etm.2019.8183)

## Content

1. Exp Ther Med. 2020 Jan;19(1):327-332. doi: 10.3892/etm.2019.8183. Epub 2019
Nov  12.

Temtamy syndrome caused by a new C12orf57 variant in a Chinese boy, including 
pedigree analysis and literature review.

Wang Y(1)(2), Li M(3), Luo Y(1)(2), Zhao X(1)(4), Liao S(1)(2), Jiang L(1)(2), 
Li X(1)(2), Zhong M(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 
Chongqing 400014, P.R. China.
(2)Pediatric Research Institute, China International Science and Technology 
Cooperation Base of Child Development and Critical Disorders, National Clinical 
Research Center for Child Health and Disorders, Chongqing Engineering Research 
Center of Stem Cell Therapy, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child 
Development and Disorders, Chongqing 400014, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Respiration, Kunming Children's Hospital, Kunming, Yunnan 
650000, P.R. China.
(4)Huazhong University of Science and Technology Union Shenzhen Hospital, 
Shenzhen, Guangdong 518052, P.R. China.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Qianjiang Central Hospital of Chongqing, Chongqing 
409000, P.R. China.

Temtamy syndrome is an extremely rare disorder caused by chromosome 12 open 
reading frame 57 (C12orf57) pathogenic variants. The present study reported a 
boy with Temtamy syndrome displaying global developmental delay, epilepsy and 
dysmorphic facial appearance. Whole-exome sequencing was performed to identify a 
novel homozygous pathogenic variant of C12orf57 (c.3G >C, p.Met1IIe), and the 
affected protein structure and function were predicted to be pathogenic. 
Additionally, clinical features of the other reported 56 patients with C12orf57 
pathogenic variants were reviewed and compared. This study highlighted that 
C12orf57 pathogenic variants are mainly associated with global developmental 
delay, epilepsy and dysmorphic facial appearances. The clinical features were in 
accordance with the previously reported cases, except for those with recurrent 
infection, but without corpus callosum abnormalities. The present study reported 
the first Asian case to the best of our knowledge with Temtamy syndrome, and the 
novel C12orf57 pathogenic variant has not reported in any ethnic groups 
previously. The present study expanded the spectrum of C12orf57 pathogenic 
variants as well as the ethnic backgrounds of the affected patients.

Copyright © 2019, Spandidos Publications.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2019.8183
PMCID: PMC6909780
PMID: 31853307