---
reference_id: "PMID:29051974"
title: Cardiac disease in familial Mediterranean fever.
authors:
- Erken E
- Erken E
journal: Rheumatol Int
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00296-017-3853-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac disease in familial Mediterranean fever.
**Authors:** Erken E, Erken E
**Journal:** Rheumatol Int (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00296-017-3853-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00296-017-3853-8)

## Content

1. Rheumatol Int. 2018 Jan;38(1):51-58. doi: 10.1007/s00296-017-3853-8. Epub 2017
 Oct 20.

Cardiac disease in familial Mediterranean fever.

Erken E(1), Erken E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology-Immunology, Çukurova Üniversitesi Tıp Fakültesi 
Balcalı Hastanesi, 01330, Sarıçam/Adana, Turkey. eerken01@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Sütçü İmam Üniversitesi Tıp Fakültesi Hastanesi, 
46040, Onikişubat/Kahramanmaraş, Turkey.

Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autoinflammatory disease manifested by 
inflammatory attacks of peritonitis, pleuritis, pericarditis accompanied by 
fever and arthritis. Mutations of MEFV gene results in pyrin dysfunction, which 
causes uncontrolled interleukin-1 beta production and triggers the inflammatory 
attacks. Inflammation persists even during attack-free periods in one-third of 
the FMF patients. Findings of elevated proinflammatory cytokine patterns during 
remission as well as inflammatory attacks indicate the continuous subclinical 
disease activity and inflammation. Chronic inflammation was thought to be 
related to the cardiovascular risk in FMF patients. Main cardiac manifestations 
reported in FMF are pericarditis, idiopathic recurrent pericarditis, pericardiac 
tamponade, coronary heart disease and abnormal cardiovascular reactivity. 
Cardiac involvement in FMF may often be related to secondary AA amyloidosis. 
Deposition of amyloid may lead to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in FMF 
patients. Associations of several vasculitic disorders such as Immunoglobulin 
A-associated vasculitis, polyarteritis nodosa and Behcet's disease are common in 
FMF. Appropriate prophylactic treatment with colchicine is recommended to 
prevent from cardiovascular risks. For those resistant to colchicine, IL-1 
inhibitor agents can be used. Associated vasculitis should be treated with 
immunosuppressive agents. This review article aims to compile information about 
cardiac disease in FMF and refer to recent studies on the topic.

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-017-3853-8
PMID: 29051974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]