---
reference_id: "PMID:16603769"
title: The FATC domains of PIKK proteins are functionally equivalent and participate in the Tip60-dependent activation of DNA-PKcs and ATM.
authors:
- Jiang X
- Sun Y
- Chen S
- Roy K
- Price BD
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M513172200
keywords:
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins
- Base Sequence
- Calcium-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Cell Cycle Proteins/metabolism
- Cell Line
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Enzyme Activation
- Histone Acetyltransferases/physiology
- Humans
- Immunoprecipitation
- Lysine Acetyltransferase 5
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism
- "Proteins/chemistry, physiology"
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The FATC domains of PIKK proteins are functionally equivalent and participate in the Tip60-dependent activation of DNA-PKcs and ATM.
**Authors:** Jiang X, Sun Y, Chen S, Roy K, Price BD
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M513172200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M513172200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 9;281(23):15741-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M513172200. Epub
2006  Apr 9.

The FATC domains of PIKK proteins are functionally equivalent and participate in
the Tip60-dependent activation of DNA-PKcs and ATM.

Jiang X(1), Sun Y, Chen S, Roy K, Price BD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genomic Stability and DNA Repair, Department of Radiation
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Members of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related kinase (PIKK) family,
including the ATM, DNA-PKcs, Atr, and Trrap proteins, function in signal
transduction pathways that activate the DNA damage response. PIKK proteins
contain a conserved C-terminal FAT/kinase domain/FATC domain structure. The FATC
domain of ATM mediates the interaction between ATM and Tip60, a histone
acetyltransferase that regulates activation of ATM. Here, we examined whether
the FATC domains of DNA-PKcs, Atr, and Trrap were also able to interact with
Tip60. Deletion of the FATC domain of ATM blocked the interaction between ATM
and Tip60 and suppressed the activation of ATM kinase activity by DNA damage.
Replacement of the FATC domain of ATM with the FATC domains of DNA-PKcs, Atr, or
Trrap restored the activation of ATM and its association with Tip60. These
results indicate that the FATC domains of DNA-PKcs, Atr, Trrap, and ATM are
functionally equivalent. Immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that Tip60
is constitutively associated with DNA-PKcs and that the histone
acetyltransferase activity associated with DNA-PKcs is up-regulated by DNA
damage. When Tip60 expression was suppressed by small interfering RNA, the
activation of DNA-PKcs (measured by autophosphorylation of DNA-PKcs at serine
2056 and threonine 2609) was inhibited, demonstrating a key role for Tip60 in
the activation of DNA-PKcs by DNA damage. The conserved FATC domain of PIKK
proteins may therefore function as a binding domain for the Tip60 histone
acetyltransferase. Further, the ability of Tip60 to regulate the activation of
both ATM and DNA-PKcs in response to DNA damage demonstrates that Tip60 is a key
component of the DNA damage-signaling network.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M513172200
PMID: 16603769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
