---
reference_id: "PMID:27245196"
title: "Comparing the symptoms and mechanisms of \"dissociation\" in dissociative identity disorder and borderline personality disorder."
authors:
- Laddis A
- Dell PF
- Korzekwa M
journal: J Trauma Dissociation
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/15299732.2016.1194358
keywords:
- Adult
- "Borderline Personality Disorder/diagnosis, psychology"
- Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
- "Dissociative Disorders/diagnosis, psychology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Interview, Psychological"
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparing the symptoms and mechanisms of "dissociation" in dissociative identity disorder and borderline personality disorder.
**Authors:** Laddis A, Dell PF, Korzekwa M
**Journal:** J Trauma Dissociation (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15299732.2016.1194358](https://doi.org/10.1080/15299732.2016.1194358)

## Content

1. J Trauma Dissociation. 2017 Mar-Apr;18(2):139-173. doi: 
10.1080/15299732.2016.1194358. Epub 2016 May 31.

Comparing the symptoms and mechanisms of "dissociation" in dissociative identity 
disorder and borderline personality disorder.

Laddis A(1), Dell PF(2), Korzekwa M(3).

Author information:
(1)a School of Public Health , Boston University , Shrewsbury , Massachusetts , 
USA.
(2)b Trauma Recovery Center at Psychotherapy Resources of Norfolk , Norfolk , 
Virginia , USA.
(3)c Community Psychiatry , McMaster University , Hamilton , Ontario , Canada.

A total of 75 patients were diagnosed with the Structured Clinical Interview for 
DSM-IV Dissociative Disorders-Revised as having dissociative identity disorder 
(DID), and 100 patients were diagnosed with the Structured Interview for DSM-IV 
Personality as having borderline personality disorder (BPD). Both groups were 
administered the Multidimensional Inventory of Dissociation (MID). DID patients 
had significantly higher MID scores than BPD patients, different distributions 
of MID scores, and different MID subscale profiles in 3 ranges of MID scores 
(0-15, 15-30, 30-45). The core MID symptoms-exhibited at all ranges of MID 
scores-for DID patients (the presence of alters, identity confusion, and memory 
problems) and BPD patients (flashbacks, identity confusion, and memory problems) 
were ostensibly similar but were considered to be mostly produced by different 
underlying processes. Multiple regression analyses showed that the core MID 
symptoms of DID patients had different predictors than did the core MID symptoms 
of BPD patients. Alter identities seemed to generate most-but not 
all-dissociative phenomena in DID patients, whereas only the 24% highest scoring 
BPD patients (MID ≥45) seemed to manifest alter-driven dissociative experiences. 
Most BPD dissociative experiences appeared to be due to 5 other mechanisms: (a) 
BPD-specific, stress-driven, rapid shifts of self-state; (b and c) nondefensive 
disruptions of the framework of perceptual organization with or without an 
accompanying BPD-specific, dissociation-like disintegration of 
affective/neurocognitive functioning; (d) a defensive distancing or detachment 
from distress (i.e., simple depersonalization); and (e) Allen, Console, and 
Lewis's (1999) severe absorptive detachment.

DOI: 10.1080/15299732.2016.1194358
PMID: 27245196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]