---
reference_id: "PMID:36246197"
title: "Middle Ear Primary Oncocytic Schneiderian Papilloma: A Case Report."
authors:
- Afzalzadeh MR
- Taraz Jamshidi S
- Zohani Z
journal: Iran J Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.22038/IJORL.2022.61033.3142
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Middle Ear Primary Oncocytic Schneiderian Papilloma: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Afzalzadeh MR, Taraz Jamshidi S, Zohani Z
**Journal:** Iran J Otorhinolaryngol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.22038/IJORL.2022.61033.3142](https://doi.org/10.22038/IJORL.2022.61033.3142)

## Content

1. Iran J Otorhinolaryngol. 2022 Sep;34(124):271-274. doi: 
10.22038/IJORL.2022.61033.3142.

Middle Ear Primary Oncocytic Schneiderian Papilloma: A Case Report.

Afzalzadeh MR(1), Taraz Jamshidi S(2), Zohani Z(3).

Author information:
(1)Sinus and Surgical Endoscopic Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad 
University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(2)Cutaneous Leishmaniosis Research Center, Mashhad University of Medical 
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(3)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical 
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic otitis media is a significant health problem, but middle 
ear and mastoid neoplasms, either benign or malignant, are extremely rare.
CASE REPORT: Here is a report from a 51-year-old female who presented persistent 
otorrhea with an aural polyp. The patient was operated on with the probable 
diagnosis of cholesteatoma. During surgery, a fragile mass was discovered, and 
histopathologic examination reported the diagnosis of a primary oncocytic 
Schneiderian papilloma. Microscopically it has pseudostratified epithelium of 
columnar cell epithelium with eosinophilic granular cytoplasm and hyperchromatic 
nuclei. The treatment of choice for Schneiderian papillomas is complete surgical 
removal.
CONCLUSIONS: Although very rare, oncocytic Schneiderian papilloma should be 
considered a differential diagnosis of ear neoplasms such as auditory canal 
polyps.

DOI: 10.22038/IJORL.2022.61033.3142
PMCID: PMC9515994
PMID: 36246197