---
reference_id: "PMID:26401313"
title: "The comorbidity of borderline personality disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder: revisiting the prevalence and associations in a general population sample."
authors:
- Scheiderer EM
- Wood PK
- Trull TJ
journal: Borderline Personal Disord Emot Dysregul
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s40479-015-0032-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The comorbidity of borderline personality disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder: revisiting the prevalence and associations in a general population sample.
**Authors:** Scheiderer EM, Wood PK, Trull TJ
**Journal:** Borderline Personal Disord Emot Dysregul (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40479-015-0032-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40479-015-0032-y)

## Content

1. Borderline Personal Disord Emot Dysregul. 2015 Jul 24;2:11. doi: 
10.1186/s40479-015-0032-y. eCollection 2015.

The comorbidity of borderline personality disorder and posttraumatic stress 
disorder: revisiting the prevalence and associations in a general population 
sample.

Scheiderer EM(1), Wood PK(2), Trull TJ(2).

Author information:
(1)104 Psychology Building, University of Missouri - Columbia, Columbia, MO 
65211 USA.
(2)210 McAlester Hall, University of Missouri - Columbia, Columbia, MO 65211 
USA.

BACKGROUND: The comorbidity of borderline personality disorder (BPD) and 
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is frequent, yet not well understood. The 
influence of childhood sexual abuse (CSA) in the development of this comorbidity 
has been a focus of prior clinical studies, but empirical evidence to generalize 
this focus to the broader population is lacking. Primary aims of the present 
study included evaluation of: (a) the association of this comorbidity with 
decrements in health-related quality of life (HRQOL) and (b) the importance of 
CSA as a predictive factor for this comorbidity in a general population sample.
METHODS: We utilized data from Wave 2 of the National Epidemiological Survey on 
Alcohol and Related Conditions, a nationally representative face-to-face survey 
evaluating mental health in the non-institutionalized adult population of the 
United States. Data from respondents who met criteria for BPD and/or PTSD were 
analyzed (N = 4104) to assess potential associations between and among lifetime 
BPD-PTSD comorbidity, CSA, gender, healthcare usage, and mental and physical 
HRQOL.
RESULTS: Lifetime comorbidity of BPD and PTSD was associated with more 
dysfunction than either individual disorder; and the factors of gender, age, and 
CSA exhibited significant effects in the prediction of this comorbidity and 
associated decrements in HRQOL.
CONCLUSIONS: Results support the measured focus on CSA as an important, but not 
necessary, etiologic factor and emphasize this comorbidity as a source of 
greater suffering and public health burden than either BPD or PTSD alone. The 
differential impact of these disorders occurring alone versus in comorbid form 
highlights the importance of diagnosing both BPD and PTSD and attending to 
lifetime comorbidity.

DOI: 10.1186/s40479-015-0032-y
PMCID: PMC4579516
PMID: 26401313