---
reference_id: "PMID:38658496"
title: "Practical Recommendations for Exercise Training in Patients with Long COVID with or without Post-exertional Malaise: A Best Practice Proposal."
authors:
- Gloeckl R
- Zwick RH
- Fürlinger U
- Schneeberger T
- Leitl D
- Jarosch I
- Behrends U
- Scheibenbogen C
- Koczulla AR
journal: Sports Med Open
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s40798-024-00695-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Practical Recommendations for Exercise Training in Patients with Long COVID with or without Post-exertional Malaise: A Best Practice Proposal.
**Authors:** Gloeckl R, Zwick RH, Fürlinger U, Schneeberger T, Leitl D, Jarosch I, Behrends U, Scheibenbogen C, Koczulla AR
**Journal:** Sports Med Open (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40798-024-00695-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40798-024-00695-8)

## Content

1. Sports Med Open. 2024 Apr 24;10(1):47. doi: 10.1186/s40798-024-00695-8.

Practical Recommendations for Exercise Training in Patients with Long COVID with 
or without Post-exertional Malaise: A Best Practice Proposal.

Gloeckl R(1)(2), Zwick RH(3), Fürlinger U(3), Schneeberger T(1)(2), Leitl 
D(1)(2), Jarosch I(1)(2), Behrends U(4)(5), Scheibenbogen C(6), Koczulla 
AR(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Rehabilitation, Philipps-University of Marburg, 
Marburg, Germany.
(2)Institute for Pulmonary Rehabilitation Research, Schoen Klinik 
Berchtesgadener Land, Schoenau am Koenigssee, Germany.
(3)Therme Wien Med, Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Rehabilitation Research, 
Vienna, Austria.
(4)Childrens' Hospital, School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich, 
Munich, Germany.
(5)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Berlin, Germany.
(6)Institute of Medical Immunology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt Universität Zu Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(7)Department of Pulmonary Rehabilitation, Philipps-University of Marburg, 
Marburg, Germany. RKoczulla@schoen-klinik.de.
(8)Institute for Pulmonary Rehabilitation Research, Schoen Klinik 
Berchtesgadener Land, Schoenau am Koenigssee, Germany. 
RKoczulla@schoen-klinik.de.
(9)Teaching Hospital, Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria. 
RKoczulla@schoen-klinik.de.

People with long COVID may suffer from a wide range of ongoing symptoms 
including fatigue, exertional dyspnea, reduced exercise performance, and others. 
In particular, impaired exercise performance is a condition that can be 
recovered in many people through an individualized physical exercise training 
program. However, clinical experience has shown that the presence of 
post-exertional malaise (PEM) is a significant barrier to physical exercise 
training in people with long COVID. Currently, there is no guideline or 
consensus available on how to apply exercise training in this cohort. Therefore, 
we conducted a literature review in the PubMed library using the following 
search terms: "COVID", "post-COVID", "long COVID" and "exercise" searching for 
studies from January 2020 to January 2024. Data from 46 trials were included. 
Exercise training regimes were very heterogeneous and none of these studies 
reported on the management of PEM in the context of an exercise training 
program. Based on the feedback from an additional survey that was answered by 14 
international experts in the field of exercise training in long COVID, combined 
with the authors´ own extensive practical experience, a best practice proposal 
for exercise training recommendations has been developed. This proposal 
differentiates exercise procedures according to the presence of no, 
mild/moderate or severe PEM in people with long COVID. These recommendations may 
guide allied healthcare professionals worldwide in initiating and adjusting 
exercise training programs for people with long COVID, stratified according to 
the presence and severity of PEM.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40798-024-00695-8
PMCID: PMC11043268
PMID: 38658496

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.