---
reference_id: "PMID:25764338"
title: Biochemical and Molecular Alterations Following Arsenic-Induced Oxidative Stress and Mitochondrial Dysfunction in Rat Brain.
authors:
- Prakash C
- Soni M
- Kumar V
journal: Biol Trace Elem Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s12011-015-0284-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biochemical and Molecular Alterations Following Arsenic-Induced Oxidative Stress and Mitochondrial Dysfunction in Rat Brain.
**Authors:** Prakash C, Soni M, Kumar V
**Journal:** Biol Trace Elem Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12011-015-0284-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12011-015-0284-9)

## Content

1. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2015 Sep;167(1):121-9. doi: 10.1007/s12011-015-0284-9.
Epub  2015 Mar 13.

Biochemical and Molecular Alterations Following Arsenic-Induced Oxidative Stress 
and Mitochondrial Dysfunction in Rat Brain.

Prakash C(1), Soni M, Kumar V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, 124001, 
Haryana, India.

Oxidative stress is associated with the generation of reactive oxygen species 
(ROS), which is supposed to be one of the mechanisms of arsenic-induced 
neurodegeneration. Mitochondria, being the major source of ROS generation may 
present an important target of arsenic-mediated neurotoxicity. Hence, we planned 
the study to elucidate the possible biochemical and molecular alterations 
induced by arsenic exposure in rat brain mitochondria. Chronic sodium arsenite 
treatment (25 ppm for 12 weeks) resulted in decreased activity of mitochondrial 
complexes I, II, and IV followed by increased ROS generation. There was decrease 
in mitochondrial superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) activity in arsenic-treated rat 
brain further showing increased superoxide radical generation in mitochondria. 
The decrease in MnSOD activity might be responsible for the increased protein 
and lipid oxidation as observed in our study. Protein and messenger RNA (mRNA) 
levels of MnSOD and mitochondrial uncoupling protein 2 (UCP-2) were 
downregulated suggesting decreased removal of ROS in rat brain. Fourier 
transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy analysis revealed significant decrease in 
amide A, amide I, amide II, and Olefinic = CH stretching band area suggesting 
molecular alteration in proteins and lipids after arsenic treatment. The results 
of present study indicate that arsenic-induced disturbed mitochondrial 
metabolism, decreased removal of ROS, decrease in protein synthesis, and altered 
membrane lipid polarity and fluidity may be responsible for the mitochondrial 
oxidative damage in rat brain that may further be implicated as contributing 
factor in arsenic-induced neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1007/s12011-015-0284-9
PMID: 25764338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]