---
reference_id: "PMID:8936358"
title: "Effects of long-term treatment in Wilson's disease with D-penicillamine and zinc sulphate."
authors:
- Czlonkowska A
- Gajda J
- Rodo M
journal: J Neurol
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1007/BF00868525
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of long-term treatment in Wilson's disease with D-penicillamine and zinc sulphate.
**Authors:** Czlonkowska A, Gajda J, Rodo M
**Journal:** J Neurol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00868525](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00868525)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 1996 Mar;243(3):269-73. doi: 10.1007/BF00868525.

Effects of long-term treatment in Wilson's disease with D-penicillamine and zinc 
sulphate.

Czlonkowska A(1), Gajda J, Rodo M.

Author information:
(1)2nd Department of Neurology, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, 
Poland.

The results of treatment with D-penicillamine (D-P) or zinc sulphate (Zn) in 67 
newly diagnosed cases of Wilson's disease have been compared. All patients (7 
with hepatic, 1 with psychiatric and 59 with neurological or preclinical forms) 
were fully compliant. During 12 years of observation, 34 patients received d-P 
and 33 Zn as the primary treatment. Fifteen patients (44%) discontinued D-P, in 
10 cases owing to side effects. Four (12%) patients discontinued Zn, in 2 cases 
because of side-effects. One patient who received Zn deteriorated during the 
first few months after the initiation of therapy. The effectiveness of long-term 
treatment with D-P and Zn was similar in those patients who were able to 
continue the initial therapy. Zn was tolerated better than D-P; we suggest, 
therefore, that it may be recommended as an initial therapy for patients in the 
preclinical stage of Wilson's disease or with neurological presentation of the 
disease. More observation is needed for patients with the hepatic and 
psychiatric forms of the disease.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00868525
PMID: 8936358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]