---
reference_id: "PMID:7707085"
title: Prevalence of bowel dysfunction in patients with multiple sclerosis and bladder dysfunction.
authors:
- Chia YW
- Fowler CJ
- Kamm MA
- Henry MM
- Lemieux MC
- Swash M
journal: J Neurol
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1007/BF00887825
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of bowel dysfunction in patients with multiple sclerosis and bladder dysfunction.
**Authors:** Chia YW, Fowler CJ, Kamm MA, Henry MM, Lemieux MC, Swash M
**Journal:** J Neurol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00887825](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00887825)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 1995 Jan;242(2):105-8. doi: 10.1007/BF00887825.

Prevalence of bowel dysfunction in patients with multiple sclerosis and bladder 
dysfunction.

Chia YW(1), Fowler CJ, Kamm MA, Henry MM, Lemieux MC, Swash M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Uro-neurology, National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, London, UK.

Urinary dysfunction is common in cases of multiple sclerosis (MS). The close 
proximity of those neural pathways which control the bladder to those which 
control anorectal function might be expected to lead to a high coexistence of 
bladder and bowel symptoms. Seventy-seven consecutive patients with clinically 
definite MS attending a uroneurology clinic were interviewed about their bowel 
function. All patients had clinical evidence of spinal cord disease with varying 
degrees of impaired mobility and sufficiently severe disturbance of bladder 
control to seek medical advice. Thirty-six per cent of these patients had 
constipation. Twenty per cent had "current incontinence", although another 30% 
had had at least one episode of faecal incontinence more than 3 months 
previously. Some patients had both constipation and faecal incontinence. A total 
of 52% currently had at least one bowel symptom. The pattern of bowel symptoms 
did not correlate with the pattern of urinary disturbance, or the duration of 
MS, or the degree of disability. Bowel symptoms are common in patients with MS, 
but even in those with urinary dysfunction are not universal. Whereas bladder 
dysfunction in MS is clearly related to spinal cord disease, the neurological 
basis for the bowel dysfunction is less clear.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00887825
PMID: 7707085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]