---
reference_id: "PMID:40378984"
title: Insulin-like Growth Factor-1 Reflects Liver Disease Stage and Improves Prediction of Liver-related Mortality.
authors:
- Schneider CV
- Gross S
- Balasubramani S
- Tomanová P
- Schrader C
- Fromme M
- Mandorfer M
- Guldiken N
- Schneider KM
- Lurje G
- Raptis A
- Huang HYR
- Mueller S
- Reiberger T
- Nahon P
- Anstee QM
- Daly AK
- Govaere O
- Strnad P
journal: Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2025.02.030
keywords:
- Humans
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/analysis
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- United Kingdom
- Aged
- Adult
- "Liver Diseases/mortality, diagnosis, pathology"
- Prognosis
- Survival Analysis
- Biomarkers/blood
- Cohort Studies
- Insulin-Like Peptides
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insulin-like Growth Factor-1 Reflects Liver Disease Stage and Improves Prediction of Liver-related Mortality.
**Authors:** Schneider CV, Gross S, Balasubramani S, Tomanová P, Schrader C, Fromme M, Mandorfer M, Guldiken N, Schneider KM, Lurje G, Raptis A, Huang HYR, Mueller S, Reiberger T, Nahon P, Anstee QM, Daly AK, Govaere O, Strnad P
**Journal:** Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cgh.2025.02.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2025.02.030)

## Content

1. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2025 Dec;23(13):2559-2569. doi:
10.1016/j.cgh.2025.02.030. Epub 2025 May 14.

Insulin-like Growth Factor-1 Reflects Liver Disease Stage and Improves
Prediction of Liver-related Mortality.

Schneider CV(1), Gross S(2), Balasubramani S(1), Tomanová P(3), Schrader C(1),
Fromme M(1), Mandorfer M(4), Guldiken N(1), Schneider KM(1), Lurje G(5), Raptis
A(1), Huang HYR(1), Mueller S(6), Reiberger T(4), Nahon P(7), Anstee QM(8), Daly
AK(9), Govaere O(10), Strnad P(11).

Author information:
(1)Medical Clinic III, Gastroenterology, Metabolic Diseases and Intensive Care,
University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Health Care Provider of the European Reference
Network on Rare Liver Disorders (ERN RARE LIVER), Aachen, Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine B, Cardiology, University Medicine
Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany; DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular
Research), Partner Site Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
(3)Prague University of Economics and Business, Prague, Czech Republic.
(4)Vienna Hepatic Hemodynamic Lab, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology,
Department of Medicine III, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Department of Surgery, Campus Charité Mitte, Campus Virchow-Klinikum,
Experimental Surgery, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of
Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute
of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Center for Alcohol Research, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany.
(7)AP-HP, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Seine Saint-Denis, Liver Unit, Bobigny,
France; Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, Bobigny, France; Inserm, UMR-1138
"Functional Genomics of Solid Tumors", Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers,
Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(8)Translational & Clinical Research Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences,
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom; Newcastle NIHR
Biomedical Research Centre, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Trust, Newcastle
upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(9)Translational & Clinical Research Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences,
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(10)Department of Imaging and Pathology, Translational Cell and Tissue Research,
KU Leuven and University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(11)Medical Clinic III, Gastroenterology, Metabolic Diseases and Intensive Care,
University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Health Care Provider of the European Reference
Network on Rare Liver Disorders (ERN RARE LIVER), Aachen, Germany. Electronic
address: pstrnad@ukaachen.de.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Liver-related mortality represents a growing public health
concern, disproportionately affecting younger subjects. Because there are no
established tools for early detection of individuals at risk for liver-related
death (LRD), we analyzed LRD predictors in the UK Biobank (UKB) data and
validated the usefulness of serum insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1).
METHODS: The UKB dataset encompassing 325,981 participants, a median follow-up
of 13.5 years, and 846 LRDs was used as a training cohort. IGF-1 was validated
in several independent cohorts of different liver disease etiologies and
fibrosis stages. A Cox proportional hazard model was used to develop the
gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT)-IGF-1 score that was validated in an
independent UKB cohort with 83,528 subjects and 237 LRDs.
RESULTS: Among 59 variables in the UKB training cohort, GGT and IGF-1 were
identified as the LRD predictors with time-dependent area under the curve
(AUROC) >80%. Phenome-wide association study demonstrated the higher liver
specificity of IGF-1 compared with GGT. In validation cohorts, IGF-1 levels: (1)
increased in subjects with alcohol misuse after alcohol detoxification; (2) were
reduced in individuals with alcohol-related/steatotic liver disease or severe
alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency and higher fibrosis stages; and (3) were
diminished in participants with more advanced liver cirrhosis and lower levels
associated with higher mortality. In the UKB training and validation cohorts,
the novel GGT-IGF-1 score achieved an AUROC of 0.87 for LRD and was
significantly better than established risk scores (AUROC = 0.77-0.81).
CONCLUSIONS: The study highlights the usefulness of IGF-1 as a reliable
predictor of LRD and identifies a novel, population-based screening tool
outperforming the currently used scores.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cgh.2025.02.030
PMID: 40378984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
