---
reference_id: "PMID:22133017"
title: "Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2 is upregulated on peripheral blood monocytes of patients with psoriatic arthritis: a role for a gram-positive inflammatory trigger?"
authors:
- Carrasco S
- Neves FS
- Fonseca MH
- Gonçalves CR
- Saad CG
- Sampaio-Barros PD
- Goldenstein-Schainberg C
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2011'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2 is upregulated on peripheral blood monocytes of patients with psoriatic arthritis: a role for a gram-positive inflammatory trigger?
**Authors:** Carrasco S, Neves FS, Fonseca MH, Gonçalves CR, Saad CG, Sampaio-Barros PD, Goldenstein-Schainberg C
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2011)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2011 Nov-Dec;29(6):958-62. Epub 2011 Dec 22.

Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2 is upregulated on peripheral blood monocytes of 
patients with psoriatic arthritis: a role for a gram-positive inflammatory 
trigger?

Carrasco S(1), Neves FS, Fonseca MH, Gonçalves CR, Saad CG, Sampaio-Barros PD, 
Goldenstein-Schainberg C.

Author information:
(1)University of Sao Paulo, Brazil. socarrasco2@gmail.com

Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2 and TLR4 are able to activate innate immune cells in 
response to gram-positive and gramnegative bacteria, respectively. Psoriatic 
arthritis (PsA) is a chronic inflammatory joint disease and gram-positive 
streptococcus may have a role in its pathogenesis, suggesting the importance of 
TLR2 stimulation in PsA.
OBJECTIVES: To assess TLR2 and TLR4 expressions on innate immune cells of PsA 
patients, relating to clinical disease activity.
METHODS: Forty-five patients with peripheral joint manifestations of PsA were 
included and disease activity was assessed by Disease Activity Score of 28 joint 
counts (DAS28). 32 healthy subjects constituted the control group. 
Membrane-bound TLR2 and TLR4 expressions were assessed on peripheral blood 
monocytes and neutrophils by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven patients had active PsA (DAS28 higher than 2.6) and 18 had 
inactive disease. TLR2 was significantly upregulated on monocytes in both active 
and inactive PsA group, comparing to healthy controls. TLR4 was similarly 
expressed in all tested groups.
CONCLUSIONS: TLR2 is overexpressed by PsA monocytes, suggesting that 
gram-positive exposure could induce higher inflammatory responses in this 
disease.

PMID: 22133017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]