---
reference_id: "PMID:32061803"
title: Cyclical amyloid beta-astrocyte activity induces oxidative stress in Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Elangovan S
- Holsinger RMD
journal: Biochimie
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2020.02.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cyclical amyloid beta-astrocyte activity induces oxidative stress in Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Elangovan S, Holsinger RMD
**Journal:** Biochimie (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biochi.2020.02.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biochi.2020.02.003)

## Content

1. Biochimie. 2020 Apr-May;171-172:38-42. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2020.02.003. Epub
 2020 Feb 13.

Cyclical amyloid beta-astrocyte activity induces oxidative stress in Alzheimer's 
disease.

Elangovan S(1), Holsinger RMD(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience and Dementia, Brain and Mind Centre, 
Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, 2050, 
Australia.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience and Dementia, Brain and Mind Centre, 
Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, 2050, 
Australia; Discipline of Pathology, School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, 2006, Australia. 
Electronic address: Damian.Holsinger@sydney.edu.au.

Glial cell involvement in Alzheimer's disease (AD) is multi-faceted. The role of 
astrocytes in AD pathology, both as a causative agent of amyloid-beta (Aβ) 
production as well as a casualty of dysfunction resulting from the presence of 
Aβ has been well-delineated. In this review, we explore the influence of 
oxidative stress in astrocytes and the subsequent effect on Aβ levels in the 
brain from a perspective of intracellular calcium homeostasis and NADPH oxidase 
activity. The response of astrocytes to the presence of Aβ, as well astrocytic 
and microglial interaction and inflammatory cytokine release is also discussed, 
highlighting a cyclical behaviour of these cells in contributing to AD 
pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie 
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2020.02.003
PMID: 32061803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.