---
reference_id: "PMID:34665663"
title: "Toward Preventing Speech and Language Disorders of Known Genetic Origin: First Post-Intervention Results of Babble Boot Camp in Children With Classic Galactosemia."
authors:
- Peter B
- Davis J
- Cotter S
- Belter A
- Williams E
- Stumpf M
- Bruce L
- Eng L
- Kim Y
- Finestack L
- Stoel-Gammon C
- Williams D
- Scherer N
- VanDam M
- Potter N
journal: Am J Speech Lang Pathol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1044/2021_AJSLP-21-00098
keywords:
- Child
- "Galactosemias/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Language Disorders
- Pilot Projects
- Speech
- "Speech Disorders/diagnosis, therapy"
- Vocabulary
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Toward Preventing Speech and Language Disorders of Known Genetic Origin: First Post-Intervention Results of Babble Boot Camp in Children With Classic Galactosemia.
**Authors:** Peter B, Davis J, Cotter S, Belter A, Williams E, Stumpf M, Bruce L, Eng L, Kim Y, Finestack L, Stoel-Gammon C, Williams D, Scherer N, VanDam M, Potter N
**Journal:** Am J Speech Lang Pathol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1044/2021_AJSLP-21-00098](https://doi.org/10.1044/2021_AJSLP-21-00098)

## Content

1. Am J Speech Lang Pathol. 2021 Nov 4;30(6):2616-2634. doi: 
10.1044/2021_AJSLP-21-00098. Epub 2021 Oct 19.

Toward Preventing Speech and Language Disorders of Known Genetic Origin: First 
Post-Intervention Results of Babble Boot Camp in Children With Classic 
Galactosemia.

Peter B(1)(2), Davis J(1), Cotter S(1), Belter A(1), Williams E(1), Stumpf M(1), 
Bruce L(1), Eng L(1), Kim Y(1), Finestack L(3), Stoel-Gammon C(4), Williams 
D(5), Scherer N(1), VanDam M(5), Potter N(5).

Author information:
(1)Speech and Hearing Science, College of Health Solutions, Arizona State 
University, Tempe.
(2)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Saint Louis University, 
MO.
(3)Department of Speech-Language-Hearing Sciences, University of Minnesota Twin 
Cities, Minneapolis.
(4)Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle.
(5)Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences, Elson S. Floyd College of 
Medicine, Washington State University, Spokane.

Purpose Babble Boot Camp (BBC) is a package of proactive activities and routines 
designed to prevent speech and language disorders in infants at predictable 
risk. It is implemented via parent training and currently undergoing clinical 
trial in children with a newborn diagnosis of classic galactosemia (CG), a 
metabolic disease with high risk of speech and language disorders. The purpose 
of this study is to provide updates to a previous pilot study and to present the 
first set of post-intervention results. Method The intervention and data 
collection occurred during child ages < 6-24 months, with follow-up assessments 
of speech and language at ages 2.5 and 3.5 years. Treatment targets included 
earliest vocalization rates, babble complexity, speech production accuracy, and 
vocabulary and syntactic growth. The oldest 15 children with CG (including three 
untreated controls) completed the first set of follow-up assessments. Aggregate 
data up to 10 months were available for 17 treated children with CG, six 
untreated children with CG, and six typical controls. Results At ages 7-9 
months, babbling complexity, as measured with mean babbling level, was higher in 
the treated children with CG than in the untreated children with CG and the 
typical controls. Prior to 24 months of age, the treated children with CG had 
greater expressive but not receptive vocabulary sizes than an untreated control. 
Follow-up testing showed typical language scores for all 12 treated children 
with CG and typical articulation scores for 11 of these, whereas one of three 
untreated children with CG had low articulation and expressive language scores. 
Conclusions The BBC appears to be a viable intervention to support the speech 
and expressive language development of children with GC. Future studies will 
evaluate the relative contributions of the earliest and later BBC components to 
outcomes.

DOI: 10.1044/2021_AJSLP-21-00098
PMCID: PMC9135004
PMID: 34665663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]