---
reference_id: "PMID:25707398"
title: Disruptive de novo mutations of DYRK1A lead to a syndromic form of autism and ID.
authors:
- van Bon BW
- Coe BP
- Bernier R
- Green C
- Gerdts J
- Witherspoon K
- Kleefstra T
- Willemsen MH
- Kumar R
- Bosco P
- Fichera M
- Li D
- Amaral D
- Cristofoli F
- Peeters H
- Haan E
- Romano C
- Mefford HC
- Scheffer I
- Gecz J
- de Vries BB
- Eichler EE
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/mp.2015.5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Autistic Disorder/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Fetal Growth Retardation/genetics
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- "Seizures, Febrile/genetics"
- Siblings
- Speech Disorders/genetics
- Stereotypic Movement Disorder/genetics
- Syndrome
- Young Adult
- Dyrk Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disruptive de novo mutations of DYRK1A lead to a syndromic form of autism and ID.
**Authors:** van Bon BW, Coe BP, Bernier R, Green C, Gerdts J, Witherspoon K, Kleefstra T, Willemsen MH, Kumar R, Bosco P, Fichera M, Li D, Amaral D, Cristofoli F, Peeters H, Haan E, Romano C, Mefford HC, Scheffer I, Gecz J, de Vries BB, Eichler EE
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/mp.2015.5](https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2015.5)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2016 Jan;21(1):126-32. doi: 10.1038/mp.2015.5. Epub 2015 Feb
24.

Disruptive de novo mutations of DYRK1A lead to a syndromic form of autism and 
ID.

van Bon BW(1)(2), Coe BP(3), Bernier R(4), Green C(5), Gerdts J(4), Witherspoon 
K(3), Kleefstra T(1), Willemsen MH(1), Kumar R(2), Bosco P(6), Fichera M(6)(7), 
Li D(8), Amaral D(8), Cristofoli F(9), Peeters H(9)(10), Haan E(2)(11), Romano 
C(6), Mefford HC(4), Scheffer I(5), Gecz J(2)(11)(12), de Vries BB(1)(13), 
Eichler EE(3)(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(2)School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, University of Adelaide, 
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(3)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(5)Florey Institute, University of Melbourne, Austin Health and Royal Children's 
Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(6)I.R.C.C.S. Associazione Oasi Maria Santissima, Troina, Italy.
(7)Medical Genetics, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
(8)Representing the Autism Phenome Project, MIND Institute, University of 
California-Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA.
(9)Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, KU Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(10)Leuven Autism Research (LAuRes), Leuven, Belgium.
(11)South Australian Clinical Genetics Service, SA Pathology, Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia.
(12)Robinson Institute, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, 
Australia.
(13)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud university 
medical center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(14)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

Dual-specificity tyrosine-(Y)-phosphorylation-regulated kinase 1 A (DYRK1A) maps 
to the Down syndrome critical region; copy number increase of this gene is 
thought to have a major role in the neurocognitive deficits associated with 
Trisomy 21. Truncation of DYRK1A in patients with developmental delay (DD) and 
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) suggests a different pathology associated with 
loss-of-function mutations. To understand the phenotypic spectrum associated 
with DYRK1A mutations, we resequenced the gene in 7162 ASD/DD patients (2446 
previously reported) and 2169 unaffected siblings and performed a detailed 
phenotypic assessment on nine patients. Comparison of our data and published 
cases with 8696 controls identified a significant enrichment of DYRK1A 
truncating mutations (P=0.00851) and an excess of de novo mutations (P=2.53 × 
10(-10)) among ASD/intellectual disability (ID) patients. Phenotypic comparison 
of all novel (n=5) and recontacted (n=3) cases with previous case reports, 
including larger CNV and translocation events (n=7), identified a syndromal 
disorder among the 15 patients. It was characterized by ID, ASD, microcephaly, 
intrauterine growth retardation, febrile seizures in infancy, impaired speech, 
stereotypic behavior, hypertonia and a specific facial gestalt. We conclude that 
mutations in DYRK1A define a syndromic form of ASD and ID with 
neurodevelopmental defects consistent with murine and Drosophila knockout 
models.

DOI: 10.1038/mp.2015.5
PMCID: PMC4547916
PMID: 25707398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST E.E.E. is on the scientific 
advisory board (SAB) of DNAnexus, Inc.