---
reference_id: "PMID:40787166"
title: "Ludwig's Angina in a 6-Year-Old Child: Case Report."
authors:
- Akbari N
- Razavi A
- Sabzi Z
- Parhiz J
journal: Clin Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/ccr3.70769
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ludwig's Angina in a 6-Year-Old Child: Case Report.
**Authors:** Akbari N, Razavi A, Sabzi Z, Parhiz J
**Journal:** Clin Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ccr3.70769](https://doi.org/10.1002/ccr3.70769)

## Content

1. Clin Case Rep. 2025 Aug 8;13(8):e70769. doi: 10.1002/ccr3.70769. eCollection 
2025 Aug.

Ludwig's Angina in a 6-Year-Old Child: Case Report.

Akbari N(1), Razavi A(2), Sabzi Z(3), Parhiz J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences Fenerbahce University 
Istanbul Turkey.
(2)Pediatrics Resident, Gorgan Medical School Golestan University of Medical 
Sciences Gorgan Iran.
(3)Faculty Member, Nursing Research Center Golestan University of Medical 
Sciences Gorgan Iran.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Neonatal and Children's Health 
Research Center Golestan University of Medical Sciences Gorgan Iran.

Ludwig's angina is a rare but potentially fatal cellulitis that affects the 
submandibular, sublingual, and submental spaces, typically triggered by dental 
infections. This case report details a severe presentation of Ludwig's angina in 
a 6-year-old girl who presented with submandibular swelling, fever, voice 
alterations, and respiratory distress. Diagnosis was based on clinical 
evaluation, supported by CT imaging, revealing significant airway narrowing and 
lymphadenopathy. The patient was promptly intubated to secure the airway, 
followed by emergency surgical drainage and intravenous antibiotics. 
Postoperative care included sedation, ongoing monitoring in the PICU, and close 
follow-up by multiple specialties. After a 10-day hospitalization, the patient 
showed significant recovery with no complications. The case underscores the 
importance of early diagnosis and intervention in preventing severe 
complications such as airway obstruction, sepsis, and mediastinal spread. It 
highlights the critical role of interdisciplinary collaboration, including 
pediatric infectious disease specialists, surgeons, and anesthesiologists, in 
managing this life-threatening condition effectively.

© 2025 The Author(s). Clinical Case Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ccr3.70769
PMCID: PMC12334268
PMID: 40787166

Conflict of interest statement: Effective home management of Ludwig's angina 
necessitates adherence to the complete course of prescribed antibiotics to 
prevent recurrence of the infection. Should symptoms worsen, including increased 
swelling, fever, or difficulty breathing, prompt medical consultation is 
imperative. Adequate hydration, sufficient rest, and the consumption of soft 
foods are essential for recovery. Additionally, regular follow‐up visits with a 
healthcare provider are crucial for monitoring progress and preventing potential 
complications.The authors declare no conflicts of interest.