---
reference_id: "PMID:36853554"
title: "Hashimoto's Encephalopathy: Case Series and Literature Review."
authors:
- Chaudhuri J
- Mukherjee A
- Chakravarty A
journal: Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s11910-023-01255-5
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Female
- "Hashimoto Disease/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- "Encephalitis/diagnosis, therapy, complications"
- "Brain Diseases/diagnosis, etiology"
- Autoantibodies
- Steroids/therapeutic use
- Immunoglobulin G
- Fibrosis
- Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hashimoto's Encephalopathy: Case Series and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Chaudhuri J, Mukherjee A, Chakravarty A
**Journal:** Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11910-023-01255-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11910-023-01255-5)

## Content

1. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2023 Apr;23(4):167-175. doi: 
10.1007/s11910-023-01255-5. Epub 2023 Feb 28.

Hashimoto's Encephalopathy: Case Series and Literature Review.

Chaudhuri J(1), Mukherjee A(2), Chakravarty A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Bangur Institute of Neurosciences, Kolkata, West 
Bengal, India.
(2)Department of Neurology, Vivekananda Institute of Medical Science, Kolkata, 
West Bengal, India.
(3)Department of Neurology, Vivekananda Institute of Medical Science, Kolkata, 
West Bengal, India. saschakra@yahoo.com.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To describe the clinical manifestations of Hashimoto's 
encephalopathy (HE) and discuss its pathogenesis in light of recent research.
RECENT FINDINGS: The pathogenesis of HE is uncertain. Available evidences point 
towards an autoimmune etiology due to vasculitis or other inflammatory process. 
Detection of thyroid antibodies - antithyroid peroxidase and anti-thyroglobulin 
are essential for diagnosis. Autoimmune encephalitis including Anti-IgLON5 
disease needs to be excluded in suspected cases with appropriate tests for 
neuronal surface antibodies. Detection of thyroid autoantibodies is nonspecific, 
as these can be detected in some normal individuals and in other autoimmune 
diseases. In recent years, attention has turned to an aggressive form of 
Hashimoto's thyroiditis accompanied by elevated serum IgG4 levels in younger 
males with very high levels of thyroid antibodies. The role of the thyroid 
autoantibodies in the central nervous system (CNS) tissue damage remains unclear 
and these can act only as markers for diagnosis. Conversely, they have a role to 
play in determining the thyroid pathology - more glandular fibrosis associated 
with thyro-peroxidase antibody than with the thyroglobulin antibody. HE is a 
syndrome characterized by altered mental status, confusion, hallucinations, 
delusions, and sometimes seizures, in association with high serum anti-thyroid 
antibody concentration that is usually responsive to glucocorticoid therapy. 
Diagnosis requires the exclusion of other causes of encephalopathies and 
encephalitis including autoimmune encephalitis associated with neuronal surface 
antibodies and paraneoplastic ones. Diagnosis also is dependent on the 
demonstration of thyroid autoantibodies in serum. Since there is no direct 
pathophysiologic link between antithyroid antibodies, Hashimoto thyroiditis and 
the cerebral syndrome, the nomenclature HE could be misleading. The response to 
steroids led to a renaming of the syndrome to steroid responsive encephalopathy 
associated with autoimmune thyroiditis (SREAT), though some cases do not respond 
to steroids. In recent years, attention has turned to an aggressive form of 
Hashimoto's thyroiditis accompanied by elevated serum IgG4 levels (IgG4-related 
disease). This is characterized by a higher incidence in men (5:1) than in 
women, onset at a younger age, more intense thyroid inflammation and higher 
antithyroid antibody titters. Such patients have excessive production of 
IgG4 + plasmacytes, which infiltrate various organs leading to their fibrosis 
and sclerosis, sometimes resulting in inflammatory tumors. HE is treated with 
corticosteroids along with treatment of the dysthyroid condition, if any. There 
are yet no guidelines regarding steroid dose and/or duration.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-023-01255-5
PMCID: PMC9972331
PMID: 36853554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.