---
reference_id: "PMID:20709770"
title: Role of imaging in the diagnosis of acute bacterial meningitis and its complications.
authors:
- Hughes DC
- Raghavan A
- Mordekar SR
- Griffiths PD
- Connolly DJ
journal: Postgrad Med J
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1136/pgmj.2010.097022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of imaging in the diagnosis of acute bacterial meningitis and its complications.
**Authors:** Hughes DC, Raghavan A, Mordekar SR, Griffiths PD, Connolly DJ
**Journal:** Postgrad Med J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1136/pgmj.2010.097022](https://doi.org/10.1136/pgmj.2010.097022)

## Content

1. Postgrad Med J. 2010 Aug;86(1018):478-85. doi: 10.1136/pgmj.2010.097022.

Role of imaging in the diagnosis of acute bacterial meningitis and its 
complications.

Hughes DC(1), Raghavan A, Mordekar SR, Griffiths PD, Connolly DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Glossop Road, Sheffield 
S10 2JF, UK. dchughes@doctors.org.uk

Acute bacterial meningitis is a common neurological emergency and a leading 
cause of death and neurological disability worldwide. Diagnosis is based on 
clinical and microbiological findings with neuroimaging in the form of CT 
reserved for those with specific adverse clinical features or when an underlying 
cause such as mastoiditis is suspected. MRI is extremely useful for detecting 
and monitoring the complications of meningitis. These can be remembered by the 
mnemonic HACTIVE (hydrocephalus, abscess, cerebritis/cranial nerve lesion, 
thrombosis, infarct, ventriculitis/vasculopathy and extra-axial collection). 
Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) and magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) are 
useful to distinguish abscess from other ring enhancing lesions.

DOI: 10.1136/pgmj.2010.097022
PMID: 20709770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]