---
reference_id: "PMID:26932181"
title: "Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome, the extreme end of the RYR1 spectrum."
authors:
- Kariminejad A
- Ghaderi-Sohi S
- Hossein-Nejad Nedai H
- Varasteh V
- Moslemi AR
- Tajsharghi H
journal: BMC Musculoskelet Disord
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s12891-016-0947-5
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Fetal Death
- Fetus/pathology
- Humans
- "Malignant Hyperthermia/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics
- "Skin Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome, the extreme end of the RYR1 spectrum.
**Authors:** Kariminejad A, Ghaderi-Sohi S, Hossein-Nejad Nedai H, Varasteh V, Moslemi AR, Tajsharghi H
**Journal:** BMC Musculoskelet Disord (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12891-016-0947-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12891-016-0947-5)

## Content

1. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2016 Mar 1;17:109. doi: 10.1186/s12891-016-0947-5.

Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome, the extreme end of the RYR1 spectrum.

Kariminejad A(1), Ghaderi-Sohi S(1), Hossein-Nejad Nedai H(2), Varasteh V(3), 
Moslemi AR(4), Tajsharghi H(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Pathology, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(3)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University 
Hospital, SE-413 45, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University 
Hospital, SE-413 45, Gothenburg, Sweden. homa.tajsharghi@gu.se.
(6)Department of Clinical and Medical Genetics, University of Gothenburg, SE-405 
30, Gothenburg, Sweden. homa.tajsharghi@gu.se.
(7)Systems Biology Research Centre, School of Biomedicine, University of Skövde, 
SE-541 28, Skövde, Sweden. homa.tajsharghi@gu.se.

BACKGROUND: Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome (LMPS, OMIM 253290), is a fatal 
disorder associated with anomalies of the skin, muscles and skeleton. It is 
characterised by prenatal growth failure with pterygium present in multiple 
areas and akinesia, leading to muscle weakness and severe arthrogryposis. Foetal 
hydrops with cystic hygroma develops in affected foetuses with LMPS. This study 
aimed to uncover the aetiology of LMPS in a family with two affected foetuses.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Whole exome sequencing studies have identified novel 
compound heterozygous mutations in RYR1 in two affected foetuses with pterygium, 
severe arthrogryposis and foetal hydrops with cystic hygroma, characteristic 
features compatible with LMPS. The result was confirmed by Sanger sequencing and 
restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: RYR1 encodes the skeletal muscle isoform ryanodine receptor 1, an 
intracellular calcium channel with a central role in muscle contraction. 
Mutations in RYR1 have been associated with congenital myopathies, which form a 
continuous spectrum of pathological features including a severe variant with 
onset in utero with fetal akinesia and arthrogryposis. Here, the results 
indicate that LMPS can be considered as the extreme end of the RYR1-related 
neonatal myopathy spectrum. This further supports the concept that LMPS is a 
severe disorder associated with defects in the process known as 
excitation-contraction coupling.

DOI: 10.1186/s12891-016-0947-5
PMCID: PMC4774121
PMID: 26932181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]