---
reference_id: "PMID:30939106"
title: "Prevalence and Strains of Colorado Tick Fever Virus in Rocky Mountain Wood Ticks in the Bitterroot Valley, Montana."
authors:
- Williamson BN
- Fischer RJ
- Lopez JE
- Ebihara H
- Schwan TG
journal: Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1089/vbz.2018.2407
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and Strains of Colorado Tick Fever Virus in Rocky Mountain Wood Ticks in the Bitterroot Valley, Montana.
**Authors:** Williamson BN, Fischer RJ, Lopez JE, Ebihara H, Schwan TG
**Journal:** Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1089/vbz.2018.2407](https://doi.org/10.1089/vbz.2018.2407)

## Content

1. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 2019 Sep;19(9):694-702. doi: 10.1089/vbz.2018.2407.
 Epub 2019 Apr 2.

Prevalence and Strains of Colorado Tick Fever Virus in Rocky Mountain Wood Ticks 
in the Bitterroot Valley, Montana.

Williamson BN(1), Fischer RJ(1), Lopez JE(1), Ebihara H(2), Schwan TG(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Zoonotic Pathogens, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Hamilton, Montana.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

The Rocky Mountain wood tick, Dermacentor andersoni, has long been known to 
transmit human pathogens. Within the Bitterroot Valley, Ravalli County, Montana, 
these agents include Rickettsia rickettsii, Francisella tularensis, and Colorado 
tick fever virus (CTFV). Found in the western United States where wood ticks 
occur, CTFV causes a biphasic, febrile illness in humans and persists in 
enzootic cycles involving the ticks and small mammals. CTFV belongs to the genus 
Coltivirus, family Reoviridae, whose genome consists of 12 double-stranded RNA 
segments. Previous studies revealed the presence of CTFV-infected ticks and 
rodents in select locations within the valley in the 1960s and 1970s, using 
animal and cell culture methods for detection. We aimed to determine the range 
and prevalence of the virus in adult questing ticks throughout the valley using 
molecular tools and to examine the genomic variation between virus strains. 
Adult D. andersoni ticks were collected during 2002-2003 and 2009-2013. RNA 
extractions and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction were performed 
on 921 ticks, of which 61 ticks were positive for CTFV, resulting in a 6.6% 
prevalence of infection. Four genetic loci, one from each of the segments 9, 10, 
11, and 12, within the viral genome were sequenced. Reassortment was detected 
between CTFV sequence strains within the valley. This study confirmed the 
prevalence of CTFV in D. andersoni ticks within the Bitterroot Valley, which has 
remained at levels found in the 1950s and 60s. Additional CTFV sequences were 
obtained and evidence of reassortment was observed between strains within the 
valley.

DOI: 10.1089/vbz.2018.2407
PMCID: PMC6716194
PMID: 30939106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing financial interests exist.