---
reference_id: "PMID:22913675"
title: "Tangier disease: epidemiology, pathophysiology, and management."
authors:
- Puntoni M
- Sbrana F
- Bigazzi F
- Sampietro T
journal: Am J Cardiovasc Drugs
year: '2012'
doi: 10.2165/11634140-000000000-00000
keywords:
- ATP Binding Cassette Transporter 1
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics
- Adult
- Amides
- Animals
- Apolipoprotein A-I/blood
- Child
- Cholesterol/blood
- Cholesterol Esters/metabolism
- Drug Design
- Esters
- Humans
- "Lipoproteins, HDL/blood"
- Mutation
- Oxazolidinones/therapeutic use
- Sulfhydryl Compounds/therapeutic use
- "Tangier Disease/epidemiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Triglycerides/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tangier disease: epidemiology, pathophysiology, and management.
**Authors:** Puntoni M, Sbrana F, Bigazzi F, Sampietro T
**Journal:** Am J Cardiovasc Drugs (2012)
**DOI:** [10.2165/11634140-000000000-00000](https://doi.org/10.2165/11634140-000000000-00000)

## Content

1. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs. 2012 Oct 1;12(5):303-11. doi:
10.2165/11634140-000000000-00000.

Tangier disease: epidemiology, pathophysiology, and management.

Puntoni M(1), Sbrana F, Bigazzi F, Sampietro T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Physiology, National Council of Research, Pisa, Italy.
mpuntoni@ifc.cnr.it

Tangier disease is one of the most severe forms of familial high-density
lipoprotein (HDL) deficiency. Since its discovery it has been diagnosed in about
100 patients and is characterized by severe plasma deficiency or absence of HDL,
apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I, the major HDL apolipoprotein) and by accumulation of
cholesteryl esters in many tissues throughout the body. The biochemical signs of
this condition are plasma HDL concentrations less than 5 mg/dL, low total plasma
cholesterol (below 150 mg/dL), and normal or high plasma triglycerides. Tangier
disease is caused by mutations in the 'ATP-Binding Cassette transporter A1'
(ABCA1) gene, which encodes the membrane transporter ABCA1. This transporter
plays a key role in the first step of reverse cholesterol transport, through
which the efflux of free cholesterol from peripheral cells is transferred to
lipid-poor apoA-I. The Tangier disease clinical phenotype is inherited as an
autosomal recessive trait, the biochemical phenotype is inherited as an
autosomal co-dominant trait. Nearly all the children affected by Tangier disease
were identified on the basis of large, yellow-orange tonsils, while half of the
adult patients affected by Tangier disease came to medical attention because of
symptoms of neuropathy. Diagnosis in the remaining subjects was related to the
clinical features of hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, premature myocardial infarction
(about 30% of Tangier disease cases) or stroke, thrombocytopenia, anemia,
gastrointestinal disorders, corneal opacities, hypocholesterolemia, low HDL
cholesterol, or following a familial screening of Tangier patients. To date
there is no specific treatment for Tangier disease. Old and recently designed
drugs, known to increase HDL levels, have been shown to be ineffective in
Tangier patients. The possible and more realistic therapeutic strategy should be
designed to obtain a selective increase of mature HDL concentration to restore
cholesterol efflux. Recently designed drugs like the cholesteryl ester transfer
protein (CETP) inhibitors dalcetrapib and anacetrapib and reconstituted forms of
HDL could be considered until the development of gene therapy.

DOI: 10.2165/11634140-000000000-00000
PMID: 22913675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
