---
reference_id: "PMID:22147895"
title: Loss-of-function germline GATA2 mutations in patients with MDS/AML or MonoMAC syndrome and primary lymphedema reveal a key role for GATA2 in the lymphatic vasculature.
authors:
- Kazenwadel J
- Secker GA
- Liu YJ
- Rosenfeld JA
- Wildin RS
- Cuellar-Rodriguez J
- Hsu AP
- Dyack S
- Fernandez CV
- Chong CE
- Babic M
- Bardy PG
- Shimamura A
- Zhang MY
- Walsh T
- Holland SM
- Hickstein DD
- Horwitz MS
- Hahn CN
- Scott HS
- Harvey NL
journal: Blood
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-08-374363
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- Female
- "GATA2 Transcription Factor/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- Germ-Line Mutation/physiology
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/genetics"
- Lymphangiogenesis/genetics
- Lymphatic Vessels/metabolism
- "Lymphedema/congenital, genetics"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Monocytes/pathology
- Myelodysplastic Syndromes/genetics
- Syndrome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss-of-function germline GATA2 mutations in patients with MDS/AML or MonoMAC syndrome and primary lymphedema reveal a key role for GATA2 in the lymphatic vasculature.
**Authors:** Kazenwadel J, Secker GA, Liu YJ, Rosenfeld JA, Wildin RS, Cuellar-Rodriguez J, Hsu AP, Dyack S, Fernandez CV, Chong CE, Babic M, Bardy PG, Shimamura A, Zhang MY, Walsh T, Holland SM, Hickstein DD, Horwitz MS, Hahn CN, Scott HS, Harvey NL
**Journal:** Blood (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2011-08-374363](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2011-08-374363)

## Content

1. Blood. 2012 Feb 2;119(5):1283-91. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-08-374363. Epub 2011
 Dec 6.

Loss-of-function germline GATA2 mutations in patients with MDS/AML or MonoMAC 
syndrome and primary lymphedema reveal a key role for GATA2 in the lymphatic 
vasculature.

Kazenwadel J(1), Secker GA, Liu YJ, Rosenfeld JA, Wildin RS, Cuellar-Rodriguez 
J, Hsu AP, Dyack S, Fernandez CV, Chong CE, Babic M, Bardy PG, Shimamura A, 
Zhang MY, Walsh T, Holland SM, Hickstein DD, Horwitz MS, Hahn CN, Scott HS, 
Harvey NL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Haematology, Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, 
5000 SA, Australia.

Recent work has established that heterozygous germline GATA2 mutations 
predispose carriers to familial myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS)/acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML), "MonoMAC" syndrome, and DCML deficiency. Here, we describe a 
previously unreported MDS family carrying a missense GATA2 mutation 
(p.Thr354Met), one patient with MDS/AML carrying a frameshift GATA2 mutation 
(p.Leu332Thrfs*53), another with MDS harboring a GATA2 splice site mutation, and 
3 patients exhibiting MDS or MDS/AML who have large deletions encompassing the 
GATA2 locus. Intriguingly, 2 MDS/AML or "MonoMAC" syndrome patients with GATA2 
deletions and one with a frameshift mutation also have primary lymphedema. 
Primary lymphedema occurs as a result of aberrations in the development and/or 
function of lymphatic vessels, spurring us to investigate whether GATA2 plays a 
role in the lymphatic vasculature. We demonstrate here that GATA2 protein is 
present at high levels in lymphatic vessel valves and that GATA2 controls the 
expression of genes important for programming lymphatic valve development. Our 
data expand the phenotypes associated with germline GATA2 mutations to include 
predisposition to primary lymphedema and suggest that complete 
haploinsufficiency or loss of function of GATA2, rather than missense mutations, 
is the key predisposing factor for lymphedema onset. Moreover, we reveal a 
crucial role for GATA2 in lymphatic vascular development.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2011-08-374363
PMCID: PMC3277359
PMID: 22147895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]