---
reference_id: "PMID:39733327"
title: Iron and Copper Liver Concentrations in Wilson Disease.
authors:
- Day PL
- Fyffe-Freil R
- Vanderboom P
- Spears G
- Wangensteen K
- Bornhorst J
- Hassan S
- Jannetto PJ
journal: J Gastrointestin Liver Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.15403/jgld-5662
keywords:
- "Liver/metabolism, surgery"
- Copper/analysis
- Iron/analysis
- "Iron Overload/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Hepatolenticular Degeneration/complications, metabolism"
- Liver Transplantation
- Biopsy
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Infant
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Hematocrit
- Hemoglobins/analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Iron and Copper Liver Concentrations in Wilson Disease.
**Authors:** Day PL, Fyffe-Freil R, Vanderboom P, Spears G, Wangensteen K, Bornhorst J, Hassan S, Jannetto PJ
**Journal:** J Gastrointestin Liver Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.15403/jgld-5662](https://doi.org/10.15403/jgld-5662)

## Content

1. J Gastrointestin Liver Dis. 2024 Dec 28;33(4):517-523. doi:
10.15403/jgld-5662.

Iron and Copper Liver Concentrations in Wilson Disease.

Day PL(1), Fyffe-Freil R(2), Vanderboom P(3), Spears G(4), Wangensteen K(5),
Bornhorst J(6), Hassan S(7), Jannetto PJ(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA. day.patrick@mayo.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha NE, USA. rfyffefreil@unmc.edu.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA. vanderboom.patrick@mayo.edu.
(4)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
Spears.Grant@mayo.edu.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. Wangensteen.Kirk@mayo.edu.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA. Bornhorst.Joshua@mayo.edu.
(7)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. Hassan.Sara@mayo.edu.
(8)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA. jannetto.paul@mayo.edu.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Wilson disease (WD) results in the defective incorporation
of copper into ceruloplasmin as well as decreased biliary copper excretion.
Secondary iron overload has also been associated with WD; however, the
prevalence is currently unknown. This study aims to determine the prevalence of
potential secondary iron overload in patients suspected to have WD. The
secondary aim was to determine whether common laboratory tests were associated
with liver copper concentrations or the need for liver transplantation in a
subset of patients with confirmed WD.
METHODS: Using our institution's laboratory information system, 197 patients
with liver copper concentrations > 250 mcg/g were identified who also had a
concurrent liver iron concentration available. Correlations between copper,
iron, and hepatic iron index were performed by log-transforming the data and
then using the Pearson method. Furthermore, in a subpopulation of ten patients
clinically confirmed to have WD, various laboratory test values were evaluated
to determine associations with liver copper concentration or liver
transplantation.
RESULTS: There was no significant association between copper and iron liver
tissue concentrations (p=0.84). However, 13 (8%) patients aged 13 or older had a
hepatic iron index >1.0 which may indicate secondary iron overload. Furthermore,
in clinically confirmed WD patients, hemoglobin and hematocrit were inversely
associated with liver copper concentrations (p=0.036).
CONCLUSIONS: Iron overload can be detected in liver tissues with elevated copper
concentrations characteristic of WD Furthermore, in WD, low hemoglobin and
hematocrit values were associated with elevated liver copper concentration.
Clinicians should consider the possibility of secondary iron overload and/or
anemia in patients with WD.

DOI: 10.15403/jgld-5662
PMID: 39733327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
