---
reference_id: PMID:34948256
title: "Mucopolysaccharidosis Type VI, an Updated Overview of the Disease."
authors:
- "D'Avanzo F"
- Zanetti A
- De Filippis C
- Tomanin R
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms222413456
keywords:
- Chondroitin Sulfates/therapeutic use
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy
- Glycosaminoglycans/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis VI/genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- N-Acetylgalactosamine-4-Sulfatase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucopolysaccharidosis Type VI, an Updated Overview of the Disease.
**Authors:** D'Avanzo F, Zanetti A, De Filippis C, Tomanin R
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms222413456](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms222413456)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Dec 15;22(24):13456. doi: 10.3390/ijms222413456.

Mucopolysaccharidosis Type VI, an Updated Overview of the Disease.

D'Avanzo F(1)(2), Zanetti A(1)(2), De Filippis C(1)(2), Tomanin R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Diagnosis and Therapy of Lysosomal Disorders, Department of 
Women's and Children's Health, University of Padova, 35128 Padova, Italy.
(2)Fondazione Istituto di Ricerca Pediatrica Città della Speranza, Corso Stati 
Uniti 4, 35127 Padova, Italy.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI, or Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome, is a rare, autosomal 
recessive genetic disease, mainly affecting the pediatric age group. The disease 
is due to pathogenic variants of the ARSB gene, coding for the lysosomal 
hydrolase N-acetylgalactosamine 4-sulfatase (arylsulfatase B, ASB). The enzyme 
deficit causes a pathological accumulation of the undegraded glycosaminoglycans 
dermatan-sulphate and chondroitin-sulphate, natural substrates of ASB activity. 
Intracellular and extracellular deposits progressively take to a pathological 
scenario, often severe, involving most organ-systems and generally starting from 
the osteoarticular apparatus. Neurocognitive and behavioral abilities, commonly 
described as maintained, have been actually investigated by few studies. The 
disease, first described in 1963, has a reported prevalence between 0.36 and 1.3 
per 100,000 live births across the continents. With this paper, we wish to 
contribute an updated overview of the disease from the clinical, diagnostic, and 
therapeutic sides. The numerous in vitro and in vivo preclinical studies 
conducted in the last 10-15 years to dissect the disease pathogenesis, the 
efficacy of the available therapeutic treatment (enzyme replacement therapy), as 
well as new therapies under study are here described. This review also 
highlights the need to identify new disease biomarkers, potentially speeding up 
the diagnostic process and the monitoring of therapeutic efficacy.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222413456
PMCID: PMC8707598
PMID: 34948256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.