---
reference_id: "PMID:26971690"
title: Clonal expansion of CD4(+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes in patients with IgG4-related disease.
authors:
- Mattoo H
- Mahajan VS
- Maehara T
- Deshpande V
- Della-Torre E
- Wallace ZS
- Kulikova M
- Drijvers JM
- Daccache J
- Carruthers MN
- Castelino FV
- Stone JR
- Stone JH
- Pillai S
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.12.1330
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Cytokines/immunology
- Female
- Humans
- "Immune System Diseases/blood, immunology"
- "Immunoglobulin G/blood, immunology"
- Kidney/cytology
- Lung/cytology
- Lymph Nodes/cytology
- Lymphocyte Count
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nasal Septum/cytology
- Retroperitoneal Space
- Submandibular Gland/cytology
- "T-Lymphocytes, Cytotoxic/immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clonal expansion of CD4(+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes in patients with IgG4-related disease.
**Authors:** Mattoo H, Mahajan VS, Maehara T, Deshpande V, Della-Torre E, Wallace ZS, Kulikova M, Drijvers JM, Daccache J, Carruthers MN, Castelino FV, Stone JR, Stone JH, Pillai S
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2015.12.1330](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2015.12.1330)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016 Sep;138(3):825-838. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2015.12.1330. Epub 2016 Mar 11.

Clonal expansion of CD4(+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes in patients with IgG4-related
disease.

Mattoo H(1), Mahajan VS(1), Maehara T(2), Deshpande V(1), Della-Torre E(1),
Wallace ZS(1), Kulikova M(1), Drijvers JM(1), Daccache J(1), Carruthers MN(1),
Castelino FV(1), Stone JR(1), Stone JH(3), Pillai S(4).

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass.
(2)Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass; Section
of Oral and Maxillofacial Oncology, Division of Maxillofacial Diagnostic and
Surgical Sciences, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass.
Electronic address: jhstone@partners.org.
(4)Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass.
Electronic address: pillai@helix.mgh.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD) is a systemic condition of unknown
cause characterized by highly fibrotic lesions with dense lymphoplasmacytic
infiltrates. CD4(+) T cells constitute the major inflammatory cell population in
IgG4-RD lesions.
OBJECTIVE: We used an unbiased approach to characterize CD4(+) T-cell subsets in
patients with IgG4-RD based on their clonal expansion and ability to infiltrate
affected tissue sites.
METHODS: We used flow cytometry to identify CD4(+) effector/memory T cells in a
cohort of 101 patients with IgG4-RD. These expanded cells were characterized by
means of gene expression analysis and flow cytometry. Next-generation sequencing
of the T-cell receptor β chain gene was performed on CD4(+)SLAMF7(+) cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs) and CD4(+)GATA3(+) TH2 cells in a subset of patients to
identify their clonality. Tissue infiltration by specific T cells was examined
by using quantitative multicolor imaging.
RESULTS: CD4(+) effector/memory T cells with a cytolytic phenotype were expanded
in patients with IgG4-RD. Next-generation sequencing revealed prominent clonal
expansions of these CD4(+) CTLs but not CD4(+)GATA3(+) memory TH2 cells in
patients with IgG4-RD. The dominant T cells infiltrating a range of inflamed
IgG4-RD tissue sites were clonally expanded CD4(+) CTLs that expressed SLAMF7,
granzyme A, IL-1β, and TGF-β1. Clinical remission induced by rituximab-mediated
B-cell depletion was associated with a reduction in numbers of
disease-associated CD4(+) CTLs.
CONCLUSIONS: IgG4-RD is prominently linked to clonally expanded IL-1β- and
TGF-β1-secreting CD4(+) CTLs in both peripheral blood and inflammatory tissue
lesions. These active, terminally differentiated, cytokine-secreting effector
CD4(+) T cells are now linked to a human disease characterized by chronic
inflammation and fibrosis.

Copyright © 2016 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.12.1330
PMCID: PMC5014627
PMID: 26971690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no relevant
conflict of interest.
