---
reference_id: "PMID:15240615"
title: "Protein-tyrosine phosphatase, nonreceptor type 11 mutation analysis and clinical assessment in 45 patients with Noonan syndrome."
authors:
- Yoshida R
- Hasegawa T
- Hasegawa Y
- Nagai T
- Kinoshita E
- Tanaka Y
- Kanegane H
- Ohyama K
- Onishi T
- Hanew K
- Okuyama T
- Horikawa R
- Tanaka T
- Ogata T
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2003-032091
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Body Height
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/epidemiology, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exons
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Growth
- Hematologic Diseases/genetics
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Male
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Noonan Syndrome/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11"
- Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases/genetics
- "Pulmonary Valve Stenosis/epidemiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein-tyrosine phosphatase, nonreceptor type 11 mutation analysis and clinical assessment in 45 patients with Noonan syndrome.
**Authors:** Yoshida R, Hasegawa T, Hasegawa Y, Nagai T, Kinoshita E, Tanaka Y, Kanegane H, Ohyama K, Onishi T, Hanew K, Okuyama T, Horikawa R, Tanaka T, Ogata T
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2003-032091](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2003-032091)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Jul;89(7):3359-64. doi: 10.1210/jc.2003-032091.

Protein-tyrosine phosphatase, nonreceptor type 11 mutation analysis and clinical
assessment in 45 patients with Noonan syndrome.

Yoshida R(1), Hasegawa T, Hasegawa Y, Nagai T, Kinoshita E, Tanaka Y, Kanegane
H, Ohyama K, Onishi T, Hanew K, Okuyama T, Horikawa R, Tanaka T, Ogata T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582,
Japan.

We report on PTPN11 (protein-tyrosine phosphatase, nonreceptor type 11) mutation
analysis and clinical assessment in 45 patients with Noonan syndrome. Sequence
analysis was performed for all of the coding exons 1-15 of PTPN11, revealing a
novel 3-bp deletion mutation and 10 recurrent missense mutations in 18 patients.
Clinical assessment showed that 1) the growth pattern was similar in
mutation-positive and mutation-negative patients, with no significant difference
in birth length [-0.6 +/- 2.2 sd (n = 10) vs. -0.6 +/- 1.4 sd (n = 21); P =
0.95], childhood height [-2.6 +/- 1.1 sd (n = 14) vs. -2.1 +/- 1.6 sd (n = 23);
P = 0.28], or target height [-0.4 +/- 0.9 sd (n = 14) vs. -0.2 +/- 0.7 sd (n =
17); P = 0.52]; 2) pulmonary valve stenosis was more frequent in
mutation-positive patients than in mutation-negative patients (10 of 18 vs. 6 of
27; P = 0.02), as was atrial septal defect (10 of 18 vs. 4 of 27; P = 0.005),
whereas hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was present in five mutation-negative
patients only; and 3) other features were grossly similar in the prevalence
between mutation-positive and mutation-negative patients, but hematological
abnormalities, such as bleeding diathesis and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia,
were exclusively present in mutation-positive patients (5 of 18 vs. 0 of 27; P =
0.007). The results suggest that PTPN11 mutations account for approximately 40%
of Noonan syndrome patients, as has been reported previously. Furthermore,
assessment of clinical features, in conjunction with data reported previously,
implies that the type of cardiovascular lesions and the occurrence of
hematological abnormalities are different in mutation-positive and
mutation-negative patients, whereas the remaining findings are similar in the
two groups of patients.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2003-032091
PMID: 15240615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
