---
reference_id: "PMID:32651990"
title: "Contribution of house dust contamination towards lead exposure among children in Karachi, Pakistan."
authors:
- Ikegami A
- Ohtsu M
- Sahito A
- Khan AA
- Fatmi Z
- Nakagi Y
- Yoshida T
- Kayama F
journal: Rev Environ Health
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1515/reveh-2020-0020
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Air Pollution, Indoor/adverse effects"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cities
- Dust/analysis
- Environmental Exposure/analysis
- Environmental Pollutants/analysis
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Lead/analysis
- Male
- Pakistan
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contribution of house dust contamination towards lead exposure among children in Karachi, Pakistan.
**Authors:** Ikegami A, Ohtsu M, Sahito A, Khan AA, Fatmi Z, Nakagi Y, Yoshida T, Kayama F
**Journal:** Rev Environ Health (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1515/reveh-2020-0020](https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2020-0020)

## Content

1. Rev Environ Health. 2020 Sep 25;35(3):271-275. doi: 10.1515/reveh-2020-0020.

Contribution of house dust contamination towards lead exposure among children in 
Karachi, Pakistan.

Ikegami A(1), Ohtsu M(1), Sahito A(2)(3), Khan AA(2), Fatmi Z(2), Nakagi Y(4), 
Yoshida T(4), Kayama F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental and Preventive Medicine, Jichi Medical 
University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan.
(2)Department of Community Health Sciences, Aga Khan University, Karachi, Sindh, 
Pakistan.
(3)Department of Community Medicine, Isra University, Hyderabad, Sindh, 
Pakistan.
(4)Department of Social Medicine, Asahikawa Medical University, Asahikawa, 
Hokkaido, Japan.

Lead exposure is associated with impaired neurodevelopment among children. House 
dust is recognized as one of the important secondary sources of lead exposure in 
children. We assessed the relationship between lead contamination in house dust 
and blood lead level in Pakistani children. We investigated lead contamination 
in house dust samples collected from 59 houses in Karachi, Pakistan. The lead 
content of house dust in Pakistan was relatively higher than that reported in 
previous studies. Weekly lead intakes from house dust were considerably higher 
among Pakistani children. In Pakistani children, 12% (7 of 58) showed lead 
intake values greater than the previous Provisional Tolerable Weekly Intake of 
lead. A correlation (Pearson's correlation = 0.37) was found between weekly lead 
intake from house dust and blood lead level in Pakistani children. In addition, 
blood lead levels were significantly higher in children with high lead intakes 
than in children with low and medium lead intakes. Thus, house dust is an 
important source of lead exposure in Pakistani children.

DOI: 10.1515/reveh-2020-0020
PMID: 32651990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]