---
reference_id: "PMID:30208878"
title: "GNPTAB c.2404C > T nonsense mutation in a patient with mucolipidosis III alpha/beta: a case report."
authors:
- Ho CC
- Tsung LL
- Liu KT
- Poon WT
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12881-018-0679-5
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chondroitinsulfatases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- "Iduronate Sulfatase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Iduronidase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Lysosomes/enzymology, pathology"
- Male
- "Mucolipidoses/diagnosis, enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- "N-Acetylgalactosamine-4-Sulfatase/genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- "Transferases (Other Substituted Phosphate Groups)/deficiency, genetics"
- "beta-Hexosaminidase alpha Chain/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GNPTAB c.2404C > T nonsense mutation in a patient with mucolipidosis III alpha/beta: a case report.
**Authors:** Ho CC, Tsung LL, Liu KT, Poon WT
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12881-018-0679-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12881-018-0679-5)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2018 Sep 12;19(1):162. doi: 10.1186/s12881-018-0679-5.

GNPTAB c.2404C > T nonsense mutation in a patient with mucolipidosis III
alpha/beta: a case report.

Ho CC(1), Tsung LL(2), Liu KT(2), Poon WT(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Pamela Youde Nethersole Eastern Hospital,
Chai Wan, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China.
(2)Department of Paediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, Pamela Youde Nethersole
Eastern Hospital, Chai Wan, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Pathology, Pamela Youde Nethersole Eastern Hospital,
Chai Wan, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China. poonwt@ha.org.hk.

BACKGROUND: Mucolipidosis alpha/beta is an inborn error of metabolism
characterized by deficiency of GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase, in which essential
alpha/beta subunits are encoded by the GNPTAB gene. The autosomal recessive
condition is due to disruptions of hydrolase mannose 6-phosphate marker
generation, defective lysosomal targeting and subsequent intracellular
accumulation of non-degraded material. Clinical severity depends on residual
GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase activity, which distinguishes between the milder
type III disease and the severe, neonatal onset type II disease.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report the clinical, biochemical and genetic diagnosis of
mucolipidosis III alpha/beta in a two-year-old Chinese boy who initially
presented with poor weight gain, microcephaly and increased tone. He was
confirmed to harbor the common splice site mutation c.2715 + 1G > A and the
nonsense variant c.2404C > T (p.Q802*). Clinically, the patient had multiple
phenotypic features typical of mucopolysaccharidosis including joint
contractures, coarse facial features, kypho-lordosis, pectus carinatum and
umbilical hernia. However, the relatively mild developmental delay compared to
severe type I and type II mucopolysaccharidosis and the absence of macrocephaly
raised the possibility of the less commonly diagnosed mucolipidosis alpha/beta.
Critical roles of lysosomal enzyme activity assay, which showed elevated
α-iduronidase, iduronate sulfatase, galactose-6-sulphate sulphatase,
arylsulfatase B and α-hexosaminidase activities; and genetic study, which
confirmed the parental origin of both mutations, were highlighted.
CONCLUSIONS: The recently reported nonsense variant c.2404C > T in the GNPTAB
gene is further recognized and this contributes to the genotype-phenotype
spectrum of mucolipidosis alpha/beta.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-018-0679-5
PMCID: PMC6134758
PMID: 30208878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The
use of laboratory genetic information was approved by the Hong Kong Hospital
Authority/Hong Kong East Cluster Institutional Review Board Ethics Committee
(HKEC-2016-047; approval date: 23 August 2016). Written informed consent for
genetic testing and participating in the study was obtained from the subject’s
parents, on behalf of the minor subject. There was no treatment intervention
involved in the study. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Informed consent to publish this
case report, including clinical images, and personal/ clinical details that
could compromise anonymity, was obtained from the subject’s parents on behalf of
the minor subject. COMPETING INTERESTS: DBS and urine testing at National Taiwan
University Hospital was provided freely by Sanofi Genzyme, USA. Sanofi Genzyme
had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, and in the decision to
publish the results. Other than above, the authors declare that they have no
competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations.
