---
reference_id: "PMID:28133421"
title: General and Specific Genetic Polymorphism of Cytokines-Related Gene in AITD.
authors:
- Xiaoheng C
- Yizhou M
- Bei H
- Huilong L
- Xin W
- Rui H
- Lu L
- Zhiguo D
journal: Mediators Inflamm
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1155/2017/3916395
content_type: abstract_only
---

# General and Specific Genetic Polymorphism of Cytokines-Related Gene in AITD.
**Authors:** Xiaoheng C, Yizhou M, Bei H, Huilong L, Xin W, Rui H, Lu L, Zhiguo D
**Journal:** Mediators Inflamm (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2017/3916395](https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/3916395)

## Content

1. Mediators Inflamm. 2017;2017:3916395. doi: 10.1155/2017/3916395. Epub 2017 Jan
 4.

General and Specific Genetic Polymorphism of Cytokines-Related Gene in AITD.

Xiaoheng C(1), Yizhou M(2), Bei H(3), Huilong L(1), Xin W(1), Rui H(1), Lu L(1), 
Zhiguo D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, Dongzhimen Hospital of Beijing University of 
Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Toxicology and Medical Countermeasures, Beijing 
Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Medical Service, The Third Clinical Medical College, Beijing 
University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China.

Autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD) shows the highest incidence among 
organ-specific autoimmune diseases and is the most common thyroid disease in 
humans, including Graves' disease (GD) and Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT). The 
susceptibility to autoimmune diseases is affected by increased autoantibody 
levels, susceptibility gene polymorphisms, environmental factors, and 
psychological factors, but the pathogenesis remains unclear. Various cytokines 
and related genes encoding them play important roles in the development and 
progression of AITD. CD152, an expression product of the CTLA-4 gene, 
downregulates T cell activation. The A/A genotype polymorphism in the CT60 locus 
may reduce the production of thyroid autoantibodies. The C1858T polymorphism of 
the PTNP22 gene reduces the expression of its encoded LYP, which increases the 
risk of GD and HT. GD is an organ-specific autoimmune disease involving 
increased secretion of thyroid hormone, whereas HT may be associated with the 
destruction of thyroid gland tissue and hypothyroidism. These two diseases 
exhibit similar pathogenesis but opposite trends in the clinical manifestations. 
In this review, we focus on the structure and function of these cytokines and 
related genes in AITD, as well as the association of polymorphisms with 
susceptibility to GD and HT, and attempt to describe their differences in 
pathogenesis and clinical manifestations.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/3916395
PMCID: PMC5241475
PMID: 28133421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interests regarding the publication of this article.