---
reference_id: "PMID:38667269"
title: Inflammation and Exosomes in Fabry Disease Pathogenesis.
authors:
- Coelho-Ribeiro B
- Silva HG
- Sampaio-Marques B
- Fraga AG
- Azevedo O
- Pedrosa J
- Ludovico P
journal: Cells
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cells13080654
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inflammation and Exosomes in Fabry Disease Pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Coelho-Ribeiro B, Silva HG, Sampaio-Marques B, Fraga AG, Azevedo O, Pedrosa J, Ludovico P
**Journal:** Cells (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells13080654](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells13080654)

## Content

1. Cells. 2024 Apr 9;13(8):654. doi: 10.3390/cells13080654.

Inflammation and Exosomes in Fabry Disease Pathogenesis.

Coelho-Ribeiro B(1)(2), Silva HG(1)(2), Sampaio-Marques B(1)(2), Fraga AG(1)(2), 
Azevedo O(3), Pedrosa J(1)(2), Ludovico P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), 4710-057 Braga, Portugal.
(2)ICVS/3B's-PT Government Associate Laboratory, 4710-057 Braga/4805-017 
Guimarães, Portugal.
(3)Reference Center on Lysosomal Storage Disorders, Hospital Senhora da 
Oliveira, 4835-044 Guimarães, Portugal.

Fabry Disease (FD) is one of the most prevalent lysosomal storage disorders, 
resulting from mutations in the GLA gene located on the X chromosome. This 
genetic mutation triggers glo-botriaosylceramide (Gb-3) buildup within 
lysosomes, ultimately impairing cellular functions. Given the role of lysosomes 
in immune cell physiology, FD has been suggested to have a profound impact on 
immunological responses. During the past years, research has been focusing on 
this topic, and pooled evidence strengthens the hypothesis that Gb-3 
accumulation potentiates the production of pro-inflammatory mediators, revealing 
the existence of an acute inflammatory process in FD that possibly develops to a 
chronic state due to stimulus persistency. In parallel, extracellular vesicles 
(EVs) have gained attention due to their function as intercellular 
communicators. Considering EVs' capacity to convey cargo from parent to distant 
cells, they emerge as potential inflammatory intermediaries capable of 
transporting cytokines and other immunomodulatory molecules. In this review, we 
revisit the evidence underlying the association between FD and altered immune 
responses and explore the potential of EVs to function as inflammatory vehicles.

DOI: 10.3390/cells13080654
PMCID: PMC11049543
PMID: 38667269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
The funding sponsors had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, 
analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the 
decision to publish the results.