---
reference_id: "PMID:31852955"
title: CD8(+) T cell-mediated endotheliopathy is a targetable mechanism of neuro-inflammation in Susac syndrome.
authors:
- Gross CC
- Meyer C
- Bhatia U
- Yshii L
- Kleffner I
- Bauer J
- Tröscher AR
- Schulte-Mecklenbeck A
- Herich S
- Schneider-Hohendorf T
- Plate H
- Kuhlmann T
- Schwaninger M
- Brück W
- Pawlitzki M
- Laplaud DA
- Loussouarn D
- Parratt J
- Barnett M
- Buckland ME
- Hardy TA
- Reddel SW
- Ringelstein M
- Dörr J
- Wildemann B
- Kraemer M
- Lassmann H
- Höftberger R
- Beltrán E
- Dornmair K
- Schwab N
- Klotz L
- Meuth SG
- Martin-Blondel G
- Wiendl H
- Liblau R
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-13593-5
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- "Cell Adhesion/drug effects, immunology"
- "Central Nervous System/blood supply, immunology, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Endothelium, Vascular/drug effects, immunology, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Integrin alpha4/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Male
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Microvessels/drug effects, immunology, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- "Natalizumab/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Susac Syndrome/blood, drug therapy, immunology"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Cytotoxic/immunology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CD8(+) T cell-mediated endotheliopathy is a targetable mechanism of neuro-inflammation in Susac syndrome.
**Authors:** Gross CC, Meyer C, Bhatia U, Yshii L, Kleffner I, Bauer J, Tröscher AR, Schulte-Mecklenbeck A, Herich S, Schneider-Hohendorf T, Plate H, Kuhlmann T, Schwaninger M, Brück W, Pawlitzki M, Laplaud DA, Loussouarn D, Parratt J, Barnett M, Buckland ME, Hardy TA, Reddel SW, Ringelstein M, Dörr J, Wildemann B, Kraemer M, Lassmann H, Höftberger R, Beltrán E, Dornmair K, Schwab N, Klotz L, Meuth SG, Martin-Blondel G, Wiendl H, Liblau R
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-019-13593-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-13593-5)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2019 Dec 18;10(1):5779. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-13593-5.

CD8(+) T cell-mediated endotheliopathy is a targetable mechanism of 
neuro-inflammation in Susac syndrome.

Gross CC(1), Meyer C(2), Bhatia U(3), Yshii L(2), Kleffner I(3)(4), Bauer J(5), 
Tröscher AR(5), Schulte-Mecklenbeck A(3), Herich S(3), Schneider-Hohendorf T(3), 
Plate H(3), Kuhlmann T(6), Schwaninger M(7), Brück W(8), Pawlitzki M(3), Laplaud 
DA(9)(10), Loussouarn D(11), Parratt J(12)(13), Barnett M(14), Buckland 
ME(14)(15), Hardy TA(14)(16), Reddel SW(14)(16), Ringelstein M(17)(18), Dörr 
J(19), Wildemann B(20), Kraemer M(17)(21), Lassmann H(5), Höftberger R(22), 
Beltrán E(23), Dornmair K(23)(24), Schwab N(3), Klotz L(3), Meuth SG(3)(25), 
Martin-Blondel G(2)(26), Wiendl H(27)(28)(29), Liblau R(30).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology with Institute of Translational Neurology, University 
Hospital Münster, University of Münster, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, 48149, 
Münster, Germany. Catharina.Gross@ukmuenster.de.
(2)Centre de Physiopathologie Toulouse-Purpan (CPTP), Université de Toulouse, 
CNRS, Inserm, UPS, CHU Purpan - BP 3028 - 31024, Toulouse Cedex 3, Toulouse, 
France.
(3)Department of Neurology with Institute of Translational Neurology, University 
Hospital Münster, University of Münster, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, 48149, 
Münster, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Knappschaftskrankenhaus Bochum, 
Ruhr University Bochum, In der Schornau 23-25, 44892, Bochum, Germany.
(5)Department of Neuroimmunology, Center for Brain Research, Medical University 
of Vienna, Spitalgasse 4, 1090, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Institute of Neuropathology, University Hospital Münster, University of 
Münster, Pottkamp 2, 48149, Münster, Germany.
(7)Institute of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, 
University of Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23562, Lübeck, Germany.
(8)Institute of Neuropathology, University Medical Center Göttingen, 
Robert-Koch-Straße 40, 37099, Göttingen, Germany.
(9)UMR 1064, INSERM, Centre de Recherche en Transplantation et Immunologie, 
Université de Nantes, CHU Nantes - Hôtel Dieu Bd Jean Monnet, 44093, Nantes 
Cedex 01, France.
(10)Service Neurologie, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France.
(11)Service d'Anatomo-Pathologie, CHU Nantes, Hôtel-Dieu, rez-de-jardin, 44093, 
Nantes Cedex 1, France.
(12)Department of Neurology, Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
(13)Australia Northern Clinical School, University of Sydney, Reserve Road, St 
Leonards, Sydney, NSW, 2065, Australia.
(14)Brain and Mind Centre, Medical Faculty, University of Sydney, Mallett 
Street, Camperdown, Sydney, NSW, 2050, Australia.
(15)Department of Neuropathology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, 94, Mallett 
Street, Camperdown, Sydney, NSW, 2050, Australia.
(16)Department of Neurology, Concord Hospital, University of Sydney, Sydney, 
NSW, 2139, Australia.
(17)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University, 
Moorenstraße 5, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(18)Department of Neurology, Center of Neurology und Neuropsychiatry, 
LVR-Klinikum, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Bergische Landstraße 2, 
40629, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(19)Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine and Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin, 
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, NeuroCure, 
Experimental and Clinical Research Center, Charitéplatz 1, 10117, Berlin, 
Germany.
(20)Molecular Neuroimmunology Group, Department of Neurology, University of 
Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 400, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(21)Department of Neurology, Alfried Krupp Hospital, Alfried-Krupp-Strasse 21, 
45130, Essen, Germany.
(22)Institute of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 
18-20, 1090, Vienna, Austria.
(23)Institute of Clinical Neuroimmunology, Biomedical Center and Hospital of the 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Großhaderner Straße 9, Martinsried, 82152, 
Munich, Germany.
(24)Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Munich, Germany.
(25)Cells in Motion (CiM), Münster, Germany.
(26)Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, Toulouse University 
Hospital, Toulouse, France.
(27)Department of Neurology with Institute of Translational Neurology, 
University Hospital Münster, University of Münster, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, 
48149, Münster, Germany. Heinz.Wiendl@ukmuenster.de.
(28)Australia Northern Clinical School, University of Sydney, Reserve Road, St 
Leonards, Sydney, NSW, 2065, Australia. Heinz.Wiendl@ukmuenster.de.
(29)Cells in Motion (CiM), Münster, Germany. Heinz.Wiendl@ukmuenster.de.
(30)Centre de Physiopathologie Toulouse-Purpan (CPTP), Université de Toulouse, 
CNRS, Inserm, UPS, CHU Purpan - BP 3028 - 31024, Toulouse Cedex 3, Toulouse, 
France. Roland.Liblau@inserm.fr.

Neuroinflammation is often associated with blood-brain-barrier dysfunction, 
which contributes to neurological tissue damage. Here, we reveal the 
pathophysiology of Susac syndrome (SuS), an enigmatic neuroinflammatory disease 
with central nervous system (CNS) endotheliopathy. By investigating immune cells 
from the blood, cerebrospinal fluid, and CNS of SuS patients, we demonstrate 
oligoclonal expansion of terminally differentiated activated cytotoxic CD8+ T 
cells (CTLs). Neuropathological data derived from both SuS patients and a 
newly-developed transgenic mouse model recapitulating the disease indicate that 
CTLs adhere to CNS microvessels in distinct areas and polarize granzyme B, which 
most likely results in the observed endothelial cell injury and 
microhemorrhages. Blocking T-cell adhesion by anti-α4 integrin-intervention 
ameliorates the disease in the preclinical model. Similarly, disease severity 
decreases in four SuS patients treated with natalizumab along with other 
therapy. Our study identifies CD8+ T-cell-mediated endotheliopathy as a key 
disease mechanism in SuS and highlights therapeutic opportunities.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-019-13593-5
PMCID: PMC6920411
PMID: 31852955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: C.C.G. received speaker honoraria and travel 
expenses for attending meetings from Biogen, Euroimmun, Genzyme, MyLan, Novartis 
Pharma GmbH, and Bayer Health Care, none related to this study. Her work is 
funded by Biogen, Novartis, the German Ministry for Education and Research 
(BMBF; 01Gl1603A), the German Research Foundation (DFG, GR3946/3–1, SFB 
Transregio 128 A09), the European Union (Horizon2020, ReSToRE), the 
Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Studies (IZKF), and the IMF. I.K. received 
travel expenses for attending meetings from Pfizer and CSL Behring. I.K. 
received speaker honoraria from Daiichi Sankyo. J.B.’s work is funded by the 
Austrian Science Fund (FWF: P26936-B27). A.S.-M. receives research support from 
Novartis. T.K. received speaker honoraria from Novartis and Excemed. Her 
research is supported by the DFG (SFB/Transregio 128 B07), European 
Leukodystrophy Association (2017-018C4A), National MS Society (RG-1801-30020), 
and Progressive MS Alliance (PA-1604-08492, VRAVEinMS). W.B. has received 
honoraria for lectures by Bayer Vital, Biogen, Merck Serono, Teva Pharma, 
Genzyme, Sanofi-Aventis, Novartis, Excemed, and Medday. He is a member of 
scientific advisory boards for Teva Pharma, Biogen, Novartis, and Genzyme. W.B. 
receives research support from Teva Pharma, Biogen, Genzyme, and Novartis. W.B. 
is supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, the German Ministry for 
Education and Research, and by the Klaus Tschira Foundation. M.P. received 
speaker honoraria from Roche and Genzyme and travel/accommodation/meeting 
expenses from Novartis, Biogen Idec, Genzyme, and MERCK Serono. D.-A.L. received 
speaker honoraria from Biogen, Merck, Novartis, Roche, Teva, and Genzyme and 
non-personal grants from Biogen, Genzyme, Novartis, MedDay, Merck, and Roche not 
related to this study. J.P. is a member of scientific advisory boards from 
Genzyme and Novartis. He received honoraria from Biogen, Sanofi/Genzyme, and 
Merck Serono. M.B. received institutional support for research, speaking and/or 
participation in advisory boards for Biogen, Merck, Novartis, Roche, and Sanofi 
Genzyme. He is a consulting neurologist for RxMx/Medical Safety Systems and a 
research director for Sydney Neuroimaging Analysis Centre. T.A.H. has received 
honoraria or travel sponsorship from Bayer-Schering, Novartis, Biogen Idec, 
Merck-Serono, Roche, Teva, Alexion, and Sanofi-Genzyme. S.W.R. has received 
honoraria, travel sponsorship, research, and/or departmental support from 
MGANSW, MGAQLD, MAA, Lambert Initiative, Beeren foundation, anonymous donors, 
and from pharmaceutical/biological companies: Baxter, Bayer Schering, Biogen 
Idec, CSL, Genzyme, Grifols, Octapharma, Merck, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi Aventis 
Genzyme, Servier, and TEVA. Relevant to this study, Biogen is the manufacturer 
of natalizumab. S.W.R. is a shareholder of Medical Safety Systems trading as 
RxMx (grant and contracts with Genzyme >$25,000 AUD, contracts with Novartis, 
Roche, Janssen). M.R. received speaker honoraria from Novartis, Bayer Vital 
GmbH, and Ipsen and travel reimbursement from Bayer Schering, Biogen Idec, Merz, 
Genzyme, Teva, and Merck, none related to this study. J.D. received research 
support by Bayer and Novartis, travel support by Bayer, Novartis, Biogen, and 
Merck Serono, and honoraria for lectures and advisory by Bayer, Novartis, 
Biogen, Merck Serono, Roche, and Sanofi Genzyme. B.W. received research support 
from German Ministry of Education and Research, Dietmar Hopp Foundation, Klaus 
Tschira Foundation, Sanofi Genzyme, Merck Serono, and Novartis and speaker 
honoraria and/or travel support from Bayer Healthcare, Biogen, Merck Serono, 
Novartis, Sanofi Genzyme, and TEVA outside the submitted work. M.K. received 
travel support and honoraria from Bayer Schering, Biogen Idec, Chugai Pharma, 
Merck Serono, Novartis Pharma, Teva Pharma, and Shire Deutschland. H.L. received 
honoraria for lectures and consultation related to multiple sclerosis from 
Novartis, Roche, Sanofi Aventis, Biogen, and MEDDAY. R.H. received speaker 
honoraria from Euroimmun and research support from the Jubiläumsfonds der 
Östereichischen Nationalbank (project 16919) and the Austrian Science Fund (FWF: 
I3334-B27). N.S. received travel support from Novartis and Sanofi-Genzyme. L.K. 
received compensation for serving on scientific advisory boards for Genzyme, 
Merck, Novartis, and Roche; speaker honoraria and travel support from Biogen, 
Genzyme, Merck, Novartis, and Roche; and research support from Biogen, Genzyme, 
Merck, Novartis, and Roche, the German Ministry for Education and Research 
(BMBF), Deutsche Forschungsgesellschaft (DFG), and the Interdisciplinary Center 
for Clinical Studies (IZKF) Münster. S.G.M. receives honoraria for lecturing, 
and travel expenses for attending meetings from Almirall, Amicus Therapeutics 
Germany, Bayer Health Care, Biogen, Celgene, Diamed, Genzyme, MedDay 
Pharmaceuticals, Merck Serono, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, ONO Pharma, Roche, 
Sanofi-Aventis, Chugai Pharma, QuintilesIMS, and Teva. His research is funded by 
the German Ministry for Education and Research (BMBF), Deutsche 
Forschungsgesellschaft (DFG), Else Kröner Fresenius Foundation, German Academic 
Exchange Service, Hertie Foundation, Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical 
Studies (IZKF) Muenster, German Foundation Neurology and Almirall, Amicus 
Therapeutics Germany, Biogen, Diamed, Fresenius Medical Care, Genzyme, Merck 
Serono, Novartis, ONO Pharma, Roche, and Teva. G.M.-B. received speaker 
honoraria and travel support for attending meetings from Abbvie, Genzyme, 
Gilead, and Pfizer. H.W. received honoraria for scientific advisory 
boards/steering committees from Biogen, Evgen, MedDay Pharmaceuticals, Merck 
Serono, Novartis, Roche Pharma AG, and Sanofi-Genzyme. He received speaker 
honoraria and travel support for attending meetings from Alexion, Biogen, 
Cognomed, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Gemeinnützige Hertie-Stiftung, Merck 
Serono, Novartis, Roche Pharma AG, Sanofi-Genzyme, TEVA, and WebMD Globa. H.W. 
received compensation as a consultant from Abbvie, Actelion, Biogen, IGES, 
Novartis, Roche, Sanofi-Genzyme, and the Swiss Multiple Sclerosis Society. He 
also received research support from the German Ministry for Education and 
Research (BMBF), Deutsche Forschungsgesellschaft (DFG), Else Kröner Fresenius 
Foundation, Fresenius Foundation, Hertie Foundation, NRW Ministry of Education 
and Research, Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Studies (IZKF) Muenster and 
RE Children’s Foundation, Biogen GmbH, GlaxoSmithKline GmbH, Roche Pharma AG, 
and Sanofi-Genzyme. R.L. received grant support from Pierre Fabre, 
GlaxoSmithKline, and Diaccurate. He received speaker or scientific board 
honoraria from Biogen, Servier, Novartis, and Sanofi-Genzyme. R.L. is currently 
receiving grants from GlaxoSmithKline, Cancer Research Institute, French Cancer 
research foundation (ARC), Rare Diseases Foundation, and National Institute of 
Cancer (INCa). C.M., U.B., L.Y., A.T., S.H., T.S.-H., H.P., M.S., D.L., M.E.B., 
E.B., and K.D. have no financial disclosures.