---
reference_id: "PMID:37402396"
title: Pediatric and Adult Liver Disease in Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.
authors:
- Ruiz M
- Lacaille F
- Schrader C
- Pons M
- Socha P
- Krag A
- Sturm E
- Bouchecareilh M
- Strnad P
journal: Semin Liver Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1055/a-2122-7674
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric and Adult Liver Disease in Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.
**Authors:** Ruiz M, Lacaille F, Schrader C, Pons M, Socha P, Krag A, Sturm E, Bouchecareilh M, Strnad P
**Journal:** Semin Liver Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1055/a-2122-7674](https://doi.org/10.1055/a-2122-7674)

## Content

1. Semin Liver Dis. 2023 Aug;43(3):258-266. doi: 10.1055/a-2122-7674. Epub 2023
Jul  4.

Pediatric and Adult Liver Disease in Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.

Ruiz M(1), Lacaille F(2), Schrader C(3), Pons M(4)(5), Socha P(6), Krag A(7), 
Sturm E(8), Bouchecareilh M(9), Strnad P(3).

Author information:
(1)Hépatologie, Gastroentérologie et Nutrition Pédiatriques, Hôpital Femme Mère 
Enfant, Hospices civils de Lyon, Health Care Provider of the European Reference 
Network on Rare Liver Disorders (ERN RARE LIVER), Lyon, France.
(2)Service de Gastroentérologie-Nutrition Pédiatriques et Unité d'Hépatologie 
Pédiatrique Hôpital Universitaire Necker-Enfants Malades, Health Care Provider 
of the European Reference Network on Rare Liver Disorders (ERN RARE LIVER), 
Paris, France.
(3)Medical Clinic III, Gastroenterology, Metabolic Diseases and Intensive Care, 
University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Health Care Provider of the European Reference 
Network on Rare Liver Disorders (ERN RARE LIVER), Aachen, Germany.
(4)Liver Unit, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Vall d'Hebron Research 
Institute (VHIR), Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Health Care Provider of the 
European Reference Network on Rare Liver Disorders (ERN RARE LIVER), Barcelona, 
Spain.
(5)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y 
Digestivas (CIBERehd), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(6)The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Department of Gastroenterology, 
Hepatology, Nutritional Disorders and Pediatrics, Al. Dzieci Polskich, Warszawa, 
Poland.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Odense University Hospital, 
Odense, Denmark.
(8)Pediatric Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Children's Hospital 
Tübingen, Member Center of the European Reference Network on Rare Liver 
Disorders (ERN RARE LIVER), Tübingen, Germany.
(9)University of Bordeaux, CNRS, INSERM, BRIC, U1312, Bordeaux, France.

Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) arises due to inherited variants in 
SERPINA1, the AAT gene that impairs the production or secretion of this 
hepatocellular protein and leads to a gain-of-function liver proteotoxicity. 
Homozygous Pi*Z pathogenic variant (Pi*ZZ genotype) is the leading cause of 
severe AATD. It manifests in 2 to 10% of carriers as neonatal cholestasis and 20 
to 35% of adults as significant liver fibrosis. Both children and adults may 
develop an end-stage liver disease requiring liver transplantation. Heterozygous 
Pi*Z pathogenic variant (Pi*MZ genotype) constitutes an established disease 
modifier. Our review summarizes the natural history and management of subjects 
with both pediatric and adult AATD-associated liver disease. Current findings 
from a phase 2 clinical trial indicate that RNA silencing may constitute a 
viable therapeutic approach for adult AATD. In conclusion, AATD is an 
increasingly appreciated pediatric and adult liver disorder that is becoming an 
attractive target for modern pharmacologic strategies.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-2122-7674
PMID: 37402396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.R. received advisory board fees and lecture 
fees from Takeda, advisory board fees from Grifols, lecture fees from CSL 
Behring. P.S. received grant support and lecture fees from Grifols and CSL 
Behring; grant support and advisory board fees from Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals 
and Dicerna Pharmaceuticals; grant support from Vertex Pharmaceuticals; advisory 
board fees from GSK, Intellia Pharmaceuticals, Novo Nordisk, Takeda, and Ono 
Pharmaceuticals; and is supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) 
grants SFB 1382 (ID 403224013) and STR 1095/6–1.