---
reference_id: "PMID:37692302"
title: Autism spectrum disorder and Coffin-Siris syndrome-Case report.
authors:
- Milutinovic L
- Grujicic R
- Mandic Maravic V
- Joksic I
- Ljubomirovic N
- Pejovic Milovancevic M
journal: Front Psychiatry
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1199710
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autism spectrum disorder and Coffin-Siris syndrome-Case report.
**Authors:** Milutinovic L, Grujicic R, Mandic Maravic V, Joksic I, Ljubomirovic N, Pejovic Milovancevic M
**Journal:** Front Psychiatry (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1199710](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1199710)

## Content

1. Front Psychiatry. 2023 Aug 24;14:1199710. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1199710. 
eCollection 2023.

Autism spectrum disorder and Coffin-Siris syndrome-Case report.

Milutinovic L(1), Grujicic R(1), Mandic Maravic V(2), Joksic I(3), Ljubomirovic 
N(1), Pejovic Milovancevic M(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Department for Children and Adolescents, Institute of Mental Health, 
Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)Day Hospital for Psychotic Disorders, Institute of Mental Health, Belgrade, 
Serbia.
(3)Clinic for Gynecology and Obstetrics "Narodni Front", Belgrade, Serbia.

INTRODUCTION: Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a group of developmental 
disorders characterized by deficits in social communicative skills and the 
occurrence of repetitive and/or stereotyped behaviors. Coffin-Siris syndrome 
(CSS) is classically characterized by aplasia or hypoplasia of the distal 
phalanx or nail of the fifth and additional digits, developmental or cognitive 
delay of varying degrees, distinctive facial features, hypotonia, 
hirsutism/hypertrichosis, and sparse scalp hair. In this study, we present a 
detailed description of autistic traits in a boy diagnosed with CSS and further 
discuss their genetic backgrounds.
CASE DESCRIPTION: An 8-year-old boy with ASD, congenital anomalies, and 
neurological problems had been diagnosed with Coffin-Siris syndrome after 
genetic testing. Genetic testing revealed a heterozygous de novo pathogenic 
variant (class 5) c.1638_1647del in the ARID1B gene that is causative of 
Coffin-Siris syndrome but also other intellectual disability (ID)-related 
disorders, including autism. Tests that preceded the diagnoses, as well as 
congenital anomalies and developmental issues, were further described in an 
attempt to better present his phenotype.
CONCLUSION: Both autism and ARID1B-related disorders are on a spectrum. This 
report points out the importance and necessity of further research regarding the 
genetic backgrounds of these disorders to understand their complex etiology.

Copyright © 2023 Milutinovic, Grujicic, Mandic Maravic, Joksic, Ljubomirovic and 
Pejovic Milovancevic.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1199710
PMCID: PMC10483805
PMID: 37692302

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.