---
reference_id: "PMID:18695762"
title: Diagnostic evaluation of cystic pancreatic lesions.
authors:
- Visser BC
- Muthusamy VR
- Yeh BM
- Coakley FV
- Way LW
journal: HPB (Oxford)
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1080/13651820701883155
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic evaluation of cystic pancreatic lesions.
**Authors:** Visser BC, Muthusamy VR, Yeh BM, Coakley FV, Way LW
**Journal:** HPB (Oxford) (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13651820701883155](https://doi.org/10.1080/13651820701883155)

## Content

1. HPB (Oxford). 2008;10(1):63-9. doi: 10.1080/13651820701883155.

Diagnostic evaluation of cystic pancreatic lesions.

Visser BC(1), Muthusamy VR, Yeh BM, Coakley FV, Way LW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. 
Brendan.Visser@va.gov

BACKGROUND: Cystic pancreatic neoplasms (CPNs) present a unique challenge in 
preoperative diagnosis. We investigated the accuracy of diagnostic methods for 
CPN.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This retrospective cases series includes 70 patients who 
underwent surgery at a university hospital for presumed CPNs between 1997 and 
2003, and for whom a definitive diagnosis was established. Variables examined 
included symptoms, preoperative work-up (including endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) in 22 cases and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) in 
12), and operative and pathological findings. Preoperative computed tomography 
(CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans (n=50 patients; CT=48; MRI=13) 
were independently reviewed by two blinded GI radiologists.
RESULTS: The final histopathologic diagnoses were mucinous cystic neoplasm 
(n=13), mucinous cystadenocarcinoma (10), serous cystadenoma (11), IPMN (14), 
simple cyst (3), cystic neuroendocrine tumor (5), pseudocyst (4), and other 
(10). Overall, 25 of 70 were malignant (37%), 21 premalignant (30%), and 24 
benign (34%). The attending surgeon's preoperative diagnosis was correct in 31% 
of cases, incorrect in 29%, non-specific "cystic tumor" in 27%, and "pseudocyst 
vs. neoplasm" in 11%. Eight had been previously managed as pseudocysts, and 3 
pseudocysts were excised as presumed CPN. In review of the CT and MRI, a 
multivariate analysis of the morphologic features did not identify predictors of 
specific pathologic diagnoses. Both radiologists were accurate with their 
preferred (no. 1) diagnosis in <50% of cases. MRI demonstrated no additional 
utility beyond CT.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of CPN remains challenging. Cross-sectional imaging 
methods do not reliably give an accurate preoperative diagnosis. Surgeons should 
continue to err on the side of resection.

DOI: 10.1080/13651820701883155
PMCID: PMC2504857
PMID: 18695762