---
reference_id: "PMID:17284617"
title: "Clinical review: Hyperandrogenism and polycystic ovary syndrome in women with type 1 diabetes mellitus."
authors:
- Codner E
- Escobar-Morreale HF
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2006-2641
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical review: Hyperandrogenism and polycystic ovary syndrome in women with type 1 diabetes mellitus.
**Authors:** Codner E, Escobar-Morreale HF
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2006-2641](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2006-2641)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Apr;92(4):1209-16. doi: 10.1210/jc.2006-2641.
Epub  2007 Feb 6.

Clinical review: Hyperandrogenism and polycystic ovary syndrome in women with 
type 1 diabetes mellitus.

Codner E(1), Escobar-Morreale HF.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Maternal and Child Research, School of Medicine, University of 
Chile, Santiago, Chile, and Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Ramón y Cajal 
and Universidad de Alcalá, Carretera de Colmenar Km 9'100, Madrid, E-28034 
Spain.

CONTEXT: At present, women with type 1 diabetes (DM1) are being treated with 
supraphysiological doses of exogenous insulin with the aim of providing a strict 
metabolic control, thereby avoiding the long-term complications of this disease. 
We hypothesized that PCOS would be especially prevalent in DM1, as might happen 
in any condition in which the ovary and the adrenals are exposed to excessive 
insulin concentrations. As will be seen in the present review, androgen excess 
and PCOS are very frequent complaints in women with DM1, yet nowadays 
hyperandrogenism is seldom diagnosed in these patients.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: We conducted a systematic review of all the published 
studies addressing hyperandrogenic symptoms in women with DM1, identified 
through the Entrez-PubMed search engine, followed by a comprehensive review of 
the pathophysiology and clinical and laboratory features of PCOS in women with 
DM1.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: The prevalence of PCOS in adult women with DM1 is 12-18, 40, 
and 31% using National Institute for Child Health and Human Development, 
Rotterdam, and Androgen Excess Society criteria, respectively. Mild hirsutism 
and biochemical hyperandrogenism are present in 30 and 20% of the patients, 
respectively. In addition, menstrual abnormalities are observed in 20% of adult 
women with DM1, and a prevalence of 50% of polycystic ovarian morphology is 
reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Physicians treating women with DM1 should be aware of the risk of 
hyperandrogenism in them and should include evaluation of hirsutism, menstrual 
abnormalities, and biochemical hyperandrogenism in their routine examinations. 
Future studies are needed to determine the best preventive and therapeutic 
options for the hyperandrogenism of these patients.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2006-2641
PMID: 17284617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]