---
reference_id: "PMID:37983289"
title: The murine meninges acquire lymphoid tissue properties and harbour autoreactive B cells during chronic Trypanosoma brucei infection.
authors:
- Quintana JF
- Sinton MC
- Chandrasegaran P
- Kumar Dubey L
- Ogunsola J
- Al Samman M
- Haley M
- McConnell G
- Kuispond Swar NR
- Ngoyi DM
- Bending D
- de Lecea L
- MacLeod A
- Mabbott NA
journal: PLoS Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3002389
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Mice
- Trypanosoma brucei brucei
- Persistent Infection
- Meninges/metabolism
- "Trypanosomiasis, African"
- Lymphoid Tissue/metabolism
- Autoantibodies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The murine meninges acquire lymphoid tissue properties and harbour autoreactive B cells during chronic Trypanosoma brucei infection.
**Authors:** Quintana JF, Sinton MC, Chandrasegaran P, Kumar Dubey L, Ogunsola J, Al Samman M, Haley M, McConnell G, Kuispond Swar NR, Ngoyi DM, Bending D, de Lecea L, MacLeod A, Mabbott NA
**Journal:** PLoS Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pbio.3002389](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3002389)

## Content

1. PLoS Biol. 2023 Nov 20;21(11):e3002389. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3002389.
eCollection 2023 Nov.

The murine meninges acquire lymphoid tissue properties and harbour autoreactive
B cells during chronic Trypanosoma brucei infection.

Quintana JF(1)(2)(3), Sinton MC(1)(4), Chandrasegaran P(3), Kumar Dubey L(5),
Ogunsola J(3), Al Samman M(3), Haley M(1)(2), McConnell G(6), Kuispond Swar
NR(7), Ngoyi DM(7), Bending D(8), de Lecea L(9), MacLeod A(3), Mabbott NA(10).

Author information:
(1)Lydia Becker Institute of Immunology and Inflammation, University of
Manchester, United Kingdom.
(2)Division of Immunology, Immunity to Infection and Health, Manchester Academic
Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, United Kingdom.
(3)School of Biodiversity, One Health, Veterinary Medicine (SBOHVM), College of
Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow United
Kingdom.
(4)Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Manchester, United
Kingdom.
(5)Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Strathclyde Institute of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences (SIPBS), University
of Strathclyde, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Parasitology, National Institute of Biomedical Research,
Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(8)Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, College of Medical and Dental
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(9)Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States
of America.
(10)The Roslin Institute and Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

The meningeal space is a critical brain structure providing immunosurveillance
for the central nervous system (CNS), but the impact of infections on the
meningeal immune landscape is far from being fully understood. The extracellular
protozoan parasite Trypanosoma brucei, which causes human African
trypanosomiasis (HAT) or sleeping sickness, accumulates in the meningeal spaces,
ultimately inducing severe meningitis and resulting in death if left untreated.
Thus, sleeping sickness represents an attractive model to study immunological
dynamics in the meninges during infection. Here, by combining single-cell
transcriptomics and mass cytometry by time-of-flight (CyTOF) with in vivo
interventions, we found that chronic T. brucei infection triggers the
development of ectopic lymphoid aggregates (ELAs) in the murine meninges. These
infection-induced ELAs were defined by the presence of ER-TR7+ fibroblastic
reticular cells, CD21/35+ follicular dendritic cells (FDCs), CXCR5+ PD1+ T
follicular helper-like phenotype, GL7+ CD95+ GC-like B cells, and
plasmablasts/plasma cells. Furthermore, the B cells found in the infected
meninges produced high-affinity autoantibodies able to recognise mouse brain
antigens, in a process dependent on LTβ signalling. A mid-throughput screening
identified several host factors recognised by these autoantibodies, including
myelin basic protein (MBP), coinciding with cortical demyelination and brain
pathology. In humans, we identified the presence of autoreactive IgG antibodies
in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of second stage HAT patients that recognised
human brain lysates and MBP, consistent with our findings in experimental
infections. Lastly, we found that the pathological B cell responses we observed
in the meninges required the presence of T. brucei in the CNS, as suramin
treatment before the onset of the CNS stage prevented the accumulation of GL7+
CD95+ GC-like B cells and brain-specific autoantibody deposition. Taken
together, our data provide evidence that the meningeal immune response during
chronic T. brucei infection results in the acquisition of lymphoid tissue-like
properties, broadening our understanding of meningeal immunity in the context of
chronic infections. These findings have wider implications for understanding the
mechanisms underlying the formation ELAs during chronic inflammation resulting
in autoimmunity in mice and humans, as observed in other autoimmune
neurodegenerative disorders, including neuropsychiatric lupus and multiple
sclerosis.

Copyright: © 2023 Quintana et al. This is an open access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3002389
PMCID: PMC10723712
PMID: 37983289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
