---
reference_id: "PMID:28284557"
title: "Binimetinib versus dacarbazine in patients with advanced NRAS-mutant melanoma (NEMO): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial."
authors:
- Dummer R
- Schadendorf D
- Ascierto PA
- Arance A
- Dutriaux C
- Di Giacomo AM
- Rutkowski P
- Del Vecchio M
- Gutzmer R
- Mandala M
- Thomas L
- Demidov L
- Garbe C
- Hogg D
- Liszkay G
- Queirolo P
- Wasserman E
- Ford J
- Weill M
- Sirulnik LA
- Jehl V
- Bozón V
- Long GV
- Flaherty K
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(17)30180-8
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Benzimidazoles/administration & dosage"
- "Dacarbazine/administration & dosage"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- GTP Phosphohydrolases/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- Neoplasm Staging
- Prognosis
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Binimetinib versus dacarbazine in patients with advanced NRAS-mutant melanoma (NEMO): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial.
**Authors:** Dummer R, Schadendorf D, Ascierto PA, Arance A, Dutriaux C, Di Giacomo AM, Rutkowski P, Del Vecchio M, Gutzmer R, Mandala M, Thomas L, Demidov L, Garbe C, Hogg D, Liszkay G, Queirolo P, Wasserman E, Ford J, Weill M, Sirulnik LA, Jehl V, Bozón V, Long GV, Flaherty K
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(17)30180-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(17)30180-8)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2017 Apr;18(4):435-445. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(17)30180-8. Epub
 2017 Mar 9.

Binimetinib versus dacarbazine in patients with advanced NRAS-mutant melanoma
(NEMO): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial.

Dummer R(1), Schadendorf D(2), Ascierto PA(3), Arance A(4), Dutriaux C(5), Di
Giacomo AM(6), Rutkowski P(7), Del Vecchio M(8), Gutzmer R(9), Mandala M(10),
Thomas L(11), Demidov L(12), Garbe C(13), Hogg D(14), Liszkay G(15), Queirolo
P(16), Wasserman E(17), Ford J(17), Weill M(18), Sirulnik LA(17), Jehl V(18),
Bozón V(19), Long GV(20), Flaherty K(21).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zürich Skin Cancer Center,
Zürich, Switzerland. Electronic address: reinhard.dummer@usz.ch.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany; German
Cancer Consortium, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Melanoma Unit, Cancer Immunotherapy and Innovative Therapies, Istituto
Nazionale Tumori Fondazione Pascale, Via Mariano Semmola, Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain.
(5)Department of Oncologic Dermatology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Bordeaux, Hôpital Saint-André, Bordeaux, France.
(6)Medical Oncology and Immunotherapy, University Hospital of Siena, Viale
Bracci, Siena, Italy.
(7)Department of Soft Tissue/Bone Sarcoma and Melanoma, Maria Sklodowska-Curie
Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland.
(8)Department of Medical Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei
Tumori, Via Giacomo Venezian, Milan, Italy.
(9)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Skin Cancer Center Hannover, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(10)Department of Oncology and Haematology, Papa Giovanni XXIII Cancer Center
Hospital, Bergamo, Italy.
(11)Department of Dermatology, Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, Lyons Cancer
Research Center, Lyon 1 University, Pierre Bénite, France.
(12)N N Blokhin Russian Cancer Research Center, Ministry of Health, Moscow,
Russian Federation.
(13)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen,
Germany.
(14)Department of Medicine, University Health Network/Princess Margaret
Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(15)Department of Dermatology, National Institute of Oncology, Budapest,
Hungary.
(16)Department of Medical Oncology, Institute for Cancer Research, IRCCS San
Martino, Largo Rosanna Benzi, Genova, Italy.
(17)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, One Health Plaza, East Hanover, NJ,
USA.
(18)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(19)Array BioPharma, Boulder, CO, USA.
(20)Melanoma Institute Australia, The University of Sydney, Royal North Shore
and Mater Hospitals, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(21)Department of Medical Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA,
USA.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2017 Apr;18(4):414-415. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(17)30172-9.
    Lancet Oncol. 2017 Jun;18(6):e298. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(17)30349-2.

BACKGROUND: There are no established therapies specific for NRAS-mutant melanoma
despite the emergence of immunotherapy. We aimed to assess the efficacy and
safety of the MEK inhibitor binimetinib versus that of dacarbazine in patients
with advanced NRAS-mutant melanoma.
METHODS: NEMO is an ongoing, randomised, open-label phase 3 study done at 118
hospitals in 26 countries. Patients with advanced, unresectable, American Joint
Committee on Cancer stage IIIC or stage IV NRAS-mutant melanoma who were
previously untreated or had progressed on or after previous immunotherapy were
randomised (2:1) to receive either binimetinib 45 mg orally twice daily or
dacarbazine 1000 mg/m2 intravenously every 3 weeks. Randomisation was stratified
by stage, performance status, and previous immunotherapy. The primary endpoint
was progression-free survival assessed by blinded central review in the
intention-to-treat population. Safety analyses were done in the safety
population, consisting of all patients who received at least one study drug dose
and one post-baseline safety assessment. This study is registered with
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01763164 and with EudraCT, number 2012-003593-51.
FINDINGS: Between Aug 19, 2013, and April 28, 2015, 402 patients were enrolled
and randomly assigned, 269 to binimetinib and 133 to dacarbazine. Median
follow-up was 1·7 months (IQR 1·4-4·1). Median progression-free survival was 2·8
months (95% CI 2·8-3·6) in the binimetinib group and 1·5 months (1·5-1·7) in the
dacarbazine group (hazard ratio 0·62 [95% CI 0·47-0·80]; one-sided p<0·001).
Grade 3-4 adverse events seen in at least 5% of patients the safety population
in either group were increased creatine phosphokinase (52 [19%] of 269 patients
in the binimetinib group vs none of 114 in the dacarbazine group), hypertension
(20 [7%] vs two [2%]), anaemia (five [2%] vs six [5%]), and neutropenia (two
[1%] vs ten [9%]). Serious adverse events (all grades) occurred in 91 (34%)
patients in the binimetinib group and 25 (22%) patients in the dacarbazine
group.
INTERPRETATION: Binimetinib improved progression-free survival compared with
dacarbazine and was tolerable. Binimetinib might represent a new treatment
option for patients with NRAS-mutant melanoma after failure of immunotherapy.
FUNDING: Array BioPharma and Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(17)30180-8
PMID: 28284557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
