---
reference_id: "PMID:24795448"
title: The 2014 Ebola virus disease outbreak in West Africa.
authors:
- Gatherer D
journal: J Gen Virol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1099/vir.0.067199-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The 2014 Ebola virus disease outbreak in West Africa.
**Authors:** Gatherer D
**Journal:** J Gen Virol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1099/vir.0.067199-0](https://doi.org/10.1099/vir.0.067199-0)

## Content

1. J Gen Virol. 2014 Aug;95(Pt 8):1619-1624. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.067199-0. Epub
2014  May 2.

The 2014 Ebola virus disease outbreak in West Africa.

Gatherer D(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical & Life Sciences, Faculty of Health & Medicine, 
Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YQ, UK.

On 23 March 2014, the World Health Organization issued its first communiqué on a 
new outbreak of Ebola virus disease (EVD), which began in December 2013 in 
Guinée Forestière (Forested Guinea), the eastern sector of the Republic of 
Guinea. Located on the Atlantic coast of West Africa, Guinea is the first 
country in this geographical region in which an outbreak of EVD has occurred, 
leaving aside the single case reported in Ivory Coast in 1994. Cases have now 
also been confirmed across Guinea as well as in the neighbouring Republic of 
Liberia. The appearance of cases in the Guinean capital, Conakry, and the 
transit of another case through the Liberian capital, Monrovia, presents the 
first large urban setting for EVD transmission. By 20 April 2014, 242 suspected 
cases had resulted in a total of 147 deaths in Guinea and Liberia. The causative 
agent has now been identified as an outlier strain of Zaire Ebola virus. The 
full geographical extent and degree of severity of the outbreak, its zoonotic 
origins and its possible spread to other continents are sure to be subjects of 
intensive discussion over the next months.

© 2014 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.067199-0
PMID: 24795448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]