---
reference_id: "PMID:24961627"
title: "Prenatal growth restriction, retinal dystrophy, diabetes insipidus and white matter disease: expanding the spectrum of PRPS1-related disorders."
authors:
- Al-Maawali A
- Dupuis L
- Blaser S
- Heon E
- Tarnopolsky M
- Al-Murshedi F
- Marshall CR
- Paton T
- Scherer SW
- FORGE Canada Consortium
- Roelofsen J
- van Kuilenburg AB
- Mendoza-Londono R
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.112
keywords:
- Brain/pathology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diabetes Insipidus/diagnosis, genetics"
- Electrocardiography
- Exome
- Facies
- "Fetal Growth Retardation/diagnosis, genetics"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Leukoencephalopathies/diagnosis, genetics"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Retinal Dystrophies/diagnosis, genetics"
- Ribose-Phosphate Pyrophosphokinase/genetics
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal growth restriction, retinal dystrophy, diabetes insipidus and white matter disease: expanding the spectrum of PRPS1-related disorders.
**Authors:** Al-Maawali A, Dupuis L, Blaser S, Heon E, Tarnopolsky M, Al-Murshedi F, Marshall CR, Paton T, Scherer SW, FORGE Canada Consortium, Roelofsen J, van Kuilenburg AB, Mendoza-Londono R
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2014.112](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2014.112)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Mar;23(3):310-6. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.112. Epub 2014
Jun  25.

Prenatal growth restriction, retinal dystrophy, diabetes insipidus and white
matter disease: expanding the spectrum of PRPS1-related disorders.

Al-Maawali A(1), Dupuis L(2), Blaser S(3), Heon E(4), Tarnopolsky M(5),
Al-Murshedi F(6), Marshall CR(7), Paton T(7), Scherer SW(7); FORGE Canada
Consortium; Roelofsen J(8), van Kuilenburg AB(8), Mendoza-Londono R(2).

Collaborators: Boycott K, Friedman J, Michaud J, Bernier F, Brudno M, Fernandez
B, Knoppers B, Samuels M, Scherer S, Marcadier J, Beaulieu C.

Author information:
(1)1] Department of Paediatrics, Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics,
The Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
[2] Genetic and Developmental Medicine Clinic, Sultan Qaboos University
Hospital, Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The
Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Diagnostic Imaging, Division of Neuroradiology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, The Hospital for Sick
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, Division of Neuromuscular and
Neurometabolic Disease, McMaster University, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(6)Genetic and Developmental Medicine Clinic, Sultan Qaboos University Hospital,
Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman.
(7)1] The Centre for Applied Genomics and Program in Genetics and Genome
Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada [2] Department of
Molecular Genetics and the McLaughlin Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON, Canada.
(8)Labratory of Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.

PRPS1 codes for the enzyme phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase-1 (PRS-1).
The spectrum of PRPS1-related disorders associated with reduced activity
includes Arts syndrome, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease-5 (CMTX5) and X-linked
non-syndromic sensorineural deafness (DFN2). We describe a novel phenotype
associated with decreased PRS-1 function in two affected male siblings. Using
whole exome and Sanger sequencing techniques, we identified a novel missense
mutation in PRPS1. The clinical phenotype in our patients is characterized by
high prenatal maternal α-fetoprotein, intrauterine growth restriction,
dysmorphic facial features, severe intellectual disability and spastic
quadraparesis. Additional phenotypic features include macular coloboma-like
lesions with retinal dystrophy, severe short stature and diabetes insipidus.
Exome sequencing of the two affected male siblings identified a shared putative
pathogenic mutation c.586C>T p.(Arg196Trp) in the PRPS1 gene that was maternally
inherited. Follow-up testing showed normal levels of hypoxanthine in urine
samples and uric acid levels in blood serum. The PRS activity was significantly
reduced in erythrocytes of the two patients. Nucleotide analysis in erythrocytes
revealed abnormally low guanosine triphosphate and guanosine diphosphate. This
presentation is the most severe form of PRPS1-deficiency syndrome described to
date and expands the spectrum of PRPS1-related disorders.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.112
PMCID: PMC4326708
PMID: 24961627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
