---
reference_id: "PMID:20301394"
title: SHOX Deficiency Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Binder G
- Rappold GA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SHOX Deficiency Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Binder G, Rappold GA

## Content

1. SHOX Deficiency Disorders.

Binder G(1), Rappold GA(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2005 Dec 12 [updated 2024 May 23].

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Endocrinology, University Children's Hospital, Tübingen, Germany
(2)Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The phenotypic spectrum of SHOX deficiency disorders, 
caused by haploinsufficiency of the short stature homeobox-containing gene 
(SHOX), ranges from Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) at the severe end of the 
spectrum to nonspecific short stature at the mild end of the spectrum. In adults 
with SHOX deficiency, the proportion of LWD versus short stature without 
features of LWD is not well defined. In LWD the classic clinical triad is short 
stature, mesomelia, and Madelung deformity. Mesomelia, in which the middle 
portion of a limb is shortened in relation to the proximal portion, can be 
evident first in school-aged children and increases with age in frequency and 
severity. Madelung deformity (abnormal alignment of the radius, ulna, and carpal 
bones at the wrist) typically develops in mid-to-late childhood and is more 
common and severe in females. The phenotype of short stature caused by SHOX 
deficiency in the absence of mesomelia and Madelung deformity (called 
SHOX-deficient short stature in this GeneReview) is highly variable, even within 
the same family.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SHOX deficiency is established in a proband 
with either a pathogenic SHOX variant or a deletion, duplication, or insertion 
that can encompass the SHOX coding region and/or the enhancer region regulating 
SHOX expression.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: For prepubertal children with 
SHOX-deficient short stature, recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH therapy) 
(dose 50 µg/kg body weight/day) should be offered. The therapeutic effect is a 
gain in final height of 7 to 10 cm. For individuals with LWD and painful 
bilateral Madelung deformity (which is uncommon): wrist splints and supports 
during periods of increased discomfort and the use of ergonomic devices such as 
ergonomic computer keyboards. Different operative procedures have been attempted 
to decrease pain and restore wrist function. Surveillance: For children with a 
SHOX deficiency disorder: biannual measurement of growth. Agents/circumstances 
to avoid: If Madelung deformity is associated with discomfort, physical 
activities such as lifting, gripping, writing, typing, and sports that strain 
the wrist should be limited and ergonomic aids sought. Evaluation of relatives 
at risk: Presymptomatic diagnosis and treatment are warranted for sibs at risk 
for SHOX-deficient short stature in order to identify as early as possible those 
who would benefit from recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) treatment.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SHOX deficiency disorders are inherited in a pseudoautosomal 
dominant manner. In pseudoautosomal dominant inheritance, homologous genes 
located on the short arm of the X chromosome (Xp) and the short arm of the Y 
chromosome (Yp) follow the rules of autosomal inheritance; thus, a SHOX 
pathogenic variant responsible for SHOX deficiency can be located on either the 
X or the Y chromosome of an affected male, or on either of the X chromosomes of 
an affected female. Each child of an individual with a SHOX deficiency disorder 
has a 50% chance of inheriting the SHOX pathogenic variant. If both parents have 
SHOX deficiency, the offspring have a 50% chance of having a SHOX deficiency 
disorder, a 25% chance of having Langer type of mesomelic dwarfism, and a 25% 
chance of having neither condition. If the SHOX pathogenic variant has been 
identified in one or both parents, prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased 
risk is possible; however, the phenotype of the SHOX deficiency disorder cannot 
be accurately predicted on the basis of prenatal molecular genetic testing 
results.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301394