---
reference_id: "PMID:34798986"
title: Identification of Lynch Syndrome.
authors:
- Maratt JK
- Stoffel E
journal: Gastrointest Endosc Clin N Am
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.giec.2021.09.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of Lynch Syndrome.
**Authors:** Maratt JK, Stoffel E
**Journal:** Gastrointest Endosc Clin N Am (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.giec.2021.09.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giec.2021.09.002)

## Content

1. Gastrointest Endosc Clin N Am. 2022 Jan;32(1):45-58. doi: 
10.1016/j.giec.2021.09.002.

Identification of Lynch Syndrome.

Maratt JK(1), Stoffel E(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, 1101 West Tenth Street, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA; Richard L. 
Roudebush Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, IN, USA; Regenstrief 
Institute, Inc, Indianapolis, IN, USA. Electronic address: jmaratt@iu.edu.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Michigan, 1500 East Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; Rogel Cancer 
Center, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Lynch syndrome (LS) is an autosomal dominant hereditary cancer syndrome caused 
by pathogenic germline variants (PGV) in any of the 4 DNA mismatch repair (MMR) 
genes, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2, or deletions in EPCAM. LS leads to an 
increased risk of intestinal and extraintestinal cancers, of which colorectal 
and endometrial cancers are the most common. Individuals at risk for LS can be 
identified by using clinical criteria, prediction models, and universal tumor 
testing. Understanding each of these tools, including limitations and mimics of 
LS, is essential to the early identification of at-risk individuals.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.giec.2021.09.002
PMID: 34798986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Dr. Maratt receives support from 
Grant Number UL1TR002529 from the National Institutes of Health (NIH), National 
Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, Clinical and Translational Sciences 
Award. The views expressed in this manuscript do not reflect views of the NIH.