---
reference_id: "PMID:11684348"
title: Kynurenic acid levels are elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with schizophrenia.
authors:
- Erhardt S
- Blennow K
- Nordin C
- Skogh E
- Lindström LH
- Engberg G
journal: Neurosci Lett
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1016/s0304-3940(01)02242-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kynurenic acid levels are elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Erhardt S, Blennow K, Nordin C, Skogh E, Lindström LH, Engberg G
**Journal:** Neurosci Lett (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0304-3940(01)02242-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0304-3940(01)02242-x)

## Content

1. Neurosci Lett. 2001 Nov 2;313(1-2):96-8. doi: 10.1016/s0304-3940(01)02242-x.

Kynurenic acid levels are elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with 
schizophrenia.

Erhardt S(1), Blennow K, Nordin C, Skogh E, Lindström LH, Engberg G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology & Pharmacology, Karolinska Institute, 171 77 
Stockholm, Sweden.

Kynurenic acid is an endogenous glutamate antagonist with a preferential action 
at the glycine-site of the N-methyl D-aspartate-receptor. Mounting evidence 
indicate that the compound is significantly involved in basal neurophysiological 
processes in the brain. In the present investigation, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
level of kynurenic acid was analyzed in 28 male schizophrenic patients and 17 
male healthy controls by means of high pressure liquid chromatography and 
fluorescence detection. Schizophrenic patients showed elevated CSF levels of 
kynurenic acid (1.67+/-0.27 nM) compared to the control group (0.97+/-0.07 nM). 
Furthermore, CSF levels of kynurenic acid in schizophrenic patients were also 
found to correlate with age. The present finding is indicative of a contribution 
of kynurenic acid in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.1016/s0304-3940(01)02242-x
PMID: 11684348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]