---
reference_id: "PMID:38243784"
title: "Selenium Supplementation in Patients with Hashimoto Thyroiditis: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Clinical Trials."
authors:
- Huwiler VV
- Maissen-Abgottspon S
- Stanga Z
- Mühlebach S
- Trepp R
- Bally L
- Bano A
journal: Thyroid
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1089/thy.2023.0556
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Selenium Supplementation in Patients with Hashimoto Thyroiditis: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Clinical Trials.
**Authors:** Huwiler VV, Maissen-Abgottspon S, Stanga Z, Mühlebach S, Trepp R, Bally L, Bano A
**Journal:** Thyroid (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1089/thy.2023.0556](https://doi.org/10.1089/thy.2023.0556)

## Content

1. Thyroid. 2024 Mar;34(3):295-313. doi: 10.1089/thy.2023.0556. Epub 2024 Feb 16.

Selenium Supplementation in Patients with Hashimoto Thyroiditis: A Systematic 
Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Clinical Trials.

Huwiler VV(1)(2), Maissen-Abgottspon S(1), Stanga Z(1), Mühlebach S(2), Trepp 
R(1), Bally L(1), Bano A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology, Nutritional Medicine and Metabolism, 
Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Division of Clinical Pharmacy and Epidemiology, Department of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.

Background: Hashimoto thyroiditis (HT) is the most common cause of 
hypothyroidism in iodine-sufficient areas. Selenium is an essential trace 
element required for thyroid hormone synthesis and exerts antioxidant effects. 
Therefore, it may be of relevance in the management of HT. Methods: We conducted 
a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) to 
evaluate the effect of selenium supplementation on thyroid function (thyrotropin 
[TSH], free and total thyroxine [fT4, T4], free and total triiodothyronine [fT3, 
T3]), thyroid antibodies (thyroid peroxidase antibodies [TPOAb], thyroglobulin 
antibodies [TGAb], thyrotropin receptor antibody [TRAb]), ultrasound findings 
(echogenicity, thyroid volume), immune markers, patient-reported outcomes, and 
adverse events in HT. The study protocol was registered on PROSPERO 
(CRD42022308377). We systematically searched MEDLINE, Embase, CINHAL, Web of 
Science, Google Scholar, and the Cochrane CENTRAL Register of Trials from 
inception to January 2023 and searched citations of eligible studies. Two 
independent authors reviewed and coded the identified literature. The primary 
outcome was TSH in patients without thyroid hormone replacement therapy (THRT); 
the others were considered secondary outcomes. We synthesized the results as 
standardized mean differences (SMD) or odds ratio (OR), assessed risk of bias 
using the Cochrane RoB 2 tool, and rated the evidence using the Grading of 
Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) approach. 
Results: We screened 687 records and included 35 unique studies. Our 
meta-analysis found that selenium supplementation decreased TSH in patients 
without THRT (SMD -0.21 [confidence interval, CI -0.43 to -0.02]; 7 cohorts, 869 
participants; I2 = 0%). In addition, TPOAb (SMD -0.96 [CI -1.36 to -0.56]; 29 
cohorts; 2358 participants; I2 = 90%) and malondialdehyde (MDA; SMD -1.16 [CI 
-2.29 to -0.02]; 3 cohorts; 248 participants; I2 = 85%) decreased in patients 
with and without THRT. Adverse effects were comparable between the intervention 
and control groups (OR 0.89 [CI 0.46 to 1.75]; 16 cohorts; 1339 participants; 
I2 = 0%). No significant changes were observed in fT4, T4, fT3, T3, TGAb, 
thyroid volume, interleukin (IL)-2, and IL-10. Overall, certainty of evidence 
was moderate. Conclusions: In people with HT without THRT, selenium was 
effective and safe in lowering TSH, TPOAb, and MDA levels. Indications for 
lowering TPOAb were found independent of THRT.

DOI: 10.1089/thy.2023.0556
PMCID: PMC10951571
PMID: 38243784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All the authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.