---
reference_id: "PMID:9109866"
title: A new leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter.
authors:
- van der Knaap MS
- Barth PG
- Gabreëls FJ
- Franzoni E
- Begeer JH
- Stroink H
- Rotteveel JJ
- Valk J
journal: Neurology
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1212/wnl.48.4.845
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Brain Diseases/diagnosis, pathology, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Electrophysiology
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
- Male
- Spinal Cord/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A new leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter.
**Authors:** van der Knaap MS, Barth PG, Gabreëls FJ, Franzoni E, Begeer JH, Stroink H, Rotteveel JJ, Valk J
**Journal:** Neurology (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1212/wnl.48.4.845](https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.48.4.845)

## Content

1. Neurology. 1997 Apr;48(4):845-55. doi: 10.1212/wnl.48.4.845.

A new leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter.

van der Knaap MS(1), Barth PG, Gabreëls FJ, Franzoni E, Begeer JH, Stroink H, 
Rotteveel JJ, Valk J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Neurology, Free University Hospital, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.

We identified nine children with a leukoencephalopathy of similar type according 
to clinical and MRI findings. The patients included three affected sibling 
pairs. The age range was 3 to 19 years. The onset of the disease was in 
childhood; the course was both chronic-progressive and episodic. There were 
episodes of deterioration following infections and minor head traumas, and these 
could results in unexplained coma. In eight patients with advanced disease, MRI 
revealed a diffuse cerebral hemispheric leukoencephalopathy, in which increasing 
areas of the abnormal white matter had a signal intensity close to that of CSF 
on all pulse sequences. In one patient in the early stages of disease, initial 
MRI showed diffusely abnormal cerebral white matter, which only reached the 
signal characteristics of CSF at a later stage. In the patients in whom the 
disease was advanced, magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) of the white matter 
showed an almost complete disappearance of all normal signals and the presence 
of glucose and lactate, compatible with the presence of mainly CSF and little 
brain tissue. Spectra of the cortex were much better preserved. However, in 
addition to the normal resonances, there were signals representing lactate and 
glucose. MRS of the white matter in the patient whose disease was at an early 
stage was much less abnormal. Autopsy in one patient confirmed the presence of 
extensive cystic degeneration of the cerebral white matter with reactive change 
and a preserved cortex. Typical involvement of pontine tegmental white matter 
was suggested by MRI and confirmed by autopsy. The disease probably has an 
autosomal recessive mode of inheritance, but the basic metabolic defect is not 
known.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.48.4.845
PMID: 9109866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]