---
reference_id: "PMID:16278852"
title: "Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency: metabolic characteristics and new neurological aspects."
authors:
- García-Cazorla A
- Rabier D
- Touati G
- Chadefaux-Vekemans B
- Marsac C
- de Lonlay P
- Saudubray JM
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/ana.20709
keywords:
- Amino Acids/metabolism
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Nervous System Diseases/etiology, physiopathology"
- "Pyruvate Carboxylase Deficiency Disease/complications, physiopathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Seizures/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency: metabolic characteristics and new neurological aspects.
**Authors:** García-Cazorla A, Rabier D, Touati G, Chadefaux-Vekemans B, Marsac C, de Lonlay P, Saudubray JM
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.20709](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.20709)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2006 Jan;59(1):121-7. doi: 10.1002/ana.20709.

Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency: metabolic characteristics and new neurological
aspects.

García-Cazorla A(1), Rabier D, Touati G, Chadefaux-Vekemans B, Marsac C, de
Lonlay P, Saudubray JM.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases Unit, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Necker
Enfants-Malades, Paris, France. agarcia@hsjdbcn.org

OBJECTIVE: Pyruvate carboxylase (PC) deficiency is a rare metabolic disease.
Recently, therapeutic possibilities have been introduced. We aimed to report the
largest series of the B type of PC deficiency, focusing on some neurological
aspects that have not yet been documented.
METHODS: We retrospectively studied nine patients with the severe neonatal form
of PC deficiency diagnosed in our hospital. Detailed clinical features, brain
imaging, biochemical characteristics, and global outcome are reported.
RESULTS: All patients had axial hypotonia and tachypnea during the first hours
of life. The initial level of consciousness was preserved in most patients.
Abnormal movements (high-amplitude tremor and hypokinesia) and bizarre ocular
behavior were the most common findings, whereas epilepsy was infrequent. Brain
magnetic resonance imaging mostly disclosed cystic periventricular leukomalacia.
Hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis, and hypercitrullinemia were invariably found.
Hyperammoniemia, hypernatremia, and high proline and lysine were frequently
detected. A rapid fatal outcome was observed in most patients.
INTERPRETATION: Clinical and biochemical characteristics of this deficiency are
highly suggestive. Abnormal movements such as rigidity and hypokinesia
(hypokinetic-rigid syndrome) are an important hallmark and may orientate to PC
deficiency when associated with severe lactic acidosis.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.20709
PMID: 16278852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
