---
reference_id: "PMID:33717766"
title: "Cerebellopontine Angle Primary Choroid Plexus Carcinoma Present in an Adult: Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Witten AJ
- Mendenhall SK
- DeWitt LS
- Vortmeyer A
- Cohen-Gadol A
journal: Cureus
year: '2021'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.13268
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebellopontine Angle Primary Choroid Plexus Carcinoma Present in an Adult: Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Witten AJ, Mendenhall SK, DeWitt LS, Vortmeyer A, Cohen-Gadol A
**Journal:** Cureus (2021)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.13268](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.13268)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2021 Feb 10;13(2):e13268. doi: 10.7759/cureus.13268.

Cerebellopontine Angle Primary Choroid Plexus Carcinoma Present in an Adult:
Case Report and Literature Review.

Witten AJ(1), Mendenhall SK(2), DeWitt LS(3), Vortmeyer A(3), Cohen-Gadol A(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurological Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
USA.
(2)Department of Neurological Surgery, Indiana University Health, Indianapolis,
USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University Health,
Indianapolis, USA.

Choroid plexus tumors (CPTs) are rare intraventricular neoplasms that primarily
occur in children and are rare in adults. Of the CPT subtypes, choroid plexus
carcinomas (CPC) are highly aggressive and malignant and of World Health
Organization (WHO) Grade III. Dissemination through the cerebrospinal fluid
space is the inevitable natural course of the disease. In this case report, we
present a 33-year-old female with a past medical history notable for
schizophrenia and bipolar disease who suffered from left-sided acute vision loss
and hearing loss. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated multiple
enhancing masses found in the left cerebellopontine angle (CPA), right internal
auditory canal, the atrium of the left ventricle, and the left foramen of
Monroe. After surgical decompression of the CPA tumor, the permanent final
pathology was consistent with CPC. To our knowledge, this is the first reported
case of a primary CPC occurring within the CPA in an adult. The unique
presentation and progression of this rare adult-onset CPC provide insight for
the diagnosis and treatment of other rare instances of CPTs.

Copyright © 2021, Witten et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.13268
PMCID: PMC7954515
PMID: 33717766

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
