---
reference_id: PMID:12762362
title: Coxiella burnetii pneumonia.
authors:
- Marrie TJ
journal: Eur Respir J
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1183/09031936.03.00099703
keywords:
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Coxiella burnetii
- Humans
- "Pneumonia/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology, microbiology"
- Prevalence
- "Q Fever/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coxiella burnetii pneumonia.
**Authors:** Marrie TJ
**Journal:** Eur Respir J (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1183/09031936.03.00099703](https://doi.org/10.1183/09031936.03.00099703)

## Content

1. Eur Respir J. 2003 Apr;21(4):713-9. doi: 10.1183/09031936.03.00099703.

Coxiella burnetii pneumonia.

Marrie TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Dept of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. 
tom.marrie@ualberta.ca

This report reviews the pulmonary and extrapulmonary manifestation of infections 
due to Coxiella burnetii. Q fever, a zoonosis, is due to infection with C. 
burnetii. This spore-forming microorganism is a small gram-negative 
coccobacillus that is an obligate intracellular parasite. The most common animal 
reservoirs are goats, cattle, sheep, cats, and occasionally dogs. The organism 
reaches high concentrations in the placenta of infected animals. Aerosolisation 
occurs at the time of parturition and infection follows inhalation of this 
aerosol. There are three distinct clinical syndromes of the acute form of the 
illness: nonspecific febrile illness, pneumonia, and hepatitis. The chronic form 
of Q fever is almost always endocarditis, but occasionally it is manifest as 
hepatitis, osteomyelitis or endovascular infection. The pneumonic form of the 
illness can range from very mild-to-severe pneumonia requiring assisted 
ventilation. Multiple round opacities are a common finding on chest radiography. 
Treatment with doxycycline or a fluoroquinolone is preferred. Susceptibility to 
macrolides is variable. In conclusion, Coxiella burnetii pneumonia should be 
considered when there is a suitable exposure history and when outbreaks of a 
pneumonic illness are being investigated.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.03.00099703
PMID: 12762362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]