---
reference_id: "PMID:32219041"
title: Identification of key gene modules and hub genes of human mantle cell lymphoma by coexpression network analysis.
authors:
- Guo D
- Wang H
- Sun L
- Liu S
- Du S
- Qiao W
- Wang W
- Hou G
- Zhang K
- Li C
- Teng Q
journal: PeerJ
year: '2020'
doi: 10.7717/peerj.8843
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of key gene modules and hub genes of human mantle cell lymphoma by coexpression network analysis.
**Authors:** Guo D, Wang H, Sun L, Liu S, Du S, Qiao W, Wang W, Hou G, Zhang K, Li C, Teng Q
**Journal:** PeerJ (2020)
**DOI:** [10.7717/peerj.8843](https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.8843)

## Content

1. PeerJ. 2020 Mar 20;8:e8843. doi: 10.7717/peerj.8843. eCollection 2020.

Identification of key gene modules and hub genes of human mantle cell lymphoma 
by coexpression network analysis.

Guo D(#)(1), Wang H(#)(2), Sun L(3), Liu S(1), Du S(1), Qiao W(1), Wang W(1), 
Hou G(4), Zhang K(5), Li C(5)(6), Teng Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Taian City Central Hospital, Taian, Shandong, 
China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, 
Jinan, Shandong, China.
(3)Department of Occupational Disease, Taian City Central Hospital Branch, 
Taian, Shandong, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Taian City Central Hospital, Taian, Shandong, China.
(5)Department of Orthopedics, Taian City Central Hospital, Taian, Shandong, 
China.
(6)Department of Orthopedics, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and 
Hospital, Tianjin, China.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a rare and aggressive subtype of 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma that is incurable with standard therapies. The use of gene 
expression analysis has been of interest, recently, to detect biomarkers for 
cancer. There is a great need for systemic coexpression network analysis of MCL 
and this study aims to establish a gene coexpression network to forecast key 
genes related to the pathogenesis and prognosis of MCL.
METHODS: The microarray dataset GSE93291 was downloaded from the Gene Expression 
Omnibus database. We systematically identified coexpression modules using the 
weighted gene coexpression network analysis method (WGCNA). Gene Ontology (GO) 
and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) functional enrichment 
analysis were performed on the modules deemed important. The protein-protein 
interaction networks were constructed and visualized using Cytoscape software on 
the basis of the STRING website; the hub genes in the top weighted network were 
identified. Survival data were analyzed using the Kaplan-Meier method and were 
compared using the log-rank test.
RESULTS: Seven coexpression modules consisting of different genes were applied 
to 5,000 genes in the 121 human MCL samples using WGCNA software. GO and KEGG 
enrichment analysis identified the blue module as one of the most important 
modules; the most critical pathways identified were the ribosome, oxidative 
phosphorylation and proteasome pathways. The hub genes in the top weighted 
network were regarded as real hub genes (IL2RB, CD3D, RPL26L1, POLR2K, KIF11, 
CDC20, CCNB1, CCNA2, PUF60, SNRNP70, AKT1 and PRPF40A). Survival analysis 
revealed that seven genes (KIF11, CDC20, CCNB1, CCNA2, PRPF40A, CD3D and PUF60) 
were associated with overall survival time (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The blue module may play a vital role in the pathogenesis of MCL. 
Five real hub genes (KIF11, CDC20, CCNB1, CCNA2 and PUF60) were identified as 
potential prognostic biomarkers as well as therapeutic targets with clinical 
utility for MCL.

© 2020 Guo et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.8843
PMCID: PMC7087492
PMID: 32219041

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.