---
reference_id: "PMID:31472888"
title: Hypertension and Heart Failure.
authors:
- Slivnick J
- Lampert BC
journal: Heart Fail Clin
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertension and Heart Failure.
**Authors:** Slivnick J, Lampert BC
**Journal:** Heart Fail Clin (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.007)

## Content

1. Heart Fail Clin. 2019 Oct;15(4):531-541. doi: 10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.007. Epub 
2019 Jul 31.

Hypertension and Heart Failure.

Slivnick J(1), Lampert BC(2).

Author information:
(1)Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 473 West 12th Avenue, Suite 200, 
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(2)Heart Transplantation and Mechanical Circulatory Support, Ohio State 
University Wexner Medical Center, 473 West 12th Avenue, Suite 200, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA. Electronic address: Brent.Lampert@osumc.edu.

Hypertensive heart disease represents a spectrum of illnesses from uncontrolled 
hypertension to heart failure. The authors discuss the natural history and 
pathogenesis of heart failure owing to hypertensive heart disease, reviewing the 
important role of left ventricular hypertrophy as the inciting process leading 
to diastolic dysfunction and heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. 
They describe the various mechanisms by which a subset of patients ultimately 
develops systolic heart failure. They discuss management strategies for 
hypertensive heart disease at all stages of the disease process. Treatment in 
the initial stages before onset of heart failure may result in regression of 
disease.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.007
PMID: 31472888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]