---
reference_id: "PMID:39091504"
title: Tetanus-diphtheria vaccine can prime SARS-CoV-2 cross-reactive T cells.
authors:
- Fernandez SA
- Pelaez-Prestel HF
- Fiyouzi T
- Gomez-Perosanz M
- Reiné J
- Reche PA
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1425374
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tetanus-diphtheria vaccine can prime SARS-CoV-2 cross-reactive T cells.
**Authors:** Fernandez SA, Pelaez-Prestel HF, Fiyouzi T, Gomez-Perosanz M, Reiné J, Reche PA
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1425374](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1425374)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Jul 18;15:1425374. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1425374. 
eCollection 2024.

Tetanus-diphtheria vaccine can prime SARS-CoV-2 cross-reactive T cells.

Fernandez SA(#)(1), Pelaez-Prestel HF(#)(1), Fiyouzi T(#)(1), Gomez-Perosanz 
M(1), Reiné J(2)(3), Reche PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology & O2, Faculty of Medicine, Complutense University of 
Madrid, Ciudad Universitaria, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Clinical Sciences, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Oxford Vaccine Group, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(#)Contributed equally

Vaccines containing tetanus-diphtheria antigens have been postulated to induce 
cross-reactive immunity to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2), which could protect against coronavirus disease (COVID-19). In 
this work, we investigated the capacity of Tetanus-diphtheria (Td) vaccine to 
prime existing T cell immunity to SARS-CoV-2. To that end, we first collected 
known SARS-CoV-2 specific CD8+ T cell epitopes targeted during the course of 
SARS-CoV-2 infection in humans and identified as potentially cross-reactive with 
Td vaccine those sharing similarity with tetanus-diphtheria vaccine antigens, as 
judged by Levenshtein edit distances (≤ 20% edits per epitope sequence). As a 
result, we selected 25 potentially cross-reactive SARS-CoV-2 specific CD8+ T 
cell epitopes with high population coverage that were assembled into a synthetic 
peptide pool (TDX pool). Using peripheral blood mononuclear cells, we first 
determined by intracellular IFNγ staining assays existing CD8+ T cell recall 
responses to the TDX pool and to other peptide pools, including overlapping 
peptide pools covering SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein and Nucleocapsid phosphoprotein 
(NP). In the studied subjects, CD8+ T cell recall responses to Spike and TDX 
peptide pools were dominant and comparable, while recall responses to NP peptide 
pool were less frequent and weaker. Subsequently, we studied responses to the 
same peptides using antigen-inexperienced naive T cells primed/stimulated in 
vitro with Td vaccine. Priming stimulations were carried out by co-culturing 
naive T cells with autologous irradiated peripheral mononuclear cells in the 
presence of Td vaccine, IL-2, IL-7 and IL-15. Interestingly, naive CD8+ T cells 
stimulated/primed with Td vaccine responded strongly and specifically to the TDX 
pool, not to other SARS-CoV-2 peptide pools. Finally, we show that 
Td-immunization of C57BL/6J mice elicited T cells cross-reactive with the TDX 
pool. Collectively, our findings support that tetanus-diphtheria vaccines can 
prime SARS-CoV-2 cross-reactive T cells and likely contribute to shape the T 
cell responses to the virus.

Copyright © 2024 Fernandez, Pelaez-Prestel, Fiyouzi, Gomez-Perosanz, Reiné and 
Reche.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1425374
PMCID: PMC11291333
PMID: 39091504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.