---
reference_id: "PMID:31599798"
title: "One year in review: Kawasaki disease."
authors:
- Tirelli F
- Marrani E
- Giani T
- Cimaz R
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000671
content_type: abstract_only
---

# One year in review: Kawasaki disease.
**Authors:** Tirelli F, Marrani E, Giani T, Cimaz R
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0000000000000671](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0000000000000671)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2020 Jan;32(1):15-20. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000671.

One year in review: Kawasaki disease.

Tirelli F(1), Marrani E(1), Giani T(1)(2), Cimaz R(3).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Anna Meyer, Florence.
(2)Department of Medical Biotechnology, University of Siena, Siena.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milano, 
Milan, Italy.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Kawasaki disease is a childhood vasculitis of unknown origin, 
whose major complication is the development of coronary artery aneurysms (CAA). 
The purpose of this review is to provide an overview on the most recent evidence 
on the pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment options of Kawasaki disease 
summarizing the most relevant studies published in the last year.
RECENT FINDINGS: Several genetic polymorphisms leading to Kawasaki disease 
susceptibility have been identified, mostly related to immune system regulation; 
potential external triggers are being investigated by environmental epidemiology 
studies. A new diagnostic test based on trascriptomics has been tested with 
promising preliminary results. With regards to first-line treatments, the real 
effectiveness of high-dose aspirin remains a matter of debate. For refractory 
cases, the ones at the highest risk for developing CAA, promising results come 
from the use of biologic agents, especially TNF and IL-1 blockers.
SUMMARY: Recent literature has provided interesting insights on the various 
factors involved in the complex scenario behind the pathogenesis of Kawasaki 
disease, especially genetic ones. Novel diagnostic tests and new evidence on the 
use of biologic agents in Kawasaki disease are emerging, but further evidence is 
needed to permit early diagnosis and effective treatment of this condition.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000671
PMID: 31599798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]