---
reference_id: "PMID:32594341"
title: Prevalence of Immunological Defects in a Cohort of 97 Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome Patients.
authors:
- Saettini F
- Herriot R
- Prada E
- Nizon M
- Zama D
- Marzollo A
- Romaniouk I
- Lougaris V
- Cortesi M
- Morreale A
- Kosaki R
- Cardinale F
- Ricci S
- Domínguez-Garrido E
- Montin D
- Vincent M
- Milani D
- Biondi A
- Gervasini C
- Badolato R
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-020-00808-4
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Autoimmunity
- "B-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- Biomarkers
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Disease Susceptibility/immunology
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- "Immune System Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- "Immunoglobulin Isotypes/blood, immunology"
- Incidence
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Prevalence
- "Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome/complications, epidemiology"
- "T-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of Immunological Defects in a Cohort of 97 Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome Patients.
**Authors:** Saettini F, Herriot R, Prada E, Nizon M, Zama D, Marzollo A, Romaniouk I, Lougaris V, Cortesi M, Morreale A, Kosaki R, Cardinale F, Ricci S, Domínguez-Garrido E, Montin D, Vincent M, Milani D, Biondi A, Gervasini C, Badolato R
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-020-00808-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-020-00808-4)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2020 Aug;40(6):851-860. doi: 10.1007/s10875-020-00808-4. Epub 
2020 Jun 27.

Prevalence of Immunological Defects in a Cohort of 97 Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome 
Patients.

Saettini F(1), Herriot R(2), Prada E(3), Nizon M(4)(5), Zama D(6), Marzollo 
A(7), Romaniouk I(8), Lougaris V(9), Cortesi M(9), Morreale A(9), Kosaki R(10), 
Cardinale F(11), Ricci S(12), Domínguez-Garrido E(13), Montin D(14), Vincent 
M(4)(5), Milani D(3), Biondi A(15), Gervasini C(16), Badolato R(8).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Hematology Department, Fondazione MBBM, University of Milano 
Bicocca, via Pergolesi 33, 20900, Monza, Italy. francescosaettini@yahoo.it.
(2)Immunology Department, Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Aberdeen, UK.
(3)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Pediatric Highly Intensive 
Care Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Università 
degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(4)Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Nantes, 44000, Nantes, France.
(5)Inserm, CNRS, l'institut du thorax, Universite de Nantes, 44000, Nantes, 
France.
(6)Pediatric Oncology and Hematology Unit "Lalla Seràgnoli", Department of 
Pediatrics, Sant'Orsola Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, Via Massarenti 
9, 40138, Bologna, Italy.
(7)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, 
University Hospital of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(8)Departamento de Nefrología, Hospital Universitario de Santiago, Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain.
(9)Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Pediatrics Clinic and 
Institute for Molecular Medicine A. Nocivelli, ASST-Spedali Civili of Brescia, 
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(10)Division of Medical Genetics, National Center for Child Health and 
Development, 2-10-1 Okura Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, 157-8535, Japan.
(11)Policlinic Giovanni XXIII, Bari, Italy.
(12)Pediatric Immunology, Meyer Children's University Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(13)Molecular Diagnostic Unit, Fundación Rioja Salud, Logrono, La Rioja, Spain.
(14)Division of Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of Paediatric Infectious 
Diseases, Regina Margherita Children's Hospital, University of Turin, Turin, 
Italy.
(15)Pediatric Hematology Department, Fondazione MBBM, University of Milano 
Bicocca, via Pergolesi 33, 20900, Monza, Italy.
(16)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.

Although recurrent infections in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) are common, 
and probably multifactorial, immunological abnormalities have not been 
extensively described with only isolated cases or small case series of immune 
deficiency and dysregulation having been reported. The objective of this study 
was to investigate primary immunodeficiency (PID) and immune dysregulation in an 
international cohort of patients with RSTS. All published cases of RSTS were 
identified. The corresponding authors and researchers involved in the diagnosis 
of inborn errors of immunity or genetic syndromes were contacted to obtain 
up-to-date clinical and immunological information. Ninety-seven RSTS patients 
were identified. For 45 patients, we retrieved data from the published reports 
while for 52 patients, a clinical update was provided. Recurrent or severe 
infections, autoimmune/autoinflammatory complications, and lymphoproliferation 
were observed in 72.1%, 12.3%, and 8.2% of patients. Syndromic immunodeficiency 
was diagnosed in 46.4% of individuals. Despite the broad heterogeneity of 
immunodeficiency disorders, antibody defects were observed in 11.3% of subjects. 
In particular, these patients presented hypogammaglobulinemia associated with 
low B cell counts and reduction of switched memory B cell numbers. 
Immunoglobulin replacement therapy, antibiotic prophylaxis, and 
immunosuppressive treatment were employed in 16.4%, 8.2%, and 9.8% of patients, 
respectively. Manifestations of immune dysfunctions, affecting mostly B cells, 
are more common than previously recognized in patients with RSTS. Full 
immunological assessment is warranted in these patients, who may require 
detailed investigation and specific supportive treatment. Graphical Abstract.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-020-00808-4
PMID: 32594341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]