---
reference_id: "PMID:37122607"
title: "Effectiveness of Helicobacter pylori eradication in the treatment of early-stage gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma: An up-to-date meta-analysis."
authors:
- Lemos FFB
- de Castro CT
- Calmon MS
- Silva Luz M
- Pinheiro SLR
- Faria Souza Mendes Dos Santos C
- Correa Santos GL
- Marques HS
- Delgado HA
- Teixeira KN
- Souza CL
- Oliveira MV
- Freire de Melo F
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v29.i14.2202
keywords:
- "Lymphoma, B-Cell, Marginal Zone/microbiology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Stomach Neoplasms/pathology
- "Lymphoma, Non-Hodgkin"
- Helicobacter Infections/microbiology
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/pharmacology
- Helicobacter pylori
- Prospective Studies
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effectiveness of Helicobacter pylori eradication in the treatment of early-stage gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma: An up-to-date meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Lemos FFB, de Castro CT, Calmon MS, Silva Luz M, Pinheiro SLR, Faria Souza Mendes Dos Santos C, Correa Santos GL, Marques HS, Delgado HA, Teixeira KN, Souza CL, Oliveira MV, Freire de Melo F
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v29.i14.2202](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v29.i14.2202)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2023 Apr 14;29(14):2202-2221. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v29.i14.2202.

Effectiveness of Helicobacter pylori eradication in the treatment of early-stage 
gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma: An up-to-date meta-analysis.

Lemos FFB(1), de Castro CT(2), Calmon MS(1), Silva Luz M(1), Pinheiro SLR(1), 
Faria Souza Mendes Dos Santos C(1), Correa Santos GL(1), Marques HS(3), Delgado 
HA(1), Teixeira KN(4), Souza CL(1), Oliveira MV(1), Freire de Melo F(5).

Author information:
(1)Instituto Multidisciplinar em Saúde, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Vitória 
da Conquista 45029094, Bahia, Brazil.
(2)Instituto de Saúde Coletiva, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador 
40110040, Bahia, Brazil.
(3)Campus Vitória da Conquista, Universidade Estadual do Sudoeste da Bahia, 
Vitória da Conquista 45029094, Bahia, Brazil.
(4)Campus Toledo, Universidade Federal do Paraná, Toledo 85919899, Paraná, 
Brazil.
(5)Instituto Multidisciplinar em Saúde, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Vitória 
da Conquista 45029094, Bahia, Brazil. freiremeloufba@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma (GML) is 
usually a low-grade B-cell neoplasia strongly associated with Helicobacter 
pylori (H. pylori)-induced chronic gastritis. Clinical practice guidelines 
currently recommend H. pylori eradication as the preferred initial treatment for 
early-stage GML. To determine the practical effect of bacterial eradication as 
the sole initial therapy for early-stage GML, an updated analysis and review of 
available evidence is imperative.
AIM: To perform a meta-analysis to assess the rate of complete remission (CR) of 
H. pylori-positive early-stage GML following bacterial eradication.
METHODS: We performed independent, computer-assisted literature searches using 
the PubMed/MEDLINE, Embase, and Cochrane Central databases through September 
2022. Prospective and retrospective observational studies evaluating the CR of 
early-stage GML following bacterial eradication in H. pylori-positive patients. 
The risk of bias was assessed using Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) Critical 
Appraisal Tools. The pooled estimate of the complete histopathological remission 
rate and respective confidence intervals (95%CI) were calculated following the 
random-effects model. Heterogeneity and inconsistency were assessed using 
Cochran's Q test and I2 statistic, and heterogeneity was defined as P < 0.01 and 
I² > 50%, respectively. Subgroup and meta-regression analyses were conducted to 
explore potential sources of heterogeneity.
RESULTS: The titles and abstracts of 1576 studies were screened; 96 articles 
were retrieved and selected for full-text reading. Finally, 61 studies were 
included in the proportional meta-analysis (P-MA). Forty-six were prospective 
and fifteen were retrospective uncontrolled, single-arm, observational studies. 
The overall risk of bias was low to moderate in all but a single report, with an 
average critical appraisal score across all studies of 79.02%. A total of 2936 
H. pylori-positive early-stage GML patients, in whom H. pylori was successfully 
eradicated, were included in the analysis. The pooled CR of H. pylori-positive 
early-stage GML after bacterial eradication was 75.18% (95%CI: 70.45%-79.91%). 
P-MA indicated the substantial heterogeneity in CR reported across studies (I 2 
= 92%; P < 0.01). Meta-regression analysis identified statistically significant 
effect modifiers, including the proportion of patients with 
t(11;18)(q21;q21)-positive GML and the risk of bias in each study.
CONCLUSION: Comprehensive synthesis of available evidence suggests that H. 
pylori eradication is effective as the sole initial therapy for early-stage GML. 
Although the substantial heterogeneity observed across studies limits the 
interpretation of the pooled overall CR, the present study is a relevant to 
informing clinical practice.

©The Author(s) 2023. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v29.i14.2202
PMCID: PMC10130965
PMID: 37122607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.