---
reference_id: "PMID:33107076"
title: Role of Surgery in Rhabdomyosarcoma of the Head and Neck in Children.
authors:
- Dombrowski ND
- Wolter NE
- Robson CD
- Kawai K
- Irace AL
- Vargas SO
- Marcus KJ
- Mack JW
- Collins NB
- Rahbar R
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/lary.28785
keywords:
- "Chemoradiotherapy, Adjuvant/statistics & numerical data"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Head and Neck Neoplasms/diagnosis, mortality, therapy"
- Humans
- Male
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/epidemiology, prevention & control"
- "Otorhinolaryngologic Surgical Procedures/statistics & numerical data"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma/diagnosis, mortality, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of Surgery in Rhabdomyosarcoma of the Head and Neck in Children.
**Authors:** Dombrowski ND, Wolter NE, Robson CD, Kawai K, Irace AL, Vargas SO, Marcus KJ, Mack JW, Collins NB, Rahbar R
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lary.28785](https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.28785)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2021 Mar;131(3):E984-E992. doi: 10.1002/lary.28785. Epub 2020
Jul  20.

Role of Surgery in Rhabdomyosarcoma of the Head and Neck in Children.

Dombrowski ND(1), Wolter NE(2)(3), Robson CD(4)(5), Kawai K(1)(6), Irace AL(1), 
Vargas SO(7)(8), Marcus KJ(9)(10), Mack JW(11)(12), Collins NB(11)(12), Rahbar 
R(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology & Communication Enhancement, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.A.
(2)Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Radiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
U.S.A.
(5)Department of Radiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
U.S.A.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
U.S.A.
(7)Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
U.S.A.
(8)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
U.S.A.
(9)Division of Radiation Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, U.S.A.
(10)Department of Radiation Oncology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, U.S.A.
(11)Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders 
Center, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.A.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
U.S.A.

OBJECTIVES: Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft tissue sarcoma in 
children. The goal of this research is to analyze the role of surgery in the 
management of pediatric parameningeal (PM) and non-PM head and neck RMS (HNRMS).
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective review.
METHODS: Retrospective chart review of patients <20 years of age treated for 
HNRMS between 1970 and 2015. Clinical presentation, tumor characteristics, 
treatment, recurrence, follow-up, and outcome data were collected.
RESULTS: Of 97 patients with HNRMS, 56% were male. Overall median (IQR: 
interquartile range) age at diagnosis was 5.8 (3.3-9.8) years. Sixty-five 
patients (67%) had PM tumors. Of 75 patients with histologic subtype identified, 
51 (53%) had embryonal and 20 (21%) alveolar RMS. Almost all patients received 
chemotherapy (99%) and radiotherapy (95%). Forty-four patients (45%) underwent 
surgery. Surgery was more likely to be conducted in patients with lesions of a 
non-PM site. Median follow-up time was 3.4 years (IQR: 1.1-10.8). In 5 years of 
follow-up, 20% (17 of 85) died and 29% (20 of 70) had recurrence. The estimated 
5-year survival rate was 72% (95% CI, 57.8, 81.5%). Surgery was associated with 
a reduced risk of mortality after accounting for TNM stage 4 and tumor site 
(adjusted HR 0.24; 95% CI, 0.07, 0.79; P = .02). The association between surgery 
and risk of mortality was similar in PM and non-PM tumors.
CONCLUSION: A multimodal protocol for treatment including chemotherapy, surgery, 
and radiotherapy is the mainstay for management of children with HNRMS. While 
surgery is more commonly used to treat non-PM HNRMS, patients who are able to 
undergo surgery have significantly higher 5-year survival.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 4 Laryngoscope, 131:E984-E992, 2021.

© 2020 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.28785
PMID: 33107076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]