---
reference_id: "PMID:40862769"
title: The Roles of Non-Coding RNAs in the Pathogenesis of Uterine Fibroids.
authors:
- Boos D
- Chuang TD
- Khorram O
journal: Cells
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/cells14161290
keywords:
- Humans
- "Leiomyoma/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- "RNA, Untranslated/genetics, metabolism"
- "Uterine Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "RNA, Long Noncoding/genetics"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Roles of Non-Coding RNAs in the Pathogenesis of Uterine Fibroids.
**Authors:** Boos D, Chuang TD, Khorram O
**Journal:** Cells (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells14161290](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells14161290)

## Content

1. Cells. 2025 Aug 20;14(16):1290. doi: 10.3390/cells14161290.

The Roles of Non-Coding RNAs in the Pathogenesis of Uterine Fibroids.

Boos D(1), Chuang TD(1), Khorram O(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The Lundquist Institute for Biomedical Innovation, Torrance, CA 90502, USA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, David Geffen School of Medicine at 
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Uterine fibroids are benign smooth muscle tumors that affect ~70% of women, with 
Black women being affected at a disproportionate rate. The growth of these 
tumors is driven by estrogen and progesterone. Driver mutations in genes such as 
MED12, HMGA2, and FH also play roles in the development and growth of fibroids. 
Despite their high prevalence, the pathogenesis of fibroids remains largely 
unknown, leading to a lack of effective therapeutic options. Non-coding RNAs 
(ncRNAs), including miRNAs (e.g., miR-21, miR-29, miR-200), lncRNAs (e.g., H19, 
MIAT, XIST), and circRNAs, are important regulatory RNAs that are becoming 
increasingly implicated in the aberrant expression of protein-coding genes 
functionally associated with ECM production, cell proliferation, apoptosis, and 
inflammation in fibroids. Race/ethnicity, MED12 mutations, and ovarian steroids 
influence the expression of ncRNA expression, further implicating their 
relevance to fibroid pathogenesis. Therapeutic targeting of these dysregulated 
ncRNAs in fibroids could enable more precise and individualized 
non-hormonal-based treatment for this common gynecologic tumor.

DOI: 10.3390/cells14161290
PMCID: PMC12384623
PMID: 40862769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have nothing to declare and no 
competing financial interests.