---
reference_id: "PMID:26950678"
title: A novel HSD17B10 mutation impairing the activities of the mitochondrial RNase P complex causes X-linked intractable epilepsy and neurodevelopmental regression.
authors:
- Falk MJ
- Gai X
- Shigematsu M
- Vilardo E
- Takase R
- McCormick E
- Christian T
- Place E
- Pierce EA
- Consugar M
- Gamper HB
- Rossmanith W
- Hou YM
journal: RNA Biol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1080/15476286.2016.1159381
keywords:
- 3-Hydroxyacyl CoA Dehydrogenases/genetics
- Child
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- Drug Resistant Epilepsy/genetics
- Exome
- "Genes, X-Linked"
- Humans
- Male
- "Mitochondria/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "RNA, Transfer/metabolism"
- Ribonuclease P/metabolism
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA/methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel HSD17B10 mutation impairing the activities of the mitochondrial RNase P complex causes X-linked intractable epilepsy and neurodevelopmental regression.
**Authors:** Falk MJ, Gai X, Shigematsu M, Vilardo E, Takase R, McCormick E, Christian T, Place E, Pierce EA, Consugar M, Gamper HB, Rossmanith W, Hou YM
**Journal:** RNA Biol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15476286.2016.1159381](https://doi.org/10.1080/15476286.2016.1159381)

## Content

1. RNA Biol. 2016 May 3;13(5):477-85. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2016.1159381. Epub
2016  Mar 7.

A novel HSD17B10 mutation impairing the activities of the mitochondrial RNase P 
complex causes X-linked intractable epilepsy and neurodevelopmental regression.

Falk MJ(1)(2), Gai X(3), Shigematsu M(4), Vilardo E(5), Takase R(4), McCormick 
E(1), Christian T(4), Place E(1)(6), Pierce EA(6), Consugar M(6), Gamper HB(4), 
Rossmanith W(5), Hou YM(4).

Author information:
(1)a Division of Human Genetics , Department of Pediatrics, The Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia , Philadelphia , PA , USA.
(2)b Department of Pediatrics , University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine , Philadelphia , PA , USA.
(3)c Center for Personalized Medicine, Children's Hospital Los Angeles , Los 
Angeles , CA , USA.
(4)d Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Thomas Jefferson 
University , Philadelphia , PA , USA.
(5)e Center for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Medical University of Vienna , Vienna 
, Austria.
(6)f Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA , 
USA.

We report a Caucasian boy with intractable epilepsy and global developmental 
delay. Whole-exome sequencing identified the likely genetic etiology as a novel 
p.K212E mutation in the X-linked gene HSD17B10 for mitochondrial short-chain 
dehydrogenase/reductase SDR5C1. Mutations in HSD17B10 cause the HSD10 disease, 
traditionally classified as a metabolic disorder due to the role of SDR5C1 in 
fatty and amino acid metabolism. However, SDR5C1 is also an essential subunit of 
human mitochondrial RNase P, the enzyme responsible for 5'-processing and 
methylation of purine-9 of mitochondrial tRNAs. Here we show that the p.K212E 
mutation impairs the SDR5C1-dependent mitochondrial RNase P activities, and 
suggest that the pathogenicity of p.K212E is due to a general mitochondrial 
dysfunction caused by reduction in SDR5C1-dependent maturation of mitochondrial 
tRNAs.

DOI: 10.1080/15476286.2016.1159381
PMCID: PMC4962811
PMID: 26950678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]