---
reference_id: "PMID:35503939"
title: Could Mental and Physical Exercise Alleviate Alzheimer's Disease?
authors:
- Radić B
- Blažeković A
- Duraković D
- Jurišić-Kvesić A
- Bilić E
- Borovečki F
journal: Psychiatr Danub
year: '2021'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Could Mental and Physical Exercise Alleviate Alzheimer's Disease?
**Authors:** Radić B, Blažeković A, Duraković D, Jurišić-Kvesić A, Bilić E, Borovečki F
**Journal:** Psychiatr Danub (2021)

## Content

1. Psychiatr Danub. 2021 Spring-Summer;33(Suppl 4):1267-1273.

Could Mental and Physical Exercise Alleviate Alzheimer's Disease?

Radić B(1), Blažeković A, Duraković D, Jurišić-Kvesić A, Bilić E, Borovečki F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.

The aim of this review is to emphasize the importance of mental activity and 
aerobic physical exercise as one of the most important health-related activities 
which may delay the onset or slow down the progression of Alzheimer's dementia. 
Studies have shown that the elderly who regularly engage in mental and physical 
activities have a lower risk of dementia development. Performing mental and 
physical activities regularly has a synergistic effect on the improvement of 
cognitive functions. Complex mental activity during life is associated with a 
reduction in the hippocampal atrophy rate, which is a sensitive early-stage 
biomarker of dementia while regular physical exercise can slow down the 
progressive reduction of the cortical brain volume which occurs during aging. 
Mental activity increases a person's "cognitive reserve" and promotes the 
formation of new communications between brain cells. Since it is not possible to 
influence genetic components of Alzheimer's dementia, preventative interventions 
such as encou¬raging regular engagement in mental and physical activities are 
extremely important. Activities need to be safe, moderate, comfortable, and 
adapted as to type, duration, and especially the health and functional status of 
the patient. In the near future, it is expected that genome analysis in 
personalized medicine will guide us in the right direction on certain types of 
physical and mental exercise.

PMID: 35503939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]