---
reference_id: "PMID:33444416"
title: CLK-2/TEL2 is a conserved component of the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathway.
authors:
- Guo Y
- Tocchini C
- Ciosk R
journal: PLoS One
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0244505
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CLK-2/TEL2 is a conserved component of the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathway.
**Authors:** Guo Y, Tocchini C, Ciosk R
**Journal:** PLoS One (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0244505](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0244505)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2021 Jan 14;16(1):e0244505. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0244505. 
eCollection 2021.

CLK-2/TEL2 is a conserved component of the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathway.

Guo Y(1), Tocchini C(2), Ciosk R(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, 
Poland.

Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) controls eukaryotic mRNA quality, inducing 
the degradation of faulty transcripts. Key players in the NMD pathway were 
originally identified, through genetics, in Caenorhabditis elegans as smg 
(suppressor with morphological effect on genitalia) genes. Using forward 
genetics and fluorescence-based NMD reporters, we reexamined the genetic 
landscape underlying NMD. Employing a novel strategy for mapping sterile 
mutations, Het-Map, we identified clk-2, a conserved gene previously implicated 
in DNA damage signaling, as a player in the nematode NMD. We find that CLK-2 is 
expressed predominantly in the germline, highlighting the importance of 
auxiliary factors in tissue-specific mRNA decay. Importantly, the human 
counterpart of CLK-2/TEL2, TELO2, has been also implicated in the NMD, 
suggesting a conserved role of CLK-2/TEL2 proteins in mRNA surveillance. 
Recently, variants of TELO2 have been linked to an intellectual disability 
disorder, the You-Hoover-Fong syndrome, which could be related to its function 
in the NMD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0244505
PMCID: PMC7808604
PMID: 33444416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.