---
reference_id: "PMID:16338214"
title: "Primary antiphospholipid syndrome: a distinct entity?"
authors:
- Mackworth-Young C
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2005.08.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary antiphospholipid syndrome: a distinct entity?
**Authors:** Mackworth-Young C
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2005.08.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2005.08.001)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2006 Jan;5(1):70-5. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2005.08.001. Epub
2005  Sep 2.

Primary antiphospholipid syndrome: a distinct entity?

Mackworth-Young C(1).

Author information:
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, London W6, England.

Although antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) was first fully described in the 
context of connective tissue diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE), it was soon recognised that the condition can exist on its own. APS 
appears to represent a clinical spectrum, both in terms of APS features and the 
presence of other autoimmune conditions. The clinical and serological 
characteristics of "primary" APS (PAPS) are similar to those of secondary APS, 
although the clinical features are more commonly recognised in the presence of 
another autoimmune or inflammatory condition. Furthermore, patients with PAPS 
may subsequently develop SLE. It is important to identify PAPS, since it is 
likely to be a contributing factor for a significant proportion of patients with 
a variety of vascular, neurological and other conditions. It may emerge as more 
common than secondary APS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2005.08.001
PMID: 16338214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]