---
reference_id: "PMID:23938603"
title: Vascular tumors have increased p70 S6-kinase activation and are inhibited by topical rapamycin.
authors:
- Du W
- Gerald D
- Perruzzi CA
- Rodriguez-Waitkus P
- Enayati L
- Krishnan B
- Edmonds J
- Hochman ML
- Lev DC
- Phung TL
journal: Lab Invest
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2013.98
keywords:
- "Administration, Topical"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Animals
- "Antibiotics, Antineoplastic/administration & dosage, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Child
- Female
- "Hemangioma, Capillary/drug therapy, epidemiology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Hemangiosarcoma/drug therapy, epidemiology, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mechanistic Target of Rapamycin Complex 1
- Mechanistic Target of Rapamycin Complex 2
- Mice
- "Mice, Nude"
- "Multiprotein Complexes/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Neoplasm Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary/drug therapy, epidemiology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/administration & dosage, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Ribosomal Protein S6 Kinases, 70-kDa/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- "Sirolimus/administration & dosage, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vascular tumors have increased p70 S6-kinase activation and are inhibited by topical rapamycin.
**Authors:** Du W, Gerald D, Perruzzi CA, Rodriguez-Waitkus P, Enayati L, Krishnan B, Edmonds J, Hochman ML, Lev DC, Phung TL
**Journal:** Lab Invest (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/labinvest.2013.98](https://doi.org/10.1038/labinvest.2013.98)

## Content

1. Lab Invest. 2013 Oct;93(10):1115-27. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2013.98. Epub 2013
 Aug 12.

Vascular tumors have increased p70 S6-kinase activation and are inhibited by
topical rapamycin.

Du W(1), Gerald D, Perruzzi CA, Rodriguez-Waitkus P, Enayati L, Krishnan B,
Edmonds J, Hochman ML, Lev DC, Phung TL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
TX, USA.

Vascular tumors are endothelial cell neoplasms whose cellular and molecular
mechanisms, leading to tumor formation, are poorly understood, and current
therapies have limited efficacy with significant side effects. We have
investigated mechanistic (mammalian) target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling in
benign and malignant vascular tumors, and the effects of mTOR kinase inhibitor
as a potential therapy for these lesions. Human vascular tumors (infantile
hemangioma and angiosarcoma) were analyzed by immunohistochemical stains and
western blot for the phosphorylation of p70 S6-kinase (S6K) and S6 ribosomal
protein (S6), which are activated downstream of mTOR complex-1 (mTORC1). To
assess the function of S6K, tumor cells with genetic knockdown of S6K were
analyzed for cell proliferation and migration. The effects of topical rapamycin,
an mTOR inhibitor, on mTORC1 and mTOR complex-2 (mTORC2) activities, as well as
on tumor growth and migration, were determined. Vascular tumors showed increased
activation of S6K and S6. Genetic knockdown of S6K resulted in reduced tumor
cell proliferation and migration. Rapamycin fully inhibited mTORC1 and partially
inhibited mTORC2 activities, including the phosphorylation of Akt (serine 473)
and PKCα, in vascular tumor cells. Rapamycin significantly reduced vascular
tumor growth in vitro and in vivo. As a potential localized therapy for
cutaneous vascular tumors, topically applied rapamycin effectively reduced tumor
growth with limited systemic drug absorption. These findings reveal the
importance of mTOR signaling pathways in benign and malignant vascular tumors.
The mTOR pathway is an important therapeutic target in vascular tumors, and
topical mTOR inhibitors may provide an alternative and well-tolerated therapy
for the treatment of cutaneous vascular lesions.

DOI: 10.1038/labinvest.2013.98
PMID: 23938603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
