---
reference_id: "PMID:33442900"
title: "Clinical and molecular characterizations of 11 new patients with type 1 Feingold syndrome: Proposal for selecting diagnostic criteria and further genetic testing in patients with severe phenotype."
authors:
- Tedesco MG
- Lonardo F
- Ceccarini C
- Cesarano C
- Digilio MC
- Magliozzi M
- Rogaia D
- Mencarelli A
- Leoni C
- Piscopo C
- Imperatore V
- Falco MT
- Fontana P
- Nardone AM
- Novelli A
- Troiani S
- Seri M
- Prontera P
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62068
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Eyelids/abnormalities, pathology"
- Female
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gi-Go/genetics"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Testing
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Intellectual Disability/complications, genetics, pathology"
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- "Microcephaly/complications, genetics, pathology"
- N-Myc Proto-Oncogene Protein/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Syndactyly/complications, genetics, pathology"
- "Tracheoesophageal Fistula/complications, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and molecular characterizations of 11 new patients with type 1 Feingold syndrome: Proposal for selecting diagnostic criteria and further genetic testing in patients with severe phenotype.
**Authors:** Tedesco MG, Lonardo F, Ceccarini C, Cesarano C, Digilio MC, Magliozzi M, Rogaia D, Mencarelli A, Leoni C, Piscopo C, Imperatore V, Falco MT, Fontana P, Nardone AM, Novelli A, Troiani S, Seri M, Prontera P
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62068](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62068)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2021 Apr;185(4):1204-1210. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62068. Epub 
2021 Jan 14.

Clinical and molecular characterizations of 11 new patients with type 1 Feingold 
syndrome: Proposal for selecting diagnostic criteria and further genetic testing 
in patients with severe phenotype.

Tedesco MG(1)(2), Lonardo F(3), Ceccarini C(4), Cesarano C(4), Digilio MC(5), 
Magliozzi M(5), Rogaia D(1), Mencarelli A(1), Leoni C(6), Piscopo C(7), 
Imperatore V(1), Falco MT(3), Fontana P(3), Nardone AM(8), Novelli A(5), Troiani 
S(1)(9), Seri M(10), Prontera P(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, Santa Maria della Misericordia Hospital and University 
of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(2)Genetics Unit, "Mauro Baschirotto" Institute for Rare Diseases (B.I.R.D.), 
Vicenza, Italy.
(3)Medical Genetics Unit, "San Pio" Hospital, Benevento, Italy.
(4)Cytogenetics Unit, Policlinico Riuniti, University Hospitals Foggia, Foggia, 
Italy.
(5)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Children's 
Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Woman and Child Health and Public Health, Center for Rare 
Diseases and Birth Defects, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli 
IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(7)U.O.S.C. Medical Genetics, A.O.R.N. "A. Cardarelli", Naples, Italy.
(8)Medical Genetics Laboratory, "Policlinico Tor Vergata" Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(9)Division of Neonatology and Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Santa Maria della 
Misericordia Hospital of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(10)Medical Genetics Unit, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Feingold Syndrome type 1 (FS1) is an autosomal dominant disorder due to a loss 
of function mutations in the MYCN gene. FS1 is generally clinically 
characterized by mild learning disability, microcephaly, short palpebral 
fissures, short stature, brachymesophalangy, hypoplastic thumbs, as well as 
syndactyly of toes, variably associated with organ abnormalities, the most 
common being gastrointestinal atresia. In current literature, more than 120 FS1 
patients have been described, but diagnostic criteria are not well agreed upon, 
likewise the genotype-phenotype correlations are not well understood. Here, we 
describe 11 FS1 patients, belonging to six distinct families, where we have 
identified three novel MYCN mutations along with three pathogenetic variants, 
the latter which have already been reported. Several patients presented a mild 
phenotype of the condition and they have been diagnosed as being affected only 
after segregation analyses of the MYCN mutation identified in the propositus. We 
also describe here the first ever FS1 patient with severe intellectual 
disability having a maternally inherited MYCN variant together with an 
additional GNAO1 mutation inherited paternally. Mutations in the GNAO1 gene are 
associated with a specific form of intellectual disability and epilepsy, thus 
the finding of two different rare diseases in the same patient could explain his 
severe phenotype. Therein, a thorough investigation is merited into the 
possibility that additional variants in patients with a MYCN mutation and severe 
phenotype do exist. Finally, in order to guarantee a more reliable diagnosis of 
FS1, we suggest using both major and minor clinical-molecular diagnostic 
criteria.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62068
PMID: 33442900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]