---
reference_id: "PMID:21326110"
title: Angiotensin-(1-7) blockade attenuates captopril- or hydralazine-induced cardiovascular protection in spontaneously hypertensive rats treated with NG-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester.
authors:
- Benter IF
- Yousif MH
- Al-Saleh FM
- Raghupathy R
- Chappell MC
- Diz DI
journal: J Cardiovasc Pharmacol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/FJC.0b013e31821324b6
keywords:
- "Angiotensin I/antagonists & inhibitors, pharmacology"
- "Angiotensin II/administration & dosage, analogs & derivatives, pharmacology"
- Animals
- "Antihypertensive Agents/administration & dosage, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Blood Glucose/analysis
- Blood Pressure/drug effects
- "Brain/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Captopril/administration & dosage, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Cytokines/immunology
- Heart/drug effects
- "Hydralazine/administration & dosage, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Hypertension/drug therapy, metabolism, physiopathology"
- In Vitro Techniques
- Insulin/blood
- "Kidney/drug effects, immunology, metabolism"
- Leptin/blood
- Male
- Myocardial Contraction/drug effects
- "Myocardial Reperfusion Injury/physiopathology, prevention & control"
- NG-Nitroarginine Methyl Ester/pharmacology
- "Peptide Fragments/administration & dosage, antagonists & inhibitors, pharmacology"
- Perfusion
- "Proteinuria/prevention & control, urine"
- Rats
- "Rats, Inbred SHR"
- "Ventricular Function, Left/drug effects"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Angiotensin-(1-7) blockade attenuates captopril- or hydralazine-induced cardiovascular protection in spontaneously hypertensive rats treated with NG-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester.
**Authors:** Benter IF, Yousif MH, Al-Saleh FM, Raghupathy R, Chappell MC, Diz DI
**Journal:** J Cardiovasc Pharmacol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/FJC.0b013e31821324b6](https://doi.org/10.1097/FJC.0b013e31821324b6)

## Content

1. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2011 May;57(5):559-67. doi:
10.1097/FJC.0b013e31821324b6.

Angiotensin-(1-7) blockade attenuates captopril- or hydralazine-induced
cardiovascular protection in spontaneously hypertensive rats treated with
NG-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester.

Benter IF(1), Yousif MH, Al-Saleh FM, Raghupathy R, Chappell MC, Diz DI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait
University, Kuwait.

We assessed the contribution of angiotensin-(1-7) [Ang-(1-7)] to
captopril-induced cardiovascular protection in spontaneously hypertensive rats
(SHRs) chronically treated with the nitric oxide synthesis inhibitor
NG-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester (SHR-l). NG-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester (80
mg/L) administration for 3 weeks increased mean arterial pressure (MAP) from 196
± 6 to 229 ± 3 mm Hg (P < 0.05). Treatment of SHR-l with Ang-(1-7) antagonist
[d-Ala7]-Ang-(1-7) (A779; 744 μg·kg(-1)·d(-1) ip) further elevated MAP to 253 ±
6 mm Hg (P < 0.05 vs SHR-l or SHR). Moreover, A779 treatment attenuated the
reduction in MAP and proteinuria by either captopril (300 mg/L in drinking
water) or hydralazine (1.5 mg·kg(-1)·d(-1) ip). In isolated perfused hearts, the
recovery of left ventricular function from global ischemia was enhanced by
captopril or hydralazine treatment and was exacerbated with A779. The Ang-(1-7)
antagonist attenuated the beneficial effects of captopril and hydralazine on
cardiac function. Recovery from global ischemia was also improved in isolated
SHR-l hearts acutely perfused with captopril during both the perfusion and
reperfusion periods. The acute administration of A779 reduced the beneficial
actions of captopril to improve recovery after ischemia. We conclude that during
periods of reduced nitric oxide availability, endogenous Ang-(1-7) plays a
protective role in effectively buffering the increase in blood pressure and
renal injury and the recovery from cardiac ischemia. Moreover, Ang-(1-7)
contributes to the blood pressure lowering and tissue protective actions of
captopril and hydralazine in a model of severe hypertension and end-organ
damage.

DOI: 10.1097/FJC.0b013e31821324b6
PMCID: PMC3095755
PMID: 21326110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
