---
reference_id: "PMID:38457671"
title: "Febrile Ulceronecrotic Mucha-Habermann Disease Associated With Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis: A Case Report and Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Chen C
- Fahmy LM
- Schreidah CM
- Magro CM
- Geskin LJ
journal: Am J Dermatopathol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000002619
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Young Adult
- Blister
- Fever/etiology
- Herpes Simplex
- "Lymphohistiocytosis, Hemophagocytic/complications, diagnosis"
- Necrosis
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/complications, diagnosis"
- Skin Neoplasms/complications
- Skin Ulcer/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Febrile Ulceronecrotic Mucha-Habermann Disease Associated With Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis: A Case Report and Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Chen C, Fahmy LM, Schreidah CM, Magro CM, Geskin LJ
**Journal:** Am J Dermatopathol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/DAD.0000000000002619](https://doi.org/10.1097/DAD.0000000000002619)

## Content

1. Am J Dermatopathol. 2024 Apr 1;46(4):238-242. doi:
10.1097/DAD.0000000000002619.

Febrile Ulceronecrotic Mucha-Habermann Disease Associated With Hemophagocytic
Lymphohistiocytosis: A Case Report and Review of the Literature.

Chen C(1), Fahmy LM(1), Schreidah CM(1), Magro CM(2), Geskin LJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY.
(2)Department of Pathology, Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, NY; and.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New
York, NY.

Mucha-Habermann disease (MHD) is an inflammatory skin disease characterized by
polymorphous eruptions of erythematous, necrotic macules that have been reported
for similarities to cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Febrile ulceronecrotic MHD
(FUMHD) represents a severe variant of MHD, marked by ulcers, hemorrhagic
bullae, and systemic symptoms. Herein, we report a case of a severely atypical
lymphomatoid expression of FUMHD associated with hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). A previously healthy 21-year-old woman was admitted
to the hospital with a rapidly progressive necrotic papular rash. Physical
examination revealed right orbital swelling, bilateral hemorrhagic auricular
bullae, and multiple ulcerative purpuric papulonodules on the trunk, face, and
extremities. Biopsy indicated a dermal and subcutaneous infiltrate of atypical
CD8 + lymphocytes with loss of CD5 and reduction in CD7 expression, along with
features of lymphomatoid vasculitis. A diagnosis of a severely atypical
lymphomatoid expression of FUMHD was made. The patient also met 7 of 9 HLH-2004
criteria, leading to a diagnosis of HLH. Positron emission tomography/computed
tomography, flow cytometry, and rheumatologic workup were unremarkable.
Treatment with an eight-week course of etoposide and dexamethasone for HLH led
to rapid clinical improvement. Over time, her skin lesions regressed and
eventually scabbed over to leave hyperpigmented scars, confirming the diagnosis
of MHD. She has remained stable, off therapy for 4 years. Although potentially
fatal, FUMHD often exhibits favorable outcomes and may resolve without
recurrence, as in our patient. FUMHD should be considered in the differential
diagnosis for patients presenting with cutaneous CD8 + necrotizing angiocentric
lymphoproliferative disease complicated by HLH.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000002619
PMID: 38457671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: C. Chen, L.M. Fahmy, C.M. Schreidah, C.M. Magro,
and L.J. Geskin have given substantial contributions to the conception and
design of the manuscript. C. Chen and L.M. Fahmy conducted chart review and
literature review and prepared the original draft of the manuscript. C.M. Magro
analyzed the histopathology slides and provided the included photomicrographs.
L.J. Geskin provided direct care in the diagnosis and treatment of the patient.
All authors contributed to the review and editing of the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final version of the manuscript. L.J. Geskin has served as
an investigator for and/or received research support from Helsinn Group, J&J,
Mallinckrodt, Kyowa Kirin, Soligenix, Innate, Merck, BMS, and Stratpharma; is on
the speakers' bureau for Helsinn Group and J&J; and is on the scientific
advisory board for Helsinn Group, J&J, Mallinckrodt, Sanofi, Regeneron, and
Kyowa Kirin. C. Chen, L.M. Fahmy, C.M. Schreidah, and C.M. Magro have no
conflicts of interest to declare.
