---
reference_id: "PMID:21454511"
title: Mutant TRPV4-mediated toxicity is linked to increased constitutive function in axonal neuropathies.
authors:
- Fecto F
- Shi Y
- Huda R
- Martina M
- Siddique T
- Deng HX
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.237685
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/metabolism"
- Axons/metabolism
- Calcium Channels/chemistry
- Cell Cycle Proteins/metabolism
- Cell Membrane/metabolism
- Cell Survival
- Cytoplasm/metabolism
- "DNA, Complementary/metabolism"
- Electrophysiology/methods
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- "Microscopy, Confocal/methods"
- "Models, Biological"
- "Models, Statistical"
- Mutation
- Neurodegenerative Diseases/metabolism
- Nuclear Proteins/metabolism
- Transient Receptor Potential Channels/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutant TRPV4-mediated toxicity is linked to increased constitutive function in axonal neuropathies.
**Authors:** Fecto F, Shi Y, Huda R, Martina M, Siddique T, Deng HX
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.237685](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.237685)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 13;286(19):17281-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.237685. Epub 
2011 Mar 21.

Mutant TRPV4-mediated toxicity is linked to increased constitutive function in 
axonal neuropathies.

Fecto F(1), Shi Y, Huda R, Martina M, Siddique T, Deng HX.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuromuscular Medicine, Davee Department of Neurology and 
Clinical Neurosciences, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Mutations in TRPV4 have been linked to three distinct axonal neuropathies. 
However, the pathogenic mechanism underlying these disorders remains unclear. 
Both gain and loss of calcium channel activity of the mutant TRPV4 have been 
suggested. Here, we show that the three previously reported TRPV4 mutant 
channels have a physiological localization and display an increased calcium 
channel activity, leading to increased cytotoxicity in three different cell 
types. Patch clamp experiments showed that cells expressing mutant TRPV4 have 
much larger whole-cell currents than those expressing the wild-type TRPV4 
channel. Single channel recordings showed that the mutant channels have higher 
open probability, due to a modification of gating, and no change in 
single-channel conductance. These data support the hypothesis that a "gain of 
function" mechanism, possibly leading to increased intracellular calcium influx, 
underlies the pathogenesis of the TRPV4-linked axonal neuropathies, and may have 
immediate implications for designing rational therapies.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.237685
PMCID: PMC3089570
PMID: 21454511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]