---
reference_id: "PMID:38583454"
title: "Feasibility, safety, and impact of the RTS,S/AS01(E) malaria vaccine when implemented through national immunisation programmes: evaluation of cluster-randomised introduction of the vaccine in Ghana, Kenya, and Malawi."
authors:
- Asante KP
- Mathanga DP
- Milligan P
- Akech S
- Oduro A
- Mwapasa V
- Moore KA
- Kwambai TK
- Hamel MJ
- Gyan T
- Westercamp N
- Kapito-Tembo A
- Njuguna P
- Ansong D
- Kariuki S
- Mvalo T
- Snell P
- Schellenberg D
- Welega P
- Otieno L
- Chimala A
- Afari EA
- Bejon P
- Maleta K
- Agbenyega T
- Snow RW
- Zulu M
- Chinkhumba J
- Samuels AM
- Malaria Vaccine Programme Evaluation Partners
journal: Lancet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)00004-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Feasibility, safety, and impact of the RTS,S/AS01(E) malaria vaccine when implemented through national immunisation programmes: evaluation of cluster-randomised introduction of the vaccine in Ghana, Kenya, and Malawi.
**Authors:** Asante KP, Mathanga DP, Milligan P, Akech S, Oduro A, Mwapasa V, Moore KA, Kwambai TK, Hamel MJ, Gyan T, Westercamp N, Kapito-Tembo A, Njuguna P, Ansong D, Kariuki S, Mvalo T, Snell P, Schellenberg D, Welega P, Otieno L, Chimala A, Afari EA, Bejon P, Maleta K, Agbenyega T, Snow RW, Zulu M, Chinkhumba J, Samuels AM, Malaria Vaccine Programme Evaluation Partners
**Journal:** Lancet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(24)00004-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(24)00004-7)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2024 Apr 27;403(10437):1660-1670. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)00004-7. 
Epub 2024 Apr 4.

Feasibility, safety, and impact of the RTS,S/AS01(E) malaria vaccine when 
implemented through national immunisation programmes: evaluation of 
cluster-randomised introduction of the vaccine in Ghana, Kenya, and Malawi.

Asante KP(1), Mathanga DP(2), Milligan P(3), Akech S(4), Oduro A(5), Mwapasa 
V(6), Moore KA(7), Kwambai TK(8), Hamel MJ(9), Gyan T(10), Westercamp N(11), 
Kapito-Tembo A(6), Njuguna P(12), Ansong D(13), Kariuki S(14), Mvalo T(15), 
Snell P(16), Schellenberg D(12), Welega P(5), Otieno L(17), Chimala A(18), Afari 
EA(19), Bejon P(20), Maleta K(6), Agbenyega T(13), Snow RW(20), Zulu M(15), 
Chinkhumba J(6), Samuels AM(21); Malaria Vaccine Programme Evaluation Partners.

Collaborators: Abubakari SW, Akumani A, Adu-Gyasi D, Sarfo A, Odei-Lartey E, 
Agbokey F, Amenga-Etego S, Gyaase S, Buabeng P, Awini E, Sylverken J, Kampim A, 
Koram KA, Hodgson A, Binka FN, Okine RNA, Tweneboah PO, Ondiegi B, Seda B, Akach 
D, Orwa G, Nyang'au I, Odunga O, Gumba F, Copeland N, Khazenzi C, Mumo E, Musa 
M, Ogero M, English M, Haji A, Njoroge J, Msuku H, Samuel V, Mariko HT, Juliano 
J, Msumba L, Mungwira RG, Zimba BE, Desai M, Furrer E, Aponte J, Alonso P, Kalu 
AA, Sillah JS.

Author information:
(1)Kintampo Health Research Centre, Research and Development Division, Ghana 
Health Service, Kintampo North Municipality, Ghana; London School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine, London, UK. Electronic address: 
kwakupoku.asante@kintampo-hrc.org.
(2)School of Public Health, Kamuzu University of Health Sciences, Blantyre, 
Malawi; Malaria Alert Centre, Kamuzu University of Health Sciences, Blantyre, 
Malawi.
(3)London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK. Electronic address: 
paul.milligan@lshtm.ac.uk.
(4)Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI)-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, 
Nairobi, Kenya.
(5)Navrongo Health Research Centre, Research and Development Division, Ghana 
Health Service, Accra, Ghana.
(6)School of Public Health, Kamuzu University of Health Sciences, Blantyre, 
Malawi.
(7)London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK; Murdoch Children's 
Research Institute, Infection and Immunity, New Vaccines, Parkville, VIC, 
Australia.
(8)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Kisumu, Kenya.
(9)Department of Immunizations, Vaccines, and Biologicals, WHO, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(10)Kintampo Health Research Centre, Research and Development Division, Ghana 
Health Service, Kintampo North Municipality, Ghana.
(11)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for 
Global Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(12)Global Malaria Programme, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland.
(13)Agogo Malaria Research Centre, Agogo, Ghana; Kwame Nkrumah University of 
Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana.
(14)Centre for Global Health Research, KEMRI, Kisumu, Kenya.
(15)University of North Carolina Project-Malawi, Lilongwe, Malawi.
(16)London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(17)KEMRI-US Army Medical Research Directorate-Africa, Kisumu, Kenya.
(18)Malaria Alert Centre, Kamuzu University of Health Sciences, Blantyre, 
Malawi.
(19)School of Public Health, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.
(20)Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI)-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, 
Nairobi, Kenya; Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield 
Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(21)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for 
Global Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Kisumu, Kenya; 
Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA. Electronic 
address: amsamuels@cdc.gov.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2024 Apr 27;403(10437):1607-1609. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(23)02892-1.

BACKGROUND: The RTS,S/AS01E malaria vaccine (RTS,S) was introduced by national 
immunisation programmes in Ghana, Kenya, and Malawi in 2019 in large-scale pilot 
schemes. We aimed to address questions about feasibility and impact, and to 
assess safety signals that had been observed in the phase 3 trial that included 
an excess of meningitis and cerebral malaria cases in RTS,S recipients, and the 
possibility of an excess of deaths among girls who received RTS,S than in 
controls, to inform decisions about wider use.
METHODS: In this prospective evaluation, 158 geographical clusters (66 districts 
in Ghana; 46 sub-counties in Kenya; and 46 groups of immunisation clinic 
catchment areas in Malawi) were randomly assigned to early or delayed 
introduction of RTS,S, with three doses to be administered between the ages of 5 
months and 9 months and a fourth dose at the age of approximately 2 years. 
Primary outcomes of the evaluation, planned over 4 years, were mortality from 
all causes except injury (impact), hospital admission with severe malaria 
(impact), hospital admission with meningitis or cerebral malaria (safety), 
deaths in girls compared with boys (safety), and vaccination coverage 
(feasibility). Mortality was monitored in children aged 1-59 months throughout 
the pilot areas. Surveillance for meningitis and severe malaria was established 
in eight sentinel hospitals in Ghana, six in Kenya, and four in Malawi. Vaccine 
uptake was measured in surveys of children aged 12-23 months about 18 months 
after vaccine introduction. We estimated that sufficient data would have accrued 
after 24 months to evaluate each of the safety signals and the impact on severe 
malaria in a pooled analysis of the data from the three countries. We estimated 
incidence rate ratios (IRRs) by comparing the ratio of the number of events in 
children age-eligible to have received at least one dose of the vaccine (for 
safety outcomes), or age-eligible to have received three doses (for impact 
outcomes), to that in non-eligible age groups in implementation areas with the 
equivalent ratio in comparison areas. To establish whether there was evidence of 
a difference between girls and boys in the vaccine's impact on mortality, the 
female-to-male mortality ratio in age groups eligible to receive the vaccine 
(relative to the ratio in non-eligible children) was compared between 
implementation and comparison areas. Preliminary findings contributed to WHO's 
recommendation in 2021 for widespread use of RTS,S in areas of moderate-to-high 
malaria transmission.
FINDINGS: By April 30, 2021, 652 673 children had received at least one dose of 
RTS,S and 494 745 children had received three doses. Coverage of the first dose 
was 76% in Ghana, 79% in Kenya, and 73% in Malawi, and coverage of the third 
dose was 66% in Ghana, 62% in Kenya, and 62% in Malawi. 26 285 children aged 
1-59 months were admitted to sentinel hospitals and 13 198 deaths were reported 
through mortality surveillance. Among children eligible to have received at 
least one dose of RTS,S, there was no evidence of an excess of meningitis or 
cerebral malaria cases in implementation areas compared with comparison areas 
(hospital admission with meningitis: IRR 0·63 [95% CI 0·22-1·79]; hospital 
admission with cerebral malaria: IRR 1·03 [95% CI 0·61-1·74]). The impact of 
RTS,S introduction on mortality was similar for girls and boys (relative 
mortality ratio 1·03 [95% CI 0·88-1·21]). Among children eligible for three 
vaccine doses, RTS,S introduction was associated with a 32% reduction (95% CI 
5-51%) in hospital admission with severe malaria, and a 9% reduction (95% CI 
0-18%) in all-cause mortality (excluding injury).
INTERPRETATION: In the first 2 years of implementation of RTS,S, the three 
primary doses were effectively deployed through national immunisation 
programmes. There was no evidence of the safety signals that had been observed 
in the phase 3 trial, and introduction of the vaccine was associated with 
substantial reductions in hospital admission with severe malaria. Evaluation 
continues to assess the impact of four doses of RTS,S.
FUNDING: Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance; the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis 
and Malaria; and Unitaid.

Copyright © 2024 World Health Organization. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)00004-7
PMCID: PMC11718159
PMID: 38583454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests KPA, AO, MJH, NW, PN, 
DA, SK, TM, DS, LO, PB, TA, and AMS previously participated in RTS,S malaria 
vaccine clinical trials as principal investigators or co-investigators before or 
following WHO's RTS,S malaria pilot implementation programme. The authors were 
not involved in the RTS,S vaccine delivery programme. All other authors declare 
no competing interests.