---
reference_id: "PMID:35953512"
title: "Opitz syndrome: improving clinical interpretation of intronic variants in MID1 gene."
authors:
- Micale L
- Russo F
- Mascaro M
- Morlino S
- Nardella G
- Fusco C
- Bisceglia L
- Meroni G
- Castori M
journal: Pediatr Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41390-022-02237-y
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- Mutation
- Cleft Palate/genetics
- Hypertelorism/genetics
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
- Esophagus/abnormalities
- Hypospadias
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Opitz syndrome: improving clinical interpretation of intronic variants in MID1 gene.
**Authors:** Micale L, Russo F, Mascaro M, Morlino S, Nardella G, Fusco C, Bisceglia L, Meroni G, Castori M
**Journal:** Pediatr Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41390-022-02237-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41390-022-02237-y)

## Content

1. Pediatr Res. 2023 Apr;93(5):1208-1215. doi: 10.1038/s41390-022-02237-y. Epub 
2022 Aug 11.

Opitz syndrome: improving clinical interpretation of intronic variants in MID1 
gene.

Micale L(1), Russo F(2), Mascaro M(3), Morlino S(2), Nardella G(2), Fusco C(2), 
Bisceglia L(2), Meroni G(3), Castori M(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della 
Sofferenza, Viale Cappuccini snc, 71013, San Giovanni Rotondo (Foggia), Italy. 
l.micale@operapadrepio.it.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della 
Sofferenza, Viale Cappuccini snc, 71013, San Giovanni Rotondo (Foggia), Italy.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, Building Q, Piazza Europa 
1, 34127, Trieste, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Loss-of-function variants in MID1 are the most common cause of Opitz 
G/BBB syndrome (OS). The interpretation of intronic variants affecting the 
splicing is a rising issue in OS.
METHODS: Exon sequencing of a 2-year-old boy with OS showed that he was a 
carrier of the de novo c.1286-10G>T variant in MID1. In silico predictions and 
minigene assays explored the effect of the variant on splicing. The minigene 
approach was also applied to two previously identified MID1 c.864+1G>T and 
c.1285+1G>T variants.
RESULTS: Minigene assay demonstrated that the c.1286-10G>T variant generated the 
inclusion of eight nucleotides that predicted generation of a frameshift. The 
c.864+1G>T and c.1285+1G>T variants resulted in an in-frame deletion predicted 
to generate a shorter MID1 protein. In hemizygous males, this allowed 
reclassification of all the identified variants from "of unknown significance" 
to "likely pathogenic."
CONCLUSIONS: Minigene assay supports functional effects from MID1 intronic 
variants. This paves the way to the introduction of similar second-tier 
investigations in the molecular diagnostics workflow of OS.
IMPACT: Causative intronic variants in MID1 are rarely investigated in Opitz 
syndrome. MID1 is not expressed in blood and mRNA studies are hardly accessible 
in routine diagnostics. Minigene assay is an alternative for assessing the 
effect of intronic variants on splicing. This is the first study characterizing 
the molecular consequences of three MID1 variants for diagnostic purposes and 
demonstrating the efficacy of minigene assays in supporting their clinical 
interpretation. Review of the criteria according to the American College of 
Medical Genetics reassessed all variants as likely pathogenic.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to the International Pediatric 
Research Foundation, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41390-022-02237-y
PMID: 35953512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]