---
reference_id: "PMID:28232778"
title: "Bloom's Syndrome: Clinical Spectrum, Molecular Pathogenesis, and Cancer Predisposition."
authors:
- Cunniff C
- Bassetti JA
- Ellis NA
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1159/000452082
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bloom's Syndrome: Clinical Spectrum, Molecular Pathogenesis, and Cancer Predisposition.
**Authors:** Cunniff C, Bassetti JA, Ellis NA
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000452082](https://doi.org/10.1159/000452082)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2017 Jan;8(1):4-23. doi: 10.1159/000452082. Epub 2016 Nov 5.

Bloom's Syndrome: Clinical Spectrum, Molecular Pathogenesis, and Cancer 
Predisposition.

Cunniff C(1), Bassetti JA(1), Ellis NA(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Weill Cornell Medical 
College, New York, N.Y, USA.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona Cancer 
Center, Tucson, Ariz., USA.

Bloom's syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by prenatal 
and postnatal growth deficiency, photosensitive skin changes, immune deficiency, 
insulin resistance, and a greatly increased risk of early onset of cancer and 
for the development of multiple cancers. Loss-of-function mutations of BLM, 
which codes for a RecQ helicase, cause Bloom's syndrome. The absence of a 
functional BLM protein causes chromosome instability, excessive homologous 
recombination, and a greatly increased number of sister chromatid exchanges that 
are pathognomonic of the syndrome. A common founder mutation designated blmAsh 
is present in about 1 in 100 persons of Eastern European Jewish ancestry, and 
there are additional recurrent founder mutations among other populations. 
Missense, nonsense, and frameshift mutations as well as multiexonic deletions 
have all been observed. Bloom's syndrome is a prototypical chromosomal 
instability syndrome, and the somatic mutations that occur as a result of that 
instability are responsible for the increased cancer risk. Although there is 
currently no treatment aimed at the underlying genetic abnormality, persons with 
Bloom's syndrome benefit from sun protection, aggressive treatment of 
infections, surveillance for insulin resistance, and early identification of 
cancer.

DOI: 10.1159/000452082
PMCID: PMC5260600
PMID: 28232778