---
reference_id: "PMID:12080440"
title: Obesity and the polycystic ovary syndrome.
authors:
- Gambineri A
- Pelusi C
- Vicennati V
- Pagotto U
- Pasquali R
journal: Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1038/sj.ijo.0801994
keywords:
- Androgens/physiology
- Body Composition
- Diet
- Estrogens/physiology
- Female
- Human Growth Hormone/physiology
- Humans
- Insulin/physiology
- Luteinizing Hormone/physiology
- "Obesity/complications, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Polycystic Ovary Syndrome/etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Sex Hormone-Binding Globulin/physiology
- Somatomedins/physiology
- beta-Endorphin/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Obesity and the polycystic ovary syndrome.
**Authors:** Gambineri A, Pelusi C, Vicennati V, Pagotto U, Pasquali R
**Journal:** Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.ijo.0801994](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ijo.0801994)

## Content

1. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2002 Jul;26(7):883-96. doi:
10.1038/sj.ijo.0801994.

Obesity and the polycystic ovary syndrome.

Gambineri A(1), Pelusi C, Vicennati V, Pagotto U, Pasquali R.

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, S. Orsola-Malpighi
Hospital, University Alma Mater Studiorum, Bologna, Italy.

The polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a condition characterized by
hyperandrogenism and chronic oligo-anovulation. However, many features of the
metabolic syndrome are inconsistently present in the majority of women with
PCOS. Approximately 50% of PCOS women are overweight or obese and most of them
have the abdominal phenotype. Obesity may play a pathogenetic role in the
development of the syndrome in susceptible individuals. In fact, insulin
possesses true gonadotrophic function and an increased insulin availability at
the level of ovarian tissue may favour excess androgen synthesis. Obesity,
particularly the abdominal phenotype, may be partly responsible for insulin
resistance and associated hyperinsulinemia in women with PCOS. Therefore,
obesity-related hyperinsulinemia may play a key role in favouring
hyperandrogenism in these women. Other factors such as increased estrogen
production rate, increased activity of the opioid system and of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, decreased sex hormone binding globulin
synthesis and, possibly, high dietary lipid intake, may be additional mechanisms
by which obesity favours the development of hyperandrogenism in PCOS.
Irrespective of the pathogenetic mechanism involved, obese PCOS women have more
severe hyperandrogenism and related clinical features (such as hirsutism,
menstrual abnormalities and anovulation) than normal-weight PCOS women. This
picture tends to be more pronounced in obese PCOS women with the abdominal
phenotype. Body weight loss is associated with beneficial effects on hormones,
metabolism and clinical features. A further clinical and endocrinological
improvement can also be achieved by adding insulin-sensitizing agents and/or
antiandrogens to weight reduction programmes. These obviously emphasize the role
of obesity in the pathophysiology of PCOS.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ijo.0801994
PMID: 12080440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
