---
reference_id: "PMID:35630404"
title: "Small Intestine Bacterial Overgrowth Can Form an Indigenous Proinflammatory Environment in the Duodenum: A Prospective Study."
authors:
- Rizos E
- Pyleris E
- Pimentel M
- Triantafyllou K
- Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ
journal: Microorganisms
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/microorganisms10050960
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Small Intestine Bacterial Overgrowth Can Form an Indigenous Proinflammatory Environment in the Duodenum: A Prospective Study.
**Authors:** Rizos E, Pyleris E, Pimentel M, Triantafyllou K, Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ
**Journal:** Microorganisms (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/microorganisms10050960](https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms10050960)

## Content

1. Microorganisms. 2022 May 2;10(5):960. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms10050960.

Small Intestine Bacterial Overgrowth Can Form an Indigenous Proinflammatory 
Environment in the Duodenum: A Prospective Study.

Rizos E(1), Pyleris E(2), Pimentel M(3), Triantafyllou K(1), 
Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Hepatogastroenterology Unit, 2nd Department of Internal Propaedeutic 
Medicine, Attikon University General Hospital, Medical School, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, 124 62 Athens, Greece.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Sismanogleion General Hospital, 151 26 
Athens, Greece.
(3)Medically Associated Science and Technology (MAST) Program, Cedars-Sinai 
Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.
(4)4th Department of Internal Medicine, Attikon University General Hospital, 
Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 1 Rimini Street, 
124 62 Athens, Greece.

Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) contributes to the formation of an 
inflammatory environment in various intestinal and extraintestinal diseases. 
Cytokines that participate in these mechanisms are yet to be examined. Upper 
gastrointestinal endoscopy with duodenal aspiration was performed in 224 
patients. Quantitative cultures of aerobic species were performed, 
concentrations of interleukin 1β (IL-1β), interleukin 6 (IL-6), and tumor 
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) were measured, and loads of Escherichia coli, 
Klebsiella pneumoniae, Methanobevibacter smithii, and Aeromonas spp. were 
detected via real-time PCR in the duodenal fluid. Analysis showed that the odds 
ratio (OR) for elevated IL-1β levels was 2.61 (1.06-6.43, p = 0.037) among 
patients with SIBO compared to patients without SIBO, while there was no 
significant difference at elevated IL-6 and TNF-α levels between patients with 
and without SIBO, using ≥10³ cfu/mL as a cut-off. The presence of all three 
elevated cytokine levels has OR 3.47 (1.06-11.34, p = 0.030) among patients with 
SIBO. Klebsiella pneumoniae detection was positively related with IL-6 and TNF-α 
levels, when Methanobevibacter smithii was positively related with IL-1β levels. 
The presence of SIBO is associated with elevated IL-1β levels in the duodenal 
fluid. There is a high prevalence of all three proinflammatory cytokine levels 
elevated (IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α) in the duodenal fluid among patients with 
SIBO.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms10050960
PMCID: PMC9145321
PMID: 35630404

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.