---
reference_id: "PMID:29111210"
title: Interaction of Adverse Disease Related Pathways in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Rowin EJ
- Maron MS
- Chan RH
- Hausvater A
- Wang W
- Rastegar H
- Maron BJ
journal: Am J Cardiol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2017.08.048
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interaction of Adverse Disease Related Pathways in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Rowin EJ, Maron MS, Chan RH, Hausvater A, Wang W, Rastegar H, Maron BJ
**Journal:** Am J Cardiol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjcard.2017.08.048](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjcard.2017.08.048)

## Content

1. Am J Cardiol. 2017 Dec 15;120(12):2256-2264. doi:
10.1016/j.amjcard.2017.08.048.  Epub 2017 Sep 20.

Interaction of Adverse Disease Related Pathways in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.

Rowin EJ(1), Maron MS(2), Chan RH(3), Hausvater A(2), Wang W(2), Rastegar H(2), 
Maron BJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Institute, Division of Cardiology, Tufts Medical 
Center, Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic address: 
erowin@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.
(2)Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Institute, Division of Cardiology, Tufts Medical 
Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Division of Cardiology, Toronto General Hospital, University Health Network, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HC) has been characterized as a generally 
progressive genetic heart disease, creating an ominous perspective for patients 
and managing cardiologists. We explored the HC disease burden and interaction of 
adverse clinical pathways to clarify patient expectations over long time periods 
in the contemporary therapeutic era. We studied 1,000 consecutive HC patients 
(52 ± 17 years) at Tufts Medical Center, followed 9.3 ± 8 years from diagnosis, 
employing a novel disease pathway model: 46% experienced a benign course free of 
adverse pathways, but 42% of patients progressed along 1 major pathway, most 
commonly refractory heart failure to New York Heart Association class III or IV 
requiring surgical myectomy (or alcohol ablation) or heart transplant; 
repetitive or permanent atrial fibrillation; and least commonly arrhythmic 
sudden death events. Eleven percent experienced 2 of these therapeutic end 
points at different times in their clinical course, most frequently the 
combination of advanced heart failure and atrial fibrillation, whereas only 1% 
incurred all 3 pathways. Freedom of progression from 1 to 2 disease pathways, or 
from 2 to 3 was 80% and 93% at 5 years, respectively. Annual HC-related 
mortality did not differ according to the number of pathways: 1 (0.8%), 2 
(0.8%), or 3 (2.4%) (p = 0.56), and 93% of patients were in New York Heart 
Association classes I or II at follow-up. In conclusion, it is uncommon for HC 
patients to experience multiple adverse (but treatable) disease pathways, 
underscoring the principle that HC is not a uniformly progressive disease. These 
observations provide a measure of clarity and/or reassurance to patients 
regarding the true long-term disease burden of HC.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2017.08.048
PMID: 29111210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]