---
reference_id: "PMID:11709688"
title: "Characteristics of oral and paraoral malignant lymphoma: a population-based review of 361 cases."
authors:
- Epstein JB
- Epstein JD
- Le ND
- Gorsky M
journal: Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1067/moe.2001.116062
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characteristics of oral and paraoral malignant lymphoma: a population-based review of 361 cases.
**Authors:** Epstein JB, Epstein JD, Le ND, Gorsky M
**Journal:** Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1067/moe.2001.116062](https://doi.org/10.1067/moe.2001.116062)

## Content

1. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 2001 Nov;92(5):519-25. doi: 
10.1067/moe.2001.116062.

Characteristics of oral and paraoral malignant lymphoma: a population-based 
review of 361 cases.

Epstein JB(1), Epstein JD, Le ND, Gorsky M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dentistry, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, Canada. 
jepstein@bccancer.bc.ca

BACKGROUND: Lymphoma is the second most common neoplasm of the head and neck; 
almost 50% of all lymphomas occur in this region. Waldeyer's ring is the most 
common site of lymphomas involving the oral region. The purpose of this study 
was to review the characteristics of a large series of malignant lymphoma of the 
oral region.
METHODS: Three hundred sixty-one consecutive cases of malignant lymphoma of the 
oral region were identified in the Tumor Registry between 1969 and 1998.
RESULTS: The 361 cases (200 males and 161 females) of malignant lymphoma of the 
oral region accounted for 3.5% of all oral malignancies. The mean age was 62.5 
years and the most prevalent site of involvement was the tonsil (32.7%), 
followed by the parotid gland (16.1%). Sixty-five percent of the lesions were 
diagnosed as large-cell (38%) or small-cell (27%) lymphoma. One quarter of the 
patients died of the disease in a mean of 2.78 years after diagnosis. Of a total 
26 patients who died from other causes, 12 died because of other cancers, 
including 7 (27%) with leukemia and 5 (19%) with oral carcinoma. The prognosis 
is based, at least partially, on the histologic grading (low, intermediate, or 
high) and the anatomic stage of the disease. Localized low-grade lymphomas have 
a more favorable prognosis compared with those that are disseminated and/or have 
high-grade cellular changes.
CONCLUSION: Lymphoma is the second most common malignant oral disease. Thorough 
head and neck and oral examination is necessary to identify lesions that may 
represent lymphoma.

DOI: 10.1067/moe.2001.116062
PMID: 11709688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]