---
reference_id: "PMID:8373550"
title: "[Cholera in pediatrics]."
authors:
- Lezama-Basulto LA
- Mota-Hernández F
journal: Bol Med Hosp Infant Mex
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Cholera in pediatrics].
**Authors:** Lezama-Basulto LA, Mota-Hernández F
**Journal:** Bol Med Hosp Infant Mex (1993)

## Content

1. Bol Med Hosp Infant Mex. 1993 Sep;50(9):671-7.

[Cholera in pediatrics].

[Article in Spanish]

Lezama-Basulto LA(1), Mota-Hernández F.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Hidratación Oral, Hospital Infantil de México Federico Gómez, 
México, D.F.

Cholerae is a grave and acute bacterial intestine infection which is caused by a 
bacilo, V. cholerae 01, that produces toxic products. Its clinical symptoms 
range from abundant liquid diarrhoea combined with vomiting and rapid 
dehydration. It is highly lethal when right treatment is not applied. There are 
also cases of cholera where victims do not show any symptoms of it, that is 
asymptomatic carriers. Any clinical suspicion of cholerae has to be corroborated 
by epidemiological data and its diagnostic confirmation should be done by 
isolating the bacteria, V. cholerae. When beginning the treatment, it is not 
necessary to confirm the diagnostic and this is based on the restitution of the 
liquids lost through vomiting and facing using any methods that are recommended 
for any other type of diarrhoea. The antimicrobial treatment is used only for 
grave cases. This present revision includes recent knowledge about cholerae 
emphasising on the effective management of cases through an adequate use of 
right treatment methods and also using the principal prevention measures against 
dissemination of this disease.

PMID: 8373550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]