---
reference_id: "PMID:38396936"
title: "Autoimmunity and Autoinflammation: Relapsing Polychondritis and VEXAS Syndrome Challenge."
authors:
- Cardoneanu A
- Rezus II
- Burlui AM
- Richter P
- Bratoiu I
- Mihai IR
- Macovei LA
- Rezus E
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25042261
keywords:
- Humans
- "Polychondritis, Relapsing/diagnosis, pathology"
- Autoimmunity
- Collagen
- Inflammation
- Myelodysplastic Syndromes
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmunity and Autoinflammation: Relapsing Polychondritis and VEXAS Syndrome Challenge.
**Authors:** Cardoneanu A, Rezus II, Burlui AM, Richter P, Bratoiu I, Mihai IR, Macovei LA, Rezus E
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25042261](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25042261)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Feb 13;25(4):2261. doi: 10.3390/ijms25042261.

Autoimmunity and Autoinflammation: Relapsing Polychondritis and VEXAS Syndrome 
Challenge.

Cardoneanu A(1)(2), Rezus II(3), Burlui AM(1)(2), Richter P(1)(2), Bratoiu 
I(1)(2), Mihai IR(1)(2), Macovei LA(1)(2), Rezus E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Rheumatology, Medical Department II, University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy "Grigore T Popa", 700115 Iasi, Romania.
(2)Clinical Rehabilitation Hospital, 700661 Iasi, Romania.
(3)Discipline of Radiology, Surgery Department II, University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy "Grigore T Popa", 700115 Iasi, Romania.

Relapsing polychondritis is a chronic autoimmune inflammatory condition 
characterized by recurrent episodes of inflammation at the level of 
cartilaginous structures and tissues rich in proteoglycans. The pathogenesis of 
the disease is complex and still incompletely elucidated. The data support the 
important role of a particular genetic predisposition, with HLA-DR4 being 
considered an allele that confers a major risk of disease occurrence. 
Environmental factors, mechanical, chemical or infectious, act as triggers in 
the development of clinical manifestations, causing the degradation of proteins 
and the release of cryptic cartilage antigens. Both humoral and cellular 
immunity play essential roles in the occurrence and perpetuation of autoimmunity 
and inflammation. Autoantibodies anti-type II, IX and XI collagens, 
anti-matrilin-1 and anti-COMPs (cartilage oligomeric matrix proteins) have been 
highlighted in increased titers, being correlated with disease activity and 
considered prognostic factors. Innate immunity cells, neutrophils, monocytes, 
macrophages, natural killer lymphocytes and eosinophils have been found in the 
perichondrium and cartilage, together with activated antigen-presenting cells, 
C3 deposits and immunoglobulins. Also, T cells play a decisive role in the 
pathogenesis of the disease, with relapsing polychondritis being considered a 
TH1-mediated condition. Thus, increased secretions of interferon γ, interleukin 
(IL)-12 and IL-2 have been highlighted. The "inflammatory storm" formed by a 
complex network of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines actively modulates 
the recruitment and infiltration of various cells, with cartilage being a source 
of antigens. Along with RP, VEXAS syndrome, another systemic autoimmune disease 
with genetic determinism, has an etiopathogenesis that is still incompletely 
known, and it involves the activation of the innate immune system through 
different pathways and the appearance of the cytokine storm. The clinical 
manifestations of VEXAS syndrome include an inflammatory phenotype often similar 
to that of RP, which raises diagnostic problems. The management of RP and VEXAS 
syndrome includes common immunosuppressive therapies whose main goal is to 
control systemic inflammatory manifestations. The objective of this paper is to 
detail the main etiopathogenetic mechanisms of a rare disease, summarizing the 
latest data and presenting the distinct features of these mechanisms.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25042261
PMCID: PMC10889424
PMID: 38396936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.