---
reference_id: "PMID:23829793"
title: Pulmonary arterial hypertension.
authors:
- Montani D
- Günther S
- Dorfmüller P
- Perros F
- Girerd B
- Garcia G
- Jaïs X
- Savale L
- Artaud-Macari E
- Price LC
- Humbert M
- Simonneau G
- Sitbon O
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-97
keywords:
- Heart Diseases/complications
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/classification, diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary arterial hypertension.
**Authors:** Montani D, Günther S, Dorfmüller P, Perros F, Girerd B, Garcia G, Jaïs X, Savale L, Artaud-Macari E, Price LC, Humbert M, Simonneau G, Sitbon O
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-8-97](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-8-97)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013 Jul 6;8:97. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-97.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Montani D, Günther S, Dorfmüller P, Perros F, Girerd B, Garcia G, Jaïs X, Savale 
L, Artaud-Macari E, Price LC, Humbert M, Simonneau G, Sitbon O.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a chronic and progressive disease 
leading to right heart failure and ultimately death if untreated. The first 
classification of PH was proposed in 1973. In 2008, the fourth World Symposium 
on PH held in Dana Point (California, USA) revised previous classifications. 
Currently, PH is devided into five subgroups. Group 1 includes patients 
suffering from idiopathic or familial PAH with or without germline mutations. 
Patients with a diagnosis of PAH should systematically been screened regarding 
to underlying mutations of BMPR2 gene (bone morphogenetic protein receptor type 
2) or more rarely of ACVRL1 (activine receptor-like kinase type 1), ENG 
(endogline) or Smad8 genes. Pulmonary veno occusive disease and pulmonary 
capillary hemagiomatosis are individualized and designated as clinical group 1'. 
Group 2 'Pulmonary hypertension due to left heart diseases' is divided into 
three sub-groups: systolic dysfonction, diastolic dysfonction and valvular 
dysfonction. Group 3 'Pulmonary hypertension due to respiratory diseases' 
includes a heterogenous subgroup of respiratory diseases like PH due to 
pulmonary fibrosis, COPD, lung emphysema or interstitial lung disease for 
exemple. Group 4 includes chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension without 
any distinction of proximal or distal forms. Group 5 regroup PH patients with 
unclear multifactorial mechanisms. Invasive hemodynamic assessment with right 
heart catheterization is requested to confirm the definite diagnosis of PH 
showing a resting mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) of ≥ 25 mmHg and a 
normal pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) of ≤ 15 mmHg. The assessment of 
PCWP may allow the distinction between pre-capillary and post-capillary PH (PCWP 
> 15 mmHg). Echocardiography is an important tool in the management of patients 
with underlying suspicion of PH. The European Society of Cardiology and the 
European Respiratory Society (ESC-ERS) guidelines specify its role, essentially 
in the screening proposing criteria for estimating the presence of PH mainly 
based on tricuspid regurgitation peak velocity and systolic artery pressure 
(sPAP). The therapy of PAH consists of non-specific drugs including oral 
anticoagulation and diuretics as well as PAH specific therapy. Diuretics are one 
of the most important treatment in the setting of PH because right heart failure 
leads to fluid retention, hepatic congestion, ascites and peripheral edema. 
Current recommendations propose oral anticoagulation aiming for targeting an 
International Normalized Ratio (INR) between 1.5-2.5. Target INR for patients 
displaying chronic thromboembolic PH is between 2-3. Better understanding in 
pathophysiological mechanisms of PH over the past quarter of a century has led 
to the development of medical therapeutics, even though no cure for PAH exists. 
Several specific therapeutic agents were developed for the medical management of 
PAH including prostanoids (epoprostenol, trepoprostenil, iloprost), endothelin 
receptor antagonists (bosentan, ambrisentan) and phosphodiesterase type 5 
inhibitors (sildenafil, tadalafil). This review discusses the current state of 
art regarding to epidemiologic aspects of PH, diagnostic approaches and the 
current classification of PH. In addition, currently available specific PAH 
therapy is discussed as well as future treatments.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-97
PMCID: PMC3750932
PMID: 23829793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]