---
reference_id: "PMID:31556146"
title: "Technique and outcome of domino liver transplantation from patients with maple syrup urine disease: Expanding the donor pool for live donor liver transplantation."
authors:
- Celik N
- Kelly B
- Soltys K
- Squires JE
- Vockley J
- Shellmer DA
- Strauss K
- McKiernan P
- Ganoza A
- Sindhi R
- Bond G
- Mazariegos G
- Khanna A
journal: Clin Transplant
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/ctr.13721
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "End Stage Liver Disease/mortality, pathology, surgery"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Graft Rejection/etiology, mortality, pathology"
- Graft Survival
- Humans
- "Liver Transplantation/adverse effects, mortality"
- "Living Donors/supply & distribution"
- Male
- Maple Syrup Urine Disease/physiopathology
- Middle Aged
- "Postoperative Complications/etiology, mortality, pathology"
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Survival Rate
- "Transplant Recipients/statistics & numerical data"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Technique and outcome of domino liver transplantation from patients with maple syrup urine disease: Expanding the donor pool for live donor liver transplantation.
**Authors:** Celik N, Kelly B, Soltys K, Squires JE, Vockley J, Shellmer DA, Strauss K, McKiernan P, Ganoza A, Sindhi R, Bond G, Mazariegos G, Khanna A
**Journal:** Clin Transplant (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ctr.13721](https://doi.org/10.1111/ctr.13721)

## Content

1. Clin Transplant. 2019 Nov;33(11):e13721. doi: 10.1111/ctr.13721. Epub 2019 Oct
 6.

Technique and outcome of domino liver transplantation from patients with maple
syrup urine disease: Expanding the donor pool for live donor liver
transplantation.

Celik N(1), Kelly B(2), Soltys K(1), Squires JE(1), Vockley J(3), Shellmer
DA(1), Strauss K(4)(5), McKiernan P(1), Ganoza A(1), Sindhi R(1), Bond G(1),
Mazariegos G(1), Khanna A(1).

Author information:
(1)Hillman Center for Pediatric Transplantation, Children's Hospital of
Pittsburgh of UPMC, Thomas E. Starzl Transplant Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)DCI Donor Services Inc, Sacramento, CA, USA.
(3)Center for Rare Disease Therapy, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(4)Pediatric Hepatology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, Pittsburgh,
PA, USA.
(5)Clinic for Special Children, Strasburg, PA, USA.

AIM/BACKGROUND: Domino liver transplantation (DLT) using liver allografts from
patients with metabolic disorders enhances organ utilization. Short- and
long-term course and outcome of these patients can impact the decision to offer
this procedure to patients, especially those with diseases that can potentially
be cured with liver transplant. We reviewed the outcomes of DLT from maple syrup
urine disease (MSUD) patients in our large academic pediatric and adult
transplant program.
METHODS: All patients receiving DLT were analyzed retrospectively with a minimum
of one-year follow-up period for patient and donor characteristics, early and
late postoperative complications and patient and graft survival with their MSUD
donors in terms of age, weight, MELD/PELD scores, cold ischemia time,
postoperative leucine levels, and peak ALT (alanine aminotransferase) levels
during the first 48 postoperative hours.
RESULTS: Between 2006 and May 2019, 21 patients underwent domino liver
transplantation with live donor allografts from MSUD patients. Four patients
transplanted for different metabolic diseases are focus of a separate report.
Seventeen patients with minimum one-year follow-up period are reported herein.
The indications were primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC, n = 4), congenital
hepatic fibrosis (CHF, n = 2), alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (A-1 ATD, n = 2),
progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC, n = 2), cystic fibrosis
(n = 1), primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC, n = 1), neonatal hepatitis (n = 1),
embryonal sarcoma (n = 1), Caroli disease (n = 1), hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC, n = 1), and chronic rejection after liver transplantations for PSC
(n = 1). All patients and grafts survived at median follow-up of 6.4 years
(range 1.2-12.9 years). Median domino recipient age was 16.2 years (range
0.6-64.6 years) and median MSUD recipient age was 17.6 years (range
4.8-32.1 years). There were no vascular complications during the early
postoperative period, one patient had portal vein thrombosis 3 years after DLT
and a meso-Rex bypass was successfully performed. Small for size syndrome (SFSS)
occurred in reduced left lobe DLT recipient and was managed successfully with
conservative management. Biliary stricture developed in 2 patients and was
resolved by stenting. Comparison between DLT and MSUD recipients' peak
postoperative ALT results and PELD/MELD scores showed lower levels in DLT group
(P-value <.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Patient and graft survival in DLT from MSUD donors was excellent at
short- and long-term follow-up. Metabolic functions have been normal in all
recipients on a normal unrestricted protein diet. Ischemia preservation injury
based on peak ALT was significantly decreased in DLT recipients. Domino
transplantation from pediatric and adult recipients with selected metabolic
diseases should be increasingly considered as an excellent option and
alternative to deceased donor transplantation, thereby expanding the living
donor pool. This, to date, is the largest world experience in DLT utilizing
livers from patients with MSUD.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ctr.13721
PMCID: PMC8902482
PMID: 31556146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST None declared.
