---
reference_id: "PMID:22067175"
title: Preoperative diagnosis of Lynch syndrome with DNA mismatch repair immunohistochemistry on a diagnostic biopsy.
authors:
- Warrier SK
- Trainer AH
- Lynch AC
- Mitchell C
- Hiscock R
- Sawyer S
- Boussioutas A
- Heriot AG
journal: Dis Colon Rectum
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/DCR.0b013e318231db1f
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preoperative diagnosis of Lynch syndrome with DNA mismatch repair immunohistochemistry on a diagnostic biopsy.
**Authors:** Warrier SK, Trainer AH, Lynch AC, Mitchell C, Hiscock R, Sawyer S, Boussioutas A, Heriot AG
**Journal:** Dis Colon Rectum (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/DCR.0b013e318231db1f](https://doi.org/10.1097/DCR.0b013e318231db1f)

## Content

1. Dis Colon Rectum. 2011 Dec;54(12):1480-7. doi: 10.1097/DCR.0b013e318231db1f.

Preoperative diagnosis of Lynch syndrome with DNA mismatch repair 
immunohistochemistry on a diagnostic biopsy.

Warrier SK(1), Trainer AH, Lynch AC, Mitchell C, Hiscock R, Sawyer S, 
Boussioutas A, Heriot AG.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Surgery, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND: DNA mismatch repair immunohistochemistry on tumor tissue is a 
simple, readily available, and cost-effective method of identifying patients 
with Lynch syndrome in the postoperative setting. The aim of the study was to 
assess whether the mismatch repair status of a colorectal cancer can be 
confirmed by mismatch repair immunohistochemistry on preoperative biopsy.
DESIGN: Germline positive patients with Lynch syndrome were identified from a 
prospectively collected Familial Cancer Clinic database. Preoperative colorectal 
cancer biopsy specimens were obtained from the source pathology provider to 
generate a cohort of matched preoperative and postoperative specimens. The 
specimens were sectioned and stained for 4 mismatch repair proteins (MLH1, MSH2, 
MSH6, PMS2). An age-matched cohort to compare specimens was selected from 
Bethesda positive but mismatch repair immunohistochemistry negative patients. 
All slides were reviewed by a single blinded pathologist. The Wilson method was 
used to calculate a true underlying proportion of patients for whom the 
preoperative result matched the postoperative test result with a 95% confidence 
interval.
RESULTS: Of 128 germline positive mutation carriers, 40 patients (mean age 41, 
SD 11.3) had colorectal resections. Thirty-three preoperative specimens were 
retrievable and were matched with biopsies from 33 controls. The germline 
mutations included in the study were 8 MLH1, 19 MSH2, 3 MSH6, and 2 PMS2. In 
patients where germline positive status was known, sensitivity was 100% (95% CI 
89.2-100) and specificity was 100% (95% CI 89.2-100). Identical sensitivity and 
specificity were observed in 33 age-matched patients. The sensitivity of the 
endoscopic biopsy in predicting germline status was 94.9% (95% CI 80.4-98.3).
CONCLUSION: The mismatch repair disease status of a colorectal cancer can be 
reliably confirmed by mismatch repair immunohistochemistry on a diagnostic 
colorectal cancer biopsy sample before definitive surgery. Ascertaining a 
diagnosis of Lynch syndrome before definitive surgery can influence surgical 
planning.

DOI: 10.1097/DCR.0b013e318231db1f
PMID: 22067175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]