---
reference_id: "PMID:31636094"
title: Natural History of Hepatic and Extrahepatic Hepatitis C Virus Diseases and Impact of Interferon-Free HCV Therapy.
authors:
- Negro F
journal: Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a036921
keywords:
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/etiology, virology"
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/etiology, virology"
- Hepacivirus/drug effects
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/complications, drug therapy, virology"
- Humans
- "Kidney Diseases/etiology, virology"
- "Liver Cirrhosis/etiology, virology"
- "Liver Neoplasms/etiology, virology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural History of Hepatic and Extrahepatic Hepatitis C Virus Diseases and Impact of Interferon-Free HCV Therapy.
**Authors:** Negro F
**Journal:** Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1101/cshperspect.a036921](https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a036921)

## Content

1. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2020 Apr 1;10(4):a036921. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a036921.

Natural History of Hepatic and Extrahepatic Hepatitis C Virus Diseases and
Impact of Interferon-Free HCV Therapy.

Negro F(1).

Author information:
(1)Divisions of Clinical Pathology and of Gastroenterology and Hepatology,
University Hospital, 1211 Genève 4, Switzerland.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) infects 71.1 million persons and causes 400,000
deaths annually worldwide. HCV mostly infects the liver, causing acute and
chronic necroinflammatory damage, which may progress toward cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma. In addition, HCV has been associated with several
extrahepatic manifestations. The advent of safe and effective direct-acting
antivirals (DAAs) has made the dream of eliminating this public health scourge
feasible in the medium term. Prospective studies using DAA-based regimens have
shown the benefit of HCV clearance in terms of both liver- and non-liver-related
mortality.

Copyright © 2020 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1101/cshperspect.a036921
PMCID: PMC7117949
PMID: 31636094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
