---
reference_id: "PMID:17505458"
title: Viral infections in pregnancy.
authors:
- Haun L
- Kwan N
- Hollier LM
journal: Minerva Ginecol
year: '2007'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Viral infections in pregnancy.
**Authors:** Haun L, Kwan N, Hollier LM
**Journal:** Minerva Ginecol (2007)

## Content

1. Minerva Ginecol. 2007 Apr;59(2):159-74.

Viral infections in pregnancy.

Haun L(1), Kwan N, Hollier LM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics, University of 
Texas-Houston Medical School, Lyndon Baines Johnson General Hospital, 5656 
Kelley Street, Houston, TX 77026, USA.

Viral infections are a common complication of pregnancy and in some cases, can 
have profound effects for the unborn fetus. The human herpesvirus family is 
composed of large, enveloped DNA viruses that have close structural similarity. 
The family includes the herpes simplex viruses types 1 and 2, varicella zoster 
virus, Epstein Barr virus, cytomegalovirus (CMV), and human herpes viruses types 
6, 7 and 8. These viruses all share the ability to establish latency and 
reactivate at a later time. Structural fetal abnormalities can result from 
intrauterine infection and transmission of the infection during the pregnancy or 
at the time of delivery can result in important neonatal disease. Human 
parvovirus B19 is a DNA virus with strong tropism for erythroid precursors and 
infection during pregnancy can result in fetal hydrops and stillbirth. The 
causative agents of hepatitis are hepatotropic viruses termed hepatitis A, B, C, 
D (deltavirus) and E. All except hepatitis B virus are RNA viruses. Vertical 
transmission of maternal infection with hepatitis B and C can result in 
significant long term sequelae.

PMID: 17505458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]