---
reference_id: "PMID:26896819"
title: Palovarotene Inhibits Heterotopic Ossification and Maintains Limb Mobility and Growth in Mice With the Human ACVR1(R206H) Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva (FOP) Mutation.
authors:
- Chakkalakal SA
- Uchibe K
- Convente MR
- Zhang D
- Economides AN
- Kaplan FS
- Pacifici M
- Iwamoto M
- Shore EM
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2820
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Palovarotene Inhibits Heterotopic Ossification and Maintains Limb Mobility and Growth in Mice With the Human ACVR1(R206H) Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva (FOP) Mutation.
**Authors:** Chakkalakal SA, Uchibe K, Convente MR, Zhang D, Economides AN, Kaplan FS, Pacifici M, Iwamoto M, Shore EM
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.2820](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.2820)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2016 Sep;31(9):1666-75. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2820. Epub 2016
Mar  12.

Palovarotene Inhibits Heterotopic Ossification and Maintains Limb Mobility and 
Growth in Mice With the Human ACVR1(R206H) Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva 
(FOP) Mutation.

Chakkalakal SA(1)(2), Uchibe K(3), Convente MR(1)(2), Zhang D(1)(2), Economides 
AN(4), Kaplan FS(1)(2)(5), Pacifici M(3), Iwamoto M(3), Shore EM(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Perelman School of Medicine, the University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)The Center for Research in FOP and Related Disorders, Perelman School of 
Medicine, the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Division of Orthopedic Surgery, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Tarrytown, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine, the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Comment in
    J Bone Miner Res. 2016 Sep;31(9):1647-51. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2912.

Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP), a rare and as yet untreatable 
genetic disorder of progressive extraskeletal ossification, is the most 
disabling form of heterotopic ossification (HO) in humans and causes skeletal 
deformities, movement impairment, and premature death. Most FOP patients carry 
an activating mutation in a bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) type I receptor 
gene, ACVR1(R206H) , that promotes ectopic chondrogenesis and osteogenesis and, 
in turn, HO. We showed previously that the retinoic acid receptor γ (RARγ) 
agonist palovarotene effectively inhibited HO in injury-induced and genetic 
mouse models of the disease. Here we report that the drug additionally prevents 
spontaneous HO, using a novel conditional-on knock-in mouse line carrying the 
human ACVR1(R206H) mutation for classic FOP. In addition, palovarotene restored 
long bone growth, maintained growth plate function, and protected growing mutant 
neonates when given to lactating mothers. Importantly, palovarotene maintained 
joint, limb, and body motion, providing clear evidence for its encompassing 
therapeutic potential as a treatment for FOP. © 2016 American Society for Bone 
and Mineral Research.

© 2016 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.2820
PMCID: PMC4992469
PMID: 26896819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]