---
reference_id: "PMID:34219261"
title: Characterization of EDARADD gene mutations responsible for hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.
authors:
- Asano N
- Yasuno S
- Hayashi R
- Shimomura Y
journal: J Dermatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.16044
keywords:
- Anodontia
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia 1, Anhidrotic"
- Ectodysplasins
- Edar-Associated Death Domain Protein/genetics
- Humans
- Hypohidrosis
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of EDARADD gene mutations responsible for hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Asano N, Yasuno S, Hayashi R, Shimomura Y
**Journal:** J Dermatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1346-8138.16044](https://doi.org/10.1111/1346-8138.16044)

## Content

1. J Dermatol. 2021 Oct;48(10):1533-1541. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.16044. Epub 2021
 Jul 4.

Characterization of EDARADD gene mutations responsible for hypohidrotic 
ectodermal dysplasia.

Asano N(1), Yasuno S(1), Hayashi R(2), Shimomura Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Ube, Japan.
(2)Division of Dermatology, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.

Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is a genetic disorder characterized by 
hypohidrosis, hypodontia, and hypotrichosis. Autosomal forms of the disease are 
caused by mutations in either EDAR or EDARADD. To date, the underlying 
pathomechanisms for HED resulting from EDARADD mutations have not fully been 
disclosed. In this study, we performed detailed in vitro analyses in order to 
characterize three dominantly inherited missense mutations, p.D120Y, p.L122R, 
and p.D123N, and one recessively inherited missense mutation, p.E152K, in the 
EDARADD gene. Nuclear factor (NF)-κB reporter assays demonstrated that all the 
mutant EDARADD showed reduction in activation of NF-κB. Importantly, p.D120Y-, 
p.L122R-, and p.D123N-mutant EDARADD slightly reduced the NF-κB activity induced 
by wild-type EDARADD in a dominant negative manner. Co-immunoprecipitation 
assays showed that all of the mutant EDARADD were capable of binding to EDAR and 
wild-type EDARADD. Additional co-immunoprecipitation assays revealed that 
p.D120Y-, p.L122R-, and p.D123N-mutant EDARADD markedly prevented the 
interaction between EDAR and wild-type EDARADD, which further indicated a 
dominant negative effect by these mutations. Finally, we found that p.D120Y-, 
p.L122R-, and p.D123N-mutant EDARADD completely lost the ability to bind with 
TRAF6, while p.E152K-mutant EDARADD showed a mild reduction in the affinity. Our 
findings will provide crucial information toward unraveling the molecular 
mechanisms how EDARADD gene mutations cause the disease.

© 2021 Japanese Dermatological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/1346-8138.16044
PMID: 34219261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]