---
reference_id: "PMID:34765398"
title: "Adenosine kinase deficiency presenting with tortuous cervical arteries: A risk factor for recurrent stroke."
authors:
- Paz JA
- Embiruçu EK
- Bueno C
- Ferreira RCCL
- Oliveira FS
- Pereira ASS
- Schwartz IVD
- Paiva ARB
- Lucato LT
- Kok F
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12252
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adenosine kinase deficiency presenting with tortuous cervical arteries: A risk factor for recurrent stroke.
**Authors:** Paz JA, Embiruçu EK, Bueno C, Ferreira RCCL, Oliveira FS, Pereira ASS, Schwartz IVD, Paiva ARB, Lucato LT, Kok F
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmd2.12252](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmd2.12252)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2021 Sep 30;62(1):49-55. doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12252. eCollection 2021 
Nov.

Adenosine kinase deficiency presenting with tortuous cervical arteries: A risk 
factor for recurrent stroke.

Paz JA(1), Embiruçu EK(2)(3), Bueno C(1)(4), Ferreira RCCL(4), Oliveira FS(2), 
Pereira ASS(2)(3), Schwartz IVD(4)(5), Paiva ARB(6), Lucato LT(7), Kok 
F(1)(4)(8).

Author information:
(1)Child Neurology Unit Children's Institute, University of Sao Paulo School of 
Medicine Sao Paulo Brazil.
(2)Medical Genetic Service Professor Edgard Santos University Hospital Salvador 
Brazil.
(3)Life Sciences Department University of the State of Bahia Salvador Brazil.
(4)Child Neurology Service, Department of Neurology University of Sao Paulo 
School of Medicine Sao Paulo Brazil.
(5)Medical Genetics Service Hospital de Clinicas de Porto Alegre Porto Alegre 
Brazil.
(6)Neurogenetics Unit, Department of Neurology University of Sao Paulo School of 
Medicine Sao Paulo Brazil.
(7)Department of Radiology University of Sao Paulo School of Medicine Sao Paulo 
Brazil.
(8)Mendelics Genomic Analysis Sao Paulo Brazil.

Adenosine kinase (ADK) deficiency is a very rare inborn error of methionine and 
adenosine metabolism. It is characterized by developmental delay, hypotonia, 
epilepsy, facial dysmorphism, failure to thrive, transient liver dysfunction 
with cholestasis, recurrent hypoglycemia, and cardiac defects. Only 26 cases (16 
families) of ADK deficiency have been published since its identification in 
2011. Vascular abnormalities in cervical arteries and cerebral stroke have never 
been reported in this condition. Here, we describe two patients with ADK 
deficiency and vascular tortuosity leading to stroke in one of them. ADK 
deficiency is a rare inborn error of methionine metabolism with a complex 
phenotype that might be associated with cerebrovascular abnormalities and 
stroke.

© 2021 The Authors. JIMD Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of 
SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jmd2.12252
PMCID: PMC8574177
PMID: 34765398

Conflict of interest statement: José A. Paz, Emilia K. Embiruçu, Clarissa Bueno, 
Rafaela C. C. L. Ferreira, Fernanda S. Oliveira, Ane S. S. Pereira, Ida V. D. 
Schwartz, and Anderson R. B. Paiva declare that they have no conflict of 
interest. Leandro T. Lucato is associate editor for Neuroimaging in the journal 
Arquivos de Neuropsiquiatria. Fernando Kok is shareholder of Mendelics Genomic 
Analysis, São Paulo, Brazil, Molecular laboratory for genetic disorders.