---
reference_id: "PMID:15257376"
title: "[Isaacs' syndrome. Diagnosis and differential diagnosis of neuromyotonia]."
authors:
- Fischer D
- Schröder R
journal: Nervenarzt
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1007/s00115-003-1619-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Isaacs' syndrome. Diagnosis and differential diagnosis of neuromyotonia].
**Authors:** Fischer D, Schröder R
**Journal:** Nervenarzt (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00115-003-1619-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00115-003-1619-x)

## Content

1. Nervenarzt. 2004 Jun;75(6):531-5. doi: 10.1007/s00115-003-1619-x.

[Isaacs' syndrome. Diagnosis and differential diagnosis of neuromyotonia].

[Article in German]

Fischer D(1), Schröder R.

Author information:
(1)Muskellabor, Neurologische Klinik und Poliklinik, Rheinische 
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität, Bonn. Dirk.Fischer@mailer.med.uni-bonn.de

Neuromyotonia is a clinical and electrophysiological syndrome of spontaneous 
muscle fiber activity due to hyperexcitability of peripheral nerve origin 
causing generalised, visible myokymia and muscular cramps. Electromyography 
shows abnormal doublet and triplet discharges of high intraburst frequency as 
well as myokymic and neuromyotonic discharges. Fasciculations and fibrillation 
potentials are common. Most commonly, neuromyotonia is an acquired 
immune-mediated disorder (Isaacs' syndrome) showing elevated antibody levels 
against presynaptic, voltage-gated, potassium channels. Some of these patients 
have additional autonomic (hyperhidrosis) and/or CNS symptoms similar to those 
from limbic encephalitis (referred to then as Morvan's syndrome). We report on a 
patient with Isaacs' syndrome and discuss the clinical and electrophysiological 
features, pathophysiology, diagnosis, and differential diagnosis of diseases 
with peripheral nerve hyperexcitability.

DOI: 10.1007/s00115-003-1619-x
PMID: 15257376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]