---
reference_id: "PMID:35592824"
title: "Asymptomatic choroid plexus carcinoma in an infant: Report of one case."
authors:
- Alshaghel MM
- Mayo W
- Sakkal N
- Alali K
- Wereeki M
journal: Ann Med Surg (Lond)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103755
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Asymptomatic choroid plexus carcinoma in an infant: Report of one case.
**Authors:** Alshaghel MM, Mayo W, Sakkal N, Alali K, Wereeki M
**Journal:** Ann Med Surg (Lond) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103755](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103755)

## Content

1. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2022 May 11;78:103755. doi: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103755.
eCollection 2022 Jun.

Asymptomatic choroid plexus carcinoma in an infant: Report of one case.

Alshaghel MM(1)(2), Mayo W(1)(3), Sakkal N(4), Alali K(4), Wereeki M(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Aleppo, Aleppo, Syria.
(2)CME Office, Faculty of Medicine, University of Aleppo, Aleppo, Syria.
(3)Mashabek, Aleppo, Syria.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Aleppo University Hospital, Aleppo University,
Aleppo, Syria.

INTRODUCTION: Choroid Plexus Carcinomas (CPC) are rare malignant brain neoplasms
of choroid plexus epithelium, with a tendency to occur in infants and children,
especially those who are under two years of age. The Main symptoms of CPC
include nausea, vomiting, headache, irritability, blurred vision, and seizures.
Few studies discuss the therapeutic methods to treat this tumor. However, most
of these studies confirmed the poor prognosis of it.
CASE PRESENTATION: A two-year-old girl presented with a headache due to head
trauma, normal consciousness, GCS 15/15, and without intracranial hypertension
symptoms. Computed Tomography (CT) has shown a large heterogeneous lesion in the
region of the right lateral ventricle. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a
large poorly-defined mass in the right lateral ventricle with mild dilatation of
the ipsilateral lateral ventricle, and midline shift and marked edema
surrounding it. In this case, the mass has been discovered by accident. The
histological diagnosis was choroid plexus carcinoma (WHO grade 3), curettage of
the right lateral ventricle was performed.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: CPC is a serious condition with a poor prognosis.
Early diagnosis and appropriate approaches are required in order to reduce
mortality and morbidity rates.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103755
PMCID: PMC9110975
PMID: 35592824
