---
reference_id: "PMID:20301427"
title: Williams Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Morris CA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Williams Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Morris CA

## Content

1. Williams Syndrome.

Morris CA(1)(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
1999 Apr 9 [updated 2023 Apr 13].

Author information:
(1)Professor Emerita, Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University 
of Nevada, Reno, Reno, Nevada
(2)Professor of Pediatrics, Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV, Las 
Vegas, Nevada

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Williams syndrome (WS) is characterized by 
developmental delay, intellectual disability (usually mild), a specific 
cognitive profile, unique personality characteristics, cardiovascular disease 
(supravalvar aortic stenosis, peripheral pulmonary stenosis, hypertension), 
connective tissue abnormalities, growth deficiency, endocrine abnormalities 
(early puberty, hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, hypothyroidism), and distinctive 
facies. Hypotonia and hyperextensible joints can result in delayed attainment of 
motor milestones. Feeding difficulties often lead to poor weight gain in 
infancy.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of WS is established by identification of a 
heterozygous 1.5- to 1.8-Mb deletion of the Williams-Beuren syndrome critical 
region (WBSCR) on chromosome 7q11.23.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Infants with feeding issues may benefit 
from feeding therapy. Early intervention programs, special education programs, 
and vocational training address developmental disabilities; programs include 
speech-language, physical, occupational, feeding, and sensory integration 
therapies as well as hippotherapy; phonics methods are recommended to teach 
reading. Psychological and psychiatric evaluation and treatment provide 
individualized behavioral counseling and medications, especially for 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and anxiety. Surgery may be required 
for supravalvar aortic or pulmonary artery stenosis, mitral valve insufficiency, 
and/or renal artery stenosis. Anesthesia consultation and electrocardiogram is 
recommended prior to sedation and surgical procedures. Orthodontic referral 
should be considered for malocclusion. Constipation should be aggressively 
managed at all ages. The lower urinary tract should be evaluated in those with 
febrile urinary tract infections; refer to a nephrologist for management of 
nephrocalcinosis, persistent hypercalcemia, and/or hypercalciuria. Range of 
motion exercises are recommended to prevent or ameliorate joint contractures. 
Treatment of hypercalcemia may include diet modification, oral corticosteroids, 
and/or intravenous pamidronate. Early puberty may be treated with a 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist. Treatment of hypertension, sleep 
disorders, ocular manifestations, recurrent otitis media, hearing loss, dental 
issues, hypothyroidism, and insulin resistance does not differ from that in the 
general population. Surveillance: Children younger than age two years should 
have serum calcium studies every four to six months. Thyroid function should be 
checked yearly until age three years and every two years thereafter. Medical 
evaluation, vision screening, hearing evaluation, measurement of blood pressure 
in both arms, calcium-to-creatinine ratio in spot urine, and urinalysis should 
be performed annually. Additional periodic evaluations for all individuals 
include: measurement of serum concentration of calcium every two years; 
cardiology evaluation for elastin arteriopathy at least annually until age five 
years and every two to three years thereafter; and renal and bladder ultrasound 
examination every ten years. Oral glucose tolerance tests in adults should start 
at age 20 years. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Multivitamins for children, 
because all pediatric multivitamin preparations contain vitamin D.
GENETIC COUNSELING: WS is an autosomal dominant disorder. Most individuals 
diagnosed with WS have the disorder as the result of a de novo 1.5- to 1.8-Mb 
7q11.23 deletion; rarely, an individual with WS has an affected parent. 
Recommendations for the parents of a proband with WS include obtaining a medical 
history to determine if signs or symptoms of WS are present. In the absence of 
clinical findings of WS in the parents, testing of the parents for the 7q11.23 
deletion identified in the proband is not warranted. Each child of an individual 
with WS has a 50% chance of inheriting the 7q11.23 deletion and being affected. 
Once the WS-causing 1.5- to 1.8-Mb 7q11.23 deletion has been identified in an 
affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are 
possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301427