---
reference_id: "PMID:25439727"
title: "A peroxisomal disorder of severe intellectual disability, epilepsy, and cataracts due to fatty acyl-CoA reductase 1 deficiency."
authors:
- Buchert R
- Tawamie H
- Smith C
- Uebe S
- Innes AM
- Al Hallak B
- Ekici AB
- Sticht H
- Schwarze B
- Lamont RE
- Parboosingh JS
- Bernier FP
- Abou Jamra R
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.10.003
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- "Aldehyde Oxidoreductases/chemistry, deficiency, genetics"
- Base Sequence
- Cataract/genetics
- "Chromatography, Gas"
- "Deficiency Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Epilepsy/genetics
- Female
- Genotype
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- INDEL Mutation/genetics
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Lipids/analysis
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Mass Spectrometry
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A peroxisomal disorder of severe intellectual disability, epilepsy, and cataracts due to fatty acyl-CoA reductase 1 deficiency.
**Authors:** Buchert R, Tawamie H, Smith C, Uebe S, Innes AM, Al Hallak B, Ekici AB, Sticht H, Schwarze B, Lamont RE, Parboosingh JS, Bernier FP, Abou Jamra R
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.10.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.10.003)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2014 Nov 6;95(5):602-10. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.10.003. Epub
 2014 Oct 30.

A peroxisomal disorder of severe intellectual disability, epilepsy, and 
cataracts due to fatty acyl-CoA reductase 1 deficiency.

Buchert R(1), Tawamie H(1), Smith C(2), Uebe S(1), Innes AM(3), Al Hallak B(4), 
Ekici AB(1), Sticht H(5), Schwarze B(6), Lamont RE(3), Parboosingh JS(3), 
Bernier FP(3), Abou Jamra R(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 4N1, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 4N1, 
Canada; Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, AB T2N 4N1, Canada.
(4)Practice for Pediatric, Kafranbel, Syria.
(5)Institute of Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 
91054 Erlangen, Germany.
(6)Department of Forensic Medicine, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
(7)Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. Electronic address: 
rami.aboujamra@uk-erlangen.de.

Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP) is a group of disorders with 
overlapping clinical features including rhizomelia, chondrodysplasia punctata, 
coronal clefts, cervical dysplasia, congenital cataracts, profound postnatal 
growth retardation, severe intellectual disability, and seizures. Mutations in 
PEX7, GNPAT, and AGPS, all involved in the plasmalogen-biosynthesis pathway, 
have been described in individuals with RCDP. Here, we report the identification 
of mutations in another gene in plasmalogen biosynthesis, fatty acyl-CoA 
reductase 1 (FAR1), in two families affected by severe intellectual disability, 
early-onset epilepsy, microcephaly, congenital cataracts, growth retardation, 
and spasticity. Exome analyses revealed a homozygous in-frame indel mutation 
(c.495_507delinsT [p.Glu165_Pro169delinsAsp]) in two siblings from a 
consanguineous family and compound-heterozygous mutations (c.[787C>T];[1094A>G], 
p.[Arg263(∗)];[Asp365Gly]) in a third unrelated individual. FAR1 reduces fatty 
acids to their respective fatty alcohols for the plasmalogen-biosynthesis 
pathway. To assess the pathogenicity of the identified mutations, we transfected 
human embryonic kidney 293 cells with plasmids encoding FAR1 with either 
wild-type or mutated constructs and extracted the lipids from the cells. We 
screened the lipids with gas chromatography and mass spectrometry and found that 
all three mutations abolished the reductase activity of FAR1, given that no 
fatty alcohols could be detected. We also observed reduced plasmalogens in red 
blood cells in one individual to a range similar to that seen in individuals 
with RCDP, further supporting abolished FAR1 activity. We thus expand the 
spectrum of clinical features associated with defects in plasmalogen 
biosynthesis to include FAR1 deficiency as a cause of syndromic severe 
intellectual disability with cataracts, epilepsy, and growth retardation but 
without rhizomelia.

Copyright © 2014 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.10.003
PMCID: PMC4225589
PMID: 25439727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]