---
reference_id: "PMID:17492597"
title: Dengue virus infects macrophages and dendritic cells in a mouse model of infection.
authors:
- Kyle JL
- Beatty PR
- Harris E
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1086/518007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue virus infects macrophages and dendritic cells in a mouse model of infection.
**Authors:** Kyle JL, Beatty PR, Harris E
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1086/518007](https://doi.org/10.1086/518007)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2007 Jun 15;195(12):1808-17. doi: 10.1086/518007. Epub 2007 May
9.

Dengue virus infects macrophages and dendritic cells in a mouse model of 
infection.

Kyle JL(1), Beatty PR, Harris E.

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, School of Public Health, University of 
California, Berkeley, CA 94720-7360, USA.

Dengue fever is a mosquitoborne viral illness caused by 4 dengue viruses 
(DENV-1-4). The cellular tropism of DENV has not been definitively determined, 
despite its importance for understanding viral pathogenesis and identifying 
therapeutic targets. To define DENV cellular tropism in a small animal model, 
129/Pas mice lacking interferon-alpha/beta and/or-gamma receptors were infected 
with DENV via a subcutaneous route. During the first week after infection, virus 
was present in lymph nodes, spleen, bone marrow, and circulating white blood 
cells. F4/80+CD11b+ macrophages and CD11c+ dendritic cells were demonstrated to 
be targets for DENV-2 infection in the spleen by flow cytometry directed to 
structural and nonstructural DENV proteins and by magnetic bead separation 
followed by strand-specific reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. We 
find that the initial cellular tropism of DENV in mice is similar to that 
reported in humans, thereby paving the way for investigation of cellular tropism 
and pathogenesis of DENV in primary and secondary infections.

DOI: 10.1086/518007
PMID: 17492597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]