---
reference_id: "PMID:39062925"
title: Investigation of the Genetic Determinants of Telangiectasia and Solid Organ Arteriovenous Malformation Formation in Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia (HHT).
authors:
- Whitehead KJ
- Toydemir D
- Wooderchak-Donahue W
- Oakley GM
- McRae B
- Putnam A
- McDonald J
- Bayrak-Toydemir P
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25147682
keywords:
- Humans
- "Telangiectasia, Hereditary Hemorrhagic/genetics, complications, pathology"
- Female
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Arteriovenous Malformations/genetics, pathology"
- Adult
- Endoglin/genetics
- Aged
- Mutation
- "Activin Receptors, Type II/genetics"
- "Telangiectasis/genetics, pathology"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Investigation of the Genetic Determinants of Telangiectasia and Solid Organ Arteriovenous Malformation Formation in Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia (HHT).
**Authors:** Whitehead KJ, Toydemir D, Wooderchak-Donahue W, Oakley GM, McRae B, Putnam A, McDonald J, Bayrak-Toydemir P
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25147682](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25147682)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jul 12;25(14):7682. doi: 10.3390/ijms25147682.

Investigation of the Genetic Determinants of Telangiectasia and Solid Organ 
Arteriovenous Malformation Formation in Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia 
(HHT).

Whitehead KJ(1)(2), Toydemir D(3), Wooderchak-Donahue W(4), Oakley GM(5), McRae 
B(5), Putnam A(4), McDonald J(4), Bayrak-Toydemir P(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.
(2)HHT Center, Department of Radiology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 
84112, USA.
(3)School of Liberal Arts, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Utah, Salt 
Lake City, UT 84112, USA.
(6)ARUP Laboratories|Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, 500 
Chipeta Way, Salt Lake City, UT 84103, USA.

Telangiectases and arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) are the characteristic 
lesions of Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia (HHT). Somatic second-hit 
loss-of-function variations in the HHT causative genes, ENG and ACVRL1, have 
been described in dermal telangiectasias. It is unclear if somatic second-hit 
mutations also cause the formation of AVMs and nasal telangiectasias in HHT. To 
investigate the genetic mechanism of AVM formation in HHT, we evaluated multiple 
affected tissues from fourteen individuals. DNA was extracted from fresh/frozen 
tissue of 15 nasal telangiectasia, 4 dermal telangiectasia, and 9 normal control 
tissue biopsies, from nine unrelated individuals with HHT. DNA from six 
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) AVM tissues (brain, lung, liver, and 
gallbladder) from five individuals was evaluated. A 736 vascular malformation 
and cancer gene next-generation sequencing (NGS) panel was used to evaluate 
these tissues down to 1% somatic mosaicism. Somatic second-hit mutations were 
identified in three in four AVM biopsies (75%) or half of the FFPE (50%) 
samples, including the loss of heterozygosity in ENG in one brain AVM sample, in 
which the germline mutation occurred in a different allele than a nearby somatic 
mutation (both are loss-of-function mutations). Eight of nine (88.9%) patients 
in whom telangiectasia tissues were evaluated had a somatic mutation ranging 
from 0.68 to 1.96% in the same gene with the germline mutation. Six of fifteen 
(40%) nasal and two of four (50%) dermal telangiectasia had a detectable somatic 
second hit. Additional low-level somatic mutations in other genes were 
identified in several telangiectasias. This is the first report that nasal 
telangiectasias and solid organ AVMs in HHT are caused by very-low-level somatic 
biallelic second-hit mutations.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25147682
PMCID: PMC11276621
PMID: 39062925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.