---
reference_id: "PMID:11812423"
title: "A frame shift mutation in a tissue-specific alternatively spliced exon of collagen 2A1 in Wagner's vitreoretinal degeneration."
authors:
- Gupta SK
- Leonard BC
- Damji KF
- Bulman DE
journal: Am J Ophthalmol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s0002-9394(01)01339-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A frame shift mutation in a tissue-specific alternatively spliced exon of collagen 2A1 in Wagner's vitreoretinal degeneration.
**Authors:** Gupta SK, Leonard BC, Damji KF, Bulman DE
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0002-9394(01)01339-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0002-9394(01)01339-3)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol. 2002 Feb;133(2):203-10. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9394(01)01339-3.

A frame shift mutation in a tissue-specific alternatively spliced exon of 
collagen 2A1 in Wagner's vitreoretinal degeneration.

Gupta SK(1), Leonard BC, Damji KF, Bulman DE.

Author information:
(1)University of Ottawa Eye Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada. 
sgupta@ottawahospital.on.ca

Comment in
    Am J Ophthalmol. 2002 Sep;134(3):473; author reply 473-4. doi: 
10.1016/s0002-9394(02)01635-5.

PURPOSE: To describe the genetic basis of an autosomal dominant 
vitreoretinopathy in a large French-Canadian kindred.
METHODS: A clinical cohort study followed by laboratory-based genetic and 
molecular analysis. Thirty-two affected and 22 unaffected members of the kindred 
were examined. Candidate genes/regions for Wagner's disease and Stickler 
syndrome were tested for genetic linkage. Mutation analysis was carried out with 
direct PCR-based sequencing.
RESULTS: Funduscopic examinations of 32 affected patients revealed optically 
clear vitreous, vitreous veils, and radial perivascular pigmentation. 
Spondyloarthropathies or craniofacial abnormalities were notably absent. There 
was a 53% rate of retinal detachments that required surgical intervention. 
Genetic linkage was obtained to COL2A1, the candidate gene for Stickler's type 
I. A frame shift mutation in exon 2, leading to early truncation of the protein 
(Cys57Stop), was detected.
CONCLUSIONS: Wagner's disease in this large kindred has had devastating visual 
consequences. In affected individuals, we found a novel COL2A1 frame shift 
mutation in exon 2. The mutation arises in an exon that is selectively present 
in vitreous collagen mRNAs, but absent in cartilage mRNAs through 
tissue-specific alternative splicing. Tissue-specific alternative splicing of 
COL2A1 mRNAs thus provides an elegant biochemical mechanism for a clinical 
phenotype of Wagner's disease in this kindred.

DOI: 10.1016/s0002-9394(01)01339-3
PMID: 11812423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]