---
reference_id: "PMID:12571597"
title: Ankyrin-B mutation causes type 4 long-QT cardiac arrhythmia and sudden cardiac death.
authors:
- Mohler PJ
- Schott JJ
- Gramolini AO
- Dilly KW
- Guatimosim S
- duBell WH
- Song LS
- Haurogné K
- Kyndt F
- Ali ME
- Rogers TB
- Lederer WJ
- Escande D
- Le Marec H
- Bennett V
journal: Nature
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1038/nature01335
keywords:
- Action Potentials
- Animals
- "Ankyrins/genetics, physiology"
- "Bradycardia/complications, genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Calcium Channels/metabolism
- Calcium Signaling
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/etiology"
- Electrocardiography
- Female
- Heart/physiopathology
- Heart Rate
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Inositol 1,4,5-Trisphosphate Receptors"
- "Long QT Syndrome/classification, genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Male
- Mice
- Mutation/genetics
- "Myocardium/metabolism, pathology"
- Patch-Clamp Techniques
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Protein Binding
- "Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/metabolism"
- Sodium-Calcium Exchanger/metabolism
- Sodium-Potassium-Exchanging ATPase/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ankyrin-B mutation causes type 4 long-QT cardiac arrhythmia and sudden cardiac death.
**Authors:** Mohler PJ, Schott JJ, Gramolini AO, Dilly KW, Guatimosim S, duBell WH, Song LS, Haurogné K, Kyndt F, Ali ME, Rogers TB, Lederer WJ, Escande D, Le Marec H, Bennett V
**Journal:** Nature (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature01335](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01335)

## Content

1. Nature. 2003 Feb 6;421(6923):634-9. doi: 10.1038/nature01335.

Ankyrin-B mutation causes type 4 long-QT cardiac arrhythmia and sudden cardiac
death.

Mohler PJ(1), Schott JJ, Gramolini AO, Dilly KW, Guatimosim S, duBell WH, Song
LS, Haurogné K, Kyndt F, Ali ME, Rogers TB, Lederer WJ, Escande D, Le Marec H,
Bennett V.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Departments of Cell Biology,
Biochemistry, and Neuroscience, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2003 Feb 6;421(6923):587, 589-90. doi: 10.1038/421587a.

Mutations in ion channels involved in the generation and termination of action
potentials constitute a family of molecular defects that underlie fatal cardiac
arrhythmias in inherited long-QT syndrome. We report here that a
loss-of-function (E1425G) mutation in ankyrin-B (also known as ankyrin 2), a
member of a family of versatile membrane adapters, causes dominantly inherited
type 4 long-QT cardiac arrhythmia in humans. Mice heterozygous for a null
mutation in ankyrin-B are haploinsufficient and display arrhythmia similar to
humans. Mutation of ankyrin-B results in disruption in the cellular organization
of the sodium pump, the sodium/calcium exchanger, and
inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors (all ankyrin-B-binding proteins), which
reduces the targeting of these proteins to the transverse tubules as well as
reducing overall protein level. Ankyrin-B mutation also leads to altered Ca2+
signalling in adult cardiomyocytes that results in extrasystoles, and provides a
rationale for the arrhythmia. Thus, we identify a new mechanism for cardiac
arrhythmia due to abnormal coordination of multiple functionally related ion
channels and transporters.

DOI: 10.1038/nature01335
PMID: 12571597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
