---
reference_id: "PMID:32216642"
title: Care of Critically Ill Patients with Human Immunodeficiency Virus.
authors:
- Garland JM
- Levinson A
- Wing E
journal: Ann Am Thorac Soc
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201909-694CME
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Care of Critically Ill Patients with Human Immunodeficiency Virus.
**Authors:** Garland JM, Levinson A, Wing E
**Journal:** Ann Am Thorac Soc (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1513/AnnalsATS.201909-694CME](https://doi.org/10.1513/AnnalsATS.201909-694CME)

## Content

1. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2020 Jun;17(6):659-669. doi:
10.1513/AnnalsATS.201909-694CME.

Care of Critically Ill Patients with Human Immunodeficiency Virus.

Garland JM(1)(2)(3), Levinson A(2)(4)(3), Wing E(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Disease.
(2)Department of Medicine, and.
(3)Warren Alpert Medical School, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island.
(4)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Miriam Hospital and 
Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, Rhode Island; and.

Care of patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in the 
intensive care unit (ICU) has changed dramatically since the infection was first 
recognized in the United States in 1981. The purpose of this review is to 
describe the current important aspects of care of patients with HIV infection in 
the ICU, with a primary focus on the United States and developed countries. The 
epidemiology and initial approach to diagnosis and treatment of HIV (including 
the newest antiretroviral guidelines), common syndromes and their management in 
the ICU, and typical comorbidities and opportunistic infections of patients with 
HIV infection are discussed.

DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201909-694CME
PMID: 32216642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]