---
reference_id: "PMID:19072424"
title: "Hepatitis B virus genotypes: natural history and implications for treatment."
authors:
- Yuen MF
- Lai CL
journal: Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1586/17474124.1.2.321
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B virus genotypes: natural history and implications for treatment.
**Authors:** Yuen MF, Lai CL
**Journal:** Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1586/17474124.1.2.321](https://doi.org/10.1586/17474124.1.2.321)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2007 Dec;1(2):321-8. doi: 
10.1586/17474124.1.2.321.

Hepatitis B virus genotypes: natural history and implications for treatment.

Yuen MF(1), Lai CL.

Author information:
(1)The University of Hong Kong, Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, 
Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, China. mfyuen@hkucc.hku.hk

There are eight different genotypes named A-H. Genotypes have distinct 
geographic distribution in different regions of the world. There exists a 
difference in the disease profile between different genotypes. Genotype A 
compared with D, and B compared with C have earlier hepatitis B e-antigen 
seroconversion and less severe liver disease. However, genotypes are closely 
linked with core promoter and precore mutations. This may have a confounding 
effect on the association of genotypes with disease progression. Patients with 
genotype A compared with D and B compared with C have a better treatment 
response to IFN-alpha. However, there are no differences in the treatment 
response and rate of emergence of drug-resistant hepatitis B virus between 
different genotypes to nucleoside/nucleotide analog therapy.

DOI: 10.1586/17474124.1.2.321
PMID: 19072424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]