---
reference_id: "PMID:17698009"
title: Pur alpha binds to rCGG repeats and modulates repeat-mediated neurodegeneration in a Drosophila model of fragile X tremor/ataxia syndrome.
authors:
- Jin P
- Duan R
- Qurashi A
- Qin Y
- Tian D
- Rosser TC
- Liu H
- Feng Y
- Warren ST
journal: Neuron
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.07.020
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Genetically Modified"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Drosophila
- "Drosophila Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Eye/pathology, ultrastructure"
- Fragile X Messenger Ribonucleoprotein 1/genetics
- "Fragile X Syndrome/complications, genetics, metabolism"
- "Green Fluorescent Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- HSP70 Heat-Shock Proteins/metabolism
- "Heterogeneous-Nuclear Ribonucleoprotein Group A-B/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Immunoprecipitation/methods
- Mice
- "Microscopy, Electron, Scanning/methods"
- "Nerve Degeneration/genetics, pathology"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins
- "RNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pur alpha binds to rCGG repeats and modulates repeat-mediated neurodegeneration in a Drosophila model of fragile X tremor/ataxia syndrome.
**Authors:** Jin P, Duan R, Qurashi A, Qin Y, Tian D, Rosser TC, Liu H, Feng Y, Warren ST
**Journal:** Neuron (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2007.07.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2007.07.020)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2007 Aug 16;55(4):556-64. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.07.020.

Pur alpha binds to rCGG repeats and modulates repeat-mediated neurodegeneration 
in a Drosophila model of fragile X tremor/ataxia syndrome.

Jin P(1), Duan R, Qurashi A, Qin Y, Tian D, Rosser TC, Liu H, Feng Y, Warren ST.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
GA 30322, USA. pjin@genetics.emory.edu

Comment in
    Neuron. 2007 Aug 16;55(4):535-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.07.032.

Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) is a recently recognized 
neurodegenerative disorder in fragile X premutation carriers with FMR1 alleles 
containing 55-200 CGG repeats. Previously, we developed a Drosophila model of 
FXTAS and demonstrated that transcribed premutation repeats alone are sufficient 
to cause neurodegeneration, suggesting that rCGG-repeat-binding proteins (RBPs) 
may be sequestered from their normal function by rCGG binding. Here, we identify 
Pur alpha and hnRNP A2/B1 as RBPs. We show that Pur alpha and rCGG repeats 
interact in a sequence-specific fashion that is conserved between mammals and 
Drosophila. Overexpression of Pur alpha in Drosophila could suppress 
rCGG-mediated neurodegeneration in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, Pur 
alpha is also present in the inclusions of FXTAS patient brains. These findings 
support the disease mechanism of FXTAS of rCGG repeat sequestration of specific 
RBPs, leading to neuronal cell death, and implicate that Pur alpha plays an 
important role in the pathogenesis of FXTAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.07.020
PMCID: PMC1994817
PMID: 17698009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]