---
reference_id: "PMID:39729595"
title: "Diagnostic and Therapeutic Approach to the Major Secondary Causes of Arterial Hypertension in Young Adults: A Narrative Review."
authors:
- Munoz-Moreno JM
- Gamarra-Valverde NN
- Muedas-Porras G
- Nombera-Aznarán M
- Aguilar-Figueroa F
- Gulati M
journal: Cardiol Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/CRD.0000000000000805
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic and Therapeutic Approach to the Major Secondary Causes of Arterial Hypertension in Young Adults: A Narrative Review.
**Authors:** Munoz-Moreno JM, Gamarra-Valverde NN, Muedas-Porras G, Nombera-Aznarán M, Aguilar-Figueroa F, Gulati M
**Journal:** Cardiol Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/CRD.0000000000000805](https://doi.org/10.1097/CRD.0000000000000805)

## Content

1. Cardiol Rev. 2024 Oct 14. doi: 10.1097/CRD.0000000000000805. Online ahead of 
print.

Diagnostic and Therapeutic Approach to the Major Secondary Causes of Arterial 
Hypertension in Young Adults: A Narrative Review.

Munoz-Moreno JM(1), Gamarra-Valverde NN(2), Muedas-Porras G(2), Nombera-Aznarán 
M(2), Aguilar-Figueroa F(3), Gulati M(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Cardiology, Javier Prado Clinic, Lima, Peru.
(2)Alberto Hurtado Faculty of Human Medicine, Universidad Peruana Cayetano 
Heredia, Lima, Peru.
(3)Medicine School, Universidad Nacional de Trujillo, La Libertad, Peru.
(4)Barbra Streisand Women's Heart Center, Smidt Heart Institute, Cedars Sinai 
Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA.

Arterial hypertension in young adults, which includes patients between 19 and 40 
years of age, has been increasing in recent years and is associated with a 
significantly higher risk of target organ damage and short-term mortality. It 
has been reported that up to 10% of these cases are due to a potentially 
reversible secondary cause, mainly of endocrine (primary aldosteronism, 
Cushing's syndrome, and pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma), renal (renovascular 
hypertension due to fibromuscular dysplasia and renal parenchymal disease), or 
cardiac (coarctation of the aorta) origin. It is recommended to rule out a 
secondary cause of high blood pressure (BP) in those patients with early onset 
of grade 2 or 3 hypertension, acute worsening of previously controlled 
hypertension, resistant hypertension, hypertensive emergency, severe target 
organ damage disproportionate to the grade of hypertension, or in the face of 
clinical or biochemical characteristics suggestive of a secondary cause of 
hypertension. The 2023 Guideline of the European Society of Hypertension 
recommends starting pharmacological therapy from grade 1 hypertension (BP 
≥140/90 mm Hg), with the aim of achieving BP control of less than 130/80 mm Hg. 
It is important to highlight that the prevalence of secondary hypertension in 
these patients could be underestimated, given that there is little evidence 
available on the management of high BP in young adults, which is why we 
developed this narrative review on the diagnostic and therapeutic approach to 
the major secondary causes of arterial hypertension in young adults.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/CRD.0000000000000805
PMID: 39729595

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors declare no conflict of 
interest.