---
reference_id: "PMID:35697016"
title: "Analysis of Serbian Primary Antiphospholipid Syndrome Patients Confirmed a Strong Association Between Livedo Reticularis and Arterial Thrombosis: A National Cross-Sectional Cohort Study."
authors:
- Djokovic A
- Stojanovich L
- Stanisavljevic N
- Matic P
- Colic D
- Skrijelj D
- Djokic S
- Filipovic B
journal: J Clin Rheumatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001879
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of Serbian Primary Antiphospholipid Syndrome Patients Confirmed a Strong Association Between Livedo Reticularis and Arterial Thrombosis: A National Cross-Sectional Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Djokovic A, Stojanovich L, Stanisavljevic N, Matic P, Colic D, Skrijelj D, Djokic S, Filipovic B
**Journal:** J Clin Rheumatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/RHU.0000000000001879](https://doi.org/10.1097/RHU.0000000000001879)

## Content

1. J Clin Rheumatol. 2022 Oct 1;28(7):362-366. doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001879.
 Epub 2022 Jun 12.

Analysis of Serbian Primary Antiphospholipid Syndrome Patients Confirmed a 
Strong Association Between Livedo Reticularis and Arterial Thrombosis: A 
National Cross-Sectional Cohort Study.

Djokovic A, Stojanovich L, Stanisavljevic N, Matic P, Colic D(1), Skrijelj D(2), 
Djokic S(3), Filipovic B.

Author information:
(1)COVID Hospital Batajnica and Clinics of.
(2)Urology.
(3)Pulmonology, University Clinical Center of Serbia.

BACKGROUND: Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is characterized by antiphospholipid 
antibodies (aPLs) associated with thrombosis (arterial and/or venous) and/or 
obstetrical manifestations. However, various manifestations, which are 
considered to be noncriteria manifestations, are frequently found in APS.
AIM: The purpose of this study was to evaluate whether noncriteria 
manifestations may be found more frequently in subjects with thrombotic and/or 
obstetrical APS ("criteria" manifestations) in a population of patients with 
primary APS (PAPS). This study presents the results from our national cohort.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This is a cross-sectional study of 360 PAPS patients. Data 
regarding the presence of thrombocytopenia, livedo reticularis, chorea, and 
valvulopathy were analyzed. The aPL analysis included the detection of 
anticardiolipin antibodies (aCLs: immunoglobulin G [IgG]/IgM), anti-β 2 
glycoprotein I (IgG/IgM), and lupus anticoagulant positivity.
RESULTS: In our cohort, livedo reticularis was significantly related to arterial 
thromboses in the same way as valvular manifestations (valvular vegetations and 
valvular thickening and dysfunction not related to age) ( p = 0.0001, p = 0.013, 
respectively). Age was strongly related to all the noncriteria manifestations 
analyzed. Thrombocytopenia was significantly related to β 2 glycoprotein I IgG 
and lupus anticoagulant positivity ( p = 0.043, p = 0.030, respectively), as 
well as to double and triple aPL positivity ( p = 0.041, p = 0.013 
respectively). Moreover, in a multivariate model, livedo reticularis was 
strongly and independently related to arterial thrombosis in our cohort (odds 
ratio, 2.010; confidence interval, 1.229-3.288; p = 0.005).
CONCLUSION: This cross-sectional analysis of a large cohort of Serbian PAPS 
patients confirmed a strong relationship between livedo reticularis and arterial 
thrombosis, suggesting a more cautious approach regarding the presence of 
noncriteria manifestations, especially livedo reticularis, in APS.

Copyright © 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001879
PMID: 35697016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.