---
reference_id: "PMID:27663613"
title: One-Year Review of the SCREEN (Skin Cancer Post-Transplant) Clinic.
authors:
- Baldwin S
- Au S
journal: J Cutan Med Surg
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1177/1203475416671694
keywords:
- Ambulatory Care Facilities
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/diagnosis, prevention & control"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/diagnosis, prevention & control"
- Early Detection of Cancer
- Health Behavior
- "Health Knowledge, Attitudes, Practice"
- Humans
- Male
- Organ Transplantation
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Assessment
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis, prevention & control"
- Sunscreening Agents/therapeutic use
- White People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# One-Year Review of the SCREEN (Skin Cancer Post-Transplant) Clinic.
**Authors:** Baldwin S, Au S
**Journal:** J Cutan Med Surg (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1203475416671694](https://doi.org/10.1177/1203475416671694)

## Content

1. J Cutan Med Surg. 2017 Jan/Feb;21(1):80-81. doi: 10.1177/1203475416671694.
Epub  2016 Sep 24.

One-Year Review of the SCREEN (Skin Cancer Post-Transplant) Clinic.

Baldwin S(1), Au S(2).

Author information:
(1)1 University of British Columbia Faculty of Medicine, Vancouver BC, Canada.
(2)2 Department of Dermatology and Skin Science, University of British Columbia
and Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, St Paul's Hospital and
Providence Health Care, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

The Skin Cancer Post-Transplant (SCREEN) Clinic is a skin-cancer screening
clinic that is fully integrated into the renal transplantation clinic at St
Paul's Hospital in Vancouver, British Columbia. The purpose of this review was
to determine characteristics of patients most at risk for skin cancer, to
specify types and locations of skin cancers diagnosed, and to identify areas for
patient and physician education. Transplant patients (91% renal; 5% heart)
screened by a dermatologist during a 12-month period were stratified into low-,
medium-, and high-risk groups based on detailed history and skin examination. In
total, 118 skin cancers were diagnosed. White males were found to be most at
risk. Squamous cell carcinoma accounted for the majority of tumours, over 25% of
which demonstrated invasion. Forty-two percent of patients used only 1 to 2
bottles of sunscreen per year, and sun-protective practices were limited. With
this information, we have identified potential target areas for patient and
physician education.

DOI: 10.1177/1203475416671694
PMID: 27663613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
