---
reference_id: "PMID:33258286"
title: "Could the MED13 mutations manifest as a Kabuki-like syndrome?"
authors:
- De Nardi L
- Faletra F
- "D'Adamo AP"
- Bianco AMR
- Athanasakis E
- Bruno I
- Barbi E
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61994
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Adolescent
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 8/genetics
- "Face/abnormalities, pathology"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Hematologic Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Mediator Complex/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- "Vestibular Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Could the MED13 mutations manifest as a Kabuki-like syndrome?
**Authors:** De Nardi L, Faletra F, D'Adamo AP, Bianco AMR, Athanasakis E, Bruno I, Barbi E
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.61994](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61994)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2021 Feb;185(2):584-590. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61994. Epub
2020  Nov 30.

Could the MED13 mutations manifest as a Kabuki-like syndrome?

De Nardi L(1), Faletra F(2), D'Adamo AP(1)(2), Bianco AMR(2), Athanasakis E(2), 
Bruno I(2), Barbi E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.
(2)Institute for Maternal and Child Health IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", Trieste, 
Italy.

MED13-related disorder is a new neurodevelopmental disorder recently described 
in literature, which belongs to the group of CDK8-kinase module genes-associated 
conditions. It is characterized by variable intellectual disability and/or 
developmental delays, especially in language. Autism spectrum disorder (ASD), 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), eye or vision problems, 
hypotonia, mild congenital hearth abnormalities and dysmorphisms have been 
described among individuals with MED13 mutations. We report the case of a 
13-year-old girl who received a previous clinical diagnosis of Kabuki syndrome 
(KS) without mutations in classic KS genes. After a whole exome sequencing (WES) 
analysis a de novo missense mutation in MED13 (c.C979T; p.Pro327Ser) was found. 
This variant has been once described in literature as accountable for a novel 
neurodevelopmental disorder. The aim of this report is to improve clinical 
delineation of MED13-related condition and to explore differences and 
similarities between KS spectrum and MED13-related disorders.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61994
PMID: 33258286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]