---
reference_id: "PMID:40152536"
title: A Novel YWHAG Variant L173S Causes Developmental and Epileptic Encephalopathy by Disrupting the Hydrophobic Internal Protein Structure.
authors:
- Jin Y
- Niu Q
- Liang SN
- Luo ML
- Su XL
- Tao Z
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.70079
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Child
- Hydrophobic and Hydrophilic Interactions
- Epilepsy/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Novel YWHAG Variant L173S Causes Developmental and Epileptic Encephalopathy by Disrupting the Hydrophobic Internal Protein Structure.
**Authors:** Jin Y, Niu Q, Liang SN, Luo ML, Su XL, Tao Z
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.70079](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.70079)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2025 Apr;13(4):e70079. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.70079.

A Novel YWHAG Variant L173S Causes Developmental and Epileptic Encephalopathy by
Disrupting the Hydrophobic Internal Protein Structure.

Jin Y(1), Niu Q(1), Liang SN(1), Luo ML(1), Su XL(1), Tao Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Dalian Women and Children's Medical Group,
Dalian, Liaoning, China.

BACKGROUND: Developmental epileptic encephalopathy 56 (DEE56) is a monogenic DEE
type caused by heterozygous mutations in YWHAG. To our knowledge, fewer than 30
cases of DEE56 have been reported globally, and our understanding of YWHAG's
function remains limited.
METHODS: Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed on the patient and his
parents. Structural conservation analysis of YWHAG was conducted using Consurf
and PyMol. A literature search for relevant cases was performed in PubMed and
Google Scholar.
RESULTS: The patient is a 6-year-2-month-old boy who developed refractory
complex seizures starting at 8 months of age. He also exhibits intellectual
disability, language impairment, and poor motor coordination. WES identified the
de novo occurrence of a novel heterozygous YWHAG missense variant, c.518T>C
(p.L173S), in the patient. L173 resides within the hydrophobic internal core
formed by three alpha helices of YWHAG, and the residues constituting this
internal core are highly evolutionarily conserved. The L173S substitution
introduces a hydrophilic side chain into the hydrophobic core composed of three
aliphatic residues. Ten missense mutations have been reported previously. Among
them, five (E15, R57, D129, R132, and Y133) are associated with the
ligand-binding region.
CONCLUSION: The functional domain involving the L173 residue of YWHAG remains
unknown. Our findings suggest that the disruption of the stability of the highly
conserved internal core of the YWHAG protein may be one mechanism leading to
functional impairment, distinct from the previously proposed pathogenic models
of dimer formation defects and/or impaired binding to phosphopeptide ligands.
This may provide insights into the functional mechanisms of YWHAG and potential
therapeutic strategies.

© 2025 The Author(s). Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.70079
PMCID: PMC11951171
PMID: 40152536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
