---
reference_id: "PMID:36186632"
title: "Imaging in children with ataxia-telangiectasia-The radiologist's approach."
authors:
- Jończyk-Potoczna K
- Potoczny J
- Szczawińska-Popłonyk A
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.988645
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imaging in children with ataxia-telangiectasia-The radiologist's approach.
**Authors:** Jończyk-Potoczna K, Potoczny J, Szczawińska-Popłonyk A
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2022.988645](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2022.988645)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2022 Sep 16;10:988645. doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.988645.
eCollection  2022.

Imaging in children with ataxia-telangiectasia-The radiologist's approach.

Jończyk-Potoczna K(1), Potoczny J(2), Szczawińska-Popłonyk A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Radiology, Institute of Pediatrics, Pozna University
of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland.
(2)Department of Radiology, Greater Poland Cancer Center, Poznań, Poland.
(3)Department of Pediatric Pneumonology, Allergy and Clinical Immunology,
Institute of Pediatrics, Poznań University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland.

Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a syndromic inborn error of immunity (IEI)
characterized by genomic instability, defective reparation of the DNA
double-strand breaks, and hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation disturbing
cellular homeostasis. The role of imaging diagnostics and the conscious choice
of safe and advantageous imaging technique, as well as its correct
interpretation, are crucial in the diagnostic process and monitoring of children
with A-T. This study aimed at defining the role of a radiologist in the early
diagnosis of A-T, as well as in detecting and tracking disease complications
associated with infections, inflammation, lymphoproliferation, organ-specific
immunopathology, and malignancy. Based on our single-center experience,
retrospective analysis of investigations using ionizing radiation-free
techniques, ultrasound (US), and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), was performed
on regularly followed-up 11 pediatric A-T patients, 6 girls and 5 boys, aged
from 2 to 18 years, with the longest period of observation coming to over 13
years. Our attention was especially drawn to the abnormalities that were
observed in the US and MRI examinations of the lungs, abdominal cavity, and
lymph nodes. The abdominal US showed no abnormalities in organ dimensions or
echostructure in 4 out of 11 children studied, yet in the other 7, during
follow-up examinations, hepato- and/or splenomegaly, mesenteric, visceral, and
paraaortic lymphadenopathy were observable. In 2 patients, focal changes in the
liver and spleen were shown, and in one patient progressive abdominal
lymphadenopathy corresponded with the diagnosis of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL).
The lung US revealed multiple subpleural consolidations and B line artifacts
related to the interstitial-alveolar syndrome in 5 patients, accompanied by
pleural effusion in one of them. The MRI investigation of the lung enabled the
detection of lymphatic nodal masses in the mediastinum, with concomitant airway
lesions characteristic of bronchiectasis and focal parenchymal consolidations in
one A-T patient with chronic respiratory failure. This patient also manifested
organomegaly and granulomatous liver disease in abdominal MRI examination. Our
study shows that the use of modern US capabilities and MRI is safe and
efficient, thereby serving as a recommended advantageous imaging diagnostic tool
in monitoring children with IEI and DNA instability syndromes.

Copyright © 2022 Jończyk-Potoczna, Potoczny and Szczawińska-Popłonyk.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2022.988645
PMCID: PMC9523007
PMID: 36186632

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
