---
reference_id: "PMID:34171586"
title: "Longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis in childhood: Clinical features, treatment approaches, and long-term neurological outcomes."
authors:
- Celik H
- Aksoy E
- Oztoprak U
- Ceylan N
- Aksoy A
- Yazici MU
- Azapagasi E
- Eksioglu AS
- Yücel H
- Senel S
- Yuksel D
journal: Clin Neurol Neurosurg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2021.106764
keywords:
- Activities of Daily Living
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Motor Activity
- "Myelitis, Transverse/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Symptom Assessment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis in childhood: Clinical features, treatment approaches, and long-term neurological outcomes.
**Authors:** Celik H, Aksoy E, Oztoprak U, Ceylan N, Aksoy A, Yazici MU, Azapagasi E, Eksioglu AS, Yücel H, Senel S, Yuksel D
**Journal:** Clin Neurol Neurosurg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clineuro.2021.106764](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clineuro.2021.106764)

## Content

1. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2021 Aug;207:106764. doi:
10.1016/j.clineuro.2021.106764.  Epub 2021 Jun 17.

Longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis in childhood: Clinical features, 
treatment approaches, and long-term neurological outcomes.

Celik H(1), Aksoy E(2), Oztoprak U(3), Ceylan N(4), Aksoy A(5), Yazici MU(6), 
Azapagasi E(7), Eksioglu AS(8), Yücel H(9), Senel S(10), Yuksel D(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology (DY) University of Health Sciences, Dr. 
Sami Ulus Maternity and Children's Health and Diseases Training and Research 
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address: dr.hcelik-40@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Pediatric Neurology (DY) University of Health Sciences, Dr. 
Sami Ulus Maternity and Children's Health and Diseases Training and Research 
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address: aksoyerhan24@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pediatric Neurology (DY) University of Health Sciences, Dr. 
Sami Ulus Maternity and Children's Health and Diseases Training and Research 
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address: ulkuhantoprak@yahoo.com.
(4)Department of Pediatric Neurology (DY) University of Health Sciences, Dr. 
Sami Ulus Maternity and Children's Health and Diseases Training and Research 
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address: drnesrinceylan@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Pediatric Neurology (DY) University of Health Sciences, Dr. 
Sami Ulus Maternity and Children's Health and Diseases Training and Research 
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address: aysechild@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Pediatric Intensive Care University of Health Sciences, Dr. 
Sami Ulus Maternity and Children's Health and Diseases Training and Research 
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address: mutluuysal@yahoo.com.
(7)Department of Pediatric Intensive Care University of Health Sciences, Dr. 
Sami Ulus Maternity and Children's Health and Diseases Training and Research 
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address: ebruazapagasi@hotmail.com.
(8)Department of Radiology University of Health Sciences, Dr. Sami Ulus 
Maternity and Children's Health and Diseases Training and Research Hospital, 
Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address: yucelsecil@yahoo.com.
(9)Department of Pediatrics University of Health Sciences, Dr. Sami Ulus 
Maternity and Children's Health and Diseases Training and Research Hospital, 
Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address: husniyeyucel@gmail.com.
(10)Department of Pediatrics University of Health Sciences, Dr. Sami Ulus 
Maternity and Children's Health and Diseases Training and Research Hospital, 
Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address: drsaliha007@yahoo.com.tr.
(11)Department of Pediatric Neurology (DY) University of Health Sciences, Dr. 
Sami Ulus Maternity and Children's Health and Diseases Training and Research 
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address: drdeniz_yuksel@yahoo.com.tr.

AIM: Longitudinally extensive transvers myelitis (LETM) is a rare and disabling 
condition in childhood. The aim of the present study was to share experiences 
from our center regarding the treatment features and clinical and radiologic 
course in our LETM patients in light of the literature data.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: The study was designed as cross-sectional and included 
children who followed for LETM at our pediatric neurology clinic between 2010 
and 2019. ATM was diagnosed according to the diagnostic criteria report from the 
Transverse Myelitis Consortium Working Group. LETM was defined as the presence 
of spinal cord lesions spanning a length of 3 or more consecutive vertebral 
segments. The patients' medical records were examined in terms of demographic 
characteristics, presenting symptoms, history of infection prior to and during 
LETM, prodromal history, neurological examination, laboratory and radiological 
findings, clinical course, and treatment. The Barthel Index was used to assess 
the physical independence in activities of daily living of patients with LETM 
who were followed for at least one year.
RESULTS: A total of 15 (8 girl) patients were included in the study. The 
patients were between 1 and 17 years of age. Presenting symptoms included 
inability to walk in 12 patients, incontinence in 9 patients, low back pain in 4 
patients, abdominal pain in 2 patients, and inability to use the arms in 2 
patients. In Barthel Index assessment of physical independence in activities of 
daily living, 8 patients were evaluated as completely independent, 3 patients as 
moderately dependent, and 2 patients as slightly dependent. When the 4 patients 
with motor area impairment and moderate dependency according to the Barthel 
Index were examined, it was noted that all of them had been admitted 4 days 
after the onset of symptoms and that 2 (13.3%) had cervicothoracic involvement 
and 2 (13.3%) had involvement of the entire cord.
CONCLUSION: Shorter delay from symptom onset to initiation of immunomodulatory 
therapy as well as effective rehabilitation resulted in favorable outcomes, with 
the most noticeable improvement in the areas of motor function and incontinence.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2021.106764
PMID: 34171586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]