---
reference_id: "PMID:30739266"
title: Peroxisomal dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases.
authors:
- Jo DS
- Cho DH
journal: Arch Pharm Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s12272-019-01131-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peroxisomal dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases.
**Authors:** Jo DS, Cho DH
**Journal:** Arch Pharm Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12272-019-01131-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12272-019-01131-2)

## Content

1. Arch Pharm Res. 2019 May;42(5):393-406. doi: 10.1007/s12272-019-01131-2. Epub 
2019 Feb 9.

Peroxisomal dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases.

Jo DS(1), Cho DH(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Kyungpook National University, 80 Daehakro Bukgu, 
Daegu, 41566, Republic of Korea.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Kyungpook National University, 80 Daehakro Bukgu, 
Daegu, 41566, Republic of Korea. dhcho@knu.ac.kr.

Peroxisomes and their (patho-)physiological importance in heath and disease have 
attracted increasing interest during last few decades. Together with 
mitochondria, peroxisomes comprise key metabolic platforms for oxidation of 
various fatty acids and redox regulation. In addition, peroxisomes contribute to 
bile acid, cholesterol, and plasmalogen biosynthesis. The importance of 
functional peroxisomes for cellular metabolism is demonstrated by the marked 
brain and systemic organ abnormalities occuring in peroxisome biogenesis 
disorders and peroxisomal enzyme deficiencies. Current evidences indicate that 
peroxisomal function is declined with aging, with peroxisomal dysfunction being 
linked to early onset of multiple age-related diseases including 
neurodegenerative diseases. Herein, we review recent progress toward 
understanding the physiological roles and pathological implications of 
peroxisomal dysfunctions, focusing on neurodegenerative disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s12272-019-01131-2
PMID: 30739266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]