---
reference_id: "PMID:38243407"
title: "ARID2, a milder cause of Coffin-Siris Syndrome? Broadening the phenotype with 17 additional individuals."
authors:
- Schrier Vergano SA
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63540
keywords:
- Humans
- "Micrognathism/genetics, diagnosis"
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- "Neck/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics, diagnosis"
- Face/abnormalities
- Phenotype
- Male
- Female
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- Mutation/genetics
- Adolescent
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ARID2, a milder cause of Coffin-Siris Syndrome? Broadening the phenotype with 17 additional individuals.
**Authors:** Schrier Vergano SA
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63540](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63540)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2024 Jun;194(6):e63540. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63540. Epub 2024
 Jan 19.

ARID2, a milder cause of Coffin-Siris Syndrome? Broadening the phenotype with 17 
additional individuals.

Schrier Vergano SA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital of The 
King's Daughters, Norfolk, Virginia, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, Virginia, 
USA.

Coffin-Siris Syndrome (CSS, MIM 135900) is now a well-described genetic 
condition caused by pathogenic variants in the Bromocriptine activating factor 
(BAF) complex, including ARID1B, ARID1A, ARID2, SMARCA4, SMARCE1, SMARCB1, 
SOX11, SMARCC2, DPF2, and more recently, BICRA. Individuals with CSS have a 
spectrum of various medical challenges, most often evident at birth, including 
feeding difficulties, hypotonia, organ-system anomalies, and learning and 
developmental differences. The classic finding of fifth digit hypo- or aplasia 
is seen variably. ARID2, previously described, is one of the less frequently 
observed gene changes in CSS. Although individuals with ARID2 have been reported 
to have classic features of CSS including hypertrichosis, coarse facial 
features, short stature, and fifth digit anomalies, as with many of the other 
CSS genes, there appears to be a spectrum of phenotypes. We report here a cohort 
of 17 individuals with ARID2 variants from the Coffin-Siris/BAF clinical 
registry and detail their medical challenges as well as developmental progress. 
Feeding difficulties, hypotonia, and short stature occur often, and hip 
dysplasia appears to occur more often than with other genes, however more severe 
medical challenges such as significant brain and cardiac malformations are 
rarer. Individuals appear to have mild to moderate intellectual impairment and 
may carry additional diagnoses such as ADHD. Further phenotypic description of 
this gene will aid clinicians caring for individuals with this rarer form of 
CSS.

© 2024 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63540
PMID: 38243407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]