---
reference_id: "PMID:10463692"
title: "An outbreak of acute bartonellosis (Oroya fever) in the Urubamba region of Peru, 1998."
authors:
- Ellis BA
- Rotz LD
- Leake JA
- Samalvides F
- Bernable J
- Ventura G
- Padilla C
- Villaseca P
- Beati L
- Regnery R
- Childs JE
- Olson JG
- Carrillo CP
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '1999'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.1999.61.344
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Bartonella/isolation & purification"
- "Bartonella Infections/diagnosis, epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease Outbreaks
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Peru/epidemiology
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An outbreak of acute bartonellosis (Oroya fever) in the Urubamba region of Peru, 1998.
**Authors:** Ellis BA, Rotz LD, Leake JA, Samalvides F, Bernable J, Ventura G, Padilla C, Villaseca P, Beati L, Regnery R, Childs JE, Olson JG, Carrillo CP
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (1999)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.1999.61.344](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.1999.61.344)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1999 Aug;61(2):344-9. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.1999.61.344.

An outbreak of acute bartonellosis (Oroya fever) in the Urubamba region of Peru,
1998.

Ellis BA(1), Rotz LD, Leake JA, Samalvides F, Bernable J, Ventura G, Padilla C,
Villaseca P, Beati L, Regnery R, Childs JE, Olson JG, Carrillo CP.

Author information:
(1)Viral and Rickettsial Zoonoses Branch, Division of Viral and Rickettsial
Diseases, National Center for Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia 30333, USA.

During May 1998, we conducted a case-control study of 357 participants from 60
households during an outbreak of acute bartonellosis in the Urubamba Valley,
Peru, a region not previously considered endemic for this disease. Blood and
insect specimens were collected and environmental assessments were done.
Case-patients (n = 22) were defined by fever, anemia, and intra-erythrocytic
coccobacilli seen in thin smears. Most case-patients were children (median age =
6.5 years). Case-patients more frequently reported sand fly bites than
individuals of neighboring households (odds ratio [OR] = 5.8, 95% confidence
interval [CI] = 1.2-39.2), or members from randomly selected households > or = 5
km away (OR = 8.5, 95% CI = 1.7-57.9). Bartonella bacilliformis isolated from
blood was confirmed by nucleotide sequencing (citrate synthase [g/tA], 338
basepairs). Using bacterial isolation (n = 141) as the standard, sensitivity,
specificity, and positive predictive value of thin smears were 36%, 96%, and
44%, respectively. Patients with clinical syndromes compatible with
bartonellosis should be treated with appropriate antibiotics regardless of
thin-smear results.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.1999.61.344
PMID: 10463692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
