---
reference_id: "PMID:28228456"
title: "Preeclampsia and Future Cardiovascular Health: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Wu P
- Haththotuwa R
- Kwok CS
- Babu A
- Kotronias RA
- Rushton C
- Zaman A
- Fryer AA
- Kadam U
- Chew-Graham CA
- Mamas MA
journal: Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.116.003497
keywords:
- Adult
- Cause of Death
- Chi-Square Distribution
- "Coronary Disease/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality"
- Female
- "Heart Failure/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Odds Ratio
- "Pre-Eclampsia/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality, therapy"
- Pregnancy
- Prognosis
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- "Stroke/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality"
- Time Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preeclampsia and Future Cardiovascular Health: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Wu P, Haththotuwa R, Kwok CS, Babu A, Kotronias RA, Rushton C, Zaman A, Fryer AA, Kadam U, Chew-Graham CA, Mamas MA
**Journal:** Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.116.003497](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.116.003497)

## Content

1. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2017 Feb;10(2):e003497. doi:
10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.116.003497. Epub 2017 Feb 22.

Preeclampsia and Future Cardiovascular Health: A Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis.

Wu P(1), Haththotuwa R(2), Kwok CS(1), Babu A(1), Kotronias RA(1), Rushton C(1),
Zaman A(1), Fryer AA(1), Kadam U(1), Chew-Graham CA(1), Mamas MA(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Institute for Science and Technology in Medicine (P.W.), Keele
Cardiovascular Research Group (P.W., C.S.K., A.B., R.A.K., C.R., U.K., M.A.M.),
Institute for Primary Care and Health Sciences (R.H., C.A.C.-G.), Institute for
Applied Clinical Sciences (A.A.F., C.S.K., C.R., U.K., M.A.M.), and NIHR
Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care (CLAHRC) West
Midlands (C.A.C.-G.), Keele University, Stoke-on-Trent, United Kingdom; Academic
Obstetrics and Gynaecology (P.W.) and The Heart Centre (C.S.K., M.A.M.), Royal
Stoke University Hospital, Stoke-on-Trent, United Kingdom; and Freeman Hospital
and Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle-Upon-Tyne,
United Kingdom (A.Z.).
(2)From the Institute for Science and Technology in Medicine (P.W.), Keele
Cardiovascular Research Group (P.W., C.S.K., A.B., R.A.K., C.R., U.K., M.A.M.),
Institute for Primary Care and Health Sciences (R.H., C.A.C.-G.), Institute for
Applied Clinical Sciences (A.A.F., C.S.K., C.R., U.K., M.A.M.), and NIHR
Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care (CLAHRC) West
Midlands (C.A.C.-G.), Keele University, Stoke-on-Trent, United Kingdom; Academic
Obstetrics and Gynaecology (P.W.) and The Heart Centre (C.S.K., M.A.M.), Royal
Stoke University Hospital, Stoke-on-Trent, United Kingdom; and Freeman Hospital
and Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle-Upon-Tyne,
United Kingdom (A.Z.). randula@doctors.org.uk.

BACKGROUND: Preeclampsia is a pregnancy-specific disorder resulting in
hypertension and multiorgan dysfunction. There is growing evidence that these
effects persist after pregnancy. We aimed to systematically evaluate and
quantify the evidence on the relationship between preeclampsia and the future
risk of cardiovascular diseases.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied the future risk of heart failure, coronary heart
disease, composite cardiovascular disease, death because of coronary heart or
cardiovascular disease, stroke, and stroke death after preeclampsia. A
systematic search of MEDLINE and EMBASE was performed to identify relevant
studies. We used random-effects meta-analysis to determine the risk. Twenty-two
studies were identified with >6.4 million women including >258 000 women with
preeclampsia. Meta-analysis of studies that adjusted for potential confounders
demonstrated that preeclampsia was independently associated with an increased
risk of future heart failure (risk ratio [RR], 4.19; 95% confidence interval
[CI], 2.09-8.38), coronary heart disease (RR, 2.50; 95% CI, 1.43-4.37),
cardiovascular disease death (RR, 2.21; 95% CI, 1.83-2.66), and stroke (RR,
1.81; 95% CI, 1.29-2.55). Sensitivity analyses showed that preeclampsia
continued to be associated with an increased risk of future coronary heart
disease, heart failure, and stroke after adjusting for age (RR, 3.89; 95% CI,
1.83-8.26), body mass index (RR, 3.16; 95% CI, 1.41-7.07), and diabetes mellitus
(RR, 4.19; 95% CI, 2.09-8.38).
CONCLUSIONS: Preeclampsia is associated with a 4-fold increase in future
incident heart failure and a 2-fold increased risk in coronary heart disease,
stroke, and death because of coronary heart or cardiovascular disease. Our study
highlights the importance of lifelong monitoring of cardiovascular risk factors
in women with a history of preeclampsia.

© 2017 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.116.003497
PMID: 28228456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
