---
reference_id: "PMID:31558473"
title: "Analysis of Biomarkers and Association With Clinical Outcomes in Patients With Differentiated Thyroid Cancer: Subanalysis of the Sorafenib Phase III DECISION Trial."
authors:
- Brose MS
- Schlumbeger M
- Jeffers M
- Kappeler C
- Meinhardt G
- Peña CEA
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-18-3439
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/blood, genetics"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm"
- Female
- GTP Phosphohydrolases/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Grading
- Progression-Free Survival
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- Sorafenib/therapeutic use
- Thyroglobulin/blood
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/blood, drug therapy, pathology"
- Treatment Outcome
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A/blood
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of Biomarkers and Association With Clinical Outcomes in Patients With Differentiated Thyroid Cancer: Subanalysis of the Sorafenib Phase III DECISION Trial.
**Authors:** Brose MS, Schlumbeger M, Jeffers M, Kappeler C, Meinhardt G, Peña CEA
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-18-3439](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-18-3439)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2019 Dec 15;25(24):7370-7380. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-18-3439. Epub 2019 Sep 26.

Analysis of Biomarkers and Association With Clinical Outcomes in Patients With
Differentiated Thyroid Cancer: Subanalysis of the Sorafenib Phase III DECISION
Trial.

Brose MS(1), Schlumbeger M(2), Jeffers M(3), Kappeler C(3), Meinhardt G(3), Peña
CEA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Abramson Cancer
Center of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
brosem@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(2)Gustave Roussy and University Paris Saclay, Villejuif, France.
(3)Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals, Whippany, New Jersey.

PURPOSE: The phase III DECISION trial (NCT00984282; EudraCT:2009-012007-25)
established sorafenib efficacy in locally recurrent or metastatic, progressive,
differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) refractory to radioactive iodine. We
conducted a retrospective, exploratory biomarker analysis of patients from
DECISION.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Candidate biomarkers [15 baseline plasma proteins, baseline
and during-treatment serum thyroglobulin, and relevant tumor mutations (BRAF,
NRAS, HRAS, and KRAS)] were analyzed for correlation with clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: Plasma biomarker and thyroglobulin data were available for 395 of 417
(94.7%) and 403 of 417 (96.6%) patients, respectively. Elevated baseline VEGFA
was independently associated with poor prognosis for progression-free survival
[PFS; HR = 1.82; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.38-2.44; P = 0.0007], overall
survival (HR = 2.13; 95% CI, 1.37-3.36; P = 0.013), and disease-control rate
(DCR; OR = 0.30; P = 0.009). Elevated baseline thyroglobulin was independently
associated with poor PFS (HR = 2.03; 95% CI, 1.52-2.71; P < 0.0001) and DCR (OR
= 0.32; P = 0.01). Combined VEGFA/thyroglobulin signatures correlated with poor
PFS (HR = 2.12; 95% CI, 1.57-2.87; P < 0.00001). Thyroglobulin decrease ≥30%
from baseline was achieved by 76% and 14% of patients receiving sorafenib and
placebo, respectively (P < 0.001). Patients with ≥30% thyroglobulin reduction
had longer PFS than those without ≥30% reduction [HR (95% CI): sorafenib = 0.61
(0.40-0.94), P = 0.022; placebo = 0.49 (0.29-0.85), P = 0.009]. BRAF mutations
were associated with better PFS; RAS mutations were associated with worse PFS,
although neither was independently prognostic in multivariate models. No
examined biomarker predicted sorafenib benefit.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified biomarkers associated with poor prognosis in DTC,
including elevated baseline VEGFA and thyroglobulin and the presence of RAS
mutations. Serum thyroglobulin may be a biomarker of tumor response and
progression.

©2019 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-18-3439
PMID: 31558473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
