---
reference_id: PMID:23317889
title: Clinical and neuroimaging features of enterovirus71 related acute flaccid paralysis in patients with hand-foot-mouth disease.
authors:
- Chen F
- Li JJ
- Liu T
- Wen GQ
- Xiang W
journal: Asian Pac J Trop Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/S1995-7645(12)60203-X
keywords:
- Brain/pathology
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Enterovirus A, Human/isolation & purification"
- Female
- "Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease/diagnosis, physiopathology, virology"
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Paralysis/diagnosis, physiopathology, virology"
- Spinal Cord/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and neuroimaging features of enterovirus71 related acute flaccid paralysis in patients with hand-foot-mouth disease.
**Authors:** Chen F, Li JJ, Liu T, Wen GQ, Xiang W
**Journal:** Asian Pac J Trop Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1995-7645(12)60203-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1995-7645(12)60203-X)

## Content

1. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2013 Jan;6(1):68-72. doi: 10.1016/S1995-7645(12)60203-X.

Clinical and neuroimaging features of enterovirus71 related acute flaccid 
paralysis in patients with hand-foot-mouth disease.

Chen F(1), Li JJ, Liu T, Wen GQ, Xiang W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, People's Hospital of Hainan Province, Haikou, PR 
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate clinical and neuroimaging features of enterovirus71 
(EV71) related acute flaccid paralysis in patients with hand-foot-mouth disease.
METHODS: Nine patients with acute flaccid paralysis met the criterion of EV71 
induced hand-foot-mouth disease underwent spinal and brain MR imaging from May 
2008 to Sep 2012.
RESULTS: One extremity flaccid was found in four cases (3 with lower limb, 1 
with upper limb), two limbs flaccid in three cases (2 with lower limbs, 1 with 
upper limbs), and four limbs flaccid in two cases. Spinal MRI studies showed 
lesion with high signal in T2-weighted images (T2WI) and low signal T1-weighted 
images (T1WI) in the spinal cord of all nine cases, and the lesions were mainly 
in bilateral and unilateral anterior horn of cervical spinal cord and spinal 
cord below thoracic 9 (T9) level. In addition, the midbrain, pons, and medulla, 
which were involved in 3 cases with brainstem encephalitis, demonstrated 
abnormal signal. Moreover, spinal cord contrast MRI studies showed mild 
enhancement in corresponding anterior horn of the involved side, and strong 
enhancement in its ventral root.
CONCLUSIONS: EV71 related acute flaccid paralysis in patients with 
hand-foot-mouth disease mainly affected the anterior horn regions and ventral 
root of cervical spinal cord and spinal cord below T9 level. MR imaging could 
efficiently show the characteristic pattern and extent of the lesions which 
correlated well with the clinical features.

Copyright © 2013 Hainan Medical College. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1995-7645(12)60203-X
PMID: 23317889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]