---
reference_id: "PMID:37399495"
title: "NKCC1 in human diseases: is the SLC12A2 gene haploinsufficient?"
authors:
- Delpire E
- Koumangoye R
journal: Am J Physiol Cell Physiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00238.2023
keywords:
- Humans
- Mice
- Animals
- Female
- Symporters/genetics
- Sodium-Potassium-Chloride Symporters/genetics
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 2/genetics"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation/genetics
- Deafness
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NKCC1 in human diseases: is the SLC12A2 gene haploinsufficient?
**Authors:** Delpire E, Koumangoye R
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Cell Physiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpcell.00238.2023](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00238.2023)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2023 Aug 1;325(2):C385-C390. doi: 
10.1152/ajpcell.00238.2023. Epub 2023 Jul 3.

NKCC1 in human diseases: is the SLC12A2 gene haploinsufficient?

Delpire E(1), Koumangoye R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, Tennessee, United States.

Mutations in the SLC12A2 gene, which encodes the Na-K-2Cl cotransporter-1 
(NKCC1), are linked to various conditions such as neurodevelopmental deficits, 
deafness, and fluid secretion in different epithelia. Cases of complete NKCC1 
deficiency in young patients are straightforward, leading to clinical 
presentations that overlap with the phenotypes observed in NKCC1 knockout mouse 
models. However, cases involving deleterious variants in one allele are more 
difficult, as the clinical presentation is variable, and the cause-effect 
relationship is not always clear. For instance, we worked on a single patient's 
case from multiple angles and published six related papers to convince ourselves 
of the cause-and-effect relationship between her NKCC1 mutation and her clinical 
presentations. The cluster of mutations in a small portion of the carboxyl 
terminus and its association with deafness point to a cause-and-effect 
relationship, even if the molecular mechanism is unknown. Overall, the 
preponderance of evidence suggests that the SLC12A2 gene is a human 
disease-causing and likely haploinsufficient gene that requires further 
investigation.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00238.2023
PMCID: PMC10393318
PMID: 37399495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest, financial or 
otherwise, are declared by the authors.