---
reference_id: "PMID:21562141"
title: On identifying the processes underlying schizophrenic speech disorder.
authors:
- Docherty NM
journal: Schizophr Bull
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbr048
content_type: abstract_only
---

# On identifying the processes underlying schizophrenic speech disorder.
**Authors:** Docherty NM
**Journal:** Schizophr Bull (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/schbul/sbr048](https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbr048)

## Content

1. Schizophr Bull. 2012 Nov;38(6):1327-35. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbr048. Epub 2011 
May 11.

On identifying the processes underlying schizophrenic speech disorder.

Docherty NM(1).

Author information:
(1)Community Support Services, Akron, Ohio, USA. ndochert@kent.edu

Speech of people with schizophrenia is often difficult to follow. There is 
evidence that neuropsychological deficits associated with schizophrenia explain 
some of the variance in speech disorder, but its nature and causes overall are 
not well understood. This study rated speech samples from 60 schizophrenic 
outpatients for thought disorder, conceptual disorganization, linguistic 
structural breakdown, and communication failure. A battery of neuropsychological 
tests potentially relevant to coherent speech production was administered, and 
associations between these variables and the speech measures were assessed. 
Consistent with previous research, the measure of functional effect, 
communication failure, was more highly associated with neuropsychological test 
performance than were the measures of putative cause: thought disorder, 
conceptual disorganization, or linguistic structural breakdown. Performance on 
tests of attention, immediate memory, working memory, organizational sequencing, 
and conceptual sequencing all were significantly related to the frequency of 
communication failures in the speech. In hierarchical regression, attention, 
working memory, and conceptual sequencing each contributed significantly and 
together explained 29% of the variance. Some other potential contributors to 
test in future research include auditory attention, internal source memory, 
emotional disturbances, and social cognitive deficits.

DOI: 10.1093/schbul/sbr048
PMCID: PMC3494050
PMID: 21562141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]