---
reference_id: "PMID:33622667"
title: "Photoparoxysmal response in ADCK3 autosomal recessive ataxia: a case report and literature review."
authors:
- Uccella S
- Pisciotta L
- Severino M
- Bertini E
- Giacomini T
- Zanni G
- Prato G
- De Grandis E
- Nobili L
- Mancardi MM
journal: Epileptic Disord
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1684/epd.2021.1243
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/complications, drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Epilepsy, Reflex/drug therapy, etiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- "Ubiquinone/analogs & derivatives, pharmacology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Photoparoxysmal response in ADCK3 autosomal recessive ataxia: a case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Uccella S, Pisciotta L, Severino M, Bertini E, Giacomini T, Zanni G, Prato G, De Grandis E, Nobili L, Mancardi MM
**Journal:** Epileptic Disord (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1684/epd.2021.1243](https://doi.org/10.1684/epd.2021.1243)

## Content

1. Epileptic Disord. 2021 Feb 1;23(1):153-160. doi: 10.1684/epd.2021.1243.

Photoparoxysmal response in ADCK3 autosomal recessive ataxia: a case report and
literature review.

Uccella S(1), Pisciotta L(2), Severino M(3), Bertini E(4), Giacomini T(1), Zanni
G(4), Prato G(5), De Grandis E(1), Nobili L(1), Mancardi MM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics and
Maternal and Child Health, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, Unit of Child
Neuropsychiatry, Epilepsy Centre, Department of Medical and Surgical
Neuroscience and Rehabilitation, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics and
Maternal and Child Health, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, Unit of Child
Neuropsychiatry, Department of Neurosciences, ASST Fatebenefratelli-Sacco,
Milan, Italy.
(3)Neuroradiology Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.
(4)Unit of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Bambino Gesù
Children's Research Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(5)Unit of Child Neuropsychiatry, Epilepsy Centre, Department of Medical and
Surgical Neuroscience and Rehabilitation, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini,
Genoa, Italy.

Mutations in AarF domain-containing kinase 3 (ADCK3) are responsible for the
most frequent form of hereditary coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) deficiency (Q10
deficiency-4), which is mainly associated with autosomal recessive cerebellar
ataxia type 2 (ARCA2). Clinical presentation is characterized by a variable
degree of cerebellar atrophy and a broad spectrum of associated symptoms,
including muscular involvement, movement disorders, neurosensory loss, cognitive
impairment, psychiatric symptoms and epilepsy. In this report, we describe, for
the first time, a case of photoparoxysmal response in a female patient with a
mutation in ADCK3. Disease onset occurred in early childhood with gait ataxia,
and mild-to-moderate degeneration. Seizures appeared at eight years and six
months, occurring only during sleep. Photoparoxysmal response was observed at 14
years, almost concomitant with the genetic diagnosis (c.901C>T;c.589-3C>G) and
the start of CoQ10 oral supplementation. A year later, disease progression
slowed down, and photosensitivity was attenuated. A review of the literature is
provided focusing on epileptic features of ADCK3-related disease as well as the
physiopathology of photoparoxysmal response and supposed cerebellar involvement
in photosensitivity. Moreover, the potential role of CoQ10 oral supplementation
is discussed. Prospective studies on larger populations are needed to further
understand these data.

DOI: 10.1684/epd.2021.1243
PMID: 33622667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
