---
reference_id: "PMID:27416962"
title: Mechanisms of immune evasion and current status of checkpoint inhibitors in non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Qin A
- Coffey DG
- Warren EH
- Ramnath N
journal: Cancer Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/cam4.819
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of immune evasion and current status of checkpoint inhibitors in non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Qin A, Coffey DG, Warren EH, Ramnath N
**Journal:** Cancer Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cam4.819](https://doi.org/10.1002/cam4.819)

## Content

1. Cancer Med. 2016 Sep;5(9):2567-78. doi: 10.1002/cam4.819. Epub 2016 Jul 15.

Mechanisms of immune evasion and current status of checkpoint inhibitors in 
non-small cell lung cancer.

Qin A(1), Coffey DG(2)(3), Warren EH(2)(3), Ramnath N(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan. qina@med.umich.edu.
(2)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
Washington.
(3)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(4)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(5)VA Ann Arbor Health Care System, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

In the past several years, immunotherapy has emerged as a viable treatment 
option for patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) without 
actionable driver mutations that have progressed on standard chemotherapy. We 
are also beginning to understand the methods of immune evasion employed by NSCLC 
which likely contribute to the 20% response rate to immunotherapy. It is also 
yet unclear what tumor or patient factors predict response to immunotherapy. The 
objectives of this review are (1) review the immunogenicity of NSCLC (2) 
describe the mechanisms of immune evasion (3) summarize efforts to target the 
anti-program death-1 (PD-1) and anti-program death-ligand 1(PD-L1) pathway (4) 
outline determinants of response to PD-1/PD-L1 therapy and (5) discuss potential 
future areas for research.

© 2016 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.819
PMCID: PMC5055165
PMID: 27416962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]