---
reference_id: "PMID:33271210"
title: A systematic review of microbiome changes and impact of probiotic supplementation in children and adolescents with neuropsychiatric disorders.
authors:
- Ligezka AN
- Sonmez AI
- Corral-Frias MP
- Golebiowski R
- Lynch B
- Croarkin PE
- Romanowicz M
journal: Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2020.110187
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Brain-Gut Axis/physiology
- Child
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome/physiology
- Humans
- "Mental Disorders/diet therapy, microbiology"
- Probiotics/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A systematic review of microbiome changes and impact of probiotic supplementation in children and adolescents with neuropsychiatric disorders.
**Authors:** Ligezka AN, Sonmez AI, Corral-Frias MP, Golebiowski R, Lynch B, Croarkin PE, Romanowicz M
**Journal:** Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pnpbp.2020.110187](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2020.110187)

## Content

1. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2021 Jun 8;108:110187. doi:
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2020.110187. Epub 2020 Dec 1.

A systematic review of microbiome changes and impact of probiotic
supplementation in children and adolescents with neuropsychiatric disorders.

Ligezka AN(1), Sonmez AI(1), Corral-Frias MP(2), Golebiowski R(1), Lynch B(3),
Croarkin PE(1), Romanowicz M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United
States of America.
(2)Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, School of Medicine and University
Hospital "Dr. José Eleuterio González", Psychiatry Department, Monterrey,
Mexico.
(3)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
United States of America.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United
States of America. Electronic address: romanowicz.magdalena@mayo.edu.

OBJECTIVES: In recent decades, the diagnostic and therapeutic implications of
the microbiome changes and the impact of probiotic supplementation have
increased rapidly. However, the potential for clinical translation of microbiome
research for children and adolescents with psychiatric disorders is unclear.
This review examined available evidence related to gut microbiota as well as the
impact of probiotic supplementation on psychiatric disorders in the pediatric
population reported to date.
METHODS: We performed a literature search for the gut microbiota in child and
adolescent population (0-18 years old) with mental health disorders from July
1999 through July 2019 in several databases: ClinicalTrials.gov, Ovid EBM
Reviews, Ovid Embase, Ovid Medline, Ovid PsycINFO, Scopus, and Web of Science.
RESULTS: A total of 7 studies met inclusion criteria consisting of randomized
controlled trials and cohort studies that examined various associations between
psychiatric disorders and gut microbiota in youth. Six studies examined the
effects of various treatment interventions such as probiotic supplementation on
microbiota composition and behaviors. One study showed an increase in prosocial
behavior in children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and an increase in the
Lachnospiraceae family following prebiotic supplementation. Another study
suggested that prebiotic supplementation increased bifidobacterial populations
for ASD and healthy controls. A study evaluating infant supplementation of
prebiotics showed both a decreased likelihood of developing Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) or ASD and decreased gut Bifidobacterium. One
study did not find significant differences in microbiome composition after
micronutrient treatment.
CONCLUSION: The main goal of this systematic review was to comprehensively
examine and summarize the current evidence focused on the potential effect of
the relationship between microbiota gut composition as well as the effects of
probiotic supplementation on psychiatric disorders in children and adolescents.
This is a relatively new area of research and the number of included studies is
limited. More studies are needed to determine whether gut dysbiosis leads to the
development and/or contributes to the severity of mental disorders or whether
gut dysbiosis is a result of other processes that accompany mental disorders.
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: A better understanding of the specific bacteria
contributions, gut-brain pathways, and role in pathophysiological mechanisms in
neuropsychiatric disorders in the child and adolescent populations can possibly
provide alternative tools for a clinical psychiatrist. Moreover, it may
ultimately aid the clinician with intervention strategies, or detect populations
at risk for developing neuropsychiatric disorders.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2020.110187
PMCID: PMC8138744
PMID: 33271210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
