---
reference_id: "PMID:32391934"
title: 2020 American College of Rheumatology Guideline for the Management of Gout.
authors:
- FitzGerald JD
- Dalbeth N
- Mikuls T
- Brignardello-Petersen R
- Guyatt G
- Abeles AM
- Gelber AC
- Harrold LR
- Khanna D
- King C
- Levy G
- Libbey C
- Mount D
- Pillinger MH
- Rosenthal A
- Singh JA
- Sims JE
- Smith BJ
- Wenger NS
- Bae SS
- Danve A
- Khanna PP
- Kim SC
- Lenert A
- Poon S
- Qasim A
- Sehra ST
- Sharma TSK
- Toprover M
- Turgunbaev M
- Zeng L
- Zhang MA
- Turner AS
- Neogi T
journal: Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/acr.24180
keywords:
- Humans
- Disease Management
- Gout/therapy
- Healthy Lifestyle
- Symptom Flare Up
- "Uricosuric Agents/administration & dosage"
- Network Meta-Analysis as Topic
- Systematic Reviews as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 2020 American College of Rheumatology Guideline for the Management of Gout.
**Authors:** FitzGerald JD, Dalbeth N, Mikuls T, Brignardello-Petersen R, Guyatt G, Abeles AM, Gelber AC, Harrold LR, Khanna D, King C, Levy G, Libbey C, Mount D, Pillinger MH, Rosenthal A, Singh JA, Sims JE, Smith BJ, Wenger NS, Bae SS, Danve A, Khanna PP, Kim SC, Lenert A, Poon S, Qasim A, Sehra ST, Sharma TSK, Toprover M, Turgunbaev M, Zeng L, Zhang MA, Turner AS, Neogi T
**Journal:** Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/acr.24180](https://doi.org/10.1002/acr.24180)

## Content

1. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2020 Jun;72(6):744-760. doi: 10.1002/acr.24180. 
Epub 2020 May 11.

2020 American College of Rheumatology Guideline for the Management of Gout.

FitzGerald JD(1), Dalbeth N(2), Mikuls T(3), Brignardello-Petersen R(4), Guyatt 
G(4), Abeles AM(5), Gelber AC(6), Harrold LR(7), Khanna D(8), King C(9), Levy 
G(10), Libbey C(11), Mount D(12), Pillinger MH(5), Rosenthal A(13), Singh 
JA(14), Sims JE(15), Smith BJ(16), Wenger NS(17), Bae SS(17), Danve A(18), 
Khanna PP(19), Kim SC(20), Lenert A(21), Poon S(22), Qasim A(4), Sehra ST(23), 
Sharma TSK(24), Toprover M(5), Turgunbaev M(25), Zeng L(4), Zhang MA(20), Turner 
AS(25), Neogi T(11).

Author information:
(1)University of California, Los Angeles and VA Greater Los Angeles Health Care 
System, Los Angeles, California.
(2)University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(3)University of Nebraska Medical Center and VA Nebraska-Western Iowa Health 
Care System, Omaha, Nebraska.
(4)McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(5)New York University School of Medicine, New York City, New York.
(6)Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland.
(7)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester Massachusetts, and 
Corrona, Waltham, Massachusetts.
(8)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
(9)North Mississippi Medical Center, Tupelo.
(10)Kaiser Permanente, Downey, California.
(11)Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts.
(12)VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, Massachusetts.
(13)Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee.
(14)University of Alabama at Birmingham and Birmingham Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center, Birmingham.
(15)Atlanta, Georgia.
(16)Florida State University College of Medicine School of Physician Assistant 
Practice, Tallahassee.
(17)University of California, Los Angeles.
(18)Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut.
(19)University of Michigan, VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System, Ann Arbor.
(20)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(21)University of Kentucky, Lexington.
(22)US Department of Veterans Affairs, Manchester, New Hampshire.
(23)Mount Auburn Hospital, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(24)Allegheny Health Network, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(25)American College of Rheumatology, Atlanta, Georgia.

Erratum in
    Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2020 Aug;72(8):1187. doi: 10.1002/acr.24401.
    Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2021 Mar;73(3):458. doi: 10.1002/acr.24566.

Comment in
    Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2020 Oct;72(10):1507-1508. doi: 
10.1002/acr.24375.
    Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2020 Oct;72(10):1506-1507. doi: 
10.1002/acr.24379.
    Am Fam Physician. 2021 Aug 1;104(2):209-210.

OBJECTIVE: To provide guidance for the management of gout, including indications 
for and optimal use of urate-lowering therapy (ULT), treatment of gout flares, 
and lifestyle and other medication recommendations.
METHODS: Fifty-seven population, intervention, comparator, and outcomes 
questions were developed, followed by a systematic literature review, including 
network meta-analyses with ratings of the available evidence according to the 
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) 
methodology, and patient input. A group consensus process was used to compose 
the final recommendations and grade their strength as strong or conditional.
RESULTS: Forty-two recommendations (including 16 strong recommendations) were 
generated. Strong recommendations included initiation of ULT for all patients 
with tophaceous gout, radiographic damage due to gout, or frequent gout flares; 
allopurinol as the preferred first-line ULT, including for those with 
moderate-to-severe chronic kidney disease (CKD; stage >3); using a low starting 
dose of allopurinol (≤100 mg/day, and lower in CKD) or febuxostat (<40 mg/day); 
and a treat-to-target management strategy with ULT dose titration guided by 
serial serum urate (SU) measurements, with an SU target of <6 mg/dl. When 
initiating ULT, concomitant antiinflammatory prophylaxis therapy for a duration 
of at least 3-6 months was strongly recommended. For management of gout flares, 
colchicine, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, or glucocorticoids (oral, 
intraarticular, or intramuscular) were strongly recommended.
CONCLUSION: Using GRADE methodology and informed by a consensus process based on 
evidence from the current literature and patient preferences, this guideline 
provides direction for clinicians and patients making decisions on the 
management of gout.

© 2020, American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/acr.24180
PMCID: PMC10563586
PMID: 32391934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]