---
reference_id: "PMID:29170913"
title: Impact of HBV replication in peripheral blood mononuclear cell on HBV intrauterine transmission.
authors:
- Shi X
- Wang X
- Xu X
- Feng Y
- Li S
- Feng S
- Wang B
- Wang S
journal: Front Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s11684-017-0597-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of HBV replication in peripheral blood mononuclear cell on HBV intrauterine transmission.
**Authors:** Shi X, Wang X, Xu X, Feng Y, Li S, Feng S, Wang B, Wang S
**Journal:** Front Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11684-017-0597-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11684-017-0597-5)

## Content

1. Front Med. 2017 Dec;11(4):548-553. doi: 10.1007/s11684-017-0597-5. Epub 2017
Nov  23.

Impact of HBV replication in peripheral blood mononuclear cell on HBV 
intrauterine transmission.

Shi X(1), Wang X(1), Xu X(1), Feng Y(1), Li S(1), Feng S(2), Wang B(2), Wang 
S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan, 030001, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The Third People Hospital of 
Taiyuan City, Taiyuan, 030001, China.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan, 030001, China. supingwang@sxmu.edu.cn.

This study determined the effect of hepatitis B virus (HBV) replication in 
peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) from HBsAg-positive mothers on HBV 
intrauterine transmission. A total of 150 HBsAg-positive mothers and their 
neonates were recruited in this study. Within 24 h after birth, HBV serological 
markers, serum HBV DNA, PBMC HBV relaxed circular DNA (rcDNA), and covalently 
closed circular DNA (cccDNA) were measured in the HBsAg-positive mothers and 
their neonates before passive-active immune prophylaxis. The relationship 
between HBV replication in PBMC and HBV intrauterine transmission was examined 
through Chisquare test and logistic regression. The rate of HBV intrauterine 
transmission was 8.00% (12/150) in the 150 neonates born to HBsAg-positive 
mothers. The positivities of PBMC HBV rcDNA and cccDNA in the HBsAg-positive 
mothers were 36.67% (55/150) and 10% (15/150), respectively. Maternal PBMC HBV 
cccDNA was a risk factor of HBV intrauterine transmission (OR = 6.003, 95% CI: 
1.249-28.855). Maternal serum HBeAg was a risk factor of PBMC HBV rcDNA (OR = 
3.896, 95% CI: 1.929-7.876) and PBMC HBV cccDNA (OR = 3.74, 95% CI: 
1.186-11.793) in the HBsAg-positive mothers. Administration of hepatitis B 
immune globulin was a protective factor of PBMC HBV cccDNA (OR = 0.312, 95%CI: 
0.102-0.954) during pregnancy. The positivity of PBMC HBV rcDNA was related to 
that of cccDNA in the HBsAg-positive mothers (χ 2= 5.087, P = 0.024). This study 
suggests that PBMC is a reservoir of HBV and an extrahepatic site for virus 
replication and plays a critical role in HBV intrauterine transmission.

DOI: 10.1007/s11684-017-0597-5
PMID: 29170913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]