---
reference_id: "PMID:36204992"
title: Implementation of an Integrated Lung Cancer Prevention and Screening Program Using a Mobile Computed Tomography (CT) Unit in Brazil.
authors:
- Chiarantano RS
- Vazquez FL
- Franco A
- Ferreira LC
- Cristina da Costa M
- Talarico T
- Oliveira ÂN
- Miziara JE
- Mauad EC
- Caetano da Silva E
- Ventura LM
- Junior RH
- Leal LF
- Reis RM
journal: Cancer Control
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/10732748221121385
keywords:
- Brazil/epidemiology
- Early Detection of Cancer/methods
- Female
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
- Male
- Mass Screening/methods
- Middle Aged
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed/methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Implementation of an Integrated Lung Cancer Prevention and Screening Program Using a Mobile Computed Tomography (CT) Unit in Brazil.
**Authors:** Chiarantano RS, Vazquez FL, Franco A, Ferreira LC, Cristina da Costa M, Talarico T, Oliveira ÂN, Miziara JE, Mauad EC, Caetano da Silva E, Ventura LM, Junior RH, Leal LF, Reis RM
**Journal:** Cancer Control (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/10732748221121385](https://doi.org/10.1177/10732748221121385)

## Content

1. Cancer Control. 2022 Jan-Dec;29:10732748221121385. doi:
10.1177/10732748221121385.

Implementation of an Integrated Lung Cancer Prevention and Screening Program
Using a Mobile Computed Tomography (CT) Unit in Brazil.

Chiarantano RS(1)(2), Vazquez FL(1), Franco A(3), Ferreira LC(1), Cristina da
Costa M(1), Talarico T(1), Oliveira ÂN(1), Miziara JE(4), Mauad EC(5), Caetano
da Silva E(6), Ventura LM(2), Junior RH(5), Leal LF(1)(7), Reis RM(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Oncology Research Center, Barretos Cancer Hospital, Barretos,
Brazil.
(2)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, 67766Barretos Cancer
Hospital, Barretos, Brazil.
(3)Barretos Municipal Health Secretary, Brazil.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Barretos Cancer Hospital, Barretos, Brazil.
(5)Department of Prevention, Barretos Cancer Hospital, Barretos, Brazil.
(6)Department of Pathology, 67766Barretos Cancer Hospital, Barretos, Brazil.
(7)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), Medical School,
University of Minho, Braga, Portugal.
(8)ICVS/3B's - PT Government Associate Laboratory, Guimarães, Portugal.

INTRODUCTION: Lung cancer is the deadliest cancer worldwide and in Brazil.
Despite strong evidence, lung cancer screening by low-dose computed tomography
(LDCT) in high-risk individuals is far from a reality in many countries,
particularly in Brazil. Brazil has a universal public health system marked with
important inequalities. One affordable strategy to increase the coverage of
resources is to use mobile units.
OBJECTIVES: To describe the implementation and results of an innovative lung
cancer prevention program that integrates tobacco cessation and lung cancer
screening using a mobile CT unit.
METHODOLOGY: From May 2019 to Dec 2020, health professionals from 18 public
primary health care units in Barretos, Brazil, were trained to offer smoking
cessation counseling and treatment. Eligible high-risk participants of this
program were also invited to perform lung cancer screening in a mobile LDCT unit
that was specially conceived to be dispatched to the community. A detailed
epidemiological questionnaire was administered to the LDCT participants.
RESULTS: Among the 233 screened participants, the majority were women (54.9%),
and the average age was 62 years old. A total of 52.8% of participants showed
high or very high nicotine dependence. After 1 year, 27.8% of participants who
were involved in smoking cessation groups had quit smoking. The first LDCT round
revealed that the majority of participants (83.7%) exhibited lung-Rads 1 or 2;
7.3% exhibited lung-Rads 3; 7.7% exhibited lung-Rads 4a; and 3% exhibited
lung-Rads 4b or 4x. The three participants with lung-Rads 4b were further
confirmed, and their surgery led to the diagnosis of early-stage cancer (1 case
of adenocarcinoma and two cases of squamous cell carcinoma), leading to a cancer
diagnosis rate of 12.8/1000.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate promising outcomes for an onsite integrative
program enrolling high-risk individuals in a middle-income country. Evidence
barriers and challenges remain to be overcome.

DOI: 10.1177/10732748221121385
PMCID: PMC9549090
PMID: 36204992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
