---
reference_id: "PMID:32039712"
title: "Mutation Spectrum of Stickler Syndrome Type I and Genotype-phenotype Analysis in East Asian Population: a systematic review."
authors:
- Wang DD
- Gao FJ
- Hu FY
- Zhang SH
- Xu P
- Wu JH
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s12881-020-0963-z
keywords:
- "Arthritis/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- "Connective Tissue Diseases/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary"
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Retinal Detachment/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation Spectrum of Stickler Syndrome Type I and Genotype-phenotype Analysis in East Asian Population: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Wang DD, Gao FJ, Hu FY, Zhang SH, Xu P, Wu JH
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12881-020-0963-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12881-020-0963-z)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2020 Feb 10;21(1):27. doi: 10.1186/s12881-020-0963-z.

Mutation Spectrum of Stickler Syndrome Type I and Genotype-phenotype Analysis in
East Asian Population: a systematic review.

Wang DD(1)(2)(3), Gao FJ(1)(2)(3), Hu FY(1)(2)(3), Zhang SH(1)(2)(3), Xu
P(1)(2)(3), Wu JH(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Eye Institute, Eye and ENT Hospital, College of Medicine, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Visual Impairment and Restoration, Science and
Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality, Shanghai, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Myopia, Ministry of Health, Shanghai, China.
(4)Eye Institute, Eye and ENT Hospital, College of Medicine, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China. jihongwu@fudan.edu.cn.
(5)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Visual Impairment and Restoration, Science and
Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality, Shanghai, China.
jihongwu@fudan.edu.cn.
(6)Key Laboratory of Myopia, Ministry of Health, Shanghai, China.
jihongwu@fudan.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Stickler syndrome is the most common genetic cause of rhegmatogenous
retinal detachment (RRD) in children, and has a high risk of blindness. Type I
(STL1) is the most common subtype, caused by COL2A1 mutations. This study aims
to analyze the mutation spectrum of COL2A1 and further elucidate the
genotype-phenotype relationships in the East Asian populations with STL1, which
is poorly studied at present.
METHODS: By searching MEDLINE, Web of Science, CNKI, Wanfang Data, HGMD and
Clinvar, all publications associated with STL1 were collected. Then, they were
carefully screened to obtain all reported STL1-related variants in COL2A1 and
clinical features in East Asian patients with STL1.
RESULTS: There were 274 COL2A1 variants identified in 999 patients with STL1
from 466 unrelated families, and more than half of them were truncation
mutations. Of the 107 STL1 patients reported in the East Asian population, it
was found that patients with truncation mutations had milder systemic
phenotypes, whereas patients with splicing mutations had severer phenotypes. In
addition, several recurrent variants (c.3106C > T, c.1833 + 1G > A, c.2710C > T
and c.1693C > T) were found.
CONCLUSIONS: Genotype-phenotype correlations should certainly be studied
carefully, contributed to making personalized follow-up plans and predicting
prognosis of this disorder. Genome editing holds great potential for treating
inherited diseases caused by pathogenic mutations. In this study, several
recurrent variants were found, providing potential candidate targets for genetic
manipulation in the future.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-020-0963-z
PMCID: PMC7008542
PMID: 32039712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
