---
reference_id: "PMID:9095492"
title: "Infection by parvovirus B 19 during pregnancy: a review."
authors:
- Levy R
- Weissman A
- Blomberg G
- Hagay ZJ
journal: Obstet Gynecol Surv
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1097/00006254-199704000-00023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infection by parvovirus B 19 during pregnancy: a review.
**Authors:** Levy R, Weissman A, Blomberg G, Hagay ZJ
**Journal:** Obstet Gynecol Surv (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00006254-199704000-00023](https://doi.org/10.1097/00006254-199704000-00023)

## Content

1. Obstet Gynecol Surv. 1997 Apr;52(4):254-9. doi: 
10.1097/00006254-199704000-00023.

Infection by parvovirus B 19 during pregnancy: a review.

Levy R(1), Weissman A, Blomberg G, Hagay ZJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kaplan Hospital, Rehovot, Israel.

Fetal infection by Parvovirus B 19 is a common cause of fetal anemia and 
nonimmune hydrops fetalis and may result in fetal death. Recent improvements in 
diagnosing parvovirus infections by sensitive molecular biology techniques now 
allow for a new insight into its pathogenic rule, immunology, and the varied 
clinical manifestations. The estimated overall risk of fetal loss after maternal 
exposure is about 6.5 percent, which is much less than previously thought. 
Inasmuch as complete spontaneous reversal of fetal hydrops has been commonly 
described, controversy exists regarding the management of the fetus with 
clinical signs of infection by Parvovirus B 19. According to the experience that 
has accumulated, it seems that only cases with severe fetal anemia or signs of 
fetal compromise should be managed by intrauterine transfusion. This procedure, 
however, is not without risk. Although an association between fetal viral 
infection and structural abnormalities has been described, it has not been 
proved yet. However, infection by Parvovirus B 19 has been recently proposed as 
a causative factor for congenital red blood cell aplasia.

DOI: 10.1097/00006254-199704000-00023
PMID: 9095492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]