---
reference_id: "PMID:26732150"
title: "Klinefelter Syndrome and medical treatment: hypogonadism and beyond."
authors:
- Chang S
- Skakkebæk A
- Gravholt CH
journal: Hormones (Athens)
year: '2015'
doi: 10.14310/horm.2002.1622
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Klinefelter Syndrome and medical treatment: hypogonadism and beyond.
**Authors:** Chang S, Skakkebæk A, Gravholt CH
**Journal:** Hormones (Athens) (2015)
**DOI:** [10.14310/horm.2002.1622](https://doi.org/10.14310/horm.2002.1622)

## Content

1. Hormones (Athens). 2015 Oct-Dec;14(4):531-48. doi: 10.14310/horm.2002.1622.

Klinefelter Syndrome and medical treatment: hypogonadism and beyond.

Chang S(1), Skakkebæk A(2), Gravholt CH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Hospital of South West Denmark, and Unit 
for Thrombosis Research, Institute of Public Health, University of Southern 
Denmark, Esbjerg, Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus 
University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University 
Hospital, Aarhus, Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, 
Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University 
Hospital, Aarhus, Department of Molecular Medicine (MOMA), Aarhus University 
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

Klinefelter syndrome (KS), though described more than 70 years ago, still 
imposes significant diagnostic challenges. Based on data from epidemiological 
studies, KS is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Although the 
pathophysiology and etiology behind these observations are as yet not well 
understood, a significant contribution of hypogonadism, central to the syndrome, 
is traditionally suspected. However, other unknown effects inherent to the 
syndrome also seem to modify the disease pattern. Herein we show that KS is 
under-diagnosed since only roughly 25% of patients are diagnosed and the mean 
age of diagnosis is during adult life. KS is associated with increased morbidity 
resulting in loss of 2-5 years in lifespan with increased mortality from 
different diseases and a poor socioeconomic profile. Small testes, 
hypergonadothrophic hypogonadism and cognitive impairment are usually found. The 
accompanying hypogonadism can lead to altered body composition and a risk of 
developing metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. 
Cancer risk is generally not different from that observed in the background 
population, although specific cancers like breast cancer and extragonadal germ 
cell tumors are seen more frequently in KS. The mainstay of medical treatment is 
testosterone replacement therapy to both attenuate acute and long-term 
consequences of hypogonadism and possibly prevent the frequent comorbidity. We 
believe that the diagnostic challenges should be tackled more efficiently, while 
there is also a pressing need to generate better evidence for timing and the 
proper dose of testosterone replacement. We advocate for a multidisciplinary 
setup with the inclusion of pediatricians, speech therapists, general 
practitioners, psychologists, infertility specialists, urologists and 
endocrinologists.

DOI: 10.14310/horm.2002.1622
PMID: 26732150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]