---
reference_id: "PMID:23539171"
title: Lymphangioleiomyomatosis screening in women with tuberous sclerosis.
authors:
- Cudzilo CJ
- Szczesniak RD
- Brody AS
- Rattan MS
- Krueger DA
- Bissler JJ
- Franz DN
- McCormack FX
- Young LR
journal: Chest
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1378/chest.12-2813
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- "Lymphangioleiomyomatosis/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, etiology"
- Middle Aged
- Ohio/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- "Tuberous Sclerosis/complications, diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lymphangioleiomyomatosis screening in women with tuberous sclerosis.
**Authors:** Cudzilo CJ, Szczesniak RD, Brody AS, Rattan MS, Krueger DA, Bissler JJ, Franz DN, McCormack FX, Young LR
**Journal:** Chest (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1378/chest.12-2813](https://doi.org/10.1378/chest.12-2813)

## Content

1. Chest. 2013 Aug;144(2):578-585. doi: 10.1378/chest.12-2813.

Lymphangioleiomyomatosis screening in women with tuberous sclerosis.

Cudzilo CJ(1), Szczesniak RD(2), Brody AS(3), Rattan MS(3), Krueger DA(4),
Bissler JJ(5), Franz DN(4), McCormack FX(1), Young LR(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, University of
Cincinnati Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH.
(2)Division of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH; Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH.
(3)Department of Radiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH.
(4)Division of Neurology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH.
(5)Division of Nephrology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH.
(6)Division of Pediatric Pulmonary Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN; Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care
Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN. Electronic
address: Lisa.Young@Vanderbilt.edu.

BACKGROUND: Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) occurs in at least 40% of women with
tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), as diagnosed based on chest CT scan findings.
Early identification may inform lifestyle choices and treatment decisions. Here
we report LAM prevalence in a large TSC clinic and propose an approach to CT
scan screening for LAM in women with TSC.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed initial chest CT scans of all female
patients with TSC aged ≥ 15 years seen at our center over a 12-year period. Each
CT image slice was manually scored for the presence or absence of characteristic
thin-walled cysts, and the diagnosis of LAM was made if the sum of the cysts on
all slices exceeded three cysts.
RESULTS: Of 133 female patients with TSC, 101 had chest CT scans available for
review. Forty-eight (47.5%) met criteria for TSC-LAM on the initial CT scan. The
risk of LAM was age dependent, rising by about 8% per year. The prevalence of
LAM was 27% in subjects &lt; 21 years of age and 81% in subjects &gt; 40 years
of age. Among asymptomatic subjects with LAM, 84% had cysts present in the
single image at the level of the carina. Most subjects with LAM eventually
developed pulmonary symptoms (63%), and 12.5% died from LAM.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that most women with TSC ultimately develop
cystic changes consistent with LAM and that most cases can be identified from a
single CT imaging slice at the level of the carina. TSC-LAM was associated with
appreciable morbidity and mortality in this referral population. An age-based
approach using limited CT scanning methods may facilitate screening and
subsequent treatment decisions with decreased radiation exposure in this at-risk
population.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.12-2813
PMID: 23539171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
