---
reference_id: "PMID:35489737"
title: "Molecular Stratification of Medulloblastoma: Clinical Outcomes and Therapeutic Interventions."
authors:
- Sursal T
- Ronecker JS
- Dicpinigaitis AJ
- Mohan AL
- Tobias ME
- Gandhi CD
- Jhanwar-Uniyal M
journal: Anticancer Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.21873/anticanres.15703
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Stratification of Medulloblastoma: Clinical Outcomes and Therapeutic Interventions.
**Authors:** Sursal T, Ronecker JS, Dicpinigaitis AJ, Mohan AL, Tobias ME, Gandhi CD, Jhanwar-Uniyal M
**Journal:** Anticancer Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.21873/anticanres.15703](https://doi.org/10.21873/anticanres.15703)

## Content

1. Anticancer Res. 2022 May;42(5):2225-2239. doi: 10.21873/anticanres.15703.

Molecular Stratification of Medulloblastoma: Clinical Outcomes and Therapeutic 
Interventions.

Sursal T(#)(1), Ronecker JS(#)(1), Dicpinigaitis AJ(1), Mohan AL(1), Tobias 
ME(1), Gandhi CD(1), Jhanwar-Uniyal M(#)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, New York Medical College/Westchester Medical 
Center, Valhalla, NY, U.S.A.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, New York Medical College/Westchester Medical 
Center, Valhalla, NY, U.S.A. meena_jhanwar@nymc.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant pediatric posterior fossa 
tumor. Recent genetic, epigenetic, and transcriptomic analyses have classified 
MB into three subgroups, Wingless Type (WNT), Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), and 
non-WNT/non-SHH (originally termed Group 3 and Group 4), with discrete patient 
profiles and prognoses. WNT is the least common subgroup with the best 
prognosis, characterized by nuclear β-catenin expression, mutations in Catenin 
beta-1 (CTNNB1), and chromosome 6 monosomy. SHH tumors contain mutations and 
alterations in GLI1, GLI2, SUFU, and PTCH1 genes, which constitutively activate 
the SHH pathway. Originally, the presence of TP53 gene alterations and/or MYC 
amplifications was considered the most reliable prognostic factor. However, 
recent molecular analyses have subdivided SHH MB into several subtypes with 
distinct characteristics such as age, TP53 mutation, MYC amplification, presence 
of metastases, TERT promoter alterations, PTEN loss, and other chromosomal 
alterations as well as SHH pathway-related gene mutations. The third 
non-WNT/non-SHH MB (Group3/4) subgroup is genetically highly heterogeneous and 
displays several molecular patterns, including MYC and OTX2 amplification, GFI1B 
activation, KBTBD4 mutation, GFI1 rearrangement, PRDM6 enhancer hijacking, KDM6A 
mutation, LCA histology, chromosome 10 loss, isochromosome 17q, SNCAIP 
duplication, and CDK6 amplification. However, based on molecular profiling and 
methylation patterns, additional non-WNT/non-SHH MB subtypes have been 
described. Recent WHO (2021) guidelines stratified MB into four molecular 
subgroups with four and eight further subgroups for SHH and non-WNT/non-SHH MB, 
respectively. In this review, we discuss advancements in genetics, epigenetics, 
and transcriptomics for better characterization, prognostication, and treatment 
of MB using precision medicine.

Copyright © 2022 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. George J. 
Delinasios), All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21873/anticanres.15703
PMID: 35489737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]