---
reference_id: "PMID:16550171"
title: Mutations in the facilitative glucose transporter GLUT10 alter angiogenesis and cause arterial tortuosity syndrome.
authors:
- Coucke PJ
- Willaert A
- Wessels MW
- Callewaert B
- Zoppi N
- De Backer J
- Fox JE
- Mancini GM
- Kambouris M
- Gardella R
- Facchetti F
- Willems PJ
- Forsyth R
- Dietz HC
- Barlati S
- Colombi M
- Loeys B
- De Paepe A
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1038/ng1764
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Arteries/pathology
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 20"
- Female
- "Glucose Transport Proteins, Facilitative/chemistry, genetics, physiology"
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic/genetics"
- Pedigree
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Vascular Diseases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the facilitative glucose transporter GLUT10 alter angiogenesis and cause arterial tortuosity syndrome.
**Authors:** Coucke PJ, Willaert A, Wessels MW, Callewaert B, Zoppi N, De Backer J, Fox JE, Mancini GM, Kambouris M, Gardella R, Facchetti F, Willems PJ, Forsyth R, Dietz HC, Barlati S, Colombi M, Loeys B, De Paepe A
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1764](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1764)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2006 Apr;38(4):452-7. doi: 10.1038/ng1764. Epub 2006 Mar 19.

Mutations in the facilitative glucose transporter GLUT10 alter angiogenesis and
cause arterial tortuosity syndrome.

Coucke PJ(1), Willaert A, Wessels MW, Callewaert B, Zoppi N, De Backer J, Fox
JE, Mancini GM, Kambouris M, Gardella R, Facchetti F, Willems PJ, Forsyth R,
Dietz HC, Barlati S, Colombi M, Loeys B, De Paepe A.

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium.
paul.coucke@ugent.be

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2006 Apr;38(4):400-1. doi: 10.1038/ng0406-400.

Arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS) is an autosomal recessive disorder
characterized by tortuosity, elongation, stenosis and aneurysm formation in the
major arteries owing to disruption of elastic fibers in the medial layer of the
arterial wall. Previously, we used homozygosity mapping to map a candidate locus
in a 4.1-Mb region on chromosome 20q13.1 (ref. 2). Here, we narrowed the
candidate region to 1.2 Mb containing seven genes. Mutations in one of these
genes, SLC2A10, encoding the facilitative glucose transporter GLUT10, were
identified in six ATS families. GLUT10 deficiency is associated with
upregulation of the TGFbeta pathway in the arterial wall, a finding also
observed in Loeys-Dietz syndrome, in which aortic aneurysms associate with
arterial tortuosity. The identification of a glucose transporter gene
responsible for altered arterial morphogenesis is notable in light of the
previously suggested link between GLUT10 and type 2 diabetes. Our data could
provide new insight on the mechanisms causing microangiopathic changes
associated with diabetes and suggest that therapeutic compounds intervening with
TGFbeta signaling represent a new treatment strategy.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1764
PMID: 16550171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
