---
reference_id: "PMID:32699773"
title: "Drug-Resistant Epilepsy in Children with Juvenile Huntington's Disease: A Challenging Case and Brief Review."
authors:
- Khair Md AM
- Kabrt DO J
- Falchek Md S
journal: Qatar Med J
year: '2020'
doi: 10.5339/qmj.2020.18
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Drug-Resistant Epilepsy in Children with Juvenile Huntington's Disease: A Challenging Case and Brief Review.
**Authors:** Khair Md AM, Kabrt DO J, Falchek Md S
**Journal:** Qatar Med J (2020)
**DOI:** [10.5339/qmj.2020.18](https://doi.org/10.5339/qmj.2020.18)

## Content

1. Qatar Med J. 2020 Jul 14;2020(1):18. doi: 10.5339/qmj.2020.18. eCollection
2020.

Drug-Resistant Epilepsy in Children with Juvenile Huntington's Disease: A 
Challenging Case and Brief Review.

Khair Md AM(1), Kabrt DO J(2), Falchek Md S(3).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Neurology Fellow. Ai.I. Dupont Hospital for Children - Thomas 
Jefferson University. 1600 Rockland Rd, Wilington DE 19809, United States.
(2)Osteopathic medical student, Rowan University. 42 e Laurel Rd, Stratford NJ 
08084, United States.
(3)Division chief of neurology- A.I Dupont Hospital for Children Wilmington DE. 
Assistant professor-Thomas Jefferson University-Philadelphia PA, United States.

Huntington's Disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder 
with a progressive decline in cognitive, motor, and psychological function. 
Chorea tends to be the most common associated movement disorder, although other 
variants of several abnormal movements are also seen. Adult-onset HD is the most 
common subtype. Juvenile Huntington's disease (JHD) accounts for 5%-10% of all 
HD cases and presents as a rapidly progressive disorder with a multitude of 
characteristics. We report on a 9-year-old male with JHD who presented with 
refractory epilepsy. His EEG findings, seizure type, and antiepileptic drug 
usage are discussed with a brief review of the currently available relevant 
literature. The currently reported case sheds light on antiepileptic drugs that 
proved effective in our patient and the importance of screening for JHD when a 
child presents with seizures that are difficult to control.

© 2020 Khair, Kabrt, Falchek, licensee HBKU Press.

DOI: 10.5339/qmj.2020.18
PMCID: PMC7359632
PMID: 32699773