---
reference_id: "PMID:27102849"
title: Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with neurodegeneration associated with AIFM1 mutation - a novel phenotype of the mitochondrial disease.
authors:
- Mierzewska H
- Rydzanicz M
- Biegański T
- Kosinska J
- Mierzewska-Schmidt M
- Ługowska A
- Pollak A
- Stawiński P
- Walczak A
- Kędra A
- Obersztyn E
- Szczepanik E
- Płoski R
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/cge.12792
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Apoptosis Inducing Factor/genetics
- Base Sequence
- Exome/genetics
- Family Health
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/diagnosis, genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnosis, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA/methods"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with neurodegeneration associated with AIFM1 mutation - a novel phenotype of the mitochondrial disease.
**Authors:** Mierzewska H, Rydzanicz M, Biegański T, Kosinska J, Mierzewska-Schmidt M, Ługowska A, Pollak A, Stawiński P, Walczak A, Kędra A, Obersztyn E, Szczepanik E, Płoski R
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.12792](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.12792)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2017 Jan;91(1):30-37. doi: 10.1111/cge.12792. Epub 2016 Jun 2.

Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with neurodegeneration associated with AIFM1 
mutation - a novel phenotype of the mitochondrial disease.

Mierzewska H(1), Rydzanicz M(2), Biegański T(3), Kosinska J(2), 
Mierzewska-Schmidt M(4), Ługowska A(5), Pollak A(6), Stawiński P(2)(6), Walczak 
A(2), Kędra A(2), Obersztyn E(7), Szczepanik E(1), Płoski R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Neurology, Institute of Mother and Child, 
Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Polish Mother's Memorial Hospital - 
Research Institute, Lodz, Poland.
(4)Department of Pediatric Anesthesiology and Intensive Therapy, Medical 
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Department of Genetics, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(6)Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, 
Warsaw, Poland.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, 
Poland.

In 1999, based on a single family, spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD) with 
mental retardation (MR) was described as a novel syndrome with probably X-linked 
recessive inheritance and unknown molecular defect (MIM 300232). Our purpose was 
to search for the causative defect in the originally described family and in an 
independently ascertained second family. All patients had slowly progressive 
neurodegeneration with central and peripheral involvement and identical skeletal 
dysplasia. Whole exome sequencing performed in two subjects showed a single 
plausible candidate - the p.Asp237Gly variant in AIFM1 (chr. Xq26.1). The 
p.Asp237Gly segregated with disease as indicated by linkage analysis [maximum 
logarithm of odds score (LOD) score at theta 0 for the two families was 3.359]. 
This variant had not been previously reported and it was predicted to be 
pathogenic by Polyphen2, SIFT, MutationTaster and Mutation Assessor. AIFM1 
encodes mitochondria associated apoptosis-inducing factor. The AIFM1 gene has 
been linked with COXPD6 encephalomyopathy (MIM 300816), Cowchock syndrome (MIM 
310490) and X-linked deafness with neuropathy (DFNX5, MIM 300614), none of which 
are similar to SEMD-MR. Our results place SEMD as the third instance of a 
skeletal phenotype associated with a mitochondrial disease (the others being 
EVEN-PLUS syndrome caused by mutations of HSPA9 and CODAS syndrome due to LONP1 
mutations).

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.12792
PMID: 27102849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]