---
reference_id: "PMID:37698022"
title: "Global, regional, and national burden of hypertensive heart disease among older adults in 204 countries and territories between 1990 and 2019: a trend analysis."
authors:
- Yang R
- Zhang X
- Bai J
- Wang L
- Wang W
- Cai J
journal: Chin Med J (Engl)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/CM9.0000000000002863
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global, regional, and national burden of hypertensive heart disease among older adults in 204 countries and territories between 1990 and 2019: a trend analysis.
**Authors:** Yang R, Zhang X, Bai J, Wang L, Wang W, Cai J
**Journal:** Chin Med J (Engl) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/CM9.0000000000002863](https://doi.org/10.1097/CM9.0000000000002863)

## Content

1. Chin Med J (Engl). 2023 Oct 20;136(20):2421-2430. doi: 
10.1097/CM9.0000000000002863. Epub 2023 Sep 12.

Global, regional, and national burden of hypertensive heart disease among older 
adults in 204 countries and territories between 1990 and 2019: a trend analysis.

Yang R(1), Zhang X, Bai J, Wang L, Wang W, Cai J.

Author information:
(1)Hypertension Center, Fuwai Hospital, State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular 
Disease, National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Peking Union Medical 
College & Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100037, China.

BACKGROUND: Hypertensive heart disease (HHD) poses a public health challenge, 
but data on its burden and trends among older adults are scarce. This study 
aimed to identify trends in the burden of HHD among older adults between 1990 
and 2019 at the global, regional, and national levels.
METHODS: Using the Global Burden of Diseases study 2019 data, we assessed HHD 
prevalence, death, and disability-adjusted life-year (DALY) rates for 
individuals aged 60-89 years at the global, regional, and national levels and 
estimated their average annual percentage changes (AAPCs) between 1990 and 2019 
using joinpoint regression analysis.
RESULTS: In 2019, there were 14.35 million HHD prevalent cases, 0.85 million 
deaths, and 14.56 million DALYs in older adults. Between 1990 and 2019, the 
prevalence of HHD increased globally {AAPC, 0.38 (95% confidence interval [CI], 
0.36, 0.41)} with decreases observed in mortality (AAPC, -0.83 [95% CI, -0.99, 
-0.66]) and the DALY rate (AAPC, -1.03 [95% CI, -1.19, -0.87]). This overall 
global trend pattern was essentially maintained for sex, age group, and 
sociodemographic index (SDI) quintile except for non-significant changes in the 
prevalence of HHD in those aged 70-74 years and in the middle SDI quintile. 
Notably, males had a higher HHD prevalence rate. However, HHD-related mortality 
and the DALY rate were higher in females. The middle SDI quintile experienced 
the largest decreases in mortality and the DALY rate, with a non-significant 
decline in prevalence between 1990 and 2019. There were significant 
discrepancies in the HHD burden and its trends across regions and countries.
CONCLUSIONS: In the past three decades, there has been an overall increasing 
trend in the prevalence of HHD among older adults worldwide despite decreasing 
trends in mortality and the DALY rate. Better management of hypertension, and 
prevention and control of HHD are needed in older adults.

Copyright © 2023 The Chinese Medical Association, produced by Wolters Kluwer, 
Inc. under the CC-BY-NC-ND license.

DOI: 10.1097/CM9.0000000000002863
PMCID: PMC10586836
PMID: 37698022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.