---
reference_id: "PMID:39516484"
title: Inhibition of sympathetic tone via hypothalamic descending pathway propagates glucocorticoid-induced endothelial impairment and osteonecrosis of the femoral head.
authors:
- Shao W
- Wang B
- Wang P
- Zhang S
- Gong S
- Guo X
- Duan D
- Shao Z
- Liu W
- He L
- Gao F
- Lv X
- Feng Y
journal: Bone Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41413-024-00371-3
keywords:
- Animals
- Male
- "Glucocorticoids/pharmacology, adverse effects"
- "Sympathetic Nervous System/drug effects, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Femur Head Necrosis/chemically induced, metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Receptors, Mineralocorticoid/metabolism, genetics"
- "Hypothalamus/metabolism, drug effects"
- "Receptors, Glucocorticoid/metabolism, genetics"
- "Endothelial Cells/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Femur Head/drug effects, pathology, metabolism"
- "Paraventricular Hypothalamic Nucleus/metabolism, drug effects, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhibition of sympathetic tone via hypothalamic descending pathway propagates glucocorticoid-induced endothelial impairment and osteonecrosis of the femoral head.
**Authors:** Shao W, Wang B, Wang P, Zhang S, Gong S, Guo X, Duan D, Shao Z, Liu W, He L, Gao F, Lv X, Feng Y
**Journal:** Bone Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41413-024-00371-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41413-024-00371-3)

## Content

1. Bone Res. 2024 Nov 8;12(1):64. doi: 10.1038/s41413-024-00371-3.

Inhibition of sympathetic tone via hypothalamic descending pathway propagates 
glucocorticoid-induced endothelial impairment and osteonecrosis of the femoral 
head.

Shao W(#)(1), Wang B(#)(2), Wang P(#)(1), Zhang S(1), Gong S(1), Guo X(1), Duan 
D(1), Shao Z(1), Liu W(1), He L(1), Gao F(1), Lv X(3), Feng Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, China.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation, Wuhan No.1 Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, China.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, China. xlyu@hust.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Orthopedics, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, China. 
fengyong@hust.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH) is a common complication of 
glucocorticoid (GC) therapy. Recent advances demonstrate that sympathetic nerves 
regulate bone homeostasis, and GCs lower the sympathetic tone. Here, we show 
that the dramatically decreased sympathetic tone is closely associated with the 
pathogenesis of GC-induced ONFH. GCs activate the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) 
but hinder the activation of the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) on neurons in 
the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN). This disrupts the balance of 
corticosteroid receptors (GR/MR) and subsequently reduces the sympathetic 
outflow in the PVN. Vascular endothelial cells rapidly react to inhibition of 
sympathetic tone by provoking endothelial apoptosis in adult male mice treated 
with methylprednisolone (MPS) daily for 3 days, and we find substantially 
reduced H-type vessels in the femoral heads of MPS-treated ONFH mice. 
Importantly, treatment with a GR inhibitor (RU486) in the PVN promotes the 
activation of MR and rebalances the ratio of GR and MR, thus effectively 
boosting sympathetic outflow, as shown by an increase in tyrosine hydroxylase 
expression in both the PVN and the sympathetic postganglionic neurons and an 
increase in norepinephrine levels in both the serum and bone marrow of the 
femoral head of MPS-treated mice. Rebalancing the corticosteroid receptors 
mitigates GC-induced endothelial impairment and ONFH and promotes angiogenesis 
coupled with osteogenesis in the femoral head, while these effects are abolished 
by chemical sympathectomy with 6-OHDA or adrenergic receptor-β2 (Adrb2) 
knockout. Furthermore, activating Adrb2 signaling in vivo is sufficient to 
rescue the GC-induced ONFH phenotype. Mechanistically, norepinephrine increases 
the expression of the key glycolytic gene 
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase 3 (PFKFB3) via Adrb2-cyclic 
AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) signaling. Endothelial-specific 
overexpression of PFKFB3 attenuates endothelial impairment and prevents severe 
osteonecrosis in MPS-treated Adrb2 knockout mice. Thus, GC inhibits sympathetic 
tone via the hypothalamic descending pathway, which, in turn, acts as a mediator 
of GC-induced ONFH.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41413-024-00371-3
PMCID: PMC11549335
PMID: 39516484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.