---
reference_id: "PMID:26002383"
title: Historical perspectives on the implantable cardioverter-defibrillator and prevention of sudden death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Maron BJ
journal: Card Electrophysiol Clin
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccep.2015.03.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Historical perspectives on the implantable cardioverter-defibrillator and prevention of sudden death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Maron BJ
**Journal:** Card Electrophysiol Clin (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccep.2015.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccep.2015.03.001)

## Content

1. Card Electrophysiol Clin. 2015 Jun;7(2):165-71. doi:
10.1016/j.ccep.2015.03.001.  Epub 2015 Apr 14.

Historical perspectives on the implantable cardioverter-defibrillator and 
prevention of sudden death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Maron BJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Center, Minneapolis Heart Institute Foundation, 
920 East 28th Street, Suite 620, Minneapolis, MN 55407, USA. Electronic address: 
hcm.maron@mhif.org.

The implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) was not originally envisioned 
as a treatment to prevent sudden death (SD) in young people with genetic heart 
diseases. In the case of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), initially it was not 
known whether the ICD would be effective in patients with a disease very 
different morphologically and functionally from coronary artery disease. 
Nevertheless, several observational clinical studies have shown that the ICD 
reliably terminates life-threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmias in HCM, and is 
largely responsible for reducing HCM mortality to 0.5% per year, by preventing 
SD and changing the natural course of the disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccep.2015.03.001
PMID: 26002383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]