---
reference_id: "PMID:36570454"
title: "Type I interferon signaling in SARS-CoV-2 associated neurocognitive disorder (SAND): Mapping host-virus interactions to an etiopathogenesis."
authors:
- Vavougios GD
- de Erausquin GA
- Snyder HM
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.1063298
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type I interferon signaling in SARS-CoV-2 associated neurocognitive disorder (SAND): Mapping host-virus interactions to an etiopathogenesis.
**Authors:** Vavougios GD, de Erausquin GA, Snyder HM
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2022.1063298](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2022.1063298)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2022 Dec 7;13:1063298. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.1063298.
eCollection 2022.

Type I interferon signaling in SARS-CoV-2 associated neurocognitive disorder
(SAND): Mapping host-virus interactions to an etiopathogenesis.

Vavougios GD(1)(2), de Erausquin GA(3), Snyder HM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Cyprus, Lefkosia, Cyprus.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Thessaly, Larisa, Greece.
(3)The Glenn Biggs Institute for Alzheimer's and Neurodegenerative Diseases,
UTHSA, San Antonio, TX, United States.
(4)Division of Medical and Scientific Relations, Alzheimer's Association,
Chicago, IL, United States.

Epidemiological, clinical, and radiological studies have provided insights into
the phenomenology and biological basis of cognitive impairment in COVID-19
survivors. Furthermore, its association with biomarkers associated with
neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration supports the notion that it is a
distinct aspect of LongCOVID syndrome with specific underlying biology.
Accounting for the latter, translational studies on SARS-CoV-2's interactions
with its hosts have provided evidence on type I interferon dysregulation, which
is seen in neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative diseases. To date, studies
attempting to describe this overlap have only described common mechanisms. In
this manuscript, we attempt to propose a mechanistic model based on the
host-virus interaction hypothesis. We discuss the molecular basis for a
SARS-CoV-2-associated neurocognitive disorder (SAND) focusing on specific genes
and pathways with potential mechanistic implications, several of which have been
predicted by Vavougios and their research group. Furthermore, our hypothesis
links translational evidence on interferon-responsive gene perturbations
introduced by SARS-CoV-2 and known dysregulated pathways in dementia. Discussion
emphasizes the crosstalk between central and peripheral immunity via
danger-associated molecular patterns in inducing SAND's emergence in the absence
of neuroinfection. Finally, we outline approaches to identifying targets that
are both testable and druggable, and could serve in the design of future
clinical and translational studies.

Copyright © 2022 Vavougios, Erausquin and Snyder.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.1063298
PMCID: PMC9771386
PMID: 36570454

Conflict of interest statement: Author HS is a full time employee of the
Alzheimer's Association; the organization's disclosures are present at
alz.org/transparency. The remaining authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
