---
reference_id: "PMID:21659424"
title: Genome-scale analysis of aberrant DNA methylation in colorectal cancer.
authors:
- Hinoue T
- Weisenberger DJ
- Lange CP
- Shen H
- Byun HM
- Van Den Berg D
- Malik S
- Pan F
- Noushmehr H
- van Dijk CM
- Tollenaar RA
- Laird PW
journal: Genome Res
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1101/gr.117523.110
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Cluster Analysis
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/classification, diagnosis, genetics"
- CpG Islands
- DNA Methylation
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Gene Silencing
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)
- ras Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-scale analysis of aberrant DNA methylation in colorectal cancer.
**Authors:** Hinoue T, Weisenberger DJ, Lange CP, Shen H, Byun HM, Van Den Berg D, Malik S, Pan F, Noushmehr H, van Dijk CM, Tollenaar RA, Laird PW
**Journal:** Genome Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gr.117523.110](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.117523.110)

## Content

1. Genome Res. 2012 Feb;22(2):271-82. doi: 10.1101/gr.117523.110. Epub 2011 Jun
9.

Genome-scale analysis of aberrant DNA methylation in colorectal cancer.

Hinoue T(1), Weisenberger DJ, Lange CP, Shen H, Byun HM, Van Den Berg D, Malik
S, Pan F, Noushmehr H, van Dijk CM, Tollenaar RA, Laird PW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of Southern California, USC Epigenome Center, Los Angeles, California
90089-9601, USA.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a heterogeneous disease in which unique subtypes are
characterized by distinct genetic and epigenetic alterations. Here we performed
comprehensive genome-scale DNA methylation profiling of 125 colorectal tumors
and 29 adjacent normal tissues. We identified four DNA methylation-based
subgroups of CRC using model-based cluster analyses. Each subtype shows
characteristic genetic and clinical features, indicating that they represent
biologically distinct subgroups. A CIMP-high (CIMP-H) subgroup, which exhibits
an exceptionally high frequency of cancer-specific DNA hypermethylation, is
strongly associated with MLH1 DNA hypermethylation and the BRAF(V600E) mutation.
A CIMP-low (CIMP-L) subgroup is enriched for KRAS mutations and characterized by
DNA hypermethylation of a subset of CIMP-H-associated markers rather than a
unique group of CpG islands. Non-CIMP tumors are separated into two distinct
clusters. One non-CIMP subgroup is distinguished by a significantly higher
frequency of TP53 mutations and frequent occurrence in the distal colon, while
the tumors that belong to the fourth group exhibit a low frequency of both
cancer-specific DNA hypermethylation and gene mutations and are significantly
enriched for rectal tumors. Furthermore, we identified 112 genes that were
down-regulated more than twofold in CIMP-H tumors together with promoter DNA
hypermethylation. These represent ∼7% of genes that acquired promoter DNA
methylation in CIMP-H tumors. Intriguingly, 48/112 genes were also
transcriptionally down-regulated in non-CIMP subgroups, but this was not
attributable to promoter DNA hypermethylation. Together, we identified four
distinct DNA methylation subgroups of CRC and provided novel insight regarding
the role of CIMP-specific DNA hypermethylation in gene silencing.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.117523.110
PMCID: PMC3266034
PMID: 21659424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
