---
reference_id: "PMID:23486536"
title: "Heterogeneous clinical presentation in ICF syndrome: correlation with underlying gene defects."
authors:
- Weemaes CM
- van Tol MJ
- Wang J
- van Ostaijen-ten Dam MM
- van Eggermond MC
- Thijssen PE
- Aytekin C
- Brunetti-Pierri N
- van der Burg M
- Graham Davies E
- Ferster A
- Furthner D
- Gimelli G
- Gennery A
- Kloeckener-Gruissem B
- Meyn S
- Powell C
- Reisli I
- Schuetz C
- Schulz A
- Shugar A
- van den Elsen PJ
- van der Maarel SM
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.40
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- DNA (Cytosine-5-)-Methyltransferases/genetics
- Demography
- Face/abnormalities
- Female
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/blood
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/blood, genetics, therapy"
- Lymphocyte Count
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- Young Adult
- DNA Methyltransferase 3B
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heterogeneous clinical presentation in ICF syndrome: correlation with underlying gene defects.
**Authors:** Weemaes CM, van Tol MJ, Wang J, van Ostaijen-ten Dam MM, van Eggermond MC, Thijssen PE, Aytekin C, Brunetti-Pierri N, van der Burg M, Graham Davies E, Ferster A, Furthner D, Gimelli G, Gennery A, Kloeckener-Gruissem B, Meyn S, Powell C, Reisli I, Schuetz C, Schulz A, Shugar A, van den Elsen PJ, van der Maarel SM
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2013.40](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2013.40)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Nov;21(11):1219-25. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.40. Epub 2013
 Mar 13.

Heterogeneous clinical presentation in ICF syndrome: correlation with underlying
gene defects.

Weemaes CM(1), van Tol MJ, Wang J, van Ostaijen-ten Dam MM, van Eggermond MC,
Thijssen PE, Aytekin C, Brunetti-Pierri N, van der Burg M, Graham Davies E,
Ferster A, Furthner D, Gimelli G, Gennery A, Kloeckener-Gruissem B, Meyn S,
Powell C, Reisli I, Schuetz C, Schulz A, Shugar A, van den Elsen PJ, van der
Maarel SM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Radboud
University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Immunodeficiency with centromeric instability and facial anomalies (ICF)
syndrome is a primary immunodeficiency, predominantly characterized by
agammaglobulinemia or hypoimmunoglobulinemia, centromere instability and facial
anomalies. Mutations in two genes have been discovered to cause ICF syndrome:
DNMT3B and ZBTB24. To characterize the clinical features of this syndrome, as
well as genotype-phenotype correlations, we compared clinical and genetic data
of 44 ICF patients. Of them, 23 had mutations in DNMT3B (ICF1), 13 patients had
mutations in ZBTB24 (ICF2), whereas for 8 patients, the gene defect has not yet
been identified (ICFX). While at first sight these patients share the same
immunological, morphological and epigenetic hallmarks of the disease, systematic
evaluation of all reported informative cases shows that: (1) the humoral
immunodeficiency is generally more pronounced in ICF1 patients, (2) B- and
T-cell compartments are both involved in ICF1 and ICF2, (3) ICF2 patients have a
significantly higher incidence of intellectual disability and (4) congenital
malformations can be observed in some ICF1 and ICF2 cases. It is expected that
these observations on prevalence and clinical presentation will facilitate
mutation-screening strategies and help in diagnostic counseling.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.40
PMCID: PMC3798845
PMID: 23486536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
