---
reference_id: "PMID:36920120"
title: "Loss of control in binge-eating disorder: Fear and resignation."
authors:
- Perelman H
- Gilbert K
- Grilo CM
- Lydecker JA
journal: Int J Eat Disord
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/eat.23929
keywords:
- Adult
- Male
- Humans
- Binge-Eating Disorder/psychology
- Bulimia Nervosa/psychology
- Depression/psychology
- Hyperphagia
- Bariatric Surgery/psychology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of control in binge-eating disorder: Fear and resignation.
**Authors:** Perelman H, Gilbert K, Grilo CM, Lydecker JA
**Journal:** Int J Eat Disord (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/eat.23929](https://doi.org/10.1002/eat.23929)

## Content

1. Int J Eat Disord. 2023 Jun;56(6):1199-1206. doi: 10.1002/eat.23929. Epub 2023 
Mar 15.

Loss of control in binge-eating disorder: Fear and resignation.

Perelman H(1)(2), Gilbert K(1)(3), Grilo CM(1), Lydecker JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA.
(2)Department of Counseling Psychology and Applied Human Development, Boston 
University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Hartford, Hartford, Connecticut, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Binge-eating disorder involves overeating while feeling a loss of 
control (LOC). Emotions around LOC appear to vary; some patients fear LOC 
whereas others feel powerless or "resigned" to LOC. This study examined 
differences in psychopathology among treatment-seeking patients with 
binge-eating disorder categorized with fear of LOC, resignation to LOC, and no 
fear/resignation of LOC.
METHOD: Doctoral research clinicians administered diagnostic and semistructured 
interviews to characterize psychopathology and establish a diagnosis of 
binge-eating disorder in participants (N = 382). The interview assessed fear of 
LOC in the past month. Further queries assessed whether, in the absence of fear 
of LOC, patients were resigned to LOC or had no fear/resignation.
RESULTS: Patients with fear of LOC and resigned to LOC endorsed significantly 
greater global eating-disorder psychopathology than patients with no 
fear/resignation. Patients with fear of LOC reported greater distress about 
binge eating and greater depression than those with no fear/resignation. 
Patients resigned to LOC reported significantly more frequent binge-eating 
episodes than those with fear of LOC and no fear/resignation. Black individuals 
and men were more likely to report no fear/resignation than other demographic 
groups.
DISCUSSION: This study describes a novel clinical aspect of binge-eating 
disorder: resignation to LOC. Findings highlight the importance of including 
anticipatory cognitive-affective experiences in treatment formulations and 
planning. Future research should examine co-occurrence of these experiences and 
their association with impairment. Future research should also examine how fear 
of LOC and resignation to LOC change during treatment and whether they predict 
or moderate treatment outcomes.
PUBLIC SIGNIFICANCE: Adults with binge-eating disorder have anticipatory 
cognitive-affective experiences about loss of control (LOC) over eating (i.e., 
fear of LOC, resigned to LOC, no fear nor resignation of LOC). Individuals who 
experience fear of LOC and those who are resigned to LOC had more severe 
psychopathology than those without fear/resignation. Binge-eating disorder has 
the highest prevalence of the eating disorders; thus, findings have high public 
significance in guiding clinicians' treatment planning.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/eat.23929
PMCID: PMC10247475
PMID: 36920120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]