---
reference_id: "PMID:38043964"
title: Alternating hemiplegia of childhood.
authors:
- Ananthavarathan P
- Kamourieh S
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-823356-6.00005-6
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hemiplegia/etiology, genetics"
- Sodium-Potassium-Exchanging ATPase/genetics
- Mutation
- Seizures
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alternating hemiplegia of childhood.
**Authors:** Ananthavarathan P, Kamourieh S
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-12-823356-6.00005-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-823356-6.00005-6)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2023;198:221-227. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-823356-6.00005-6.

Alternating hemiplegia of childhood.

Ananthavarathan P(1), Kamourieh S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Headache and Facial Pain Group, National Hospital 
for Neurology and Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Neurology, Headache and Facial Pain Group, National Hospital 
for Neurology and Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: salwa.kamourieh@nhs.net.

Alternating hemiplegia of childhood (AHC) is characterized by recurrent episodes 
of hemiplegia which may alternate sides between attacks. The condition is 
associated with severe neurodevelopmental disorder presenting in early infancy, 
and may encompass a wide range of other paroxysmal manifestations (e.g., 
dystonia, nystagmus, dysautonomia) and pervasive neurological disabilities 
(e.g., developmental delay, learning disabilities, choreoathetosis, and ataxia). 
Epileptic seizures are particularly common among patients with AHC. Diagnosis is 
usually based on history and clinical grounds using the Aicardi criteria. 
Mutations in the ATP1A3 gene are implicated in the disease pathology of the 
condition, as well as several other neurodevelopmental disorders, suggesting AHC 
forms part of a spectrum of overlapping clinical syndromes rather than a 
distinct clinical entity per se. Management of patients with AHC includes the 
rapid induction of sleep during paroxysmal attacks and the avoidance of 
identified triggers. Pharmacotherapeutic treatments have a role in managing 
epileptic seizures, as well as in the prevention of paroxysmal attacks wherein 
flunarizine remains the treatment of choice.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved, including those for text and 
data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-823356-6.00005-6
PMID: 38043964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]