---
reference_id: "PMID:16740155"
title: Pfeiffer syndrome.
authors:
- Vogels A
- Fryns JP
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2006'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pfeiffer syndrome.
**Authors:** Vogels A, Fryns JP
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2006)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2006 Jun 1;1:19. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-19.

Pfeiffer syndrome.

Vogels A(1), Fryns JP.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital Leuven, Herestraat 49, B-3000
Leuven, Belgium. annick.vogels@uz.kuleuven.ac.be

Pfeiffer syndrome is a rare autosomal dominantly inherited disorder that
associates craniosynostosis, broad and deviated thumbs and big toes, and partial
syndactyly on hands and feet. Hydrocephaly may be found occasionally, along with
severe ocular proptosis, ankylosed elbows, abnormal viscera, and slow
development. Based on the severity of the phenotype, Pfeiffer syndrome is
divided into three clinical subtypes. Type 1 "classic" Pfeiffer syndrome
involves individuals with mild manifestations including brachycephaly, midface
hypoplasia and finger and toe abnormalities; it is associated with normal
intelligence and generally good outcome. Type 2 consists of cloverleaf skull,
extreme proptosis, finger and toe abnormalities, elbow ankylosis or synostosis,
developmental delay and neurological complications. Type 3 is similar to type 2
but without a cloverleaf skull. Clinical overlap between the three types may
occur. Pfeiffer syndrome affects about 1 in 100,000 individuals. The disorder
can be caused by mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor genes FGFR-1
or FGFR-2. Pfeiffer syndrome can be diagnosed prenatally by sonography showing
craniosynostosis, hypertelorism with proptosis, and broad thumb, or molecularly
if it concerns a recurrence and the causative mutation was found. Molecular
genetic testing is important to confirm the diagnosis. Management includes
multiple-staged surgery of craniosynostosis. Midfacial surgery is performed to
reduce the exophthalmos and the midfacial hypoplasia.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-19
PMCID: PMC1482682
PMID: 16740155
