---
reference_id: "PMID:39381850"
title: Extended long-term efficacy and safety of velmanase alfa treatment up to 12 years in patients with alpha-mannosidosis.
authors:
- Guffon N
- Borgwardt L
- Tylki-Szymańska A
- Ballabeni A
- Donà F
- Joseph A
- Nienhuis H
- Maugeri C
- Lund A
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12799
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy/methods
- Child
- Adult
- Adolescent
- alpha-Mannosidosis/drug therapy
- Young Adult
- Treatment Outcome
- Middle Aged
- "Child, Preschool"
- Immunoglobulin G
- alpha-Mannosidase/therapeutic use
- "Oligosaccharides/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extended long-term efficacy and safety of velmanase alfa treatment up to 12 years in patients with alpha-mannosidosis.
**Authors:** Guffon N, Borgwardt L, Tylki-Szymańska A, Ballabeni A, Donà F, Joseph A, Nienhuis H, Maugeri C, Lund A
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12799](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12799)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2025 Jan;48(1):e12799. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12799. Epub 2024
 Oct 9.

Extended long-term efficacy and safety of velmanase alfa treatment up to
12 years in patients with alpha-mannosidosis.

Guffon N(1), Borgwardt L(2)(3), Tylki-Szymańska A(4), Ballabeni A(5), Donà F(5),
Joseph A(5), Nienhuis H(5), Maugeri C(5), Lund A(2).

Author information:
(1)Reference Center for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Femme Mère Enfant
Hospital, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(2)Center for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Departments of Pediatrics and
Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(3)Center for Genomic Medicine, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases, The Children's
Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A., Parma, Italy.

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) using velmanase alfa previously showed
promising efficacy and safety outcomes for up to 4 years of therapy in patients
with alpha-mannosidosis. This pooled analysis from two multicenter, open-label
phase IIIb extension trials rhLAMAN-07 (N = 13; NCT01908712) and rhLAMAN-09
(N = 8; NCT01908725) evaluated the long-term effects of velmanase alfa. Sixteen
patients who previously completed phase I-III rhLAMAN-02/-03/-04/-05/-08 trials
and five ERT-naïve patients were enrolled. Patients received 1 mg/kg velmanase
alfa once weekly. Endpoints included changes from treatment baseline (before
initial dose of velmanase alfa in any trial) in serum oligosaccharides, 6-minute
walk test (6MWT), 3-minute stair climb test (3MSCT), pulmonary function (forced
vital capacity [FVC], % predicted), serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) levels, and
adverse events. The overall cohort comprised 21 patients, divided by age at
treatment baseline into pediatric (n = 14) and adult subgroups (n = 7). Distance
walked according to 6MWT increased or stabilized in pediatric patients, while in
adults either stabilization or slight decline was observed. Similarly, pediatric
patients performed better in the 3MSCT. Changes in FVC, % predicted, were
comparable in both subgroups up to ~6 years of observation, diverging
thereafter. Overall, sustained serum oligosaccharide clearance and serum IgG
level increase was observed upon treatment initiation and persisted until last
common observation. Velmanase alfa treatment was generally well tolerated, with
the majority of reported adverse events being of mild-to-moderate intensity.
With follow-up of up to 12 years, long-term efficacy and safety outcomes
indicate continued benefits of velmanase alfa in patients with
alpha-mannosidosis.

© 2024 The Author(s). Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12799
PMCID: PMC11667663
PMID: 39381850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: N.G. has received hospital grants as a P.I. for
this study from Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A., and has received fees for
participating as an expert on lysosomal disease management from Chiesi
Farmaceutici S.p.A., Biomarin, Sanofi Genzyme, Takeda, and Ultragenyx
Pharmaceutical Inc. L.B. was subinvestigator for this study from Chiesi
Farmaceutici S.p.A. and received consulting fees and/or honoraria/travel support
from Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A. A.B. was an employee at Chiesi Farmaceutici
S.p.A at the time the work was conducted. F.D., A.J., H.N., and C.M. are
employees at Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A. A.L. has received hospital grants as a
P.I. for this study from Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A. as well as consulting fees
and/or honoraria/travel support from Alexion, BioMarin, Chiesi Farmaceutici
S.p.A., Sanofi Genzyme, and Shire. A.T.S. was P.I. for this study from Chiesi
Farmaceutici S.p.A., and has received fees for participating as an expert on
lysosomal disease management from Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A., Sanofi Genzyme,
and Takeda.
