---
reference_id: "PMID:30732528"
title: CDC42 Deletion Elicits Cerebral Vascular Malformations via Increased MEKK3-Dependent KLF4 Expression.
authors:
- Castro M
- Laviña B
- Ando K
- Álvarez-Aznar A
- Abu Taha A
- Brakebusch C
- Dejana E
- Betsholtz C
- Gaengel K
journal: Circ Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.118.314300
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- Apoptosis Regulatory Proteins/genetics
- Blood Vessels/abnormalities
- Brain/blood supply
- Cell Cycle/physiology
- Cell Proliferation
- Endothelial Cells/physiology
- Gene Deletion
- "Hemangioma, Cavernous, Central Nervous System/etiology"
- KRIT1 Protein/genetics
- Kruppel-Like Factor 4
- Kruppel-Like Transcription Factors/metabolism
- MAP Kinase Kinase 5/metabolism
- MAP Kinase Kinase Kinase 3/metabolism
- Mice
- Microfilament Proteins/genetics
- "cdc42 GTP-Binding Protein/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CDC42 Deletion Elicits Cerebral Vascular Malformations via Increased MEKK3-Dependent KLF4 Expression.
**Authors:** Castro M, Laviña B, Ando K, Álvarez-Aznar A, Abu Taha A, Brakebusch C, Dejana E, Betsholtz C, Gaengel K
**Journal:** Circ Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.118.314300](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.118.314300)

## Content

1. Circ Res. 2019 Apr 12;124(8):1240-1252. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.118.314300.

CDC42 Deletion Elicits Cerebral Vascular Malformations via Increased
MEKK3-Dependent KLF4 Expression.

Castro M(1), Laviña B(1), Ando K(1), Álvarez-Aznar A(1), Abu Taha A(1),
Brakebusch C(2)(3), Dejana E(1)(4), Betsholtz C(1), Gaengel K(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck
Laboratory, Uppsala University, Sweden (M.C., B.L., K.A., A.Á.-A., A.A.T., E.D.,
C. Betsholtz, K.G.).
(2)Biotech Research and Innovation Center, University of Copenhagen, Denmark (C.
Brakebusch).
(3)ICMC (Integrated Cardio Metabolic Centre), Karolinska
Institutet/AstraZeneca/Integrated Cardio Metabolic Centre, Huddinge, Stockholm,
Sweden (C. Betsholtz).
(4)FIRC (Italian Foundation for Cancer Research) Institute of Molecular Oncology
Foundation, Milan, Italy (E.D.).

RATIONALE: Aberrant formation of blood vessels precedes a broad spectrum of
vascular complications; however, the cellular and molecular events governing
vascular malformations are not yet fully understood.
OBJECTIVE: Here, we investigated the role of CDC42 (cell division cycle 42)
during vascular morphogenesis and its relative importance for the development of
cerebrovascular malformations.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To avoid secondary systemic effects often associated with
embryonic gene deletion, we generated an endothelial-specific and inducible
knockout approach to study postnatal vascularization of the mouse brain.
Postnatal endothelial-specific deletion of Cdc42 elicits cerebrovascular
malformations reminiscent of cerebral cavernous malformations (CCMs). At the
cellular level, loss of CDC42 function in brain endothelial cells (ECs) impairs
their sprouting, branching morphogenesis, axial polarity, and normal dispersion
within the brain tissue. Disruption of CDC42 does not alter EC proliferation,
but malformations occur where EC proliferation is the most pronounced during
brain development-the postnatal cerebellum-indicating that a high, naturally
occurring EC proliferation provides a permissive state for the appearance of
these malformations. Mechanistically, CDC42 depletion in ECs elicited increased
MEKK3 (mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase 3)-MEK5 (mitogen-activated
protein kinase kinase 5)-ERK5 (extracellular signal-regulated kinase 5)
signaling and consequent detrimental overexpression of KLF (Kruppel-like factor)
2 and KLF4, recapitulating the hallmark mechanism for CCM pathogenesis. Through
genetic approaches, we demonstrate that the coinactivation of Klf4 reduces the
severity of vascular malformations in Cdc42 mutant mice. Moreover, we show that
CDC42 interacts with CCMs and that CCM3 promotes CDC42 activity in ECs.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that endothelial-specific deletion of Cdc42 elicits
CCM-like cerebrovascular malformations and that CDC42 is engaged in the CCM
signaling network to restrain the MEKK3-MEK5-ERK5-KLF2/4 pathway.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.118.314300
PMID: 30732528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
