---
reference_id: "PMID:27501770"
title: "Biochemical and imaging surveillance in germline TP53 mutation carriers with Li-Fraumeni syndrome: 11 year follow-up of a prospective observational study."
authors:
- Villani A
- Shore A
- Wasserman JD
- Stephens D
- Kim RH
- Druker H
- Gallinger B
- Naumer A
- Kohlmann W
- Novokmet A
- Tabori U
- Tijerin M
- Greer ML
- Finlay JL
- Schiffman JD
- Malkin D
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30249-2
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/metabolism"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Germ-Line Mutation/genetics
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Li-Fraumeni Syndrome/diagnostic imaging, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multimodal Imaging/methods
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Population Surveillance
- Prognosis
- Prospective Studies
- Survival Rate
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biochemical and imaging surveillance in germline TP53 mutation carriers with Li-Fraumeni syndrome: 11 year follow-up of a prospective observational study.
**Authors:** Villani A, Shore A, Wasserman JD, Stephens D, Kim RH, Druker H, Gallinger B, Naumer A, Kohlmann W, Novokmet A, Tabori U, Tijerin M, Greer ML, Finlay JL, Schiffman JD, Malkin D
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30249-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30249-2)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2016 Sep;17(9):1295-305. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30249-2.
Epub  2016 Aug 5.

Biochemical and imaging surveillance in germline TP53 mutation carriers with 
Li-Fraumeni syndrome: 11 year follow-up of a prospective observational study.

Villani A(1), Shore A(2), Wasserman JD(3), Stephens D(4), Kim RH(5), Druker 
H(6), Gallinger B(7), Naumer A(8), Kohlmann W(8), Novokmet A(9), Tabori U(1), 
Tijerin M(10), Greer ML(10), Finlay JL(11), Schiffman JD(8), Malkin D(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 
Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 
Genetics & Genomic Biology Program, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Genetics & Genomic Biology Program, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 
Division of Endocrinology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Genetics 
& Genomic Biology Program, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Division of Biostatistics, Design and Analysis, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)The Hospital for Sick Children, and Department of Medicine and Division of 
Medical Oncology and Hematology, Princess Margaret Cancer Center, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(6)Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 
Department of Genetic Counselling and Department of Molecular Genetics, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(7)Genetics & Genomic Biology Program, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada; Department of Genetic Counselling and Department of Molecular Genetics, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(8)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Huntsman Cancer Institute, 
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(9)Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 
Genetics & Genomic Biology Program, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(10)Department of Medical Imaging, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(11)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Nationwide Children's Hospital, The Ohio 
State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 
Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 
Genetics & Genomic Biology Program, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 
Electronic address: david.malkin@sickkids.ca.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2016 Sep;17(9):1184-6. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30382-5.
    Lancet Oncol. 2016 Nov;17(11):e472. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30530-7.
    Lancet Oncol. 2016 Nov;17(11):e473. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30525-3.

BACKGROUND: Carriers of a germline TP53 pathogenic variant have a substantial 
lifetime risk of developing cancer. In 2011, we did a prospective observational 
study of members of families who chose to either undergo a comprehensive 
surveillance protocol for individuals with Li-Fraumeni syndrome or not. We 
sought to update our assessment of and modify the surveillance protocol, so in 
this study we report both longer follow-up of these patients and additional 
patients who underwent surveillance, as well as update the originally presented 
surveillance protocol.
METHODS: A clinical surveillance protocol using physical examination and 
frequent biochemical and imaging studies (consisting of whole-body MRI, brain 
MRI, breast MRI, mammography, abdominal and pelvic ultrasound, and colonoscopy) 
was introduced at three tertiary care centres in Canada and the USA on Jan 1, 
2004, for carriers of TP53 pathogenic variants. After confirmation of TP53 
mutation, participants either chose to undergo surveillance or chose not to 
undergo surveillance. Patients could cross over between groups at any time. The 
primary outcome measure was detection of asymptomatic tumours by surveillance 
investigations. The secondary outcome measure was 5 year overall survival 
established from a tumour diagnosed symptomatically (in the non-surveillance 
group) versus one diagnosed by surveillance. We completed survival analyses 
using an as-treated approach.
FINDINGS: Between Jan 1, 2004, and July 1, 2015, we identified 89 carriers of 
TP53 pathogenic variants in 39 unrelated families, of whom 40 (45%) agreed to 
surveillance and 49 (55%) declined surveillance. 19 (21%) patients crossed over 
from the non-surveillance to the surveillance group, giving a total of 59 (66%) 
individuals undergoing surveillance for a median of 32 months (IQR 12-87). 40 
asymptomatic tumours have been detected in 19 (32%) of 59 patients who underwent 
surveillance. Two additional cancers were diagnosed between surveillance 
assessments (false negatives) and two biopsied lesions were non-neoplastic 
entities on pathological review (false positives). Among the 49 individuals who 
initially declined surveillance, 61 symptomatic tumours were diagnosed in 43 
(88%) patients. 21 (49%) of the 43 individuals not on surveillance who developed 
cancer were alive compared with 16 (84%) of the 19 individuals undergoing 
surveillance who developed cancer (p=0·012) after a median follow-up of 46 
months (IQR 22-72) for those not on surveillance and 38 months (12-86) for those 
on surveillance. 5 year overall survival was 88·8% (95% CI 78·7-100) in the 
surveillance group and 59·6% (47·2-75·2) in the non-surveillance group 
(p=0·0132).
INTERPRETATION: Our findings show that long-term compliance with a comprehensive 
surveillance protocol for early tumour detection in individuals with pathogenic 
TP53 variants is feasible and that early tumour detection through surveillance 
is associated with improved long-term survival. Incorporation of this approach 
into clinical management of these patients should be considered.
FUNDING: Canadian Institutes for Heath Research, Canadian Cancer Society, Terry 
Fox Research Institute, SickKids Foundation, and Soccer for Hope Foundation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30249-2
PMID: 27501770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]