---
reference_id: "PMID:19442771"
title: "DYNC2H1 mutations cause asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy and short rib-polydactyly syndrome, type III."
authors:
- Dagoneau N
- Goulet M
- Geneviève D
- Sznajer Y
- Martinovic J
- Smithson S
- Huber C
- Baujat G
- Flori E
- Tecco L
- Cavalcanti D
- Delezoide AL
- Serre V
- Le Merrer M
- Munnich A
- Cormier-Daire V
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.04.016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DYNC2H1 mutations cause asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy and short rib-polydactyly syndrome, type III.
**Authors:** Dagoneau N, Goulet M, Geneviève D, Sznajer Y, Martinovic J, Smithson S, Huber C, Baujat G, Flori E, Tecco L, Cavalcanti D, Delezoide AL, Serre V, Le Merrer M, Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.04.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.04.016)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 May;84(5):706-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.04.016.

DYNC2H1 mutations cause asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy and short 
rib-polydactyly syndrome, type III.

Dagoneau N(1), Goulet M, Geneviève D, Sznajer Y, Martinovic J, Smithson S, Huber 
C, Baujat G, Flori E, Tecco L, Cavalcanti D, Delezoide AL, Serre V, Le Merrer M, 
Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V.

Author information:
(1)Département de Génétique, Unité INSERM U781, Université Paris Descartes, 
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 75015 
Paris, France.

Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy (ATD) is an autosomal-recessive 
chondrodysplasia characterized by short ribs and a narrow thorax, short long 
bones, inconstant polydactyly, and trident acetabular roof. ATD is closely 
related to the short rib polydactyly syndrome (SRP) type III, which is a more 
severe condition characterized by early prenatal expression and lethality and 
variable malformations. We first excluded IFT80 in a series of 26 fetuses and 
children belonging to 14 families diagnosed with either ATD or SRP type III. 
Studying a consanguineous family from Morocco, we mapped an ATD gene to 
chromosome 11q14.3-q23.1 in a 20.4 Mb region and identified homozygous mutations 
in the cytoplasmic dynein 2 heavy chain 1 (DYNC2H1) gene in the affected 
children. Compound heterozygosity for DYNC2H1 mutations was also identified in 
four additional families. Among the five families, 3/5 were diagnosed with ATD 
and 2/5 included pregnancies terminated for SRP type III. DYNC2H1 is a component 
of a cytoplasmic dynein complex and is directly involved in the generation and 
maintenance of cilia. From this study, we conclude that ATD and SRP type III are 
variants of a single disorder belonging to the ciliopathy group.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.04.016
PMCID: PMC2681009
PMID: 19442771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]