---
reference_id: "PMID:34545712"
title: Clinical and molecular characterization of five Chinese patients with autosomal recessive osteopetrosis.
authors:
- Liang H
- Li N
- Yao RE
- Yu T
- Ding L
- Chen J
- Wang J
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1815
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chloride Channels/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- "Osteopetrosis/genetics, pathology"
- Vacuolar Proton-Translocating ATPases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and molecular characterization of five Chinese patients with autosomal recessive osteopetrosis.
**Authors:** Liang H, Li N, Yao RE, Yu T, Ding L, Chen J, Wang J
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.1815](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.1815)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2021 Nov;9(11):e1815. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1815. Epub 2021
 Sep 21.

Clinical and molecular characterization of five Chinese patients with autosomal 
recessive osteopetrosis.

Liang H(1), Li N(2)(3), Yao RE(2)(3), Yu T(2)(3), Ding L(1), Chen J(1), Wang 
J(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Ministry of Health, 
Department of Hematology and Oncology, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Shanghai 
Children's Medical Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, China.
(3)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Clinical Molecular Diagnostics for Pediatrics, 
Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Osteopetrosis is characterized by increased bone density and bone 
marrow cavity stenosis due to a decrease in the number of osteoclasts or the 
dysfunction of their differentiation and absorption properties usually caused by 
biallelic variants of the TCIRG1 and CLCN7 genes.
METHODS: In this study, we describe five Chinese children who presented with 
anemia, thrombocytopenia, hepatosplenomegaly, repeated infections, and increased 
bone density. Whole-exome sequencing identified five compound heterozygous 
variants of the CLCN7 and TCIRG1 genes in these patients.
RESULTS: Patient 1 had a novel variant c.1555C>T (p.L519F) and a previously 
reported pathogenic variant c.2299C>T (p.R767W) in CLCN7. Patient 2 harbored a 
novel missense variant (c.1025T>C; p.L342P) and a novel splicing variant 
(c.286-9G>A) in CLCN7. Patients 3A and 3B from one family displayed the same 
compound heterozygous TCIRG1 variant, including a novel frameshift variant 
(c.1370del; p.T457Tfs*71) and a novel splicing variant (c.1554+2T>C). In Patient 
4, two novel variants were identified in the TCIRG1 gene: c.676G>T; p.E226* and 
c.1191del; p.P398Sfs*5. Patient 5 harbored two known pathogenic variants, 
c.909C>A (p.Y303*) and c.2008C>T (p.R670*), in TCIRG1. Analysis of the products 
obtained from the reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction revealed that 
the c.286-9G>A variant in CLCN7 of patient 2 leads to intron 3 retention, 
resulting in the formation of a premature termination codon (p.E95Vfs*8). These 
five patients were eventually diagnosed with autosomal recessive osteopetrosis, 
and the three children with TCIRG1 variants received hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results expand the spectrum of variation of genes related to 
osteopetrosis and deepen the understanding of the relationship between the 
genotype and clinical characteristics of osteopetrosis.

© 2021 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.1815
PMCID: PMC8606217
PMID: 34545712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared no conflict of 
interest.