---
reference_id: "PMID:23681793"
title: Value-based healthcare in Lynch syndrome.
authors:
- Hennink SD
- Hofland N
- Gopie JP
- van der Kaa C
- de Koning K
- Nielsen M
- Tops C
- Morreau H
- de Vos tot Nederveen Cappel WH
- Langers AM
- Hardwick JC
- Gaarenstroom KN
- Tollenaar RA
- Veenendaal RA
- Tibben A
- Wijnen J
- van Heck M
- van Asperen C
- Roukema AJ
- Hommes DW
- Hes FJ
- Vasen HF
journal: Fam Cancer
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s10689-013-9655-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Value-based healthcare in Lynch syndrome.
**Authors:** Hennink SD, Hofland N, Gopie JP, van der Kaa C, de Koning K, Nielsen M, Tops C, Morreau H, de Vos tot Nederveen Cappel WH, Langers AM, Hardwick JC, Gaarenstroom KN, Tollenaar RA, Veenendaal RA, Tibben A, Wijnen J, van Heck M, van Asperen C, Roukema AJ, Hommes DW, Hes FJ, Vasen HF
**Journal:** Fam Cancer (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10689-013-9655-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10689-013-9655-6)

## Content

1. Fam Cancer. 2013 Jun;12(2):347-54. doi: 10.1007/s10689-013-9655-6.

Value-based healthcare in Lynch syndrome.

Hennink SD(1), Hofland N, Gopie JP, van der Kaa C, de Koning K, Nielsen M, Tops 
C, Morreau H, de Vos tot Nederveen Cappel WH, Langers AM, Hardwick JC, 
Gaarenstroom KN, Tollenaar RA, Veenendaal RA, Tibben A, Wijnen J, van Heck M, 
van Asperen C, Roukema AJ, Hommes DW, Hes FJ, Vasen HF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Leiden University Medical 
Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Lynch syndrome (LS), one of the most frequent forms of hereditary colorectal 
cancer (CRC), is caused by a defect in one of the mismatch repair (MMR) genes. 
Carriers of MMR defects have a strongly increased risk of developing CRC and 
endometrial cancer. Over the last few years, value-based healthcare has been 
introduced as an approach to the cost-effective delivery of measurable patient 
value over complete cycles of care. This requires all involved stakeholders to 
formulate and validate 'patient value' for Lynch syndrome, as well as to 
identify targets and associated costs. The aim of this study was to develop a 
value-based care model for Lynch syndrome that can determine patient value and 
associated costs, and to design a coordinated care pathway from existing 
guidelines. All specialists in our hospital involved in the management of LS 
patients evaluated the care delivered to these patients at their department and 
formulated outcome measures relevant to patient value. Patients were then 
invited to complete a questionnaire that assessed the importance of these 
measures on a scale of 1-10. Six high-value outcomes were identified: (1) 
prevention of cancer or detection of early stage cancer (2) rapid results from 
MMR gene mutation testing (3) rapid investigation of the colon and uterus (4) 
no/little pain during colonoscopy and gynaecologic examination/biopsy (5) the 
offer of psychological help and (6) registration with the Dutch Lynch syndrome 
registry. A total of 38 (59 %) out of 62 patients completed the questionnaire. 
The relevance of all outcomes was confirmed by the patients and mean scores 
varied from 7.2 to 9.9. Patients underscored the relevance of both proper 
patient education and the efficiency of surveillance during their care cycle. 
Value-based care delivery for Lynch syndrome includes the implementation of six 
parameters related to prevention and early detection of cancer, a short cycle 
time and registration to ensure continuation of care. Estimated costs are <euro> 
3320 for the first cycle of care (<euro> 3550 including gynaecologic 
surveillance) and approximately 720 per subsequent annual cycle (<euro> 950 
including gynaecologic surveillance).

DOI: 10.1007/s10689-013-9655-6
PMID: 23681793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]