---
reference_id: "PMID:29107342"
title: "Sweet syndrome in patients with and without malignancy: A retrospective analysis of 83 patients from a tertiary academic referral center."
authors:
- Nelson CA
- Noe MH
- McMahon CM
- Gowda A
- Wu B
- Ashchyan HJ
- Perl AE
- James WD
- Micheletti RG
- Rosenbach M
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2017.09.013
keywords:
- Academic Medical Centers
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Adult
- Aged
- Anemia/etiology
- Arthralgia/etiology
- Colchicine/therapeutic use
- Dapsone/therapeutic use
- Female
- Filgrastim/adverse effects
- Folic Acid Antagonists/therapeutic use
- Hematologic Agents/adverse effects
- Humans
- Inflammation/complications
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/complications, genetics"
- Leukopenia/etiology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Neoplasms/complications
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Nucleophosmin
- Potassium Iodide/therapeutic use
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sweet Syndrome/drug therapy, etiology, pathology"
- Tertiary Care Centers
- Thrombocytopenia/etiology
- Tubulin Modulators/therapeutic use
- fms-Like Tyrosine Kinase 3/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sweet syndrome in patients with and without malignancy: A retrospective analysis of 83 patients from a tertiary academic referral center.
**Authors:** Nelson CA, Noe MH, McMahon CM, Gowda A, Wu B, Ashchyan HJ, Perl AE, James WD, Micheletti RG, Rosenbach M
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2017.09.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2017.09.013)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2018 Feb;78(2):303-309.e4. doi:
10.1016/j.jaad.2017.09.013.  Epub 2017 Oct 26.

Sweet syndrome in patients with and without malignancy: A retrospective analysis 
of 83 patients from a tertiary academic referral center.

Nelson CA(1), Noe MH(1), McMahon CM(2), Gowda A(3), Wu B(4), Ashchyan HJ(1), 
Perl AE(2), James WD(1), Micheletti RG(1), Rosenbach M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, Perelman School 
of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(3)University of Toledo College of Medicine, Toledo, Ohio.
(4)Department of Medicine, Drexel College of Medicine, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Electronic address: 
misha.rosenbach@uphs.upenn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Sweet syndrome is a neutrophilic dermatosis that may be categorized 
into classic, malignancy-associated, and drug-induced subtypes. Few studies have 
systematically analyzed this rare disorder.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the clinicopathologic characteristics and treatment of 
Sweet syndrome and identify characteristics associated with concurrent 
malignancy.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed patients with Sweet syndrome at the 
University of Pennsylvania from 2005 to 2015.
RESULTS: We identified 83 patients (mean age, 57 years; 51% male) with Sweet 
syndrome: 30% with the classic form, 44% with the malignancy-associated form, 
24% with the drug-induced form in the setting of malignancy, and 2% with the 
drug-induced form. Acute myeloid leukemia was the most common malignancy (in 24 
of 83 patients [29%]). Filgrastim was the most common medication (used in 8 of 
83 patients [10%]). Leukopenia (P < .001), anemia (P = .002), thrombocytopenia 
(P < .001), absence of arthralgia (P < .001), and histiocytoid or subcutaneous 
histopathology (P = .024) were associated with malignancy (χ2 test).
LIMITATIONS: This was a retrospective study that represents patients from a 
single tertiary academic referral center, which may limit its generalizability 
to other settings.
CONCLUSION: When caring for patients with Sweet syndrome, dermatologists should 
be aware of the potential association of leukopenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia, 
absence of arthralgia, and histiocytoid or subcutaneous histopathology with 
malignancy.

Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2017.09.013
PMID: 29107342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]