---
reference_id: PMID:40054503
title: CVA16 infection causes neurological injury by engaging TLR2/MYD88/TNF-α/CXCL1 signalling pathway in hSCARB2 knock-in mice.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Wu Y
- Wang Y
- Xiong R
- Ling C
- Cao Y
- Wang Y
- Yang Y
- Qu Z
- Xu N
- Liu S
- Li W
- Lv Z
- Hu Z
- Fan C
journal: Antiviral Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2025.106133
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Signal Transduction
- Myeloid Differentiation Factor 88/metabolism
- Toll-Like Receptor 2/metabolism
- Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Chemokine CXCL1/metabolism
- Enterovirus
- "Coxsackievirus Infections/virology, pathology"
- "Brain/virology, pathology"
- "Enterovirus A, Human"
- Viral Load
- Gene Knock-In Techniques
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CVA16 infection causes neurological injury by engaging TLR2/MYD88/TNF-α/CXCL1 signalling pathway in hSCARB2 knock-in mice.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Wu Y, Wang Y, Xiong R, Ling C, Cao Y, Wang Y, Yang Y, Qu Z, Xu N, Liu S, Li W, Lv Z, Hu Z, Fan C
**Journal:** Antiviral Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.antiviral.2025.106133](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.antiviral.2025.106133)

## Content

1. Antiviral Res. 2025 May;237:106133. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2025.106133. Epub
 2025 Mar 5.

CVA16 infection causes neurological injury by engaging TLR2/MYD88/TNF-α/CXCL1 
signalling pathway in hSCARB2 knock-in mice.

Wang Y(1), Wu Y(1), Wang Y(1), Xiong R(1), Ling C(1), Cao Y(1), Wang Y(1), Yang 
Y(2), Qu Z(2), Xu N(3), Liu S(1), Li W(1), Lv Z(4), Hu Z(5), Fan C(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Laboratory Animal Resources, National Institutes for Food and 
Drug Control (NIFDC), Beijing, China.
(2)National Center for Safety Evaluation of Drugs, National Institutes for Food 
and Drug Control (NIFDC), Beijing, China.
(3)Institute for Biological Products Control, National Institutes for Food and 
Drug Control (NIFDC), Beijing, China.
(4)Sinovac Biotech Ltd., Beijing, China.
(5)Institute for Biological Products Control, National Institutes for Food and 
Drug Control (NIFDC), Beijing, China. Electronic address: huzhy@nifdc.org.cn.
(6)Institute for Laboratory Animal Resources, National Institutes for Food and 
Drug Control (NIFDC), Beijing, China. Electronic address: fancf@nifdc.org.cn.

Coxsackievirus A16 (CVA16), a major pathogen responsible for hand-foot-and-mouth 
disease (HFMD) in children, has frequently replaced Enterovirus A71 as the 
predominant causative agent in China and other Asia-Pacific regions. The lack 
effective drugs and vaccines against this virus exacerbates the concerns on its 
outbreaks. Clinical reports and laboratory studies indicate that CVA16 infection 
may lead to neurological injury, but the precise mechanisms remain elusive. In 
this study, we meticulously established a CVA16 murine disease model using 
3-week-old hSCARB2 knock-in mice through intracranial inoculation. Within 4-7 
days post-infection, the infected mice exhibited severe neurological symptoms 
featured as limb paralysis, hind limb weakness and ataxia. Furthermore, high 
viral loads were detected in the brain, spleen, skeletal muscle tissues, 
indicating a systemic infection. A robust cytokine response was observed, 
characterized with the elevation of TNF-α, IL-12 (p40), IL-10 and MIP-1β. 
Histological and immunofluorescence staining revealed extensive inflammation, 
marked by the concentrated infiltration of astrocytes cells, as well as severe 
neurological injury, which included hypertrophic and extended pseudopodia 
microglia, increased astrocytes with long and stretched protuberances, markedly 
decreased neuronal cell bodies and nerve fibers in brain. No visible 
pathological changes were observed in spinal cord tissues. RNA sequencing and 
immunofluorescence staining of brain tissue verification assays indicated that 
the neurological injury may engage in TLR2/MYD88/TNF-α/CXCL1 signal pathway. 
Over all, this work addressed the gap in the availability of CVA16 disease 
rodent model for vaccine development and provided novel insights into the 
mechanisms underlying neurological injury caused by enteroviruses and other 
neurotropic viruses.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2025.106133
PMID: 40054503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.