---
reference_id: "PMID:40266357"
title: "Late-onset GM2 gangliosidosis: magnetic resonance imaging, diffusion tensor imaging, and correlational fiber tractography differentiate Tay-Sachs and Sandhoff diseases."
authors:
- Lewis CJ
- Chipman SI
- Johnston JM
- Acosta MT
- Toro C
- Tifft CJ
journal: J Neurol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-025-13091-3
keywords:
- Humans
- Diffusion Tensor Imaging
- Male
- Female
- "Gangliosidoses, GM2/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Tay-Sachs Disease/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Sandhoff Disease/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Aged
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Age of Onset
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Late-onset GM2 gangliosidosis: magnetic resonance imaging, diffusion tensor imaging, and correlational fiber tractography differentiate Tay-Sachs and Sandhoff diseases.
**Authors:** Lewis CJ, Chipman SI, Johnston JM, Acosta MT, Toro C, Tifft CJ
**Journal:** J Neurol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-025-13091-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-025-13091-3)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2025 Apr 23;272(5):355. doi: 10.1007/s00415-025-13091-3.

Late-onset GM2 gangliosidosis: magnetic resonance imaging, diffusion tensor
imaging, and correlational fiber tractography differentiate Tay-Sachs and
Sandhoff diseases.

Lewis CJ(1), Chipman SI(1), Johnston JM(1), Acosta MT(1), Toro C(1), Tifft
CJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Office of the Clinical Director and Medical Genetics Branch, National Human
Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 10 Center Drive,
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Office of the Clinical Director and Medical Genetics Branch, National Human
Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 10 Center Drive,
Bethesda, MD, USA. cynthiat@mail.nih.gov.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2024 Dec 16:2024.12.13.24318793. doi: 10.1101/2024.12.13.24318793.

GM2 gangliosidosis is lysosomal storage disorder caused by deficiency of the
heterodimeric enzyme β-hexosaminidase A. Tay-Sachs disease is caused by variants
in HEXA encoding the α-subunit and Sandhoff disease is caused by variants in
HEXB encoding the β-subunit. Due to shared clinical and biochemical findings,
the two have been considered indistinguishable. We applied T1-weighted
volumetric analysis, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), and correlational fiber
tractography to assess phenotypic differences in these two diseases. 51
T1-weighted and 40 DTI scans from 19 Late-Onset GM2 patients with either
late-onset Sandhoff disease (LOSD), or late-onset Tay-Sachs (LOTS) were included
and compared to 1033 neurotypical control volumetric MRI scans. LOTS patients
had significantly smaller cerebellum volume compared to neurotypical controls
(p < 0.0001) and LOSD patients (p < 0.0001). There was no statistical difference
for the volume of any structure between LOSD and neurotypical controls. DTI
analysis showed LOTS patients had higher mean diffusivity (MD) in the left
cerebellum (p = 0.003703), right cerebellum (p = 0.003435), superior cerebellar
peduncle (p = 0.007332), and vermis (p = 0.01007) compared to LOSD. LOTS
patients had lower fractional anisotropy (FA) in the left cerebellum
(p = 0.005537), right cerebellum (p = 0.01905), SCP (p = 0.02844), and vermis
(p = 0.02469) when compared to LOSD. Correlational fiber tractography identified
fiber tracts in cerebellar pathways with higher FA and lower MD in LOSD patients
compared to LOTS patients. Our study shows neurobiologic differences between
these two related disorders. To our knowledge, this is the first study using
correlational tractography in a lysosomal storage disorder. This result
indicates a greater burden of cerebellar pathology in LOTS patients compared
with LOSD patients.

© 2025. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-025-13091-3
PMCID: PMC12018622
PMID: 40266357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflicts of interest: The authors
declare no conflict of interest. Ethical approval: The NIH Institutional Review
Board approved this protocol (02-HG-0107). Informed consent was completed with
parents or legal guardians of the patients. Informed consent was completed
before participation and all research was completed in accordance with the
Declaration of Helsinki.
