---
reference_id: "PMID:39210340"
title: "Prenatal diagnosis of recurrent Kagami-Ogata syndrome inherited from a mother affected by Temple syndrome: a case report and literature review."
authors:
- Yang X
- Li M
- Qi Q
- Zhou X
- Hao N
- Lü Y
- Jiang Y
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12920-024-01987-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal diagnosis of recurrent Kagami-Ogata syndrome inherited from a mother affected by Temple syndrome: a case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Yang X, Li M, Qi Q, Zhou X, Hao N, Lü Y, Jiang Y
**Journal:** BMC Med Genomics (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12920-024-01987-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-024-01987-4)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genomics. 2024 Aug 29;17(1):222. doi: 10.1186/s12920-024-01987-4.

Prenatal diagnosis of recurrent Kagami-Ogata syndrome inherited from a mother 
affected by Temple syndrome: a case report and literature review.

Yang X(#)(1), Li M(#)(1), Qi Q(1), Zhou X(1), Hao N(1), Lü Y(2), Jiang Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Clinical Research Center 
for Obstetric & Gynecologic Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Science & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Clinical Research Center 
for Obstetric & Gynecologic Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Science & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 
China. lvyan@pumch.cn.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Clinical Research Center 
for Obstetric & Gynecologic Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Science & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 
China. yulinj@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Kagami-Ogata syndrome (KOS) and Temple syndrome (TS) are two 
imprinting disorders characterized by the absence or reduced expression of 
maternal or paternal genes in the chromosome 14q32 region, respectively. We 
present a rare prenatally diagnosed case of recurrent KOS inherited from a 
mother affected by TS.
CASE PRESENTATION: The woman's two affected pregnancies exhibited recurrent 
manifestations of prenatal overgrowth, polyhydramnios, and omphalocele, as well 
as a small bell-shaped thorax with coat-hanger ribs postnatally. Prenatal 
genetic testing using a single-nucleotide polymorphism array detected a 268.2-kb 
deletion in the chromosome 14q32 imprinted region inherited from the mother, 
leading to the diagnosis of KOS. Additionally, the woman carried a de novo 
deletion in the paternal chromosome 14q32 imprinted region and presented with 
short stature and small hands and feet, indicating a diagnosis of TS.
CONCLUSIONS: Given the rarity of KOS as an imprinting disorder, accurate 
prenatal diagnosis of this rare imprinting disorder depends on two factors: (1) 
increasing clinician recognition of the clinical phenotype and related genetic 
mechanism, and (2) emphasizing the importance of imprinted regions in the CMA 
workflow for laboratory analysis.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-024-01987-4
PMCID: PMC11360317
PMID: 39210340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.