---
reference_id: "PMID:36964447"
title: Early recognition of CLN3 disease facilitated by visual electrophysiology and multimodal imaging.
authors:
- Sakti DH
- Cornish EE
- Fraser CL
- Nash BM
- Sandercoe TM
- Jones MM
- Rowe NA
- Jamieson RV
- Johnson AM
- Grigg JR
journal: Doc Ophthalmol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10633-023-09930-1
keywords:
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Electroretinography
- Retina
- Retinal Diseases
- Multimodal Imaging
- Electrophysiology
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Membrane Glycoproteins/genetics
- Molecular Chaperones/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early recognition of CLN3 disease facilitated by visual electrophysiology and multimodal imaging.
**Authors:** Sakti DH, Cornish EE, Fraser CL, Nash BM, Sandercoe TM, Jones MM, Rowe NA, Jamieson RV, Johnson AM, Grigg JR
**Journal:** Doc Ophthalmol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10633-023-09930-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10633-023-09930-1)

## Content

1. Doc Ophthalmol. 2023 Jun;146(3):241-256. doi: 10.1007/s10633-023-09930-1. Epub
 2023 Mar 25.

Early recognition of CLN3 disease facilitated by visual electrophysiology and
multimodal imaging.

Sakti DH(1)(2), Cornish EE(1)(3), Fraser CL(1), Nash BM(3)(4), Sandercoe TM(5),
Jones MM(5), Rowe NA(5), Jamieson RV(1)(3), Johnson AM(6), Grigg JR(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Save Sight Institute, Speciality of Clinical Ophthalmology and Eye Health,
Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney Eye Hospital
Campus, 8 Macquarie St, Sydney, NSW, 2001, Australia.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, Public Health, and Nursing,
Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, Indonesia.
(3)Eye Genetics Research Unit, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Save Sight
Institute, Children's Medical Research Institute, The University of Sydney,
Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)Sydney Genome Diagnostics, Sydney Children's Hospital Network (Westmead),
Sydney, Australia.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Sydney Children's Hospital Network (Westmead),
Sydney, Australia.
(6)Department of Neurology, Sydney Children's Hospital, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, Australia.
(7)Save Sight Institute, Speciality of Clinical Ophthalmology and Eye Health,
Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney Eye Hospital
Campus, 8 Macquarie St, Sydney, NSW, 2001, Australia. john.grigg@sydney.edu.au.
(8)Eye Genetics Research Unit, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Save Sight
Institute, Children's Medical Research Institute, The University of Sydney,
Sydney, NSW, Australia. john.grigg@sydney.edu.au.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, Sydney Children's Hospital Network (Westmead),
Sydney, Australia. john.grigg@sydney.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis is a group of neurodegenerative
disorders with varying visual dysfunction. CLN3 is a subtype which commonly
presents with visual decline. Visual symptomatology can be indistinct making
early diagnosis difficult. This study reports ocular biomarkers of CLN3 patients
to assist clinicians in early diagnosis, disease monitoring, and future therapy.
METHODS: Retrospective review of 5 confirmed CLN3 patients in our eye clinic.
Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA), electroretinogram (ERG), ultra-widefield
(UWF) fundus photography and fundus autofluorescence (FAF), and optical
coherence tomography (OCT) studies were undertaken.
RESULTS: Five unrelated children, 4 females and 1 male, with median age of
6.2 years (4.6-11.7) at first assessment were investigated at the clinic from
2016 to 2021. Four homozygous and one heterozygous pathogenic CLN3 variants were
found. Best corrected visual acuities (BCVAs) ranged from 0.18 to 0.88 logMAR at
first presentation. Electronegative ERGs were identified in all patients. Bull's
eye maculopathies found in all patients. Hyper-autofluorescence ring surrounding
hypo-autofluorescence fovea on FAF was found. Foveal ellipsoid zone (EZ)
disruptions were found in all patients with additional inner and outer retinal
microcystic changes in one patient. Neurological problems noted included autism,
anxiety, motor dyspraxia, behavioural issue, and psychomotor regression.
CONCLUSIONS: CLN3 patients presented at median age 6.2 years with visual
decline. Early onset maculopathy with an electronegative ERG and variable
cognitive and motor decline should prompt further investigations including
neuropaediatric evaluation and genetic assessment for CLN3 disease. The
structural parameters such as EZ and FAF will facilitate ocular monitoring.

© 2023. Crown.

DOI: 10.1007/s10633-023-09930-1
PMCID: PMC10256658
PMID: 36964447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DH Sakti, None; EE Cornish, None; CL Fraser,
None; BM Nash, None; TM Sandercoe, None; MM Jones, None; NA Rowe; AM Johnson,
None; J R Grigg; and RV Jamieson are consultant to Novartis.
