---
reference_id: "PMID:38141137"
title: "Evaluation of clinical, laboratory, and molecular genetic features of patients with biotinidase deficiency."
authors:
- Yılmaz B
- Ceylan AC
- Gündüz M
- Ünal Uzun Ö
- Küçükcongar Yavaş A
- Bilginer Gürbüz B
- Öncül Ü
- Güleç Ceylan G
- Kasapkara ÇS
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-023-05376-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of clinical, laboratory, and molecular genetic features of patients with biotinidase deficiency.
**Authors:** Yılmaz B, Ceylan AC, Gündüz M, Ünal Uzun Ö, Küçükcongar Yavaş A, Bilginer Gürbüz B, Öncül Ü, Güleç Ceylan G, Kasapkara ÇS
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-023-05376-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-023-05376-4)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2024 Mar;183(3):1341-1351. doi: 10.1007/s00431-023-05376-4.
Epub  2023 Dec 23.

Evaluation of clinical, laboratory, and molecular genetic features of patients 
with biotinidase deficiency.

Yılmaz B(1), Ceylan AC(2)(3), Gündüz M(4), Ünal Uzun Ö(5), Küçükcongar Yavaş 
A(4), Bilginer Gürbüz B(4), Öncül Ü(4), Güleç Ceylan G(2)(3), Kasapkara 
ÇS(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Ankara City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara Yıldırım Beyazıt University, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(4)Department of Pediatric Metabolic Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Ankara 
City Hospital, Ankara, 06800, Turkey.
(5)Department of Pediatric Metabolic Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Kocaeli 
University, Kocaeli, Turkey.
(6)Department of Pediatric Metabolic Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Ankara 
City Hospital, Ankara, 06800, Turkey. cskasapkara@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Pediatric Metabolic Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Ankara 
Yıldırım Beyazıt University, Ankara, Turkey. cskasapkara@gmail.com.

Biotinidase deficiency (BD) is an autosomal recessive inherited metabolic 
disorder which results from the inability of biotin-dependent carboxylase 
enzymes to function due to the release and absorption of biotin, leading to 
neurological and cutaneous findings. In the present study, evaluation of 
demographic characteristics, clinical findings, laboratory results, molecular 
genetic characteristics, and genotype-phenotype correlations of cases with BD. 
Two hundred forty-seven cases were included in the study who were admitted to 
the Department of Pediatric Metabolism of Ankara Bilkent City Hospital after 
being identified with potential BD through the Newborn Screening Program (NBS), 
during family screening or based on suspicious clinical findings, or following 
the detection of a pathogenic variant in a BTD genetic analysis during the 
period of October 2020 and February 2022. The medical files of the cases were 
reviewed retrospectively. An analysis of the admission routes of all cases to 
our clinic revealed 89.5% NBS, 5.7% family screening, and 4.9% suspicious 
clinical findings suggestive of BD. Complete enzyme deficiency was identified in 
19.8%, partial enzyme deficiency in 55.1%, and heterogenous enzyme deficiency in 
9.7%. The most common pathogenic variants were c.1270G > C (p.Asp424His), 
c.410G > A (p.Arg137His), and c.38_44delGCGCTGinsTCC (p.Cys13Phefs*36) in BTD 
gene. The c.1270G > C variant was most common in patients with cutaneous 
symptoms. The c.410G > A and c.38_44delGCGCTGinsTCC variants were more common in 
the patients with neurological symptoms. The mean activity level in patients 
with the c.1270G > C homozygous variant was statistically significantly higher 
than the mean activity level in the c.1270G > C compound heterozygous patients 
and the activity level of patients without the c.1270G > C variant. The mean 
activity level in c.410G > A homozygous patients was statistically significantly 
lower than the mean activity level of the c.410G > A compound heterozygous 
patients and the activity level of patients without the c.410G > A variant. In 
the course of our study, four new pathogenic variants were detected, namely: 
c.190G > A (p.Glu64Lys), c.249 + 5G > T, c.228delA (p.Val77*), and c.682A > G 
(p.Ile228Val).     Conclusions: The present study has determined the clinical 
and genetic spectrum of a large group of patients with BD in a single center. 
The frequent mutations in our study were similar to those reported in 
literature, and four novel variants were also described. What is Known: • 
Biotinidase deficiency is an autosomal recessive, treatable inborn error of 
metabolism. Two hundred ninety-four pathogenic variants in the BTD gene have 
been identified and the c.1270G > C variant is the most frequent BTD gene 
mutation in both Turkey and around the world. What is New: • Four new pathogenic 
variants (c.190G > A, p.Glu64Lys; c.249 + 5G > T; c.228delA, p.Val77*; and 
c.682A > G, p.Ile228Val) have been identified. It is believed that the 
c.38_44delGCGGCTGinsTCC variant is more commonly seen in individuals with ocular 
issues; however, further genotype-phenotype correlations are needed.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-023-05376-4
PMID: 38141137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]