---
reference_id: "PMID:11343308"
title: "Mutation and haplotype analyses in 26 Spanish Sanfilippo syndrome type A patients: possible single origin for 1091delC mutation."
authors:
- Chabás A
- Montfort M
- Martínez-Campos M
- Díaz A
- Coll MJ
- Grinberg D
- Vilageliu L
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1248
keywords:
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Founder Effect
- Gene Frequency
- Genes
- Genotype
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Hydrolases
- Mucopolysaccharidosis III/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Point Mutation
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation and haplotype analyses in 26 Spanish Sanfilippo syndrome type A patients: possible single origin for 1091delC mutation.
**Authors:** Chabás A, Montfort M, Martínez-Campos M, Díaz A, Coll MJ, Grinberg D, Vilageliu L
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.1248](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.1248)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 2001 May 1;100(3):223-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1248.

Mutation and haplotype analyses in 26 Spanish Sanfilippo syndrome type A
patients: possible single origin for 1091delC mutation.

Chabás A(1), Montfort M, Martínez-Campos M, Díaz A, Coll MJ, Grinberg D,
Vilageliu L.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Barcelona, Spain. achabas@clinic.ub.es

Mucopolysaccharidosis IIIA, also known as Sanfilippo syndrome type A, is an
autosomal recessive storage disorder caused by deficiency of sulfamidase. The
disease results in severe central nervous system degeneration often with mild
somatic features that may delay the clinical diagnosis. Molecular analyses would
allow early and unequivocal heterozygote detection, providing a useful tool for
genetic counselling. About 40 mutations have been reported in the sulfamidase
gene, with a very uneven distribution in different patient populations. We have
previously described the high prevalence of mutation 1091delC in a small number
of Spanish Sanfilippo A patients. The aim of the present work is to extend the
mutational study to a total of 26 unrelated patients and perform haplotype
analysis in order to study the origin of some mutations. The whole coding region
of the gene was scanned by SSCP analysis and sequencing. This allowed the
identification of 14 different mutations, corresponding to 90% of the mutant
alleles. Seven of these mutations were only found in this Spanish group of
patients, three of which, R150W, R433Q and R433W, are described here for the
first time. We have also analyzed four internal polymorphisms and constructed
the corresponding haplotypes. Chromosomes bearing mutation 1091delC show a
conserved haplotype suggesting a common origin for this mutation. Moreover, all
other mutations found twice or more also have conserved haplotypes for those
polymorphic markers.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1248
PMID: 11343308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
