---
reference_id: "PMID:31022053"
title: "Neuropsychiatric Syndromes in Childhood-Onset Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis."
authors:
- Santos FPST
- Nascimento BR
- Calderaro DC
- Ferreira GA
- Correa H
journal: J Clin Rheumatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001029
keywords:
- Adult
- Headache
- Humans
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Seizures
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropsychiatric Syndromes in Childhood-Onset Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Santos FPST, Nascimento BR, Calderaro DC, Ferreira GA, Correa H
**Journal:** J Clin Rheumatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/RHU.0000000000001029](https://doi.org/10.1097/RHU.0000000000001029)

## Content

1. J Clin Rheumatol. 2021 Aug 1;27(5):206-214. doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001029.

Neuropsychiatric Syndromes in Childhood-Onset Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: A
Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.

Santos FPST(1), Nascimento BR(2), Calderaro DC(3), Ferreira GA(3), Correa H(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Post Graduation Program in Molecular Medicine - Federal University
of Minas.
(2)Division of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Surgery and Telehealth Center,
Hospital das Clínicas da Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais.
(3)Departments of Locomotor Apparatus.
(4)Mental Health, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas
Gerais, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to access the prevalence of 19
neuropsychiatric syndromes in childhood-onset systemic lupus erythematosus
(cSLE), as defined by the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) in 1999, by
performing a systematic review and meta-analysis of relevant publications.
METHODS: A literature search from April 1999 to March 2018 identified studies
investigating neuropsychiatric syndromes in cSLE patients, applying 1999 ACR
Case Definitions, with a sample of at least 20 patients. Case reports, small
case series, reviews, articles that did not use 1999 ACR case definitions, and
those with adult SLE patients were excluded. The methodological quality of the
studies was determined through the Loney quality assessment. Prevalence
estimates with a 95% confidence interval were combined using random-effect
(DerSimonian-Laird) models.
RESULTS: A total of 143 articles were identified and 9 were included. In a
population of 1463 cSLE patients, 351 (29.9%) presented 869 neuropsychiatric
cSLE events (2.48 events/patient). The results for each syndrome were headache
(52.2%), seizure disorders (48.6%), cognitive dysfunction (32.9%), mood disorder
(28.3%), psychosis (22.7%), cerebrovascular disease (19.5%), acute confusional
state (15.7%), movement disorder (9.4%), anxiety disorder (7.2%), aseptic
meningitis (5.1%), mononeuropathy single/multiplex (4.9%), myelopathy (4.2%),
demyelinating syndrome (3.2%), cranial neuropathy (2.7%), polyneuropathy (2.6%),
Guillain-Barré syndrome (2.5%), autonomic disorder (1.9%), plexopathy (1.3%),
and myasthenia gravis (1.3%).
CONCLUSIONS: Neuropsychiatric syndromes are prevalent among cSLE patients. The
most prevalent were headaches, seizures, cognitive dysfunction, mood disorders,
and psychosis. Determining the prevalence of each neuropsychiatric syndrome in
cSLE may improve clinical awareness of these potentially fatal and disabling
conditions.

Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001029
PMID: 31022053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The
authors declare no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article. There were no sources of
financial support for writing.
