---
reference_id: "PMID:26656646"
title: Oligodendrocyte death results in immune-mediated CNS demyelination.
authors:
- Traka M
- Podojil JR
- McCarthy DP
- Miller SD
- Popko B
journal: Nat Neurosci
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/nn.4193
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oligodendrocyte death results in immune-mediated CNS demyelination.
**Authors:** Traka M, Podojil JR, McCarthy DP, Miller SD, Popko B
**Journal:** Nat Neurosci (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nn.4193](https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4193)

## Content

1. Nat Neurosci. 2016 Jan;19(1):65-74. doi: 10.1038/nn.4193. Epub 2015 Dec 14.

Oligodendrocyte death results in immune-mediated CNS demyelination.

Traka M(1), Podojil JR(2), McCarthy DP(2), Miller SD(2), Popko B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The University of Chicago Center for Peripheral 
Neuropathy, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology-Immunology and Interdepartmental Immunobiology 
Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, 
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2016 Feb;17(2):76. doi: 10.1038/nrn.2016.5.

Although multiple sclerosis is a common neurological disorder, the origin of the 
autoimmune response against myelin, which is the characteristic feature of the 
disease, remains unclear. To investigate whether oligodendrocyte death could 
cause this autoimmune response, we examined the oligodendrocyte ablation 
Plp1-CreER(T);ROSA26-eGFP-DTA (DTA) mouse model. Approximately 30 weeks after 
recovering from oligodendrocyte loss and demyelination, DTA mice develop a fatal 
secondary disease characterized by extensive myelin and axonal loss. Strikingly, 
late-onset disease was associated with increased numbers of T lymphocytes in the 
CNS and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG)-specific T cells in lymphoid 
organs. Transfer of T cells derived from DTA mice to naive recipients resulted 
in neurological defects that correlated with CNS white matter inflammation. 
Furthermore, immune tolerization against MOG ameliorated symptoms. Overall, 
these data indicate that oligodendrocyte death is sufficient to trigger an 
adaptive autoimmune response against myelin, suggesting that a similar process 
can occur in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis.

DOI: 10.1038/nn.4193
PMCID: PMC4837900
PMID: 26656646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]