---
reference_id: "PMID:30385147"
title: "Acute hepatic porphyrias: Identification of 46 hydroxymethylbilane synthase, 11 coproporphyrinogen oxidase, and 20 protoporphyrinogen oxidase novel mutations."
authors:
- Loskove Y
- Yasuda M
- Chen B
- Nazarenko I
- Cody N
- Desnick RJ
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.10.008
keywords:
- Asymptomatic Diseases
- Coproporphyrinogen Oxidase/genetics
- Family
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Heme/biosynthesis
- Humans
- Hydroxymethylbilane Synthase/genetics
- Molecular Diagnostic Techniques
- Mutation
- "Porphyria, Acute Intermittent/diagnosis, genetics"
- Protoporphyrinogen Oxidase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute hepatic porphyrias: Identification of 46 hydroxymethylbilane synthase, 11 coproporphyrinogen oxidase, and 20 protoporphyrinogen oxidase novel mutations.
**Authors:** Loskove Y, Yasuda M, Chen B, Nazarenko I, Cody N, Desnick RJ
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.10.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.10.008)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2019 Nov;128(3):352-357. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.10.008.
Epub  2018 Oct 26.

Acute hepatic porphyrias: Identification of 46 hydroxymethylbilane synthase, 11 
coproporphyrinogen oxidase, and 20 protoporphyrinogen oxidase novel mutations.

Loskove Y(1), Yasuda M(2), Chen B(3), Nazarenko I(4), Cody N(5), Desnick RJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Department of Genetics and Genomic 
Sciences, New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic address: yonina.loskove@mssm.edu.
(2)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Department of Genetics and Genomic 
Sciences, New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic address: makiko.yasuda@mssm.edu.
(3)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Department of Genetics and Genomic 
Sciences, New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic address: brenden.chen@mssm.edu.
(4)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Department of Genetics and Genomic 
Sciences, New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic address: 
irina.nazarenko@sema4genomics.com.
(5)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Department of Genetics and Genomic 
Sciences, New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic address: 
neal.cody@sema4genomics.com.
(6)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Department of Genetics and Genomic 
Sciences, New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic address: robert.desnick@mssm.edu.

The acute hepatic porphyrias (AHPs) are inborn errors of heme biosynthesis, 
which include three autosomal dominant porphyrias, Acute Intermittent Porphyria 
(AIP), Hereditary Coproporphyria (HCP), and Variegate Porphyria (VP), and the 
ultra-rare autosomal recessive porphyria, δ-Aminolevulinic Acid Dehydratase 
Deficiency Porphyria (ADP). AIP, HCP, VP, and ADP each results from 
loss-of-function (LOF) mutations in their disease-causing genes: 
hydroxymethylbilane synthase (HMBS); coproporphyrinogen oxidase (CPOX); 
protoporphyrinogen oxidase (PPOX), and δ-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase (ALAD), 
respectively. During the 11-year period from January 1, 2007 through December 
31, 2017, the Mount Sinai Porphyrias Diagnostic Laboratory diagnosed 315 
unrelated AIP individuals with HMBS mutations, including 46 previously 
unreported mutations, 29 unrelated HCP individuals with CPOX mutations, 
including 11 previously unreported mutations, and 54 unrelated VP individuals 
with PPOX mutations, including 20 previously unreported mutations. Overall, of 
the 1692 unrelated individuals referred for AHP molecular diagnostic testing, 
398 (23.5%) had an AHP mutation. Of the 650 family members of mutation-positive 
individuals tested for an autosomal dominant AHP, 304 (46.8%) had their 
respective family mutation. These data expand the molecular genetic 
heterogeneity of the AHPs and document the usefulness of molecular testing to 
confirm the positive biochemical findings in symptomatic patients and identify 
at-risk asymptomatic family members.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.10.008
PMID: 30385147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]