---
reference_id: "PMID:34981460"
title: Three Novel Variants of CEP290 and CC2D2DA and a Link Between ZNF77 and SHH Signaling Pathway Are Found in Two Meckel-Gruber Syndrome Fetuses.
authors:
- Hong Z
- He X
- Yu F
- Liu H
- Zhang X
- Zhang Y
journal: Reprod Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s43032-021-00835-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Three Novel Variants of CEP290 and CC2D2DA and a Link Between ZNF77 and SHH Signaling Pathway Are Found in Two Meckel-Gruber Syndrome Fetuses.
**Authors:** Hong Z, He X, Yu F, Liu H, Zhang X, Zhang Y
**Journal:** Reprod Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s43032-021-00835-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s43032-021-00835-5)

## Content

1. Reprod Sci. 2022 Aug;29(8):2322-2332. doi: 10.1007/s43032-021-00835-5. Epub
2022  Jan 3.

Three Novel Variants of CEP290 and CC2D2DA and a Link Between ZNF77 and SHH 
Signaling Pathway Are Found in Two Meckel-Gruber Syndrome Fetuses.

Hong Z(1), He X(1), Yu F(2), Liu H(1), Zhang X(3), Zhang Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 
430071, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430071, 
China.
(3)Department of Ultrasound, Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430071, 
China.
(4)Reproductive Medicine Center, Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 
430071, China. zhangyuanzhen@whu.edu.cn.

Meckel-Gruber syndrome (MKS) is a rare lethal autosomal recessive inherited 
disorder. Missed diagnosis might happen in clinical works due to an unclear 
genotype-phenotype correlation. We analyzed two families visiting our center; 
the parents are normal; each of the family aborted a fetus at 12WG. Following 
ultrasonography and pathological examination, both were diagnosed as MKS. Whole 
exome sequencing identified a compound heterozygous of two novel variants of 
CEP290 and a heterozygous of a novel variant of CC2D2A. Frameshift mutations in 
ZNF77 were also detected. Western blot analyzing whole-brain tissue showed that 
the expression of ZNF77, CC2D2A, and CEP290 was enhanced. HEK293T transfected 
with over-expression wildtype/mutated ZNF77 plasmid showed that SHH was 
increased in wildtype ZNF77 cells, while SHH and CC2D2A were increased in 
mutated ZNF77 cells. Our research provided two novel pathogenic variants of 
CEP290 and CC2D2A and suggested that ZNF77 might promote the expression of 
CC2D2A and regulate the amount of SHH.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s43032-021-00835-5
PMCID: PMC9352615
PMID: 34981460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.