---
reference_id: "PMID:11309399"
title: ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) functions as a cholesterol efflux regulatory protein.
authors:
- Wang N
- Silver DL
- Thiele C
- Tall AR
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M102348200
keywords:
- ATP Binding Cassette Transporter 1
- "ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics, physiology"
- Apolipoprotein A-I/metabolism
- Biological Transport/drug effects
- Cell Line
- Cholesterol/metabolism
- Cyclodextrins/pharmacology
- Glyburide/pharmacology
- Humans
- Mutation
- Phospholipids/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) functions as a cholesterol efflux regulatory protein.
**Authors:** Wang N, Silver DL, Thiele C, Tall AR
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M102348200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M102348200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 29;276(26):23742-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M102348200. Epub
2001  Apr 17.

ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) functions as a cholesterol efflux
regulatory protein.

Wang N(1), Silver DL, Thiele C, Tall AR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Columbia University,
New York, New York 10032, USA. nw30@columbia.edu

ABCA1, an ATP-binding cassette transporter mutated in Tangier disease, promotes
cellular phospholipid and cholesterol efflux by loading free apoA-I with these
lipids. This process involves binding of apoA-I to the cell surface and
phospholipid translocation by ABCA1. The goals of this study were to examine the
relationship between ABCA1-mediated lipid efflux and apolipoprotein binding and
to determine whether phospholipid and cholesterol efflux are coupled. Inhibition
of lipid efflux by glybenclamide treatment or by mutation of the ATP-binding
cassette of ABCA1 showed a close correlation between lipid efflux, the binding
of apoA-I to cells, and cross-linking of apoA-I to ABCA1. The data suggest that
a functionally important apoA-I binding site exists on ABCA1 and that the
binding site could also involve lipids. After using cyclodextrin preincubation
to deplete cellular cholesterol, ABCA1-mediated cholesterol efflux was abolished
but phospholipid efflux and the binding of apoA-I were unaffected. The
conditioned media from cyclodextrin-pretreated, ABCA1-expressing cells readily
promoted cholesterol efflux when added to fresh cells not expressing ABCA1,
indicating that cholesterol efflux can be dissociated from phospholipid efflux.
Further, using a photoactivatable cholesterol analog, we showed that ABCA1 did
not bind cholesterol directly, even though several other cholesterol-binding
proteins specifically bound the cholesterol analog. The data suggest that the
binding of apoA-I to ABCA1 leads to the formation of phospholipid-apoA-I
complexes, which subsequently promote cholesterol efflux in an autocrine or
paracrine fashion.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M102348200
PMID: 11309399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
