---
reference_id: "PMID:39078281"
title: SIRT1 silencing promotes EMT and Crizotinib resistance by regulating autophagy through AMPK/mTOR/S6K signaling pathway in EML4-ALK L1196M and EML4-ALK G1202R mutant non-small cell lung cancer cells.
authors:
- Yang Q
- Sun K
- Gao T
- Gao Y
- Yang Y
- Li Z
- Zuo D
journal: Mol Carcinog
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/mc.23799
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, drug therapy, pathology, metabolism"
- "Sirtuin 1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, drug therapy, pathology, metabolism"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Crizotinib/pharmacology
- "TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism, genetics"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- Autophagy/drug effects
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition/drug effects
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Mutation
- "AMP-Activated Protein Kinases/metabolism, genetics"
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/drug effects"
- Animals
- Cell Movement/drug effects
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SIRT1 silencing promotes EMT and Crizotinib resistance by regulating autophagy through AMPK/mTOR/S6K signaling pathway in EML4-ALK L1196M and EML4-ALK G1202R mutant non-small cell lung cancer cells.
**Authors:** Yang Q, Sun K, Gao T, Gao Y, Yang Y, Li Z, Zuo D
**Journal:** Mol Carcinog (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mc.23799](https://doi.org/10.1002/mc.23799)

## Content

1. Mol Carcinog. 2024 Nov;63(11):2133-2144. doi: 10.1002/mc.23799. Epub 2024 Jul
30.

SIRT1 silencing promotes EMT and Crizotinib resistance by regulating autophagy
through AMPK/mTOR/S6K signaling pathway in EML4-ALK L1196M and EML4-ALK G1202R
mutant non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Yang Q(1), Sun K(1), Gao T(1), Gao Y(1), Yang Y(1), Li Z(1), Zuo D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang,
Shenhe District, China.

Most EML4-ALK rearrangement non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients
inevitably develop acquired drug resistance after treatment. The main mechanism
of drug resistance is the acquired secondary mutation of ALK kinase domain.
L1196M and G1202R are classical mutation sites. We urgently need to understand
the underlying molecular mechanism of drug resistance to study the therapeutic
targets of mutant drug-resistant NSCLC cells. The silent information regulator
sirtuin1 (SIRT1) can regulate the normal energy metabolism of cells, but its
role in cancer is still unclear. In our report, it was found that the SIRT1 in
EML4-ALK G1202R and EML4-ALK L1196M mutant drug-resistant cells was
downregulated compared with EML4-ALK NSCLC cells. The high expression of SIRT1
was related to the longer survival time of patients with lung cancer. Activation
of SIRT1 induced autophagy and suppressed the invasion and migration of mutant
cells. Further experiments indicated that the activation of SIRT1 inhibited the
phosphorylation level of mTOR and S6K by upregulating the expression of AMPK,
thus activating autophagy. SIRT1 can significantly enhanced the sensitivity of
mutant cells to crizotinib, improved its ability to promote apoptosis of mutant
cells, and inhibited cell proliferation. In conclusion, SIRT1 is a key regulator
of drug resistant in EML4-ALK L1196M and G1202R mutant cells. SIRT1 may be a
novel therapeutic target for EML4-ALK drug resistant NSCLC.

© 2024 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mc.23799
PMID: 39078281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
