---
reference_id: "PMID:35258639"
title: Cardiac Complications Associated with COVID-19, MIS-C, and mRNA COVID-19 Vaccination.
authors:
- Chin SE
- Bhavsar SM
- Corson A
- Ghersin ZJ
- Kim HS
journal: Pediatr Cardiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00246-022-02851-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac Complications Associated with COVID-19, MIS-C, and mRNA COVID-19 Vaccination.
**Authors:** Chin SE, Bhavsar SM, Corson A, Ghersin ZJ, Kim HS
**Journal:** Pediatr Cardiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00246-022-02851-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00246-022-02851-x)

## Content

1. Pediatr Cardiol. 2022 Mar;43(3):483-488. doi: 10.1007/s00246-022-02851-x. Epub
 2022 Mar 8.

Cardiac Complications Associated with COVID-19, MIS-C, and mRNA COVID-19 
Vaccination.

Chin SE(1)(2)(3), Bhavsar SM(4)(5), Corson A(6), Ghersin ZJ(6)(5), Kim HS(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)K. Hovnanian Children's Hospital at Jersey Shore University Medical Center, 
Neptune, NJ, USA. schin@alpertzalescastro.com.
(2)Hackensack Meridian School of Medicine, Nutley, NJ, USA. 
schin@alpertzalescastro.com.
(3)Alpert Zales Castro Pediatric Cardiology, 1623 Route 88, Brick, NJ, 08724, 
USA. schin@alpertzalescastro.com.
(4)Joseph M. Sanzari Children's Hospital at Hackensack University Medical 
Center, Hackensack, NJ, USA.
(5)Hackensack Meridian School of Medicine, Nutley, NJ, USA.
(6)K. Hovnanian Children's Hospital at Jersey Shore University Medical Center, 
Neptune, NJ, USA.

The COVID-19 vaccine is now approved for individuals greater than 5 years of 
age, but vaccination rates remain lower than expected in the pediatric age 
group. Misinformation and widespread reporting of vaccine-related myocarditis 
are contributing to vaccine hesitancy. When compared to severe cardiac 
complications that are associated with COVID-19, vaccine-related myocarditis has 
a milder presentation, is easily treated, and has a good prognosis. Acute 
COVID-19 has been associated with higher rates of myocarditis and myocardial 
injury. Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children occurs weeks after initial 
infection with SARS-CoV-2 and can be associated with severe cardiovascular 
complications and death. Cardiac complications associated with acute COVID-19 
and MIS-C are more severe and occur more frequently than myocarditis after mRNA 
COVID-19 vaccination. Furthermore, some of the academic and social disruptions 
caused by the pandemic expect to be eased by widespread vaccination. For all 
these reasons, COVID-19 vaccination is strongly recommended for all eligible age 
groups.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00246-022-02851-x
PMCID: PMC8902276
PMID: 35258639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.