---
reference_id: "PMID:42299067"
title: Coupling Far-Western Blotting with Peptide Microarrays Reveals Novel E-Cadherin Spore-Surface Ligands in Clostridioides difficile.
authors:
- Lopez-Garcia OK
- Pizarro-Guajardo M
- Kocurek KI
- Rezenom YH
- Paredes-Sabja D
journal: J Proteome Res
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5c01166
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coupling Far-Western Blotting with Peptide Microarrays Reveals Novel E-Cadherin Spore-Surface Ligands in Clostridioides difficile.
**Authors:** Lopez-Garcia OK, Pizarro-Guajardo M, Kocurek KI, Rezenom YH, Paredes-Sabja D
**Journal:** J Proteome Res (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.jproteome.5c01166](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jproteome.5c01166)

## Content

1. J Proteome Res. 2026 Jun 16. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5c01166. Online ahead
of  print.

Coupling Far-Western Blotting with Peptide Microarrays Reveals Novel E-Cadherin 
Spore-Surface Ligands in Clostridioides difficile.

Lopez-Garcia OK(1)(2), Pizarro-Guajardo M(1), Kocurek KI(3), Rezenom YH(3), 
Paredes-Sabja D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843, 
United States.
(2)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Genetics & Genomics, Texas A&M 
University, College Station, Texas 77843, United States.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843, 
United States.

Clostridioides difficile is an anaerobic spore-forming bacterium and the leading 
cause of nosocomial diarrhea. A major clinical challenge is C. difficile 
infection recurrence, affecting 20-30% of patients, mainly driven by spore 
persistence. The mechanisms underlying spore persistence in the gut remain 
poorly understood. Recently, our group showed that E-cadherin acts as a spore 
receptor mediating adherence to intestinal epithelial cells (PMID: 36448839), 
but the identity of the E-cadherin-binding proteins remains unknown. Here, 
far-Western blotting coupled with MS/MS-identified E-cadherin-binding spore 
ligands. The spore surface proteins CotE (CDIF27147_01458) and CdeM 
(CDIF27147_01682), along with two uncharacterized proteins, CDIF27147_03838 and 
CDIF27147_02282, interact with E-cadherin. Peptide microarray analysis mapped 
discrete E-cadherin-binding regions within these proteins, corresponding to 9-20 
residue motifs, predicted to be surface-exposed by AlphaFold. However, 
competitive E-cadherin pull-down assays using synthetic peptides of these motifs 
did not reduce E-cadherin binding to C. difficile spores. Comparative genomics 
showed that these ligands and motifs are conserved across all five classical C. 
difficile clades (C1-C5). Similar levels of E-cadherin binding were observed in 
spores from all five classical clades. Collectively, this work identifies 
CDIF27147_03838 and CDIF27147_02282 as novel E-cadherin ligands and suggests 
additional roles for CotE and CdeM, expanding insights into spore-host 
interactions.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5c01166
PMID: 42299067