---
reference_id: "PMID:7929490"
title: Spinal deformity in patients who have fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
authors:
- Shah PB
- Zasloff MA
- Drummond D
- Kaplan FS
journal: J Bone Joint Surg Am
year: '1994'
doi: 10.2106/00004623-199410000-00002
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Contraindications
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- "Myositis Ossificans/complications, epidemiology"
- Orthotic Devices
- Radiography
- "Scoliosis/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- Spinal Fusion
- Spine/diagnostic imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal deformity in patients who have fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
**Authors:** Shah PB, Zasloff MA, Drummond D, Kaplan FS
**Journal:** J Bone Joint Surg Am (1994)
**DOI:** [10.2106/00004623-199410000-00002](https://doi.org/10.2106/00004623-199410000-00002)

## Content

1. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1994 Oct;76(10):1442-50. doi:
10.2106/00004623-199410000-00002.

Spinal deformity in patients who have fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.

Shah PB(1), Zasloff MA, Drummond D, Kaplan FS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia.

We reviewed roentgenograms and clinical records in order to characterize the
spinal deformity in forty patients who had an established diagnosis of
fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva. Twenty-six (65 per cent) of the patients
had scoliosis, which, according to the clinical records and the recollection of
the patients, had been present during childhood. Twenty-three (88 per cent) of
the twenty-six curves were unbalanced c-shaped curves, while the remaining three
(12 per cent) were balanced s-shaped curves. Twenty-one (91 per cent) of the
twenty-three c-shaped curves involved the thoraco-lumbar or lumbar spine. The
c-shaped curves ranged in magnitude from 15 to more than 80 degrees. Curves
became rigid by early adulthood and many resulted in severe pelvic obliquity
with impaired sitting or standing balance. An osseous bridge developed between
the posterolateral aspect of the iliac crest and the posterolateral aspect of
the rib cage in twenty-two (55 per cent) of the forty patients. Nineteen (86 per
cent) of these twenty-two patients had scoliosis; there was a significant
association between the development of scoliosis and the presence of the osseous
bridge (p < 0.005). Ossification of the paravertebral muscles and fascia during
the first decade of life limited the development of a normal thoracic kyphosis
in ten (42 per cent) of twenty-four patients for whom lateral roentgenograms of
the spine were available. A spinal orthosis was used to treat the scoliosis in
two patients, but this method resulted in breakdown of the skin and failed to
halt progression of the curve.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.2106/00004623-199410000-00002
PMID: 7929490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
