---
reference_id: "PMID:39732702"
title: Towards a histological diagnosis of childhood small vessel CNS vasculitis.
authors:
- Nouri MN
- Dropol A
- Tyrrell PN
- Sheikh S
- Twilt M
- Michaud J
- Ellezam B
- Sarnat HB
- Dunham C
- Schutz PW
- Keith J
- Munoz DG
- Vinters HV
- Hawkins C
- Benseler SM
journal: Pediatr Rheumatol Online J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12969-024-01053-4
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/diagnosis, pathology"
- Male
- Female
- Adolescent
- Biopsy/methods
- "Child, Preschool"
- Brain/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Towards a histological diagnosis of childhood small vessel CNS vasculitis.
**Authors:** Nouri MN, Dropol A, Tyrrell PN, Sheikh S, Twilt M, Michaud J, Ellezam B, Sarnat HB, Dunham C, Schutz PW, Keith J, Munoz DG, Vinters HV, Hawkins C, Benseler SM
**Journal:** Pediatr Rheumatol Online J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12969-024-01053-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12969-024-01053-4)

## Content

1. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2024 Dec 28;22(1):111. doi: 
10.1186/s12969-024-01053-4.

Towards a histological diagnosis of childhood small vessel CNS vasculitis.

Nouri MN(1), Dropol A(2), Tyrrell PN(3), Sheikh S(4), Twilt M(5), Michaud J(6), 
Ellezam B(7), Sarnat HB(8), Dunham C(9), Schutz PW(10), Keith J(11), Munoz 
DG(12), Vinters HV(13), Hawkins C(14), Benseler SM(15).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Paediatrics, Schulich School 
of Medicine and Dentistry, Western University, 800 Commissioners Road E, London, 
ON, N6A 5W9, Canada. Maryam.nouri@lhsc.on.ca.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Digital Solutions, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada.
(3)Department of Medical Imaging, Institute of Medical Science, and Department 
of Statistical Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Rheumatology, Alberta Children's 
Hospital, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of 
Eastern Ontario, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.
(7)Department of Pathology (Neuropathology) and Clinical Neurosciences, Alberta 
Children's Hospital, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada.
(8)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Université de Montréal, 
Sainte-Justine Hospital, Montreal, Canada.
(9)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's and Women's 
Health Centre of B.C, University of British Colombia, Vancouver, Canada.
(10)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(11)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, Sunnybrook Health 
Sciences Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(12)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, St. Michael's Hospital, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(13)Departments of Pathology, Laboratory Medicine and Neurology, David Geffen 
School of Medicine at UCLA and Ronald Reagan-UCLA Medical Center, Los Angeles, 
USA.
(14)Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, Hospital for Sick Children, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(15)Section of Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, Alberta Children's 
Hospital, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Primary small vessel CNS vasculitis (sv-cPACNS) is a challenging 
inflammatory brain disease in children. Brain biopsy is mandatory to confirm the 
diagnosis. This study aims to develop and validate a histological scoring tool 
for diagnosing small vessel CNS vasculitis.
METHODS: A standardized brain biopsy scoring instrument was developed and 
applied to consecutive full-thickness brain biopsies of pediatric cases and 
controls at a single center. Stains included immunohistochemistry and 
Hematoxylin & Eosin. Nine North American neuropathologists, blinded to patients' 
presentation, diagnosis, and therapy, scored de-identified biopsies 
independently.
RESULTS: A total of 31 brain biopsy specimens from children with sv-cPACNS, 11 
with epilepsy, and 11 with non-vasculitic inflammatory brain disease controls 
were included. Angiocentric inflammation in the cortex or white matter increases 
the likelihood of sv-cPACNS, with odds ratios (ORs) of 3.231 (95CI: 
0.914-11.420, p = 0.067) and 3.923 (95CI: 1.13-13.6, p = 0.031). Moderate to 
severe inflammation in these regions is associated with a higher probability of 
sv-cPACNS, with ORs of 5.56 (95CI: 1.02-29.47, p = 0.046) in the cortex and 6.76 
(95CI: 1.26-36.11, p = 0.025) in white matter. CD3, CD4, CD8, and CD20 cells 
predominated the inflammatory infiltrate. Reactive endothelium was strongly 
associated with sv-cPACNS, with an OR of 8.93 (p = 0.001). Features reported in 
adult sv-PACNS, including granulomas, necrosis, or fibrin deposits, were absent 
in all biopsies. The presence of leptomeningeal inflammation in isolation was 
non-diagnostic.
CONCLUSION: Distinct histological features were identified in sv-cPACNS 
biopsies, including moderate to severe angiocentric inflammatory infiltrates in 
the cortex or white matter, consisting of CD3, CD4, CD8, and CD20 cells, 
alongside reactive endothelium with specificity of 95%. In the first study of 
its kind proposing histological criteria for evaluating brain biopsies, we aim 
to precisely characterize the type and severity of the inflammatory response in 
patients with sv-cPACNS; this can enable consolidation of this population to 
assess outcomes and treatment methodologies comprehensively.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12969-024-01053-4
PMCID: PMC11682624
PMID: 39732702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Standard protocol approvals, 
registrations, and patient consents: The Declaration of Helsinki was followed 
when conducting the study. Ethics approval was obtained (REB#1000014279). 
Consent for publication: section: Not applicable. Conflict of interest: The 
authors do not declare any conflicts of interests.