---
reference_id: "PMID:15737696"
title: Aicardi syndrome.
authors:
- Aicardi J
journal: Brain Dev
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2003.11.011
keywords:
- Agenesis of Corpus Callosum
- Choroid Diseases/congenital
- Corpus Callosum
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Pregnancy
- Retinal Diseases/congenital
- "Spasms, Infantile/congenital"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aicardi syndrome.
**Authors:** Aicardi J
**Journal:** Brain Dev (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.braindev.2003.11.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.braindev.2003.11.011)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 2005 Apr;27(3):164-71. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2003.11.011.

Aicardi syndrome.

Aicardi J(1).

Author information:
(1)Hôpital Robert Debré, 48 Boulevard Sérurier, 75935 Paris Cedex 19, France. 
jean.aicardi@free.fr

Aicardi syndrome (AS) is characterized by a triad of callosal agenesis, 
infantile spasms and chorioretinal 'lacunae'. It occurs only in individuals with 
two X chromosomes and is not familial. The outcome of AS is severe, with a high 
early mortality, considerable morbidity and a generally poor developmental 
outcome. However, the spectrum of AS seems broader than previously defined with 
a small proportion of the affected girls only moderately or mildly retarded. 
Several novel and important features should be added to the classic triad. The 
brain malformation is complex with cortical migration abnormalities, often 
cystic formations and sometimes choroid plexus papillomas; the eye anomalies, 
often feature a coloboma in addition to the lacunae, and focal seizures rather 
than spasms, are common. AS has been reported in 2 boys, both with an XXY 
complement, supporting the hypothesis of an X-linked gene lethal early in 
pregnancy for male conceptuses. A locus at Xp22.3 has been suggested but has not 
been confirmed. Treatment is only symptomatic.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2003.11.011
PMID: 15737696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]