---
reference_id: "PMID:38338833"
title: "The Molecular Landscape of Thymic Epithelial Tumors: A Comprehensive Review."
authors:
- Elm L
- Levidou G
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25031554
keywords:
- Humans
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- "Thymus Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Thymoma/genetics, pathology"
- "Neoplasms, Glandular and Epithelial/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Molecular Landscape of Thymic Epithelial Tumors: A Comprehensive Review.
**Authors:** Elm L, Levidou G
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25031554](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25031554)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jan 26;25(3):1554. doi: 10.3390/ijms25031554.

The Molecular Landscape of Thymic Epithelial Tumors: A Comprehensive Review.

Elm L(1), Levidou G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Nuremberg Clinic, Paracelsus Medical University,
90419 Nuremberg, Germany.

Thymic epithelial tumors (TETs) are characterized by their extreme rarity and
variable clinical presentation, with the inadequacy of the use of histological
classification alone to distinguish biologically indolent from aggressive cases.
The utilization of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) to unravel the intricate
genetic landscape of TETs could offer us a comprehensive understanding that is
crucial for precise diagnoses, prognoses, and potential therapeutic strategies.
Despite the low tumor mutational burden of TETS, NGS allows for exploration of
specific genetic signatures contributing to TET onset and progression. Thymomas
exhibit a limited mutational load, with prevalent GTF2I and HRAS mutations. On
the other hand, thymic carcinomas (TCs) exhibit an elevated mutational burden,
marked by frequent mutations in TP53 and genes associated with epigenetic
regulation. Moreover, signaling pathway analyses highlight dysregulation in
crucial cellular functions and pathways. Targeted therapies, and ongoing
clinical trials show promising results, addressing challenges rooted in the
scarcity of actionable mutations and limited genomic understanding.
International collaborations and data-sharing initiatives are crucial for
breakthroughs in TETs research.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25031554
PMCID: PMC10855681
PMID: 38338833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
