---
reference_id: "PMID:32712723"
title: Is Axial Spondyloarthritis More Common Than Rheumatoid Arthritis?
authors:
- Akkoc N
- Khan MA
journal: Curr Rheumatol Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s11926-020-00934-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is Axial Spondyloarthritis More Common Than Rheumatoid Arthritis?
**Authors:** Akkoc N, Khan MA
**Journal:** Curr Rheumatol Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11926-020-00934-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11926-020-00934-3)

## Content

1. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2020 Jul 25;22(9):54. doi: 10.1007/s11926-020-00934-3.

Is Axial Spondyloarthritis More Common Than Rheumatoid Arthritis?

Akkoc N(1), Khan MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Celal Bayar University 
School of Medicine, Manisa, Turkey. nurullah.akkoc@gmail.com.
(2)MetroHealth Medical Center, Case Western Reserve University, 2500 MetroHealth 
Drive, Cleveland, OH, 44109, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To discuss the disease incidence and prevalence rates of 
axial spondyloarthritis (axSpA) and ankylosing spondylitis (AS) relative to 
those of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
RECENT FINDINGS: According to the most recently published systematic reviews, 
pooled prevalence estimates for RA are 0.38% in North America, and 0.21 to 0.25% 
in European subregions, while that of AS is 0.20% in North America and 0.25% in 
Europe. The estimated prevalence of axSpA has been reported to be approximately 
twice as common as AS in a study from the USA. This finding has also been 
supported by studies from northern Norway, central Italy, western Turkey, 
northern and southern regions of China, and rural Taiwan. These data suggest 
that axSpA, that encompasses AS, may be more prevalent than RA, at least in some 
countries. In general, higher occurrences of RA relative to AS have been noted 
worldwide, both in terms of incidence and prevalence. But axSpA, that 
encompasses AS, may be more prevalent than RA, at least in some countries. There 
is a need for concurrently run studies in the same population for a reliable 
comparison to establish occurrence of RA, AS, and axSpA. It is hoped that the 
implementation of the ICD-11 codes for axSpA will be helpful in determining a 
more accurate estimate of its incidence and prevalence.

DOI: 10.1007/s11926-020-00934-3
PMID: 32712723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]