---
reference_id: "PMID:35096274"
title: "The Promising Role of Chemokines in Vitiligo: From Oxidative Stress to the Autoimmune Response."
authors:
- He S
- Xu J
- Wu J
journal: Oxid Med Cell Longev
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1155/2022/8796735
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Promising Role of Chemokines in Vitiligo: From Oxidative Stress to the Autoimmune Response.
**Authors:** He S, Xu J, Wu J
**Journal:** Oxid Med Cell Longev (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2022/8796735](https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/8796735)

## Content

1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2022 Jan 19;2022:8796735. doi: 10.1155/2022/8796735. 
eCollection 2022.

The Promising Role of Chemokines in Vitiligo: From Oxidative Stress to the 
Autoimmune Response.

He S(1), Xu J(1), Wu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 
200040, China.

Vitiligo is a common chronic autoimmune skin disorder featured with depigmented 
patches and underlying destruction of melanocytes in the lesional skin. Multiple 
factors and mechanisms have been proposed for the etiopathogenesis of vitiligo, 
among which oxidative stress has been widely accepted as a key factor in 
initiating melanocyte loss. The altered redox status caused by oxidative stress, 
including the overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the decreased 
activity of the antioxidant system in the skin, surrenders the resistance of 
melanocytes to exogenous or endogenous stimuli and eventually impairs the normal 
defense mechanism, leading to the absence of melanocytes. Considering the 
important role of innate and adaptive immunity in vitiligo, there is mounting 
evidence revealing an association between oxidative stress and autoimmunity. 
Since the significant changes of chemokines have been documented in vitiligo in 
many recent studies, it has been suggested that ROS-mediated chemotactic signals 
are not only the biomarkers of disease progression and prognosis but also are 
involved in the pathogenesis of vitiligo by facilitating the innate and adaptive 
immune cells, especially melanocyte-specific T cells, trafficking to the 
lesional areas of vitiligo. In this review, we discuss the interaction between 
oxidative stress and autoimmune response orchestrated by chemokines, including 
CXCL16-CXCR6 axis, CXCL9/CXCL10-CXCR3 axis, and other altered chemokines in 
vitiligo, and we also try to provide insight into potential therapeutic options 
through targeting these pathways.

Copyright © 2022 Shan He et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/8796735
PMCID: PMC8791757
PMID: 35096274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.