---
reference_id: "PMID:1185334"
title: Articular and cutaneous prodromal manifestations of viral hepatitis.
authors:
- Segool RA
- Lejtenyi C
- Taussig LM
journal: J Pediatr
year: '1975'
doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(75)80292-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Articular and cutaneous prodromal manifestations of viral hepatitis.
**Authors:** Segool RA, Lejtenyi C, Taussig LM
**Journal:** J Pediatr (1975)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0022-3476(75)80292-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-3476(75)80292-7)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 1975 Nov;87(5):709-12. doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(75)80292-7.

Articular and cutaneous prodromal manifestations of viral hepatitis.

Segool RA, Lejtenyi C, Taussig LM.

The association of arthritis, arthralgia, and various types of skin rashes, as a 
prodrome to viral hepatitis, although well recognized in adults, has not been 
well described in children. In an 18-month period, three children presented with 
this serum sickness-like illness before the onset of evident liver involvement. 
In one case, the prodromal symptoms occurred four weeks before biochemical or 
clinical evidence of hepatitis. The SSLI tended to subside with the onset of 
clinically evident liver disease. Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg, Australia 
antigen) was detected in the sera of two patients, but free antibody to the 
antigen was not demonstrable in either one. Serum complement levels were low 
during the prodromal phase and tended to return to normal value at the onset of 
extensive liver involvement. The diagnosis of viral hepatitis should be 
considered in children presenting with polyarthritis, polyarthralgia, and a rash 
(serum sickness-like illness) of uncertain etiology.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-3476(75)80292-7
PMID: 1185334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]