---
reference_id: "PMID:11385214"
title: Accuracy of color-Doppler in the quantification of proximal vertebral artery stenoses.
authors:
- de Bray JM
- Pasco A
- Tranquart F
- Papon X
- Alecu C
- Giraudeau B
- Dubas F
- Emile J
journal: Cerebrovasc Dis
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1159/000047663
keywords:
- Arterial Occlusive Diseases/diagnostic imaging
- "Arteriosclerosis/complications, diagnostic imaging"
- Cerebral Angiography
- Double-Blind Method
- False Positive Reactions
- Humans
- Prospective Studies
- Stroke/diagnostic imaging
- "Ultrasonography, Doppler, Color"
- Vertebral Artery/diagnostic imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Accuracy of color-Doppler in the quantification of proximal vertebral artery stenoses.
**Authors:** de Bray JM, Pasco A, Tranquart F, Papon X, Alecu C, Giraudeau B, Dubas F, Emile J
**Journal:** Cerebrovasc Dis (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000047663](https://doi.org/10.1159/000047663)

## Content

1. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2001;11(4):335-40. doi: 10.1159/000047663.

Accuracy of color-Doppler in the quantification of proximal vertebral artery 
stenoses.

de Bray JM(1), Pasco A, Tranquart F, Papon X, Alecu C, Giraudeau B, Dubas F, 
Emile J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, CHU, Angers, France.

BACKGROUND: Vertebrobasilar (VB) strokes appear to have the same causes as 
carotid strokes. Obstructive lesions of proximal vertebral arteries probably 
occur in about 30% of stroke patients.
PURPOSE: Our aim was to assess the validity of color Doppler sonography compared 
to selective intra-arterial angiography in the quantification of proximal 
vertebral artery stenoses.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A prospective blind study of 316 vertebral arteries was 
undertaken between 1996 and 1998. One hundred and fifty-eight patients with 
cerebrovascular disorders without cerebral hemorrhage were studied consecutively 
by frequency or amplitude color Doppler flow imaging and intra-arterial 
angiography. The lesions were quantified by morphological and hemodynamic 
criteria and classified into 6 groups: 0% 207 arteries; 1-29% 32 arteries; 
30-49% 29 arteries; 50-69% 13 arteries; 70-99% 23 arteries; 100% 12 arteries.
RESULTS: Ten of the 12 occlusions were identified, the 2 false-negatives were 
due to 2 revascularized vessels. Moderate stenoses (<50%) were differentiated 
from tight stenoses (>50%) using hemodynamic criteria. The majority of 
false-negative stenoses (38) in the different groups were related to 
intrathoracic or very deep origin of the artery, anechogenic stenosis or a 
tortuous vessel. Stenoses greater than 70% were diagnosed in 71% of cases with a 
specificity of 99%. The kappa value was 0.80.
CONCLUSION: Duplex sonography should be proposed first in VB attacks or stroke 
to detect and quantify vertebral artery stenoses for surgery and angioplasty.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000047663
PMID: 11385214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]