---
reference_id: "PMID:35149520"
title: Mouse Model of a Human STAT4 Point Mutation That Predisposes to Disseminated Coccidiomycosis.
authors:
- Powell DA
- Hsu AP
- Shubitz LF
- Butkiewicz CD
- Moale H
- Trinh HT
- Doetschman T
- Georgieva TG
- Reinartz DM
- Wilson JE
- Orbach MJ
- Holland SM
- Galgiani JN
- Frelinger JA
journal: Immunohorizons
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4049/immunohorizons.2200007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mouse Model of a Human STAT4 Point Mutation That Predisposes to Disseminated Coccidiomycosis.
**Authors:** Powell DA, Hsu AP, Shubitz LF, Butkiewicz CD, Moale H, Trinh HT, Doetschman T, Georgieva TG, Reinartz DM, Wilson JE, Orbach MJ, Holland SM, Galgiani JN, Frelinger JA
**Journal:** Immunohorizons (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4049/immunohorizons.2200007](https://doi.org/10.4049/immunohorizons.2200007)

## Content

1. Immunohorizons. 2022 Feb 11;6(2):130-143. doi: 10.4049/immunohorizons.2200007.

Mouse Model of a Human STAT4 Point Mutation That Predisposes to Disseminated 
Coccidiomycosis.

Powell DA(1)(2), Hsu AP(3), Shubitz LF(4), Butkiewicz CD(4), Moale H(4), Trinh 
HT(4), Doetschman T(5), Georgieva TG(5), Reinartz DM(2), Wilson JE(2)(6), Orbach 
MJ(4)(7), Holland SM(3), Galgiani JN(4)(8), Frelinger JA(4).

Author information:
(1)Valley Fever Center for Excellence, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ; 
danielpowell@email.arizona.edu.
(2)Department of Immunobiology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.
(3)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD.
(4)Valley Fever Center for Excellence, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.
(5)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ.
(6)The University of Arizona Cancer Center, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.
(7)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ; and.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.

STAT4 plays a critical role in the generation of both innate and adaptive immune 
responses. In the absence of STAT4, Th1 responses, critical for resistance to 
fungal disease, do not occur. Infection with the dimorphic fungus, Coccidioides, 
is a major cause of community-acquired pneumonia in the endemic regions of 
Arizona and California. In some people and often for unknown reasons, 
coccidioidal infection results in hematogenous dissemination and progressive 
disease rather than the typical self-limited pneumonia. Members of three 
generations in a family developed disseminated coccidioidomycosis, prompting 
genetic investigation. All affected family members had a single heterozygous 
base change in STAT4, c.1877A>G, causing substitution of glycine for glutamate 
at AA626 (STAT4E626G/+ ). A knockin mouse, heterozygous for the substitution, 
developed more severe experimental coccidioidomycosis than did wild-type mice. 
Stat4E626G/+ T cells were deficient in production of IFN-γ after anti-CD3/CD28 
stimulation. Spleen cells from Stat4E626G mice showed defective responses to 
IL-12/IL-18 stimulation in vitro. In vivo, early postinfection, mutant 
Stat4E626G/+ mice failed to produce IFN-γ and related cytokines in the lung and 
to accumulate activated adaptive immune cells in mediastinal lymph nodes. 
Therefore, defective early induction of IFN-γ and adaptive responses by STAT4 
prevents normal control of coccidioidomycosis in both mice and humans.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.4049/immunohorizons.2200007
PMCID: PMC9235507
PMID: 35149520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]