---
reference_id: "PMID:24367151"
title: Molecular aspects of poliovirus pathogenesis.
authors:
- Nomoto A
journal: Proc Jpn Acad Ser B Phys Biol Sci
year: '2007'
doi: 10.2183/pjab/83.266
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular aspects of poliovirus pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Nomoto A
**Journal:** Proc Jpn Acad Ser B Phys Biol Sci (2007)
**DOI:** [10.2183/pjab/83.266](https://doi.org/10.2183/pjab/83.266)

## Content

1. Proc Jpn Acad Ser B Phys Biol Sci. 2007 Dec;83(8):266-75. doi: 
10.2183/pjab/83.266.

Molecular aspects of poliovirus pathogenesis.

Nomoto A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan . ; Recipient of the Japan Academy Prize in 2004.

The development of a transgenic mouse model carrying the human poliovirus 
receptor has made it possible to investigate the molecular mechanisms of the 
viral dissemination process in a whole organism. Studies on this have provided 
an insight into the mechanisms for viral permeation through the blood-brain 
barrier and retrograde axonal transport of the virus. In addition, 
strain-specific neurovirulence levels are shown to depend mainly on the 
replicating capacity of the virus in the central nervous system rather than the 
efficiency of the 2 dissemination pathways indicated above. Studies of 
poliovirus-induced cytopathic effects on neural cells revealed that neural cells 
possess anti-poliovirus characteristics that may offer a new avenue for 
investigating the molecular mechanisms of poliovirus neurovirulence.

DOI: 10.2183/pjab/83.266
PMCID: PMC3859295
PMID: 24367151