---
reference_id: "PMID:33338401"
title: A Surge of DNA Damage Links Transcriptional Reprogramming and Hematopoietic Deficit in Fanconi Anemia.
authors:
- Shen X
- Wang R
- Kim MJ
- Hu Q
- Hsu CC
- Yao J
- Klages-Mundt N
- Tian Y
- Lynn E
- Brewer TF
- Zhang Y
- Arun B
- Gan B
- Andreeff M
- Takeda S
- Chen J
- Park JI
- Shi X
- Chang CJ
- Jung SY
- Qin J
- Li L
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2020.11.040
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Surge of DNA Damage Links Transcriptional Reprogramming and Hematopoietic Deficit in Fanconi Anemia.
**Authors:** Shen X, Wang R, Kim MJ, Hu Q, Hsu CC, Yao J, Klages-Mundt N, Tian Y, Lynn E, Brewer TF, Zhang Y, Arun B, Gan B, Andreeff M, Takeda S, Chen J, Park JI, Shi X, Chang CJ, Jung SY, Qin J, Li L
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2020.11.040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2020.11.040)

## Content

1. Mol Cell. 2020 Dec 17;80(6):1013-1024.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2020.11.040.

A Surge of DNA Damage Links Transcriptional Reprogramming and Hematopoietic 
Deficit in Fanconi Anemia.

Shen X(1), Wang R(1), Kim MJ(1), Hu Q(1), Hsu CC(2), Yao J(3), Klages-Mundt 
N(1), Tian Y(1), Lynn E(1), Brewer TF(4), Zhang Y(1), Arun B(5), Gan B(1), 
Andreeff M(6), Takeda S(7), Chen J(1), Park JI(1), Shi X(2), Chang CJ(4), Jung 
SY(8), Qin J(8), Li L(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, the University of Texas, MD 
Anderson Cancer, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Epigenetics and Molecular Carcinogenesis, the University of 
Texas, MD Anderson Cancer, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Oncology, the University of Texas, MD Anderson 
Cancer, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University 
of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(5)Department of Breast Medical Oncology, the University of Texas, MD Anderson 
Cancer, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(6)Department of Leukemia, the University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer, Houston, 
TX 77030, USA.
(7)Department of Radiation Biology, Kyoto University, 606-8501 Kyoto, Japan.
(8)Department of Biochemistry, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA.
(9)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, the University of Texas, MD 
Anderson Cancer, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou 310058, China. Electronic address: leili852002@yahoo.com.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2020 Dec 17;80(6):935-937. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2020.11.042.

Impaired DNA crosslink repair leads to Fanconi anemia (FA), characterized by a 
unique manifestation of bone marrow failure and pancytopenia among diseases 
caused by DNA damage response defects. As a germline disorder, why the 
hematopoietic hierarchy is specifically affected is not fully understood. We 
find that reprogramming transcription during hematopoietic differentiation 
results in an overload of genotoxic stress, which causes aborted differentiation 
and depletion of FA mutant progenitor cells. DNA damage onset most likely arises 
from formaldehyde, an obligate by-product of oxidative protein demethylation 
during transcription regulation. Our results demonstrate that rapid and 
extensive transcription reprogramming associated with hematopoietic 
differentiation poses a major threat to genome stability and cell viability in 
the absence of the FA pathway. The connection between differentiation and DNA 
damage accumulation reveals a novel mechanism of genome scarring and is critical 
to exploring therapies to counteract the aplastic anemia for the treatment of FA 
patients.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2020.11.040
PMCID: PMC8600940
PMID: 33338401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
conflict of interests.