---
reference_id: "PMID:39157719"
title: Assessing the arrhythmogenic propensity of fibrotic substrate using digital twins to inform a mechanisms-based atrial fibrillation ablation strategy.
authors:
- Sakata K
- Bradley RP
- Prakosa A
- Yamamoto CAP
- Ali SY
- Loeffler S
- Tice BM
- Boyle PM
- Kholmovski EG
- Yadav R
- Sinha SK
- Marine JE
- Calkins H
- Spragg DD
- Trayanova NA
journal: Nat Cardiovasc Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s44161-024-00489-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessing the arrhythmogenic propensity of fibrotic substrate using digital twins to inform a mechanisms-based atrial fibrillation ablation strategy.
**Authors:** Sakata K, Bradley RP, Prakosa A, Yamamoto CAP, Ali SY, Loeffler S, Tice BM, Boyle PM, Kholmovski EG, Yadav R, Sinha SK, Marine JE, Calkins H, Spragg DD, Trayanova NA
**Journal:** Nat Cardiovasc Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s44161-024-00489-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s44161-024-00489-x)

## Content

1. Nat Cardiovasc Res. 2024 Jul;3(7):857-868. doi: 10.1038/s44161-024-00489-x.
Epub  2024 Jun 18.

Assessing the arrhythmogenic propensity of fibrotic substrate using digital 
twins to inform a mechanisms-based atrial fibrillation ablation strategy.

Sakata K(1), Bradley RP(1)(2), Prakosa A(1), Yamamoto CAP(3), Ali SY(3), 
Loeffler S(1), Tice BM(1), Boyle PM(4)(5), Kholmovski EG(1)(3), Yadav R(6), 
Sinha SK(6), Marine JE(6), Calkins H(6), Spragg DD(6), Trayanova NA(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Alliance for Cardiovascular Diagnostic and Treatment Innovation, Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Research Computing, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
MD, USA.
(4)Center for Cardiovascular Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 
USA.
(5)Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(6)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Atrial fibrillation (AF), the most common heart rhythm disorder, may cause 
stroke and heart failure. For patients with persistent AF with fibrosis 
proliferation, the standard AF treatment-pulmonary vein isolation-has poor 
outcomes, necessitating redo procedures, owing to insufficient understanding of 
what constitutes good targets in fibrotic substrates. Here we present a 
prospective clinical and personalized digital twin study that characterizes the 
arrhythmogenic properties of persistent AF substrates and uncovers locations 
possessing rotor-attracting capabilities. Among these, a portion needs to be 
ablated to render the substrate not inducible for rotors, but the rest (37%) 
lose rotor-attracting capabilities when another location is ablated. Leveraging 
digital twin mechanistic insights, we suggest ablation targets that eliminate 
arrhythmia propensity with minimum lesions while also minimizing the risk of 
iatrogenic tachycardia and AF recurrence. Our findings provide further evidence 
regarding the appropriate substrate ablation targets in persistent AF, opening 
the door for effective strategies to mitigate patients' AF burden.

DOI: 10.1038/s44161-024-00489-x
PMCID: PMC11329066
PMID: 39157719