---
reference_id: "PMID:40632032"
title: "Cemiplimab in Locally Advanced or Metastatic Secondary Angiosarcomas (CEMangio): A Phase II Clinical Trial and Biomarker Analyses."
authors:
- van Ravensteijn SG
- de Haan JJ
- Gelderblom H
- Nederkoorn MJL
- Hillebrandt-Roeffen MHS
- Gorris MAJ
- de Bitter TJJ
- Boleij A
- Gusinac A
- Ederveen THA
- Flucke UE
- Bonenkamp JJ
- Speetjens FM
- Kaal SEJ
- Smits M
- Bol KF
- van Herpen CML
- Versleijen-Jonkers YMH
- Desar IME
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-25-0311
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use, adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Adult
- "Hemangiosarcoma/drug therapy, pathology, mortality, etiology, genetics"
- Prospective Studies
- Prognosis
- "Antineoplastic Agents, Immunological/therapeutic use, adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- "Aged, 80 and over"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cemiplimab in Locally Advanced or Metastatic Secondary Angiosarcomas (CEMangio): A Phase II Clinical Trial and Biomarker Analyses.
**Authors:** van Ravensteijn SG, de Haan JJ, Gelderblom H, Nederkoorn MJL, Hillebrandt-Roeffen MHS, Gorris MAJ, de Bitter TJJ, Boleij A, Gusinac A, Ederveen THA, Flucke UE, Bonenkamp JJ, Speetjens FM, Kaal SEJ, Smits M, Bol KF, van Herpen CML, Versleijen-Jonkers YMH, Desar IME
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-25-0311](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-25-0311)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2025 Sep 2;31(17):3678-3691. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-25-0311.

Cemiplimab in Locally Advanced or Metastatic Secondary Angiosarcomas (CEMangio):
A Phase II Clinical Trial and Biomarker Analyses.

van Ravensteijn SG(1), de Haan JJ(2), Gelderblom H(3), Nederkoorn MJL(1),
Hillebrandt-Roeffen MHS(1), Gorris MAJ(4), de Bitter TJJ(5), Boleij A(6),
Gusinac A(6), Ederveen THA(4), Flucke UE(6), Bonenkamp JJ(7), Speetjens FM(3),
Kaal SEJ(1), Smits M(1), Bol KF(1)(4), van Herpen CML(1), Versleijen-Jonkers
YMH(1), Desar IME(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medical BioSciences, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pathology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Surgery, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the
Netherlands.

PURPOSE: Angiosarcomas (AS) are rare vascular sarcomas. Secondary AS (sAS) arise
from DNA-damaging factors such as radiotherapy and UV radiation (UV-AS) or due
to chronic lymphedema. The prognosis for advanced AS is poor, with limited
treatment options. Immune checkpoint inhibition is not approved for AS, but high
intratumoral T-cell density and frequent mutations in sAS may support efficacy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This prospective, single-arm, multicenter phase II trial
assessed the efficacy and safety of cemiplimab (350 mg, intravenously every 3
weeks) in patients with locally advanced or metastatic sAS using a Simon's
two-stage design. The primary outcome was the best overall response rate within
24 weeks of treatment. Secondary outcomes included time to response, duration of
response, progression-free survival, overall survival, and predictive biomarkers
for treatment response.
RESULTS: Eighteen patients (12 with AS from radiotherapy, 3 with UV-AS, and 3
with AS due to chronic lymphedema) were treated with cemiplimab. The best
overall response rate was 27.8% (4 partial responses, 1 complete response), with
a time to response of 2.6 months and a duration of response of 6.9 months. The
median progression-free survival was 3.7 months, and the median overall survival
was 13.1 months. Grade ≥3 immune-related adverse events occurred in 33.3% of
patients. High tumor mutational burden was observed in three patients with
UV-AS, two of whom showed a response. High intratumoral CD3+ (P = 0.019), CD4 (P
= 0.046), CD8+ (P = 0.026), and FoxP3+ (P = 0.026) T-cell densities; low
platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio (P = 0.026); and Colidextribacter abundance were
associated with response.
CONCLUSIONS: Cemiplimab shows promising effectivity in sAS and warrants further
investigation. Promising predictive blood and tissue biomarkers were identified,
indicating potential for improved patient selection.

©2025 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-25-0311
PMCID: PMC12402795
PMID: 40632032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.G. van Ravensteijn reports nonfinancial
support and other support from Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. and grants from
the Sarcoma Foundation of America during the conduct of the study. Y.M.H.
Versleijen-Jonkers reports grants from Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. and the
Sarcoma Foundation of America during the conduct of the study. I.M.E. Desar
reports other support from Regeneron during the conduct of the study. No
disclosures were reported by the other authors.
