---
reference_id: "PMID:36471344"
title: Ketogenic diet as a glycine lowering therapy in nonketotic hyperglycinemia and impact on brain glycine levels.
authors:
- Shelkowitz E
- Saneto RP
- Al-Hertani W
- Lubout CMA
- Stence NV
- Brown MS
- Long P
- Walleigh D
- Nelson JA
- Perez FE
- Shaw DWW
- Michl EJ
- Van Hove JLK
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02581-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ketogenic diet as a glycine lowering therapy in nonketotic hyperglycinemia and impact on brain glycine levels.
**Authors:** Shelkowitz E, Saneto RP, Al-Hertani W, Lubout CMA, Stence NV, Brown MS, Long P, Walleigh D, Nelson JA, Perez FE, Shaw DWW, Michl EJ, Van Hove JLK
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-022-02581-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-022-02581-6)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2022 Dec 5;17(1):423. doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02581-6.

Ketogenic diet as a glycine lowering therapy in nonketotic hyperglycinemia and 
impact on brain glycine levels.

Shelkowitz E(1), Saneto RP(2), Al-Hertani W(3), Lubout CMA(4), Stence NV(5), 
Brown MS(5), Long P(1), Walleigh D(6), Nelson JA(6), Perez FE(7), Shaw DWW(7), 
Michl EJ(3), Van Hove JLK(8).

Author information:
(1)Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Colorado, Education 2 South, L28-4114, East 17Th Avenue, Aurora, 
CO, 80045, USA.
(2)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Neurology, Center for 
Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle 
Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA, 98105, USA.
(3)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Section of Metabolic Diseases, Beatrix Children's Hospital, University of 
Groningen, University Medical Center, Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Radiology, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.
(6)Section of Child Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado, 
Aurora, CO, USA.
(7)Department of Radiology, Seattle Children's Hospital, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(8)Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Colorado, Education 2 South, L28-4114, East 17Th Avenue, Aurora, 
CO, 80045, USA. Johan.Vanhove@childrenscolorado.org.

Erratum in
    Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Mar 13;18(1):54. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02646-0.

BACKGROUND: Nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH) is a severe neurometabolic disorder 
characterized by increased glycine levels. Current glycine reduction therapy 
uses high doses of sodium benzoate. The ketogenic diet (KD) may represent an 
alternative method of glycine reduction.
AIM: We aimed to assess clinical and biochemical effects of two glycine 
reduction strategies: high dose benzoate versus KD with low dose benzoate.
METHODS: Six infants with NKH were first treated with high dose benzoate therapy 
to achieve target plasma glycine levels, and then switched to KD with low dose 
benzoate. They were evaluated as clinically indicated by physical examination, 
electroencephalogram, plasma and cerebral spinal fluid amino acid levels. Brain 
glycine levels were monitored by magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS).
RESULTS: Average plasma glycine levels were significantly lower with KD compared 
to benzoate monotherapy by on average 28%. Two infants underwent comparative 
assessments of brain glycine levels via serial MRS. A 30% reduction of brain 
glycine levels was observed in the basal ganglia and a 50% reduction in the 
white matter, which remained elevated above normal, and was equivalent between 
the KD and high dose benzoate therapies. CSF analysis obtained while 
participants remained on the KD showed a decrease in glycine, serine and 
threonine levels, reflecting their gluconeogenetic usage. Clinically, half the 
patients had seizure reduction on KD, otherwise the clinical impact was 
variable.
CONCLUSION: KD is an effective glycine reduction method in NKH, and may provide 
a more consistent reduction in plasma glycine levels than high-dose benzoate 
therapy. Both high-dose benzoate therapy and KD equally reduced but did not 
normalize brain glycine levels even in the setting of low-normal plasma glycine.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-022-02581-6
PMCID: PMC9720968
PMID: 36471344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The University of Colorado (JVH) has a pending 
patent application to the use of formate for the treatment of conditions 
associated with elevated homocysteine. All authors further deny any real or 
apparent conflict of interest pertaining to nonketotic hyperglycinemia.