---
reference_id: "PMID:32895731"
title: "Protracted febrile myalgia syndrome as the first manifestation of familial Mediterranean fever in children: case-based review."
authors:
- Öztürk K
- Çakan M
journal: Rheumatol Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00296-020-04696-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protracted febrile myalgia syndrome as the first manifestation of familial Mediterranean fever in children: case-based review.
**Authors:** Öztürk K, Çakan M
**Journal:** Rheumatol Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00296-020-04696-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00296-020-04696-0)

## Content

1. Rheumatol Int. 2021 Jan;41(1):213-218. doi: 10.1007/s00296-020-04696-0. Epub 
2020 Sep 7.

Protracted febrile myalgia syndrome as the first manifestation of familial 
Mediterranean fever in children: case-based review.

Öztürk K(1), Çakan M(2).

Author information:
(1)Gaziantep Cengiz Gökçek Children Hospital, Clinic of Pediatric Rheumatology, 
15 Temmuz Mahallesi, 148063 Cadde, No 4, 27010, Sehitkamil, Gaziantep, Turkey. 
ozturk1209@gmail.com.
(2)Şanlıurfa Research and Training Hospital, Clinic of Pediatric Rheumatology, 
Yenice Mah, 63250, Şanlıurfa, Turkey.

Protracted febrile myalgia syndrome (PFMS) is one of the rare conditions 
characterized by long standing severe myalgia and fever in familial 
Mediterranean fever (FMF) patients. Laboratory studies show elevated values of 
inflammatory markers and normal creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) levels. Rarely, 
PFMS may be the first manifestation of FMF and this makes the diagnosis of FMF 
and PFMS challenging. The aim of this report was to describe case series of PFMS 
patients without previous diagnosis of FMF and discuss with other pediatric PFMS 
cases described in the literature. Six patients with PFMS as the first 
manifestation of FMF from two Pediatric Rheumatology clinics were presented. The 
male: female ratio was 1:1. The median (min-max) age at diagnosis was 7.05 
(5.5-15.5) years. All patients had severe myalgia. No fever was detected in two 
patients. Only one patient had rash. Markedly elevated acute phase reactants 
were observed in all patients. CPK levels were normal in all patients. Also, we 
searched the PubMed/MEDLINE, Google Scholar, Web of Science and Scopus databases 
from inception to May 2020, using the keywords 'familial Mediterranean fever, 
protracted febrile myalgia, child' and 52 pediatric PFMS were found. In the 
literature, three patients did not have fever, and nineteen patients were not 
previously diagnosed with FMF as our patients. As a conclusion, PFMS may be the 
first manifestation of FMF. It should be suspected in cases with prolonged 
severe myalgia with or without fever, and high acute phase reactants.

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-020-04696-0
PMID: 32895731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]