---
reference_id: "PMID:25748549"
title: Strengthening And stretching for Rheumatoid Arthritis of the Hand (SARAH). A randomised controlled trial and economic evaluation.
authors:
- Williams MA
- Williamson EM
- Heine PJ
- Nichols V
- Glover MJ
- Dritsaki M
- Adams J
- Dosanjh S
- Underwood M
- Rahman A
- McConkey C
- Lord J
- Lamb SE
journal: Health Technol Assess
year: '2015'
doi: 10.3310/hta19190
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Strengthening And stretching for Rheumatoid Arthritis of the Hand (SARAH). A randomised controlled trial and economic evaluation.
**Authors:** Williams MA, Williamson EM, Heine PJ, Nichols V, Glover MJ, Dritsaki M, Adams J, Dosanjh S, Underwood M, Rahman A, McConkey C, Lord J, Lamb SE
**Journal:** Health Technol Assess (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3310/hta19190](https://doi.org/10.3310/hta19190)

## Content

1. Health Technol Assess. 2015 Mar;19(19):1-222. doi: 10.3310/hta19190.

Strengthening And stretching for Rheumatoid Arthritis of the Hand (SARAH). A 
randomised controlled trial and economic evaluation.

Williams MA(1), Williamson EM(1), Heine PJ(1), Nichols V(1), Glover MJ(2), 
Dritsaki M(2), Adams J(3), Dosanjh S(1), Underwood M(1), Rahman A(4), McConkey 
C(1), Lord J(1), Lamb SE(1).

Author information:
(1)Warwick Clinical Trials Unit, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.
(2)Health Economics Research Group, Brunel University, Uxbridge, UK.
(3)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(4)University College London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: The effectiveness of exercise for improving hand and wrist function 
in people with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is uncertain.
OBJECTIVES: The study aims were (1) to estimate the clinical effectiveness and 
cost-effectiveness of adding an optimised exercise programme for hands and upper 
limbs to standard care for patients with RA; and (2) to qualitatively describe 
the experience of participants in the trial with a particular emphasis on 
acceptability of the intervention, exercise behaviours and reasons for 
adherence/non-adherence.
DESIGN: A pragmatic, multicentred, individually randomised controlled trial with 
an embedded qualitative study. Outcome assessors were blind to group assignment 
and independent of treatment delivery.
SETTING: Seventeen NHS trusts in England comprising 21 rheumatology and therapy 
departments.
PARTICIPANTS: Adults with RA who had pain and dysfunction of the hands and/or 
wrists and had been on stable medication for at least 3 months. Patients were 
excluded if they were under 18 years old, had undergone upper limb 
surgery/fracture in the last 6 months, were on a waiting list for upper limb 
surgery or were pregnant.
INTERVENTIONS: Usual care or usual care plus an individualised exercise 
programme. Usual care consisted of joint protection education, general exercise 
advice and functional splinting if required. The exercise programme consisted of 
six sessions of strengthening and stretching exercises with a hand therapist, 
daily home exercises and strategies to maximise adherence.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary outcome was the Michigan Hand Outcome 
Questionnaire (MHQ) overall hand function subscale score at 12 months. Secondary 
outcome measures included the full MHQ, pain, health-related quality of life 
(Short Form questionnaire-12 items), impairment (grip strength, dexterity and 
range of motion) and self-efficacy. European Quality of Life-5 Dimensions, 
medication and health-care use were collected for the health economics 
evaluation. Follow-up was at 4 and 12 months post randomisation. Analysis was 
performed on an intention-to-treat basis.
RESULTS: We randomised 490 patients (244 to usual care, 246 to exercise 
programme). Compliance with the treatments was very good (93% of usual care 
participants and 75% of exercise programme participants completed treatment). 
Outcomes were obtained for 89% of participants at 12 months (222 for usual care, 
216 for exercise programme). There was a statistically significant difference in 
favour of the exercise programme for the primary outcome at 4 and 12 months 
[mean difference 4.6 points, 95% confidence interval (CI) 2.2 to 7.0 points; and 
mean difference 4.4 points, 95% CI 1.6 to 7.1 points, respectively]. There were 
no significant differences in pain scores or adverse events. The estimated 
difference in mean quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) accrued over 12 months 
was 0.01 greater (95% CI -0.03 to 0.05) in the exercise programme group. Imputed 
analysis produced incremental cost-effectiveness ratio estimates of £17,941 
(0.59 probability of cost-effectiveness at willingness-to-pay threshold of 
£30,000 per QALY). The qualitative study found the exercise programme to be 
acceptable and highlighted the importance of the therapist in enabling patients 
to establish a routine and incorporate the exercises into their lives.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the Strengthening And stretching for Rheumatoid 
Arthritis of the Hand trial suggest that the addition of an exercise programme 
for RA hands/wrists to usual care is clinically effective and cost-effective 
when compared with usual care alone. No adverse effects were associated with the 
exercise programme. The economic analysis suggests that the intervention is 
likely to be cost-effective.
STUDY REGISTRATION: Current Controlled Trials ISRCTN 89936343.

DOI: 10.3310/hta19190
PMCID: PMC4780893
PMID: 25748549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]