---
reference_id: "PMID:12771001"
title: Restoration of endothelial function by increasing high-density lipoprotein in subjects with isolated low high-density lipoprotein.
authors:
- Bisoendial RJ
- Hovingh GK
- Levels JH
- Lerch PG
- Andresen I
- Hayden MR
- Kastelein JJ
- Stroes ES
journal: Circulation
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000070934.69310.1A
keywords:
- ATP Binding Cassette Transporter 1
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics
- Adult
- "Apolipoprotein A-I/administration & dosage"
- Blood Flow Velocity/drug effects
- Cohort Studies
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- "Drug Carriers/administration & dosage"
- "Endothelium, Vascular/drug effects, physiopathology"
- Enzyme Inhibitors/pharmacology
- Female
- Forearm/blood supply
- Humans
- "Infusions, Intravenous"
- "Lipoproteins, HDL/blood"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Nitric Oxide Synthase/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Nitric Oxide Synthase Type III
- Nitroprusside/pharmacology
- "Phosphatidylcholines/administration & dosage"
- Recovery of Function/drug effects
- Serotonin/pharmacology
- "Tangier Disease/blood, physiopathology, therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
- Vasodilator Agents/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Restoration of endothelial function by increasing high-density lipoprotein in subjects with isolated low high-density lipoprotein.
**Authors:** Bisoendial RJ, Hovingh GK, Levels JH, Lerch PG, Andresen I, Hayden MR, Kastelein JJ, Stroes ES
**Journal:** Circulation (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.CIR.0000070934.69310.1A](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.0000070934.69310.1A)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2003 Jun 17;107(23):2944-8. doi:
10.1161/01.CIR.0000070934.69310.1A. Epub 2003 May 27.

Restoration of endothelial function by increasing high-density lipoprotein in
subjects with isolated low high-density lipoprotein.

Bisoendial RJ(1), Hovingh GK, Levels JH, Lerch PG, Andresen I, Hayden MR,
Kastelein JJ, Stroes ES.

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Meibergdreef 9,
1105 AZ Amsterdam, Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Loss-of-function mutations in the ATP-binding cassette (ABCA)-1 gene
locus are the underlying cause for familial hypoalphalipoproteinemia, providing
a human isolated low-HDL model. In these familial hypoalphalipoproteinemia
subjects, we evaluated the impact of isolated low HDL on endothelial function
and the vascular effects of an acute increase in HDL.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In 9 ABCA1 heterozygotes and 9 control subjects, vascular
function was assessed by venous occlusion plethysmography. Forearm blood flow
responses to the endothelium-dependent and -independent vasodilators serotonin
(5HT) and sodium nitroprusside, respectively, and the inhibitor of nitric oxide
synthase NG-monomethyl-l-arginine (L-NMMA) were measured. Dose-response curves
were repeated after systemic infusion of apolipoprotein A-I/phosphatidylcholine
(apoA-I/PC) disks. At baseline, ABCA1 heterozygotes had decreased HDL levels
(0.4+/-0.2 mmol/L; P<0.05), and their forearm blood flow responses to both 5HT
(maximum, 49.0+/-10.4%) and L-NMMA (maximum, -22.8+/-22.9%) were blunted
compared with control subjects (both P< or =0.005). Infusion of apoA-I/PC disks
increased plasma HDL to 1.3+/-0.4 mmol/L in ABCA1 heterozygotes, which resulted
in complete restoration of vasomotor responses to both 5HT and L-NMMA (both
P</=0.001). Endothelium-independent vasodilation remained unaltered throughout
the protocol.
CONCLUSIONS: In ABCA1 heterozygotes, isolated low HDL is associated with
endothelial dysfunction, attested to by impaired basal and stimulated NO
bioactivity. Strikingly, both parameters were completely restored after a
single, rapid infusion of apoA-I/PC. These findings indicate that in addition to
its long-term role within reverse cholesterol transport, HDL per se also exerts
direct beneficial effects on the arterial wall.

DOI: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000070934.69310.1A
PMID: 12771001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
