---
reference_id: "PMID:39728403"
title: Digital-Tier Strategy Improves Newborn Screening for Glutaric Aciduria Type 1.
authors:
- Zaunseder E
- Teinert J
- Boy N
- Garbade SF
- Haupt S
- Feyh P
- Hoffmann GF
- Kölker S
- Mütze U
- Heuveline V
journal: Int J Neonatal Screen
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijns10040083
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Digital-Tier Strategy Improves Newborn Screening for Glutaric Aciduria Type 1.
**Authors:** Zaunseder E, Teinert J, Boy N, Garbade SF, Haupt S, Feyh P, Hoffmann GF, Kölker S, Mütze U, Heuveline V
**Journal:** Int J Neonatal Screen (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijns10040083](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijns10040083)

## Content

1. Int J Neonatal Screen. 2024 Dec 21;10(4):83. doi: 10.3390/ijns10040083.

Digital-Tier Strategy Improves Newborn Screening for Glutaric Aciduria Type 1.

Zaunseder E(1)(2), Teinert J(3), Boy N(3), Garbade SF(3), Haupt S(1)(2), Feyh 
P(3), Hoffmann GF(3), Kölker S(3), Mütze U(3), Heuveline V(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Engineering Mathematics and Computing Lab (EMCL), Interdisciplinary Center 
for Scientific Computing (IWR), Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(2)Data Mining and Uncertainty Quantification (DMQ), Heidelberg Institute for 
Theoretical Studies (HITS), 69118 Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Division of Pediatric Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Department of 
Pediatrics I, Center for Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Medical Faculty of 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Glutaric aciduria type 1 (GA1) is a rare inherited metabolic disease 
increasingly included in newborn screening (NBS) programs worldwide. Because of 
the broad biochemical spectrum of individuals with GA1 and the lack of reliable 
second-tier strategies, NBS for GA1 is still confronted with a high rate of 
false positives. In this study, we aim to increase the specificity of NBS for 
GA1 and, hence, to reduce the rate of false positives through machine learning 
methods. Therefore, we studied NBS profiles from 1,025,953 newborns screened 
between 2014 and 2023 at the Heidelberg NBS Laboratory, Germany. We identified a 
significant sex difference, resulting in twice as many false-positives male than 
female newborns. Moreover, the proposed digital-tier strategy based on logistic 
regression analysis, ridge regression, and support vector machine reduced the 
false-positive rate by over 90% compared to regular NBS while identifying all 
confirmed individuals with GA1 correctly. An in-depth analysis of the profiles 
revealed that in particular false-positive results with high associated 
follow-up costs could be reduced significantly. In conclusion, understanding the 
origin of false-positive NBS and implementing a digital-tier strategy to enhance 
the specificity of GA1 testing may significantly reduce the burden on newborns 
and their families from false-positive NBS results.

DOI: 10.3390/ijns10040083
PMCID: PMC11679506
PMID: 39728403

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, 
or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision 
to publish the results.