---
reference_id: "PMID:26801501"
title: Defective Leukocyte Adhesion and Chemotaxis Contributes to Combined Immunodeficiency in Humans with Autosomal Recessive MST1 Deficiency.
authors:
- Dang TS
- Willet JD
- Griffin HR
- Morgan NV
- "O'Boyle G"
- Arkwright PD
- Hughes SM
- Abinun M
- Tee LJ
- Barge D
- Engelhardt KR
- Jackson M
- Cant AJ
- Maher ER
- Koref MS
- Reynard LN
- Ali S
- Hambleton S
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-016-0232-2
keywords:
- Cell Adhesion/genetics
- "Chemotaxis, Leukocyte/genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Immunophenotyping
- Intercellular Adhesion Molecule-1/metabolism
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- "Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/deficiency
- Siblings
- Hippo Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defective Leukocyte Adhesion and Chemotaxis Contributes to Combined Immunodeficiency in Humans with Autosomal Recessive MST1 Deficiency.
**Authors:** Dang TS, Willet JD, Griffin HR, Morgan NV, O'Boyle G, Arkwright PD, Hughes SM, Abinun M, Tee LJ, Barge D, Engelhardt KR, Jackson M, Cant AJ, Maher ER, Koref MS, Reynard LN, Ali S, Hambleton S
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-016-0232-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-016-0232-2)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2016 Feb;36(2):117-22. doi: 10.1007/s10875-016-0232-2. Epub
2016  Jan 22.

Defective Leukocyte Adhesion and Chemotaxis Contributes to Combined 
Immunodeficiency in Humans with Autosomal Recessive MST1 Deficiency.

Dang TS(1), Willet JD(1), Griffin HR(2), Morgan NV(3), O'Boyle G(1), Arkwright 
PD(4), Hughes SM(4), Abinun M(1)(5), Tee LJ(3), Barge D(6), Engelhardt KR(1), 
Jackson M(5), Cant AJ(1)(5), Maher ER(3)(7), Koref MS(2), Reynard LN(1), Ali 
S(1), Hambleton S(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
NE2 4HH, UK.
(2)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(3)School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK.
(4)Department of Paediatric Allergy & Immunology, Royal Manchester Children's 
Hospital, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(5)Great North Children's Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(6)Blood Sciences Flow Cytometry Laboratory, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(8)Institute for Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
NE2 4HH, UK. sophie.hambleton@newcastle.ac.uk.
(9)Great North Children's Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. sophie.hambleton@newcastle.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    J Clin Immunol. 2016 Apr;36(3):336-7. doi: 10.1007/s10875-016-0248-7.

PURPOSE: To investigate the clinical and functional aspects of MST1 (STK4) 
deficiency in a profoundly CD4-lymphopenic kindred with a novel homozygous 
nonsense mutation in STK4. Although recent studies have described the cellular 
effects of murine Mst1 deficiency, the phenotype of MST1-deficient human 
lymphocytes has yet to be fully explored. Patient lymphocytes were therefore 
investigated in the context of current knowledge of murine Mst1 deficiency.
METHODS: Genetic etiology was identified by whole exome sequencing of genomic 
DNA from two siblings, combined with linkage analysis in the wider family. MST1 
protein expression was assessed by immunoblotting. The ability of patient 
lymphocytes to adhere to ICAM-1 under flow conditions was measured, and 
transwell assays were used to assess chemotaxis. Chemokine receptor expression 
was examined by flow cytometry and receptor signalling by immunoblotting.
RESULTS: A homozygous nonsense mutation in STK4 (c.442C > T, p.Arg148Stop) was 
found in the patients, leading to a lack of MST1 protein expression. Patient 
leukocytes exhibited deficient chemotaxis after stimulation with CXCL11, despite 
preserved expression of CXCR3. Patient lymphocytes were also unable to bind 
effectively to immobilised ICAM-1 under flow conditions, in keeping with a 
failure to develop high affinity binding.
CONCLUSION: The observed abnormalities of adhesion and migration imply a 
profound trafficking defect among human MST1-deficient lymphocytes. By analogy 
with murine Mst1 deficiency and other defects of leucocyte trafficking, this is 
likely to contribute to immunodeficiency by impairing key aspects of T-cell 
development and function such as positive selection in the thymus, thymic egress 
and immune synapse formation in the periphery.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-016-0232-2
PMCID: PMC4769310
PMID: 26801501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]