---
reference_id: "PMID:31864909"
title: "Thyro-entero-gastric autoimmunity: Pathophysiology and implications for patient management."
authors:
- Lahner E
- Conti L
- Cicone F
- Capriello S
- Cazzato M
- Centanni M
- Annibale B
- Virili C
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.beem.2019.101373
keywords:
- Adult
- "Autoimmune Diseases/etiology, therapy"
- Autoimmunity/physiology
- "Gastritis/complications, etiology, immunology, therapy"
- Humans
- "Intestinal Diseases/etiology, immunology, pathology, therapy"
- "Polyendocrinopathies, Autoimmune/etiology, immunology, therapy"
- "Thyroiditis, Autoimmune/etiology, immunology, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thyro-entero-gastric autoimmunity: Pathophysiology and implications for patient management.
**Authors:** Lahner E, Conti L, Cicone F, Capriello S, Cazzato M, Centanni M, Annibale B, Virili C
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.beem.2019.101373](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beem.2019.101373)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2020 Jan;34(1):101373. doi: 
10.1016/j.beem.2019.101373. Epub 2019 Dec 11.

Thyro-entero-gastric autoimmunity: Pathophysiology and implications for patient 
management.

Lahner E(1), Conti L(1), Cicone F(2), Capriello S(3), Cazzato M(1), Centanni 
M(3), Annibale B(1), Virili C(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical-Surgical Department of Clinical Sciences and Translational Medicine, 
Sant'Andrea Hospital, School of Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Via 
Grottarossa 1035, 00189, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, Lausanne University 
Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
f.cicone@iol.it.
(3)Department of Medico-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies, Sapienza 
University of Rome, Viale Policlinico 155, 00161, Rome, Italy.

The association between autoimmune atrophic gastritis and thyroid disorders has 
been observed since the early 1960s and the expression "thyrogastric syndrome" 
was coined to indicate the presence of thyroid autoantibodies or autoimmune 
thyroid disease in patients with pernicious anemia, a late clinical stage of 
autoimmune atrophic gastritis. More recently, it was confirmed that autoimmune 
thyroid disorders, in particular Hashimoto's thyroiditis, may be frequently 
associated with other organ-specific, immune-mediated disorders, such as 
autoimmune atrophic gastritis or celiac disease. The association of Hashimoto's 
thyroiditis with autoimmune atrophic gastritis or celiac disease in adult 
patients is currently considered part of the polyglandular autoimmune syndromes 
which include several autoimmune disorders associated with an autoaggressive 
impairment of endocrine glands. From a clinical point of view, the 
thyro-entero-gastric autoimmunity may lead to potentially serious consequences 
like anemia, micronutrients deficiencies, and drugs malabsorption, as well as to 
an increased risk for malignancies. These alterations may frequently present in 
an underhand manner, with consequent diagnostic and treatment delays. Many 
aspects of the association between thyroid, gastric and intestinal autoimmune 
diseases still await clarification. The present review focuses on the 
embryological, genetic and pathophysiological aspects of thyro-entero-gastric 
autoimmunity. In particular, the current diagnostic criteria of autoimmune 
thyroid disease, autoimmune atrophic gastritis, and celiac disease are reviewed, 
along with the evidences for their association in poly-autoimmunity syndromes. 
The benefits of proactive screening of autoimmune thyroid disorders in patients 
with autoimmune gastritis or enteropathy and viceversa are also discussed.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.beem.2019.101373
PMID: 31864909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]