---
reference_id: "PMID:35775489"
title: "Lymphocytes in the neighborhood: good or bad for the kidney?"
authors:
- Li H
- Tsokos MG
- Tsokos GC
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1172/JCI160657
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lymphocytes in the neighborhood: good or bad for the kidney?
**Authors:** Li H, Tsokos MG, Tsokos GC
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI160657](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI160657)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2022 Jul 1;132(13):e160657. doi: 10.1172/JCI160657.

Lymphocytes in the neighborhood: good or bad for the kidney?

Li H, Tsokos MG, Tsokos GC.

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2022 Jul 1;132(13):e155350. doi: 10.1172/JCI155350.

Lupus nephritis (LN) is common in people with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 
and advances, almost invariably, to end-stage renal disease (ESRD). In this 
issue of the JCI, Abraham, Durkee, et al. presented a large-scale immune cell 
landscape of kidney biopsies from patients with LN by combining multiplexed 
confocal microscopy imaging with customized computer vision and quantification. 
The presence of diverse CD4- T cells in small neighborhoods, but not of B cells 
or CD4+ T cells in large neighborhoods, is linked to the development of ESRD. 
Unexpectedly, B cells in the kidney heralded a good prognosis. The precise 
location of different types of immune cells allows inference on possible 
interactions between different immune cells and also between immune and 
kidney-resident cells. The data have important implications on the development 
of prognostic tools and effective targeted therapies in patients with LN.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI160657
PMCID: PMC9246371
PMID: 35775489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: GCT has received a 
research grant from Janssen Pharmaceuticals and serves on the scientific 
advisory boards of A2 Biopharmaceuticals, Cugene, COREVITAS, and Selecta.