---
reference_id: "PMID:8819070"
title: Variant and masked translocations in acute promyelocytic leukemia.
authors:
- Brunel V
- Lafage-Pochitaloff M
- Alcalay M
- Pelicci PG
- Birg F
journal: Leuk Lymphoma
year: '1996'
doi: 10.3109/10428199609051752
keywords:
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/genetics"
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variant and masked translocations in acute promyelocytic leukemia.
**Authors:** Brunel V, Lafage-Pochitaloff M, Alcalay M, Pelicci PG, Birg F
**Journal:** Leuk Lymphoma (1996)
**DOI:** [10.3109/10428199609051752](https://doi.org/10.3109/10428199609051752)

## Content

1. Leuk Lymphoma. 1996 Jul;22(3-4):221-8. doi: 10.3109/10428199609051752.

Variant and masked translocations in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Brunel V(1), Lafage-Pochitaloff M, Alcalay M, Pelicci PG, Birg F.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U119, Marseillo, France.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by a unique hemorrhagic
syndrome, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and the association with the
specific (15;17 chi q22-23:q12-21) translocation, which disrupts the retinoic
acid receptor alpha (RARA) and the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) genes. The
t(15;17) leads to the formation of two reciprocal fusion genes, PML/RARA on
chromosome 15 and RARA/PML on chromosome 17; it is responsible for the unique
response of the disease to retinoic acid (ATRA) treatment. As was described for
chronic myeloid leukemia and its associated t(9;22) [Philadelphia chromosome],
variant translocations have been reported in APL, which are either complex
translocations involving additional chromosome(s), or simple variant
translocations involving only either one chromosome 15 or 17 and any of several
chromosomes. Rearrangements of RARA and PML were documented in some of these
variant translocations. In contrast, recent molecular analysis of APL cases with
cytogenetically normal chromosomes 15 and 17 revealed the occurrence of
submicroscopic translocations, leading to the formation of non reciprocal fusion
genes, either PML/RARA or RARA/PML only. Detailed analysis of such cases may
shed light on the mechanisms of translocation, on the selection of oncogenic
products, and on the respective role(s) of the products of the translocation.
Demonstration of the existence, in some APL-like leukemias, of masked
translocations with involvement of PML and RARA, thus allows to (i) confirm the
diagnosis of APL, (ii) adapt the treatment and (iii) monitor the residual
disease. Finally APL-like leukemias were recently reported, with either a
t(11;17) or t(5;17), resulting in the fusion of RARA to genes other than PML;
these patients do not appear to respond to ATRA treatment. Altogether, these
results emphasize the usefulness of a molecular definition of APL.

DOI: 10.3109/10428199609051752
PMID: 8819070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
