---
reference_id: "PMID:24129186"
title: "Chorein, the protein responsible for chorea-acanthocytosis, interacts with β-adducin and β-actin."
authors:
- Shiokawa N
- Nakamura M
- Sameshima M
- Deguchi A
- Hayashi T
- Sasaki N
- Sano A
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.10.011
keywords:
- Actins/metabolism
- Animals
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- Calmodulin-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Erythrocyte Membrane/metabolism
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Immunoprecipitation
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/metabolism
- "Neuroacanthocytosis/metabolism, pathology"
- Protein Binding
- Protein Transport
- Vesicular Transport Proteins/metabolism
- Adducins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chorein, the protein responsible for chorea-acanthocytosis, interacts with β-adducin and β-actin.
**Authors:** Shiokawa N, Nakamura M, Sameshima M, Deguchi A, Hayashi T, Sasaki N, Sano A
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.10.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.10.011)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Nov 8;441(1):96-101. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.10.011. Epub 2013 Oct 12.

Chorein, the protein responsible for chorea-acanthocytosis, interacts with
β-adducin and β-actin.

Shiokawa N(1), Nakamura M, Sameshima M, Deguchi A, Hayashi T, Sasaki N, Sano A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and
Dental Sciences, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima 890-8520, Japan.

Chorea-acanthocytosis (ChAc) is an autosomal, recessive hereditary disease
characterized by striatal neurodegeneration and acanthocytosis, and caused by
loss of function mutations in the vacuolar protein sorting 13 homolog A (VPS13A)
gene. VPS13A encodes chorein whose physiological function at the molecular level
is poorly understood. In this study, we show that chorein interacts with
β-adducin and β-actin. We first compare protein expression in human erythrocyte
membranes using proteomic analysis. Protein levels of β-adducin isoform 1 and
β-actin are markedly decreased in erythrocyte membranes from a ChAc patient.
Subsequent co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) and reverse co-IP assays using
extracts from chorein-overexpressing human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells,
shows that β-adducin (isoforms 1 and 2) and β-actin interact with chorein.
Immunocytochemical analysis using chorein-overexpressing HEK293 cells
demonstrates co-localization of chorein with β-adducin and β-actin. In addition,
immunoreactivity of β-adducin isoform 1 is significantly decreased in the
striatum of gene-targeted ChAc-model mice. Adducin and actin are membrane
cytoskeletal proteins, involved in synaptic function. Expression of β-adducin is
restricted to the brain and hematopoietic tissues, corresponding to the main
pathological lesions of ChAc, and thereby implicating β-adducin and β-actin in
ChAc pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.10.011
PMID: 24129186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
