---
reference_id: "PMID:25373504"
title: "Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome: homozygosity for two novel and one recurrent SLC2A10 missense mutations in three families with severe cardiopulmonary complications in infancy and a literature review."
authors:
- Ritelli M
- Chiarelli N
- Dordoni C
- Reffo E
- Venturini M
- Quinzani S
- Monica MD
- Scarano G
- Santoro G
- Russo MG
- Calzavara-Pinton P
- Milanesi O
- Colombi M
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/s12881-014-0122-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Arteries/abnormalities, pathology"
- Child
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Glucose Transport Proteins, Facilitative/genetics"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Joint Instability/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- "Respiratory Distress Syndrome, Newborn/genetics, pathology"
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic/complications, genetics, pathology"
- "Vascular Malformations/complications, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome: homozygosity for two novel and one recurrent SLC2A10 missense mutations in three families with severe cardiopulmonary complications in infancy and a literature review.
**Authors:** Ritelli M, Chiarelli N, Dordoni C, Reffo E, Venturini M, Quinzani S, Monica MD, Scarano G, Santoro G, Russo MG, Calzavara-Pinton P, Milanesi O, Colombi M
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12881-014-0122-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12881-014-0122-5)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2014 Nov 6;15:122. doi: 10.1186/s12881-014-0122-5.

Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome: homozygosity for two novel and one recurrent
SLC2A10 missense mutations in three families with severe cardiopulmonary
complications in infancy and a literature review.

Ritelli M(1), Chiarelli N(2), Dordoni C(3), Reffo E(4), Venturini M(5), Quinzani
S(6), Monica MD(7), Scarano G(8), Santoro G(9), Russo MG(10), Calzavara-Pinton
P(11), Milanesi O(12), Colombi M(13).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Molecular and Translational
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Brescia, Viale Europa 11, 25123,
Brescia, Italy. marco.ritelli@unibs.it.
(2)Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Molecular and Translational
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Brescia, Viale Europa 11, 25123,
Brescia, Italy. nicola.chiarelli@unibs.it.
(3)Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Molecular and Translational
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Brescia, Viale Europa 11, 25123,
Brescia, Italy. chiara.dordoni@hotmail.it.
(4)Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Padova, School
of Medicine, Padova, Italy. elenareffo@libero.it.
(5)Division of Dermatology, Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences,
Spedali Civili University Hospital, Brescia, Italy. marina.venturini@unibs.it.
(6)Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Molecular and Translational
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Brescia, Viale Europa 11, 25123,
Brescia, Italy. s.quinzani002@unibs.it.
(7)Unità Operativa di Genetica Medica, Ospedale Gaetano Rummo, Benevento, Italy.
demomatt@tiscali.it.
(8)Unità Operativa di Genetica Medica, Ospedale Gaetano Rummo, Benevento, Italy.
gioacchino.scarano@ao-rummo.it.
(9)Pediatric Cardiology, A.O.R.N. Ospedale dei Colli, II University of Naples,
Naples, Italy. santoropino@tin.it.
(10)Pediatric Cardiology, A.O.R.N. Ospedale dei Colli, II University of Naples,
Naples, Italy. mariagiovanna.russo@unina2.it.
(11)Division of Dermatology, Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences,
Spedali Civili University Hospital, Brescia, Italy.
piergiacomo.calzavarapinton@unibs.it.
(12)Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Padova, School
of Medicine, Padova, Italy. ornella.milanesi@unipd.it.
(13)Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Molecular and Translational
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Brescia, Viale Europa 11, 25123,
Brescia, Italy. marina.colombi@unibs.it.

BACKGROUND: Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome (ATS) is a very rare autosomal
recessive connective tissue disorder (CTD) characterized by tortuosity and
elongation of the large- and medium-sized arteries and a propensity for aneurysm
formation and vascular dissection. During infancy, children frequently present
the involvement of the pulmonary arteries (elongation, tortuosity, stenosis)
with dyspnea and cyanosis. Other CTD signs of ATS are dysmorphisms, abdominal
hernias, joint hypermobility, skeletal abnormalities, and keratoconus. ATS is
typically described as a severe disease with high rate of mortality due to major
cardiovascular malformations. ATS is caused by mutations in the SLC2A10 gene,
which encodes the facilitative glucose transporter 10 (GLUT10). Approximately
100 ATS patients have been described, and 21 causal mutations have been
identified in the SLC2A10 gene.
CASE PRESENTATION: We describe the clinical findings and molecular
characterization of three new ATS families, which provide insight into the
clinical phenotype of the disorder; furthermore, we expand the allelic
repertoire of SLC2A10 by identifying two novel mutations. We also review the ATS
patients characterized by our group and compare their clinical findings with
previous data.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data confirm that the cardiovascular prognosis in ATS is less
severe than previously reported and that the first years of life are the most
critical for possible life-threatening events. Molecular diagnosis is mandatory
to distinguish ATS from other CTDs and to define targeted clinical follow-up and
timely cardiovascular surgical or interventional treatment, when needed.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-014-0122-5
PMCID: PMC4412100
PMID: 25373504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
