---
reference_id: "PMID:29278556"
title: Discerning the relationship between left ventricular geometry, high-sensitivity troponin T, and nondipper hypertension.
authors:
- Askin L
- Tasolar H
- Aksu U
- Cetin M
- Uslu A
- Tanboga HI
- Turkmen S
- Akturk E
journal: Blood Press Monit
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/MBP.0000000000000297
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Discerning the relationship between left ventricular geometry, high-sensitivity troponin T, and nondipper hypertension.
**Authors:** Askin L, Tasolar H, Aksu U, Cetin M, Uslu A, Tanboga HI, Turkmen S, Akturk E
**Journal:** Blood Press Monit (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MBP.0000000000000297](https://doi.org/10.1097/MBP.0000000000000297)

## Content

1. Blood Press Monit. 2018 Feb;23(1):12-18. doi: 10.1097/MBP.0000000000000297.

Discerning the relationship between left ventricular geometry, high-sensitivity 
troponin T, and nondipper hypertension.

Askin L(1), Tasolar H(1), Aksu U(2), Cetin M(1), Uslu A(2), Tanboga HI(2), 
Turkmen S(1), Akturk E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Adiyaman Training and Research Hospital, Adiyaman.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine, Ataturk University, Erzurum, 
Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Hypertension can cause anatomic changes in the left ventricle, 
generally leading to abnormal geometry. High-sensitivity cardiac troponin T 
(hs-cTnT) values have been shown to be positively correlated with left 
ventricular hypertrophy in hypertensive patients. The current study investigated 
the diagnostic value of hs-cTnT in patient with nondipper hypertension (NDH) as 
well as determined the correlation between left ventricular geometric patterns 
and hs-cTnT values in hypertensive patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 100 consecutive patients (58 women and 42 men) 
who were referred to our clinic between 1 October 2015 and 1 March 2016 with 
elevated blood pressure (BP) were included. Of the patients, 63 had dipper 
hypertension [nocturnal decline in mean BP (≥10%)], whereas the remaining 37 had 
NDH [nocturnal decline in mean BP (<10%)]. Of note, hs-cTnT levels were measured 
only once during admission. Echocardiographic examinations were performed at 
baseline month and repeated at the sixth month.
RESULTS: Hs-cTnT was significantly increased in those with NDH (P<0.001). The 
NDH group experienced significant decreases in concentric hypertrophy pattern 
over 6 months (P=0.014). Hs-cTnT was significantly related with nondipping 
status (r=0.747, P<0.001). Hs-cTnT was also an independent predictor of NDH 
(odds ratio=1.034, 95% confidence interval: 1.018-1049, P<0.001). Hs-cTnT value 
of more than 0.95 ng/l predicted NDH with a sensitivity of 75% and specificity 
of 98% (area under the curve: 0.86; 95% confidence interval: 0.782-0.925; 
P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Our current results indicate that patients with NDH had higher 
hs-cTnT levels than the patients with dipper hypertension. Hs-cTnT was an 
independent predictor of NDH and was significantly related with nondipping 
status. Hence, hs-cTnT may be used as diagnostic biomarker in NDH.

DOI: 10.1097/MBP.0000000000000297
PMID: 29278556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]