---
reference_id: "PMID:35140252"
title: Systematic review and meta-analysis of cognitive impairment in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS).
authors:
- Aoun Sebaiti M
- Hainselin M
- Gounden Y
- Sirbu CA
- Sekulic S
- Lorusso L
- Nacul L
- Authier FJ
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-04764-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic review and meta-analysis of cognitive impairment in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS).
**Authors:** Aoun Sebaiti M, Hainselin M, Gounden Y, Sirbu CA, Sekulic S, Lorusso L, Nacul L, Authier FJ
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-021-04764-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-04764-w)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2022 Feb 9;12(1):2157. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-04764-w.

Systematic review and meta-analysis of cognitive impairment in myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS).

Aoun Sebaiti M(1)(2)(3), Hainselin M(3), Gounden Y(3), Sirbu CA(4)(5), Sekulic 
S(5)(6), Lorusso L(5)(7), Nacul L(5)(8), Authier FJ(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department, Henri Mondor University Hospital, APHP, Créteil, 
France.
(2)INSERM U955-Team Relaix, Faculty of Health, Paris Est-Creteil University, 
Créteil, France.
(3)CRP-CPO, UR UPJV 7273, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, France.
(4)Central Military Emergency University Hospital, Titu Maiorescu University, 
Bucharest, Romania.
(5)European Network On ME/CFS (EUROMENE), London, UK.
(6)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine Novi Sad, University of Novio 
Sad, Novio Sad, Serbia.
(7)Neurology and Stroke Unit, Neuroscience Dept - ASST- Lecco, Merate Hospital, 
Merate, LC, Italy.
(8)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(9)INSERM U955-Team Relaix, Faculty of Health, Paris Est-Creteil University, 
Créteil, France. authier@u-pec.fr.
(10)European Network On ME/CFS (EUROMENE), London, UK. authier@u-pec.fr.
(11)Neuromuscular Reference Center, Henri Mondor University Hospital, APHP, 51, 
Av. du Maréchal de Lattre de Tassigny, 94000, Créteil, France. authier@u-pec.fr.

Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is commonly 
associated with cognitive complaints. To bring out the neuropsychological 
symptomatology inherent to ME/CFS, we conducted a systematic review according to 
PRISMA and MOOSE guidelines of the literature through the analysis of 764 
studies published between 1988 and 2019 by using PubMed Central website and 
Clarivate analytics platform. We performed a meta-analysis to delineate an idea 
of the neuropsychological profile inherent in ME/CFS. The clinical picture 
typically affects visuo-spatial immediate memory (g = - 0.55, p = 0.007), 
reading speed (g = - 0.82, p = 0.0001) and graphics gesture (g = - 0.59, 
p = 0.0001). Analysis also revealed difficulties in several processes inherent 
in episodic verbal memory (storage, retrieval, recognition) and visual memory 
(recovery) and a low efficiency in attentional abilities. Executive functions 
seemed to be little or not affected and instrumental functions appeared 
constantly preserved. With regard to the complexity and heterogeneity of the 
cognitive phenotype, it turns out that determining a sound clinical picture of 
ME/CFS cognitive profile must go through a neuropsychological examination 
allowing a complete evaluation integrating the notion of agreement between the 
choice and the number of tests and the complexity intrinsic to the pathology.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-04764-w
PMCID: PMC8828740
PMID: 35140252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.