---
reference_id: "PMID:30713928"
title: "Huntington's Disease, Huntington's Disease Look-Alikes‎, and Benign Hereditary Chorea: What's New?"
authors:
- Schneider SA
- Bird T
journal: Mov Disord Clin Pract
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/mdc3.12312
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Huntington's Disease, Huntington's Disease Look-Alikes‎, and Benign Hereditary Chorea: What's New?
**Authors:** Schneider SA, Bird T
**Journal:** Mov Disord Clin Pract (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mdc3.12312](https://doi.org/10.1002/mdc3.12312)

## Content

1. Mov Disord Clin Pract. 2016 Jan 27;3(4):342-354. doi: 10.1002/mdc3.12312. 
eCollection 2016 Jul-Aug.

Huntington's Disease, Huntington's Disease Look-Alikes‎, and Benign Hereditary 
Chorea: What's New?

Schneider SA(1)(2), Bird T(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Munich 
Germany.
(2)University of Kiel Kiel Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology University of Washington Seattle Seattle Washington 
U.S.A.
(4)VA Puget Sound Health Care System Geriatric Research Education and Clinical 
Center Seattle Washington U.S.A.

BACKGROUND: The differential diagnosis of chorea syndromes is complex. It 
includes inherited forms, the most common of which is autosomal dominant 
Huntington's disease (HD). In addition, there are disorders mimicking HD, the 
so-called HD-like (HDL) syndromes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here we review main clinical, genetic, and 
pathophysiological characteristics of HD and the rare HD phenocopies in order to 
familiarize clinicians with them. Molecular studies have shown that HD 
phenocopies account for about 1% of suspected HD cases, most commonly due to 
mutations in C9orf72 (also the main cause of frontotemporal dementia and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis syndromes), TATA box-binding protein 
(spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 [SCA17]/HDL4), and JPH3 (HDL2). Systematic 
screening studies also revealed mutations in PRNP (prion disease), VPS13A 
(chorea-acanthocytosis), ATXN8OS-ATXN8 (SCA8), and FXN (late-onset Friedreich's 
Ataxia) in single cases. Further differential diagnoses to consider in patients 
presenting with a clinical diagnosis consistent with HD, but without the HD 
expansion, include dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy and benign hereditary 
chorea (TITF1), as well as the recently described form of ADCY5-associated 
neurodegeneration. Lastly, biallelic mutations in RNF216 and FRRS1L have 
recently been reported as autosomal recessive phenocopies of HD.
CONCLUSION: There is a growing list of genes associated with chorea, yet a 
substantial percentage of patients remain undiagnosed. It is likely that more 
genes will be discovered in the future and that the clinical spectrum of the 
described disorders will broaden.

DOI: 10.1002/mdc3.12312
PMCID: PMC6353394
PMID: 30713928