---
reference_id: "PMID:23331701"
title: "Equine sarcoidosis: clinical signs, diagnosis, treatment and outcome of 22 cases."
authors:
- Sloet van Oldruitenborgh-Oosterbaan MM
- Grinwis GC
journal: Vet Dermatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3164.2012.01108.x
keywords:
- Animals
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Dexamethasone/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Female
- Horse Diseases/pathology
- Horses
- Male
- "Prednisolone/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Sarcoidosis/pathology, veterinary"
- "Skin Diseases/pathology, veterinary"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Equine sarcoidosis: clinical signs, diagnosis, treatment and outcome of 22 cases.
**Authors:** Sloet van Oldruitenborgh-Oosterbaan MM, Grinwis GC
**Journal:** Vet Dermatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-3164.2012.01108.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3164.2012.01108.x)

## Content

1. Vet Dermatol. 2013 Feb;24(1):218-24.e48. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-3164.2012.01108.x.

Equine sarcoidosis: clinical signs, diagnosis, treatment and outcome of 22
cases.

Sloet van Oldruitenborgh-Oosterbaan MM(1), Grinwis GC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Equine Sciences Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Utrecht University, Yalelaan 114, 3584 CM Utrecht, The Netherlands.
m.sloet@uu.nl

BACKGROUND: Equine sarcoidosis may present as a generalized or localized
exfoliative dermatitis and/or as a granulomatous inflammation of multiple
organs.
OBJECTIVES: To report the clinical signs, diagnosis, treatment and outcome for
22 horses with histologically confirmed sarcoidosis.
ANIMALS: Twenty-two horses of different breeds, between 3 and 17 years of age.
METHODS: Diagnosis was based on clinical signs and histopathological findings.
RESULTS: The following three forms of equine sarcoidosis were identified:
generalized (13.6%), partially generalized (18.2%) and localized (68.2%).
High-dose systemic corticosteroids were used as the initial treatment in all
three forms, followed by lower doses for a variable number of weeks. No local
treatment was prescribed. Case outcome was variable; one of three cases of
generalized sarcoidosis was euthanized immediately and the remaining two were
euthanized after 2-3 months of unsuccessful treatment; all four cases of
partially generalized sarcoidosis deteriorated despite treatment and were
euthanized after 3.5-12 months; two cases with localized disease showed no
response or insufficient response to treatment and were euthanized; four cases
recovered fully with or without treatment, and one showed partial recovery
without treatment; and eight cases improved whilst receiving prednisolone but
required continuous low doses to maintain remission.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: Recognition of the different forms of
sarcoidosis based on history, clinical appearance and histopathology assisted in
making an informed choice between treatment and euthanasia and prevented
unnecessary local treatment. Equine sarcoidosis should be included in the
differential diagnosis of a localized exfoliative dermatitis of unknown origin.

© 2013 The Authors. Veterinary Dermatology © 2013 ESVD and ACVD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3164.2012.01108.x
PMID: 23331701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
