---
reference_id: "PMID:35450878"
title: "Roifman syndrome: a description of further immunological and radiological features."
authors:
- Clifford D
- Moloney F
- Leahy TR
- Murray DM
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2022-249109
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Roifman syndrome: a description of further immunological and radiological features.
**Authors:** Clifford D, Moloney F, Leahy TR, Murray DM
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2022-249109](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2022-249109)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2022 Apr 21;15(4):e249109. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2022-249109.

Roifman syndrome: a description of further immunological and radiological 
features.

Clifford D(1), Moloney F(2), Leahy TR(#)(3)(4), Murray DM(#)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Cork University Hospital, Cork, 
Ireland danielle.clifford@umail.ucc.ie.
(2)Department of Paediatric Radiology, Cork University Hospital, Cork, Ireland.
(3)Department of Paediatric Immunology, Children's Health Ireland at Crumlin, 
Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(5)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Cork University Hospital, Cork, 
Ireland.
(6)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, University College Cork, Cork, 
Ireland.
(7)Principal Investigator, INFANT Centre, University College Cork, Cork, 
Ireland.
(#)Contributed equally

Roifman syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive inherited syndromic 
immunodeficiency. We wish to add to the available literature by reporting two 
brothers with clinical, radiological and immunological features of Roifman 
syndrome, confirmed on whole exome sequencing. We report an excellent response 
to subcutaneous immunoglobulin therapy in both brothers, reducing infection 
burden and hospital admissions. New radiological features are also described 
here which may assist in the diagnosis of other patients.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2022. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2022-249109
PMCID: PMC9024203
PMID: 35450878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.