---
reference_id: "PMID:33818458"
title: Seasonal variations of dengue vector mosquitoes in rural settings of Thiruvarur district in Tamil Nadu, India.
authors:
- Shukla A
- Rajalakshmi A
- Subash K
- Jayakumar S
- Arul N
- Srivastava PK
- Eapen A
- Krishnan J
journal: J Vector Borne Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.4103/0972-9062.308803
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seasonal variations of dengue vector mosquitoes in rural settings of Thiruvarur district in Tamil Nadu, India.
**Authors:** Shukla A, Rajalakshmi A, Subash K, Jayakumar S, Arul N, Srivastava PK, Eapen A, Krishnan J
**Journal:** J Vector Borne Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0972-9062.308803](https://doi.org/10.4103/0972-9062.308803)

## Content

1. J Vector Borne Dis. 2020 Jan-Mar;57(1):63-70. doi: 10.4103/0972-9062.308803.

Seasonal variations of dengue vector mosquitoes in rural settings of Thiruvarur 
district in Tamil Nadu, India.

Shukla A(1), Rajalakshmi A(1), Subash K(1), Jayakumar S(2), Arul N(3), 
Srivastava PK(4), Eapen A(5), Krishnan J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Central University of Tamil Nadu, Thiruvarur, 
Tamil Nadu, India.
(2)Department of Ecology and Environmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences, 
Pondicherry University, Puducherry, Tamil Nadu, India.
(3)Department of Zoology, Bharathiar University, Tamil Nadu, India.
(4)Visiting Faculty, Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Central 
University of Tamil Nadu, Thiruvarur; Division of Entomology & Vector Control, 
National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme, Delhi; Director, Absolute Human 
Care Foundation, New Delhi, India.
(5)ICMR-National Institute of Malaria Research Field Unit, Chennai, India.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: Mosquitoes are vectors of several important 
vector-borne diseases (VBDs) like malaria, dengue, chikungunya, Japanese 
encephalitis (JE) and lymphatic filariasis (LF). Globally, these VBDs are of 
major public health concern including India. The information on vector 
mosquitoes from Thiruvarur district in Tamil Nadu state remains largely either 
unknown or undocumented. The present study was, therefore, undertaken to find 
out the seasonal variation in mosquitoes with special reference to dengue 
vectors in rural areas of Thiruvarur district, Tamil Nadu, India.
METHODS: Surveillance of immature vector mosquitoes was undertaken from March 
2018 to February 2019. The emerged adults were identified to find out the 
composition of mosquito species prevalent in the district. The seasonal 
variations of the mosquitoes especially dengue vectors were analysed for summer 
(March-July) spring (August-November) and winter (December-February) seasons in 
all the blocks of Thiruvarur district.
RESULTS: A total of 4879 mosquitoes emerged from the immature collection and the 
species identification revealed the prevalence of both vector and non-vector 
species. Five important mosquito vectors collected were -Aedes albopictus, Ae. 
aegypti, Culex tritaeniorhynchus, Cx. gelidus, and Cx. quinquefasciatus. Other 
mosquito species collected were Lutzia fuscana, Anopheles barbirostris, An. 
subpictus, and Armigeres (Armigeres) subalbatus. During the spring season, the 
dengue vectors showed high indices of breateau index (BI), ranging from 16 to 
120; besides, container index (CI) ranging from14.29 to 68.57 and pupal index 
(PI) from 53.33 to 295 among the study blocks. The major breeding sites were 
discarded plastic containers, discarded tyres, open sintex tanks (water storage 
tanks), cement tanks, discarded fibre box, pleated plastic sheets, tree holes, 
bamboo cut stumps, coconut spathe, and coconut shells.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSION: The immature vector surveillance revealed seasonal 
variations in the entomological indices of Aedes breeding potential. The high 
indices observed indicate high Aedes breeding density and, therefore, a higher 
risk for dengue/chikungunya outbreaks in rural areas of Thiruvarur district. The 
present finding warrants intensive surveillance and follow up vector control 
measures to avert outbreaks and prevent vector-borne diseases. Health education 
and the community participation in awareness camps prior to monsoon and societal 
commitment will help in strengthening source reduction, anti-larval operations 
and anti-adult measures to tackle vector-borne diseases especially dengue.

DOI: 10.4103/0972-9062.308803
PMID: 33818458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None