---
reference_id: "PMID:39376298"
title: Topical Antibiotic-Induced Otomycosis - a Systematic Review of Aetiology and Risk Factors.
authors:
- Pereira M
- Rao K
- Sharin F
- Tanweer F
- Mair M
- Rea P
journal: Indian J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12070-024-04852-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Topical Antibiotic-Induced Otomycosis - a Systematic Review of Aetiology and Risk Factors.
**Authors:** Pereira M, Rao K, Sharin F, Tanweer F, Mair M, Rea P
**Journal:** Indian J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12070-024-04852-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12070-024-04852-z)

## Content

1. Indian J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2024 Oct;76(5):3766-3776. doi: 
10.1007/s12070-024-04852-z. Epub 2024 Jul 22.

Topical Antibiotic-Induced Otomycosis - a Systematic Review of Aetiology and 
Risk Factors.

Pereira M(1), Rao K(2), Sharin F(1), Tanweer F(3), Mair M(4), Rea P(3).

Author information:
(1)University Hospital of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(2)Department of surgical Oncology, AIIMS Raipur, Raipur, India.
(3)Department of ENT, University Hospital of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(4)Department of Maxillofacial, University Hospital of Leicester, Leicester, UK.

Otomycosis is a chronic or subacute fungal infection of external ear accounting 
to 5 to 20% of external ear infection worldwide. Literature has suggested 
multiple local and environmental host factors associated with otomycosis, but 
their strength of association is not well established. We did this review to 
analyse otomycosis with respect to it's various common predisposing factors. 
Human studies reporting ototopical antibiotics with or without steroids as 
predisposing factors for otomycosis, or pooled data together with other 
predisposing factors were included. MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, the ISRCTN 
register, and Cochrane databases were searched for the data extraction. Critical 
appraisal was done using the standardized Joanna Briggs Institute's (JBI) 
Appraisal checklist. Random effects were used to calculate pooled estimate 
prevalence with 95% Confidence Intervals (CIs). Age varied in different studies 
with a mean age variation from 7 to 43.19. Most of the studies were conducted in 
tropical and sub-tropical countries. Aspergillus was the most common species 
isolated. The use of ototopical antibiotics with or without steroid drops [47% 
(95% CI, 0.38 - 0.56)] were found to be the commonest predisposing factor for 
otomycosis, followed by the use of a variety of oils and wax solvents [38% (95% 
CI,0.26 - 0.51)] and trauma to the External Auditory Canal (EAC) as a result of 
compulsive cleaning or instrumentation[37% (95% CI, 0.21 - 0.54)]. We suggest 
the need for caution and vigilance from clinicians treating patients with 
ototopical drops for ear infections and use of other alternative treatment like 
2% acetic acid for mild cases whenever feasible.

© Association of Otolaryngologists of India 2024. Springer Nature or its 
licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this 
article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other 
rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of 
this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and 
applicable law.

DOI: 10.1007/s12070-024-04852-z
PMCID: PMC11455860
PMID: 39376298