---
reference_id: "PMID:24053006"
title: "Cutaneous malignant and premalignant conditions caused by chronic arsenicosis from contaminated ground water consumption: a profile of patients from eastern India."
authors:
- Ghosh SK
- Bandyopadhyay D
- Bandyopadhyay SK
- Debbarma K
journal: Skinmed
year: '2013'
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Arsenic Poisoning/complications
- "Bowen's Disease/chemically induced"
- Basal Cell Carcinoma/chemically induced
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/chemically induced"
- Chronic Disease
- Drinking Water
- Female
- Foot Dermatoses/chemically induced
- Hand Dermatoses/chemically induced
- Humans
- India
- Keratosis/chemically induced
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Precancerous Conditions/chemically induced
- Skin Neoplasms/chemically induced
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous malignant and premalignant conditions caused by chronic arsenicosis from contaminated ground water consumption: a profile of patients from eastern India.
**Authors:** Ghosh SK, Bandyopadhyay D, Bandyopadhyay SK, Debbarma K
**Journal:** Skinmed (2013)

## Content

1. Skinmed. 2013 Jul-Aug;11(4):211-6.

Cutaneous malignant and premalignant conditions caused by chronic arsenicosis
from contaminated ground water consumption: a profile of patients from eastern
India.

Ghosh SK(1), Bandyopadhyay D, Bandyopadhyay SK, Debbarma K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology, & Leprosy, R.G. Kar Medical College,
Kolkata, India. dr_skghosh@yahoo.co.in

Natural arsenic pollution is a major global health problem. The two worst
affected areas e Bangladesh and West Bengal, India. Arsenic is a well-documented
human carcinogen that affects many organs including the skin. The authors sought
to find out the clinical patterns of different malignant and premalignant
conditions associated with chronic arsenicosis from drinking contaminated ground
water in a group of patients from eastern India. This was a clinical
observational study. Patients with chronic arsenicoses with suspected cutaneous
malignancies for whom dermatology service was sought were enrolled in the study.
A total of 24 patients (male to female ratio, 11:1; age range, 32-71 years; mean
age, 52.2 years) were evaluated. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) was the commonest
malignancies in our series, seen in 10 (41.7%) patients. This was followed by
Bowen's disease (9 [37.5%]) and basal cell carcinoma (8 [33.3%]). Three patients
(12.5%) had > 1 type of cutaneous malignancies. Multicentric lesions were seen
in 3 cases. The most common site of involvement was the chest (8 [33.3%]). No
statistically significant correlation was found between number of lesions and
arsenic content in the hairs and nails of the patients.

PMID: 24053006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
