---
reference_id: "PMID:36103646"
title: Addition of Germline Testing to Tumor-Only Sequencing Improves Detection of Pathogenic Germline Variants in Men With Advanced Prostate Cancer.
authors:
- Berchuck JE
- Boiarsky D
- Silver R
- Sunkara R
- McClure HM
- Tsai HK
- Siegmund S
- Tewari AK
- Nowak JA
- Lindeman NI
- Rana HQ
- Choudhury AD
- Pomerantz MM
- Freedman ML
- Van Allen EM
- Taplin ME
journal: JCO Precis Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1200/PO.22.00329
keywords:
- Germ Cells/pathology
- Germ-Line Mutation/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Prospective Studies
- Prostatic Neoplasms/diagnosis
- Sequence Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Addition of Germline Testing to Tumor-Only Sequencing Improves Detection of Pathogenic Germline Variants in Men With Advanced Prostate Cancer.
**Authors:** Berchuck JE, Boiarsky D, Silver R, Sunkara R, McClure HM, Tsai HK, Siegmund S, Tewari AK, Nowak JA, Lindeman NI, Rana HQ, Choudhury AD, Pomerantz MM, Freedman ML, Van Allen EM, Taplin ME
**Journal:** JCO Precis Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1200/PO.22.00329](https://doi.org/10.1200/PO.22.00329)

## Content

1. JCO Precis Oncol. 2022 Aug;6:e2200329. doi: 10.1200/PO.22.00329.

Addition of Germline Testing to Tumor-Only Sequencing Improves Detection of
Pathogenic Germline Variants in Men With Advanced Prostate Cancer.

Berchuck JE(1)(2), Boiarsky D(3), Silver R(1), Sunkara R(1)(2), McClure HM(1),
Tsai HK(2), Siegmund S(2), Tewari AK(1)(2), Nowak JA(2), Lindeman NI(2), Rana
HQ(1)(2), Choudhury AD(1)(2), Pomerantz MM(1)(2), Freedman ML(1), Van Allen
EM(1)(2), Taplin ME(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA.
(2)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA.
(3)Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA.

PURPOSE: Guidelines recommend somatic and germline testing for men with advanced
prostate cancer (PCa). Barriers to widespread implementation result in
underutilization of germline testing. Somatic testing alone risks missing
pathogenic germline variants (PGVs). We sought to determine whether the addition
of germline testing to tumor-only sequencing improves detection of PGVs in men
with advanced PCa. Secondarily, we sought to define the added value of combining
somatic and germline testing to optimize detection of clinically actionable
alterations.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analyzed results of independent germline testing and
tumor-only sequencing from 100 men with advanced PCa from a prospective clinical
trial (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03328091). The primary outcome was the
proportion of PGVs not reported with tumor-only sequencing. The secondary
outcome was the association of locus-specific loss of heterozygosity for PGVs in
homologous recombination genes with clinical-genomic features.
RESULTS: In the 100 men who underwent germline testing and tumor-only
sequencing, 24 PGVs were identified, 17 of which were clinically actionable, in
23 patients. Tumor-only sequencing failed to report four (17%) of the PGVs. One
additional PGV (4.2%) had variant allele frequency on tumor-sequencing below the
threshold for follow-up germline testing. When integrating tumor-only sequencing
with germling testing results, 33% of patients harbored clinically actionable
alterations. Rates of locus-specific loss of heterozygosity were higher for
BRCA2 PGVs in castration-resistant PCa than PGVs in other homologous
recombination genes in hormone-sensitive PCa (P = .029).
CONCLUSION: Tumor-only sequencing failed to report more than 20% of PGVs in men
with advanced PCa. These findings strongly support guideline recommendations for
universal germline and somatic testing in this population. Combining tumor and
germline sequencing doubled the chance of detecting a clinically actionable
alteration.

DOI: 10.1200/PO.22.00329
PMCID: PMC9489164
PMID: 36103646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The following represents disclosure information
provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are considered
compensated unless otherwise noted. Relationships are self-held unless noted. I
= Immediate Family Member, Inst = My Institution. Relationships may not relate
to the subject matter of this manuscript. For more information about ASCO's
conflict of interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or
ascopubs.org/po/author-center. Open Payments is a public database containing
information reported by companies about payments made to US-licensed physicians
(Open Payments).
