---
reference_id: "PMID:28817111"
title: Prospective cohort study for identification of underlying genetic causes in neonatal encephalopathy using whole-exome sequencing.
authors:
- Bruun TUJ
- DesRoches CL
- Wilson D
- Chau V
- Nakagawa T
- Yamasaki M
- Hasegawa S
- Fukao T
- Marshall C
- Mercimek-Andrews S
journal: Genet Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/gim.2017.129
keywords:
- "Brain Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Electroencephalography
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Infant, Newborn, Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Pregnancy
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prospective cohort study for identification of underlying genetic causes in neonatal encephalopathy using whole-exome sequencing.
**Authors:** Bruun TUJ, DesRoches CL, Wilson D, Chau V, Nakagawa T, Yamasaki M, Hasegawa S, Fukao T, Marshall C, Mercimek-Andrews S
**Journal:** Genet Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/gim.2017.129](https://doi.org/10.1038/gim.2017.129)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2018 Apr;20(5):486-494. doi: 10.1038/gim.2017.129. Epub 2017 Aug
17.

Prospective cohort study for identification of underlying genetic causes in 
neonatal encephalopathy using whole-exome sequencing.

Bruun TUJ(1)(2), DesRoches CL(1), Wilson D(3)(4), Chau V(4), Nakagawa T(5), 
Yamasaki M(6), Hasegawa S(6), Fukao T(7), Marshall C(1)(8), Mercimek-Andrews 
S(1)(2)(9).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Genome Biology Program, Research Institute, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Paediatrics, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Division of Neonatology, Department of Paediatrics, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Division of Cell Proliferation, ART, Graduate School of Medicine, Tohoku 
University, Sendai, Japan.
(6)Department of Health Chemistry, Hoshi University, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu University, Gifu, 
Japan.
(8)Genome Diagnostics, Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(9)Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, Onatrio, 
Canada.

PurposeNeonatal encephalopathy, which is characterized by a decreased level of 
consciousness, occurs in 1-7/1,000 live-term births. In more than half of term 
newborns, there is no identifiable etiological factor. To identify underlying 
genetic defects, we applied whole-exome sequencing (WES) in term newborns with 
neonatal encephalopathy as a prospective cohort study.MethodsTerm newborns with 
neonatal encephalopathy and no history of perinatal asphyxia were included. WES 
was performed using patient and both parents' DNA.ResultsNineteen patients 
fulfilling inclusion criteria were enrolled. Five patients were excluded owing 
to withdrawal of consent, no parental DNA samples, or a genetic diagnosis prior 
to WES. Fourteen patients underwent WES. We confirmed a genetic diagnosis in 
five patients (36%): epileptic encephalopathy associated with autosomal dominant 
de novo variants in SCN2A (p.Met1545Val), KCNQ2 (p.Asp212Tyr), and GNAO1 
(p.Gly40Arg); lipoic acid synthetase deficiency due to compound heterozygous 
variants in LIAS (p.Ala253Pro and p.His236Gln); and encephalopathy associated 
with an X-linked variant in CUL4B (p.Asn211Ser).ConclusionWES is helpful at 
arriving genetic diagnoses in neonatal encephalopathy and/or seizures and brain 
damage. It will increase our understanding and probably enable us to develop 
targeted neuroprotective treatment strategies.

DOI: 10.1038/gim.2017.129
PMID: 28817111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]