---
reference_id: "PMID:24462372"
title: NR2F1 mutations cause optic atrophy with intellectual disability.
authors:
- Bosch DG
- Boonstra FN
- Gonzaga-Jauregui C
- Xu M
- de Ligt J
- Jhangiani S
- Wiszniewski W
- Muzny DM
- Yntema HG
- Pfundt R
- Vissers LE
- Spruijt L
- Blokland EA
- Chen CA
- Baylor-Hopkins Center for Mendelian Genomics
- Lewis RA
- Tsai SY
- Gibbs RA
- Tsai MJ
- Lupski JR
- Zoghbi HY
- Cremers FP
- de Vries BB
- Schaaf CP
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.01.002
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "COUP Transcription Factor I/genetics, metabolism"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Optic Atrophy/genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Young Adult
- Zinc Fingers/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NR2F1 mutations cause optic atrophy with intellectual disability.
**Authors:** Bosch DG, Boonstra FN, Gonzaga-Jauregui C, Xu M, de Ligt J, Jhangiani S, Wiszniewski W, Muzny DM, Yntema HG, Pfundt R, Vissers LE, Spruijt L, Blokland EA, Chen CA, Baylor-Hopkins Center for Mendelian Genomics, Lewis RA, Tsai SY, Gibbs RA, Tsai MJ, Lupski JR, Zoghbi HY, Cremers FP, de Vries BB, Schaaf CP
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.01.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.01.002)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2014 Feb 6;94(2):303-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.01.002. Epub 
2014 Jan 23.

NR2F1 mutations cause optic atrophy with intellectual disability.

Bosch DG(1), Boonstra FN(2), Gonzaga-Jauregui C(3), Xu M(4), de Ligt J(5), 
Jhangiani S(6), Wiszniewski W(7), Muzny DM(6), Yntema HG(8), Pfundt R(8), 
Vissers LE(5), Spruijt L(9), Blokland EA(10), Chen CA(11); Baylor-Hopkins Center 
for Mendelian Genomics; Lewis RA(12), Tsai SY(4), Gibbs RA(13), Tsai MJ(4), 
Lupski JR(14), Zoghbi HY(15), Cremers FP(10), de Vries BB(16), Schaaf CP(17).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, 6500 HB 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Bartiméus, Institute for the Visually Impaired, 3700 
BA Zeist, the Netherlands; Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Radboud university medical center, 6500 HB Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Donders 
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud university medical center, 
6500 HB Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(2)Bartiméus, Institute for the Visually Impaired, 3700 BA Zeist, the 
Netherlands; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud 
university medical center, 6500 HB Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, 6500 HB 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Radboud university medical center, 6500 HB Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Institute 
for Genetic and Metabolic Disease, Radboud university medical center, 6500 HB 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(6)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 
77030, USA.
(7)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(8)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, 6500 HB 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(9)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, 6500 HB 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Research Institute for Oncology, Radboud university 
medical center, 6500 HB Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(10)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, 6500 HB 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Radboud university medical center, 6500 HB Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(11)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute, 
Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(12)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA; 
Department of Ophthalmology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; 
Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(13)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(14)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA; 
Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(15)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 4000 Jones Bridge Road, 
Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA; Department of Neuroscience, Program in Developmental 
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Jan and Dan Duncan 
Neurological Research Institute, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA.
(16)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, 6500 HB 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, 
Radboud university medical center, 6500 HB Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Institute 
for Genetic and Metabolic Disease, Radboud university medical center, 6500 HB 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: Bert.deVries@radboudumc.nl.
(17)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Jan 
and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute, Texas Children's Hospital, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: schaaf@bcm.edu.

Optic nerve atrophy and hypoplasia can be primary disorders or can result from 
trans-synaptic degeneration arising from cerebral visual impairment (CVI). Here 
we report six individuals with CVI and/or optic nerve abnormalities, born after 
an uneventful pregnancy and delivery, who have either de novo heterozygous 
missense mutations in NR2F1, also known as COUP-TFI, or deletions encompassing 
NR2F1. All affected individuals show mild to moderate intellectual impairment. 
NR2F1 encodes a nuclear receptor protein that regulates transcription. A 
reporter assay showed that missense mutations in the zinc-finger DNA-binding 
domain and the putative ligand-binding domain decrease NR2F1 transcriptional 
activity. These findings indicate that NR2F1 plays an important role in the 
neurodevelopment of the visual system and that its disruption can lead to optic 
atrophy with intellectual disability.

Copyright © 2014 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.01.002
PMCID: PMC3928641
PMID: 24462372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]