---
reference_id: "PMID:30944672"
title: "Prognostic Biomarkers of Sarcoidosis: A Comparative Study of Serum Chitotriosidase, ACE, Lysozyme, and KL-6."
authors:
- Bergantini L
- Bianchi F
- Cameli P
- Mazzei MA
- Fui A
- Sestini P
- Rottoli P
- Bargagli E
journal: Dis Markers
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1155/2019/8565423
keywords:
- Adult
- Biomarkers/blood
- Female
- "Hexosaminidases/blood, standards"
- Humans
- Lung Diseases/blood
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mucin-1/blood
- "Muramidase/blood, standards"
- "Peptidyl-Dipeptidase A/blood, standards"
- Sarcoidosis/blood
- Sensitivity and Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic Biomarkers of Sarcoidosis: A Comparative Study of Serum Chitotriosidase, ACE, Lysozyme, and KL-6.
**Authors:** Bergantini L, Bianchi F, Cameli P, Mazzei MA, Fui A, Sestini P, Rottoli P, Bargagli E
**Journal:** Dis Markers (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2019/8565423](https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/8565423)

## Content

1. Dis Markers. 2019 Mar 3;2019:8565423. doi: 10.1155/2019/8565423. eCollection
2019.

Prognostic Biomarkers of Sarcoidosis: A Comparative Study of Serum
Chitotriosidase, ACE, Lysozyme, and KL-6.

Bergantini L(1), Bianchi F(1), Cameli P(1), Mazzei MA(2), Fui A(1), Sestini
P(1), Rottoli P(1), Bargagli E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Immunological Sciences, Respiratory
Disease and Lung Transplant Unit, Respiratory Diseases and Transplant Unit,
Siena University, Siena, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine and Immunological Sciences, Radiology Unit,
Siena University, Siena, Italy.

PURPOSE: Sarcoidosis is a systemic granulomatous disease with unknown etiology.
Many clinical presentations have been reported, and acute disease needs to be
distinguished from subacute and chronic disease. The unpredictable clinical
course of the disease prompted us to evaluate the clinical utility of biomarker
serum detection in sarcoidosis follow-up.
METHODS: Serum concentrations of chitotriosidase, ACE, KL-6, and lysozyme were
analyzed by different methods in a population of 74 sarcoidosis patients (46 on
steroid therapy at sampling) regularly monitored at Siena Sarcoidosis Regional
Referral Centre and in a group of controls with the aim of comparing their
contribution to clinical management of sarcoidosis patients.
RESULTS: KL-6 concentrations were significantly elevated in sarcoidosis patients
with lung fibrosis and were significantly correlated with DLco and CPI score,
while chitotriosidase was significantly higher in patients with extrapulmonary
localizations. With a cut-off value of 303.5 IU/ml, KL-6 showed the best
sensitivity (78%), while chitotriosidase reported the best specificity (85%)
among the biomarkers.
CONCLUSIONS: KL-6 is a reliable biomarker of fibrotic lung involvement in
sarcoidosis patients. Among biomarkers, KL-6 showed the best sensitivity and
serum chitotriosidase the best specificity, even in patients on chronic steroid
therapy, and seemed to correlate with extrapulmonary localizations.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/8565423
PMCID: PMC6421736
PMID: 30944672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
