---
reference_id: "PMID:29671837"
title: "Analysis of 17 genes detects mutations in 81% of 811 patients with lissencephaly."
authors:
- Di Donato N
- Timms AE
- Aldinger KA
- Mirzaa GM
- Bennett JT
- Collins S
- Olds C
- Mei D
- Chiari S
- Carvill G
- Myers CT
- Rivière JB
- Zaki MS
- University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics
- Gleeson JG
- Rump A
- Conti V
- Parrini E
- Ross ME
- Ledbetter DH
- Guerrini R
- Dobyns WB
journal: Genet Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/gim.2018.8
keywords:
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- "Classical Lissencephalies and Subcortical Band Heterotopias/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- "Lissencephaly/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Reelin Protein
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of 17 genes detects mutations in 81% of 811 patients with lissencephaly.
**Authors:** Di Donato N, Timms AE, Aldinger KA, Mirzaa GM, Bennett JT, Collins S, Olds C, Mei D, Chiari S, Carvill G, Myers CT, Rivière JB, Zaki MS, University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics, Gleeson JG, Rump A, Conti V, Parrini E, Ross ME, Ledbetter DH, Guerrini R, Dobyns WB
**Journal:** Genet Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/gim.2018.8](https://doi.org/10.1038/gim.2018.8)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2018 Nov;20(11):1354-1364. doi: 10.1038/gim.2018.8. Epub 2018 Apr
19.

Analysis of 17 genes detects mutations in 81% of 811 patients with 
lissencephaly.

Di Donato N(1), Timms AE(2), Aldinger KA(3), Mirzaa GM(3)(4), Bennett JT(2)(4), 
Collins S(3), Olds C(3), Mei D(5), Chiari S(5), Carvill G(4)(6), Myers CT(4), 
Rivière JB(7), Zaki MS(8); University of Washington Center for Mendelian 
Genomics; Gleeson JG(9), Rump A(10), Conti V(5), Parrini E(5), Ross ME(11), 
Ledbetter DH(12), Guerrini R(5), Dobyns WB(13)(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Clinical Genetics, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany. 
nataliya.didonato@uniklinikum-dresden.de.
(2)Center for Developmental Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Seattle 
Children's Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(5)Pediatric Neurology, Neurogenetics and Neurobiology Unit and Laboratories, 
Neuroscience Excellence Centre, A. Meyer Children's Hospital, University of 
Florence, Florence, Italy.
(6)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(7)Department of Human Genetics, Research Institute of the McGill University 
Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(8)Clinical Genetics Department, Human Genetics and Genome Research Division, 
National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt.
(9)Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(10)Institute for Clinical Genetics, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(11)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, New York, USA.
(12)Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA.
(13)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research 
Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA. wbd@u.washington.edu.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
USA. wbd@u.washington.edu.
(15)Department of Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. 
wbd@u.washington.edu.

PURPOSE: To estimate diagnostic yield and genotype-phenotype correlations in a 
cohort of 811 patients with lissencephaly or subcortical band heterotopia.
METHODS: We collected DNA from 756 children with lissencephaly over 30 years. 
Many were tested for deletion 17p13.3 and mutations of LIS1, DCX, and ARX, but 
few other genes. Among those tested, 216 remained unsolved and were tested by a 
targeted panel of 17 genes (ACTB, ACTG1, ARX, CRADD, DCX, LIS1, TUBA1A, TUBA8, 
TUBB2B, TUBB, TUBB3, TUBG1, KIF2A, KIF5C, DYNC1H1, RELN, and VLDLR) or by 
whole-exome sequencing. Fifty-five patients studied at another institution were 
added as a validation cohort.
RESULTS: The overall mutation frequency in the entire cohort was 81%. LIS1 
accounted for 40% of patients, followed by DCX (23%), TUBA1A (5%), and DYNC1H1 
(3%). Other genes accounted for 1% or less of patients. Nineteen percent 
remained unsolved, which suggests that several additional genes remain to be 
discovered. The majority of unsolved patients had posterior pachygyria, 
subcortical band heterotopia, or mild frontal pachygyria.
CONCLUSION: The brain-imaging pattern correlates with mutations in single 
lissencephaly-associated genes, as well as in biological pathways. We propose 
the first LIS classification system based on the underlying molecular 
mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1038/gim.2018.8
PMCID: PMC6195491
PMID: 29671837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest notification page None of 
the authors have any competing interests. The content is solely the 
responsibility of the authors, and does not necessarily represent the official 
views of the National Institutes of Health. The funding sources had no role in 
the design and conduct of the study, collection, management, analysis and 
interpretation of the data, preparation, review or approval of the manuscript, 
or decision to submit the manuscript for publication.