---
reference_id: "PMID:30021845"
title: "Lipoprotein Particle Profiles, Standard Lipids, and Peripheral Artery Disease Incidence."
authors:
- Aday AW
- Lawler PR
- Cook NR
- Ridker PM
- Mora S
- Pradhan AD
journal: Circulation
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.035432
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lipoprotein Particle Profiles, Standard Lipids, and Peripheral Artery Disease Incidence.
**Authors:** Aday AW, Lawler PR, Cook NR, Ridker PM, Mora S, Pradhan AD
**Journal:** Circulation (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.035432](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.035432)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2018 Nov 20;138(21):2330-2341. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.035432.

Lipoprotein Particle Profiles, Standard Lipids, and Peripheral Artery Disease 
Incidence.

Aday AW(1)(2)(3), Lawler PR(4), Cook NR(1), Ridker PM(1)(2), Mora S(1)(2), 
Pradhan AD(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Preventive Medicine (A.W.A., N.R.C., P.M.R., S.M., A.D.P.), 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine (A.W.A., P.M.R., S.M.), Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(3)Dr Aday's current affiliation is Vanderbilt Translational and Clinical 
Cardiovascular Research Center, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN.
(4)Peter Munk Cardiac Centre, University Health Network and the Heart and Stroke 
Richard Lewar Centre of Excellence in Cardiovascular Research, University of 
Toronto, Canada (P.R.L.).
(5)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, VA Boston Medical Center, MA (A.D.P.).

Comment in
    Circulation. 2018 Nov 20;138(21):2447-2448. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.036490.
    Circulation. 2018 Nov 20;138(21):2342-2344. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.036347.

BACKGROUND: Despite strong and consistent prospective associations of elevated 
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol concentration with incident coronary 
and cerebrovascular disease, data for incident peripheral artery disease (PAD) 
are less robust. Atherogenic dyslipidemia characterized by increased small LDL 
particle (LDL-P) concentration, rather than total LDL cholesterol content, along 
with elevated triglyceride-rich lipoproteins and low high-density lipoprotein 
(HDL) cholesterol (HDL-C), may be the primary lipid driver of PAD risk.
METHODS: The study population was a prospective cohort study of 27 888 women ≥45 
years old free of cardiovascular disease at baseline and followed for a median 
of 15.1 years. We tested whether standard lipid concentrations, as well as 
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy-derived lipoprotein measures, were 
associated with incident symptomatic PAD (n=110) defined as claudication and/or 
revascularization.
RESULTS: In age-adjusted analyses, while LDL cholesterol was not associated with 
incident PAD, we found significant associations for increased total and small 
LDL-P concentrations, triglycerides, and concentrations of very LDL (VLDL) 
particle (VLDL-P) subclasses, increased total cholesterol (TC):HDL-C, low HDL-C, 
and low HDL particle (HDL-P) concentration (all P for extreme tertile 
comparisons <0.05). Findings persisted in multivariable-adjusted models 
comparing extreme tertiles for elevated total LDL-P (adjusted hazard ratio 
[HRadj] 2.03; 95% CI, 1.14-3.59), small LDL-P (HRadj 2.17; 95% CI, 1.10-4.27), 
very large VLDL-P (HRadj 1.68; 95% CI, 1.06-2.66), medium VLDL-P (HRadj 1.98; 
95% CI, 1.15-3.41), and TC:HDL-C (HRadj, 3.11; 95% CI, 1.67-5.81). HDL was 
inversely associated with risk; HRadj for extreme tertiles of HDL-C and HDL-P 
concentration were 0.30 ( P trend < 0.0001) and 0.29 ( P trend < 0.0001), 
respectively. These components of atherogenic dyslipidemia, including small 
LDL-P, medium and very large VLDL-P, TC:HDL-C, HDL-C, and HDL-P, were more 
strongly associated with incident PAD than incident coronary and cerebrovascular 
disease. Finally, the addition of LDL-P and HDL-P concentration to TC:HDL-C 
measures identified women at heightened PAD risk.
CONCLUSIONS: In this prospective study, nuclear magnetic resonance-derived 
measures of LDL-P, but not LDL cholesterol, were associated with incident PAD. 
Other features of atherogenic dyslipidemia, including elevations in TC:HDL-C, 
elevations in triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, and low standard and nuclear 
magnetic resonance-derived measures of HDL, were significant risk determinants. 
These data help clarify prior inconsistencies and may elucidate a unique 
lipoprotein signature for PAD compared to coronary and cerebrovascular disease.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: URL: https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ . Unique 
Identifier: NCT00000479.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.035432
PMCID: PMC6343136
PMID: 30021845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]