---
reference_id: "PMID:12370462"
title: "Neuroanatomy of holoprosencephaly as predictor of function: beyond the face predicting the brain."
authors:
- Plawner LL
- Delgado MR
- Miller VS
- Levey EB
- Kinsman SL
- Barkovich AJ
- Simon EM
- Clegg NJ
- Sweet VT
- Stashinko EE
- Hahn JS
journal: Neurology
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1212/wnl.59.7.1058
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Brain/pathology
- Chi-Square Distribution
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Face/pathology
- Female
- Forecasting
- "Holoprosencephaly/pathology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Infant
- Linear Models
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Prospective Studies
- "Seizures/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Statistics, Nonparametric"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuroanatomy of holoprosencephaly as predictor of function: beyond the face predicting the brain.
**Authors:** Plawner LL, Delgado MR, Miller VS, Levey EB, Kinsman SL, Barkovich AJ, Simon EM, Clegg NJ, Sweet VT, Stashinko EE, Hahn JS
**Journal:** Neurology (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1212/wnl.59.7.1058](https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.59.7.1058)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2002 Oct 8;59(7):1058-66. doi: 10.1212/wnl.59.7.1058.

Neuroanatomy of holoprosencephaly as predictor of function: beyond the face 
predicting the brain.

Plawner LL(1), Delgado MR, Miller VS, Levey EB, Kinsman SL, Barkovich AJ, Simon 
EM, Clegg NJ, Sweet VT, Stashinko EE, Hahn JS.

Author information:
(1)Stanford University School of Medicine and Lucile Packard Children's 
Hospital, Palo Alto, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Despite advances in neuroimaging and molecular genetics of 
holoprosencephaly (HPE), the clinical spectrum of HPE has remained inadequately 
described.
OBJECTIVE: To better characterize the clinical features of HPE and identify 
specific neuroanatomic abnormalities that may be useful predictors of 
neurodevelopmental function.
METHODS: The authors evaluated 68 children with HPE in a multicenter, 
prospective study. Neuroimaging studies were assessed for the grade of HPE 
(lobar, semilobar, and alobar), the degree of nonseparation of the deep gray 
nuclei, and presence of dorsal cyst or cortical malformation.
RESULTS: In general, the severity of clinical problems and neurologic 
dysfunctions correlated with the degree of hemispheric nonseparation (grade of 
HPE). Nearly three-quarters of the patients had endocrinopathies, with all 
having at least diabetes insipidus. The severity of endocrine abnormalities 
correlated with the degree of hypothalamic nonseparation (p = 0.029). Seizures 
occurred in approximately half of the children with HPE. The presence of 
cortical malformations was associated with difficult-to-control seizures. The 
presence and degree of dystonia correlated with the degree of nonseparation of 
the caudate and lentiform nuclei and the grade of HPE (p < 0.05). Hypotonia 
correlated with the grade of HPE (p < 0.05). Mobility, upper extremity function, 
and language correlated with the degree of nonseparation of the caudate, 
lentiform and thalamic nuclei, and grade of HPE (p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with HPE manifest a wide spectrum of clinical problems and 
neurologic dysfunction. The nature and severity of many of these problems can be 
predicted by specific neuroanatomic abnormalities found in HPE.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.59.7.1058
PMID: 12370462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]