---
reference_id: "PMID:20301691"
title: Classic Galactosemia and Clinical Variant Galactosemia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Berry GT
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Classic Galactosemia and Clinical Variant Galactosemia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Berry GT

## Content

1. Classic Galactosemia and Clinical Variant Galactosemia.

Berry GT(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2000 Feb 4 [updated 2021 Mar 11].

Author information:
(1)Boston Children's HospitalHarvard Medical SchoolBoston, Massachusetts

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The term "galactosemia" refers to disorders of 
galactose metabolism that include classic galactosemia, clinical variant 
galactosemia, and biochemical variant galactosemia (not covered in this 
chapter). This GeneReview focuses on: Classic galactosemia, which can result in 
life-threatening complications including feeding problems, failure to thrive, 
hepatocellular damage, bleeding, and E coli sepsis in untreated infants. If a 
lactose-restricted diet is provided during the first ten days of life, the 
neonatal signs usually quickly resolve and the complications of liver failure, 
sepsis, and neonatal death are prevented; however, despite adequate treatment 
from an early age, children with classic galactosemia remain at increased risk 
for developmental delays, speech problems (termed childhood apraxia of speech 
and dysarthria), and abnormalities of motor function. Almost all females with 
classic galactosemia manifest hypergonadatropic hypogonadism or premature 
ovarian insufficiency (POI). Clinical variant galactosemia, which can result in 
life-threatening complications including feeding problems, failure to thrive, 
hepatocellular damage including cirrhosis, and bleeding in untreated infants. 
This is exemplified by the disease that occurs in African Americans and native 
Africans in South Africa. Persons with clinical variant galactosemia may be 
missed with newborn screening as the hypergalactosemia is not as marked as in 
classic galactosemia and breath testing is normal. If a lactose-restricted diet 
is provided during the first ten days of life, the severe acute neonatal 
complications are usually prevented. African Americans with clinical variant 
galactosemia and adequate early treatment do not appear to be at risk for 
long-term complications, including POI.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of classic galactosemia and clinical variant 
galactosemia is established by detection of elevated erythrocyte 
galactose-1-phosphate concentration, reduced erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate 
uridylyltransferase (GALT) enzyme activity, and/or biallelic pathogenic variants 
in GALT. In classic galactosemia, erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate is usually 
>10 mg/dL and erythrocyte GALT enzyme activity is absent or barely detectable. 
In clinical variant galactosemia, erythrocyte GALT enzyme activity is close to 
or above 1% of control values but probably never >10%-15%. However, in African 
Americans with clinical variant galactosemia, the erythrocyte GALT enzyme 
activity may be absent or barely detectable but is often much higher in liver 
and in intestinal tissue (e.g., 10% of control values). Virtually 100% of 
infants with classic galactosemia or clinical variant galactosemia can be 
detected in newborn screening programs that include testing for galactosemia in 
their panel. However, infants with clinical variant galactosemia may be missed 
if the program only measures blood total galactose level and not erythrocyte 
GALT enzyme activity.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Standard of care in any newborn who is 
"screen-positive" for galactosemia is immediate dietary intervention while 
diagnostic testing is under way. Once a diagnosis is confirmed, restriction of 
galactose intake is continued and all milk products are replaced with 
lactose-free formulas (e.g., Isomil® or Prosobee®) containing non-galactose 
carbohydrates; dietary restrictions on all lactose-containing foods and other 
dairy products should continue throughout life, although management of the diet 
becomes less important after infancy and early childhood. In rare instances, 
cataract surgery may be needed in the first year of life. Childhood apraxia of 
speech and dysarthria require expert speech therapy. Developmental assessment at 
age one year by a psychologist and/or developmental pediatrician is recommended 
in order to formulate a treatment plan with the speech therapist and treating 
physician. For school-age children, an individual education plan and/or 
professional help with learning skills and special classrooms as needed. Hormone 
replacement therapy as needed for delayed pubertal development and/or primary or 
secondary amenorrhea. Stimulation with follicle-stimulating hormone may be 
useful in producing ovulation in some women. Prevention of secondary 
complications: Recommended calcium, vitamin D, and vitamin K intake to help 
prevent decreased bone mineralization; standard treatment for gastrointestinal 
dysfunction. Surveillance: Biochemical genetics clinic visits every three months 
for the first year of life or as needed depending on the nature of the potential 
acute complications; every six months during the second year of life; yearly 
thereafter. Routine monitoring for: the accumulation of toxic analytes (e.g., 
erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate and urinary galactitol); cataracts; speech and 
development; movement disorder; POI; nutritional deficiency; and osteoporosis. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Breast milk, proprietary infant formulas 
containing lactose, cow's milk, dairy products, and casein or whey-containing 
foods; medications with lactose and galactose. Evaluation of relatives at risk: 
To allow for earliest possible diagnosis and treatment of at-risk sibs: Perform 
prenatal diagnosis when the GALT pathogenic variants in the family are known; or 
If prenatal testing has not been performed, test the newborn for either the 
family-specific GALT pathogenic variants or erythrocyte GALT enzyme activity. 
Pregnancy management: Women with classic galactosemia should maintain a 
lactose-restricted diet during pregnancy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Classic galactosemia and clinical variant galactosemia are 
inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Couples who have had one affected 
child have a 25% chance of having an affected child in each subsequent 
pregnancy. Molecular genetic carrier testing for at-risk sibs and prenatal 
testing for pregnancies at increased risk are an option if the GALT pathogenic 
variants in the family are known. If the GALT pathogenic variants in a family 
are not known, prenatal testing can rely on assay of GALT enzyme activity in 
cultured amniotic fluid cells.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301691