---
reference_id: "PMID:39381600"
title: Proteomic analysis of toxic effects of short-term cadmium exposure on goat livers.
authors:
- Liu G
- Shen X
- Li Y
journal: Toxicol Res (Camb)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/toxres/tfae162
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proteomic analysis of toxic effects of short-term cadmium exposure on goat livers.
**Authors:** Liu G, Shen X, Li Y
**Journal:** Toxicol Res (Camb) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/toxres/tfae162](https://doi.org/10.1093/toxres/tfae162)

## Content

1. Toxicol Res (Camb). 2024 Oct 7;13(5):tfae162. doi: 10.1093/toxres/tfae162. 
eCollection 2024 Oct.

Proteomic analysis of toxic effects of short-term cadmium exposure on goat 
livers.

Liu G(1), Shen X(1)(2), Li Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Science and Engineering, Southwest University of Science and 
Technology, No. 59, Middle Section of Qinglong Avenue, Fucheng District, 621010, 
Mianyang, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Liaocheng University, No. 1, Hunan Road, 252000, 
Liaocheng, China.

Food safety is closely related to environmental pollution. It is worth noting 
that the long-term accumulation of Cd, a toxic heavy metal, in animals may pose 
a threat to human health through food chain. Previous studies have found that Cd 
exposure may cause liver metabolic disorders of black goats, but the mechanism 
of its impact on liver proteome of goats has not been widely studied. Therefore, 
in this study, ten male goats (Nubian black goat × native black goat) were 
exposed to Cd via drinking water containing CdCl2 (20 mg Cd·kg - 1·BW) for 
30 days (five male goats per group). Blood physiology and liver antioxidant 
indices in black goats were determined and differentially expressed proteins 
(DEPs) in the livers of Cd-exposed goats were profiled by using TMT-labelled 
proteomics. It was found that plasma Hb and RBC levels as well as PCV values 
were decreased, liver SOD, GSH-Px, T-AOC and CAT levels were decreased, and MDA 
level was increased in Cd-treated goats, and 630 DEPs (up 326, down 304) in the 
livers of Cd-treated goats. Proteomics analysis revealed that Cd exposure 
affected glutathione metabolism and drug metabolism-cytochrome P450. We 
identified GP×2, GSTM3, and TBXAS1 as potential protein markers of early Cd 
toxicity in goats. This study provided theoretical basis for early diagnosis of 
Cd poisoning in goats.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/toxres/tfae162
PMCID: PMC11457375
PMID: 39381600