---
reference_id: "PMID:30602191"
title: Reliability of the Hirschsprung-Associated Enterocolitis Score in Clinical Practice.
authors:
- Dore M
- Vilanova Sanchez A
- Triana Junco P
- Barrena S
- De Ceano-Vivas M
- Jimenez Gomez J
- Andres Moreno AM
- Lopez Santamaria M
- Martinez L
journal: Eur J Pediatr Surg
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1055/s-0038-1677046
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reliability of the Hirschsprung-Associated Enterocolitis Score in Clinical Practice.
**Authors:** Dore M, Vilanova Sanchez A, Triana Junco P, Barrena S, De Ceano-Vivas M, Jimenez Gomez J, Andres Moreno AM, Lopez Santamaria M, Martinez L
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr Surg (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0038-1677046](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0038-1677046)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2019 Feb;29(1):132-137. doi: 10.1055/s-0038-1677046. Epub 
2019 Jan 2.

Reliability of the Hirschsprung-Associated Enterocolitis Score in Clinical 
Practice.

Dore M(1), Vilanova Sanchez A(1)(2), Triana Junco P(1), Barrena S(1), De 
Ceano-Vivas M(3), Jimenez Gomez J(1), Andres Moreno AM(1), Lopez Santamaria 
M(1), Martinez L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, 
Spain.
(2)Center for Colorectal and Pelvic Reconstruction, Nationwide Children's 
Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, United States.
(3)Department of Pediatric Emergency Medicine, Hospital Universitario La Paz, 
Madrid, Spain.

INTRODUCTION:  There is a lack of an agreed Hirschsprung-associated 
enterocolitis (HAEC) definition. In 2009, a HAEC score was proposed for the 
diagnosis of HAEC episodes. Our aim was to apply the HAEC score on HAEC episodes 
to determine its diagnostic efficiency and whether it correlated to its 
severity.
METHODS:  Retrospective study of patients with HAEC admitted between 2000 and 
2016. Episodes of HAEC were identified and the HAEC score was calculated. A 
cut-off of ≥ 10 according to Pastor et al and ≥ 4 according to Frykman et al 
were used. A Pearson's correlation coefficient was performed for outcome 
variable: length-of-stay (LOS).
RESULTS:  Note that 21/93 (22.6%) patients with Hirschsprung's disease presented 
50 HAEC episodes with a median of 2 (1-5) episodes during an 8.3-year (2-15.6) 
follow-up. The most common symptoms were foul-smelling (86% [43/50]) and 
explosive (60% [30/50]) diarrhea. Physical findings showed a distended abdomen 
(76% [38/50]) and fever (60% [30/50]) with dilated bowel (82% [41/50]) and 
rectosigmoid cut-off (80% [40/50]) identified on X-rays. Only 34% (17/50) showed 
abnormal laboratory findings. Patients were admitted with a median LOS of 7 days 
(1-28). A HAEC score of 9 (2-16) was found, and only 50% (25/50) of patients met 
the initial criteria (score of 10 points). However, the use of a 4-point cut-off 
would have allowed the diagnosis of 98% (49/50) of the patients. A positive 
linear correlation was found for LOS and HAEC score (r = 0.3, p = 0.014).
CONCLUSION:  There is no standardized definition for HAEC. The initial HAEC 
score cut-off is restrictive and might fail to identify milder episodes. The 
positive correlation with LOS and thus HAEC severity might aid in patient 
information and anticipation of treatment.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0038-1677046
PMID: 30602191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.