---
reference_id: "PMID:22308486"
title: Hypertension with or without adrenal hyperplasia due to different inherited mutations in the potassium channel KCNJ5.
authors:
- Scholl UI
- Nelson-Williams C
- Yue P
- Grekin R
- Wyatt RJ
- Dillon MJ
- Couch R
- Hammer LK
- Harley FL
- Farhi A
- Wang WH
- Lifton RP
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1121407109
keywords:
- "Adrenocortical Hyperfunction/complications, genetics"
- Cell Line
- Female
- G Protein-Coupled Inwardly-Rectifying Potassium Channels/genetics
- Humans
- "Hypertension/complications, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertension with or without adrenal hyperplasia due to different inherited mutations in the potassium channel KCNJ5.
**Authors:** Scholl UI, Nelson-Williams C, Yue P, Grekin R, Wyatt RJ, Dillon MJ, Couch R, Hammer LK, Harley FL, Farhi A, Wang WH, Lifton RP
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1121407109](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1121407109)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 14;109(7):2533-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1121407109. Epub 2012 Jan 30.

Hypertension with or without adrenal hyperplasia due to different inherited 
mutations in the potassium channel KCNJ5.

Scholl UI(1), Nelson-Williams C, Yue P, Grekin R, Wyatt RJ, Dillon MJ, Couch R, 
Hammer LK, Harley FL, Farhi A, Wang WH, Lifton RP.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Genetics and Internal Medicine and Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

We recently implicated two recurrent somatic mutations in an adrenal potassium 
channel, KCNJ5, as a cause of aldosterone-producing adrenal adenomas (APAs) and 
one inherited KCNJ5 mutation in a Mendelian form of early severe hypertension 
with massive adrenal hyperplasia. The mutations identified all altered the 
channel selectivity filter, producing increased Na(+) conductance and membrane 
depolarization, the signal for aldosterone production and proliferation of 
adrenal glomerulosa cells. We report herein members of four kindreds with early 
onset primary aldosteronism of unknown cause. Sequencing of KCNJ5 revealed that 
affected members of two kindreds had KCNJ5(G151R) mutations, identical to one of 
the prevalent recurrent mutations in APAs. These individuals had severe 
progressive aldosteronism and hyperplasia requiring bilateral adrenalectomy in 
childhood for blood pressure control. Affected members of the other two kindreds 
had KCNJ5(G151E) mutations, which are not seen in APAs. These subjects had 
easily controlled hypertension and no evidence of hyperplasia. Surprisingly, 
electrophysiology of channels expressed in 293T cells demonstrated that 
KCNJ5(G151E) was the more extreme mutation, producing a much larger Na(+) 
conductance than KCNJ5(G151R), resulting in rapid Na(+)-dependent cell 
lethality. We infer that this increased lethality limits adrenocortical cell 
mass and the severity of aldosteronism in vivo, accounting for the milder 
phenotype among these patients. These findings demonstrate striking variations 
in phenotypes and clinical outcome resulting from different mutations of the 
same amino acid in KCNJ5 and have implications for the diagnosis and 
pathogenesis of primary aldosteronism with and without adrenal hyperplasia.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1121407109
PMCID: PMC3289329
PMID: 22308486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.