---
reference_id: "PMID:36371486"
title: Adenine base editing efficiently restores the function of Fanconi anemia hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.
authors:
- Siegner SM
- Ugalde L
- Clemens A
- Garcia-Garcia L
- Bueren JA
- Rio P
- Karasu ME
- Corn JE
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-34479-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adenine base editing efficiently restores the function of Fanconi anemia hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.
**Authors:** Siegner SM, Ugalde L, Clemens A, Garcia-Garcia L, Bueren JA, Rio P, Karasu ME, Corn JE
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-022-34479-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34479-z)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2022 Nov 12;13(1):6900. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-34479-z.

Adenine base editing efficiently restores the function of Fanconi anemia 
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.

Siegner SM(#)(1), Ugalde L(#)(2), Clemens A(#)(1), Garcia-Garcia L(2), Bueren 
JA(2), Rio P(3), Karasu ME(4), Corn JE(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Division of Hematopoietic Innovative Therapies, Centro de Investigaciones 
Energéticas Medioambientales y Tecnológicas and Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIEMAT/CIBERER) and Advanced Therapies 
Unit, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Fundación Jiménez Díaz (IIS-FJD, 
UAM), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Division of Hematopoietic Innovative Therapies, Centro de Investigaciones 
Energéticas Medioambientales y Tecnológicas and Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIEMAT/CIBERER) and Advanced Therapies 
Unit, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Fundación Jiménez Díaz (IIS-FJD, 
UAM), Madrid, Spain. paula.rio@ciemat.ed.
(4)Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. karasum@ethz.ch.
(5)Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. 
jacob.corn@biol.ethz.ch.
(#)Contributed equally

Fanconi Anemia (FA) is a debilitating genetic disorder with a wide range of 
severe symptoms including bone marrow failure and predisposition to cancer. 
CRISPR-Cas genome editing manipulates genotypes by harnessing DNA repair and has 
been proposed as a potential cure for FA. But FA is caused by deficiencies in 
DNA repair itself, preventing the use of editing strategies such as homology 
directed repair. Recently developed base editing (BE) systems do not rely on 
double stranded DNA breaks and might be used to target mutations in FA genes, 
but this remains to be tested. Here we develop a proof of concept therapeutic 
base editing strategy to address two of the most prevalent FANCA mutations in 
patient hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. We find that optimizing adenine 
base editor construct, vector type, guide RNA format, and delivery conditions 
leads to very effective genetic modification in multiple FA patient backgrounds. 
Optimized base editing restored FANCA expression, molecular function of the FA 
pathway, and phenotypic resistance to crosslinking agents. ABE8e mediated 
editing in primary hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells from FA patients was 
both genotypically effective and restored FA pathway function, indicating the 
potential of base editing strategies for future clinical application in FA.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-34479-z
PMCID: PMC9653444
PMID: 36371486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.E.C. is a cofounder and board member of 
Spotlight Therapeutics, an SAB member of Mission Therapeutics, an SAB member of 
Relation Therapeutics, an SAB member of Hornet Bio, an SAB member for the Joint 
AstraZeneca-CRUK Functional Genomics Centre, and a consultant for Cimeo 
Therapeutics. P.R. and J.A.B receive funding and has licensed the 
PGK-FANCA-WPRE* lentiviral vector to Rocket Pharmaceuticals. P.R. and J.A.B. are 
inventors on patents filed by CIEMAT, CIBERER, and Fundación Jiménez Díaz, and 
may be entitled to receive financial benefits from the licensing of such 
patents. The rest of the authors declare that they have no competing interests.