---
reference_id: "PMID:37547170"
title: "Dengue Myocarditis: A Case Report and Major Review."
authors:
- Cristodulo R
- Luoma-Overstreet G
- Leite F
- Vaca M
- Navia M
- Durán G
- Molina F
- Zonneveld B
- Perrone SV
- Barbagelata A
- Kaplinsky E
journal: Glob Heart
year: '2023'
doi: 10.5334/gh.1254
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue Myocarditis: A Case Report and Major Review.
**Authors:** Cristodulo R, Luoma-Overstreet G, Leite F, Vaca M, Navia M, Durán G, Molina F, Zonneveld B, Perrone SV, Barbagelata A, Kaplinsky E
**Journal:** Glob Heart (2023)
**DOI:** [10.5334/gh.1254](https://doi.org/10.5334/gh.1254)

## Content

1. Glob Heart. 2023 Aug 4;18(1):41. doi: 10.5334/gh.1254. eCollection 2023.

Dengue Myocarditis: A Case Report and Major Review.

Cristodulo R(1), Luoma-Overstreet G(2), Leite F(1), Vaca M(1), Navia M(1), Durán 
G(1), Molina F(1), Zonneveld B(1), Perrone SV(3), Barbagelata A(3)(4), Kaplinsky 
E(5).

Author information:
(1)Clínica de las Américas, Santa Cruz, Bolivia.
(2)Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA, US.
(3)Catholic University of Argentina, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, US.
(5)Hospital Municipal de Badalona, Barcelona University, Barcelona, Spain.

Dengue is a viral disease transmitted by the bite of a female arthropod, 
prevalent primarily in tropical and subtropical regions. Its manifestations 
include asymptomatic infections, dengue fever, and a severe form called 
hemorrhagic dengue or dengue shock syndrome. Atypical manifestations can also 
occur, called expanded dengue syndrome. We describe the case of a 43-year-old 
man with an unusual presentation of dengue, demonstrating a workup suggestive of 
myocardial and pericardial damage. Symptoms and markers indicative of cardiac 
compromise improved after five days on anti-inflammatory treatment. Dengue 
myocarditis is considered an uncommon complication of dengue, although its 
reported incidence is likely an underestimation. In general, most cases of 
dengue myocarditis are self-limited, with only a minority at risk of progressing 
to heart failure. In order to improve recognition and prevent progression, 
healthcare providers should maintain a high degree of suspicion regarding 
potential cardiac complications in patients with dengue.

Copyright: © 2023 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.5334/gh.1254
PMCID: PMC10402786
PMID: 37547170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests to 
declare.