---
reference_id: "PMID:25351923"
title: Comparative pathobiology of environmentally induced lung cancers in humans and rodents.
authors:
- Pandiri A
journal: Toxicol Pathol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1177/0192623314556516
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative pathobiology of environmentally induced lung cancers in humans and rodents.
**Authors:** Pandiri A
**Journal:** Toxicol Pathol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0192623314556516](https://doi.org/10.1177/0192623314556516)

## Content

1. Toxicol Pathol. 2015 Jan;43(1):107-14. doi: 10.1177/0192623314556516. Epub
2014  Oct 27.

Comparative pathobiology of environmentally induced lung cancers in humans and 
rodents.

Pandiri A(1).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Pathology Laboratories, Inc., Research Triangle Park, North 
Carolina, USA pandiriak@niehs.nih.gov apandiri@epl-inc.com.

Lung cancer is the number one cause of cancer-related deaths in humans 
worldwide. Environmental factors play an important role in the epidemiology of 
these cancers. Rodents are the most common experimental model to study human 
lung cancers and are frequently used in bioassays to identify environmental 
exposure hazards associated with lung cancer. Lung tumors in rodents are common, 
particularly in certain strains of mice. Rodent lung tumors are predominantly 
bronchioloalveolar carcinomas and usually follow a progressive continuum of 
hyperplasia to adenoma to carcinoma. Human lung cancers are phenotypically more 
diverse and broadly constitute 2 types: small cell lung cancers and nonsmall 
cell lung cancers (NSCLCs). Rodent lung tumors resulting from exposure to 
environmental agents are comparable with certain adenocarcinomas that are a 
subset of human NSCLCs. Human pulmonary carcinomas differ from rodent lung 
tumors by exhibiting greater morphologic heterogeneity (encompassing squamous 
cell, neuroendocrine, mucinous, sarcomatoid, and multiple cell combinations), 
higher metastatic rate, higher stromal response, aggressive clinical behavior, 
and lack of a clear continuum of proliferative lesions. In spite of these 
differences, rodent lung tumors recapitulate several fundamental aspects of 
human lung tumor biology at the morphologic and molecular level, especially in 
lung cancers resulting from exposure to environmental carcinogens.

© 2014 by The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1177/0192623314556516
PMCID: PMC4310768
PMID: 25351923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]