---
reference_id: "PMID:8859061"
title: Excess glutamate levels in the cerebrospinal fluid predict clinical outcome of bacterial meningitis.
authors:
- Spranger M
- Schwab S
- Krempien S
- Winterholler M
- Steiner T
- Hacke W
journal: Arch Neurol
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1001/archneur.1996.00550100066016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Excess glutamate levels in the cerebrospinal fluid predict clinical outcome of bacterial meningitis.
**Authors:** Spranger M, Schwab S, Krempien S, Winterholler M, Steiner T, Hacke W
**Journal:** Arch Neurol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archneur.1996.00550100066016](https://doi.org/10.1001/archneur.1996.00550100066016)

## Content

1. Arch Neurol. 1996 Oct;53(10):992-6. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1996.00550100066016.

Excess glutamate levels in the cerebrospinal fluid predict clinical outcome of 
bacterial meningitis.

Spranger M(1), Schwab S, Krempien S, Winterholler M, Steiner T, Hacke W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The clinical course of bacterial meningitis still is characterized 
by a high mortality and frequent neurological deficits in survivors. In addition 
to other potentially neurotoxic mediators of inflammation, the excitatory amino 
acid glutamate, which has been implicated in neuronal death in a variety of 
other neurological diseases, may also be involved in the pathological process of 
bacterial meningitis.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the prognostic value of the glutamate concentration 
in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients with bacterial meningitis.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Thirty consecutive patients with bacterial meningitis were 
included in a prospective study. The clinical severity of the disease was 
assessed on admission and 14 days after the beginning of antibiotic treatment by 
means of the Glasgow Coma Scale. Studies of CSF were performed on admission and 
after 3 to 6 days. In addition to standard CSF investigations, including cell 
count, cytologic findings, protein analysis, glucose and lactate levels, and 
microbiological tests, the concentration of glutamate in the CSF was measured by 
an enzymatic assay.
RESULTS: At admission, both CSF cell count and concentration of glutamate 
correlated well with the severity of the disease. After treatment, glutamate 
concentrations decreased significantly to normal or only slightly elevated 
levels in 23 patients. However, in 7 patients glutamate levels remained markedly 
increased. In this group, clinical outcome was significantly worse than in the 
group of patients with low glutamate levels in the second CSF analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: A prolonged increase of glutamate levels in the CSF may predict 
poor clinical outcome in patients with bacterial meningitis, possibly because of 
the sustained neurotoxic effects of this excitatory neurotransmitter.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1996.00550100066016
PMID: 8859061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]