---
reference_id: "PMID:39911519"
title: Genetics in Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia Due to 21-Hydroxylase Deficiency and Clinical Implications.
authors:
- Concolino P
- Falhammar H
journal: J Endocr Soc
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1210/jendso/bvaf018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics in Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia Due to 21-Hydroxylase Deficiency and Clinical Implications.
**Authors:** Concolino P, Falhammar H
**Journal:** J Endocr Soc (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jendso/bvaf018](https://doi.org/10.1210/jendso/bvaf018)

## Content

1. J Endocr Soc. 2025 Jan 28;9(3):bvaf018. doi: 10.1210/jendso/bvaf018.
eCollection  2025 Feb 4.

Genetics in Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia Due to 21-Hydroxylase Deficiency and 
Clinical Implications.

Concolino P(1), Falhammar H(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze di Laboratorio ed Ematologiche, UOC Chimica, 
Biochimica e Biologia Molecolare Clinica. Fondazione Policlinico Universitario 
Agostino Gemelli IRCCS, Roma 00168, Italy.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm SE-171 76, Sweden.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm SE-171 
76, Sweden.

Of all congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), 95% to 99% is 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency (21OHD), an autosomal recessive disease. 21OHD is due to an 
insufficiency of 21-hydroxylase enzyme, which is encoded by the CYP21A2 gene and 
involved in cortisol and aldosterone production. The clinical presentation 
differs widely from severe classic to mild nonclassic CAH. 21OHD represents one 
of the most complex and at the same time intriguing topics in human genetics and 
its molecular diagnosis involves ongoing challenges. To provide a meticulous 
presentation of the topic, we searched the past and present literature, 
including original articles and reviews from PubMed, ScienceDirect, Web of 
Science, Embase, and Scopus, using search terms for genetics of 21OHD, 21OHD 
variants, molecular diagnosis of 21OHD, and 21OHD genetic testing. We offer a 
comprehensive review focusing on recent developments, new concepts, and 
conclusions.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/jendso/bvaf018
PMCID: PMC11795198
PMID: 39911519