---
reference_id: "PMID:19318653"
title: Clinical outcome and phenotypic expression in LAMP2 cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Maron BJ
- Roberts WC
- Arad M
- Haas TS
- Spirito P
- Wright GB
- Almquist AK
- Baffa JM
- Saul JP
- Ho CY
- Seidman J
- Seidman CE
journal: JAMA
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.371
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Autopsy
- "Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Child
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/etiology"
- Disease Progression
- Echocardiography
- Electrocardiography
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type IIb/genetics, mortality, pathology, surgery"
- Heart Failure/etiology
- Heart Transplantation
- Humans
- "Hypertrophy, Left Ventricular/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Lysosomal-Associated Membrane Protein 2
- Lysosomal Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Sarcomeres
- Young Adult
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Clinical outcome and phenotypic expression in LAMP2 cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Maron BJ, Roberts WC, Arad M, Haas TS, Spirito P, Wright GB, Almquist AK, Baffa JM, Saul JP, Ho CY, Seidman J, Seidman CE
**Journal:** JAMA (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2009.371](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2009.371)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2009 Mar 25;301(12):1253-9. doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.371.

Clinical outcome and phenotypic expression in LAMP2 cardiomyopathy.

Maron BJ(1), Roberts WC, Arad M, Haas TS, Spirito P, Wright GB, Almquist AK,
Baffa JM, Saul JP, Ho CY, Seidman J, Seidman CE.

Author information:
(1)Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Center, Minneapolis Heart Institute Foundation,
920 E 28th St, Ste 620, Minneapolis, MN 55407, USA. hcm.maron@mhif.org

CONTEXT: Mutations in X-linked lysosome-associated membrane protein gene (LAMP2;
Danon disease) produce a cardiomyopathy in young patients that clinically mimics
severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) due to sarcomere protein mutations.
However, the natural history and phenotypic expression of this newly recognized
disease is incompletely resolved and its identification may have important
clinical implications.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the clinical consequences, outcome, and phenotypic
expression of LAMP2 cardiomyopathy associated with diagnostic and management
strategies.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PATIENTS: Clinical course and outcome were assessed
prospectively in 7 young patients (6 boys) with defined LAMP2 mutations from the
time of diagnosis (age 7-17 years; median, 14 years) to October 2008. Phenotypic
expression of this disease was assessed both clinically and at autopsy.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Progressive heart failure, cardiac death, and transplant.
RESULTS: Over a mean (SD) follow-up of 8.6 (2.6) years, and by age 14 to 24
years, the study patients developed left ventricular systolic dysfunction (mean
[SD] ejection fraction, 25% [7%]) and cavity enlargement, as well as
particularly adverse clinical consequences, including progressive refractory
heart failure and death (n = 4), sudden death (n = 1), aborted cardiac arrest (n
= 1), or heart transplantation (n = 1). Left ventricular hypertrophy was
particularly marked (maximum thickness, 29-65 mm; mean [SD], 44 [15] mm),
including 2 patients with massive ventricular septal thickness of 60 mm and 65
mm at ages 23 and 14 years, respectively. In 6 patients, a ventricular
pre-excitation pattern at study entry was associated with markedly increased
voltages of R-wave or S-wave (15-145 mm; mean [SD], 69 [39] mm), and deeply
inverted T-waves. Autopsy findings included a combination of histopathologic
features that were consistent with a lysosomal storage disease (ie, clusters of
vacuolated myocytes) but also typical of HCM due to sarcomere protein mutations
(ie, myocyte disarray, small vessel disease, myocardial scarring).
CONCLUSIONS: LAMP2 cardiomyopathy is a profound disease process characterized by
progressive clinical deterioration leading rapidly to cardiac death in young
patients (<25 years). These observations underscore the importance of timely
molecular diagnosis for predicting prognosis and early consideration of heart
transplantation.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2009.371
PMCID: PMC4106257
PMID: 19318653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Metabolic myocardial storage diseases which mimic the clinical and phenotypic
expression of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) have recently been reported in young patients
(1), including those due to mutations in the X-linked
lysosome-associated membrane protein gene (LAMP2; Danon disease) (1–7). The morphologic
expression as well as the clinical course experienced by patients with this newly identified
cardiomyopathy (2–7), is incompletely resolved at present. Therefore, it is informative at this time
to report our early experience with an assessment of the natural history associated with LAMP2
cardiomyopathy.

The most current clinical status of 7 previously identified LAMP2 patients (1) was reexamined, as of October 2008. Two-dimensional and
Doppler echocardiographic studies were performed according to standard methodology, with
commercially available instruments. As previously described in detail (1), all mutations found in probands reported here were identified
using dideoxy sequencing and confirmed by restriction enzyme digestion (8). Tissue sections of LV myocardium were obtained from
formalin-fixed hearts, embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 6μ thickness, and stained
with hematoxylin and eosin and Masson’s trichrome. All participating centers
received approval from their Institutional Review Boards.

Clinical, demographic and outcome data were assembled for the 7 affected proband
study patients, and are summarized in Table 1. At
cardiac diagnosis, the one female and 6 male patients were 7 to 15 years old (mean 12).
Clinical recognition in 6 patients occurred by virtue of heart murmur, family screening,
and routine ECG, or by symptoms (chest pain or syncope), and in one due to atrial
fibrillation. All had predominant or isolated cardiac manifestations without mental
retardation, neurological or musculoskeletal deficits associated with Danon disease (2–7). On
ECG at diagnosis, 6 patients had ventricular pre-excitation patterns with short PR
interval (Figure 1). These patients also showed
markedly increase standard and/or precordial lead voltages with maximum R- or S-wave of
40–145 mm, usually with deep negative T-waves (Table 1).

At cardiac diagnosis, all patients were in New York Heart Association (NYHA)
functional class I. Over the subsequent 7±3 years, each of the 7 patients
experienced particularly adverse clinical consequences, by 12 to 24 years of age (mean
20). Four patients died of acute and/or progressive heart failure and one underwent heart
transplantation; clinical deterioration was often rapid with the time interval from
clinical stability with little or no symptoms and preserved systolic function to end-stage
heart failure as brief as 6 months. Two others experienced sudden unexpected major
arrhythmic events: one died suddenly (age 12) from ventricular fibrillation refractory to
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) therapy (Figure
2), and one received appropriate defibrillator shock for rapid ventricular
tachycardia at age 18 (9). All 7 patients developed
marked LV systolic dysfunction (ejection fraction, 20–35%; mean
25±7), associated with LV cavity dilatation in 4 and enlargement in 2 others over
the follow-up period. (Table 1) (10).

Most recent echocardiographic studies demonstrated diffuse and marked LV
hypertrophy in each patient. Maximum wall thickness (ventricular septum) was 29 to 65 mm
(mean 44±15[SD]), including 2 patients with particularly massive
thickening of 60 mm and 65 mm at age 23 and 15 years, respectively. (Table 1; patients #1 and #2). LV end-diastolic
cavity dimension was documented to have dilated and/or enlarged over the follow-up
period. LV outflow obstruction due to mitral valve systolic anterior motion was present
at rest in 2 patients (gradient, 65 mm Hg).

Post-mortem examination of 2 hearts showed massive cardiac hypertrophy; heart
weights were 1265 grams and 1425 grams with asymmetric LV wall thickening (Figures 2 and 3).
Patient #1 showed, in addition, substantial myocyte disarray, abnormal
intramural coronary arteries (with thickened walls and narrowed lumen), and replacement
fibrosis including subepicardial distribution (Figure
2). Both patients showed prominent clusters of numerous myocytes with
distinctive and extensive sarcoplasmic vacuolation, and inclusions of amorphous granular
material in some cells within areas of scarring (Figure
3).

The clinical course of patients reported here with LAMP2 mutations provides
insights to the cardiovascular community regarding molecular diagnosis as well as the
natural history, pathophysiology and clinical implications of this recently recognized
genetic cardiomyopathy (1–7). Indeed, as previously suggested (1), LAMP2 mutations cause a particularly profound and accelerated cardiac disease
process characterized by clinical deterioration and early death, perhaps representing one of
the most lethal cardiomyopathies in the young. Such an outcome occurred in our patients
despite application of the most contemporary treatment strategies, including the ICD (9) which failed to convert 5 patients to normal
rhythm.

The clinical presentation of LAMP2 cardiomyopathy mimics HCM caused by mutations
in genes encoding cardiac sarcomere proteins (1,2), as both are associated with marked LV hypertrophy.
However, while LAMP2 cardiomyopathy is a phenocopy of HCM, it represents a fundamentally
different pathologic process which results from a metabolic storage disease. In 2005, we
reported genetic diagnosis in the present 7 patients with LAMP2 mutations (1), and in the ensuing and relatively brief 3-year period
prospectively recognized that these patients had all experienced adverse and lethal disease
consequences. Specifically, each patient evolved into an end-stage phase characterized by LV
systolic dysfunction with dilated and/or enlarging cavity size (10), and experienced severe outcome: sudden death, heart failure
death, heart transplantation or an appropriate ICD intervention triggered by rapid
ventricular tachyarrhythmia (9) at youthful ages of 12
to 24 years. Of note, the patients presented here with LAMP2 cardiomyopathy demonstrated a
clinical profile dominated by cardiac manifestations, largely without evidence of
multisystem disease (e.g., mental retardation, hepatic involvement, and overt skeletal
myopathy) reported in other patients with Danon disease (2–7). These observations underscore
the heterogeneous clinical expression of LAMP2 mutations.

Reliably predicting future clinical events and prognosis in HCM by genetic testing
for sarcomeric mutations has proved challenging in HCM (11–13). LAMP2 cardiomyopathy
appears to represent an exception. Although the clinical outcome in our relatively small
cohort was uniformly adverse, we should emphasize that this is not necessarily
characteristic of all patients affected by LAMP2 mutations given the heterogeneity in
disease expression and clinical course which has been reported in some affected relatives
experiencing a generally more benign course (2,3). Indeed, 7 female LAMP2 obligate carriers (age range
19–51 years) in 2 of the families remain asymptomatic, and at present have not
developed LV hypertrophy or systolic dysfunction, underscoring the striking differences in
clinical phenotypes and outcomes between female carriers and affected males with LAMP2
mutations (2,4,5,7).

The early experience with the distinctive natural history and prognosis of
patients with LAMP2 mutations establishes the importance of molecular diagnosis and
underscores the utility of genetic testing. In this regard, a high index of suspicion should
be raised for LAMP2 cardiomyopathy (and genetic testing) in young patients demonstrating
massive LV hypertrophy and distinctive ECG patterns with greatly increased voltages. These
observations also raise legitimate consideration for early intervention with heart
transplantation (4,15) as a treatment for LAMP2 cardiomyopathy, probably when LV systolic dysfunction
intervenes, despite the possibility of extra-cardiac organ involvement in this disease
(3,4).

The present observations also provide insight into the phenotypic and pathologic
expression of LAMP2 cardiomyopathy. Despite youthful age, most of our patients with this
metabolic storage disease showed particularly massive LV hypertrophy, and two had the most
substantial hypertrophy reported in man (16–18). Histopathology of the
hypertrophied LV showed a hybrid architecture with features of traditional HCM due to
sarcomere protein mutations (i.e., myocyte disarray, intramural small vessel disease, and
myocardial scarring including subepicardial distribution) (17,19–21), but also distinctive evidence of a storage process in which
clusters of numerous vacuolated and vesicle-like myocytes were embedded in areas of
replacement fibrosis. The material contents of these myocytes could not be defined on the
available postmortem tissue. However, a murine model of LAMP2 cardiomyopathy has
demonstrated the accumulation of non-specific, partially degraded biologic material
(presumably lysosomal cellular debris), in large vacuoles indicative of impaired autophagy
and associated with only a modest elevation in cardiac glycogen (22).

In conclusion, LAMP2 cardiomyopathy in young patients appears to be a lethal
genetic disease. The clinical resemblance of LAMP2 to sarcomeric HCM underscores the
necessity and power of timely genetic testing in young patients with substantial LV
hypertrophy for early molecular identification of this myocardial storage disease
characterized by adverse clinical course.
