---
reference_id: "PMID:37978175"
title: Mutation of key signaling regulators of cerebrovascular development in vein of Galen malformations.
authors:
- Zhao S
- Mekbib KY
- van der Ent MA
- Allington G
- Prendergast A
- Chau JE
- Smith H
- Shohfi J
- Ocken J
- Duran D
- Furey CG
- Hao LT
- Duy PQ
- Reeves BC
- Zhang J
- Nelson-Williams C
- Chen D
- Li B
- Nottoli T
- Bai S
- Rolle M
- Zeng X
- Dong W
- Fu PY
- Wang YC
- Mane S
- Piwowarczyk P
- Fehnel KP
- See AP
- Iskandar BJ
- Aagaard-Kienitz B
- Moyer QJ
- Dennis E
- Kiziltug E
- Kundishora AJ
- DeSpenza T Jr
- Greenberg ABW
- Kidanemariam SM
- Hale AT
- Johnston JM
- Jackson EM
- Storm PB
- Lang SS
- Butler WE
- Carter BS
- Chapman P
- Stapleton CJ
- Patel AB
- Rodesch G
- Smajda S
- Berenstein A
- Barak T
- Erson-Omay EZ
- Zhao H
- Moreno-De-Luca A
- Proctor MR
- Smith ER
- Orbach DB
- Alper SL
- Nicoli S
- Boggon TJ
- Lifton RP
- Gunel M
- King PD
- Jin SC
- Kahle KT
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-43062-z
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Mice
- "Vein of Galen Malformations/genetics, pathology"
- Endothelial Cells/pathology
- Mutation
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- GTPase-Activating Proteins/genetics
- Vascular Diseases
- "Activin Receptors, Type II/genetics"
- p120 GTPase Activating Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation of key signaling regulators of cerebrovascular development in vein of Galen malformations.
**Authors:** Zhao S, Mekbib KY, van der Ent MA, Allington G, Prendergast A, Chau JE, Smith H, Shohfi J, Ocken J, Duran D, Furey CG, Hao LT, Duy PQ, Reeves BC, Zhang J, Nelson-Williams C, Chen D, Li B, Nottoli T, Bai S, Rolle M, Zeng X, Dong W, Fu PY, Wang YC, Mane S, Piwowarczyk P, Fehnel KP, See AP, Iskandar BJ, Aagaard-Kienitz B, Moyer QJ, Dennis E, Kiziltug E, Kundishora AJ, DeSpenza T Jr, Greenberg ABW, Kidanemariam SM, Hale AT, Johnston JM, Jackson EM, Storm PB, Lang SS, Butler WE, Carter BS, Chapman P, Stapleton CJ, Patel AB, Rodesch G, Smajda S, Berenstein A, Barak T, Erson-Omay EZ, Zhao H, Moreno-De-Luca A, Proctor MR, Smith ER, Orbach DB, Alper SL, Nicoli S, Boggon TJ, Lifton RP, Gunel M, King PD, Jin SC, Kahle KT
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-023-43062-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43062-z)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2023 Nov 17;14(1):7452. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-43062-z.

Mutation of key signaling regulators of cerebrovascular development in vein of 
Galen malformations.

Zhao S(#)(1)(2), Mekbib KY(#)(2)(3), van der Ent MA(#)(4), Allington G(#)(2)(5), 
Prendergast A(6), Chau JE(7), Smith H(2)(3), Shohfi J(2)(3), Ocken J(3), Duran 
D(8), Furey CG(3)(9)(10), Hao LT(2), Duy PQ(11), Reeves BC(3), Zhang J(12), 
Nelson-Williams C(12), Chen D(4), Li B(13), Nottoli T(14), Bai S(14), Rolle 
M(2), Zeng X(7)(15), Dong W(12)(15), Fu PY(1), Wang YC(1), Mane S(12), 
Piwowarczyk P(16), Fehnel KP(16), See AP(16), Iskandar BJ(17), Aagaard-Kienitz 
B(17)(18), Moyer QJ(2), Dennis E(2), Kiziltug E(2), Kundishora AJ(3), DeSpenza T 
Jr(3), Greenberg ABW(2), Kidanemariam SM(19), Hale AT(20), Johnston JM(20), 
Jackson EM(21), Storm PB(22)(23), Lang SS(22)(23), Butler WE(2), Carter BS(2), 
Chapman P(2), Stapleton CJ(2), Patel AB(2), Rodesch G(24)(25), Smajda S(25), 
Berenstein A(26), Barak T(3), Erson-Omay EZ(3), Zhao H(12)(13), Moreno-De-Luca 
A(27), Proctor MR(16), Smith ER(16), Orbach DB(16)(28), Alper SL(29), Nicoli 
S(12)(30)(31), Boggon TJ(7)(30), Lifton RP(15), Gunel M(3), King PD(32), Jin 
SC(33)(34), Kahle KT(35)(36)(37)(38).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO, USA.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(6)Yale Zebrafish Research Core, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(7)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale School of Medicine, 
New Haven, CT, USA.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Mississippi Medical Center, 
Jackson, MS, USA.
(9)Department of Neurosurgery, Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(10)Ivy Brain Tumor Center, Department of Translational Neuroscience, Barrow 
Neurological Institute, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(11)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Virginia School of Medicine, 
Charlottesville, VA, USA.
(12)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(13)Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT, 
USA.
(14)Yale Genome Editing Center, Department of Comparative Medicine, Yale School 
of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(15)Laboratory of Human Genetics and Genomics, The Rockefeller University, New 
York, NY, USA.
(16)Department of Neurosurgery, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(17)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Wisconsin School of 
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(18)Department of Radiology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(19)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of 
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(20)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Alabama School of Medicine, 
Birmingham, AL, USA.
(21)Department of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(22)Department of Neurosurgery, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(23)Division of Neurosurgery, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.
(24)Service de Neuroradiologie Diagnostique et Thérapeutique, Hôpital Foch, 
Suresnes, France.
(25)Department of Interventional Neuroradiology, Hôpital Fondation A. de 
Rothschild, Paris, France.
(26)Department of Neurosurgery, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA.
(27)Department of Radiology, Autism & Developmental Medicine Institute, Genomic 
Medicine Institute, Geisinger, Danville, PA, USA.
(28)Department of Neurointerventional Radiology, Boston Children's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(29)Division of Nephrology and Center for Vascular Biology Research, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, and Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(30)Department of Pharmacology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(31)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Section of Cardiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(32)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. kingp@umich.edu.
(33)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO, USA. jin810@wustl.edu.
(34)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO, USA. jin810@wustl.edu.
(35)Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA. Kahle.Kristopher@mgh.harvard.edu.
(36)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 
Kahle.Kristopher@mgh.harvard.edu.
(37)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, 
US. Kahle.Kristopher@mgh.harvard.edu.
(38)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
Kahle.Kristopher@mgh.harvard.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

To elucidate the pathogenesis of vein of Galen malformations (VOGMs), the most 
common and most severe of congenital brain arteriovenous malformations, we 
performed an integrated analysis of 310 VOGM proband-family exomes and 336,326 
human cerebrovasculature single-cell transcriptomes. We found the Ras suppressor 
p120 RasGAP (RASA1) harbored a genome-wide significant burden of 
loss-of-function de novo variants (2042.5-fold, p = 4.79 x 10-7). Rare, damaging 
transmitted variants were enriched in Ephrin receptor-B4 (EPHB4) (17.5-fold, 
p = 1.22 x 10-5), which cooperates with p120 RasGAP to regulate vascular 
development. Additional probands had damaging variants in ACVRL1, NOTCH1, ITGB1, 
and PTPN11. ACVRL1 variants were also identified in a multi-generational VOGM 
pedigree. Integrative genomic analysis defined developing endothelial cells as a 
likely spatio-temporal locus of VOGM pathophysiology. Mice expressing a 
VOGM-specific EPHB4 kinase-domain missense variant (Phe867Leu) exhibited 
disrupted developmental angiogenesis and impaired hierarchical development of 
arterial-capillary-venous networks, but only in the presence of a "second-hit" 
allele. These results illuminate human arterio-venous development and VOGM 
pathobiology and have implications for patients and their families.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-43062-z
PMCID: PMC10656524
PMID: 37978175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.