---
reference_id: "PMID:39988782"
title: Genetic Predisposition and Severity of Eating Disorders- A Review.
authors:
- Rashid MH
- Deora N
- Kolur SR
- Malini SS
- Sen P
journal: CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets
year: '2025'
doi: 10.2174/0118715273372810250214054917
keywords:
- Humans
- Feeding and Eating Disorders/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor/genetics
- Animals
- Ghrelin/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Predisposition and Severity of Eating Disorders- A Review.
**Authors:** Rashid MH, Deora N, Kolur SR, Malini SS, Sen P
**Journal:** CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets (2025)
**DOI:** [10.2174/0118715273372810250214054917](https://doi.org/10.2174/0118715273372810250214054917)

## Content

1. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2025;24(7):498-510. doi:
10.2174/0118715273372810250214054917.

Genetic Predisposition and Severity of Eating Disorders- A Review.

Rashid MH(1), Deora N(2), Kolur SR(3), Malini SS(3), Sen P(1).

Author information:
(1)Vellore Institute of Technology, Centre for Bio Separation Technology (CBST),
Technology Tower, VIT University, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, 632014, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, School of Basic and Applied Sciences, Dayananda
Sagar University, Bengaluru, Karnataka, 560068, India.
(3)Department of Studies Genetics and Genomics (DSSGG), University of Mysore,
Mansagangotri Campus, Mysore, Karnataka, 570006, India.

Eating disorders (EDs) are multifaceted psychiatric conditions with significant
genetic, psychological, and environmental components. This review provides a
comprehensive analysis of the genetic underpinnings and key molecular pathways
contributing to anorexia nervosa (AN), bulimia nervosa (BN), and binge eating
disorder (BED). Genetic studies, particularly genome-wide association studies
(GWAS), have identified key loci associated with ED susceptibility, with
heritability estimates for these disorders ranging between 48% and 74%. Among
the critical genes explored, the Agouti-related protein (AGRP), ghrelin (GHRL),
and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) pathways emerge as pivotal
regulators of appetite control, energy balance, and reward systems, offering
insights into ED etiology. These pathways are modulated by environmental factors
and often dysregulated in individuals with EDs, linking abnormal eating
behaviors to disturbances in neurobiological functions. EDs also show a strong
association with comorbid psychiatric disorders, such as depression and anxiety,
and pose significant physical health risks, including cardiovascular disease and
metabolic disturbances. Exploring the intricate genetic and neurobiological
mechanisms underlying eating disorders (EDs) paves the way for more effective
prevention, early detection, and tailored treatment strategies. This review
highlights the potential of utilizing genetic insights to enhance diagnostic and
intervention strategies, ultimately leading to better outcomes for individuals
impacted by eating disorders.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/0118715273372810250214054917
PMID: 39988782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
