---
reference_id: "PMID:24100223"
title: "The effect of perinatal exposures on the infant: antidepressants and depression."
authors:
- Hanley GE
- Oberlander TF
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2013.09.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The effect of perinatal exposures on the infant: antidepressants and depression.
**Authors:** Hanley GE, Oberlander TF
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2013.09.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2013.09.001)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol. 2014 Jan;28(1):37-48. doi: 
10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2013.09.001. Epub 2013 Sep 18.

The effect of perinatal exposures on the infant: antidepressants and depression.

Hanley GE(1), Oberlander TF(2).

Author information:
(1)Child and Family Research Institute, University of British Columbia, 948 West 
28th Ave, Vancouver, BC V5Z 4H4, Canada; School of Population and Public Health, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Electronic address: 
Gillian.Hanley@cw.bc.ca.
(2)Child and Family Research Institute, University of British Columbia, 948 West 
28th Ave, Vancouver, BC V5Z 4H4, Canada; School of Population and Public Health, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Electronic address: 
toberlander@cw.bc.ca.

Depression, anxiety, or both, during pregnancy are common complications during 
the perinatal period, with 15-20% of women experiencing depression at some point 
during their pregnancy. Considerable evidence suggests that untreated or 
undertreated maternal Axis I mood disorders can increase the risk for preterm 
birth, low birth weight, and alter neurobehavioral development in utero. 
Serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressants are often considered for antenatal 
therapy, with the goal of improving maternal mental health during pregnancy. 
Treatment with a serotonin-reuptake inhibitor, however, does not guarantee 
remission of depression, and in-utero serotonin reuptake inhibitor exposure has 
also been linked to increased risks for adverse infant outcomes. In this 
chapter, evidence linking serotonin reuptake inhibitor use with an increased 
risk for postnatal adaptation syndrome, congenital heart defects, and neonatal 
persistent pulmonary hypertension is reviewed. Management decisions should 
include attention to the continuum of depression symptoms, from subclinical to 
severe major depressive disorder and the long-term developmental risks that 
might also be associated with pre- and postnatal exposure.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2013.09.001
PMID: 24100223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]