---
reference_id: "PMID:37565864"
title: "Adult granulosa cell tumor of the testis with malignant tendency: A case report with genetic analysis using high-throughput sequencing."
authors:
- Deng L
- Zeng J
- Qiu JF
- Yang LH
- Ma J
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000034523
keywords:
- Male
- Female
- Humans
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- "Granulosa Cell Tumor/genetics, surgery, drug therapy"
- "Testicular Neoplasms/genetics, surgery, drug therapy"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Ovarian Neoplasms/drug therapy
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult granulosa cell tumor of the testis with malignant tendency: A case report with genetic analysis using high-throughput sequencing.
**Authors:** Deng L, Zeng J, Qiu JF, Yang LH, Ma J
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000034523](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000034523)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2023 Aug 11;102(32):e34523. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000034523.

Adult granulosa cell tumor of the testis with malignant tendency: A case report 
with genetic analysis using high-throughput sequencing.

Deng L(1), Zeng J(2), Qiu JF(1), Yang LH(1), Ma J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, Guangxi Province, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, Guangxi Province, China.

BACKGROUND: The adult granulosa cell tumor of the testis is a rare 
sex-cord/stromal tumor, with a potentiality for late recurrence and metastasis. 
Because of its rarity, this tumor is poorly understood, particularly in terms of 
its molecular features. As a result, it is necessary to register each occurrence 
in order to study the evolution of this rare malignancy and develop therapeutic 
strategies.
METHODS: A 50-year-old man discovered a painless right testicular mass 
unexpectedly, and the mass steadily expanded for 2 months. Ultrasonography 
showed a 5.2 cm × 4.0 cm × 3.6 cm mass in the right testicle. A right radical 
orchiectomy was performed on September 7, 2016. The pathologic diagnosis was a 
testicular adult granulosa cell tumor. The post-computed tomography scans and 
bone scintigraphy ruled out distant metastases. A high-throughput sequencing of 
520 cancer-related genes revealed FOXL2 C134W, CDKN2A E87Gfs*24, TP53 S183*, 
TERT c.-124C > T, and H3F3A K28R mutations in this case. Because the patient 
stated he would be unable to return to the hospital for a follow-up appointment 
on time, he elected to have 4 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy BEP (bleomycin, 
etoposide, and cisplatin) after the right radical orchiectomy.
RESULTS: The patient has not had a clinical recurrence or metastasis in 6 years.
CONCLUSION: Surgery together with adjuvant chemotherapy may be useful treatment 
options for these individuals with malignant tendencies who are unable to visit 
the hospital for a follow-up appointment on time. Adult testicular granulosa 
cell tumors have a relatively complex genetic profile; their etiology is linked 
to a number of common driver genes, including TERT, CDKN2A, TP53, and H3F3A.

Copyright © 2023 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000034523
PMCID: PMC10419672
PMID: 37565864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.