---
reference_id: "PMID:38703603"
title: Dissecting the genetic and causal relationship between sleep-related traits and common brain disorders.
authors:
- Xue B
- Jian X
- Peng L
- Wu C
- Fahira A
- Syed AAS
- Xia D
- Wang B
- Niu M
- Jiang Y
- Ding Y
- Gao C
- Zhao X
- Zhang Q
- Shi Y
- Li Z
journal: Sleep Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2024.04.032
keywords:
- Humans
- Mendelian Randomization Analysis
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Linkage Disequilibrium
- Brain Diseases/genetics
- Sleep Wake Disorders/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dissecting the genetic and causal relationship between sleep-related traits and common brain disorders.
**Authors:** Xue B, Jian X, Peng L, Wu C, Fahira A, Syed AAS, Xia D, Wang B, Niu M, Jiang Y, Ding Y, Gao C, Zhao X, Zhang Q, Shi Y, Li Z
**Journal:** Sleep Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.sleep.2024.04.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sleep.2024.04.032)

## Content

1. Sleep Med. 2024 Jul;119:201-209. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2024.04.032. Epub 2024
Apr  27.

Dissecting the genetic and causal relationship between sleep-related traits and
common brain disorders.

Xue B(1), Jian X(2), Peng L(3), Wu C(4), Fahira A(5), Syed AAS(5), Xia D(5),
Wang B(3), Niu M(1), Jiang Y(1), Ding Y(1), Gao C(6), Zhao X(6), Zhang Q(6), Shi
Y(7), Li Z(8).

Author information:
(1)The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, The Biomedical Sciences
Institute of Qingdao University (Qingdao Branch of SJTU Bio-X Institutes),
Qingdao University, Qingdao, 266003, China; School of Public Health, Qingdao
University, Qingdao, China.
(2)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), the Collaborative Innovation
Center for Brain Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200030,
China. Electronic address: jian13238440365@sjtu.edu.cn.
(3)The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, The Biomedical Sciences
Institute of Qingdao University (Qingdao Branch of SJTU Bio-X Institutes),
Qingdao University, Qingdao, 266003, China; School of Pharmacy, Qingdao
University, Qingdao, 266003, China.
(4)The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, The Biomedical Sciences
Institute of Qingdao University (Qingdao Branch of SJTU Bio-X Institutes),
Qingdao University, Qingdao, 266003, China; School of Basic Medicine, Qingdao
University, Qingdao, 266003, China.
(5)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), the Collaborative Innovation
Center for Brain Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200030,
China.
(6)The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, The Biomedical Sciences
Institute of Qingdao University (Qingdao Branch of SJTU Bio-X Institutes),
Qingdao University, Qingdao, 266003, China.
(7)The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, The Biomedical Sciences
Institute of Qingdao University (Qingdao Branch of SJTU Bio-X Institutes),
Qingdao University, Qingdao, 266003, China; Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for
the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of
Education), the Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, 200030, China; School of Basic Medicine, Qingdao
University, Qingdao, 266003, China; Shanghai Clinical Research Center for Mental
Health, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health
Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200030,
China; Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Metabolic Disease & the Metabolic
Disease Institute of Qingdao University, Qingdao, 266003, China; Institute of
Social Cognitive and Behavioral Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, 200030, China; Institute of Neuropsychiatric Science and Systems
Biological Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200030, China;
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Sleep Disordered Breathing, Shanghai, 200030, China;
Department of Psychiatry, the First Teaching Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi, 830054, China; Changning Mental Health Center, Shanghai,
200042, China. Electronic address: shiyongyong@gmail.com.
(8)The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, The Biomedical Sciences
Institute of Qingdao University (Qingdao Branch of SJTU Bio-X Institutes),
Qingdao University, Qingdao, 266003, China; School of Public Health, Qingdao
University, Qingdao, China; Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of
Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), the
Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, 200030, China; School of Pharmacy, Qingdao University,
Qingdao, 266003, China; School of Basic Medicine, Qingdao University, Qingdao,
266003, China; Shanghai Clinical Research Center for Mental Health, Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200030, China; Shandong Provincial
Key Laboratory of Metabolic Disease & the Metabolic Disease Institute of Qingdao
University, Qingdao, 266003, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Sleep Disordered
Breathing, Shanghai, 200030, China. Electronic address: lizqsjtu@163.com.

BACKGROUND: There is a profound connection between abnormal sleep patterns and
brain disorders, suggesting a shared influential association. However, the
shared genetic basis and potential causal relationships between sleep-related
traits and brain disorders are yet to be fully elucidated.
METHODS: Utilizing linkage disequilibrium score regression (LDSC) and
bidirectional two-sample univariable Mendelian Randomization (UVMR) analyses
with large-scale GWAS datasets, we investigated the genetic correlations and
causal associations across six sleep traits and 24 prevalent brain disorders.
Additionally, a multivariable Mendelian Randomization (MVMR) analysis evaluated
the cumulative effects of various sleep traits on each brain disorder,
complemented by genetic loci characterization to pinpoint pertinent genes and
pathways.
RESULTS: LDSC analysis identified significant genetic correlations in 66 out of
144 (45.8 %) pairs between sleep-related traits and brain disorders, with the
most pronounced correlations observed in psychiatric disorders (66 %, 48/72).
UVMR analysis identified 29 causal relationships (FDR<0.05) between sleep traits
and brain disorders, with 19 associations newly discovered according to our
knowledge. Notably, major depression, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder,
bipolar disorder, cannabis use disorder, and anorexia nervosa showed
bidirectional causal relations with sleep traits, especially insomnia's marked
influence on major depression (IVW beta 0.468, FDR = 5.24E-09). MVMR analysis
revealed a nuanced interplay among various sleep traits and their impact on
brain disorders. Genetic loci characterization underscored potential genes, such
as HOXB2, while further enrichment analyses illuminated the importance of
synaptic processes in these relationships.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides compelling evidence for the causal
relationships and shared genetic backgrounds between common sleep-related traits
and brain disorders.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2024.04.032
PMID: 38703603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
