---
reference_id: "PMID:27000652"
title: RELN and VLDLR mutations underlie two distinguishable clinico-radiological phenotypes.
authors:
- Valence S
- Garel C
- Barth M
- Toutain A
- Paris C
- Amsallem D
- Barthez MA
- Mayer M
- Rodriguez D
- Burglen L
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/cge.12779
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Cell Adhesion Molecules, Neuronal/genetics"
- "Cerebellum/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Developmental Disabilities/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology"
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Mutation
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- "Nervous System Malformations/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology"
- Phenotype
- "Receptors, LDL/genetics"
- Reelin Protein
- Serine Endopeptidases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RELN and VLDLR mutations underlie two distinguishable clinico-radiological phenotypes.
**Authors:** Valence S, Garel C, Barth M, Toutain A, Paris C, Amsallem D, Barthez MA, Mayer M, Rodriguez D, Burglen L
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.12779](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.12779)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2016 Dec;90(6):545-549. doi: 10.1111/cge.12779. Epub 2016 Apr 29.

RELN and VLDLR mutations underlie two distinguishable clinico-radiological
phenotypes.

Valence S(1)(2)(3), Garel C(1)(4), Barth M(5), Toutain A(6), Paris C(7),
Amsallem D(7), Barthez MA(8), Mayer M(2), Rodriguez D(1)(2)(3), Burglen
L(1)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)APHP, GHUEP, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Centre de Référence 'Malformations et
maladies congénitales du cervelet', Paris, France.
(2)APHP, GHUEP, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Service de Neuropédiatrie, Paris,
France.
(3)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Université Paris 06, GRC-UPMC ConCer-LD, Paris,
France.
(4)APHP, GHUEP, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Service de Radiologie, Paris, France.
(5)Service de Génétique, CHU d'Angers, Angers, France.
(6)Service de Génétique, CHU de Tours, and UMR_INSERM U930, Faculté de Médecine,
Université François Rabelais, Tours, France.
(7)Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, CHU J Minjoz, Besançon, France.
(8)Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, CHU de Tours, Tours, France.
(9)Neuroprotection du cerveau en développement, INSERM U1141, Paris, France.
(10)APHP, GHUEP, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Département de Génétique, Paris,
France.

Pontocerebellar hypoplasias (PCH) are characterized by lack of development
and/or early neurodegeneration of cerebellum and brainstem. We report five
patients referred for PCH, showing atypical clinical and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) features suggestive of defects in the Reelin pathway. We screened
for mutations in RELN or VLDLR and compared the phenotype of these patients with
that of previously reported patients. All patients had profound cerebellar
hypoplasia on MRI with peculiar cerebellar morphology, associated with flattened
pons and neocortical abnormalities. Patient 1 had profound motor and
intellectual disability with moderate lissencephaly suggestive of RELN mutations
and was shown to harbor a splicing homozygous RELN mutation. The four other
patients had a milder phenotype consistent with CARMQ1 (cerebellar ataxia and
mental retardation with or without quadrupedal locomotion). These patients
showed mild simplification or thickening of cortical gyration and had VLDLR
mutations. Reelin signaling regulates neuronal migration in the developing
mammalian brain. VLDLR is a key component of the Reelin pathway. Our patients
had a very small and dysplatic cerebellar vermis that should suggest the
involvement of these genes. Moreover, differences in clinical severity,
involvement of the cerebellar hemispheres, together with the severity of the
neocortical defect, enables RELN-mutated patients to be distinguished from
VLDLR-mutated patients.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.12779
PMID: 27000652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
