---
reference_id: "PMID:32873933"
title: DOORS syndrome and a recurrent truncating ATP6V1B2 variant.
authors:
- Beauregard-Lacroix E
- Pacheco-Cuellar G
- Ajeawung NF
- Tardif J
- Dieterich K
- Dabir T
- Vind-Kezunovic D
- White SM
- Zadori D
- Castiglioni C
- Tranebjærg L
- Tørring PM
- Blair E
- Wisniewska M
- Camurri MV
- van Bever Y
- Molidperee S
- Taylor J
- Dionne-Laporte A
- Sisodiya SM
- Hennekam RCM
- Campeau PM
journal: Genet Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41436-020-00950-9
keywords:
- Epilepsy/genetics
- Exome
- GTPase-Activating Proteins
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- "Nails, Malformed/genetics"
- Phenotype
- Vacuolar Proton-Translocating ATPases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DOORS syndrome and a recurrent truncating ATP6V1B2 variant.
**Authors:** Beauregard-Lacroix E, Pacheco-Cuellar G, Ajeawung NF, Tardif J, Dieterich K, Dabir T, Vind-Kezunovic D, White SM, Zadori D, Castiglioni C, Tranebjærg L, Tørring PM, Blair E, Wisniewska M, Camurri MV, van Bever Y, Molidperee S, Taylor J, Dionne-Laporte A, Sisodiya SM, Hennekam RCM, Campeau PM
**Journal:** Genet Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41436-020-00950-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41436-020-00950-9)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2021 Jan;23(1):149-154. doi: 10.1038/s41436-020-00950-9. Epub 2020 
Sep 2.

DOORS syndrome and a recurrent truncating ATP6V1B2 variant.

Beauregard-Lacroix E(1), Pacheco-Cuellar G(1), Ajeawung NF(2), Tardif J(1), 
Dieterich K(3), Dabir T(4), Vind-Kezunovic D(5), White SM(6), Zadori D(7), 
Castiglioni C(8), Tranebjærg L(9)(10), Tørring PM(11), Blair E(12), Wisniewska 
M(13), Camurri MV(1), van Bever Y(14), Molidperee S(2), Taylor J(15), 
Dionne-Laporte A(16), Sisodiya SM(17)(18), Hennekam RCM(19), Campeau PM(20).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Division, Department of Pediatrics, Sainte-Justine 
University Hospital Center, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)CHU Sainte Justine Research Center, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, 
Canada.
(3)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inserm, U1216, CHU Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble Institut 
Neurosciences (GIN), Grenoble, France.
(4)Department of Genetic Medicine, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, Northern 
Ireland, UK.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Copenhagen University Hospital Bispebjerg, 
Copenhagen, NV, Denmark.
(6)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
Melbourne, Australia.
(7)Department of Neurology, Interdisciplinary Excellence Center, Faculty of 
Medicine, Albert Szent-Györgyi Clinical Center, University of Szeged, Szeged, 
Hungary.
(8)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Clínica Las Condes, Santiago, Chile.
(9)The Kennedy Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University 
Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(10)Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(11)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, 
Denmark.
(12)Oxford Regional Genetics Service, Oxford University Hospitals, Oxford, UK.
(13)Department of Medical Genetics, Poznañ University of Medical Sciences, 
Poznañ, Poland.
(14)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(15)Genetic Health Service New Zealand-Northern Hub, Auckland, New Zealand.
(16)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute, 
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(17)Department of Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy, UCL Queen Square Institute 
of Neurology, London, UK.
(18)Chalfont Centre for Epilepsy, Bucks, UK.
(19)Department of Pediatrics, Amsterdam University Medical Center, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands.
(20)Medical Genetics Division, Department of Pediatrics, Sainte-Justine 
University Hospital Center, Montreal, QC, Canada. p.campeau@umontreal.ca.

Erratum in
    Genet Med. 2021 Jan;23(1):237. doi: 10.1038/s41436-020-00969-y.

Comment in
    Genet Med. 2021 Aug;23(8):1578-1579. doi: 10.1038/s41436-021-01167-0.
    Genet Med. 2021 Aug;23(8):1580-1581. doi: 10.1038/s41436-021-01168-z.

PURPOSE: Biallelic variants in TBC1D24, which encodes a protein that regulates 
vesicular transport, are frequently identified in patients with DOORS (deafness, 
onychodystrophy, osteodystrophy, intellectual disability [previously referred to 
as mental retardation], and seizures) syndrome. The aim of the study was to 
identify a genetic cause in families with DOORS syndrome and without a TBC1D24 
variant.
METHODS: Exome or Sanger sequencing was performed in individuals with a clinical 
diagnosis of DOORS syndrome without TBC1D24 variants.
RESULTS: We identified the same truncating variant in ATP6V1B2 
(NM_001693.4:c.1516C>T; p.Arg506*) in nine individuals from eight unrelated 
families with DOORS syndrome. This variant was already reported in individuals 
with dominant deafness onychodystrophy (DDOD) syndrome. Deafness was present in 
all individuals, along with onychodystrophy and abnormal fingers and/or toes. 
All families but one had developmental delay or intellectual disability and five 
individuals had epilepsy. We also describe two additional families with DDOD 
syndrome in whom the same variant was found.
CONCLUSION: We expand the phenotype associated with ATP6V1B2 and propose another 
causal gene for DOORS syndrome. This finding suggests that DDOD and DOORS 
syndromes might lie on a spectrum of clinically and molecularly 
related conditions.

DOI: 10.1038/s41436-020-00950-9
PMID: 32873933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]