---
reference_id: "PMID:30537913"
title: "Repetitive Behaviors in Frontotemporal Dementia: Compulsions or Impulsions?"
authors:
- Moheb N
- Charuworn K
- Ashla MM
- Desarzant R
- Chavez D
- Mendez MF
journal: J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1176/appi.neuropsych.18060148
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Repetitive Behaviors in Frontotemporal Dementia: Compulsions or Impulsions?
**Authors:** Moheb N, Charuworn K, Ashla MM, Desarzant R, Chavez D, Mendez MF
**Journal:** J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1176/appi.neuropsych.18060148](https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.neuropsych.18060148)

## Content

1. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2019 Spring;31(2):132-136. doi: 
10.1176/appi.neuropsych.18060148. Epub 2018 Dec 12.

Repetitive Behaviors in Frontotemporal Dementia: Compulsions or Impulsions?

Moheb N(1), Charuworn K(1), Ashla MM(1), Desarzant R(1), Chavez D(1), Mendez 
MF(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Neurology (Moheb, Ashla, Mendez) and Psychiatry and 
Biobehavioral Sciences (Charuworn, Mendez), David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California at Los Angeles; and the Neurobehavior Unit, VA Greater 
Los Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles (Desarzant, Chavez, Mendez).

OBJECTIVE: The presence of repetitive behaviors is one of the core criteria for 
behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD). Patients with bvFTD often 
have perseverative, stereotyped, or compulsive-ritualistic behavior as an early 
aspect of their disorder. It is unclear whether such behaviors are related to 
compulsions, as in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), or are part of the 
impulse disorder spectrum.
METHODS: The authors investigated early (within 3 years) repetitive behaviors 
among 93 well-characterized patients who met International Consensus Criteria 
for clinically probable bvFTD and compared the results with the literature on 
OCD. The most common repetitive behaviors among 59 (63.4%) bvFTD patients were 
stereotypies of speech (35.5%), simple repetitive movements (15.2%-18.6%), 
hoarding and collecting (16.9%), and excessive or unnecessary trips to the 
bathroom (13.5%).
RESULTS: Only hoarding and collecting was significantly common in both bvFTD and 
OCD; otherwise, the bvFTD patients had very low frequencies of the common OCD 
behaviors of checking, cleaning, counting, and ordering. The repetitive 
behaviors in bvFTD were not associated with verbalized anxiety, obsessional 
ideation, or reports of relief after completing the act. In contrast, these 
behaviors were often triggered by environmental stimuli and could be temporarily 
prevented from completion without undue distress. Finally, among the bvFTD 
patients, the repetitive behaviors were always associated with impulsive or 
disinhibited behaviors, such as inappropriate verbal or physical behavior.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the repetitive behaviors in bvFTD are 
repetitive impulsions, possibly from specific involvement of 
frontostriatal-anterior temporal pathology.

DOI: 10.1176/appi.neuropsych.18060148
PMCID: PMC6535208
PMID: 30537913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]