---
reference_id: "PMID:36222212"
title: Sebaceous gland atrophy in seborrheic dermatitis of the scalp; a pilot study.
authors:
- Nagrani NS
- Goldberg LJ
journal: J Cutan Pathol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/cup.14300
keywords:
- Alopecia/pathology
- Atrophy/pathology
- "Dermatitis, Seborrheic/pathology"
- Humans
- Pilot Projects
- Psoriasis/pathology
- Retrospective Studies
- Scalp/pathology
- Sebaceous Glands/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sebaceous gland atrophy in seborrheic dermatitis of the scalp; a pilot study.
**Authors:** Nagrani NS, Goldberg LJ
**Journal:** J Cutan Pathol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cup.14300](https://doi.org/10.1111/cup.14300)

## Content

1. J Cutan Pathol. 2022 Nov;49(11):988-992. doi: 10.1111/cup.14300. Epub 2022 Aug
 18.

Sebaceous gland atrophy in seborrheic dermatitis of the scalp; a pilot study.

Nagrani NS(1), Goldberg LJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Dermatopathology, Department of Dermatology, Boston University 
Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND: Sebaceous gland (SG) atrophy is well-documented in scalp lesions of 
psoriasis and has been considered as an important clue to psoriatic alopecia. 
However, its specificity for psoriasis has been questioned over the years. We 
hypothesize that SG atrophy is not specific for psoriasis and looked for its 
presence in biopsies of seborrheic dermatitis of the scalp.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective study of biopsy specimens of clinically 
suspected and histopathologically proven seborrheic dermatitis of the scalp for 
changes in SGs between January 1, 2014 and August 6, 2021.
RESULTS: SGs lobules were smaller and narrower in five of the six cases of 
seborrheic dermatitis, and SG atrophy was present in four out of six cases.
CONCLUSIONS: SG atrophy is observed in seborrheic dermatitis and is not specific 
for psoriasis or psoriatic alopecia.

© 2022 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cup.14300
PMID: 36222212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]