---
reference_id: "PMID:31098895"
title: "Tafamidis: A Review in Transthyretin Amyloidosis with Polyneuropathy."
authors:
- Lamb YN
- Deeks ED
journal: Drugs
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s40265-019-01129-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tafamidis: A Review in Transthyretin Amyloidosis with Polyneuropathy.
**Authors:** Lamb YN, Deeks ED
**Journal:** Drugs (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40265-019-01129-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40265-019-01129-6)

## Content

1. Drugs. 2019 Jun;79(8):863-874. doi: 10.1007/s40265-019-01129-6.

Tafamidis: A Review in Transthyretin Amyloidosis with Polyneuropathy.

Lamb YN(1), Deeks ED(2).

Author information:
(1)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, Auckland, 0754, New Zealand. 
demail@springer.com.
(2)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, Auckland, 0754, New Zealand.

Transthyretin amyloidosis with polyneuropathy (ATTR-PN), a rare and progressive 
hereditary disorder, results from mutations in the gene coding for the 
transthyretin (TTR) protein that destabilize the protein's tetrameric structure. 
In over 40 countries worldwide, tafamidis (Vyndaqel®) is approved for the 
treatment of TTR amyloidosis in adults with stage 1 symptomatic polyneuropathy, 
to delay peripheral neurological impairment. Tafamidis is administered orally 
once daily, as a soft capsule. Evidence from clinical studies, including an 
18-month placebo-controlled trial and subsequent long-term, open-label extension 
studies (providing data from ≤ 6 years of treatment), indicate that tafamidis 
slowed deterioration of neurological function and maintained health-related 
quality of life in patients with early-stage ATTR-PN and the Val30Met mutation. 
TTR tetramers were stabilized in nearly all patients, and nutritional status was 
generally maintained or improved. Similar benefit was seen with tafamidis over 
12 months in a noncomparative trial in patients with non-Val30Met ATTR-PN, 
although disease progression in this population (which was older and had had 
ATTR-PN for longer than Val30Met patients) became more notable with continued 
therapy in an extension study. Data for up to 10 years from large registry and 
referral centre studies support the long-term effectiveness and safety of 
tafamidis in delaying disease progression and conferring survival benefits in 
patients with stage 1 ATTR-PN. Tafamidis was generally well tolerated, with no 
new safety signals detected during the long-term trial or real-world experience. 
Thus, based on up to 10 years' experience, tafamidis continues to be a valuable 
option in the treatment of early-stage ATTR-PN.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-019-01129-6
PMID: 31098895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]