---
reference_id: "PMID:37256147"
title: Arterial wall fibrosis in Takayasu arteritis and its potential for therapeutic modulation.
authors:
- Misra DP
- Singh K
- Sharma A
- Agarwal V
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1174249
keywords:
- Humans
- "Takayasu Arteritis/drug therapy, pathology"
- Interleukin-17
- Interleukin-6/metabolism
- Tissue Inhibitor of Metalloproteinase-1
- Giant Cell Arteritis/pathology
- Inflammation
- Transforming Growth Factor beta
- Fibrosis
- Mechanistic Target of Rapamycin Complex 1
- Membrane Glycoproteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arterial wall fibrosis in Takayasu arteritis and its potential for therapeutic modulation.
**Authors:** Misra DP, Singh K, Sharma A, Agarwal V
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1174249](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1174249)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 May 15;14:1174249. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1174249.
eCollection 2023.

Arterial wall fibrosis in Takayasu arteritis and its potential for therapeutic
modulation.

Misra DP(1), Singh K(1), Sharma A(2), Agarwal V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Sanjay Gandhi
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences (SGPGIMS), Lucknow, India.
(2)Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology Services, Department of Internal
Medicine, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER),
Chandigarh, India.

Arterial wall damage in Takayasu arteritis (TAK) can progress despite
immunosuppressive therapy. Vascular fibrosis is more prominent in TAK than in
giant cell arteritis (GCA). The inflamed arterial wall in TAK is infiltrated by
M1 macrophages [which secrete interleukin-6 (IL-6)], which transition to M2
macrophages once the inflammation settles. M2 macrophages secrete transforming
growth factor beta (TGF-β) and glycoprotein non-metastatic melanoma protein B
(GPNMB), both of which can activate fibroblasts in the arterial wall adventitia.
Mast cells in the arterial wall of TAK also activate resting adventitial
fibroblasts. Th17 lymphocytes play a role in both TAK and GCA. Sub-populations
of Th17 lymphocytes, Th17.1 lymphocytes [which secrete interferon gamma (IFN-γ)
in addition to interleukin-17 (IL-17)] and programmed cell death 1
(PD1)-expressing Th17 (which secrete TGF-β), have been described in TAK but not
in GCA. IL-6 and IL-17 also drive fibroblast activation in the arterial wall.
The Th17 and Th1 lymphocytes in TAK demonstrate an activation of mammalian
target organ of rapamycin 1 (mTORC1) driven by Notch-1 upregulation. A recent
study reported that the enhanced liver fibrosis score (derived from serum
hyaluronic acid, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1, and pro-collagen III
amino-terminal pro-peptide) had a moderate-to-strong correlation with clinically
assessed and angiographically assessed vascular damage. In vitro experiments
suggest the potential to target arterial wall fibrosis in TAK with leflunomide,
tofacitinib, baricitinib, or mTORC1 inhibitors. Since arterial wall inflammation
is followed by fibrosis, a strategy of combining immunosuppressive agents with
drugs that have an antifibrotic effect merits exploration in future clinical
trials of TAK.

Copyright © 2023 Misra, Singh, Sharma and Agarwal.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1174249
PMCID: PMC10225504
PMID: 37256147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
