---
reference_id: "PMID:25165714"
title: Pulmonary hypertension and right heart dysfunction in chronic lung disease.
authors:
- Zangiabadi A
- De Pasquale CG
- Sajkov D
journal: Biomed Res Int
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1155/2014/739674
keywords:
- "Echocardiography, Doppler"
- Endothelin Receptor Antagonists/therapeutic use
- "Heart Failure/drug therapy, etiology, physiopathology"
- Heart Ventricles/pathology
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/complications, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- "Lung Diseases, Interstitial/complications, drug therapy, pathology"
- Phosphodiesterase 5 Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Prostaglandins/therapeutic use
- "Pulmonary Disease, Chronic Obstructive/complications, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- "Sleep Apnea Syndromes/complications, drug therapy, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary hypertension and right heart dysfunction in chronic lung disease.
**Authors:** Zangiabadi A, De Pasquale CG, Sajkov D
**Journal:** Biomed Res Int (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2014/739674](https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/739674)

## Content

1. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:739674. doi: 10.1155/2014/739674. Epub 2014 Jul 24.

Pulmonary hypertension and right heart dysfunction in chronic lung disease.

Zangiabadi A(1), De Pasquale CG(2), Sajkov D(1).

Author information:
(1)Australian Respiratory and Sleep Medicine Institute, Flinders Medical Centre,
Bedford Park, Adelaide, SA 5042, Australia.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park, Adelaide, SA
5042, Australia.

Group 3 pulmonary hypertension (PH) is a common complication of chronic lung
disease (CLD), including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
interstitial lung disease, and sleep-disordered breathing. Development of PH is
associated with poor prognosis and may progress to right heart failure, however,
in the majority of the patients with CLD, PH is mild to moderate and only a
small number of patients develop severe PH. The pathophysiology of PH in CLD is
multifactorial and includes hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction, pulmonary
vascular remodeling, small vessel destruction, and fibrosis. The effects of PH
on the right ventricle (RV) range between early RV remodeling, hypertrophy,
dilatation, and eventual failure with associated increased mortality. The golden
standard for diagnosis of PH is right heart catheterization, however, evidence
of PH can be appreciated on clinical examination, serology, radiological
imaging, and Doppler echocardiography. Treatment of PH in CLD focuses on
management of the underlying lung disorder and hypoxia. There is, however,
limited evidence to suggest that PH-specific vasodilators such as
phosphodiesterase-type 5 inhibitors, endothelin receptor antagonists, and
prostanoids may have a role in the treatment of patients with CLD and
moderate-to-severe PH.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/739674
PMCID: PMC4140123
PMID: 25165714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]