---
reference_id: "PMID:26243569"
title: "A genetic cause of Alzheimer disease: mechanistic insights from Down syndrome."
authors:
- Wiseman FK
- Al-Janabi T
- Hardy J
- Karmiloff-Smith A
- Nizetic D
- Tybulewicz VL
- Fisher EM
- Strydom A
journal: Nat Rev Neurosci
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/nrn3983
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A genetic cause of Alzheimer disease: mechanistic insights from Down syndrome.
**Authors:** Wiseman FK, Al-Janabi T, Hardy J, Karmiloff-Smith A, Nizetic D, Tybulewicz VL, Fisher EM, Strydom A
**Journal:** Nat Rev Neurosci (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrn3983](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3983)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2015 Sep;16(9):564-74. doi: 10.1038/nrn3983. Epub 2015 Aug
5.

A genetic cause of Alzheimer disease: mechanistic insights from Down syndrome.

Wiseman FK(1), Al-Janabi T(2), Hardy J(3), Karmiloff-Smith A(4), Nizetic D(5), 
Tybulewicz VL(6), Fisher EM(1), Strydom A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, Institute of Neurology, University 
College London, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(2)Division of Psychiatry, University College London, Maple House, 149 Tottenham 
Court Road, London W1T 7NF, UK.
(3)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, University 
College London, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(4)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck, University of London, 
Malet Street, London WC1E 7HX, UK.
(5)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, Novena 
Campus, 11 Mandalay Road, Singapore 308232; and the Blizard Institute, Barts and 
the London School of Medicine, Queen Mary University of London, 4 Newark Street, 
London E1 2AT, UK.
(6)Francis Crick Institute, Mill Hill Laboratory, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Down syndrome, which arises in individuals carrying an extra copy of chromosome 
21, is associated with a greatly increased risk of early-onset Alzheimer 
disease. It is thought that this risk is conferred by the presence of three 
copies of the gene encoding amyloid precursor protein (APP)--an Alzheimer 
disease risk factor--although the possession of extra copies of other chromosome 
21 genes may also play a part. Further study of the mechanisms underlying the 
development of Alzheimer disease in people with Down syndrome could provide 
insights into the mechanisms that cause dementia in the general population.

DOI: 10.1038/nrn3983
PMCID: PMC4678594
PMID: 26243569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]