---
reference_id: "PMID:18179898"
title: Rare missense and synonymous variants in UBE1 are associated with X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy.
authors:
- Ramser J
- Ahearn ME
- Lenski C
- Yariz KO
- Hellebrand H
- von Rhein M
- Clark RD
- Schmutzler RK
- Lichtner P
- Hoffman EP
- Meindl A
- Baumbach-Reardon L
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2007.09.009
keywords:
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- "Genes, X-Linked"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- Spinal Muscular Atrophies of Childhood/genetics
- Ubiquitin-Activating Enzymes/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rare missense and synonymous variants in UBE1 are associated with X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy.
**Authors:** Ramser J, Ahearn ME, Lenski C, Yariz KO, Hellebrand H, von Rhein M, Clark RD, Schmutzler RK, Lichtner P, Hoffman EP, Meindl A, Baumbach-Reardon L
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2007.09.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2007.09.009)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Jan;82(1):188-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2007.09.009.

Rare missense and synonymous variants in UBE1 are associated with X-linked 
infantile spinal muscular atrophy.

Ramser J(1), Ahearn ME, Lenski C, Yariz KO, Hellebrand H, von Rhein M, Clark RD, 
Schmutzler RK, Lichtner P, Hoffman EP, Meindl A, Baumbach-Reardon L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Technical University Munich, 81675 
Munich, Germany.

X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy (XL-SMA) is an X-linked disorder 
presenting with the clinical features hypotonia, areflexia, and multiple 
congenital contractures (arthrogryposis) associated with loss of anterior horn 
cells and infantile death. To identify the XL-SMA disease gene, we performed 
large-scale mutation analysis in genes located between markers DXS8080 and 
DXS7132 (Xp11.3-Xq11.1). This resulted in detection of three rare novel variants 
in exon 15 of UBE1 that segregate with disease: two missense mutations (c.1617 
G-->T, p.Met539Ile; c.1639 A-->G, p.Ser547Gly) present each in one XL-SMA 
family, and one synonymous C-->T substitution (c.1731 C-->T, p.Asn577Asn) 
identified in another three unrelated families. Absence of the missense 
mutations was demonstrated for 3550 and absence of the synonymous mutation was 
shown in 7914 control X chromosomes; therefore, these results yielded 
statistical significant evidence for the association of the synonymous 
substitution and the two missense mutations with XL-SMA (p = 2.416 x 10(-10), p 
= 0.001815). We also demonstrated that the synonymous C-->T substitution leads 
to significant reduction of UBE1 expression and alters the methylation pattern 
of exon 15, implying a plausible role of this DNA element in developmental UBE1 
expression in humans. Our observations indicate first that XL-SMA is part of a 
growing list of neurodegenerative disorders associated with defects in the 
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway and second that synonymous C-->T transitions might 
have the potential to affect gene expression.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2007.09.009
PMCID: PMC2253959
PMID: 18179898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]