---
reference_id: "PMID:289343"
title: "Osteosarcoma: histological evaluation and grading."
authors:
- Meister P
- Konrad E
- Lob G
- Janka G
- Keyl W
- Stürz H
journal: Arch Orthop Trauma Surg (1978)
year: '1979'
doi: 10.1007/BF00433573
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteosarcoma: histological evaluation and grading.
**Authors:** Meister P, Konrad E, Lob G, Janka G, Keyl W, Stürz H
**Journal:** Arch Orthop Trauma Surg (1978) (1979)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00433573](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00433573)

## Content

1. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg (1978). 1979 Jul 31;94(2):91-8. doi:
10.1007/BF00433573.

Osteosarcoma: histological evaluation and grading.

Meister P, Konrad E, Lob G, Janka G, Keyl W, Stürz H.

With 60 cases of osteosarcomas a histological evaluation from + to +++ carried 
out for mitoses, osteoid formation, presence of multinucleated giant cells, and 
tumor necrosis. A subclassification in osteoblastic, chondroblastic, and 
fibroblastic type of osteosarcoma (according to Dahlin) and a histological 
grading from + to +++ based on degree of cellular atypism was also done. In our 
material no relations between these three types of osteosarcoma and chance for 
survival became evident. There was, however, a significant correlation between 
grade of atypism and rate of mitoses. Grading of oestosarcomas from + to +++ 
showed that cases with grade III osteosarcoma remained only seldomly without 
metastases during the course of the disease. Grade I osteosarcomas and also 
grade II tumors showed a higher number of patients with 2-year survival. 
However, neither correlation between tumor grade and incidence of metastases, 
nor with chances for survival were statistically significant. Nevertheless, 
characterization of osteosarcomas, by a histological grading from + to +++ based 
on cellular atypism and mitotic count is advisable, in addition to the TNM 
stages. This histological grading appeared to be more practicable than 
subclassifications of osteosarcoma by type which had been tested by us in a 
previous study (Konrad et al., in press).

DOI: 10.1007/BF00433573
PMID: 289343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]