---
reference_id: "PMID:35770942"
title: "State of the Art: Quantitative Cardiac MRI in Cardiac Amyloidosis."
authors:
- Guo Y
- Li X
- Wang Y
journal: J Magn Reson Imaging
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/jmri.28314
content_type: abstract_only
---

# State of the Art: Quantitative Cardiac MRI in Cardiac Amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Guo Y, Li X, Wang Y
**Journal:** J Magn Reson Imaging (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmri.28314](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmri.28314)

## Content

1. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2022 Nov;56(5):1287-1301. doi: 10.1002/jmri.28314. Epub 
2022 Jun 30.

State of the Art: Quantitative Cardiac MRI in Cardiac Amyloidosis.

Guo Y(1), Li X(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare 
Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Science and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

Cardiac amyloidosis (CA) is characterized by amyloid infiltration in the 
myocardial extracellular space, causing heart failure. Patients with CA are 
currently underdiagnosed. Cardiac involvement is significantly associated with 
the prognosis and treatment decision-making for CA. Early identification and 
accurate stratification are the crucial first step in patient management. 
Comprehensive cardiac MRI-based evaluation of the cardiac structure, function, 
and myocardial tissue characterization assesses cardiac involvement by tracing 
disease processes. Emerging quantitative tissue characterization techniques have 
introduced new measures that can identify early staged CA and monitor disease 
progression or response after treatment. Quantitative cardiac MRI is becoming an 
instrumental tool in understanding CA, which leads to changes in individualized 
patient care. This review aimed to discuss the quantitative cardiac MRI-based 
assessment of CA using established and emerging techniques. EVIDENCE LEVEL: 5 
TECHNICAL EFFICACY: Stage 3.

© 2022 International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine.

DOI: 10.1002/jmri.28314
PMID: 35770942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]