---
reference_id: "PMID:22865452"
title: Inactivation of the HIF-1α/PDK3 signaling axis drives melanoma toward mitochondrial oxidative metabolism and potentiates the therapeutic activity of pro-oxidants.
authors:
- Kluza J
- Corazao-Rozas P
- Touil Y
- Jendoubi M
- Maire C
- Guerreschi P
- Jonneaux A
- Ballot C
- Balayssac S
- Valable S
- Corroyer-Dulmont A
- Bernaudin M
- Malet-Martino M
- de Lassalle EM
- Maboudou P
- Formstecher P
- Polakowska R
- Mortier L
- Marchetti P
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0979
keywords:
- Aged
- Animals
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Survival/drug effects
- "Dichloroacetic Acid/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- Female
- HL-60 Cells
- Humans
- "Hydrazines/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- "Hypoxia-Inducible Factor 1, alpha Subunit/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Immunoblotting
- Male
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, SCID"
- Middle Aged
- "Mitochondria/drug effects, metabolism"
- Oxidative Phosphorylation/drug effects
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Acetyl-Transferring Kinase
- RNA Interference
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- Tumor Burden/drug effects
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inactivation of the HIF-1α/PDK3 signaling axis drives melanoma toward mitochondrial oxidative metabolism and potentiates the therapeutic activity of pro-oxidants.
**Authors:** Kluza J, Corazao-Rozas P, Touil Y, Jendoubi M, Maire C, Guerreschi P, Jonneaux A, Ballot C, Balayssac S, Valable S, Corroyer-Dulmont A, Bernaudin M, Malet-Martino M, de Lassalle EM, Maboudou P, Formstecher P, Polakowska R, Mortier L, Marchetti P
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0979](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0979)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 2012 Oct 1;72(19):5035-47. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0979.
Epub  2012 Aug 3.

Inactivation of the HIF-1α/PDK3 signaling axis drives melanoma toward
mitochondrial oxidative metabolism and potentiates the therapeutic activity of
pro-oxidants.

Kluza J(1), Corazao-Rozas P, Touil Y, Jendoubi M, Maire C, Guerreschi P,
Jonneaux A, Ballot C, Balayssac S, Valable S, Corroyer-Dulmont A, Bernaudin M,
Malet-Martino M, de Lassalle EM, Maboudou P, Formstecher P, Polakowska R,
Mortier L, Marchetti P.

Author information:
(1)Unit 837 Equipe 4 Inserm and Faculté de Médecine, Université de Lille II 1
Place, Verdun Cedex, CHRU Lille, France.

Cancer cells can undergo a metabolic reprogramming from oxidative
phosphorylation to glycolysis that allows them to adapt to nutrient-poor
microenvironments, thereby imposing a selection for aggressive variants.
However, the mechanisms underlying this reprogramming are not fully understood.
Using complementary approaches in validated cell lines and freshly obtained
human specimens, we report here that mitochondrial respiration and oxidative
phosphorylation are slowed in metastatic melanomas, even under normoxic
conditions due to the persistence of a high nuclear expression of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α). Pharmacologic or genetic blockades of the
HIF-1α pathway decreased glycolysis and promoted mitochondrial respiration via
specific reduction in the expression of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase-3 (PDK3).
Inhibiting PDK3 activity by dichloroacetate (DCA) or siRNA-mediated attenuation
was sufficient to increase pyruvate dehydrogenase activity, oxidative
phosphorylation, and mitochondrial reactive oxygen species generation. Notably,
DCA potentiated the antitumor effects of elesclomol, a pro-oxidative drug
currently in clinical development, both by limiting cell proliferation and
promoting cell death. Interestingly, this combination was also effective against
BRAF V600E-mutant melanoma cells that were resistant to the BRAF inhibitor
vemurafenib. Cotreatment of melanomas with DCA and elesclomol in vivo achieved a
more durable response than single agent alone. Our findings offer a preclinical
validation of the HIF-1/PDK3 bioenergetic pathway as a new target for
therapeutic intervention in metastatic melanoma, opening the door to innovative
combinations that might eradicate this disease.

©2012 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0979
PMID: 22865452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
