---
reference_id: "PMID:29928910"
title: "Prevalence of psoriatic arthritis in patients with psoriasis: A systematic review and meta-analysis of observational and clinical studies."
authors:
- Alinaghi F
- Calov M
- Kristensen LE
- Gladman DD
- Coates LC
- Jullien D
- Gottlieb AB
- Gisondi P
- Wu JJ
- Thyssen JP
- Egeberg A
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2018.06.027
keywords:
- "Arthritis, Psoriatic/epidemiology, etiology"
- Clinical Studies as Topic
- Humans
- Observational Studies as Topic
- Prevalence
- Psoriasis/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of psoriatic arthritis in patients with psoriasis: A systematic review and meta-analysis of observational and clinical studies.
**Authors:** Alinaghi F, Calov M, Kristensen LE, Gladman DD, Coates LC, Jullien D, Gottlieb AB, Gisondi P, Wu JJ, Thyssen JP, Egeberg A
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2018.06.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2018.06.027)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019 Jan;80(1):251-265.e19. doi:
10.1016/j.jaad.2018.06.027.  Epub 2018 Jun 19.

Prevalence of psoriatic arthritis in patients with psoriasis: A systematic
review and meta-analysis of observational and clinical studies.

Alinaghi F(1), Calov M(1), Kristensen LE(2), Gladman DD(3), Coates LC(4),
Jullien D(5), Gottlieb AB(6), Gisondi P(7), Wu JJ(8), Thyssen JP(1), Egeberg
A(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Herlev and Gentofte Hospital,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)The Parker Institute, Department of Rheumatology, Copenhagen University
Hospital, Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto,
Krembil Research Institute, Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal
Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Edouard Herriot Hospital, University Claude
Bernard Lyon-1, University of Lyon, Lyon, France.
(6)Department of Dermatology, New York Medical College, Metropolitan Hospital,
New York, New York.
(7)Section of Dermatology and Venereology, Department of Medicine, University of
Verona, Verona, Italy.
(8)Kaiser Permanente Los Angeles Medical Center, Department of Dermatology, Los
Angeles, California.
(9)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Herlev and Gentofte Hospital,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address:
alexander.egeberg@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Wide-ranging prevalence estimates of psoriatic arthritis (PsA) in
patients with psoriasis have been reported.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the prevalence and incidence of PsA in patients with
psoriasis.
METHODS: Two authors independently searched 3 databases for studies reporting on
the prevalence or incidence of PsA in patients with psoriasis. A proportion
meta-analysis was performed to calculate the pooled proportion estimates of PsA
in patients with psoriasis.
RESULTS: A total of 266 studies examining 976,408 patients with psoriasis were
included. Overall, the pooled proportion (95% confidence interval [CI]) of PsA
among patients with psoriasis was 19.7% (95% CI, 18.5%-20.9%). In children and
adolescents (<18 years of age), the pooled prevalence was 3.3% (95% CI,
2.1%-4.9%). The PsA prevalence was 22.7% (95% CI, 20.6%-25.0%) in European
patients with psoriasis, 21.5% (95% CI, 15.4%-28.2%) in South American patients
with psoriasis, 19.5% (95% CI, 17.1%-22.1%) in North American patients with
psoriasis, 15.5% (95% CI, 0.009%-51.5%) in African patients with psoriasis, and
14.0% (95% CI, 95% CI, 11.7%-16.3%) in Asian patients with psoriasis. The
prevalence of PsA was 23.8% (95% CI, 20.1%-27.6%) in studies in which the
Classification Criteria for Psoriatic Arthritis were applied. The incidence of
PsA among patients with psoriasis ranged from 0.27 to 2.7 per 100 person-years.
LIMITATIONS: Between-study heterogeneity may have affected the estimates.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that 1 in 4 patients with psoriasis have PsA. With the
growing recognition of the Classification Criteria for Psoriatic Arthritis, more
homogenous and comparable prevalence estimates are expected to be reported.

Copyright © 2018 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2018.06.027
PMID: 29928910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
