---
reference_id: "PMID:28306229"
title: The 2017 international classification of the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes.
authors:
- Malfait F
- Francomano C
- Byers P
- Belmont J
- Berglund B
- Black J
- Bloom L
- Bowen JM
- Brady AF
- Burrows NP
- Castori M
- Cohen H
- Colombi M
- Demirdas S
- De Backer J
- De Paepe A
- Fournel-Gigleux S
- Frank M
- Ghali N
- Giunta C
- Grahame R
- Hakim A
- Jeunemaitre X
- Johnson D
- Juul-Kristensen B
- Kapferer-Seebacher I
- Kazkaz H
- Kosho T
- Lavallee ME
- Levy H
- Mendoza-Londono R
- Pepin M
- Pope FM
- Reinstein E
- Robert L
- Rohrbach M
- Sanders L
- Sobey GJ
- Van Damme T
- Vandersteen A
- van Mourik C
- Voermans N
- Wheeldon N
- Zschocke J
- Tinkle B
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31552
keywords:
- Collagen/genetics
- Connective Tissue Diseases/genetics
- "Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome/classification, diagnosis, genetics"
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Humans
- Mutation
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The 2017 international classification of the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes.
**Authors:** Malfait F, Francomano C, Byers P, Belmont J, Berglund B, Black J, Bloom L, Bowen JM, Brady AF, Burrows NP, Castori M, Cohen H, Colombi M, Demirdas S, De Backer J, De Paepe A, Fournel-Gigleux S, Frank M, Ghali N, Giunta C, Grahame R, Hakim A, Jeunemaitre X, Johnson D, Juul-Kristensen B, Kapferer-Seebacher I, Kazkaz H, Kosho T, Lavallee ME, Levy H, Mendoza-Londono R, Pepin M, Pope FM, Reinstein E, Robert L, Rohrbach M, Sanders L, Sobey GJ, Van Damme T, Vandersteen A, van Mourik C, Voermans N, Wheeldon N, Zschocke J, Tinkle B
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31552](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31552)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2017 Mar;175(1):8-26. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31552.

The 2017 international classification of the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes.

Malfait F, Francomano C, Byers P, Belmont J, Berglund B, Black J, Bloom L, Bowen 
JM, Brady AF, Burrows NP, Castori M, Cohen H, Colombi M, Demirdas S, De Backer 
J, De Paepe A, Fournel-Gigleux S, Frank M, Ghali N, Giunta C, Grahame R, Hakim 
A, Jeunemaitre X, Johnson D, Juul-Kristensen B, Kapferer-Seebacher I, Kazkaz H, 
Kosho T, Lavallee ME, Levy H, Mendoza-Londono R, Pepin M, Pope FM, Reinstein E, 
Robert L, Rohrbach M, Sanders L, Sobey GJ, Van Damme T, Vandersteen A, van 
Mourik C, Voermans N, Wheeldon N, Zschocke J, Tinkle B.

The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) are a clinically and genetically heterogeneous 
group of heritable connective tissue disorders (HCTDs) characterized by joint 
hypermobility, skin hyperextensibility, and tissue fragility. Over the past two 
decades, the Villefranche Nosology, which delineated six subtypes, has been 
widely used as the standard for clinical diagnosis of EDS. For most of these 
subtypes, mutations had been identified in collagen-encoding genes, or in genes 
encoding collagen-modifying enzymes. Since its publication in 1998, a whole 
spectrum of novel EDS subtypes has been described, and mutations have been 
identified in an array of novel genes. The International EDS Consortium proposes 
a revised EDS classification, which recognizes 13 subtypes. For each of the 
subtypes, we propose a set of clinical criteria that are suggestive for the 
diagnosis. However, in view of the vast genetic heterogeneity and phenotypic 
variability of the EDS subtypes, and the clinical overlap between EDS subtypes, 
but also with other HCTDs, the definite diagnosis of all EDS subtypes, except 
for the hypermobile type, relies on molecular confirmation with identification 
of (a) causative genetic variant(s). We also revised the clinical criteria for 
hypermobile EDS in order to allow for a better distinction from other joint 
hypermobility disorders. To satisfy research needs, we also propose a 
pathogenetic scheme, that regroups EDS subtypes for which the causative proteins 
function within the same pathway. We hope that the revised International EDS 
Classification will serve as a new standard for the diagnosis of EDS and will 
provide a framework for future research purposes. © 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31552
PMID: 28306229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]