---
reference_id: PMID:40802120
title: Repeated stereotactic radiosurgery for high grade meningioma.
authors:
- Peng TC
- Hsieh MH
- Lin CF
- Kuan AS
- Lee CC
- Wu HM
- Lai IC
- Yang HC
journal: J Neurooncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s11060-025-05165-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Repeated stereotactic radiosurgery for high grade meningioma.
**Authors:** Peng TC, Hsieh MH, Lin CF, Kuan AS, Lee CC, Wu HM, Lai IC, Yang HC
**Journal:** J Neurooncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11060-025-05165-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11060-025-05165-z)

## Content

1. J Neurooncol. 2025 Nov;175(2):687-695. doi: 10.1007/s11060-025-05165-z. Epub 
2025 Aug 13.

Repeated stereotactic radiosurgery for high grade meningioma.

Peng TC(#)(1), Hsieh MH(#)(2), Lin CF(1), Kuan AS(1)(3)(4), Lee CC(1)(5), Wu 
HM(6), Lai IC(7), Yang HC(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Neurological Institute, Taipei Veterans General 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)School of Medicine, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Public Health, College of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao 
Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)School of Medicine, College of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Radiology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Heavy Particles & Radiation Oncology, Taipei Veterans General 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, Neurological Institute, Taipei Veterans General 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. wade012@gmail.com.
(9)School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan. 
wade012@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Atypical and anaplastic meningioma (World Health 
organization [WHO] Grades II and III) present therapeutic challenges due to 
their aggressive behavior and high risk of recurrence. This study addressed the 
lack of data related to the effectiveness and safety of repeated stereotactic 
radiosurgery (SRS) in managing high-grade recurrent or residual meningioma.
METHODS: This study analyzed data extracted from the medical records of 112 
patients (mean age of 57.9 years) who underwent SRS for recurrent or residual 
high-grade meningioma between January 2002 and December 2022. The data included 
clinicodemographic profiles, treatment parameters, and imaging phenotypes. The 
average follow-up duration was 41.7 months (range 12-160.7 months).
RESULTS: There was slight preponderance of females in the cohort (65:47). All 
patients had undergone craniotomy and histopathologic confirmation of atypical 
or anaplastic meningioma. Gross tumor resection was achieved in 35 cases. 
Atypical meningioma accounted for the vast majority of cases (105; 93.8%) with 
only 7 cases of anaplastic meningioma (6.2%). At a median follow-up of 41.7 
months after SRS, tumor control was achieved in 29.5% of cases. Kaplan-Meier 
analysis indicated overall actuarial progression free survival rates of 79.5%, 
43.8% and 30.4% at 1, 3 and 5 years after radiosurgery, respectively. In cases 
involving repeated SRS, these rates were 97.6%, 69% and 45.2%, respectively. 
Male sex, older age, anaplastic phenotype, subtotal resection, and larger tumor 
volume were significantly predictive of tumor growth after treatment. Adverse 
radiation effects were observed in 33.8% of patients who underwent repeated SRS. 
Most of those patients were asymptomatic and only five patients required a 
temporary course of steroid therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that SRS is a relatively safe and effective 
treatment option for recurrent or residual high-grade meningioma, with an 
acceptable complication profile, even when performed repeatedly. Anaplastic 
tumor phenotype, subtotal resection, and larger tumor volume were factors 
associated with tumor growth, warranting close clinical surveillance after 
radiosurgery.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11060-025-05165-z
PMCID: PMC12420693
PMID: 40802120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: This article is ethically approved by internal review boards. 
Consent to participate: Consent to participate was gained and IRB number was 
2021-07-025CC. Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.