---
reference_id: "PMID:16940238"
title: "Relationship between oxidative stress and antioxidant systems in the liver of patients with Wilson disease: hepatic manifestation in Wilson disease as a consequence of augmented oxidative stress."
authors:
- Nagasaka H
- Inoue I
- Inui A
- Komatsu H
- Sogo T
- Murayama K
- Murakami T
- Yorifuji T
- Asayama K
- Katayama S
- Uemoto S
- Kobayashi K
- Takayanagi M
- Fujisawa T
- Tsukahara H
journal: Pediatr Res
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1203/01.pdr.0000238341.12229.d3
keywords:
- Adult
- Antioxidants/analysis
- Blood Chemical Analysis
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Glutathione/analysis
- Glutathione Disulfide/analysis
- Hepatolenticular Degeneration/diagnosis
- Humans
- "Liver/chemistry, enzymology"
- Liver Diseases/diagnosis
- Male
- Oxidative Stress
- Oxidoreductases/analysis
- Thiobarbituric Acid Reactive Substances/analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relationship between oxidative stress and antioxidant systems in the liver of patients with Wilson disease: hepatic manifestation in Wilson disease as a consequence of augmented oxidative stress.
**Authors:** Nagasaka H, Inoue I, Inui A, Komatsu H, Sogo T, Murayama K, Murakami T, Yorifuji T, Asayama K, Katayama S, Uemoto S, Kobayashi K, Takayanagi M, Fujisawa T, Tsukahara H
**Journal:** Pediatr Res (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1203/01.pdr.0000238341.12229.d3](https://doi.org/10.1203/01.pdr.0000238341.12229.d3)

## Content

1. Pediatr Res. 2006 Oct;60(4):472-7. doi: 10.1203/01.pdr.0000238341.12229.d3.
Epub  2006 Aug 28.

Relationship between oxidative stress and antioxidant systems in the liver of
patients with Wilson disease: hepatic manifestation in Wilson disease as a
consequence of augmented oxidative stress.

Nagasaka H(1), Inoue I, Inui A, Komatsu H, Sogo T, Murayama K, Murakami T,
Yorifuji T, Asayama K, Katayama S, Uemoto S, Kobayashi K, Takayanagi M, Fujisawa
T, Tsukahara H.

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism, Chiba Children's Hospital, Chiba 266-0007, Japan.
nagasa-hirono@k2.dion.ne.jp

The role of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of liver disease in Wilson
disease (WD), a genetic disorder characterized by excess hepatic deposition of
copper that generates free radicals, remains unclear. This study investigates
oxidative stress on the liver and hepatic antioxidant responses in WD using
liver specimens from affected patients showing mild liver damage (group I, n =
3), moderate or greater liver damage (group II, n = 5), and fulminant hepatic
failure (group III, n = 5) and from asymptomatic carriers (n = 2). Decreased
ratios of reduced glutathione (GSH) to oxidized glutathione (GSSG) and increased
thiobarbituric acid reactive substance (TBARS), a lipid peroxidation product,
were found in every affected patient, especially in group II and III patients.
Activities and protein expressions of Mn-dependent superoxide dismutase
(Mn-SOD), CuZn-dependent superoxide dismutase (CuZn-SOD), and catalase were
decreased in all patients, especially in group III patients. Glutathione
peroxidase (GPx) activity was decreased only in group III patients. Asymptomatic
carriers without any clinical manifestations showed normal TBARS level and
GSH/GSSG ratio with increases in both GSH and GSSG levels. Their CuZn-SOD,
Mn-SOD, and catalase activities were increased. These results suggest that
excessive copper-derived oxidants contribute to development and progression of
liver disease in WD.

DOI: 10.1203/01.pdr.0000238341.12229.d3
PMID: 16940238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
