---
reference_id: PMID:29651604
title: "Patterns and frequency of renal abnormalities in Fanconi anaemia: implications for long-term management."
authors:
- Sathyanarayana V
- Lee B
- Wright NB
- Santos R
- Bonney D
- Wynn R
- Patel L
- Chandler K
- Cheesman E
- Schindler D
- Webb NJA
- Meyer S
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-018-3952-0
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease Progression
- "Fanconi Anemia/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation/adverse effects
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- "Kidney/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- "Long-Term Care/methods, standards"
- Male
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- Retrospective Studies
- Ultrasonography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patterns and frequency of renal abnormalities in Fanconi anaemia: implications for long-term management.
**Authors:** Sathyanarayana V, Lee B, Wright NB, Santos R, Bonney D, Wynn R, Patel L, Chandler K, Cheesman E, Schindler D, Webb NJA, Meyer S
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-018-3952-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-018-3952-0)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2018 Sep;33(9):1547-1551. doi: 10.1007/s00467-018-3952-0.
Epub  2018 Apr 12.

Patterns and frequency of renal abnormalities in Fanconi anaemia: implications 
for long-term management.

Sathyanarayana V(1)(2), Lee B(2)(3), Wright NB(2)(4), Santos R(2)(4), Bonney 
D(2)(3), Wynn R(2)(3), Patel L(2)(5), Chandler K(2)(6), Cheesman E(2)(7), 
Schindler D(8), Webb NJA(1)(2), Meyer S(9)(10)(11)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Nephrology, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, 
Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(2)Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK.
(3)Department of Paediatric Hematology and Oncology, Royal Manchester Children's 
Hospital, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(4)Department of Paediatric Radiology, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, 
Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(5)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, 
Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(6)Department of Genetic Medicine, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester University NHS 
Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(7)Department of Paediatric Histopathology, Royal Manchester Children's 
Hospital, Manchester, UK.
(8)Department of Human Genetics, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(9)Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK. 
stefan.meyer@manchester.ac.uk.
(10)Department of Paediatric Hematology and Oncology, Royal Manchester 
Children's Hospital, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK. 
stefan.meyer@manchester.ac.uk.
(11)Young Oncology Unit, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Wilmslow Road, 
Manchester, M20 6XB, UK. stefan.meyer@manchester.ac.uk.
(12)Paediatric and Adolescent Oncology, Division of Molecular and Clinical 
Cancer Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine & Health, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK. stefan.meyer@manchester.ac.uk.
(13)Academic Unit of Paediatric and Adolescent Oncology, Department of 
Paediatric Hematology and Oncology, Royal Manchester Children's and Christie 
Hospital, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. 
stefan.meyer@manchester.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Fanconi anaemia (FA) is an inherited disease with bone marrow 
failure, variable congenital and developmental abnormalities, and cancer 
predisposition. With improved survival, non-haematological manifestations of FA 
become increasingly important for long-term management. While renal 
abnormalities are recognized, detailed data on patterns and frequency and 
implications for long-term management are sparse.
METHODS: We reviewed clinical course and imaging findings of FA patients with 
respect to renal complications in our centre over a 25-year period to formulate 
some practical suggestions for guidelines for management of renal problems 
associated with FA.
RESULTS: Thirty patients including four sibling sets were reviewed. On imaging, 
14 had evidence of anatomical abnormalities of the kidneys. Two cases with 
severe phenotype, including renal abnormalities, had chronic kidney disease 
(CKD) at diagnosis. Haematopoietic stem cell transplantation was complicated by 
significant acute kidney injury (AKI) in three cases. In three patients, there 
was CKD at long-term follow-up. All patients had normal blood pressure.
CONCLUSIONS: Evaluation of renal anatomy with ultrasound imaging is important at 
diagnostic workup of FA. While CKD is uncommon at diagnosis, our data suggests 
that the incidence of CKD increases with age, in particular after haematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation. Monitoring of renal function is essential for 
management of FA. Based on these long-term clinical observations, we formulate 
some practical guidelines for assessment and management of renal abnormalities 
in FA.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-018-3952-0
PMCID: PMC6061664
PMID: 29651604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The analysis was carried out with consent in 
accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki as an anonymized case review and as 
such had institutional review board approval. CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.