---
reference_id: "PMID:39518492"
title: "From Cells to Plaques: The Molecular Pathways of Coronary Artery Calcification and Disease."
authors:
- Mitsis A
- Khattab E
- Christodoulou E
- Myrianthopoulos K
- Myrianthefs M
- Tzikas S
- Ziakas A
- Fragakis N
- Kassimis G
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13216352
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From Cells to Plaques: The Molecular Pathways of Coronary Artery Calcification and Disease.
**Authors:** Mitsis A, Khattab E, Christodoulou E, Myrianthopoulos K, Myrianthefs M, Tzikas S, Ziakas A, Fragakis N, Kassimis G
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13216352](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13216352)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Oct 23;13(21):6352. doi: 10.3390/jcm13216352.

From Cells to Plaques: The Molecular Pathways of Coronary Artery Calcification 
and Disease.

Mitsis A(1), Khattab E(1), Christodoulou E(2), Myrianthopoulos K(1), Myrianthefs 
M(1), Tzikas S(3), Ziakas A(4), Fragakis N(5), Kassimis G(5).

Author information:
(1)Cardiology Department, Nicosia General Hospital, State Health Services 
Organization, Nicosia 2029, Cyprus.
(2)Cardiology Department, Limassol General Hospital, State Health Services 
Organization, Limassol 3304, Cyprus.
(3)Third Department of Cardiology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54636 
Thessaloniki, Greece.
(4)First Department of Cardiology, AHEPA University Hospital, Aristotle 
University of Thessaloniki, 54636 Thessaloniki, Greece.
(5)Second Department of Cardiology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54642 
Thessaloniki, Greece.

Coronary artery calcification (CAC) is a hallmark of atherosclerosis and a 
critical factor in the development and progression of coronary artery disease 
(CAD). This review aims to address the complex pathophysiological mechanisms 
underlying CAC and its relationship with CAD. We examine the cellular and 
molecular processes that drive the formation of calcified plaques, highlighting 
the roles of inflammation, lipid accumulation, and smooth muscle cell 
proliferation. Additionally, we explore the genetic and environmental factors 
that contribute to the heterogeneity in CAC and CAD presentation among 
individuals. Understanding these intricate mechanisms is essential for 
developing targeted therapeutic strategies and improving diagnostic accuracy. By 
integrating current research findings, this review provides a comprehensive 
overview of the pathways linking CAC to CAD, offering insights into potential 
interventions to mitigate the burden of these interrelated conditions.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13216352
PMCID: PMC11545949
PMID: 39518492

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.