---
reference_id: PMID:30474499
title: "Paraquat exposure and Parkinson's disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Tangamornsuksan W
- Lohitnavy O
- Sruamsiri R
- Chaiyakunapruk N
- Norman Scholfield C
- Reisfeld B
- Lohitnavy M
journal: Arch Environ Occup Health
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1080/19338244.2018.1492894
keywords:
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Humans
- Occupational Exposure
- Odds Ratio
- Paraquat/adverse effects
- "Parkinson Disease/epidemiology, etiology"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Paraquat exposure and Parkinson's disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Tangamornsuksan W, Lohitnavy O, Sruamsiri R, Chaiyakunapruk N, Norman Scholfield C, Reisfeld B, Lohitnavy M
**Journal:** Arch Environ Occup Health (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1080/19338244.2018.1492894](https://doi.org/10.1080/19338244.2018.1492894)

## Content

1. Arch Environ Occup Health. 2019;74(5):225-238. doi: 
10.1080/19338244.2018.1492894. Epub 2018 Nov 25.

Paraquat exposure and Parkinson's disease: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Tangamornsuksan W(1)(2), Lohitnavy O(1)(2)(3), Sruamsiri R(2)(4), Chaiyakunapruk 
N(2)(4)(5)(6)(7), Norman Scholfield C(1)(2), Reisfeld B(1)(8), Lohitnavy 
M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center of Excellence for Environmental Health & Toxicology, Faculty of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Naresuan University , Phitsanulok , Thailand.
(2)Department of Pharmacy Practice, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Naresuan 
University , Phitsanulok , Thailand.
(3)Pharmacokinetic Research Unit, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Naresuan 
University , Phitsanulok , Thailand.
(4)Center of Pharmaceutical Outcomes Research, Department of Pharmacy Practice, 
Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Naresuan University , Phitsanulok , 
Thailand.
(5)School of Pharmacy, Monash University Malaysia , Malaysia , Selangor.
(6)School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison , Madison , Wisconsin , 
USA.
(7)School of Population Health, University of Queensland , Brisbane , Australia.
(8)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Colorado State University 
, Fort Collins , Colorado , USA.

Erratum in
    Arch Environ Occup Health. 2019;74(5):292-293. doi: 
10.1080/19338244.2018.1558737.

To reconcile and unify available results regarding paraquat exposure and 
Parkinson's disease (PD), we conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis to 
provide a quantitative estimate of the risk of PD associated with paraquat 
exposure. Six scientific databases including PubMed, Cochrane libraries, EMBASE, 
Scopus, ISI Web of Knowledge, and TOXLINE were systematically searched. The 
overall odds ratios (ORs) with corresponding 95% CIs were calculated using a 
random-effects model. Of 7,309 articles identified, 13 case control studies with 
3,231 patients and 4,901 controls were included into our analysis. Whereas, one 
prospective cohort studies was included into our systematic review. A subsequent 
meta-analysis showed an association between PD and paraquat exposure (odds 
ratio = 1.64 (95% CI: 1.27-2.13; I2 = 24.8%). There is a statistically 
significant association between paraquat exposure and PD. Thus, future studies 
regarding paraquat and Parkinson's disease are warranted.

DOI: 10.1080/19338244.2018.1492894
PMID: 30474499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]