---
reference_id: "PMID:24170102"
title: "Residual adrenal function in autoimmune Addison's disease: improvement after tetracosactide (ACTH1-24) treatment."
authors:
- Gan EH
- MacArthur K
- Mitchell AL
- Hughes BA
- Perros P
- Ball SG
- James RA
- Quinton R
- Chen S
- Furmaniak J
- Arlt W
- Pearce SH
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-2449
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Residual adrenal function in autoimmune Addison's disease: improvement after tetracosactide (ACTH1-24) treatment.
**Authors:** Gan EH, MacArthur K, Mitchell AL, Hughes BA, Perros P, Ball SG, James RA, Quinton R, Chen S, Furmaniak J, Arlt W, Pearce SH
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2013-2449](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2013-2449)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jan;99(1):111-8. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-2449. Epub
 2013 Dec 20.

Residual adrenal function in autoimmune Addison's disease: improvement after 
tetracosactide (ACTH1-24) treatment.

Gan EH(1), MacArthur K, Mitchell AL, Hughes BA, Perros P, Ball SG, James RA, 
Quinton R, Chen S, Furmaniak J, Arlt W, Pearce SH.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine (E.H.G., K.M., A.L.M., P.P., R.Q., S.H.S.P.), 
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, United Kingdom; the Endocrine 
Unit (E.H.G., A.L.M., P.P., S.G.B., R.A.J., R.Q., S.H.S.P.), Royal Victoria 
Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 4LP, United Kingdom; the Centre for 
Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism (B.A.H., W.A.), University of 
Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom; and RSR Ltd (S.C., J.F.), FIRS 
Laboratories, Cardiff CF4 5DU, United Kingdom.

CONTEXT: Despite lifelong steroid hormone replacement, there is excess morbidity 
and mortality associated with autoimmune Addison's disease. In health, 
adrenocortical cells undergo continuous self-renewal from a population of 
subcapsular progenitor cells, under the influence of ACTH, suggesting a 
therapeutic possibility.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to determine whether tetracosactide (synthetic ACTH1-24) 
could revive adrenal steroidogenic function in autoimmune Addison's disease.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PATIENTS: Thirteen patients (aged 16-65 y) with established 
autoimmune Addison's disease for more than 1 year were recruited at the 
Newcastle University Clinical Research Facility.
INTERVENTION: The intervention included a 20-week study of regular sc 
tetracosactide (ACTH1-24) therapy.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Serum and urine corticosteroids were measured during 
medication withdrawal at baseline and every 5 weeks during the study.
RESULTS: Serum cortisol levels remained less than 100 nmol/L in 11 of 13 
participants throughout the study. However, two women achieved peak serum 
cortisol concentrations greater than 400 nmol/L after 10 and 29 weeks of 
tetracosactide therapy, respectively, allowing withdrawal of corticosteroid 
replacement. Concurrently, urine glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid metabolite 
excretion increased from subnormal to above the median of healthy controls. One 
of these responders remains well with improving peak serum cortisol (672 nmol/L) 
28 months after stopping all treatments. The other responder showed a gradual 
reduction in serum cortisol and aldosterone over time, and steroid therapy was 
recommenced after a 28-week period without glucocorticoid replacement.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study to demonstrate that established autoimmune 
Addison's disease is amenable to a regenerative medicine therapy approach.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2013-2449
PMID: 24170102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]