---
reference_id: "PMID:35665929"
title: New evidence of genetic heterogeneity causing hereditary gingival fibromatosis and ALK and CD36 as new candidate genes.
authors:
- Machado RA
- de Andrade RS
- Pêgo SPB
- Krepischi ACV
- Coletta RD
- Martelli-Júnior H
journal: J Periodontol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/JPER.22-0219
keywords:
- Humans
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- "Fibromatosis, Gingival/genetics, pathology"
- CD36 Antigens/genetics
- Pedigree
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New evidence of genetic heterogeneity causing hereditary gingival fibromatosis and ALK and CD36 as new candidate genes.
**Authors:** Machado RA, de Andrade RS, Pêgo SPB, Krepischi ACV, Coletta RD, Martelli-Júnior H
**Journal:** J Periodontol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/JPER.22-0219](https://doi.org/10.1002/JPER.22-0219)

## Content

1. J Periodontol. 2023 Jan;94(1):108-118. doi: 10.1002/JPER.22-0219. Epub 2022
Jul  1.

New evidence of genetic heterogeneity causing hereditary gingival fibromatosis 
and ALK and CD36 as new candidate genes.

Machado RA(1)(2), de Andrade RS(1), Pêgo SPB(3), Krepischi ACV(4), Coletta 
RD(1)(5), Martelli-Júnior H(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Diagnosis, School of Dentistry, University of Campinas 
(FOP/UNICAMP), Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Hospital for Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies, University of São 
Paulo, Bauru, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Stomatology Clinic, Dental School, State University of Montes Claros 
(Unimontes), Montes Claros, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(4)Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, Human Genome and Stem-Cell 
Research Center, Institute of Biosciences, University of São Paulo (IB/USP), São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Graduate Program in Oral Biology, School of Dentistry, University of 
Campinas, Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Center for Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies, Dental School, 
University of José Rosario Vellano (Unifenas), Alfenas, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Hereditary gingival fibromatosis (HGF) is an uncommon genetic 
condition characterized by slow but progressive fibrous, non-hemorrhagic, and 
painless growth of the gingival tissues due to the increased deposition of 
collagen and other macromolecules of the extracellular matrix. HGF occurs in 
approximately 1:750,000 individuals and can exhibit dominant or recessive 
inheritance. To date, five loci (2p21-p22, 2p22.3-p23.3, 4q12, 5q13-q22, and 
11p15) and three genes [REST (RE1-silencing transcription factor), SOS1 
(Son-of-Sevenless-1), and ZNF862 (zinc finger protein 862 gene)] have been 
associated with HGF. Here, our study aimed to identify genetic variants 
associated with HGF by applying whole-exome sequencing (WES) and bioinformatics 
analyses.
METHODS: Thirteen Brazilian individuals with HGF and nine relatives without HGF 
from four unrelated families were chosen for our investigation. Blood collected 
from the patients and their relatives were used for WES. Five Web-available 
tools, namely, CADD, PolyPhen, SIFT, Mutation Taster, and Franklin's algorithms, 
were used to predict protein damage.
RESULTS: WES revealed pathogenic variants affecting the known HGF genes REST 
(c.1491_1492delAG) and SOS1 (c.3265_3266insTAAC) in two families. Additionally, 
potentially pathogenic variants segregating in the other two families were 
mapped to ALK receptor tyrosine kinase gene (ALK) (c.361C > T) and to collagen 
type I receptor and thrombospondin receptor gene (CD36) (c.1133G > T).
CONCLUSION: Our findings reinforce the high genetic heterogeneity of HGF, 
identifying new variants in HGF known genes (REST and SOS1) and ALK and CD36 as 
new genes that cause HGF.

© 2022 American Academy of Periodontology.

DOI: 10.1002/JPER.22-0219
PMID: 35665929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]