---
reference_id: "PMID:3291200"
title: "Aspartame: review of recent experimental and observational data."
authors:
- Janssen PJ
- van der Heijden CA
journal: Toxicology
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1016/0300-483x(88)90117-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aspartame: review of recent experimental and observational data.
**Authors:** Janssen PJ, van der Heijden CA
**Journal:** Toxicology (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0300-483x(88)90117-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/0300-483x(88)90117-5)

## Content

1. Toxicology. 1988 Jun;50(1):1-26. doi: 10.1016/0300-483x(88)90117-5.

Aspartame: review of recent experimental and observational data.

Janssen PJ(1), van der Heijden CA.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Public Health and Environmental Hygiene, Bilthoven, The 
Netherlands.

In this report the neurotoxicity of aspartame and its constituent amino acids 
aspartic acid and phenylalanine is reviewed. The adverse reactions ascribed to 
the consumption of aspartame-containing products, as reported in the U.S.A., are 
discussed and placed in perspective with the results of recent behavioural 
studies in humans and animals. The issue of common intake levels associated with 
proposed uses of aspartame is addressed. In brief, the following conclusions can 
be drawn: When aspartame is consumed at levels within the ADI-limit of 40 mg/kg 
body wt, there is no significant risk for an aspartate-induced neurotoxic effect 
in the brain. When aspartame is consumed at levels within the ADI-limit by 
normal subjects or persons heterozygous for phenylketonuria (PKU) the resultant 
plasma phenylalanine concentrations are practically always within the normal 
postprandial range; elevation to plasma concentrations commonly associated with 
adverse effects has not been observed. Persons suffering from phenylketonuria 
(PKU-homozygotes) on a phenylalanine-restricted diet should avoid consumption of 
aspartame. PKU-homozygotes on the (less strict) phenylalanine-liberalized diet 
should be made aware of the phenylalanine content of aspartame. In the available 
behavioural studies in humans with acute dosing, no adverse effects were 
observed. Long-term studies on behaviour and cognitive function in (sensitive) 
humans are lacking. Analyses of adverse reaction reports made by consumers in 
the U.S.A. have not yielded a specific constellation of symptoms clearly related 
to aspartame that would suggest a widespread public health hazard associated 
with aspartame use. Focussed clinical studies are now being carried out in the 
U.S.A.; the results should provide additional evidence concerning the 
interpretation of the reports on adverse reactions ascribed to aspartame. In the 
regulation of admitted uses for aspartame the possibility of intake levels 
exceeding the ADI-limit in some groups of consumers should be a point of 
attention.

DOI: 10.1016/0300-483x(88)90117-5
PMID: 3291200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]