---
reference_id: "PMID:38628283"
title: "Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency: a case report with autopsy."
authors:
- Thunga C
- Mitra S
- Dayal D
- Lal S
journal: Autops Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4322/acr.2024.483
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency: a case report with autopsy.
**Authors:** Thunga C, Mitra S, Dayal D, Lal S
**Journal:** Autops Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4322/acr.2024.483](https://doi.org/10.4322/acr.2024.483)

## Content

1. Autops Case Rep. 2024 Apr 4;14:e2024483. doi: 10.4322/acr.2024.483.
eCollection  2024.

Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency: a case report with autopsy.

Thunga C(1), Mitra S(2), Dayal D(3), Lal S(1).

Author information:
(1)Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), 
Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Chandigarh, 
India.
(2)Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), 
Department of Histopathology, Chandigarh, India.
(3)Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), 
Department of Pediatrics, Endocrinology and Diabetes Unit, Chandigarh, India.

Fatty acid oxidation defects are a heterogeneous group of disorders related to 
the mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation pathway. Carnitine acylcarnitine 
translocase (CACT) is an enzyme responsible for the unidirectional transport of 
acylcarnitine across the inner mitochondrial membrane. This enzyme plays a 
crucial role in the oxidation of fatty acids. The autopsy pathology of the CACT 
deficiency is described in only a few cases. We describe the autopsy pathology 
of a child with CACT deficiency dominantly in the form of microvesicular 
steatosis of the hepatocytes, renal proximal tubular epithelia, cardiac 
myocytes, and rhabdomyocytes. The diagnosis was further confirmed on whole exome 
sequencing with compound heterozygous variants in the exon 1 (c.82G>T, 
p.Gly28Cys; likely pathogenic) and exon 5 (c.535G>A, p.Asp179Asn; uncertain 
significance) of the SLC25A20 gene. This case elucidates the histopathology of 
the liver and the detailed autopsy of a case of CACT deficiency from India.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.4322/acr.2024.483
PMCID: PMC11021025
PMID: 38628283

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None.