---
reference_id: "PMID:36252418"
title: Evidence that a working memory cognitive phenotype within schizophrenia has a unique underlying biology.
authors:
- Dean B
- Thomas EHX
- Bozaoglu K
- Tan EJ
- Van Rheenen TE
- Neill E
- Sumner PJ
- Carruthers SP
- Scarr E
- Rossell SL
- Gurvich C
journal: Psychiatry Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2022.114873
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence that a working memory cognitive phenotype within schizophrenia has a unique underlying biology.
**Authors:** Dean B, Thomas EHX, Bozaoglu K, Tan EJ, Van Rheenen TE, Neill E, Sumner PJ, Carruthers SP, Scarr E, Rossell SL, Gurvich C
**Journal:** Psychiatry Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.psychres.2022.114873](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2022.114873)

## Content

1. Psychiatry Res. 2022 Nov;317:114873. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2022.114873. Epub
 2022 Oct 8.

Evidence that a working memory cognitive phenotype within schizophrenia has a 
unique underlying biology.

Dean B(1), Thomas EHX(2), Bozaoglu K(3), Tan EJ(4), Van Rheenen TE(5), Neill 
E(4), Sumner PJ(6), Carruthers SP(6), Scarr E(7), Rossell SL(4), Gurvich C(2).

Author information:
(1)The Molecular Psychiatry Laboratory, The Florey Institute for Neuroscience 
and Mental Health, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. Electronic address: 
brian.dean@florey.edu.au.
(2)Monash Alfred Psychiatry Research Centre, Central Clinical School, Monash 
University and The Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(3)The Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; 
Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Centre for Mental Health, Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorne, 
Victoria, Australia; Department of Psychiatry, St Vincent's Hospital, Fitzroy, 
Victoria, Australia.
(5)Centre for Mental Health, Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorne, 
Victoria, Australia; Melbourne Neuropsychiatry Centre, University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(6)Centre for Mental Health, Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(7)Melbourne Veterinary School, Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, 
The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

It is suggested studying phenotypes within the syndrome of schizophrenia will 
accelerate understanding the complex molecular pathology of the disorder. 
Supporting this hypothesis, we have identified a sub-group within schizophrenia 
with impaired working memory (WM) and have used Affymetrix™ Human Exon 1.0 ST 
Arrays to compare their blood RNA levels (n=16) to a group of with intact WM 
(n=18). Levels of 72 RNAs were higher in blood from patients with impaired WM, 
11 of which have proven links to the maintenance of different aspects of working 
memory (cognition). Overall, changed gene expression in those with impaired WM 
could be linked to cognition through glutamatergic activity, olfaction, 
immunity, inflammation as well as energy and metabolism. Our data gives 
preliminary support to the hypotheses that there is a working memory deficit 
phenotype within the syndrome of schizophrenia with has a biological 
underpinning. In addition, our data raises the possibility that a larger study 
could show that the specific changes in gene expression we have identified could 
prove to be the biomarkers needed to develop a blood test to identify those with 
impaired WM; a significant step toward allowing the use of personalised medicine 
directed toward improving their impaired working memory.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2022.114873
PMID: 36252418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests The authors have no 
competing interests to report.