---
reference_id: "PMID:28726805"
title: "PREPL deficiency: delineation of the phenotype and development of a functional blood assay."
authors:
- Régal L
- Mårtensson E
- Maystadt I
- Voermans N
- Lederer D
- Burlina A
- Juan Fita MJ
- Hoogeboom AJM
- Olsson Engman M
- Hollemans T
- Schouten M
- Meulemans S
- Jonson T
- François I
- Gil Ortega D
- Kamsteeg EJ
- Creemers JWM
journal: Genet Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/gim.2017.74
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Enzyme Activation
- Facies
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Phenotype
- Prolyl Oligopeptidases
- "Serine Endopeptidases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PREPL deficiency: delineation of the phenotype and development of a functional blood assay.
**Authors:** Régal L, Mårtensson E, Maystadt I, Voermans N, Lederer D, Burlina A, Juan Fita MJ, Hoogeboom AJM, Olsson Engman M, Hollemans T, Schouten M, Meulemans S, Jonson T, François I, Gil Ortega D, Kamsteeg EJ, Creemers JWM
**Journal:** Genet Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/gim.2017.74](https://doi.org/10.1038/gim.2017.74)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2018 Jan;20(1):109-118. doi: 10.1038/gim.2017.74. Epub 2017 Jul 20.

PREPL deficiency: delineation of the phenotype and development of a functional 
blood assay.

Régal L(1)(2), Mårtensson E(3), Maystadt I(4), Voermans N(5), Lederer D(4), 
Burlina A(6), Juan Fita MJ(7), Hoogeboom AJM(8), Olsson Engman M(9), Hollemans 
T(2), Schouten M(10), Meulemans S(1), Jonson T(3), François I(11), Gil Ortega 
D(7), Kamsteeg EJ(10), Creemers JWM(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemical Neuroendocrinology, Department of Human Genetics, 
University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Pediatric Neurology and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, UZ Brussel, 
Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, Region Skåne and Lund University, Lund, 
Sweden.
(4)Centre de Génétique Humaine, Institut de Pathologie et Génétique, Charleroi, 
Belgium.
(5)Department of Neurology, RadboudUMC Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(6)Division of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, 
University Hospital Padova, Padova, Italy.
(7)Unidad de Metabolopatías, Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, 
Murcia, Spain.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Blekinge Hospital, Karlskrona, Sweden.
(10)Department of Clinical Genetics, RadboudUMC Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(11)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

PurposePREPL deficiency causes neonatal hypotonia, ptosis, neonatal feeding 
difficulties, childhood obesity, xerostomia, and growth hormone deficiency. 
Different recessive contiguous gene deletion syndromes involving PREPL and a 
variable combination of SLC3A1 (hypotonia-cystinuria syndrome), CAMKMT (atypical 
hypotonia-cystinuria syndrome), and PPM1B (2p21 deletion syndrome) have been 
described. In isolated PREPL deficiency, previously described only once, the 
absence of cystinuria complicates the diagnosis. Therefore, we developed a PREPL 
blood assay and further delineated the phenotype.MethodsClinical features of new 
subjects with PREPL deficiency were recorded. The presence of PREPL in 
lymphocytes and its reactivity with an activity-based probe were evaluated by 
western blot.ResultsFive subjects with isolated PREPL deficiency, three with 
hypotonia-cystinuria syndrome, and two with atypical hypotonia-cystinuria 
syndrome had nine novel alleles. Their IQs ranged from 64 to 112. Adult 
neuromuscular signs included ptosis, nasal dysarthria, facial weakness, and 
variable proximal and neck flexor weakness. Autonomic features are prevalent. 
PREPL protein and reactivity were absent in lymphocytes from subjects with PREPL 
deficiency, but normal in the clinically similar Prader-Willi 
syndrome.ConclusionPREPL deficiency causes neuromuscular, autonomic, cognitive, 
endocrine, and dysmorphic clinical features. PREPL is not deficient in 
Prader-Willi syndrome. The novel blood test should facilitate the confirmation 
of PREPL deficiency.

DOI: 10.1038/gim.2017.74
PMID: 28726805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]