---
reference_id: "PMID:19764023"
title: Confirmation of TFAP2A gene involvement in branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) and report of temporal bone anomalies.
authors:
- Stoetzel C
- Riehm S
- Bennouna Greene V
- Pelletier V
- Vigneron J
- Leheup B
- Marion V
- Hellé S
- Danse JM
- Thibault C
- Moulinier L
- Veillon F
- Dollfus H
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33015
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Branchio-Oto-Renal Syndrome/complications, genetics"
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- Temporal Bone/abnormalities
- "Transcription Factor AP-2/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Confirmation of TFAP2A gene involvement in branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) and report of temporal bone anomalies.
**Authors:** Stoetzel C, Riehm S, Bennouna Greene V, Pelletier V, Vigneron J, Leheup B, Marion V, Hellé S, Danse JM, Thibault C, Moulinier L, Veillon F, Dollfus H
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.33015](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.33015)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Oct;149A(10):2141-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33015.

Confirmation of TFAP2A gene involvement in branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) 
and report of temporal bone anomalies.

Stoetzel C(1), Riehm S, Bennouna Greene V, Pelletier V, Vigneron J, Leheup B, 
Marion V, Hellé S, Danse JM, Thibault C, Moulinier L, Veillon F, Dollfus H.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale EA 3949, Equipe Avenir-Inserm, Faculté de 
Médecine de Strasbourg, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) is an autosomal-dominant condition 
characterized by three main features, respectively: branchial defects, ocular 
anomalies, and craniofacial defects including cleft lip and/or palate (CL/P). We 
report on one family with three affected, and two sporadic cases that have been 
found to carry missense mutations in the newly reported BOFS gene: TFAP2A. This 
report confirms the involvement of this transcription factor in this 
developmental syndrome with clinical variability. Moreover, we present CT scan 
temporal bone anomalies in the familial cases, related to branchial arch 
defects, highlighting the importance of radiological investigations for 
differential diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33015
PMID: 19764023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]