---
reference_id: "PMID:29651749"
title: Medium-chain triglycerides supplement therapy with a low-carbohydrate formula can supply energy and enhance ammonia detoxification in the hepatocytes of patients with adult-onset type II citrullinemia.
authors:
- Hayasaka K
- Numakura C
- Yamakawa M
- Mitsui T
- Watanabe H
- Haga H
- Yazaki M
- Ohira H
- Ochiai Y
- Tahara T
- Nakahara T
- Yamashiki N
- Nakayama T
- Kon T
- Mitsubuchi H
- Yoshida H
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-018-0176-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medium-chain triglycerides supplement therapy with a low-carbohydrate formula can supply energy and enhance ammonia detoxification in the hepatocytes of patients with adult-onset type II citrullinemia.
**Authors:** Hayasaka K, Numakura C, Yamakawa M, Mitsui T, Watanabe H, Haga H, Yazaki M, Ohira H, Ochiai Y, Tahara T, Nakahara T, Yamashiki N, Nakayama T, Kon T, Mitsubuchi H, Yoshida H
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-018-0176-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-018-0176-1)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2018 Sep;41(5):777-784. doi: 10.1007/s10545-018-0176-1. 
Epub 2018 Apr 12.

Medium-chain triglycerides supplement therapy with a low-carbohydrate formula 
can supply energy and enhance ammonia detoxification in the hepatocytes of 
patients with adult-onset type II citrullinemia.

Hayasaka K(1)(2), Numakura C(3), Yamakawa M(4), Mitsui T(3), Watanabe H(5), Haga 
H(5), Yazaki M(6), Ohira H(7), Ochiai Y(8), Tahara T(8), Nakahara T(9), 
Yamashiki N(10), Nakayama T(11), Kon T(12), Mitsubuchi H(13), Yoshida H(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University School of Medicine, 2-2-2 
Iida-nishi, Yamagata, 990-9585, Japan. hayasaka@med.id.yamagata-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Miyukikai Hospital, Kaminoyama, Japan. 
hayasaka@med.id.yamagata-u.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University School of Medicine, 2-2-2 
Iida-nishi, Yamagata, 990-9585, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathological Diagnostics, Yamagata University School of 
Medicine, Yamagata, Japan.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Yamagata University School of Medicine, 
Yamagata, Japan.
(6)Department of Biological Sciences for Intractable Neurological Disorders, 
Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Shinshu University, Nagano, Japan.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology, Fukushima Medical University School of 
Medicine, Fukushima, Japan.
(8)Department of Gastroenterology, Saiseikai Utsunomiya Hospital, Tochigi, 
Japan.
(9)Department of Gastroenterology, Hikone Municipal Hospital, Hikone, Shiga, 
Japan.
(10)Organ Transplantation Unit, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(11)Division of Internal Medicine, Nihonkai General Hospital, Sakata, Japan.
(12)Department of Gastroenterology, Yonezawa Municipal Hospital, Yonezawa, 
Japan.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto 
University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, Tsuruoka Municipal Shonai Hospital, Tsuruoka, 
Japan.

Citrin, encoded by SLC25A13, constitutes the malate-aspartate shuttle, the main 
NADH-shuttle in the liver. Citrin deficiency causes neonatal intrahepatic 
cholestasis (NICCD) and adult-onset type II citrullinemia (CTLN2). Citrin 
deficiency is predicted to impair hepatic glycolysis and de novo lipogenesis, 
resulting in hepatic energy deficit. Secondary decrease in hepatic 
argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS1) expression has been considered a cause of 
hyperammonemia in CTLN2. We previously reported that medium-chain triglyceride 
(MCT) supplement therapy with a low-carbohydrate formula was effective in CTLN2 
to prevent a relapse of hyperammonemic encephalopathy. We present the therapy 
for six CTLN2 patients. All the patients' general condition steadily improved 
and five patients with hyperammonemic encephalopathy recovered from 
unconsciousness in a few days. Before the treatment, plasma glutamine levels did 
not increase over the normal range and rather decreased to lower than the normal 
range in some patients. The treatment promptly decreased the blood ammonia 
level, which was accompanied by a decrease in plasma citrulline levels and an 
increase in plasma glutamine levels. These findings indicated that 
hyperammonemia was not only caused by the impairment of ureagenesis at ASS1 
step, but was also associated with an impairment of glutamine synthetase (GS) 
ammonia-detoxification system in the hepatocytes. There was no decrease in the 
GS expressing hepatocytes. MCT supplement with a low-carbohydrate formula can 
supply the energy and/or substrates for ASS1 and GS, and enhance ammonia 
detoxification in hepatocytes. Histological improvement in the hepatic steatosis 
and ASS1-expression was also observed in a patient after long-term treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-018-0176-1
PMID: 29651749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]