---
reference_id: "PMID:31871139"
title: Relationship between neuropsychiatric disorders and cognitive and behavioural change in MND.
authors:
- McHutchison CA
- Leighton DJ
- McIntosh A
- Cleary E
- Warner J
- Porteous M
- Chandran S
- Pal S
- Abrahams S
journal: J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2019-321737
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relationship between neuropsychiatric disorders and cognitive and behavioural change in MND.
**Authors:** McHutchison CA, Leighton DJ, McIntosh A, Cleary E, Warner J, Porteous M, Chandran S, Pal S, Abrahams S
**Journal:** J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jnnp-2019-321737](https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp-2019-321737)

## Content

1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2020 Mar;91(3):245-253. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2019-321737. Epub 2019 Dec 23.

Relationship between neuropsychiatric disorders and cognitive and behavioural 
change in MND.

McHutchison CA(1)(2)(3), Leighton DJ(2)(4), McIntosh A(3)(5), Cleary E(6), 
Warner J(6), Porteous M(6), Chandran S(2)(4), Pal S(2)(4), Abrahams S(7)(2).

Author information:
(1)Human Cognitive Neurosciences, Department of Psychology, The University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK Caroline.McHutchison@ed.ac.uk.
(2)Euan MacDonald Centre for MND Research, The University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, UK.
(3)Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive Epidemiology, The University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(4)Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, 
UK.
(5)Division of Psychiatry, Royal Edinburgh Hospital, Edinburgh, UK.
(6)Centre for Genomic & Experimental Medicine, South East Scotland Genetics 
Service, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK.
(7)Human Cognitive Neurosciences, Department of Psychology, The University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

OBJECTIVE: In this population-based study, we aimed to determine whether 
neuropsychiatric history, medication or family history of neuropsychiatric 
disorders predicted cognitive and/or behavioural impairment in motor neuron 
disease (MND).
METHODS: People with MND (pwMND) on the Scottish Clinical, Audit, Research and 
Evaluation of MND (CARE-MND) register, diagnosed from January 2015 to January 
2018, with cognitive and/or behavioural data measured using the Edinburgh 
Cognitive and Behavioural ALS Screen were included. Data were extracted on 
patient neuropsychiatric, medication and family history of neuropsychiatric 
disorders. We identified patients with cognitive impairment (motor neuron 
disease with cognitive impairment (MNDci)), behavioural impairment (motor neuron 
disease with behavioural impairment (MNDbi), both (motor neuron disease with 
cognitive and behavioural impairment (MNDcbi)) or motor neuron 
disease-frontotemporal dementia (MND-FTD).
RESULTS: Data were available for 305 pwMND (mean age at diagnosis=62.26 years, 
SD=11.40), of which 60 (19.7%) had a neuropsychiatric disorder. A family history 
of neuropsychiatric disorders was present in 36/231 (15.58%) of patients. 
Patient premorbid mood disorders were associated with increased apathy (OR=2.78, 
95% CI 1.083 to 7.169). A family history of any neuropsychiatric disorder was 
associated with poorer visuospatial scores, MNDbi (OR=3.14, 95% CI 1.09 to 8.99) 
and MND-FTD (OR=5.08, 95% CI 1.26 to 20.40). A family history of mood disorders 
was associated with poorer overall cognition (exp(b)=0.725, p=0.026), language, 
verbal fluency and visuospatial scores, and MND-FTD (OR=7.57, 95% CI 1.55 to 
46.87). A family history of neurotic disorders was associated with poorer 
language (exp(b)=0.362, p<0.001), visuospatial scores (exp(b)=0.625, p<0.009) 
and MND-FTD (OR=13.75, 95% CI 1.71 to 110.86).
CONCLUSION: Neuropsychiatric disorders in patients and their families are 
associated with cognitive and behavioural changes post-MND diagnosis, with many 
occurring independently of MND-FTD and C9orf72 status. These findings support an 
overlap between MND, frontotemporal dementia and neuropsychiatric disorders, 
particularly mood disorders.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2019-321737
PMID: 31871139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.