---
reference_id: "PMID:19229559"
title: "SCA8 repeat expansion: large CTA/CTG repeat alleles in neurological disorders and functional implications."
authors:
- Wu YR
- Chen IC
- Soong BW
- Kao SH
- Lee GC
- Huang SY
- Fung HC
- Lee-Chen GJ
- Chen CM
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0641-x
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Alzheimer Disease/genetics
- Base Sequence
- Case-Control Studies
- Cell Line
- Central Nervous System Diseases/genetics
- DNA Primers/genetics
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- Leupeptins/pharmacology
- "Lymphocytes/drug effects, metabolism"
- Male
- Microfilament Proteins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Parkinson Disease/genetics
- Parkinsonian Disorders/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Pyrimidines
- "RNA, Long Noncoding"
- "RNA, Untranslated"
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics
- Staurosporine/pharmacology
- Sulfonamides
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SCA8 repeat expansion: large CTA/CTG repeat alleles in neurological disorders and functional implications.
**Authors:** Wu YR, Chen IC, Soong BW, Kao SH, Lee GC, Huang SY, Fung HC, Lee-Chen GJ, Chen CM
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-009-0641-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-009-0641-x)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2009 May;125(4):437-44. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0641-x. Epub 2009
Feb  20.

SCA8 repeat expansion: large CTA/CTG repeat alleles in neurological disorders 
and functional implications.

Wu YR(1), Chen IC, Soong BW, Kao SH, Lee GC, Huang SY, Fung HC, Lee-Chen GJ, 
Chen CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang-Gung University 
College of Medicine, Taipei, 10507, Taiwan.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 8 (SCA8) involves bidirectional expression of CUG 
(ATXN8OS) and CAG (ATXN8) expansion transcripts. The pathogenesis of SCA8 is 
complex and the spectrum of clinical presentations is broad. In the present 
study, we assessed the SCA8 repeat size ranges in Taiwanese Parkinson's disease, 
Alzheimer's disease and atypical parkinsonism and investigated the genetic 
variation modulating ATXN8 expression. Thirteen large SCA8 alleles and a novel 
ATXN8 -62 G/A promoter SNP were found. There is a significant difference in the 
proportion of the individuals carrying SCA8 larger alleles in atypical 
parkinsonism (P = 0.044) as compared to that in the control subjects. In 
lymphoblastoid cells carrying SCA8 large alleles, treatment of MG-132 or 
staurosporine significantly increases the cell death or caspase 3 activity. 
Although expressed at low steady-state, ATXN8 expression level is significantly 
higher (P = 0.012) in cells with SCA8 large alleles than that of the control 
cells. The ATXN8 transcriptional activity was significantly higher in the 
luciferase reporter construct containing the -62G allele than that containing 
the -62A allele in both neuroblastoma and embryonic kidney cells. Therefore, our 
preliminary results suggest that ATXN8 gene -62 G/A polymorphism may be 
functional in modulating ATXN8 expression.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-009-0641-x
PMID: 19229559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]