---
reference_id: "PMID:35361845"
title: Prediction of dengue fever outbreaks using climate variability and Markov chain Monte Carlo techniques in a stochastic susceptible-infected-removed model.
authors:
- Martheswaran TK
- Hamdi H
- Al-Barty A
- Zaid AA
- Das B
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-09489-y
keywords:
- Bayes Theorem
- COVID-19
- Dengue/epidemiology
- Disease Outbreaks
- Humans
- Markov Chains
- Pandemics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prediction of dengue fever outbreaks using climate variability and Markov chain Monte Carlo techniques in a stochastic susceptible-infected-removed model.
**Authors:** Martheswaran TK, Hamdi H, Al-Barty A, Zaid AA, Das B
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-022-09489-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-09489-y)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2022 Mar 31;12(1):5459. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-09489-y.

Prediction of dengue fever outbreaks using climate variability and Markov chain
Monte Carlo techniques in a stochastic susceptible-infected-removed model.

Martheswaran TK(1), Hamdi H(2), Al-Barty A(3), Zaid AA(4), Das B(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics, Waterford School, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, College of Science, Taif University, P.O. Box 11099,
Taif, 21944, Saudi Arabia. shimaa76sl@tu.edu.sa.
(3)Department of Biology, College of Science, Taif University, P.O. Box 11099,
Taif, 21944, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Biology, Alkhormah University College, Taif University, Taif,
21974, Saudi Arabia.
(5)School of Biotechnology, Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology, KIIT
Deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India.
biswadeep.das@kiitbiotech.ac.in.

The recent increase in the global incidence of dengue fever resulted in over 2.7
million cases in Latin America and many cases in Southeast Asia and has
warranted the development and application of early warning systems (EWS) for
futuristic outbreak prediction. EWS pertaining to dengue outbreaks is
imperative; given the fact that dengue is linked to environmental factors owing
to its dominance in the tropics. Prediction is an integral part of EWS, which is
dependent on several factors, in particular, climate, geography, and
environmental factors. In this study, we explore the role of increased
susceptibility to a DENV serotype and climate variability in developing novel
predictive models by analyzing RT-PCR and DENV-IgM confirmed cases in Singapore
and Honduras, which reported high dengue incidence in 2019 and 2020,
respectively. A random-sampling-based susceptible-infected-removed (SIR) model
was used to obtain estimates of the susceptible fraction for modeling the dengue
epidemic, in addition to the Bayesian Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) technique
that was used to fit the model to Singapore and Honduras case report data from
2012 to 2020. Regression techniques were used to implement climate variability
in two methods: a climate-based model, based on individual climate variables,
and a seasonal model, based on trigonometrically varying transmission rates. The
seasonal model accounted for 98.5% and 92.8% of the variance in case count in
the 2020 Singapore and 2019 Honduras outbreaks, respectively. The climate model
accounted for 75.3% and 68.3% of the variance in Singapore and Honduras
outbreaks respectively, besides accounting for 75.4% of the variance in the
major 2013 Singapore outbreak, 71.5% of the variance in the 2019 Singapore
outbreak, and over 70% of the variance in 2015 and 2016 Honduras outbreaks. The
seasonal model accounted for 14.2% and 83.1% of the variance in the 2013 and
2019 Singapore outbreaks, respectively, in addition to 91% and 59.5% of the
variance in the 2015 and 2016 Honduras outbreaks, respectively. Autocorrelation
lag tests showed that the climate model exhibited better prediction dynamics for
Singapore outbreaks during the dry season from May to August and in the rainy
season from June to October in Honduras. After incorporation of susceptible
fractions, the seasonal model exhibited higher accuracy in predicting outbreaks
of higher case magnitude, including those of the 2019-2020 dengue epidemic, in
comparison to the climate model, which was more accurate in outbreaks of smaller
magnitude. Such modeling studies could be further performed in various
outbreaks, such as the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic to understand the outbreak
dynamics and predict the occurrence of future outbreaks.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-09489-y
PMCID: PMC8969405
PMID: 35361845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
