---
reference_id: "PMID:2475586"
title: The significance of plasma phytanic acid levels in adults.
authors:
- Britton TC
- Gibberd FB
- Clemens ME
- Billimoria JD
- Sidey MC
journal: J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1136/jnnp.52.7.891
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Eicosanoic Acids/blood
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Phytanic Acid/blood
- "Refsum Disease/blood, diagnosis, diet therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The significance of plasma phytanic acid levels in adults.
**Authors:** Britton TC, Gibberd FB, Clemens ME, Billimoria JD, Sidey MC
**Journal:** J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jnnp.52.7.891](https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.52.7.891)

## Content

1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1989 Jul;52(7):891-4. doi:
10.1136/jnnp.52.7.891.

The significance of plasma phytanic acid levels in adults.

Britton TC(1), Gibberd FB, Clemens ME, Billimoria JD, Sidey MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Westminster Hospital, London, UK.

The presence of phytanic acid in tissues and plasma has been considered
diagnostic of heredopathia atactica polyneuritiformis (Refsum's disease), but
recently slightly raised plasma phytanic acid levels have been reported in other
conditions. Forty two normal people were found to have a phytanic acid level of
0-33 mumol/l. Fourteen patients with heredopathia atactica polyneuritiformis had
a plasma phytanic acid level before treatment of 992-6400 mumol/l. Five patients
with retinitis pigmentosa but not heredopathia atactica polyneuritiformis had
plasma levels of 38-192 mumol/l. It was concluded that some patients with
retinitis pigmentosa without heredopathia atactica polyneuritiformis but a
raised plasma phytanic acid may represent a group of patients with a disease or
diseases as yet uncharacterised apart from the retinal condition.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.52.7.891
PMCID: PMC1031939
PMID: 2475586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
