---
reference_id: "PMID:16094309"
title: Variable expressivity of the clinical and biochemical phenotype associated with the apolipoprotein E p.Leu149del mutation.
authors:
- Faivre L
- Saugier-Veber P
- Pais de Barros JP
- Verges B
- Couret B
- Lorcerie B
- Thauvin C
- Charbonnier F
- Huet F
- Gambert P
- Frebourg T
- Duvillard L
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201480
keywords:
- "Apolipoproteins E/blood, genetics"
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- Hyperlipoproteinemia Type IV/genetics
- Lipids/blood
- Lipoproteins/blood
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Sea-Blue Histiocyte Syndrome/genetics
- Splenomegaly/genetics
- Syndrome
- Thrombocytopenia/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variable expressivity of the clinical and biochemical phenotype associated with the apolipoprotein E p.Leu149del mutation.
**Authors:** Faivre L, Saugier-Veber P, Pais de Barros JP, Verges B, Couret B, Lorcerie B, Thauvin C, Charbonnier F, Huet F, Gambert P, Frebourg T, Duvillard L
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201480](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201480)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005 Nov;13(11):1186-91. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201480.

Variable expressivity of the clinical and biochemical phenotype associated with 
the apolipoprotein E p.Leu149del mutation.

Faivre L(1), Saugier-Veber P, Pais de Barros JP, Verges B, Couret B, Lorcerie B, 
Thauvin C, Charbonnier F, Huet F, Gambert P, Frebourg T, Duvillard L.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d'Enfants, Dijon, France. 
laurence.faivre@chu-dijon.fr

Splenomegaly with sea-blue histiocytes, thrombocytopenia and 
hypertriglyceridemia is a very rare association that has been described in only 
one report to date. The molecular defect in the two reported patients consists 
in a deletion of a leucine at position 149 in the receptor-binding region of the 
apoE molecule. Here, we report on another family in whom the proband and his 
brother were diagnosed with splenomegaly, thrombocytopenia and 
hypertriglyceridemia. An apoE p.Leu149del mutation was found in both subjects. A 
large beta band in the VLDL fraction and elevated VLDL cholesterol-to-plasma 
triglyceride ratio was observed in the proband only. Their mother, presenting 
with isolated hypertriglyceridemia, also carried the same p.Leu149del mutation. 
The coexistence of factors facilitating the development of hypertriglyceridemia 
and/or low HDL-cholesterol level could explain why the proband and his brother 
developed a splenomegaly with thrombocytopenia, whereas the mother did not. 
Moreover, the presence of an apoE2 allele in the proband likely explains the 
more severe phenotype we observed in this subject. In conclusion, the apoE 
p.Leu149del mutation results in a very striking phenotype including one or all 
symptoms among splenomegaly, thrombocytopenia and hypertriglyceridemia, and 
should be considered as a differential diagnosis of storage disorders in the 
causes of splenomegaly with sea-blue histiocytes.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201480
PMID: 16094309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]