---
reference_id: "PMID:33506248"
title: Incidence of and Trends in the Leading Cancers With Elevated Incidence Among American Indian and Alaska Native Populations, 2012-2016.
authors:
- Melkonian SC
- Weir HK
- Jim MA
- Preikschat B
- Haverkamp D
- White MC
journal: Am J Epidemiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/aje/kwaa222
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence of and Trends in the Leading Cancers With Elevated Incidence Among American Indian and Alaska Native Populations, 2012-2016.
**Authors:** Melkonian SC, Weir HK, Jim MA, Preikschat B, Haverkamp D, White MC
**Journal:** Am J Epidemiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/aje/kwaa222](https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwaa222)

## Content

1. Am J Epidemiol. 2021 Apr 6;190(4):528-538. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwaa222.

Incidence of and Trends in the Leading Cancers With Elevated Incidence Among 
American Indian and Alaska Native Populations, 2012-2016.

Melkonian SC, Weir HK, Jim MA, Preikschat B, Haverkamp D, White MC.

Cancer incidence varies among American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) 
populations, as well as between AI/AN and White populations. This study examined 
trends for cancers with elevated incidence among AI/AN compared with 
non-Hispanic White populations and estimated potentially avoidable incident 
cases among AI/AN populations. Incident cases diagnosed during 2012-2016 were 
identified from population-based cancer registries and linked with the Indian 
Health Service patient registration databases to improve racial classification 
of AI/AN populations. Age-adjusted rates (per 100,000) and trends were 
calculated for cancers with elevated incidence among AI/AN compared with 
non-Hispanic White populations (rate ratio of >1.0) according to region. Trends 
were estimated using joinpoint regression analyses. Expected cancers were 
estimated by applying age-specific cancer incidence rates among non-Hispanic 
White populations to population estimates for AI/AN populations. Excess cancer 
cases among AI/AN populations were defined as observed minus expected cases. 
Liver, stomach, kidney, lung, colorectal, and female breast cancers had higher 
incidence rates among AI/AN populations across most regions. Between 2012 and 
2016, nearly 5,200 excess cancers were diagnosed among AI/AN populations, with 
the largest number of excess cancers (1,925) occurring in the Southern Plains 
region. Culturally informed efforts could reduce cancer disparities associated 
with these and other cancers among AI/AN populations.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg 
School of Public Health 2020. This work is written by (a) US Government 
employee(s) and is in the public domain in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwaa222
PMCID: PMC8026484
PMID: 33506248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None Declared