---
reference_id: "PMID:17916990"
title: The Heart and APS.
authors:
- Amigo MC
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-007-0013-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Heart and APS.
**Authors:** Amigo MC
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-007-0013-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-007-0013-z)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2007 Apr;32(2):178-83. doi:
10.1007/s12016-007-0013-z.

The Heart and APS.

Amigo MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, Universidad Nacional 
Autónoma de México, Juan Badiano # 1 Tlalpan, Mexico City 14080, Mexico. 
marycarmenamigo@gmail.com

The heart is a target organ in antiphospholipid syndrome (APS). Endocardial 
disease, intracardiac thrombosis, myocardial involvement including coronary 
heart disease and microvascular thrombosis, as well as pulmonary hypertension 
have all been described in APS patients. Valvular involvement is the most common 
manifestation with a prevalence of 82% detected by transesophageal 
echocardiography. Symmetrical, nodular thickening of the mitral and/or aortic 
valves is characteristic. Anticoagulant/antiplatelet treatment is ineffective in 
terms of valvular lesion regression. Some patients require cardiac valve 
replacement. However, patients with APS have shown an increased perioperative 
morbidity and mortality. Intracardiac thrombosis, although a rare complication, 
can cause pulmonary and systemic emboli. Differential diagnosis with myxoma may 
be very difficult.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-007-0013-z
PMID: 17916990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]