---
reference_id: "PMID:1281272"
title: Genotoxic effects of sodium arsenite on human cells.
authors:
- Jha AN
- Noditi M
- Nilsson R
- Natarajan AT
journal: Mutat Res
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1016/0027-5107(92)90005-m
keywords:
- Arsenic/toxicity
- Arsenites
- Chromosome Deletion
- DNA Damage/drug effects
- DNA Repair/drug effects
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Humans
- "Micronuclei, Chromosome-Defective/drug effects"
- Mutagenicity Tests
- Mutagens/toxicity
- Ring Chromosomes
- Sister Chromatid Exchange/drug effects
- Ultraviolet Rays/adverse effects
- X-Rays/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotoxic effects of sodium arsenite on human cells.
**Authors:** Jha AN, Noditi M, Nilsson R, Natarajan AT
**Journal:** Mutat Res (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0027-5107(92)90005-m](https://doi.org/10.1016/0027-5107(92)90005-m)

## Content

1. Mutat Res. 1992 Dec 16;284(2):215-21. doi: 10.1016/0027-5107(92)90005-m.

Genotoxic effects of sodium arsenite on human cells.

Jha AN(1), Noditi M, Nilsson R, Natarajan AT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Genetics and Chemical Mutagenesis, State University
of Leiden, Netherlands.

The effects of sodium arsenite (SA) were studied either alone or in combination
with X-rays in peripheral blood lymphocytes, and with short-wave ultraviolet
(UV) radiation in primary human fibroblast culture systems. It was found that SA
(i) inhibited the cell cycle progression of phytohaemagglutinin (PHA)-responsive
lymphocytes, (ii) induced chromatid-type aberrations and sister-chromatid
exchanges (SCEs) as a function of concentration and (iii) potentiated the X-ray-
and UV-induced chromosomal damage. Our results suggest that SA interferes with
the DNA repair process, presumably by inhibiting the ligase activity. This
accounted for an increase in the DNA replication-dependent processes, chromatid
aberrations and SCEs and synergistic enhancement of the X-ray- and UV-induced
chromosomal damage. This ability of arsenite may be responsible for its
comutagenic properties with different types of mutagens and hence its
carcinogenicity.

DOI: 10.1016/0027-5107(92)90005-m
PMID: 1281272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
