---
reference_id: "PMID:26426639"
title: "Comparative Study of Modified Posterior Operation to Treat Kümmell's Disease."
authors:
- Wang F
- Wang D
- Tan B
- Dong J
- Feng R
- Yuan Z
- Wang N
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001595
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative Study of Modified Posterior Operation to Treat Kümmell's Disease.
**Authors:** Wang F, Wang D, Tan B, Dong J, Feng R, Yuan Z, Wang N
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000001595](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000001595)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Sep;94(39):e1595. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001595.

Comparative Study of Modified Posterior Operation to Treat Kümmell's Disease.

Wang F(1), Wang D, Tan B, Dong J, Feng R, Yuan Z, Wang N.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Spinal Surgery, Shandong Provincial Hospital 
affiliated to Shandong University, China.

The present study aimed at examining the curative effect of modified posterior 
operation on treatment of Kümmell's disease. About 30 patients of Kümmell's 
disease with complete image and clinical data treated during June 2004 to July 
2013 were conducted with anterior and posterior approaches, respectively. 
Kyphotic Cobb angle, fractured vertebra wedge angle, and the anterior and 
posterior heights of fractured vertebra were all measured through x-ray before 
and after operation, and the pain visual analog scale (VAS) was determined for 
evaluating the effect of operations. The injury and restoration of neurological 
function were assessed using Frankel classification. Patients in group A were 
treated with anterior operation, whereas group B was posterior operation. 
Postoperatively, VAS score, kyphotic Cobb angle, anterior vertebra height, and 
pathologic vertebra wedge angle were all significantly improved in patients with 
Kümmell's disease receiving modified posterior operation (group B). Similar 
results were also observed in patients with anterior operation. The improvement 
of VAS and correction rate of kyphotic Cobb angle indicated equivalent effects 
of posterior and anterior operations. Meanwhile, alleviated neurological 
function damage was observed in 2 groups. Relevant factor analysis illustrated 
that there was no significant correlation of the severity and improvement rate 
of pain symptoms with age, medical history, anterior and posterior vertebra 
heights, kyphotic Cobb angle, and pathological vertebra wedge angle. Compared 
with traditional anterior approach, modified posterior operation, adopting 
transpedicular vertebral body grafting combined with vertebral pedicle screw 
fixation, could produce equivalent effects on kyphosis correction, pain relief, 
and improvement of neurological function in patients with Kümmell's disease.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001595
PMCID: PMC4616816
PMID: 26426639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.