---
reference_id: "PMID:28771246"
title: "Diagnosis and treatment of tyrosinemia type I: a US and Canadian consensus group review and recommendations."
authors:
- Chinsky JM
- Singh R
- Ficicioglu C
- van Karnebeek CDM
- Grompe M
- Mitchell G
- Waisbren SE
- Gucsavas-Calikoglu M
- Wasserstein MP
- Coakley K
- Scott CR
journal: Genet Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/gim.2017.101
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and treatment of tyrosinemia type I: a US and Canadian consensus group review and recommendations.
**Authors:** Chinsky JM, Singh R, Ficicioglu C, van Karnebeek CDM, Grompe M, Mitchell G, Waisbren SE, Gucsavas-Calikoglu M, Wasserstein MP, Coakley K, Scott CR
**Journal:** Genet Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/gim.2017.101](https://doi.org/10.1038/gim.2017.101)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2017 Dec;19(12). doi: 10.1038/gim.2017.101. Epub 2017 Aug 3.

Diagnosis and treatment of tyrosinemia type I: a US and Canadian consensus group 
review and recommendations.

Chinsky JM(1), Singh R(2), Ficicioglu C(3), van Karnebeek CDM(4), Grompe M(5), 
Mitchell G(6), Waisbren SE(7), Gucsavas-Calikoglu M(8), Wasserstein MP(9), 
Coakley K(10), Scott CR(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Human Genetics and Pediatrics, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(3)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Division of Human Genetics and 
Metabolism, Perelman School of Medicine at The University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, CA and Departments of Pediatrics and 
Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Pape Family Pediatric Research Institute, Oregon 
Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon, USA.
(6)CHU Sainte-Justine and Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(7)Metabolism Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Metabolism, University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(9)The Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Bronx, New York, USA.
(10)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.
(11)Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Comment in
    Genet Med. 2020 Feb;22(2):437-438. doi: 10.1038/s41436-019-0658-z.
    Genet Med. 2020 Feb;22(2):439-440. doi: 10.1038/s41436-019-0659-y.

Tyrosinemia type I (hepatorenal tyrosinemia, HT-1) is an autosomal recessive 
condition resulting in hepatic failure with comorbidities involving the renal 
and neurologic systems and long term risks for hepatocellular carcinoma. An 
effective medical treatment with 
2-[2-nitro-4-trifluoromethylbenzoyl]-1,3-cyclohexanedione (NTBC) exists but 
requires early identification of affected children for optimal long-term 
results. Newborn screening (NBS) utilizing blood succinylacetone as the NBS 
marker is superior to observing tyrosine levels as a way of identifying neonates 
with HT-1. If identified early and treated appropriately, the majority of 
affected infants can remain asymptomatic. A clinical management scheme is needed 
for infants with HT-1 identified by NBS or clinical symptoms. To this end, a 
group of 11 clinical practitioners, including eight biochemical genetics 
physicians, two metabolic dietitian nutritionists, and a clinical psychologist, 
from the United States and Canada, with experience in providing care for 
patients with HT-1, initiated an evidence- and consensus-based process to 
establish uniform recommendations for identification and treatment of HT-1. 
Recommendations were developed from a literature review, practitioner management 
survey, and nominal group process involving two face-to-face meetings. There was 
strong consensus in favor of NBS for HT-1, using blood succinylacetone as a 
marker, followed by diagnostic confirmation and early treatment with NTBC and 
diet. Consensus recommendations for both immediate and long-term clinical 
follow-up of positive diagnoses via both newborn screening and clinical 
symptomatic presentation are provided.

DOI: 10.1038/gim.2017.101
PMCID: PMC5729346
PMID: 28771246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All discussions of both the content and writing 
of the manuscript were performed without the presence or input of any 
representative of Sobi, Inc. J.M.C., R.S., C.F., M.G.C., M.G., G.M., and C.R.S. 
have participated as physician consultants/advisers intermittently for Sobi, 
Inc., the manufacturers of Orfadin (nitisinone) and have received compensation 
for their activities. The other authors declare no conflict of interest.