---
reference_id: "PMID:21425267"
title: Axonal damage in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Haines JD
- Inglese M
- Casaccia P
journal: Mt Sinai J Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/msj.20246
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Axonal damage in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Haines JD, Inglese M, Casaccia P
**Journal:** Mt Sinai J Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/msj.20246](https://doi.org/10.1002/msj.20246)

## Content

1. Mt Sinai J Med. 2011 Mar-Apr;78(2):231-43. doi: 10.1002/msj.20246.

Axonal damage in multiple sclerosis.

Haines JD(1), Inglese M, Casaccia P.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neuroscience Neurology and Genetics and Genomics, Mount Sinai 
School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Multiple sclerosis is a debilitating disease of the central nervous system that 
has been characteristically classified as an immune-mediated destruction of 
myelin, the protective coating on nerve fibers. Although the mechanisms 
responsible for the immune attack to central nervous system myelin have been the 
subject of intense investigation, more recent studies have focused on the 
neurodegenerative component, which is cause of clinical disability in young 
adults and appears to be only partially controlled by immunomodulatory 
therapies. Here, we review distinct, but not mutually exclusive, mechanisms of 
pathogenesis of axonal damage in multiple sclerosis patients that are either 
consequent to long-term demyelination or independent from it. We propose that 
the complexity of axonal degeneration and the heterogeneity of the underlying 
pathogenetic mechanisms should be taken into consideration for the design of 
targeted therapeutic intervention.

© 2011 Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

DOI: 10.1002/msj.20246
PMCID: PMC3142952
PMID: 21425267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURES Potential conflict of interest: 
Nothing to report.