---
reference_id: "PMID:39156600"
title: "Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndromes and rare dysimmune conditions associated with hyper-eosinophilia in practice: An innovative multidisciplinary approach."
authors:
- Caminati M
- Carpagnano LF
- Alberti C
- Amaddeo F
- Bixio R
- Caldart F
- De Franceschi L
- Del Giglio M
- Festi G
- Friso S
- Frulloni L
- Gisondi P
- Krampera M
- Lippi G
- Micheletto C
- Piacentini G
- Pinter P
- Rossini M
- Schiappoli M
- Tecchio C
- Tenero L
- Tinazzi E
- Senna G
- Carlucci M
- Multidisciplinary Group on rare dysimmune conditions with hyper-Eosinophilia (GEos)
journal: World Allergy Organ J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.waojou.2024.100928
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndromes and rare dysimmune conditions associated with hyper-eosinophilia in practice: An innovative multidisciplinary approach.
**Authors:** Caminati M, Carpagnano LF, Alberti C, Amaddeo F, Bixio R, Caldart F, De Franceschi L, Del Giglio M, Festi G, Friso S, Frulloni L, Gisondi P, Krampera M, Lippi G, Micheletto C, Piacentini G, Pinter P, Rossini M, Schiappoli M, Tecchio C, Tenero L, Tinazzi E, Senna G, Carlucci M, Multidisciplinary Group on rare dysimmune conditions with hyper-Eosinophilia (GEos)
**Journal:** World Allergy Organ J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.waojou.2024.100928](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.waojou.2024.100928)

## Content

1. World Allergy Organ J. 2024 Jul 25;17(8):100928. doi: 
10.1016/j.waojou.2024.100928. eCollection 2024 Aug.

Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndromes and rare dysimmune conditions associated 
with hyper-eosinophilia in practice: An innovative multidisciplinary approach.

Caminati M(1)(2), Carpagnano LF(3), Alberti C(4), Amaddeo F(5), Bixio R(6), 
Caldart F(7), De Franceschi L(1)(8), Del Giglio M(9), Festi G(10), Friso 
S(1)(8), Frulloni L(1)(7), Gisondi P(9), Krampera M(11), Lippi G(12), Micheletto 
C(10), Piacentini G(13), Pinter P(14), Rossini M(1)(6), Schiappoli M(2), Tecchio 
C(11), Tenero L(13), Tinazzi E(8), Senna G(1)(2), Carlucci M(15); 
Multidisciplinary Group on rare dysimmune conditions with hyper-Eosinophilia 
(GEos).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(2)Allergy Unit and Asthma Center, Verona Integrated University Hospital, 
Verona, Italy.
(3)University of Verona, Verona Italy.
(4)Pharmacy Unit, Verona Integrated University Hospital, Verona, Italy.
(5)Unit of Psychosomatics and Medical Psychology, Verona Integrated University 
Hospital, and Department of Neurosciences, Biomedicine and Movement, University 
of Verona, Italy.
(6)Rheumatology Unit, Verona Integrated University Hospital, Verona, Italy.
(7)Gastroenterology and Digestive Endoscopy Unit, The Pancreas Institute, Verona 
Integrated University Hospital, Verona, Italy.
(8)Unit of Internal Medicine B, Verona Integrated University Hospital, Verona 
Italy.
(9)Section of Dermatology and Venereology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Verona, Verona, Italy.
(10)Pulmonology Unit, Verona Integrated University Hospital, Verona Italy.
(11)Department of Engineering for Innovation Medicine, Section of Innovation 
Biomedicine, Hematology Area, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(12)Section of Clinical Biochemistry and School of Medicine, University of 
Verona, Verona, Italy.
(13)Department of Surgical Sciences, Dentistry, Gynecology and Pediatrics, 
Pediatric Clinic, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(14)Unit of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Department, University of Verona, 
Verona, Italy.
(15)Health Directorate, Verona Integrated University Hospital, Verona, Italy.

Hypereosinophilic syndromes (HES) represent a group of rare dis-immune 
conditions characterized by blood hyper-eosinophilia and eosinophilic related 
burden. Especially the idiopathic subtype (I-HES) is particularly difficult to 
diagnose because of its heterogeneous clinical presentation, the lack of 
specific findings on physical exam, lab tools, and imaging informative enough to 
unequivocally confirm the diagnosis and the overlap with other entities, 
including eosinophilic organ-diseases or systemic dis-immune conditions other 
than I-HES (from atopy to eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis [EGPA], 
the last often extremely difficult to distinguish from HES). Taken together, all 
the features mentioned above account for an extremely difficult early 
recognition HES and on-time referral to a specialized centre. The referral 
itself is challenging due to a not univocal specialist identification, because 
of the variability of physicians managing HES in different settings (including 
allergist/clinical immunologist, haematologist, internal medicine doctors, 
pulmonologist, rheumatologist). Furthermore, the approach in terms of 
personalized treatment identification and follow-up plan (timing, organ 
assessment), is poorly standardized. Further translational and clinical research 
is needed to address the mentioned unmet needs, but on practical grounds 
increasing the overall clinicians' awareness on HES and implementing healthcare 
pathways for HES patients represent a roadmap that every clinician might try to 
realize in his specific setting. The present review aims at providing an 
overview about the current challenges and unmet needs in the practical approach 
to HES and rare hypereosinophilic allergo-immunological diseases, including a 
proposal for an innovative multidisciplinary organizational model.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.waojou.2024.100928
PMCID: PMC11327453
PMID: 39156600

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests in relation to the topic of the manuscript.