---
reference_id: "PMID:20301505"
title: Prader-Willi Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Driscoll DJ
- Miller JL
- Cassidy SB
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prader-Willi Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Driscoll DJ, Miller JL, Cassidy SB

## Content

1. Prader-Willi Syndrome.

Driscoll DJ(1), Miller JL(2), Cassidy SB(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
1998 Oct 6 [updated 2026 Feb 19].

Author information:
(1)Professor of Pediatrics and Genetics, Hayward Professor of Genetics Research, 
University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida
(2)Professor of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, University of 
Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida
(3)Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is characterized by severe 
hypotonia, poor appetite, and feeding difficulties in early infancy, followed in 
early childhood by excessive eating and gradual development of morbid obesity 
(unless food intake is strictly controlled). Motor milestones and language 
development are delayed. All individuals have some degree of cognitive 
impairment. Hypogonadism is present in both males and females and manifests as 
genital hypoplasia, incomplete pubertal development, and, in most, infertility. 
Short stature is common (if not treated with growth hormone). A distinctive 
behavioral phenotype (temper tantrums, stubbornness, manipulative behavior, and 
obsessive-compulsive characteristics) is common. Characteristic facial features, 
strabismus, and scoliosis are often present.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: PWS is a contiguous gene syndrome due to abnormal DNA 
methylation within the Prader-Willi critical region (PWCR) at 15q11.2-q13. The 
diagnosis and molecular cause can be identified in a proband by simultaneous DNA 
methylation analysis and oligo-SNP combination array (OSA). DNA methylation 
analysis identifies maternal-only imprinting within the PWCR. OSA can identify 
the molecular cause in those with a 15q11.2-q13 deletion, imprinting center 
deletion, and uniparental isodisomy and segmental isodisomy. In individuals with 
maternal-only imprinting identified on DNA methylation analysis and a normal 
OSA, DNA polymorphism analysis can be used to distinguish uniparental 
heterodisomy from an imprinting defect by epimutation.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: Diazoxide choline for hyperphagia. Supportive 
care: In infancy, special nipples or nasogastric tube feeding to assure adequate 
nutrition. In childhood, strict supervision of daily food intake based on 
height, weight, and body mass index (BMI) to provide energy requirements while 
limiting excessive weight gain (maintain BMI z score <2); encourage physical 
activity. Developmental services and educational support; hormonal and surgical 
treatments can be considered for cryptorchidism; growth hormone therapy to 
normalize height, increase lean body mass and mobility, and decrease fat mass; 
endocrine management of sex hormone replacement at puberty; treatment for those 
with precocious puberty, type 2 diabetes, and hypothyroidism; urgent evaluation 
for those with acute gastrointestinal manifestations; topiramate or 
N-acetylcysteine as needed for skin picking; standard treatment for 
neurobehavioral and ophthalmologic manifestations, sleep issues, scoliosis, hip 
dysplasia, and seizures; modafinil may be helpful for daytime sleepiness; 
calcium and vitamin D supplementation to avoid osteoporosis; sex steroid 
therapy, growth hormone, or bisphosphonates for low bone density; products for 
dry mouth and frequent dental hygiene; social work support and care 
coordination. In adulthood, a residential facility for individuals with PWS that 
helps regulate behavior and weight management may prevent morbid obesity, and 
growth hormone may help to maintain muscle mass. Surveillance: Monitor 
development, growth, skin, sleep issues, and family needs at each visit. Assess 
testicular position annually in males; assess glycosylated hemoglobin and/or 
glucose tolerance test in adolescents and those with obesity or rapid weight 
gain; and assess free thyroxine and TSH every six to 12 months. Assess for 
central adrenal insufficiency as needed; monitor height, weight, and BMI monthly 
in infancy, every six months until age ten years, and then annually. Assess for 
behavioral issues annually after age two years, and for psychosis annually in 
adolescent and adults. Assess for vision issues and sleep issues annually; sleep 
study prior to starting growth hormone therapy and four to eight weeks after 
starting growth hormone therapy. Clinical examination for scoliosis at each 
visit when child can sit independently; spine radiographs annually in those with 
clinical findings of scoliosis or obesity; DXA scan every two years beginning in 
adolescence. Assess for new seizures or monitor those with seizures at each 
visit. Dental evaluations every six months or more frequently in those with 
dental issues. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Unsupervised access to food; 
emetics; antidiarrheal medications; sedatives and other medications.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Individuals with PWS typically represent simplex cases 
(i.e., a single affected family member) and have the disorder as the result of a 
de novo genetic alteration. The vast majority of families have a recurrence risk 
of less than 1%. However, certain etiologies involve a recurrence risk as high 
as 50%, and a scenario with a risk of almost 100%, though very unlikely, is 
theoretically possible. Reliable PWS recurrence risk assessment therefore 
requires identification of the genetic mechanism of PWS in the proband (i.e., a 
15q deletion, UPD 15, or an imprinting defect) and parental testing to discern 
the presence of a predisposing genetic alternation (e.g., a parental chromosome 
rearrangement or paternal heterozygosity for an imprinting center deletion). 
Once the causative genetic mechanism has been identified in the proband, 
prenatal testing for PWS is possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301505