---
reference_id: "PMID:16728643"
title: Pituitary adenoma predisposition caused by germline mutations in the AIP gene.
authors:
- Vierimaa O
- Georgitsi M
- Lehtonen R
- Vahteristo P
- Kokko A
- Raitila A
- Tuppurainen K
- Ebeling TM
- Salmela PI
- Paschke R
- Gündogdu S
- De Menis E
- Mäkinen MJ
- Launonen V
- Karhu A
- Aaltonen LA
journal: Science
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1126/science.1126100
keywords:
- Adenoma/genetics
- Age of Onset
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Finland
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Testing
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Growth Hormone-Secreting Pituitary Adenoma/genetics
- Haplotypes
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Lod Score
- Loss of Heterozygosity
- Male
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Pedigree
- Penetrance
- Pituitary Neoplasms/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Prolactinoma/genetics
- "Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- Sex Distribution
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pituitary adenoma predisposition caused by germline mutations in the AIP gene.
**Authors:** Vierimaa O, Georgitsi M, Lehtonen R, Vahteristo P, Kokko A, Raitila A, Tuppurainen K, Ebeling TM, Salmela PI, Paschke R, Gündogdu S, De Menis E, Mäkinen MJ, Launonen V, Karhu A, Aaltonen LA
**Journal:** Science (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1126100](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1126100)

## Content

1. Science. 2006 May 26;312(5777):1228-30. doi: 10.1126/science.1126100.

Pituitary adenoma predisposition caused by germline mutations in the AIP gene.

Vierimaa O(1), Georgitsi M, Lehtonen R, Vahteristo P, Kokko A, Raitila A,
Tuppurainen K, Ebeling TM, Salmela PI, Paschke R, Gündogdu S, De Menis E,
Mäkinen MJ, Launonen V, Karhu A, Aaltonen LA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Oulu University Hospital, 90029 Oulu,
Finland.

Pituitary adenomas are common in the general population, and understanding their
molecular basis is of great interest. Combining chip-based technologies with
genealogy data, we identified germline mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor interacting protein (AIP) gene in individuals with pituitary adenoma
predisposition (PAP). AIP acts in cytoplasmic retention of the latent form of
the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and also has other functions. In a
population-based series from Northern Finland, two AIP mutations account for 16%
of all patients diagnosed with pituitary adenomas secreting growth hormone and
for 40% of the subset of patients who were diagnosed when they were younger than
35 years of age. Typically, PAP patients do not display a strong family history
of pituitary adenoma; thus, AIP is an example of a low-penetrance tumor
susceptibility gene.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1126100
PMID: 16728643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
