---
reference_id: "PMID:19439424"
title: Targeted loss of Arx results in a developmental epilepsy mouse model and recapitulates the human phenotype in heterozygous females.
authors:
- Marsh E
- Fulp C
- Gomez E
- Nasrallah I
- Minarcik J
- Sudi J
- Christian SL
- Mancini G
- Labosky P
- Dobyns W
- Brooks-Kayal A
- Golden JA
journal: Brain
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awp107
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- Brain/pathology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Electroencephalography
- "Epilepsy/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Female
- Genotype
- Heterozygote
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- Interneurons/pathology
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Phenotype
- "Receptors, Androgen/genetics"
- "Spasms, Infantile/genetics, pathology"
- "Transcription Factors/deficiency, genetics"
- X Chromosome Inactivation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted loss of Arx results in a developmental epilepsy mouse model and recapitulates the human phenotype in heterozygous females.
**Authors:** Marsh E, Fulp C, Gomez E, Nasrallah I, Minarcik J, Sudi J, Christian SL, Mancini G, Labosky P, Dobyns W, Brooks-Kayal A, Golden JA
**Journal:** Brain (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awp107](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awp107)

## Content

1. Brain. 2009 Jun;132(Pt 6):1563-76. doi: 10.1093/brain/awp107. Epub 2009 May
12.

Targeted loss of Arx results in a developmental epilepsy mouse model and
recapitulates the human phenotype in heterozygous females.

Marsh E(1), Fulp C, Gomez E, Nasrallah I, Minarcik J, Sudi J, Christian SL,
Mancini G, Labosky P, Dobyns W, Brooks-Kayal A, Golden JA.

Author information:
(1)Abramson Research Center, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 3615 Civic
Center Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. marshe@email.chop.edu

Comment in
    Epilepsy Curr. 2010 Jan;10(1):24-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1535-7511.2009.01343.x.

Mutations in the X-linked aristaless-related homeobox gene (ARX) have been
linked to structural brain anomalies as well as multiple neurocognitive
deficits. The generation of Arx-deficient mice revealed several morphological
anomalies, resembling those observed in patients and an interneuron migration
defect but perinatal lethality precluded analyses of later phenotypes.
Interestingly, many of the neurological phenotypes observed in patients with
various ARX mutations can be attributed, in part, to interneuron dysfunction. To
directly test this possibility, mice carrying a floxed Arx allele were generated
and crossed to Dlx5/6(CRE-IRES-GFP)(Dlx5/6(CIG)) mice, conditionally deleting
Arx from ganglionic eminence derived neurons including cortical interneurons. We
now report that Arx(-/y);Dlx5/6(CIG) (male) mice exhibit a variety of seizure
types beginning in early-life, including seizures that behaviourally and
electroencephalographically resembles infantile spasms, and show evolution
through development. Thus, this represents a new genetic model of a malignant
form of paediatric epilepsy, with some characteristics resembling infantile
spasms, caused by mutations in a known infantile spasms gene. Unexpectedly,
approximately half of the female mice carrying a single mutant Arx allele
(Arx(-/+);Dlx5/6(CIG)) also developed seizures. We also found that a subset of
human female carriers have seizures and neurocognitive deficits. In summary, we
have identified a previously unrecognized patient population with neurological
deficits attributed to ARX mutations that are recapitulated in our mouse model.
Furthermore, we show that perturbation of interneuron subpopulations is an
important mechanism underling the pathogenesis of developmental epilepsy in both
hemizygous males and carrier females. Given the frequency of ARX mutations in
patients with infantile spasms and related disorders, our data unveil a new
model for further understanding the pathogenesis of these disorders.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awp107
PMCID: PMC2685924
PMID: 19439424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
