---
reference_id: "PMID:22305528"
title: Haploinsufficiency of a spliceosomal GTPase encoded by EFTUD2 causes mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly.
authors:
- Lines MA
- Huang L
- Schwartzentruber J
- Douglas SL
- Lynch DC
- Beaulieu C
- Guion-Almeida ML
- Zechi-Ceide RM
- Gener B
- Gillessen-Kaesbach G
- Nava C
- Baujat G
- Horn D
- Kini U
- Caliebe A
- Alanay Y
- Utine GE
- Lev D
- Kohlhase J
- Grix AW
- Lohmann DR
- Hehr U
- Böhm D
- FORGE Canada Consortium
- Majewski J
- Bulman DE
- Wieczorek D
- Boycott KM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.12.023
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Exome
- Female
- GTP Phosphohydrolases/genetics
- Haploinsufficiency/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mandibulofacial Dysostosis/genetics
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary/genetics"
- RNA Splicing/genetics
- "Ribonucleoprotein, U5 Small Nuclear/genetics"
- Spliceosomes/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Haploinsufficiency of a spliceosomal GTPase encoded by EFTUD2 causes mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly.
**Authors:** Lines MA, Huang L, Schwartzentruber J, Douglas SL, Lynch DC, Beaulieu C, Guion-Almeida ML, Zechi-Ceide RM, Gener B, Gillessen-Kaesbach G, Nava C, Baujat G, Horn D, Kini U, Caliebe A, Alanay Y, Utine GE, Lev D, Kohlhase J, Grix AW, Lohmann DR, Hehr U, Böhm D, FORGE Canada Consortium, Majewski J, Bulman DE, Wieczorek D, Boycott KM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.12.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.12.023)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Feb 10;90(2):369-77. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.12.023.
Epub  2012 Feb 2.

Haploinsufficiency of a spliceosomal GTPase encoded by EFTUD2 causes 
mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly.

Lines MA(1), Huang L, Schwartzentruber J, Douglas SL, Lynch DC, Beaulieu C, 
Guion-Almeida ML, Zechi-Ceide RM, Gener B, Gillessen-Kaesbach G, Nava C, Baujat 
G, Horn D, Kini U, Caliebe A, Alanay Y, Utine GE, Lev D, Kohlhase J, Grix AW, 
Lohmann DR, Hehr U, Böhm D; FORGE Canada Consortium; Majewski J, Bulman DE, 
Wieczorek D, Boycott KM.

Collaborators: Boycott K, Friedman J, Michaud J, Bernier F, Brudno M, Fernandez 
B, Knoppers B, Samuels M, Scherer S.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, University of 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly (MFDM) is a rare sporadic syndrome 
comprising craniofacial malformations, microcephaly, developmental delay, and a 
recognizable dysmorphic appearance. Major sequelae, including choanal atresia, 
sensorineural hearing loss, and cleft palate, each occur in a significant 
proportion of affected individuals. We present detailed clinical findings in 12 
unrelated individuals with MFDM; these 12 individuals compose the largest 
reported cohort to date. To define the etiology of MFDM, we employed whole-exome 
sequencing of four unrelated affected individuals and identified heterozygous 
mutations or deletions of EFTUD2 in all four. Validation studies of eight 
additional individuals with MFDM demonstrated causative EFTUD2 mutations in all 
affected individuals tested. A range of EFTUD2-mutation types, including null 
alleles and frameshifts, is seen in MFDM, consistent with haploinsufficiency; 
segregation is de novo in all cases assessed to date. U5-116kD, the protein 
encoded by EFTUD2, is a highly conserved spliceosomal GTPase with a central 
regulatory role in catalytic splicing and post-splicing-complex disassembly. 
MFDM is the first multiple-malformation syndrome attributed to a defect of the 
major spliceosome. Our findings significantly extend the range of reported 
spliceosomal phenotypes in humans and pave the way for further investigation in 
related conditions such as Treacher Collins syndrome.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.12.023
PMCID: PMC3276671
PMID: 22305528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]