---
reference_id: "PMID:40917492"
title: A Case of Relapsing Polychondritis with Multisystemic Involvement.
authors:
- Huang J
- Mu X
- Tang S
- Zhou H
- Lu Y
- Zhang M
- Zhu D
journal: Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.2147/CCID.S470498
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Case of Relapsing Polychondritis with Multisystemic Involvement.
**Authors:** Huang J, Mu X, Tang S, Zhou H, Lu Y, Zhang M, Zhu D
**Journal:** Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.2147/CCID.S470498](https://doi.org/10.2147/CCID.S470498)

## Content

1. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2025 Aug 31;18:2093-2101. doi: 
10.2147/CCID.S470498. eCollection 2025.

A Case of Relapsing Polychondritis with Multisystemic Involvement.

Huang J(#)(1), Mu X(#)(2), Tang S(3), Zhou H(4), Lu Y(5), Zhang M(3), Zhu D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Clinical Research Center, Hainan Hospital, 
Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou University of 
Chinese Medicine, Haikou, Hainan, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, The People's Hospital of Peng'an County, Nanchong, 
Sichuan, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Imaging, The Fifth People's Hospital of Hainan Province, 
Haikou, Hainan, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, The Fifth People's Hospital of Hainan Province, 
Haikou, Hainan, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Pathology, The Fifth People's Hospital of Hainan Province, 
Haikou, Hainan, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

Relapsing polychondritis is a rare immunologic disorder that can involve all 
cartilage and proteoglycan-rich tissues. Clinical symptoms of relapsing 
polychondritis are often associated with recurrent inflammatory manifestations 
and functional impairment of such tissues. The disease has an insidious onset, 
and the first symptoms and clinical manifestations vary, making it easy to 
misdiagnose and miss the diagnosis. Here, we report a case of relapsing 
polychondritis with multi-systemic disease in a single ear and a single eye. A 
44-year-old Chinese man suddenly developed redness, swelling, and pain in the 
right auricle without any causative factors half a year ago, followed by other 
multi-systemic symptoms, and he went to an outside hospital several times. He 
was diagnosed with sinusitis and bronchitis after completing some investigations 
in a foreign hospital, and his condition did not improve after taking oral 
medication, so he came to our hospital and was diagnosed with relapsing 
polychondritis after completing some investigations.

© 2025 Huang et al.

DOI: 10.2147/CCID.S470498
PMCID: PMC12410384
PMID: 40917492

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.