---
reference_id: "PMID:20301784"
title: Mucolipidosis III Gamma.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Raas-Rothschild A
- Spiegel R
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucolipidosis III Gamma.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Raas-Rothschild A, Spiegel R

## Content

1. Mucolipidosis III Gamma.

Raas-Rothschild A(1)(2), Spiegel R(3)(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2010 Jan 28 [updated 2026 Apr 23].

Author information:
(1)Pediatrician Medical Geneticist, Institute of Rare Diseases, Genetic 
Institute, Sheba Medical Center, Tel HaShomer, Ramat Gan, Israel
(2)Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
(3)Pediatrician Medical Geneticist, Pediatric Department B and Center for Rare 
Diseases, Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel
(4)Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, 
Haifa, Israel

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Mucolipidosis III gamma (ML IIIγ) is a slowly 
progressive inborn error of metabolism mainly affecting skeletal, joint, and 
connective tissues. Clinical onset is in early childhood; the progressive course 
results in severe functional impairment and significant morbidity from chronic 
pain. Cardiorespiratory complications (restrictive lung disease from thoracic 
involvement and thickening and insufficiency of the mitral and aortic valves) 
are rarely clinically significant. Motor milestones can be affected due to joint 
disease. A few (probably <5%) affected individuals display mild cognitive 
impairment.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of ML IIIγ is established in a proband with 
suggestive clinical and radiographic findings and biallelic pathogenic variants 
in GNPTG identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: No measures are known to be effective 
in treating the progressive limitation of motion in large and small joints. 
Physical and occupational therapy adapted to individual's needs; low-impact aqua 
therapy is usually well tolerated. Braces (especially of the hands) at night may 
improve daily functions; carpal tunnel and, rarely, tarsal tunnel syndrome may 
require surgical release procedures for temporary relief; treatment of spine 
deformities per specialists. Anesthesia requires careful multidisciplinary 
planning due to multisystem involvement (atlantoaxial instability, cardiac, 
airway, and respiratory). In older adolescents and adults, joint replacement has 
been successful in relieving hip pain and knee pain. Later in the disease 
course, when bone pain of variable intensity may become frequent, management 
focuses on pain relief. Bisphosphonate treatment in individuals with significant 
skeletal disease and markedly decreased bone mineral densitometry can be 
considered. Treatment of restricted lung disease per pulmonologist. When 
significant cardiac valvular dysfunction disrupts ventricular function, valve 
replacement needs to be considered. Developmental and educational support as 
needed. Addressing the social and emotional needs of affected individuals and 
their families is recommended. Surveillance: Annual assessment (unless more 
frequent pain, cardiac, and/or respiratory monitoring is warranted) of 
musculoskeletal manifestations, gross motor and fine motor function, pain level, 
growth, dental, vision, respiratory and cardiac function, development, 
educational needs, psychological issues, and utilization of community resources. 
Frequency of DXA scans depends on age and results of prior studies. Pulmonary 
function studies every five years. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Vigorous 
stretching exercises because they are ineffective, painful, and may damage the 
surrounding joint capsule and adjacent tendons.
GENETIC COUNSELING: ML IIIγ is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If 
both parents are known to be heterozygous for a GNPTG pathogenic variant, each 
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, 
a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being 
unaffected and not a carrier. Once the GNPTG pathogenic variants have been 
identified in an affected family member, molecular genetic carrier testing for 
at-risk relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301784