---
reference_id: "PMID:29663270"
title: Molecular biology and gene therapy for glycogen storage disease type Ib.
authors:
- Chou JY
- Cho JH
- Kim GY
- Mansfield BC
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-018-0180-5
keywords:
- Animals
- Antiporters/genetics
- Blood Glucose/analysis
- Dependovirus/genetics
- Genetic Therapy
- Genetic Vectors
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type I/genetics, therapy"
- Homeostasis
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Monosaccharide Transport Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular biology and gene therapy for glycogen storage disease type Ib.
**Authors:** Chou JY, Cho JH, Kim GY, Mansfield BC
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-018-0180-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-018-0180-5)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2018 Nov;41(6):1007-1014. doi: 10.1007/s10545-018-0180-5.
 Epub 2018 Apr 16.

Molecular biology and gene therapy for glycogen storage disease type Ib.

Chou JY(1), Cho JH(2), Kim GY(2), Mansfield BC(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Section on Cellular Differentiation, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Building 10, Room 8N240C, NIH 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD, 20892-1830, USA.
chouja@mail.nih.gov.
(2)Section on Cellular Differentiation, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Building 10, Room 8N240C, NIH 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD, 20892-1830, USA.
(3)Foundation Fighting Blindness, Columbia, MD, 21046, USA.

Glycogen storage disease type Ib (GSD-Ib) is caused by a deficiency in the
ubiquitously expressed glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) transporter (G6PT or SLC37A4).
The primary function of G6PT is to translocate G6P from the cytoplasm into the
lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Inside the ER, G6P is hydrolyzed to
glucose and phosphate by either the liver/kidney/intestine-restricted
glucose-6-phosphatase-α (G6Pase-α) or the ubiquitously expressed G6Pase-β. A
deficiency in G6Pase-α causes GSD type Ia (GSD-Ia) and a deficiency in G6Pase-β
causes GSD-I-related syndrome (GSD-Irs). In gluconeogenic organs, functional
coupling of G6PT and G6Pase-α is required to maintain interprandial blood
glucose homeostasis. In myeloid tissues, functional coupling of G6PT and
G6Pase-β is required to maintain neutrophil homeostasis. Accordingly, GSD-Ib is
a metabolic and immune disorder, manifesting impaired glucose homeostasis,
neutropenia, and neutrophil dysfunction. A G6pt knockout mouse model is being
exploited to delineate the pathophysiology of GSD-Ib and develop new clinical
treatment options, including gene therapy. The safety and efficacy of several
G6PT-expressing recombinant adeno-associated virus pseudotype 2/8 vectors have
been examined in murine GSD-Ib. The results demonstrate that the liver-directed
gene transfer and expression safely corrects metabolic abnormalities and
prevents hepatocellular adenoma (HCA) development. However, a second vector
system may be required to correct myeloid and renal dysfunction in GSD-Ib. These
findings are paving the way to a safe and efficacious gene therapy for entering
clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-018-0180-5
PMID: 29663270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
