---
reference_id: "PMID:36769638"
title: The Role of MCM9 in the Etiology of Sertoli Cell-Only Syndrome and Premature Ovarian Insufficiency.
authors:
- Potorac I
- Laterre M
- Malaise O
- Nechifor V
- Fasquelle C
- Colleye O
- Detrembleur N
- Verdin H
- Symoens S
- De Baere E
- Daly AF
- Bours V
- Pétrossians P
- Pintiaux A
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/jcm12030990
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of MCM9 in the Etiology of Sertoli Cell-Only Syndrome and Premature Ovarian Insufficiency.
**Authors:** Potorac I, Laterre M, Malaise O, Nechifor V, Fasquelle C, Colleye O, Detrembleur N, Verdin H, Symoens S, De Baere E, Daly AF, Bours V, Pétrossians P, Pintiaux A
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm12030990](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12030990)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2023 Jan 28;12(3):990. doi: 10.3390/jcm12030990.

The Role of MCM9 in the Etiology of Sertoli Cell-Only Syndrome and Premature 
Ovarian Insufficiency.

Potorac I(1), Laterre M(2), Malaise O(3), Nechifor V(4), Fasquelle C(2), Colleye 
O(5), Detrembleur N(5), Verdin H(6), Symoens S(6), De Baere E(6), Daly AF(1), 
Bours V(2), Pétrossians P(1), Pintiaux A(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Liège, 
Domaine Universitaire Sart-Tilman, 4000 Liège, Belgium.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de 
Liège, Domaine Universitaire Sart-Tilman, 4000 Liège, Belgium.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Liège, 
Domaine Universitaire Sart-Tilman, 4000 Liège, Belgium.
(4)Department of Urology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Liège, 
Domaine Universitaire Sart-Tilman, 4000 Liège, Belgium.
(5)Department of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Liège, 
Domaine Universitaire Sart-Tilman, 4000 Liège, Belgium.
(6)Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University and Ghent University 
Hospital, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(7)Department of Gynecology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Liège, 
Domaine Universitaire Sart-Tilman, 4000 Liège, Belgium.

Infertility in couples is a common problem, with both female and male factors 
contributing to similar extents. Severe, congenital disorders affecting 
fertility are, however, rare. While folliculogenesis and spermatogenesis are 
generally orchestrated via different mechanisms, some genetic anomalies can 
impair both female and male gametogenesis. Minichromosome maintenance complex 
component 9 (MCM9) is involved in DNA repair and mutations of the MCM9 gene have 
been previously reported in females with premature ovarian insufficiency (POI). 
MCM9 is also an emerging cancer risk gene. We performed next-generation and 
Sanger sequencing of fertility and related genes and hormonal and imaging 
studies in a kindred whose members had POI and disordered spermatogenesis. We 
identified a homozygous pathogenic MCM9 variant, c.394C>T (p.Arg132*) in three 
sisters affected by POI due to ovarian dysgenesis and their brother who had 
normal pubertal development but suffered from non-obstructive azoospermia. 
Testicular biopsy revealed Sertoli cell-only testicular histopathology. No 
evidence of early onset cancer was found in the homozygotic family members, but 
they were all young (<30 years) at the time of the study. In the male patient 
the homozygous MCM9 variant led to normal pubertal development and hormonal 
levels but caused a Sertoli-cell-only syndrome with non-obstructive azoospermia. 
In the homozygous females studied, the clinical, hormonal, and gonadal 
phenotypes revealed ovarian dysgenesis consistent with previous reports. Active 
screening for potential colorectal and other cancer risks in the homozygotic 
MCM9 subjects has been instigated.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12030990
PMCID: PMC9917496
PMID: 36769638

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.