---
reference_id: "PMID:17023257"
title: "Systemic rheumatoid vasculitis: a review."
authors:
- Genta MS
- Genta RM
- Gabay C
journal: Semin Arthritis Rheum
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2006.04.006
keywords:
- "Arthritis, Rheumatoid/epidemiology, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- "Vasculitis/epidemiology, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic rheumatoid vasculitis: a review.
**Authors:** Genta MS, Genta RM, Gabay C
**Journal:** Semin Arthritis Rheum (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semarthrit.2006.04.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2006.04.006)

## Content

1. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2006 Oct;36(2):88-98. doi: 
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2006.04.006.

Systemic rheumatoid vasculitis: a review.

Genta MS(1), Genta RM, Gabay C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland. 
marcia.genta@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVES: To review the most recent information on the incidence, clinical 
course, pathology, pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment of rheumatoid 
vasculitis (RV), including the still scanty data on the use of biologics.
METHODS: PubMed and MEDLINE databases (1950-2006) were searched for the key 
words "vasculitis" and "rheumatoid arthritis"; and "rheumatoid arthritis" and 
"extra-articular manifestations." All relevant articles in English and French 
were reviewed. Additional words used in follow-up research include "anti-TNF," 
"rituximab," "IL-1 receptor antagonists," and "CTLA-4 Ig," all in conjunction 
with "vasculitis." Pertinent secondary references were also retrieved.
RESULTS: RV is an inflammatory condition of the small- and medium-sized vessels 
that affects a subset of patients with established rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 
(approximately 1 to approximately 5%). It has a vast array of clinical 
manifestations with a predilection for the skin (peripheral gangrene, deep 
cutaneous ulcers) and the peripheral nervous system (mononeuritis multiplex). 
Because of the lack of specific signs and symptoms, the diagnosis relies on the 
exclusion of other causes of similar lesions (diabetes, atherosclerosis, drug 
reactions, infection, neoplasias) and, ideally, on the histopathological 
demonstration of necrotizing vasculitis. Despite the availability of a host of 
promising new drugs for the treatment of RA, no clinical trials have tested 
their efficacy in RV; therefore, its management remains largely empirical.
CONCLUSIONS: Although RV has apparently been decreasing over the last 2 decades, 
possibly as a consequence of the more energetic approach to the management of RA 
currently used, it remains an important complication of RA that needs to be 
promptly recognized and treated.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2006.04.006
PMID: 17023257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]