---
reference_id: "PMID:36831116"
title: "N-Glycoprofiling of SLC35A2-CDG: Patient with a Novel Hemizygous Variant."
authors:
- Kodríková R
- Pakanová Z
- Krchňák M
- Šedivá M
- Šesták S
- Květoň F
- Beke G
- Šalingová A
- Skalická K
- Brennerová K
- Jančová E
- Baráth P
- Mucha J
- Nemčovič M
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11020580
content_type: abstract_only
---

# N-Glycoprofiling of SLC35A2-CDG: Patient with a Novel Hemizygous Variant.
**Authors:** Kodríková R, Pakanová Z, Krchňák M, Šedivá M, Šesták S, Květoň F, Beke G, Šalingová A, Skalická K, Brennerová K, Jančová E, Baráth P, Mucha J, Nemčovič M
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines11020580](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines11020580)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2023 Feb 16;11(2):580. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11020580.

N-Glycoprofiling of SLC35A2-CDG: Patient with a Novel Hemizygous Variant.

Kodríková R(1), Pakanová Z(1), Krchňák M(1), Šedivá M(1), Šesták S(1), Květoň 
F(1), Beke G(1)(2), Šalingová A(3), Skalická K(4), Brennerová K(5), Jančová 
E(5), Baráth P(1), Mucha J(1), Nemčovič M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Chemistry, Centre of Glycomics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, 
Dúbravská cesta 9, 841 04 Bratislava, Slovakia.
(2)Department of Genomics and Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular Biology, 
Slovak Academy of Sciences, Dúbravská cesta 21, 845 51 Bratislava, Slovakia.
(3)National Institute of Children's Diseases, Center for Inherited Metabolic 
Disorders, Limbová 1, 833 40 Bratislava, Slovakia.
(4)Laboratory of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, National Institute of 
Children's Diseases, Limbová 1, 833 40 Bratislava, Slovakia.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine of Comenius University and 
National Institute for Children's Diseases, Limbová 1, 833 40 Bratislava, 
Slovakia.

Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) are a group of rare inherited 
metabolic disorders caused by a defect in the process of protein glycosylation. 
In this work, we present a comprehensive glycoprofile analysis of a male patient 
with a novel missense variant in the SLC35A2 gene, coding a galactose 
transporter that translocates UDP-galactose from the cytosol to the lumen of the 
endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus. Isoelectric focusing of serum 
transferrin, which resulted in a CDG type II pattern, was followed by structural 
analysis of transferrin and serum N-glycans, as well as the analysis of 
apolipoprotein CIII O-glycans by mass spectrometry. An abnormal serum 
N-glycoprofile with significantly increased levels of agalactosylated 
(Hex3HexNAc4-5 and Hex3HexNAc5Fuc1) and monogalactosylated (Hex4HexNAc4 ± 
NeuAc1) N-glycans was observed. Additionally, whole exome sequencing and Sanger 
sequencing revealed de novo hemizygous c.461T > C (p.Leu154Pro) mutation in the 
SLC35A2 gene. Based on the combination of biochemical, analytical, and genomic 
approaches, the set of distinctive N-glycan biomarkers was characterized. 
Potentially, the set of identified aberrant N-glycans can be specific for other 
variants causing SLC35A2-CDG and can distinguish this disorder from the other 
CDGs or other defects in the galactose metabolism.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines11020580
PMCID: PMC9952902
PMID: 36831116

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.