---
reference_id: "PMID:31802236"
title: "Risk-adapted therapy and biological heterogeneity in pineoblastoma: integrated clinico-pathological analysis from the prospective, multi-center SJMB03 and SJYC07 trials."
authors:
- Liu APY
- Gudenas B
- Lin T
- Orr BA
- Klimo P Jr
- Kumar R
- Bouffet E
- Gururangan S
- Crawford JR
- Kellie SJ
- Chintagumpala M
- Fisher MJ
- Bowers DC
- Hassall T
- Indelicato DJ
- Onar-Thomas A
- Ellison DW
- Boop FA
- Merchant TE
- Robinson GW
- Northcott PA
- Gajjar A
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-019-02106-9
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age Factors
- "Brain Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- DNA Methylation
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Pineal Gland
- "Pinealoma/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Proto-Oncogene Mas
- Risk Factors
- Survival Rate
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk-adapted therapy and biological heterogeneity in pineoblastoma: integrated clinico-pathological analysis from the prospective, multi-center SJMB03 and SJYC07 trials.
**Authors:** Liu APY, Gudenas B, Lin T, Orr BA, Klimo P Jr, Kumar R, Bouffet E, Gururangan S, Crawford JR, Kellie SJ, Chintagumpala M, Fisher MJ, Bowers DC, Hassall T, Indelicato DJ, Onar-Thomas A, Ellison DW, Boop FA, Merchant TE, Robinson GW, Northcott PA, Gajjar A
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-019-02106-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-019-02106-9)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2020 Feb;139(2):259-271. doi: 10.1007/s00401-019-02106-9.
Epub  2019 Dec 4.

Risk-adapted therapy and biological heterogeneity in pineoblastoma: integrated
clinico-pathological analysis from the prospective, multi-center SJMB03 and
SJYC07 trials.

Liu APY(1), Gudenas B(2), Lin T(3), Orr BA(4), Klimo P Jr(5)(6)(7), Kumar R(2),
Bouffet E(8), Gururangan S(9), Crawford JR(10), Kellie SJ(11), Chintagumpala
M(12), Fisher MJ(13), Bowers DC(14), Hassall T(15), Indelicato DJ(16),
Onar-Thomas A(3), Ellison DW(4), Boop FA(5)(6)(7), Merchant TE(17), Robinson
GW(18), Northcott PA(2), Gajjar A(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny
Thomas Place, Memphis, TN, USA. anthony.liu@stjude.org.
(2)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
TN, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN,
USA.
(5)Department of Surgery, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN,
USA.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, TN, USA.
(7)Le Bonheur Neuroscience Institute, Le Bonheur Children's Hospital, Memphis,
TN, USA.
(8)Division of Hematology-Oncology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON,
Canada.
(9)Lillian S. Wells Department of Neurosurgery, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(10)University of California San Diego and Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego,
CA, USA.
(11)Children's Cancer Centre, The Children's Hospital at Westmead and University
of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Cancer Center, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(13)Division of Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(14)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(15)Queensland Children's Hospital, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(16)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Florida, Jacksonville, FL,
USA.
(17)Department of Radiation Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN, USA.
(18)Department of Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny
Thomas Place, Memphis, TN, USA.

Erratum in
    Acta Neuropathol. 2020 Feb;139(2):273-275. doi: 10.1007/s00401-019-02115-8.

Pineoblastoma is a rare embryonal tumor of childhood that is conventionally
treated with high-dose craniospinal irradiation (CSI). Multi-dimensional
molecular evaluation of pineoblastoma and associated intertumoral heterogeneity
is lacking. Herein, we report outcomes and molecular features of children with
pineoblastoma from two multi-center, risk-adapted trials (SJMB03 for
patients ≥ 3 years; SJYC07 for patients < 3 years) complemented by a
non-protocol institutional cohort. The clinical cohort consisted of 58 patients
with histologically diagnosed pineoblastoma (SJMB03 = 30, SJYC07 = 12,
non-protocol = 16, including 12 managed with SJMB03-like therapy). The SJMB03
protocol comprised risk-adapted CSI (average-risk = 23.4 Gy, high-risk = 36 Gy)
with radiation boost to the primary site and adjuvant chemotherapy. The SJYC07
protocol consisted of induction chemotherapy, consolidation with focal radiation
(intermediate-risk) or chemotherapy (high-risk), and metronomic maintenance
therapy. The molecular cohort comprised 43 pineal parenchymal tumors profiled by
DNA methylation array (n = 43), whole-exome sequencing (n = 26), and
RNA-sequencing (n = 16). Respective 5-year progression-free survival rates for
patients with average-risk or high-risk disease on SJMB03 or SJMB03-like therapy
were 100% and 56.5 ± 10.3% (P = 0.007); respective 2-year progression-free
survival rates for those with intermediate-risk or high-risk disease on SJYC07
were 14.3 ± 13.2% and 0% (P = 0.375). Of patients with average-risk disease
treated with SJMB03/SJMB03-like therapy, 17/18 survived without progression.
DNA-methylation analysis revealed four clinically relevant pineoblastoma
subgroups: PB-A, PB-B, PB-B-like, and PB-FOXR2. Pineoblastoma subgroups differed
in age at diagnosis, propensity for metastasis, cytogenetics, and clinical
outcomes. Alterations in the miRNA-processing pathway genes DICER1, DROSHA, and
DGCR8 were recurrent and mutually exclusive in PB-B and PB-B-like subgroups;
PB-FOXR2 samples universally overexpressed the FOXR2 proto-oncogene. Our
findings suggest superior outcome amongst older children with average-risk
pineoblastoma treated with reduced-dose CSI. The identification of biologically
and clinically distinct pineoblastoma subgroups warrants consideration of future
molecularly-driven treatment protocols for this rare pediatric brain tumor
entity.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-019-02106-9
PMCID: PMC7065912
PMID: 31802236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AUTHORS’ DISCLOSURES OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF
INTEREST The authors disclose no conflict of interest.
