---
reference_id: "PMID:39062866"
title: Pathogenesis of Endometriosis and Endometriosis-Associated Cancers.
authors:
- Adilbayeva A
- Kunz J
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25147624
keywords:
- "Endometriosis/pathology, genetics, etiology, metabolism"
- Humans
- Female
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/pathology, etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis of Endometriosis and Endometriosis-Associated Cancers.
**Authors:** Adilbayeva A, Kunz J
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25147624](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25147624)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jul 11;25(14):7624. doi: 10.3390/ijms25147624.

Pathogenesis of Endometriosis and Endometriosis-Associated Cancers.

Adilbayeva A(1), Kunz J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine, Nazarbayev University,
5/1 Kerey and Zhanibek Khans St, Astana 020000, Kazakhstan.

Endometriosis is a hormone-dependent, chronic inflammatory condition that
affects 5-10% of reproductive-aged women. It is a complex disorder characterized
by the growth of endometrial-like tissue outside the uterus, which can cause
chronic pelvic pain and infertility. Despite its prevalence, the underlying
molecular mechanisms of this disease remain poorly understood. Current treatment
options are limited and focus mainly on suppressing lesion activity rather than
eliminating it entirely. Although endometriosis is generally considered a benign
condition, substantial evidence suggests that it increases the risk of
developing specific subtypes of ovarian cancer. The discovery of cancer driver
mutations in endometriotic lesions indicates that endometriosis may share
molecular pathways with cancer. Moreover, the application of single-cell and
spatial genomics, along with the development of organoid models, has started to
illuminate the molecular mechanisms underlying disease etiology. This review
aims to summarize the key genetic mutations and alterations that drive the
development and progression of endometriosis to malignancy. We also review the
significant recent advances in the understanding of the molecular basis of the
disorder, as well as novel approaches and in vitro models that offer new avenues
for improving our understanding of disease pathology and for developing new
targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25147624
PMCID: PMC11277188
PMID: 39062866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
