---
reference_id: "PMID:38167209"
title: Dynamic monitoring of UBA1 somatic mutations in patients with relapsing polychondritis.
authors:
- Duan S
- Luo H
- Wang Y
- Jiang D
- Liu J
- Li J
- Zheng H
- Zhao T
- Liu C
- Zhang H
- Mao C
- Zhang L
- Xu Y
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-03003-x
keywords:
- Alleles
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic"
- Male
- Asian People
- Mutation/genetics
- Ubiquitin-Activating Enzymes/genetics
- Humans
- "Polychondritis, Relapsing/genetics"
- Myelodysplastic Syndromes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dynamic monitoring of UBA1 somatic mutations in patients with relapsing polychondritis.
**Authors:** Duan S, Luo H, Wang Y, Jiang D, Liu J, Li J, Zheng H, Zhao T, Liu C, Zhang H, Mao C, Zhang L, Xu Y
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-03003-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-03003-x)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Jan 2;19(1):1. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-03003-x.

Dynamic monitoring of UBA1 somatic mutations in patients with relapsing 
polychondritis.

Duan S(#)(1)(2)(3), Luo H(#)(1)(3), Wang Y(#)(1)(3), Jiang D(2), Liu J(2), Li 
J(1)(3), Zheng H(1)(4), Zhao T(1)(3), Liu C(1), Zhang H(1), Mao C(1)(4), Zhang 
L(5), Xu Y(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.
(2)Rheumatology & Immunology Department, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.
(3)Henan Key Laboratory of Cerebrovascular Diseases, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.
(4)The Academy of Medical Sciences of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.
(5)Rheumatology & Immunology Department, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China. fcczhangl6@zzu.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China. xuyuming@zzu.edu.cn.
(7)Henan Key Laboratory of Cerebrovascular Diseases, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China. 
xuyuming@zzu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Commonly clinically diagnosed with relapsing polychondritis (RP), 
vacuoles, E1 enzyme, X-linked, autoinflammatory, somatic syndrome (VEXAS) is a 
recently identified autoinflammatory disease caused by UBA1 somatic mutations. 
The low frequency and dynamic changes challenge the accurate detection of 
somatic mutations. The present study monitored these mutations in Chinese 
patients with RP. We included 44 patients with RP. Sanger sequencing of UBA1 was 
performed using genomic DNA from peripheral blood. Droplet digital polymerase 
chain reaction (ddPCR) was performed to screen low-prevalence somatic variants.
RESULTS: Multiple ddPCR detections were performed using available blood samples 
collected at different follow-up time points. Three male patients were UBA1 
somatic mutation carriers. Sanger sequencing detected the somatic UBA1 variant 
c.122T > C (p.Met41Thr) in two male patients. Initial ddPCR confirmed the 
variant in the two patients, with allele fractions of 73.75% and 88.46%, 
respectively, while yielding negative results in other patients. Subsequent 
ddPCR detected the somatic variant (c.122T > C) with low prevalence (1.02%) in 
another male patient from blood samples collected at a different time point, and 
confirmed dynamically fractional abundance in one patient with VEXAS, with 
allele fractions of 73.75%, 61.28%, 65.01%, and 73.75%. Nine patients assessed 
by ddPCR at different time points remained negative.
CONCLUSION: We report UBA1 variants in patients with RP in the Chinese 
population for the first time. Multiple ddPCR detections from samples collected 
at different time points can enhance sensitivity and should be considered for 
patients with initial negative ddPCR results.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-03003-x
PMCID: PMC10762806
PMID: 38167209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.