---
reference_id: "PMID:17152067"
title: Two novel point mutations in the long-range SHH enhancer in three families with triphalangeal thumb and preaxial polydactyly.
authors:
- Gurnett CA
- Bowcock AM
- Dietz FR
- Morcuende JA
- Murray JC
- Dobbs MB
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31563
keywords:
- Base Pairing
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 7/genetics"
- "Enhancer Elements, Genetic/genetics"
- Female
- Finger Phalanges/abnormalities
- Hedgehog Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- Polydactyly/genetics
- Thumb/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two novel point mutations in the long-range SHH enhancer in three families with triphalangeal thumb and preaxial polydactyly.
**Authors:** Gurnett CA, Bowcock AM, Dietz FR, Morcuende JA, Murray JC, Dobbs MB
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.31563](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.31563)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Jan 1;143A(1):27-32. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31563.

Two novel point mutations in the long-range SHH enhancer in three families with 
triphalangeal thumb and preaxial polydactyly.

Gurnett CA(1), Bowcock AM, Dietz FR, Morcuende JA, Murray JC, Dobbs MB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri, USA.

Spatio-temporal expression of sonic hedgehog (SHH) is driven by a regulatory 
element (ZRS) that lies 1 Mb upstream from SHH. Point mutations within the 
highly conserved ZRS have been described in the hemimelic extra toes mouse and 
in four families with preaxial polydactyly [Lettice et al., 2003]. Four North 
American Caucasian families were identified with autosomal dominant 
triphalangeal thumb. DNA from 20 affected and 36 unaffected family members was 
evaluated by sequence analysis of a 774-bp highly conserved ZRS contained within 
LMBR1 intron 5. Mutations within ZRS were identified in three of four families. 
In pedigree A and C, a novel A/G transition was identified near the 5' end of 
ZRS at bp 739 that segregated with disease or carrier status. Pedigree A, 
described previously [Dobbs et al., 2000], is a large family with 19 affected 
members who exhibit a milder phenotype, including predominantly triphalangeal 
thumbs and low penetrance (82%) relative to other families. Pedigree C is a 
small family with two affected family members with triphalangeal thumb, and one 
affected with both triphalangeal thumb and preaxial polydactyly. A novel C/G 
mutation at bp 621 was identified in pedigree B that segregated with the disease 
in all four affected individuals who manifested both preaxial polydactyly and 
triphalangeal thumb. Both mutations alter putative Cdx transcription factor 
binding sites. Mutations within ZRS appear to be a common cause of familial 
triphalangeal thumb and preaxial polydactyly. A genotype/phenotype correlate is 
suggested by pedigree A, whose mutation lies near the 5' end of ZRS; this family 
demonstrates a higher rate of nonpenetrance and milder phenotype. However, 
modifier genes may be contributing to the milder phenotype in this family.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31563
PMID: 17152067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]