---
reference_id: "PMID:39003323"
title: Early human fetal lung atlas reveals the temporal dynamics of epithelial cell plasticity.
authors:
- Quach H
- Farrell S
- Wu MJM
- Kanagarajah K
- Leung JW
- Xu X
- Kallurkar P
- Turinsky AL
- Bear CE
- Ratjen F
- Kalish B
- Goyal S
- Moraes TJ
- Wong AP
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-50281-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early human fetal lung atlas reveals the temporal dynamics of epithelial cell plasticity.
**Authors:** Quach H, Farrell S, Wu MJM, Kanagarajah K, Leung JW, Xu X, Kallurkar P, Turinsky AL, Bear CE, Ratjen F, Kalish B, Goyal S, Moraes TJ, Wong AP
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-50281-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-50281-5)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Jul 13;15(1):5898. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-50281-5.

Early human fetal lung atlas reveals the temporal dynamics of epithelial cell 
plasticity.

Quach H(#)(1)(2), Farrell S(#)(3), Wu MJM(1), Kanagarajah K(1)(2), Leung JW(4), 
Xu X(5), Kallurkar P(5), Turinsky AL(5), Bear CE(6), Ratjen F(7), Kalish 
B(4)(8)(9), Goyal S(3), Moraes TJ(7), Wong AP(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Physics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Program in Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Centre for Computational Medicine, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(6)Program in Molecular Medicine, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(7)Program in Translational Medicine, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(8)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(9)Division of Neonatology, Department of Paediatrics, Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(10)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. apwong@sickkids.ca.
(11)Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. apwong@sickkids.ca.
(#)Contributed equally

Studying human fetal lungs can inform how developmental defects and disease 
states alter the function of the lungs. Here, we sequenced >150,000 single cells 
from 19 healthy human pseudoglandular fetal lung tissues ranging between 
gestational weeks 10-19. We capture dynamic developmental trajectories from 
progenitor cells that express abundant levels of the cystic fibrosis conductance 
transmembrane regulator (CFTR). These cells give rise to multiple specialized 
epithelial cell types. Combined with spatial transcriptomics, we show temporal 
regulation of key signalling pathways that may drive the temporal and spatial 
emergence of specialized epithelial cells including ciliated and pulmonary 
neuroendocrine cells. Finally, we show that human pluripotent stem cell-derived 
fetal lung models contain CFTR-expressing progenitor cells that capture similar 
lineage developmental trajectories as identified in the native tissue. Overall, 
this study provides a comprehensive single-cell atlas of the developing human 
lung, outlining the temporal and spatial complexities of cell lineage 
development and benchmarks fetal lung cultures from human pluripotent stem cell 
differentiations to similar developmental window.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-50281-5
PMCID: PMC11246468
PMID: 39003323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no competing interests.