---
reference_id: "PMID:35822089"
title: "Natural history of arginase 1 deficiency and the unmet needs of patients: A systematic review of case reports."
authors:
- Bin Sawad A
- Pothukuchy A
- Badeaux M
- Hodson V
- Bubb G
- Lindsley K
- Uyei J
- Diaz GA
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12283
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of arginase 1 deficiency and the unmet needs of patients: A systematic review of case reports.
**Authors:** Bin Sawad A, Pothukuchy A, Badeaux M, Hodson V, Bubb G, Lindsley K, Uyei J, Diaz GA
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmd2.12283](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmd2.12283)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2022 Mar 25;63(4):330-340. doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12283. eCollection 2022
 Jul.

Natural history of arginase 1 deficiency and the unmet needs of patients: A
systematic review of case reports.

Bin Sawad A(1), Pothukuchy A(1), Badeaux M(1), Hodson V(1), Bubb G(1), Lindsley
K(2), Uyei J(2), Diaz GA(3).

Author information:
(1)Aeglea BioTherapeutics, Inc. Austin Texas USA.
(2)Health Economics and Outcomes Research - Evidence Synthesis IQVIA, Inc. San
Francisco California USA.
(3)Division of Medical Genetics and Genomics, Department of Genetics and Genomic
Sciences Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai New York New York USA.

BACKGROUND: Arginase 1 deficiency (ARG1-D) is a rare, progressive and
debilitating urea cycle disorder characterized by clinical manifestations
including spasticity, seizures, developmental delay, and intellectual
disability. The aim of this systematic review was to identify and summarize the
natural history of ARG1-D and the unmet needs of patients.
METHODS: A comprehensive search of published case reports was undertaken to
identify patients with ARG1-D regardless of interventions, comparisons, or
outcomes. MEDLINE, EMBASE, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, and
other evidence-based medicine literature databases were searched on 20 April
2020. Quality was assessed using the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) Critical
Appraisal Checklist. (PROSPERO registration: CRD42020212142.).
RESULTS: One hundred and fifty seven ARG1-D patients were included from 111
publications (good overall quality based on JBI's Checklist); 84 (53.5%) were
males. Motor deficits (including spasticity), intellectual disability, and
seizures were reported in >50% of the cases. Mean age (SD) at diagnosis was
6.4 years and the laboratory findings most commonly reported to support
diagnosis included elevated plasma arginine (81.5%), mutation in ARG1 gene
through genetic testing (60%), and absence/reduction of red blood cell arginase
activity (51%). Reported management approaches mainly included dietary protein
restriction (68%), nitrogen scavengers (45%), and essential amino acid
supplements (21%). Author-reported clinical improvement was documented for 26%
of patients, 15% deteriorated, and 19% had limited or no change; notably, no
indication of clinical outcome was reported for 40% cases.
CONCLUSION: This review illustrates a significant burden of disease and
highlights a considerable unmet need for clinically effective treatment options
for patients with ARG1-D.

© 2022 The Authors. JIMD Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of
SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jmd2.12283
PMCID: PMC9259395
PMID: 35822089

Conflict of interest statement: Aseel Bin Sawad is an employee of Aeglea
BioTherapeutics. Arti Pothukuchy is an employee of Aeglea BioTherapeutics. Mark
Badeaux is an employee of Aeglea BioTherapeutics. Victoria Hodson is an employee
of Aeglea BioTherapeutics. Gillian Bubb is an employee of Aeglea
BioTherapeutics. Kristina Lindsley is an employee of IQVIA, which provides
consulting and other research services to biopharmaceutical companies and
received funding from Aeglea BioTherapeutics to conduct this study. Jennifer
Uyei is an employee of IQVIA, which provides consulting and other research
services to biopharmaceutical companies and received funding from Aeglea
BioTherapeutics to conduct this study. George A. Diaz works at the Division of
Medical Genetics and Genomics in the Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences
at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai and is an external consultant
with Aeglea BioTherapeutics.
