---
reference_id: "PMID:12405488"
title: CSF-ACE activity in probable CNS neurosarcoidosis.
authors:
- Tahmoush AJ
- Amir MS
- Connor WW
- Farry JK
- Didato S
- Ulhoa-Cintra A
- Vasas JM
- Schwartzman RJ
- Israel HL
- Patrick H
journal: Sarcoidosis Vasc Diffuse Lung Dis
year: '2002'
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Biomarkers/cerebrospinal fluid
- Central Nervous System/pathology
- "Central Nervous System Diseases/cerebrospinal fluid, diagnosis"
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Peptidyl-Dipeptidase A/cerebrospinal fluid
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sarcoidosis/cerebrospinal fluid, diagnosis"
- Sensitivity and Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CSF-ACE activity in probable CNS neurosarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Tahmoush AJ, Amir MS, Connor WW, Farry JK, Didato S, Ulhoa-Cintra A, Vasas JM, Schwartzman RJ, Israel HL, Patrick H
**Journal:** Sarcoidosis Vasc Diffuse Lung Dis (2002)

## Content

1. Sarcoidosis Vasc Diffuse Lung Dis. 2002 Oct;19(3):191-7.

CSF-ACE activity in probable CNS neurosarcoidosis.

Tahmoush AJ(1), Amir MS, Connor WW, Farry JK, Didato S, Ulhoa-Cintra A, Vasas
JM, Schwartzman RJ, Israel HL, Patrick H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, MCP Hahnemann University, Philadelphia, PA 19102,
USA. albert.tahmoush@drexel.edu

OBJECTIVE: To redefine the utility of CSF-ACE as a selective indicator of
probable CNS neurosarcoidosis.
METHODS: The diagnosis of probable CNS neurosarcoidosis required: (a) biopsy
evidence of systemic sarcoidosis, (b) cortical, brainstem, and/or spinal cord
deficits, (c) enhancing lesions on brain and/or spinal cord MRI, and (d)
exclusion of other etiologies which could account for the neurological deficits.
Radioassay measurement of CSF-ACE activity was performed in 11 patients who met
our criteria for probable CNS neurosarcoidosis and 207 control patients.
RESULTS: The M +/- SD for CSF-ACE activity was significantly higher (p < 0.05)
for the 11 probable CNS neurosarcoidosis patients (9.5 +/- 6.9 nmol/mL/min) than
for the control patients (2.9 +/- 2.7 nmol/mL/min). The optimal CSF-ACE activity
discriminator value was 8 nmol/mL/min. At this value, the sensitivity and
specificity of CSF-ACE activity was 55% and 94%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: CSF-ACE activity is a useful biochemical marker of probable CNS
neurosarcoidosis when brain and/or spinal cord MRI show diffuse enhancing
lesions.

PMID: 12405488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
