---
reference_id: "PMID:22918513"
title: Clinical and radiological features in young individuals with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome.
authors:
- Kimonis VE
- Singh KE
- Zhong R
- Pastakia B
- Digiovanna JJ
- Bale SJ
journal: Genet Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/gim.2012.96
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Phenotype
- Radiography
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and radiological features in young individuals with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome.
**Authors:** Kimonis VE, Singh KE, Zhong R, Pastakia B, Digiovanna JJ, Bale SJ
**Journal:** Genet Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/gim.2012.96](https://doi.org/10.1038/gim.2012.96)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2013 Jan;15(1):79-83. doi: 10.1038/gim.2012.96. Epub 2012 Aug 23.

Clinical and radiological features in young individuals with nevoid basal cell
carcinoma syndrome.

Kimonis VE(1), Singh KE, Zhong R, Pastakia B, Digiovanna JJ, Bale SJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, University of California, Irvine,
Irvine, California, USA. vkimonis@uci.edu

PURPOSE: Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by multiple basal cell carcinomas, jaw cysts, palmar/plantar pits,
spine and rib anomalies, and falx cerebri calcification. Current diagnostic
criteria are suboptimal when applied to pediatric populations, as most common
symptoms often do not begin to appear until teenage years.
METHODS: We studied minor and major clinical features in 30 children/teenagers
and compared the findings with 75 adults from 26 families with nevoid basal cell
carcinoma syndrome.
RESULTS: Fifty percent of children/teenagers and 82% of adults had at least one
basal cell carcinoma. Jaw cysts occurred in 60% of children/teenagers and 81% of
adults. Palmar/plantar pits were the most frequent feature seen in affected
individuals at all ages. Macrocephaly was seen in 50% of affected and 8% of
unaffected children/teenagers. Frontal bossing, hypertelorism, Sprengel
deformity, pectus deformity, and cleft lip/palate were seen among affected
children/teenagers but not among their unaffected siblings. Falx calcification,
the most frequent radiological feature, was present in 37% of individuals <20
and 79% of those >20 years.
CONCLUSION: We report clinical and radiological manifestations of nevoid basal
cell carcinoma syndrome in children/teenagers, many of whom lacked major
features such as basal cell carcinomas, jaw cysts, and falx calcification.
Evaluations for palmar/plantar pits, craniofacial features, and radiological
manifestations permit early diagnosis and optimum surveillance.

DOI: 10.1038/gim.2012.96
PMID: 22918513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
