---
reference_id: "PMID:38924775"
title: Single-Cell Analysis Reveals Novel Immune Perturbations in Fibrotic Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis.
authors:
- Zhao AY
- Unterman A
- Abu Hussein NS
- Sharma P
- Nikola F
- Flint J
- Yan X
- Adams TS
- Justet A
- Sumida TS
- Zhao J
- Schupp JC
- Raredon MSB
- Ahangari F
- Deluliis G
- Zhang Y
- Buendia-Roldan I
- Adegunsoye A
- Sperling AI
- Prasse A
- Ryu C
- Herzog E
- Selman M
- Pardo A
- Kaminski N
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1164/rccm.202401-0078OC
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-Cell Analysis Reveals Novel Immune Perturbations in Fibrotic Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis.
**Authors:** Zhao AY, Unterman A, Abu Hussein NS, Sharma P, Nikola F, Flint J, Yan X, Adams TS, Justet A, Sumida TS, Zhao J, Schupp JC, Raredon MSB, Ahangari F, Deluliis G, Zhang Y, Buendia-Roldan I, Adegunsoye A, Sperling AI, Prasse A, Ryu C, Herzog E, Selman M, Pardo A, Kaminski N
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1164/rccm.202401-0078OC](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.202401-0078OC)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2024 Nov 15;210(10):1252-1266. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.202401-0078OC.

Single-Cell Analysis Reveals Novel Immune Perturbations in Fibrotic 
Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis.

Zhao AY(1), Unterman A(1)(2), Abu Hussein NS(1), Sharma P(1), Nikola F(1), Flint 
J(1), Yan X(1), Adams TS(1), Justet A(1)(3), Sumida TS(4), Zhao J(1), Schupp 
JC(1)(5), Raredon MSB(1)(6)(7), Ahangari F(1), Deluliis G(1), Zhang Y(8), 
Buendia-Roldan I(9), Adegunsoye A(10), Sperling AI(11), Prasse A(12), Ryu C(1), 
Herzog E(1), Selman M(9), Pardo A(13), Kaminski N(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Medicine.
(2)Institute of Pulmonary Medicine, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Sackler 
School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Service de Pneumologie, Centre de Competences de Maladies Pulmonaires Rares, 
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Caen University of Caen Normandie, CEA, 
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Imagerie et Stratégies 
Thérapeutiques pour les Cancers et Tissus Cérébraux/CERVOxy Group, GIP CYCERON, 
Normandie University, Caen, France.
(4)Department of Neurology.
(5)Department of Pulmonary and Infectious Diseases, Hannover Medical School, 
Biomedical Research in End-Stage and Obstructive Lung Disease (BREATH), German 
Center for Lung Research BREATH, Hannover, Germany.
(6)Department of Anesthesiology, and.
(7)Department of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Conncecticut.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(9)Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias Ismael Cosio Villegas, 
Mexico City, Mexico.
(10)Section of Pulmonary/Critical Care, Department of Medicine, University of 
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(11)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia.
(12)Section of Pulmonary Medicine, University Medical Center, Basel, 
Switzerland; and.
(13)Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2024 Nov 15;210(10):1180-1182. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.202406-1194ED.

Rationale: Fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (FHP) is a debilitating 
interstitial lung disease driven by incompletely understood immune mechanisms. 
Objectives: To elucidate immune aberrations in FHP in single-cell resolution. 
Methods: Single-cell 5' RNA sequencing was conducted on peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells and BAL cells obtained from 45 patients with FHP, 63 patients 
with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), 4 patients with nonfibrotic 
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, and 36 healthy control subjects in the United 
States and Mexico. Analyses included differential gene expression (Seurat), TF 
(transcription factor) activity imputation (DoRothEA-VIPER), and trajectory 
analyses (Monocle3 and Velocyto-scVelo-CellRank). Measurements and Main Results: 
Overall, 501,534 peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 110 patients and 
control subjects and 88,336 BAL cells from 19 patients were profiled. Compared 
with control samples, FHP has elevated classical monocytes 
(adjusted-P = 2.5 × 10-3) and is enriched in CCL3hi/CCL4hi and S100Ahi classical 
monocytes (adjusted-P < 2.2 × 10-16). Trajectory analyses demonstrate that 
S100Ahi classical monocytes differentiate into SPP1hi lung macrophages 
associated with fibrosis. Compared with both control subjects and IPF, cells 
from patients with FHP are significantly enriched in GZMhi cytotoxic T cells. 
These cells exhibit TF activities indicative of TGFβ and TNFα and NFκB pathways. 
These results are publicly available at http://ildimmunecellatlas.com. 
Conclusions: Single-cell transcriptomics of patients with FHP uncovered novel 
immune perturbations, including previously undescribed increases in GZMhi 
cytotoxic CD4+ and CD8+ T cells-reflecting this disease's unique inflammatory T 
cell-driven nature-as well as increased S100Ahi and CCL3hi/CCL4hi classical 
monocytes also observed in IPF. Both cell populations may guide the development 
of new biomarkers and therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.202401-0078OC
PMCID: PMC11568434
PMID: 38924775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]