---
reference_id: "PMID:3528691"
title: "Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus: pathophysiology."
authors:
- Gerich JE
journal: Mayo Clin Proc
year: '1986'
doi: 10.1016/s0025-6196(12)64818-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus: pathophysiology.
**Authors:** Gerich JE
**Journal:** Mayo Clin Proc (1986)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0025-6196(12)64818-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0025-6196(12)64818-6)

## Content

1. Mayo Clin Proc. 1986 Oct;61(10):787-91. doi: 10.1016/s0025-6196(12)64818-6.

Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus: pathophysiology.

Gerich JE.

Diabetes mellitus is a heterogeneous disorder. About 80% of the patients with 
this disease are categorized as having non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, 
a disorder resulting from varied degrees of insulin resistance and impaired 
insulin secretion; the causes for these abnormalities are unknown. The remaining 
15 to 20% of patients have insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, a disorder 
caused by the destruction of insulin-producing endocrine cells within the 
pancreas and currently considered to be the result of an autoimmune process. 
During the course of both types of diabetes mellitus, the so-called long-term 
complications of diabetes invariably occur to some extent in all patients. These 
complications include retinopathy, nephropathy, neuropathy, and premature 
atherosclerosis. The molecular basis for these complications is not completely 
understood, but recent evidence obtained from both experiments in animals and 
prospective clinical studies indicates that metabolic derangements associated 
with poor glycemic control are a major determinant of the frequency and severity 
of these complications. Such evidence is the rationale for current attempts to 
maintain near-normal glycemia in patients with diabetes mellitus.

DOI: 10.1016/s0025-6196(12)64818-6
PMID: 3528691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]