---
reference_id: "PMID:33435440"
title: Molecular Epidemiology of the Main Druggable Genetic Alterations in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.
authors:
- Fois SS
- Paliogiannis P
- Zinellu A
- Fois AG
- Cossu A
- Palmieri G
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms22020612
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Epidemiology of the Main Druggable Genetic Alterations in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.
**Authors:** Fois SS, Paliogiannis P, Zinellu A, Fois AG, Cossu A, Palmieri G
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms22020612](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22020612)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jan 9;22(2):612. doi: 10.3390/ijms22020612.

Molecular Epidemiology of the Main Druggable Genetic Alterations in Non-Small 
Cell Lung Cancer.

Fois SS(1), Paliogiannis P(1), Zinellu A(2), Fois AG(1), Cossu A(1), Palmieri 
G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical, Surgical and Experimental Sciences, University of 
Sassari, Viale San Pietro 43, 07100 Sassari, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sassari, Viale San Pietro 
43b, 07100 Sassari, Italy.
(3)Unit of Cancer Genetics, Institute of Genetic and Biomedical Research (IRGB), 
National Research Council (CNR), Traversa La Crucca 3, 07100 Sassari, Italy.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of death for malignancy worldwide. Its 
molecular profiling has enriched our understanding of cancer initiation and 
progression and has become fundamental to provide guidance on treatment with 
targeted therapies. Testing the presence of driver mutations in specific genes 
in lung tumors has thus radically changed the clinical management and outcomes 
of the disease. Numerous studies performed with traditional sequencing methods 
have investigated the occurrence of such mutations in lung cancer, and new 
insights regarding their frequency and clinical significance are continuously 
provided with the use of last generation sequencing technologies. In this 
review, we discuss the molecular epidemiology of the main druggable genetic 
alterations in non-small cell lung cancer, namely EGFR, KRAS, BRAF, MET, and 
HER2 mutations or amplification, as well as ALK and ROS1 fusions. Furthermore, 
we investigated the predictive impact of these alterations on the outcomes of 
modern targeted therapies, their global prognostic significance, and their 
mutual interaction in cases of co-occurrence.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22020612
PMCID: PMC7827915
PMID: 33435440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.