---
reference_id: "PMID:29432718"
title: Natural History of Ground-Glass Lesions Among Patients With Previous Lung Cancer.
authors:
- Shewale JB
- Nelson DB
- Rice DC
- Sepesi B
- Hofstetter WL
- Mehran RJ
- Vaporciyan AA
- Walsh GL
- Swisher SG
- Roth JA
- Antonoff MB
journal: Ann Thorac Surg
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2018.01.031
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural History of Ground-Glass Lesions Among Patients With Previous Lung Cancer.
**Authors:** Shewale JB, Nelson DB, Rice DC, Sepesi B, Hofstetter WL, Mehran RJ, Vaporciyan AA, Walsh GL, Swisher SG, Roth JA, Antonoff MB
**Journal:** Ann Thorac Surg (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.athoracsur.2018.01.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.athoracsur.2018.01.031)

## Content

1. Ann Thorac Surg. 2018 Jun;105(6):1671-1677. doi: 
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2018.01.031. Epub 2018 Feb 9.

Natural History of Ground-Glass Lesions Among Patients With Previous Lung 
Cancer.

Shewale JB(1), Nelson DB(2), Rice DC(2), Sepesi B(2), Hofstetter WL(2), Mehran 
RJ(2), Vaporciyan AA(2), Walsh GL(2), Swisher SG(2), Roth JA(2), Antonoff MB(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; Department of Epidemiology, Human 
Genetics and Environmental Sciences, UTHealth School of Public Health, Houston, 
Texas.
(2)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(3)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. Electronic address: 
mbantonoff@mdanderson.org.

Comment in
    J Thorac Dis. 2018 Nov;10(Suppl 33):S3828-S3830. doi: 
10.21037/jtd.2018.09.41.
    J Thorac Dis. 2018 Nov;10(Suppl 33):S3927-S3929. doi: 
10.21037/jtd.2018.08.129.

BACKGROUND: Among patients with previous lung cancer, the malignant potential of 
subsequent ground-glass opacities (GGOs) on computed tomography remains unknown, 
with a lack of consensus regarding surveillance and intervention. This study 
sought to describe the natural history of GGO in patients with a history of lung 
cancer.
METHODS: A retrospective review was performed of 210 patients with a history of 
lung cancer and ensuing computed tomography evidence of pure or mixed GGOs 
between 2007 and 2013. Computed tomography reports were reviewed to determine 
the fate of the GGOs, by classifying all lesions as stable, resolved, or 
progressive over the course of the study. Multivariable analysis was performed 
to identify predictors of GGO progression and resolution.
RESULTS: The mean follow-up time was 13 months. During this period, 55 (26%) 
patients' GGOs were stable, 131 (62%) resolved, and 24 (11%) progressed. Of the 
24 GGOs that progressed, three were subsequently diagnosed as adenocarcinoma. 
Patients of black race (odds ratio [OR], 0.26) and other races besides white 
(OR, 0.89) had smaller odds of GGO resolution (p = 0.033), whereas patients with 
previous lung squamous cell carcinoma (OR, 5.16) or small cell carcinoma (OR, 
5.36) were more likely to experience GGO resolution (p < 0.001). On 
multivariable analysis, only a history of adenocarcinoma was an independent 
predictor of GGO progression (OR, 6.9; p = 0.011).
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with a history of lung cancer, prior adenocarcinoma 
emerged as a predictor of GGO progression, whereas a history of squamous cell 
carcinoma or small cell carcinoma and white race were identified as predictors 
of GGO resolution.

Copyright © 2018 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2018.01.031
PMID: 29432718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]