---
reference_id: "PMID:20937450"
title: Prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of hypertensive heart disease.
authors:
- Georgiopoulou VV
- Kalogeropoulos AP
- Raggi P
- Butler J
journal: Cardiol Clin
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccl.2010.07.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of hypertensive heart disease.
**Authors:** Georgiopoulou VV, Kalogeropoulos AP, Raggi P, Butler J
**Journal:** Cardiol Clin (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccl.2010.07.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccl.2010.07.005)

## Content

1. Cardiol Clin. 2010 Nov;28(4):675-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ccl.2010.07.005. Epub 2010
 Aug 25.

Prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of hypertensive heart disease.

Georgiopoulou VV(1), Kalogeropoulos AP, Raggi P, Butler J.

Author information:
(1)Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Hypertensive heart disease (HHD), a result of long-standing hypertension, is 
characterized by changes in the myocardial structure and function in the absence 
of other primary cardiovascular abnormalities. Although increased blood pressure 
is the initiating stimulus, neurohormonal factors, particularly the 
renin-angiotensin system, play a key role in remodeling of cardiac chamber 
geometry and walls. Optimal antihypertensive therapy in the setting of 
therapeutic lifestyle changes is crucial in the prevention and control of HHD. 
Regression of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) is achievable and associated 
with improved prognosis. However, prevention of myocardial remodeling before LVH 
establishes would further increase the benefits to cardiac function and 
prognosis. Antihypertensive agents exhibit variable effectiveness in inducing 
LVH regression. Currently, renin-angiotensin system blocking agents seem to be 
the most effective approach for LVH regression and reverse remodeling in these 
patients.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccl.2010.07.005
PMID: 20937450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]