---
reference_id: "PMID:39456230"
title: "FUS::DDIT3 Fusion Protein in the Development of Myxoid Liposarcoma and Possible Implications for Therapy."
authors:
- Hou X
- Shi W
- Luo W
- Luo Y
- Huang X
- Li J
- Ji N
- Chen Q
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biom14101297
keywords:
- Humans
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/drug effects"
- "Liposarcoma, Myxoid/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- "RNA-Binding Protein FUS/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FUS::DDIT3 Fusion Protein in the Development of Myxoid Liposarcoma and Possible Implications for Therapy.
**Authors:** Hou X, Shi W, Luo W, Luo Y, Huang X, Li J, Ji N, Chen Q
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom14101297](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom14101297)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2024 Oct 14;14(10):1297. doi: 10.3390/biom14101297.

FUS::DDIT3 Fusion Protein in the Development of Myxoid Liposarcoma and Possible 
Implications for Therapy.

Hou X(1), Shi W(1), Luo W(1), Luo Y(1), Huang X(1), Li J(1), Ji N(1), Chen Q(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, National Clinical Research Center for 
Oral Diseases, Research Unit of Oral Carcinogenesis and Management, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu 610041, China.

The FUS::DDIT3 fusion protein, formed by the chromosomal translocation t (12;16) 
(q13;p11), is found in over 90% of myxoid liposarcoma (MLS) cases and is a 
crucial protein in its development. Many studies have explored the role of 
FUS::DDIT3 in MLS, and the prevailing view is that FUS::DDIT3 inhibits adipocyte 
differentiation and promotes MLS growth and invasive migration by functioning as 
an aberrant transcription factor that affects gene expression and regulates its 
downstream molecules. As fusion proteins are gradually showing their potential 
as targets for precision cancer therapy, FUS::DDIT3 has also been investigated 
as a therapeutic target. Drugs that target FUS::DDIT3 and its downstream 
molecules for treating MLS are widely utilized in both clinical practice and 
experimental studies, and some of them have demonstrated promising results. This 
article reviews the findings of relevant research, providing an overview of the 
oncogenic mechanisms of the FUS::DDIT3 fusion protein in MLS, as well as recent 
advancements in its therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/biom14101297
PMCID: PMC11506083
PMID: 39456230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.