---
reference_id: "PMID:38398422"
title: "Paroxysmal Dystonic Posturing Mimicking Nocturnal Leg Cramps as a Presenting Sign in an Infant with DCC Mutation, Callosal Agenesis and Mirror Movements."
authors:
- Prato A
- Cirnigliaro L
- Maugeri F
- Luca A
- Giuliano L
- Vitiello G
- Errichiello E
- Valente EM
- Del Giudice E
- Mostile G
- Rizzo R
- Barone R
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13041109
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Paroxysmal Dystonic Posturing Mimicking Nocturnal Leg Cramps as a Presenting Sign in an Infant with DCC Mutation, Callosal Agenesis and Mirror Movements.
**Authors:** Prato A, Cirnigliaro L, Maugeri F, Luca A, Giuliano L, Vitiello G, Errichiello E, Valente EM, Del Giudice E, Mostile G, Rizzo R, Barone R
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13041109](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13041109)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Feb 16;13(4):1109. doi: 10.3390/jcm13041109.

Paroxysmal Dystonic Posturing Mimicking Nocturnal Leg Cramps as a Presenting 
Sign in an Infant with DCC Mutation, Callosal Agenesis and Mirror Movements.

Prato A(1), Cirnigliaro L(1), Maugeri F(1), Luca A(2), Giuliano L(2), Vitiello 
G(3), Errichiello E(4)(5), Valente EM(4)(5), Del Giudice E(6), Mostile G(2)(7), 
Rizzo R(1), Barone R(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental 
Medicine, University of Catania, 95123 Catania, Italy.
(2)Department "G.F. Ingrassia", Section of Neurosciences, University of Catania, 
95123 Catania, Italy.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnologies, University of 
Naples Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy.
(5)Neurogenetics Research Center, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, 27100 Pavia, Italy.
(6)Child Neurology, Department of Translational Medical Sciences, University of 
Naples Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy.
(7)Research Unit of Rare Diseases and Neurodevelopmental Disorders, OASI 
Research Institute-IRCCS, 94018 Troina, Italy.

Background/Objectives: Pathogenic variants in the deleted in colorectal cancer 
gene (DCC), encoding the Netrin-1 receptor, may lead to mirror movements (MMs) 
associated with agenesis/dysgenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC) and cognitive 
and/or neuropsychiatric issues. The clinical phenotype is related to the 
biological function of DCC in the corpus callosum and corticospinal tract 
development as Netrin-1 is implicated in the guidance of developing axons toward 
the midline. We report on a child with a novel inherited, monoallelic, 
pathogenic variant in the DCC gene. Methods: Standardized measures and clinical 
scales were used to assess psychomotor development, communication and social 
skills, emotional and behavioural difficulties. MMs were measured via the Woods 
and Teuber classification. Exome sequencing was performed on affected and 
healthy family members. Results: The patient's clinical presentation during 
infancy consisted of paroxysmal dystonic posturing when asleep, mimicking 
nocturnal leg cramps. A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed complete 
ACC. He developed typical upper limb MMs during childhood and a progressively 
evolving neuro-phenotype with global development delay and behavioural problems. 
We found an intrafamilial clinical variability associated with DCC mutations: 
the proband's father and uncle shared the same DCC variant, with a milder 
clinical phenotype. The atypical early clinical presentation of the present 
patient expands the clinical spectrum associated with DCC variants, especially 
those in the paediatric age. Conclusions: This study underlines the importance 
of in-depth genetic investigations in young children with ACC and highlights the 
need for further detailed analyses of early motor symptoms in infants with DCC 
mutations.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13041109
PMCID: PMC10889236
PMID: 38398422

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.