---
reference_id: "PMID:38973067"
title: Immunophenotyping and viral studies in pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta lesions.
authors:
- Mishlab S
- Avitan-Hersh E
- Zohar Y
- Szwarcwort-Cohen M
- Bergman R
journal: J Cutan Pathol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/cup.14679
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/pathology, virology, immunology"
- Female
- Immunophenotyping
- Male
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Adolescent
- "CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology, pathology"
- Immunohistochemistry/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunophenotyping and viral studies in pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta lesions.
**Authors:** Mishlab S, Avitan-Hersh E, Zohar Y, Szwarcwort-Cohen M, Bergman R
**Journal:** J Cutan Pathol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cup.14679](https://doi.org/10.1111/cup.14679)

## Content

1. J Cutan Pathol. 2024 Oct;51(10):790-798. doi: 10.1111/cup.14679. Epub 2024 Jul
 7.

Immunophenotyping and viral studies in pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis
acuta lesions.

Mishlab S(1)(2), Avitan-Hersh E(1), Zohar Y(2), Szwarcwort-Cohen M(3), Bergman
R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Rambam Health Care Campus and The Bruce Rappaport
Faculty of Medicine, Haifa, Israel.
(2)Department of Pathology, Rambam Health Care Campus and The Bruce Rappaport
Faculty of Medicine, Haifa, Israel.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Rambam Health Care Campus and The Bruce Rappaport
Faculty of Medicine, Haifa, Israel.

BACKGROUND: The underlying pathogenesis of pityriasis lichenoides et
varioliformis acuta (PLEVA) remains unclear, although immunologic injury and
viral etiology have been suggested.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate and expand the immunophenotype of PLEVA and to search for
possible viral pathogens.
METHODS: Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens of 20 patients with PLEVA
and 9 patients with common inflammatory dermatoses (ID) were studied for
immunophenotyping and for human herpesvirus (HHV) 1 and 2, cytomegalovirus
(CMV), HHV-8, parvovirus B19, and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) immunohistochemistry.
The presence of HHV-6, HHV-7, and enteroviruses was assayed molecularly.
RESULTS: The numbers of CD8+ T cells and T-cell intracellular antigen-1 (TIA-1)+
cells were statistically significantly higher in PLEVA compared to the ID group.
Immunohistochemistry for human HHV-1 and HHV-2, CMV and HHV-8, parvovirus B19,
and in situ hybridization for EBV were all negative. There was molecular
evidence for HHV-7 in only one PLEVA case (5%). Molecular studies for HHV-6 and
enterovirus involvement were negative in all the PLEVA specimens.
CONCLUSIONS: The predominant T-cell infiltrate in PLEVA is dominated by CD8+
cells, and by increased numbers of TIA1+ cells, which may indicate a cytotoxic
T-cell damage to the epidermis. Viral presence was not detected.

© 2024 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cup.14679
PMID: 38973067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
