---
reference_id: "PMID:11135492"
title: Absence of ocular manifestations in autosomal dominant Alport syndrome associated with haematological abnormalties.
authors:
- Colville D
- Wang YY
- Jamieson R
- Collins F
- Hood J
- Savige J
journal: Ophthalmic Genet
year: '2000'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 22/genetics"
- "Corneal Dystrophies, Hereditary/diagnosis, etiology"
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Hematologic Diseases/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- "Hematuria/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- "Lens Diseases/diagnosis, etiology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Pedigree
- "Retinal Diseases/diagnosis, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Absence of ocular manifestations in autosomal dominant Alport syndrome associated with haematological abnormalties.
**Authors:** Colville D, Wang YY, Jamieson R, Collins F, Hood J, Savige J
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Genet (2000)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Genet. 2000 Dec;21(4):217-25.

Absence of ocular manifestations in autosomal dominant Alport syndrome
associated with haematological abnormalties.

Colville D(1), Wang YY, Jamieson R, Collins F, Hood J, Savige J.

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmology Unit, Austin and Repatriation Medical Centre, University of
Melbourne Department of Medicine, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia.

Most patients with Alport syndrome have X-linked or autosomal recessive disease
that is characterised by renal failure, hearing loss, and, in nearly 75% of the
cases, a dot-and-fleck retinopathy and anterior lenticonus. There are only case
reports of individuals with the rare autosomal dominant form, who can have
haematuria or renal failure, deafness, and, in addition, low platelet counts and
neutrophil inclusions. The ocular features of autosomal dominant inheritance
have not been described. We have examined the eyes in the members of two
families where Alport syndrome was diagnosed on the basis of the clinical
features and family history, and where autosomal dominant inheritance was
confirmed by father-to-son disease transmission, the associated haematological
abnormalities, and haplotypes that segregated with the recently described locus
at chromosome 22q. In Family A, the eyes of two individuals with haematuria,
hearing loss, and haematological abnormalities and of nine unaffected family
members were examined. In Family B, the eyes of two individuals with renal
failure, normal hearing, and haematological abnormalities were examined. None of
the affected or unaffected members in either family had a dot-and-fleck
retinopathy, anterior lenticonus, a history suggesting recurrent corneal
erosions, or corneal dystrophy. These results indicate that the protein
abnormality in autosomal dominant Alport syndrome does not produce the
retinopathy and lenticonus typical of X-linked and autosomal recessive disease.
This may be because the abnormal protein is not present or is less important in
the ocular basement membranes than elsewhere, or because the presence of a
normal allele in autosomal dominant disease compensates for the defective
allele.

PMID: 11135492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
