---
reference_id: "PMID:11718214"
title: "Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma/immunocytoma: towards a disease-targeted treatment?"
authors:
- Clavio M
- Quintino S
- Venturino C
- Ballerini F
- Varaldo R
- Gatto S
- Galbusera V
- Garrone A
- Grasso R
- Canepa L
- Miglino M
- Pierri I
- Gobbi M
journal: J Exp Clin Cancer Res
year: '2001'
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/therapeutic use"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived"
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- B-Lymphocytes/pathology
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Immunophenotyping
- Immunotherapy
- "Lymphoma, B-Cell/genetics, immunology, pathology, therapy"
- Lymphoproliferative Disorders/immunology
- Rituximab
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma/immunocytoma: towards a disease-targeted treatment?
**Authors:** Clavio M, Quintino S, Venturino C, Ballerini F, Varaldo R, Gatto S, Galbusera V, Garrone A, Grasso R, Canepa L, Miglino M, Pierri I, Gobbi M
**Journal:** J Exp Clin Cancer Res (2001)

## Content

1. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2001 Sep;20(3):351-8.

Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma/immunocytoma: towards a disease-targeted treatment?

Clavio M(1), Quintino S, Venturino C, Ballerini F, Varaldo R, Gatto S, Galbusera
V, Garrone A, Grasso R, Canepa L, Miglino M, Pierri I, Gobbi M.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Internal Medicine, University of Genoa, Genova, Italy.

Lymphoplasmacytic-lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma (LPL)/Waldenstrom's
macroglobulinemia (WM) or immunocytoma (IMC) consists of diffuse proliferation
of small mature B lymphocytes, plasmacytoid lymphocytes, and plasma-cells. The
nosographic definition includes the lack of histological, immunophenotypic,
cytogenetic, and molecular markers considered specific of other types of
lymphoma. The cells show surface Ig (usually IgM), B-cell-associated antigens
and display the CD5-, CD23- and CD10- phenotype, which allows for differential
diagnosis from B-CLL and mantle cell lymphoma. t(9;14)(p13;q32) chromosomal
translocation has been found in 50% of all LPL cases. The cytogenetic
rearrangement juxtaposes the PAX-5 gene, which encodes for an essential
transcription factor for B-cell proliferation and differention, to the Ig heavy
chain gene. The combination of chlorambucil and prednisone holds as the standard
treatment and seems to guarantee good control of the disease in most patients.
Similar therapeutic results have been described with the combination of
cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone with (CHOP) or without doxorubicin
(CVP), or with a combination of other alkylating agents and prednisone.
Nucleoside analogues, alone or in combination with alkylating agents and
anthracyclines, provide good salvage therapy for IMC and being increasingly
employed as first line therapy. In a multicentric European trial Foran et al.
administered the chimeric anti-CD20-monoclonal antibody (Rituximab) to 28
patients with previously treated IMC. Seven out of 25 evaluable patients (28%)
achieved a partial response. Byrd et al. examined the outcome of 7 previously
treated WM patients who received weekly infusions of rituximab (375 mg/m2).
Therapy was well tolerated by all patients, and there was no decrease in
cellular immune function, or significant infectious morbidity. Partial responses
were noted in three of these patients, including two with fludarabine-refractory
disease. These data suggest that rituximab exerts clinical activity on heavily
pre-treated patients with WM. Furthermore, Weide et al. first reported that
WM-associated polyneuropathy can be treated effectively with a combination of
chemotherapy and the anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody rituximab. Most published
trials exploring the efficacy of high dose treatment as salvage therapy for
relapsed or refractory low grade non Hodgkin's lymphoma have included
prevalently follicular or lymphocytic lymphomas. In selected high risk patients
radioimmunotherapy with autologous stem-cell rescue, and myeloablative therapy
followed either by autologous stem cell transplantation (SCT) or allogeneic SCT
might represent an alternative strategy.

PMID: 11718214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
