---
reference_id: "PMID:29846157"
title: Role of serum autoantibodies in blood brain barrier damages in neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Hirohata S
- Sakuma Y
- Matsueda Y
- Arinuma Y
- Yanagida T
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2018'
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antibodies, Antinuclear/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, immunology"
- Biomarkers/blood
- "Blood-Brain Barrier/metabolism, pathology"
- Capillary Permeability
- Female
- Humans
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, immunology, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Young Adult
- snRNP Core Proteins/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of serum autoantibodies in blood brain barrier damages in neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Hirohata S, Sakuma Y, Matsueda Y, Arinuma Y, Yanagida T
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2018)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2018 Nov-Dec;36(6):1003-1007. Epub 2018 May 24.

Role of serum autoantibodies in blood brain barrier damages in neuropsychiatric
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Hirohata S(1), Sakuma Y(2), Matsueda Y(2), Arinuma Y(2), Yanagida T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Infectious Diseases, Kitasato University
School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan. shunsei@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Infectious Diseases, Kitasato University
School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.

OBJECTIVES: The present study was carried out to elucidate the roles of serum
autoantibodies in the development of blood-brain barrier (BBB) damages in
neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus (NPSLE).
METHODS: Paired serum and CSF samples were obtained from 101 SLE patients when
they presented active neuropsychiatric manifestations (69 patients with diffuse
psychiatric/neuropsychological syndromes [diffuse NPSLE] and 32 patients with
neurologic syndromes or peripheral neuropathy [focal NPSLE]). IgG anti-NR2
subunit of NMDA receptor (anti-NR2), anti-Sm, anti-ribosomal P and IgG
anti-cardiolipin in sera and albumin in CSF and sera were measured by ELISA.
Blood-brain barrier (BBB) function was evaluated by Q albumin (CSF/serum albumin
quotient x 1,000).
RESULTS: Q albumin was significantly higher in acute confusional state (ACS)
than in non-ACS diffuse NPSLE (anxiety disorder, cognitive dysfunction, mood
disorder and psychosis) or in focal NPSLE. Anti-Sm, but not anti-NR2, anti-P or
anticardiolipin, was significantly elevated in ACS compared with the other 2
groups of NPSLE, although serum anti-NR2 was significantly higher in ACS than
that in focal NPSLE. Multiple regression analysis confirmed the significant
contribution of anti-Sm (p=0.0040), but not anti-NR2 (p=0.5023), anti-P
(p=0.2651), or anti-cardiolipin (p=0.6769) in the elevation of Q albumin.
CONCLUSIONS: The data demonstrate that serum anti-Sm antibodies play a most
important role in the disruption of BBB in NPSLE.

PMID: 29846157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
