---
reference_id: "PMID:36746024"
title: Caco-2 cell-derived biomimetic electrochemical biosensor for cholera toxin detection.
authors:
- Kim Y
- Lee D
- Seo Y
- Jung HG
- Jang JW
- Park D
- Kim I
- Kim J
- Lee G
- Hwang KS
- Kim SH
- Lee SW
- Lee JH
- Yoon DS
journal: Biosens Bioelectron
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2023.115105
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Caco-2 cell-derived biomimetic electrochemical biosensor for cholera toxin detection.
**Authors:** Kim Y, Lee D, Seo Y, Jung HG, Jang JW, Park D, Kim I, Kim J, Lee G, Hwang KS, Kim SH, Lee SW, Lee JH, Yoon DS
**Journal:** Biosens Bioelectron (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bios.2023.115105](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2023.115105)

## Content

1. Biosens Bioelectron. 2023 Apr 15;226:115105. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2023.115105. 
Epub 2023 Jan 28.

Caco-2 cell-derived biomimetic electrochemical biosensor for cholera toxin 
detection.

Kim Y(1), Lee D(2), Seo Y(1), Jung HG(1), Jang JW(1), Park D(3), Kim I(4), Kim 
J(1), Lee G(5), Hwang KS(6), Kim SH(7), Lee SW(8), Lee JH(9), Yoon DS(10).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, 02841, South 
Korea; Interdisciplinary Program in Precision Public Health, Korea University, 
Seoul, 02841, South Korea.
(2)School of Biomedical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, 02841, South 
Korea; Center for Nanomedicine, Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and 
Pain Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, 02115, USA; Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(3)School of Biomedical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, 02841, South 
Korea; Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, College of 
Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, 02447, South Korea.
(4)School of Biomedical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, 02841, South 
Korea.
(5)Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Korea University, Sejong, 
30019, South Korea; Interdisciplinary Graduate Program for Artificial 
Intelligence Smart Convergence Technology, Korea University, Sejong, 30019, 
South Korea.
(6)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, College of Medicine, 
Kyung Hee University, Seoul, 02447, South Korea.
(7)School of Engineering, Brown University, Providence, RI, 02912, USA.
(8)School of Biomedical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, 02841, South 
Korea; Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of 
California, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA. Electronic address: skylsw5@korea.ac.kr.
(9)Department of Electrical Engineering, Kwangwoon University, Seoul, 01897, 
South Korea. Electronic address: jhlee@kw.ac.kr.
(10)School of Biomedical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, 02841, South 
Korea; Interdisciplinary Program in Precision Public Health, Korea University, 
Seoul, 02841, South Korea; Astrion Inc, Seoul, 02841, South Korea. Electronic 
address: dsyoon@korea.ac.kr.

Cholera is a highly contagious and lethal waterborne disease induced by an 
infection with Vibrio cholerae (V. cholerae) secreting cholera toxin (CTx). 
Cholera toxin subunit B (CTxB) from the CTx specifically binds with 
monosialo-tetra-hexosyl-ganglioside (GM1) found on the exterior cell membrane of 
an enterocyte. Bioinspired by the pathological process of CTx, we developed an 
electrochemical biosensor with GM1-expressing Caco-2 cell membrane (CCM) on the 
electrode surface. Briefly, the electrode surface was functionalized with CCM 
using the vesicle fusion method. We determined the CTxB detection performances 
of Caco-2 cell membrane-coated biosensor (CCB) using electrochemical impedance 
spectroscopy (EIS). the CCB had an excellent limit of detection of ∼11.46 nM and 
a detection range spanning 100 ng/mL - 1 mg/mL. In addition, the CCB showed high 
selectivity against various interfering molecules, including abundant 
constituents of intestinal fluid and various bacterial toxins. The long-term 
stability of the CCBs was also verified for 3 weeks using EIS. Overall, the CCB 
has excellent potential for practical use such as point-of-care and 
cost-effective testing for CTxB detection in developing countries.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2023.115105
PMID: 36746024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.