---
reference_id: "PMID:39111871"
title: "A suspected case of \"itai-itai disease\" in a cadmium-polluted area in Akita prefecture, Japan."
authors:
- Sasaki T
- Horiguchi H
- Matsukawa T
- Kobayashi M
- Omori Y
- Oguma E
- Komatsuda A
journal: Environ Health Prev Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1265/ehpm.24-00063
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A suspected case of "itai-itai disease" in a cadmium-polluted area in Akita prefecture, Japan.
**Authors:** Sasaki T, Horiguchi H, Matsukawa T, Kobayashi M, Omori Y, Oguma E, Komatsuda A
**Journal:** Environ Health Prev Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1265/ehpm.24-00063](https://doi.org/10.1265/ehpm.24-00063)

## Content

1. Environ Health Prev Med. 2024;29:40. doi: 10.1265/ehpm.24-00063.

A suspected case of "itai-itai disease" in a cadmium-polluted area in Akita 
prefecture, Japan.

Sasaki T(1)(2), Horiguchi H(3), Matsukawa T(4), Kobayashi M(3), Omori Y(3), 
Oguma E(3), Komatsuda A(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Fukunaga Clinic.
(2)Akita Rosai Hospital, Japan Organization of Occupational Health and Safe.
(3)Department of Hygiene, Kitasato University School of Medicine.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Environmental Health, Juntendo University 
Faculty of Medicine.
(5)Department of Hematology, Nephrology, and Rheumatology, Akita University 
Graduate School of Medicine.
(6)Ogachi Central Hospital.

BACKGROUND: Itai-itai disease is the most severe case of chronic cadmium (Cd) 
toxicity, which was endemic in Cd-polluted areas in the Jinzu River basin in 
Toyama prefecture, Japan. Akita prefecture also has Cd-polluted areas, but there 
have been no cases of "itai-itai disease".
CASE PRESENTATION: An elderly female farmer with Cd nephropathy residing in a 
Cd-polluted area in the northern part of the Akita prefecture was identified 
through hospital-based screening at Akita Rosai Hospital in Odate city. She had 
chronic renal failure with a high Cd exposure level and advanced renal tubular 
dysfunction. The shortening of height, bone deformities and fractures, abnormal 
bone metabolism suggesting osteomalacia, and renal anemia were also noted. 
Therefore, "itai-itai disease", similar to cases in the Jinzu River basin, was 
suspected.
CONCLUSION: This is the first case of "itai-itai disease" in a Cd-polluted area 
in Akita prefecture.

DOI: 10.1265/ehpm.24-00063
PMCID: PMC11310559
PMID: 39111871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.