---
reference_id: "PMID:17910142"
title: Antinuclear antibodies and HLA class II alleles in Jamaican patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Christian N
- Smikle MF
- DeCeulaer K
- Daniels L
- Walravens MJ
- Barton EN
journal: West Indian Med J
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1590/s0043-31442007000200005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antinuclear antibodies and HLA class II alleles in Jamaican patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Christian N, Smikle MF, DeCeulaer K, Daniels L, Walravens MJ, Barton EN
**Journal:** West Indian Med J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1590/s0043-31442007000200005](https://doi.org/10.1590/s0043-31442007000200005)

## Content

1. West Indian Med J. 2007 Mar;56(2):130-3. doi: 10.1590/s0043-31442007000200005.

Antinuclear antibodies and HLA class II alleles in Jamaican patients with 
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Christian N(1), Smikle MF, DeCeulaer K, Daniels L, Walravens MJ, Barton EN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of the West Indies, Kingston 7, 
Jamaica . nchristn@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: The relationship between human leukocyte antigens class II (HLA) and 
antinuclear antibodies was investigated in Jamaican patients with Systemic Lupus 
Erythematosus (SLE).
METHODS: Samples of blood of 82 patients with SLE and 75 healthy controls were 
tested for antinuclear antibodies using the fluorescent antinuclear antibody 
(FANA) test, counterimmunoelectrophoresis (CIEP) and the Crithidia luciliae 
immunofluorescence test (CL-IFT). A DNA-based HLA typing method was used to 
determine the frequencies of alleles of HLA-DRB1, DRB3, DRB4 and DRB5 in 
patients and healthy controls.
RESULTS: The FANA test was positive in all of the sera from patients with SLE. 
Anti-dsDNA antibodies were present in 49% (40/82), anti-Sm/RNP 44% (36/82) and 
anti-Ro/La 43% (35/82) of the sera from SLE patients. The frequency of HLA-DR4 
was significantly lower in SLE patients than in healthy controls (2/82, 2% vs 
15/75, 20%; RR = 0.12; p = 0.0004; CP = 0.005) but no other HLA-DRB1 SLE 
associations were found. A positive HLA-DR3 anti-Ro/La antibody association was 
found in the patients with SLE (9/21, 43% vs 5/55, 9%; odds ratio (OR) = 7.5; CP 
= 0.01). In contrast, possession of HLA-DR6 was negatively associated with the 
absence of anti-dsDNA antibodies (9/32, 28% vs 27/44, 61%; OR = 0.2; CP = 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The HLA-DR6 allele is associated with the absence of antinuclear 
antibodies and HLA-DR3 with the presence of anti-Ro/La antibodies in Jamaican 
patients with SLE. However, these results and those of previous studies of 
Jamaican patients suggest that the HLA-DR3 association with the development of 
SLE reported in other populations might in fact reflect the association of 
HLA-DR3 with anti-Ro/La antibodies. Further investigations are needed to 
determine whether HLA-DRB antinuclear antibody associations define clinical 
subsets of SLE in Jamaican patients.

DOI: 10.1590/s0043-31442007000200005
PMID: 17910142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]