---
reference_id: "PMID:27140670"
title: Cystic fibrosis.
authors:
- Elborn JS
journal: Lancet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00576-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cystic fibrosis.
**Authors:** Elborn JS
**Journal:** Lancet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00576-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00576-6)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2016 Nov 19;388(10059):2519-2531. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00576-6. 
Epub 2016 Apr 29.

Cystic fibrosis.

Elborn JS(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Dentistry and Biomedical Sciences, Queen's University 
Belfast, and Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, UK. Electronic address: 
s.elborn@qub.ac.uk.

Cystic fibrosis is a common life-limiting autosomal recessive genetic disorder, 
with highest prevalence in Europe, North America, and Australia. The disease is 
caused by mutation of a gene that encodes a chloride-conducting transmembrane 
channel called the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), 
which regulates anion transport and mucociliary clearance in the airways. 
Functional failure of CFTR results in mucus retention and chronic infection and 
subsequently in local airway inflammation that is harmful to the lungs. CFTR 
dysfunction mainly affects epithelial cells, although there is evidence of a 
role in immune cells. Cystic fibrosis affects several body systems, and 
morbidity and mortality is mostly caused by bronchiectasis, small airways 
obstruction, and progressive respiratory impairment. Important comorbidities 
caused by epithelial cell dysfunction occur in the pancreas (malabsorption), 
liver (biliary cirrhosis), sweat glands (heat shock), and vas deferens 
(infertility). The development and delivery of drugs that improve the clearance 
of mucus from the lungs and treat the consequent infection, in combination with 
correction of pancreatic insufficiency and undernutrition by multidisciplinary 
teams, have resulted in remarkable improvements in quality of life and clinical 
outcomes in patients with cystic fibrosis, with median life expectancy now older 
than 40 years. Innovative and transformational therapies that target the basic 
defect in cystic fibrosis have recently been developed and are effective in 
improving lung function and reducing pulmonary exacerbations. Further small 
molecule and gene-based therapies are being developed to restore CFTR function; 
these therapies promise to be disease modifying and to improve the lives of 
people with cystic fibrosis.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00576-6
PMID: 27140670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]