---
reference_id: "PMID:39837070"
title: "Genotypes and clinical phenotypes of pediatric patients with NOG variants: Middle ear surgical outcomes from a Tertiary Center in South Korea."
authors:
- Han SY
- Cho SH
- Jung SH
- Kang M
- Suh MW
- Park MK
- Lee JH
- Lee SY
journal: Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2025.112230
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- Male
- Female
- Republic of Korea
- "Child, Preschool"
- Phenotype
- Adolescent
- Infant
- "Hearing Loss, Conductive/genetics, surgery"
- Genotype
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Treatment Outcome
- "Ear, Middle/surgery"
- Tertiary Care Centers
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Exome Sequencing
- Stapes Surgery
- Noggin Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotypes and clinical phenotypes of pediatric patients with NOG variants: Middle ear surgical outcomes from a Tertiary Center in South Korea.
**Authors:** Han SY, Cho SH, Jung SH, Kang M, Suh MW, Park MK, Lee JH, Lee SY
**Journal:** Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijporl.2025.112230](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijporl.2025.112230)

## Content

1. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2025 Feb;189:112230. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijporl.2025.112230. Epub 2025 Jan 11.

Genotypes and clinical phenotypes of pediatric patients with NOG variants: 
Middle ear surgical outcomes from a Tertiary Center in South Korea.

Han SY(1), Cho SH(2), Jung SH(2), Kang M(2), Suh MW(3), Park MK(3), Lee JH(3), 
Lee SY(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, College of Medicine, 
Hanyang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, College of Medicine, 
Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, College of Medicine, 
Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea; Sensory Organ 
Research Institute, Seoul National University, Medical Research Center, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, College of Medicine, 
Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea; Sensory Organ 
Research Institute, Seoul National University, Medical Research Center, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: maru4843@hanmail.net.

OBJECTIVE: Although NOG variants are linked to congenital stapes fixation and 
conductive hearing loss (CHL), little is known about middle ear surgery outcomes 
and the characteristics of accompanying inner ear anomalies. We explored 
auditory phenotypes in patients with NOG variants, with a focus on the outcomes 
of middle ear surgery.
METHODS: This study included 11 patients from five unrelated Korean families 
harboring NOG variants. Genomic investigations were conducted using whole-exome 
sequencing and whole-genome sequencing. The clinical phenotypes, including pre- 
and postoperative audiological profiles, radiological abnormalities, and other 
comorbidities, were analyzed.
RESULTS: The average age at genetic testing was 8.2 years (range, 0-13 years). 
Two previously reported NOG variants (c.509C > T:p.Pro170Leu and 
c.252dup:p.Glu85ArgfsTer97) and three novel NOG variants, including the 
c.187G > T: p.Glu63Ter and two cryptic large deletion within the 17q22.2 region, 
were identified. All patients exhibited non-progressive CHL. Inner ear anomalies 
were documented in two patients, with variations such as cochlea and vestibular 
dysplasia. In this study, seven ears of four patients underwent stapedotomy, 
resulting in a significantly reduced air-bone gap of 
10.18 ± 1.48 dB (P = 0.016), with sustained improvement. Conversely, patients 
carrying p.Pro170Leu variant, which is associated with poor outcomes for middle 
ear surgery, were excluded from surgical consideration.
CONCLUSION: We expanded the spectrum of genotypes and auditory phenotypes 
associated with NOG variants. Surgical intervention for CHL underlying NOG 
variants elicits favorable outcomes. However, clinicians should consider the 
potential for poor prognosis in certain NOG variants. Collectively, identifying 
NOG variants could guide the treatment strategies to improve CHL.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2025.112230
PMID: 39837070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.