---
reference_id: "PMID:20418184"
title: Ginger (Zingiber officinale) reduces muscle pain caused by eccentric exercise.
authors:
- Black CD
- Herring MP
- Hurley DJ
- "O'Connor PJ"
journal: J Pain
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2009.12.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ginger (Zingiber officinale) reduces muscle pain caused by eccentric exercise.
**Authors:** Black CD, Herring MP, Hurley DJ, O'Connor PJ
**Journal:** J Pain (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpain.2009.12.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpain.2009.12.013)

## Content

1. J Pain. 2010 Sep;11(9):894-903. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2009.12.013. Epub 2010
Apr  24.

Ginger (Zingiber officinale) reduces muscle pain caused by eccentric exercise.

Black CD(1), Herring MP, Hurley DJ, O'Connor PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Kinesiology, Georgia College and State University, 
Milledgeville, Georgia, USA. Chris.Black@gcsu.edu

Comment in
    J Pain. 2013 Nov;14(11):1531-2. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2013.07.001.

Ginger has been shown to exert anti-inflammatory effects in rodents, but its 
effect on human muscle pain is uncertain. Heat treatment of ginger has been 
suggested to enhance its hypoalgesic effects. The purpose of this study was to 
examine the effects of 11 days of raw (study 1) and heat-treated (study 2) 
ginger supplementation on muscle pain. Study 1 and 2 were identical 
double-blind, placebo controlled, randomized experiments with 34 and 40 
volunteers, respectively. Participants consumed 2 grams of either raw (study 1) 
or heated (study 2) ginger or placebo for 11 consecutive days. Participants 
performed 18 eccentric actions of the elbow flexors to induce pain and 
inflammation. Pain intensity, perceived effort, plasma prostaglandin E(2), arm 
volume, range-of-motion and isometric strength were assessed prior to and for 3 
days after exercise. Results Raw (25%, -.78 SD, P = .041) and heat-treated (23%, 
-.57 SD, P = .049) ginger resulted in similar pain reductions 24 hours after 
eccentric exercise compared to placebo. Smaller effects were noted between both 
types of ginger and placebo on other measures. Daily supplementation with ginger 
reduced muscle pain caused by eccentric exercise, and this effect was not 
enhanced by heat treating the ginger.
PERSPECTIVE: This study demonstrates that daily consumption of raw and 
heat-treated ginger resulted in moderate-to-large reductions in muscle pain 
following exercise-induced muscle injury. Our findings agree with those showing 
hypoalgesic effects of ginger in osteoarthritis patients and further demonstrate 
ginger's effectiveness as a pain reliever.

Copyright 2010 American Pain Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpain.2009.12.013
PMID: 20418184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]