---
reference_id: "PMID:35592706"
title: PI3K/AKT/mTOR Pathway-Associated Genes Reveal a Putative Prognostic Signature Correlated with Immune Infiltration in Hepatocellular Carcinoma.
authors:
- Wang Z
- Rehman AU
- Qin X
- Zhu C
- Wu S
journal: Dis Markers
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1155/2022/7545666
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/pathology"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Humans
- Liver Neoplasms/pathology
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics
- Prognosis
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/genetics
- TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PI3K/AKT/mTOR Pathway-Associated Genes Reveal a Putative Prognostic Signature Correlated with Immune Infiltration in Hepatocellular Carcinoma.
**Authors:** Wang Z, Rehman AU, Qin X, Zhu C, Wu S
**Journal:** Dis Markers (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2022/7545666](https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/7545666)

## Content

1. Dis Markers. 2022 May 9;2022:7545666. doi: 10.1155/2022/7545666. eCollection
2022.

PI3K/AKT/mTOR Pathway-Associated Genes Reveal a Putative Prognostic Signature
Correlated with Immune Infiltration in Hepatocellular Carcinoma.

Wang Z(1)(2), Rehman AU(3), Qin X(2), Zhu C(2), Wu S(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Dalian Medical University, Dalian Medical University,
Dalian 116044, China.
(2)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The Affiliated Changzhou No. 2 People's
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Changzhou 213000, China.
(3)Center of Gastrointestinal Disease, The Affiliated Changzhou No. 2 People's
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Changzhou 213000, China.

BACKGROUND: The dysregulated PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway acts as the main regulator of
tumorigenesis in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
AIM: Here, we identify the prognostic significance of PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathway-associated genes (PAGs) as well as their putative signature based on
PAGs in an HCC patient's cohort.
METHODS: The transcriptomic data and clinical feature sets were queried to
extract the putative prognostic signature.
RESULTS: We identified nine PAGs with different expressions. GO and KEGG
indicated that these differentially expressed genes were associated with various
carcinogenic pathways. Based on the signature-computed median risk score, we
categorized the patients into groups of low risk and high risk. The survival
time for the low-risk group is longer than that of the high-risk group in
Kaplan-Meier (KM) curves. The prognostic value of risk score (ROC = 0.736) of
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves performed better in comparison to
that of other clinicopathological features. In both the GEO database and ICGC
database, these outcomes were verified. The predictions of the overall survival
rates in HCC patients of 1 year, 3 years, and 5 years can be obtained separately
from the nomogram. The risk score was associated with the immune infiltrations
of CD8 T cells, activated CD4 memory T cells, and follicular helper T cells, and
the expression of immune checkpoints (PD-1, TIGIT, TIM-3, BTLA, LAG-3, and
CTLA4) was positively relevant to the risk score. The sensitivity to several
chemotherapeutic drugs can also be revealed by the signature. CDK1, PITX2,
PRKAA2, and SFN were all upregulated in the tumor tissue of clinical samples.
CONCLUSION: A putative and differential dataset-validated prognostic signature
on the basis of integrated bioinformatic analysis was established in our study,
providing the immunotherapeutic targets as well as the personalized treatment in
HCC with neoteric insight.

Copyright © 2022 Zhihuai Wang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/7545666
PMCID: PMC9112180
PMID: 35592706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of
interest in terms of publishing the manuscript.
