---
reference_id: "PMID:26014290"
title: Revisiting Li-Fraumeni Syndrome From TP53 Mutation Carriers.
authors:
- Bougeard G
- Renaux-Petel M
- Flaman JM
- Charbonnier C
- Fermey P
- Belotti M
- Gauthier-Villars M
- Stoppa-Lyonnet D
- Consolino E
- Brugières L
- Caron O
- Benusiglio PR
- Bressac-de Paillerets B
- Bonadona V
- Bonaïti-Pellié C
- Tinat J
- Baert-Desurmont S
- Frebourg T
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2014.59.5728
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Revisiting Li-Fraumeni Syndrome From TP53 Mutation Carriers.
**Authors:** Bougeard G, Renaux-Petel M, Flaman JM, Charbonnier C, Fermey P, Belotti M, Gauthier-Villars M, Stoppa-Lyonnet D, Consolino E, Brugières L, Caron O, Benusiglio PR, Bressac-de Paillerets B, Bonadona V, Bonaïti-Pellié C, Tinat J, Baert-Desurmont S, Frebourg T
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2014.59.5728](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2014.59.5728)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2015 Jul 20;33(21):2345-52. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2014.59.5728. Epub 
2015 May 26.

Revisiting Li-Fraumeni Syndrome From TP53 Mutation Carriers.

Bougeard G(1), Renaux-Petel M(1), Flaman JM(1), Charbonnier C(1), Fermey P(1), 
Belotti M(1), Gauthier-Villars M(1), Stoppa-Lyonnet D(1), Consolino E(1), 
Brugières L(1), Caron O(1), Benusiglio PR(1), Bressac-de Paillerets B(1), 
Bonadona V(1), Bonaïti-Pellié C(1), Tinat J(1), Baert-Desurmont S(1), Frebourg 
T(2).

Author information:
(1)Gaëlle Bougeard, Mariette Renaux-Petel, Jean-Michel Flaman, Camille 
Charbonnier, Pierre Fermey, Julie Tinat, Stéphanie Baert-Desurmont, Thierry 
Frebourg, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (Inserm) 
U1079, University of Rouen, Institute for Research and Innovation in 
Biomedicine; Julie Tinat, Stéphanie Baert-Desurmont, Thierry Frebourg, 
University Hospital, Rouen; Muriel Belotti, Marion Gauthier-Villars, Dominique 
Stoppa-Lyonnet, Curie Institute, Paris; Emilie Consolino, Laurence Brugières, 
Olivier Caron, Patrick R. Benusiglio, Brigitte Bressac-de Paillerets, Gustave 
Roussy Institute, Villejuif; Valérie Bonadona, Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique (CNRS) UMR 5558, University of Lyon 1, Leon Berard Cancer Center, 
Lyon; and Catherine Bonaïti-Pellié, Inserm UMR-S 669, University of Paris-Sud, 
Villejuif, France.
(2)Gaëlle Bougeard, Mariette Renaux-Petel, Jean-Michel Flaman, Camille 
Charbonnier, Pierre Fermey, Julie Tinat, Stéphanie Baert-Desurmont, Thierry 
Frebourg, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (Inserm) 
U1079, University of Rouen, Institute for Research and Innovation in 
Biomedicine; Julie Tinat, Stéphanie Baert-Desurmont, Thierry Frebourg, 
University Hospital, Rouen; Muriel Belotti, Marion Gauthier-Villars, Dominique 
Stoppa-Lyonnet, Curie Institute, Paris; Emilie Consolino, Laurence Brugières, 
Olivier Caron, Patrick R. Benusiglio, Brigitte Bressac-de Paillerets, Gustave 
Roussy Institute, Villejuif; Valérie Bonadona, Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique (CNRS) UMR 5558, University of Lyon 1, Leon Berard Cancer Center, 
Lyon; and Catherine Bonaïti-Pellié, Inserm UMR-S 669, University of Paris-Sud, 
Villejuif, France. frebourg@chu-rouen.fr.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2015 Jul 20;33(21):2331-3. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2015.61.5757.

PURPOSE: The aim of the study was to update the description of Li-Fraumeni 
syndrome (LFS), a remarkable cancer predisposition characterized by extensive 
clinical heterogeneity.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: From 1,730 French patients suggestive of LFS, we 
identified 415 mutation carriers in 214 families harboring 133 distinct TP53 
alterations and updated their clinical presentation.
RESULTS: The 322 affected carriers developed 552 tumors, and 43% had developed 
multiple malignancies. The mean age of first tumor onset was 24.9 years, 41% 
having developed a tumor by age 18. In childhood, the LFS tumor spectrum was 
characterized by osteosarcomas, adrenocortical carcinomas (ACC), CNS tumors, and 
soft tissue sarcomas (STS) observed in 30%, 27%, 26%, and 23% of the patients, 
respectively. In adults, the tumor distribution was characterized by the 
predominance of breast carcinomas observed in 79% of the females, and STS 
observed in 27% of the patients. The TP53 mutation detection rate in children 
presenting with ACC or choroid plexus carcinomas, and in females with breast 
cancer before age 31 years, without additional features indicative of LFS, was 
45%, 42% and 6%, respectively. The mean age of tumor onset was statistically 
different (P < .05) between carriers harboring dominant-negative missense 
mutations (21.3 years) and those with all types of loss of function mutations 
(28.5 years) or genomic rearrangements (35.8 years). Affected children, except 
those with ACC, harbored mostly dominant-negative missense mutations.
CONCLUSION: The clinical gradient of the germline TP53 mutations, which should 
be validated by other studies, suggests that it might be appropriate to stratify 
the clinical management of LFS according to the class of the mutation.

© 2015 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2014.59.5728
PMID: 26014290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]