---
reference_id: PMID:36982891
title: "Hormone-Related and Drug-Induced Osteoporosis: A Cellular and Molecular Overview."
authors:
- Wang LT
- Chen LR
- Chen KH
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24065814
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Glycoproteins/metabolism
- Glucocorticoids/metabolism
- Osteoclasts/metabolism
- Osteoprotegerin/metabolism
- Osteoblasts/metabolism
- "Osteoporosis/chemically induced, genetics, drug therapy"
- Cell Differentiation
- Estrogens/metabolism
- RANK Ligand/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hormone-Related and Drug-Induced Osteoporosis: A Cellular and Molecular Overview.
**Authors:** Wang LT, Chen LR, Chen KH
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24065814](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24065814)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Mar 18;24(6):5814. doi: 10.3390/ijms24065814.

Hormone-Related and Drug-Induced Osteoporosis: A Cellular and Molecular 
Overview.

Wang LT(1), Chen LR(1)(2), Chen KH(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Mackay Memorial Hospital, 
Taipei 104, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Mechanical Engineering, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung 
University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Taipei Tzu-Chi Hospital, The 
Buddhist Tzu-Chi Medical Foundation, Taipei 231, Taiwan.
(4)School of Medicine, Tzu-Chi University, Hualien 970, Taiwan.

Osteoporosis resulting from an imbalance of bone turnover between resorption and 
formation is a critical health issue worldwide. Estrogen deficiency following a 
nature aging process is the leading cause of hormone-related osteoporosis for 
postmenopausal women, while glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis remains the most 
common in drug-induced osteoporosis. Other medications and medical conditions 
related to secondary osteoporosis include proton pump inhibitors, hypogonadism, 
selective serotonin receptor inhibitors, chemotherapies, and medroxyprogesterone 
acetate. This review is a summary of the cellular and molecular mechanisms of 
bone turnover, the pathophysiology of osteoporosis, and their treatment. Nuclear 
factor-κβ ligand (RANKL) appears to be the critical uncoupling factor that 
enhances osteoclastogenesis. In contrast, osteoprotegerin (OPG) is a RANKL 
antagonist secreted by osteoblast lineage cells. Estrogen promotes apoptosis of 
osteoclasts and inhibits osteoclastogenesis by stimulating the production of OPG 
and reducing osteoclast differentiation after suppression of IL-1 and TNF, and 
subsequent M-CSF, RANKL, and IL-6 release. It can also activate the Wnt 
signaling pathway to increase osteogenesis, and upregulate BMP signaling to 
promote mesenchymal stem cell differentiation from pre-osteoblasts to 
osteoblasts rather than adipocytes. Estrogen deficiency leads to the uncoupling 
of bone resorption and formation; therefore, resulting in greater bone loss. 
Excessive glucocorticoids increase PPAR-2 production, upregulate the expression 
of Dickkopf-1 (DKK1) in osteoblasts, and inhibit the Wnt signaling pathway, thus 
decreasing osteoblast differentiation. They promote osteoclast survival by 
enhancing RANKL expression and inhibiting OPG expression. Appropriate estrogen 
supplement and avoiding excessive glucocorticoid use are deemed the primary 
treatment for hormone-related and glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis. 
Additionally, current pharmacological treatment includes bisphosphonates, 
teriparatide (PTH), and RANKL inhibitors (such as denosumab). However, many 
detailed cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying osteoporosis seem 
complicated and unexplored and warrant further investigation.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24065814
PMCID: PMC10054048
PMID: 36982891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.