---
reference_id: "PMID:2548429"
title: The acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) dementia complex.
authors:
- Ho DD
- Bredesen DE
- Vinters HV
- Daar ES
journal: Ann Intern Med
year: '1989'
doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-111-5-400
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) dementia complex.
**Authors:** Ho DD, Bredesen DE, Vinters HV, Daar ES
**Journal:** Ann Intern Med (1989)
**DOI:** [10.7326/0003-4819-111-5-400](https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-111-5-400)

## Content

1. Ann Intern Med. 1989 Sep 1;111(5):400-10. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-111-5-400.

The acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) dementia complex.

Ho DD(1), Bredesen DE, Vinters HV, Daar ES.

Author information:
(1)Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048.

The acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) dementia complex is a frequent and 
devastating complication of infection with human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 
(HIV-1). Features of the AIDS dementia complex include decreased memory, the 
inability to concentrate, apathy, and psychomotor retardation. Typical 
neuropathologic findings include gliosis, focal necrosis of neurons, 
perivascular inflammation, formation of microglial nodules, multinucleated giant 
cells, and demyelination. That HIV-1 is the direct cause of this neurologic 
syndrome is strongly supported by the available evidence. In addition, several 
studies have identified the monocyte-macrophage as the predominant cell type in 
the brain infected with HIV-1. However, the mechanisms by which the infected 
monocytes-macrophages mediate neurologic dysfunction and destruction have not 
been elucidated.

DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-111-5-400
PMID: 2548429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]