---
reference_id: "PMID:34015244"
title: "A Randomized Controlled Trial of SGS-742, a γ-aminobutyric acid B (GABA-B) Receptor Antagonist, for Succinic Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase Deficiency."
authors:
- Schreiber JM
- Wiggs E
- Cuento R
- Norato G
- Dustin IH
- Rolinski R
- Austermuehle A
- Zhou X
- Inati SK
- Gibson KM
- Pearl PL
- Theodore WH
journal: J Child Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/08830738211012804
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cross-Over Studies
- Developmental Disabilities
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- GABA Antagonists/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Male
- Organophosphorus Compounds/therapeutic use
- "Succinate-Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase/deficiency, drug effects"
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Randomized Controlled Trial of SGS-742, a γ-aminobutyric acid B (GABA-B) Receptor Antagonist, for Succinic Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Schreiber JM, Wiggs E, Cuento R, Norato G, Dustin IH, Rolinski R, Austermuehle A, Zhou X, Inati SK, Gibson KM, Pearl PL, Theodore WH
**Journal:** J Child Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/08830738211012804](https://doi.org/10.1177/08830738211012804)

## Content

1. J Child Neurol. 2021 Nov;36(13-14):1189-1199. doi: 10.1177/08830738211012804.
Epub 2021 May 20.

A Randomized Controlled Trial of SGS-742, a γ-aminobutyric acid B (GABA-B)
Receptor Antagonist, for Succinic Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase Deficiency.

Schreiber JM(1)(2), Wiggs E(3), Cuento R(3)(4), Norato G(3), Dustin IH(1),
Rolinski R(1), Austermuehle A(1), Zhou X(1), Inati SK(3), Gibson KM(5), Pearl
PL(6), Theodore WH(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Epilepsy Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke, 35053National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Division of Epilepsy, Neurophysiology, and Critical Care Neurology,
8404Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC, USA.
(3)Office of the Clinical Director, 35053National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Clinical Trials Unit, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke, 2511National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacotherapy, College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, 53424Washington State University, Spokane, WA, USA.
(6)Department of Epilepsy and Clinical Neurophysiology, 1862Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

We examined safety, tolerability, and efficacy of SGS-742, a γ-aminobutyric acid
B (GABA-B) receptor antagonist, in patients with succinic semialdehyde
dehydrogenase deficiency. This was a single-center randomized, double-blind
crossover phase II clinical trial of SGS-742 versus placebo in patients with
succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency. Procedures included transcranial
magnetic stimulation and the Adaptive Behavior Assessment Scale. Nineteen
subjects were consented and enrolled; the mean age was 14.0 ± 7.5 years and 11
(58%) were female. We did not find a significant effect of SGS-742 on the
Adaptive Behavior Assessment Scale score, motor threshold, and paired-pulse
stimulation. The difference in recruitment curve slopes between treatment groups
was 0.003 (P = .09). There was no significant difference in incidence of adverse
effects between drug and placebo arms. SGS-742 failed to produce improved
cognition and normalization of cortical excitability as measured by the Adaptive
Behavior Assessment Scale and transcranial magnetic stimulation. Our data do not
support the current use of SGS-742 in succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase
deficiency.Trial registry number NCT02019667. Phase 2 Clinical Trial of SGS-742
Therapy in Succinic Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02019667.

DOI: 10.1177/08830738211012804
PMCID: PMC8605041
PMID: 34015244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF CONFLICTING INTERESTS The authors
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
