---
reference_id: "PMID:30012004"
title: "Huntington's disease: Neuropsychiatric manifestations of Huntington's disease."
authors:
- Goh AM
- Wibawa P
- Loi SM
- Walterfang M
- Velakoulis D
- Looi JC
journal: Australas Psychiatry
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1177/1039856218791036
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Huntington's disease: Neuropsychiatric manifestations of Huntington's disease.
**Authors:** Goh AM, Wibawa P, Loi SM, Walterfang M, Velakoulis D, Looi JC
**Journal:** Australas Psychiatry (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1039856218791036](https://doi.org/10.1177/1039856218791036)

## Content

1. Australas Psychiatry. 2018 Aug;26(4):366-375. doi: 10.1177/1039856218791036. 
Epub 2018 Jul 16.

Huntington's disease: Neuropsychiatric manifestations of Huntington's disease.

Goh AM(1), Wibawa P(2), Loi SM(3), Walterfang M(4), Velakoulis D(3), Looi JC(5).

Author information:
(1)Neuropsychologist, Neuropsychiatry Unit, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, 
VIC, and; Research Fellow, Academic Unit for Psychiatry of Old Age, The 
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, and; National Ageing Research 
Institute, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(2)Neuropsychiatry Registrar, Neuropsychiatry Unit, Royal Melbourne Hospital, 
Parkville, VIC, and; Melbourne Neuropsychiatry Centre, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC, and; Northwestern Mental Health, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(3)Neuropsychiatrist, Neuropsychiatry Unit, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, 
VIC, and; Melbourne Neuropsychiatry Centre, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
VIC, and; Northwestern Mental Health, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(4)Neuropsychiatrist, Neuropsychiatry Unit, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, 
VIC, and; Melbourne Neuropsychiatry Centre & Melbourne, VIC, and; Florey 
Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
VIC, Australia.
(5)Clinical Associate Professor, Neuropsychiatry Unit, Royal Melbourne Hospital, 
Parkville, VIC, and; Melbourne Neuropsychiatry Centre, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC, and; Associate Professor and Acting Head, Academic Unit of 
Psychiatry and Addiction Medicine, Australian National University Medical 
School, Canberra Hospital, Canberra, ACT, Australia.

OBJECTIVES: Huntington's disease (HD) is a profoundly incapacitating, and 
ultimately fatal, neurodegenerative disease. HD is presently incurable, so the 
current goal is to allow affected individuals to live as well as possible with 
the illness, to maximise functional independence and quality of life for the 
person with HD, their carers and family members. This clinical update review 
focuses on the common neuropsychiatric manifestations in HD, and outlines and 
evaluates the various neuropsychiatric facets of HD, including the aetiology, 
symptoms and diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Neuropsychiatric symptoms can precede the classic motor clinical 
symptoms of HD (prodromal HD) by decades, and cause significant functional 
impairment. HD provides key insights and understanding into the organic 
psychiatric disorders, including contemporary clinical insights into the process 
of neurodegeneration and manifestation of neuropsychiatric symptoms.

DOI: 10.1177/1039856218791036
PMID: 30012004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]