---
reference_id: "PMID:23390440"
title: Clinical characteristics of Kawasaki disease with sterile pyuria.
authors:
- Choi JY
- Park SY
- Choi KH
- Park YH
- Lee YH
journal: Korean J Pediatr
year: '2013'
doi: 10.3345/kjp.2013.56.1.13
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical characteristics of Kawasaki disease with sterile pyuria.
**Authors:** Choi JY, Park SY, Choi KH, Park YH, Lee YH
**Journal:** Korean J Pediatr (2013)
**DOI:** [10.3345/kjp.2013.56.1.13](https://doi.org/10.3345/kjp.2013.56.1.13)

## Content

1. Korean J Pediatr. 2013 Jan;56(1):13-8. doi: 10.3345/kjp.2013.56.1.13. Epub
2013  Jan 29.

Clinical characteristics of Kawasaki disease with sterile pyuria.

Choi JY(1), Park SY, Choi KH, Park YH, Lee YH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yeungnam University College of Medicine, Daegu, 
Korea.

PURPOSE: Kawasaki disease (KD) is a systemic vasculitis and affects many organ 
systems. It often presents sterile pyuria, microscopic hematuria, and 
proteinuria due to renal involvement. The aims of this study were to define 
clinical characteristics of acute KD patients with pyuria and to analyze meaning 
of pyuria in KD.
METHODS: The medical records and laboratory findings including serum and urine 
test of 133 patients with KD admitted to Yeungnam University Hospital from March 
2006 to December 2010 were reviewed retrospectively.
RESULTS: Forty patients had sterile pyuria and their clinical characteristics 
including age, gender and body weight were not significantly different with 
those who did not have pyuria. Fever duration after treatment was significantly 
longer in KD patients with pyuria. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive 
protein and serum concentration of alanine aminotransferase were significantly 
higher in patients with pyuria. Hyponatremia and coronary artery lesion were 
seen more often in patients with pyuria but there was no significant difference. 
Also serum blood urea nitrogen was significantly higher in KD patients with 
pyuria. Urine β(2)-microglobulin was elevated in both patients groups and showed 
no difference between two groups.
CONCLUSION: We found more severe inflammatory reaction in KD patients with 
pyuria. We also found elevation of some useful parameters like 
β(2)-microglobulin that indicate renal involvement of KD through the urine test. 
Careful management and follow up will need for KD patients with pyuria and it is 
necessary in the future to study the specific parameters for renal involvement 
of KD.

DOI: 10.3345/kjp.2013.56.1.13
PMCID: PMC3564025
PMID: 23390440