---
reference_id: "PMID:11683776"
title: "Waardenburg syndrome type 3 (Klein-Waardenburg syndrome) segregating with a heterozygous deletion in the paired box domain of PAX3: a simple variant or a true syndrome?"
authors:
- Tekin M
- Bodurtha JN
- Nance WE
- Pandya A
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.2001.600408.x
keywords:
- Chromosome Segregation/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant/genetics"
- Genetic Variation/genetics
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- PAX3 Transcription Factor
- Paired Box Transcription Factors
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- Sequence Deletion/genetics
- Transcription Factors
- Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Waardenburg syndrome type 3 (Klein-Waardenburg syndrome) segregating with a heterozygous deletion in the paired box domain of PAX3: a simple variant or a true syndrome?
**Authors:** Tekin M, Bodurtha JN, Nance WE, Pandya A
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1034/j.1399-0004.2001.600408.x](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1399-0004.2001.600408.x)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2001 Oct;60(4):301-4. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.2001.600408.x.

Waardenburg syndrome type 3 (Klein-Waardenburg syndrome) segregating with a 
heterozygous deletion in the paired box domain of PAX3: a simple variant or a 
true syndrome?

Tekin M(1), Bodurtha JN, Nance WE, Pandya A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Medical College of Virginia/Virginia 
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298-0033, USA.

Klein-Waardenburg syndrome or Waardenburg syndrome type 3 (WS-III; MIM 148820) 
is characterized by the presence of musculoskeletal abnormalities in association 
with clinical features of Waardenburg syndrome type 1 (WS-I). Since the 
description of the first patient in 1947 (D. Klein, Arch Klaus Stift Vererb 
Forsch 1947: 22: 336-342), a few cases have been reported. Only occasional 
families have demonstrated autosomal-dominant inheritance of WS-III. In a 
previous report, a missense mutation in the paired domain of the PAX3 gene has 
been described in a family with dominant segregation of WS-III. In this report, 
we present a second family (mother and son) with typical clinical findings of 
WS-III segregating with a heterozygous 13-bp deletion in the paired domain of 
the PAX3 gene. Although homozygosity or compound heterozygosity has also been 
documented in patients with severe limb involvement, a consistent 
genotype-phenotype correlation for limb abnormalities associated with 
heterozygous PAX3 mutations has not previously been apparent. Heterozygous 
mutations could either reflect a unique dominant-negative effect or possibly the 
contribution of other unlinked genetic modifiers in determining the phenotype.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.2001.600408.x
PMID: 11683776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]