---
reference_id: "PMID:38972133"
title: Therapeutic implications of the metabolic changes associated with BRAF inhibition in melanoma.
authors:
- Loftus AW
- Zarei M
- Kakish H
- Hajihassani O
- Hue JJ
- Boutros C
- Graor HJ
- Nakazzi F
- Bahlibi T
- Winter JM
- Rothermel LD
journal: Cancer Treat Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2024.102795
keywords:
- Humans
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, metabolism, genetics, pathology"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Mutation
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology, metabolism, genetics"
- Glycolysis/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic implications of the metabolic changes associated with BRAF inhibition in melanoma.
**Authors:** Loftus AW, Zarei M, Kakish H, Hajihassani O, Hue JJ, Boutros C, Graor HJ, Nakazzi F, Bahlibi T, Winter JM, Rothermel LD
**Journal:** Cancer Treat Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ctrv.2024.102795](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ctrv.2024.102795)

## Content

1. Cancer Treat Rev. 2024 Sep;129:102795. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2024.102795. Epub
2024 Jun 28.

Therapeutic implications of the metabolic changes associated with BRAF
inhibition in melanoma.

Loftus AW(1), Zarei M(2), Kakish H(1), Hajihassani O(2), Hue JJ(1), Boutros
C(1), Graor HJ(2), Nakazzi F(2), Bahlibi T(2), Winter JM(3), Rothermel LD(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology, University Hospitals
Cleveland Medical Center, 11100 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.
(2)Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland,
OH, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology, University Hospitals
Cleveland Medical Center, 11100 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44106, USA; Case
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH,
USA.
(4)Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology, University Hospitals
Cleveland Medical Center, 11100 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44106, USA; Case
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH,
USA. Electronic address: Luke.Rothermel@UHHospitals.org.

Melanoma metabolism can be reprogrammed by activating BRAF mutations. These
mutations are present in up to 50% of cutaneous melanomas, with the most common
being V600E. BRAF mutations augment glycolysis to promote macromolecular
synthesis and proliferation. Prior to the development of targeted anti-BRAF
therapies, these mutations were associated with accelerated clinical disease in
the metastatic setting. Combination BRAF and MEK inhibition is a first line
treatment option for locally advanced or metastatic melanoma harboring
targetable BRAF mutations. This therapy shows excellent response rates but these
responses are not durable, with almost all patients developing resistance. When
BRAF mutated melanoma cells are inhibited with targeted therapies the metabolism
of those cells also changes. These cells rely less on glycolysis for energy
production, and instead shift to a mitochondrial phenotype with upregulated TCA
cycle activity and oxidative phosphorylation. An increased dependence on
glutamine utilization is exhibited to support TCA cycle substrates in this
metabolic rewiring of BRAF mutated melanoma. Herein we describe the relevant
core metabolic pathways modulated by BRAF inhibition. These adaptive pathways
represent vulnerabilities that could be targeted to overcome resistance to BRAF
inhibitors. This review evaluates current and future therapeutic strategies that
target metabolic reprogramming in melanoma cells, particularly in response to
BRAF inhibition.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2024.102795
PMCID: PMC11361048
PMID: 38972133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
