---
reference_id: "PMID:41177756"
title: "Ravulizumab as an alternative for gemcitabine related trombotic microangiopathy: A case report."
authors:
- Riaza Ortiz C
- Calvo Arévalo M
- Álvarez Nadal M
- Casado A
- Sánchez-Fructuoso AI
- García-Carro C
journal: Nefrologia (Engl Ed)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.nefroe.2025.501356
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Deoxycytidine/analogs & derivatives, adverse effects"
- Gemcitabine
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Thrombotic Microangiopathies/chemically induced, drug therapy"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use"
- "Antimetabolites, Antineoplastic/adverse effects"
- Breast Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Hemangiosarcoma/drug therapy
- Indazoles
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ravulizumab as an alternative for gemcitabine related trombotic microangiopathy: A case report.
**Authors:** Riaza Ortiz C, Calvo Arévalo M, Álvarez Nadal M, Casado A, Sánchez-Fructuoso AI, García-Carro C
**Journal:** Nefrologia (Engl Ed) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nefroe.2025.501356](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nefroe.2025.501356)

## Content

1. Nefrologia (Engl Ed). 2025 Nov;45(9):501356. doi:
10.1016/j.nefroe.2025.501356.  Epub 2025 Nov 1.

Ravulizumab as an alternative for gemcitabine related trombotic microangiopathy:
A case report.

Riaza Ortiz C(1), Calvo Arévalo M(2), Álvarez Nadal M(2), Casado A(3),
Sánchez-Fructuoso AI(4), García-Carro C(4).

Author information:
(1)Nephrology Department, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain. Electronic
address: cristina.riaza@salud.madrid.org.
(2)Nephrology Department, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Oncology Department, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Nephrology Department, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain; Nephrology
Department, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Department of Medicine, Complutense
University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) is characterized by endotelial damage,
microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia and organ damage,
particularly renal. In Oncology, TMA can be secondary to the cancer itself or
related to oncological treatments. TMA associated with gemcitabine has a poor
prognosis, with high mortality and complement activation plays a central role in
its pathophisiology. While eculizumab has shown efficacy and improved outcomes
in this condition, evidence regarding the use of ravulizumab remains scarce. We
present the case of an 81-year-old woman with arterial hypertension and a
history of left breast cancer treated with surgery and radiotherapy, currently
diagnosed with stage IV left breast angiosarcoma treated with gemcitabine after
progression on paclitaxel. She developed a hypertensive emergency, anemia (Hb
6.9 g/dL), thrombocytopenia (68,000 platelets), impaired renal function
(creatinine 1.64 mg/dL) and elevated LDH (1126 U/L). Suspecting
gemcitabine-induced TMA, the treatment was discontinued and ravulizumab was
initiated, resulting in rapid renal and hematological response. Oncological
treatment with pazopanib was reintroduced, leading to recurrence of TMA. That
treatment was suspended and another dose of ravulizumab was administered, with
good response. TMA is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in cancer
patients, contributing to progression to chronic kidney disease and the
discontinuation of oncological treatment. This case highlights the role of
ravulizumab in gemcitabine-associated TMA, offering advantages in frail patients
due to its longer half-life, reduced administration frequency and favorable
outcomes.

Copyright © 2025 Sociedad Española de Nefrología. Published by Elsevier España,
S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nefroe.2025.501356
PMID: 41177756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors of
this manuscript declare that they have no conflicts of interest.
