---
reference_id: "PMID:35238134"
title: "Genotype-phenotype correlates in Joubert syndrome: A review."
authors:
- Gana S
- Serpieri V
- Valente EM
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31963
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-phenotype correlates in Joubert syndrome: A review.
**Authors:** Gana S, Serpieri V, Valente EM
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31963](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31963)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2022 Mar;190(1):72-88. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31963. Epub 2022 Mar 3.

Genotype-phenotype correlates in Joubert syndrome: A review.

Gana S(1), Serpieri V(1), Valente EM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurogenetics Research Center, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.

Joubert syndrome (JS) is a genetically heterogeneous primary ciliopathy 
characterized by a pathognomonic cerebellar and brainstem malformation, the 
"molar tooth sign," and variable organ involvement. Over 40 causative genes have 
been identified to date, explaining up to 94% of cases. To date, gene-phenotype 
correlates have been delineated only for a handful of genes, directly 
translating into improved counseling and clinical care. For instance, JS 
individuals harboring pathogenic variants in TMEM67 have a significantly higher 
risk of liver fibrosis, while pathogenic variants in NPHP1, RPGRIP1L, and 
TMEM237 are frequently associated to JS with renal involvement, requiring a 
closer monitoring of liver parameters, or renal functioning. On the other hand, 
individuals with causal variants in the CEP290 or AHI1 need a closer 
surveillance for retinal dystrophy and, in case of CEP290, also for chronic 
kidney disease. These examples highlight how an accurate description of the 
range of clinical symptoms associated with defects in each causative gene, 
including the rare ones, would better address prognosis and help guiding a 
personalized management. This review proposes to address this issue by assessing 
the available literature, to confirm known, as well as to propose rare 
gene-phenotype correlates in JS.

© 2022 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part C: Seminars in 
Medical Genetics published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31963
PMCID: PMC9314610
PMID: 35238134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare to have no competing 
financial interests.