---
reference_id: "PMID:26861125"
title: "Creatine synthesis and exchanges between brain cells: What can be learned from human creatine deficiencies and various experimental models?"
authors:
- Hanna-El-Daher L
- Braissant O
journal: Amino Acids
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00726-016-2189-0
keywords:
- "Amidinotransferases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- "Blood-Brain Barrier/metabolism, pathology"
- "Brain Diseases, Metabolic, Inborn/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Capillaries/metabolism, pathology"
- "Creatine/biosynthesis, deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Developmental Disabilities/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Endothelial Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Guanidinoacetate N-Methyltransferase/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Language Development Disorders/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "X-Linked Intellectual Disability/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Movement Disorders/congenital, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Plasma Membrane Neurotransmitter Transport Proteins/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Speech Disorders/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Creatine synthesis and exchanges between brain cells: What can be learned from human creatine deficiencies and various experimental models?
**Authors:** Hanna-El-Daher L, Braissant O
**Journal:** Amino Acids (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00726-016-2189-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00726-016-2189-0)

## Content

1. Amino Acids. 2016 Aug;48(8):1877-95. doi: 10.1007/s00726-016-2189-0. Epub 2016
 Feb 10.

Creatine synthesis and exchanges between brain cells: What can be learned from
human creatine deficiencies and various experimental models?

Hanna-El-Daher L(1), Braissant O(2).

Author information:
(1)Service of Biomedicine, Neurometabolic Unit, Lausanne University Hospital,
1011, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Service of Biomedicine, Neurometabolic Unit, Lausanne University Hospital,
1011, Lausanne, Switzerland. Olivier.Braissant@chuv.ch.

While it has long been thought that most of cerebral creatine is of peripheral
origin, the last 20 years has provided evidence that the creatine synthetic
pathway (AGAT and GAMT enzymes) is expressed in the brain together with the
creatine transporter (SLC6A8). It has also been shown that SLC6A8 is expressed
by microcapillary endothelial cells at the blood-brain barrier, but is absent
from surrounding astrocytes, raising the concept that the blood-brain barrier
has a limited permeability for peripheral creatine. The first creatine
deficiency syndrome in humans was also discovered 20 years ago (GAMT
deficiency), followed later by AGAT and SLC6A8 deficiencies, all three diseases
being characterized by creatine deficiency in the CNS and essentially affecting
the brain. By reviewing the numerous and latest experimental studies addressing
creatine transport and synthesis in the CNS, as well as the clinical and
biochemical characteristics of creatine-deficient patients, our aim was to
delineate a clearer view of the roles of the blood-brain and blood-cerebrospinal
fluid barriers in the transport of creatine and guanidinoacetate between
periphery and CNS, and on the intracerebral synthesis and transport of creatine.
This review also addresses the question of guanidinoacetate toxicity for brain
cells, as probably found under GAMT deficiency.

DOI: 10.1007/s00726-016-2189-0
PMID: 26861125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
