---
reference_id: "PMID:37270692"
title: "Phase II, Open-Label Study of Encorafenib Plus Binimetinib in Patients With BRAF(V600)-Mutant Metastatic Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer."
authors:
- Riely GJ
- Smit EF
- Ahn MJ
- Felip E
- Ramalingam SS
- Tsao A
- Johnson M
- Gelsomino F
- Esper R
- Nadal E
- Offin M
- Provencio M
- Clarke J
- Hussain M
- Otterson GA
- Dagogo-Jack I
- Goldman JW
- Morgensztern D
- Alcasid A
- Usari T
- Wissel P
- Wilner K
- Pathan N
- Tonkovyd S
- Johnson BE
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.23.00774
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Melanoma/drug therapy
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/adverse effects
- Mutation
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects
- Carbamates
- Sulfonamides
- Benzimidazoles
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase II, Open-Label Study of Encorafenib Plus Binimetinib in Patients With BRAF(V600)-Mutant Metastatic Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.
**Authors:** Riely GJ, Smit EF, Ahn MJ, Felip E, Ramalingam SS, Tsao A, Johnson M, Gelsomino F, Esper R, Nadal E, Offin M, Provencio M, Clarke J, Hussain M, Otterson GA, Dagogo-Jack I, Goldman JW, Morgensztern D, Alcasid A, Usari T, Wissel P, Wilner K, Pathan N, Tonkovyd S, Johnson BE
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.23.00774](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.23.00774)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2023 Jul 20;41(21):3700-3711. doi: 10.1200/JCO.23.00774. Epub
2023  Jun 4.

Phase II, Open-Label Study of Encorafenib Plus Binimetinib in Patients With
BRAF(V600)-Mutant Metastatic Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.

Riely GJ(1), Smit EF(2), Ahn MJ(3), Felip E(4), Ramalingam SS(5), Tsao A(6),
Johnson M(7), Gelsomino F(8), Esper R(9), Nadal E(10), Offin M(1), Provencio
M(11), Clarke J(12), Hussain M(9), Otterson GA(13), Dagogo-Jack I(14), Goldman
JW(15), Morgensztern D(16), Alcasid A(17), Usari T(18), Wissel P(19), Wilner
K(20), Pathan N(20), Tonkovyd S(21), Johnson BE(22).

Author information:
(1)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.
(2)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
the Netherlands.
(3)Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul,
South Korea.
(4)Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology,
Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, Atlanta, GA.
(6)MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.
(7)Tennessee Oncology, Sarah Cannon Research Institute, Nashville, TN.
(8)Medical Oncology Unit, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna,
Bologna, Italy.
(9)Florida Cancer Specialists, Fort Myers, FL.
(10)Medical Oncology, Catalan Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro-Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain.
(12)Duke Cancer Center, Durham, NC.
(13)Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH.
(14)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA.
(15)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA.
(16)Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO.
(17)Pfizer, Collegeville, PA.
(18)Pfizer, Milan, Italy.
(19)Pfizer, New York, NY.
(20)Pfizer, La Jolla, CA.
(21)Pfizer, Warsaw, Poland.
(22)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA.

Erratum in
    J Clin Oncol. 2024 Jan 10;42(2):245. doi: 10.1200/JCO.23.02518.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2023 Jul 20;41(21):3679-3681. doi: 10.1200/JCO.23.00983.
    Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2024 Apr 29;13(4):930-935. doi:
10.21037/tlcr-24-117.

PURPOSE: The combination of encorafenib (BRAF inhibitor) plus binimetinib (MEK
inhibitor) has demonstrated clinical efficacy with an acceptable safety profile
in patients with BRAFV600E/K-mutant metastatic melanoma. We evaluated the
efficacy and safety of encorafenib plus binimetinib in patients with
BRAFV600E-mutant metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: In this ongoing, open-label, single-arm, phase II study, patients with
BRAFV600E-mutant metastatic NSCLC received oral encorafenib 450 mg once daily
plus binimetinib 45 mg twice daily in 28-day cycles. The primary end point was
confirmed objective response rate (ORR) by independent radiology review (IRR).
Secondary end points included duration of response (DOR), disease control rate
(DCR), progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival, time to response, and
safety.
RESULTS: At data cutoff, 98 patients (59 treatment-naïve and 39 previously
treated) with BRAFV600E-mutant metastatic NSCLC received encorafenib plus
binimetinib. Median duration of treatment was 9.2 months with encorafenib and
8.4 months with binimetinib. ORR by IRR was 75% (95% CI, 62 to 85) in
treatment-naïve and 46% (95% CI, 30 to 63) in previously treated patients;
median DOR was not estimable (NE; 95% CI, 23.1 to NE) and 16.7 months (95% CI,
7.4 to NE), respectively. DCR after 24 weeks was 64% in treatment-naïve and 41%
in previously treated patients. Median PFS was NE (95% CI, 15.7 to NE) in
treatment-naïve and 9.3 months (95% CI, 6.2 to NE) in previously treated
patients. The most frequent treatment-related adverse events (TRAEs) were nausea
(50%), diarrhea (43%), and fatigue (32%). TRAEs led to dose reductions in 24
(24%) and permanent discontinuation of encorafenib plus binimetinib in 15 (15%)
patients. One grade 5 TRAE of intracranial hemorrhage was reported. Interactive
visualization of the data presented in this article is available at the PHAROS
dashboard (https://clinical-trials.dimensions.ai/pharos/).
CONCLUSION: For patients with treatment-naïve and previously treated
BRAFV600E-mutant metastatic NSCLC, encorafenib plus binimetinib showed a
meaningful clinical benefit with a safety profile consistent with that observed
in the approved indication in melanoma.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.23.00774
PMID: 37270692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
