---
reference_id: "PMID:37775701"
title: "Fallopian tube lesions as potential precursors of early ovarian cancer: a comprehensive proteomic analysis."
authors:
- Wisztorski M
- Aboulouard S
- Roussel L
- Duhamel M
- Saudemont P
- Cardon T
- Narducci F
- Robin YM
- Lemaire AS
- Bertin D
- Hajjaji N
- Kobeissy F
- Leblanc E
- Fournier I
- Salzet M
journal: Cell Death Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41419-023-06165-5
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Fallopian Tubes
- "Fallopian Tube Neoplasms/genetics, chemistry, pathology"
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53
- Proteomics
- "Cystadenocarcinoma, Serous/genetics, pathology"
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fallopian tube lesions as potential precursors of early ovarian cancer: a comprehensive proteomic analysis.
**Authors:** Wisztorski M, Aboulouard S, Roussel L, Duhamel M, Saudemont P, Cardon T, Narducci F, Robin YM, Lemaire AS, Bertin D, Hajjaji N, Kobeissy F, Leblanc E, Fournier I, Salzet M
**Journal:** Cell Death Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41419-023-06165-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-023-06165-5)

## Content

1. Cell Death Dis. 2023 Sep 30;14(9):644. doi: 10.1038/s41419-023-06165-5.

Fallopian tube lesions as potential precursors of early ovarian cancer: a 
comprehensive proteomic analysis.

Wisztorski M(#)(1), Aboulouard S(#)(1), Roussel L(#)(1), Duhamel M(#)(1), 
Saudemont P(1), Cardon T(1), Narducci F(1)(2), Robin YM(1)(2), Lemaire AS(1)(2), 
Bertin D(1)(2), Hajjaji N(1)(3), Kobeissy F(4)(5), Leblanc E(6)(7), Fournier 
I(#)(8)(9), Salzet M(#)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Univ.Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, U-1192 - Laboratoire Protéomique Réponse 
Inflammatoire Spectrométrie de Masse - PRISM, F-59000, Lille, France.
(2)Department of Gynecology Oncology, Oscar Lambret Cancer Center, 59020, Lille, 
France.
(3)Medical Oncology Department, Oscar Lambret Cancer Center, 59020, Lille, 
France.
(4)Department of Neurobiology, Center for Neurotrauma, Multiomics & Biomarkers 
(CNMB), MorehouseSchool of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 30310, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, 
American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.
(6)Univ.Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, U-1192 - Laboratoire Protéomique Réponse 
Inflammatoire Spectrométrie de Masse - PRISM, F-59000, Lille, France. 
e-leblanc@o-lambret.fr.
(7)Department of Gynecology Oncology, Oscar Lambret Cancer Center, 59020, Lille, 
France. e-leblanc@o-lambret.fr.
(8)Univ.Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, U-1192 - Laboratoire Protéomique Réponse 
Inflammatoire Spectrométrie de Masse - PRISM, F-59000, Lille, France. 
isabelle.fournier@univ-lille.fr.
(9)Institut Universitaire de France, 75000, Paris, France. 
isabelle.fournier@univ-lille.fr.
(10)Univ.Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, U-1192 - Laboratoire Protéomique Réponse 
Inflammatoire Spectrométrie de Masse - PRISM, F-59000, Lille, France. 
michel.salzet@univ-lille.fr.
(11)Institut Universitaire de France, 75000, Paris, France. 
michel.salzet@univ-lille.fr.
(#)Contributed equally

Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of death from gynecologic cancer worldwide. 
High-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) is the most common and deadliest subtype of 
ovarian cancer. While the origin of ovarian tumors is still debated, it has been 
suggested that HGSC originates from cells in the fallopian tube epithelium 
(FTE), specifically the epithelial cells in the region of the tubal-peritoneal 
junction. Three main lesions, p53 signatures, STILs, and STICs, have been 
defined based on the immunohistochemistry (IHC) pattern of p53 and Ki67 markers 
and the architectural alterations of the cells, using the Sectioning and 
Extensively Examining the Fimbriated End Protocol. In this study, we performed 
an in-depth proteomic analysis of these pre-neoplastic epithelial lesions guided 
by mass spectrometry imaging and IHC. We evaluated specific markers related to 
each preneoplastic lesion. The study identified specific lesion markers, such as 
CAVIN1, Emilin2, and FBLN5. We also used SpiderMass technology to perform a 
lipidomic analysis and identified the specific presence of specific lipids 
signature including dietary Fatty acids precursors in lesions. Our study 
provides new insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying the progression 
of ovarian cancer and confirms the fimbria origin of HGSC.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-023-06165-5
PMCID: PMC10541450
PMID: 37775701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.