---
reference_id: "PMID:40882535"
title: Natural history of epilepsy in FOXG1 Syndrome.
authors:
- Rhodes C
- Rees B
- Dubbs H
- Lesser M
- Morgan L
- Benke TA
- Percy A
- Neul JL
- Marsh ED
- NIH Rett and Related Disorders Natural History Study
journal: Epilepsy Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2025.107644
keywords:
- Humans
- Forkhead Transcription Factors/genetics
- Female
- Male
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- Child
- "Epilepsy/genetics, physiopathology"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Adolescent
- Retrospective Studies
- "Rett Syndrome/genetics, complications, physiopathology"
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Longitudinal Studies
- Microcephaly/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of epilepsy in FOXG1 Syndrome.
**Authors:** Rhodes C, Rees B, Dubbs H, Lesser M, Morgan L, Benke TA, Percy A, Neul JL, Marsh ED, NIH Rett and Related Disorders Natural History Study
**Journal:** Epilepsy Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2025.107644](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2025.107644)

## Content

1. Epilepsy Res. 2025 Dec;218:107644. doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2025.107644. Epub
 2025 Aug 26.

Natural history of epilepsy in FOXG1 Syndrome.

Rhodes C(1), Rees B(1), Dubbs H(2), Lesser M(3), Morgan L(3), Benke TA(3), Percy
A(4), Neul JL(5), Marsh ED(6); NIH Rett and Related Disorders Natural History
Study.

Author information:
(1)University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA.
(2)Division of Child Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics, Neurology, Pharmacology and Otolaryngology,
University of Colorado School of Medicine and Children's Hospital of Colorado,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(4)University of Alabama Birmingham, Birmingham AL, 35233.
(5)Vanderbilt Kennedy Center, Departments of Pediatrics, Pharmacology and
Special Education, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN
37240, USA.
(6)University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA; Division of Child Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics, University
of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
Electronic address: marshe@chop.edu.

BACKGROUND: FOXG1 syndrome is rare neurodevelopmental disorder with
microcephaly, brain malformations, epilepsy, and cognitive and motor
disabilities as major features. Knowledge of the clinical features is primarily
from case series and a foundation sponsored registry. We expand insight into
epilepsy in FOXG1 syndrome by examining longitudinal data from 94 individuals
from a multi-site natural history study and local cohorts.
METHODS: Clinical information on severity, seizure type, and seizure features
was collected from 68 individuals enrolled in the Rett Syndrome and Related
Disorders Natural History Study and extracted via retrospective chart review
from 15 individuals seen at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Rett
Syndrome Center of Excellence and 11 individuals from Children's Hospital of
Colorado. Genotype-phenotype and other correlations were assessed using non- and
semi-parametric analyses.
RESULTS: 78.7 % of participants had seizures, beginning at a median age of 1.0
years. Individuals were followed for a median of 4.9 years after first seizure
onset. Taken independently, over 70 % of seizures were partial or tonic-clonic,
occurred less than weekly, and lasted less than 5 min. 1/3 of seizures resolved
in a median time and age of 1.1 and 3.3 years. Age had a weak non-linear
association with average seizure frequency, and, for those with seizures,
smaller head circumference correlated with increased disease severity.
CONCLUSIONS: We further characterize disease severity and epilepsy in FOXG1
syndrome and demonstrate that smaller head circumferences are associated with
more severe disease and age is weakly non-linearly correlated with average
seizure frequency. This information will improve clinical care and aid
therapeutic development.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2025.107644
PMCID: PMC12481521
PMID: 40882535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
