---
reference_id: "PMID:34548985"
title: Mucocutaneous Manifestations of Inflammatory Bowel Disease.
authors:
- Alvarez-Payares JC
- Ramírez-Urrea S
- Correa-Parra L
- Salazar-Uribe D
- Velásquez-López M
journal: Cureus
year: '2021'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.17191
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucocutaneous Manifestations of Inflammatory Bowel Disease.
**Authors:** Alvarez-Payares JC, Ramírez-Urrea S, Correa-Parra L, Salazar-Uribe D, Velásquez-López M
**Journal:** Cureus (2021)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.17191](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.17191)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2021 Aug 15;13(8):e17191. doi: 10.7759/cureus.17191. eCollection 2021 
Aug.

Mucocutaneous Manifestations of Inflammatory Bowel Disease.

Alvarez-Payares JC(1), Ramírez-Urrea S(2), Correa-Parra L(2), Salazar-Uribe 
D(3), Velásquez-López M(4).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, University of Antioquia, Medellin, COL.
(2)General Medicine, Fundación Universitaria San Martín, Medellin, COL.
(3)Dermatology, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellin, COL.
(4)General Medicine, Corporación Para Estudios en la Salud (CES), Medellin, COL.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic and incurable disease, of unknown 
etiology, associated with an unregulated immune response to environmental 
triggers in a genetically predisposed host. IBD affects mainly the 
gastrointestinal (GI) tract and includes Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative 
colitis (UC). However, a large percentage of patients may present with 
extraintestinal manifestations, including mucocutaneous ones (which are the most 
common) and dermatologic findings, such as erythema nodosum, pyoderma 
gangrenosum, and aphthous stomatitis (which are the most frequently occurring). 
According to pathophysiologic mechanisms, mucocutaneous manifestations of IBD 
are classified into five categories, namely, specific manifestations, associated 
manifestations, reactive manifestations, adverse effects of IBD therapy, and 
malabsorption manifestations. Recognizing such manifestations should not be 
performed only by a dermatologist but also other specialties such as internal 
medicine, gastroenterology, among others. This is because these manifestations 
can present before the IBD diagnosis, even in the absence of GI symptoms. 
Therefore, these skin lesions could be a fundamental tool for the earlier 
diagnosis of IBD. This review provides a comprehensive overview of the most 
common cutaneous manifestations of IBD with a focus on their epidemiology, 
diagnostic criteria, clinical presentation, and available medical treatment.

Copyright © 2021, Alvarez-Payares et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.17191
PMCID: PMC8439267
PMID: 34548985

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.