---
reference_id: "PMID:28598687"
title: Lomitapide for the treatment of hypercholesterolemia.
authors:
- Berberich AJ
- Hegele RA
journal: Expert Opin Pharmacother
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/14656566.2017.1340941
keywords:
- "Anticholesteremic Agents/pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- "Atherosclerosis/prevention & control"
- "Benzimidazoles/pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- "Carrier Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Cholesterol, LDL/blood"
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Hypercholesterolemia/blood, drug therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lomitapide for the treatment of hypercholesterolemia.
**Authors:** Berberich AJ, Hegele RA
**Journal:** Expert Opin Pharmacother (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14656566.2017.1340941](https://doi.org/10.1080/14656566.2017.1340941)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2017 Aug;18(12):1261-1268. doi:
10.1080/14656566.2017.1340941. Epub 2017 Jul 30.

Lomitapide for the treatment of hypercholesterolemia.

Berberich AJ(1), Hegele RA(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Medicine and Robarts Research Institute, Schulich School of
Medicine and Dentistry , Western University , London , Canada.

Homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (HoFH) is a serious rare inherited
condition that leads to extremely elevated levels of low density lipoprotein
cholesterol (LDL-C), and predisposes affected individuals to high risk of
atherosclerotic vascular disease. Traditional therapies are largely ineffective
in managing the hypercholesterolemia in these patients; diet and regular
LDL-apheresis are the mainstays of management. Lomitapide is an inhibitor of
microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) that blocks the assembly of
metabolic precursors of LDL particles. Lomitapide has been approved for use in
the HoFH population. Areas covered: This article explores the basic properties
of lomitapide, including its pharmacodynamic, pharmacokinetic and metabolic
profiles. It also reports the current market status of lomitapide and its close
competitors. Trials of lomitapide are also briefly reviewed as well as the
safety and tolerability of the drug. Expert opinion: Lomitapide has been
recently approved for use in HoFH, a population that has been traditionally very
difficult to effectively manage. While lomitapide has some safety concerns,
including gastrointestinal symptoms and potential hepatotoxicity, and has yet to
prove long term efficacy on hard cardiovascular endpoints, it does represent an
attractive treatment option for a small group of patients who, until now, had
very limited available effective therapies.

DOI: 10.1080/14656566.2017.1340941
PMID: 28598687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
