---
reference_id: "PMID:40638773"
title: PTS-Related Tetrahydrobiopterin Deficiency (PTPSD).
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Opladen T
- Longo N
- Blau N
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PTS-Related Tetrahydrobiopterin Deficiency (PTPSD).
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Opladen T, Longo N, Blau N

## Content

1. PTS-Related Tetrahydrobiopterin Deficiency (PTPSD).

Opladen T(1), Longo N(2), Blau N(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2025 Jul 10 [updated 2026 Mar 5].

Author information:
(1)Center for Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Department I, Division of 
Pediatric Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Medical Faculty Heidelberg, 
Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
(2)Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Human Genetics, University of 
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California
(3)Division of Metabolism, University Children's Hospital Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: PTS-related tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency (PTPSD) 
results in a lack of tetrahydropterin, an important cofactor for phenylalanine 
hydroxylase (PAH), tyrosine hydroxylase, and tryptophan hydroxylase. Deficiency 
can thus lead to neurotransmitter and neuropsychiatric disorders. The clinical 
spectrum of PTPSD is broad and differs according to age of onset, severity of 
disease, and whether preventative therapies were initiated and maintained from 
an early age. In the severe form, clinical symptoms may become apparent in the 
neonatal period and can include hypotonia, movement disorders, abnormal eye 
movements, autonomic dysregulation, and impaired development. Without treatment, 
developmental delays become more marked. Neurologic symptoms (dysarthria, 
dystonia, tremors, abnormal gait, parkinsonism, oculogyric crises, motor tics) 
may be ameliorated by treatment with sapropterin dihydrochloride and 
neurotransmitter precursors. Other features of the condition can include 
psychiatric comorbidities (ADHD, anxiety, depression), infant feeding 
difficulties leading to early growth failure, hyperprolactinemia, growth hormone 
deficiency, sleep issues, and autonomic dysfunction; many of these features can 
be ameliorated by appropriate treatment. In treated individuals, development 
often improves during adolescence, with many adults having a normal IQ level. In 
the mild (peripheral) form, affected individuals are usually asymptomatic apart 
from an increase in phenylalanine (Phe) levels. Some remain asymptomatic. 
However, with time, some have mild developmental delays and can develop 
deficiency of neurotransmitter production, such that treatment of some 
asymptomatic individuals may be required.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The biochemical diagnosis of PTPSD is established in a 
proband with confirmed hyperphenylalaninemia, elevated neopterin levels, reduced 
biopterin levels, and a decreased biopterin-to-neopterin ratio in urine or dried 
blood spots (DBS) and normal dihydropteridine reductase (DHPR) activity in DBS. 
The molecular diagnosis of PTPSD is established in a proband by identification 
of biallelic pathogenic (or likely pathogenic) variants in PTS by molecular 
genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Immediate therapy with sapropterin 
(tetrahydrobiopterin dihydrochloride; BH4), a cofactor/cosubstrate of PAH, is 
recommended to reduce blood Phe concentrations in individuals with 
hyperphenylalaninemia. If sapropterin is not available, dietary Phe restriction 
should be implemented. Because sapropterin has limited access to the central 
nervous system (CNS), or rather, this access is only achieved at high doses, 
therapy with sapropterin does not normalize the activity of tyrosine or 
tryptophan hydroxylase in people with PTPSD. Additional treatment strategies are 
necessary for long-term management and may include the use of neurotransmitter 
precursors (levodopa plus decarboxylase inhibitor (DCI), i.e., carbidopa or 
benserazide), 5-hydroxytryptophan, and/or dopamine (rotigotine patch, 
pramipexole) and/or serotonin agonists, or other medications (MAO inhibitors 
such as selegiline) to address specific neurotransmitter deficiencies and 
maintain optimal neurologic function. Supportive care: Optimization of dosage 
and intervals of levodopa/DCI in those with abnormal movements/parkinsonism; 
growth hormone supplementation and/or optimization of neurotransmitter precursor 
therapy for growth hormone deficiency; optimization of neurotransmitter 
precursor therapy for recurrent hyperthermia; anticholinergic treatment may be 
considered for hypersalivation; standard treatment for developmental delay, 
spasticity, epilepsy, sleep disorders, and decreased bone mineral density. 
Biochemical surveillance: Routine Phe monitoring in infants (age <1 year) weekly 
until normalized and then every three to six months once levels normalize; every 
six months in children younger than age 12 years; and every six to 12 months in 
adolescents and adults; the Phe target ranges correspond to those of PAH 
deficiency. Prolactin level at each visit. Routine clinical visits with a 
metabolic specialist (and metabolic dietician if on Phe-restricted diet) every 
one to three months in infants (age <1 year), every three to six months between 
ages one and seven years, and every six to 12 months in those age eight years 
and older. General surveillance: At each visit, measure growth parameters and 
evaluate nutritional status; asses for new neurologic manifestations (changes in 
tone, seizures, movement disorders); monitor developmental progress and assess 
educational needs; monitor for behavioral issues (anxiety, ADHD, emotional 
dysregulation, depression, aggression); and assess for signs and symptoms of 
sleep disorders. At ages two, six, 12, and 18 years, consider neuropsychological 
evaluation. In adulthood, periodic parathormone levels and DXA scan. As needed, 
consider EEG to differentiate from movement disorder seizures. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Persons with PTPSD on Phe-reduced diet should 
either avoid products containing aspartame or calculate total intake of Phe when 
using such products and adapt diet components accordingly. Evaluation of 
relatives at risk: If prenatal genetic testing has not been performed, each 
at-risk newborn sib should be evaluated immediately (at or just after 24 hours) 
after birth for PTPSD using measurement of blood Phe concentration to allow for 
earliest possible diagnosis and treatment. If older sibs have not undergone NBS 
or genetic testing for the known familial pathogenic variants in PTS, measure 
blood Phe concentrations to clarify their disease status. Pregnancy management: 
Women with PTPSD who have received appropriate treatment throughout childhood 
and adolescence and during pregnancy may have offspring with normal intellectual 
and behavioral development, particularly if levels of Phe are kept in the normal 
range during pregnancy. Intensive clinical and biochemical supervision by a 
multidisciplinary team before, during, and after pregnancy in a woman with PTPSD 
is essential to control the symptoms of the disease, adjust the treatment if 
needed, and monitor the development of the fetus. If the affected woman has 
elevated blood Phe concentrations during pregnancy, the fetus is at high risk 
for maternal phenylketonuria (MPKU) syndrome (reported specifically in women who 
have PAH deficiency as the primary cause of their elevated Phe levels), 
including malformations and intellectual disability, since Phe is a potent 
teratogen.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PTPSD is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for a PTS pathogenic variant, each sib of 
an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% 
chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of inheriting neither 
of the familial PTS pathogenic variants. Children born of one parent with PTPSD 
and one parent with two normal PTS alleles are obligate heterozygotes. If the 
mother is the affected parent, MPKU syndrome is a critical issue. Females with 
PTPSD should receive counseling regarding the teratogenic effects of elevated 
maternal plasma Phe concentration (i.e., MPKU syndrome) when they reach 
childbearing age. Once the PTS pathogenic variants have been identified in an 
affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives and 
prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing for PTPSD are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 40638773