---
reference_id: "PMID:39992227"
title: Germline Pathogenic DROSHA Variants Are Linked to Pineoblastoma and Wilms Tumor Predisposition.
authors:
- Fiorica PN
- Golmard L
- Kim J
- Bao R
- Lin FY
- Roy A
- Pribnow A
- Perrino MR
- Masliah-Planchon J
- Michalak-Provost S
- Wong J
- Filser M
- Stoppa-Lyonnet D
- Bourdeaut F
- Brahimi A
- Ingster O
- Saulnier Sholler G
- Jackson SA
- Sasaki MM
- Fowler T
- Ng A
- Corbett RJ
- Kaufman RS
- Haley JS
- Carey DJ
- Huang KL
- Diskin SJ
- Rokita JL
- Al-Kateb H
- McGee RB
- Schiffman JD
- Chen KS
- Stewart DR
- Williams Parsons D
- Plon SE
- Schultz KAP
- Onel K
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-2785
keywords:
- Humans
- Ribonuclease III/genetics
- "Wilms Tumor/genetics, pathology"
- "Pinealoma/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adult
- Pineal Gland/pathology
- Adolescent
- "Kidney Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- MicroRNAs/genetics
- Infant
- DEAD-box RNA Helicases/genetics
- Middle Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Germline Pathogenic DROSHA Variants Are Linked to Pineoblastoma and Wilms Tumor Predisposition.
**Authors:** Fiorica PN, Golmard L, Kim J, Bao R, Lin FY, Roy A, Pribnow A, Perrino MR, Masliah-Planchon J, Michalak-Provost S, Wong J, Filser M, Stoppa-Lyonnet D, Bourdeaut F, Brahimi A, Ingster O, Saulnier Sholler G, Jackson SA, Sasaki MM, Fowler T, Ng A, Corbett RJ, Kaufman RS, Haley JS, Carey DJ, Huang KL, Diskin SJ, Rokita JL, Al-Kateb H, McGee RB, Schiffman JD, Chen KS, Stewart DR, Williams Parsons D, Plon SE, Schultz KAP, Onel K
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-2785](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-2785)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2025 Apr 14;31(8):1491-1503. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-2785.

Germline Pathogenic DROSHA Variants Are Linked to Pineoblastoma and Wilms Tumor
Predisposition.

Fiorica PN(1), Golmard L(2)(3), Kim J(4), Bao R(5)(6), Lin FY(7)(8)(9), Roy
A(7)(8)(9)(10)(11), Pribnow A(12), Perrino MR(13), Masliah-Planchon J(2)(3),
Michalak-Provost S(14), Wong J(2)(3), Filser M(2)(3), Stoppa-Lyonnet
D(2)(15)(16), Bourdeaut F(3)(15)(17), Brahimi A(18), Ingster O(19), Saulnier
Sholler G(20), Jackson SA(21), Sasaki MM(21), Fowler T(22)(23), Ng A(24),
Corbett RJ(25)(26), Kaufman RS(27)(28), Haley JS(29), Carey DJ(29), Huang
KL(30)(31), Diskin SJ(27)(28)(32), Rokita JL(25)(26)(33), Al-Kateb H(34), McGee
RB(13), Schiffman JD(22)(23)(35), Chen KS(36)(37), Stewart DR(4), Williams
Parsons D(7)(8)(9), Plon SE(7)(8)(9), Schultz KAP(38), Onel K(1)(39)(40).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Prevention and Control, Roswell Park Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Buffalo, New York.
(2)Department of Genetics, Institut Curie, Paris, France.
(3)PSL Research University, Paris, France.
(4)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
Rockville, Maryland.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(6)Hillman Cancer Center, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston Texas.
(8)Texas Children's Cancer and Hematology Center, Texas Children's Hospital,
Houston, Texas.
(9)Dan L. Duncan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas.
(10)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas.
(11)Department of Pathology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas.
(12)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Lucile
Packard Children's Hospital, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California.
(13)Division of Cancer Predisposition, Department of Oncology, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee.
(14)Department of Pathology, Centre Angers University Hospital, Angers, France.
(15)Inserm U830, Institut Curie, Paris, France.
(16)Paris Cité University, Paris, France.
(17)SIREDO Oncology Center (Care, Innovation and Research for Children,
Adolescents and Young Adults with Cancer), Institut Curie, Paris, France.
(18)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lille University Hospital, Lille, France.
(19)Department of Genetics, Centre Angers University Hospital, Angers, France.
(20)Department of Pediatrics, Penn State Health Children's Hospital, Hershey,
Pennsylvania.
(21)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(22)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(23)Peel Therapeutics, Inc., Salt Lake City, Utah.
(24)Karches Center for Oncology Research, The Feinstein Institutes for Medical
Research, Northwell Health, Manhasset, New York.
(25)Center for Data-Driven Discovery in Biomedicine, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(26)Division of Neurosurgery, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.
(27)Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(28)Division of Oncology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.
(29)Department of Genomic Health, Danville, Pennsylvania.
(30)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
(31)Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York.
(32)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.
(33)Center for Cancer and Immunology Research, Children's National Hospital,
Washington, District of Columbia.
(34)Department of Lab Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(35)Department of Pediatrics, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, Utah.
(36)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas.
(37)Children's Medical Center Research Institute, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.
(38)International Pleuropulmonary Blastoma/DICER1 Registry, Minneapolis,
Minnesota.
(39)Department of Clinical Genomics, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Buffalo, New York.
(40)Center for Precision Oncology and Cancer Prevention, Roswell Park
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo, New York.

PURPOSE: DROSHA, DGCR8, and DICER1 regulate miRNA biogenesis and are commonly
mutated in cancer. Although DGCR8 and DICER1 germline pathogenic variants (GPV)
cause autosomal dominant tumor predisposition, no association between DROSHA
GPVs and clinical phenotypes has been reported.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: After obtaining informed consent, sequencing was performed
on germline and tumor samples from all patients. The occurrence of germline
DROSHA GPVs was investigated in large pediatric and adult cancer datasets. The
population prevalence of DROSHA GPVs was investigated in the UK Biobank and
Geisinger DiscovEHR cohorts.
RESULTS: We describe nine children from eight families with heterozygous DROSHA
GPVs and a diagnosis of pineoblastoma (n = 8) or Wilms tumor (n = 1). A somatic
second hit in DROSHA was detected in all eight tumors analyzed. All
pineoblastoma tumors analyzed were classified as miRNA processing-altered 1
subtype. We estimate the population prevalence of germline DROSHA
loss-of-function variants to be 1:3,875 to 1:4,843 but find no evidence for
increased adult cancer risk.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of DROSHA-related tumor predisposition. As
pineoblastoma and Wilms tumor are also associated with DICER1 GPVs, our results
suggest that the tissues of origin for these tumors are uniquely tolerant of
general miRNA loss. The miRNA processing-altered 1 pineoblastoma subtype is
associated with older age of diagnosis and better outcomes than other subtypes,
suggesting DROSHA GPV status may have important clinical and prognostic
significance. We suggest that genetic testing for DROSHA GPVs be considered for
patients with pineoblastoma, Wilms tumor, or other DICER1-/DGCR8-related
conditions and propose surveillance recommendations through research studies for
individuals with DROSHA GPVs.

©2025 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-2785
PMCID: PMC11995001
PMID: 39992227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.A. Jackson reports current employment with
Natera and ownership of Natera stocks as well as past employment with Invitae
and past ownership of Invitae stocks. D.J. Carey reports grants from the NIH
during the conduct of the study. S.E. Plon reports she is a member of the
Scientific Advisory Panel of Baylor Genetics. K.A.P. Schultz reports other
support from the Pine Tree Apple Classic Fund and Children’s Minnesota
Foundation during the conduct of the study. No disclosures were reported by the
other authors.
