---
reference_id: "PMID:10369863"
title: "Abundant expression and cytoplasmic aggregations of [alpha]1A voltage-dependent calcium channel protein associated with neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia type 6."
authors:
- Ishikawa K
- Fujigasaki H
- Saegusa H
- Ohwada K
- Fujita T
- Iwamoto H
- Komatsuzaki Y
- Toru S
- Toriyama H
- Watanabe M
- Ohkoshi N
- Shoji S
- Kanazawa I
- Tanabe T
- Mizusawa H
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/8.7.1185
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- "Calcium Channels/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cytoplasm/metabolism
- Humans
- PC12 Cells
- Peptides/metabolism
- Purkinje Cells
- "RNA, Messenger/biosynthesis"
- Rats
- "Spinocerebellar Degenerations/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abundant expression and cytoplasmic aggregations of [alpha]1A voltage-dependent calcium channel protein associated with neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia type 6.
**Authors:** Ishikawa K, Fujigasaki H, Saegusa H, Ohwada K, Fujita T, Iwamoto H, Komatsuzaki Y, Toru S, Toriyama H, Watanabe M, Ohkoshi N, Shoji S, Kanazawa I, Tanabe T, Mizusawa H
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/8.7.1185](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/8.7.1185)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Jul;8(7):1185-93. doi: 10.1093/hmg/8.7.1185.

Abundant expression and cytoplasmic aggregations of [alpha]1A voltage-dependent
calcium channel protein associated with neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar
ataxia type 6.

Ishikawa K(1), Fujigasaki H, Saegusa H, Ohwada K, Fujita T, Iwamoto H,
Komatsuzaki Y, Toru S, Toriyama H, Watanabe M, Ohkoshi N, Shoji S, Kanazawa I,
Tanabe T, Mizusawa H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Japan.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6) is one of the eight neurodegenerative
diseases caused by a tri-nucleotide (CAG) repeat expansion coding polyglutamine
(CAG repeat/polyglutamine diseases) and is characterized by late onset autosomal
dominant cerebellar ataxia and predominant loss of cerebellar Purkinje cells.
Although the causative, small and stable CAG repeat expansion for this disease
has been identified in the [alpha]1A voltage-dependent calcium channel gene
(CACNA1A), the mechanism which leads to predominant Purkinje cell degeneration
is totally unknown. In this study, we show that the calcium channel mRNA/protein
containing the CAG repeat/polyglutamine tract is most intensely expressed in
Purkinje cells of human brains. In SCA6 brains, numerous oval or rod-shaped
aggregates were seen exclusively in the cytoplasm of Purkinje cells. These
cytoplasmic inclusions were not ubiquitinated, which contrasts with the neuronal
intra-nuclear inclusions of other CAG repeat/polyglutamine diseases. In cultured
cells, formation of perinuclear aggregates of the channel protein and apoptotic
cell death were seen when transfected with full-length CACNA1A coding an
expanded polyglutamine tract. The present study indicates that the mechanism of
neurodegeneration in SCA6 is associated with cytoplasmic aggregations of the
[alpha]1A calcium channel protein caused by a small CAG repeat/polyglutamine
expansion in CACNA1A.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/8.7.1185
PMID: 10369863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
