---
reference_id: "PMID:36990309"
title: Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and long-term risk of maternal stroke-a systematic review and meta-analysis.
authors:
- Brohan MP
- Daly FP
- Kelly L
- McCarthy FP
- Khashan AS
- Kublickiene K
- Barrett PM
journal: Am J Obstet Gynecol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2023.03.034
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and long-term risk of maternal stroke-a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Brohan MP, Daly FP, Kelly L, McCarthy FP, Khashan AS, Kublickiene K, Barrett PM
**Journal:** Am J Obstet Gynecol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajog.2023.03.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2023.03.034)

## Content

1. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2023 Sep;229(3):248-268. doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2023.03.034.
 Epub 2023 Mar 27.

Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and long-term risk of maternal stroke-a 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Brohan MP(1), Daly FP(2), Kelly L(3), McCarthy FP(4), Khashan AS(5), Kublickiene 
K(6), Barrett PM(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland; School of 
Medicine, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. Electronic address: 
117307681@umail.ucc.ie.
(2)School of Medicine, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(3)Department of General Medicine, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Irish Centre for Maternal & Child Health, University College Cork, Cork, 
Ireland.
(5)School of Public Health, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(6)Division of Renal Medicine, Department of Clinical Intervention, Science and 
Technology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Comment in
    Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2024 Mar;230(3):e30-e31. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajog.2023.11.005.

OBJECTIVE: Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy are associated with a long-term 
risk for cardiovascular disease among parous patients later in life. However, 
relatively little is known about whether hypertensive disorders of pregnancy are 
associated with an increased risk for ischemic stroke or hemorrhagic stroke in 
later life. This systematic review aimed to synthesize the available literature 
on the association between hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and the long-term 
risk for maternal stroke.
DATA SOURCES: PubMed, Web of Science, and CINAHL were searched from inception to 
December 19, 2022.
STUDY ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: Studies were only included if the following criteria 
were met: case-control or cohort studies that were conducted with human 
participants, were available in English, and that measured the exposure of a 
history of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (preeclampsia, gestational 
hypertension, chronic hypertension, or superimposed preeclampsia) and the 
outcome of maternal ischemic stroke or hemorrhagic stroke.
METHODS: Three reviewers extracted the data and appraised the study quality 
following the Meta-analyses of Observational Studies in Epidemiology guidelines 
and using the Newcastle-Ottawa scale for risk of bias assessment.
RESULTS: The primary outcome was any stroke (undifferentiated) and secondary 
outcomes included ischemic stroke and hemorrhagic stroke. The protocol for this 
systematic review was registered in the International Prospective Register of 
Systematic Reviews under identifier CRD42021254660. Of 24 studies included 
(10,632,808 study participants), 8 studies examined more than 1 outcome of 
interest. Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy were significantly associated with 
any stroke (adjusted risk ratio, 1.74; 95% confidence interval, 1.45-2.10). 
Preeclampsia was significantly associated with any stroke (adjusted risk ratio, 
1.75; 95% confidence interval, 1.56-1.97), ischemic stroke (adjusted risk ratio, 
1.74; 95% confidence interval, 1.46-2.06), and hemorrhagic stroke (adjusted risk 
ratio, 2.77; 95% confidence interval, 2.04-3.75). Gestational hypertension was 
significantly associated with any stroke (adjusted risk ratio, 1.23; 95% 
confidence interval, 1.20-1.26), ischemic stroke (adjusted risk ratio, 1.35; 95% 
confidence interval, 1.19-1.53), and hemorrhagic stroke (adjusted risk ratio, 
2.66; 95% confidence interval, 1.02-6.98). Chronic hypertension was associated 
with ischemic stroke (adjusted risk ratio, 1.49; 95% confidence interval, 
1.01-2.19).
CONCLUSION: In this meta-analysis, exposure to hypertensive disorders of 
pregnancy, including preeclampsia and gestational hypertension, seems to be 
associated with an increased risk for any stroke and ischemic stroke among 
parous patients in later life. Preventive interventions may be warranted for 
patients who experience hypertensive disorders of pregnancy to reduce their 
long-term risk for stroke.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2023.03.034
PMID: 36990309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]