---
reference_id: "PMID:34020687"
title: "Enzyme replacement therapy and hematopoietic stem cell transplant: a new paradigm of treatment in Wolman disease."
authors:
- Potter JE
- Petts G
- Ghosh A
- White FJ
- Kinsella JL
- Hughes S
- Roberts J
- Hodgkinson A
- Brammeier K
- Church H
- Merrigan C
- Hughes J
- Evans P
- Campbell H
- Bonney D
- Newman WG
- Bigger BW
- Broomfield A
- Jones SA
- Wynn RF
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-021-01849-7
keywords:
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- Infant
- Quality of Life
- Sterol Esterase/therapeutic use
- Wolman Disease/therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enzyme replacement therapy and hematopoietic stem cell transplant: a new paradigm of treatment in Wolman disease.
**Authors:** Potter JE, Petts G, Ghosh A, White FJ, Kinsella JL, Hughes S, Roberts J, Hodgkinson A, Brammeier K, Church H, Merrigan C, Hughes J, Evans P, Campbell H, Bonney D, Newman WG, Bigger BW, Broomfield A, Jones SA, Wynn RF
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-021-01849-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-021-01849-7)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2021 May 21;16(1):235. doi: 10.1186/s13023-021-01849-7.

Enzyme replacement therapy and hematopoietic stem cell transplant: a new
paradigm of treatment in Wolman disease.

Potter JE(1), Petts G(2), Ghosh A(3), White FJ(3)(4), Kinsella JL(5), Hughes
S(6), Roberts J(3), Hodgkinson A(2), Brammeier K(3), Church H(3), Merrigan C(7),
Hughes J(7), Evans P(8), Campbell H(5), Bonney D(5), Newman WG(3)(9), Bigger
BW(10), Broomfield A(3), Jones SA(3), Wynn RF(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Royal Manchester Children's
Hospital, Oxford Road, Manchester, UK. janeelizabeth.potter@mft.nhs.uk.
(2)Department of Paediatric Histopathology, Royal Manchester Children's
Hospital, Oxford Road, Manchester, UK.
(3)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University NHS Foundation
Trust, Oxford Road, Manchester, UK.
(4)Department of Therapy and Dietetics, Manchester University NHS Foundation
Trust, Oxford Road, Manchester, UK.
(5)Department of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Royal Manchester Children's
Hospital, Oxford Road, Manchester, UK.
(6)Paediatric Allergy and Immunology Department, Royal Manchester Children's
Hospital, Oxford Road, Manchester, UK.
(7)National Centre for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Children's Health Ireland
at Temple Street, Dublin, Ireland.
(8)Department of Haematology and Oncology, Children's Health Ireland at Crumlin,
Dublin, Ireland.
(9)Evolution and Genomic Science, School of Biological Sciences, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(10)Stem Cell and Neurotherapies Laboratory, Division of Cell Matrix Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

BACKGROUND: Wolman disease is a rare, lysosomal storage disorder in which
biallelic variants in the LIPA gene result in reduced or complete lack of
lysosomal acid lipase. The accumulation of the substrates; cholesterol esters
and triglycerides, significantly impacts cellular function. Untreated patients
die within the first 12 months of life. Clinically, patients present severely
malnourished, with diarrhoea and hepatosplenomegaly, many have an inflammatory
phenotype, including with hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH).
Hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HCT) had been historically the only
treatment available but has a high procedure-related mortality because of
disease progression and disease-associated morbidities. More recently, enzyme
replacement therapy (ERT) with dietary substrate reduction (DSR) has
significantly improved patient survival. However, ERT is life long, expensive
and its utility is limited by anti-drug antibodies (ADA) and the need for
central venous access.
RESULTS: We describe five Wolman disease patients diagnosed in infancy that were
treated at Royal Manchester Children's Hospital receiving ERT with DSR then
HCT-multimodal therapy. In 3/5 an initial response to ERT was attenuated by ADA
with associated clinical and laboratory features of deterioration. 1/5 developed
anaphylaxis to ERT and the other patient died post HCT with ongoing HLH. All
patients received allogeneic HCT. 4/5 patients are alive, and both disease
phenotype and laboratory parameters are improved compared to when they were on
ERT alone. The gastrointestinal symptoms are particularly improved after HCT,
with reduced diarrhoea and vomiting. This allows gradual structured
normalisation of diet with improved tolerance of dietary fat. Histologically
there are reduced cholesterol clefts, fewer foamy macrophages and an improved
villous structure. Disease biomarkers also show improvement with ERT,
immunotherapy and HCT. Three patients have mixed chimerism after HCT, indicating
a likely engraftment-defect in this condition.
CONCLUSION: We describe combined ERT, DSR and HCT, multimodal treatment for
Wolman disease. ERT and DSR stabilises the sick infant and reduces the formerly
described prohibitively high, transplant-associated mortality in this condition.
HCT abrogates the problems of ERT, namely attenuating ADA, the need for
continuing venous access, and continuing high cost drug treatment. HCT also
brings improved efficacy, particularly evident in improved gastrointestinal
function and histology. Multimodal therapy should be considered a new paradigm
of treatment for Wolman disease patients where there is an attenuated response
to ERT, and for all patients where there is a well-matched transplant donor, in
order to improve long term gut function, tolerance of a normal diet and quality
of life.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-021-01849-7
PMCID: PMC8139039
PMID: 34020687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors had no competing interests unless listed
below. SJhas received consultancy fees, grants, and travel support for
conferences from Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc. AGhas received consultancy
fees/honoraria from Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc. FWhas received consultancy
fees/honoraria from Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
