---
reference_id: "PMID:31971066"
title: Recovery of cognitive function after relapse in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Benedict RH
- Pol J
- Yasin F
- Hojnacki D
- Kolb C
- Eckert S
- Tacca B
- Drake A
- Wojcik C
- Morrow SA
- Jakimovski D
- Fuchs TA
- Dwyer MG
- Zivadinov R
- Weinstock-Guttman B
journal: Mult Scler
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/1352458519898108
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recovery of cognitive function after relapse in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Benedict RH, Pol J, Yasin F, Hojnacki D, Kolb C, Eckert S, Tacca B, Drake A, Wojcik C, Morrow SA, Jakimovski D, Fuchs TA, Dwyer MG, Zivadinov R, Weinstock-Guttman B
**Journal:** Mult Scler (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1352458519898108](https://doi.org/10.1177/1352458519898108)

## Content

1. Mult Scler. 2021 Jan;27(1):71-78. doi: 10.1177/1352458519898108. Epub 2020 Jan
 23.

Recovery of cognitive function after relapse in multiple sclerosis.

Benedict RH(1), Pol J(1), Yasin F(1), Hojnacki D(1), Kolb C(1), Eckert S(1), 
Tacca B(1), Drake A(1), Wojcik C(1), Morrow SA(2), Jakimovski D(3), Fuchs TA(4), 
Dwyer MG(5), Zivadinov R(5), Weinstock-Guttman B(1).

Author information:
(1)Jacobs Multiple Sclerosis Center, Department of Neurology, Jacobs School of 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, State University of New 
York, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(2)University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada.
(3)Buffalo Neuroimaging Analysis Center, Department of Neurology, Jacobs School 
of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, State University of 
New York, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(4)Jacobs Multiple Sclerosis Center, Department of Neurology, Jacobs School of 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, State University of New 
York, Buffalo, NY, USA/Buffalo Neuroimaging Analysis Center, Department of 
Neurology, Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at 
Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(5)Buffalo Neuroimaging Analysis Center, Department of Neurology, Jacobs School 
of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, State University of 
New York, Buffalo, NY, USA/Center for Biomedical Imaging, Clinical and 
Translational Science Institute, University at Buffalo, State University of New 
York, Buffalo, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cognitive impairment is common in multiple sclerosis (MS) but its 
manifestation as acute disease activity is underappreciated.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to examine recovery after MS relapse on 
multiple tests of cognitive and motor function and explore correlates of change 
with Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
and cognitive reserve.
METHODS: Fifty relapsing group (RG) and matched stable participants were 
examined at baseline, during relapse, and at 3-month follow-up. Tests of 
cognitive processing speed (Symbol Digit Modalities Test (SDMT)) and consensus 
opinion measures of memory, ambulation, and manual dexterity were administered. 
All RG patients were treated with a 5-day course of Acthar Gel (5 mL/80 IU).
RESULTS: In RG patients, SDMT declined from 55.2 to 44.6 at relapse and 
recovered to 51.7, a slope differing from stable controls (p = 0.001). A 
statistical trend (p = 0.07) for the same effect was observed for verbal memory 
and was significant for ambulation (p = 0.03). The Cerebral Function Score from 
the EDSS also changed in the RG and recovered incompletely relative to controls 
(p = 0.006).
CONCLUSION: These results replicate earlier reports of cognitive worsening 
during relapse in MS. Clinically meaningful improvements followed relapse on 
SDMT and ambulation. Cognitive decline during relapse can be appreciated on 
neurological exam but not patient-reported outcomes.

DOI: 10.1177/1352458519898108
PMID: 31971066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]