---
reference_id: "PMID:19180262"
title: Montelukast sodium for exercise-induced asthma.
authors:
- de Benedictis FM
- Vaccher S
- de Benedictis D
journal: Drugs Today (Barc)
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1358/dot.2008.44.11.1297498
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Montelukast sodium for exercise-induced asthma.
**Authors:** de Benedictis FM, Vaccher S, de Benedictis D
**Journal:** Drugs Today (Barc) (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1358/dot.2008.44.11.1297498](https://doi.org/10.1358/dot.2008.44.11.1297498)

## Content

1. Drugs Today (Barc). 2008 Nov;44(11):845-55. doi:
10.1358/dot.2008.44.11.1297498.

Montelukast sodium for exercise-induced asthma.

de Benedictis FM(1), Vaccher S, de Benedictis D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Salesi Children's Hospital, Ancona, Italy. 
debenedictis@ao-salesi.marche.it

Exercise is the most common trigger of bronchospasm in children with asthma. 
Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction (EIB) occurs in up to 90% of individuals 
with asthma who are not under antiinflammatory treatment and in about 40% of 
those with allergic rhinitis. EIB may be an overwhelming problem in childhood 
and adolescence, when physical activity is a prominent component of daily life. 
The importance for those with asthma to maintain regular physical activity is 
recognized by asthma guidelines, which include the recommendation of full 
participation in sporting activities in their goals for the management of 
asthma. Cysteinyl leukotrienes, which are derivatives of the 5-lipoxygenase 
pathway of arachidonic acid metabolism, are important mediators of airway 
allergic inflammation and have a role in the pathogenetic mechanism of EIB. 
Montelukast sodium (Singulair, Merck & Co.) is a selective and orally active 
leukotriene receptor antagonist with demonstrated activity for treating asthma 
and allergic rhinitis. The effect of this drug in the prevention of EIB has been 
evaluated in a variety of studies in adults as well as in children. Both 
single-dose and regular-treatment studies showed that montelukast provides 
effective protection against EIB. Furthermore, chronic treatment with 
montelukast does not induce tolerance to the bronchoprotective effect over time. 
This aspect is particularly relevant for children, who tend to be active at 
frequent and irregular intervals throughout the day, and who therefore may 
benefit from around-the-clock pharmacologic protection.

Copyright 2008 Prous Science, S.A.U. or its licensors. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1358/dot.2008.44.11.1297498
PMID: 19180262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]