---
reference_id: "PMID:36822454"
title: "Newborn screening for 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency in Zhejiang province, China."
authors:
- Cheng Y
- Chen P
- Yu Z
- Yin X
- Zhang C
- Miao H
- Huang X
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2023.117266
keywords:
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn"
- Carbon-Carbon Ligases/deficiency
- "Infant, Newborn"
- China/epidemiology
- Neonatal Screening/methods
- Mutation
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Newborn screening for 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency in Zhejiang province, China.
**Authors:** Cheng Y, Chen P, Yu Z, Yin X, Zhang C, Miao H, Huang X
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2023.117266](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2023.117266)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2023 Mar 1;542:117266. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2023.117266. Epub
2023  Feb 21.

Newborn screening for 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency in Zhejiang
province, China.

Cheng Y(1), Chen P(2), Yu Z(1), Yin X(3), Zhang C(1), Miao H(1), Huang X(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child
Health, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Children's Medical Center, University of Chinese Academy of Science, Shenzhen
Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
(3)School of Health in Social Science, The University of Edinburg, United
Kingdom.
(4)Department of Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child
Health, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address: 6305022@zju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: 3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency (3-MCCD) is an autosomal
recessive inborn defect of leucine catabolism caused by MCCC1 or MCCC2 variants.
3-MCCD is considered to be a relatively benign disorder with favorable outcome.
We report the biochemical, clinical, and molecular features of patients with
3-MCCD.
METHODS: From January 2009 to August 2022, 4,402,587 newborns were screened by
tandem mass spectrometry. Newborns with increased C5OH concentrations were
recalled for repeated testing, urine organic acid analysis and molecular genetic
analysis were performed if the second test was still positive.
RESULTS: A total of 53 patients were diagnosed with 3-MCCD. The estimated
incidence of 3-MCCD in Zhejiang Province was 1 in 83,068 newborns. All these 53
patients exhibited increased C5OH concentrations in blood. 94 % (50/53) of the
patients had markedly increased urinary 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid and
3-methylcrotonylglycine. All these 53 patients did not present any clinical
symptom. Twenty-three of 53 patients had secondary carnitine deficiency.
Twenty-eight patients had variants in MCCC1 and 25 had variants in MCCC2. Eleven
novel variants were found in MCCC1 and MCCC2. The c.639 + 2 T > A and
c.1144-1147delinsTTTT were the most common variant in MCCC1 and MCCC2 gene,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: We elucidated the incidence of 3-MCCD in Zhejiang province, China.
All patients showed asymptomatic and present normal growth and development
during follow-up. Eleven novel MCCC1 and MCCC2 variants were identified, which
expanded the variant spectrum.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2023.117266
PMID: 36822454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
