---
reference_id: "PMID:14745511"
title: Macrophage response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection.
authors:
- Gammack D
- Doering CR
- Kirschner DE
journal: J Math Biol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1007/s00285-003-0232-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Macrophage response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection.
**Authors:** Gammack D, Doering CR, Kirschner DE
**Journal:** J Math Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00285-003-0232-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00285-003-0232-8)

## Content

1. J Math Biol. 2004 Feb;48(2):218-42. doi: 10.1007/s00285-003-0232-8. Epub 2003 
Aug 20.

Macrophage response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection.

Gammack D(1), Doering CR, Kirschner DE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, MI 49109, USA.

The immune response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) infection is the 
formation of multicellular lesions, or granolomas, in the lung of the 
individual. However, the structure of the granulomas and the spatial 
distribution of the immune cells within is not well understood. In this paper we 
develop a mathematical model investigating the early and initial immune response 
to Mtb. The model consists of coupled reaction-diffusion-advection partial 
differential equations governing the dynamics of the relevant macrophage and 
bacteria populations and a bacteria-produced chemokine. Our novel application of 
mathematical concepts of internal states and internal velocity allows us to 
begin to study this unique immunological structure. Volume changes resulting 
from proliferation and death terms generate a velocity field by which all cells 
are transported within the forming granuloma. We present numerical results for 
two distinct infection outcomes: controlled and uncontrolled granuloma growth. 
Using a simplified model we are able to analytically determine conditions under 
which the bacteria population decreases, representing early clearance of 
infection, or grows, representing the initial stages of granuloma formation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00285-003-0232-8
PMID: 14745511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]