---
reference_id: "PMID:31725167"
title: "Correspondence Between Behavioral, Physiological, and Anatomical Measurements of Visual Function in Inhibitory Neuron-Ablated Zebrafish."
authors:
- Xie J
- Goodbourn PT
- Bui BV
- Sztal TE
- Jusuf PR
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.19-27544
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Correspondence Between Behavioral, Physiological, and Anatomical Measurements of Visual Function in Inhibitory Neuron-Ablated Zebrafish.
**Authors:** Xie J, Goodbourn PT, Bui BV, Sztal TE, Jusuf PR
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.19-27544](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.19-27544)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2019 Nov 1;60(14):4681-4690. doi: 
10.1167/iovs.19-27544.

Correspondence Between Behavioral, Physiological, and Anatomical Measurements of 
Visual Function in Inhibitory Neuron-Ablated Zebrafish.

Xie J(1), Goodbourn PT(2), Bui BV(3), Sztal TE(4), Jusuf PR(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biosciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(2)Department of Optometry and Vision Sciences, The University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences, The University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.

PURPOSE: To compare the effects of reduced inhibitory neuron function in the 
retina across behavioral, physiological, and anatomical levels.
METHODS: Inhibitory neurons were ablated in larval zebrafish retina. The Ptf1a 
gene, which determines inhibitory neuron fate in developing vertebrates, was 
used to express nitroreductase. By exposing larvae to the prodrug metronidazole, 
cytotoxicity was selectively induced in inhibitory neurons. Visual phenotypes 
were characterized at behavioral, physiological, and anatomical levels using an 
optomotor response (OMR) assay, electroretinography (ERG), and routine 
histology, respectively. Nonvisual locomotion was also assessed to reveal any 
general behavioral effects due to ablation of other nonvisual neurons that also 
express Ptf1a.
RESULTS: Injured larvae showed severely reduced OMR relative to controls. 
Locomotor assessment showed unaltered swimming ability, indicating that reduced 
OMR was due to visual deficits. For ERG, injured larvae manifested either 
reduced (type-I) or absent (type-II) b-wave signals originating from bipolar 
interneurons in the retina. Histologic analysis showed altered retinal 
morphology in injured larvae, with reductions in synaptic inner plexiform layer 
(IPL) thickness and synaptic density more pronounced in type-II than type-I 
larvae; type-II larvae also had smaller retinae overall.
CONCLUSIONS: The consequences of inhibitory neuron ablation corresponded closely 
across behavioral, physiological, and anatomical levels. Inhibitory neuron loss 
likely increases the ratio of neural excitation to inhibition, leading to 
hyperexcitability. In addition to modulating visual signals, inhibitory neurons 
may be critical for maintaining retinal structure and organization. This study 
highlights the utility of a multidisciplinary approach and provides a template 
for characterizing other zebrafish models of neurological disease.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.19-27544
PMID: 31725167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]