---
reference_id: "PMID:40340642"
title: "Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis in Children and Adolescents: A Multicenter Retrospective Study of Relapse and Outcome."
authors:
- Kanmaz S
- Yılmaz S
- Dündar NO
- Aksoy A
- Canpolat M
- Per H
- Erol İ
- Gümüş H
- Özkale Y
- Öztürk S
- Toprak DE
- Öncel İ
- Özkale M
- Ozmansur EN
- Serin HM
- Ersöz G
- Besen Ş
- Mert GG
- Güleç A
- Şahin S
- Ölçülü CB
- Selek A
- Pekuz S
- Başarır G
- Günay Ç
- Biçer D
- Kahraman ZF
- Yüksel D
- Karadağ M
- Şimşek E
- Ünalp A
- Yıldız N
- Direk MÇ
- Yiş U
- Tan H
- Havalı C
- Değerliyurt A
- Güngör M
- Hergüner Ö
- Oncel EP
- Ünver O
- Kumandaş S
- Celik HA
- Özgör B
- Cansu A
- Atasever AK
- Tosun A
- Güngör O
- Okuyaz Ç
- Edizer S
- Hız S
- Sarıgeçili E
- Kayılıoğlu H
- Yazgan CD
- Tuncer GÖ
- Gençpınar P
- Yılmaz Ü
- Özgür S
- Tekgül H
- Anlar B
journal: J Child Neurol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1177/08830738251334219
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- "Encephalomyelitis, Acute Disseminated/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy, epidemiology"
- Male
- Female
- Adolescent
- Retrospective Studies
- "Child, Preschool"
- Recurrence
- Myelin-Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein/immunology
- Infant
- Prognosis
- Follow-Up Studies
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis in Children and Adolescents: A Multicenter Retrospective Study of Relapse and Outcome.
**Authors:** Kanmaz S, Yılmaz S, Dündar NO, Aksoy A, Canpolat M, Per H, Erol İ, Gümüş H, Özkale Y, Öztürk S, Toprak DE, Öncel İ, Özkale M, Ozmansur EN, Serin HM, Ersöz G, Besen Ş, Mert GG, Güleç A, Şahin S, Ölçülü CB, Selek A, Pekuz S, Başarır G, Günay Ç, Biçer D, Kahraman ZF, Yüksel D, Karadağ M, Şimşek E, Ünalp A, Yıldız N, Direk MÇ, Yiş U, Tan H, Havalı C, Değerliyurt A, Güngör M, Hergüner Ö, Oncel EP, Ünver O, Kumandaş S, Celik HA, Özgör B, Cansu A, Atasever AK, Tosun A, Güngör O, Okuyaz Ç, Edizer S, Hız S, Sarıgeçili E, Kayılıoğlu H, Yazgan CD, Tuncer GÖ, Gençpınar P, Yılmaz Ü, Özgür S, Tekgül H, Anlar B
**Journal:** J Child Neurol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1177/08830738251334219](https://doi.org/10.1177/08830738251334219)

## Content

1. J Child Neurol. 2025 Nov;40(10):838-851. doi: 10.1177/08830738251334219. Epub 
2025 May 8.

Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis in Children and Adolescents: A Multicenter 
Retrospective Study of Relapse and Outcome.

Kanmaz S(1), Yılmaz S(1), Dündar NO(2), Aksoy A(3), Canpolat M(4), Per H(4), 
Erol İ(5), Gümüş H(4), Özkale Y(5), Öztürk S(4), Toprak DE(1), Öncel İ(6), 
Özkale M(5), Ozmansur EN(4), Serin HM(1), Ersöz G(6), Besen Ş(5), Mert GG(7), 
Güleç A(4), Şahin S(8), Ölçülü CB(1), Selek A(6), Pekuz S(9), Başarır G(10), 
Günay Ç(11), Biçer D(7), Kahraman ZF(4), Yüksel D(12), Karadağ M(13), Şimşek 
E(1), Ünalp A(9), Yıldız N(8), Direk MÇ(14), Yiş U(11), Tan H(15), Havalı C(16), 
Değerliyurt A(17), Güngör M(18), Hergüner Ö(7), Oncel EP(5), Ünver O(19), 
Kumandaş S(4), Celik HA(12), Özgör B(13), Cansu A(8), Atasever AK(20), Tosun 
A(21), Güngör O(22), Okuyaz Ç(14), Edizer S(23), Hız S(11), Sarıgeçili E(24), 
Kayılıoğlu H(25), Yazgan CD(16), Tuncer GÖ(3), Gençpınar P(2), Yılmaz Ü(9), 
Özgür S(26), Tekgül H(1), Anlar B(6).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Ege University, 
Izmir, Turkey.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Katip Celebi 
University, Izmir, Turkey.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Ondokuz Mayıs 
University, Samsun, Turkey.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Erciyes University, 
Kayseri, Turkey.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Başkent University, 
Adana, Turkey.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Hacettepe University, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Çukurova University, 
Adana, Turkey.
(8)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Karadeniz Technical 
University, Trabzon, Turkey.
(9)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Izmir Faculty of Medicine, Dr. Behçet Uz 
Children's Education and Research Hospital, University of Health Sciences 
Turkey, Izmir, Turkey.
(10)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Izmir Faculty of Medicine, Tepecik 
Education and Research Hospital, University of Health Sciences Turkey, Izmir, 
Turkey.
(11)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Dokuz Eylül 
University, Izmir, Turkey.
(12)Department of Pediatric Neurology, University of Health Sciences Turkey, 
Ankara Etlik City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(13)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Turgut Ozal 
University, Malatya, Turkey.
(14)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Mersin University, 
Mersin, Turkey.
(15)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Ataturk University, 
Erzurum, Turkey.
(16)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Bursa Yüksek Ihtisas Training and 
Research Hospital, Bursa, Turkey.
(17)Deparment of Pediatric Neurology, Ankara Bilkent City Hospital, University 
of Health Sciences Turkey, Ankara, Turkey.
(18)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Kocaeli University Faculty of Medicine, 
Kocaeli, Turkey.
(19)Faculty of Medicine, Pendik Training and Research Hospital, Department of 
Pediatric Neurology, Marmara University, İstanbul, Turkey.
(20)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Celal Bayar 
University, Manisa, Turkey.
(21)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Adnan Menderes 
University, Aydın, Turkey.
(22)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Pamukkale 
University, Denizli, Turkey.
(23)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Istanbul Bezm-i Alem Vakıf University, 
İstanbul, Turkey.
(24)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Adana City Training and Research 
Hospital, Adana, Turkey.
(25)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Mugla Sitki Kocman 
University, Mugla, Turkey.
(26)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, 
Ege University, Izmir, Turkey.

ObjectivesTo evaluate the demographic, clinical, laboratory, and prognostic data 
of children with acute disseminated encephalomyelitis with respect to 
anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) antibody status.MethodsAcute 
disseminated encephalomyelitis patients (n = 245) from 24 centers followed up 
between 2010 and 2022 were evaluated retrospectively. The short- and long-term 
outcome characteristics (disease severity and course, clinical relapse, and 
recovery rates) were assessed. Incomplete clinical recovery was defined as 
modified Rankin Score ≥1 or the presence of epilepsy. Univariant and 
multivariant analysis were performed for outcome characteristics.ResultsThe mean 
age at diagnosis was 6.3 ± 3.8 (0.5-17.7) years and the median follow-up was 22 
(3-132) months. The outcome characteristics were evaluated in 180 of 245 
patients (73.4%) with at least 12 months' follow-up. Twenty-three patients 
(12.6%) relapsed. The multivariable logistic regression analysis revealed the 
following clinical parameters as predictors of relapse: sex, visual impairment, 
and ataxia at initial presentation. Incomplete clinical recovery (n = 42/180, 
23.3%) was associated with the presence of seizures on admission and the need 
for an intensive care unit. Anti-MOG antibody positivity was not associated with 
an increased risk of relapse (25% vs 13.1%, P = .164) or incomplete clinical 
recovery (P = .511).ConclusionThe nationwide cohort presented further supports 
the typically monophasic nature of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, and a 
high rate of complete recovery. The presence of certain symptoms in the acute 
period may assist the clinician in estimating the outcome.

DOI: 10.1177/08830738251334219
PMID: 40340642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe authors 
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.