---
reference_id: "PMID:37655119"
title: ALK-positive anaplastic large cell lymphoma in adults.
authors:
- Gromowsky MJ
- "D'Angelo CR"
- Lunning MA
- Armitage JO
journal: Fac Rev
year: '2023'
doi: 10.12703/r/12-21
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ALK-positive anaplastic large cell lymphoma in adults.
**Authors:** Gromowsky MJ, D'Angelo CR, Lunning MA, Armitage JO
**Journal:** Fac Rev (2023)
**DOI:** [10.12703/r/12-21](https://doi.org/10.12703/r/12-21)

## Content

1. Fac Rev. 2023 Aug 25;12:21. doi: 10.12703/r/12-21. eCollection 2023.

ALK-positive anaplastic large cell lymphoma in adults.

Gromowsky MJ(1), D'Angelo CR(1), Lunning MA(1), Armitage JO(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.

ALK-positive anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) represents approximately 6-7%
of the mature T-cell lymphomas. This subtype contains a translocation between
the ALK gene on chromosome 2 and one of several other genes that together form
an oncogene. The most frequent translocation is t(2;5) which combines ALK with
NPM1. This lymphoma has a median age of 34 years, is more common in males, and
is in advanced stage at the time of diagnosis in most patients. ALK-positive
ALCL is the most curable of the peripheral T-cell lymphomas. The CHOP regimen
has been most frequently used, but results are improved with the substitution of
brentuximab vedotin for vincristine (BV-CHP) and the addition of etoposide
(CHOEP), with BV-CHP being favored. Salvage therapies include allogeneic or
autologous bone marrow transplantation, BV, if not used as part of the primary
therapy, and ALK inhibitors. The latter are very active and likely to be
incorporated into the primary therapy.

Copyright: © 2023 Armitage JO et al.

DOI: 10.12703/r/12-21
PMCID: PMC10467138
PMID: 37655119

Conflict of interest statement: JA is a Cardiff Oncology-Member, Board of
Directors. The other authors declare that they have no competing interests.No
competing interests were disclosed.No competing interests were disclosed.
