---
reference_id: "PMID:34749918"
title: Pediatric Headache Attributed to Infection.
authors:
- Walter SM
- Laderman M
- Polk P
journal: Semin Pediatr Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.spen.2021.100923
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Headache Attributed to Infection.
**Authors:** Walter SM, Laderman M, Polk P
**Journal:** Semin Pediatr Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.spen.2021.100923](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spen.2021.100923)

## Content

1. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2021 Dec;40:100923. doi: 10.1016/j.spen.2021.100923.
Epub  2021 Sep 9.

Pediatric Headache Attributed to Infection.

Walter SM(1), Laderman M(2), Polk P(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Health, West Virginia University School of 
Nursing, Robert C. Byrd Health Sciences Center, Morgantown, WV. Electronic 
address: swalters@hsc.wvu.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, Nationwide Childrens Hospital, Columbus, OH.
(3)School of Nursing, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, OH.

Pediatric headaches attributed to infection are typically related to non-life 
threatening illnesses such as upper respiratory tract infections and 
rhinosinusitis. Although less common, secondary headaches related to life 
threatening infections are most frequently associated with meningitis. This 
review provides an overview of the International Classification of Headache 
Disorders third edition (ICHD-3) categories of infections contributing to 
secondary headache, describes clinical presentation, and presents a focused 
review on relevant diagnoses associated with this headache type. An 
understanding of headache attributed to infection will provide the foundation on 
distinguishing secondary headaches from various etiological infectious 
disorders.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.spen.2021.100923
PMID: 34749918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]