---
reference_id: "PMID:17577020"
title: "Phase IIb multicenter trial of vorinostat in patients with persistent, progressive, or treatment refractory cutaneous T-cell lymphoma."
authors:
- Olsen EA
- Kim YH
- Kuzel TM
- Pacheco TR
- Foss FM
- Parker S
- Frankel SR
- Chen C
- Ricker JL
- Arduino JM
- Duvic M
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2006.10.2434
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Confidence Intervals
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Drug Administration Schedule
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Hydroxamic Acids/therapeutic use
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Cutaneous/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- Male
- Maximum Tolerated Dose
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Staging
- Probability
- Salvage Therapy
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- Survival Analysis
- Treatment Outcome
- Vorinostat
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase IIb multicenter trial of vorinostat in patients with persistent, progressive, or treatment refractory cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.
**Authors:** Olsen EA, Kim YH, Kuzel TM, Pacheco TR, Foss FM, Parker S, Frankel SR, Chen C, Ricker JL, Arduino JM, Duvic M
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2006.10.2434](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2006.10.2434)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2007 Jul 20;25(21):3109-15. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2006.10.2434. Epub
2007 Jun 18.

Phase IIb multicenter trial of vorinostat in patients with persistent,
progressive, or treatment refractory cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.

Olsen EA(1), Kim YH, Kuzel TM, Pacheco TR, Foss FM, Parker S, Frankel SR, Chen
C, Ricker JL, Arduino JM, Duvic M.

Author information:
(1)Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. olsen001@mc.duke.edu

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2008 Jan 10;26(2):332-3; discussion 333-4. doi:
10.1200/JCO.2007.14.7249.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the activity and safety of the histone deacetylase
inhibitor vorinostat (suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid) in persistent,
progressive, or recurrent mycosis fungoides or Sézary syndrome (MF/SS) cutaneous
t-cell lymphoma (CTCL) subtypes.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with stage IB-IVA MF/SS were treated with 400 mg
of oral vorinostat daily until disease progression or intolerable toxicity in
this open-label phase IIb trial (NCT00091559). Patients must have received at
least two prior systemic therapies at least one of which included bexarotene
unless intolerable. The primary end point was the objective response rate (ORR)
measured by the modified severity weighted assessment tool and secondary end
points were time to response (TTR), time to progression (TTP), duration of
response (DOR), and pruritus relief ( > or = 3-point improvement on a 10-point
visual analog scale). Safety and tolerability were also evaluated.
RESULTS: Seventy-four patients were enrolled, including 61 with at least stage
IIB disease. The ORR was 29.7% overall; 29.5% in stage IIB or higher patients.
Median TTR in stage IIB or higher patients was 56 days. Median DOR was not
reached but estimated to be >or = 185 days (34+ to 441+). Median TTP was 4.9
months overall, and 9.8 months for stage IIB or higher responders. Overall, 32%
of patients had pruritus relief. The most common drug-related adverse
experiences (AE) were diarrhea (49%), fatigue (46%), nausea (43%), and anorexia
(26%); most were grade 2 or lower but those grade 3 or higher included fatigue
(5%), pulmonary embolism (5%), thrombocytopenia (5%), and nausea (4%). Eleven
patients required dose modification and nine discontinued due to AE.
CONCLUSION: Oral vorinostat was effective in treatment refractory MF/SS with an
acceptable safety profile.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2006.10.2434
PMID: 17577020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
