---
reference_id: "PMID:19082818"
title: "[Activation of sonic hedgehog signaling in keratocystic odontogenic tumors]."
authors:
- Freier K
- Pungs S
- Flechtenmacher C
- Hofele C
journal: HNO
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s00106-008-1842-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Activation of sonic hedgehog signaling in keratocystic odontogenic tumors].
**Authors:** Freier K, Pungs S, Flechtenmacher C, Hofele C
**Journal:** HNO (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00106-008-1842-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00106-008-1842-7)

## Content

1. HNO. 2009 Apr;57(4):345-50. doi: 10.1007/s00106-008-1842-7.

[Activation of sonic hedgehog signaling in keratocystic odontogenic tumors].

[Article in German]

Freier K(1), Pungs S, Flechtenmacher C, Hofele C.

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Mund-, Kiefer- und Gesichtschirurgie, Universitätsklinikum 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg. Kolja.Freier@med.uni-heidelberg.de

BACKGROUND: Keratocystic odontogenic tumors are benign neoplasms of the 
viscerocranium that occur sporadically as well as in association with 
Gorlin-Goltz syndrome. Multiple basal cell carcinomas of the skin are another 
typical feature of Gorlin-Goltz syndrome. Aberrant activation of sonic hedgehog 
signaling has been reported for sporadic and hereditary basal cell carcinoma 
caused by specific genetic mutations, but for keratocystic odontogenic tumors, 
the role of aberrant sonic hedgehog signaling has not yet been evaluated in 
detail.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the present study, 131 keratocystic odontogenic tumors 
were analyzed by immunohistochemistry for the expression of sonic hedgehog 
signaling proteins SHH, PTCH1, SMO, GLI1, and NMYC on tissue microarray 
sections.
RESULTS: High expression of the analyzed proteins-between 67.3% (PTCH1) and 
92.9% (SHH)-was found in the epithelial compartment of the keratocystic 
odontogenic tumors analyzed. In the stromal compartment of the tumors, high 
expression of the target proteins was found significantly less frequently (all 
p-values <0.001).
CONCLUSION: Aberrant sonic hedgehog signaling is critically involved in the 
molecular pathogenesis of keratocystic odontogenic tumors. This finding 
underlines the neoplastic character of this intraosseous lesion. Because of high 
recurrence rates after local excision, more radical surgical approaches are 
recommended for treating keratocystic odontogenic tumors.

DOI: 10.1007/s00106-008-1842-7
PMID: 19082818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]