---
reference_id: PMID:40645150
title: "Predicting epilepsy in patients diagnosed with intracranial meningiomas: A systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical and anatomical risk factors."
authors:
- Khan MF
- Patel S
- Alnasser AA
- Ghaderi S
- Patel A
- Gendreau J
- Brown NJ
- Cohen-Gadol A
journal: J Clin Neurosci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2025.111451
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predicting epilepsy in patients diagnosed with intracranial meningiomas: A systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical and anatomical risk factors.
**Authors:** Khan MF, Patel S, Alnasser AA, Ghaderi S, Patel A, Gendreau J, Brown NJ, Cohen-Gadol A
**Journal:** J Clin Neurosci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jocn.2025.111451](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2025.111451)

## Content

1. J Clin Neurosci. 2025 Sep;139:111451. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2025.111451. Epub
2025  Jul 10.

Predicting epilepsy in patients diagnosed with intracranial meningiomas: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical and anatomical risk factors.

Khan MF(1), Patel S(2), Alnasser AA(3), Ghaderi S(4), Patel A(5), Gendreau J(6), 
Brown NJ(7), Cohen-Gadol A(8).

Author information:
(1)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Seton Hall University, South Orange, NJ, 
United States.
(3)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States. 
Electronic address: aalnass3@jh.edu.
(4)Research Center for Evidence-Based Medicine, Iranian EBM Centre: A JBJI 
Centre of Excellence, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(5)Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, United States.
(6)Johns Hopkins Whiting School of Engineering, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(7)Center for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders, University of 
California, Irvine, CA, United States.
(8)Department of Neurological Surgery, Keck School of Medicine of USC, Los 
Angeles, CA, United States.

INTRODUCTION: Meningiomas comprise 40% of all central nervous system neoplasms, 
with peak prevalence occurring in the fifth and sixth decades of life. 
Presenting symptoms vary between patients and are location-dependent, but 
new-onset seizures bring a subset of patients to clinical attention.
OBJECTIVE: The present meta-analysis aims to identify the clinical features and 
tumor characteristics most associated with seizures at diagnosis of intracranial 
meningioma.
METHODS: The PubMed, Scopus, and Embase databases were queried for all primary 
retrospectives (case-control studies, cohort studies, and case series) reporting 
the presence versus absence of seizures in patients with newly diagnosed 
meningioma. Data on tumor location, baseline neurological exam, and presenting 
signs and symptoms were collected. Meta-analysis was performed using the 
Mantel-Haenszel method to identify statistically significant associations 
between primary and secondary variables and seizures in patients diagnosed with 
meningioma. P-values < 0.05 were regarded as statistically significant.
RESULTS: Ultimately, 4,129 studies were identified, of which 33 were included 
for quantitative analysis - 18 case-control, four retrospective cohort studies, 
and 11 case series. Among the 8,221 meningioma patients analyzed, 26 % 
(n = 2137) presented with seizures at diagnosis. The presence of seizures was 
associated with pediatric age group (p < 0.05), male sex (p < 0.001), non-skull 
base location (p < 0.001), presence of peritumoral vasogenic edema (p < 0.001), 
and presence of pre-intervention neurological deficits (p < 0.001). Of note, 
headaches (p < 0.001) were less common at presentation in patients with 
preoperative seizures.
CONCLUSION: In the present meta-analysis of 33 studies comprising 8,221 
patients, new-onset seizures were reported by 26% of newly diagnosed meningioma 
patients. Male sex, youth, non-skull base location, presence of peritumoral 
edema, neurological deficits, and headaches predicted the occurrence of seizures 
in the pre-diagnosis and/or pre-operative period. Population-level data are 
necessary to confirm these findings. Further considerations going forward will 
involve leveraging next-generation AI and biomarker-based medicine to predict 
the risk for progression of asymptomatic, incidental meningiomas so that 
radiosurgery or surgical resection is offered prior to symptomatic onset 
(including onset of seizure).

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2025.111451
PMID: 40645150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.