---
reference_id: "PMID:38992300"
title: The attenuated hepatic clearance of propionate increases cardiac oxidative stress in propionic acidemia.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Zhu S
- He W
- Marchuk H
- Richard E
- Desviat LR
- Young SP
- Koeberl D
- Kasumov T
- Chen X
- Zhang GF
journal: Basic Res Cardiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00395-024-01066-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The attenuated hepatic clearance of propionate increases cardiac oxidative stress in propionic acidemia.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Zhu S, He W, Marchuk H, Richard E, Desviat LR, Young SP, Koeberl D, Kasumov T, Chen X, Zhang GF
**Journal:** Basic Res Cardiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00395-024-01066-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00395-024-01066-w)

## Content

1. Basic Res Cardiol. 2024 Dec;119(6):1045-1062. doi: 10.1007/s00395-024-01066-w.
 Epub 2024 Jul 11.

The attenuated hepatic clearance of propionate increases cardiac oxidative 
stress in propionic acidemia.

Wang Y(#)(1)(2), Zhu S(#)(1)(2), He W(2), Marchuk H(2), Richard E(3), Desviat 
LR(3), Young SP(4)(5), Koeberl D(5), Kasumov T(6), Chen X(7)(8)(9), Zhang 
GF(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)School of Basic Medicine, Jining Medical University, Shandong, 272067, China.
(2)Duke Molecular Physiology Institute and Sarah W. Stedman Nutrition and 
Metabolism Center, Duke University Medical Center, Carmichael Building 48-203, 
300 North Duke Street, Durham, NC, 27701, USA.
(3)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa UAM-CSIC, CIBERER, IdiPaz, IUBM, 
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Biochemical Genetics Laboratory, Duke University Health System, Durham, NC, 
USA.
(5)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University 
School of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, 27710, USA.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Northeast Ohio 
Medical University, Rootstown, OH, USA.
(7)Surgical Research Lab, Department of Surgery, Cooper University Hospital and 
Cooper Medical School of Rowan University, Camden, NJ, 08103, USA.
(8)Coriell Institute for Medical Research, Camden, NJ, 08103, USA.
(9)MD Anderson Cancer Center at Cooper, Camden, NJ, 08103, USA.
(10)Duke Molecular Physiology Institute and Sarah W. Stedman Nutrition and 
Metabolism Center, Duke University Medical Center, Carmichael Building 48-203, 
300 North Duke Street, Durham, NC, 27701, USA. Guofang.zhang@duke.edu.
(11)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Nutrition, 
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, 27701, USA. Guofang.zhang@duke.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Propionic acidemia (PA), arising from PCCA or PCCB variants, manifests as 
life-threatening cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias, with unclear pathophysiology. 
In this work, propionyl-CoA metabolism in rodent hearts and human pluripotent 
stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes was investigated with stable isotope tracing 
analysis. Surprisingly, gut microbiome-derived propionate rather than the 
propiogenic amino acids (valine, isoleucine, threonine, and methionine) or 
odd-chain fatty acids was found to be the primary cardiac propionyl-CoA source. 
In a Pcca-/-(A138T) mouse model and PA patients, accumulated propionyl-CoA and 
diminished acyl-CoA synthetase short-chain family member 3 impede hepatic 
propionate disposal, elevating circulating propionate. Prolonged propionate 
exposure induced significant oxidative stress in PCCA knockdown HL-1 cells and 
the hearts of Pcca-/-(A138T) mice. Additionally, Pcca-/-(A138T) mice exhibited 
mild diastolic dysfunction after the propionate challenge. These findings 
suggest that elevated circulating propionate may cause oxidative damage and 
functional impairment in the hearts of patients with PA.

© 2024. Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00395-024-01066-w
PMCID: PMC11702364
PMID: 38992300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors 
have declared that no conflict of interest exists.