---
reference_id: "PMID:17660530"
title: Risk alleles for multiple sclerosis identified by a genomewide study.
authors:
- International Multiple Sclerosis Genetics Consortium
- Hafler DA
- Compston A
- Sawcer S
- Lander ES
- Daly MJ
- De Jager PL
- de Bakker PI
- Gabriel SB
- Mirel DB
- Ivinson AJ
- Pericak-Vance MA
- Gregory SG
- Rioux JD
- McCauley JL
- Haines JL
- Barcellos LF
- Cree B
- Oksenberg JR
- Hauser SL
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa073493
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk alleles for multiple sclerosis identified by a genomewide study.
**Authors:** International Multiple Sclerosis Genetics Consortium, Hafler DA, Compston A, Sawcer S, Lander ES, Daly MJ, De Jager PL, de Bakker PI, Gabriel SB, Mirel DB, Ivinson AJ, Pericak-Vance MA, Gregory SG, Rioux JD, McCauley JL, Haines JL, Barcellos LF, Cree B, Oksenberg JR, Hauser SL
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa073493](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa073493)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2007 Aug 30;357(9):851-62. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa073493. Epub 2007 
Jul 29.

Risk alleles for multiple sclerosis identified by a genomewide study.

International Multiple Sclerosis Genetics Consortium(1); Hafler DA, Compston A, 
Sawcer S, Lander ES, Daly MJ, De Jager PL, de Bakker PI, Gabriel SB, Mirel DB, 
Ivinson AJ, Pericak-Vance MA, Gregory SG, Rioux JD, McCauley JL, Haines JL, 
Barcellos LF, Cree B, Oksenberg JR, Hauser SL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Center for Neurologic Diseases, Department 
of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Aug 30;357(9):927-9. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe078147.
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Nov 22;357(21):2199-200; author reply 2200-1. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc072836.
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Nov 22;357(21):2200; author reply 2200-1.
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Nov 22;357(21):2200; author reply 2200-1.

BACKGROUND: Multiple sclerosis has a clinically significant heritable component. 
We conducted a genomewide association study to identify alleles associated with 
the risk of multiple sclerosis.
METHODS: We used DNA microarray technology to identify common DNA sequence 
variants in 931 family trios (consisting of an affected child and both parents) 
and tested them for association. For replication, we genotyped another 609 
family trios, 2322 case subjects, and 789 control subjects and used genotyping 
data from two external control data sets. A joint analysis of data from 12,360 
subjects was performed to estimate the overall significance and effect size of 
associations between alleles and the risk of multiple sclerosis.
RESULTS: A transmission disequilibrium test of 334,923 single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 931 family trios revealed 49 SNPs having an association 
with multiple sclerosis (P<1x10(-4)); of these SNPs, 38 were selected for the 
second-stage analysis. A comparison between the 931 case subjects from the 
family trios and 2431 control subjects identified an additional nonoverlapping 
32 SNPs (P<0.001). An additional 40 SNPs with less stringent P values (<0.01) 
were also selected, for a total of 110 SNPs for the second-stage analysis. Of 
these SNPs, two within the interleukin-2 receptor alpha gene (IL2RA) were 
strongly associated with multiple sclerosis (P=2.96x10(-8)), as were a 
nonsynonymous SNP in the interleukin-7 receptor alpha gene (IL7RA) 
(P=2.94x10(-7)) and multiple SNPs in the HLA-DRA locus (P=8.94x10(-81)).
CONCLUSIONS: Alleles of IL2RA and IL7RA and those in the HLA locus are 
identified as heritable risk factors for multiple sclerosis.

Copyright 2007 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa073493
PMID: 17660530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]