---
reference_id: "PMID:11698112"
title: The interactions of cartilage proteoglycans with collagens are determined by their structures.
authors:
- Vynios DH
- Papageorgakopoulou N
- Sazakli H
- Tsiganos CP
journal: Biochimie
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1016/s0300-9084(01)01332-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The interactions of cartilage proteoglycans with collagens are determined by their structures.
**Authors:** Vynios DH, Papageorgakopoulou N, Sazakli H, Tsiganos CP
**Journal:** Biochimie (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0300-9084(01)01332-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0300-9084(01)01332-3)

## Content

1. Biochimie. 2001 Sep;83(9):899-906. doi: 10.1016/s0300-9084(01)01332-3.

The interactions of cartilage proteoglycans with collagens are determined by 
their structures.

Vynios DH(1), Papageorgakopoulou N, Sazakli H, Tsiganos CP.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, University of Patras, 
261 10 Patras, Greece. vynios@chemistry.upatras.gr

In the present work, the interaction of aggrecan, decorin and biglycan isolated 
from pig laryngeal cartilage and of the three squid cartilage proteoglycans with 
collagen type I and II was studied. The interaction was examined under 
conditions allowing the formation of collagen fibrils. It was found that 
biglycan interacted strongly with collagen type II and not with type I and the 
interaction seemed to proceed exclusively through its core proteins. Decorin 
interacted with collagen type I but not with type II. Aggrecan interacted very 
poorly with both collagen types. The two squid proteoglycans of large size, 
D1D1A and D1D2, interacted only with collagen type I through both 
glycosaminoglycans and core proteins. The third squid proteoglycan of small 
size, D1D1B, interacted poorly only with collagen type I. The results suggested 
that the interactions of cartilage proteoglycans with collagen were mainly due 
to the primary structure of both molecules, and would contribute to the 
maintenance of the integrity of the tissue. The biochemical significance of 
these interactions might be more critical in aged vertebrate cartilage, where 
loss of aggrecan and increase of the small proteoglycans was observed, a large 
proportion of which is found in the extracellular matrix free of 
glycosaminoglycan chains.

DOI: 10.1016/s0300-9084(01)01332-3
PMID: 11698112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]