---
reference_id: "PMID:41136097"
title: Challenges in Cutaneous Mastocytosis.
authors:
- Franz T
- Hubbuch M
- Rupp S
- Brockow K
journal: Immunol Allergy Clin North Am
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.iac.2025.06.011
keywords:
- Humans
- "Mastocytosis, Cutaneous/diagnosis, therapy, etiology, genetics"
- Skin/pathology
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit/genetics
- Mutation
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Disease Management
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Challenges in Cutaneous Mastocytosis.
**Authors:** Franz T, Hubbuch M, Rupp S, Brockow K
**Journal:** Immunol Allergy Clin North Am (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.iac.2025.06.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iac.2025.06.011)

## Content

1. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am. 2025 Nov;45(4):589-602. doi: 
10.1016/j.iac.2025.06.011. Epub 2025 Aug 5.

Challenges in Cutaneous Mastocytosis.

Franz T(1), Hubbuch M(1), Rupp S(1), Brockow K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergy Biederstein, School of Medicine and 
Health, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Allergy Biederstein, School of Medicine and 
Health, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany; Department of 
Dermatology and Allergy Centre, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark. 
Electronic address: knut.brockow@tum.de.

Cutaneous lesions of mastocytosis (CLM) are a hallmark for the diagnosis of 
mastocytosis. The nomenclature of the term "cutaneous mastocytosis" (CM) is 
ambiguous as it is used both for classification excluding and as a morphologic 
description including systemic variants of mastocytosis. Recognition of CLM may 
be delayed by clinically subtle and very heterogeneous presentations. 
Distinguishing monomorphic versus polymorphic maculopapular CM may be 
challenging. Less common presentations require a clearly positive Darier's sign, 
histopathological confirmation, and/or skin D816V kit mutational analysis. 
Management of patients with CLM requires multidisciplinary therapy, adequate 
staging, and follow-up to recognize complications.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.iac.2025.06.011
PMID: 41136097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors declare no conflict of 
interest regarding the content of the article. Access to original data is 
restricted due to data protection guidelines and can be granted on reasonable 
request. Funding: The research was sponsored by the authors’ departments.