---
reference_id: "PMID:32798076"
title: Tremor as an early sign of hereditary spastic paraplegia due to mutations in ALDH18A1.
authors:
- Kalmár T
- Maróti Z
- Zimmermann A
- Sztriha L
journal: Brain Dev
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2020.07.015
keywords:
- "Aldehyde Dehydrogenase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Hungary
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Spastic Paraplegia, Hereditary/diagnosis, genetics"
- Tremor/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tremor as an early sign of hereditary spastic paraplegia due to mutations in ALDH18A1.
**Authors:** Kalmár T, Maróti Z, Zimmermann A, Sztriha L
**Journal:** Brain Dev (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.braindev.2020.07.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.braindev.2020.07.015)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 2021 Jan;43(1):144-151. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2020.07.015. Epub
2020 Aug 11.

Tremor as an early sign of hereditary spastic paraplegia due to mutations in
ALDH18A1.

Kalmár T(1), Maróti Z(1), Zimmermann A(1), Sztriha L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary. Electronic
address: sztriha.laszlo@med.u-szeged.hu.

BACKGROUND: The ALDH18A1 gene is located at 10q24.1 and encodes
delta-1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase (P5CS), a mitochondrial bifunctional
enzyme that catalyzes the first two steps in de novo biosynthesis of proline,
ornithine, citrulline, and arginine. ALDH18A1-related disorders have been
classified into four groups, such as autosomal dominant and recessive hereditary
spastic paraplegia (SPG9A and SPG9B, respectively), as well as autosomal
dominant and recessive cutis laxa (ADCL3 and ARCL3A, respectively).
Neurodegeneration is a characteristic feature of all groups.
CASE REPORT: Here, we report a girl with compound heterozygous disease-causing
variants (c.-28-2A>G and c.383G>A, p.Arg128His) in the ALDH18A1 gene, revealed
by whole exome sequencing. The c.-28-2A>G variant in intron 1, inherited from
the mother, is a novel mutation, while the c.383G>A variant in exon 4, inherited
from the father, has already been reported. The patient presented with vigorous
infantile tremor preceding progressive spastic paraplegia. Dysmorphic features
included elongated face, deep-set ears, upturned nose, long philtrum and pointed
chin. Intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation, microcephaly, global
developmental delay and profound intellectual disability were also noticed.
Blood fasting ammonia level, plasma proline, ornithine and arginine levels were
normal, while citrulline level was slightly decreased. Brain MRI revealed
moderate hypoplasia of the corpus callosum and reduction of white matter volume.
CONCLUSIONS: The patient represents SPG9B, a rare form of autosomal recessive
hereditary spastic paraplegias. The early onset tremor, preceding lower limb
spasticity appears to be a unique early manifestation of neurodegeneration in
this case.

Copyright © 2020 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2020.07.015
PMID: 32798076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
