---
reference_id: "PMID:21092187"
title: Fabry disease.
authors:
- Germain DP
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-30
keywords:
- Adult
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/genetics, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, X/genetics"
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy
- "Fabry Disease/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- Female
- Humans
- Kidney/pathology
- "Kidney Diseases/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Male
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "alpha-Galactosidase/analysis, genetics, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fabry disease.
**Authors:** Germain DP
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-5-30](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-5-30)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2010 Nov 22;5:30. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-30.

Fabry disease.

Germain DP(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Versailles - St Quentin en Yvelines, Faculté de Médecine Paris 
- Ile de France Ouest (PIFO), 78035 Versailles, France. 
dominique.germain@rpc.aphp.fr

Fabry disease (FD) is a progressive, X-linked inherited disorder of 
glycosphingolipid metabolism due to deficient or absent lysosomal 
α-galactosidase A activity. FD is pan-ethnic and the reported annual incidence 
of 1 in 100,000 may underestimate the true prevalence of the disease. 
Classically affected hemizygous males, with no residual α-galactosidase A 
activity may display all the characteristic neurological (pain), cutaneous 
(angiokeratoma), renal (proteinuria, kidney failure), cardiovascular 
(cardiomyopathy, arrhythmia), cochleo-vestibular and cerebrovascular (transient 
ischemic attacks, strokes) signs of the disease while heterozygous females have 
symptoms ranging from very mild to severe. Deficient activity of lysosomal 
α-galactosidase A results in progressive accumulation of globotriaosylceramide 
within lysosomes, believed to trigger a cascade of cellular events. 
Demonstration of marked α-galactosidase A deficiency is the definitive method 
for the diagnosis of hemizygous males. Enzyme analysis may occasionnally help to 
detect heterozygotes but is often inconclusive due to random X-chromosomal 
inactivation so that molecular testing (genotyping) of females is mandatory. In 
childhood, other possible causes of pain such as rheumatoid arthritis and 
'growing pains' must be ruled out. In adulthood, multiple sclerosis is sometimes 
considered. Prenatal diagnosis, available by determination of enzyme activity or 
DNA testing in chorionic villi or cultured amniotic cells is, for ethical 
reasons, only considered in male fetuses. Pre-implantation diagnosis is 
possible. The existence of atypical variants and the availability of a specific 
therapy singularly complicate genetic counseling. A disease-specific therapeutic 
option - enzyme replacement therapy using recombinant human α-galactosidase A - 
has been recently introduced and its long term outcome is currently still being 
investigated. Conventional management consists of pain relief with analgesic 
drugs, nephroprotection (angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and 
angiotensin receptors blockers) and antiarrhythmic agents, whereas dialysis or 
renal transplantation are available for patients experiencing end-stage renal 
failure. With age, progressive damage to vital organ systems develops and at 
some point, organs may start to fail in functioning. End-stage renal disease and 
life-threatening cardiovascular or cerebrovascular complications limit 
life-expectancy of untreated males and females with reductions of 20 and 10 
years, respectively, as compared to the general population. While there is 
increasing evidence that long-term enzyme therapy can halt disease progression, 
the importance of adjunctive therapies should be emphasized and the possibility 
of developing an oral therapy drives research forward into active site specific 
chaperones.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-30
PMCID: PMC3009617
PMID: 21092187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]