---
reference_id: "PMID:40899815"
title: Assessment of hepatitis C virus permissiveness in iteratively genetically humanized mice.
authors:
- Schwoerer MP
- Carver S
- Cafiero TR
- Joyce B
- Berggren KA
- Suzuki S
- Heller B
- "O'Connell AK"
- Gertje HP
- Crossland NA
- Posfai E
- Ploss A
journal: J Virol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1128/jvi.00793-25
keywords:
- Animals
- Hepacivirus/physiology
- Mice
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Hepatocytes/virology
- "Hepatitis C/virology, immunology, genetics"
- Humans
- Virus Replication
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Viremia
- Tetraspanin 28/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessment of hepatitis C virus permissiveness in iteratively genetically humanized mice.
**Authors:** Schwoerer MP, Carver S, Cafiero TR, Joyce B, Berggren KA, Suzuki S, Heller B, O'Connell AK, Gertje HP, Crossland NA, Posfai E, Ploss A
**Journal:** J Virol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jvi.00793-25](https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.00793-25)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2025 Sep 23;99(9):e0079325. doi: 10.1128/jvi.00793-25. Epub 2025 Sep
3.

Assessment of hepatitis C virus permissiveness in iteratively genetically
humanized mice.

Schwoerer MP(1), Carver S(1), Cafiero TR(1), Joyce B(1), Berggren KA(1), Suzuki
S(1), Heller B(1), O'Connell AK(2), Gertje HP(2), Crossland NA(2)(3), Posfai
E(1), Ploss A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey,
USA.
(2)National Emerging Infectious Diseases Laboratories, Boston University,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Boston University Chobanian
& Avedisian School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is an enveloped, positive-sense single-stranded RNA
virus causing chronic infections in over 50 million people who are at risk of
developing severe liver disease. Greater understanding of HCV pathogenesis and
vaccine development has been hampered by the lack of a fully immunocompetent
small-animal model permissive to infection. Rodents are resistant to HCV
infection due to a variety of factors at the levels of entry and replication,
many of which have been discovered within the past decade. We hypothesized that
genetically altering these factors in mice would provide a host environment
conducive to infection. Here, we present the generation and characterization of
a series of mouse lines bearing humanized alleles for CD81, occludin, TRIM26,
and CypA, the murine orthologs for which do not support HCV uptake and
replication. Additionally, we knocked out CD302 and CR1L, which restrict HCV
infection in mouse hepatocytes. Intravenously, inoculation of mice harboring
some or all of these mutant alleles did not increase viremia. To ascertain that
mouse adaptive immune responses do not rapidly clear any putative low-level
viremia, we engrafted hepatocytes from these genetically complex lines into
immunodeficient liver-injury strains. No cohort of mice presented with sustained
HC viremia, although we detected low-level viremia in a subset of
transplant-recipient mice. Collectively, although these mouse models did not
support robust, sustained viremia, these mouse mutant lines represent the most
genetically advanced mouse model of HCV infection and will provide an important
platform for future genetic host adaptations and/or complementary viral
adaptation approaches.IMPORTANCEHepatitis C virus (HCV) presents a significant
threat to global health. Despite its prevalence worldwide, there remain
significant knowledge gaps regarding immunopathogenesis, oncogenesis, and
determinants for vaccine efficacy. This is due to the scarcity of small-animal
models for HCV, a virus that only robustly infects human and chimpanzee
hepatocytes. In this work, we genetically engineer mice to either humanize or
remove several factors that are known to limit HCV infection in mice. We then
expose these mice to HCV and assess whether they develop infection over time. To
see whether the immune system impacts infection in these modified mice, we
transplant liver cells from those mice into ones that lack immune cells and then
assess their ability to develop HCV infection. While we did not succeed in
generating a mouse that sustains robust viremia, these complex strains
nevertheless represent an important platform for further model development.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.00793-25
PMCID: PMC12456128
PMID: 40899815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
