---
reference_id: "PMID:1448"
title: Defects in the biochemistry of collagen in diseases of connective tissue.
authors:
- Uitto J
- Lichtenstein JR
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '1976'
doi: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12481404
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defects in the biochemistry of collagen in diseases of connective tissue.
**Authors:** Uitto J, Lichtenstein JR
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (1976)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1523-1747.ep12481404](https://doi.org/10.1111/1523-1747.ep12481404)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 1976 Feb;66(02):59-79. doi: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12481404.

Defects in the biochemistry of collagen in diseases of connective tissue.

Uitto J, Lichtenstein JR.

The collagens are the major structural glycoproteins of connective tissues. A 
unique primary structure and a multiplicity of post-translational modification 
reactions are required for normal fibrillogenesis. The post-translational 
modifications include hydroxylation of prolyl and lysyl residues, glycosylation, 
folding of the molecule into triple-helical conformation, proteolytic conversion 
of precursor procollagen to collagen, and oxidative deamination of certain lysyl 
and hydroxylysyl residues. Any defect in the normal mechanisms responsible for 
the synthesis and secretion of collagen molecules or the deposition of these 
molecules into extracellular fibers could result in abnormal fibrillogenesis; 
such defects could result in a connective tissue disease. Recently, defects in 
the regulation of the types of collagen synthesized and in the enzymes involved 
in the post-translational modifications have been found in heritable diseases of 
connective tissue. Thus far, the primary heritable disorders of collagen 
metabolism in man include lysyl hydroxylase deficiency in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 
type VI, p-collagen peptidase deficency in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type VII, 
decreased synthesis of type III collagen in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV, 
lysyl oxidase deficency in S-linked cutis laxa and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type 
V, and decreased synthesis of type I collagen in osteogenesis imperfecta.

DOI: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12481404
PMID: 1448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]