---
reference_id: "PMID:22766003"
title: 2p21 Deletions in hypotonia-cystinuria syndrome.
authors:
- Eggermann T
- Spengler S
- Venghaus A
- Denecke B
- Zerres K
- Baudis M
- Ensenauer R
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2012.06.008
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Transport Systems, Basic/genetics"
- "Amino Acid Transport Systems, Neutral/genetics"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2/genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 21/genetics"
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Cystinuria/diagnosis, genetics"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics"
- Karyotyping
- Male
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Muscle Hypotonia/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 2p21 Deletions in hypotonia-cystinuria syndrome.
**Authors:** Eggermann T, Spengler S, Venghaus A, Denecke B, Zerres K, Baudis M, Ensenauer R
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2012.06.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2012.06.008)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2012 Oct;55(10):561-3. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2012.06.008. Epub 
2012 Jul 17.

2p21 Deletions in hypotonia-cystinuria syndrome.

Eggermann T(1), Spengler S, Venghaus A, Denecke B, Zerres K, Baudis M, Ensenauer 
R.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, RWTH Aachen, Pauwelsstr. 30, D-52074 Aachen, 
Germany. teggermann@ukaachen.de

The significant role of the SLC3A1 gene in the aetiology of cystinuria is 
meanwhile well established and more than 130 point mutations have been reported. 
With the reports on genomic deletions including at least both SLC3A1 and the 
neighboured PREPL gene the spectrum of cystinuria mutations and of clinical 
symptoms could recently be enlarged: patients homozygous for these deletions 
suffer from a general neonatal hypotonia and growth retardation in addition to 
cystinuria. The hypotonia in these hypotonia-cystinuria (HCS) patients has been 
attributed to the total loss of the PREPL protein. Here we report on the 
clinical course and molecular findings in a HCS patient compound heterozygote 
for a new deletion in 2p21 and a previously reported deletion, both identified 
by molecular karyotyping. The diagnostic workup in this patient illustrates the 
need for a careful clinical examination in context with powerful molecular 
genetic tools in patients with unusual phenotypes. The identification of unique 
genomic alterations and their interpretation serves as a prerequisite for the 
individual counselling of patients and their families. In diagnostic strategies 
to identify the molecular basis of both cystinuria and hypotonia 2p21 deletions 
should be considered as the molecular basis of the phenotype.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2012.06.008
PMID: 22766003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]