---
reference_id: "PMID:34244963"
title: Dental enamel defects and oral cavity manifestations in Asian patients with celiac disease.
authors:
- Ahmed A
- Singh A
- Kajal S
- Chauhan A
- Rajput MS
- Banyal V
- Ahuja V
- Makharia GK
journal: Indian J Gastroenterol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s12664-021-01175-7
keywords:
- Adult
- Asian People
- Case-Control Studies
- "Celiac Disease/complications, diet therapy, epidemiology"
- Dental Enamel
- "Diet, Gluten-Free"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Mouth Diseases/epidemiology, etiology"
- Prevalence
- "Stomatitis, Aphthous/epidemiology, etiology"
- Tooth Abnormalities/epidemiology
- "Tooth Diseases/epidemiology, etiology"
- Ulcer
- Xerostomia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dental enamel defects and oral cavity manifestations in Asian patients with celiac disease.
**Authors:** Ahmed A, Singh A, Kajal S, Chauhan A, Rajput MS, Banyal V, Ahuja V, Makharia GK
**Journal:** Indian J Gastroenterol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12664-021-01175-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12664-021-01175-7)

## Content

1. Indian J Gastroenterol. 2021 Aug;40(4):402-409. doi:
10.1007/s12664-021-01175-7.  Epub 2021 Jul 10.

Dental enamel defects and oral cavity manifestations in Asian patients with 
celiac disease.

Ahmed A(1), Singh A(1), Kajal S(2), Chauhan A(1), Rajput MS(1), Banyal V(1), 
Ahuja V(1), Makharia GK(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Human Nutrition, All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Ansari Nagar, New Delhi, 110 029, India.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head - Neck Surgery, All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi 110 029, India.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Human Nutrition, All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Ansari Nagar, New Delhi, 110 029, India. 
govindmakharia@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: While the small intestine is the main site of disease, many other 
organs are affected by celiac disease (CeD). Dental enamel defects (DED) are 
common in patients with CeD, and these are one of the indicators of CeD, even 
when no other symptom of CeD is present. Data on dental and oral cavity 
manifestations in Asian patients with CeD are scanty. The purpose of the current 
study was to evaluate dental and oral manifestations in Asian patients with CeD.
METHODS: We recruited 118 patients with biopsy-confirmed CeD (36 treatment naïve 
and 82 on follow-up for at least 1 year on gluten-free diet [GFD]) and 40 
controls. Diagnosis was made as per the standard criteria. Oral and dental 
manifestations were evaluated by a dental surgeon. The DED were evaluated 
according to Aine's criteria.
RESULTS: Overall higher number of patients with CeD (66.9%), both treatment 
naïve (69.4%) and those on GFD (65.8%) had DED in comparison to controls (20%) 
(odds ratio, 8.1, 95% confidence interval [CI] 3.4-19.2; p<0.001). 
Specific/bilaterally symmetrical DED were significantly higher in patients with 
CeD than controls. Recurrent aphthous ulcers were also significantly higher in 
patients with CeD. Approximately 80.6% and 63.4% treatment-naïve patients and 
those on GFD, respectively reported dry mouth sensation, which was significantly 
higher than the controls.
CONCLUSION: Almost two-third of patients with CeD had DED. Physicians and 
dietitians caring for patients with CeD should be trained in identification of 
DED and other oral manifestations of CeD.

© 2021. Indian Society of Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.1007/s12664-021-01175-7
PMID: 34244963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]