---
reference_id: "PMID:39070093"
title: "Patient organization perspective: a research roadmap for Okur-Chung Neurodevelopmental Syndrome."
authors:
- Rushing GV
- Sills J
journal: Ther Adv Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/26330040241249763
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patient organization perspective: a research roadmap for Okur-Chung Neurodevelopmental Syndrome.
**Authors:** Rushing GV, Sills J
**Journal:** Ther Adv Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/26330040241249763](https://doi.org/10.1177/26330040241249763)

## Content

1. Ther Adv Rare Dis. 2024 Jul 25;5:26330040241249763. doi:
10.1177/26330040241249763. eCollection 2024 Jan-Dec.

Patient organization perspective: a research roadmap for Okur-Chung
Neurodevelopmental Syndrome.

Rushing GV(1), Sills J(2).

Author information:
(1)CSNK2A1 Foundation, 1929 Van Ness Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94109, USA.
(2)CSNK2A1 Foundation, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Okur-Chung neurodevelopmental syndrome (OCNDS) is an ultra-rare disorder caused
by variants in the CSNK2A1 gene. CSNK2A1 encodes for the alpha subunit of casein
kinase 2 (CK2), a serine/threonine kinase critical in neural development. CK2 is
implicated in many human pathologies, including viral infections, cancer,
inflammation, cardiovascular, neurodegenerative, and psychiatric diseases.
However, the mechanism of action for the CSNK2A1 variants observed in OCNDS is
not fully understood, although studies suggest a loss of function or altered
substrate specificity. There are no approved treatments for OCNDS, and current
treatments focus on symptom management. The CSNK2A1 Foundation was established
in 2018 and aims to find a cure for OCNDS and provide support to affected
individuals. OCNDS presents with symptoms at varying severity, including
developmental delay/intellectual disabilities, autism, disrupted sleep, speech
delays/inability to speak, short stature, and, in ~25% of cases, epilepsy. The
foundation has developed a research toolbox that is readily available to
researchers worldwide and has awarded ~$1 million in grant funding. These
efforts have provided valuable insights into CK2 biology and the natural history
of OCNDS. However, additional efforts are needed to fully characterize the
disease mechanism and investigate potential treatment interventions. Continued
investigation into CK2 and its role in neural development holds promise for a
better understanding of OCNDS and related disorders in the future. To accelerate
research, we have developed a research roadmap highlighting key focus areas of
landscape analysis/toolbox expansion, biomarker development, and therapeutic
testing through a series of steps that are nonlinear; we expect these efforts to
guide decision-making for therapeutic exploration whether that be drug
repurposing, gene therapy, novel drug discovery, or a combination. In this
perspective article, we describe OCNDS and the CSNK2A1 gene, highlight gaps in
OCNDS research, discuss the research roadmap, and offer the founder's
perspective on our growth and future opportunities.

Plain Language Summary: Patient organization perspective: a research roadmap for
Okur-Chung Neurodevelopmental Syndrome Okur-Chung Neurodevelopmental Syndrome
(OCNDS) is an ultra-rare disorder caused by variants in the CSNK2A1 gene.CSNK2A1
creates a subunit of CK2, a critical protein in brain development among other
biological processes.There are no approved treatments for OCNDS, and current
suggested treatments focus on symptom management.Individuals with OCNDS exhibit
many symptoms at varying severity levels, including developmental
delay/intellectual disabilities, autism, disrupted sleep, speech
delays/inability to speak, short stature, and in approximately 25% of cases,
epilepsy. We think that seizure prevalence may be underreported due to lack of
extended EEG recordings for OCNDS patients and that seizures may preferentially
occur at night as has been observed in other autism spectrum disorders.The
CSNK2A1 Foundation was established in 2018 and aims to find a cure for OCNDS and
provide support to affected individuals. The CSNK2A1 Foundation’s research tools
and efforts have provided valuable insights into the biology of OCNDS and the
natural history of the disorder. However, additional efforts are needed to fully
understand how OCNDS affects the body and investigate potential treatment
approaches.To accelerate OCNDS research, the foundation has developed a research
roadmap that is presented in this perspective article. We describe OCNDS and the
CSNK2A1 gene, highlight gaps in OCNDS research, discuss the research roadmap,
and offer the founder’s perspective on our growth and future opportunities.

© The Author(s), 2024.

DOI: 10.1177/26330040241249763
PMCID: PMC11273705
PMID: 39070093

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of
interest.
