---
reference_id: "PMID:41064725"
title: "Respiratory-Predominant Relapsing Polychondritis: The Role of Pet Scan in Making this Challenging Diagnosis."
authors:
- Alves D
- Fonseca J
- Martins M
- Duarte V
- Gonçalves G
- Lopes P
journal: Eur J Case Rep Intern Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.12890/2025_005677
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Respiratory-Predominant Relapsing Polychondritis: The Role of Pet Scan in Making this Challenging Diagnosis.
**Authors:** Alves D, Fonseca J, Martins M, Duarte V, Gonçalves G, Lopes P
**Journal:** Eur J Case Rep Intern Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.12890/2025_005677](https://doi.org/10.12890/2025_005677)

## Content

1. Eur J Case Rep Intern Med. 2025 Sep 8;12(10):005677. doi:
10.12890/2025_005677.  eCollection 2025.

Respiratory-Predominant Relapsing Polychondritis: The Role of Pet Scan in Making 
this Challenging Diagnosis.

Alves D(1), Fonseca J(1), Martins M(1), Duarte V(1), Gonçalves G(1), Lopes P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Unidade Local de Saúde da Região de Aveiro, 
Aveiro, Portugal.

Relapsing polychondritis is a rare, immune-mediated, multisystemic disease 
characterized by recurrent inflammation of cartilaginous and proteoglycan-rich 
tissues. Its diagnosis may be challenging due to its rarity and wide clinical 
variability. It can be primary or associated with other autoimmune conditions. 
Recently, it has been associated with an autoinflammatory disease known as 
vacuoles, E1 enzyme, X-linked, autoinflammatory, somatic syndrome. We present a 
case of a 65-year-old man with respiratory-predominant relapsing polychondritis. 
This case illustrates the diagnostic complexity of relapsing polychondritis, 
where multiple initial investigations were inconclusive. We highlight the 
pivotal role of the fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography 
scan, which provided the key evidence of cartilaginous inflammation, ultimately 
guiding the diagnosis in this atypical presentation.
LEARNING POINTS: Atypical presentations of relapsing polychondritis may present 
with isolated respiratory symptoms and constitutional signs in the absence of 
auricular or nasal chondritis.In older male patients with relapsing 
polychondritis features and myelodysplastic syndromes, vacuoles, E1 enzyme, 
X-linked, autoinflammatory, somatic syndrome must be considered, requiring 
detection of somatic ubiquitin-like modifier-activating enzyme 1 gene 
mutations.When histopathology is unavailable, positron emission tomography 
imaging and clinical criteria are key to diagnosis.

© EFIM 2025.

DOI: 10.12890/2025_005677
PMCID: PMC12503823
PMID: 41064725

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interests: The Authors declare that 
there are no competing interests.