---
reference_id: "PMID:37207470"
title: "Clinical, biochemical and molecular characterization of 12 patients with pyruvate carboxylase deficiency treated with triheptanoin."
authors:
- Lasio MLD
- Leshinski AC
- Ducich NH
- Flore LA
- Lehman A
- Shur N
- Jayakar PB
- Hainline BE
- Basinger AA
- Wilson WG
- Diaz GA
- Erbe RW
- Koeberl DD
- Vockley J
- Bedoyan JK
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107605
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pyruvate Carboxylase Deficiency Disease/drug therapy, genetics"
- Triglycerides
- Mitochondria
- Lactates
- "Pyruvate Carboxylase/genetics, chemistry"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, biochemical and molecular characterization of 12 patients with pyruvate carboxylase deficiency treated with triheptanoin.
**Authors:** Lasio MLD, Leshinski AC, Ducich NH, Flore LA, Lehman A, Shur N, Jayakar PB, Hainline BE, Basinger AA, Wilson WG, Diaz GA, Erbe RW, Koeberl DD, Vockley J, Bedoyan JK
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107605](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107605)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2023 Jun;139(2):107605. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107605.
Epub  2023 May 9.

Clinical, biochemical and molecular characterization of 12 patients with 
pyruvate carboxylase deficiency treated with triheptanoin.

Lasio MLD(1), Leshinski AC(2), Ducich NH(3), Flore LA(4), Lehman A(5), Shur 
N(6), Jayakar PB(7), Hainline BE(8), Basinger AA(9), Wilson WG(10), Diaz GA(11), 
Erbe RW(12), Koeberl DD(13), Vockley J(14), Bedoyan JK(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA; 
Division of Genetic and Genomic Medicine, UPMC Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh 
and Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)Division of Genetic and Genomic Medicine, UPMC Children's Hospital of 
Pittsburgh and Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(4)Division of Genetic, Genomic and Metabolic Disorders, Children's Hospital of 
Michigan, Detroit, MI and Central Michigan University College of Medicine, Mount 
Pleasant, MI, USA.
(5)Division of Genetic and Genomic Medicine, UPMC Children's Hospital of 
Pittsburgh and Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Division of Genetic, Genomic and Metabolic 
Disorders, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, MI and Central Michigan 
University College of Medicine, Mount Pleasant, MI, USA.
(6)Genetics and Metabolism, Rare Disease Institute, Children's National 
Hospital, Washington, DC, USA.
(7)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Nicklaus Children's Hospital, Miami, FL, 
USA.
(8)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Riley Hospital at Indiana 
University Health, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(9)Medical Genetics, Cook Children's Hospital, Fort Worth, TX, USA.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, University of Virginia Health, Charlottesville, 
VA, USA.
(11)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY, USA.
(12)Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, 
USA.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(14)Division of Genetic and Genomic Medicine, UPMC Children's Hospital of 
Pittsburgh and Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Department of Human Genetics, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Public Health, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(15)Division of Genetic and Genomic Medicine, UPMC Children's Hospital of 
Pittsburgh and Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Electronic address: jbedoyan@pitt.edu.

Pyruvate carboxylase (PC) deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive mitochondrial 
neurometabolic disorder of energy deficit resulting in high morbidity and 
mortality, with limited therapeutic options. The PC homotetramer has a critical 
role in gluconeogenesis, anaplerosis, neurotransmitter synthesis, and 
lipogenesis. The main biochemical and clinical findings in PC deficiency (PCD) 
include lactic acidosis, ketonuria, failure to thrive, and neurological 
dysfunction. Use of the anaplerotic agent triheptanoin on a limited number of 
individuals with PCD has had mixed results. We expand on the potential utility 
of triheptanoin in PCD by examining the clinical, biochemical, molecular, and 
health-related quality-of-life (HRQoL) findings in a cohort of 12 individuals 
with PCD (eight with Type A and two each with Types B and C) treated with 
triheptanoin ranging for 6 days to about 7 years. The main endpoints were 
changes in blood lactate and HRQoL scores, but collection of useful data was 
limited to about half of subjects. An overall trend of lactate reduction with 
time on triheptanoin was noted, but with significant variability among subjects 
and only one subject reaching close to statistical significance for this 
endpoint. Parent reported HRQoL assessments with treatment showed mixed results, 
with some subjects showing no change, some improvement, and some worsening of 
overall scores. Subjects with buried amino acids in the pyruvate 
carboxyltransferase domain of PC that undergo destabilizing replacements may be 
more likely to respond (with lactate reduction or HRQoL improvement) to 
triheptanoin compared to those with replacements that disrupt tetramerization or 
subunit-subunit interface contacts. The reason for this difference is unclear 
and requires further validation. We observed significant variability but an 
overall trend of lactate reduction with time on triheptanoin and mixed parent 
reported outcome changes by HRQoL assessments for subjects with PCD on long-term 
triheptanoin. The mixed results noted with triheptanoin therapy in this study 
could be due to endpoint data limitation, variability of disease severity 
between subjects, limitation of the parent reported HRQoL tool, or subject 
genotype variability. Alternative designed trials and more study subjects with 
PCD will be needed to validate important observations from this work.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107605
PMCID: PMC10330474
PMID: 37207470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.