---
reference_id: "PMID:39609952"
title: "Multisocietal Consensus on the Use of Cytoreductive Surgery and HIPEC for the Treatment of Diffuse Malignant Peritoneal Mesothelioma: A GRADE Approach for Evidence Evaluation and Recommendation."
authors:
- Kusamura S
- Cinquini M
- Morris D
- Piso P
- Kindler H
- Brandl A
- Levine E
- Glehen O
- Kepenekian V
- Sgarbura O
- Sugarbaker PH
- Baratti D
- Marcello G
- Marcello D
journal: J Surg Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/jso.27947
keywords:
- Humans
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Cytoreduction Surgical Procedures/methods
- "Hyperthermia, Induced"
- Hyperthermic Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy/methods
- "Lung Neoplasms/therapy, pathology"
- "Mesothelioma/therapy, pathology"
- "Mesothelioma, Malignant"
- "Peritoneal Neoplasms/therapy, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multisocietal Consensus on the Use of Cytoreductive Surgery and HIPEC for the Treatment of Diffuse Malignant Peritoneal Mesothelioma: A GRADE Approach for Evidence Evaluation and Recommendation.
**Authors:** Kusamura S, Cinquini M, Morris D, Piso P, Kindler H, Brandl A, Levine E, Glehen O, Kepenekian V, Sgarbura O, Sugarbaker PH, Baratti D, Marcello G, Marcello D
**Journal:** J Surg Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jso.27947](https://doi.org/10.1002/jso.27947)

## Content

1. J Surg Oncol. 2025 Apr;131(5):810-815. doi: 10.1002/jso.27947. Epub 2024 Nov
28.

Multisocietal Consensus on the Use of Cytoreductive Surgery and HIPEC for the
Treatment of Diffuse Malignant Peritoneal Mesothelioma: A GRADE Approach for
Evidence Evaluation and Recommendation.

Kusamura S(1), Cinquini M(2), Morris D(3), Piso P(4), Kindler H(5), Brandl A(6),
Levine E(7), Glehen O(8), Kepenekian V(8), Sgarbura O(9), Sugarbaker PH(10),
Baratti D(1), Marcello G(1), Marcello D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, PSM unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical Oncology, Istituto di Richerche Farmacologiche Mario
Negri IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Surgery, St. George Hospital, University of New South Wales,
Sydney, Australia.
(4)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, Hospital Barmherzige Brüder,
Regensburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(6)Department of General, Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Department of Surgery, Section of Surgical Oncology, Wake Forest University
School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.
(8)Department of General Surgery and Surgical Oncology, Centre Hospitalier
Lyon-Sud, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Pierre, Bénite, France.
(9)Department of Surgical Oncology, Montpellier Cancer Institute, University of
Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(10)Program in Peritoneal Surface Malignancy, Washington Cancer Institute,
Washington, District of Columbia, USA.

The Peritoneal Surface Oncology Group International (PSOGI) previously issued a
recommendation endorsing cytoreductive surgery (CRS) and hyperthermic
intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) for treating diffuse malignant peritoneal
mesothelioma (DMPM). However, broader acceptance of this approach, particularly
within some segments of medical oncology, remains limited. To address this,
PSOGI initiated a multisociety consensus effort, involving multidisciplinary
International Societies, to strengthen and expand the endorsement of CRS-HIPEC
for DMPM. Using the GRADE ADOLOPMENT approach, the expert panel systematically
reviewed existing guidelines and evaluated the available evidence to reinforce
the recommendation. The panel unanimously recommended CRS-HIPEC for a carefully
selected subset of DMPM patients, emphasizing that this approach offers the best
potential for improved survival compared to systemic chemotherapy alone. Despite
the very low certainty of evidence, a strong recommendation was issued,
reflecting the panel's recognition of the life-threatening feature of DMPM and
the limited efficacy of systemic chemotherapy. This consensus also highlights
the importance of centralized and expert-driven care. The recommendation aligns
with previous guidelines and underscores the critical need for broader
acceptance of this treatment strategy in managing this rare and aggressive
malignancy.

© 2024 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jso.27947
PMID: 39609952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
