---
reference_id: "PMID:22265017"
title: De novo mutations of the gene encoding the histone acetyltransferase KAT6B cause Genitopatellar syndrome.
authors:
- Simpson MA
- Deshpande C
- Dafou D
- Vissers LE
- Woollard WJ
- Holder SE
- Gillessen-Kaesbach G
- Derks R
- White SM
- Cohen-Snuijf R
- Kant SG
- Hoefsloot LH
- Reardon W
- Brunner HG
- Bongers EM
- Trembath RC
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.024
keywords:
- Acetylation
- Alleles
- Animals
- Exome
- Exons
- Female
- Histone Acetyltransferases/genetics
- Histones/metabolism
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/enzymology, genetics"
- Male
- Mice
- "Musculoskeletal Abnormalities/enzymology, genetics"
- Mutation
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA/methods"
- "Urogenital Abnormalities/enzymology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# De novo mutations of the gene encoding the histone acetyltransferase KAT6B cause Genitopatellar syndrome.
**Authors:** Simpson MA, Deshpande C, Dafou D, Vissers LE, Woollard WJ, Holder SE, Gillessen-Kaesbach G, Derks R, White SM, Cohen-Snuijf R, Kant SG, Hoefsloot LH, Reardon W, Brunner HG, Bongers EM, Trembath RC
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.024)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Feb 10;90(2):290-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.024. Epub
 2012 Jan 19.

De novo mutations of the gene encoding the histone acetyltransferase KAT6B cause 
Genitopatellar syndrome.

Simpson MA(1), Deshpande C, Dafou D, Vissers LE, Woollard WJ, Holder SE, 
Gillessen-Kaesbach G, Derks R, White SM, Cohen-Snuijf R, Kant SG, Hoefsloot LH, 
Reardon W, Brunner HG, Bongers EM, Trembath RC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, King's College London School of 
Medicine, Guy's Hospital, UK.

Genitopatellar syndrome (GPS) is a rare disorder in which patellar aplasia or 
hypoplasia is associated with external genital anomalies and severe intellectual 
disability. Using an exome-sequencing approach, we identified de novo mutations 
of KAT6B in five individuals with GPS; a single nonsense variant and three 
frameshift indels, including a 4 bp deletion observed in two cases. All 
identified mutations are located within the terminal exon of the gene and are 
predicted to generate a truncated protein product lacking evolutionarily 
conserved domains. KAT6B encodes a member of the MYST family of histone 
acetyltranferases. We demonstrate a reduced level of both histone H3 and H4 
acetylation in patient-derived cells suggesting that dysregulation of histone 
acetylation is a direct functional consequence of GPS alleles. These findings 
define the genetic basis of GPS and illustrate the complex role of the 
regulation of histone acetylation during development.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.024
PMCID: PMC3276665
PMID: 22265017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]