---
reference_id: "PMID:37456775"
title: Mechanisms of Coronary Artery Spasm.
authors:
- Nishimiya K
- Takahashi J
- Oyama K
- Matsumoto Y
- Yasuda S
- Shimokawa H
journal: Eur Cardiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.15420/ecr.2022.55
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of Coronary Artery Spasm.
**Authors:** Nishimiya K, Takahashi J, Oyama K, Matsumoto Y, Yasuda S, Shimokawa H
**Journal:** Eur Cardiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.15420/ecr.2022.55](https://doi.org/10.15420/ecr.2022.55)

## Content

1. Eur Cardiol. 2023 May 30;18:e39. doi: 10.15420/ecr.2022.55. eCollection 2023.

Mechanisms of Coronary Artery Spasm.

Nishimiya K(1), Takahashi J(1), Oyama K(1), Matsumoto Y(1), Yasuda S(1), 
Shimokawa H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine Sendai, Japan.

Recent clinical trials have highlighted that percutaneous coronary intervention 
in patients with stable angina provides limited additional benefits on top of 
optimal medical therapy. This has led to much more attention being paid to 
coronary vasomotion abnormalities regardless of obstructive or non-obstructive 
arterial segments. Coronary vasomotion is regulated by multiple mechanisms that 
include the endothelium, vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs), myocardial 
metabolic demand, autonomic nervous system and inflammation. Over the years, 
several animal models have been developed to explore the central mechanism of 
coronary artery spasm. This review summarises the landmark studies on the 
mechanisms of coronary vasospasm demonstrating the central role of Rho-kinase as 
a molecular switch of VSMC hypercontraction and the important role of coronary 
adventitial inflammation for Rho-kinase upregulation in VSMCs.

Copyright © 2023, Radcliffe Cardiology.

DOI: 10.15420/ecr.2022.55
PMCID: PMC10345984
PMID: 37456775

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: HS is on the European Cardiology 
Review editorial board; this did not influence peer review. All other authors 
have no conflicts of interest to declare.