---
reference_id: PMID:37389095
title: Immunological dysfunction and mast cell activation syndrome in long COVID.
authors:
- Sumantri S
- Rengganis I
journal: Asia Pac Allergy
year: '2023'
doi: 10.5415/apallergy.0000000000000022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunological dysfunction and mast cell activation syndrome in long COVID.
**Authors:** Sumantri S, Rengganis I
**Journal:** Asia Pac Allergy (2023)
**DOI:** [10.5415/apallergy.0000000000000022](https://doi.org/10.5415/apallergy.0000000000000022)

## Content

1. Asia Pac Allergy. 2023 Mar;13(1):50-53. doi:
10.5415/apallergy.0000000000000022.  Epub 2023 Apr 28.

Immunological dysfunction and mast cell activation syndrome in long COVID.

Sumantri S(1), Rengganis I(2).

Author information:
(1)Allergy and Clinical Immunology Division, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Pelita Harapan, Banten, Indonesia.
(2)Allergy and Clinical Immunology Division, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia.

At least 65 million people around the world suffer from long COVID-19, with the 
majority of cases occurring in the productive age (36-50 years old). Individuals 
with long COVID-19 are confounded with multiple organ system dysfunctions, 
long-term organ injury sequelae, and a decreased quality of life. There is an 
overlapping of risk factors between long COVID-19 and other postviral infection 
syndromes, so advances in research could also benefit other groups of patients. 
Long COVID-19 is the consequence of multiple immune system dysregulation, such 
as T-cell depletion, innate immune cell hyperactivity, lack of naive T and B 
cells, and elevated signature of pro-inflammatory cytokines, together with 
persistent severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus 2 reservoir and other 
consequences of acute infection. There is an activated condition of mast cells 
in long COVID-19, with abnormal granulation and excessive inflammatory cytokine 
release. A study by Weinstock et al. indicates that patients with long COVID-19 
suffer the same clinical syndrome as patients with mast cell activation syndrome 
(MCAS). Diagnosis and treatment of MCAS in patients with long COVID-19 will 
provide further symptomatic relief, and manage mast cell-mediated 
hyperinflammation states, which could be useful in the long-term control and 
recovery of such patients.

Copyright © 2023. Asia Pacific Association of Allergy, Asthma and Clinical 
Immunology.

DOI: 10.5415/apallergy.0000000000000022
PMCID: PMC10166245
PMID: 37389095

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial conflicts of 
interest.