---
reference_id: "PMID:30027601"
title: "Schmid's Type of Metaphyseal Chondrodysplasia: Diagnosis and Management."
authors:
- Al Kaissi A
- Ghachem MB
- Nabil NM
- Kenis V
- Melchenko E
- Morenko E
- Grill F
- Ganger R
- Kircher SG
journal: Orthop Surg
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/os.12382
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Collagen Type X/genetics
- Female
- Femur/surgery
- "Genu Varum/diagnostic imaging, etiology, genetics, surgery"
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/complications, diagnostic imaging, genetics, surgery"
- Osteotomy/methods
- Phenotype
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schmid's Type of Metaphyseal Chondrodysplasia: Diagnosis and Management.
**Authors:** Al Kaissi A, Ghachem MB, Nabil NM, Kenis V, Melchenko E, Morenko E, Grill F, Ganger R, Kircher SG
**Journal:** Orthop Surg (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/os.12382](https://doi.org/10.1111/os.12382)

## Content

1. Orthop Surg. 2018 Aug;10(3):241-246. doi: 10.1111/os.12382. Epub 2018 Jul 19.

Schmid's Type of Metaphyseal Chondrodysplasia: Diagnosis and Management.

Al Kaissi A(1)(2), Ghachem MB(3), Nabil NM(3), Kenis V(4), Melchenko E(4), 
Morenko E(4), Grill F(2), Ganger R(2), Kircher SG(5).

Author information:
(1)First Medical Department, Hanusch Hospital, Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of 
Osteology at the Hanusch Hospital of WGKK and AUVA Trauma Centre Meidling, 
Vienna, Austria.
(2)Paediatric Department, Orthopaedic Hospital of Speising, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Paediatric Orthopaedic Surgery Department, Children Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.
(4)Department of Foot and Ankle Surgery, Neuroorthopaedics and Systemic 
Disorders, Pediatric Orthopedic Institute n.a. H. Turner, Saint-Petersburg, 
Russia.
(5)Institute of Medical Chemistry, Medical University of Vienna, Austria.

OBJECTIVES: There are several types of metaphyseal chondrodysplasia and various 
clinical types have been differentiated. The Schmid type of metaphyseal 
chondrodysplasia is the most common. Diffuse metaphyseal flaring, irregularity, 
and growth plate widening, which are most severe in the knees, are the most 
striking radiological features of this disease. The Schmid type of metaphyseal 
dysostosis is characterized by failure of normal mineralization of the zone of 
provisional calcification, leading to widened physes and enlarged knobby 
metaphyses, effectively causing shortening of the tubular bones, splaying of the 
metaphyses, coxa vara, and bow legs. Orthopaedic interventions were primarily 
performed on the lower extremities.
METHODS: Twelve children (seven girls and five boys) aged 7-10 years were 
enrolled in this study. Moderate short stature was a uniform feature associated 
with predominant involvement of the proximal femora and bow legs resulted in the 
development of angular deformities. A waddling gait was a consequence of coxa 
vara in eight children. Valgus osteotomy of the proximal femur was planned after 
physeal closure for the group of children with coxa vara. Hemiepiphysiodesis was 
performed to re-align the genu varum in three children.
RESULTS: Other forms of metaphyseal dysostosis were ruled based on full clinical 
and radiographic phenotypes, with confirmation through molecular pathology. 
Mutations in the COL10A1 gene located on chromosome 6q21-q22.3 were confirmed. 
Re-alignment was accomplished in our group of patients.
CONCLUSION: The most striking clinical features of Schmid metaphyseal 
chondrodysplasia which appear within the first 2-3 years of life are: moderate 
short limbs and short stature, a waddling gait, and increasing shortness of 
stature with age. The Schmid type of metaphyseal chondrodysplasia is a disorder 
that arises from defective type X collagen, which is typically found in the 
hypertrophic zone of the physes. Moderate short stature and a waddling gait 
associated with pain are the most common clinical presentations. Osteotomies to 
correct bow legs are sometimes combined with lengthening procedures. Recurrence 
of the deformities with growth is not uncommon; therefore, hemiepiphysiodesis or 
stapling might be indicated in some cases.

© 2018 Chinese Orthopaedic Association and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/os.12382
PMCID: PMC6594483
PMID: 30027601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]