---
reference_id: "PMID:26396935"
title: Current concepts on osteonecrosis of the femoral head.
authors:
- Moya-Angeler J
- Gianakos AL
- Villa JC
- Ni A
- Lane JM
journal: World J Orthop
year: '2015'
doi: 10.5312/wjo.v6.i8.590
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current concepts on osteonecrosis of the femoral head.
**Authors:** Moya-Angeler J, Gianakos AL, Villa JC, Ni A, Lane JM
**Journal:** World J Orthop (2015)
**DOI:** [10.5312/wjo.v6.i8.590](https://doi.org/10.5312/wjo.v6.i8.590)

## Content

1. World J Orthop. 2015 Sep 18;6(8):590-601. doi: 10.5312/wjo.v6.i8.590. 
eCollection 2015 Sep 18.

Current concepts on osteonecrosis of the femoral head.

Moya-Angeler J(1), Gianakos AL(1), Villa JC(1), Ni A(1), Lane JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Joaquin Moya-Angeler, Arianna L Gianakos, Jordan C Villa, Amelia Ni, Joseph M 
Lane, Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, NY 10021, United States.

It is estimated that 20000 to 30000 new patients are diagnosed with 
osteonecrosis annually accounting for approximately 10% of the 250000 total hip 
arthroplasties done annually in the United States. The lack of level 1 evidence 
in the literature makes it difficult to identify optimal treatment protocols to 
manage patients with pre-collapse avascular necrosis of the femoral head, and 
early intervention prior to collapse is critical to successful outcomes in joint 
preserving procedures. There have been a variety of traumatic and atraumatic 
factors that have been identified as risk factors for osteonecrosis, but the 
etiology and pathogenesis still remains unclear. Current osteonecrosis diagnosis 
is dependent upon plain anteroposterior and frog-leg lateral radiographs of the 
hip, followed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Generally, the first 
radiographic changes seen by radiograph will be cystic and sclerotic changes in 
the femoral head. Although the diagnosis may be made by radiograph, plain 
radiographs are generally insufficient for early diagnosis, therefore MRI is 
considered the most accurate benchmark. Treatment options include pharmacologic 
agents such as bisphosphonates and statins, biophysical treatments, as well as 
joint-preserving and joint-replacing surgeries. the surgical treatment of 
osteonecrosis of the femoral head can be divided into two major branches: 
femoral head sparing procedures (FHSP) and femoral head replacement procedures 
(FHRP). In general, FHSP are indicated at pre-collapse stages with minimal 
symptoms whereas FHRP are preferred at post-collapse symptomatic stages. It is 
difficult to know whether any treatment modality changes the natural history of 
core decompression since the true natural history of core decompression has not 
been delineated.

DOI: 10.5312/wjo.v6.i8.590
PMCID: PMC4573503
PMID: 26396935