---
reference_id: "PMID:37520564"
title: Mechanisms of airway epithelial injury and abnormal repair in asthma and COPD.
authors:
- Raby KL
- Michaeloudes C
- Tonkin J
- Chung KF
- Bhavsar PK
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1201658
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of airway epithelial injury and abnormal repair in asthma and COPD.
**Authors:** Raby KL, Michaeloudes C, Tonkin J, Chung KF, Bhavsar PK
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1201658](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1201658)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Jul 13;14:1201658. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1201658. 
eCollection 2023.

Mechanisms of airway epithelial injury and abnormal repair in asthma and COPD.

Raby KL(1), Michaeloudes C(2), Tonkin J(1)(3), Chung KF(1)(3), Bhavsar PK(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(2)School of Medicine, European University Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Royal Brompton and Harefield Hospital, 
London, United Kingdom.

The airway epithelium comprises of different cell types and acts as a physical 
barrier preventing pathogens, including inhaled particles and microbes, from 
entering the lungs. Goblet cells and submucosal glands produce mucus that traps 
pathogens, which are expelled from the respiratory tract by ciliated cells. 
Basal cells act as progenitor cells, differentiating into different epithelial 
cell types, to maintain homeostasis following injury. Adherens and tight 
junctions between cells maintain the epithelial barrier function and regulate 
the movement of molecules across it. In this review we discuss how abnormal 
epithelial structure and function, caused by chronic injury and abnormal repair, 
drives airway disease and specifically asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). In both diseases, inhaled allergens, pollutants and microbes 
disrupt junctional complexes and promote cell death, impairing the barrier 
function and leading to increased penetration of pathogens and a constant airway 
immune response. In asthma, the inflammatory response precipitates the 
epithelial injury and drives abnormal basal cell differentiation. This leads to 
reduced ciliated cells, goblet cell hyperplasia and increased epithelial 
mesenchymal transition, which contribute to impaired mucociliary clearance and 
airway remodelling. In COPD, chronic oxidative stress and inflammation trigger 
premature epithelial cell senescence, which contributes to loss of epithelial 
integrity and airway inflammation and remodelling. Increased numbers of basal 
cells showing deregulated differentiation, contributes to ciliary dysfunction 
and mucous hyperproduction in COPD airways. Defective antioxidant, antiviral and 
damage repair mechanisms, possibly due to genetic or epigenetic factors, may 
confer susceptibility to airway epithelial dysfunction in these diseases. The 
current evidence suggests that a constant cycle of injury and abnormal repair of 
the epithelium drives chronic airway inflammation and remodelling in asthma and 
COPD. Mechanistic understanding of injury susceptibility and damage response may 
lead to improved therapies for these diseases.

Copyright © 2023 Raby, Michaeloudes, Tonkin, Chung and Bhavsar.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1201658
PMCID: PMC10374037
PMID: 37520564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.