---
reference_id: "PMID:33495935"
title: Fertility preservation for genetic diseases leading to premature ovarian insufficiency (POI).
authors:
- La Marca A
- Mastellari E
journal: J Assist Reprod Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10815-021-02067-7
keywords:
- BRCA1 Protein/genetics
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- Cryopreservation
- Female
- Fertility Preservation
- "Fragile X Syndrome/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- "Oocytes/growth & development"
- Pregnancy
- "Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/complications, genetics, pathology, prevention & control"
- "Turner Syndrome/complications, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fertility preservation for genetic diseases leading to premature ovarian insufficiency (POI).
**Authors:** La Marca A, Mastellari E
**Journal:** J Assist Reprod Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10815-021-02067-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10815-021-02067-7)

## Content

1. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2021 Apr;38(4):759-777. doi:
10.1007/s10815-021-02067-7.  Epub 2021 Jan 25.

Fertility preservation for genetic diseases leading to premature ovarian 
insufficiency (POI).

La Marca A(1)(2), Mastellari E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences for Mother, Child and Adult, 
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. antlamarca@libero.it.
(2)Clinica Eugin Modena, Modena, Italy. antlamarca@libero.it.
(3)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences for Mother, Child and Adult, 
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.

PURPOSE: The current review aims to summarize the data available concerning the 
applicability of fertility preservation techniques to genetic conditions at risk 
of premature ovarian insufficiency (POI).
METHODS: A literature review through the PubMed Database was carried out.
RESULTS: About 10% of cases of POI is related to genetic diseases. The most 
frequent conditions associated with POI are Turner syndrome and fragile X 
pre-mutation; mutation of BRCA 1-2 genes and several other mutations and genetic 
syndromes have recently been highlighted, although they rarely occur. If a 
diagnosis is issued before POI onset, counseling on currently available 
fertility preservation techniques is advisable. In case of spontaneous menarche 
(this can occur variably depending on the mutation) established techniques like 
embryo or oocyte cryopreservation can be proposed, even if, in some cases, their 
effectiveness may be reduced by ovarian alterations connected to the mutation. 
Ovarian tissue cryopreservation has recently been defined as an established 
medical procedure for fertility preservation in young cancer patients and may be 
an option for prepubertal patients. However, it is still experimental in special 
populations with genetic diseases causing POI. New innovative experimental 
techniques, like in vitro maturation of immature oocytes (IVM) and vitro 
activation (IVA) of immature follicles on ovarian tissue, have shown limited but 
encouraging data and they will be probably available in the near future. For a 
correct risk-benefit evaluation, the following aspects should be considered: 
actual knowledge about the pathology-specific efficacy of the various 
techniques, the average age of onset of POI, the possible risks associated with 
the procedure in relation to the underlying pathology, the probability of 
spontaneous conception, as well as the health implications of a possible future 
pregnancy..
CONCLUSIONS: Fertility preservation techniques represent a crucial opportunity 
for patients with genetic risk of POI. Early diagnosis increases the chances to 
apply these techniques. No specific recommendations concerning fertility 
preservation for each genetic pathology are available, and clinicians should 
first counsel the patient and her relatives about known risks and benefits of 
the available techniques, both those established and those considered as 
experimental.

DOI: 10.1007/s10815-021-02067-7
PMCID: PMC8079553
PMID: 33495935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.