---
reference_id: "PMID:19445746"
title: Lung cancer.
authors:
- Neville A
journal: BMJ Clin Evid
year: '2009'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lung cancer.
**Authors:** Neville A
**Journal:** BMJ Clin Evid (2009)

## Content

1. BMJ Clin Evid. 2009 Apr 21;2009:1504.

Lung cancer.

Neville A(1).

Author information:
(1)McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in both men and 
women, with 80-90% of cases caused by smoking. Small cell lung cancer accounts 
for 20% of all cases, and is usually treated with chemotherapy. Adenocarcinoma 
is the main non-small cell pathology, and is treated initially with surgery.
METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the 
following clinical questions: What are the effects of treatments for resectable 
and unresectable non-small cell lung cancer? What are the effects of treatments 
for small cell lung cancer? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library, 
and other important databases up to May 2008 (Clinical Evidence reviews are 
updated periodically, please check our website for the most up-to-date version 
of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations, such as 
the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare 
products Regulatory Agency (MHRA).
RESULTS: We found 86 systematic reviews and RCTs. We performed a GRADE 
evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions.
CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review, we present information relating to the 
effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: chemotherapy 
(postoperative or preoperative, dose intensification), continuous 
hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy (CHART), different single-agent 
chemotherapy regimens, first-line palliative chemotherapy (single or multiple 
agents), first-line platinum (or non-platinum)-based chemotherapy, 
molecular-targeted therapy, non-CHART hyperfractionated radiotherapy, palliative 
care, prophylactic cranial irradiation, second-line chemotherapy (with single or 
multiple agents), second-line molecular-targeted therapy (with gefitinib or 
erlotinib), second-line palliative chemotherapy, and thoracic irradiation (with 
or without chemotherapy).

PMCID: PMC2907801
PMID: 19445746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]