---
reference_id: "PMID:30588469"
title: "Relationship between liver iron concentration determined by R2-MRI, serum ferritin, and liver enzymes in patients with thalassemia intermedia."
authors:
- Al-Momen H
- Jasim SK
- Hassan QA
- Ali HH
journal: Blood Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.5045/br.2018.53.4.314
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relationship between liver iron concentration determined by R2-MRI, serum ferritin, and liver enzymes in patients with thalassemia intermedia.
**Authors:** Al-Momen H, Jasim SK, Hassan QA, Ali HH
**Journal:** Blood Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.5045/br.2018.53.4.314](https://doi.org/10.5045/br.2018.53.4.314)

## Content

1. Blood Res. 2018 Dec;53(4):314-319. doi: 10.5045/br.2018.53.4.314. Epub 2018
Dec  17.

Relationship between liver iron concentration determined by R2-MRI, serum
ferritin, and liver enzymes in patients with thalassemia intermedia.

Al-Momen H(1), Jasim SK(2), Hassan QA(3), Ali HH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Al-Kindy College of Medicine, University of
Baghdad, Baghdad, Iraq.
(2)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, College of Medicine, University of
Baghdad, Baghdad, Iraq.
(3)Division of Radiology, Department of Surgery, Al-Kindy College of Medicine,
University of Baghdad, Baghdad, Iraq.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Al-Elwiya Pediatric Teaching Hospital, Al-Rusafa
Health Directorate, Baghdad, Iraq.

BACKGROUND: Iron overload is a risk factor affecting all patients with
thalassemia intermedia (TI). We aimed to determine whether there is a
relationship of serum ferritin (SF) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) with
liver iron concentration (LIC) determined by R2 magnetic resonance imaging
(R2-MRI), to estimate the most relevant degree of iron overload and best time to
chelate in patients with TI.
METHODS: In this cross-sectional study, 119 patients with TI (mean age years)
were randomly selected and compared with 120 patients who had a diagnosis of
thalassemia major (TM). Correlations of LIC, as determined by R2-MRI, with SF
and ALT levels, were assessed in all participants. A P-value <0.05 was
considered statistically significant.
RESULTS: SF and LIC levels were lower in patients with TI than in those with TM;
only ferritin values were significant. We found a statistically significant
relationship between SF and LIC, with cut-off estimates of SF in patients with
TI who had splenectomy and those who entered puberty spontaneously (916 and 940
ng/mL, respectively) with LIC >5 mg Fe/g dry weight (P<0.0001). A significant
relationship was also found for patients with TI who had elevated ALT level
(63.5 U/L), of 3.15 times the upper normal laboratory limit, using a cut-off for
LIC ≥5 mg Fe/g dry weight.
CONCLUSION: We determined the cut-off values for ALT and SF indicating the best
time to start iron chelation therapy in patients with TI, and found significant
correlations among iron overload, SF, and ALT.

DOI: 10.5045/br.2018.53.4.314
PMCID: PMC6300676
PMID: 30588469

Conflict of interest statement: Authors' Disclosures of Potential Conflicts of
Interest: No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were
reported.
