---
reference_id: "PMID:39404413"
title: "Bile Acids-Based Therapies for Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis: Current Landscape and Future Developments."
authors:
- Fiorucci S
- Urbani G
- Di Giorgio C
- Biagioli M
- Distrutti E
journal: Cells
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cells13191650
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bile Acids-Based Therapies for Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis: Current Landscape and Future Developments.
**Authors:** Fiorucci S, Urbani G, Di Giorgio C, Biagioli M, Distrutti E
**Journal:** Cells (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells13191650](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells13191650)

## Content

1. Cells. 2024 Oct 4;13(19):1650. doi: 10.3390/cells13191650.

Bile Acids-Based Therapies for Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis: Current Landscape 
and Future Developments.

Fiorucci S(1), Urbani G(1), Di Giorgio C(1), Biagioli M(1), Distrutti E(2).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina e Chirurgia, Università di Perugia, 06123 Perugia, 
Italy.
(2)SC di Gastroenterologia ed Epatologia, Azienda Ospedaliera di Perugia, 06123 
Perugia, Italy.

Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a rare, chronic liver disease with no 
approved therapies. The ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) has been widely used, 
although there is no evidence that the use of UDCA delays the time to liver 
transplant or increases survival. Several candidate drugs are currently being 
developed. The largest group of these new agents is represented by FXR agonists, 
including obeticholic acid, cilofexor, and tropifexor. Other agents that target 
bile acid metabolism are ASTB/IBAP inhibitors and fibroblasts growth factor 
(FGF)19 analogues. Cholangiocytes, the epithelial bile duct cells, play a role 
in PSC development. Recent studies have revealed that these cells undergo a 
downregulation of GPBAR1 (TGR5), a bile acid receptor involved in bicarbonate 
secretion and immune regulation. Additional agents under evaluation are PPARs 
(elafibranor and seladelpar), anti-itching agents such as MAS-related 
G-protein-coupled receptors antagonists, and anti-fibrotic and immunosuppressive 
agents. Drugs targeting gut bacteria and bile acid pathways are also under 
investigation, given the strong link between PSC and gut microbiota.

DOI: 10.3390/cells13191650
PMCID: PMC11475195
PMID: 39404413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.