---
reference_id: "PMID:36508512"
title: NR2F1-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Schaaf CP
- Yu-Wai-Man P
- Valentin I
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NR2F1-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Schaaf CP, Yu-Wai-Man P, Valentin I

## Content

1. NR2F1-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder.

Schaaf CP(1), Yu-Wai-Man P(2)(3), Valentin I(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2022 Dec 8.

Author information:
(1)Medical Director and Chairman, Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg 
University, Heidelberg, Germany
(2)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom
(3)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom
(4)Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: NR2F1-related neurodevelopmental disorder (NR2F1-NDD) 
is characterized by developmental delay / intellectual disability (ranging from 
profound to mild) and is commonly associated with hypotonia, visual impairment 
(due to optic nerve abnormalities and/or cerebral visual impairment), epilepsy, 
and behavioral manifestations (e.g., autism spectrum disorder, 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder).
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of NR2F1-NDD is established in a proband with 
suggestive findings and a heterozygous pathogenic (or likely pathogenic) variant 
in NR2F1 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: There is no cure for NR2F1-NDD. 
Supportive treatment typically relies on multidisciplinary specialists in the 
fields of neurology, speech-language pathology, ophthalmology (including 
low-vision services), gastroenterology, nutrition, occupational therapy, 
physical therapy, audiology, clinical genetics, and genetic counseling. 
Surveillance: Regular monitoring of existing manifestations, the individual's 
response to supportive care, and the emergence of new manifestations.
GENETIC COUNSELING: NR2F1-NDD is an autosomal dominant disorder. Most probands 
reported to date with an intragenic NR2F1 pathogenic variant whose parents have 
undergone molecular genetic testing have the disorder as the result of a de novo 
pathogenic variant. Some recurrences within a family have been reported. Risk to 
future pregnancies is presumed to be low when the proband has what appears to be 
a de novo NR2F1 pathogenic variant; however, there is a recurrence risk (~1%) to 
sibs based on the theoretic possibility of parental germline mosaicism. Given 
this risk, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing may be considered.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 36508512