---
reference_id: "PMID:33341448"
title: Pre-treatment serum vitamin D deficiency is associated with increased inflammatory biomarkers and short overall survival in patients with pancreatic cancer.
authors:
- Rasmussen LS
- Yilmaz MK
- Falkmer UG
- Poulsen LØ
- Bøgsted M
- Christensen HS
- Bojesen SE
- Jensen BV
- Chen IM
- Johansen AZ
- Hansen CP
- Hasselby JP
- Holländer N
- Nielsen SE
- Andersen F
- Bjerregaard JK
- Pfeiffer P
- Johansen JS
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.10.038
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pre-treatment serum vitamin D deficiency is associated with increased inflammatory biomarkers and short overall survival in patients with pancreatic cancer.
**Authors:** Rasmussen LS, Yilmaz MK, Falkmer UG, Poulsen LØ, Bøgsted M, Christensen HS, Bojesen SE, Jensen BV, Chen IM, Johansen AZ, Hansen CP, Hasselby JP, Holländer N, Nielsen SE, Andersen F, Bjerregaard JK, Pfeiffer P, Johansen JS
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2020.10.038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2020.10.038)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2021 Feb;144:72-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.10.038. Epub 2020
Dec  17.

Pre-treatment serum vitamin D deficiency is associated with increased 
inflammatory biomarkers and short overall survival in patients with pancreatic 
cancer.

Rasmussen LS(1), Yilmaz MK(2), Falkmer UG(3), Poulsen LØ(3), Bøgsted M(4), 
Christensen HS(4), Bojesen SE(5), Jensen BV(6), Chen IM(6), Johansen AZ(6), 
Hansen CP(7), Hasselby JP(8), Holländer N(9), Nielsen SE(10), Andersen F(11), 
Bjerregaard JK(12), Pfeiffer P(13), Johansen JS(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Clinical Cancer Research Center, Aalborg University 
Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark; Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark. Electronic address: loskr@rn.dk.
(2)Department of Oncology, Clinical Cancer Research Center, Aalborg University 
Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark.
(3)Department of Oncology, Clinical Cancer Research Center, Aalborg University 
Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark; Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark.
(4)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Aalborg University, 
Aalborg, Denmark; Department of Haematology, Clinical Cancer Research Center, 
Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark.
(5)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, Copenhagen 
University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark; Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty 
of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Department of Oncology, Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, Copenhagen University 
Hospital, Herlev, Denmark.
(7)Department of Surgery, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(8)Department of Pathology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(9)Department of Oncology, Zealand University Hospital, Næstved, Denmark.
(10)Department of Oncology, Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, Copenhagen University 
Hospital, Herlev, Denmark; Department of Oncology and Palliative Care, North 
Zealand University Hospital, Hillerød, Denmark.
(11)Department of Oncology and Palliative Care, North Zealand University 
Hospital, Hillerød, Denmark.
(12)Department of Oncology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(13)Academy of Geriatric Cancer Research (AgeCare), Odense University Hospital, 
Odense, Denmark; Institute of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, 
Odense, Denmark.
(14)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of Oncology, Herlev 
and Gentofte Hospital, Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark; 
Department of Medicine, Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, Copenhagen University 
Hospital, Herlev, Denmark.

Comment in
    Eur J Cancer. 2021 Nov;158:248-250. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2021.09.009.
    Eur J Cancer. 2021 Nov;158:246-247. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2021.09.006.

BACKGROUND: Vitamin D deficiency and inflammation are associated with increased 
mortality. We investigated the relationship between pre-treatment serum vitamin 
D levels, inflammatory biomarkers (IL-6, YKL-40 and CRP) and overall survival 
(OS) in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) patients.
METHODS: Pre-treatment serum vitamin D, IL-6, YKL-40 and CRP levels were 
determined in 1,267 patients with PDAC enrolled from July 2008 to September 2018 
in the prospective BIOPAC study (NCT03311776). The patients were grouped 
according to vitamin D levels: sufficient >50 nmol/L, insufficient 
25-50 nmol/L and deficient <25 nmol/L.
RESULTS: Across all tumour stages, vitamin D-deficient patients had the highest 
median levels of IL-6 (8.3 pg/mL, range 0.7-91), YKL-40 (177 ng/ml, range 
25-5279) and CRP (15.5 mg/L, range 0.8-384). The resected stage I and II 
patients with vitamin D deficiencies had a shorter median OS, 18.3 months (95% 
CI, 12.1-31.5 months) than those with sufficient levels, 29.7 months (95% CI, 
22.3-36.1 months), and the hazard ratio for death was 1.55 (95% CI, 1.04-2.31; 
p = 0.03). In advanced PDAC, there was no significant difference in OS between 
the vitamin D groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Vitamin D deficiency was associated with increased inflammatory 
biomarkers in all PDAC stages. The resected stage I and II patients with 
sufficient vitamin D levels had a higher OS than those with a vitamin D 
deficiency. However, there was no correlation between vitamin D levels and 
survival in advanced PDAC. Future studies need to investigate vitamin D 
supplementation effects on survival in PDAC.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.10.038
PMID: 33341448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement The authors 
declare no potential conflicts of interest.