---
reference_id: "PMID:28232169"
title: "Cogan's syndrome: State of the art of systemic immunosuppressive treatment in adult and pediatric patients."
authors:
- Mora P
- Calzetti G
- Ghirardini S
- Rubino P
- Gandolfi S
- Orsoni J
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2017.02.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cogan's syndrome: State of the art of systemic immunosuppressive treatment in adult and pediatric patients.
**Authors:** Mora P, Calzetti G, Ghirardini S, Rubino P, Gandolfi S, Orsoni J
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2017.02.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2017.02.009)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2017 Apr;16(4):385-390. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2017.02.009. Epub
 2017 Feb 14.

Cogan's syndrome: State of the art of systemic immunosuppressive treatment in 
adult and pediatric patients.

Mora P(1), Calzetti G(2), Ghirardini S(2), Rubino P(2), Gandolfi S(2), Orsoni 
J(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Ophthalmology, University Hospital of Parma, Italy. Electronic 
address: paolo.mora@unipr.it.
(2)Institute of Ophthalmology, University Hospital of Parma, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to systematically evaluate the evidences 
for treatment of Cogan's syndrome (CS), with reference to adult and younger 
patients described in the literature.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW METHODOLOGY: DATA SOURCES: Studies reviewed were English 
language original articles ranging from 1990 to 2016 reporting data for subjects 
with CS (typical and atypical) undergoing any systemic treatment other than 
steroids alone. Medline/EMBASE, Cochrane Library were searched. The full text of 
articles meeting selection criteria was reviewed for: study type, diagnosis, 
number of subjects, treatment type and duration, clinical and/or functional 
outcomes, possible systemic manifestation or other autoimmune syndromes 
combined.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The authors identified 76 relevant reports: 4 
prospective studies, 2 retrospective studies, 12 case series and 58 case 
reports. The studies included a total of 141 new patients: based on the 
available data, 46 men and 50 women with a mean age of 33years (range 5-69). In 
the descriptive analysis adult patients (N=87) were separated from pediatric 
patients (<18years old) (N=17). Concerning treatment strategies, except for a 
first-line approach to check for a rapid remission, or for a drug sensibility 
often supporting the diagnosis, a long-term steroidal monotherapy is no longer 
recommended in CS. As in other autoimmune and rheumatologic diseases, combined 
treatment with steroid-sparing immunosuppressant agents, also considering 
"biological" drugs, is nowadays preferred. However, the evidence of clearly 
effective or preferable treatment options for CS remains lacking, mostly due to 
the rarity of the disease and to the consequent difficulty in organizing 
high-quality prospective trials.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2017.02.009
PMID: 28232169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]