---
reference_id: "PMID:28386624"
title: Mutated PET117 causes complex IV deficiency and is associated with neurodevelopmental regression and medulla oblongata lesions.
authors:
- Renkema GH
- Visser G
- Baertling F
- Wintjes LT
- Wolters VM
- van Montfrans J
- de Kort GAP
- Nikkels PGJ
- van Hasselt PM
- van der Crabben SN
- Rodenburg RJT
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-017-1794-7
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Central Nervous System/pathology
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Medulla Oblongata/pathology
- Mutation
- Oxidative Phosphorylation
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutated PET117 causes complex IV deficiency and is associated with neurodevelopmental regression and medulla oblongata lesions.
**Authors:** Renkema GH, Visser G, Baertling F, Wintjes LT, Wolters VM, van Montfrans J, de Kort GAP, Nikkels PGJ, van Hasselt PM, van der Crabben SN, Rodenburg RJT
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-017-1794-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-017-1794-7)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2017 Jun;136(6):759-769. doi: 10.1007/s00439-017-1794-7. Epub 2017 
Apr 6.

Mutated PET117 causes complex IV deficiency and is associated with 
neurodevelopmental regression and medulla oblongata lesions.

Renkema GH(1), Visser G(2), Baertling F(1)(3), Wintjes LT(1), Wolters VM(4), van 
Montfrans J(5), de Kort GAP(6), Nikkels PGJ(7), van Hasselt PM(2), van der 
Crabben SN(2), Rodenburg RJT(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, 774 Translational Metabolic Laboratory (TML), 
Radboud Center for Mitochondrial Medicine (RCMM), Radboud University Medical 
Center, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University 
Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of General Pediatrics, Neonatology and Pediatric Cardiology, 
Heinrich-Heine-University, Duesseldorf, Germany.
(4)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, 
University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pediatric Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Wilhelmina 
Children's Hospital, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Radiology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, 774 Translational Metabolic Laboratory (TML), 
Radboud Center for Mitochondrial Medicine (RCMM), Radboud University Medical 
Center, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. 
richard.rodenburg@radboudumc.nl.

The genetic basis of the many progressive, multi systemic, mitochondrial 
diseases that cause a lack of cellular ATP production is heterogeneous, with 
defects found both in the mitochondrial genome as well as in the nuclear genome. 
Many different mutations have been found in the genes encoding subunits of the 
enzyme complexes of the oxidative phosphorylation system. In addition, mutations 
in genes encoding proteins involved in the assembly of these complexes are known 
to cause mitochondrial disorders. Here we describe two sisters with a 
mitochondrial disease characterized by lesions in the medulla oblongata, as 
demonstrated by brain magnetic resonance imaging, and an isolated complex IV 
deficiency and reduced levels of individual complex IV subunits. Whole exome 
sequencing revealed a homozygous nonsense mutation resulting in a premature stop 
codon in the gene encoding Pet117, a small protein that has previously been 
predicted to be a complex IV assembly factor. PET117 has not been identified as 
a mitochondrial disease gene before. Lentiviral complementation of patient 
fibroblasts with wild-type PET117 restored the complex IV deficiency, proving 
that the gene defect is responsible for the complex IV deficiency in the 
patients, and indicating a pivotal role of this protein in the proper 
functioning of complex IV. Although previous studies had suggested a possible 
role of this protein in the insertion of copper into complex IV, studies in 
patient fibroblasts could not confirm this. This case presentation thus 
implicates mutations in PET117 as a novel cause of mitochondrial disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-017-1794-7
PMCID: PMC5429353
PMID: 28386624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: On behalf of all authors, the corresponding 
author states that there is no conflict of interest.