---
reference_id: "PMID:23035701"
title: "Efficacy of phosphatidic acid ingestion on lean body mass, muscle thickness and strength gains in resistance-trained men."
authors:
- Hoffman JR
- Stout JR
- Williams DR
- Wells AJ
- Fragala MS
- Mangine GT
- Gonzalez AM
- Emerson NS
- McCormack WP
- Scanlon TC
- Purpura M
- Jäger R
journal: J Int Soc Sports Nutr
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1186/1550-2783-9-47
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of phosphatidic acid ingestion on lean body mass, muscle thickness and strength gains in resistance-trained men.
**Authors:** Hoffman JR, Stout JR, Williams DR, Wells AJ, Fragala MS, Mangine GT, Gonzalez AM, Emerson NS, McCormack WP, Scanlon TC, Purpura M, Jäger R
**Journal:** J Int Soc Sports Nutr (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1550-2783-9-47](https://doi.org/10.1186/1550-2783-9-47)

## Content

1. J Int Soc Sports Nutr. 2012 Oct 5;9(1):47. doi: 10.1186/1550-2783-9-47.

Efficacy of phosphatidic acid ingestion on lean body mass, muscle thickness and 
strength gains in resistance-trained men.

Hoffman JR(1), Stout JR, Williams DR, Wells AJ, Fragala MS, Mangine GT, Gonzalez 
AM, Emerson NS, McCormack WP, Scanlon TC, Purpura M, Jäger R.

Author information:
(1)Human Performance Laboratory, University of Central Florida, Orlando, 32186, 
FL, USA. Jay.Hoffman@ucf.edu.

BACKGROUND: Phosphatidic acid (PA) has been reported to activate the mammalian 
target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway and is thought to enhance the 
anabolic effects of resistance training. The purpose of this pilot study was to 
examine if oral phosphatidic acid administration can enhance strength, muscle 
thickness and lean tissue accruement during an 8-week resistance training 
program.
METHODS: Sixteen resistance-trained men were randomly assigned to a group that 
either consumed 750 mg of PA (n = 7, 23.1 ± 4.4 y; 176.7 ± 6.7 cm; 
86.5 ± 21.2 kg) or a placebo (PL, n = 9, 22.5 ± 2.0 y; 179.8 ± 5.4 cm; 
89.4 ± 13.6 kg) group. During each testing session subjects were assessed for 
strength (one repetition maximum [1-RM] bench press and squat) and body 
composition. Muscle thickness and pennation angle were also measured in the 
vastus lateralis of the subject's dominant leg.
RESULTS: Subjects ingesting PA demonstrated a 12.7% increase in squat strength 
and a 2.6% increase in LBM, while subjects consuming PL showed a 9.3% 
improvement in squat strength and a 0.1% change in LBM. Although parametric 
analysis was unable to demonstrate significant differences, magnitude based 
inferences indicated that the Δ change in 1-RM squat showed a likely benefit 
from PA on increasing lower body strength and a very likely benefit for 
increasing lean body mass (LBM).
CONCLUSIONS: Results of this study suggest that a combination of a daily 750 mg 
PA ingestion, combined with a 4-day per week resistance training program for 
8-weeks appears to have a likely benefit on strength improvement, and a very 
likely benefit on lean tissue accruement in young, resistance trained 
individuals.

DOI: 10.1186/1550-2783-9-47
PMCID: PMC3506449
PMID: 23035701