---
reference_id: "PMID:31014995"
title: "Environmental Risk Factors for Inflammatory Bowel Diseases: An Umbrella Review of Meta-analyses."
authors:
- Piovani D
- Danese S
- Peyrin-Biroulet L
- Nikolopoulos GK
- Lytras T
- Bonovas S
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2019.04.016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Environmental Risk Factors for Inflammatory Bowel Diseases: An Umbrella Review of Meta-analyses.
**Authors:** Piovani D, Danese S, Peyrin-Biroulet L, Nikolopoulos GK, Lytras T, Bonovas S
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2019.04.016](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2019.04.016)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2019 Sep;157(3):647-659.e4. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2019.04.016.  Epub 2019 Apr 20.

Environmental Risk Factors for Inflammatory Bowel Diseases: An Umbrella Review 
of Meta-analyses.

Piovani D(1), Danese S(1), Peyrin-Biroulet L(2), Nikolopoulos GK(3), Lytras 
T(4), Bonovas S(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Milan, Italy; 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease Center, Humanitas Clinical and Research Center-IRCCS, 
Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Hepato-Gastroenterology and INSERM U954, University Hospital of 
Nancy, University of Lorraine, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, France.
(3)Medical School, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(4)Hellenic Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Athens, Greece.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Milan, Italy; 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease Center, Humanitas Clinical and Research Center-IRCCS, 
Milan, Italy. Electronic address: sbonovas@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Multiple environmental factors have been associated with the 
development of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs). We performed an umbrella 
review of meta-analyses to summarize available epidemiologic evidence and assess 
its credibility.
METHODS: We systematically identified and appraised meta-analyses of 
observational studies examining environmental factors and risk of IBD (Crohn's 
disease [CD] or ulcerative colitis [UC]). For each meta-analysis, we considered 
the random effects estimate, its 95% confidence interval, the estimates of 
heterogeneity, and small-study effects, and we graded the evidence according to 
prespecified criteria. Methodologic quality was assessed with AMSTAR (ie, A 
Measurement Tool to Assess Systematic Reviews) 2.
RESULTS: We examined 183 estimates in 53 meta-analyses of 71 environmental 
factors related to lifestyles and hygiene, surgeries, drug exposures, diet, 
microorganisms, and vaccinations. We identified 9 factors that increase risk of 
IBD: smoking (CD), urban living (CD and IBD), appendectomy (CD), tonsillectomy 
(CD), antibiotic exposure (IBD), oral contraceptive use (IBD), consumption of 
soft drinks (UC), vitamin D deficiency (IBD), and non-Helicobacter pylori-like 
enterohepatic Helicobacter species (IBD). We identified 7 factors that reduce 
risk of IBD: physical activity (CD), breastfeeding (IBD), bed sharing (CD), tea 
consumption (UC), high levels of folate (IBD), high levels of vitamin D (CD), 
and H pylori infection (CD, UC, and IBD). Epidemiologic evidence for all of 
these associations was of high to moderate strength; we identified another 11 
factors associated with increased risk and 16 factors associated with reduced 
risk with weak credibility. Methodologic quality varied considerably among 
meta-analyses. Several associations were based on findings from retrospective 
studies, so it is not possible to determine if these are effects of IBD or the 
results of recall bias.
CONCLUSIONS: In an umbrella review of meta-analyses, we found varying levels of 
evidence for associations of different environmental factors with risk of IBD. 
High-quality prospective studies with analyses of samples from patients with 
recent diagnoses of IBD are needed to determine whether these factors cause or 
are results of IBD and their pathogenic mechanisms.

Copyright © 2019 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2019.04.016
PMID: 31014995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]