---
reference_id: "PMID:38389095"
title: Phenotypically concordant distribution of pick bodies in aphasic versus behavioral dementias.
authors:
- Kawles A
- Keszycki R
- Minogue G
- Zouridakis A
- Ayala I
- Gill N
- Macomber A
- Lubbat V
- Coventry C
- Rogalski E
- Weintraub S
- Mao Q
- Flanagan ME
- Zhang H
- Castellani R
- Bigio EH
- Mesulam MM
- Geula C
- Gefen T
journal: Acta Neuropathol Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s40478-024-01738-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Pick Disease of the Brain/pathology
- Frontotemporal Dementia/pathology
- Alzheimer Disease/pathology
- Brain/pathology
- Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration/pathology
- Atrophy/pathology
- Tauopathies/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypically concordant distribution of pick bodies in aphasic versus behavioral dementias.
**Authors:** Kawles A, Keszycki R, Minogue G, Zouridakis A, Ayala I, Gill N, Macomber A, Lubbat V, Coventry C, Rogalski E, Weintraub S, Mao Q, Flanagan ME, Zhang H, Castellani R, Bigio EH, Mesulam MM, Geula C, Gefen T
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40478-024-01738-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-024-01738-7)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2024 Feb 22;12(1):31. doi:
10.1186/s40478-024-01738-7.

Phenotypically concordant distribution of pick bodies in aphasic versus 
behavioral dementias.

Kawles A(1)(2), Keszycki R(1)(2), Minogue G(1)(2), Zouridakis A(1), Ayala I(1), 
Gill N(1)(3), Macomber A(1)(2), Lubbat V(1), Coventry C(1), Rogalski E(4), 
Weintraub S(1)(2), Mao Q(1)(5), Flanagan ME(1)(5), Zhang H(1)(3), Castellani 
R(1)(5), Bigio EH(1)(5), Mesulam MM(1)(6), Geula C(1)(7), Gefen T(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Mesulam Center for Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer's Disease, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Northwestern University 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Chicago School of Medicine, Chicago, 
IL, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(7)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Northwestern University 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, USA.
(8)Mesulam Center for Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer's Disease, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. 
tamar.gefen@northwestern.edu.
(9)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Northwestern University 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. tamar.gefen@northwestern.edu.

Pick's disease (PiD) is a subtype of the tauopathy form of frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration (FTLD-tau) characterized by intraneuronal 3R-tau inclusions. PiD 
can underly various dementia syndromes, including primary progressive aphasia 
(PPA), characterized by an isolated and progressive impairment of language and 
left-predominant atrophy, and behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia 
(bvFTD), characterized by progressive dysfunction in personality and bilateral 
frontotemporal atrophy. In this study, we investigated the neocortical and 
hippocampal distributions of Pick bodies in bvFTD and PPA to establish 
clinicopathologic concordance between PiD and the salience of the aphasic versus 
behavioral phenotype. Eighteen right-handed cases with PiD as the primary 
pathologic diagnosis were identified from the Northwestern University 
Alzheimer's Disease Research Center brain bank (bvFTD, N = 9; PPA, N = 9). 
Paraffin-embedded sections were stained immunohistochemically with AT8 to 
visualize Pick bodies, and unbiased stereological analysis was performed in up 
to six regions bilaterally [middle frontal gyrus (MFG), superior temporal gyrus 
(STG), inferior parietal lobule (IPL), anterior temporal lobe (ATL), dentate 
gyrus (DG) and CA1 of the hippocampus], and unilateral occipital cortex (OCC). 
In bvFTD, peak neocortical densities of Pick bodies were in the MFG, while the 
ATL was the most affected in PPA. Both the IPL and STG had greater leftward 
pathology in PPA, with the latter reaching significance (p < 0.01). In bvFTD, 
Pick body densities were significantly right-asymmetric in the STG (p < 0.05). 
Hippocampal burden was not clinicopathologically concordant, as both bvFTD and 
PPA cases demonstrated significant hippocampal pathology compared to neocortical 
densities (p < 0.0001). Inclusion-to-neuron analyses in a subset of PPA cases 
confirmed that neurons in the DG are disproportionately burdened with inclusions 
compared to neocortical areas. Overall, stereological quantitation suggests that 
the distribution of neocortical Pick body pathology is concordant with salient 
clinical features unique to PPA vs. bvFTD while raising intriguing questions 
about the selective vulnerability of the hippocampus to 3R-tauopathies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-024-01738-7
PMCID: PMC10885488
PMID: 38389095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.