---
reference_id: "PMID:18602922"
title: The clinical phenotype of Lynch syndrome due to germ-line PMS2 mutations.
authors:
- Senter L
- Clendenning M
- Sotamaa K
- Hampel H
- Green J
- Potter JD
- Lindblom A
- Lagerstedt K
- Thibodeau SN
- Lindor NM
- Young J
- Winship I
- Dowty JG
- White DM
- Hopper JL
- Baglietto L
- Jenkins MA
- de la Chapelle A
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.04.026
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The clinical phenotype of Lynch syndrome due to germ-line PMS2 mutations.
**Authors:** Senter L, Clendenning M, Sotamaa K, Hampel H, Green J, Potter JD, Lindblom A, Lagerstedt K, Thibodeau SN, Lindor NM, Young J, Winship I, Dowty JG, White DM, Hopper JL, Baglietto L, Jenkins MA, de la Chapelle A
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2008.04.026](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2008.04.026)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2008 Aug;135(2):419-28. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.04.026. 
Epub 2008 May 2.

The clinical phenotype of Lynch syndrome due to germ-line PMS2 mutations.

Senter L(1), Clendenning M, Sotamaa K, Hampel H, Green J, Potter JD, Lindblom A, 
Lagerstedt K, Thibodeau SN, Lindor NM, Young J, Winship I, Dowty JG, White DM, 
Hopper JL, Baglietto L, Jenkins MA, de la Chapelle A.

Author information:
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Although the clinical phenotype of Lynch syndrome (also known 
as hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer) has been well described, little is 
known about disease in PMS2 mutation carriers. Now that mutation detection 
methods can discern mutations in PMS2 from mutations in its pseudogenes, more 
mutation carriers have been identified. Information about the clinical 
significance of PMS2 mutations is crucial for appropriate counseling. Here, we 
report the clinical characteristics of a large series of PMS2 mutation carriers.
METHODS: We performed PMS2 mutation analysis using long-range polymerase chain 
reaction and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification for 99 probands 
diagnosed with Lynch syndrome-associated tumors showing isolated loss of PMS2 by 
immunohistochemistry. Penetrance was calculated using a modified segregation 
analysis adjusting for ascertainment.
RESULTS: Germ-line PMS2 mutations were detected in 62% of probands (n = 55 
monoallelic; 6 biallelic). Among families with monoallelic PMS2 mutations, 65.5% 
met revised Bethesda guidelines. Compared with the general population, in 
mutation carriers, the incidence of colorectal cancer was 5.2-fold higher, and 
the incidence of endometrial cancer was 7.5-fold higher. In North America, this 
translates to a cumulative cancer risk to age 70 years of 15%-20% for colorectal 
cancer, 15% for endometrial cancer, and 25%-32% for any Lynch 
syndrome-associated cancer. No elevated risk for non-Lynch syndrome-associated 
cancers was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: PMS2 mutations contribute significantly to Lynch syndrome, but the 
penetrance for monoallelic mutation carriers appears to be lower than that for 
the other mismatch repair genes. Modified counseling and cancer surveillance 
guidelines for PMS2 mutation carriers are proposed.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.04.026
PMCID: PMC2759321
PMID: 18602922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: No conflicts of interest 
exist