---
reference_id: "PMID:7426480"
title: Cadmium-induced osteomalacia.
authors:
- Blainey JD
- Adams RG
- Brewer DB
- Harvey TC
journal: Br J Ind Med
year: '1980'
doi: 10.1136/oem.37.3.278
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cadmium-induced osteomalacia.
**Authors:** Blainey JD, Adams RG, Brewer DB, Harvey TC
**Journal:** Br J Ind Med (1980)
**DOI:** [10.1136/oem.37.3.278](https://doi.org/10.1136/oem.37.3.278)

## Content

1. Br J Ind Med. 1980 Aug;37(3):278-84. doi: 10.1136/oem.37.3.278.

Cadmium-induced osteomalacia.

Blainey JD, Adams RG, Brewer DB, Harvey TC.

The detailed study of a battery plate maker, who had worked with cadmium for 36 
years, showed that proteinuria, typical of renal tubular dysfunction, had been 
observed for 25 years and during the last 12 years of his life the patient had 
suffered increasing disability from gross bone disease. Several bone biopsies 
and detailed metabolic studies showed typical severe osteomalacia, which 
responded well initially to calcium and vitamin D treatment. Examination of the 
liver both in life and after death showed a gross excess of cadmium. This was 
also found in the kidneys after death. Previously unreported changes were 
present in the bones, especially the lumbar vertebrae which were probably more 
the result of gross bone deformity than cadmium deposition. The mechanism of 
development of the severe acquired Fanconi syndrome was thought to be a 
combination of dietary calcium and vitamin D deficiency and impaired calcium 
absorption from abnormal vitamin D synthesis, related to the cadmium deposition 
in the renal tubules, which also caused the defect in renal tubular 
reabsorption.

DOI: 10.1136/oem.37.3.278
PMCID: PMC1008708
PMID: 7426480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]