---
reference_id: "PMID:34541796"
title: Mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome.
authors:
- Jonak C
- Tittes J
- Brunner PM
- Guenova E
journal: J Dtsch Dermatol Ges
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/ddg.14610
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Cutaneous"
- "Mycosis Fungoides/diagnosis, therapy"
- Quality of Life
- "Sezary Syndrome/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome.
**Authors:** Jonak C, Tittes J, Brunner PM, Guenova E
**Journal:** J Dtsch Dermatol Ges (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ddg.14610](https://doi.org/10.1111/ddg.14610)

## Content

1. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2021 Sep;19(9):1307-1334. doi: 10.1111/ddg.14610.

Mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome.

Jonak C(1), Tittes J(1), Brunner PM(1), Guenova E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Mycosis fungoides (MF) and Sézary syndrome (SS) are primary cutaneous T-cell
lymphomas (CTCL) with not yet fully understood etiology and pathogenesis.
Conceptually, MF and SS are classified as distinct entities arising from
different T helper cell subsets. MF is the most common CTCL entity, while SS is
very rare. MF presents clinically with patch, plaque and/or tumor stages, but
can also evolve as erythroderma, which in turn is pathognomonic for SS. SS is
characterized by a detectable tumor-cell burden (Sézary cells) in the peripheral
blood consistent with advanced-stage disease and a poor prognosis. In
early-stage disease of MF, which is the predominant form, the prognosis is
generally favorable. However, in up to 30 % of patients, there is progression of
skin lesions, which can ultimately lead to visceral involvement. The
histological manifestation of MF can be subtle in early-stage disease and
therefore a careful clinicopathological correlation is paramount. The treatment
of MF/SS is dependent on the disease stage. Therapeutic options include both
skin-directed and systemic regimens. Apart from allogeneic stem cell
transplantation (alloSCT), there is as yet no curative therapy for MF/SS.
Accordingly, the treatment approach is symptom oriented and aims to reduce the
tumor burden and improve health-related quality of life. However, the
therapeutic landscape for CTCL is constantly being expanded by the discovery of
novel therapeutic targets.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal der Deutschen Dermatologischen Gesellschaft
published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Deutsche Dermatologische
Gesellschaft.

DOI: 10.1111/ddg.14610
PMCID: PMC9293091
PMID: 34541796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CJ is employed by the Medical University of
Vienna and has received personal remunerations from AbbVie, Almirall, Amgen, Eli
Lilly, Janssen, Kyowa Kirin, LEO Pharma, Mallinckrodt/Therakos, Pfizer,
Novartis, Recordati Rare Diseases, Sandoz, Takeda, and UCB Pharma independently
of this work. CJ has conducted clinical trials for Eli Lilly, Novartis, and 4SC
(financial support for her employer). JT is employed by the Medical University
of Vienna and has received personal remunerations from AbbVie, Almirall, Eli
Lilly, Janssen, LEO Pharma, and Novartis independently of this work. JT has
conducted clinical trials for Eli Lilly (financial support for her employer).
PMB is employed by the Medical University of Vienna and has received personal
remunerations from LEO Pharma, Pfizer, Sanofi Genzyme, Eli Lilly, Novartis,
Celgene, UCB Pharma, Biotest, Boehringer Ingelheim, AbbVie, Amgen, Arena
Pharmaceuticals, GSK, and Regeneron independently of this work. PMB has
conducted clinical trials for Novartis (financial support for his employer). EG
is employed by the University Hospital of Lausanne and a member of the
Scientific Advisory Board for Scailyte AG. EG has reported research grants and
personal remunerations from Helsinn Healthcare SA, Kyowa Hakko Kirin Co., Ltd.,
and Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, as well as personal remunerations
from Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals, Recordati Rare Diseases, Novartis, and Sanofi
independently of this work.
