---
reference_id: "PMID:35243119"
title: "Rectal Dieulafoy's lesion: a comprehensive review of patient characteristics, presentation patterns, diagnosis, management, and clinical outcomes."
authors:
- Inayat F
- Hussain A
- Yahya S
- Weissman S
- Sarfraz N
- Faisal MS
- Riaz I
- Saleem S
- Saif MW
journal: Transl Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.21037/tgh.2020.02.17
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rectal Dieulafoy's lesion: a comprehensive review of patient characteristics, presentation patterns, diagnosis, management, and clinical outcomes.
**Authors:** Inayat F, Hussain A, Yahya S, Weissman S, Sarfraz N, Faisal MS, Riaz I, Saleem S, Saif MW
**Journal:** Transl Gastroenterol Hepatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.21037/tgh.2020.02.17](https://doi.org/10.21037/tgh.2020.02.17)

## Content

1. Transl Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2022 Jan 25;7:10. doi: 10.21037/tgh.2020.02.17. 
eCollection 2022.

Rectal Dieulafoy's lesion: a comprehensive review of patient characteristics, 
presentation patterns, diagnosis, management, and clinical outcomes.

Inayat F(1), Hussain A(1), Yahya S(2), Weissman S(3), Sarfraz N(4), Faisal 
MS(5), Riaz I(6), Saleem S(7), Saif MW(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Allama Iqbal Medical College, Lahore, Pakistan.
(2)Fatima Jinnah Medical University, Lahore, Pakistan.
(3)Hackensack Meridian Health Palisades Medical Center, North Bergen, NJ, USA.
(4)King Edward Medical University, Lahore, Pakistan.
(5)Allegheny General Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(6)Einstein Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)Mercy Saint Vincent Medical Center, Toledo, OH, USA.
(8)The Feinstein Institute of Medical Research, Manhasset, NY, USA.
(9)Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, Hempstead, NY, USA.

Dieulafoy's lesion is an abnormally large, tortuous, submucosal vessel that 
erodes the overlying mucosa, without primary ulceration or erosion. Although 
these lesions predominantly involve the stomach and upper small intestine, they 
are being detected with increasing frequency in the rectum. We conducted a 
systematic literature search of MEDLINE, Cochrane, Embase, and Scopus databases 
for adult rectal Dieulafoy's lesion. After careful review of the search results, 
a total of 101 cases were identified. The data on patient characteristics, 
clinical features, colonoscopy findings, diagnosis, treatment, and clinical 
outcomes were collected and analyzed. The mean age of presentation was 66±17 
years (range, 18-94 years), with 54% of cases reported in males. Clinical 
presentation was dominated by acute lower gastrointestinal bleeding in the form 
of bright-red blood per rectum 47% and hematochezia 36%, whereas 16% of patients 
were admitted with symptoms related to other medical conditions. Major 
underlying disorders were hypertension 29%, diabetes mellitus 21%, and chronic 
kidney disease 16%. The average number of colonoscopies required for the 
diagnosis of rectal Dieulafoy's lesion was 1.5±0.7. In regard to treatment, 
endoscopic therapy was applied in 80%, direct surgical suturing in 12%, 
angiographic embolization in 4%, and endoscopic therapy followed by surgical 
ligation was performed in 4% of patients. The endoscopic treatment was a 
feasible choice for rectal disease, with a primary hemostasis rate of 88%. 
Although the overall mortality rate was 6%, the causes of death were unrelated 
to this entity. This review illustrates that patients with rectal Dieulafoy's 
lesion can have a favorable clinical outcome. Prompt diagnosis and appropriate 
management are of paramount importance to prevent serious hemodynamic 
complications. The best therapeutic modality remains to be determined but the 
data presented here support the use of mechanical endoscopic methods as safe and 
effective.

2022 Translational Gastroenterology and Hepatology. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tgh.2020.02.17
PMCID: PMC8826214
PMID: 35243119

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
https://tgh.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/tgh.2020.02.17/coif). The 
authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.