---
reference_id: "PMID:25406876"
title: The relationship of age and radiographic incidence of superior semicircular canal dehiscence in pediatric patients.
authors:
- Jackson NM
- Allen LM
- Morell B
- Carpenter CC
- Givens VB
- Kakade A
- Jeyakumar A
- Arcement C
- Arriaga MA
- Ying YL
journal: Otol Neurotol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000000660
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age Distribution
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- "Labyrinth Diseases/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
- Male
- Prevalence
- Retrospective Studies
- "Semicircular Canals/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The relationship of age and radiographic incidence of superior semicircular canal dehiscence in pediatric patients.
**Authors:** Jackson NM, Allen LM, Morell B, Carpenter CC, Givens VB, Kakade A, Jeyakumar A, Arcement C, Arriaga MA, Ying YL
**Journal:** Otol Neurotol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MAO.0000000000000660](https://doi.org/10.1097/MAO.0000000000000660)

## Content

1. Otol Neurotol. 2015 Jan;36(1):99-105. doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000000660.

The relationship of age and radiographic incidence of superior semicircular 
canal dehiscence in pediatric patients.

Jackson NM(1), Allen LM, Morell B, Carpenter CC, Givens VB, Kakade A, Jeyakumar 
A, Arcement C, Arriaga MA, Ying YL.

Author information:
(1)*Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Louisiana State 
University Health Science Center New Orleans; †Department of Radiology, The 
Children's Hospital of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana; and ‡Merial Limited, 
North Brunswick, New Jersey, U.S.A.

OBJECTIVE: To determine if age affects radiographic incidence of superior 
semicircular canal dehiscence (SSCD) in pediatric patients.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective case review.
SETTING: Tertiary children's hospital.
PATIENTS: Patients (0-18 yr) with high-resolution computed tomography (CT) 
temporal bone scans from April 2001 to February 2013.
INTERVENTIONS: Diagnostic high-resolution CT temporal bone scans.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Findings of dehiscent, thin, or normal SSC on CT scans 
(including reconstructed Poschl views). Interobserver radiographic 
interpretation rate between neuroradiologist and otologist.
RESULTS: Seven-hundred CT scans (1,400 ears) were reviewed, and 1,188 ears were 
acceptable for analysis. Twenty-three ears (1.9%) had dehiscent SSC, 185 ears 
(15.6%) had thin SSC, and 980 ears (82.5%) had normal SSC. Median ages of 
dehiscent, thin, and normal canals were 5, 7, and 9 years, respectively ( p < 
0.05). As age increased, the incidence of dehiscent and thin SCC cases 
decreased; for example, dehiscent or thin canal existed in 51.4% of children 
less than 12 months, 17.5% of children between 1 and 2 years, 18.5% of children 
between 3 and 10 years, and 10.9% of children between 11 and 18 years. The κ 
value of agreement between neuroradiologist and otologist was 0.814, 
demonstrating a high value of agreement (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Radiographic SSCD, although uncommon, appears to be more prevalent 
in younger children, especially infants younger than 12 months. This suggests 
that the SSC may develop more bony covering with age.

DOI: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000000660
PMID: 25406876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]