---
reference_id: "PMID:38423215"
title: Assessment of Visual Function with Cotoretigene Toliparvovec in X-Linked Retinitis Pigmentosa in the Randomized XIRIUS Phase 2/3 Study.
authors:
- Lam BL
- Pennesi ME
- Kay CN
- Panda S
- Gow JA
- Zhao G
- MacLaren RE
- XIRIUS Study Group
journal: Ophthalmology
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2024.02.023
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- Dependovirus/genetics
- Electroretinography
- "Eye Proteins/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- "Genetic Vectors/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Recombinant Proteins/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Visual Fields/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessment of Visual Function with Cotoretigene Toliparvovec in X-Linked Retinitis Pigmentosa in the Randomized XIRIUS Phase 2/3 Study.
**Authors:** Lam BL, Pennesi ME, Kay CN, Panda S, Gow JA, Zhao G, MacLaren RE, XIRIUS Study Group
**Journal:** Ophthalmology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ophtha.2024.02.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2024.02.023)

## Content

1. Ophthalmology. 2024 Sep;131(9):1083-1093. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2024.02.023. 
Epub 2024 Feb 28.

Assessment of Visual Function with Cotoretigene Toliparvovec in X-Linked 
Retinitis Pigmentosa in the Randomized XIRIUS Phase 2/3 Study.

Lam BL(1), Pennesi ME(2), Kay CN(3), Panda S(4), Gow JA(4), Zhao G(4), MacLaren 
RE(5); XIRIUS Study Group.

Collaborators: MacLaren R, Aleman T, Birch D, Jalil A, Lotery A, Lam B, Pennesi 
M, Kay CN, Yusuf IH, Cehajic Kapetanovic J, Jolly JK, Josan AS, Taylor LJ, Xue 
K, Nanda A, Buckley T, Salvetti AP, Thulasidharan S, Kurc M, Khandhadia S, Dias 
KOM, Baltmr A, Mandal N, Tsokolas G, Ivanova T, El-Faouri M, Shaarawy S, Black 
G, Davis JL, Gregori NZ, Mendoza-Santiesteban CE, Lauer AK, Yang P, Bailey S, 
Spencer R, Fish GE, Wang R, Chong D, Abbey A, Anand R, MaGuire AA, Roseman RL, 
Hazariwala KM, Parrott B.

Author information:
(1)Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, University of Miami, Miami, Florida.
(2)Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon.
(3)Vitreoretinal Associates, Gainesville, Florida.
(4)Biogen, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(5)University of Oxford and NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Center, Oxford, 
United Kingdom. Electronic address: enquiries@eye.ox.ac.uk.

PURPOSE: Cotoretigene toliparvovec (BIIB112/AAV8-RPGR) is an investigational 
vector-based gene therapy designed to provide a full-length, codon-optimized 
retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator (RPGR) protein to individuals with 
RPGR-associated X-linked retinitis pigmentosa (XLRP). We assessed efficacy and 
tolerability of cotoretigene toliparvovec subretinal gene therapy.
DESIGN: Part 2 of the XIRIUS trial (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier, NCT03116113) 
was a phase 2/3, 12-month, randomized (1:1:1) dose-expansion study.
PARTICIPANTS: Male patients ≥10 years of age with RPGR-associated XLRP were 
included.
METHODS: Participants were randomized 1:1:1 to receive low-dose subretinal 
cotoretigene toliparvovec (5 × 1010 vector genomes/eye), high-dose cotoretigene 
toliparvovec (2.5 × 1011 vector genomes/eye) or to be an untreated control 
participant.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary end point was the percentage of participants 
meeting microperimetry responder criteria (≥ 7-dB improvement at ≥ 5 of 16 
central loci). Secondary end points included change from baseline in retinal 
sensitivity at the central 16 loci and the entire 68 loci at 12 months and 
change from baseline in low-luminance visual acuity (LLVA) at 12 months, as well 
as the proportion of eyes with a ≥ 15-Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study 
ETDRS letter LLVA and ≥ 10-ETDRS letter LLVA change from baseline at month 12.
RESULTS: Because of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, enrollment ended before 
reaching the initial target, leaving the trial underpowered. Twenty-nine 
participants were included (low-dose group, n = 10; high-dose group, n = 10; 
control group, n = 9). At month 12, the percentage of participants meeting 
microperimetry responder criteria was not significantly different between either 
cotoretigene toliparvovec group (low dose, 37.5% [P = 0.3181]; high dose, 25.0% 
[P = 0.5177]) and the control group (22.2%). However, the mean change from 
baseline in microperimetry sensitivity improved significantly with the low-dose 
group versus the control group at month 12 (P = 0.0350). Significant improvement 
in LLVA occurred in the low-dose group versus the control group at month 12 
(33.3% difference [80% confidence interval, 14.7%-55.2%]; P = 0.0498). Three 
ocular-related serious adverse events (SAEs) occurred in the low-dose group 
versus 7 SAEs in the high-dose group.
CONCLUSIONS: The primary microperimetry end point was not met. Significant 
improvements in LLVA and mean microperimetry were observed compared with 
controls and fewer SAEs occured with low-dose compared with high dose 
cotoretigene toliparvovec.
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE(S): Proprietary or commercial disclosure may be found in 
the Footnotes and Disclosures at the end of this article.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2024.02.023
PMID: 38423215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]