---
reference_id: "PMID:36856986"
title: The ocular manifestations of relapsing polychondritis.
authors:
- Gallagher K
- Al-Janabi A
- Wang A
journal: Int Ophthalmol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10792-023-02662-w
keywords:
- Humans
- "Polychondritis, Relapsing/complications, diagnosis"
- Eye
- "Scleritis/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Uveitis/etiology, complications"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The ocular manifestations of relapsing polychondritis.
**Authors:** Gallagher K, Al-Janabi A, Wang A
**Journal:** Int Ophthalmol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10792-023-02662-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10792-023-02662-w)

## Content

1. Int Ophthalmol. 2023 Aug;43(8):2633-2641. doi: 10.1007/s10792-023-02662-w.
Epub  2023 Mar 1.

The ocular manifestations of relapsing polychondritis.

Gallagher K(1), Al-Janabi A(2), Wang A(2).

Author information:
(1)Ysbyty Cwm Rhondda Hospital, Cwm Taf Morgannwg University Health Board, 
Tonypandy, CF40 2LX, Wales, UK. kevin.gallagher@wales.nhs.uk.
(2)Ysbyty Cwm Rhondda Hospital, Cwm Taf Morgannwg University Health Board, 
Tonypandy, CF40 2LX, Wales, UK.

PURPOSE: Relapsing polychondritis (RPC) is a rare, multi-system, inflammatory 
disorder. Ocular disease is estimated to occur in 14-67% of patients with RPC, 
and any ocular structure can be affected. Published case reports and series of 
RPC were analysed to determine the frequency and nature of the ocular 
manifestations of RPC, including the age and gender distribution.
METHODS: A literature search of the MEDLINE database for case reports and series 
on RPC was conducted in October 2021 using search terms [relapsing 
polychondritis (MeSH Major Topic)] OR [relapsing polychondritis 
(Title/Abstract)]. Articles were included if the diagnosis of RPC was confirmed 
using established diagnostic criteria and if the paper described the clinical 
features of patients with RPC.
RESULTS: 546 articles (454 case reports and 92 case series) described the 
clinical features in a total of 2414 patients with RPC. 49% of patients with RPC 
had ocular involvement, and this was a presenting feature in 21%. The most 
common ocular manifestations were scleritis (32%), episcleritis (31%) and 
uveitis (23%).
CONCLUSION: Many patients with RPC will be seen by an ophthalmologist during the 
course of their disease. Knowledge and awareness of RPC and its ocular 
manifestations is therefore essential to enable the ophthalmologist to make the 
diagnosis.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V.

DOI: 10.1007/s10792-023-02662-w
PMID: 36856986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]