---
reference_id: "PMID:16327428"
title: "Perivascular epithelioid cell neoplasms of soft tissue and gynecologic origin: a clinicopathologic study of 26 cases and review of the literature."
authors:
- Folpe AL
- Mentzel T
- Lehr HA
- Fisher C
- Balzer BL
- Weiss SW
journal: Am J Surg Pathol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1097/01.pas.0000173232.22117.37
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Epithelioid Cells/pathology
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Genital Neoplasms, Female/pathology"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Immunophenotyping
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mitosis
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local"
- "Neoplasms, Connective and Soft Tissue/drug therapy, immunology, metabolism, pathology, radiotherapy, surgery"
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Analysis
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- Tumor Burden
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Perivascular epithelioid cell neoplasms of soft tissue and gynecologic origin: a clinicopathologic study of 26 cases and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Folpe AL, Mentzel T, Lehr HA, Fisher C, Balzer BL, Weiss SW
**Journal:** Am J Surg Pathol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.pas.0000173232.22117.37](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.pas.0000173232.22117.37)

## Content

1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2005 Dec;29(12):1558-75. doi: 
10.1097/01.pas.0000173232.22117.37.

Perivascular epithelioid cell neoplasms of soft tissue and gynecologic origin: a 
clinicopathologic study of 26 cases and review of the literature.

Folpe AL(1), Mentzel T, Lehr HA, Fisher C, Balzer BL, Weiss SW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, 
GA 30322, USA. afolpe@emory.edu

PEComas, occasionally associated with the tuberous sclerosis complex, are 
defined by the presence of perivascular epithelioid cells that coexpress muscle 
and melanocytic markers. This family of tumors includes angiomyolipoma (AML), 
clear cell sugar tumor of the lung (CCST), lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM), and 
very rare tumors in other locations. Because non-AML/non-LAM PEComas are 
extremely rare and their natural history and prognostic features undefined, we 
present our experience with 26 PEComas of soft tissue and the gynecologic tract, 
the largest series to date. We also performed a detailed review of the 
literature, with special attention to features predictive of clinical behavior. 
All PEComas exclusive of AML and LAM were retrieved from our consultation files. 
Immunohistochemistry for pan-cytokeratin (CK), S-100 protein, smooth muscle 
actins (SMA), desmin, vimentin, HMB45, Melan-A, microphthalmia transcription 
factor (MiTF), TFE3, CD117, and CD34 was performed. Clinical follow-up 
information was obtained. Fisher's exact test was performed. The median patient 
age was 46 years (range, 15-97 years); there was a marked female predominance 
(22 females, 4 males). Sites of involvement included the omentum or mesentery (6 
cases), uterus (4 cases), pelvic soft tissues (3 cases), abdominal wall (2 
cases), uterine cervix (2 cases), and vagina, retroperitoneum, thigh, falciform 
ligament, scalp, broad ligament, forearm, shoulder, and neck (1 case each). The 
tumors ranged from 1.6 to 29 cm in size (median, 7.8 cm). Tumors were 
epithelioid (N = 9), spindled (N = 7), or mixed (N = 10). Multinucleated giant 
cells were present in 18 cases. High nuclear grade was noted in 10 cases, high 
cellularity in 7 cases, necrosis in 8 cases, and vascular invasion in 3 cases. 
Mitotic activity was 0 to 50 mitotic figures (MF)/50 high power fields (HPF) 
(median, 0 MF/50 HPF) with atypical MF in 6 cases. IHC results were: SMA 
(20/25), desmin (8/22), HMB45 (22/24), Melan-A (13/18), MITF (9/18), S-100 
protein (8/24), CK (3/23), vimentin (12/14), TFE3 (5/17), c-kit (1/20), and CD34 
(0/7). Clinical follow-up (24 of 26 patients, 92%; median, 30 months; range, 
10-84 months) showed 3 local recurrences and 5 distant metastases. At last 
available clinical follow-up, 2 patients (8%) were dead of disease, 4 patients 
(17%) were alive with metastatic or unresectable local disease, and 18 patients 
(75%) were alive with no evidence of disease. No patient in our series had a 
history of tuberous sclerosis complex. Recurrence and/or metastasis was strongly 
associated tumor size > median size (8 cm), mitotic activity greater than 1/50 
HPF, and necrosis. We conclude that PEComas of soft tissue and gynecologic 
origin may be classified as "benign," "of uncertain malignant potential," or 
"malignant." Small PEComas without any worrisome histologic features are most 
likely benign. PEComas with nuclear pleomorphism alone ("symplastic") and large 
PEComas without other worrisome features have uncertain malignant potential. 
PEComas with two or more worrisome histologic features should be considered 
malignant. Occasional PEComas express unusual markers, such as S-100 protein, 
desmin, and rarely CK. The role of TFE3 in PEComas should be further studied.

DOI: 10.1097/01.pas.0000173232.22117.37
PMID: 16327428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]