---
reference_id: "PMID:35067977"
title: RNAi therapy with givosiran significantly reduces attack rates in acute intermittent porphyria.
authors:
- Sardh E
- Harper P
journal: J Intern Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/joim.13443
keywords:
- "Acetylgalactosamine/analogs & derivatives"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Heme/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Incidence
- Porphobilinogen Synthase/deficiency
- "Porphyria, Acute Intermittent/therapy"
- "Porphyrias, Hepatic"
- Pyrrolidines
- Quality of Life
- RNAi Therapeutics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RNAi therapy with givosiran significantly reduces attack rates in acute intermittent porphyria.
**Authors:** Sardh E, Harper P
**Journal:** J Intern Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/joim.13443](https://doi.org/10.1111/joim.13443)

## Content

1. J Intern Med. 2022 May;291(5):593-610. doi: 10.1111/joim.13443. Epub 2022 Jan
23.

RNAi therapy with givosiran significantly reduces attack rates in acute
intermittent porphyria.

Sardh E(1), Harper P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Centre for Inherited Metabolic
Diseases, Porphyria Centre Sweden, Department of Endocrinology, Karolinska
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Centre for inherited
Metabolic Diseases, Porphyria Centre Sweden., Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

Acute hepatic porphyria (AHP) is a group of inherited metabolic disorders that
affect hepatic heme biosynthesis. They are associated with attacks of
neurovisceral manifestations that can be life threatening and constitute what is
considered an acute porphyria attack. Until recently, the sole specific
treatment for acute porphyria attacks consisted of the intravenous
administration of hemin. Although attacks are often sporadic, some patients
develop recurrent acute attacks, with devastating effects on quality of life.
Liver transplantation has historically been the sole curative treatment option.
The clinical manifestations of AHP are attributed to the accumulation of the
heme precursor 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and porphobilinogen (PBG). Advances
in molecular engineering have provided new therapeutic possibilities for
modifying the heme synthetic pathway. We reviewed the background and current
status of AHP treatment using liver-directed small interfering RNA targeting
ALAS1. The therapeutic aim was to normalize the levels of ALAS1, which is highly
upregulated during acute porphyria attacks. Givosiran is now an approved drug
for use in adults and adolescents aged 12 years and older. The results of
clinical trials have shown that givosiran treatment leads to a rapid and
sustained reduction of ALAS1 mRNA, decreased heme precursor levels, and a
decreased rate of acute attacks compared with placebo. The clinical trials
(phases I, II, and III) were all randomized and placebo controlled. Many
patients enrolled in the initial clinical trials have continued treatment in
open label extension and extended/compassionate-use programs in countries where
givosiran is not yet commercially available.

© 2022 The Authors. Journal of Internal Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons
Ltd on behalf of Association for Publication of The Journal of Internal
Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/joim.13443
PMID: 35067977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
