---
reference_id: "PMID:32429959"
title: "Gastrointestinal manifestations in Satoyoshi syndrome: a systematic review."
authors:
- Solís-García Del Pozo J
- de Cabo C
- Solera J
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-01395-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gastrointestinal manifestations in Satoyoshi syndrome: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Solís-García Del Pozo J, de Cabo C, Solera J
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-020-01395-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-020-01395-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2020 May 19;15(1):115. doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-01395-8.

Gastrointestinal manifestations in Satoyoshi syndrome: a systematic review.

Solís-García Del Pozo J(1)(2), de Cabo C(3)(4), Solera J(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de 
Albacete, Albacete, Spain.
(2)Department of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Castilla 
- La Mancha, Albacete, Spain.
(3)Research Department, Neuropsychopharmacology Unit, Complejo Hospitalario 
Universitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain. carlosd@sescam.jccm.es.
(4)Hospital General Universitario de Albacete, Unidad de Neuropsicofarmacología, 
Edificio de Investigación, 3ª planta c/ Hermanos Falcó, 37 E-02008, Albacete, 
Spain. carlosd@sescam.jccm.es.
(5)Research Department, Neuropsychopharmacology Unit, Complejo Hospitalario 
Universitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Satoyoshi syndrome (SS) [OMIM 600705; ORFHA 3130] is a multisystemic 
disease with a probable autoimmune basis, whose main symptoms are muscle spasms, 
alopecia, diarrhea and skeletal alterations. Chronic diarrhea may be severe and 
result in malnutrition, anemia, growth retardation, cachexia, disability and 
even death. However, to date, no review of the digestive symptoms has been 
carried out.
METHODS: A search was performed in MEDLINE, Scopus and Web of Science databases. 
Cases of SS, without language or date restrictions, were recorded. Sixty-seven 
cases of SS were found up until December 2019. Thirty-nine cases described 
gastrointestinal manifestations.
RESULTS: Chronic diarrhea was the main digestive symptom (92.3%). Other symptoms 
such as abdominal pain (15.4%), nausea (7.7%) and vomiting (7.7%), were less 
frequent. The D-xylose test was positive in 10 out of 12 patients, and 9 out of 
13 cases showed a flattened oral glucose tolerance test suggesting carbohydrate 
malabsorption. Antinuclear antibodies were detected in 8 out of 16 cases. 
Antibodies to stomach or duodenum tissue lysates were also detected by Western 
blot. Histological data revealed predominantly lymphoplasmacytic inflammatory 
infiltrate that can affect any section of the digestive tract. In 6 out of 10 
patients, diarrhea improved with a treatment regimen that included 
corticosteroids. Other treatments, such as methotrexate, carbohydrate restricted 
diets or otilonium bromide, improved digestive symptoms in isolated patients. 
Improvement of symptoms up to three years of follow-up has been described. None 
of the three patients who died had received corticosteroids or 
immunosuppressants.
CONCLUSION: Chronic diarrhea with malabsorption is one of the most disabling 
symptoms in SS. The early recognition of this disease is essential for 
immunosuppressive treatment and a better outcome.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-020-01395-8
PMCID: PMC7236136
PMID: 32429959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant affiliations or 
financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest 
in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the 
manuscript. This includes employment, consultations, honoraria, stock ownership 
or options, expert testimony, grants or patents received or pending, or 
royalties.