---
reference_id: "PMID:33570899"
title: T helper 17 cell responses induce cardiac hypertrophy and remodeling in essential hypertension.
authors:
- Xu L
- Chen G
- Liang Y
- Zhou C
- Zhang F
- Fan T
- Chen X
- Zhou H
- Yuan W
journal: Pol Arch Intern Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.20452/pamw.15811
content_type: abstract_only
---

# T helper 17 cell responses induce cardiac hypertrophy and remodeling in essential hypertension.
**Authors:** Xu L, Chen G, Liang Y, Zhou C, Zhang F, Fan T, Chen X, Zhou H, Yuan W
**Journal:** Pol Arch Intern Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.20452/pamw.15811](https://doi.org/10.20452/pamw.15811)

## Content

1. Pol Arch Intern Med. 2021 Mar 30;131(3):257-265. doi: 10.20452/pamw.15811.
Epub  2021 Feb 11.

T helper 17 cell responses induce cardiac hypertrophy and remodeling in 
essential hypertension.

Xu L(1), Chen G(1), Liang Y(1), Zhou C(1), Zhang F(1), Fan T(1), Chen X(1), Zhou 
H(2), Yuan W(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University, 
Zhenjiang, Jiangsu Province, China
(2)School of Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu Province, China
(3)Department of Cardiology, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University, 
Zhenjiang, Jiangsu Province, China. dryuanwei123@163.com

INTRODUCTION: An increasing body of evidence has shown that type 17 helper T 
(TH17) cell responses play an important role in the progression of cardiac 
remodeling stimulated by long‑term pressure overload.
OBJECTIVES: We aimed to investigate the relationship between TH17 responses and 
cardiac remodeling, and the prognostic value of TH17 responses in hypertensive 
patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 187 adults with hypertension and 70 healthy 
controls were enrolled in the present study. TH17 cell frequencies, matrix 
metallopeptidase 9, procollagen type I, and procollagen type III were studied at 
baseline. All adults underwent routine echocardiography to assess left 
ventricular diastolic function (LVDF) at baseline and after 24 months of 
follow‑up.
RESULTS: The percentage of TH17 cells was increased in hypertensive patients, 
particularly in adults with left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). Receiver 
operating characteristic (ROC) analysis revealed that the area under the curve 
(AUC) of TH17 cells for predicting of LVH was 0.943 (95% CI, 0.914-0.971; P 
<0.001) and the cutoff value was 2.3%. On logistic regression analysis, the 
percentage of TH17 cells was an independent predictor of LVH (odds ratio, 1.47; 
95% CI, 2.23-2.28; P = 0.005). The percentage of TH17 cells significantly 
correlated with the levels of fibrotic parameters. According to the cutoff value 
of TH17 cells, patients with a lower level of TH17 cell differentiation had a 
better prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: The differentiation of TH17 cells reflected the cardiac hypertrophy 
and remodeling response to hypertension‑induced pressure overload, and it might 
be a potential inflammatory marker to predict the prognosis of hypertensive 
patients.

DOI: 10.20452/pamw.15811
PMID: 33570899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]