---
reference_id: "PMID:35634570"
title: "Efficacy and safety of intravenous immunoglobulin for treating refractory livedoid vasculopathy: a systematic review."
authors:
- Gao Y
- Jin H
journal: Ther Adv Chronic Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/20406223221097331
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of intravenous immunoglobulin for treating refractory livedoid vasculopathy: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Gao Y, Jin H
**Journal:** Ther Adv Chronic Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/20406223221097331](https://doi.org/10.1177/20406223221097331)

## Content

1. Ther Adv Chronic Dis. 2022 May 22;13:20406223221097331. doi: 
10.1177/20406223221097331. eCollection 2022.

Efficacy and safety of intravenous immunoglobulin for treating refractory 
livedoid vasculopathy: a systematic review.

Gao Y(1), Jin H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare 
Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Science and Peking Union Medical College, National Clinical Research Center for 
Dermatologic and Immunologic Diseases, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare 
Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Science and Peking Union Medical College, National Clinical Research Center for 
Dermatologic and Immunologic Diseases, No.1 Shuaifuyuan, Dongcheng district, 
Beijing, 100730 China.

INTRODUCTION: Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) was reported to be the third 
most used monotherapy in livedoid vasculopathy (LV). There is currently a lack 
of randomized controlled clinical trials and no standardized therapeutic regimen 
for IVIG therapy in LV.
METHODS: We performed a systematic review of the efficacy and safety of IVIG in 
treating patients with LV using PubMed, Cochrane, and Embase databases.
RESULTS: Eighty LV patients from 17 articles were included, receiving IVIG 
therapy at a dose of 1-2.1 g/kg body weight every 4 weeks. The effective rate of 
IVIG therapy in LV patients was 95% (76/80) in published studies, showing a good 
clinical response for resolution of pain, skin ulcerations, and neurological 
symptoms, and reducing the dependence on glucocorticoids and immunosuppressive 
agents. IVIG therapy was well tolerated, and no severe adverse events were 
observed.
CONCLUSION: Overall, to a certain degree, IVIG is probably a safe and effective 
treatment alternative for refractory LV patients, which still need to be 
confirmed by large-scale randomized controlled clinical trials.

© The Author(s), 2022.

DOI: 10.1177/20406223221097331
PMCID: PMC9134453
PMID: 35634570

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors 
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.