---
reference_id: "PMID:25979278"
title: "The social contact hypothesis under the assumption of endemic equilibrium: Elucidating the transmission potential of VZV in Europe."
authors:
- Santermans E
- Goeyvaerts N
- Melegaro A
- Edmunds WJ
- Faes C
- Aerts M
- Beutels P
- Hens N
journal: Epidemics
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.epidem.2014.12.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The social contact hypothesis under the assumption of endemic equilibrium: Elucidating the transmission potential of VZV in Europe.
**Authors:** Santermans E, Goeyvaerts N, Melegaro A, Edmunds WJ, Faes C, Aerts M, Beutels P, Hens N
**Journal:** Epidemics (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.epidem.2014.12.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epidem.2014.12.005)

## Content

1. Epidemics. 2015 Jun;11:14-23. doi: 10.1016/j.epidem.2014.12.005. Epub 2015 Jan
 10.

The social contact hypothesis under the assumption of endemic equilibrium: 
Elucidating the transmission potential of VZV in Europe.

Santermans E(1), Goeyvaerts N(2), Melegaro A(3), Edmunds WJ(4), Faes C(5), Aerts 
M(5), Beutels P(6), Hens N(2).

Author information:
(1)Interuniversity Institute for Biostatistics and Statistical Bioinformatics, 
Hasselt University, Diepenbeek, Belgium. Electronic address: 
eva.santermans@uhasselt.be.
(2)Interuniversity Institute for Biostatistics and Statistical Bioinformatics, 
Hasselt University, Diepenbeek, Belgium; Centre for Health Economic Research and 
Modelling Infectious Diseases, Vaccine & Infectious Disease Institute, 
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(3)Department of Policy Analysis and Public Management and Dondena Centre for 
Research on Social Dynamics, Universit Commerciale L. Bocconi, Milan, Italy.
(4)London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Interuniversity Institute for Biostatistics and Statistical Bioinformatics, 
Hasselt University, Diepenbeek, Belgium.
(6)Centre for Health Economic Research and Modelling Infectious Diseases, 
Vaccine & Infectious Disease Institute, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium; 
School of Public Health and Community Medicine, The University of New South 
Wales, Sydney, Australia.

The basic reproduction number R0 and the effective reproduction number R are 
pivotal parameters in infectious disease epidemiology, quantifying the 
transmission potential of an infection in a population. We estimate both 
parameters from 13 pre-vaccination serological data sets on varicella zoster 
virus (VZV) in 12 European countries and from population-based social contact 
surveys under the commonly made assumptions of endemic and demographic 
equilibrium. The fit to the serology is evaluated using the inferred effective 
reproduction number R as a model eligibility criterion combined with AIC as a 
model selection criterion. For only 2 out of 12 countries, the common choice of 
a constant proportionality factor is sufficient to provide a good fit to the 
seroprevalence data. For the other countries, an age-specific proportionality 
factor provides a better fit, assuming physical contacts lasting longer than 15 
min are a good proxy for potential varicella transmission events. In all 
countries, primary infection with VZV most often occurs in early childhood, but 
there is substantial variation in transmission potential with R0 ranging from 
2.8 in England and Wales to 7.6 in The Netherlands. Two non-parametric methods, 
the maximal information coefficient (MIC) and a random forest approach, are used 
to explain these differences in R0 in terms of relevant country-specific 
characteristics. Our results suggest an association with three general factors: 
inequality in wealth, infant vaccination coverage and child care attendance. 
This illustrates the need to consider fundamental differences between European 
countries when formulating and parameterizing infectious disease models.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.epidem.2014.12.005
PMID: 25979278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]