---
reference_id: "PMID:36353773"
title: Atrophic Papulosis.
authors:
- Robert M
- Hot A
journal: Dermatology
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1159/000526789
keywords:
- Humans
- "Malignant Atrophic Papulosis/complications, diagnosis, pathology"
- Skin/pathology
- Erythema
- Immunosuppressive Agents
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atrophic Papulosis.
**Authors:** Robert M, Hot A
**Journal:** Dermatology (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000526789](https://doi.org/10.1159/000526789)

## Content

1. Dermatology. 2023;239(2):177-187. doi: 10.1159/000526789. Epub 2022 Nov 9.

Atrophic Papulosis.

Robert M(1), Hot A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology and Internal Medicine, University of Lyon 
1, Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.

BACKGROUND: Atrophic papulosis (AP) is a rare obliterating vasculopathy 
characterized by specific skin lesions. The etiology and the pathophysiology of 
the disease remain unclear. The treatment is still empirical, while the 
malignant form of the disease is associated with a poor prognosis.
SUMMARY: The underlying pathogenesis of AP includes three mechanisms with 
vasculopathy, coagulopathy, and endothelial dysfunction. Benign and malignant 
forms of AP are described. The benign form is confined to the skin. The 
pathognomonic skin lesions evolve over time and are large papules with an 
atrophic porcelain-white center and an erythematous rim. However, systemic 
involvement can occur months or years after the initial skin features. In this 
latter case, the associated mortality is very high with a mortality rate of over 
65% in some series. Gastrointestinal involvement and central nervous system 
infarctions are the most frequent causes of death. Treatment is empirical with 
the use of antiplatelet therapy, anticoagulants, steroids, intravenous 
immunoglobulins, and immunosuppressive agents. Recent evidence shows that 
eculizumab, a complement inhibitor, is the most effective therapy in malignant 
AP with gastrointestinal involvement of the disease and should be combined with 
treprostinil to prevent relapse.

© 2022 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000526789
PMID: 36353773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]