---
reference_id: "PMID:16136463"
title: Lung remodeling in pulmonary tuberculosis.
authors:
- Dheda K
- Booth H
- Huggett JF
- Johnson MA
- Zumla A
- Rook GA
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1086/444545
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lung remodeling in pulmonary tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Dheda K, Booth H, Huggett JF, Johnson MA, Zumla A, Rook GA
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1086/444545](https://doi.org/10.1086/444545)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2005 Oct 1;192(7):1201-9. doi: 10.1086/444545. Epub 2005 Aug 29.

Lung remodeling in pulmonary tuberculosis.

Dheda K(1), Booth H, Huggett JF, Johnson MA, Zumla A, Rook GA.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of 
Thoracic and HIV Medicine, Royal Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom. 
k.dheda@ucl.ac.uk

Tuberculosis is a global public health catastrophe responsible for >8 million 
cases of illness and 2 million deaths annually. Pulmonary cavitation with 
cough-generated aerosol is the principle means of spread, and lung remodeling 
(healed cavitation, fibrosis, and bronchiectasis) is a major cause of lung 
disability, surpassing all other diffuse parenchymal lung diseases combined. 
Efficient granuloma turnover is mycobactericidal, and extracellular matrix is 
disbanded without scarring. In many with progressive disease, however, there is 
dysregulated granuloma turnover, liquefactive necrosis, and pathological 
scarring. The pathological mechanisms and the related immunological pathways 
underpinning these phenomena are reviewed in the present article. Further 
studies are needed to identify and develop specific immunotherapeutic 
interventions that target immunopathology, since they have the potential to 
substantially reduce spread.

DOI: 10.1086/444545
PMID: 16136463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]