---
reference_id: "PMID:36950864"
title: COVID-19 as a Trigger for Type 1 Diabetes.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Guo H
- Wang G
- Zhai J
- Du B
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgad165
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COVID-19 as a Trigger for Type 1 Diabetes.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Guo H, Wang G, Zhai J, Du B
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgad165](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgad165)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2023 Aug 18;108(9):2176-2183. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgad165.

COVID-19 as a Trigger for Type 1 Diabetes.

Wang Y(1), Guo H(1), Wang G(2), Zhai J(2), Du B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Lequn Branch, The First Hospital of Jilin 
University, Changchun, Jilin 130021, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Lequn Branch, The First Hospital of Jilin 
University, Changchun, Jilin 130021, P.R. China.

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is usually caused by immune-mediated destruction of islet 
β cells, and genetic and environmental factors are thought to trigger 
autoimmunity. Convincing evidence indicates that viruses are associated with T1D 
development and progression. During the COVID-19 pandemic, cases of 
hyperglycemia, diabetic ketoacidosis, and new diabetes increased, suggesting 
that SARS-CoV-2 may be a trigger for or unmask T1D. Possible mechanisms of 
β-cell damage include virus-triggered cell death, immune-mediated loss of 
pancreatic β cells, and damage to β cells because of infection of surrounding 
cells. This article examines the potential pathways by which SARS-CoV-2 affects 
islet β cells in these 3 aspects. Specifically, we emphasize that T1D can be 
triggered by SARS-CoV-2 through several autoimmune mechanisms, including epitope 
spread, molecular mimicry, and bystander activation. Given that the development 
of T1D is often a chronic, long-term process, it is difficult to currently draw 
firm conclusions as to whether SARS-CoV-2 causes T1D. This area needs to be 
focused on in terms of the long-term outcomes. More in-depth and comprehensive 
studies with larger cohorts of patients and long-term clinical follow-ups are 
required.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgad165
PMID: 36950864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]