---
reference_id: "PMID:25085631"
title: Frequency and clinical pattern of vitelliform macular dystrophy caused by mutations of interphotoreceptor matrix IMPG1 and IMPG2 genes.
authors:
- Meunier I
- Manes G
- Bocquet B
- Marquette V
- Baudoin C
- Puech B
- Defoort-Dhellemmes S
- Audo I
- Verdet R
- Arndt C
- Zanlonghi X
- Le Meur G
- Dhaenens CM
- Hamel CP
journal: Ophthalmology
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2014.06.028
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Case-Control Studies
- Electrooculography
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins/genetics
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Proteoglycans/genetics
- Retinal Pigment Epithelium/pathology
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Visual Acuity
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequency and clinical pattern of vitelliform macular dystrophy caused by mutations of interphotoreceptor matrix IMPG1 and IMPG2 genes.
**Authors:** Meunier I, Manes G, Bocquet B, Marquette V, Baudoin C, Puech B, Defoort-Dhellemmes S, Audo I, Verdet R, Arndt C, Zanlonghi X, Le Meur G, Dhaenens CM, Hamel CP
**Journal:** Ophthalmology (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ophtha.2014.06.028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2014.06.028)

## Content

1. Ophthalmology. 2014 Dec;121(12):2406-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2014.06.028.
Epub  2014 Jul 29.

Frequency and clinical pattern of vitelliform macular dystrophy caused by 
mutations of interphotoreceptor matrix IMPG1 and IMPG2 genes.

Meunier I(1), Manes G(2), Bocquet B(3), Marquette V(3), Baudoin C(3), Puech 
B(4), Defoort-Dhellemmes S(4), Audo I(5), Verdet R(6), Arndt C(7), Zanlonghi 
X(8), Le Meur G(9), Dhaenens CM(10), Hamel CP(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Référence Maladies Sensorielles Génétiques, Hôpital Gui de 
Chauliac, Montpellier, France; Montpellier University, Montpellier, France; 
Institute for Neurosciences, INSERM, Montpellier, France. Electronic address: 
isabelannemeunier@yahoo.fr.
(2)Centre de Référence Maladies Sensorielles Génétiques, Hôpital Gui de 
Chauliac, Montpellier, France; Institute for Neurosciences, INSERM, Montpellier, 
France.
(3)Centre de Référence Maladies Sensorielles Génétiques, Hôpital Gui de 
Chauliac, Montpellier, France; Montpellier University, Montpellier, France; 
Institute for Neurosciences, INSERM, Montpellier, France.
(4)Service d'Exploration de la Vision et Neuro-ophtalmologie, Hôpital Robert 
Salengro, Lille, France.
(5)Service d'Ophtalmologie, Centre National des XV-XX, Paris, France.
(6)Ophthalmologist, Avignon, France.
(7)Eye Clinic, Hôpital Robert Debré, Reims, France.
(8)Clinic Sourdille, Nantes, France.
(9)Service d'Ophtalmologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Nantes, France.
(10)Institut de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, UF Génopathies, Lille, 
France, and Université Lille Nord de France, Lille, France.

PURPOSE: To assess the frequency of and to characterize the clinical spectrum 
and optical coherence tomography findings of vitelliform macular dystrophy 
linked to IMPG1 and IMPG2, 2 new causal genes expressed in the 
interphotoreceptor matrix.
DESIGN: Retrospective epidemiologic, clinical, electrophysiologic, and molecular 
genetic study.
PARTICIPANTS: The database of a national referral center specialized in genetic 
sensory diseases was screened for patients with a macular vitelliform dystrophy 
without identified mutation or small deletion or large rearrangement in BEST1 
and PRPH2 genes. Forty-nine families were included.
METHODS: Clinical, imaging, and electro-oculogram findings were reviewed. 
Mutation screening of IMPG1 and IMPG2 genes were performed systematically.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Frequency, inheritance, and clinical pattern of 
vitelliform dystrophy associated with IMPG1 and IMPG2 mutations were 
characterized.
RESULTS: IMPG1 was the causal gene in 3 families (IMPG1 1-3, 11 patients) and 
IMPG2 in a fourth family (2 patients). With an autosomal dominant transmission, 
families 1 and 2 had the c.713T→G (p.Leu238Arg) mutation in IMPG1 and family 4 
had the c.3230G→T (p.Cys1077Phe) mutation in IMPG2. Patients with IMPG1 or IMPG2 
mutations had a late onset and moderate visual impairment (mean visual acuity, 
20/40; mean age of onset, 42 years), even in the sporadic case of family 3 with 
a presumed recessive transmission (age at onset, 38 years; mean visual acuity, 
20/50). Drusen-like lesions adjacent to the vitelliform deposits were observed 
in 9 of 13 patients. The vitelliform material was above the retinal pigment 
epithelium (RPE) at any stage of the macular dystrophy, and this epithelium was 
well preserved and maintained its classical reflectivity on spectral-domain 
optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT). Electro-oculogram results were normal or 
borderline in 9 cases.
CONCLUSIONS: IMPG1 and IMPG2 are new causal genes in 8% of families negative for 
BEST1 and PRPH2 mutations. These genes should be screened in adult-onset 
vitelliform dystrophy with (1) moderate visual impairment, (2) drusen-like 
lesions, (3) normal reflectivity of the RPE line on SD-OCT, and (4) vitelliform 
deposits located between ellipsoid and interdigitation lines on SD-OCT. These 
clinical characteristics are not observed in the classical forms of BEST1 or 
PRPH2 vitelliform dystrophies.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Ophthalmology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2014.06.028
PMID: 25085631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]