---
reference_id: "PMID:37967063"
title: The matrix metalloproteinase ADAM10 supports hepatitis C virus entry and cell-to-cell spread via its sheddase activity.
authors:
- Carriquí-Madroñal B
- Sheldon J
- Duven M
- Stegmann C
- Cirksena K
- Wyler E
- Zapatero-Belinchón FJ
- Vondran FWR
- Gerold G
journal: PLoS Pathog
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011759
keywords:
- Humans
- Hepacivirus/physiology
- "Scavenger Receptors, Class B/genetics, metabolism"
- Virus Internalization
- Hepatitis C
- Carrier Proteins
- ErbB Receptors/metabolism
- "Tetraspanin 28/genetics, metabolism"
- "ADAM10 Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Amyloid Precursor Protein Secretases/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The matrix metalloproteinase ADAM10 supports hepatitis C virus entry and cell-to-cell spread via its sheddase activity.
**Authors:** Carriquí-Madroñal B, Sheldon J, Duven M, Stegmann C, Cirksena K, Wyler E, Zapatero-Belinchón FJ, Vondran FWR, Gerold G
**Journal:** PLoS Pathog (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.ppat.1011759](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1011759)

## Content

1. PLoS Pathog. 2023 Nov 15;19(11):e1011759. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011759.
eCollection 2023 Nov.

The matrix metalloproteinase ADAM10 supports hepatitis C virus entry and
cell-to-cell spread via its sheddase activity.

Carriquí-Madroñal B(1), Sheldon J(2), Duven M(1), Stegmann C(1), Cirksena K(1),
Wyler E(3), Zapatero-Belinchón FJ(1)(4), Vondran FWR(5)(6), Gerold
G(1)(2)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Research Center for Emerging Infections and
Zoonoses (RIZ), University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Hanover, Germany.
(2)Institute for Experimental Virology, TWINCORE, Centre for Experimental and
Clinical Infection Research, a joint venture between the Medical School Hannover
and the Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Hanover, Germany.
(3)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association
(MDC), Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology (BIMSB), Berlin, Germany.
(4)Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(5)Department of General, Visceral and Transplant Surgery, Regenerative Medicine
and Experimental Surgery, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(6)German Center for Infection Research Partner Site Hannover-Braunschweig
Hannover, Germany.
(7)Wallenberg Centre for Molecular Medicine (WCMM), Umeå University, Umeå,
Sweden.
(8)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Virology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) exploits the four entry factors CD81, scavenger receptor
class B type I (SR-BI, also known as SCARB1), occludin, and claudin-1 as well as
the co-factor epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) to infect human
hepatocytes. Here, we report that the disintegrin and matrix metalloproteinase
10 (ADAM10) associates with CD81, SR-BI, and EGFR and acts as HCV host factor.
Pharmacological inhibition, siRNA-mediated silencing and genetic ablation of
ADAM10 reduced HCV infection. ADAM10 was dispensable for HCV replication but
supported HCV entry and cell-to-cell spread. Substrates of the ADAM10 sheddase
including epidermal growth factor (EGF) and E-cadherin, which activate EGFR
family members, rescued HCV infection of ADAM10 knockout cells. ADAM10 did not
influence infection with other enveloped RNA viruses such as alphaviruses and a
common cold coronavirus. Collectively, our study reveals a critical role for the
sheddase ADAM10 as a HCV host factor, contributing to EGFR family member
transactivation and as a consequence to HCV uptake.

Copyright: © 2023 Carriquí-Madroñal et al. This is an open access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which
permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided
the original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011759
PMCID: PMC10650992
PMID: 37967063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
