---
reference_id: "PMID:37179316"
title: Long-term mepolizumab treatment reduces relapse rates in super-responders with eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis.
authors:
- Masumoto N
- Oshikata C
- Nakadegawa R
- Motobayashi Y
- Osada R
- Manabe S
- Kaneko T
- Tsurikisawa N
journal: Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13223-023-00801-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term mepolizumab treatment reduces relapse rates in super-responders with eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis.
**Authors:** Masumoto N, Oshikata C, Nakadegawa R, Motobayashi Y, Osada R, Manabe S, Kaneko T, Tsurikisawa N
**Journal:** Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13223-023-00801-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13223-023-00801-7)

## Content

1. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol. 2023 May 13;19(1):40. doi: 
10.1186/s13223-023-00801-7.

Long-term mepolizumab treatment reduces relapse rates in super-responders with 
eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis.

Masumoto N(1)(2), Oshikata C(1)(2)(3), Nakadegawa R(1), Motobayashi Y(1), Osada 
R(1), Manabe S(1), Kaneko T(2), Tsurikisawa N(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respirology, National Hospital Organization Yokohama Medical 
Center, 3-60-2 Harajuku, Totsuka-Ku, Yokohama, 245-8575, Japan.
(2)Department of Pulmonology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 3-9 Fukuura, Kanazawa-Ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, 236-0004, Japan.
(3)Department of Allergy and Respirology, Hiratsuka City Hospital, 1-19-1 
Minamihara, Hiratsuka, Kanagawa, 254-0065, Japan.
(4)Department of Respirology, National Hospital Organization Yokohama Medical 
Center, 3-60-2 Harajuku, Totsuka-Ku, Yokohama, 245-8575, Japan. 
User831328@aol.com.
(5)Department of Pulmonology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 3-9 Fukuura, Kanazawa-Ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, 236-0004, Japan. 
User831328@aol.com.
(6)Department of Allergy and Respirology, Hiratsuka City Hospital, 1-19-1 
Minamihara, Hiratsuka, Kanagawa, 254-0065, Japan. User831328@aol.com.

BACKGROUND: The mainstay of treatment for eosinophilic granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis (EGPA) is systemic corticosteroid therapy; some patients also 
receive intravenous immunoglobulins, other immunosuppressive agents, and 
biologics. Mepolizumab, an anti-interleukin-5 monoclonal antibody, induces 
remission and decreases the daily corticosteroid dose; however, the clinical 
efficacy of mepolizumab in EGPA and the prognosis with long-term treatment with 
this drug are unknown.
METHODS: Seventy-one EGPA patients were treated at Hiratsuka City Hospital, 
Japan, between April 2018 and March 2022. We administered mepolizumab for a mean 
of 2.8 ± 1.7 years to 43 patients in whom remission could not be induced by 
conventional treatment. After excluding 18 patients who had received mepolizumab 
for less than 3 years, we classified 15 patients into a "super-responder group" 
(the daily dose of corticosteroids or other immunosuppressant could be 
decreased, or the interval between IVIG treatments could be prolonged) and 10 
patients into a "responder group" (neither of these changes was achievable). 
Eosinophil numbers, serum IgG levels, daily doses of corticosteroids and other 
immunosuppressants, Birmingham Vasculitis Activity Score (BVAS), and relapse 
frequency before and after mepolizumab initiation were determined.
RESULTS: Blood eosinophil count at diagnosis and the lowest serum IgG level 
before mepolizumab treatment were significantly higher in super-responders than 
in responders (p < 0.05). In super-responders, the prednisolone dose at last 
visit on mepolizumab treatment was lower than that before treatment (p < 0.01) 
and lower than that at last visit in the responders (p < 0.01). In both groups, 
peripheral blood eosinophil numbers and BVAS were lower after starting 
mepolizumab than before (p < 0.01). BVAS before mepolizumab (p < 0.05) and at 
last visit (p < 0.01) were lower in super-responders than in responders. Relapse 
rates every year after the start of mepolizumab were lower in super-responders 
than in responder groups (p < 0.01). In super-responders, relapse rates were 
lower during the 3 years following mepolizumab initiation (p < 0.01) and at last 
visit (p < 0.01) were significantly lower than after 1 year of treatment.
CONCLUSION: Mepolizumab treatment of super-responders sustainably reduced the 
relapse rate.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13223-023-00801-7
PMCID: PMC10182616
PMID: 37179316

Conflict of interest statement: N. Masumoto, C. Oshikata, R. Nakadegawa, Y. 
Motobayashi, R. Osada, S. Manabe, and T. Kaneko have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose regarding this study. N. Tsurikisawa received a lecture fees from 
GlaxoSmithKline Co., Ltd., and Teijin Healthcare Co., Ltd.