---
reference_id: "PMID:35104443"
title: Neuromuscular Complications of Systemic Amyloidosis.
authors:
- Namiranian D
- Geisler S
journal: Am J Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2022.01.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuromuscular Complications of Systemic Amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Namiranian D, Geisler S
**Journal:** Am J Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjmed.2022.01.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2022.01.006)

## Content

1. Am J Med. 2022 Apr;135 Suppl 1:S13-S19. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2022.01.006.
Epub  2022 Jan 31.

Neuromuscular Complications of Systemic Amyloidosis.

Namiranian D(1), Geisler S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Neuromuscular Division, Washington University School 
of Medicine in St. Louis, Mo.
(2)Department of Neurology, Neuromuscular Division, Washington University School 
of Medicine in St. Louis, Mo. Electronic address: geislers@wustl.edu.

Systemic amyloidosis is characterized by extracellular deposition of insoluble 
fibrillar proteins in multiple tissues, frequently at a distance from the site 
of synthesis. The 2 most common forms, light chain (AL) and transthyretin (ATTR) 
amyloidosis can cause peripheral neuropathy and, rarely, myopathy. Diagnosis can 
be challenging, and abundant suspicion is required to identify patients. As 
neurological manifestations of amyloidosis may precede involvement of other 
organs by several years, recognizing amyloid neuropathy and myopathy are 
crucial, especially in this new and exciting era of effective therapies for AL 
and ATTR neuropathy. This review will focus on the neuromuscular manifestations 
of AL and ATTR amyloidosis, diagnostic approaches, and recent advances in the 
treatment of amyloid neuropathy.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2022.01.006
PMID: 35104443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]