---
reference_id: "PMID:37239850"
title: Mitochondrial Mutations Can Alter Neuromuscular Transmission in Congenital Myasthenic Syndrome and Mitochondrial Disease.
authors:
- "O'Connor K"
- Spendiff S
- Lochmüller H
- Horvath R
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24108505
keywords:
- Humans
- "Myasthenic Syndromes, Congenital/genetics"
- Neuromuscular Junction/genetics
- Synapses
- Mitochondrial Diseases
- Mutation
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- Organic Anion Transporters/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial Mutations Can Alter Neuromuscular Transmission in Congenital Myasthenic Syndrome and Mitochondrial Disease.
**Authors:** O'Connor K, Spendiff S, Lochmüller H, Horvath R
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24108505](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24108505)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 May 9;24(10):8505. doi: 10.3390/ijms24108505.

Mitochondrial Mutations Can Alter Neuromuscular Transmission in Congenital 
Myasthenic Syndrome and Mitochondrial Disease.

O'Connor K(1)(2)(3), Spendiff S(1), Lochmüller H(1)(4)(5)(6)(7), Horvath R(8).

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, ON K1H 
8L1, Canada.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, 
ON K1H 8M5, Canada.
(3)Centre for Neuromuscular Disease, University of Ottawa Brain and Mind 
Research Institute, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada.
(4)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, 
ON K1H 8L6, Canada.
(5)Brain and Mind Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, 
Canada.
(6)Department of Neuropediatrics and Muscle Disorders, Faculty of Medicine, 
Medical Center-University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(7)Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico (CNAG-CRG), Center for Genomic 
Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), 08028 
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(8)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 
0FD, UK.

Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are a group of rare, neuromuscular 
disorders that usually present in childhood or infancy. While the phenotypic 
presentation of these disorders is diverse, the unifying feature is a 
pathomechanism that disrupts neuromuscular transmission. Recently, two 
mitochondrial genes-SLC25A1 and TEFM-have been reported in patients with 
suspected CMS, prompting a discussion about the role of mitochondria at the 
neuromuscular junction (NMJ). Mitochondrial disease and CMS can present with 
similar symptoms, and potentially one in four patients with mitochondrial 
myopathy exhibit NMJ defects. This review highlights research indicating the 
prominent roles of mitochondria at both the pre- and postsynapse, demonstrating 
the potential for mitochondrial involvement in neuromuscular transmission 
defects. We propose the establishment of a novel subcategorization for 
CMS-mitochondrial CMS, due to unifying clinical features and the potential for 
mitochondrial defects to impede transmission at the pre- and postsynapse. 
Finally, we highlight the potential of targeting the neuromuscular transmission 
in mitochondrial disease to improve patient outcomes.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24108505
PMCID: PMC10218558
PMID: 37239850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.