---
reference_id: "PMID:39939082"
title: "Bell's Palsy."
authors:
- Dalrymple SN
- Row JH
- Gazewood JD
journal: Prim Care
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.pop.2024.09.012
keywords:
- Humans
- "Bell Palsy/diagnosis, therapy, etiology, epidemiology, physiopathology, drug therapy"
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- "Botulinum Toxins, Type A/therapeutic use"
- Primary Health Care
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bell's Palsy.
**Authors:** Dalrymple SN, Row JH, Gazewood JD
**Journal:** Prim Care (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pop.2024.09.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pop.2024.09.012)

## Content

1. Prim Care. 2025 Mar;52(1):111-121. doi: 10.1016/j.pop.2024.09.012. Epub 2025
Jan  3.

Bell's Palsy.

Dalrymple SN(1), Row JH(1), Gazewood JD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, University of Virginia Health, 
Charlottesville, VA, USA.
(2)Department of Family Medicine, University of Virginia Health, 
Charlottesville, VA, USA. Electronic address: Jdg3k@uvahealth.org.

Bell's palsy is acute weakness of the facial muscles associated with compression 
of cranial nerve VII. The annual incidence is 20 to 30 per 100,000. Diagnosis is 
based on a thorough history and physical examination, with careful attention to 
exclude other causes of facial weakness, such as stroke or Lyme disease. Oral 
corticosteroids improve recovery rates and antiviral medications reduce 
synkinesis. Most patients will recover completely. Physical therapy and Botox 
injections can help patients with persistent symptoms. The roles of surgery and 
acupuncture remain unclear. Close follow-up is warranted and patients without 
improvement should be referred to a specialist.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pop.2024.09.012
PMID: 39939082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors have nothing to disclose.