---
reference_id: "PMID:27502083"
title: "A novel mutation m.8561C>G in MT-ATP6/8 causing a mitochondrial syndrome with ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, diabetes mellitus, and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism."
authors:
- Kytövuori L
- Lipponen J
- Rusanen H
- Komulainen T
- Martikainen MH
- Majamaa K
journal: J Neurol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-016-8249-2
keywords:
- Adenosine Triphosphate/metabolism
- "Ataxia/complications, genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypogonadism/complications, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/complications, genetics"
- Mitochondrial Proton-Translocating ATPases/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- "Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel mutation m.8561C>G in MT-ATP6/8 causing a mitochondrial syndrome with ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, diabetes mellitus, and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism.
**Authors:** Kytövuori L, Lipponen J, Rusanen H, Komulainen T, Martikainen MH, Majamaa K
**Journal:** J Neurol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-016-8249-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-016-8249-2)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2016 Nov;263(11):2188-2195. doi: 10.1007/s00415-016-8249-2. Epub
2016  Aug 8.

A novel mutation m.8561C>G in MT-ATP6/8 causing a mitochondrial syndrome with 
ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, diabetes mellitus, and hypergonadotropic 
hypogonadism.

Kytövuori L(1)(2)(3), Lipponen J(1)(2)(3), Rusanen H(1)(2)(3), Komulainen T(4), 
Martikainen MH(5), Majamaa K(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit of Clinical Neuroscience, University of Oulu, P.O. Box 5000, 
90014, Oulu, Finland.
(2)Medical Research Center Oulu, Oulu University Hospital and University of 
Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(3)Department of Neurology, Oulu University Hospital, P.O. Box 20, 90029, Oulu, 
Finland.
(4)PEDEGO Research Unit, University of Oulu, P.O. Box 5000, 90014, Oulu, 
Finland.
(5)Division of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Turku and Turku University 
Hospital, Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, 20520, Turku, Finland.
(6)Research Unit of Clinical Neuroscience, University of Oulu, P.O. Box 5000, 
90014, Oulu, Finland. kari.majamaa@oulu.fi.
(7)Medical Research Center Oulu, Oulu University Hospital and University of 
Oulu, Oulu, Finland. kari.majamaa@oulu.fi.
(8)Department of Neurology, Oulu University Hospital, P.O. Box 20, 90029, Oulu, 
Finland. kari.majamaa@oulu.fi.

Defects in the respiratory chain or mitochondrial ATP synthase (complex V) 
result in mitochondrial dysfunction that is an important cause of inherited 
neurological disease. Two of the subunits of complex V are encoded by MT-ATP6 
and MT-ATP8 in the mitochondrial genome. Pathogenic mutations in MT-ATP6 are 
associated with the Leigh syndrome, the syndrome of neuropathy, ataxia, and 
retinitis pigmentosa (NARP), as well as with non-classical phenotypes, while 
MT-ATP8 is less frequently mutated in patients with mitochondrial disease. We 
investigated two adult siblings presenting with features of cerebellar ataxia, 
peripheral neuropathy, diabetes mellitus, sensorineural hearing impairment, and 
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. As the phenotype was suggestive of mitochondrial 
disease, mitochondrial DNA was sequenced and a novel heteroplasmic mutation 
m.8561C>G in the overlapping region of the MT-ATP6 and MT-ATP8 was found. The 
mutation changed amino acids in both subunits. Mutation heteroplasmy correlated 
with the disease phenotype in five family members. An additional assembly 
intermediate of complex V and increased amount of subcomplex F1 were observed in 
myoblasts of the two patients, but the total amount of complex V was unaffected. 
Furthermore, intracellular ATP concentration was lower in patient myoblasts 
indicating defective energy production. We suggest that the m.8561C>G mutation 
in MT-ATP6/8 is pathogenic, leads biochemically to impaired assembly and 
decreased ATP production of complex V, and results clinically in a phenotype 
with the core features of cerebellar ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, diabetes 
mellitus, and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-016-8249-2
PMID: 27502083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]