---
reference_id: "PMID:36067040"
title: Functional assessment of homozygous ALDH18A1 variants reveals alterations in amino acid and antioxidant metabolism.
authors:
- Colonna MB
- Moss T
- Mokashi S
- Srikanth S
- Jones JR
- Foley JR
- Skinner C
- Lichty A
- Kocur A
- Wood T
- Stewart TM
- Casero RA Jr
- Flanagan-Steet H
- Edison AS
- Lyons MJ
- Steet R
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac226
keywords:
- Humans
- Amino Acids
- Antioxidants
- Proline/metabolism
- Glutamic Acid/metabolism
- "Cutis Laxa/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Ornithine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional assessment of homozygous ALDH18A1 variants reveals alterations in amino acid and antioxidant metabolism.
**Authors:** Colonna MB, Moss T, Mokashi S, Srikanth S, Jones JR, Foley JR, Skinner C, Lichty A, Kocur A, Wood T, Stewart TM, Casero RA Jr, Flanagan-Steet H, Edison AS, Lyons MJ, Steet R
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddac226](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddac226)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2023 Feb 19;32(5):732-744. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac226.

Functional assessment of homozygous ALDH18A1 variants reveals alterations in
amino acid and antioxidant metabolism.

Colonna MB(1), Moss T(2), Mokashi S(2), Srikanth S(2), Jones JR(2), Foley JR(3),
Skinner C(2), Lichty A(2), Kocur A(2), Wood T(4), Stewart TM(3), Casero RA
Jr(3), Flanagan-Steet H(2), Edison AS(1), Lyons MJ(2), Steet R(2).

Author information:
(1)Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, GA
30602, USA.
(2)Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC 29646, USA.
(3)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine;
Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital
Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Mono- and bi-allelic variants in ALDH18A1 cause a spectrum of human disorders
associated with cutaneous and neurological findings that overlap with both cutis
laxa and spastic paraplegia. ALDH18A1 encodes the bifunctional enzyme
pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase (P5CS) that plays a role in the de novo
biosynthesis of proline and ornithine. Here we characterize a previously
unreported homozygous ALDH18A1 variant (p.Thr331Pro) in four affected probands
from two unrelated families, and demonstrate broad-based alterations in amino
acid and antioxidant metabolism. These four patients exhibit variable
developmental delay, neurological deficits and loose skin. Functional
characterization of the p.Thr331Pro variant demonstrated a lack of any impact on
the steady-state level of the P5CS monomer or mitochondrial localization of the
enzyme, but reduced incorporation of the monomer into P5CS oligomers. Using an
unlabeled NMR-based metabolomics approach in patient fibroblasts and
ALDH18A1-null human embryonic kidney cells expressing the variant P5CS, we
identified reduced abundance of glutamate and several metabolites derived from
glutamate, including proline and glutathione. Biosynthesis of the polyamine
putrescine, derived from ornithine, was also decreased in patient fibroblasts,
highlighting the functional consequence on another metabolic pathway involved in
antioxidant responses in the cell. RNA sequencing of patient fibroblasts
revealed transcript abundance changes in several metabolic and extracellular
matrix-related genes, adding further insight into pathogenic processes
associated with impaired P5CS function. Together these findings shed new light
on amino acid and antioxidant pathways associated with ALDH18A1-related
disorders, and underscore the value of metabolomic and transcriptomic profiling
to discover new pathways that impact disease pathogenesis.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddac226
PMCID: PMC9941824
PMID: 36067040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
