---
reference_id: "PMID:32745073"
title: "Pompe disease: pathogenesis, molecular genetics and diagnosis."
authors:
- Taverna S
- Cammarata G
- Colomba P
- Sciarrino S
- Zizzo C
- Francofonte D
- Zora M
- Scalia S
- Brando C
- Curto AL
- Marsana EM
- Olivieri R
- Vitale S
- Duro G
journal: Aging (Albany NY)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.18632/aging.103794
keywords:
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type II/diagnosis, etiology, genetics, therapy"
- Humans
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pompe disease: pathogenesis, molecular genetics and diagnosis.
**Authors:** Taverna S, Cammarata G, Colomba P, Sciarrino S, Zizzo C, Francofonte D, Zora M, Scalia S, Brando C, Curto AL, Marsana EM, Olivieri R, Vitale S, Duro G
**Journal:** Aging (Albany NY) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.18632/aging.103794](https://doi.org/10.18632/aging.103794)

## Content

1. Aging (Albany NY). 2020 Aug 3;12(15):15856-15874. doi: 10.18632/aging.103794.
Epub 2020 Aug 3.

Pompe disease: pathogenesis, molecular genetics and diagnosis.

Taverna S(1), Cammarata G(1), Colomba P(1), Sciarrino S(1), Zizzo C(1),
Francofonte D(1), Zora M(1), Scalia S(1), Brando C(1), Curto AL(1), Marsana
EM(1), Olivieri R(1), Vitale S(1), Duro G(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biomedical Research and Innovation (IRIB-CNR), National
Research Council of Italy, Palermo, Italy.

Pompe disease (PD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in
the GAA gene, localized on chromosome 17 and encoding for acid
alpha-1,4-glucosidase (GAA). Currently, more than 560 mutations spread
throughout GAA gene have been reported. GAA catalyzes the hydrolysis of α-1,4
and α-1,6-glucosidic bonds of glycogen and its deficiency leads to lysosomal
storage of glycogen in several tissues, particularly in muscle. PD is a chronic
and progressive pathology usually characterized by limb-girdle muscle weakness
and respiratory failure. PD is classified as infantile and childhood/adult
forms. PD patients exhibit a multisystemic manifestation that depends on age of
onset.Early diagnosis is essential to prevent or reduce the irreversible organ
damage associated with PD progression. Here, we make an overview of PD focusing
on pathogenesis, clinical phenotypes, molecular genetics, diagnosis, therapies,
autophagy and the role of miRNAs as potential biomarkers for PD.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.103794
PMCID: PMC7467391
PMID: 32745073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare no
conflicts of interest.
