---
reference_id: "PMID:16838075"
title: Classical galactosaemia revisited.
authors:
- Bosch AM
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-006-0382-0
keywords:
- Bone Density
- "Child, Preschool"
- Diet
- Galactose/metabolism
- "Galactosemias/complications, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Models, Biological"
- Neonatal Screening
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Classical galactosaemia revisited.
**Authors:** Bosch AM
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-006-0382-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-006-0382-0)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2006 Aug;29(4):516-25. doi: 10.1007/s10545-006-0382-0.
Epub  2006 Jul 11.

Classical galactosaemia revisited.

Bosch AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Metabolic Disorders, Academic Medical 
Centre (G8 205), University Hospital of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. a.m.bosch@amc.uva.nl

Classical galactosaemia (McKusick 230400) is an: autosomal recessive disorder of 
galactose metabolism, caused by a deficiency of the enzyme galactose-1-phosphate 
uridyltransferase (GALT; EC 2.7.712). Most patients present in the neonatal 
period, after ingestion of galactose, with jaundice, hepatosplenomegaly, 
hepatocellular insufficiency, food intolerance, hypoglycaemia, renal tubular 
dysfunction, muscle hypotonia, sepsis and cataract. The gold standard for 
diagnosis of classical galactosaemia is measurement of GALT activity in 
erythrocytes. Gas-chromatographic determination of urinary sugars and sugar 
alcohols demonstrates elevated concentrations of galactose and galactitol. The 
only therapy for patients with classical galactosaemia is a galactose-restricted 
diet, and initially all galactose must be removed from the diet as soon as the 
diagnosis is suspected. After the neonatal period, a lactose-free diet is 
advised in most countries, without restriction of galactose-containing fruit and 
vegetables. In spite of the strict diet, long-term complications such as 
retarded mental development, verbal dyspraxia, motor abnormalities and 
hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism are frequently seen in patients with classical 
galactosaemia. It has been suggested that these complications may result from 
endogenous galactose synthesis or from abnormal galactosylation. Novel 
therapeutic strategies, aiming at the prevention of galactose 1-phosphate 
production, should be developed. In the meantime, the follow-up protocol for 
patients with GALT deficiency should focus on early detection, evaluation and, 
if possible, early intervention in problems of motor, speech and cognitive 
development.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-006-0382-0
PMID: 16838075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]