---
reference_id: "PMID:33873076"
title: "Ebola virus disease: current vaccine solutions."
authors:
- Tomori O
- Kolawole MO
journal: Curr Opin Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2021.03.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebola virus disease: current vaccine solutions.
**Authors:** Tomori O, Kolawole MO
**Journal:** Curr Opin Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.coi.2021.03.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coi.2021.03.008)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Immunol. 2021 Aug;71:27-33. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2021.03.008. Epub
2021  Apr 17.

Ebola virus disease: current vaccine solutions.

Tomori O(1), Kolawole MO(2).

Author information:
(1)Redeemer's University, Ede, Osun State, Nigeria. Electronic address: 
oyewaletomori@gmail.com.
(2)Infectious Diseases and Environmental Health Research Group (IDEHRG), 
Department of Microbiology, University of Ilorin, Ilorin, Kwara State, Nigeria.

Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) is an emerging zoonotic disease with intermittent 
outbreaks in Central and West African countries. The unpredictable high case 
fatality rate has made it a disease of public health concern. Different vaccine 
platforms have shown prophylactic protection in human and non-human primates, 
with the progress towards a licensed vaccine greatly accelerated in response to 
the devastating outbreak of EVD in West Africa from 2013-2016. Currently, two 
vaccines: Ervebo (rVSV-ZEBOV) and a two-dose combination of Zabdeno (Ad26.ZEBOV) 
and Mvabea (MVA-BN-Filo) have been licensed and in use. The licensing of an 
Ebola vaccine for use is challenging for several reasons, including the sporadic 
and limited nature of EVD outbreaks and the enormous resources needed to bring a 
vaccine to licensure. While vaccine solutions remain important in reducing the 
fatality of EVD, other strategic interventions are necessary for the prevention 
and control of EVD.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coi.2021.03.008
PMID: 33873076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]