---
reference_id: "PMID:35907134"
title: "Surgical and prosthetic rehabilitation of siblings with Witkop tooth and nail syndrome using zygomatic implants: a familial case series of 3 patients with up to 15-year follow-up."
authors:
- McMillan KB
- McMillan DC
- Arce K
- Salinas TJ
journal: Oral Maxillofac Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10006-022-01107-5
keywords:
- Humans
- Dental Implants
- Follow-Up Studies
- Sinus Floor Augmentation
- Siblings
- "Dental Implantation, Endosseous/methods"
- Maxilla/surgery
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/etiology, surgery"
- "Dental Prosthesis, Implant-Supported"
- Zygoma/surgery
- "Jaw, Edentulous/etiology, rehabilitation, surgery"
- Anodontia
- "Nails, Malformed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical and prosthetic rehabilitation of siblings with Witkop tooth and nail syndrome using zygomatic implants: a familial case series of 3 patients with up to 15-year follow-up.
**Authors:** McMillan KB, McMillan DC, Arce K, Salinas TJ
**Journal:** Oral Maxillofac Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10006-022-01107-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10006-022-01107-5)

## Content

1. Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2023 Dec;27(4):711-719. doi: 10.1007/s10006-022-01107-5.
 Epub 2022 Jul 30.

Surgical and prosthetic rehabilitation of siblings with Witkop tooth and nail 
syndrome using zygomatic implants: a familial case series of 3 patients with up 
to 15-year follow-up.

McMillan KB(1), McMillan DC(2), Arce K(3), Salinas TJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Department of Surgery, Mayo 
Clinic and Mayo College of Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA. mcmillan.kale@mayo.edu.
(2)Division of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Department of Surgery, Mayo 
Clinic and Mayo College of Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Division of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Section of Head & Neck Oncologic 
Surgery and Reconstruction, Department of Surgery, Mayo Clinic and Mayo College 
of Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.
(4)Department of Dental Specialties, Mayo Clinic and Mayo College of Medicine, 
Rochester, MN, USA.

Witkop tooth and nail syndrome is a rare, autosomal dominant type of ectodermal 
dysplasia that can have significant effects on dentition, including hypoplastic 
and malformed dentition and significantly atrophic maxillas. Endosseous implants 
have become one possible solution to replace missing teeth, although their use 
in areas where bone is sparse becomes challenging. Due to the severe atrophy of 
the maxillary alveolus, extensive preprosthetic surgeries including orthognathic 
surgery, extensive bone grafting, and sinus floor augmentations have been 
recommended prior to placement of endosseous dental implants. Although this 
treatment has shown favorable outcomes, it requires multiple surgical 
procedures, contributing to a prolonged treatment course and increased 
morbidity. An alternative treatment of atrophic maxillas in patients with 
ectodermal dysplasia includes the use of zygomatic implants. This familial case 
series discusses 3 siblings, all previously diagnosed with Witkop Syndrome, who 
underwent comprehensive preprosthetic surgery and prosthetic rehabilitation 
using zygomatic implants with a follow-up period up to 15 years.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10006-022-01107-5
PMID: 35907134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]