---
reference_id: "PMID:16059936"
title: Microcephaly is not mandatory for the diagnosis of mosaic variegated aneuploidy syndrome.
authors:
- Callier P
- Faivre L
- Cusin V
- Marle N
- Thauvin-Robinet C
- Sandre D
- Rousseau T
- Sagot P
- Lacombe E
- Faber V
- Mugneret F
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30783
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Aneuploidy
- Craniofacial Abnormalities
- Developmental Disabilities/pathology
- Growth Disorders/pathology
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Infant
- Karyotyping
- Male
- Microcephaly/pathology
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microcephaly is not mandatory for the diagnosis of mosaic variegated aneuploidy syndrome.
**Authors:** Callier P, Faivre L, Cusin V, Marle N, Thauvin-Robinet C, Sandre D, Rousseau T, Sagot P, Lacombe E, Faber V, Mugneret F
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.30783](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.30783)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Aug 30;137(2):204-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30783.

Microcephaly is not mandatory for the diagnosis of mosaic variegated aneuploidy
syndrome.

Callier P(1), Faivre L, Cusin V, Marle N, Thauvin-Robinet C, Sandre D, Rousseau
T, Sagot P, Lacombe E, Faber V, Mugneret F.

Author information:
(1)Département de Génétique, Laboratoire de Cytogénetique, CHU Le Bocage,
Boulevard Marechal de Lattre de Tassigny 2, Dijon 21034, France.
patrick.callier@chu-dijon.fr

The phenotype of mosaic variegated aneuploidy (MVA) syndrome is characterized by
severe microcephaly, growth deficiency, mental retardation, and mild physical
anomalies. The MVA syndrome is associated with mosaicism for several different
aneuploidies involving many different chromosomes with or without premature
centromere division (PCD). To date 28 cases of MVA syndrome have been reported.
We report the first case of MVA syndrome without microcephaly. The clinical
features in our patient included craniofacial dysmorphic features, growth
retardation, and developmental delay. Cytogenetics analyses and FISH studies
showed multiple aneuploidy with trisomy 18, 19, and 8, respectively in blood
lymphocyte and fibroblasts without PCD. This case is compared with the other of
MVA syndrome previously reported in literature. From this case report, we
suggest that microcephaly is not mandatory for the diagnosis of MVA syndrome.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30783
PMID: 16059936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
