---
reference_id: "PMID:25684164"
title: "Antiplatelet treatment compared with anticoagulation treatment for cervical artery dissection (CADISS): a randomised trial."
authors:
- CADISS trial investigators
- Markus HS
- Hayter E
- Levi C
- Feldman A
- Venables G
- Norris J
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)70018-9
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aortic Dissection/complications, drug therapy"
- "Anticoagulants/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Arteries
- "Carotid Artery, Internal, Dissection/complications, drug therapy"
- Female
- Humans
- "Ischemic Attack, Transient/drug therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Odds Ratio
- "Platelet Aggregation Inhibitors/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Spine/blood supply
- "Stroke/drug therapy, epidemiology, mortality, prevention & control"
- Subarachnoid Hemorrhage/chemically induced
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiplatelet treatment compared with anticoagulation treatment for cervical artery dissection (CADISS): a randomised trial.
**Authors:** CADISS trial investigators, Markus HS, Hayter E, Levi C, Feldman A, Venables G, Norris J
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(15)70018-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(15)70018-9)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2015 Apr;14(4):361-7. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)70018-9. Epub 
2015 Feb 12.

Antiplatelet treatment compared with anticoagulation treatment for cervical 
artery dissection (CADISS): a randomised trial.

CADISS trial investigators; Markus HS, Hayter E, Levi C, Feldman A, Venables G, 
Norris J.

Collaborators: Peycke J, Willson M, Hicks C, Hayter E, Madigan J, Clifton A, 
Menon R, Kennedy F, Khan U, Feldman A, Hollocks M, Markus HS, King A, Madigan J, 
Markus HS, Norris J, Venables GS, Kerry S, Hassan A, Levi C, Ford GA, Bath PM, 
Weir C, Kalra L, Briley D, Bhalla A, Reid J, Kumar R, Mawer S, Smith M, Ali K, 
Sharma P, Dutta D, Nor AM, Boswell R, Baldwin N, Rudd A, Stanley D, Burger I, 
Kalra L, Hassan A, Price C, Dixit A, MacWalter R, Cohen D, Davey R, Cassidy T, 
Gunathilagan G, Jenkinson D, Harrington F, James M, Venables G, Smyth N, Emsley 
H, Shaw L, Lovett J, Guyler P, Macleod M, Colam B, Al-Shahi Salman R, Markus HS, 
Gompertz P, Kelly D, Salih I, Davies B, Shetty H, Mistri A, Hargroves D, Rashed 
K, Clarke B, Collas D, Gerraty R, Sturm J, Levi C, Kleinig T, Wong A, Hand P, 
Delcourt C.

Erratum in
    Lancet Neurol. 2015 Jun;14(6):566. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00045-9.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2015 Apr;14(4):342-3. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70271-6.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2016 Jan 15;193(2):210-2. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201506-1152RR.

BACKGROUND: Extracranial carotid and vertebral artery dissection is an important 
cause of stroke, especially in young people. In some observational studies it 
has been associated with a high risk of recurrent stroke. Both antiplatelet 
drugs and anticoagulant drugs are used to reduce risk of stroke but whether one 
treatment strategy is more effective than the other is unknown. We compared 
their efficacy in the Cervical Artery Dissection in Stroke Study (CADISS), with 
the additional aim of establishing the true risk of recurrent stroke.
METHODS: We did this randomised trial at hospitals with specialised stroke or 
neurology services (39 in the UK and seven in Australia). We included patients 
with extracranial carotid and vertebral dissection with onset of symptoms within 
the past 7 days. Patients were randomly assigned (1:1) by an automated telephone 
randomisation service to receive antiplatelet drugs or anticoagulant drugs 
(specific treatment decided by the local clinician) for 3 months. Patients and 
clinicians were not masked to allocation, but investigators assessing endpoints 
were. The primary endpoint was ipsilateral stroke or death in the 
intention-to-treat population. The trial was registered with EUDract 
(2006-002827-18) and ISRN (CTN44555237).
FINDINGS: We enrolled 250 participants (118 carotid, 132 vertebral). Mean time 
to randomisation was 3·65 days (SD 1·91). The major presenting symptoms were 
stroke or transient ischaemic attack (n=224) and local symptoms (headache, neck 
pain, or Horner's syndrome; n=26). 126 participants were assigned to 
antiplatelet treatment versus 124 to anticoagulant treatment. Overall, four (2%) 
of 250 patients had stroke recurrence (all ipsilateral). Stroke or death 
occurred in three (2%) of 126 patients versus one (1%) of 124 (odds ratio [OR] 
0·335, 95% CI 0·006-4·233; p=0·63). There were no deaths, but one major bleeding 
(subarachnoid haemorrhage) in the anticoagulant group. Central review of imaging 
failed to confirm dissection in 52 patients. Preplanned per-protocol analysis 
excluding these patients showed stroke or death in three (3%) of 101 patients in 
the antiplatelet group versus one (1%) of 96 patients in the anticoagulant group 
(OR 0·346, 95% CI 0·006-4·390; p=0·66).
INTERPRETATION: We found no difference in efficacy of antiplatelet and 
anticoagulant drugs at preventing stroke and death in patients with symptomatic 
carotid and vertebral artery dissection but stroke was rare in both groups, and 
much rarer than reported in some observational studies. Diagnosis of dissection 
was not confirmed after review in many cases, suggesting that radiographic 
criteria are not always correctly applied in routine clinical practice.
FUNDING: Stroke Association.

Copyright © 2015 Markus et al. Open Access article distributed under the terms 
of CC BY. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)70018-9
PMID: 25684164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]