---
reference_id: "PMID:39501269"
title: "A rare Coffin-Siris syndrome induced by SOX11: a de novo nonsense variant of short stature."
authors:
- Bai G
- Yuan R
- Yuan J
- Liu Y
- Zhao S
- Zhang X
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12920-024-02036-w
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Dwarfism/genetics
- Exome Sequencing
- Face/abnormalities
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Micrognathism/genetics
- Neck/abnormalities
- Phenotype
- SOXC Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A rare Coffin-Siris syndrome induced by SOX11: a de novo nonsense variant of short stature.
**Authors:** Bai G, Yuan R, Yuan J, Liu Y, Zhao S, Zhang X
**Journal:** BMC Med Genomics (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12920-024-02036-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-024-02036-w)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genomics. 2024 Nov 5;17(1):262. doi: 10.1186/s12920-024-02036-w.

A rare Coffin-Siris syndrome induced by SOX11: a de novo nonsense variant of 
short stature.

Bai G(1), Yuan R(1), Yuan J(1), Liu Y(1), Zhao S(1), Zhang X(2).

Author information:
(1)Xi'an People's Hospital (Xi'an Fourth Hospital), Xi'an, China.
(2)Xi'an People's Hospital (Xi'an Fourth Hospital), Xi'an, China. 
xianxinwen@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Coffin-Siris syndrome is a clinically elusive and rare genetic 
disease characterized by a wide range of clinical manifestations. This study 
deeply analyzed and identified the clinical phenotype and genetic variant 
location in a pediatric patient with Coffin-Siris syndrome, aiming to enhance 
the understanding of this syndrome and assist in its screening and diagnosis.
METHODS: A combination of advanced diagnostic tools, including high-throughput 
whole-exome sequencing (WES) and first-generation sequencing technologies, was 
employed to ascertain the etiology of the disease in the child.
RESULTS: The clinical phenotype was characterized by stunted growth, reduced 
stature, spina bifida, enuresis, and a ventricular septal defect. WES revealed a 
de novo variant in the SOX11 gene locus (c.700G > T), identified as pathogenic. 
It is noteworthy that this variant has not been previously reported.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of clinical presentation and genetic testing 
results supports that the patient suffers from Coffin-Siris syndrome due to a 
genetic variant in the SOX11 gene. This de novo variant expands our 
understanding of human gene variation, which is conducive to genetic counseling 
and screening for early diagnosis of Coffin-Siris syndrome.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-024-02036-w
PMCID: PMC11539493
PMID: 39501269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.