---
reference_id: "PMID:6666366"
title: Rectal myenteric nerve plexus stimulation in Hirschsprung's disease and in healthy children.
authors:
- Frenckner B
journal: Z Kinderchir
year: '1983'
doi: 10.1055/s-2008-1060016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rectal myenteric nerve plexus stimulation in Hirschsprung's disease and in healthy children.
**Authors:** Frenckner B
**Journal:** Z Kinderchir (1983)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-2008-1060016](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2008-1060016)

## Content

1. Z Kinderchir. 1983 Dec;38(6):396-9. doi: 10.1055/s-2008-1060016.

Rectal myenteric nerve plexus stimulation in Hirschsprung's disease and in 
healthy children.

Frenckner B.

The internal anal sphincter response was studied manometrically while applying 
electrical stimulation to the rectal mucosa. Seven patients with Hirschsprung's 
disease and ten healthy controls were investigated during general anaesthesia. 
In addition, six healthy controls were examined when awake. Internal sphincter 
relaxations elicited by electrical stimulation of the rectal myenteric nerve 
plexus were recorded in all anaesthetized controls, but in only two of the 
patients. The latter required a higher stimulation voltage. Rectal myenteric 
nerve plexus stimulation is a theoretical alternative for the diagnosis of 
Hirschsprung's disease. One advantage over conventional manometry is that it 
avoids the risk of mechanical artifacts. Further studies are necessary to 
evaluate whether the method can be of practical importance in neonatal diagnosis 
of Hirschsprung's disease.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2008-1060016
PMID: 6666366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]