---
reference_id: "PMID:22312921"
title: Histopathology of the temporal bone in a case of superior canal dehiscence syndrome.
authors:
- Teixido M
- Kung B
- Rosowski JJ
- Merchant SN
journal: Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1177/000348941212100102
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Histopathology of the temporal bone in a case of superior canal dehiscence syndrome.
**Authors:** Teixido M, Kung B, Rosowski JJ, Merchant SN
**Journal:** Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1177/000348941212100102](https://doi.org/10.1177/000348941212100102)

## Content

1. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2012 Jan;121(1):7-12. doi:
10.1177/000348941212100102.

Histopathology of the temporal bone in a case of superior canal dehiscence 
syndrome.

Teixido M(1), Kung B, Rosowski JJ, Merchant SN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Christiana Care Health System, Wilmington, 
Delaware, USA.

OBJECTIVES: We describe the histopathologic findings in the temporal bones of a 
patient who had, during life, received a diagnosis of superior canal dehiscence 
(SCD) syndrome.
METHODS: The patient was found to have SCD syndrome at 59 years of age. She 
became a temporal bone donor, and died of unrelated causes at 62 years of age. 
Both temporal bones were prepared in celloidin and examined by light microscopy.
RESULTS: The patient developed bilateral aural fullness, pulsatile tinnitus, and 
difficulty tolerating loud noises after minor head trauma at 53 years of age. 
The symptoms were worse on the right. She also had Valsalva-induced dizziness 
and eye movements, as well as sound-induced dizziness (more prominent on the 
right). Audiometry showed a small air-bone gap of 10 dB in the right ear. 
Vestibular evoked myogenic potential testing showed an abnormally low threshold 
of 66 dB on the right, and a computed tomography scan showed dehiscence of the 
superior canal on the right. Histopathologic examination of the right ear showed 
a 1.4 x 0.6-mm dehiscence of bone covering the superior canal. Dura was in 
direct contact with the endosteum and the membranous duct at the level of the 
dehiscence. No osteoclastic process was evident within the otic capsule bone 
surrounding the dehiscence. The left ear showed thin but intact bone over the 
superior canal. Both ears showed focal microdehiscences of the tegmen tympani 
and tegmen mastoideum. The auditory and vestibular sense organs on both sides 
appeared normal. No endolymphatic hydrops was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings were consistent with the hypothesis put forth by Carey 
and colleagues that SCD may arise from a failure of postnatal bone development, 
and that minor trauma may disrupt thin bone or stable dura over the superior 
canal.

DOI: 10.1177/000348941212100102
PMCID: PMC3690372
PMID: 22312921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors do not have any conflicts of 
interest to disclose.