---
reference_id: "PMID:17627674"
title: "Ethosuximide: from bench to bedside."
authors:
- Gören MZ
- Onat F
journal: CNS Drug Rev
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1111/j.1527-3458.2007.00009.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ethosuximide: from bench to bedside.
**Authors:** Gören MZ, Onat F
**Journal:** CNS Drug Rev (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1527-3458.2007.00009.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1527-3458.2007.00009.x)

## Content

1. CNS Drug Rev. 2007 Summer;13(2):224-39. doi: 10.1111/j.1527-3458.2007.00009.x.

Ethosuximide: from bench to bedside.

Gören MZ(1), Onat F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacology, School of Medicine, 
Epilepsy Research Center, Marmara University, Haydarpaşa, Istanbul, Turkey. 
zgoren@gmail.com

Ethosuximide, 2-ethyl-2-methylsuccinimide, has been used extensively for "petit 
mal" seizures and it is a valuable agent in studies of absence epilepsy. In the 
treatment of epilepsy, ethosuximide has a narrow therapeutic profile. It is the 
drug of choice in the monotherapy or combination therapy of children with 
generalized absence (petit mal) epilepsy. Commonly observed side effects of 
ethosuximide are dose dependent and involve the gastrointestinal tract and 
central nervous system. Ethosuximide has been associated with a wide variety of 
idiosyncratic reactions and with hematopoietic adverse effects. Typical absence 
seizures are generated as a result of complex interactions between the thalamus 
and the cerebral cortex. This thalamocortical circuitry is under the control of 
several specific inhibitory and excitatory systems arising from the forebrain 
and brainstem. Corticothalamic rhythms are believed to be involved in the 
generation of spike-and-wave discharges that are the characteristic 
electroencephalographic signs of absence seizures. The spontaneous pacemaker 
oscillatory activity of thalamocortical circuitry involves low threshold T-type 
Ca2+ currents in the thalamus, and ethosuximide is presumed to reduce these low 
threshold T-type Ca2+ currents in thalamic neurons. Ethosuximide also decreases 
the persistent Na+ and Ca2+ -activated K+ currents in thalamic and layer V 
cortical pyramidal neurons. In addition, there is evidence that in a genetic 
absence epilepsy rat model ethosuximide reduces cortical gamma-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA) levels. Also, elevated glutamate levels in the primary motor cortex of 
rats with absence epilepsy (but not in normal animals) are reduced by 
ethosuximide.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1527-3458.2007.00009.x
PMCID: PMC6528725
PMID: 17627674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]