---
reference_id: "PMID:29048543"
title: Cardiac tamponade in systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Goswami RP
- Sircar G
- Ghosh A
- Ghosh P
journal: QJM
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcx195
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac tamponade in systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Goswami RP, Sircar G, Ghosh A, Ghosh P
**Journal:** QJM (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/qjmed/hcx195](https://doi.org/10.1093/qjmed/hcx195)

## Content

1. QJM. 2018 Feb 1;111(2):83-87. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcx195.

Cardiac tamponade in systemic lupus erythematosus.

Goswami RP(1), Sircar G(1), Ghosh A(1), Ghosh P(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Rheumatology, Institute of Post Graduate Medical 
Education and Research, Kolkata 700107, West Bengal, India.

BACKGROUND: Cardiac tamponade is a rare but life-threatening complication of 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
AIMS/OBJECTIVES: To describe incidence, risk factors and treatment of cardiac 
tamponade in a large cohort of Indian patients with SLE.
METHODS: This retrospective study was conducted at the Department of 
Rheumatology, IPGMER, Kolkata, India from May 2014 to December 2016 on admitted 
patients with SLE. Lupus-related serositis was diagnosed after excluding other 
causes, such as infection, malignancy or heart failure.
RESULTS: Of 409 patients with SLE, pericarditis was diagnosed in 25.4% (104/409) 
and cardiac tamponade in 5.9% (24/409). Tamponade was the presenting feature of 
SLE in 50% (12/24). Tamponade occurred in 77.8% (14/18) of large effusions and 
in 11.63% (10/86) of small-to-moderate effusions. The commonest autoantibody in 
serum and pericardial fluid was anti-nucleosme antibody. Large pericardial 
effusion (>20 mm) (Odd's ratio (OR): 93.2, 95% confidence interval (CI): 
11.1-782.5, P < 0.001) predicted tamponade. In the subset of patients with 
small-to-moderate sized pericardial effusion, tamponade was associated with 
pleuritis (OR: 44.5, 95% CI: 1.6-1243, P = 0.025), anti-nucleosome antibody (OR: 
42.9, 95% CI: 1.6-1176, P = 0.026) and size of pericardial effusion (OR: 1.36, 
95% CI: 1.04-1.76, P = 0.025). Repeated pericardiocentesis was required in 3 
patients and one needed surgical intervention. Immunosuppressives used were: 
prednisolone with monthly intravenous cyclophosphamide (in 33.33%) and 
intravenous methylprednisolone with monthly cyclophosphamide (in 50%).
CONCLUSIONS: Pleuritis, anti-nucleosome antibody and size of pericardial 
effusion predicted development of tamponade. High dose immunosuppression 
(methylprednisolone and IV cyclophosphamide) alleviated need for surgery in 
majority.

DOI: 10.1093/qjmed/hcx195
PMID: 29048543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]