---
reference_id: "PMID:18480301"
title: "Renal phenotype in Lowe Syndrome: a selective proximal tubular dysfunction."
authors:
- Bockenhauer D
- Bokenkamp A
- "van't Hoff W"
- Levtchenko E
- Kist-van Holthe JE
- Tasic V
- Ludwig M
journal: Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.2215/CJN.00520108
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Renal Tubular/genetics, physiopathology"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Albuminuria/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Europe
- "Fanconi Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- "Glycosuria/genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Hypercalciuria/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Hypophosphatemia, Familial/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Kidney Tubules, Proximal/physiopathology"
- "Lysosomal Storage Diseases/genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Nephrocalcinosis/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Oculocerebrorenal Syndrome/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- Phenotype
- Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/genetics
- "Proteinuria/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Renal Tubular Transport, Inborn Errors/genetics, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renal phenotype in Lowe Syndrome: a selective proximal tubular dysfunction.
**Authors:** Bockenhauer D, Bokenkamp A, van't Hoff W, Levtchenko E, Kist-van Holthe JE, Tasic V, Ludwig M
**Journal:** Clin J Am Soc Nephrol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.2215/CJN.00520108](https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.00520108)

## Content

1. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008 Sep;3(5):1430-6. doi: 10.2215/CJN.00520108. Epub
2008 May 14.

Renal phenotype in Lowe Syndrome: a selective proximal tubular dysfunction.

Bockenhauer D(1), Bokenkamp A, van't Hoff W, Levtchenko E, Kist-van Holthe JE,
Tasic V, Ludwig M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United
Kingdom. bocked@gosh.nhs.uk

Comment in
    Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008 Sep;3(5):1244-5. doi: 10.2215/CJN.02880608.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Lowe syndrome is defined by congenital cataracts,
mental retardation, and proximal tubulopathy and is due to mutations in OCRL.
Recently, mutations in OCRL were found to underlie some patients with Dent
disease, characterized by low molecular weight proteinuria, hypercalciuria, and
nephrocalcinosis. This phenotypic heterogeneity is poorly understood.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: The renal phenotype of 16
patients with Lowe syndrome (10.9 +/- 7.0 yr) under care of the authors was
characterized to define overlap of symptoms with Dent disease and infer clues
about OCRL function. Medical charts of patients were reviewed for data regarding
glomerular filtration rate and markers of proximal tubular function.
RESULTS: All patients had low molecular weight proteinuria and albuminuria.
Lysosomal enzymuria was elevated in all 11 patients assessed. Fifteen patients
had hypercalciuria, and 14 aminoaciduria. Seven patients required bicarbonate
and three required phosphate replacement; all others maintained normal serum
values without supplementation. None of the patients had detectable glycosuria,
and none had clinically overt rickets. GFR was mildly to moderately impaired and
highly variable, with a trend of deterioration with age.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with Lowe syndrome do not have renal Fanconi syndrome but
a selective proximal tubulopathy, variable in extent and dominated by low
molecular weight proteinuria and hypercalciuria, the classical features of Dent
disease. These findings suggest that OCRL and ClC-5, the chloride channel
mutated in Dent disease, are involved in similar reabsorption pathways in the
proximal tubule.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.00520108
PMCID: PMC2518783
PMID: 18480301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
