---
reference_id: "PMID:35652618"
title: The impact of genetic aberrations on response to radium-223 treatment for castration-resistant prostate cancer with bone metastases.
authors:
- Liu AJ
- Kosiorek HE
- Ueberroth BE
- Jaeger E
- Ledet E
- Kendi AT
- Tzou K
- Quevedo F
- Choo R
- Moore CN
- Ho TH
- Singh P
- Keole SR
- Wong WW
- Sartor O
- Bryce AH
journal: Prostate
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/pros.24375
keywords:
- "Bone Neoplasms/genetics, radiotherapy"
- Humans
- Male
- Prospective Studies
- Prostate-Specific Antigen
- "Prostatic Neoplasms, Castration-Resistant/drug therapy, genetics, radiotherapy"
- Radium/therapeutic use
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The impact of genetic aberrations on response to radium-223 treatment for castration-resistant prostate cancer with bone metastases.
**Authors:** Liu AJ, Kosiorek HE, Ueberroth BE, Jaeger E, Ledet E, Kendi AT, Tzou K, Quevedo F, Choo R, Moore CN, Ho TH, Singh P, Keole SR, Wong WW, Sartor O, Bryce AH
**Journal:** Prostate (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pros.24375](https://doi.org/10.1002/pros.24375)

## Content

1. Prostate. 2022 Sep;82(12):1202-1209. doi: 10.1002/pros.24375. Epub 2022 Jun 2.

The impact of genetic aberrations on response to radium-223 treatment for
castration-resistant prostate cancer with bone metastases.

Liu AJ(1), Kosiorek HE(2), Ueberroth BE(3), Jaeger E(4), Ledet E(4), Kendi
AT(5), Tzou K(6), Quevedo F(7), Choo R(7), Moore CN(1), Ho TH(1), Singh P(1),
Keole SR(1), Wong WW(1), Sartor O(4), Bryce AH(1).

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, Phoenix, Arizona, USA.
(2)Mayo Clinic Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Phoenix,
Arizona, USA.
(3)Mayo Clinic Internal Medicine Residency, Phoenix, Arizona, USA.
(4)Tulane Cancer Center, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.
(5)Mayo Clinic Department of Radiology, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(6)Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, Jacksonville, Florida, USA.
(7)Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Comment in
    Prostate. 2023 May;83(6):613. doi: 10.1002/pros.24489.

BACKGROUND: Radium (Ra)-223 is an established treatment option for patients with
metastatic castrate-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) who have symptomatic bone
metastases without soft tissue disease. Studies have indicated genetic
aberrations that regulate DNA damage response (DDR) in prostate cancer can
increase susceptibility to treatments such as poly ADP-ribose polymerase
inhibitors and platinum-based therapies. This study aims to evaluate mCRPC
response to Ra-223 stratified by tumor genomics.
METHODS: This is a retrospective study of mCRPC patients who received Ra-223 and
genetic testing within the Mayo Clinic database (Arizona, Florida, and
Minnesota) and Tulane Cancer Center. Patient demographics, genetic aberrations,
treatment responses in terms of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and prostate-specific
antigen (PSA), and survival were assessed. Primary end points were ALP and PSA
response. Secondary end points were progression-free survival (PFS) and overall
survival (OS) from time of first radium treatment.
RESULTS: One hundred and twenty-seven mCRPC patients treated with Ra-223 had
germline and/or somatic genetic sequencing. The median age at time of diagnosis
and Ra-223 treatment was 61.0 and 68.6 years, respectively. Seventy-nine (62.2%)
had Gleason score ≥ 8 at time of diagnosis. 50.4% received prior docetaxel, and
12.6% received prior cabazitaxel. Notable alterations include TP53 (51.7%), BRCA
1/2 (15.0%), PTEN (13.4%), ATM (11.7%), TMPRSS2-ERG (8.2%), RB deletion (3.4%),
and CDK12 (1.9%). There was no significant difference in ALP or PSA response
among the different genetic aberrations. Patients with a TMPRSS2-ERG mutation
exhibited a trend toward lower OS 15.4 months (95% confidence interval [CI]
10.0-NR) versus 26.8 months (95% CI 20.9-35.1). Patients with an RB deletion had
a lower PFS 6.0 months (95% CI 1.28-NR) versus 9.0 months (95% CI 7.3-11.1) and
a lower OS 13.9 months (95% CI 5.2-NR) versus 26.5 months (95% CI 19.8-33.8).
CONCLUSIONS: Among mCRPC patients treated with Ra-223 at Mayo Clinic and Tulane
Cancer Center, we did not find any clear negative predictors of biochemical
response or survival to treatment. TMPRSS2-ERG and RB mutations were associated
with a worse OS. Prospective studies and larger sample sizes are needed to
determine the impact of genetic aberrations in response to Ra-223.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/pros.24375
PMID: 35652618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
