---
reference_id: "PMID:34185076"
title: "The 2021 WHO Classification of Tumors of the Central Nervous System: a summary."
authors:
- Louis DN
- Perry A
- Wesseling P
- Brat DJ
- Cree IA
- Figarella-Branger D
- Hawkins C
- Ng HK
- Pfister SM
- Reifenberger G
- Soffietti R
- von Deimling A
- Ellison DW
journal: Neuro Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noab106
keywords:
- Brain
- Central Nervous System
- Central Nervous System Neoplasms/diagnosis
- Humans
- "Pathology, Molecular"
- World Health Organization
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The 2021 WHO Classification of Tumors of the Central Nervous System: a summary.
**Authors:** Louis DN, Perry A, Wesseling P, Brat DJ, Cree IA, Figarella-Branger D, Hawkins C, Ng HK, Pfister SM, Reifenberger G, Soffietti R, von Deimling A, Ellison DW
**Journal:** Neuro Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/neuonc/noab106](https://doi.org/10.1093/neuonc/noab106)

## Content

1. Neuro Oncol. 2021 Aug 2;23(8):1231-1251. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noab106.

The 2021 WHO Classification of Tumors of the Central Nervous System: a summary.

Louis DN(1), Perry A(2), Wesseling P(3)(4), Brat DJ(5), Cree IA(6), 
Figarella-Branger D(7), Hawkins C(8), Ng HK(9), Pfister SM(10), Reifenberger 
G(11), Soffietti R(12), von Deimling A(13)(14), Ellison DW(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers/VUmc, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Laboratory for Childhood Cancer Pathology, Princess Máxima Center for 
Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(6)International Agency for Research on Cancer, World Health Organization, Lyon, 
France.
(7)Service d'Anatomie Pathologique et de Neuropathologie, APHM, CNRS, Institut 
de Neurophysiopathologie, Hôpital de la Timone, Aix-Marseille University, 
Marseille, France.
(8)Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(9)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(10)Hopp Children's Cancer Center at the NCT Heidelberg (KiTZ), Division of 
Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) and German Cancer 
Research Center (DKFZ), and Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and 
Immunology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(11)Institute of Neuropathology, University Hospital Düsseldorf and Medical 
Faculty, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, and German Cancer Consortium 
(DKTK) Partner Site Essen/Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(12)Department of Neurology and Neuro-Oncology, University of Turin Medical 
School, Turin, Italy.
(13)Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology, 
Ruprecht-Karls-University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(14)Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuropathology, German Cancer Research Center 
(DKFZ), and German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany.
(15)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
Tennessee, USA.

Comment in
    Neuro Oncol. 2021 Aug 2;23(8):1215-1217. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noab120.
    Neuro Oncol. 2021 Dec 1;23(12):2120-2121. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noab190.
    Neuro Oncol. 2021 Dec 1;23(12):2122. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noab215.

The fifth edition of the WHO Classification of Tumors of the Central Nervous 
System (CNS), published in 2021, is the sixth version of the international 
standard for the classification of brain and spinal cord tumors. Building on the 
2016 updated fourth edition and the work of the Consortium to Inform Molecular 
and Practical Approaches to CNS Tumor Taxonomy, the 2021 fifth edition 
introduces major changes that advance the role of molecular diagnostics in CNS 
tumor classification. At the same time, it remains wedded to other established 
approaches to tumor diagnosis such as histology and immunohistochemistry. In 
doing so, the fifth edition establishes some different approaches to both CNS 
tumor nomenclature and grading and it emphasizes the importance of integrated 
diagnoses and layered reports. New tumor types and subtypes are introduced, some 
based on novel diagnostic technologies such as DNA methylome profiling. The 
present review summarizes the major general changes in the 2021 fifth edition 
classification and the specific changes in each taxonomic category. It is hoped 
that this summary provides an overview to facilitate more in-depth exploration 
of the entire fifth edition of the WHO Classification of Tumors of the Central 
Nervous System.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/neuonc/noab106
PMCID: PMC8328013
PMID: 34185076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]