---
reference_id: "PMID:37620810"
title: "Clinical characteristics of Dieulafoy's lesion in the small bowel diagnosed and treated by double-balloon endoscopy."
authors:
- Nakamura M
- Yamamura T
- Maeda K
- Sawada T
- Ishikawa E
- Furukawa K
- Iida T
- Mizutani Y
- Yamao K
- Ishikawa T
- Honda T
- Ishigami M
- Kawashima H
journal: BMC Gastroenterol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12876-023-02913-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical characteristics of Dieulafoy's lesion in the small bowel diagnosed and treated by double-balloon endoscopy.
**Authors:** Nakamura M, Yamamura T, Maeda K, Sawada T, Ishikawa E, Furukawa K, Iida T, Mizutani Y, Yamao K, Ishikawa T, Honda T, Ishigami M, Kawashima H
**Journal:** BMC Gastroenterol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12876-023-02913-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12876-023-02913-1)

## Content

1. BMC Gastroenterol. 2023 Aug 24;23(1):290. doi: 10.1186/s12876-023-02913-1.

Clinical characteristics of Dieulafoy's lesion in the small bowel diagnosed and 
treated by double-balloon endoscopy.

Nakamura M(1), Yamamura T(2), Maeda K(2), Sawada T(3), Ishikawa E(2), Furukawa 
K(2), Iida T(2), Mizutani Y(2), Yamao K(3), Ishikawa T(2), Honda T(2), Ishigami 
M(2), Kawashima H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endoscopy, Nagoya University Hospital, 65 Tsurumai-cho, 
Showa-ku, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan. makamura@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Nagoya University Graduate 
School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan.
(3)Department of Endoscopy, Nagoya University Hospital, 65 Tsurumai-cho, 
Showa-ku, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Obscure gastrointestinal bleeding refers to bleeding for which the 
source cannot be ascertained even through balloon-assisted endoscopy. In certain 
instances, Dieulafoy's lesion in the small bowel is presumed to be the 
underlying cause.
AIM: This retrospective study aimed to elucidate the clinical characteristics of 
Dieulafoy's lesion in the small bowel as diagnosed via double-balloon endoscopy 
while also exploring the feasibility of predicting bleeding from Dieulafoy's 
lesion prior to endoscopy in cases of obscure gastrointestinal bleeding.
METHODS: A comprehensive analysis of our database was conducted, identifying 38 
patients who received a diagnosis of Dieulafoy's lesion and subsequently 
underwent treatment via double-balloon endoscopy. The clinical background, 
diagnosis, and treatment details of patients with Dieulafoy's lesion were 
carefully examined.
RESULTS: The median age of the 38 patients was 72 years, and 50% of the patients 
were male. A total of 26 (68%) patients exhibited a high comorbidity index. The 
upper jejunum and lower ileum were the most frequently reported locations for 
the occurrence of Dieulafoy's lesion in the small bowel. The detected 
Dieulafoy's lesions exhibited active bleeding (n = 33) and an exposed vessel 
with plaque on the surface (n = 5). Rebleeding after endoscopic treatment 
occurred in 8 patients (21%, median period: 7 days, range: 1-366 days). We 
conducted an analysis to determine the definitive nature of the initial 
double-balloon endoscopy diagnosis. Multivariate analysis revealed that 
hematochezia of ≥ 2 episodes constituted the independent factor associated with 
≥ 2 double-balloon endoscopy diagnoses. Additionally, we explored factors 
associated with rebleeding following endoscopic treatment. Although the number 
of hemoclips utilized displayed a likely association, multivariate analysis did 
not identify any independent factor associated with rebleeding.
CONCLUSION: If a patient encounters multiple instances of hematochezia, promptly 
scheduling balloon-assisted endoscopy, equipped with optional instruments 
without delay is advised, after standard endoscopic evaluation with 
esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy is unrevealing.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s12876-023-02913-1
PMCID: PMC10464443
PMID: 37620810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Not applicable.