---
reference_id: "PMID:40013621"
title: Reappraising the relationship between hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance in PCOS.
authors:
- Houston EJ
- Templeman NM
journal: J Endocrinol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1530/JOE-24-0269
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reappraising the relationship between hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance in PCOS.
**Authors:** Houston EJ, Templeman NM
**Journal:** J Endocrinol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1530/JOE-24-0269](https://doi.org/10.1530/JOE-24-0269)

## Content

1. J Endocrinol. 2025 Mar 12;265(2):e240269. doi: 10.1530/JOE-24-0269. Print 2025
 May 1.

Reappraising the relationship between hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance in 
PCOS.

Houston EJ, Templeman NM.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), a reproductive endocrine disorder with 
quintessential features of metabolic dysfunction, affects millions of women 
worldwide. Hyperinsulinemia (i.e., elevated insulin without hypoglycemia) is a 
common metabolic feature of PCOS that worsens its reproductive symptoms by 
exacerbating pituitary hormone imbalances and increasing levels of bioactive 
androgens. Hyperinsulinemia in PCOS is often attributed to insulin resistance, 
based on the concept that impaired insulin-mediated glucose disposal would 
induce compensatory insulin hypersecretion. However, it is challenging to define 
the sequential relationship between insulin sensitivity and insulin secretion, 
as they are tightly interlinked, and evidence suggests that hyperinsulinemia can 
alternatively precede insulin resistance. Notably, other drivers of 
hyperinsulinemia (outside of insulin resistance) may be highly relevant in the 
context of PCOS. For instance, high androgen levels can augment both 
hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance, generating a self-perpetuating cycle of 
reproductive and metabolic dysfunction. In this review, we evaluate the 
cause-and-effect relationships between insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia 
in PCOS. We examine evidence for the prevailing theory of insulin resistance as 
the primary defect that causes secondary compensatory hyperinsulinemia, and an 
alternative framework of hyperinsulinemia as the earlier defect that perpetuates 
reproductive and metabolic features of PCOS. Considering the heterogeneous 
nature of PCOS, it is improbable that its metabolic characteristics always 
follow the same progression. Comprehensively examining all mechanistic 
regulators of hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance in PCOS might thereby lead 
to improved prevention and management strategies, and address critical knowledge 
gaps in the progression of PCOS pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1530/JOE-24-0269
PMCID: PMC11906131
PMID: 40013621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of this work.