---
reference_id: "PMID:27441066"
title: Ataxia and Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism with Intrafamilial Variability Caused by RNF216 Mutation.
authors:
- Alqwaifly M
- Bohlega S
journal: Neurol Int
year: '2016'
doi: 10.4081/ni.2016.6444
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ataxia and Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism with Intrafamilial Variability Caused by RNF216 Mutation.
**Authors:** Alqwaifly M, Bohlega S
**Journal:** Neurol Int (2016)
**DOI:** [10.4081/ni.2016.6444](https://doi.org/10.4081/ni.2016.6444)

## Content

1. Neurol Int. 2016 Jun 15;8(2):6444. doi: 10.4081/ni.2016.6444. eCollection 2016
 Jun 15.

Ataxia and Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism with Intrafamilial Variability Caused 
by RNF216 Mutation.

Alqwaifly M(1), Bohlega S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research 
Center Riyadh , Saudi Arabia.

Gordon Holmes syndrome (GHS) is a distinct phenotype of autosomal recessive 
cerebellar ataxia, characterized by ataxia, dementia, reproductive defects and 
hypogonadism; it has been recently found to be associated with RNF216 mutation. 
We performed whole-exome sequencing and filtered the resulting novel variants by 
the coordinates of the shared autozygome. We identified a novel splicing variant 
in RNF216 that is likely to abolish the canonical splice site at the junction of 
exon/intron 13 (NM_207111.3:c.2061G>A). We herein report two patients with GHS 
caused by a novel RNF216 mutation as the first follow up report on 
RNF216-related GHS, and show interfamilial variability of phenotype supporting 
the previously reported RNF216-related cases.

DOI: 10.4081/ni.2016.6444
PMCID: PMC4935815
PMID: 27441066

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: the authors declare no 
potential conflict of interest.