---
reference_id: "PMID:33407676"
title: "Long-term survival with sebelipase alfa enzyme replacement therapy in infants with rapidly progressive lysosomal acid lipase deficiency: final results from 2 open-label studies."
authors:
- Vijay S
- Brassier A
- Ghosh A
- Fecarotta S
- Abel F
- Marulkar S
- Jones SA
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-01577-4
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy
- Humans
- Infant
- Sterol Esterase/therapeutic use
- Wolman Disease/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term survival with sebelipase alfa enzyme replacement therapy in infants with rapidly progressive lysosomal acid lipase deficiency: final results from 2 open-label studies.
**Authors:** Vijay S, Brassier A, Ghosh A, Fecarotta S, Abel F, Marulkar S, Jones SA
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-020-01577-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-020-01577-4)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2021 Jan 6;16(1):13. doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-01577-4.

Long-term survival with sebelipase alfa enzyme replacement therapy in infants
with rapidly progressive lysosomal acid lipase deficiency: final results from 2
open-label studies.

Vijay S(1), Brassier A(2), Ghosh A(3), Fecarotta S(4), Abel F(5), Marulkar S(5),
Jones SA(3).

Author information:
(1)Birmingham Children's Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Steelhouse Lane,
Birmingham, B4 6NH, UK. suresh.vijay1@nhs.net.
(2)Hospital Necker Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, France.
(3)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University NHS Foundation
Trust, St. Mary's Hospital, Manchester, UK.
(4)Federico II University, Naples, Italy.
(5)Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Boston, MA, USA.

Erratum in
    Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2021 Mar 1;16(1):113. doi: 10.1186/s13023-021-01753-0.

BACKGROUND: If symptomatic in infants, the autosomal recessive disease lysosomal
acid lipase deficiency (LAL-D; sometimes called Wolman disease or LAL-D/Wolman
phenotype) is characterized by complete loss of LAL enzyme activity. This very
rare, rapidly progressive form of LAL-D results in severe manifestations leading
to failure to thrive and death, usually by 6 months of age. We report results
from 2 open-label studies of enzyme replacement therapy with sebelipase alfa, a
recombinant human LAL, in infants with LAL-D: the phase 2/3 Survival of LAL-D
Infants Treated With Sebelipase Alfa (VITAL) study (NCT01371825) and a phase 2
dose-escalation study (LAL-CL08 [CL08]; NCT02193867). In both, infants received
once-weekly intravenous infusions of sebelipase alfa.
RESULTS: The analysis population contained 19 patients (9 in VITAL; 10 in CL08).
Kaplan-Meier estimates of survival to 12 months and 5 years of age were 79% and
68%, respectively, in the combined population, and the median age of surviving
patients was 5.2 years in VITAL and 3.2 years in CL08. In both studies, median
weight-for-age, length-for-age, and mid-upper arm circumference-for-age z scores
increased from baseline to end of study. Decreases in median liver and spleen
volume over time were noted in both studies. Short-term transfusion-free
hemoglobin normalization was achieved by 100% of patients eligible for
assessment in VITAL, in an estimated median (95% confidence interval [CI]) time
of 4.6 (0.3-16.6) months. In CL08, short-term transfusion-free hemoglobin
normalization was achieved by 70% of patients eligible for assessment, in an
estimated median (95% CI) time of 5.5 (3.7-19.6) months. No patient discontinued
treatment because of treatment-emergent adverse events. Most infusion-associated
reactions (94% in VITAL and 88% in CL08) were mild or moderate in severity.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of these 2 studies of infants with rapidly progressive
LAL-D demonstrated that enzyme replacement therapy with sebelipase alfa
prolonged survival with normal psychomotor development, improved growth,
hematologic parameters, and liver parameters, and was generally well tolerated,
with an acceptable safety profile.

Plain Language Summary: • Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency (LAL-D) is a rare,
inherited disease in which fatty material (cholesterol and triglycerides)
becomes trapped in cells throughout the body, causing organ damage.• Infants can
experience a particularly aggressive form of this disease where the functioning
of the liver and intestine is impaired, thus leading to an enlarged abdomen and
failure to grow and thrive.• If left untreated, LAL-D in infants leads to death,
usually by 6 months of age.• This publication reports the results from 2 studies
involving 19 infants with rapidly progressive LAL-D; infants received
once-weekly intravenous infusions of sebelipase alfa for up to 3 or 5 years,
depending on the study.• Results show that with sebelipase alfa treatment, the
likelihood of an infant with LAL-D surviving to 12 months of age is 79% and the
likelihood of surviving to 5 years of age is 68%.• Throughout both studies,
treatment with sebelipase alfa was associated with (1) improvements in growth
(weight, length/height, and arm circumference), (2) improvements in liver
function, and (3) a decrease in liver and spleen size.• All patients experienced
1 or more adverse events (unwanted side effects), most of which were mild or
moderate in severity; no patient stopped receiving treatment because of these
events.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-020-01577-4
PMCID: PMC7789691
PMID: 33407676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S. Vijay, A. Ghosh, and S. Fecarotta have
received consultancy fees/honoraria from Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc. F. Abel
and S. Marulkar are employees of and may own stock/stock options in Alexion
Pharmaceuticals, Inc. which sponsored the studies. A. Brassier has received fees
and travel support for conferences from Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc. S. A.
Jones has received consultancy fees, grants, and travel support for conferences
from Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
