---
reference_id: "PMID:24700531"
title: A novel homozygous ERCC5 truncating mutation in a family with prenatal arthrogryposis--further evidence of genotype-phenotype correlation.
authors:
- Drury S
- Boustred C
- Tekman M
- Stanescu H
- Kleta R
- Lench N
- Chitty LS
- Scott RH
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36506
keywords:
- Aborted Fetus
- "Arthrogryposis/diagnosis, genetics"
- Autopsy
- "Cockayne Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Endonucleases/genetics
- Exome
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Linkage
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- DNA Excision Repair Protein ERCC-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel homozygous ERCC5 truncating mutation in a family with prenatal arthrogryposis--further evidence of genotype-phenotype correlation.
**Authors:** Drury S, Boustred C, Tekman M, Stanescu H, Kleta R, Lench N, Chitty LS, Scott RH
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36506](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36506)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Jul;164A(7):1777-83. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36506. Epub
2014  Apr 3.

A novel homozygous ERCC5 truncating mutation in a family with prenatal 
arthrogryposis--further evidence of genotype-phenotype correlation.

Drury S(1), Boustred C, Tekman M, Stanescu H, Kleta R, Lench N, Chitty LS, Scott 
RH.

Author information:
(1)NE Thames Regional Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children, London, United Kingdom.

We report on a family with five fetuses conceived to first cousin parents 
presenting with abnormal ultrasound findings including contractures and 
microcephaly. Cerebellar hypoplasia and ventriculomegaly were also present in 
two and fetal edema developed in the one fetus that survived beyond 24 weeks of 
gestation. Linkage studies of 15 members of the family, including four 
affecteds, were undertaken followed by exome sequencing of one affected 
individual and their parents. Analysis of exome data was restricted to the 
9.3 Mb largest shared region of homozygosity identified by linkage; a single 
novel homozygous mutation in the proband that was heterozygous in the parents 
(ERCC5 c.2766dupA, p.Leu923ThrfsX7) was identified. This segregated with 
disease. ERCC5 is a component of the nucleotide excision repair machinery and 
biallelic mutations in the gene have previously been associated with xeroderma 
pigmentosum (group G), Cockayne syndrome and the more severe 
cerebrooculofacioskeletal syndrome. The phenotype in the family we report on is 
consistent with a severe manifestation of cerebrooculofacioskeletal syndrome. 
Our data broaden the reported clinical spectrum of ERCC5 mutations and provide 
further evidence of genotype-phenotype correlation with truncating mutations 
being associated with severe phenotypes. They also demonstrate the molecular 
diagnostic power of a combined approach of linkage studies and exome sequencing 
in families with rare, genetically heterogeneous disorders and a well described 
pedigree.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36506
PMID: 24700531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]