---
reference_id: "PMID:18460889"
title: Autoimmune etiology of generalized vitiligo.
authors:
- Le Poole IC
- Luiten RM
journal: Curr Dir Autoimmun
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1159/000131485
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune etiology of generalized vitiligo.
**Authors:** Le Poole IC, Luiten RM
**Journal:** Curr Dir Autoimmun (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000131485](https://doi.org/10.1159/000131485)

## Content

1. Curr Dir Autoimmun. 2008;10:227-43. doi: 10.1159/000131485.

Autoimmune etiology of generalized vitiligo.

Le Poole IC(1), Luiten RM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Oncology Institute, Loyola University, Chicago, IL, 
USA. ilepool@lumc.edu

Vitiligo is characterized by progressive skin depigmentation resulting from an 
autoimmune response targeting epidermal melanocytes. Melanocytes are 
particularly immunogenic by virtue of the contents of their melanosomes, 
generating the complex radical scavenging molecule melanin in a process that 
involves melanogenic enzymes and structural components, including tyrosinase, 
MART-1, gp100, TRP-2 and TRP-1. These molecules are also prime targets of the 
immune response in both vitiligo and melanoma. The immunogenicity of melanosomal 
proteins can partly be explained by the dual role of melanosomes, involved both 
in melanin synthesis and processing of exogenous antigens. Melanocytes are 
capable of presenting antigens in the context of MHC class II, providing HLA-DR+ 
melanocytes in perilesional vitiligo skin the option of presenting melanosomal 
antigens in response to trauma and local inflammation. Type I cytokine-mediated 
immunity to melanocytes in vitiligo involves T cells reactive with melanosomal 
antigens, similar to T cells observed in melanoma. In vitiligo, however, T cell 
tuning allows T cells with higher affinity for melanocyte differentiation 
antigens to enter the circulation after escaping clonal deletion in primary 
lymphoid organs. The resulting efficacious and progressive autoimmune response 
to melanocytes provides a roadmap for melanoma therapy.

DOI: 10.1159/000131485
PMID: 18460889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]