---
reference_id: PMID:34036913
title: "Epidermolysis Bullosa: Pediatric Perspectives."
authors:
- Hon KL
- Chu S
- Leung AKC
journal: Curr Pediatr Rev
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2174/1573396317666210525161252
keywords:
- Child
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa Dystrophica/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa, Junctional/diagnosis, pathology"
- Humans
- Pediatrics
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidermolysis Bullosa: Pediatric Perspectives.
**Authors:** Hon KL, Chu S, Leung AKC
**Journal:** Curr Pediatr Rev (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1573396317666210525161252](https://doi.org/10.2174/1573396317666210525161252)

## Content

1. Curr Pediatr Rev. 2022;18(3):182-190. doi: 10.2174/1573396317666210525161252.

Epidermolysis Bullosa: Pediatric Perspectives.

Hon KL(1), Chu S(2), Leung AKC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, and 
Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, The Hong Kong Children's 
Hospital, Kowloon, Hong Kong.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Hong 
Kong.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Calgary, and The Alberta 
Children's Hospital, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is a group of rare congenital genetic conditions that 
result in painful blistering of the skin and mucous membranes, which occur with 
minor trauma or friction. There are many types and subtypes of EB that need to 
be distinguished, as the management and prognosis of each can vary 
significantly. We aim to perform an up-to-date literature review on congenital 
EB for healthcare providers in pediatrics. We performed a review of existing 
literature in the English language on EB via PubMed Clinical Queries, using key 
words such as "epidermolysis bullosa", "congenital" and "children". We reviewed 
EB based on the following subheadings: epidemiology, diagnosis, therapy, 
prognosis, and clinical prediction guidelines. EB is due to mutation in a number 
of genes, some types are autosomal dominant while others are autosomal 
recessive. The underlying mechanism is a defect in attachment between or within 
the epidermis and dermis of the skin. There are four main types: epidermolysis 
bullosa simplex, dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa, junctional epidermolysis 
bullosa, and Kindler syndrome. The diagnosis is suspected based on symptoms and 
confirmed by skin biopsy and definitive genetic testing. The severity of EB can 
range from mild to fatal. Severe complications may arise in some EB types and 
subtypes within the eye, ear, nose, upper airway, gastrointestinal and 
genitourinary tracts. There is no cure for the condition to date. Optimal 
management must be multidisciplinary, and involves wound care, pain control, 
controlling infections, nutritional support, and prevention and treatment of 
complications. EB presents in different forms. Treatment is supportive. The 
prognosis of milder forms is good. Children severely affected with EB and their 
families live a misery life with impaired quality of life. Health care workers 
must be aware of the suffering in these families and proactively support them.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1573396317666210525161252
PMID: 34036913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]