---
reference_id: "PMID:21862994"
title: Management of medullary thyroid carcinoma and MEN2 syndromes in childhood.
authors:
- Waguespack SG
- Rich TA
- Perrier ND
- Jimenez C
- Cote GJ
journal: Nat Rev Endocrinol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2011.139
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of medullary thyroid carcinoma and MEN2 syndromes in childhood.
**Authors:** Waguespack SG, Rich TA, Perrier ND, Jimenez C, Cote GJ
**Journal:** Nat Rev Endocrinol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrendo.2011.139](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrendo.2011.139)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2011 Aug 23;7(10):596-607. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2011.139.

Management of medullary thyroid carcinoma and MEN2 syndromes in childhood.

Waguespack SG(1), Rich TA, Perrier ND, Jimenez C, Cote GJ.

Author information:
(1)The Department of Endocrine Neoplasia and Hormonal Disorders, PO Box 301402, 
Unit 1461, Houston, TX 77230-1402, USA. swagues@mdanderson.org

Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) and the multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 
type 2 syndromes are rare but important endocrine diseases that are increasingly 
managed by pediatric providers. MTC is generally associated with a favorable 
prognosis when diagnosed during childhood, where it frequently occurs secondary 
to activating mutations in the RET proto-oncogene and arises from pre-existing 
C-cell hyperplasia. MEN2A accounts for 90-95% of childhood MTC cases and is most 
commonly due to mutations in codon 634 of RET. MEN2B is associated with the most 
aggressive clinical presentation of MTC and is almost always due to the 
Met918Thr mutation of RET. Surgery is the primary treatment and only chance of 
cure, although the advent of targeted therapies seems to be improving 
progression-free survival in advanced cases. Since the discovery of the role of 
RET in MEN2A, considerable advances in the management of this syndrome have 
occurred, and most of the children with MEN2A who have undergone early 
thyroidectomy will now lead full, productive lives. Strong genotype-phenotype 
correlations have facilitated the development of guidelines for interventions. 
Contemporary approaches for deciding the appropriate age at which surgery should 
take place incorporate data from ultrasonography and calcitonin measurements in 
addition to the results of genotyping. To optimize care and to facilitate 
ongoing research, children with MTC and the MEN2 syndromes are optimally treated 
at tertiary centers with multidisciplinary expertise.

DOI: 10.1038/nrendo.2011.139
PMID: 21862994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]