---
reference_id: "PMID:27179424"
title: Zika Virus Disrupts Neural Progenitor Development and Leads to Microcephaly in Mice.
authors:
- Li C
- Xu D
- Ye Q
- Hong S
- Jiang Y
- Liu X
- Zhang N
- Shi L
- Qin CF
- Xu Z
journal: Cell Stem Cell
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2016.04.017
keywords:
- Animals
- "Brain/embryology, pathology, virology"
- Cell Cycle/genetics
- Cell Death/genetics
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- Cell Lineage/genetics
- "Embryo, Mammalian/immunology, pathology, virology"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Immunity
- "Mice, Inbred ICR"
- "Microcephaly/genetics, immunology, pathology, virology"
- "Neural Stem Cells/pathology, virology"
- Virus Replication
- Zika Virus/physiology
- "Zika Virus Infection/genetics, immunology, pathology, virology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Zika Virus Disrupts Neural Progenitor Development and Leads to Microcephaly in Mice.
**Authors:** Li C, Xu D, Ye Q, Hong S, Jiang Y, Liu X, Zhang N, Shi L, Qin CF, Xu Z
**Journal:** Cell Stem Cell (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.stem.2016.04.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2016.04.017)

## Content

1. Cell Stem Cell. 2016 Jul 7;19(1):120-6. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2016.04.017. Epub 
2016 May 11.

Zika Virus Disrupts Neural Progenitor Development and Leads to Microcephaly in 
Mice.

Li C(1), Xu D(2), Ye Q(3), Hong S(1), Jiang Y(4), Liu X(1), Zhang N(5), Shi 
L(4), Qin CF(6), Xu Z(7).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of 
Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, 
China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(2)Institute of Life Sciences, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350116, China.
(3)Department of Virology, State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, 
Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing 100071, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of 
Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, 
China.
(5)Department of Virology, State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, 
Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing 100071, China; 
Guangxi Medical University, Nanning 530021, China.
(6)Department of Virology, State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, 
Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing 100071, China. 
Electronic address: qincf@bmi.ac.cn.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of 
Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, 
China; Parkinson's Disease Center, Beijing Institute for Brain Disorders, 
Beijing 100101, China. Electronic address: zhxu@genetics.ac.cn.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2016 Jul;14(7):401. doi: 10.1038/nrmicro.2016.80.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2016 Jul 7;19(1):4-6. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2016.06.009.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2016 Nov 3;19(5):672. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2016.10.017.

The link between Zika virus (ZIKV) infection and microcephaly has raised urgent 
global alarm. The historical African ZIKV MR766 was recently shown to infect 
cultured human neural precursor cells (NPCs), but unlike the contemporary ZIKV 
strains, it is not believed to cause microcephaly. Here we investigated whether 
the Asian ZIKV strain SZ01 could infect NPCs in vivo and affect brain 
development. We found that SZ01 replicates efficiently in embryonic mouse brain 
by directly targeting different neuronal linages. ZIKV infection leads to 
cell-cycle arrest, apoptosis, and inhibition of NPC differentiation, resulting 
in cortical thinning and microcephaly. Global gene expression analysis of 
infected brains reveals upregulation of candidate flavirus entry receptors and 
dysregulation of genes associated with immune response, apoptosis, and 
microcephaly. Our model provides evidence for a direct link between Zika virus 
infection and microcephaly, with potential for further exploration of the 
underlying mechanisms and management of ZIKV-related pathological effects during 
brain development.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stem.2016.04.017
PMID: 27179424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]