---
reference_id: "PMID:32846060"
title: Efficacy of Selpercatinib in RET Fusion-Positive Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.
authors:
- Drilon A
- Oxnard GR
- Tan DSW
- Loong HHF
- Johnson M
- Gainor J
- McCoach CE
- Gautschi O
- Besse B
- Cho BC
- Peled N
- Weiss J
- Kim YJ
- Ohe Y
- Nishio M
- Park K
- Patel J
- Seto T
- Sakamoto T
- Rosen E
- Shah MH
- Barlesi F
- Cassier PA
- Bazhenova L
- De Braud F
- Garralda E
- Velcheti V
- Satouchi M
- Ohashi K
- Pennell NA
- Reckamp KL
- Dy GK
- Wolf J
- Solomon B
- Falchook G
- Ebata K
- Nguyen M
- Nair B
- Zhu EY
- Yang L
- Huang X
- Olek E
- Rothenberg SM
- Goto K
- Subbiah V
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2005653
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of Selpercatinib in RET Fusion-Positive Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.
**Authors:** Drilon A, Oxnard GR, Tan DSW, Loong HHF, Johnson M, Gainor J, McCoach CE, Gautschi O, Besse B, Cho BC, Peled N, Weiss J, Kim YJ, Ohe Y, Nishio M, Park K, Patel J, Seto T, Sakamoto T, Rosen E, Shah MH, Barlesi F, Cassier PA, Bazhenova L, De Braud F, Garralda E, Velcheti V, Satouchi M, Ohashi K, Pennell NA, Reckamp KL, Dy GK, Wolf J, Solomon B, Falchook G, Ebata K, Nguyen M, Nair B, Zhu EY, Yang L, Huang X, Olek E, Rothenberg SM, Goto K, Subbiah V
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2005653](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2005653)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2020 Aug 27;383(9):813-824. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2005653.

Efficacy of Selpercatinib in RET Fusion-Positive Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.

Drilon A(1), Oxnard GR(1), Tan DSW(1), Loong HHF(1), Johnson M(1), Gainor J(1), 
McCoach CE(1), Gautschi O(1), Besse B(1), Cho BC(1), Peled N(1), Weiss J(1), Kim 
YJ(1), Ohe Y(1), Nishio M(1), Park K(1), Patel J(1), Seto T(1), Sakamoto T(1), 
Rosen E(1), Shah MH(1), Barlesi F(1), Cassier PA(1), Bazhenova L(1), De Braud 
F(1), Garralda E(1), Velcheti V(1), Satouchi M(1), Ohashi K(1), Pennell NA(1), 
Reckamp KL(1), Dy GK(1), Wolf J(1), Solomon B(1), Falchook G(1), Ebata K(1), 
Nguyen M(1), Nair B(1), Zhu EY(1), Yang L(1), Huang X(1), Olek E(1), Rothenberg 
SM(1), Goto K(1), Subbiah V(1).

Author information:
(1)From Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and Weill Cornell Medical College 
(A.D., E.R.) and New York University Langone Medical Center (V.V.), New York, 
and Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo (G.K.D.) - all in New 
York; Dana-Farber Cancer Institute (G.R.O.) and Massachusetts General Hospital 
(J.G.), Boston; National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore (D.S.W.T.); the 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China (H.H.F.L.); Sarah Cannon 
Research Institute, Nashville (M.J.); University of California, San 
Francisco-Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Francisco 
(C.E.M.), University of California, San Diego, Moores Cancer Center, La Jolla 
(L.B.), and City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, Duarte (K.L.R.) - all in 
California; University of Bern, Bern, and Cantonal Hospital of Lucerne, Lucerne 
- both in Switzerland (O.G.); Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif (B.B.), 
Hospital La Timone, Marseille (F.B.), and Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon (P.A.C.) - 
all in France; Severance Hospital, Yonsei University Health System (B.C.C.), and 
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine (K.P.), 
Seoul, and Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam (Y.J.K.) - all 
in South Korea; Soroka University Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel (N.P.); 
University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill (J. Weiss); National 
Cancer Center Hospital (Y.O.) and Cancer Institute Hospital of the Japanese 
Foundation for Cancer Research (M. Nishio), Tokyo, National Hospital 
Organization Kyushu Cancer Center, Fukuoka (T. Seto), Tottori University 
Hospital, Tottori (T. Sakamoto), Hyogo Cancer Center, Akashi (M.S.), Okayama 
University Hospital, Okayama (K.O.), and National Cancer Center Hospital East, 
Chiba (K.G.) - all in Japan; University of Chicago, Chicago (J.P.); the Ohio 
State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus (M.H.S.), and Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland (N.A.P.); Istituto Nazionale Tumori-National Cancer Institute, 
Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan (F.D.B.); Vall d'Hebron Institute of 
Oncology, Hospital Universitario Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona (E.G.); Center for 
Integrated Oncology, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany (J. Wolf); 
Peter MacCallum Cancer Institute, Melbourne, VIC, Australia (B.S.); Sarah Cannon 
Research Institute at HealthONE, Denver (G.F.); Loxo Oncology, Stamford, CT 
(K.E., M. Nguyen, B.N., E.Y.Z., L.Y., X.H., E.O., S.M.R.); and the University of 
Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston (V.S.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2020 Aug 27;383(9):868-869. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe2024831.

BACKGROUND: RET fusions are oncogenic drivers in 1 to 2% of non-small-cell lung 
cancers (NSCLCs). In patients with RET fusion-positive NSCLC, the efficacy and 
safety of selective RET inhibition are unknown.
METHODS: We enrolled patients with advanced RET fusion-positive NSCLC who had 
previously received platinum-based chemotherapy and those who were previously 
untreated separately in a phase 1-2 trial of selpercatinib. The primary end 
point was an objective response (a complete or partial response) as determined 
by an independent review committee. Secondary end points included the duration 
of response, progression-free survival, and safety.
RESULTS: In the first 105 consecutively enrolled patients with RET 
fusion-positive NSCLC who had previously received at least platinum-based 
chemotherapy, the percentage with an objective response was 64% (95% confidence 
interval [CI], 54 to 73). The median duration of response was 17.5 months (95% 
CI, 12.0 to could not be evaluated), and 63% of the responses were ongoing at a 
median follow-up of 12.1 months. Among 39 previously untreated patients, the 
percentage with an objective response was 85% (95% CI, 70 to 94), and 90% of the 
responses were ongoing at 6 months. Among 11 patients with measurable central 
nervous system metastasis at enrollment, the percentage with an objective 
intracranial response was 91% (95% CI, 59 to 100). The most common adverse 
events of grade 3 or higher were hypertension (in 14% of the patients), an 
increased alanine aminotransferase level (in 12%), an increased aspartate 
aminotransferase level (in 10%), hyponatremia (in 6%), and lymphopenia (in 6%). 
A total of 12 of 531 patients (2%) discontinued selpercatinib because of a 
drug-related adverse event.
CONCLUSIONS: Selpercatinib had durable efficacy, including intracranial 
activity, with mainly low-grade toxic effects in patients with RET 
fusion-positive NSCLC who had previously received platinum-based chemotherapy 
and those who were previously untreated. (Funded by Loxo Oncology and others; 
LIBRETTO-001 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03157128.).

Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2005653
PMCID: PMC7506467
PMID: 32846060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]