---
reference_id: "PMID:40506541"
title: A scalable gut epithelial organoid model reveals the genome-wide colonization landscape of a human-adapted pathogen.
authors:
- Di Martino ML
- Jenniches L
- Bhetwal A
- Eriksson J
- Lopes ACC
- Ntokaki A
- Pasqua M
- Sundbom M
- Skogar M
- Graf W
- Webb DL
- Hellström PM
- Mateus A
- Barquist L
- Sellin ME
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41588-025-02218-x
keywords:
- Humans
- Organoids/microbiology
- "Shigella flexneri/genetics, pathogenicity"
- Intestinal Mucosa/microbiology
- "Dysentery, Bacillary/microbiology, genetics"
- "Genome, Bacterial"
- Virulence/genetics
- Host-Pathogen Interactions/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A scalable gut epithelial organoid model reveals the genome-wide colonization landscape of a human-adapted pathogen.
**Authors:** Di Martino ML, Jenniches L, Bhetwal A, Eriksson J, Lopes ACC, Ntokaki A, Pasqua M, Sundbom M, Skogar M, Graf W, Webb DL, Hellström PM, Mateus A, Barquist L, Sellin ME
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41588-025-02218-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-025-02218-x)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2025 Jul;57(7):1730-1741. doi: 10.1038/s41588-025-02218-x. Epub
2025  Jun 12.

A scalable gut epithelial organoid model reveals the genome-wide colonization
landscape of a human-adapted pathogen.

Di Martino ML(1), Jenniches L(2), Bhetwal A(3), Eriksson J(3), Lopes ACC(3),
Ntokaki A(3), Pasqua M(3)(4), Sundbom M(5), Skogar M(5), Graf W(5), Webb DL(6),
Hellström PM(6), Mateus A(7)(8), Barquist L(9)(10)(11)(12), Sellin ME(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. ml.dimartino@imbim.uu.se.
(2)Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz Centre
for Infection Research (HZI), Würzburg, Germany.
laura.jenniches@helmholtz-hiri.de.
(3)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Department of Biology and Biotechnologies 'Charles Darwin', Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Surgical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(6)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(7)Department of Chemistry, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(8)The Laboratory for Molecular Infection Medicine Sweden (MIMS), Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden.
(9)Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz Centre
for Infection Research (HZI), Würzburg, Germany.
lars.barquist@helmholtz-hiri.de.
(10)Faculty of Medicine, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
lars.barquist@helmholtz-hiri.de.
(11)Department of Biology, University of Toronto, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada.
lars.barquist@helmholtz-hiri.de.
(12)Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. lars.barquist@helmholtz-hiri.de.
(13)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. mikael.sellin@imbim.uu.se.
(14)Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden. mikael.sellin@imbim.uu.se.

Studying the pathogenesis of human-adapted microorganisms is challenging, since
small animal models often fail to recapitulate human physiology. Hence, the
comprehensive genetic and regulatory circuits driving the infection process of
principal human pathogens such as Shigella flexneri remain to be defined. We
combined large-scale Shigella infections of enteroids and colonoids with
transposon-directed insertion sequencing and Bayesian statistical modeling to
address infection bottlenecks, thereby establishing the comprehensive
genome-wide map of Shigella genes required to infect human intestinal
epithelium. This revealed the Shigella virulence effectors essential for
epithelial cell colonization across geometries and intestinal segments,
identified over 100 chromosomal genes involved in the process and uncovered a
post-transcriptional mechanism whereby tRNA-modification enzymes and
differential codon usage exert global control of a bacterial virulence program.
Our findings provide a broadly applicable framework for combining advanced
organotypic tissue culture with functional genomics and computational tools to
map human-microorganism interactions at scale.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41588-025-02218-x
PMCID: PMC12283395
PMID: 40506541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no
competing interests.
