---
reference_id: "PMID:30520383"
title: "Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer with Activating Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Mutation: First Line Treatment and Beyond."
authors:
- Rocco D
- Battiloro C
- Gravara LD
- Gridelli C
journal: Rev Recent Clin Trials
year: '2019'
doi: 10.2174/1574887114666181205155211
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer with Activating Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Mutation: First Line Treatment and Beyond.
**Authors:** Rocco D, Battiloro C, Gravara LD, Gridelli C
**Journal:** Rev Recent Clin Trials (2019)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1574887114666181205155211](https://doi.org/10.2174/1574887114666181205155211)

## Content

1. Rev Recent Clin Trials. 2019;14(2):120-128. doi: 
10.2174/1574887114666181205155211.

Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer with Activating Epidermal Growth Factor 
Receptor Mutation: First Line Treatment and Beyond.

Rocco D(1), Battiloro C(1), Gravara LD(2), Gridelli C(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary Oncology, Azienda Ospedaliera Dei Colli Monaldi, 
Naples, Italy.
(2)Luigi Vanvitelli University, Caserta, Italy.
(3)Division of Medical Oncology, AORN Giuseppe Moscati, Avellino, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer mortality, being 
responsible for more than 1.6 million deaths each year worldwide and 
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for approximately 85% of lung 
cancers; moreover, 10 to 15% of all NSCLCs harbor EGFR (epidermal growth factor 
receptor) activating mutations, being suitable for EGFR-Tyrosine Kinase 
Inhibitors (TKI) molecular targeted therapy. However, EGFR+ NSCLCs gain acquired 
resistance to these agents, representing one of the key challenges for modern 
precision oncology.
OBJECTIVE: Therefore, this paper aims to provide an extensive state of the art 
review, alongside with hints about future perspectives.
CONCLUSION: To date, in the light of the data from the FLAURA study, osimertinib 
represents the best first-line option in NSCLC patients with EGFR activating 
mutations; EGFR-TKI plus chemotherapy combination therapies, even though 
interesting, must still be considered investigational.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1574887114666181205155211
PMID: 30520383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]