---
reference_id: "PMID:38818404"
title: "Case report: Exploring autosomal recessive woolly hair: genetic and scanning electron microscopic perspectives on a Japanese patient."
authors:
- Minakawa S
- Matsuzaki Y
- Higashino T
- Suzuki T
- Tomita H
- Akasaka E
- Sawamura D
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2024.1374222
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: Exploring autosomal recessive woolly hair: genetic and scanning electron microscopic perspectives on a Japanese patient.
**Authors:** Minakawa S, Matsuzaki Y, Higashino T, Suzuki T, Tomita H, Akasaka E, Sawamura D
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2024.1374222](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2024.1374222)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2024 May 16;11:1374222. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2024.1374222. 
eCollection 2024.

Case report: Exploring autosomal recessive woolly hair: genetic and scanning 
electron microscopic perspectives on a Japanese patient.

Minakawa S(1)(2), Matsuzaki Y(1), Higashino T(3), Suzuki T(4), Tomita H(2), 
Akasaka E(1), Sawamura D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Hirosaki, Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Hirosaki University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Hirosaki, Japan.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, Yamagata University, 
Yamagata, Japan.

Woolly hair (WH) is a hair shaft anomaly characterized by tightly curled hair 
that typically stops growing at a few inches. Autosomal recessive WH (ARWH; OMIM 
no. 278150/604379/616760) has been reported to be caused by variants in genes 
coding lysophosphatidic acid receptor 6 (LPAR6), lipase H (LIPH), or keratin 25 
(KRT25). In this study, we conducted a scanning electron microscopic (SEM) 
examination of the hair of a 3-year-old Japanese ARWH patient. The SEM revealed 
that her affected hair had an irregular and rough cuticle compared to her 
mother's hair. Many irregular small projections and longitudinal grooves were 
seen on the surface of the patient's hair shaft, and some free margins of the 
hair cortex were raised or serrated. Her hairs were oval-shaped on the 
cross-section. Mutation analysis revealed a homozygous pathogenic variant 
(c.736 T > A; Cys246Ser) in exon 6 in LIPH. In our clinic, we identified three 
additional cases with the homozygous Cys246Ser variant and one case with 
compound heterozygous variants in LIPH: Cys246Ser and c.671C > G (Pro224Arg). 
Consequently, genetic analyses, including genotype-phenotype correlation 
involving rare LIPH variants, have become more crucial in the Japanese 
population.

Copyright © 2024 Minakawa, Matsuzaki, Higashino, Suzuki, Tomita, Akasaka and 
Sawamura.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2024.1374222
PMCID: PMC11137284
PMID: 38818404

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.