---
reference_id: "PMID:28328696"
title: Enterocolitis in a Child With Hirschsprung Disease.
authors:
- Guillaume AWD
- Miller AC
- Nguyen MC
journal: Pediatr Emerg Care
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/PEC.0000000000001108
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enterocolitis in a Child With Hirschsprung Disease.
**Authors:** Guillaume AWD, Miller AC, Nguyen MC
**Journal:** Pediatr Emerg Care (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PEC.0000000000001108](https://doi.org/10.1097/PEC.0000000000001108)

## Content

1. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2019 Jul;35(7):e131-e132. doi:
10.1097/PEC.0000000000001108.

Enterocolitis in a Child With Hirschsprung Disease.

Guillaume AWD(1), Miller AC, Nguyen MC.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Emergency Medicine, Lehigh Valley Hospital and Health 
Network/USF MCOM, Allentown, PA.

Hirschsprung disease is a congenital abnormality that can be surgically 
corrected. However, Hirschsprung-associated enterocolitis can be a 
life-threatening sequela. Very little has been published in the emergency 
medicine literature about the risk of enterocolitis and shock in patients with a 
history of Hirschsprung disease. We describe the case of a 6-month-old male 
infant with a history of multiple surgeries for Hirschsprung disease who 
presented to the emergency department with a seemingly benign viral 
gastrointestinal illness. His stable condition led him to be discharged. 
However, 4 days later, he returned to the emergency department with severe 
diarrhea and was subsequently admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit for 
the management of enterocolitis and shock. With this case report, we aim to 
raise emergency physicians' awareness of the serious and possibly fatal 
complications of Hirschsprung disease. We argue that this single element of a 
patient's medical history can alter the management of seemingly simple viral 
gastrointestinal illnesses; rather than be discharged, such a patient requires 
surgical consultation and possibly admission for close monitoring and treatment.

DOI: 10.1097/PEC.0000000000001108
PMID: 28328696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]