---
reference_id: "PMID:38495792"
title: Differences in the clinical and hormonal presentation of patients with familial and sporadic primary aldosteronism.
authors:
- Araujo-Castro M
- Parra P
- Martín Rojas-Marcos P
- Paja Fano M
- González Boillos M
- Pascual-Corrales E
- García Cano AM
- Ruiz-Sanchez JG
- Vicente Delgado A
- Gómez Hoyos E
- Ferreira R
- García Sanz I
- Recasens Sala M
- Barahona San Millan R
- Picón César MJ
- Díaz Guardiola P
- Perdomo CM
- Manjón-Miguélez L
- García Centeno R
- Rebollo Román Á
- Gracia Gimeno P
- Robles Lázaro C
- Morales-Ruiz M
- Calatayud M
- Furio Collao SA
- Meneses D
- Sampedro Nuñez M
- Escudero Quesada V
- Mena Ribas E
- Sanmartín Sánchez A
- Gonzalvo Diaz C
- Lamas C
- Del Castillo Tous M
- Serrano Gotarredona J
- Michalopoulou Alevras T
- Moya Mateo EM
- Hanzu FA
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1336306
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Aldosterone
- "Hyperaldosteronism/complications, genetics, epidemiology"
- Hypokalemia/etiology
- Potassium
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differences in the clinical and hormonal presentation of patients with familial and sporadic primary aldosteronism.
**Authors:** Araujo-Castro M, Parra P, Martín Rojas-Marcos P, Paja Fano M, González Boillos M, Pascual-Corrales E, García Cano AM, Ruiz-Sanchez JG, Vicente Delgado A, Gómez Hoyos E, Ferreira R, García Sanz I, Recasens Sala M, Barahona San Millan R, Picón César MJ, Díaz Guardiola P, Perdomo CM, Manjón-Miguélez L, García Centeno R, Rebollo Román Á, Gracia Gimeno P, Robles Lázaro C, Morales-Ruiz M, Calatayud M, Furio Collao SA, Meneses D, Sampedro Nuñez M, Escudero Quesada V, Mena Ribas E, Sanmartín Sánchez A, Gonzalvo Diaz C, Lamas C, Del Castillo Tous M, Serrano Gotarredona J, Michalopoulou Alevras T, Moya Mateo EM, Hanzu FA
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2024.1336306](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2024.1336306)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2024 Mar 1;15:1336306. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2024.1336306. eCollection 2024.

Differences in the clinical and hormonal presentation of patients with familial 
and sporadic primary aldosteronism.

Araujo-Castro M(1)(2), Parra P(3), Martín Rojas-Marcos P(3), Paja Fano M(4)(5), 
González Boillos M(6), Pascual-Corrales E(1)(2), García Cano AM(7), Ruiz-Sanchez 
JG(8), Vicente Delgado A(9), Gómez Hoyos E(10), Ferreira R(11), García Sanz 
I(12), Recasens Sala M(13), Barahona San Millan R(13), Picón César MJ(14)(15), 
Díaz Guardiola P(16), Perdomo CM(17), Manjón-Miguélez L(18)(19), García Centeno 
R(20), Rebollo Román Á(21), Gracia Gimeno P(22), Robles Lázaro C(23), 
Morales-Ruiz M(24), Calatayud M(25), Furio Collao SA(25), Meneses D(6), Sampedro 
Nuñez M(26), Escudero Quesada V(27), Mena Ribas E(28), Sanmartín Sánchez A(28), 
Gonzalvo Diaz C(29), Lamas C(29), Del Castillo Tous M(30), Serrano Gotarredona 
J(31), Michalopoulou Alevras T(32), Moya Mateo EM(33), Hanzu FA(34).

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, 
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Investigación Biomédica Ramón y Cajal (IRYCIS), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Universitario La Paz, 
Madrid, Spain.
(4)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, OSI Bilbao-Basurto, Hospital 
Universitario de Basurto, Bilbao, Spain.
(5)Medicine Department, Basque Country University, Bilbao, Spain.
(6)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Universitario de Castellón, 
Castellón, Spain.
(7)Biochemistry Department, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Universitario Fundación 
Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain.
(9)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Universitario de Toledo, 
Toledo, Spain.
(10)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Universitario de 
Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain.
(11)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Universitario Rey Juan 
Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
(12)General and Digestive Surgery Department, Hospital Universitario de La 
Princesa, Madrid, Spain.
(13)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital De Girona Doctor Josep 
Trueta, Girona, Spain.
(14)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Universitario Virgen de la 
Victoria de Málaga, IBIMA, Malaga, Spain.
(15)CIBEROBN, Madrid, Spain.
(16)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Universitario Infanta 
Sofía, Madrid, Spain.
(17)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Clínica Universidad de Navarra, 
Pamplona, Spain.
(18)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Universitario Central de 
Asturias, Oviedo, Spain.
(19)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias (ISPA), 
Oviedo, Spain.
(20)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Universitario Gregorio 
Marañón, Madrid, Spain.
(21)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Reina Sofía, Córdoba, 
Spain.
(22)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Royo Villanova, Zaragoza, 
Spain.
(23)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Complejo Universitario de Salamanca, 
Salamanca, Spain.
(24)Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Department-CDB, Hospital Clinic, 
IDIBAPS, CIBERehd, Barcelona, Spain.
(25)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Doce de Octubre, Madrid, 
Spain.
(26)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Universitario La Princesa, 
Madrid, Spain.
(27)Nephrology Department, Hospital Universitario Doctor Peset, Valencia, Spain.
(28)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Universitario Son Espases, 
Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
(29)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Universitario De Albacete, 
Albacete, Spain.
(30)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Universitario Virgen 
Macarena, Sevilla, Spain.
(31)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital General Universitario de 
Alicante, Alicante, Spain.
(32)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Joan XXIII, Tarragona, 
Spain.
(33)Internal Medicine, Hospital Universitario Infanta Leonor, Madrid, Spain.
(34)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Clinic, IDIPAS, Barcelona, 
Spain.

PURPOSE: To compare the clinical and hormonal characteristics of patients with 
familial hyperaldosteronism (FH) and sporadic primary aldosteronism (PA).
METHODS: A systematic review of the literature was performed for the 
identification of FH patients. The SPAIN-ALDO registry cohort of patients with 
no suspicion of FH was chosen as the comparator group (sporadic group).
RESULTS: A total of 360 FH (246 FH type I, 73 type II, 29 type III, and 12 type 
IV) cases and 830 sporadic PA patients were included. Patients with FH-I were 
younger than sporadic cases, and women were more commonly affected (P = 0.003). 
In addition, the plasma aldosterone concentration (PAC) was lower, plasma renin 
activity (PRA) higher, and hypokalemia (P < 0.001) less frequent than in 
sporadic cases. Except for a younger age (P < 0.001) and higher diastolic blood 
pressure (P = 0.006), the clinical and hormonal profiles of FH-II and sporadic 
cases were similar. FH-III had a distinct phenotype, with higher PAC and higher 
frequency of hypokalemia (P < 0.001), and presented 45 years before sporadic 
cases. Nevertheless, the clinical and hormonal phenotypes of FH-IV and sporadic 
cases were similar, with the former being younger and having lower serum 
potassium levels.
CONCLUSION: In addition to being younger and having a family history of PA, FH-I 
and III share other typical characteristics. In this regard, FH-I is 
characterized by a low prevalence of hypokalemia and FH-III by a severe 
aldosterone excess causing hypokalemia in more than 85% of patients. The 
clinical and hormonal phenotype of type II and IV is similar to the sporadic 
cases.

Copyright © 2024 Araujo-Castro, Parra, Martín Rojas-Marcos, Paja Fano, González 
Boillos, Pascual-Corrales, García Cano, Ruiz-Sanchez, Vicente Delgado, Gómez 
Hoyos, Ferreira, García Sanz, Recasens Sala, Barahona San Millan, Picón César, 
Díaz Guardiola, Perdomo, Manjón-Miguélez, García Centeno, Rebollo Román, Gracia 
Gimeno, Robles Lázaro, Morales-Ruiz, Calatayud, Furio Collao, Meneses, Sampedro 
Nuñez, Escudero Quesada, Mena Ribas, Sanmartín Sánchez, Gonzalvo Diaz, Lamas, 
del Castillo Tous, Serrano Gotarredona, Michalopoulou Alevras, Moya Mateo and 
Hanzu.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1336306
PMCID: PMC10940345
PMID: 38495792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.