---
reference_id: "PMID:39321395"
title: Comprehensive Analysis of Paraneoplastic Neurologic Syndrome and PNS-CARE Diagnostic Criteria in Clinical Practice.
authors:
- Zhao-Fleming H
- Rezk M
- Shah S
- Gupta P
- Zekeridou A
- Flanagan EP
- Pittock SJ
- McKeon A
- Dubey D
journal: Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000200316
keywords:
- Humans
- "Paraneoplastic Syndromes, Nervous System/immunology, diagnosis"
- Male
- Female
- Retrospective Studies
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Adult
- Autoantibodies/blood
- "Aged, 80 and over"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive Analysis of Paraneoplastic Neurologic Syndrome and PNS-CARE Diagnostic Criteria in Clinical Practice.
**Authors:** Zhao-Fleming H, Rezk M, Shah S, Gupta P, Zekeridou A, Flanagan EP, Pittock SJ, McKeon A, Dubey D
**Journal:** Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXI.0000000000200316](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXI.0000000000200316)

## Content

1. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2024 Dec;11(6):e200316. doi: 
10.1212/NXI.0000000000200316. Epub 2024 Sep 25.

Comprehensive Analysis of Paraneoplastic Neurologic Syndrome and PNS-CARE 
Diagnostic Criteria in Clinical Practice.

Zhao-Fleming H(1), Rezk M(1), Shah S(1), Gupta P(1), Zekeridou A(1), Flanagan 
EP(1), Pittock SJ(1), McKeon A(1), Dubey D(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Neurology (H.Z.-F., M.R., P.G., A.Z., E.P.F., S.J.P., 
A.M., D.D.) and Laboratory Medicine and Pathology (M.R., P.G., A.Z., E.P.F., 
S.J.P., A.M., D.D.), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; and Department of Neurology 
(S.S.), Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Paraneoplastic neurologic syndrome (PNS) diagnostic 
criteria were first proposed in 2004 and updated in 2021. The PNS-CARE score, 
derived from the updated criteria, is a composite model for assigning likelihood 
for patients with suspected PNS. In this study, we evaluated the utility and 
applicability of the 2021 PNS-CARE score and present our PNS cohort.
METHODS: This is a retrospective study. We identified Mayo Clinic patients 
suspected to have PNS (1/2005-12/2020) and collected relevant information 
including demographics, PNS presentation, and clinical outcomes. Inclusion 
criteria were the following: (1) patients with a syndrome consistent with PNS 
and (2) patients with sufficient information available in charts. Exclusion 
criteria were the following: (1) evaluation only before 2005, (2) patients not 
evaluated by neurology, (3) presentation after immune checkpoint inhibitors, and 
(4) syndromes not included in 2021 criteria. All patients were evaluated for the 
2021 and 2004 PNS criteria.
RESULTS: We identified 484 patients suspected to have PNS at initial 
presentation, of whom 212 (44%) were considered to have PNS after completion of 
evaluation. Among these 212 patients, the most common autoantibodies were PCA1 
(Yo)-IgG (17%), KLHL11-IgG (16%), and CRMP5-IgG (14%) and the most common 
phenotypes were rapidly progressive cerebellar syndrome (29%), brainstem 
encephalitis (14%), and limbic encephalitis (8%). The 2021 PNS criteria 
definite/probable categorization (PNS-CARE score ≥ 6) had a sensitivity and 
specificity of 93% and 100%, respectively, while the 2004 PNS criteria definite 
categorization had a sensitivity and specificity of 67% and 99%, respectively. 
We found 15 patients with a PNS-CARE score ≤5 who likely had PNS on our review. 
The most common presentation among these patients was KLHL11-IgG brainstem 
encephalitis (7/15, 47%) with likely burned-out testicular tumor.
DISCUSSION: Our study validates the PNS-CARE score. A clearer understanding of 
typical PNS presentation and common underlying malignancies and autoantibodies 
can aid in earlier and more accurate diagnosis, which is crucial for downstream 
clinical decisions. Some patients with an intermediate-risk phenotype do not 
meet probable/definite criteria despite the presence of high-risk antibodies 
and/or underlying malignancy.

DOI: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000200316
PMCID: PMC11443324
PMID: 39321395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: H. Zhao-Fleming, M. Rezk, S. Shah, and P. Gupta 
report no disclosures; A. Zekeridou reported grants from Roche/Genentech outside 
the submitted work and had patents for DACH1-IgG, PDE10A-IgG and Tensacin-R-IgG 
as biomarkers of neurological autoimmunity pending; E.P. Flanagan has served on 
advisory boards for Alexion, Genentech, Horizon Therapeutics and UCB. He has 
received research support from UCB. He has received speaker honoraria from 
Pharmacy Times. He received royalties from UpToDate. E.P. Flanagan is a site 
principal investigator in a randomized clinical trial of rozanolixizumab for 
relapsing myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disease run by 
UCB and a site principal investigator and a member of the steering committee for 
a clinical trial of satralizumab for relapsing myelin oligodendrocyte 
glycoprotein antibody-associated disease run by Roche/Genentech. E.P. Flanagan 
has received funding from the NIH (R01NS113828); is a member of the medical 
advisory board of the MOG project; and is an editorial board member of 
Neurology, Neuroimmunology and Neuroinflammation, The Journal of the 
Neurological Sciences and Neuroimmunology Reports. A patent has been submitted 
on DACH1-IgG as a biomarker of paraneoplastic autoimmunity. S.J. Pittock has 
received personal compensation for serving as a consultant for Roche/Genentech, 
Sage Therapeutics, and Astellas. He has received personal compensation for 
serving on scientific advisory boards or data safety monitoring boards for F. 
Hoffman-LaRoche AG, Genentech, and UCB. His institution has received 
compensation for serving as a consultant for Astellas, Alexion, Viela 
Bio/MedImmune and Roche/Genentech. He has received research support from 
Alexion, Viela Bio/MedImmune, Roche/Genentech. He has a patent, Patent# 
8,889,102 (Application#12-678350, Neuromyelitis Optica Autoantibodies as a 
Marker for Neoplasia)-issued; a patent, Patent# 9,891,219B2 
(Application#12-573942, Methods for Treating Neuromyelitis Optica (NMO) by 
Administration of Eculizumab to an individual that is Aquaporin-4 (AQP4)-IgG 
Autoantibody positive)-issued and for which he has received royalties. He is 
working as a consultant in the Mayo Clinic Neuroimmunology Laboratory clinical 
service. The Mayo Clinic Neuroimmunology Laboratory commercially offers MOG-IgG 
testing, but revenue accrued does not contribute to salary, research support, or 
personal income. He has a patent for GFAP-IgG; Septin-5-IgG; MAP1B-IgG; 
Kelch-like protein 11; PDE10A pending. A. McKeon reported grants from the NIH 
(grants RO1NS126227 and U01NS120901) during the conduct of the study; consulting 
fees from Janssen and Roche (all paid to Mayo Clinic) outside the submitted 
work; and had a patent for MAP1B antibody issued, a patent for Septins 5, 7, 
GFAP, PDE10A, KLCHL11 antibodies pending, a patent for Septin antibodies and 
MAP1B antibodies with royalties paid; D. Dubey has consulted for UCB, 
Immunovant, Argenx, Arialys and Astellas pharmaceuticals. All compensation for 
consulting activities is paid directly to Mayo Clinic. Dr. Dubey is a named 
inventor on filed patent that relates to KLHL11 as marker of autoimmunity and 
germ cell tumor. He has patents pending for LUZP4-IgG and cavin-4-IgG as markers 
of neurologic autoimmunity. Dr. Dubey has received funding from the DOD 
(CA210208 & PR220430) and UCB. Go to Neurology.org/NN for full disclosures.