---
reference_id: PMID:37243335
title: Antisense Oligonucleotide Silencing Reverses Abnormal Neurochemistry in Spinocerebellar Ataxia 3 Mice.
authors:
- McLoughlin HS
- Gundry K
- Rainwater O
- Schuster KH
- Wellik IG
- Zalon AJ
- Benneyworth MA
- Eberly LE
- Öz G
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ana.26713
keywords:
- Humans
- Mice
- Animals
- "Machado-Joseph Disease/genetics, pathology"
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/therapeutic use"
- Glutamine
- Neurochemistry
- Biomarkers
- Choline/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antisense Oligonucleotide Silencing Reverses Abnormal Neurochemistry in Spinocerebellar Ataxia 3 Mice.
**Authors:** McLoughlin HS, Gundry K, Rainwater O, Schuster KH, Wellik IG, Zalon AJ, Benneyworth MA, Eberly LE, Öz G
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.26713](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.26713)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2023 Oct;94(4):658-671. doi: 10.1002/ana.26713. Epub 2023 Aug 2.

Antisense Oligonucleotide Silencing Reverses Abnormal Neurochemistry in 
Spinocerebellar Ataxia 3 Mice.

McLoughlin HS(1), Gundry K(2), Rainwater O(3), Schuster KH(1), Wellik IG(1), 
Zalon AJ(1), Benneyworth MA(4), Eberly LE(2)(5), Öz G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Center for Magnetic Resonance Research, Department of Radiology, Medical 
School, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(5)Division of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3) is the most common dominantly 
inherited ataxia, and biomarkers are needed to noninvasively monitor disease 
progression and treatment response. Anti-ATXN3 antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) 
treatment has been shown to mitigate neuropathology and rescue motor phenotypes 
in SCA3 mice. Here, we investigated whether repeated ASO administration reverses 
brainstem and cerebellar neurochemical abnormalities by magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy (MRS).
METHODS: Symptomatic SCA3 mice received intracerebroventricular treatment of ASO 
or vehicle and were compared to wild-type vehicle-treated littermates. To 
quantify neurochemical changes in treated mice, longitudinal 9.4T MRS of 
cerebellum and brainstem was performed. Acquired magnetic resonance (MR) group 
means were analyzed by 2-way analysis of variance mixed-effects sex-adjusted 
analysis with post hoc Sidak correlation for multiple comparisons. Pearson 
correlations were used to relate SCA3 pathology and behavior.
RESULTS: MR spectra yielded 15 to 16 neurochemical concentrations in the 
cerebellum and brainstem. ASO treatment in SCA3 mice resulted in significant 
total choline rescue and partial reversals of taurine, glutamine, and total 
N-acetylaspartate across both regions. Some ASO-rescued neurochemicals 
correlated with reduction in diseased protein and nuclear ATXN3 accumulation. 
ASO-corrected motor activity correlated with total choline and total 
N-acetylaspartate levels early in disease.
INTERPRETATION: SCA3 mouse cerebellar and brainstem neurochemical trends 
parallel those in patients with SCA3. Decreased total choline may reflect 
oligodendrocyte abnormalities, decreased total N-acetylaspartate highlights 
neuronal health disturbances, and high glutamine may indicate gliosis. ASO 
treatment fully or partially reversed select neurochemical abnormalities in SCA3 
mice, indicating the potential for these measures to serve as noninvasive 
treatment biomarkers in future SCA3 gene silencing trials. ANN NEUROL 
2023;94:658-671.

© 2023 The Authors. Annals of Neurology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.26713
PMCID: PMC10543567
PMID: 37243335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential Conflicts of interest Dr. Öz consults 
for IXICO Technologies Limited, which provides neuroimaging services and digital 
biomarker analytics to biopharmaceutical firms conducting clinical trials for 
SCAs, and receives research support from Biogen, which develops therapeutics for 
SCA3. All other authors declare no conflicts of interest.