---
reference_id: "PMID:17955344"
title: "CFD analysis in an anatomically realistic coronary artery model based on non-invasive 3D imaging: comparison of magnetic resonance imaging with computed tomography."
authors:
- Goubergrits L
- Kertzscher U
- Schöneberg B
- Wellnhofer E
- Petz C
- Hege HC
journal: Int J Cardiovasc Imaging
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1007/s10554-007-9275-z
keywords:
- Blood Pressure
- Coronary Angiography/methods
- Coronary Circulation
- "Coronary Vessels/anatomy & histology"
- Equipment Design
- "Hemorheology/instrumentation, methods"
- Humans
- "Imaging, Three-Dimensional"
- Magnetic Resonance Angiography
- "Models, Anatomic"
- "Models, Cardiovascular"
- Regional Blood Flow
- Replica Techniques
- Reproducibility of Results
- Research Design
- "Signal Processing, Computer-Assisted"
- Silicon
- "Stress, Mechanical"
- Time Factors
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CFD analysis in an anatomically realistic coronary artery model based on non-invasive 3D imaging: comparison of magnetic resonance imaging with computed tomography.
**Authors:** Goubergrits L, Kertzscher U, Schöneberg B, Wellnhofer E, Petz C, Hege HC
**Journal:** Int J Cardiovasc Imaging (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10554-007-9275-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10554-007-9275-z)

## Content

1. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2008 Apr;24(4):411-21. doi:
10.1007/s10554-007-9275-z.  Epub 2007 Oct 23.

CFD analysis in an anatomically realistic coronary artery model based on 
non-invasive 3D imaging: comparison of magnetic resonance imaging with computed 
tomography.

Goubergrits L(1), Kertzscher U, Schöneberg B, Wellnhofer E, Petz C, Hege HC.

Author information:
(1)Biofluidmechanics Laboratory, Charité - Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, 
Spandauer Damm 130, 14050, Berlin, Germany. leonid.goubergrits@charite.de

Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) methods based on in vivo three-dimensional 
vessel reconstructions have recently been shown to provide prognostically 
relevant hemodynamic data. However, the geometry reconstruction and the 
assessment of clinically relevant hemodynamic parameters may depend on the used 
imaging modality. This study compares geometric reconstruction and calculated 
wall shear stress (WSS) values based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and 
computed tomography (CT). Both imaging methods were applied to a same 2.5-fold 
upscale silicon model of the left coronary artery (LCA) main bifurcation. The 
original model is an optically digitized post mortem vessel cast. This digitized 
geometry is considered as a "gold standard" or original geometry for the MRI 
versus CT comparative study. The use of the upscale model allowed generating a 
high resolution CT raw data set with voxel size of 0.156 x 0.156 x 0.36 mm(3) 
and a high resolution MRI data set with an equivalent voxel size of 0.196 x 
0.196 x 0.196 mm(3) for corresponding in vivo conditions. MRI based 
reconstruction achieved a mean Hausdorff surface distance of 0.1 mm to the 
original geometry. This is 2.5 times better than CT based reconstruction with 
mean Hausdorff surface distance of 0.252 mm. A comparison of the calculated mean 
WSS shows good correlation (r = 0.97) and good agreement among the three 
modalities with a WSS of 0.65 Pa in the original model, of 0.68 Pa in the CT 
based model and of 0.67 Pa in the MRI based model.

DOI: 10.1007/s10554-007-9275-z
PMID: 17955344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]