---
reference_id: "PMID:26574151"
title: "Psychological treatments for adults with posttraumatic stress disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Cusack K
- Jonas DE
- Forneris CA
- Wines C
- Sonis J
- Middleton JC
- Feltner C
- Brownley KA
- Olmsted KR
- Greenblatt A
- Weil A
- Gaynes BN
journal: Clin Psychol Rev
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2015.10.003
keywords:
- "Cognitive Behavioral Therapy/methods, statistics & numerical data"
- "Eye Movement Desensitization Reprocessing/methods, statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
- "Implosive Therapy/methods, statistics & numerical data"
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care/statistics & numerical data"
- "Stress Disorders, Post-Traumatic/therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Psychological treatments for adults with posttraumatic stress disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Cusack K, Jonas DE, Forneris CA, Wines C, Sonis J, Middleton JC, Feltner C, Brownley KA, Olmsted KR, Greenblatt A, Weil A, Gaynes BN
**Journal:** Clin Psychol Rev (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cpr.2015.10.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2015.10.003)

## Content

1. Clin Psychol Rev. 2016 Feb;43:128-41. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2015.10.003. Epub
2015  Nov 2.

Psychological treatments for adults with posttraumatic stress disorder: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Cusack K(1), Jonas DE(2), Forneris CA(3), Wines C(4), Sonis J(5), Middleton 
JC(4), Feltner C(2), Brownley KA(3), Olmsted KR(6), Greenblatt A(6), Weil A(7), 
Gaynes BN(8).

Author information:
(1)Raymond G. Murphy VA Medical Center, Albuquerque, NM, United States. 
Electronic address: Karen.cusack@va.gov.
(2)University of North Carolina (UNC) Department of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, 
United States; UNC, Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research, Chapel 
Hill, NC, United States.
(3)UNC Department of Psychiatry, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(4)UNC, Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research, Chapel Hill, NC, 
United States.
(5)UNC Department of Social Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, United States; UNC 
Department of Family Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(6)Triangle Institute (RTI) International, Research Triangle Park, NC, United 
States.
(7)University of North Carolina (UNC) Department of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, 
United States.
(8)UNC, Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research, Chapel Hill, NC, 
United States; UNC Department of Psychiatry, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.

Numerous guidelines have been developed over the past decade regarding 
treatments for Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). However, given differences 
in guideline recommendations, some uncertainty exists regarding the selection of 
effective PTSD therapies. The current manuscript assessed the efficacy, 
comparative effectiveness, and adverse effects of psychological treatments for 
adults with PTSD. We searched MEDLINE, Cochrane Library, PILOTS, Embase, CINAHL, 
PsycINFO, and the Web of Science. Two reviewers independently selected trials. 
Two reviewers assessed risk of bias and graded strength of evidence (SOE). We 
included 64 trials; patients generally had severe PTSD. Evidence supports 
efficacy of exposure therapy (high SOE) including the manualized version 
Prolonged Exposure (PE); cognitive therapy (CT), cognitive processing therapy 
(CPT), cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)-mixed therapies (moderate SOE); eye 
movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) and narrative exposure therapy 
(low-moderate SOE). Effect sizes for reducing PTSD symptoms were large (e.g., 
Cohen's d ~-1.0 or more compared with controls). Numbers needed to treat (NNTs) 
were <4 to achieve loss of PTSD diagnosis for exposure therapy, CPT, CT, 
CBT-mixed, and EMDR. Several psychological treatments are effective for adults 
with PTSD. Head-to-head evidence was insufficient to determine these treatments' 
comparative effectiveness, and data regarding adverse events was absent from 
most studies.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cpr.2015.10.003
PMID: 26574151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]