---
reference_id: "PMID:22230271"
title: Diagnosis and management of Crohn's disease.
authors:
- Wilkins T
- Jarvis K
- Patel J
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2011'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and management of Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Wilkins T, Jarvis K, Patel J
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2011)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2011 Dec 15;84(12):1365-75.

Diagnosis and management of Crohn's disease.

Wilkins T(1), Jarvis K, Patel J.

Author information:
(1)Georgia Health Sciences University, Augusta, 30912, USA. 
twilkins@georgiahealth.edu

Summary for patients in
    Am Fam Physician. 2011 Dec 15;84(12):1379-80.

Crohn's disease is a chronic inflammatory condition affecting the 
gastrointestinal tract at any point from the mouth to the rectum. Patients may 
experience diarrhea, abdominal pain, fever, weight loss, abdominal masses, and 
anemia. Extraintestinal manifestations of Crohn's disease include osteoporosis, 
inflammatory arthropathies, scleritis, nephrolithiasis, cholelithiasis, and 
erythema nodosum. Acute phase reactants, such as C-reactive protein level and 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, are often increased with inflammation and may 
correlate with disease activity. Levels of vitamin B12, folate, albumin, 
prealbumin, and vitamin D can help assess nutritional status. Colonoscopy with 
ileoscopy, capsule endoscopy, computed tomography enterography, and small bowel 
follow-through are often used to diagnose Crohn's disease. Ultrasonography, 
computed axial tomography, scintigraphy, and magnetic resonance imaging can 
assess for extraintestinal manifestations or complications (e.g., abscess, 
perforation). Mesalamine products are often used for the medical management of 
mild to moderate colonic Crohn's disease. Antibiotics (e.g., metronidazole, 
fluoroquinolones) are often used for treatment. Patients with moderate to severe 
Crohn's disease are treated with corticosteroids, azathioprine, 
6-mercaptopurine, or anti-tumor necrosis factor agents (e.g., infliximab, 
adalimumab). Severe disease may require emergent hospitalization and a 
multidisciplinary approach with a family physician, gastroenterologist, and 
surgeon.

PMID: 22230271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]