---
reference_id: "PMID:38353578"
title: Aberrant Lipid Metabolism in Macrophages Is Associated with Granuloma Formation in Sarcoidosis.
authors:
- Lim CX
- Redl A
- Kleissl L
- Pandey RV
- Mayerhofer C
- El Jammal T
- Mazic M
- Gonzales K
- Sukhbaatar N
- Krausgruber T
- Bock C
- Hengstschläger M
- Calender A
- Pacheco Y
- Stary G
- Weichhart T
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1164/rccm.202307-1273OC
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Mice
- Macrophages/metabolism
- Sarcoidosis/metabolism
- Lipid Metabolism
- Granuloma/metabolism
- Female
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- "Disease Models, Animal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aberrant Lipid Metabolism in Macrophages Is Associated with Granuloma Formation in Sarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Lim CX, Redl A, Kleissl L, Pandey RV, Mayerhofer C, El Jammal T, Mazic M, Gonzales K, Sukhbaatar N, Krausgruber T, Bock C, Hengstschläger M, Calender A, Pacheco Y, Stary G, Weichhart T
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1164/rccm.202307-1273OC](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.202307-1273OC)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2024 May 1;209(9):1152-1164. doi:
10.1164/rccm.202307-1273OC.

Aberrant Lipid Metabolism in Macrophages Is Associated with Granuloma Formation
in Sarcoidosis.

Lim CX(1), Redl A(2)(3), Kleissl L(2)(3), Pandey RV(2), Mayerhofer C(2), El
Jammal T(1)(4), Mazic M(1), Gonzales K(1), Sukhbaatar N(1), Krausgruber T(5)(3),
Bock C(5)(3), Hengstschläger M(1), Calender A(4)(6), Pacheco Y(4), Stary
G(2)(3), Weichhart T(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, Center of Pathobiochemistry and Genetics.
(2)Department of Dermatology, and.
(3)CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of
Sciences, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Laboratory of Tissue Biology and Therapeutic Engineering, CNRS UMR5305,
University Claude Bernard Lyon 1, IBCP, Lyon, France; and.
(5)Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Center for Medical Data Science,
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Department of Genetics, Hospices Civils de Lyon, University Claude Bernard
Lyon 1, Bron, France.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2024 May 1;209(9):1064-1066. doi:
10.1164/rccm.202402-0287ED.

Rationale: Chronic sarcoidosis is a complex granulomatous disease with limited
treatment options that can progress over time. Understanding the molecular
pathways contributing to disease would aid in new therapeutic development.
Objectives: To understand whether macrophages from patients with nonresolving
chronic sarcoidosis are predisposed to macrophage aggregation and granuloma
formation and whether modulation of the underlying molecular pathways influence
sarcoidosis granuloma formation. Methods: Macrophages were cultivated in vitro
from isolated peripheral blood CD14+ monocytes and evaluated for spontaneous
aggregation. Transcriptomics analyses and phenotypic and drug inhibitory
experiments were performed on these monocyte-derived macrophages. Human skin
biopsies from patients with sarcoidosis and a myeloid Tsc2-specific sarcoidosis
mouse model were analyzed for validatory experiments. Measurements and Main
Results: Monocyte-derived macrophages from patients with chronic sarcoidosis
spontaneously formed extensive granulomas in vitro compared with healthy control
participants. Transcriptomic analyses separated healthy and sarcoidosis
macrophages and identified an enrichment in lipid metabolic processes. In vitro
patient granulomas, sarcoidosis mouse model granulomas, and those directly
analyzed from lesional patient skin expressed an aberrant lipid metabolism
profile and contained increased neutral lipids. Conversely, a combination of
statins and cholesterol-reducing agents reduced granuloma formation both
in vitro and in vivo in a sarcoidosis mouse model. Conclusions: Together, our
findings show that altered lipid metabolism in sarcoidosis macrophages is
associated with its predisposition to granuloma formation and suggest
cholesterol-reducing therapies as a treatment option in patients.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.202307-1273OC
PMCID: PMC7617514
PMID: 38353578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
