---
reference_id: "PMID:39514635"
title: Macrophage LRRK2 hyperactivity impairs autophagy and induces Paneth cell dysfunction.
authors:
- Sun S
- Hodel M
- Wang X
- De Vicente J
- Haritunians T
- Debebe A
- Hung CT
- Ma C
- Malique A
- Nguyen HN
- Agam M
- Maloney MT
- Goo MS
- Kluss JH
- Mishra R
- Frein J
- Foster A
- Ballentine S
- Pandey U
- Kern J
- Yang S
- Mengesha E
- Balasubramanian I
- Arguello A
- Estrada AA
- Gao N
- Peter I
- McGovern DPB
- Henry AG
- Stappenbeck TS
- Liu TC
journal: Sci Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1126/sciimmunol.adi7907
keywords:
- "Leucine-Rich Repeat Serine-Threonine Protein Kinase-2/genetics, immunology"
- Paneth Cells/immunology
- Animals
- "Autophagy/immunology, genetics"
- Mice
- "Crohn Disease/immunology, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Macrophages/immunology
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Male
- Female
- "Mice, Knockout"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Macrophage LRRK2 hyperactivity impairs autophagy and induces Paneth cell dysfunction.
**Authors:** Sun S, Hodel M, Wang X, De Vicente J, Haritunians T, Debebe A, Hung CT, Ma C, Malique A, Nguyen HN, Agam M, Maloney MT, Goo MS, Kluss JH, Mishra R, Frein J, Foster A, Ballentine S, Pandey U, Kern J, Yang S, Mengesha E, Balasubramanian I, Arguello A, Estrada AA, Gao N, Peter I, McGovern DPB, Henry AG, Stappenbeck TS, Liu TC
**Journal:** Sci Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1126/sciimmunol.adi7907](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.adi7907)

## Content

1. Sci Immunol. 2024 Nov 8;9(101):eadi7907. doi: 10.1126/sciimmunol.adi7907. Epub
 2024 Nov 8.

Macrophage LRRK2 hyperactivity impairs autophagy and induces Paneth cell
dysfunction.

Sun S(1), Hodel M(1), Wang X(2), De Vicente J(2), Haritunians T(3), Debebe A(4),
Hung CT(1), Ma C(1), Malique A(1), Nguyen HN(2), Agam M(2), Maloney MT(2), Goo
MS(2), Kluss JH(2), Mishra R(1), Frein J(1), Foster A(1), Ballentine S(1),
Pandey U(1), Kern J(1), Yang S(3), Mengesha E(3), Balasubramanian I(5), Arguello
A(2), Estrada AA(2), Gao N(5), Peter I(4), McGovern DPB(3), Henry AG(2),
Stappenbeck TS(6), Liu TC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(2)Denali Therapeutics, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
(3)F. Widjaja Foundation Inflammatory Bowel Disease Institute, Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount-Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Rutgers, State University of New Jersey,
Newark, NJ 07102, USA.
(6)Department of Inflammation and Immunity, Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

LRRK2 polymorphisms (G2019S/N2081D) that increase susceptibility to Parkinson's
disease and Crohn's disease (CD) lead to LRRK2 kinase hyperactivity and suppress
autophagy. This connection suggests that LRRK2 kinase inhibition, a therapeutic
strategy being explored for Parkinson's disease, may also benefit patients with
CD. Paneth cell homeostasis is tightly regulated by autophagy, and their
dysfunction is a precursor to gut inflammation in CD. Here, we found that
patients with CD and mice carrying hyperactive LRRK2 polymorphisms developed
Paneth cell dysfunction. We also found that LRRK2 kinase can be activated in the
context of interactions between genes (genetic autophagy deficiency) and the
environment (cigarette smoking). Unexpectedly, lamina propria immune cells were
the main intestinal cell types that express LRRK2, instead of Paneth cells as
previously suggested. We showed that LRRK2-mediated pro-inflammatory cytokine
release from phagocytes impaired Paneth cell function, which was rescued by
LRRK2 kinase inhibition through activation of autophagy. Together, these data
suggest that LRRK2 kinase inhibitors maintain Paneth cell homeostasis by
restoring autophagy and may represent a therapeutic strategy for CD.

DOI: 10.1126/sciimmunol.adi7907
PMCID: PMC11730131
PMID: 39514635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: J.D.V. and A.A.E. have a
patent application (WO2017218843) that includes DN-9713. D.P.B.M. owns stock in
Prometheus Biosciences Inc. D.P.B.M. has consulted for Gilead, Pfizer,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Qu Biologics, Bridge Biotherapeutics, Takeda, and Palatin
Technologies, and received grant support from Janssen. T.S.S. consulted for
Janssen, Abbvie, and Nxera. T.-C.L. has research contracts with Denali and
Interline Therapeutics. All other authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
