---
reference_id: "PMID:38669354"
title: Subcutaneous Administration of a Monoclonal Antibody to Prevent Malaria.
authors:
- Kayentao K
- Ongoiba A
- Preston AC
- Healy SA
- Hu Z
- Skinner J
- Doumbo S
- Wang J
- Cisse H
- Doumtabe D
- Traore A
- Traore H
- Djiguiba A
- Li S
- Peterson ME
- Telscher S
- Idris AH
- Adams WC
- McDermott AB
- Narpala S
- Lin BC
- Serebryannyy L
- Hickman SP
- McDougal AJ
- Vazquez S
- Reiber M
- Stein JA
- Gall JG
- Carlton K
- Schwabl P
- Traore S
- Keita M
- Zéguimé A
- Ouattara A
- Doucoure M
- Dolo A
- Murphy SC
- Neafsey DE
- Portugal S
- Djimdé A
- Traore B
- Seder RA
- Crompton PD
- Mali Malaria mAb Trial Team
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2312775
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Subcutaneous Administration of a Monoclonal Antibody to Prevent Malaria.
**Authors:** Kayentao K, Ongoiba A, Preston AC, Healy SA, Hu Z, Skinner J, Doumbo S, Wang J, Cisse H, Doumtabe D, Traore A, Traore H, Djiguiba A, Li S, Peterson ME, Telscher S, Idris AH, Adams WC, McDermott AB, Narpala S, Lin BC, Serebryannyy L, Hickman SP, McDougal AJ, Vazquez S, Reiber M, Stein JA, Gall JG, Carlton K, Schwabl P, Traore S, Keita M, Zéguimé A, Ouattara A, Doucoure M, Dolo A, Murphy SC, Neafsey DE, Portugal S, Djimdé A, Traore B, Seder RA, Crompton PD, Mali Malaria mAb Trial Team
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2312775](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2312775)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2024 May 2;390(17):1549-1559. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2312775. Epub 
2024 Apr 26.

Subcutaneous Administration of a Monoclonal Antibody to Prevent Malaria.

Kayentao K(1), Ongoiba A(1), Preston AC(1), Healy SA(1), Hu Z(1), Skinner J(1), 
Doumbo S(1), Wang J(1), Cisse H(1), Doumtabe D(1), Traore A(1), Traore H(1), 
Djiguiba A(1), Li S(1), Peterson ME(1), Telscher S(1), Idris AH(1), Adams WC(1), 
McDermott AB(1), Narpala S(1), Lin BC(1), Serebryannyy L(1), Hickman SP(1), 
McDougal AJ(1), Vazquez S(1), Reiber M(1), Stein JA(1), Gall JG(1), Carlton 
K(1), Schwabl P(1), Traore S(1), Keita M(1), Zéguimé A(1), Ouattara A(1), 
Doucoure M(1), Dolo A(1), Murphy SC(1), Neafsey DE(1), Portugal S(1), Djimdé 
A(1), Traore B(1), Seder RA(1), Crompton PD(1); Mali Malaria mAb Trial Team.

Collaborators: Camara L, Camara M, Coulibaly S, Dembélé Y, Diakite D, Diakite O, 
Diarra D, Diarra M, Doumbia F, Fofana B, Kassogue B, Keita MS, Konare B, Konare 
B, Konare M, Konare Y, Omar C, Mamoudou K, Ahmadou K, Papa M, N'diaye M, 
Ouologuem MI, Sacko S, Somboro AAP, Sylla M, Carroll R, Castro M, Jethmalani Y, 
Kazmierski R, Low K, Lukoskie AE, Mughal M, Saez D, Wang L, Kelley K, Knox C, 
Chang M, Chavtur C, Seilie A, Staubus W, Bajwa K, Holdsworth M, Kandaswamay H, 
Kress DR, Namawejje M, Tang P, Tartakovsky M, Whalen C, Xiao J, Buehn M, 
Francella S, Gulati N, Harmon L, Jankelevich S, Jato Y, King A, Kopka S, Miller 
M, Miller T, Opher V, Simpson S, Teitelbaum M, Tierney J, Vogel S, Wells S, 
Young K.

Author information:
(1)From the Malaria Research and Training Center, Mali International Center of 
Excellence in Research, University of Sciences, Techniques, and Technologies of 
Bamako, Bamako, Mali (K.K., A. Ongoiba, S.D., D.D., A.T., H.T., A. Djiguiba, S. 
Traore, M.K., A.Z., A. Ouattara, M.D., A. Dolo, A. Djimdé, B.T.); the Malaria 
Infection Biology and Immunity Section, Laboratory of Immunogenetics, Division 
of Intramural Research (A.C.P., S.A.H., J.S., H.C., S.L., M.E.P., P.D.C.), and 
the Biostatistics Research Branch, Division of Clinical Research (Z.H.), 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Rockville, the Vaccine Research Center (S. Telscher, A.H.I., W.C.A., 
A.B.M., S.N., B.C.L., L.S., S.P.H., A.J.M., S.V., M.R., J.A.S., J.G.G., K.C., 
R.A.S.), National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, and the Clinical Monitoring Research Program 
Directorate, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick (J.W.) 
- all in Maryland; the Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard 
T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston (P.S., D.E.N.); the Malaria Molecular 
Diagnostic Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, and the 
Center for Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases, University of 
Washington, Seattle (S.C.M.); and the Max Planck Institute for Infection 
Biology, Berlin (S.P.).

BACKGROUND: Subcutaneous administration of the monoclonal antibody L9LS 
protected adults against controlled Plasmodium falciparum infection in a phase 1 
trial. Whether a monoclonal antibody administered subcutaneously can protect 
children from P. falciparum infection in a region where this organism is endemic 
is unclear.
METHODS: We conducted a phase 2 trial in Mali to assess the safety and efficacy 
of subcutaneous administration of L9LS in children 6 to 10 years of age over a 
6-month malaria season. In part A of the trial, safety was assessed at three 
dose levels in adults, followed by assessment at two dose levels in children. In 
part B of the trial, children were randomly assigned, in a 1:1:1 ratio, to 
receive 150 mg of L9LS, 300 mg of L9LS, or placebo. The primary efficacy end 
point, assessed in a time-to-event analysis, was the first P. falciparum 
infection, as detected on blood smear performed at least every 2 weeks for 24 
weeks. A secondary efficacy end point was the first episode of clinical malaria, 
as assessed in a time-to-event analysis.
RESULTS: No safety concerns were identified in the dose-escalation part of the 
trial (part A). In part B, 225 children underwent randomization, with 75 
children assigned to each group. No safety concerns were identified in part B. 
P. falciparum infection occurred in 36 participants (48%) in the 150-mg group, 
in 30 (40%) in the 300-mg group, and in 61 (81%) in the placebo group. The 
efficacy of L9LS against P. falciparum infection, as compared with placebo, was 
66% (adjusted confidence interval [95% CI], 45 to 79) with the 150-mg dose and 
70% (adjusted 95% CI, 50 to 82) with the 300-mg dose (P<0.001 for both 
comparisons). Efficacy against clinical malaria was 67% (adjusted 95% CI, 39 to 
82) with the 150-mg dose and 77% (adjusted 95% CI, 55 to 89) with the 300-mg 
dose (P<0.001 for both comparisons).
CONCLUSIONS: Subcutaneous administration of L9LS to children was protective 
against P. falciparum infection and clinical malaria over a period of 6 months. 
(Funded by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases; 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT05304611.).

Copyright © 2024 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2312775
PMCID: PMC11238904
PMID: 38669354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]