---
reference_id: "PMID:16917943"
title: Mutations in RYR1 in malignant hyperthermia and central core disease.
authors:
- Robinson R
- Carpenter D
- Shaw MA
- Halsall J
- Hopkins P
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20356
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in RYR1 in malignant hyperthermia and central core disease.
**Authors:** Robinson R, Carpenter D, Shaw MA, Halsall J, Hopkins P
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20356](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20356)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2006 Oct;27(10):977-89. doi: 10.1002/humu.20356.

Mutations in RYR1 in malignant hyperthermia and central core disease.

Robinson R(1), Carpenter D, Shaw MA, Halsall J, Hopkins P.

Author information:
(1)Malignant Hyperthermia Investigation Unit, St James' University Hospital, 
Leeds, United Kingdom. medrlr@leeds.ac.uk

The RYR1 gene encodes the skeletal muscle isoform ryanodine receptor and is 
fundamental to the process of excitation-contraction coupling and skeletal 
muscle calcium homeostasis. Mapping to chromosome 19q13.2, the gene comprises 
106 exons and encodes a protein of 5,038 amino acids. Mutations in the gene have 
been found in association with several diseases: the pharmacogenetic disorder, 
malignant hyperthermia (MH); and three congenital myopathies, including central 
core disease (CCD), multiminicore disease (MmD), and in an isolated case of a 
congenital myopathy characterized on histology by cores and rods. The majority 
of gene mutations reported are missense changes identified in cases of MH and 
CCD. In vitro analysis has confirmed that alteration of normal calcium 
homeostasis is a functional consequence of some of these changes. 
Genotype-phenotype correlation studies performed using data from MH and CCD 
patients have also suggested that mutations may be associated with a range of 
disease severity phenotypes. This review aims to summarize the current 
understanding of RYR1 mutations reported in association with MH and CCD and the 
present viewpoint on the use of mutation data to aid clinical diagnosis of these 
conditions.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20356
PMID: 16917943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]