---
reference_id: "PMID:21814823"
title: Anti-LRP4 autoantibodies in AChR- and MuSK-antibody-negative myasthenia gravis.
authors:
- Pevzner A
- Schoser B
- Peters K
- Cosma NC
- Karakatsani A
- Schalke B
- Melms A
- Kröger S
journal: J Neurol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-011-6194-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-LRP4 autoantibodies in AChR- and MuSK-antibody-negative myasthenia gravis.
**Authors:** Pevzner A, Schoser B, Peters K, Cosma NC, Karakatsani A, Schalke B, Melms A, Kröger S
**Journal:** J Neurol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-011-6194-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-011-6194-7)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2012 Mar;259(3):427-35. doi: 10.1007/s00415-011-6194-7. Epub 2011
Aug  5.

Anti-LRP4 autoantibodies in AChR- and MuSK-antibody-negative myasthenia gravis.

Pevzner A(1), Schoser B, Peters K, Cosma NC, Karakatsani A, Schalke B, Melms A, 
Kröger S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Genomics, Institute for Physiology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians University, Pettenkoferstrasse 12, 80336, Munich, Germany.

Myasthenia gravis (MG) is an autoimmune disorder characterized by a defect in 
synaptic transmission at the neuromuscular junction causing fluctuating muscle 
weakness with a decremental response to repetitive nerve stimulation or altered 
jitter in single-fiber electromyography (EMG). Approximately 80% of all 
myasthenia gravis patients have autoantibodies against the nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptor in their serum. Autoantibodies against the tyrosine 
kinase muscle-specific kinase (MuSK) are responsible for 5-10% of all myasthenia 
gravis cases. The autoimmune target in the remaining cases is unknown. Recently, 
low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP4) has been identified as 
the agrin receptor. LRP4 interacts with agrin, and the binding of agrin 
activates MuSK, which leads to the formation of most if not all postsynaptic 
specializations, including aggregates containing acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) 
in the junctional plasma membrane. In the present study we tested if 
autoantibodies against LRP4 are detectable in patients with myasthenia gravis. 
To this end we analyzed 13 sera from patients with generalized myasthenia gravis 
but without antibodies against AChR or MuSK. The results showed that 12 out of 
13 antisera from double-seronegative MG patients bound to proteins concentrated 
at the neuromuscular junction of adult mouse skeletal muscle and that 
approximately 50% of the tested sera specifically bound to HEK293 cells 
transfected with human LRP4. Moreover, 4 out of these 13 sera inhibited 
agrin-induced aggregation of AChRs in cultured myotubes by more than 50%, 
suggesting a pathogenic role regarding the dysfunction of the neuromuscular 
endplate. These results indicate that LRP4 is a novel target for autoantibodies 
and is a diagnostic marker in seronegative MG patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-011-6194-7
PMID: 21814823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]