---
reference_id: "PMID:22215617"
title: New mutations at the imprinted Gnas cluster show gene dosage effects of Gsα in postnatal growth and implicate XLαs in bone and fat metabolism but not in suckling.
authors:
- Eaton SA
- Williamson CM
- Ball ST
- Beechey CV
- Moir L
- Edwards J
- Teboul L
- Maconochie M
- Peters J
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1128/MCB.06174-11
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone and Bones/metabolism
- Chromogranins
- Energy Metabolism/genetics
- Female
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gs/genetics"
- Gene Dosage
- Genetic Loci
- Genomic Imprinting
- Lipid Metabolism/genetics
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Obesity/genetics
- Protein Isoforms/genetics
- Sucking Behavior
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New mutations at the imprinted Gnas cluster show gene dosage effects of Gsα in postnatal growth and implicate XLαs in bone and fat metabolism but not in suckling.
**Authors:** Eaton SA, Williamson CM, Ball ST, Beechey CV, Moir L, Edwards J, Teboul L, Maconochie M, Peters J
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.06174-11](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.06174-11)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Mar;32(5):1017-29. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06174-11. Epub 2012
Jan  3.

New mutations at the imprinted Gnas cluster show gene dosage effects of Gsα in
postnatal growth and implicate XLαs in bone and fat metabolism but not in
suckling.

Eaton SA(1), Williamson CM, Ball ST, Beechey CV, Moir L, Edwards J, Teboul L,
Maconochie M, Peters J.

Author information:
(1)Mammalian Genetics Unit, MRC Harwell, Harwell Science and Innovation Campus,
Oxfordshire, United Kingdom. s.eaton@victorchang.edu.au

The imprinted Gnas cluster is involved in obesity, energy metabolism, feeding
behavior, and viability. Relative contribution of paternally expressed proteins
XLαs, XLN1, and ALEX or a double dose of maternally expressed Gsα to phenotype
has not been established. In this study, we have generated two new mutants
(Ex1A-T-CON and Ex1A-T) at the Gnas cluster. Paternal inheritance of Ex1A-T-CON
leads to loss of imprinting of Gsα, resulting in preweaning growth retardation
followed by catch-up growth. Paternal inheritance of Ex1A-T leads to loss of
imprinting of Gsα and loss of expression of XLαs and XLN1. These mice have
severe preweaning growth retardation and incomplete catch-up growth. They are
fully viable probably because suckling is unimpaired, unlike mutants in which
the expression of all the known paternally expressed Gnasxl proteins (XLαs, XLN1
and ALEX) is compromised. We suggest that loss of ALEX is most likely
responsible for the suckling defects previously observed. In adults, paternal
inheritance of Ex1A-T results in an increased metabolic rate and reductions in
fat mass, leptin, and bone mineral density attributable to loss of XLαs. This
is, to our knowledge, the first report describing a role for XLαs in bone
metabolism. We propose that XLαs is involved in the regulation of bone and
adipocyte metabolism.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.06174-11
PMCID: PMC3295192
PMID: 22215617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
