---
reference_id: "PMID:38585541"
title: Sepiapterin Reductase Deficiency Misdiagnosed as Neurological Sequelae of Meningitis.
authors:
- Engin Erdal A
- Kıreker Köylü O
- Ceylan AC
- Kasapkara ÇS
- Tunçez E
- Topçu M
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000534587
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sepiapterin Reductase Deficiency Misdiagnosed as Neurological Sequelae of Meningitis.
**Authors:** Engin Erdal A, Kıreker Köylü O, Ceylan AC, Kasapkara ÇS, Tunçez E, Topçu M
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000534587](https://doi.org/10.1159/000534587)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2024 Mar;15(2):130-135. doi: 10.1159/000534587. Epub 2023 Nov
8.

Sepiapterin Reductase Deficiency Misdiagnosed as Neurological Sequelae of 
Meningitis.

Engin Erdal A(1), Kıreker Köylü O(1), Ceylan AC(2), Kasapkara ÇS(3), Tunçez 
E(2), Topçu M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Metabolic Diseases, Ankara Bilkent City Hospital, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara Bilkent City Hospital, Faculty of 
Medicine, Ankara Yıldırım Beyazıt University, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Department of Pediatric Metabolic Diseases, Ankara City Hospital, Ankara 
Yıldırım Beyazıt University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Hacettepe University Hospital, Ankara, 
Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Sepiapterin reductase deficiency (SRD) is an exceedingly rare 
neurotransmitter disease caused by an enzyme error involved in the synthesis of 
tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4). It has been described in nearly 60 cases so far. The 
clinical manifestations include motor and speech delay, axial hypotonia, 
dystonia, weakness, oculogyric crises, diurnal fluctuation, and improvement of 
symptoms during sleep. Molecular genetic analysis can demonstrate pathogenic 
mutations in the SPR gene, allowing for a definitive diagnosis. 
Levodopa/carbidopa and 5-hydroxytryptophan are used for treatment.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present a 19-year-old male patient who was evaluated for 
dysarthria, axial hypotonia, limb dystonia, and movement disorder. The parents 
described the current patient's history with febrile seizures since 9 months of 
age, as well as speech and neuromotor developmental retardation, which indicated 
that the disease began in infancy. The basal metabolic work-up was normal except 
for hyperprolactinemia. The definitive diagnosis of SRD was confirmed by whole 
exome sequencing (WES) analysis, which revealed a homozygous pathogenic mutation 
c.655C>T (p.Arg219*) (rs779204655) in the SPR gene. After treatment, we noted 
significant improvements in dystonia, axial hypotonia, and dysarthria.
CONCLUSION: WES analysis offers a more expeditious and dependable method for 
diagnosing difficult cases exhibiting neurodevelopmental problems and thus 
renders the possibilities of early management.

© 2023 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000534587
PMCID: PMC10996339
PMID: 38585541

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.