---
reference_id: "PMID:29981837"
title: "Konzo: a distinct neurological disease associated with food (cassava) cyanogenic poisoning."
authors:
- Kashala-Abotnes E
- Okitundu D
- Mumba D
- Boivin MJ
- Tylleskär T
- Tshala-Katumbay D
journal: Brain Res Bull
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2018.07.001
keywords:
- Africa South of the Sahara/epidemiology
- Cyanides
- Diet
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Manihot/adverse effects, toxicity"
- "Motor Neuron Disease/etiology, physiopathology"
- Nervous System Diseases/complications
- Nitriles
- Thiocyanates
- Vegetables
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Konzo: a distinct neurological disease associated with food (cassava) cyanogenic poisoning.
**Authors:** Kashala-Abotnes E, Okitundu D, Mumba D, Boivin MJ, Tylleskär T, Tshala-Katumbay D
**Journal:** Brain Res Bull (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.brainresbull.2018.07.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2018.07.001)

## Content

1. Brain Res Bull. 2019 Feb;145:87-91. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2018.07.001. 
Epub 2018 Jul 5.

Konzo: a distinct neurological disease associated with food (cassava) cyanogenic 
poisoning.

Kashala-Abotnes E(1), Okitundu D(2), Mumba D(3), Boivin MJ(4), Tylleskär T(5), 
Tshala-Katumbay D(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Global Public Health and Primary Care, University of Bergen, 
Norway. Electronic address: esperance.abotnes@uib.no.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of 
Congo.
(3)Department of Tropical Medicine, University of Kinshasa & National Institute 
of Biomedical Research (INRB), Democratic Republic of Congo.
(4)Departments of Psychiatry and Neurology & Ophthalmology, Michigan State 
University, East Lansing MI, USA; Department of Psychiatry, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(5)Department of Global Public Health and Primary Care, University of Bergen, 
Norway.
(6)Department of Neurology, University of Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of 
Congo; Department of Tropical Medicine, University of Kinshasa & National 
Institute of Biomedical Research (INRB), Democratic Republic of Congo; 
Department of Neurology & School of Public Health, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland OR, USA.

Epidemics of neurodegenerative diseases putatively caused by food toxins have 
been reported in the tropics with no clear understanding of their pathogenetic 
mechanisms. These diseases include the disease named Konzo that has been well 
documented in sub-Sahara Africa, mostly among children and women of childbearing 
age. Outbreaks of Konzo have occurred in the Democratic Republic of Congo, 
Mozambique, Tanzania, Central African Republic, Angola, Cameroun, and most 
recently in Zambia. The main clinical picture consists of a symmetrical, 
permanent and irreversible spastic paraparesis (motor neuron disease) with no 
signs of sensory or genitourinary impairments. Recently, cognitive impairments 
and neurodevelopmental delays have been reported among school-aged and very 
young children. The exact pathogenetic mechanisms of the disease remain unknown. 
Epidemiological studies consistently show an association between outbreaks of 
the disease and chronic dietary reliance on insufficiently processed cyanogenic 
cassava (manioc or tapioca). Biochemical and toxicological studies suggest that 
the metabolites of linamarin (α-Hydroxyisobutyronitrile β-D-glucopyranoside, the 
main cassava cyanogen), notably cyanide (mitochondrial toxin), thiocyanate (AMPA 
chaotropic agent), and cyanate (protein carbamoylating agent) may play an 
important role in the pathogenesis of Konzo. Experimental data suggest that 
thiol-redox and protein- folding mechanisms may also be perturbed. Factors of 
susceptibility including genetics, poor nutrition, poverty and dietary cyanogen 
exposure, or their interactions have been suggested. Serological studies have 
ruled out the role of retroviruses such as the human lymphotropic viruses 
HIV-I/II or HTLV-I/II. Because there is no cure for Konzo, prevention of the 
disease remains of paramount importance. Prospects for cognitive rehabilitation 
still need to be explored and tested.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2018.07.001
PMCID: PMC6626527
PMID: 29981837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.

Cassava toxicity has been incriminated in the pathogenesis of tropical
myeloneuropathies, such as the tropical ataxic neuropathy (TAN) and Konzo. TAN is a
progressive myeloneuropathy that was first described in Nigeria and is characterized
by a progressive onset of ataxia. On the other hand, Konzo is a permanent and
clinically distinct upper motor neurone disease of abrupt onset firstly described in
the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). The word “Konzo” means tied
legs and originated from the Yaka tribe in DRC to designate a
fetish used by hunters to weaken legs and catch wild animals. The literature
suggests that Konzo was known from the Yaka indigenous population
of the Bandundu province in Zaïre, presently known as the DRC, since the end
of the 19Th century. However, it is only decades later that the syndrome
was first documented in the medical literature (Trolli, 1938; Van der Beken,
1993). Since then, outbreaks of Konzo have been reported in many other
sub-Sahara African countries notably in Mozambique (where it is called
mantakassa), Tanzania, Central African Republic (CAR),
Cameroon, Angola, DRC (Chabwine et al., 2011;
Ciglenecki et al., 2011; Cliff et al., 2011; Mlingi et al., 2011; Banea et al.,
1992; Mbelesso et al., 2009;
Bettencourt et al., 2011), and more recently in Zambia (http://www.parliament.gov.zm/node/4637, April
2018). While isolated cases of the disease may be found, the disease mostly occurs
as an outbreak suggesting to be triggered by crisis situations such as drought,
civil wars or famine. Most epidemiological studies have shown a link between
outbreaks of Konzo, agro-ecological collapse, and consumption of insufficiently
processed bitter cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz), a staple for
millions of people in sub-Saharan Africa.

Although Konzo affects both men and women, adult males are less frequently
affected, and no studies have reported Konzo in children younger than 2 years of
age. The disease primarily affects children above the age of three and women in the
fertile age group for reasons that are yet to be elucidated (Cliff et al., 2011; Mlingi et al., 2011; Tylleskar et al.,
1995, 1992; Okitundu Luwa et al., 2014; Nzwalo and Cliff, 2011). The total number of persons
affected by Konzo has been estimated to hundreds of thousands with majority of cases
occurring in the DRC. Accurate prevalence estimates (as high as 5% in certain rural
areas) have been difficult to obtain because of unreliable demographic data and poor
surveillance systems (Tshala-Katumbay et al.,
2013).

The onset and clinical features of Konzo are so distinct that the disease is
easily recognizable by lay people within the affected regions. The disease has a
sudden onset often preceded by physical exertion such as a long walk. During the
initial phase, affected subjects experience trembling, a sensation of weakness,
heaviness, or stiffness in their legs; and muscle cramps usually confined to the
calf musculature. Acute reversible somatosensory symptoms are often reported and may
include paraesthesia, numbness, muscle ache, and a sensation of electrical discharge
in the back of the legs. Blurred vision and swallowing difficulties have been
occasionally reported. Clinical deficits are usually greater at the onset of the
disease, confining the affected subjects to bed. Within few days, the course of the
disease stabilizes and the deficits are mostly confined to the motor system.
However, a “second attack” remains possible. The most visible feature
is the cross-legged (scissoring) gait of affected subjects who may still be able to
walk and/ or run. Once stabilized, the most prominent sign is a symmetrical postural
abnormality with a spastic (cross-legged or scissoring) gait during ambulation
(Fig. 1).

The spasticity of legs is revealed only when the subject is asked to run
among subjects who are mildly affected by the disease, (Tylleskar et al., 1992; Howlett et al., 1990; Tshala-Katumbay et
al., 2002a, 2001; Cliff and Nicala, 1997).

The world health organization (WHO) has adopted the following definition and
epidemiological criteria for the disease (Trolli,
1938): a heavy reliance on cassava as staple food (Van der Beken, 1993), abrupt onset (< 1 week) of
leg weakness and a non-progressive course of the disease in a formerly healthy
person (Chabwine et al., 2011), a symmetric
spastic abnormality when walking and/or running (Ciglenecki et al., 2011), bilaterally exaggerated knee and/or ankle
jerks without signs of disease of the spine. Based on the ability to walk, the
following WHO classification of severity has been proposed (Trolli, 1938): mild form = subject is able to walk
without support (Van der Beken, 1993),
moderate form = subject has to use one or two sticks, and (Chabwine et al., 2011) severe form = subject is unable to
walk (Konzo, 1996).

At the neurological examination, the main clinical picture of Konzo consists
of an isolated symmetric spastic paraparesis. Deep tendon reflexes of the lower
limbs are exaggerated and extensor plantar responses can be seen in most cases when
tested in the recumbent position. The ankle clonus is frequently found, as well as
pathological reflexes of the upper extremities in severely affected subjects, with a
clearly noticeable palmomental reflex. Severely affected subjects may present with
tetraparesis associated with weakness of the trunk and pseudobulbar signs in the
form of speech and swallowing difficulties (Tylleskar et al., 1992; Howlett et al.,
1990; Tshala-Katumbay et al.,
2002a, 2001; Cliff and Nicala, 1997). A bilateral optic neuropathy may
also be seen in subjects affected by Konzo. This condition encompasses visual
impairment, temporal pallor of the optic discs, and defect of visual fields. A
pendular nystagmus has been reported in few cases (Mwanza et al., 2003a, b; Mwanza et al., 2005). The presence of visual
symptoms at the disease onset and/or optic neuropathy during subsequent examinations
do not seem to be correlated with the severity of Konzo. Hearing and sensory
function, as well as urinary, bowel and sexual functions appear to be clinically
normal (Tshala-Katumbay et al., 2001).

Our recent neuropsychological findings suggested impaired neurocognition in
children from Konzo-affected areas compared to those from nearby non-affected areas,
raising concerns as to whether the overall human burden of the disease has been
underestimated (Boivin et al., 2013). The
domains assessed were motor proficiency (fine motor, manual coordination, body
coordination, strength and agility), and cognitive performances (sequential
processing as measure of visual and auditory working memory, simultaneous
processing, learning, planning and delayed recall). More recently, we showed that
subjects affected by the disease also have poor neurodevelopmental trajectories
including decline in motor and cognitive performances while still relying on
improperly processed cassava as the main source of food (Boivin et al., 2017). Our most recent work has extended
these findings to children as young as one year of age, suggesting that
cassava-associated neurotoxicity may begin when children are weaned from breast milk
to cassava porridge (Kashala-Abotnes et al.,
2018). In documenting neurocognitive impairments in children with Konzo,
Boivin and colleagues also noted sub-clinical symptoms even in Konzo-free children
living in Konzo-affected households. These subtler symptoms may constitute a
pre-Konzo condition, providing a warning that a child is approaching the
disease’s threshold (Boivin et al.,
2013). Thus, the neurocognitive effects documented for children without
Konzo in Konzo-affected households and communities make it all the more important to
ensure food safety in regions dependent on bitter varieties of cassava with high
levels of cyanogenic compounds. In these regions, stunting and goitre are commonly
found.

Peripheral and central nerve conduction studies have shown a prominent
dysfunction of the pyramidal system with evidence of subclinical involvement of
sensory pathways (Table 1). Non-epileptic
electroencephalographic abnormalities are found while magnetic resonance imaging
from two subjects has remained unremarkable (Tshala-Katumbay et al., 2002a, b;
Tshala Katumbay et al., 2000; Tylleskar et al., 1993). To date, the only
observation that was done on an autopsied brain in the 1930′s was not
conclusive (Trolli, 1938).

In most studies, the exposure to cyanogenic compounds is ascertained by
measuring the concentrations of thiocyanate (SCN), the main cyanide metabolite
in urine (U-SCN) or plasma (P-SCN) (Kassa et
al., 2011). Levels of U-SCN or P-SCN may be as high as 1720 and 426
μmol/ l, respectively, in Konzo-affected populations. A recent study
found a mean ± SD concentration of 520.4 ± 355.7 μmol/l of
U-SCN in children with Konzo, which was significantly higher than 382.5 ±
226.3 μmol/l in those with no Konzo (p < 0.05) (Boivin et al., 2017). Samples of cassava flour from
18 consenting households were collected and found to have cyanide concentrations
from 30 to 200 ppm with a mean (SD) of 92.2 ( ± 562) ppm, well-above the
10 ppm safe limit proposed by WHO (Boivin et al.,
2013; Organization FaAOWH, 2018). Samples of cassava flour and urines
in a study of very young children had similar concentrations. The cyanogen
content in cassava flour was above the safe limit of 10 ppm (Organization
FaAOWH, 2018) and the level of SCN urinary excretion was above 350
μmole/litre in most households (Kashala-Abotnes et al., 2018). The introduction of a new
food-processing method has helped reduce the cyanogenic content of cassava and
hence, the levels of exposure to its cyanogenic compounds, and a subsequent
decrease in the number of incident cases of Konzo was noted in select areas of
DRC and Tanzania (Mlingi et al., 2011;
Banea et al., 2013, 2014; Banea et al.,
2012). The only study that measured the concentration of cyanide in
blood of subjects with Konzo found concentrations that can reach ∼ 20X
the “accumulation level” of 4 μmol/l in 3 subjects within
the first week of Konzo onset (Tylleskar et al.,
1992).

Current knowledge of cassava toxicity clearly indicates that Konzo is
associated with chronic reliance on improperly processed cyanogenic (bitter)
cassava as the main source of food. It is possible that outbreaks of the disease
and/or it sudden onset are triggered by a peak in the exposure to the cassava
cyanogens and hence, to their toxic metabolites (vide infra). While most
subjects from Konzo-affected areas rely on cyanogenic cassava as staple food,
only a fraction (i.e. ∼ up to 10%) suffers from overt gait abnormalities
suggesting that there may be individual factors that dictate susceptibility to
the disease. The latter include malnutrition and younger age or female gender
for reasons that are not clearly understood, but also poor cyanide
detoxification capability and, possibly, genetics. Impaired cyanide
detoxification may be seen as a result of poor nutrition (insufficient protein
intake and/or availability of sulfur donors) and/or, possibly, genetic
polymorphisms (Tshala-Katumbay et al.,
2013).

The only available data on neuropathology was not conclusive (Trolli, 1938). Most insight on the site of
the lesion in Konzo was provided by electrophysiological studies, which suggest
that both motor and somatosensory pathways as well as visual pathways are
affected (Table 1) (Tshala-Katumbay et al., 2002a, b; Tshala Katumbay et
al., 2000). Additional insights are gained from experimental studies,
which suggest that the neuropathology of Konzo may be mediated through
mechanisms of oxidative damage or protein carbamoylation induced by cyanide
(pro-oxidant) or cyanate (cyanide metabolite, motor system toxicant, and
protein-carbamoylating agent) (Kassa et al.,
2011; Makila-Mabe et al.,
2014; Kimani et al., 2013). We
recently confirmed the association between the serum levels of
8,12-iso-iPF2α-VI F2-isoprostane isomer, a marker of lipid peroxidation
and thus oxidative damage, and the extent of neurocognitive deficits found in
children with Konzo (Makila-Mabe et al.,
2014). However, these peripheral markers of oxidative stress may well
not reflect the exact neuropathogenic mechanisms taking place in the central
nervous system in response to the toxicity of cyanogenic cassava.

The diagnosis of Konzo is relatively straightforward when the disease occurs
in its epidemic form as several families within a community are affected within a
common timeframe. The association with poor nutrition and overconsumption of
insufficiently processed bitter cassava is required for the diagnosis of Konzo. The
disease must be differentiated from lathyrism, another spastic paraparesis
associated with poor nutrition and overconsumption of the grass pea lathyrus
sativus (Bradbury and Lambein,
2011); and tropical spastic paraparesis (TSP), a neurological entity
endemic to tropical Africa, or Latin America, or the Seychelles and Japan islands
(Gessain and Mahieux, 2012). In certain
parts of the world, for example the Bandundu province of the DRC, clusters of TSP
coexists with Konzo (Goubau et al., 1990;
Kayembe et al., 1990). While Konzo
appears to be a toxico-nutritional disease, the aetiology of TSP is linked to the
infection by the human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) (Gessain and Mahieux, 2012; Tylleskar et al., 1996). Because of this association, TSP
has been named HTLV-I Associated Myelopathy (HAM). The differential diagnosis of
Konzo, lathyrism and TSP/HAM may be difficult when (a) either Konzo or lathyrism
coexist with TSP/HAM or (b) a TSP/HAM subject tests negative to HTLV-I while
residing in a Konzo- or lathyrism-affected area. In these cases, the differential
diagnosis is made by carefully taking the history of the disease through a
structured interview, the dietary habits, and the findings from the physical
examination. TSP/HAM is a slowly progressive spastic paraparesis whereas lathyrism
and Konzo are non-progressive conditions usually of acute or subacute onset. In
addition, clinical signs of sensory and sphincter involvement may be evident in the
extremities of subjects with TSP/HAM. In the absence of co-morbidity, subjects with
Konzo or lathyrism should test negative for HTLV-I antibodies or protein
immunoblots.

The process of identifying the cause a spastic paraparesis in the tropics
may be challenging for the physician in presence of an isolated case. In this
situation, the differential diagnosis should be made against other causes of
non-compressive myelopathy. These include but are not limited to the subacute
myelo-optic neuropathy (SMON) due to clioquinol (5-chloro-7-iodo-8-quinolinol;
iodochloroxyquin) intoxication, infections or liver failure, hereditary spastic
paraplegia (HSP), primary lateral sclerosis (PLS), or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS) (Konagaya et al., 2004; Berger and Sabet, 2002; McArthur et al., 2005; Utku et al.,
2005). In most cases, the history of the illness, the presence of signs
of systemic disease, laboratory analyses, and neuroimaging findings may help to
confirm and differentiate the diagnosis. Genetic and serum and/ or cerebrospinal
fluid laboratory analyses, virology testing of viruses such as the human
immunodeficiency viruses type I (HIV-I) and II (HIV-I-II) are also helpful to
differentiate diagnosis. An earlier detection of treatable causes of myelopathy and
spastic paraparesis such as tuberculosis remains of paramount importance (Table 2).

Up to date, there is no effective treatment for Konzo that has been
documented. The neurological damages are debilitating, and permanent. Severely
affected subjects may use walking aids, but once the neurodamaging process has
stabilized, the disability remains unchanged and irreversible. There has been
attempts with physical therapy to reduce muscle spasms and contractures, and with
reconstructive surgery. A proximal tendon release of the calf has proven successful
in a handful of patients in Central African Republic where the patients have
regained the ability to stand on their whole feet, thus improving both standing and
gait (Fig. 2). A possible option is to trial
centrally acting spasmolytics, dorsal rhizotomy or intramuscular injection of
botulinum toxin used with success to reduce adductor spasticity in patients with
cerebral palsy. However, no such therapeutic trials have been tested in patients
with Konzo so far.

Konzo-affected regions face the challenges of the agricultural, educational,
and public health capacity and infrastructure needed to implement the necessary
dietary changes. For the same reasons, these regions fail to diversify their food
staples. Presently, the key to eradicating Konzo is prevention. Because there is no
cure for the neurological damage that Konzo causes, the battle against the disease
must focus on prevention. In 2005, an Australian scientist discovered an efficient
cassava processing method to reduce cyanogen content in cassava. The method called
wetting method has been used successfully in the DRC and has helped prevent
outbreaks of Konzo (Mlingi et al., 2011;
Banea et al., 2013, 2014; Banea et al.,
2012).

Konzo victims are able to survive for decades with their handicap, depending
on how supportive the environment is. It will therefore be possible to document a
‘post-Konzo’ syndrome with increased pain and weakness due to
contractures and joint malalignment in old patients.

It has been proposed to switch from bitter to sweet cassava (low in toxin),
but it is not the solution because only bitter cassava can grow in the region due to
the acidity of the soil. According to the FAO/ UNESCO Soil map of the world (1977),
the soil in the Southern Bandundu Province in DRC, which is one of the most
Konzo-affected areas in the world, is not suitable for modern agriculture and
livestock due to mineral deficiencies and low ferralic arenosols.

The human model of food (cassava) cyanide poisoning offers invaluable
opportunities to explore treatment options, e.g., antidotes for cyanide poisoning
and elucidate the neuropathogenic mechanisms underlying the long-term impact of
cyanide exposure on the brain. Other opportunities to be explored include testing
and validation of point-of-care diagnostic tools to measure and monitor levels of
cyanide exposure and metabolites in relation to risks for neurological diseases and
child neurodevelopment. Further studies should explore the differential roles of
cyanide (mitochondrial toxicant), thiocyanate (AMPA-receptor chaotropic metabolite),
cyanate (protein-carbamoylating metabolite), and 2-iminothiazolidine-4-carboxylic
acid (seizure inducer) in the pathogenesis of cassava-associated neurological damage
(Spencer, 1999). Whole genome or exome
sequencing, metagenomics and epigenetics may, possibly, unveil other factors of
individual susceptibility to cyanide related neurological disease (Tshala-Katumbay et al., 2013). Further studies should
focus on the burden of social challenges such as poverty, maternal mental health,
and malnutrition (stunting) that have been reported in households affected by Konzo.
Therapeutic trials with substances that can reduce adductor spasticity, such as in
patients with cerebral palsy could be tested to alleviate symptoms. Prospects on
cognitive rehabilitation have yet to be explored.