---
reference_id: "PMID:31175328"
title: Histone H3K27 dimethyl loss is highly specific for malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor and distinguishes true PRC2 loss from isolated H3K27 trimethyl loss.
authors:
- Marchione DM
- Lisby A
- Viaene AN
- Santi M
- Nasrallah M
- Wang LP
- Williams EA
- Larque AB
- Chebib I
- Garcia BA
- Wojcik JB
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41379-019-0287-8
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis, genetics"
- DNA Methylation/genetics
- "Histones/analysis, genetics"
- Humans
- "Neurofibrosarcoma/diagnosis, genetics"
- Polycomb Repressive Complex 2/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Histone H3K27 dimethyl loss is highly specific for malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor and distinguishes true PRC2 loss from isolated H3K27 trimethyl loss.
**Authors:** Marchione DM, Lisby A, Viaene AN, Santi M, Nasrallah M, Wang LP, Williams EA, Larque AB, Chebib I, Garcia BA, Wojcik JB
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41379-019-0287-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41379-019-0287-8)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2019 Oct;32(10):1434-1446. doi: 10.1038/s41379-019-0287-8. Epub
2019  Jun 7.

Histone H3K27 dimethyl loss is highly specific for malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor and distinguishes true PRC2 loss from isolated H3K27 trimethyl
loss.

Marchione DM(1), Lisby A(2), Viaene AN(2)(3), Santi M(3), Nasrallah M(2), Wang
LP(2), Williams EA(4), Larque AB(5), Chebib I(4), Garcia BA(1), Wojcik JB(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, and Penn Epigenetics Institute,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
19104, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, 02114, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. jbwojcik5@gmail.com.

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors contain loss of histone H3K27
trimethylation (H3K27me3) due to driver mutations affecting the polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2). Consequently, loss of H3K27me3 staining has served
as a diagnostic marker for this tumor type. However, recent reports demonstrate
H3K27me3 loss in numerous other tumors, including some in the differential
diagnosis of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor. Since these tumors lose
H3K27me3 through mechanisms distinct from PRC2 loss, we set out to determine
whether loss of dimethylation of H3K27, which is also catalyzed by PRC2, might
be a more specific marker of PRC2 loss and malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor. Using mass spectrometry, we identify a near complete loss of H3K27me2 in
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors and cell lines. Immunohistochemical
analysis of 72 malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, seven K27M-mutant
gliomas, 43 ependymomas, and 10 Merkel cell carcinomas demonstrates that while
H3K27me3 loss is common across these tumor types, H3K27me2 loss is limited to
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors and is highly concordant with H3K27me3
loss (33/34 cases). Thus, increased specificity does not come at the cost of
greatly reduced sensitivity. To further compare H3K27me2 and H3K27me3
immunohistochemistry, we investigated 42 melanomas and 54 synovial sarcomas,
histologic mimics of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor with varying
degrees of H3K27me3 loss in prior reports. While global H3K27me3 loss was not
seen in these tumors, weak and limited H3K27me3 staining was common. By
contrast, H3K27me2 staining was more clearly retained in all cases, making it a
superior binary classifier. This was confirmed by digital image analysis of
stained slides. Our findings indicate that H3K27me2 loss is highly specific for
PRC2 loss and that PRC2 loss is a rarer phenomenon than H3K27me3 loss.
Consequently, H3K27me2 loss is a superior diagnostic marker for malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor.

DOI: 10.1038/s41379-019-0287-8
PMCID: PMC6763358
PMID: 31175328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
