---
reference_id: "PMID:24260777"
title: Biotin-Thiamine-Responsive Basal Ganglia Disease.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Tabarki B
- Al-Hashem A
- Ortigoza-Escobar JD
- Alsharhan H
- Alfadhel M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biotin-Thiamine-Responsive Basal Ganglia Disease.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Tabarki B, Al-Hashem A, Ortigoza-Escobar JD, Alsharhan H, Alfadhel M

## Content

1. Biotin-Thiamine-Responsive Basal Ganglia Disease.

Tabarki B(1), Al-Hashem A(2)(3), Ortigoza-Escobar JD(4)(5)(6), Alsharhan H(7),
Alfadhel M(8)(9).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2013 Nov 21 [updated 2025 Jan 9].

Author information:
(1)Prince Sultan Military and Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
(2)King Fahad Specialist Hospital, Dammam, Saudi Arabia
(3)SEHA Virtual Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
(4)Movement Disorders Unit, Pediatric Neurology Department, Institut de Recerca,
Hospital Sant Joan de Déu Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
(5)European Reference Network for Rare Neurological Diseases (ERN-RND),
Barcelona, Spain
(6)U-703 Centre for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBER-ER), Instituto
de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain
(7)College of Medicine, Kuwait University, Kuwait City, Kuwait
(8)King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
(9)King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease
(BTBGD) may present in early infancy, childhood, or adulthood. Early-infantile
BTBGD presents before age three months with vomiting, feeding difficulties,
encephalopathy, hypotonia, seizures, and respiratory failure. Classic BTBGD
presents between ages three and ten years with recurrent subacute encephalopathy
manifesting as confusion, seizures, ataxia, supranuclear facial palsy, external
ophthalmoplegia, and/or dysphagia that, if left untreated, can eventually lead
to coma and even death. Dystonia and cogwheel rigidity are nearly always
present; hyperreflexia, ankle clonus, and Babinski responses are common.
Hemiparesis or quadriparesis may be seen. Episodes are often triggered by
febrile illness or mild trauma or stress. Simple partial or generalized seizures
are easily controlled with anti-seizure medication. Adult Wernicke-like
encephalopathy BTBGD, described in three individuals to date, presents after age
ten years with acute onset of status epilepticus, ataxia, nystagmus, diplopia,
and ophthalmoplegia. Prompt administration of biotin and thiamine early in the
disease course results in partial or complete improvement within days in classic
and adult BTBGD; however, most infants with early-infantile BTBGD have a poor
outcome.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of BTBGD is established in a proband with
biallelic pathogenic variants in SLC19A3 identified by molecular genetic
testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Biotin (5-10 mg/kg/day) and thiamine (up to 40
mg/kg/day with a maximum of 1,500 mg daily) are given orally as early in the
disease course as possible and are continued lifelong. During acute
decompensations thiamine may be increased to double the regular dose and given
intravenously. Disease manifestations typically resolve within days in classic
and adult BTBGD. Supportive care: Acute encephalopathic episodes may require
care in an ICU to manage seizures and increased intracranial pressure; thiamine
may be increased to double the regular dose and given intravenously.
Anti-seizure medication is used to control seizures. Treatment of dystonia is
symptomatic and includes administration of trihexyphenidyl or levodopa.
Rehabilitation, physical therapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy as
needed and adaptation of educational programs to meet individual needs.
Education of the family regarding the importance of lifelong adherence to
medical therapy. Surveillance: At each visit, review neurologic status and
assess developmental progress, educational needs, social support, and need for
care coordination. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Avoid use of sodium valproate
to treat epilepsy. Use of ACTH to treat epileptic spasms can induce status
dystonicus. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to clarify the
genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an affected
individual to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt
initiation of treatment with biotin and thiamine and information about
agents/circumstances to avoid. Pregnancy management: Affected women should
continue thiamine and biotin during pregnancy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: BTBGD is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both
parents are known to be heterozygous for an SLC19A3 pathogenic variant, each sib
of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a
50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being
unaffected and not a carrier. Once the SLC19A3 pathogenic variants have been
identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk family
members and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing for BTBGD are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 24260777
