---
reference_id: "PMID:30179903"
title: "Iron deficiency anemia in gastric cancer: a Canadian retrospective review."
authors:
- Tang GH
- Hart R
- Sholzberg M
- Brezden-Masley C
journal: Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/MEG.0000000000001251
keywords:
- Aged
- "Anemia/chemically induced, diagnosis, therapy"
- "Anemia, Iron-Deficiency/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- "Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Erythrocyte Transfusion
- Female
- Ferritins/blood
- Follow-Up Studies
- Hemoglobins/metabolism
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Staging
- Retrospective Studies
- "Stomach Neoplasms/complications, drug therapy, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Iron deficiency anemia in gastric cancer: a Canadian retrospective review.
**Authors:** Tang GH, Hart R, Sholzberg M, Brezden-Masley C
**Journal:** Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MEG.0000000000001251](https://doi.org/10.1097/MEG.0000000000001251)

## Content

1. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018 Dec;30(12):1497-1501. doi: 
10.1097/MEG.0000000000001251.

Iron deficiency anemia in gastric cancer: a Canadian retrospective review.

Tang GH(1), Hart R(1), Sholzberg M(2), Brezden-Masley C(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology.
(2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Division of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathobiology.
(3)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. 
Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019 Apr;31(4):547-548. doi: 
10.1097/MEG.0000000000001383.

BACKGROUND: Gastric cancer is highly prevalent amongst men and women. Previous 
studies have described the high prevalence of iron deficiency anemia (IDA) in 
gastrointestinal cancer patients, but few have focused on the gastric cancer 
population. We aimed to determine the point prevalence of patients with gastric 
cancer who developed IDA and chemotherapy-induced anemia, and to identify types 
and frequencies of IDA therapies.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A retrospective review was carried out for 126 gastric 
cancer patients from 2006 to 2016 at St Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Canada. 
Patient demographics, laboratory (ferritin, iron parameters) and clinical data 
regarding IDA were reviewed. IDA was defined as transferrin saturation less than 
20%, ferritin less than 100 μg/l, and hemoglobin less than 130 g/l in men and 
less than 120 g/l in women.
RESULTS: Of the 126 patients with gastric cancer identified (median age 70, 
interquartile range: 59-77), 64.3% were men. Only 18.3% of patients had a 
self-reported history of IDA, 40% had IDA at the time of gastric cancer 
diagnosis, and 58.7% were anemic. A total of 77 patients received chemotherapy, 
and of these, 54.2% developed chemotherapy-induced anemia. At the final 
follow-up, 21.4% of patients were diagnosed with IDA along their treatment 
course, and 79.4% were anemic. Red blood cell transfusions were most frequently 
prescribed (48.4%; median: 4 U; interquartile range: 2-6), compared with oral 
(31.8%) or intravenous iron (16.7%) therapy.
CONCLUSION: The point prevalence of IDA was high in our gastric cancer patients 
despite inconsistent screening for IDA. Our findings indicate the need for a 
consistent diagnostic and therapeutic approach to IDA in this vulnerable patient 
population.

DOI: 10.1097/MEG.0000000000001251
PMID: 30179903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]