---
reference_id: "PMID:12952183"
title: Multiple signaling pathways converge on the Cbfa1/Runx2 transcription factor to regulate osteoblast differentiation.
authors:
- Franceschi RT
- Xiao G
- Jiang D
- Gopalakrishnan R
- Yang S
- Reith E
journal: Connect Tissue Res
year: '2003'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple signaling pathways converge on the Cbfa1/Runx2 transcription factor to regulate osteoblast differentiation.
**Authors:** Franceschi RT, Xiao G, Jiang D, Gopalakrishnan R, Yang S, Reith E
**Journal:** Connect Tissue Res (2003)

## Content

1. Connect Tissue Res. 2003;44 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):109-16.

Multiple signaling pathways converge on the Cbfa1/Runx2 transcription factor to 
regulate osteoblast differentiation.

Franceschi RT(1), Xiao G, Jiang D, Gopalakrishnan R, Yang S, Reith E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Periodontics/Prevention/Geriatrics, School of Medicine, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1078, USA. rennyf@umich.edu

The Cbfa1/Runx2 transcription factor is essential for osteoblast 
differentiation. However, levels of Runx2 are often not well correlated with its 
transcriptional activity suggesting that this factor must be activated either by 
covalent modification or through interactions with other nuclear components. 
Runx2 is phosphorylated and activated by the mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK) pathway. This pathway is stimulated in at least two ways: by binding of 
type I collagen to alpha2beta1 integrins on the osteoblast surface and by 
treatment of cells with the osteogenic growth factor, FGF2. Protein kinase A 
(PKA) also may phosphorylate/activate Runx2 under certain conditions. Runx2 
activity also is enhanced by factors known to stimulate specific signal 
transduction pathways such as PTH/PTHrP (signals through PKA and PKC pathways) 
and BMPs (Signal through Smad proteins). Interactions with Runx2 are complex 
involving both binding of distinct components such as AP-1 factors and Smads to 
separate sites on DNA, direct interactions between Runx2 and AP-1/Smad factors 
and MAPK or PKA-dependent Runx2 phosphorylation. These findings suggest that 
Runx2 plays a central role in coordinating multiple signals involved in 
osteoblast differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3564252
PMID: 12952183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]