---
reference_id: "PMID:23863460"
title: Hyperactive Ras/MAPK signaling is critical for tibial nonunion fracture in neurofibromin-deficient mice.
authors:
- Sharma R
- Wu X
- Rhodes SD
- Chen S
- He Y
- Yuan J
- Li J
- Yang X
- Li X
- Jiang L
- Kim ET
- Stevenson DA
- Viskochil D
- Xu M
- Yang FC
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt333
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Lineage
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Flavonoids/pharmacology
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases/metabolism
- "Neurofibromatosis 1/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Neurofibromin 1/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Osteoblasts/physiology
- "Osteoclasts/drug effects, metabolism"
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Pseudarthrosis/drug therapy, genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Signal Transduction/drug effects, physiology"
- "Stem Cells/drug effects, metabolism"
- Tibial Fractures/physiopathology
- ras Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperactive Ras/MAPK signaling is critical for tibial nonunion fracture in neurofibromin-deficient mice.
**Authors:** Sharma R, Wu X, Rhodes SD, Chen S, He Y, Yuan J, Li J, Yang X, Li X, Jiang L, Kim ET, Stevenson DA, Viskochil D, Xu M, Yang FC
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddt333](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddt333)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Dec 1;22(23):4818-28. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt333. Epub 2013
Jul  17.

Hyperactive Ras/MAPK signaling is critical for tibial nonunion fracture in
neurofibromin-deficient mice.

Sharma R(1), Wu X, Rhodes SD, Chen S, He Y, Yuan J, Li J, Yang X, Li X, Jiang L,
Kim ET, Stevenson DA, Viskochil D, Xu M, Yang FC.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics.

Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common genetic disorder affecting 1 in 3500
individuals. Patients with NF1 are predisposed to debilitating skeletal
manifestations, including osteopenia/osteoporosis and long bone pseudarthrosis
(nonunion fracture). Hyperactivation of the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) pathway in NF1 is known to underlie aberrant proliferation and
differentiation in cell lineages, including osteoclast progenitors and
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) also known as osteoblast progenitors (pro-OBLs).
Our current study demonstrates the hyper Ras/MAPK as a critical pathway
underlying the pathogenesis of NF1-associated fracture repair deficits.
Nf1-deficient pro-OBLs exhibit Ras/MAPK hyperactivation. Introduction of the NF1
GTPase activating-related domain (NF1 GAP-related domain) in vitro is sufficient
to rescue hyper Ras activity and enhance osteoblast (OBL) differentiation in
Nf1(-/-) pro-OBLs and NF1 human (h) MSCs cultured from NF1 patients with
skeletal abnormalities, including pseudarthrosis or scoliosis. Pharmacologic
inhibition of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) signaling with
PD98059 partially rescues aberrant Erk activation while enhancing OBL
differentiation and expression of OBL markers, osterix and osteocalcin, in
Nf1-deficient murine pro-OBLs. Similarly, MEK inhibition enhances OBL
differentiation of hMSCs. In addition, PD98059 rescues aberrant osteoclast
maturation in Nf1 haploinsufficient bone marrow mononuclear cells (BMMNCs).
Importantly, MEK inhibitor significantly improves fracture healing in an NF1
murine model, Col2.3Cre;Nf1(flox/-). Collectively, these data indicate the
Ras/MAPK cascade as a critical pathway in the pathogenesis of bone loss and
pseudarthrosis related to NF1 mutations. These studies provide evidence for
targeting the MAPK pathway to improve bone mass and treat pseudarthrosis in NF1.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt333
PMCID: PMC3820137
PMID: 23863460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
