---
reference_id: "PMID:8506491"
title: "Surgical treatment of Meckel's diverticulum."
authors:
- DiGiacomo JC
- Cottone FJ
journal: South Med J
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1097/00007611-199306000-00017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical treatment of Meckel's diverticulum.
**Authors:** DiGiacomo JC, Cottone FJ
**Journal:** South Med J (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00007611-199306000-00017](https://doi.org/10.1097/00007611-199306000-00017)

## Content

1. South Med J. 1993 Jun;86(6):671-5. doi: 10.1097/00007611-199306000-00017.

Surgical treatment of Meckel's diverticulum.

DiGiacomo JC(1), Cottone FJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Saint Francis Medical Center, Trenton, NJ 08629.

Meckel's diverticula are the result of incomplete degeneration of the vitelline 
duct. It is generally believed that less than 5% of them become symptomatic, the 
frequency decreasing with age. Meckel's diverticula are most commonly manifested 
in children by painless lower gastrointestinal bleeding and in adults, as an 
inflammatory process or obstruction. Definitive diagnosis is usually made at 
surgery, though the Meckel's scan may suggest a diagnosis preoperatively, 
especially in the pediatric population. All symptomatic and pathologic Meckel's 
diverticula should be removed with a segment of ileum. The use of stapling 
devices, with their ease of use and low complication rate, make it reasonable to 
remove any Meckel's diverticulum that easily fits in the device. If a 
diverticulum found incidentally is so broad-based or short that stapling cannot 
be done without difficulty, it is unlikely to become symptomatic and should be 
left undisturbed.

DOI: 10.1097/00007611-199306000-00017
PMID: 8506491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]