---
reference_id: "PMID:19738495"
title: A rare case of infantile myofibromatosis and review of literature.
authors:
- Hausbrandt PA
- Leithner A
- Beham A
- Bodo K
- Raith J
- Windhager R
journal: J Pediatr Orthop B
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1097/BPB.0b013e32832e4756
keywords:
- "Calcinosis/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Frozen Sections
- "Histiocytosis, Langerhans-Cell/diagnosis"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Myofibromatosis/pathology
- "Neoplasm Regression, Spontaneous"
- Radiography
- "Soft Tissue Neoplasms/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Tibia/diagnostic imaging, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A rare case of infantile myofibromatosis and review of literature.
**Authors:** Hausbrandt PA, Leithner A, Beham A, Bodo K, Raith J, Windhager R
**Journal:** J Pediatr Orthop B (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BPB.0b013e32832e4756](https://doi.org/10.1097/BPB.0b013e32832e4756)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Orthop B. 2010 Jan;19(1):122-6. doi: 10.1097/BPB.0b013e32832e4756.

A rare case of infantile myofibromatosis and review of literature.

Hausbrandt PA(1), Leithner A, Beham A, Bodo K, Raith J, Windhager R.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Orthopaedic Surgery, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria.

Infantile myofibromatosis is a rare benign tumor-disease (1/400,000). Four 
different types have been reported in literature. The most commonly affected 
body areas are the head, the neck, and the trunk. We would like to present a 
rare case of a multicentric type with singular visceral involvement and a 
literature review of all case series with more than five patients. A 9-month-old 
boy presented with a swelling on the medial side of his proximal left tibia. The 
lesion which was present since birth, was well palpable, indolent, hard, and 
mobile in relation to the surrounding tissue. Radiographic films and ultrasound 
examination presented a pretibial soft-tissue tumor mass with calcifications and 
two osteolytic lesions with a sclerotic rim. A skeletal survey showed more 
osteolytic lesions, but the magnetic resonance imaging showed no more 
soft-tissue lesions. The rapid frozen section biopsy hinted at the diagnosis of 
histiocytosis X. The definitive histological result 6 days later was infantile 
myofibromatosis. As therapy, we determined a wait-and-see policy with controls 
all 3 months. At 20 months follow-up, the boy showed beginning of regression of 
all lesions. Infantile myofibromatosis is a very rare benign tumor-disease. 
Radiologically often soft-tissue masses with calcifications and osteolytic 
lesions with sclerotic rims are described. These findings also can be 
interpreted as histiocytosis X, which is a potential differential diagnosis. 
Histopathologically, cells characteristically appear as spindle-shaped 
fibroblast cells with pale pink cytoplasm and elongated nuclei and the 
immunophenotype is defined with a positive reaction on smooth-muscle antigen 
vimentin and the muscle-specific antigen HHF-35. The data of the literature 
review underline that a wait-and-see-policy should be considered as the first 
treatment of choice as in most instances the bony lesions regress spontaneously. 
However, a thorough examination has to be carried out to exclude lesion in other 
organs like gastro-intestinal or cardio-pulmonary nodular tumor masses. In 
conclusion, the present case report and the literature review support the notion 
that infantile myofibromatosis should be considered as a possible differential 
diagnosis for soft tissue expansions and/or osteolytic lesions in a newborn.

DOI: 10.1097/BPB.0b013e32832e4756
PMID: 19738495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]