---
reference_id: "PMID:19815466"
title: "Efficacy and safety of Creon 24,000 in subjects with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency due to cystic fibrosis."
authors:
- Trapnell BC
- Maguiness K
- Graff GR
- Boyd D
- Beckmann K
- Caras S
journal: J Cyst Fibros
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcf.2009.08.008
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Cross-Over Studies
- "Cystic Fibrosis/complications, drug therapy"
- "Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency/drug therapy, etiology, metabolism"
- Fats/metabolism
- Female
- "Gastrointestinal Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Humans
- Intestinal Absorption/drug effects
- Male
- "Pancrelipase/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Placebos
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of Creon 24,000 in subjects with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency due to cystic fibrosis.
**Authors:** Trapnell BC, Maguiness K, Graff GR, Boyd D, Beckmann K, Caras S
**Journal:** J Cyst Fibros (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcf.2009.08.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcf.2009.08.008)

## Content

1. J Cyst Fibros. 2009 Dec;8(6):370-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jcf.2009.08.008. Epub 2009
Oct 7.

Efficacy and safety of Creon 24,000 in subjects with exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency due to cystic fibrosis.

Trapnell BC(1), Maguiness K, Graff GR, Boyd D, Beckmann K, Caras S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
and Division of Pulmonary, Sleep, and Critical Care Medicine, University of
Cincinnati, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH, 45229-3039, USA.
bruce.trapnell@cchmc.org

BACKGROUND: Pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy is critical for adequate
nutrition in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients with exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency (EPI).
METHODS: This was a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, two-period
crossover study assessing efficacy and safety of Creon 24,000-unit capsules in
CF subjects > or =12 years with EPI. Patients were randomised to one of two
5-day sequences, Creon/placebo or placebo/Creon (target dose, 4000 lipase
units/g fat). Primary outcome was the coefficient of fat absorption (CFA);
secondary outcomes were coefficient of nitrogen absorption (CNA), symptoms, and
safety.
RESULTS: Thirty-two subjects were randomised. Mean CFA and CNA were
significantly greater with Creon than placebo (CFA, 88.6% vs. 49.6%; CNA, 85.1%
vs. 49.9%; p<0.001 for both). Symptoms were improved and fewer
treatment-emergent adverse events were reported with Creon than placebo. One
patient discontinued for weight loss unrelated to study drug.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated Creon was effective in treating EPI due to
CF and was safe and well tolerated.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcf.2009.08.008
PMID: 19815466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
