---
reference_id: "PMID:29909971"
title: "Phospholipase PLA2G6, a Parkinsonism-Associated Gene, Affects Vps26 and Vps35, Retromer Function, and Ceramide Levels, Similar to α-Synuclein Gain."
authors:
- Lin G
- Lee PT
- Chen K
- Mao D
- Tan KL
- Zuo Z
- Lin WW
- Wang L
- Bellen HJ
journal: Cell Metab
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2018.05.019
keywords:
- Animals
- Brain/metabolism
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Ceramides/metabolism
- Drosophila/genetics
- "Drosophila Proteins/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Feedback, Physiological"
- Female
- "Group VI Phospholipases A2/genetics, metabolism"
- Group X Phospholipases A2/metabolism
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Male
- Membrane Fluidity
- Mutation
- Neurons/metabolism
- Nuclear Proteins/chemistry
- Parkinson Disease/metabolism
- RNA-Binding Proteins/chemistry
- Sphingolipids/metabolism
- Vesicular Transport Proteins/metabolism
- alpha-Synuclein/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phospholipase PLA2G6, a Parkinsonism-Associated Gene, Affects Vps26 and Vps35, Retromer Function, and Ceramide Levels, Similar to α-Synuclein Gain.
**Authors:** Lin G, Lee PT, Chen K, Mao D, Tan KL, Zuo Z, Lin WW, Wang L, Bellen HJ
**Journal:** Cell Metab (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cmet.2018.05.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2018.05.019)

## Content

1. Cell Metab. 2018 Oct 2;28(4):605-618.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2018.05.019. Epub
 2018 Jun 14.

Phospholipase PLA2G6, a Parkinsonism-Associated Gene, Affects Vps26 and Vps35,
Retromer Function, and Ceramide Levels, Similar to α-Synuclein Gain.

Lin G(1), Lee PT(1), Chen K(2), Mao D(2), Tan KL(2), Zuo Z(1), Lin WW(1), Wang
L(2), Bellen HJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute,
Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA; Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute, Texas Children's
Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Neuroscience, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological
Research Institute, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
Electronic address: hbellen@bcm.edu.

Mutations in PLA2G6 (PARK14) cause neurodegenerative disorders in humans,
including autosomal recessive neuroaxonal dystrophy and early-onset
parkinsonism. We show that loss of iPLA2-VIA, the fly homolog of PLA2G6, reduces
lifespan, impairs synaptic transmission, and causes neurodegeneration.
Phospholipases typically hydrolyze glycerol phospholipids, but loss of iPLA2-VIA
does not affect the phospholipid composition of brain tissue but rather causes
an elevation in ceramides. Reducing ceramides with drugs, including myriocin or
desipramine, alleviates lysosomal stress and suppresses neurodegeneration.
iPLA2-VIA binds the retromer subunits Vps35 and Vps26 and enhances retromer
function to promote protein and lipid recycling. Loss of iPLA2-VIA impairs
retromer function, leading to a progressive increase in ceramide. This induces a
positive feedback loop that affects membrane fluidity and impairs retromer
function and neuronal function. Similar defects are observed upon loss of vps26
or vps35 or overexpression of α-synuclein, indicating that these defects may be
common in Parkinson disease.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmet.2018.05.019
PMID: 29909971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
