---
reference_id: PMID:23919265
title: Genotype-phenotype correlations in recessive RYR1-related myopathies.
authors:
- Amburgey K
- Bailey A
- Hwang JH
- Tarnopolsky MA
- Bonnemann CG
- Medne L
- Mathews KD
- Collins J
- Daube JR
- Wellman GP
- Callaghan B
- Clarke NF
- Dowling JJ
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-117
keywords:
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Male
- "Muscular Diseases/congenital, genetics, physiopathology"
- Mutation
- "Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics, metabolism"
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-phenotype correlations in recessive RYR1-related myopathies.
**Authors:** Amburgey K, Bailey A, Hwang JH, Tarnopolsky MA, Bonnemann CG, Medne L, Mathews KD, Collins J, Daube JR, Wellman GP, Callaghan B, Clarke NF, Dowling JJ
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-8-117](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-8-117)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013 Aug 6;8:117. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-117.

Genotype-phenotype correlations in recessive RYR1-related myopathies.

Amburgey K(1), Bailey A, Hwang JH, Tarnopolsky MA, Bonnemann CG, Medne L, 
Mathews KD, Collins J, Daube JR, Wellman GP, Callaghan B, Clarke NF, Dowling JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Taubman Medical Research Institute, University of 
Michigan Medical Center, 5019 A, Alfred Taubman Biomedical Science Research 
Building, 109 Zina Pitcher Place, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.

BACKGROUND: RYR1 mutations are typically associated with core myopathies and are 
the most common overall cause of congenital myopathy. Dominant mutations are 
most often associated with central core disease and malignant hyperthermia, and 
genotype-phenotype patterns have emerged from the study of these mutations that 
have contributed to the understanding of disease pathogenesis. The recent 
availability of genetic testing for the entire RYR1 coding sequence has led to a 
dramatic expansion in the identification of recessive mutations in core 
myopathies and other congenital myopathies. To date, no clear patterns have been 
identified in these recessive mutations, though no systematic examination has 
yet been performed.
METHODS: In this study, we investigated genotype-phenotype correlations in a 
large combined cohort of unpublished (n = 14) and previously reported (n = 92) 
recessive RYR1 cases.
RESULTS: Overall examination of this cohort revealed nearly 50% of cases to be 
non-core myopathy related. Our most significant finding was that hypomorphic 
mutations (mutations expected to diminish RyR1 expression) were enriched in 
patients with severe clinical phenotypes. We also determined that hypomorphic 
mutations were more likely to be encountered in non-central core myopathies. 
With analysis of the location of non-hypomorphic mutations, we found that 
missense mutations were generally enriched in the MH/CCD hotspots and 
specifically enriched in the selectivity filter of the channel pore.
CONCLUSIONS: These results support a hypothesis that loss of protein function is 
a key predictive disease parameter. In addition, they suggest that decreased 
RyR1 expression may dictate non-core related pathology though, data on protein 
expression was limited and should be confirmed in a larger cohort. Lastly, the 
results implicate abnormal ion conductance through the channel pore in the 
pathogenesis in recessive core myopathies. Overall, our findings represent a 
comprehensive analysis of genotype-phenotype associations in recessive 
RYR1-myopathies.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-117
PMCID: PMC3751094
PMID: 23919265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]