---
reference_id: "PMID:36315063"
title: "Diagnosing and treating ANCA-associated vasculitis: an updated review for clinical practice."
authors:
- Chevet B
- Cornec D
- Casal Moura M
- Cornec-Le Gall E
- Fervenza FC
- Warrington KJ
- Specks U
- Berti A
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/keac623
keywords:
- Humans
- "Antibodies, Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/chemically induced"
- Anti-Neutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibody-Associated Vasculitis/drug therapy
- Rituximab/therapeutic use
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- Remission Induction
- Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosing and treating ANCA-associated vasculitis: an updated review for clinical practice.
**Authors:** Chevet B, Cornec D, Casal Moura M, Cornec-Le Gall E, Fervenza FC, Warrington KJ, Specks U, Berti A
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/keac623](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/keac623)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2023 May 2;62(5):1787-1803. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/keac623.

Diagnosing and treating ANCA-associated vasculitis: an updated review for 
clinical practice.

Chevet B(1), Cornec D(1), Casal Moura M(2), Cornec-Le Gall E(3), Fervenza FC(4), 
Warrington KJ(5), Specks U(2), Berti A(6).

Author information:
(1)LBAI, UMR1227, Univ Brest, Inserm, Labex IGO, CHU de Brest, Brest, France.
(2)Department Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, and Thoracic Research Disease Unit, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine 
and Science, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Univ Brest, Inserm, UMR 1078, GGB, Brest, France.
(4)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(5)Division of Rheumatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(6)Rheumatology, Santa Chiara Regional Hospital, APSS Trento, and Department of 
Cellular, Computational and Integrative Biology (CIBIO), University of Trento, 
Italy.

ANCA-associated vasculitides (AAV) are a group of rare, primary, systemic 
necrotizing small-vessel vasculitides. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis and 
microscopic polyangiitis account for ∼80-90% of all AAV. Exposure to silica 
dust, farming and chronic nasal Staphylococcus aureus carriage are associated 
with increased risk of developing AAV. When a diagnosis of AAV is suspected, as 
in patients with multisystem organ dysfunction or those with features such as 
chronic recurrent rhinosinusitis, cavitated lung nodules, palpable purpura or 
acute kidney injury, then appropriate further investigations are needed, 
including ANCA testing. In this scenario, a structured clinical assessment 
should be conducted, evaluating all the organs possibly involved, and tissue 
biopsy may be necessary for confirmation of the diagnosis. Therapeutic 
algorithms vary based on the severity of AAV, the clinical diagnosis/ANCA 
specificity, and the patient's age, weight, comorbidities and prognosis. Recent 
data favour rituximab as a preferable option for both induction and maintenance 
of remission. In addition, regimens with less glucocorticoids are equally 
effective and safer in inducing remission compared with conventional regimens, 
and avacopan is an effective glucocorticoid-sparing option. In contrast, there 
is not compelling evidence to support the routine use of plasma exchange in 
addition to standard remission-induction therapy in AAV. ANCA and other 
biomarkers can be helpful in association with clinical assessment to guide 
diagnosis and treatment decisions. Patients should be frequently evaluated 
during follow-up for possible disease relapses or treatment-related morbidity, 
and for monitoring damage accrual, especially metabolic and cardiovascular 
damage.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/keac623
PMID: 36315063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]