---
reference_id: "PMID:40257527"
title: Genetic characterization of BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants in cancer and high-risk family screening cohorts in the UAE population.
authors:
- Al Ali AAAA
- Al Ali MMA
- El-Shourbagy DMA
- Tirmazy SHH
- Mirza I
- Raza A
- Latif MF
- Yasaei H
journal: J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00432-025-06188-9
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- BRCA1 Protein/genetics
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- United Arab Emirates/epidemiology
- Adult
- Genetic Testing
- Cohort Studies
- Aged
- Germ-Line Mutation
- "Neoplasms/genetics, epidemiology"
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/genetics, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic characterization of BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants in cancer and high-risk family screening cohorts in the UAE population.
**Authors:** Al Ali AAAA, Al Ali MMA, El-Shourbagy DMA, Tirmazy SHH, Mirza I, Raza A, Latif MF, Yasaei H
**Journal:** J Cancer Res Clin Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00432-025-06188-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00432-025-06188-9)

## Content

1. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2025 Apr 21;151(4):146. doi:
10.1007/s00432-025-06188-9.

Genetic characterization of BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants in cancer and high-risk
family screening cohorts in the UAE population.

Al Ali AAAA(1), Al Ali MMA(1), El-Shourbagy DMA(2), Tirmazy SHH(2), Mirza I(3),
Raza A(4), Latif MF(5), Yasaei H(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Dubai Genetics Center, Pathology and Genetics Department, Latifa Hospital,
Dubai Academic Health Corporation, Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
(2)Department of Oncology, Dubai Hospital, Dubai Academic Health Corporation,
Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
(3)Molecular Genomics Department, National Reference Laboratory, M42, Abu Dhabi,
United Arab Emirates.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences, Abu Dhabi
University, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
(5)Department of Oncology, Dubai Hospital, Dubai Academic Health Corporation,
Dubai, United Arab Emirates. Muflatif@dha.gov.ae.
(6)Dubai Genetics Center, Pathology and Genetics Department, Latifa Hospital,
Dubai Academic Health Corporation, Dubai, United Arab Emirates. hemad@nrl.ae.
(7)Molecular Genomics Department, National Reference Laboratory, M42, Abu Dhabi,
United Arab Emirates. hemad@nrl.ae.

INTRODUCTION: Germline BRCA1/2 (gBRCA1/2) variants are strongly associated with
hereditary cancers, and screening for these variants in high-risk populations is
recommended for personalized management. This study aims to comprehensively
characterize gBRCA1/2 variants in cancer and family screening cohorts from the
Dubai Emirate, UAE.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 443 patients with breast, ovarian, prostate and
pancreatic cancer were tested for gBRCA1/2 variants from 2017 to 2022 using
whole-gene sequencing, and data were analysed using variant interpretation and
in-silico prediction tools. All BRCA1/2 variants were classified as P/LP or
variants of uncertain significance (VUS) according to ACMG guidelines.
RESULTS: In the cancer cohort, 38 out of 306 patients harboured gBRCA1/2 P/LP or
VUS variants. Of these, 23 (7.5%) were classified as BRCA1/2 P/LP, while 15
(4.9%) were categorized as VUS. These variants were predominantly observed in
estrogen receptor-positive/progesterone receptor-positive (ER + /PR +) and
triple-negative breast cancer patients. Common BRCA1 P/LP variants included
deletion frameshift variants (c.4065_4068del, c.68_69delAG, c.3228_3229delAG),
an insertion frameshift variant (c.1140dup), and a nonsense variant
(c.5251C > T). BRCA2 P/LP variants included a nonsense variant (c.5645C > A), a
missense variant (c.7007G > A), and a deletion frameshift variant
(c.2254_2257del). In the family screening cohort, 14 out of 137 samples
harboured BRCA1/2 P/LP orVUS. Of these, five (3.6%) were classified as P/LP,
while nine (6.6%) were VUS. Pathogenic BRCA1 variants included deletions
(c.4065_4068del, c.3756_3759del) and a nonsense variant (c.5095C > T), while
BRCA2 PVs included a deletion frameshift (c.771_775del) and a novel missense
variant (c.8377G > A). In both cohorts, novel distinct variants were observed.
CONCLUSION: gBRCA1/2 variant prevalence in cancer and family screening cohorts
can serve as beneficial personalized tool for management and treatment of cancer
patients. Larger studies from other emirates of UAE will serve as a foundation
for robust risk assessment and implementation of treatment and prevention
strategies.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-025-06188-9
PMCID: PMC12011969
PMID: 40257527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors
declare no competing interests. Ethics approval and consent to participate:
Ethical approval for this study was obtained from the Dubai Scientific Research
Ethics Committee (DSREC), Dubai Health Authority, under reference number
DSREC-07/2022_14. This research was conducted in full adherence to the
principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki. All participants provided
informed consent, including consent for genetic research and publication
purposes. Consent for publication: Not Applicable.
