---
reference_id: "PMID:36588897"
title: "Nuclear imaging for localization and surgical outcome prediction in epilepsy: A review of latest discoveries and future perspectives."
authors:
- Sukprakun C
- Tepmongkol S
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.1083775
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nuclear imaging for localization and surgical outcome prediction in epilepsy: A review of latest discoveries and future perspectives.
**Authors:** Sukprakun C, Tepmongkol S
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2022.1083775](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2022.1083775)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2022 Dec 16;13:1083775. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.1083775. 
eCollection 2022.

Nuclear imaging for localization and surgical outcome prediction in epilepsy: A 
review of latest discoveries and future perspectives.

Sukprakun C(1), Tepmongkol S(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nuclear Medicine, Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Chulalongkorn University Biomedical Imaging Group (CUBIG), Faculty of 
Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Chula Neuroscience Center, King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital, Bangkok, 
Thailand.
(4)Cognitive Impairment and Dementia Research Unit, Faculty of Medicine, 
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological disorders. 
Approximately, one-third of patients with epilepsy have seizures refractory to 
antiepileptic drugs and further require surgical removal of the epileptogenic 
region. In the last decade, there have been many recent developments in 
radiopharmaceuticals, novel image analysis techniques, and new software for an 
epileptogenic zone (EZ) localization.
OBJECTIVES: Recently, we provided the latest discoveries, current challenges, 
and future perspectives in the field of positron emission tomography (PET) and 
single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) in epilepsy.
METHODS: We searched for relevant articles published in MEDLINE and CENTRAL from 
July 2012 to July 2022. A systematic literature review based on the Preferred 
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis was conducted using the 
keywords "Epilepsy" and "PET or SPECT." We included both prospective and 
retrospective studies. Studies with preclinical subjects or not focusing on EZ 
localization or surgical outcome prediction using recently developed PET 
radiopharmaceuticals, novel image analysis techniques, and new software were 
excluded from the review. The remaining 162 articles were reviewed.
RESULTS: We first present recent findings and developments in PET 
radiopharmaceuticals. Second, we present novel image analysis techniques and new 
software in the last decade for EZ localization. Finally, we summarize the 
overall findings and discuss future perspectives in the field of PET and SPECT 
in epilepsy.
CONCLUSION: Combining new radiopharmaceutical development, new indications, new 
techniques, and software improves EZ localization and provides a better 
understanding of epilepsy. These have proven not to only predict prognosis but 
also to improve the outcome of epilepsy surgery.

Copyright © 2022 Sukprakun and Tepmongkol.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.1083775
PMCID: PMC9800996
PMID: 36588897

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.