---
reference_id: "PMID:19809272"
title: Prospective evaluation of TLE1 as a diagnostic immunohistochemical marker in synovial sarcoma.
authors:
- Jagdis A
- Rubin BP
- Tubbs RR
- Pacheco M
- Nielsen TO
journal: Am J Surg Pathol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181b7ed36
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- Co-Repressor Proteins
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Keratins/analysis
- Mucin-1/analysis
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prospective Studies
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-bcl-2/analysis
- Repressor Proteins/analysis
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Sarcoma, Synovial/chemistry, genetics, pathology"
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- "Soft Tissue Neoplasms/chemistry, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prospective evaluation of TLE1 as a diagnostic immunohistochemical marker in synovial sarcoma.
**Authors:** Jagdis A, Rubin BP, Tubbs RR, Pacheco M, Nielsen TO
**Journal:** Am J Surg Pathol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181b7ed36](https://doi.org/10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181b7ed36)

## Content

1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2009 Dec;33(12):1743-51. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181b7ed36.

Prospective evaluation of TLE1 as a diagnostic immunohistochemical marker in
synovial sarcoma.

Jagdis A(1), Rubin BP, Tubbs RR, Pacheco M, Nielsen TO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Synovial sarcoma is a high-grade soft tissue sarcoma that can be challenging to
diagnose on the basis of histology alone. It is defined by a characteristic
translocation t(X;18) that produces the fusion oncogene SYT-SSX. The current
diagnostic gold standard for synovial sarcoma is the demonstration of the
translocation by fluorescence in situ hybridization, reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction, or cytogenetics, in an appropriate histologic
context. TLE1 encodes a transcriptional corepressor that is overexpressed in
synovial sarcomas. Gene and tissue microarray studies have identified TLE1 as an
excellent bio-marker for distinguishing the synovial sarcoma from other soft
tissue malignancies. We prospectively evaluated incoming soft tissue tumor cases
where the histology and clinical setting made synovial sarcoma a real
consideration in the differential diagnosis. TLE1, Bcl2, epithelial membrane
antigen, and cytokeratin expression were assessed using commercially available
antibodies. TLE1 gave intense, diffuse nuclear staining in 35 of 35 molecularly
confirmed synovial sarcoma cases, and was rare to absent in the 73 other soft
tissue tumors examined (positive staining was found only in 1 of 43 malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors, the 1 tested fibrosarcoma, and 1 pleomorphic
sarcoma). TLE1 was more sensitive and specific for synovial sarcoma than other
currently available immunohistochemical markers including Bcl2, epithelial
membrane antigen and cytokeratins, and had a positive predictive value of 92%
and a negative predictive value of 100% in this clinical setting. Our findings
confirm, in a prospective diagnostic context, that TLE1 is more sensitive and
specific for synovial sarcoma than any other currently available
immunohistochemical stains, and in some cases may preclude the need for
molecular testing.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181b7ed36
PMID: 19809272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
