---
reference_id: PMID:37048743
title: "Desmoplakin Cardiomyopathy: Comprehensive Review of an Increasingly Recognized Entity."
authors:
- Brandão M
- Bariani R
- Rigato I
- Bauce B
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/jcm12072660
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Desmoplakin Cardiomyopathy: Comprehensive Review of an Increasingly Recognized Entity.
**Authors:** Brandão M, Bariani R, Rigato I, Bauce B
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm12072660](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12072660)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2023 Apr 3;12(7):2660. doi: 10.3390/jcm12072660.

Desmoplakin Cardiomyopathy: Comprehensive Review of an Increasingly Recognized
Entity.

Brandão M(1), Bariani R(2), Rigato I(3), Bauce B(2).

Author information:
(1)Cardiology Department, Centro Hospitalar Vila Nova de Gaia/Espinho, 4430-000
Vila Nova de Gaia, Portugal.
(2)Department of Cardiac, Thoracic, Vascular Sciences and Public Health,
University of Padova, 35122 Padova, Italy.
(3)Azienda Ospedaliera/Universita' di Padova, Via Giustiniani, 2-Padova, 35128
Padova, Italy.

Desmoplakin (DSP) is a desmosomal protein that plays an essential role for
cell-to-cell adhesion within the cardiomyocytes. The first association between
DSP genetic variants and the presence of a myocardial disease referred to
patients with Carvajal syndrome. Since then, several reports have linked the DSP
gene to familial forms of arrhythmogenic (ACM) and dilated cardiomyopathies.
Left-dominant ACM is the most common phenotype in individuals carrying DSP
variants. More recently, a new entity-"Desmoplakin cardiomyopathy"-was described
as a distinct form of cardiomyopathy characterized by frequent left ventricular
involvement with extensive fibrosis, high arrhythmic risk, and episodes of acute
myocardial injury. The purpose of this review was to summarize the available
evidence on DSP cardiomyopathy and to identify existing gaps in knowledge that
need clarification from upcoming research.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12072660
PMCID: PMC10095332
PMID: 37048743

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
