---
reference_id: "PMID:40275685"
title: Malignant germ cells tumor of the ovary.
authors:
- De Maria F
- Amant F
- Chiappa V
- Paolini B
- Bergamini A
- Fruscio R
- Corso G
- Raspagliesi F
- Bogani G
journal: J Gynecol Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3802/jgo.2025.36.e108
keywords:
- Humans
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/therapy, diagnosis, pathology"
- Female
- "Neoplasms, Germ Cell and Embryonal/therapy, diagnosis, pathology"
- Fertility Preservation/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malignant germ cells tumor of the ovary.
**Authors:** De Maria F, Amant F, Chiappa V, Paolini B, Bergamini A, Fruscio R, Corso G, Raspagliesi F, Bogani G
**Journal:** J Gynecol Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3802/jgo.2025.36.e108](https://doi.org/10.3802/jgo.2025.36.e108)

## Content

1. J Gynecol Oncol. 2025 May;36(3):e108. doi: 10.3802/jgo.2025.36.e108. Epub 2025
 Apr 8.

Malignant germ cells tumor of the ovary.

De Maria F(1), Amant F(2)(3), Chiappa V(4), Paolini B(4), Bergamini A(5)(6), 
Fruscio R(7)(8), Corso G(9)(10), Raspagliesi F(4), Bogani G(4).

Author information:
(1)Gynecological Oncology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori 
di Milano, Milano, Italy. francesca.demaria@istitutotumori.mi.it.
(2)Center for Gynecological Oncology Amsterdam (CGOA), Antoni van Leeuwenhoek - 
Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Unit of Gynecologic Oncology, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Gynecological Oncology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori 
di Milano, Milano, Italy.
(5)Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milano, 
Italy.
(6)Unit of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 
Milano, Italy.
(7)UO Gynecology, Fondazione IRCCS San Gerardo dei Tintori, Monza, Italy.
(8)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milan-Bicocca, Milan, 
Italy.
(9)Division of Breast Surgery, European Institute of Oncology (IEO), IRCCS, 
Milan, Italy.
(10)Department of Oncology and Hemato-Oncology, University of Milano, Milan, 
Italy.

Malignant ovarian germ cell tumors are rare and diverse malignancies, accounting 
for approximately 5% of all ovarian cancers. Primarily affecting young women, 
these tumors present unique challenges, particularly in balancing effective 
treatment with fertility preservation. Early diagnosis is common due to the 
rapid tumor growth and symptoms such as abdominal pain and distension, leading 
to favorable prognoses when combined with the high chemosensitivity of 
platinum-based regimens. Fertility-sparing surgery is the cornerstone of 
treatment for stage I disease, often followed by close surveillance to minimize 
the long-term toxicities of chemotherapy. Pathology is pivotal for diagnosis, 
incorporating immunohistochemical markers to differentiate malignant ovarian 
germ cell tumors subtypes, including dysgerminomas, yolk sac tumors, and 
immature teratomas. Advanced imaging modalities like ultrasound, magnetic 
resonance imaging, and computed tomography are essential for staging, monitoring 
treatment response, and detecting recurrences. Despite high cure rates, 
long-term follow-up is crucial to manage late toxicities, such as gonadal 
dysfunction and secondary malignancies. Recurrent malignant ovarian germ cell 
tumors present significant therapeutic challenges. High-dose chemotherapy with 
stem-cell transplantation offers promise in select cases, while the role of 
secondary cytoreductive surgery and radiotherapy is limited to specific 
indications. Emerging targeted therapies and novel approaches, such as KIT 
inhibitors for dysgerminomas with KIT mutations, remain experimental, with 
limited success reported so far. The rarity and heterogeneity of malignant 
ovarian germ cell tumors impede large-scale research efforts, underscoring the 
need for greater understanding of their molecular and genetic landscape to 
develop more effective and personalized therapies.

© 2025. Asian Society of Gynecologic Oncology, Korean Society of Gynecologic 
Oncology, and Japan Society of Gynecologic Oncology.

DOI: 10.3802/jgo.2025.36.e108
PMCID: PMC12099048
PMID: 40275685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to 
this article was reported.