---
reference_id: "PMID:27899358"
title: Cytohesin 1 regulates homing and engraftment of human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.
authors:
- Rak J
- Foster K
- Potrzebowska K
- Talkhoncheh MS
- Miharada N
- Komorowska K
- Torngren T
- Kvist A
- Borg Å
- Svensson L
- Bonnet D
- Larsson J
journal: Blood
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2016-06-720649
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antigens, CD/metabolism"
- "Antigens, CD34/metabolism"
- Cell Adhesion
- Cell Adhesion Molecules/metabolism
- Cell Movement
- Fibronectins/metabolism
- "Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- "Hematopoietic Stem Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- Humans
- Integrins/metabolism
- Intercellular Adhesion Molecule-1/metabolism
- "Mesenchymal Stem Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- "Mice, Inbred Strains"
- RNA Interference
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytohesin 1 regulates homing and engraftment of human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.
**Authors:** Rak J, Foster K, Potrzebowska K, Talkhoncheh MS, Miharada N, Komorowska K, Torngren T, Kvist A, Borg Å, Svensson L, Bonnet D, Larsson J
**Journal:** Blood (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2016-06-720649](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2016-06-720649)

## Content

1. Blood. 2017 Feb 23;129(8):950-958. doi: 10.1182/blood-2016-06-720649. Epub
2016  Nov 29.

Cytohesin 1 regulates homing and engraftment of human hematopoietic stem and 
progenitor cells.

Rak J(1), Foster K(2), Potrzebowska K(3), Talkhoncheh MS(1), Miharada N(1), 
Komorowska K(1), Torngren T(4), Kvist A(4), Borg Å(4), Svensson L(3), Bonnet 
D(2), Larsson J(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Haematopoietic Stem Cell Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, 
United Kingdom; and.
(3)Division of Immunology and.
(4)Division of Oncology and Pathology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Comment in
    Blood. 2017 Feb 23;129(8):921-922. doi: 10.1182/blood-2016-12-755520.

Adhesion is a key component of hematopoietic stem cell regulation mediating 
homing and retention to the niche in the bone marrow. Here, using an RNA 
interference screen, we identify cytohesin 1 (CYTH1) as a critical mediator of 
adhesive properties in primary human cord blood-derived hematopoietic stem and 
progenitor cells (HSPCs). Knockdown of CYTH1 disrupted adhesion of HSPCs to 
primary human mesenchymal stroma cells. Attachment to fibronectin and ICAM1, 2 
integrin ligands, was severely impaired, and CYTH1-deficient cells showed a 
reduced integrin β1 activation response, suggesting that CYTH1 mediates 
integrin-dependent functions. Transplantation of CYTH1-knockdown cells to 
immunodeficient mice resulted in significantly lower long-term engraftment 
levels, associated with a reduced capacity of the transplanted cells to home to 
the bone marrow. Intravital microscopy showed that CYTH1 deficiency profoundly 
affects HSPC mobility and localization within the marrow space and thereby 
impairs proper lodgment into the niche. Thus, CYTH1 is a novel major regulator 
of adhesion and engraftment in human HSPCs through mechanisms that, at least in 
part, involve the activation of integrins.

© 2017 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2016-06-720649
PMCID: PMC5335807
PMID: 27899358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]