---
reference_id: "PMID:19057668"
title: Loss of Kindlin-1 causes skin atrophy and lethal neonatal intestinal epithelial dysfunction.
authors:
- Ussar S
- Moser M
- Widmaier M
- Rognoni E
- Harrer C
- Genzel-Boroviczeny O
- Fässler R
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000289
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- "Atrophy/metabolism, mortality, physiopathology"
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Adhesion
- Cell Line
- "Colitis, Ulcerative/metabolism, mortality, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Epithelium/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- Humans
- Intestinal Mucosa/metabolism
- "Intestines/pathology, physiopathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Skin/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic/metabolism, mortality, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of Kindlin-1 causes skin atrophy and lethal neonatal intestinal epithelial dysfunction.
**Authors:** Ussar S, Moser M, Widmaier M, Rognoni E, Harrer C, Genzel-Boroviczeny O, Fässler R
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1000289](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000289)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2008 Dec;4(12):e1000289. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000289. Epub 
2008 Dec 5.

Loss of Kindlin-1 causes skin atrophy and lethal neonatal intestinal epithelial 
dysfunction.

Ussar S(1), Moser M, Widmaier M, Rognoni E, Harrer C, Genzel-Boroviczeny O, 
Fässler R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 
Martinsried, Germany.

Kindler Syndrome (KS), characterized by transient skin blistering followed by 
abnormal pigmentation, skin atrophy, and skin cancer, is caused by mutations in 
the FERMT1 gene. Although a few KS patients have been reported to also develop 
ulcerative colitis (UC), a causal link to the FERMT1 gene mutation is unknown. 
The FERMT1 gene product belongs to a family of focal adhesion proteins 
(Kindlin-1, -2, -3) that bind several beta integrin cytoplasmic domains. Here, 
we show that deleting Kindlin-1 in mice gives rise to skin atrophy and an 
intestinal epithelial dysfunction with similarities to human UC. This intestinal 
dysfunction results in perinatal lethality and is triggered by defective 
intestinal epithelial cell integrin activation, leading to detachment of this 
barrier followed by a destructive inflammatory response.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000289
PMCID: PMC2585060
PMID: 19057668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.