---
reference_id: "PMID:29034068"
title: Clinical phenotype of ASD-associated DYRK1A haploinsufficiency.
authors:
- Earl RK
- Turner TN
- Mefford HC
- Hudac CM
- Gerdts J
- Eichler EE
- Bernier RA
journal: Mol Autism
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13229-017-0173-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Autism Spectrum Disorder/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Haploinsufficiency/genetics
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/complications, pathology"
- "Language Development Disorders/complications, pathology"
- Male
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Dyrk Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical phenotype of ASD-associated DYRK1A haploinsufficiency.
**Authors:** Earl RK, Turner TN, Mefford HC, Hudac CM, Gerdts J, Eichler EE, Bernier RA
**Journal:** Mol Autism (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13229-017-0173-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13229-017-0173-5)

## Content

1. Mol Autism. 2017 Oct 5;8:54. doi: 10.1186/s13229-017-0173-5. eCollection 2017.

Clinical phenotype of ASD-associated DYRK1A haploinsufficiency.

Earl RK(1), Turner TN(2), Mefford HC(3), Hudac CM(1), Gerdts J(1), Eichler 
EE(2)(4), Bernier RA(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, 
CHDD Box 357920, Seattle, WA 98195 USA.
(2)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA USA.
(3)School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA USA.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Seattle, WA USA.
(5)Center on Human Development and Disability, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA USA.

BACKGROUND: DYRK1A is a gene recurrently disrupted in 0.1-0.5% of the ASD 
population. A growing number of case reports with DYRK1A haploinsufficiency 
exhibit common phenotypic features including microcephaly, intellectual 
disability, speech delay, and facial dysmorphisms.
METHODS: Phenotypic information from previously published DYRK1A cases (n = 51) 
and participants in an ongoing study at the University of Washington (UW, 
n = 10) were compiled. Frequencies of recurrent phenotypic features in this 
population were compared to features observed in a large sample with idiopathic 
ASD from the Simons Simplex Collection (n = 1981). UW DYRK1A cases were further 
characterized quantitatively and compared to a randomly subsampled set of 
idiopathic ASD cases matched on age and gender (n = 10) and to cases with an 
ASD-associated disruptive mutation to CHD8 (n = 12). Contribution of familial 
genetic background to clinical heterogeneity was assessed by comparing head 
circumference, IQ, and ASD-related symptoms of UW DYRK1A cases to their 
unaffected parents.
RESULTS: DYRK1A haploinsufficiency results in a common phenotypic profile 
including intellectual disability, speech and motor difficulties, microcephaly, 
feeding difficulties, and vision abnormalities. Eighty-nine percent of DYRK1A 
cases ascertained for ASD presented with a constellation of five or more of 
these symptoms. When compared quantitatively, DYRK1A cases presented with 
significantly lower IQ and adaptive functioning compared to idiopathic cases and 
significantly smaller head size compared to both idiopathic and CHD8 cases. 
Phenotypic variability in parental head circumference, IQ, and ASD-related 
symptoms corresponded to observed variability in affected child phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Results confirm a core clinical phenotype for DYRK1A disruptions, 
with a combination of features that is distinct from idiopathic ASD. Cases with 
DYRK1A mutations are also distinguishable from disruptive mutations to CHD8 by 
head size. Measurable, quantitative characterization of DYRK1A 
haploinsufficiency illuminates clinical variability, which may be, in part, due 
to familial genetic background.

DOI: 10.1186/s13229-017-0173-5
PMCID: PMC5629761
PMID: 29034068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Written consent was obtained from participants, and all procedures were approved 
by the University of Washington Institutional Review Board. CONSENT FOR 
PUBLICATION: Written informed consent was obtained from the participants for 
publication of their individual details and accompanying images in this 
manuscript. The consent form is held by the authors and is available for review 
by the Editor-in-Chief. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have 
no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.