---
reference_id: "PMID:38854223"
title: "MED13 Gene Mutation Related to Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Case Report."
authors:
- Rivera MD
- Aponte SN
- Rivera F
- Arciniegas NJ
- Carlo S
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.59904
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MED13 Gene Mutation Related to Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Rivera MD, Aponte SN, Rivera F, Arciniegas NJ, Carlo S
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.59904](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.59904)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 May 8;16(5):e59904. doi: 10.7759/cureus.59904. eCollection 2024 
May.

MED13 Gene Mutation Related to Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Case Report.

Rivera MD(1)(2), Aponte SN(1)(2), Rivera F(3), Arciniegas NJ(1)(4), Carlo 
S(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry, Ponce Health Sciences University (PHSU) School of Medicine, 
Ponce, PRI.
(2)Research, Ponce Research Institute, Ponce, PRI.
(3)Biochemistry, University of Medicine and Health Sciences (UMHS) School of 
Medicine, Bassettiere, KNA.
(4)Pediatrics, Mayagüez Medical Center, Mayagüez, PRI.

This case report highlights an association between the MED13 gene and autism 
spectrum disorder (ASD). ASD is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by 
impaired social interactions, communication difficulties, and repetitive 
behaviors. The MED13 gene encodes a subunit of the Mediator complex, which plays 
a key role in gene expression regulation and transcriptional processes. In this 
case report, we present a case of a child diagnosed with ASD who underwent whole 
exome sequencing (WES) and revealed an uncertain heterozygous variant in the 
MED13 gene. The patient exhibited typical features of ASD, including the 
following: social and communication deficits, restricted interests, repetitive 
behaviors, and characteristic dysmorphic facial features. The identification of 
this MED13 gene variant provides further evidence of its potential involvement 
in ASD pathogenesis. This case adds to the growing body of evidence linking 
MED13 gene mutations to ASD susceptibility. Understanding the genetic basis of 
ASD through case reports can aid in early diagnosis, personalized treatment 
strategies, and genetic counseling for affected individuals and their families. 
Further research is warranted to explain the precise mechanisms underlying MED13 
gene involvement in ASD.

Copyright © 2024, Rivera et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.59904
PMCID: PMC11157474
PMID: 38854223

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.