---
reference_id: "PMID:25205112"
title: "Mutation of SLC9A1, encoding the major Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger, causes ataxia-deafness Lichtenstein-Knorr syndrome."
authors:
- Guissart C
- Li X
- Leheup B
- Drouot N
- Montaut-Verient B
- Raffo E
- Jonveaux P
- Roux AF
- Claustres M
- Fliegel L
- Koenig M
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu461
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cation Transport Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/genetics, metabolism"
- "Deafness/genetics, metabolism"
- Facies
- Female
- "Fibrous Dysplasia of Bone/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Neutropenia/genetics, metabolism"
- Sodium-Hydrogen Exchanger 1
- "Sodium-Hydrogen Exchangers/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation of SLC9A1, encoding the major Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger, causes ataxia-deafness Lichtenstein-Knorr syndrome.
**Authors:** Guissart C, Li X, Leheup B, Drouot N, Montaut-Verient B, Raffo E, Jonveaux P, Roux AF, Claustres M, Fliegel L, Koenig M
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddu461](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddu461)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Jan 15;24(2):463-70. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu461. Epub 2014
Sep  8.

Mutation of SLC9A1, encoding the major Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger, causes ataxia-deafness 
Lichtenstein-Knorr syndrome.

Guissart C(1), Li X(2), Leheup B(3), Drouot N(4), Montaut-Verient B(5), Raffo 
E(6), Jonveaux P(7), Roux AF(8), Claustres M(1), Fliegel L(2), Koenig M(9).

Author information:
(1)INSERM U827, Montpellier F-34000, France Université Montpellier I, 
Montpellier F-34000, France Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) Montpellier, Montpellier F-34000, France.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(3)Service de Médecine Infantile et Génétique Clinique, Centre de Référence 
Syndrome Malformatif et Anomalies du Développement, CHU de Nancy Pôle Enfants, 
54511 Vandoeuvre cedex, France INSERM U954, Faculté de Médecine, Université de 
Lorraine, 54505 Vandoeuvre cedex, France.
(4)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), 
INSERM U964/CNRS UMR7104/Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.
(5)Service d'Oto-Rhino-Laryngologie et de Chirurgie Cervico-Faciale, CHU de 
Nancy, Vandoeuvre, France.
(6)INSERM U954, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Lorraine, 54505 Vandoeuvre 
cedex, France Service de Neuropédiatrie, CHU de Nancy Pôle Enfants, 54511 
Vandoeuvre cedex, France and.
(7)INSERM U954, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Lorraine, 54505 Vandoeuvre 
cedex, France Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, CHU Nancy, INSERM U954, 
Université de Lorraine, Vandoeuvre, France.
(8)INSERM U827, Montpellier F-34000, France Laboratoire de Génétique 
Moléculaire, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) Montpellier, Montpellier 
F-34000, France.
(9)INSERM U827, Montpellier F-34000, France Université Montpellier I, 
Montpellier F-34000, France Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) Montpellier, Montpellier F-34000, France 
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), INSERM 
U964/CNRS UMR7104/Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France 
michel.koenig@inserm.fr.

Lichtenstein-Knorr syndrome is an autosomal recessive condition that associates 
sensorineural hearing loss and cerebellar ataxia. Here, we report the first 
identification of a gene involved in Lichtenstein-Knorr syndrome. By using a 
combination of homozygosity mapping and whole-exome sequencing, we identified 
the homozygous p.Gly305Arg missense mutation in SLC9A1 that segregates with the 
disease in a large consanguineous family. Mutant glycine 305 is a highly 
conserved amino acid present in the eighth transmembrane segment of all metazoan 
orthologues of NHE1, the Na(+)/H(+) exchanger 1, encoded by SLC9A1. We 
demonstrate that the p.Gly305Arg mutation causes the near complete 
de-glycosylation, mis-targeting and loss of proton pumping activity of NHE1. The 
comparison of our family with the phenotypes of spontaneous and knockout Slc9a1 
murine models demonstrates that the association between ataxia and hearing loss 
is caused by complete or near complete loss of function of NHE1 and altered 
regulation of pHi in the central nervous system.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddu461
PMID: 25205112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]