---
reference_id: "PMID:31548614"
title: Genome-wide screening identifies novel genes implicated in cellular sensitivity to BRAF(V600E) expression.
authors:
- Ko T
- Sharma R
- Li S
journal: Oncogene
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41388-019-1022-0
keywords:
- "3-Methyl-2-Oxobutanoate Dehydrogenase (Lipoamide)/genetics, metabolism"
- Apoptosis
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
- Cellular Senescence
- "Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p21/genetics, metabolism"
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- "Genome, Human"
- Humans
- MAP Kinase Signaling System
- Melanocytes/metabolism
- "Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase 1/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide screening identifies novel genes implicated in cellular sensitivity to BRAF(V600E) expression.
**Authors:** Ko T, Sharma R, Li S
**Journal:** Oncogene (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41388-019-1022-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41388-019-1022-0)

## Content

1. Oncogene. 2020 Jan;39(4):723-738. doi: 10.1038/s41388-019-1022-0. Epub 2019
Sep  23.

Genome-wide screening identifies novel genes implicated in cellular sensitivity
to BRAF(V600E) expression.

Ko T(1), Sharma R(2)(3), Li S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, 70803, USA.
(2)National Hansen's Disease Program, Laboratory Research Branch at Louisiana
State University, 3519E School of Veterinary Medicine, Baton Rouge, LA, 70803,
USA.
(3)NuProbe Inc, Cambridge, MA, 02140, USA.
(4)Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, 70803, USA. shli@lsu.edu.

The V600E mutation of BRAF (BRAFV600E), which constitutively activates the
ERK/MAPK signaling pathway, is frequently found in melanoma and other cancers.
Like most other oncogenes, BRAFV600E causes oncogenic stress to normal cells,
leading to growth arrest (senescence) or apoptosis. Through genome-wide
screening, we identified genes implicated in sensitivity of human skin
melanocytes and fibroblasts to BRAFV600E overexpression. Among the identified
genes shared by the two cell types are proto-oncogenes ERK2, a component of the
ERK/MAPK pathway, and VAV1, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Rho family
GTPases that also activates the ERK/MAPK pathway. CDKN1A, which has been known
to promote senescence of fibroblasts but not melanocytes, is implicated in
sensitivity of the fibroblasts but not the melanocytes to BRAFV600E
overexpression. Disruptions of GPR4, a pH-sensing G-protein coupled receptor,
and DBT, a subunit of the branched chain α-keto acid dehydrogenase that is
required for the second and rate-limiting step of branched amino acid catabolism
and implicated in maple syrup urine disease, are the most highly selected in the
melanocytes upon BRAFV600E overexpression. Disruption of DBT severely attenuates
ERK/MAPK signaling, p53 activation, and apoptosis in melanocytes, at least in
part due to accumulation of branched chain α-keto acids. The expression level of
BRAF positively correlates with that of DBT in all cancer types and with that of
GPR4 in most cancer types. Overexpression of DBT kills all four melanoma cell
lines tested regardless of the presence of BRAFV600E mutation. Our findings shed
new lights on regulations of oncogenic stress signaling and may be informative
for development of novel cancer treatment strategies.

DOI: 10.1038/s41388-019-1022-0
PMID: 31548614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
