---
reference_id: "PMID:31117962"
title: Clinical diagnosis and mutation analysis of four Chinese families with succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency.
authors:
- Wang P
- Cai F
- Cao L
- Wang Y
- Zou Q
- Zhao P
- Wang C
- Zhang Y
- Cai C
- Shu J
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12881-019-0821-z
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnostic imaging, ethnology, genetics"
- Asian People/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- China
- DNA Mutational Analysis/methods
- "Developmental Disabilities/diagnostic imaging, ethnology, genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Mutation
- "Succinate-Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical diagnosis and mutation analysis of four Chinese families with succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency.
**Authors:** Wang P, Cai F, Cao L, Wang Y, Zou Q, Zhao P, Wang C, Zhang Y, Cai C, Shu J
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12881-019-0821-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12881-019-0821-z)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2019 May 22;20(1):88. doi: 10.1186/s12881-019-0821-z.

Clinical diagnosis and mutation analysis of four Chinese families with succinic
semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency.

Wang P(1), Cai F(2), Cao L(3), Wang Y(3), Zou Q(3), Zhao P(4), Wang C(1), Zhang
Y(5), Cai C(6), Shu J(7).

Author information:
(1)Tianjin Pediatric Research Institute, Tianjin Children's Hospital, No.238,
Longyan Road, Beichen District, Tianjin, 300134, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Physiology, Tianjin Medical College, Tianjin, 300222, China.
(3)Graduate College of Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300070, China.
(4)Department of Rehabilitation, Tianjin Children's Hospital, Tianjin, 300134,
China.
(5)Department of Neurology, Tianjin Children's Hospital, Tianjin, 300134, China.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Children's Hospital, No.238, Longyan
Road, Beichen District, Tianjin, 300134, People's Republic of China.
tjpns@126.com.
(7)Tianjin Pediatric Research Institute, Tianjin Children's Hospital, No.238,
Longyan Road, Beichen District, Tianjin, 300134, People's Republic of China.
shjb1981@sina.com.

BACKGROUND: Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH) deficiency is a rare
autosomal recessively-inherited defect of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) metabolism.
The absence of SSADH, which is encoded by aldehyde dehydrogenase family 5 member
A1 (ALDH5A1) gene, leads to the accumulation of GABA and γ-hydroxybutyric acid
(GHB). Few cases with SSADH deficiency were reported in China.
CASE PRESENTATION: In this study, four Chinese patients were diagnosed with
SSADH deficiency in Tianjin Children's Hospital. We conducted a multidimensional
analysis with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head, semi quantitative
detection of urine organic acid using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, and
analysis of ALDH5A1 gene mutations. Two of the patients were admitted to the
hospital due to convulsions, and all patients were associated with developmental
delay. Cerebral MRI showed symmetrical hyperintense signal of bilateral globus
pallidus and basal ganglia in patient 1; hyperintensity of bilateral
frontal-parietal lobe, widened ventricle and sulci in patient 2; and widened
ventricle and sulci in patient 4. Electroencephalogram (EEG) revealed the
background activity of epilepsy in patient 1 and the disappearance of sleep
spindle in patient 2. Urine organic acid analysis revealed elevated GHB in all
the patients. Mutational analysis, which was performed by sequencing the 10
exons and flanking the intronic regions of ALDH5A1 gene for all the patients,
revealed mutations at five sites. Two cases had homozygous mutations with
c.1529C > T and c.800 T > G respectively, whereas the remaining two had
different compound heterozygous mutations including c.527G > A/c.691G > A and
c.1344-2delA/c.1529C > T. Although these four mutations have been described
previously, the homozygous mutation of c.800 T > G in ALDH5A1 gene is a novel
discovery.
CONCLUSION: SSADH deficiency is diagnosed based on the elevated GHB and 4, 5DHHA
by urinary organic acid analysis. We describe a novel mutation p.V267G
(c.800 T > G) located in the NAD binding domain, which is possibly crucial for
this disease's severity. Our study expands the mutation spectrum of ALDH5A1 and
highlights the importance of molecular genetic evaluation in patients with SSADH
deficiency.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-019-0821-z
PMCID: PMC6532217
PMID: 31117962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
