---
reference_id: "PMID:23014067"
title: New and old knowledge on differentiated thyroid cancer epidemiology and risk factors.
authors:
- Agate L
- Lorusso L
- Elisei R
journal: J Endocrinol Invest
year: '2012'
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Papillary, Follicular/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- Cell Differentiation
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Risk Factors
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New and old knowledge on differentiated thyroid cancer epidemiology and risk factors.
**Authors:** Agate L, Lorusso L, Elisei R
**Journal:** J Endocrinol Invest (2012)

## Content

1. J Endocrinol Invest. 2012;35(6 Suppl):3-9.

New and old knowledge on differentiated thyroid cancer epidemiology and risk
factors.

Agate L(1), Lorusso L, Elisei R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, University of Pisa, Via Paradisa 2, Pisa, Italy.

Differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) represents 1-2% of all human malignancies.
The annual incidence varies among countries and it is estimated that 1.2-2.6 men
and 2.0-3.8 women/100,000 individuals are affected worldwide. This incidence has
been increasing in the last decades, likely due to an "over-diagnosis" of small
cancers that would have remained occult and that have been likely revealed
because of an increased diagnostic scrutiny rather than a real increase of
incidence. The annual mortality rate for DTC is 0.5/100,000 both in men and
women. DTC is 2-4 times more frequent in females than in males. The mean age at
diagnosis is 40-45 yr for papillary tumors (PTC) and 50-55 yr for follicular
tumors (FTC). They are very rare in children. Ninety percent of DTC are
represented by PTC hystotype, mainly follicular and classical variants. In the
last years it has been observed an important change in the oncogenic pattern of
PTC with a significant reduction of RET/PTC rearrangements and an increase of
BRAFV600E mutation suggesting a change in pathogenic events. The unique
well-demonstrated risk factor of DTC is the exposure to external radiation which
is also correlated with the presence of RET/PTC rearrangements. Recently, other
environmental factors (i.e. living in a volcanic area or in a iodine- either
deficient or rich area) or some eating habits leading to obesity have been
considered as potential DTC risk factors. However, at present, the favorite
hypothesis is that a complex interaction between genetic and environmental
factors is required to develop DTC.

PMID: 23014067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
