---
reference_id: "PMID:37234726"
title: "Lyme disease presenting as complete heart block in a young man: Case report and review of pathogenesis."
authors:
- Carnazzo MC
- Scholin C
- Shweta F
- Calvin AD
journal: IDCases
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.idcr.2023.e01799
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lyme disease presenting as complete heart block in a young man: Case report and review of pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Carnazzo MC, Scholin C, Shweta F, Calvin AD
**Journal:** IDCases (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.idcr.2023.e01799](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idcr.2023.e01799)

## Content

1. IDCases. 2023 May 12;32:e01799. doi: 10.1016/j.idcr.2023.e01799. eCollection 
2023.

Lyme disease presenting as complete heart block in a young man: Case report and 
review of pathogenesis.

Carnazzo MC(1), Scholin C(2), Shweta F(3), Calvin AD(4).

Author information:
(1)Post-graduate School of Emergency Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, 
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, MO 41125, Italy.
(2)Medical College of Wisconsin - Central Wisconsin, Wausau, WI 54401, United 
States.
(3)Department of Infectious Disease, Mayo Clinic Health System, Eau Claire, WI 
54703, United States.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Mayo Clinic Health System, Eau Claire, 
WI 54703, United States.

Lyme carditis is a serious complication of Lyme disease, the most common 
vector-borne infection in both the United States and Northern Europe. It is a 
rare manifestation of Lyme disease that primarily affects young adults with a 
marked 3:1 male-to-female predominance. The presentation of Lyme carditis is 
heterogenous and often non-specific, although the most common clinical 
manifestation is AV block, which can be acute in onset and can rapidly progress 
to complete heart block. We discuss the case of a young adult male with complete 
heart block as a complication of Lyme infection, presenting with two episodes of 
syncope without prodromal symptoms months after tick bites. There are several 
pathogen, host and environmental factors that can play an important role in the 
epidemiology and pathogenesis of this serious condition that is reversible if 
treated in a timely manner. It is important for clinicians to be familiar with 
the presentation and treatment of this infection that is now being observed in a 
wider geographic distribution so as to avoid serious long-term complications and 
unnecessary permanent pacemaking implantation.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.idcr.2023.e01799
PMCID: PMC10205533
PMID: 37234726

Conflict of interest statement: None.