---
reference_id: "PMID:19033866"
title: Loss of INI1 expression is characteristic of both conventional and proximal-type epithelioid sarcoma.
authors:
- Hornick JL
- Dal Cin P
- Fletcher CD
journal: Am J Surg Pathol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181882c54
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/metabolism, secondary"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/metabolism"
- "Carcinoma, Embryonal/metabolism, secondary"
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/metabolism"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry/methods
- Infant
- Male
- SMARCB1 Protein
- "Sarcoma/metabolism, pathology"
- "Soft Tissue Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology"
- Transcription Factors/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of INI1 expression is characteristic of both conventional and proximal-type epithelioid sarcoma.
**Authors:** Hornick JL, Dal Cin P, Fletcher CD
**Journal:** Am J Surg Pathol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181882c54](https://doi.org/10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181882c54)

## Content

1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2009 Apr;33(4):542-50. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181882c54.

Loss of INI1 expression is characteristic of both conventional and proximal-type 
epithelioid sarcoma.

Hornick JL(1), Dal Cin P, Fletcher CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

INI1 (hSNF5/SMARCB1), a member of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex 
located on chromosome 22q11.2, is deleted or/or mutated in strictly defined 
malignant rhabdoid tumors (MRT) of infancy. Recent studies suggest that some 
epithelioid sarcomas (ES) also show inactivation of INI1. However, very few 
cases of ES have been studied, and INI1 expression in other epithelioid 
malignant neoplasms has not been examined systematically. The purpose of this 
study was to evaluate the immunohistochemical expression of INI1 in ES compared 
with histologic mimics. We evaluated 350 tumors: 136 ES, including 64 
conventional ("distal") ES, 64 proximal-type ES, and 8 with hybrid features of 
conventional and proximal-type ES; 54 metastatic carcinomas (22 from lung, 6 
breast, 6 stomach, 5 colorectum, 5 kidney, 5 prostate, 5 pancreas); 12 
metastatic testicular embryonal carcinomas; 20 metastatic melanomas; 20 
epithelioid mesotheliomas; 20 epithelioid angiosarcomas; 10 epithelioid 
hemangioendotheliomas; 24 epithelioid malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors 
(MPNST); 22 myoepithelial carcinomas of soft tissue; 7 anaplastic large cell 
lymphomas; 5 histiocytic sarcomas; and 10 control MRT of infancy (4 brain, 3 
liver, 2 soft tissue, 1 kidney). Immunohistochemistry was performed following 
pressure cooker heat-induced epitope retrieval using monoclonal antibody BAF47 
(BD Biosciences). In total, 127 of 136 (93%) ES cases showed complete absence of 
INI1 expression, including 58 (91%) conventional ES, 61 (95%) proximal-type ES, 
and all 8 (100%) hybrid ES. Of the non-ES cases, 12 (50%) epithelioid MPNST also 
showed loss of INI1, as did 2 (9%) myoepithelial carcinomas and all control MRT 
cases. INI1 expression was intact in all other tumor types examined. In 
conclusion, similar to MRT of infancy, loss of INI1 expression is characteristic 
of both conventional and proximal-type ES, being detected in >90% of cases. 
Moreover, 50% epithelioid MPNST and occasional myoepithelial carcinomas are also 
negative for INI1. Immunostaining for INI1 can be used to confirm the diagnosis 
of ES in the appropriate context. Loss of INI1 expression may also be helpful to 
distinguish epithelioid MPNST from metastatic melanoma in a subset of cases.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181882c54
PMID: 19033866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]