---
reference_id: "PMID:30466902"
title: "Dengue Outbreak in Peshawar: Clinical Features and Laboratory Markers of Dengue Virus Infection."
authors:
- Haroon M
- Jan H
- Faisal S
- Ali N
- Kamran M
- Ullah F
journal: J Infect Public Health
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jiph.2018.10.138
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue Outbreak in Peshawar: Clinical Features and Laboratory Markers of Dengue Virus Infection.
**Authors:** Haroon M, Jan H, Faisal S, Ali N, Kamran M, Ullah F
**Journal:** J Infect Public Health (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jiph.2018.10.138](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiph.2018.10.138)

## Content

1. J Infect Public Health. 2019 Mar-Apr;12(2):258-262. doi: 
10.1016/j.jiph.2018.10.138. Epub 2018 Nov 19.

Dengue Outbreak in Peshawar: Clinical Features and Laboratory Markers of Dengue 
Virus Infection.

Haroon M(1), Jan H(2), Faisal S(3), Ali N(2), Kamran M(3), Ullah F(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan. 
Electronic address: haroon_ibgian@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Bacha Khan University, Charsadda, KP, Pakistan.
(4)Centre of Biotechnology and Microbiology, University of Peshawar, KP, 
Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Dengue is a tropical disease caused by dengue virus (DENV). It is 
one of the most significant arthropod-borne viral infection.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of the current study was to characterize epidemiological, 
clinical features and laboratory markers of dengue infection during the recent 
epidemic in Peshawar, KP.
METHODS: During the prospective hospital-based observational study, 2000 dengue 
suspected cases were serologically examined at Lady Reading Hospital (LRH) 
Peshawar. Dengue NS1 antigen and Dengue IgG and IgM antibody ELISA tests were 
conducted for the confirmation of dengue infection. Data regarding the clinical 
features, platelet count and liver function tests were also recorded for the 
dengue positive patients.
RESULTS: Out of total samples 415 (21%) cases including 309 (74%) male and 106 
(25%) female were detected positive for the dengue infection. In the dengue 
positive patients, the highest prevalence was observed in the age group of 
21-40years with 160 (38%) followed by the age group of 1-20years with 89 (21%) 
patients. Fever was recorded in 100% of the dengue patients followed by a 
headache and fatigue in 73% and liver abnormality observed in 70% of the cases. 
During laboratory examinations IgM antibody was detected in 180 cases, followed 
by IgG antibody in 87, NS1 antigen in 43, NS1 antigen along with IgG and IgM 
antibodies in 41 dengue positive cases. Another combine detection of NS1 antigen 
with IgM antibody, NS1 antigen with IgG antibody and both IgG and IgM antibodies 
was observed in 21, 21, 22 dengue cases respectively.
CONCLUSION: It was concluded that the dengue infection can be early diagnosed on 
the basis of described clinical features and with the detection of 
dengue-specific NS1 antigen along with antibodies such as IgG and IgM.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiph.2018.10.138
PMID: 30466902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]