---
reference_id: "PMID:34479523"
title: "Pulmonary fibrosis in dyskeratosis congenita: a case report with a PRISMA-compliant systematic review."
authors:
- Wang P
- Xu Z
journal: BMC Pulm Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s12890-021-01645-w
keywords:
- Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- "Dyskeratosis Congenita/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Fatal Outcome
- Humans
- "Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Telomere-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary fibrosis in dyskeratosis congenita: a case report with a PRISMA-compliant systematic review.
**Authors:** Wang P, Xu Z
**Journal:** BMC Pulm Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12890-021-01645-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12890-021-01645-w)

## Content

1. BMC Pulm Med. 2021 Sep 3;21(1):279. doi: 10.1186/s12890-021-01645-w.

Pulmonary fibrosis in dyskeratosis congenita: a case report with a 
PRISMA-compliant systematic review.

Wang P(1), Xu Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Peking Union Medical 
College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical 
College, Beijing, China. iarentree@sina.com.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Peking Union Medical 
College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical 
College, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Dyskeratosis congenita (DC) is a rare genetic disorder of poor 
telomere maintenance. Pulmonary fibrosis (PF) related to DC is rarely reported.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 23-year-old student presented with a four-year history of 
progressive cough and exertional dyspnea. Physical examination was remarkable 
for typical mucocutaneous abnormalities. Chest computerized tomography scan 
revealed interstitial fibrosis. Testing of peripheral blood leukocytes confirmed 
that his telomeres were 30th percentile of age-matched controls. A heterozygous 
missense mutation located in exon 22 of PARN gene was identified in the patient 
by whole exome sequencing. The patient refused danazol therapy and lung 
transplantation, and died of respiratory failure 2 years later. In addition, 
this case and 26 reported cases of DC-related PF identified through the 
comprehensive search of PubMed, Web of Science, WANFANG and CNKI were reviewed. 
Later-onset PF was observed in 11 patients (40.7%). Radiological usual 
interstitial pneumonia (UIP) pattern or possible UIP pattern was noted only in 
half of patients. However, histopathological UIP or probable UIP patterns were 
found in 63.6% of patients. Age at bone marrow failure (BMF) and the frequency 
of normal to mild thrombocytopenia in later-onset patients was significantly 
higher than in early-onset patients (p = 0.017 and p = 0.021, respectively). Age 
at PF and age at BMF in DC patients with TERC/TERT variants was significantly 
higher than in those with TINF2 variants or DKC1/NHP2 variants (p = 0.004 and 
p = 0.003, respectively). The patients with TERT/TERC/RTEL1/PARN variants had a 
significantly better transplant-free survival than those with TINF2 variants or 
DKC1/NHP2 variants (p < 0.05). Patients who underwent surgical lung biopsy had 
significantly worse transplant-free survival than those without lung biopsy 
(p = 0.042). Worse survival was found in patients with immunosuppression therapy 
than in those without (p = 0.012).
CONCLUSIONS: It is common for DC-associated PF to occur later in life without 
significant hematological manifestations. Mutations in the genes encoding 
different components of the telomere maintenance pathway were associated with 
clinical phenotypes and prognosis. PF caused by DC should be kept in mind by 
clinicians in the differential diagnosis of patients with unexplained PF and 
should be excluded before diagnostic surgical lung biopsy is undertaken or 
empirical immunosuppression therapy is prescribed.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-021-01645-w
PMCID: PMC8418029
PMID: 34479523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.