---
reference_id: "PMID:30123799"
title: Long QT Syndrome and Sinus Bradycardia-A Mini Review.
authors:
- Wilders R
- Verkerk AO
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2018.00106
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long QT Syndrome and Sinus Bradycardia-A Mini Review.
**Authors:** Wilders R, Verkerk AO
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2018.00106](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2018.00106)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2018 Aug 3;5:106. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2018.00106.
eCollection 2018.

Long QT Syndrome and Sinus Bradycardia-A Mini Review.

Wilders R(1), Verkerk AO(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers,
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Experimental Cardiology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers,
Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Congenital long-QT syndrome (LQTS) is an inherited cardiac disorder
characterized by the prolongation of ventricular repolarization, susceptibility
to Torsades de Pointes (TdP), and a risk for sudden death. Various types of
congenital LQTS exist, all due to specific defects in ion channel-related genes.
Interestingly, almost all of the ion channels affected by the various types of
LQTS gene mutations are also expressed in the human sinoatrial node (SAN). It is
therefore not surprising that LQTS is frequently associated with a change in
basal heart rate (HR). However, current data on how the LQTS-associated ion
channel defects result in impaired human SAN pacemaker activity are limited. In
this mini-review, we provide an overview of known LQTS mutations with effects on
HR and the underlying changes in expression and kinetics of ion channels. Sinus
bradycardia has been reported in relation to a large number of LQTS mutations.
However, the occurrence of both QT prolongation and sinus bradycardia on a
family basis is almost completely limited to LQTS types 3 and 4 (LQT3 and
Ankyrin-B syndrome, respectively). Furthermore, a clear causative role of this
sinus bradycardia in cardiac events seems reserved to mutations underlying LQT3.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2018.00106
PMCID: PMC6085426
PMID: 30123799
