---
reference_id: "PMID:38889319"
title: Productivity costs due to human papillomavirus-related cancer mortality in the United Kingdom.
authors:
- Engelbrecht K
- Ovcinnikova O
- Ntais D
- Shoel H
- Meiwald A
- Hughes R
- Weston G
- Morais E
- Bencina G
journal: J Med Econ
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/13696998.2024.2368986
keywords:
- Humans
- United Kingdom/epidemiology
- Female
- Male
- "Papillomavirus Infections/complications, economics, mortality"
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasms/mortality, economics"
- Adult
- Aged
- Efficiency
- Cost of Illness
- "Models, Econometric"
- "Papillomavirus Vaccines/economics, administration & dosage"
- "Uterine Cervical Neoplasms/mortality, economics, virology"
- Human Papillomavirus Viruses
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Productivity costs due to human papillomavirus-related cancer mortality in the United Kingdom.
**Authors:** Engelbrecht K, Ovcinnikova O, Ntais D, Shoel H, Meiwald A, Hughes R, Weston G, Morais E, Bencina G
**Journal:** J Med Econ (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13696998.2024.2368986](https://doi.org/10.1080/13696998.2024.2368986)

## Content

1. J Med Econ. 2024 Apr;27(sup2):20-29. doi: 10.1080/13696998.2024.2368986. Epub 
2024 Jul 5.

Productivity costs due to human papillomavirus-related cancer mortality in the 
United Kingdom.

Engelbrecht K(1), Ovcinnikova O(1), Ntais D(1), Shoel H(2), Meiwald A(2), Hughes 
R(2), Weston G(2), Morais E(3), Bencina G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Economics, MSD (UK) Limited, London, UK.
(2)Department of Health Economics, Adelphi Values PROVE, Bollington, UK.
(3)MSD France, Puteaux, France.
(4)Center for Observational and Real-World Evidence, MSD Spain, Madrid.

BACKGROUND: Human papillomavirus (HPV) causes several cancers such as cervical 
cancer and some head and neck (oral cavity, pharynx, and larynx), vulval, 
vaginal, anal, and penile cancers. As HPV vaccination is available, there is 
potential to prevent these cancers attributed to HPV and consequently the burden 
associated with them. The aim of this analysis was to estimate the number of 
HPV-related cancer deaths and the productivity costs due to years of life lost 
(YLL) in the United Kingdom (UK).
METHOD: A model was developed utilizing UK 2019 mortality data sourced from 
country-specific databases for England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland 
for the following HPV-related cancers: head and neck (ICD-10 C00-14 and C32), 
cervix uteri (C53), vaginal (C51), vulval (C52), anal (C21), and penile (C60). 
The proportion of deaths and years of life lost (YLL) due to HPV were estimated 
using HPV attributable fractions for each anatomic location from the published 
literature. Labor force participation, retirement ages, and mean annual 
earnings, discounted at 3.5% annually, were applied to YLL to calculate the 
present value of future lost productivity (PVFLP).
RESULTS: A total of 1817 deaths due to HPV-related cancers were reported in the 
UK in 2019 resulting in 31,804 YLL. Restricting to only YLL that occurred prior 
to retirement age yielded a total YPLL of 11,765 and a total PVFLP of 
£187,764,978.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a high disease burden in the UK for HPV-related cancers, 
with a large economic impact on the wider economy due to productivity losses. 
Implementing and reinforcing public health measures to maintain high HPV 
vaccination coverage in both males and females may further facilitate reduction 
of this burden.

DOI: 10.1080/13696998.2024.2368986
PMID: 38889319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]