---
reference_id: "PMID:35216110"
title: Innate Immunity in Mucopolysaccharide Diseases.
authors:
- Mandolfo O
- Parker H
- Bigger B
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms23041999
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Innate Immunity in Mucopolysaccharide Diseases.
**Authors:** Mandolfo O, Parker H, Bigger B
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms23041999](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23041999)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Feb 11;23(4):1999. doi: 10.3390/ijms23041999.

Innate Immunity in Mucopolysaccharide Diseases.

Mandolfo O(1), Parker H(2), Bigger B(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Faculty of 
Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, 3721 Stopford Building, 
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.
(2)Division of Immunology, Immunity to Infection and Respiratory Medicine, The 
Lydia Becker Institute of Immunology and Inflammation, Manchester Collaborative 
Centre for Inflammation Research, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, 
University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester 
M13 9PT, UK.

Mucopolysaccharidoses are rare paediatric lysosomal storage disorders, 
characterised by accumulation of glycosaminoglycans within lysosomes. This is 
caused by deficiencies in lysosomal enzymes involved in degradation of these 
molecules. Dependent on disease, progressive build-up of sugars may lead to 
musculoskeletal abnormalities and multi-organ failure, and in others, to 
cognitive decline, which is still a challenge for current therapies. The 
worsening of neuropathology, observed in patients following recovery from 
flu-like infections, suggests that inflammation is highly implicated in disease 
progression. This review provides an overview of the pathological features 
associated with the mucopolysaccharidoses and summarises current knowledge 
regarding the inflammatory responses observed in the central nervous system and 
periphery. We propose a model whereby progressive accumulation of 
glycosaminoglycans elicits an innate immune response, initiated by the Toll-like 
receptor 4 pathway, but also precipitated by secondary storage components. Its 
activation induces cells of the immune system to release pro-inflammatory 
cytokines, such as TNF-α and IL-1, which induce progression through chronic 
neuroinflammation. While TNF-α is mostly associated with bone and joint disease 
in mucopolysaccharidoses, increasing evidence implicates IL-1 as a main effector 
of innate immunity in the central nervous system. The (NOD)-like receptor 
protein 3 inflammasome is therefore implicated in chronic neuroinflammation and 
should be investigated further to identify novel anti-inflammatory treatments.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23041999
PMCID: PMC8879755
PMID: 35216110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.