---
reference_id: "PMID:28567523"
title: Bystander mechanism for complement-initiated early oligodendrocyte injury in neuromyelitis optica.
authors:
- Tradtrantip L
- Yao X
- Su T
- Smith AJ
- Verkman AS
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-017-1734-6
keywords:
- Animals
- "Aquaporin 4/genetics, immunology"
- "Astrocytes/immunology, pathology"
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- "Brain/immunology, pathology"
- Bystander Effect/immunology
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Coculture Techniques
- Complement System Proteins/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Immunoglobulin G/immunology
- "Neuromyelitis Optica/immunology, pathology"
- "Oligodendroglia/immunology, pathology"
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- "Rats, Transgenic"
- Recombinant Proteins/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bystander mechanism for complement-initiated early oligodendrocyte injury in neuromyelitis optica.
**Authors:** Tradtrantip L, Yao X, Su T, Smith AJ, Verkman AS
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-017-1734-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-017-1734-6)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2017 Jul;134(1):35-44. doi: 10.1007/s00401-017-1734-6. Epub
2017 May 31.

Bystander mechanism for complement-initiated early oligodendrocyte injury in
neuromyelitis optica.

Tradtrantip L(1), Yao X(1), Su T(1), Smith AJ(1), Verkman AS(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine and Physiology, University of California, San
Francisco, 1246 Health Sciences East Tower, San Francisco, CA, 94143-0521, USA.
(2)Departments of Medicine and Physiology, University of California, San
Francisco, 1246 Health Sciences East Tower, San Francisco, CA, 94143-0521, USA.
Alan.Verkman@ucsf.edu.

Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (herein called NMO) is an autoimmune
inflammatory disease of the central nervous system in which immunoglobulin G
antibodies against astrocyte water channel aquaporin-4 (AQP4-IgG) cause
demyelination and neurological deficit. Injury to oligodendrocytes, which do not
express AQP4, links the initiating pathogenic event of AQP4-IgG binding to
astrocyte AQP4 to demyelination. Here, we report evidence for a complement
'bystander mechanism' to account for early oligodendrocyte injury in NMO in
which activated, soluble complement proteins following AQP4-IgG binding to
astrocyte AQP4 result in deposition of the complement membrane attack complex
(MAC) on nearby oligodendrocytes. Primary cocultures of rat astrocytes and
mature oligodendrocytes exposed to AQP4-IgG and complement showed early death of
oligodendrocytes in close contact with astrocytes, which was not seen in pure
oligodendrocyte cultures, in cocultures exposed to AQP4-IgG and C6-depleted
serum, or when astrocytes were damaged by a complement-independent mechanism.
Astrocyte-oligodendrocyte cocultures exposed to AQP4-IgG and complement showed
prominent MAC deposition on oligodendrocytes in contact with astrocytes, whereas
C1q, the initiating protein in the classical complement pathway, and C3d, a
component of the alternative complement pathway, were deposited only on
astrocytes. Early oligodendrocyte injury with MAC deposition was also found in
rat brain following intracerebral injection of AQP4-IgG, complement and a
fixable dead-cell stain. These results support a novel complement bystander
mechanism for early oligodendrocyte injury and demyelination in NMO.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-017-1734-6
PMCID: PMC5600280
PMID: 28567523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests. None of the authors has
competing interests.
