---
reference_id: "PMID:26775134"
title: A case of familial partial lipodystrophy caused by a novel lamin A/C (LMNA) mutation in exon 1 (D47N).
authors:
- Kutbay NO
- Yurekli BS
- Onay H
- Altay CT
- Atik T
- Hekimsoy Z
- Saygili F
- Akinci B
journal: Eur J Intern Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2015.12.012
keywords:
- Adult
- "Diabetes Mellitus/drug therapy, genetics"
- Exons
- Fatty Liver/diagnostic imaging
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Insulin/therapeutic use
- Insulin Resistance/genetics
- Lamin Type A/genetics
- "Lipodystrophy, Familial Partial/drug therapy, genetics"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Metformin/therapeutic use
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of familial partial lipodystrophy caused by a novel lamin A/C (LMNA) mutation in exon 1 (D47N).
**Authors:** Kutbay NO, Yurekli BS, Onay H, Altay CT, Atik T, Hekimsoy Z, Saygili F, Akinci B
**Journal:** Eur J Intern Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejim.2015.12.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejim.2015.12.012)

## Content

1. Eur J Intern Med. 2016 Apr;29:37-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2015.12.012. Epub 2016
 Jan 7.

A case of familial partial lipodystrophy caused by a novel lamin A/C (LMNA) 
mutation in exon 1 (D47N).

Kutbay NO(1), Yurekli BS(2), Onay H(3), Altay CT(4), Atik T(3), Hekimsoy Z(5), 
Saygili F(2), Akinci B(6).

Author information:
(1)Ege University, Division of Endocrinology, Izmir, Turkey. Electronic address: 
nozdemirkutbay@hotmail.com.
(2)Ege University, Division of Endocrinology, Izmir, Turkey.
(3)Ege University, Division of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey.
(4)Dokuz Eylul University, Department of Radiology, Izmir, Turkey.
(5)Celal Bayar University, Division of Endocrinology, Manisa, Turkey.
(6)Dokuz Eylul University, Division of Endocrinology, Izmir, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Familial partial lipodystrophy (FPL) is a rare genetic disorder 
characterized by selective lack of subcutaneous fat which is associated with 
insulin resistant diabetes. The Dunnigan variety (FPL2) is caused by several 
missense mutations in the lamin A/C (LMNA) gene, most of which are typically 
located in exon 8 at the codon position 482.
CASE REPORT: Here, we report on a Turkish family with FPL2 which is caused by a 
novel heterozygous missense LMNA mutation in exon 1 (D47N, c.139G>A), in the rod 
domain of lamins A/C. Fat distribution and metabolic features of LMNA D47N 
mutation were similar to typical codon 482 mutation. Metabolic abnormalities 
were observed as a form of insulin resistant diabetes, hypertriglyceridemia, low 
HDL cholesterol and hepatic steatosis. There was no evidence for neuromuscular 
and cardiac involvement.
CONCLUSION: Although it is previously known that alterations in the rod domain 
of type A lamins are involved in cardiac and neuromuscular diseases, our current 
observation shows that exon 1 LMNA mutations may be associated with partial 
lipodystrophy without any cardiac and neurological abnormalities, at least at 
the time of the presentation.

Copyright © 2015 European Federation of Internal Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejim.2015.12.012
PMID: 26775134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]