---
reference_id: "PMID:12796854"
title: Mutational mechanisms of Williams-Beuren syndrome deletions.
authors:
- Bayés M
- Magano LF
- Rivera N
- Flores R
- Pérez Jurado LA
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1086/376565
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutational mechanisms of Williams-Beuren syndrome deletions.
**Authors:** Bayés M, Magano LF, Rivera N, Flores R, Pérez Jurado LA
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1086/376565](https://doi.org/10.1086/376565)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2003 Jul;73(1):131-51. doi: 10.1086/376565. Epub 2003 Jun 9.

Mutational mechanisms of Williams-Beuren syndrome deletions.

Bayés M(1), Magano LF, Rivera N, Flores R, Pérez Jurado LA.

Author information:
(1)Unitat de Genètica, Departament Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Doctor Aiguader 80, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. 
luis.perez@cexs.upf.es

Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a segmental aneusomy syndrome that results 
from a heterozygous deletion of contiguous genes at 7q11.23. Three large 
region-specific low-copy repeat elements (LCRs), composed of different blocks 
(A, B, and C), flank the WBS deletion interval and are thought to predispose to 
misalignment and unequal crossing-over, causing the deletions. In this study, we 
have determined the exact deletion size and LCR copy number in 74 patients with 
WBS, as well as precisely defined deletion breakpoints in 30 of them, using 
LCR-specific nucleotide differences. Most patients (95%) exhibit a 1.55-Mb 
deletion caused by recombination between centromeric and medial block B copies, 
which share approximately 99.6% sequence identity along 105-143 kb. In these 
cases, deletion breakpoints were mapped at several sites within the recombinant 
block B, with a cluster (>27%) occurring at a 12 kb region within the 
GTF2I/GTF2IP1 gene. Almost one-third (28%) of the transmitting progenitors were 
found to be heterozygous for an inversion between centromeric and telomeric 
LCRs. All deletion breakpoints in the patients with the inversion occurred in 
the distal 38-kb block B region only present in the telomeric and medial copies. 
Finally, only four patients (5%) displayed a larger deletion ( approximately 
1.84 Mb) caused by recombination between centromeric and medial block A copies. 
We propose models for the specific pairing and precise aberrant recombination 
leading to each of the different germline rearrangements that occur in this 
region, including inversions and deletions associated with WBS. Chromosomal 
instability at 7q11.23 is directly related to the genomic structure of the 
region.

DOI: 10.1086/376565
PMCID: PMC1180575
PMID: 12796854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]