---
reference_id: "PMID:31526868"
title: Progress in the understanding and treatment of Fabry disease.
authors:
- Miller JJ
- Kanack AJ
- Dahms NM
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta Gen Subj
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2019.129437
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progress in the understanding and treatment of Fabry disease.
**Authors:** Miller JJ, Kanack AJ, Dahms NM
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta Gen Subj (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbagen.2019.129437](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbagen.2019.129437)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta Gen Subj. 2020 Jan;1864(1):129437. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbagen.2019.129437. Epub 2019 Sep 14.

Progress in the understanding and treatment of Fabry disease.

Miller JJ(1), Kanack AJ(1), Dahms NM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, 
United States of America.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, 
United States of America. Electronic address: ndahms@mcw.edu.

BACKGROUND: Fabry disease is caused by α-galactosidase A deficiency. Substrates 
of this lysosomal enzyme accumulate, resulting in cellular dysfunction. Patients 
experience neuropathic pain, kidney failure, heart disease, and strokes.
SCOPE OF REVIEW: The clinical picture and molecular features of Fabry disease 
are described, along with updates on disease mechanisms, animal models, and 
therapies.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: How the accumulation of α-galactosidase A substrates, mainly 
glycosphingolipids, leads to organ damage is incompletely understood. Enzyme 
replacement and chaperone therapies are clinically available to patients, while 
substrate reduction, mRNA-based, and gene therapies are on the horizon. Animal 
models exist to optimize these therapies and elucidate disease mechanisms for 
novel treatments.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Recent newborn screening studies demonstrate that Fabry 
disease is the most common lysosomal storage disease. As many countries now 
include Fabry disease in their screening panels, the number of identified 
patients is expected to increase significantly. Better knowledge of disease 
pathogenesis is needed to improve treatment options.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2019.129437
PMCID: PMC6981246
PMID: 31526868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]