---
reference_id: "PMID:35273387"
title: Effects of targeted therapies on bone in rheumatic and musculoskeletal diseases.
authors:
- Soós B
- Szentpétery Á
- Raterman HG
- Lems WF
- Bhattoa HP
- Szekanecz Z
journal: Nat Rev Rheumatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41584-022-00764-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of targeted therapies on bone in rheumatic and musculoskeletal diseases.
**Authors:** Soós B, Szentpétery Á, Raterman HG, Lems WF, Bhattoa HP, Szekanecz Z
**Journal:** Nat Rev Rheumatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41584-022-00764-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41584-022-00764-w)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2022 May;18(5):249-257. doi: 10.1038/s41584-022-00764-w.
Epub  2022 Mar 10.

Effects of targeted therapies on bone in rheumatic and musculoskeletal diseases.

Soós B(1), Szentpétery Á(1)(2), Raterman HG(3), Lems WF(4), Bhattoa HP(#)(5), 
Szekanecz Z(#)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, 
Debrecen, Hungary.
(2)Department of Medical Sciences, Rheumatology, Uppsala University Hospital, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Northwest Clinics, Alkmaar, Netherlands.
(4)Amsterdam Rheumatology and Immunology Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.
(6)Department of Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, 
Debrecen, Hungary. szekanecz.zoltan@med.unideb.hu.
(#)Contributed equally

Generalized bone loss (osteoporosis) and fragility fractures can occur in 
rheumatic and musculoskeletal diseases including rheumatoid arthritis and 
spondyloarthritis (SpA; including ankylosing spondylitis and psoriatic 
arthritis). In addition, rheumatoid arthritis can involve localized, 
periarticular bone erosion and, in SpA, local (pathological) bone formation can 
occur. The RANK-RANKL-osteoprotegerin axis and the Wnt-β-catenin signalling 
pathway (along with its inhibitors sclerostin and Dickkopf 1) have been 
implicated in inflammatory bone loss and formation, respectively. Targeted 
therapies including biologic DMARDs and Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors can 
stabilize bone turnover and inhibit radiographic joint damage, and potentially 
also prevent generalized bone loss. Targeted therapies interfere at various 
points in the mechanisms of local and generalized bone changes in systemic 
rheumatic diseases, and they effect biomarkers of bone resorption and formation, 
bone mass and risk of fragility fractures. Studies on the effects of targeted 
therapies on rates of fragility fracture are scarce. The efficacy of biologic 
DMARDs for arresting bone formation in axial SpA is debated. Improved 
understanding of the most relevant therapeutic targets and identification of 
important targeted therapies could lead to the preservation of bone in 
inflammatory rheumatic and musculoskeletal diseases.

© 2022. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41584-022-00764-w
PMID: 35273387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]