---
reference_id: "PMID:30544401"
title: Case report of dysregulation of primary bile acid synthesis in a family with X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy.
authors:
- Płatek T
- Orso E
- Zapała B
- Polus A
- Kieć-Wilk B
- Piwowar M
- Chojnacka M
- Ciałowicz U
- Malczewska-Malec M
- Schmitz G
- Solnica B
- Dembińska-Kieć A
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000013353
keywords:
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily D, Member 1/genetics"
- "Adrenoleukodystrophy/genetics, metabolism"
- Adult
- Bile Acids and Salts/biosynthesis
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Family
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report of dysregulation of primary bile acid synthesis in a family with X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy.
**Authors:** Płatek T, Orso E, Zapała B, Polus A, Kieć-Wilk B, Piwowar M, Chojnacka M, Ciałowicz U, Malczewska-Malec M, Schmitz G, Solnica B, Dembińska-Kieć A
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000013353](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000013353)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2018 Dec;97(49):e13353. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000013353.

Case report of dysregulation of primary bile acid synthesis in a family with 
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy.

Płatek T(1), Orso E(2), Zapała B(1), Polus A(1), Kieć-Wilk B(3), Piwowar M(4), 
Chojnacka M(1), Ciałowicz U(1), Malczewska-Malec M(1), Schmitz G(2), Solnica 
B(1), Dembińska-Kieć A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 
Krakow, Poland.
(2)Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University Hospital 
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Metabolic Diseases, University Hospital Krakow.
(4)Department of Bioinformatics and Telemedicine, Jagiellonian University 
Medical College, Krakow, Poland.

RATIONALE: X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) is a rare disorder caused by 
mutations in the ABCD1 gene, coding for peroxisomal membrane transporter 
adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) protein. The disease is characterized by accumulation 
of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) in tissues. Adult adrenomyeloneuropathy 
(AMN) and the cerebral inflammatory form of ALD are the main phenotypes 
presenting various symptoms.
PATIENT CONCERNS: We report a case of 37-year-old patient with diagnosis of 
X-ALD, confirmed based on elevated VLCFA concentrations and genetic testing of 
ABCD1 gene. The complete clinical picture in the patient indicates AMN phenotype 
with cerebral involvement.
DIAGNOSES: The reduced synthesis of unconjugated cholic and chenodeoxycholic 
acids, and the reduction to 28% to 29% of peroxisomal beta-oxidation of behenic 
acid and normal peroxisomal metabolism of pristanic and palmitic acid were 
observed in the X-ALD patient. Sanger sequencing of major genes involved in 
primary bile acid (BA) synthesis failed to identify pathogenic mutations of the 
investigated set of genes.
INTERVENTIONS: Plasma concentrations of BAs, VLCFAs, and beta-oxidation of 
C22:0, C16:0, and pristanic acid were studied in primary skin fibroblasts of the 
patient. In addition, we performed sequencing of the ABCD1, ABCD3, CYP7A1, 
CYP7B1, CYP27A1, HSD3B7, AKR1D1, and SLC27A5 genes in the X-ALD family.
OUTCOMES: In the Polish family affected with AMN a dysregulation of the primary 
BA synthesis pathway was found.
LESSONS: We have demonstrated the coincidence of the adult form of X-ALD with 
abnormalities in BA synthesis. We suggest that decreased synthesis of BAs may be 
an additional dysfunction as a consequence of the ABCD1 c.659T>C, p.(Leu220Pro) 
mutation and may be further evidence that disturbed cholesterol metabolism is 
important in the pathology of ALD.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000013353
PMCID: PMC6310492
PMID: 30544401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.