---
reference_id: "PMID:21349848"
title: Disease-associated GPR56 mutations cause bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria via multiple mechanisms.
authors:
- Chiang NY
- Hsiao CC
- Huang YS
- Chen HY
- Hsieh IJ
- Chang GW
- Lin HH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.183830
keywords:
- Animals
- CHO Cells
- Cricetinae
- Cricetulus
- Glycosaminoglycans/chemistry
- Humans
- Malformations of Cortical Development/genetics
- Membrane Microdomains
- Mice
- Nervous System Diseases/metabolism
- Point Mutation
- Protein Binding
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease-associated GPR56 mutations cause bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria via multiple mechanisms.
**Authors:** Chiang NY, Hsiao CC, Huang YS, Chen HY, Hsieh IJ, Chang GW, Lin HH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.183830](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.183830)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 22;286(16):14215-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.183830. Epub 
2011 Feb 24.

Disease-associated GPR56 mutations cause bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria 
via multiple mechanisms.

Chiang NY(1), Hsiao CC, Huang YS, Chen HY, Hsieh IJ, Chang GW, Lin HH.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung 
University, 259 Wen-Hwa 1st Road, Kwei-Shan, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

Loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding G protein-coupled receptor 56 
(GPR56) lead to bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria (BFPP), an autosomal 
recessive disorder affecting brain development. The GPR56 receptor is a member 
of the adhesion-GPCR family characterized by the chimeric composition of a long 
ectodomain (ECD), a GPCR proteolysis site (GPS), and a seven-pass transmembrane 
(7TM) moiety. Interestingly, all identified BFPP-associated missense mutations 
are located within the extracellular region of GPR56 including the ECD, GPS, and 
the extracellular loops of 7TM. In the present study, a detailed molecular and 
functional analysis of the wild-type GPR56 and BFPP-associated point mutants 
shows that individual GPR56 mutants most likely cause BFPP via different 
combination of multiple mechanisms. These include reduced surface receptor 
expression, loss of GPS proteolysis, reduced receptor shedding, inability to 
interact with a novel protein ligand, and differential distribution of the 7TM 
moiety in lipid rafts. These results provide novel insights into the cellular 
functions of GPR56 receptor and reveal molecular mechanisms whereby GPR56 
mutations induce BFPP.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.183830
PMCID: PMC3077623
PMID: 21349848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]