---
reference_id: "PMID:31943503"
title: "From genotype to phenotype: Early prediction of disease severity in argininosuccinic aciduria."
authors:
- Zielonka M
- Garbade SF
- Gleich F
- Okun JG
- Nagamani SCS
- Gropman AL
- Hoffmann GF
- Kölker S
- Posset R
- Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium (UCDC) and the European registry and network for Intoxication type Metabolic Diseases (E-IMD) Consortia Study Group
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/humu.23983
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Argininosuccinate Lyase/blood, genetics, metabolism"
- "Argininosuccinic Aciduria/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Biomarkers
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Enzyme Activation
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Genetic Association Studies/methods
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- Humans
- Kidney/metabolism
- Liver/metabolism
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From genotype to phenotype: Early prediction of disease severity in argininosuccinic aciduria.
**Authors:** Zielonka M, Garbade SF, Gleich F, Okun JG, Nagamani SCS, Gropman AL, Hoffmann GF, Kölker S, Posset R, Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium (UCDC) and the European registry and network for Intoxication type Metabolic Diseases (E-IMD) Consortia Study Group
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23983](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23983)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2020 May;41(5):946-960. doi: 10.1002/humu.23983. Epub 2020 Jan 30.

From genotype to phenotype: Early prediction of disease severity in
argininosuccinic aciduria.

Zielonka M(1)(2), Garbade SF(1), Gleich F(1), Okun JG(1), Nagamani SCS(3),
Gropman AL(4), Hoffmann GF(1), Kölker S(1), Posset R(1); Urea Cycle Disorders
Consortium (UCDC) and the European registry and network for Intoxication type
Metabolic Diseases (E-IMD) Consortia Study Group.

Collaborators: Ah Mew N, Burrage LC, Schulze A, Berry SA, Baumgartner MR, Diaz
GA, Merritt JL 2nd, Bedoyan JK, Wong D, Harding CO, Yudkoff M, Garcia-Cazorla A,
Cortès-Saladelafont E, Lund AM, Dionisi-Vici C, Burlina AB, Morris AA,
Freisinger P, Walter ME, Jalan A, Schiff M, Dobbelaere D, Bosch AM, Ioannou H,
Barić I.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Center for Pediatric
and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Heidelberg Research Center for Molecular Medicine (HRCMM), Heidelberg,
Germany.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine and
Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas.
(4)Division of Neurodevelopmental Pediatrics and Neurogenetics, Children's
National Health System and The George Washington School of Medicine, Washington,
District of Columbia.

Argininosuccinic aciduria (ASA) is an inherited urea cycle disorder and has a
highly variable phenotypic spectrum ranging from individuals with lethal
hyperammonemic encephalopathy, liver dysfunction, and cognitive deterioration,
to individuals with a mild disease course. As it is difficult to predict the
phenotypic severity, we aimed at identifying a reliable disease prediction
model. We applied a biallelic expression system to assess the functional impact
of pathogenic argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) variants and to determine the
enzymatic activity of ASL in 58 individuals with ASA. This cohort represented 42
ASL gene variants and 42 combinations in total. Enzymatic ASL activity was
compared with biochemical and clinical endpoints from the UCDC and E-IMD
databases. Enzymatic ASL activity correlated with peak plasma ammonium
concentration at initial presentation and with the number of hyperammonemic
events (HAEs) per year of observation. Individuals with ≤9% of enzymatic
activity had more severe initial decompensations and a higher annual frequency
of HAEs than individuals above this threshold. Enzymatic ASL activity also
correlated with the cognitive outcome and the severity of the liver disease,
enabling a reliable severity prediction for individuals with ASA. Thus,
enzymatic activity measured by this novel expression system can serve as an
important marker of phenotypic severity.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23983
PMCID: PMC7428858
PMID: 31943503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement All other authors
declare that they have no conflict of interest.
