---
reference_id: "PMID:26399581"
title: "Combination of palmoplantar keratoderma and hair shaft anomalies, the warning signal of severe arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy: a systematic review on genetic desmosomal diseases."
authors:
- Polivka L
- Bodemer C
- Hadj-Rabia S
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103403
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/etiology"
- "Cardiomyopathies/complications, etiology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Desmoplakins/genetics
- Desmosomal Cadherins/genetics
- Desmosomes/metabolism
- Female
- "Hair Diseases/complications, diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/complications, diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Mutation
- Plakophilins/genetics
- Prognosis
- Syndrome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Combination of palmoplantar keratoderma and hair shaft anomalies, the warning signal of severe arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy: a systematic review on genetic desmosomal diseases.
**Authors:** Polivka L, Bodemer C, Hadj-Rabia S
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103403](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103403)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2016 May;53(5):289-95. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103403. Epub
2015 Sep 23.

Combination of palmoplantar keratoderma and hair shaft anomalies, the warning
signal of severe arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy: a systematic review on genetic
desmosomal diseases.

Polivka L(1), Bodemer C(1), Hadj-Rabia S(1).

Author information:
(1)Service de Dermatologie, Centre de référence MAGEC, INSERM1163, Institut
Imagine Université Paris Descartes, Paris Sorbonne Cité, Faculté de Médecine et
AP-HP Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

Inherited desmosomal diseases are characterised by skin and/or cardiac features.
Dermatological features might be a clue in the determination of the underlying
life-threatening cardiac disease. This article aims to propose a dermatological
algorithm for the diagnosis of desmosomal diseases after a systematic review of
published articles. Palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK), hair shaft anomalies and
skin fragility are the major features in the 458 patients analysed. Isolated PPK
or isolated hair shaft anomalies are associated with a desmosomal disease
limited to skin. The combination of PPK and hair shaft anomalies was recorded in
161 patients, and this association is at high risk of cardiac disease (129/161,
80.1%). Skin features had led to cardiac monitoring in only 2.3% of those
patients. We delineated three major phenotypes: the PPK-hair shaft
anomalies-non-fragile skin subtype (77%), always associated with cardiac
involvement; the PPK-hair shaft anomalies-skin fragility-normal cardiac function
subtype (19.9%), frequently associated with PKP1 mutations; the PPK-hair shaft
anomalies-skin fragility-cardiac involvement subtype (3.1%), always due to DSP
mutations. Three mutation hotspots in DSP and JUP account for 90.8% of the
patients with cardiac involvement. The combination of PPK and hair shaft
anomalies justifies long-term cardiac monitoring.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103403
PMID: 26399581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
