---
reference_id: "PMID:9811582"
title: Repression of hedgehog signaling and BMP4 expression in growth plate cartilage by fibroblast growth factor receptor 3.
authors:
- Naski MC
- Colvin JS
- Coffin JD
- Ornitz DM
journal: Development
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1242/dev.125.24.4977
keywords:
- Achondroplasia/genetics
- Animals
- Bone Morphogenetic Protein 4
- Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/genetics
- Bone and Bones/pathology
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Division
- "Chondrocytes/cytology, metabolism"
- Collagen/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental/genetics"
- "Growth Plate/growth & development"
- Hedgehog Proteins
- Histocytochemistry
- Humans
- In Situ Hybridization
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Parathyroid Hormone-Related Protein
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- Proteins/genetics
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3"
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- Trans-Activators
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Repression of hedgehog signaling and BMP4 expression in growth plate cartilage by fibroblast growth factor receptor 3.
**Authors:** Naski MC, Colvin JS, Coffin JD, Ornitz DM
**Journal:** Development (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.125.24.4977](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.125.24.4977)

## Content

1. Development. 1998 Dec;125(24):4977-88. doi: 10.1242/dev.125.24.4977.

Repression of hedgehog signaling and BMP4 expression in growth plate cartilage 
by fibroblast growth factor receptor 3.

Naski MC(1), Colvin JS, Coffin JD, Ornitz DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Washington University 
School of Medicine, Campus Box 8103, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) is a key regulator of skeletal 
growth and activating mutations in Fgfr3 cause achondroplasia, the most common 
genetic form of dwarfism in humans. Little is known about the mechanism by which 
FGFR3 inhibits bone growth and how FGFR3 signaling interacts with other 
signaling pathways that regulate endochondral ossification. To understand these 
mechanisms, we targeted the expression of an activated FGFR3 to growth plate 
cartilage in mice using regulatory elements from the collagen II gene. As with 
humans carrying the achondroplasia mutation, the resulting transgenic mice are 
dwarfed, with axial, appendicular and craniofacial skeletal hypoplasia. We found 
that FGFR3 inhibited endochondral bone growth by markedly inhibiting chondrocyte 
proliferation and by slowing chondrocyte differentiation. Significantly, FGFR3 
downregulated the Indian hedgehog (Ihh) signaling pathway and Bmp4 expression in 
both growth plate chondrocytes and in the perichondrium. Conversely, Bmp4 
expression is upregulated in the perichondrium of Fgfr3-/- mice. These data 
support a model in which Fgfr3 is an upstream negative regulator of the hedgehog 
(Hh) signaling pathway. Additionally, Fgfr3 may coordinate the growth and 
differentiation of chondrocytes with the growth and differentiation of 
osteoprogenitor cells by simultaneously modulating Bmp4 and patched expression 
in both growth plate cartilage and in the perichondrium.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.125.24.4977
PMID: 9811582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]