---
reference_id: "PMID:37567982"
title: Genetic manipulation resulting in decreased donor chondroitin sulfate synthesis mitigates hepatic GVHD via suppression of T cell activity.
authors:
- Tamura S
- Ishiguro H
- Suwabe T
- Katagiri T
- Cho K
- Fuse K
- Shibasaki Y
- Mikami T
- Shindo T
- Kitagawa H
- Igarashi M
- Sone H
- Masuko M
- Ushiki T
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-40367-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic manipulation resulting in decreased donor chondroitin sulfate synthesis mitigates hepatic GVHD via suppression of T cell activity.
**Authors:** Tamura S, Ishiguro H, Suwabe T, Katagiri T, Cho K, Fuse K, Shibasaki Y, Mikami T, Shindo T, Kitagawa H, Igarashi M, Sone H, Masuko M, Ushiki T
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-023-40367-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-40367-3)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2023 Aug 11;13(1):13098. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-40367-3.

Genetic manipulation resulting in decreased donor chondroitin sulfate synthesis 
mitigates hepatic GVHD via suppression of T cell activity.

Tamura S(1), Ishiguro H(1), Suwabe T(1), Katagiri T(1), Cho K(1), Fuse K(1), 
Shibasaki Y(1), Mikami T(2), Shindo T(3), Kitagawa H(2), Igarashi M(4), Sone 
H(1), Masuko M(1), Ushiki T(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Niigata University Faculty of Medicine, 1-757 
Asahimachi-dori, Chuo-ku, Niigata City, Niigata, 951-8510, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Kobe Pharmaceutical University, Kobe, Japan.
(3)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Kyoto University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Niigata University 
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.
(5)Department of Hematology, Niigata University Faculty of Medicine, 1-757 
Asahimachi-dori, Chuo-ku, Niigata City, Niigata, 951-8510, Japan. 
tushiki@med.niigata-u.ac.jp.
(6)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Health Sciences, 
Niigata University, Niigata, Japan. tushiki@med.niigata-u.ac.jp.

Donor T cell activation, proliferation, differentiation, and migration are the 
major steps involved in graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) development following 
bone marrow transplantation. Chondroitin sulfate (CS) proteoglycan is a major 
component of the extracellular matrix and causes immune modulation by 
interacting with cell growth factors and inducing cell adhesion. However, its 
precise effects on immune function are unclear than those of other proteoglycan 
families. Thus, we investigated the significance of CS within donor cells in 
acute GVHD development utilizing CSGalNAc T1-knockout (T1KO) mice. To determine 
the effects of T1KO, the mice underwent allogenic bone marrow transplantation 
from major histocompatibility complex-mismatched donors. While transplantation 
resulted in hepatic GVHD with inflammatory cell infiltration of both CD4+ and 
CD8+ effector memory T cells, transplantation in T1KO-donors showed milder cell 
infiltration and improved survival with fewer splenic effector T cells. In vitro 
T-cell analyses showed that the ratio of effector memory T cells was 
significantly lower via phorbol myristate acetate/ionomycin stimulation. 
Moreover, quantitative PCR analyses showed significantly less production of 
inflammatory cytokines, such as IFN-γ and CCL-2, in splenocytes of T1KO mice. 
These results suggest that reduction of CS in donor blood cells may suppress the 
severity of acute GVHD after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-40367-3
PMCID: PMC10421903
PMID: 37567982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.