---
reference_id: "PMID:35475077"
title: "Comparative Analysis of Adult Patients With Idiopathic Pulmonary Hemosiderosis and Lane-Hamilton Syndrome: A Systematic Review of the Literature in the Period 1971-2022."
authors:
- Saha BK
- Datar P
- Aiman A
- Bonnier A
- Saha S
- Milman NT
journal: Cureus
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.23482
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative Analysis of Adult Patients With Idiopathic Pulmonary Hemosiderosis and Lane-Hamilton Syndrome: A Systematic Review of the Literature in the Period 1971-2022.
**Authors:** Saha BK, Datar P, Aiman A, Bonnier A, Saha S, Milman NT
**Journal:** Cureus (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.23482](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.23482)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2022 Mar 25;14(3):e23482. doi: 10.7759/cureus.23482. eCollection 2022 
Mar.

Comparative Analysis of Adult Patients With Idiopathic Pulmonary Hemosiderosis 
and Lane-Hamilton Syndrome: A Systematic Review of the Literature in the Period 
1971-2022.

Saha BK(1), Datar P(1), Aiman A(2), Bonnier A(3), Saha S(4), Milman NT(5).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Ozarks Medical Center, West Plains, 
USA.
(2)Internal Medicine, New York Institute of Technology College of Osteopathic 
Medicine at Arkansas State University, Jonesboro, USA.
(3)Critical Care, Goldfarb School of Nursing at Barnes Jewish College, Saint 
Louis, USA.
(4)Internal Medicine, Saha Clinic, Narail, BGD.
(5)Pulmonary and Critical Care, University College Zealand, Næstved, DNK.

Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis (IPH) causes diffuse alveolar hemorrhage 
(DAH) by a yet unknown mechanism. The coexistence of IPH and celiac disease 
(CD), also known as Lane-Hamilton syndrome (LHS), has been reported in both 
pediatric and adult patients. The objective of this study was to compare 
demographics, clinical and radiologic findings, treatment, and outcomes between 
adult patients with IPH and LHS. This is a systematic review of the literature. 
Multiple databases were searched using appropriate formulas to identify relevant 
articles. A total of 60 studies reporting 65 patients were included in the 
review. Forty-nine of these patients had IPH and 16 had LHS. The prevalence of 
anti-CD antibodies among tested patients was 13/22 (59%). The symptom onset and 
diagnosis of IPH occurred earlier in patients with LHS. The median delay in 
diagnosis was the same between the two groups (52 weeks). The classic triad was 
more likely to be present in patients with LHS. Only 20% of patients in the LHS 
cohort had any significant gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms at the time of IPH 
diagnosis. A gluten-free diet alone was effective in the majority of patients. 
Fewer patients in the LHS cohort received systemic corticosteroid than the IPH 
cohort. The recurrence and mortality in patients with LHS appear to be less than 
in the IPH cohort. The prevalence of CD is 25% in adult patients with IPH. 
Patients with LHS may have a milder course than patients without CD. Serologic 
testing for CD should be performed in all patients diagnosed with IPH.

Copyright © 2022, Saha et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.23482
PMCID: PMC9035284
PMID: 35475077

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.