---
reference_id: "PMID:36116464"
title: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
authors:
- Feldman EL
- Goutman SA
- Petri S
- Mazzini L
- Savelieff MG
- Shaw PJ
- Sobue G
journal: Lancet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(22)01272-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
**Authors:** Feldman EL, Goutman SA, Petri S, Mazzini L, Savelieff MG, Shaw PJ, Sobue G
**Journal:** Lancet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(22)01272-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(22)01272-7)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2022 Oct 15;400(10360):1363-1380. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(22)01272-7. 
Epub 2022 Sep 15.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Feldman EL(1), Goutman SA(2), Petri S(3), Mazzini L(4), Savelieff MG(2), Shaw 
PJ(5), Sobue G(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Michigan Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA. Electronic address: efeldman@umich.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, Michigan Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(4)ALS Centre, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Maggiore della Carità, Novara, 
Italy; Department of Neurology, University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy.
(5)Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience (SITraN), University of 
Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(6)Department of Neurology, Aichi Medical University, Nagakute, Aichi, Japan.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a fatal CNS neurodegenerative disease. Despite 
intensive research, current management of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis remains 
suboptimal from diagnosis to prognosis. Recognition of the phenotypic 
heterogeneity of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, global CNS dysfunction, genetic 
architecture, and development of novel diagnostic criteria is clarifying the 
spectrum of clinical presentation and facilitating diagnosis. Insights into the 
pathophysiology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, identification of disease 
biomarkers and modifiable risks, along with new predictive models, scales, and 
scoring systems, and a clinical trial pipeline of mechanism-based therapies, are 
changing the prognostic landscape. Although most recent advances have yet to 
translate into patient benefit, the idea of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis as a 
complex syndrome is already having tangible effects in the clinic. This Seminar 
will outline these insights and discuss the status of the management of 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis for the general neurologist, along with future 
prospects that could improve care and outcomes for patients with amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(22)01272-7
PMCID: PMC10089700
PMID: 36116464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests ELF and SAG have a 
patent issued (US20200253977A1). SAG reports personal fees from Biogen, ITF 
Pharma, and Watermark, outside the submitted work. SP reports grants from the 
German Neuromuscular Society, the German-Israeli Foundation for Scientific 
Research and Development (GIF), and personal fees from Cytokinetics, Desitin 
Pharma, Italfarmaco, Biogen, Roche, and Zambon outside the submitted work. PJS 
reports consultancy and advisory board membership with Biogen, Benevolent AI, 
QurALIS, Quell, and Aclipse Therapeutics, outside the submitted work. GS reports 
personal fees from Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation, Cyberdyne, Biogen 
Japan, Takeda Pharmaceutical, Nihon Pharmaceutical, and Teijin Pharma, outside 
the submitted work. LM and MGS declare no competing interests.