---
reference_id: "PMID:20301585"
title: Classic Mowat-Wilson Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Adam MP
- Conta J
- Bean LJH
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Classic Mowat-Wilson Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Adam MP, Conta J, Bean LJH

## Content

1. Classic Mowat-Wilson Syndrome.

Adam MP(1), Conta J(2), Bean LJH(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2007 Mar 28 [updated 2026 Apr 23].

Author information:
(1)Professor of Pediatrics, Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
(2)Department of Laboratories, Seattle Children’s Hospital, Seattle, Washington
(3)PerkinElmer Genomics, Inc, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Classic Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is characterized
by distinctive facial features (widely spaced eyes, broad eyebrows with a medial
flare, low-hanging columella, prominent or pointed chin, open-mouth expression,
and uplifted earlobes with a central depression), congenital heart defects with
predilection for abnormalities of the pulmonary arteries and/or valves,
Hirschsprung disease and/or chronic constipation, genitourinary anomalies
(particularly hypospadias in males), and hypogenesis or agenesis of the corpus
callosum. Most affected individuals have moderate-to-severe intellectual
disability. Speech is typically limited to a few words or is absent, with
relative preservation of receptive language skills. Growth restriction with
microcephaly and epilepsy are also common. Most affected people have a happy
demeanor and a wide-based gait that can sometimes be confused with Angelman
syndrome.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of classic MWS is established in a proband with
the typical recognizable dysmorphic facial features and developmental delay /
intellectual disability and/or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in ZEB2 (most
classic MWS-related ZEB2 pathogenic variants lead to predicted
haploinsufficiency for the functional components of the ZEB2 protein) identified
by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Care by the appropriate specialist for
dental anomalies, seizures, ocular abnormalities, congenital heart defects,
chronic constipation, Hirschsprung disease, genitourinary abnormalities, and
pectus anomalies of the chest and/or foot/ankle anomalies; educational
intervention and speech therapy beginning in infancy. Surveillance: Annual eye
examination in childhood to monitor for strabismus and refractive errors;
monitoring for otitis media; regular developmental assessments to plan/refine
educational interventions; periodic reevaluation by a clinical geneticist.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Classic MWS is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by a
pathogenic variant in ZEB2, a heterozygous deletion of 2q22.3 involving ZEB2, or
(rarely) a chromosome rearrangement that disrupts ZEB2. Almost all individuals
reported to date have been simplex cases (i.e., a single occurrence in a family)
resulting from a de novo genetic alteration; rarely, recurrence in a family has
been reported when a parent has a low level of somatic or presumed gonadal
mosaicism for a classic MWS-causing pathogenic variant. Individuals with classic
MWS are not known to reproduce. Once the causative genetic alteration has been
identified in the proband, prenatal testing may be offered to parents of a child
with classic MWS because of the recurrence risk associated with the possibility
of parental mosaicism or a balanced chromosome rearrangement.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301585
