---
reference_id: "PMID:35339179"
title: The Role of Voltage-Gated Calcium Channels in Basal Ganglia Neurodegenerative Disorders.
authors:
- Correa BHM
- Moreira CR
- Hildebrand ME
- Vieira LB
journal: Curr Neuropharmacol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2174/1570159X20666220327211156
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of Voltage-Gated Calcium Channels in Basal Ganglia Neurodegenerative Disorders.
**Authors:** Correa BHM, Moreira CR, Hildebrand ME, Vieira LB
**Journal:** Curr Neuropharmacol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1570159X20666220327211156](https://doi.org/10.2174/1570159X20666220327211156)

## Content

1. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2023;21(2):183-201. doi:
10.2174/1570159X20666220327211156.

The Role of Voltage-Gated Calcium Channels in Basal Ganglia Neurodegenerative 
Disorders.

Correa BHM(1), Moreira CR(1), Hildebrand ME(2)(3), Vieira LB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal 
University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo 
Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Calcium (Ca2+) plays a central role in regulating many cellular processes and 
influences cell survival. Several mechanisms can disrupt Ca2+ homeostasis to 
trigger cell death, including oxidative stress, mitochondrial damage, 
excitotoxicity, neuroinflammation, autophagy, and apoptosis. Voltage-gated Ca2+ 
channels (VGCCs) act as the main source of Ca2+ entry into electrically 
excitable cells, such as neurons, and they are also expressed in glial cells 
such as astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. The dysregulation of VGCC activity has 
been reported in both Parkinson's disease (PD) and Huntington's (HD). PD and HD 
are progressive neurodegenerative disorders (NDs) of the basal ganglia 
characterized by motor impairment as well as cognitive and psychiatric 
dysfunctions. This review will examine the putative role of neuronal VGCCs in 
the pathogenesis and treatment of central movement disorders, focusing on PD and 
HD. The link between basal ganglia disorders and VGCC physiology will provide a 
framework for understanding the neurodegenerative processes that occur in PD and 
HD, as well as a possible path towards identifying new therapeutic targets for 
the treatment of these debilitating disorders.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1570159X20666220327211156
PMCID: PMC10190140
PMID: 35339179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest, 
financial or otherwise.