---
reference_id: "PMID:38405931"
title: "iSCORE-PD: an isogenic stem cell collection to research Parkinson's Disease."
authors:
- Busquets O
- Li H
- Syed KM
- Jerez PA
- Dunnack J
- Bu RL
- Verma Y
- Pangilinan GR
- Martin A
- Straub J
- Du Y
- Simon VM
- Poser S
- Bush Z
- Diaz J
- Sahagun A
- Gao J
- Hong S
- Hernandez DG
- Levine KS
- Booth EO
- Blanchette M
- Bateup HS
- Rio DC
- Blauwendraat C
- Hockemeyer D
- Soldner F
journal: bioRxiv
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1101/2024.02.12.579917
content_type: abstract_only
---

# iSCORE-PD: an isogenic stem cell collection to research Parkinson's Disease.
**Authors:** Busquets O, Li H, Syed KM, Jerez PA, Dunnack J, Bu RL, Verma Y, Pangilinan GR, Martin A, Straub J, Du Y, Simon VM, Poser S, Bush Z, Diaz J, Sahagun A, Gao J, Hong S, Hernandez DG, Levine KS, Booth EO, Blanchette M, Bateup HS, Rio DC, Blauwendraat C, Hockemeyer D, Soldner F
**Journal:** bioRxiv (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1101/2024.02.12.579917](https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.12.579917)

## Content

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2025 Mar 9:2024.02.12.579917. doi:
10.1101/2024.02.12.579917.

iSCORE-PD: an isogenic stem cell collection to research Parkinson's Disease.

Busquets O(1)(2)(3)(4), Li H(3)(5)(6)(4), Syed KM(3)(5)(4), Jerez PA(7)(8)(4),
Dunnack J(3)(5)(4), Bu RL(1)(3), Verma Y(3)(5), Pangilinan GR(3)(5), Martin
A(5), Straub J(3)(5), Du Y(3)(5), Simon VM(5), Poser S(1)(3), Bush Z(3)(9), Diaz
J(1)(3), Sahagun A(3)(5)(10), Gao J(5), Hong S(7), Hernandez DG(11), Levine
KS(7), Booth EO(3)(5), Blanchette M(12), Bateup HS(3)(5)(10)(13), Rio DC(3)(5),
Blauwendraat C(7)(11), Hockemeyer D(3)(5)(6)(13), Soldner F(1)(2)(3)(9)(14).

Author information:
(1)Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Rose F. Kennedy Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1410
Pelham Parkway South, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
(2)Ruth L. and David S. Gottesman Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative
Medicine Research, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1301 Morris Park Ave.,
Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
(3)Aligning Science Across Parkinson's (ASAP) Collaborative Research Network,
Chevy Chase, MD, 20815, USA.
(4)These authors contributed equally.
(5)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(6)Innovative Genomics Institute, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 94720,
USA.
(7)Center for Alzheimer's and Related Dementias, National Institute on Aging and
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(8)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Queen Square Institute of
Neurology, University College London, London, UK.
(9)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1301 Morris Park
Ave., Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
(10)Department of Neuroscience, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA
94720, USA.
(11)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(12)LiftOff Biosolution. 813 Isbel Ct, Santa Cruz 95060, USA.
(13)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA, 94158, USA.
(14)Lead contact.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by complex
genetic and environmental factors. Genome-edited human pluripotent stem cells
(hPSCs) offer a unique experimental platform to advance our understanding of PD
etiology by enabling the generation of disease-relevant cell types carrying
patient mutations along with isogenic control cells. To facilitate this
approach, we generated a collection of 65 human stem cell lines genetically
engineered to harbor high risk or causal variants in genes associated with PD
(SNCA A53T, SNCA A30P, PRKN Ex3del, PINK1 Q129X, DJ1/PARK7 Ex1-5del, LRRK2
G2019S, ATP13A2 FS, FBXO7 R498X/FS, DNAJC6 c.801 A>G/FS, SYNJ1 R258Q/FS, VPS13C
A444P/FS, VPS13C W395C/FS, GBA1 IVS2+1/FS). All mutations were introduced into a
fully characterized and sequenced female human embryonic stem cell (hESC) line
(WIBR3; NIH approval number NIHhESC-10-0079) using different genome editing
techniques. To ensure the genetic integrity of these cell lines, we implemented
rigorous quality controls, including whole-genome sequencing of each line. Our
analysis of the genetic variation in this cell line collection revealed that
while genome editing, particularly using CRISPR/Cas9, can introduce rare
off-target mutations, the predominant source of genetic variants arises from
routine cell culture and are fixed in cell lines during clonal isolation. The
observed genetic variation was minimal compared to that typically found in
patient-derived iPSC experiments and predominantly affected non-coding regions
of the genome. Importantly, our analysis outlines strategies for effectively
managing genetic variation through stringent quality control measures and
careful experimental design. This systematic approach ensures the high quality
of our stem cell collection, highlights advantages of prime editing over
conventional CRISPR/Cas9 methods and provides a roadmap for the generation of
gene-edited hPSC collections at scale in an academic setting. Our iSCORE-PD
collection represents an easily accessible and valuable platform to study PD,
which can be used by investigators to understand the molecular pathophysiology
of PD in a human cellular setting.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.02.12.579917
PMCID: PMC10888955
PMID: 38405931

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
