---
reference_id: "PMID:29700411"
title: "A dualistic model of primary anal canal adenocarcinoma with distinct cellular origins, etiologies, inflammatory microenvironments and mutational signatures: implications for personalised medicine."
authors:
- Herfs M
- Roncarati P
- Koopmansch B
- Peulen O
- Bruyere D
- Lebeau A
- Hendrick E
- Hubert P
- Poncin A
- Penny W
- Piazzon N
- Monnien F
- Guenat D
- Mougin C
- Prétet JL
- Vuitton L
- Segers K
- Lambert F
- Bours V
- de Leval L
- Valmary-Degano S
- Quick CM
- Crum CP
- Delvenne P
journal: Br J Cancer
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41416-018-0049-2
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/genetics, pathology"
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Anus Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- B7-H1 Antigen/genetics
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/drug effects"
- Humans
- "Inflammation/genetics, pathology"
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- "Lymphocytes, Tumor-Infiltrating/pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Precision Medicine
- Prognosis
- Programmed Cell Death 1 Receptor/genetics
- Tumor Microenvironment/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A dualistic model of primary anal canal adenocarcinoma with distinct cellular origins, etiologies, inflammatory microenvironments and mutational signatures: implications for personalised medicine.
**Authors:** Herfs M, Roncarati P, Koopmansch B, Peulen O, Bruyere D, Lebeau A, Hendrick E, Hubert P, Poncin A, Penny W, Piazzon N, Monnien F, Guenat D, Mougin C, Prétet JL, Vuitton L, Segers K, Lambert F, Bours V, de Leval L, Valmary-Degano S, Quick CM, Crum CP, Delvenne P
**Journal:** Br J Cancer (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41416-018-0049-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-018-0049-2)

## Content

1. Br J Cancer. 2018 May;118(10):1302-1312. doi: 10.1038/s41416-018-0049-2. Epub 
2018 Apr 27.

A dualistic model of primary anal canal adenocarcinoma with distinct cellular 
origins, etiologies, inflammatory microenvironments and mutational signatures: 
implications for personalised medicine.

Herfs M(1), Roncarati P(2), Koopmansch B(3), Peulen O(4), Bruyere D(2), Lebeau 
A(2), Hendrick E(2), Hubert P(2), Poncin A(5)(6), Penny W(7), Piazzon N(8), 
Monnien F(9), Guenat D(10)(11)(12), Mougin C(10)(11), Prétet JL(10)(11), Vuitton 
L(10)(13), Segers K(3), Lambert F(3), Bours V(3)(6), de Leval L(8), 
Valmary-Degano S(9)(10), Quick CM(7), Crum CP(14), Delvenne P(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Pathology, GIGA-Cancer, University of Liege, 4000, 
Liege, Belgium. M.Herfs@uliege.be.
(2)Laboratory of Experimental Pathology, GIGA-Cancer, University of Liege, 4000, 
Liege, Belgium.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, University Hospital Center of Liege, 4000, 
Liege, Belgium.
(4)Metastasis Research Laboratory, GIGA-Cancer, University of Liege, 4000, 
Liege, Belgium.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital Center of Liege, 4000, 
Liege, Belgium.
(6)Laboratory of Human Genetics, GIGA-Cancer, University of Liege, 4000, Liege, 
Belgium.
(7)Department of Pathology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, AR, 72205, USA.
(8)Institute of Pathology, Lausanne University Hospital, University of Lausanne, 
1011, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(9)Department of Pathology, Besançon University Hospital, University of 
Bourgogne Franche-Comté, 25000, Besançon, France.
(10)EA3181, University of Bourgogne Franche-Comté, LabEx LipSTIC 
ANR-11-LABX-0021, 25000, Besançon, France.
(11)CNR Papillomavirus, Besançon University Hospital, 25000, Besançon, France.
(12)Department of Medicine, Division of Oncology, Stanford Cancer Institute, 
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94304, USA.
(13)Department of Gastroenterology, Besançon University Hospital, University of 
Bourgogne Franche-Comté, 25000, Besançon, France.
(14)Department of Pathology, Division of Women's and Perinatal Pathology, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02215, USA.

BACKGROUND: Primary adenocarcinoma of the anal canal is a rare and aggressive 
gastrointestinal disease with unclear pathogenesis. Because of its rarity, no 
clear clinical practice guideline has been defined and a targeted therapeutic 
armamentarium has yet to be developed. The present article aimed at addressing 
this information gap by in-depth characterising the anal glandular neoplasms at 
the histologic, immunologic, genomic and epidemiologic levels.
METHODS: In this multi-institutional study, we first examined the histological 
features displayed by each collected tumour (n = 74) and analysed their 
etiological relationship with human papillomavirus (HPV) infection. The 
intratumoural immune cell subsets (CD4, CD8, Foxp3), the expression of immune 
checkpoints (PD-1, PD-L1), the defect in mismatch repair proteins and the 
mutation analysis of multiple clinically relevant genes in the gastrointestinal 
cancer setting were also determined. Finally, the prognostic significance of 
each clinicopathological variable was assessed.
RESULTS: Phenotypic analysis revealed two region-specific subtypes of anal canal 
adenocarcinoma. The significant differences in the HPV status, density of 
tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes, expression of immune checkpoints and mutational 
profile of several targetable genes further supported the separation of these 
latter neoplasms into two distinct entities. Importantly, anal 
gland/transitional-type cancers, which poorly respond to standard treatments, 
displayed less mutations in downstream effectors of the EGFR signalling pathway 
(i.e., KRAS and NRAS) and demonstrated a significantly higher expression of the 
immune inhibitory ligand-receptor pair PD-1/PD-L1 compared to their counterparts 
arising from the colorectal mucosa.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, the findings reported in the present article 
reveal, for the first time, that glandular neoplasms of the anal canal arise by 
HPV-dependent or independent pathways. These etiological differences leads to 
both individual immune profiles and mutational landscapes that can be targeted 
for therapeutic benefits.

DOI: 10.1038/s41416-018-0049-2
PMCID: PMC5959925
PMID: 29700411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.