---
reference_id: "PMID:38653563"
title: Recent Update on Acute Kidney Injury-to-Chronic Kidney Disease Transition.
authors:
- Koh ES
- Chung S
journal: Yonsei Med J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3349/ymj.2023.0306
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent Update on Acute Kidney Injury-to-Chronic Kidney Disease Transition.
**Authors:** Koh ES, Chung S
**Journal:** Yonsei Med J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3349/ymj.2023.0306](https://doi.org/10.3349/ymj.2023.0306)

## Content

1. Yonsei Med J. 2024 May;65(5):247-256. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2023.0306.

Recent Update on Acute Kidney Injury-to-Chronic Kidney Disease Transition.

Koh ES(1), Chung S(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yeouido St. Mary's 
Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yeouido St. Mary's 
Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea. 
chungs@catholic.ac.kr.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is characterized by an abrupt decline of excretory 
kidney function. The incidence of AKI has increased in the past decades. 
Patients diagnosed with AKI often undergo diverse clinical trajectories, such as 
early or late recovery, relapses, and even a potential transition from AKI to 
chronic kidney disease (CKD). Although recent clinical studies have demonstrated 
a strong association between AKI and progression of CKD, our understanding of 
the complex relationship between AKI and CKD is still evolving. No cohort study 
has succeeded in painting a comprehensive picture of these multi-faceted 
pathways. To address this lack of understanding, the idea of acute kidney 
disease (AKD) has recently been proposed. This presents a new perspective to 
pinpoint a period of heightened vulnerability following AKI, during which a 
patient could witness a substantial decline in glomerular filtration rate, 
ultimately leading to CKD transition. Although AKI is included in a range of 
kidney conditions collectively known as AKD, spanning from mild and 
self-limiting to severe and persistent, AKD can also occur without a rapid onset 
usually seen in AKI, such as when kidney dysfunction slowly evolves. In the 
present review, we summarize the most recent findings about AKD, explore the 
current state of biomarker discovery related to AKD, discuss the latest insights 
into pathophysiological underpinnings of AKI to CKD transition, and reflect on 
therapeutic challenges and opportunities that lie ahead.

© Copyright: Yonsei University College of Medicine 2024.

DOI: 10.3349/ymj.2023.0306
PMCID: PMC11045347
PMID: 38653563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts of 
interest to disclose.