---
reference_id: "PMID:11792318"
title: The novel zinc finger-containing transcription factor osterix is required for osteoblast differentiation and bone formation.
authors:
- Nakashima K
- Zhou X
- Kunkel G
- Zhang Z
- Deng JM
- Behringer RR
- de Crombrugghe B
journal: Cell
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00622-5
keywords:
- Animals
- Biomarkers
- Cell Differentiation/physiology
- Chondrocytes/cytology
- Core Binding Factor Alpha 1 Subunit
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Neoplasm Proteins
- Osteoblasts/cytology
- Osteoclasts/cytology
- Osteogenesis/physiology
- Recombinant Proteins/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Zinc Fingers/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The novel zinc finger-containing transcription factor osterix is required for osteoblast differentiation and bone formation.
**Authors:** Nakashima K, Zhou X, Kunkel G, Zhang Z, Deng JM, Behringer RR, de Crombrugghe B
**Journal:** Cell (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00622-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00622-5)

## Content

1. Cell. 2002 Jan 11;108(1):17-29. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00622-5.

The novel zinc finger-containing transcription factor osterix is required for 
osteoblast differentiation and bone formation.

Nakashima K(1), Zhou X, Kunkel G, Zhang Z, Deng JM, Behringer RR, de Crombrugghe 
B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Program in Genes and Development, M. D. 
Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, 
TX 77030, USA.

We have identified a novel zinc finger-containing transcription factor, called 
Osterix (Osx), that is specifically expressed in all developing bones. In Osx 
null mice, no bone formation occurs. In endochondral skeletal elements of Osx 
null mice, mesenchymal cells, together with osteoclasts and blood vessels, 
invade the mineralized cartilage matrix. However, the mesenchymal cells do not 
deposit bone matrix. Similarly, cells in the periosteum and in the condensed 
mesenchyme of membranous skeletal elements cannot differentiate into 
osteoblasts. These cells do, however, express Runx2/Cbfa1, another transcription 
factor required for bone formation. In contrast, Osx is not expressed in 
Runx2/Cbfa1 null mice. Thus, Osx acts downstream of Runx2/Cbfa1. Because Osx 
null preosteoblasts express typical chondrocyte marker genes, we propose that 
Runx2/Cbfa1-expressing preosteoblasts are still bipotential cells.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00622-5
PMID: 11792318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]