---
reference_id: "PMID:26152315"
title: Large maculopapular cutaneous lesions are associated with favorable outcome in childhood-onset mastocytosis.
authors:
- Wiechers T
- Rabenhorst A
- Schick T
- Preussner LM
- Förster A
- Valent P
- Horny HP
- Sotlar K
- Hartmann K
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.05.034
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit/genetics
- Tryptases/blood
- "Urticaria Pigmentosa/blood, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Large maculopapular cutaneous lesions are associated with favorable outcome in childhood-onset mastocytosis.
**Authors:** Wiechers T, Rabenhorst A, Schick T, Preussner LM, Förster A, Valent P, Horny HP, Sotlar K, Hartmann K
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2015.05.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2015.05.034)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Dec;136(6):1581-1590.e3. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2015.05.034. Epub 2015 Jul 4.

Large maculopapular cutaneous lesions are associated with favorable outcome in 
childhood-onset mastocytosis.

Wiechers T(1), Rabenhorst A(1), Schick T(2), Preussner LM(1), Förster A(1), 
Valent P(3), Horny HP(4), Sotlar K(4), Hartmann K(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany; 
Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Hematology & Hemostaseology, 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Institute of Pathology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany.
(5)Department of Dermatology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany; 
Department of Dermatology, University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany. Electronic 
address: karin.hartmann@uksh.de.

BACKGROUND: Mastocytosis, characterized by pathologic accumulation of mast 
cells, can manifest itself in adulthood or childhood. Pediatric patients usually 
have cutaneous mastocytosis (CM) with mast cell infiltrates limited to the skin 
and spontaneous improvement of skin lesions after several years. However, there 
are some patients with persistent disease resembling adulthood-onset 
mastocytosis.
OBJECTIVE: The current classification of CM differentiates between 3 subforms. 
In clinical practice we noticed that different variants of these subforms might 
exist, particularly in patients with childhood-onset mastocytosis. Therefore, in 
the present study, we aimed to investigate whether specific cutaneous lesions in 
patients with childhood-onset mastocytosis are associated with other disease 
parameters.
METHODS: We analyzed 144 patients with a disease onset of less than age 17 years 
using a systematic dermatologic approach.
RESULTS: One hundred twenty-two patients presented with maculopapular cutaneous 
mastocytosis (MPCM), 12 patients presented with diffuse CM, and 10 patients 
presented with solitary mastocytoma of the skin. Patients with MPCM showed 
particularly heterogeneous cutaneous lesions and were therefore grouped into 3 
variants presenting either with small lesions (MPCM-small, skin lesions <1 cm in 
diameter; n = 19), large lesions (MPCM-large, skin lesions ≥ 1 cm in diameter; n 
= 89), or atypical lesions (MPCM-other, n = 14). Patients with MPCM-large 
lesions, compared with those with MPCM-small lesions, were characterized by 
significantly lower tryptase levels, shorter disease duration, and earlier 
disease onset. In addition, more patients with MPCM-large lesions exhibited 
spontaneous regression of cutaneous lesions.
CONCLUSION: Our data show that patients with MPCM-large lesions compared with 
those with MPCM-small lesions have a more favorable disease course and suggest 
exploring the size of cutaneous lesions as a prognostic parameter in 
childhood-onset MPCM.

Copyright © 2015 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.05.034
PMID: 26152315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]