---
reference_id: "PMID:34624068"
title: CCRK/CDK20 regulates ciliary retrograde protein trafficking via interacting with BROMI/TBC1D32.
authors:
- Noguchi T
- Nakamura K
- Satoda Y
- Katoh Y
- Nakayama K
journal: PLoS One
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258497
keywords:
- Cilia/metabolism
- Protein Transport
- Animals
- Mice
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism, genetics"
- Signal Transduction
- Protein Binding
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CCRK/CDK20 regulates ciliary retrograde protein trafficking via interacting with BROMI/TBC1D32.
**Authors:** Noguchi T, Nakamura K, Satoda Y, Katoh Y, Nakayama K
**Journal:** PLoS One (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0258497](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0258497)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 8;16(10):e0258497. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258497. 
eCollection 2021.

CCRK/CDK20 regulates ciliary retrograde protein trafficking via interacting with 
BROMI/TBC1D32.

Noguchi T(1), Nakamura K(1), Satoda Y(1), Katoh Y(1), Nakayama K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

CCRK/CDK20 was reported to interact with BROMI/TBC1D32 and regulate ciliary 
Hedgehog signaling. In various organisms, mutations in the orthologs of CCRK and 
those of the kinase ICK/CILK1, which is phosphorylated by CCRK, are known to 
result in cilia elongation. Furthermore, we recently showed that ICK regulates 
retrograde ciliary protein trafficking and/or the turnaround event at the 
ciliary tips, and that its mutations result in the elimination of intraflagellar 
transport (IFT) proteins that have overaccumulated at the bulged ciliary tips as 
extracellular vesicles, in addition to cilia elongation. However, how these 
proteins cooperate to regulate ciliary protein trafficking has remained unclear. 
We here show that the phenotypes of CCRK-knockout (KO) cells closely resemble 
those of ICK-KO cells; namely, the overaccumulation of IFT proteins at the 
bulged ciliary tips, which appear to be eliminated as extracellular vesicles, 
and the enrichment of GPR161 and Smoothened on the ciliary membrane. The 
abnormal phenotypes of CCRK-KO cells were rescued by the exogenous expression of 
wild-type CCRK but not its kinase-dead mutant or a mutant defective in BROMI 
binding. These results together indicate that CCRK regulates the turnaround 
process at the ciliary tips in concert with BROMI and probably via activating 
ICK.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258497
PMCID: PMC8500422
PMID: 34624068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No authors have competing interests.