---
reference_id: "PMID:12836217"
title: "[The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: the extracellular matrix scaffold in question]."
authors:
- Fichard A
- Chanut-Delalande H
- Ruggiero F
journal: Med Sci (Paris)
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1051/medsci/2003194443
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: the extracellular matrix scaffold in question].
**Authors:** Fichard A, Chanut-Delalande H, Ruggiero F
**Journal:** Med Sci (Paris) (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1051/medsci/2003194443](https://doi.org/10.1051/medsci/2003194443)

## Content

1. Med Sci (Paris). 2003 Apr;19(4):443-52. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2003194443.

[The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: the extracellular matrix scaffold in question].

[Article in French]

Fichard A(1), Chanut-Delalande H, Ruggiero F.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie et Chimie des Protéines, UMR Cnrs 5086, 7, passage du 
Vercors, 69367 Lyon, France.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a heterogeneous heritable connective tissue 
disorder characterized by hyper-extensible skin, hypermobile joints and fragile 
vessels. The molecular causes of this disorder are often, although not strictly, 
related to collagens and to the enzymes that process these proteins. The 
classical form of the syndrome, which will be principally discussed in this 
review, can be due to mutations on collagen V, a fibrillar collagen present in 
small amounts in affected tissues. However, collagen I and tenascin have also 
been demonstrated to be involved in the same type of EDS. Moreover gene 
disruption of several other matrix molecules (thrombospondin, SPARC, small 
leucine rich proteoglycans...) in mice, lead to phenotypes that mimic EDS and 
these molecules have thus emerged as new players. As collagen V remains the 
prime candidate, we discuss, based on fundamental and clinical observations, its 
physiological role. We also explore its potential interactions with other matrix 
molecules to determine tissue properties.

DOI: 10.1051/medsci/2003194443
PMID: 12836217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]