---
reference_id: "PMID:36568833"
title: "Antibiotics and Antimicrobial Resistance in Acne: Epidemiological Trends and Clinical Practice Considerations."
authors:
- Dessinioti C
- Katsambas A
journal: Yale J Biol Med
year: '2022'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antibiotics and Antimicrobial Resistance in Acne: Epidemiological Trends and Clinical Practice Considerations.
**Authors:** Dessinioti C, Katsambas A
**Journal:** Yale J Biol Med (2022)

## Content

1. Yale J Biol Med. 2022 Dec 22;95(4):429-443. eCollection 2022 Dec.

Antibiotics and Antimicrobial Resistance in Acne: Epidemiological Trends and 
Clinical Practice Considerations.

Dessinioti C(1), Katsambas A(2).

Author information:
(1)1st Department of Dermatology, Andreas Sygros Hospital, University of Athens, 
Athens, Greece.
(2)University of Athens, Athens, Greece.

Antimicrobial resistance is an increasing public health problem worldwide. The 
interest of a focus on antimicrobial resistance in acne lies on the facts that 
acne vulgaris (acne) is the most common skin disease worldwide, that the 
bacterium Cutibacterium acnes (C. acnes, formerly Propionibacterium acnes) plays 
a key role in the pathogenesis of acne, while at the same time being part of the 
skin flora, and that antibiotics are commonly recommended for acne treatment. 
The overuse of topical and/or systemic antibiotics, the long treatment courses 
used for acne, and the availability of over-the-counter antibiotic preparations, 
have led to the worldwide emergence of resistant strains in acne patients. In 
this review, we discuss the epidemiological trends of antimicrobial resistance 
in acne, the need to avoid the perturbation of the skin microbiome caused by 
anti-acne antibiotics, and the clinical practice considerations related to the 
emergence of resistant strains in acne patients. In light of the increasing risk 
of antimicrobial resistance, raising concerns over the misuse of antibiotics, 
prescribing patterns can be a critical target for antibiotic stewardship 
efforts. Also, the selection of non-antibiotic therapies for acne, whenever 
possible, may offer significant advantages.

Copyright ©2022, Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine.

PMCID: PMC9765333
PMID: 36568833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]