---
reference_id: "PMID:12210347"
title: "Familial Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly, cardiac malformations, and sensorineural hearing loss: a provisionally unique genetic syndrome?"
authors:
- Grosso S
- Farnetani MA
- Berardi R
- Vivarelli R
- Vanni M
- Morgese G
- Balestri P
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.10493
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly, cardiac malformations, and sensorineural hearing loss: a provisionally unique genetic syndrome?
**Authors:** Grosso S, Farnetani MA, Berardi R, Vivarelli R, Vanni M, Morgese G, Balestri P
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.10493](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.10493)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Aug 1;111(2):182-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.10493.

Familial Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly, cardiac malformations, and sensorineural 
hearing loss: a provisionally unique genetic syndrome?

Grosso S(1), Farnetani MA, Berardi R, Vivarelli R, Vanni M, Morgese G, Balestri 
P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.

Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly (ARA) is an autosomal dominant disorder of the anterior 
chamber of the eye that includes a prominent and anteriorly displaced Schwalbe 
line and an iridocorneal synechiae, and is associated with iris hypoplasia, 
corectopia, and hole formation. Extraocular developmental abnormalities, 
especially of the teeth, facial bones, and periumbilical skin, have also been 
reported with ARA, in the context of the so-called Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome 
(ARS). Genetic heterogeneity exists, as ARA maps to chromosome 6p25, whereas ARS 
can be linked to both chromosome 4q25 and chromosome 13q14. Here we describe a 
new family in which ARA is associated with cardiac malformations and 
sensorineural hearing loss. No abnormalities of the teeth, facial bone, or 
periumbilical skin, which are considered of paramount importance in the 
diagnosis of ARS, were observed in our patients. Genetic studies will clarify if 
these patients represent a unique phenotypic expression of ARS or constitute the 
clinical presentation of a new genetic syndrome.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.10493
PMID: 12210347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]