---
reference_id: "PMID:38915825"
title: "Worldwide cohort study of 46, XY differences/disorders of sex development genetic diagnoses: geographic and ethnic differences in variants."
authors:
- Jiali C
- Huifang P
- Yuqing J
- Xiantao Z
- Hongwei J
journal: Front Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1387598
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Worldwide cohort study of 46, XY differences/disorders of sex development genetic diagnoses: geographic and ethnic differences in variants.
**Authors:** Jiali C, Huifang P, Yuqing J, Xiantao Z, Hongwei J
**Journal:** Front Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2024.1387598](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2024.1387598)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2024 Jun 10;15:1387598. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1387598. 
eCollection 2024.

Worldwide cohort study of 46, XY differences/disorders of sex development 
genetic diagnoses: geographic and ethnic differences in variants.

Jiali C(#)(1), Huifang P(#)(1), Yuqing J(1), Xiantao Z(2), Hongwei J(1).

Author information:
(1)Henan Key Laboratory of Rare Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, and 
College of Clinical Medicine of Henan University of Science and Technology, 
Luoyang, China.
(2)Center for Evidence-Based and Translational Medicine, Zhongnan Hospital of 
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Differences/disorders of sex development (DSDs) in individuals with a 46, XY 
karyotype are a group of congenital disorders that manifest as male gonadal 
hypoplasia or abnormalities of the external genitalia. Approximately 50% of 
patients with 46, XY DSDs cannot obtain a molecular diagnosis. The aims of this 
paper were to review the most common causative genes and rare genes in patients 
with 46, XY DSDs, analyze global molecular diagnostic cohorts for the prevalence 
and geographic distribution of causative genes, and identify the factors 
affecting cohort detection results. Although the spectrum of genetic variants 
varies across regions and the severity of the clinical phenotype varies across 
patients, next-generation sequencing (NGS), the most commonly used detection 
method, can still reveal genetic variants and aid in diagnosis. A comparison of 
the detection rates of various sequencing modalities revealed that whole-exome 
sequencing (WES) facilitates a greater rate of molecular diagnosis of the 
disease than panel sequencing. Whole-genome sequencing (WGS), third-generation 
sequencing, and algorithm advancements will contribute to the improvement of 
detection efficiency. The most commonly mutated genes associated with androgen 
synthesis and action are AR, SR5A2, and HSD17B3, and the most commonly mutated 
genes involved in gonadal formation are NR5A1 and MAP3K1. Detection results are 
affected by differences in enrollment criteria and sequencing technologies.

Copyright © 2024 Jiali, Huifang, Yuqing, Xiantao and Hongwei.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1387598
PMCID: PMC11194351
PMID: 38915825

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.