---
reference_id: "PMID:34085743"
title: "European Academy of Neurology/Peripheral Nerve Society guideline on diagnosis and treatment of chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy: Report of a joint Task Force-Second revision."
authors:
- Van den Bergh PYK
- van Doorn PA
- Hadden RDM
- Avau B
- Vankrunkelsven P
- Allen JA
- Attarian S
- Blomkwist-Markens PH
- Cornblath DR
- Eftimov F
- Goedee HS
- Harbo T
- Kuwabara S
- Lewis RA
- Lunn MP
- Nobile-Orazio E
- Querol L
- Rajabally YA
- Sommer C
- Topaloglu HA
journal: J Peripher Nerv Syst
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/jns.12455
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
- Neurology
- Peripheral Nerves
- "Polyradiculoneuropathy, Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating/diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# European Academy of Neurology/Peripheral Nerve Society guideline on diagnosis and treatment of chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy: Report of a joint Task Force-Second revision.
**Authors:** Van den Bergh PYK, van Doorn PA, Hadden RDM, Avau B, Vankrunkelsven P, Allen JA, Attarian S, Blomkwist-Markens PH, Cornblath DR, Eftimov F, Goedee HS, Harbo T, Kuwabara S, Lewis RA, Lunn MP, Nobile-Orazio E, Querol L, Rajabally YA, Sommer C, Topaloglu HA
**Journal:** J Peripher Nerv Syst (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jns.12455](https://doi.org/10.1111/jns.12455)

## Content

1. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2021 Sep;26(3):242-268. doi: 10.1111/jns.12455. Epub
2021  Jul 30.

European Academy of Neurology/Peripheral Nerve Society guideline on diagnosis 
and treatment of chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy: 
Report of a joint Task Force-Second revision.

Van den Bergh PYK(1), van Doorn PA(2), Hadden RDM(3), Avau B(4), Vankrunkelsven 
P(5), Allen JA(6), Attarian S(7), Blomkwist-Markens PH(8), Cornblath DR(9), 
Eftimov F(10), Goedee HS(11), Harbo T(12), Kuwabara S(13), Lewis RA(14), Lunn 
MP(15), Nobile-Orazio E(16), Querol L(17), Rajabally YA(18), Sommer C(19), 
Topaloglu HA(20).

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Reference Centre, Department of Neurology, University Hospital 
Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Department of Neurology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Neurology, King's College Hospital, London, UK.
(4)Cochrane Belgium, CEBAM, Leuven, Belgium and CEBaP, Belgian Red Cross, 
Mechelen, Belgium.
(5)Cochrane Belgium, CEBAM, Leuven, Belgium.
(6)Department of Neurology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 
USA.
(7)Centre de Référence des Maladies Neuromusculaires et de la SLA, APHM, CHU 
Timone, Marseille, France.
(8)Patient Representative GBS/CIDP Foundation International, International 
Office, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(9)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(10)Department of Neurology, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(11)Department of Neuromuscular Disorders, University Medical Centre Utrecht, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(12)Department of Neurology, Århus University Hospital, Århus, Denmark.
(13)Department of Neurology, Chiba University Hospital, Chiba, Japan.
(14)Department of Neurology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.
(15)Department of Neurology and MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, National 
Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, UK.
(16)Neuromuscular and Neuroimmunology Service, IRCCS Humanitas Clinical and 
Research Center, Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, 
University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(17)Neuromuscular Diseases Unit-Neurology Department, Hospital de la Santa Creu 
I Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
(18)Regional Neuromuscular Service, Neurology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital 
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(19)Neurology Clinic, University Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(20)Department of Pediatrics, Yeditepe University, İstanbul, Turkey.

Erratum in
    J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2022 Mar;27(1):94. doi: 10.1111/jns.12479.
    Eur J Neurol. 2022 Apr;29(4):1288. doi: 10.1111/ene.15225.

Comment in
    J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2024 Jun;29(2):286-287. doi: 10.1111/jns.12639.

To revise the 2010 consensus guideline on chronic inflammatory demyelinating 
polyradiculoneuropathy (CIDP). Seventeen disease experts, a patient 
representative, and two Cochrane methodologists constructed 12 
Population/Intervention/Comparison/Outcome (PICO) questions regarding diagnosis 
and treatment to guide the literature search. Data were extracted and summarized 
in GRADE summary of findings (for treatment PICOs) or evidence tables (for 
diagnostic PICOs). Statements were prepared according to the GRADE 
Evidence-to-Decision frameworks. Typical CIDP and CIDP variants were 
distinguished. The previous term "atypical CIDP" was replaced by "CIDP variants" 
because these are well characterized entities (multifocal, focal, distal, motor, 
or sensory CIDP). The levels of diagnostic certainty were reduced from three 
(definite, probable, possible CIDP) to only two (CIDP and possible CIDP), 
because the diagnostic accuracy of criteria for probable and definite CIDP did 
not significantly differ. Good Practice Points were formulated for supportive 
criteria and investigations to be considered to diagnose CIDP. The principal 
treatment recommendations were: (a) intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) or 
corticosteroids are strongly recommended as initial treatment in typical CIDP 
and CIDP variants; (b) plasma exchange is strongly recommended if IVIg and 
corticosteroids are ineffective; (c) IVIg should be considered as first-line 
treatment in motor CIDP (Good Practice Point); (d) for maintenance treatment, 
IVIg, subcutaneous immunoglobulin or corticosteroids are recommended; (e) if the 
maintenance dose of any of these is high, consider either combination treatments 
or adding an immunosuppressant or immunomodulatory drug (Good Practice Point); 
and (f) if pain is present, consider drugs against neuropathic pain and 
multidisciplinary management (Good Practice Point).

© 2021 European Academy of Neurology and Peripheral Nerve Society.

DOI: 10.1111/jns.12455
PMID: 34085743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]