---
reference_id: "PMID:36084640"
title: Space microgravity improves proliferation of human iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes.
authors:
- Rampoldi A
- Forghani P
- Li D
- Hwang H
- Armand LC
- Fite J
- Boland G
- Maxwell J
- Maher K
- Xu C
journal: Stem Cell Reports
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2022.08.007
keywords:
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Proliferation
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
- "Myocytes, Cardiac"
- Weightlessness
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Space microgravity improves proliferation of human iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes.
**Authors:** Rampoldi A, Forghani P, Li D, Hwang H, Armand LC, Fite J, Boland G, Maxwell J, Maher K, Xu C
**Journal:** Stem Cell Reports (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.stemcr.2022.08.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stemcr.2022.08.007)

## Content

1. Stem Cell Reports. 2022 Oct 11;17(10):2272-2285. doi: 
10.1016/j.stemcr.2022.08.007. Epub 2022 Sep 8.

Space microgravity improves proliferation of human iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes.

Rampoldi A(1), Forghani P(1), Li D(1), Hwang H(1), Armand LC(1), Fite J(2), 
Boland G(2), Maxwell J(1), Maher K(1), Xu C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine and Children's 
Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)Techshot, Inc., Greenville, IN, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine and Children's 
Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA, USA; Wallace H. Coulter Department of 
Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology and Emory University, 
Atlanta, GA, USA. Electronic address: chunhui.xu@emory.edu.

In microgravity, cells undergo profound changes in their properties. However, 
how human cardiac progenitors respond to space microgravity is unknown. In this 
study, we evaluated the effect of space microgravity on differentiation of human 
induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived cardiac progenitors compared with 
1G cultures on the International Space Station (ISS). Cryopreserved 3D cardiac 
progenitors were cultured for 3 weeks on the ISS. Compared with 1G cultures, the 
microgravity cultures had 3-fold larger sphere sizes, 20-fold higher counts of 
nuclei, and increased expression of proliferation markers. Highly enriched 
cardiomyocytes generated in space microgravity showed improved Ca2+ handling and 
increased expression of contraction-associated genes. Short-term exposure 
(3 days) of cardiac progenitors to space microgravity upregulated genes involved 
in cell proliferation, survival, cardiac differentiation, and contraction, 
consistent with improved microgravity cultures at the late stage. These results 
indicate that space microgravity increased proliferation of 
hiPSC-cardiomyocytes, which had appropriate structure and function.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2022.08.007
PMCID: PMC9561632
PMID: 36084640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest J.F. and G.B. were 
employees of Techshot. All other authors declare no competing interests.