---
reference_id: "PMID:30304514"
title: Bi-allelic mutations of LONP1 encoding the mitochondrial LonP1 protease cause pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency and profound neurodegeneration with progressive cerebellar atrophy.
authors:
- Nimmo GAM
- Venkatesh S
- Pandey AK
- Marshall CR
- Hazrati LN
- Blaser S
- Ahmed S
- Cameron J
- Singh K
- Ray PN
- Suzuki CK
- Yoon G
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy351
keywords:
- ATP-Dependent Proteases/genetics
- Alleles
- "Cerebellar Diseases/enzymology, genetics"
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/metabolism"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Lactates/metabolism
- Male
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/enzymology, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Phosphorylation
- Protein Subunits/metabolism
- Proteolysis
- "Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Deficiency Disease/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bi-allelic mutations of LONP1 encoding the mitochondrial LonP1 protease cause pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency and profound neurodegeneration with progressive cerebellar atrophy.
**Authors:** Nimmo GAM, Venkatesh S, Pandey AK, Marshall CR, Hazrati LN, Blaser S, Ahmed S, Cameron J, Singh K, Ray PN, Suzuki CK, Yoon G
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddy351](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddy351)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2019 Jan 15;28(2):290-306. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy351.

Bi-allelic mutations of LONP1 encoding the mitochondrial LonP1 protease cause
pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency and profound neurodegeneration with
progressive cerebellar atrophy.

Nimmo GAM(1), Venkatesh S(2), Pandey AK(2), Marshall CR(3)(4), Hazrati LN(5),
Blaser S(6), Ahmed S(1), Cameron J(3), Singh K(7)(8), Ray PN(3)(4)(9), Suzuki
CK(2), Yoon G(1)(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Paediatrics, The
Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry, and Molecular Genetics, New Jersey
Medical School, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Newark, NJ, USA.
(3)Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)The Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.
(5)Division of Neuropathology, The Hospital for Sick Children, The University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Division of Paediatric Neuroradiology, The Hospital for Sick Children,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(7)Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Christopher Bond Life Sciences Center,
University of Missouri School of Medicine, Columbia, Missouri, USA.
(8)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Clinical Microbiology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, SE Sweden.
(9)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.
(10)Division of Neurology, Department of Paediatrics, The Hospital for Sick
Children, The University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

LonP1 is crucial for maintaining mitochondrial proteostasis and mitigating cell
stress. We identified a novel homozygous missense LONP1 variant, c.2282 C > T,
(p.Pro761Leu), by whole-exome and Sanger sequencing in two siblings born to
healthy consanguineous parents. Both siblings presented with stepwise regression
during infancy, profound hypotonia and muscle weakness, severe intellectual
disability and progressive cerebellar atrophy on brain imaging. Muscle biopsy
revealed the absence of ragged-red fibers, however, scattered cytochrome c
oxidase-negative staining and electron dense mitochondrial inclusions were
observed. Primary cultured fibroblasts from the siblings showed normal levels of
mtDNA and mitochondrial transcripts, and normal activities of oxidative
phosphorylation complexes I through V. Interestingly, fibroblasts of both
siblings showed glucose-repressed oxygen consumption compared to their mother,
whereas galactose and palmitic acid utilization were similar. Notably, the
siblings' fibroblasts had reduced pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) activity and
elevated intracellular lactate:pyruvate ratios, whereas plasma ratios were
normal. We demonstrated that in the siblings' fibroblasts, PDH dysfunction was
caused by increased levels of the phosphorylated E1α subunit of PDH, which
inhibits enzyme activity. Blocking E1α phosphorylation activated PDH and reduced
intracellular lactate concentrations. In addition, overexpressing wild-type
LonP1 in the siblings' fibroblasts down-regulated phosphoE1α. Furthermore, in
vitro studies demonstrated that purified LonP1-P761L failed to degrade
phosphorylated E1α, in contrast to wild-type LonP1. We propose a novel mechanism
whereby homozygous expression of the LonP1-P761L variant leads to PDH deficiency
and energy metabolism dysfunction, which promotes severe neurologic impairment
and neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddy351
PMCID: PMC6322071
PMID: 30304514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
