---
reference_id: "PMID:2959621"
title: How can we diagnose coronary heart disease in hypertensive patients?
authors:
- Prisant LM
- Frank MJ
- Carr AA
- von Dohlen TW
- Abdulla AM
journal: Hypertension
year: '1987'
doi: 10.1161/01.hyp.10.5.467
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How can we diagnose coronary heart disease in hypertensive patients?
**Authors:** Prisant LM, Frank MJ, Carr AA, von Dohlen TW, Abdulla AM
**Journal:** Hypertension (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.hyp.10.5.467](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.hyp.10.5.467)

## Content

1. Hypertension. 1987 Nov;10(5):467-72. doi: 10.1161/01.hyp.10.5.467.

How can we diagnose coronary heart disease in hypertensive patients?

Prisant LM(1), Frank MJ, Carr AA, von Dohlen TW, Abdulla AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta.

Chest pain is a common complaint among hypertensive patients. Hypertension and 
coronary heart disease each may present with symptoms and signs that are 
clinically indistinguishable. Noninvasive testing by routine exercise stress 
testing and stress radionuclide angiography are not reliably predictive of 
ischemia resulting from obstructive epicardial coronary artery disease and 
should be abandoned for that diagnostic purpose. Noninvasive thallium-201 
myocardial perfusion imaging for this purpose may prove to be a valuable tool, 
avoiding the risk and expense of coronary arteriography. However, carefully 
performed prospective studies are not available. Because of the high prevalence 
of both diseases, a high priority must be given to obtaining these data and 
evaluating other noninvasive methods (especially positron emission tomography) 
if they appear promising.

DOI: 10.1161/01.hyp.10.5.467
PMID: 2959621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]