---
reference_id: "PMID:25001940"
title: "[Detection and analysis of Toll-like receptors and DC-SIGN expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with chronic urticaria]."
authors:
- Wang X
- Liu J
- Song S
- Xu B
- Tan X
- Si S
journal: Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi
year: '2014'
keywords:
- Adult
- "Cell Adhesion Molecules/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chronic Disease
- Female
- Flow Cytometry
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- "Lectins, C-Type/genetics, metabolism"
- "Leukocytes, Mononuclear/metabolism"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Receptors, Cell Surface/genetics, metabolism"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Toll-Like Receptor 2/genetics, metabolism"
- "Toll-Like Receptor 7/genetics, metabolism"
- "Toll-Like Receptor 9/genetics, metabolism"
- "Toll-Like Receptors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Urticaria/blood, genetics, metabolism"
- Young Adult
- DC-Specific ICAM-3 Grabbing Nonintegrin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Detection and analysis of Toll-like receptors and DC-SIGN expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with chronic urticaria].
**Authors:** Wang X, Liu J, Song S, Xu B, Tan X, Si S
**Journal:** Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi (2014)

## Content

1. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Jul;30(7):736-9.

[Detection and analysis of Toll-like receptors and DC-SIGN expression in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with chronic urticaria].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang X(1), Liu J(2), Song S(3), Xu B(3), Tan X(3), Si S(3).

Author information:
(1)No.306 Clinical College of PLA, Anhui Medical University, Beijing 100101,
China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, No.306 Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100101, China.
(3)Center for Special Medicine and Experimental Research, No.306 Hospital of
PLA, Beijing 100101, China.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the expressions of Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2), TLR7, TLR9
and dendritic cell-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing
nonintegrin (DC-SIGN) mRNA and protein in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) from patients with chronic urticaria (CU).
METHODS: PBMCs were isolated from 20 patients with CU and 20 normal controls.
The expressions of TLR2, TLR7, TLR9 and DC-SIGN mRNA were detected by real-time
fluorescent quantitative PCR and the expressions of their proteins were detected
by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: The expression of DC-SIGN mRNA in PBMCs from patients with CU was
significantly lower than that from normal controls (P<0.01). The expression of
TLR2 protein was significantly higher (P<0.05), but the expression of DC-SIGN
protein was significantly lower (P<0.05) in CU patients than those in normal
controls.
CONCLUSION: The expression of DC-SIGN decreases and that of TLR2 protein
increases in patients with CU.

PMID: 25001940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
