---
reference_id: "PMID:28002825"
title: "From Common to Rare Variants: The Genetic Component of Alzheimer Disease."
authors:
- Nicolas G
- Charbonnier C
- Campion D
journal: Hum Hered
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1159/000452256
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From Common to Rare Variants: The Genetic Component of Alzheimer Disease.
**Authors:** Nicolas G, Charbonnier C, Campion D
**Journal:** Hum Hered (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000452256](https://doi.org/10.1159/000452256)

## Content

1. Hum Hered. 2016;81(3):129-141. doi: 10.1159/000452256. Epub 2016 Dec 22.

From Common to Rare Variants: The Genetic Component of Alzheimer Disease.

Nicolas G(1), Charbonnier C, Campion D.

Author information:
(1)CNR-MAJ, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France.

Alzheimer disease (AD) is a remarkable example of genetic heterogeneity. 
Extremely rare variants in the APP, PSEN1, or PSEN2 genes, or duplications of 
the APP gene cause autosomal dominant forms, generally with complete penetrance 
by the age of 65 years. Nonautosomal dominant forms are considered as a complex 
disorder with a high genetic component, whatever the age of onset. Although 
genetically heterogeneous, AD is defined by the same neuropathological criteria 
in all configurations. According to the amyloid cascade hypothesis, the Aβ 
peptide, which aggregates in AD brains, is a key player. APP, PSEN1, or PSEN2 
gene mutations increase the production of more aggregation-prone forms of the Aβ 
peptide, triggering the pathological process. Several risk factors identified in 
association studies hit genes involved in Aβ production/secretion, aggregation, 
clearance, or toxicity. Among them, the APOE ε4 allele is a rare example of a 
common allele with a large effect size, the ORs ranging from 4 to 11-14 for 
heterozygous and homozygous carriers, respectively. In addition, genome-wide 
association studies have identified more than two dozen loci with a weak but 
significant association, the OR of the at-risk allele ranging from 1.08 to 1.30. 
Recently, the use of massive parallel sequencing has enabled the analysis of 
rare variants in a genome-wide manner. Two rare variants have been nominally 
associated with AD risk or protection (TREM2 p.R47H, MAF approximately 0.002, OR 
approximately 4 and APP p.A673T, MAF approximately 0.0005, OR approximately 
0.2). Association analyses at the gene level identified rare loss-of-function 
and missense, predicted damaging, variants (MAF <0.01) in the SORL1 and ABCA7 
genes associated with a moderate relative risk (OR approximately 5 and 
approximately 2.8, respectively). Although the latter analyses revealed 
association signals with moderately rare variants by collapsing them, the power 
to detect genes hit by extremely rare variants is still limited. An alternative 
approach is to consider the de novo paradigm, stating that de novo variants may 
contribute to AD genetics in sporadic patients. Here, we critically review AD 
genetics reports with a special focus on rare variants.

© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000452256
PMID: 28002825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]