---
reference_id: "PMID:39444518"
title: Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism as First Presentation of the Severe Neuroendocrine Disorder Caused by RNF216.
authors:
- Rochtus A
- Asscherickx W
- Timmers M
- Vermeer S
- Antonio L
journal: JCEM Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1210/jcemcr/luae195
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism as First Presentation of the Severe Neuroendocrine Disorder Caused by RNF216.
**Authors:** Rochtus A, Asscherickx W, Timmers M, Vermeer S, Antonio L
**Journal:** JCEM Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcemcr/luae195](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcemcr/luae195)

## Content

1. JCEM Case Rep. 2024 Oct 23;2(11):luae195. doi: 10.1210/jcemcr/luae195. 
eCollection 2024 Nov.

Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism as First Presentation of the Severe Neuroendocrine 
Disorder Caused by RNF216.

Rochtus A(1), Asscherickx W(1), Timmers M(2), Vermeer S(3), Antonio L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospitals Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, University Hospitals Leuven, 3000 Leuven, 
Belgium.
(3)Department of Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Biallelic pathogenic variants in RNF216 cause a syndrome characterized by 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, cerebellar ataxia, chorea, and cognitive 
impairment, a combination first described as Gordon Holmes syndrome (MIM 
212840). We report 2 siblings who were referred due to absent or delayed 
puberty. The older sibling, a 17-year-old male, presented with absence of 
secondary sexual characteristics and a high-pitched voice. He had normal 
cognitive development and no anosmia. Clinical examination revealed Tanner stage 
P1/G1 and bilateral gynecomastia. Blood tests showed low gonadotropin and 
morning testosterone levels. His 15-year-old sister was referred due to primary 
amenorrhea. She had spontaneous thelarche and presented with Tanner stage P3/B3. 
Pituitary magnetic resonance imaging was performed on the brother due to 
suspicion of Kallmann syndrome, revealing a normal anterior pituitary, a 
hypoplastic posterior pituitary, and an extensive supratentorial 
leuko-encephalopathy. Whole-exome sequencing revealed a homozygous pathogenic 
variant in RNF216 in both affected siblings. Both parents were heterozygous 
carriers. RNF216 pathogenic variants cause a disorder characterized by combined 
neurodegeneration and reproductive dysfunction. Although neurological symptoms 
are typically recognized first, they often seem to follow the onset of 
hypogonadism. This highlights the need for awareness, as hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism may be the initial manifestation of this severe neuroendocrine 
disorder, especially in males.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/jcemcr/luae195
PMCID: PMC11497609
PMID: 39444518