---
reference_id: "PMID:34408948"
title: "Anophthalmia, Global Developmental Delay, and Severe Dysphagia in a Young Girl With 14q22q23 Microdeletion Syndrome."
authors:
- Kera J
- Watal P
- Ali SA
journal: Cureus
year: '2021'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.16395
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anophthalmia, Global Developmental Delay, and Severe Dysphagia in a Young Girl With 14q22q23 Microdeletion Syndrome.
**Authors:** Kera J, Watal P, Ali SA
**Journal:** Cureus (2021)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.16395](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.16395)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2021 Jul 14;13(7):e16395. doi: 10.7759/cureus.16395. eCollection 2021 
Jul.

Anophthalmia, Global Developmental Delay, and Severe Dysphagia in a Young Girl 
With 14q22q23 Microdeletion Syndrome.

Kera J(1), Watal P(2), Ali SA(3).

Author information:
(1)Medicine, University of Central Florida College of Medicine, Orlando, USA.
(2)Radiology, Nemours Children's Hospital, Orlando, USA.
(3)Inpatient Pediatrics, Nemours Children's Hospital, Orlando, USA.

14q22q23 microdeletion syndrome, also called Frias syndrome, is an extremely 
rare partial deletion of the long arm of chromosome 14 characterized by the 
anomalies of the pituitary gland, eyes, and hand/foot. Intellectual disability 
and facial dysmorphism are other common manifestations. Haploinsufficiency of 
the genes bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) and orthodenticle homeobox 2 
(OTX2) accounts for most of the phenotypic abnormalities seen in these patients. 
There are only a few cases reported with Frias syndrome in the literature, and 
there are multiple variations present, which are not well recognized due to 
different set of genes involved. This case report presents the case of a young 
child with a deletion in 14q22.2q23.1 region containing both BMP4 and OTX2 genes 
as well as sineoculis homeobox homolog 1 (SIX1) and sineoculis homeobox homolog 
6 (SIX6) genes. The case report illustrates the wide phenotypic findings 
associated with these genes along with additional unique findings that 
previously have not been commonly reported.

Copyright © 2021, Kera et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.16395
PMCID: PMC8362864
PMID: 34408948

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.