---
reference_id: "PMID:25172238"
title: "Methotrexate for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in the biologic era: still an \"anchor\" drug?"
authors:
- Favalli EG
- Biggioggero M
- Meroni PL
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2014.08.026
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Methotrexate for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in the biologic era: still an "anchor" drug?
**Authors:** Favalli EG, Biggioggero M, Meroni PL
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2014.08.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2014.08.026)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2014 Nov;13(11):1102-8. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2014.08.026. Epub
 2014 Aug 26.

Methotrexate for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in the biologic era: 
still an "anchor" drug?

Favalli EG(1), Biggioggero M(2), Meroni PL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Gaetano Pini Institute, Milan, Italy. Electronic 
address: enniofavalli@me.com.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Gaetano Pini Institute, Milan, Italy; Department 
of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, Istituto 
Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy.

The improvement of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) management has been strictly 
related to methotrexate (MTX) long-term effectiveness, safety profile and its 
widespread use in clinical practice over the last decades. According to the 
results of several head-to-head comparative trials against other synthetic 
DMARDs, MTX has been recognised as the "anchor drug" for the treatment of RA at 
the end of the 1990s. The subsequent increasing knowledge in the area of RA 
pathophysiology has progressively expanded the arsenal of available therapeutic 
tools, especially by the introduction of novel drugs such as biological DMARDs. 
The introduction of therapies targeted to key molecules and cells involved in RA 
pathogenesis has significantly changed the strategies for disease management, 
possibly modifying the key role of MTX. This review first analyses data 
supporting the evolution of MTX towards the role of "anchor drug" for RA in the 
pre-biologic era. We will then examine how the introduction and progressive 
spreading of biological agents could have modified the central role of MTX in 
the approach to RA.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2014.08.026
PMID: 25172238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]