---
reference_id: "PMID:37980821"
title: Incidence and risk of stroke in Korean patients with congenital heart disease.
authors:
- Lee JS
- Choi J
- Shin HJ
- Jung JM
- Seo WK
journal: J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2023.107408
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence and risk of stroke in Korean patients with congenital heart disease.
**Authors:** Lee JS, Choi J, Shin HJ, Jung JM, Seo WK
**Journal:** J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2023.107408](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2023.107408)

## Content

1. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2023 Dec;32(12):107408. doi: 
10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2023.107408. Epub 2023 Nov 17.

Incidence and risk of stroke in Korean patients with congenital heart disease.

Lee JS(1), Choi J(2), Shin HJ(3), Jung JM(4), Seo WK(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Korea University Anam Hospital, Korea University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Neurology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Myoungju Hospital, Yongin, 
Korea.
(4)Department of Neurology, Korea University Ansan Hospital, Korea University 
College of Medicine, Ansan, Korea; Korea University Zebrafish Translational 
Medical Research Center, Ansan, Korea. Electronic address: 
dr.jinmanjung@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVES: The incidence and risk of ischemic stroke (IS) and hemorrhagic 
stroke (HS) in Korean patients with CHD have not been reported, therefore, we 
aimed to investigate this.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Participants were selected from the Korean National 
Health Insurance Service benefit records from 2006-2017. Cases were extracted 
using diagnosis codes related to CHD. Controls without CHD were selected through 
age- and sex-matched random sampling at a 1:10 ratio.
RESULTS: The case and control groups included 232,203 and 3,024,633 
participants, respectively. The median (interquartile range) follow-up period 
was 7.28 (3.59-8.73) years. The incidence rates of IS and HS per 100,000 
person-years were much higher in cases than in controls (IS: 135 vs. 47; HS: 
41.7 vs. 24.9). After adjusting for confounders, CHD was a risk factor for IS 
and HS (subdistribution HR; 1.96 and 1.71, respectively). In patients with CHD, 
the following risk factors were identified: diabetes, heart failure, and atrial 
fibrillation for any stroke; hypertension, atrial septal defects, and use of 
antiplatelet agents for IS only; and coronary artery bypass graft surgery for HS 
only.
CONCLUSIONS: Korean patients with CHD have a high risk of stroke. A personalized 
preventive approach is needed to reduce the incidence of stroke in this 
population.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2023.107408
PMID: 37980821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no competing interests related to this study.