---
reference_id: "PMID:37727271"
title: "Base editing corrects the common Salla disease SLC17A5 c.115C>T variant."
authors:
- Harb JF
- Christensen CL
- Kan SH
- Rha AK
- Andrade-Heckman P
- Pollard L
- Steet R
- Huang JY
- Wang RY
journal: Mol Ther Nucleic Acids
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.omtn.2023.08.024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Base editing corrects the common Salla disease SLC17A5 c.115C>T variant.
**Authors:** Harb JF, Christensen CL, Kan SH, Rha AK, Andrade-Heckman P, Pollard L, Steet R, Huang JY, Wang RY
**Journal:** Mol Ther Nucleic Acids (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.omtn.2023.08.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtn.2023.08.024)

## Content

1. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2023 Aug 26;34:102022. doi:
10.1016/j.omtn.2023.08.024.  eCollection 2023 Dec 12.

Base editing corrects the common Salla disease SLC17A5 c.115C>T variant.

Harb JF(1), Christensen CL(1), Kan SH(1), Rha AK(1), Andrade-Heckman P(1), 
Pollard L(2), Steet R(2), Huang JY(1), Wang RY(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)CHOC Children's Research Institute, Orange, CA 92868, USA.
(2)Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC 29646, USA.
(3)Division of Metabolic Disorders, Children's Hospital of Orange County 
Specialists, Orange, CA 92868, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of California-Irvine School of Medicine, 
Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Free sialic acid storage disorders (FSASDs) result from pathogenic variations in 
the SLC17A5 gene, which encodes the lysosomal transmembrane protein sialin. Loss 
or deficiency of sialin impairs FSA transport out of the lysosome, leading to 
cellular dysfunction and neurological impairment, with the most severe form of 
FSASD resulting in death during early childhood. There are currently no 
therapies for FSASDs. Here, we evaluated the efficacy of CRISPR-Cas9-mediated 
homology directed repair (HDR) and adenine base editing (ABE) targeting the 
founder variant, SLC17A5 c.115C>T (p.Arg39Cys) in human dermal fibroblasts. We 
observed minimal correction of the pathogenic variant in HDR samples with a high 
frequency of undesired insertions/deletions (indels) and significant levels of 
correction for ABE-treated samples with no detectable indels, supporting 
previous work showing that CRISPR-Cas9-mediated ABE outperforms HDR. 
Furthermore, ABE treatment of either homozygous or compound heterozygous SLC17A5 
c.115C>T human dermal fibroblasts demonstrated significant FSA reduction, 
supporting amelioration of disease pathology. Translation of this ABE strategy 
to mouse embryonic fibroblasts harboring the Slc17a5 c.115C>T variant in 
homozygosity recapitulated these results. Our study demonstrates the feasibility 
of base editing as a therapeutic approach for the FSASD variant SLC17A5 c.115C>T 
and highlights the usefulness of base editing in monogenic diseases where 
transmembrane protein function is impaired.

© 2023 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtn.2023.08.024
PMCID: PMC10506058
PMID: 37727271

Conflict of interest statement: There are no competing interests to disclose.