---
reference_id: "PMID:36258277"
title: Different degree of loss-of-function among four missense mutations in the EDAR gene responsible for autosomal recessive hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia may be associated with the phenotypic severity.
authors:
- Yagi S
- Yasuno S
- Ansai O
- Hayashi R
- Shimomura Y
journal: J Dermatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.16610
keywords:
- Humans
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia 1, Anhidrotic/diagnosis, genetics"
- "NF-kappa B/genetics, metabolism"
- "Edar Receptor/genetics, metabolism"
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Different degree of loss-of-function among four missense mutations in the EDAR gene responsible for autosomal recessive hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia may be associated with the phenotypic severity.
**Authors:** Yagi S, Yasuno S, Ansai O, Hayashi R, Shimomura Y
**Journal:** J Dermatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1346-8138.16610](https://doi.org/10.1111/1346-8138.16610)

## Content

1. J Dermatol. 2023 Mar;50(3):349-356. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.16610. Epub 2022
Oct  18.

Different degree of loss-of-function among four missense mutations in the EDAR 
gene responsible for autosomal recessive hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia may 
be associated with the phenotypic severity.

Yagi S(1)(2), Yasuno S(1), Ansai O(3), Hayashi R(3), Shimomura Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Ube, Japan.
(2)Department of Plastic Surgery, Yamaguchi University Hospital, Ube, Japan.
(3)Division of Dermatology, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.

Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia is a rare condition characterized by 
hypohidrosis, hypodontia, and hypotrichosis. The disease can show X-linked 
recessive, autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive inheritance trait. Of 
these, the autosomal forms are caused by mutations in either EDAR or EDARADD. To 
date, the underlying pathomechanisms or genotype-phenotype correlations for 
autosomal forms have not completely been disclosed. In this study, we performed 
a series of in vitro studies for four missense mutations in the death domain of 
EDAR protein: p.R358Q, p.G382S, p.I388T, and p.T403M. The results revealed that 
p.R358Q- and p.T403M-mutant EDAR showed different expression patterns from 
wild-type EDAR in both western blots and immunostainings. NF-κB reporter assays 
demonstrated that all the mutant EDAR showed reduced activation of NF-κB, but 
the reduction by p.G382S- and p.I388T-mutant EDAR was moderate. 
Co-immunoprecipitation assays showed that p.R358Q- and p.T403M-mutant EDAR did 
not bind with EDARADD at all, whereas p.G382S- and p.I388T-mutant EDAR 
maintained the affinity to some extent. Furthermore, we demonstrated that all 
the mutant EDAR proteins analyzed aberrantly bound with TRAF6. Sum of the data 
suggest that the degree of loss-of-function is different among the mutant EDAR 
proteins, which may be associated with the severity of the disease.

© 2022 Japanese Dermatological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/1346-8138.16610
PMID: 36258277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]