---
reference_id: "PMID:28017789"
title: "Driven by Mutations: The Predictive Value of Mutation Subtype in EGFR-Mutated Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer."
authors:
- Castellanos E
- Feld E
- Horn L
journal: J Thorac Oncol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2016.12.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Driven by Mutations: The Predictive Value of Mutation Subtype in EGFR-Mutated Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.
**Authors:** Castellanos E, Feld E, Horn L
**Journal:** J Thorac Oncol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtho.2016.12.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtho.2016.12.014)

## Content

1. J Thorac Oncol. 2017 Apr;12(4):612-623. doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2016.12.014. Epub 
2016 Dec 23.

Driven by Mutations: The Predictive Value of Mutation Subtype in EGFR-Mutated 
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Castellanos E(1), Feld E(1), Horn L(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee.
(2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee. Electronic address: leora.horn@vanderbilt.edu.

EGFR-mutated NSCLC is a genetically heterogeneous disease that includes more 
than 200 distinct mutations. The implications of mutational subtype for both 
prognostic and predictive value are being increasingly understood. Although the 
most common EGFR mutations-exon 19 deletions or L858R mutations-predict 
sensitivity to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), it is now being 
recognized that outcomes may be improved in patients with exon 19 deletions. 
Additionally, 10% of patients will have an uncommon EGFR mutation, and response 
to EGFR TKI therapy is highly variable depending on the mutation. Given the 
growing recognition of the genetic and clinical variation seen in this disease, 
the development of comprehensive bioinformatics-driven tools to both analyze 
response in uncommon mutation subtypes and inform clinical decision making will 
be increasingly important. Clinical trials of novel EGFR TKIs should 
prospectively account for the presence of uncommon mutation subtypes in study 
design.

Copyright © 2016 International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtho.2016.12.014
PMID: 28017789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]