---
reference_id: "PMID:29490941"
title: Olfactory dysfunction is worse in primary ciliary dyskinesia compared with other causes of chronic sinusitis in children.
authors:
- Pifferi M
- Bush A
- Rizzo M
- Tonacci A
- Di Cicco M
- Piras M
- Maggi F
- Paiola G
- Michelucci A
- Cangiotti A
- Peroni D
- Caramella D
- Boner AL
journal: Thorax
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2017-210661
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Olfactory dysfunction is worse in primary ciliary dyskinesia compared with other causes of chronic sinusitis in children.
**Authors:** Pifferi M, Bush A, Rizzo M, Tonacci A, Di Cicco M, Piras M, Maggi F, Paiola G, Michelucci A, Cangiotti A, Peroni D, Caramella D, Boner AL
**Journal:** Thorax (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1136/thoraxjnl-2017-210661](https://doi.org/10.1136/thoraxjnl-2017-210661)

## Content

1. Thorax. 2018 Oct;73(10):980-982. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2017-210661. Epub 2018
 Feb 28.

Olfactory dysfunction is worse in primary ciliary dyskinesia compared with other 
causes of chronic sinusitis in children.

Pifferi M(1), Bush A(2), Rizzo M(1), Tonacci A(3), Di Cicco M(1), Piras M(1), 
Maggi F(4), Paiola G(5), Michelucci A(6), Cangiotti A(7), Peroni D(1), Caramella 
D(8), Boner AL(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(2)Imperial College and Royal Brompton Hospital, London, UK.
(3)Institute of Clinical Physiology, National Research Council of Italy 
(IFC-CNR), Pisa, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University Hospital of 
Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(6)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, University Hospital of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(7)Electron Microscopy Unit, University Hospital of Ancona, Ancona, Italy.
(8)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, University Hospital of 
Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

Comment in
    Thorax. 2018 Oct;73(10):897. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2018-211620.

Cilia have multiple functions including olfaction. We hypothesised that 
olfactory function could be impaired in primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD). 
Olfaction, nasal nitric oxide (nNO) and sinus CT were assessed in patients with 
PCD and non-PCD sinus disease, and healthy controls (no CT scan). PCD and 
non-PCD patients had similar severity of sinus disease. Despite this, defective 
olfaction was more common in patients with PCD (P<0.0001) and more severe in 
patients with PCD with major Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) 
abnormalities. Only in classical PCD did olfaction inversely correlate with 
sinusitis and nNO. We speculate that defective olfaction in PCD is primary in 
nature.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless 
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2017-210661
PMID: 29490941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.