---
reference_id: "PMID:20301396"
title: Urea Cycle Disorders Overview.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Simpson KL
- MacLeod EL
- Kakajiwala A
- Gropman AL
- Ah Mew N
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Urea Cycle Disorders Overview.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Simpson KL, MacLeod EL, Kakajiwala A, Gropman AL, Ah Mew N

## Content

1. Urea Cycle Disorders Overview.

Simpson KL(1), MacLeod EL(1), Kakajiwala A(2), Gropman AL(3), Ah Mew N(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2003 Apr 29 [updated 2025 Jul 3].

Author information:
(1)Children's National Rare Disease Institute, Children's National Hospital, 
Washington, DC
(2)Critical Care Medicine, Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC
(3)Neurometabolic Translational Research, Center for Experimental 
Neurotherapeutics, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee

The purpose of this overview is to: 1.. Briefly describe the clinical 
characteristics of urea cycle disorders; 2.. Review the genetic causes of urea 
cycle disorders; 3.. Review the differential diagnosis of urea cycle disorders 
with a focus on genetic conditions; 4.. Provide an evaluation strategy to 
identify the genetic cause of a urea cycle disorder in a proband (when 
possible); 5.. Review management of hyperammonemia and urea cycle disorders; 6.. 
Inform genetic counseling of family members of an individual with a urea cycle 
disorder and evaluation of a newborn at risk for a urea cycle disorder.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301396