---
reference_id: PMID:38976374
title: "Distinguishing Features of Autoimmune Gastritis Depending on Previous Helicobacter pylori Infection or Positivity to Anti-Parietal Cell Antibodies: Results From the Autoimmune gastRitis Italian netwOrk Study grOup (ARIOSO)."
authors:
- Lenti MV
- Miceli E
- Lahner E
- Natalello G
- Massironi S
- Schiepatti A
- Zingone F
- Sciola V
- Rossi RE
- Cannizzaro R
- De Giorgi EM
- Gregorio V
- Fazzino E
- Gentile A
- Petrucci C
- Dilaghi E
- Pivetta G
- Vanoli A
- Luinetti O
- Paulli M
- Anderloni A
- Vecchi M
- Biagi F
- Repici A
- Savarino EV
- Joudaki S
- Delliponti M
- Pasini A
- Facciotti F
- Farinati F
- "D'Elios MM"
- Della Bella C
- Annibale B
- Klersy C
- Corazza GR
- Di Sabatino A
journal: Am J Gastroenterol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.14309/ajg.0000000000002948
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Helicobacter Infections/immunology, complications, epidemiology"
- "Stomach Neoplasms/immunology, epidemiology, microbiology"
- "Autoimmune Diseases/immunology, epidemiology"
- "Parietal Cells, Gastric/immunology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Italy/epidemiology
- Aged
- "Gastritis/immunology, microbiology, epidemiology, complications"
- Helicobacter pylori/immunology
- "Autoantibodies/blood, immunology"
- Longitudinal Studies
- "Adenocarcinoma/immunology, microbiology"
- "Anemia, Pernicious/immunology, epidemiology, complications"
- Neuroendocrine Tumors/immunology
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinguishing Features of Autoimmune Gastritis Depending on Previous Helicobacter pylori Infection or Positivity to Anti-Parietal Cell Antibodies: Results From the Autoimmune gastRitis Italian netwOrk Study grOup (ARIOSO).
**Authors:** Lenti MV, Miceli E, Lahner E, Natalello G, Massironi S, Schiepatti A, Zingone F, Sciola V, Rossi RE, Cannizzaro R, De Giorgi EM, Gregorio V, Fazzino E, Gentile A, Petrucci C, Dilaghi E, Pivetta G, Vanoli A, Luinetti O, Paulli M, Anderloni A, Vecchi M, Biagi F, Repici A, Savarino EV, Joudaki S, Delliponti M, Pasini A, Facciotti F, Farinati F, D'Elios MM, Della Bella C, Annibale B, Klersy C, Corazza GR, Di Sabatino A
**Journal:** Am J Gastroenterol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.14309/ajg.0000000000002948](https://doi.org/10.14309/ajg.0000000000002948)

## Content

1. Am J Gastroenterol. 2024 Dec 1;119(12):2408-2417. doi: 
10.14309/ajg.0000000000002948. Epub 2024 Jul 5.

Distinguishing Features of Autoimmune Gastritis Depending on Previous 
Helicobacter pylori Infection or Positivity to Anti-Parietal Cell Antibodies: 
Results From the Autoimmune gastRitis Italian netwOrk Study grOup (ARIOSO).

Lenti MV(1)(2), Miceli E(1), Lahner E(3), Natalello G(1)(2), Massironi S(4), 
Schiepatti A(1)(5), Zingone F(6), Sciola V(7), Rossi RE(8), Cannizzaro R(9), De 
Giorgi EM(1), Gregorio V(1), Fazzino E(1), Gentile A(1), Petrucci C(1), Dilaghi 
E(3), Pivetta G(3), Vanoli A(10), Luinetti O(10), Paulli M(10), Anderloni A(11), 
Vecchi M(7), Biagi F(1)(5), Repici A(8)(12), Savarino EV(6), Joudaki S(1)(2), 
Delliponti M(2), Pasini A(2), Facciotti F(13), Farinati F(6), D'Elios MM(14), 
Della Bella C(14), Annibale B(3), Klersy C(15), Corazza GR(1)(2), Di Sabatino 
A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Therapeutics, University of 
Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(2)First Department of Internal Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San 
Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical-Surgical Sciences and Translational Medicine, 
Sant'Andrea Hospital, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology and Center for Autoimmune Liver Diseases, 
Department of Medicine and Surgery, Fondazione IRCCS San Gerardo dei Tintori; 
University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy.
(5)Gastroenterology Unit of Pavia Institute, Istituti Clinici Scientifici 
Maugeri IRCCS, Pavia, Italy.
(6)Department of Surgery, Oncology and Gastroenterology, University of Padua, 
Padua, Italy, Gastroenterology Unit, Azienda Ospedale-Università Padova, Padua, 
Italy.
(7)Gastroenterology and Endoscopy Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico Milano, Milan, Italy.
(8)Gastroenterology and Endoscopy Unit, IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, 
Rozzano, Milan, Italy.
(9)Oncological Gastroenterology, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico di Aviano 
(CRO) IRCCS, Italy, Department of Medical, Surgical and Health Sciences, 
University of Trieste, Italy.
(10)Unit of Anatomic Pathology, Department of Molecular Medicine, University of 
Pavia, and IRCCS San Matteo Hospital Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(11)Gastroenterology and Digestive Endoscopy Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico 
San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(12)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele, 
Milan, Italy.
(13)IEO, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, Department of Experimental 
Oncology, Milan, Italy; University of Milano-Bicocca, Department of 
Biotechnology and Biosciences, Milan, Italy.
(14)Department of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, University of Siena, 
Siena, Italy.
(15)Biostatistics & Clinical Trial Center, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San 
Matteo, Pavia, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: To describe the clinical features and the risk of developing 
gastric tumors in patients with autoimmune gastritis (AIG).
METHODS: This was a retrospective, longitudinal, multicenter study conducted at 
8 Italian tertiary referral centers. We retrieved clinical data from all 
histologically proven patients with AIG. Differences between Helicobacter pylori 
-exposed vs H. pylori -naive and anti-parietal cell antibody (PCA)-positive vs 
PCA-negative patients were investigated. The rate of gastric adenocarcinoma and 
type 1 gastric neuroendocrine neoplasm (gNEN) was assessed. A multivariable 
model for factors associated with gNEN was fitted.
RESULTS: A total of 1,598 patients with AIG (median age 58 years, interquartile 
range 46-68; F:M ratio 2.7:1) were included. H. pylori -naive patients were more 
likely to have a first-degree family history of AIG (14.7% vs 8.9%; P = 0.012), 
type 1 diabetes mellitus (4.9% vs 2.3%; P = 0.025), and pernicious anemia (30.9% 
vs 21.1%; P = 0.003). PCA-positive patients had significantly more associated 
autoimmune diseases (59.0% vs 42.9%; P < 0.001) and were more likely to have 
been diagnosed by a case-finding strategy (15.3% vs 2.6%; P < 0.001). Overall, 
15 cases (0.9%) of gastric adenocarcinoma and 153 cases (9.6%) of gNEN occurred, 
with a global rate of 0.12 (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.07-0.20) and 1.22 
(95% CI 1.03-1.42) per 100 person/year, respectively. Having a vitamin B12/iron 
deficiency manifestation at AIG diagnosis was associated with a 16.44 (95% CI 
9.94-27.20 P < 0.001) hazard ratio of gNEN.
DISCUSSION: The "pure" AIG pattern has typical features of an autoimmune disease 
and seems to be unrelated to H. pylori . In a tertiary referral setting, the 
risk of developing overt gastric adenocarcinoma is low, while patients with 
vitamin B12 deficiency complications at onset may benefit from a more intense 
endoscopic follow-up for early gNEN detection.

Copyright © 2024 by The American College of Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.14309/ajg.0000000000002948
PMID: 38976374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]