---
reference_id: "PMID:39565990"
title: Safety and Efficacy of Immunization with a Late-Liver-Stage Attenuated Malaria Parasite.
authors:
- Lamers OAC
- Franke-Fayard BMD
- Koopman JPR
- Roozen GVT
- Janse JJ
- Chevalley-Maurel SC
- Geurten FJA
- de Bes-Roeleveld HM
- Iliopoulou E
- Colstrup E
- Wessels E
- van Gemert GJ
- van de Vegte-Bolmer M
- Graumans W
- Stoter TR
- Mordmüller BG
- Houlder EL
- Bousema T
- Murugan R
- McCall MBB
- Janse CJ
- Roestenberg M
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2313892
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety and Efficacy of Immunization with a Late-Liver-Stage Attenuated Malaria Parasite.
**Authors:** Lamers OAC, Franke-Fayard BMD, Koopman JPR, Roozen GVT, Janse JJ, Chevalley-Maurel SC, Geurten FJA, de Bes-Roeleveld HM, Iliopoulou E, Colstrup E, Wessels E, van Gemert GJ, van de Vegte-Bolmer M, Graumans W, Stoter TR, Mordmüller BG, Houlder EL, Bousema T, Murugan R, McCall MBB, Janse CJ, Roestenberg M
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2313892](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2313892)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2024 Nov 21;391(20):1913-1923. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2313892.

Safety and Efficacy of Immunization with a Late-Liver-Stage Attenuated Malaria 
Parasite.

Lamers OAC(1), Franke-Fayard BMD(1), Koopman JPR(1), Roozen GVT(1), Janse JJ(1), 
Chevalley-Maurel SC(1), Geurten FJA(1), de Bes-Roeleveld HM(1), Iliopoulou E(1), 
Colstrup E(1), Wessels E(1), van Gemert GJ(1), van de Vegte-Bolmer M(1), 
Graumans W(1), Stoter TR(1), Mordmüller BG(1), Houlder EL(1), Bousema T(1), 
Murugan R(1), McCall MBB(1), Janse CJ(1), Roestenberg M(1).

Author information:
(1)From Leiden University Center for Infectious Diseases, Leiden University 
Medical Center, Leiden (O.A.C.L., B.M.D.F-.F., J.P.R.K., G.V.T.R., J.J.J., 
S.C.C.-M., F.J.A.G., H.M.B.-R., E.I., E.C., E.W., E.L.H., R.M., C.J.J., M.R.), 
and the Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen (G.-J.G., M.V.-B., W.G., T.R.S., B.G.M., T.B., M.B.B.M.) - both in the 
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Currently licensed and approved malaria subunit vaccines provide 
modest, short-lived protection against malaria. Immunization with 
live-attenuated Plasmodium falciparum malaria parasites is an alternative 
vaccination strategy that has potential to improve protection.
METHODS: We conducted a double-blind, controlled clinical trial to evaluate the 
safety, side-effect profile, and efficacy of immunization, by means of mosquito 
bites, with a second-generation genetically attenuated parasite (GA2) - a mei2 
single knockout P. falciparum NF54 parasite (sporozoite form) with extended 
development into the liver stage. After an open-label dose-escalation safety 
phase in which participants were exposed to the bites of 15 or 50 infected 
mosquitoes (stage A), healthy adults who had not had malaria were randomly 
assigned to be exposed to 50 mosquito bites per immunization of GA2, an 
early-arresting parasite (GA1), or placebo (bites from uninfected mosquitoes) 
(stage B). After the completion of three immunization sessions with 50 mosquito 
bites per session, we compared the protective efficacy of GA2 against homologous 
P. falciparum controlled human malaria infection with that of GA1 and placebo. 
The primary end points were the number and severity of adverse events (in stages 
A and B) and blood-stage parasitemia greater than 100 P. falciparum parasites 
per milliliter after bites from GA2-infected mosquitoes (in stage A) and after 
controlled human malaria infection (in stage B).
RESULTS: Adverse events were similar across the trial groups. Protective 
efficacy against subsequent controlled human malaria infection was observed in 8 
of 9 participants (89%) in the GA2 group, in 1 of 8 participants (13%) in the 
GA1 group, and in 0 of 3 participants in the placebo group. A significantly 
higher frequency of P. falciparum-specific polyfunctional CD4+ and Vδ2+ γδ T 
cells were observed among participants who received GA2 than among those who 
received GA1, whereas GA2 and GA1 induced similar antibody titers targeting the 
P. falciparum circumsporozoite protein.
CONCLUSIONS: In this small trial, GA2 was associated with a favorable immune 
induction profile and protective efficacy, findings that warrant further 
evaluation. (Funded by the Bontius Foundation; ClinicalTrials.gov number, 
NCT04577066.).

Copyright © 2024 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2313892
PMID: 39565990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]