---
reference_id: "PMID:20378608"
title: Gene therapy rescues cone function in congenital achromatopsia.
authors:
- Komáromy AM
- Alexander JJ
- Rowlan JS
- Garcia MM
- Chiodo VA
- Kaya A
- Tanaka JC
- Acland GM
- Hauswirth WW
- Aguirre GD
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq136
keywords:
- Animals
- "Color Vision Defects/genetics, therapy"
- Cone Opsins/genetics
- Cyclic Nucleotide-Gated Cation Channels/genetics
- Dependovirus/genetics
- Dogs
- Female
- Genetic Therapy
- Genetic Vectors
- Male
- "Models, Animal"
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Retinal Cone Photoreceptor Cells/metabolism
- Transgenes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene therapy rescues cone function in congenital achromatopsia.
**Authors:** Komáromy AM, Alexander JJ, Rowlan JS, Garcia MM, Chiodo VA, Kaya A, Tanaka JC, Acland GM, Hauswirth WW, Aguirre GD
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddq136](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddq136)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Jul 1;19(13):2581-93. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq136. Epub 2010
Apr  8.

Gene therapy rescues cone function in congenital achromatopsia.

Komáromy AM(1), Alexander JJ, Rowlan JS, Garcia MM, Chiodo VA, Kaya A, Tanaka 
JC, Acland GM, Hauswirth WW, Aguirre GD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Studies, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. komaromy@vet.upenn.edu

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Dec 15;20(24):5024.

The successful restoration of visual function with recombinant adeno-associated 
virus (rAAV)-mediated gene replacement therapy in animals and humans with an 
inherited disease of the retinal pigment epithelium has ushered in a new era of 
retinal therapeutics. For many retinal disorders, however, targeting of 
therapeutic vectors to mutant rods and/or cones will be required. In this study, 
the primary cone photoreceptor disorder achromatopsia served as the ideal 
translational model to develop gene therapy directed to cone photoreceptors. We 
demonstrate that rAAV-mediated gene replacement therapy with different forms of 
the human red cone opsin promoter led to the restoration of cone function and 
day vision in two canine models of CNGB3 achromatopsia, a neuronal channelopathy 
that is the most common form of achromatopsia in man. The robustness and 
stability of the observed treatment effect was mutation independent, but 
promoter and age dependent. Subretinal administration of rAAV5-hCNGB3 with a 
long version of the red cone opsin promoter in younger animals led to a stable 
therapeutic effect for at least 33 months. Our results hold promise for future 
clinical trials of cone-directed gene therapy in achromatopsia and other 
cone-specific disorders.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq136
PMCID: PMC2883338
PMID: 20378608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]