---
reference_id: "PMID:21325617"
title: "Growth hormone receptor deficiency is associated with a major reduction in pro-aging signaling, cancer, and diabetes in humans."
authors:
- Guevara-Aguirre J
- Balasubramanian P
- Guevara-Aguirre M
- Wei M
- Madia F
- Cheng CW
- Hwang D
- Martin-Montalvo A
- Saavedra J
- Ingles S
- de Cabo R
- Cohen P
- Longo VD
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3001845
keywords:
- Adult
- Aging/physiology
- "Apoptosis/drug effects, genetics"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cohort Studies
- DNA Breaks/drug effects
- "Diabetes Mellitus/blood, epidemiology, metabolism"
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- Hydrogen Peroxide/pharmacology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasms/blood, epidemiology, metabolism"
- "Receptors, Somatotropin/deficiency, genetics"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Growth hormone receptor deficiency is associated with a major reduction in pro-aging signaling, cancer, and diabetes in humans.
**Authors:** Guevara-Aguirre J, Balasubramanian P, Guevara-Aguirre M, Wei M, Madia F, Cheng CW, Hwang D, Martin-Montalvo A, Saavedra J, Ingles S, de Cabo R, Cohen P, Longo VD
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.3001845](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.3001845)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2011 Feb 16;3(70):70ra13. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3001845.

Growth hormone receptor deficiency is associated with a major reduction in 
pro-aging signaling, cancer, and diabetes in humans.

Guevara-Aguirre J(1), Balasubramanian P, Guevara-Aguirre M, Wei M, Madia F, 
Cheng CW, Hwang D, Martin-Montalvo A, Saavedra J, Ingles S, de Cabo R, Cohen P, 
Longo VD.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Reproduction, Quito, Ecuador. 
jguevara@iemyr-ecuador.org

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2011 Apr 6;13(4):355-356. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2011.03.003.

Mutations in growth signaling pathways extend life span, as well as protect 
against age-dependent DNA damage in yeast and decrease insulin resistance and 
cancer in mice. To test their effect in humans, we monitored for 22 years 
Ecuadorian individuals who carry mutations in the growth hormone receptor (GHR) 
gene that lead to severe GHR and IGF-1 (insulin-like growth factor-1) 
deficiencies. We combined this information with surveys to identify the cause 
and age of death for individuals in this community who died before this period. 
The individuals with GHR deficiency exhibited only one nonlethal malignancy and 
no cases of diabetes, in contrast to a prevalence of 17% for cancer and 5% for 
diabetes in control subjects. A possible explanation for the very low incidence 
of cancer was suggested by in vitro studies: Serum from subjects with GHR 
deficiency reduced DNA breaks but increased apoptosis in human mammary 
epithelial cells treated with hydrogen peroxide. Serum from GHR-deficient 
subjects also caused reduced expression of RAS, PKA (protein kinase A), and TOR 
(target of rapamycin) and up-regulation of SOD2 (superoxide dismutase 2) in 
treated cells, changes that promote cellular protection and life-span extension 
in model organisms. We also observed reduced insulin concentrations (1.4 μU/ml 
versus 4.4 μU/ml in unaffected relatives) and a very low HOMA-IR (homeostatic 
model assessment-insulin resistance) index (0.34 versus 0.96 in unaffected 
relatives) in individuals with GHR deficiency, indicating higher insulin 
sensitivity, which could explain the absence of diabetes in these subjects. 
These results provide evidence for a role of evolutionarily conserved pathways 
in the control of aging and disease burden in humans.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3001845
PMCID: PMC3357623
PMID: 21325617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]