---
reference_id: "PMID:24610330"
title: PREPL deficiency with or without cystinuria causes a novel myasthenic syndrome.
authors:
- Régal L
- Shen XM
- Selcen D
- Verhille C
- Meulemans S
- Creemers JW
- Engel AG
journal: Neurology
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000295
keywords:
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2/genetics"
- "Cystinuria/complications, genetics"
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- Infant
- Muscle Weakness/genetics
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- "Myasthenic Syndromes, Congenital/diagnosis, etiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Phenotype
- Prolyl Oligopeptidases
- "Serine Endopeptidases/deficiency, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PREPL deficiency with or without cystinuria causes a novel myasthenic syndrome.
**Authors:** Régal L, Shen XM, Selcen D, Verhille C, Meulemans S, Creemers JW, Engel AG
**Journal:** Neurology (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000000295](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000000295)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2014 Apr 8;82(14):1254-60. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000295. Epub 
2014 Mar 7.

PREPL deficiency with or without cystinuria causes a novel myasthenic syndrome.

Régal L(1), Shen XM, Selcen D, Verhille C, Meulemans S, Creemers JW, Engel AG.

Author information:
(1)From the Center of Human Genetics (L.R., J.W.M.C., S.M.), Laboratory of 
Biochemical Neuroendocrinology, KU Leuven; Department of Pediatrics and 
Pediatric Metabolic Disorders (C.V.), University Hospital Leuven, Belgium; and 
Department of Neurology (X.-M.S., D.S., A.G.E.), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the genetic and physiologic basis of the neuromuscular 
symptoms of hypotonia-cystinuria syndrome (HCS) and isolated PREPL deficiency, 
and their response to therapy.
METHODS: We performed molecular genetic, histochemical, immunoblot, and 
ultrastructural studies, investigated neuromuscular transmission in vitro in a 
patient with isolated PREPL deficiency, and evaluated the effect of 
pyridostigmine in this patient and in 3 patients with the HCS.
RESULTS: HCS is caused by recessive deletions involving the SLC3A1 and PREPL 
genes. The major clinical features of HCS are type A cystinuria, growth hormone 
deficiency, muscle weakness, ptosis, and feeding problems. The proband with 
isolated PREPL deficiency had myasthenic symptoms since birth and a positive 
edrophonium test but no cystinuria. She and 1 of 3 patients with HCS responded 
transiently to pyridostigmine during infancy. The proband harbors a paternally 
inherited nonsense mutation in PREPL and a maternally inherited deletion 
involving both PREPL and SLC3A1; therefore, the PREPL deficiency determines the 
phenotype. We detected no PREPL expression in the patient's muscle and 
endplates. Electrophysiology studies revealed decreased quantal content of the 
endplate potential and reduced amplitude of the miniature endplate potential 
without endplate acetylcholine receptor deficiency or altered endplate geometry.
CONCLUSION: Isolated PREPL deficiency is a novel monogenic disorder that causes 
a congenital myasthenic syndrome with pre- and postsynaptic features and growth 
hormone deficiency. The myasthenic symptoms in PREPL deficiency with or without 
cystinuria may respond to pyridostigmine in early life. We attribute the 
myasthenia to abrogated interaction of PREPL with adaptor protein 1.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000295
PMCID: PMC4001208
PMID: 24610330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]