---
reference_id: "PMID:11493522"
title: Pax3 acts cell autonomously in the neural tube and somites by controlling cell surface properties.
authors:
- Mansouri A
- Pla P
- Larue L
- Gruss P
journal: Development
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1242/dev.128.11.1995
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Line
- "Cell Membrane/metabolism, physiology"
- Cell Movement/physiology
- Chick Embryo
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- Neural Crest/cytology
- Olfactory Mucosa/cytology
- PAX3 Transcription Factor
- Paired Box Transcription Factors
- Somites/cytology
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pax3 acts cell autonomously in the neural tube and somites by controlling cell surface properties.
**Authors:** Mansouri A, Pla P, Larue L, Gruss P
**Journal:** Development (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.128.11.1995](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.128.11.1995)

## Content

1. Development. 2001 Jun;128(11):1995-2005. doi: 10.1242/dev.128.11.1995.

Pax3 acts cell autonomously in the neural tube and somites by controlling cell 
surface properties.

Mansouri A(1), Pla P, Larue L, Gruss P.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular Cell 
Biology, Am Fassberg 11, D-37077 Göttingen, Germany. amansou@gwdg.de

Pax3 is a member of the paired-box-containing transcription factors. It is 
expressed in the developing somites, dorsal spinal cord, mesencephalon and 
neural crest derivatives. Several loss-of-function mutations are correlated with 
the Splotch phenotype in mice and Waardenburg syndrome in humans. Malformations 
include a lack of muscle in the limb, a failure of neural tube closure and 
dysgenesis of numerous neural crest derivatives. In this study we have used 
embryonic stem (ES) cells to generate a lacZ knock-in into the Pax3 locus. The 
Pax3 knock-in Splotch allele (Sp(2G)) was used to generate Pax3-deficient ES 
cells in order to investigate whether, in chimeric embryos, Pax3 is acting cell 
autonomously in the somites and the neural tube. We found that while Pax3 
function is essential for the neuroepithelium and somites, a wild-type 
environment rescues mutant neural crest cells. In the two affected embryonic 
tissues, mutant and wild-type cells undergo segregation and do not intermingle. 
The contribution of mutant cells to the neural tube and the somites displayed 
temporal differences. All chimeric embryos showed a remarkable contribution of 
blue cells to the neural tube at all stages analyzed, indicating that the 
Pax3-deficient cells are not excluded from the neural epithelium while 
development proceeds. In contrast, this is not true for the paraxial mesoderm. 
The somite contribution of Pax3(-/-) ES cells becomes less frequent in older 
embryos as compared to controls with Pax3(+/-) ES cells. We propose that 
although Pax3 function is related to cell surface properties, its role may 
differ in various tissues. In fact, apoptosis was found in Pax3-deficient cells 
of the lateral dermomyotome but not in the neural tube.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.128.11.1995
PMID: 11493522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]