---
reference_id: "PMID:21402584"
title: "Biological glass: structural determinants of eye lens transparency."
authors:
- Bassnett S
- Shi Y
- Vrensen GF
journal: Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2010.0302
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Adhesion Molecules/metabolism
- Cytoplasm/chemistry
- Humans
- Intercellular Junctions/physiology
- "Lens, Crystalline/embryology, physiology, ultrastructure"
- Mice
- Optical Phenomena
- Organelles/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biological glass: structural determinants of eye lens transparency.
**Authors:** Bassnett S, Shi Y, Vrensen GF
**Journal:** Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1098/rstb.2010.0302](https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2010.0302)

## Content

1. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2011 Apr 27;366(1568):1250-64. doi: 
10.1098/rstb.2010.0302.

Biological glass: structural determinants of eye lens transparency.

Bassnett S(1), Shi Y, Vrensen GF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA.

The purpose of the lens is to project a sharply focused, undistorted image of 
the visual surround onto the neural retina. The first pre-requisite, therefore, 
is that the tissue should be transparent. Despite the presence of remarkably 
high levels of protein, the lens cytosol remains transparent as a result of 
short-range-order interactions between the proteins. At a cellular level, the 
programmed elimination of nuclei and other light-scattering organelles from 
cells located within the pupillary space contributes directly to tissue 
transparency. Scattering at the cell borders is minimized by the close 
apposition of lens fibre cells facilitated by a plethora of adhesive proteins, 
some expressed only in the lens. Similarly, refractive index matching between 
lens membranes and cytosol is believed to minimize scatter. Refractive index 
matching between the cytoplasm of adjacent cells is achieved through the 
formation of cellular fusions that allow the intermingling of proteins. 
Together, these structural adaptations serve to minimize light scatter and 
enable this living, cellular structure to function as 'biological glass'.

DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2010.0302
PMCID: PMC3061108
PMID: 21402584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]