---
reference_id: "PMID:36906494"
title: Gaps in Prenatal Hepatitis B Screening and Management of HBsAg Positive Pregnant Persons in the U.S., 2015-2020.
authors:
- Pham TTH
- Maria N
- Cheng V
- Nguyen B
- Toy M
- Hutton D
- Conners EE
- Nelson NP
- Salomon JA
- So S
journal: Am J Prev Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2023.01.041
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gaps in Prenatal Hepatitis B Screening and Management of HBsAg Positive Pregnant Persons in the U.S., 2015-2020.
**Authors:** Pham TTH, Maria N, Cheng V, Nguyen B, Toy M, Hutton D, Conners EE, Nelson NP, Salomon JA, So S
**Journal:** Am J Prev Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amepre.2023.01.041](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2023.01.041)

## Content

1. Am J Prev Med. 2023 Jul;65(1):52-59. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2023.01.041. Epub 
2023 Mar 10.

Gaps in Prenatal Hepatitis B Screening and Management of HBsAg Positive Pregnant 
Persons in the U.S., 2015-2020.

Pham TTH(1), Maria N(1), Cheng V(1), Nguyen B(1), Toy M(1), Hutton D(2), Conners 
EE(3), Nelson NP(3), Salomon JA(4), So S(5).

Author information:
(1)Asian Liver Center, Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Palo Alto, California.
(2)Department of Health Management and Policy, School of Public Health, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(3)Division of Viral Hepatitis, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, Georgia.
(4)Center for Health Policy/Center for Primary Care and Outcomes Research, 
Stanford University, Stanford, California.
(5)Asian Liver Center, Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Palo Alto, California. Electronic address: samso@stanford.edu.

Comment in
    Am J Prev Med. 2023 Nov;65(5):950-951. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2023.08.003.

BACKGROUND: The Advisory Committee for Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommends 
testing all pregnant women for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and testing 
HBsAg-positive pregnant women for hepatitis B virus deoxyribonucleic acid (HBV 
DNA). HBsAg-positive pregnant persons are recommended by the American 
Association for the Study of Liver Diseases to receive regular monitoring, 
including alanine transaminase (ALT) and HBV DNA and antiviral therapy for 
active hepatitis and to prevent perinatal HBV transmission if HBV DNA level is 
>200,000 IU/mL.
METHODS: Using Optum Clinformatics Data Mart Database claims data, pregnant 
women who received HBsAg testing and HBsAg-positive pregnant persons who 
received HBV DNA and alt testing and antiviral therapy during pregnancy and 
after delivery during January 1, 2015-December 31, 2020 were analyzed.
RESULTS: Among 506,794 pregnancies, 14.6% did not receive HBsAg testing. 
Pregnant women more likely to receive testing for HBsAg (p<0.01) were persons 
aged ≥20 years, were Asian, had >1 child, or received education beyond high 
school. Among the 0.28% (1,437) pregnant women who tested positive for hepatitis 
B surface antigen, 46% were Asian. The proportion of HBsAg-positive pregnant 
women who received HBV DNA testing during pregnancy and in the 12 months after 
delivery was 44.3% and 28.6%, respectively; the proportion that received 
hepatitis B e antigen was 31.6% and 12.7%, respectively; the proportion that 
received ALT testing was 67.4% and 47%, respectively; and the proportion that 
received HBV antiviral therapy was 7% and 6.2%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that as many as half a million (∼14%) pregnant 
persons who gave birth each year were not tested for HBsAg to prevent perinatal 
transmission. More than 50% of HBsAg-positive persons did not receive the 
recommended HBV-directed monitoring tests during pregnancy and after delivery.

Copyright © 2023 American Journal of Preventive Medicine. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amepre.2023.01.041
PMCID: PMC10994214
PMID: 36906494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]