---
reference_id: "PMID:37291214"
title: An integrated cell atlas of the lung in health and disease.
authors:
- Sikkema L
- Ramírez-Suástegui C
- Strobl DC
- Gillett TE
- Zappia L
- Madissoon E
- Markov NS
- Zaragosi LE
- Ji Y
- Ansari M
- Arguel MJ
- Apperloo L
- Banchero M
- Bécavin C
- Berg M
- Chichelnitskiy E
- Chung MI
- Collin A
- Gay ACA
- Gote-Schniering J
- Hooshiar Kashani B
- Inecik K
- Jain M
- Kapellos TS
- Kole TM
- Leroy S
- Mayr CH
- Oliver AJ
- von Papen M
- Peter L
- Taylor CJ
- Walzthoeni T
- Xu C
- Bui LT
- De Donno C
- Dony L
- Faiz A
- Guo M
- Gutierrez AJ
- Heumos L
- Huang N
- Ibarra IL
- Jackson ND
- Kadur Lakshminarasimha Murthy P
- Lotfollahi M
- Tabib T
- Talavera-López C
- Travaglini KJ
- Wilbrey-Clark A
- Worlock KB
- Yoshida M
- Lung Biological Network Consortium
- van den Berge M
- Bossé Y
- Desai TJ
- Eickelberg O
- Kaminski N
- Krasnow MA
- Lafyatis R
- Nikolic MZ
- Powell JE
- Rajagopal J
- Rojas M
- Rozenblatt-Rosen O
- Seibold MA
- Sheppard D
- Shepherd DP
- Sin DD
- Timens W
- Tsankov AM
- Whitsett J
- Xu Y
- Banovich NE
- Barbry P
- Duong TE
- Falk CS
- Meyer KB
- Kropski JA
- "Pe'er D"
- Schiller HB
- Tata PR
- Schultze JL
- Teichmann SA
- Misharin AV
- Nawijn MC
- Luecken MD
- Theis FJ
journal: Nat Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-023-02327-2
keywords:
- Humans
- COVID-19
- Lung
- Pulmonary Fibrosis
- Lung Neoplasms/genetics
- Macrophages
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An integrated cell atlas of the lung in health and disease.
**Authors:** Sikkema L, Ramírez-Suástegui C, Strobl DC, Gillett TE, Zappia L, Madissoon E, Markov NS, Zaragosi LE, Ji Y, Ansari M, Arguel MJ, Apperloo L, Banchero M, Bécavin C, Berg M, Chichelnitskiy E, Chung MI, Collin A, Gay ACA, Gote-Schniering J, Hooshiar Kashani B, Inecik K, Jain M, Kapellos TS, Kole TM, Leroy S, Mayr CH, Oliver AJ, von Papen M, Peter L, Taylor CJ, Walzthoeni T, Xu C, Bui LT, De Donno C, Dony L, Faiz A, Guo M, Gutierrez AJ, Heumos L, Huang N, Ibarra IL, Jackson ND, Kadur Lakshminarasimha Murthy P, Lotfollahi M, Tabib T, Talavera-López C, Travaglini KJ, Wilbrey-Clark A, Worlock KB, Yoshida M, Lung Biological Network Consortium, van den Berge M, Bossé Y, Desai TJ, Eickelberg O, Kaminski N, Krasnow MA, Lafyatis R, Nikolic MZ, Powell JE, Rajagopal J, Rojas M, Rozenblatt-Rosen O, Seibold MA, Sheppard D, Shepherd DP, Sin DD, Timens W, Tsankov AM, Whitsett J, Xu Y, Banovich NE, Barbry P, Duong TE, Falk CS, Meyer KB, Kropski JA, Pe'er D, Schiller HB, Tata PR, Schultze JL, Teichmann SA, Misharin AV, Nawijn MC, Luecken MD, Theis FJ
**Journal:** Nat Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-023-02327-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-023-02327-2)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2023 Jun;29(6):1563-1577. doi: 10.1038/s41591-023-02327-2. Epub 2023
Jun 8.

An integrated cell atlas of the lung in health and disease.

Sikkema L(1)(2), Ramírez-Suástegui C(#)(1)(3), Strobl DC(#)(1)(4), Gillett
TE(#)(5)(6), Zappia L(#)(1)(7), Madissoon E(#)(8), Markov NS(#)(9), Zaragosi
LE(#)(10), Ji Y(1)(2), Ansari M(1)(11), Arguel MJ(10), Apperloo L(6)(12),
Banchero M(6)(12), Bécavin C(10), Berg M(6)(12), Chichelnitskiy E(13), Chung
MI(14), Collin A(10)(15), Gay ACA(6)(12), Gote-Schniering J(11), Hooshiar
Kashani B(11), Inecik K(1)(2), Jain M(9), Kapellos TS(11)(16), Kole TM(6)(17),
Leroy S(18), Mayr CH(11), Oliver AJ(8), von Papen M(19), Peter L(14), Taylor
CJ(20), Walzthoeni T(21), Xu C(8), Bui LT(14), De Donno C(1), Dony L(1)(2)(22),
Faiz A(6)(23), Guo M(24)(25), Gutierrez AJ(14), Heumos L(1)(2)(11), Huang N(8),
Ibarra IL(1), Jackson ND(26), Kadur Lakshminarasimha Murthy P(27)(28),
Lotfollahi M(1)(8), Tabib T(29), Talavera-López C(1)(30), Travaglini
KJ(31)(32)(33), Wilbrey-Clark A(8), Worlock KB(34), Yoshida M(34); Lung
Biological Network Consortium; van den Berge M(6)(17), Bossé Y(35), Desai
TJ(36), Eickelberg O(37), Kaminski N(38), Krasnow MA(31)(32), Lafyatis R(29),
Nikolic MZ(34), Powell JE(39)(40), Rajagopal J(41), Rojas M(42),
Rozenblatt-Rosen O(43)(44), Seibold MA(26)(45)(46), Sheppard D(47), Shepherd
DP(48), Sin DD(49), Timens W(6)(12), Tsankov AM(50), Whitsett J(24), Xu Y(24),
Banovich NE(14), Barbry P(10)(15), Duong TE(51), Falk CS(13), Meyer KB(8),
Kropski JA(20)(52), Pe'er D(32)(53), Schiller HB(11), Tata PR(27), Schultze
JL(16)(54), Teichmann SA(8)(55), Misharin AV(9), Nawijn MC(6)(12), Luecken
MD(56)(57), Theis FJ(58)(59)(60).

Collaborators: Chen Y, Hagood JS, Agami A, Horvath P, Lundeberg J, Marquette CH,
Pryhuber G, Samakovlis C, Sun X, Ware LB, Zhang K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computational Health, Institute of Computational Biology,
Helmholtz Center Munich, Munich, Germany.
(2)TUM School of Life Sciences, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(3)La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(4)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Pathobiochemistry, TUM School of
Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(5)Experimental Pulmonary and Inflammatory Research, Department of Pathology and
Medical Biology, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen,
Groningen, the Netherlands.
(6)Groningen Research Institute for Asthma and COPD, University Medical Center
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Mathematics, Technical University of Munich, Garching, Germany.
(8)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK.
(9)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(10)Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université Côte d'Azur
and Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Valbonne, France.
(11)Institute of Lung Health and Immunity (a member of the German Center for
Lung Research) and Comprehensive Pneumology Center with the CPC-M bioArchive,
Helmholtz Center Munich, Munich, Germany.
(12)Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, University Medical Center
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(13)Institute for Transplant Immunology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.
(14)Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(15)3IA Côte d'Azur, Nice, France.
(16)Department of Genomics and Immunoregulation, Life and Medical Sciences
Institute, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(17)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(18)Pulmonology Department, Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire OncoAge, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Nice, Université Côte d'Azur, Nice, France.
(19)Research, Development and Innovation, Comma Soft, Bonn, Germany.
(20)Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(21)Core Facility Genomics, Helmholtz Center Munich, Munich, Germany.
(22)Department of Translational Psychiatry, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry
and International Max Planck Research School for Translational Psychiatry,
Munich, Germany.
(23)School of Life Sciences, Respiratory Bioinformatics and Molecular Biology,
University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(24)Division of Neonatology and Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(25)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, OH, US.
(26)Center for Genes, Environment, and Health, National Jewish Health, Denver,
CO, USA.
(27)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC,
USA.
(28)Department of Pharmacology and Regenerative Medicine, University of Illinois
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(29)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Department of Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(30)Division of Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine, Klinikum der
Lüdwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany.
(31)Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA, USA.
(32)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, USA.
(33)Allen Institute for Brain Science, Seattle, WA, USA.
(34)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Division of Medicine, University College
London, London, UK.
(35)Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et de Pneumologie de Québec,
Department of Molecular Medicine, Laval University, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.
(36)Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA, USA.
(37)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(38)Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT, USA.
(39)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(40)Cellular Genomics Futures Institute, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
New South Wales, Australia.
(41)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(42)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and
Sleep Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(43)Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA,
USA.
(44)Cellular and Tissue Genomics, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(45)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA.
(46)Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.
(47)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Sleep Medicine, University
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(48)Department of Physics and Center for Biological Physics, Arizona State
University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(49)Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, St. Paul's Hospital, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(50)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(51)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Respiratory Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(52)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN, USA.
(53)Computational and Systems Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(54)PRECISE Platform for Single Cell Genomics and Epigenomics, Deutsches Zentrum
für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen and University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(55)Department of Physics, Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.
(56)Department of Computational Health, Institute of Computational Biology,
Helmholtz Center Munich, Munich, Germany. malte.luecken@helmholtz-munich.de.
(57)Institute of Lung Health and Immunity (a member of the German Center for
Lung Research) and Comprehensive Pneumology Center with the CPC-M bioArchive,
Helmholtz Center Munich, Munich, Germany. malte.luecken@helmholtz-munich.de.
(58)Department of Computational Health, Institute of Computational Biology,
Helmholtz Center Munich, Munich, Germany. fabian.theis@helmholtz-munich.de.
(59)TUM School of Life Sciences, Technical University of Munich, Munich,
Germany. fabian.theis@helmholtz-munich.de.
(60)Department of Mathematics, Technical University of Munich, Garching,
Germany. fabian.theis@helmholtz-munich.de.
(#)Contributed equally

Single-cell technologies have transformed our understanding of human tissues.
Yet, studies typically capture only a limited number of donors and disagree on
cell type definitions. Integrating many single-cell datasets can address these
limitations of individual studies and capture the variability present in the
population. Here we present the integrated Human Lung Cell Atlas (HLCA),
combining 49 datasets of the human respiratory system into a single atlas
spanning over 2.4 million cells from 486 individuals. The HLCA presents a
consensus cell type re-annotation with matching marker genes, including
annotations of rare and previously undescribed cell types. Leveraging the number
and diversity of individuals in the HLCA, we identify gene modules that are
associated with demographic covariates such as age, sex and body mass index, as
well as gene modules changing expression along the proximal-to-distal axis of
the bronchial tree. Mapping new data to the HLCA enables rapid data annotation
and interpretation. Using the HLCA as a reference for the study of disease, we
identify shared cell states across multiple lung diseases, including SPP1+
profibrotic monocyte-derived macrophages in COVID-19, pulmonary fibrosis and
lung carcinoma. Overall, the HLCA serves as an example for the development and
use of large-scale, cross-dataset organ atlases within the Human Cell Atlas.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-023-02327-2
PMCID: PMC10287567
PMID: 37291214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: P.R.T. serves as a consultant for Surrozen,
Cellarity and Celldom and is currently acting Chief Executive Officer of Iolux.
F.J.T. consults for Immunai, Singularity Bio, CytoReason and Omniscope and has
ownership interest in Dermagnostix and Cellarity. In the past 3 years, M.D.L.
was a contractor for the CZI and received remuneration for talks at Pfizer and
Janssen Pharmaceuticals. J.A.K. reports grants/contracts from Boehringer
Ingelheim and Bristol Myers Squibb, consulting fees from Janssen and Boehringer
Ingelheim and study support from Genentech and is a member of the scientific
advisory board of APIE Therapeutics. In the past 3 years, S.A.T. has received
remuneration for consulting and Scientific Advisory Board membership from
Genentech, Roche, Biogen, GlaxoSmithKline, Foresite Labs and Qiagen. S.A.T. is a
co-founder and board member of and holds equity in Transition Bio. D.S. is a
founder of Pliant Therapeutics and a member of the Genentech Scientific Advisory
Board and has a sponsored research agreement with AbbVie. N.K. served as a
consultant to Boehringer Ingelheim, Third Rock, Pliant, Samumed, NuMedii,
Theravance, LifeMax, Three Lakes Partners, Optikira, AstraZeneca, RohBar,
Veracyte, Augmanity, CSL Behring, Galapagos and Thyron over the past 3 years and
reports equity in Pliant and Thyron, grants from Veracyte, Boehringer Ingelheim
and Bristol Myers Squibb and nonfinancial support from miRagen and AstraZeneca.
N.K. owns intellectual property on novel biomarkers and therapeutics in IPF
licensed to biotechnology. O.R.-R. is a co-inventor on patent applications
(PCT/US2016/059233, PCT/US2018/064553, PCT/US2018/060860, PCT/US2017/016146,
PCT/US2019/055894, PCT/US2018/064563, PCT/US2020/032933) filed by the Broad
Institute for inventions related to single-cell genomics. O.R.-R. has been an
employee of Genentech since 19 October 2020 and has equity in Roche. O.E. serves
in an advisory capacity to Pieris Pharmaceuticals, Blade Therapeutics, Delta 4
and YAP Therapeutics. Y.B. holds a Canada Research Chair in the Genomics of
Heart and Lung Diseases. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.
