---
reference_id: "PMID:22931943"
title: "[Clinical and electroencephalographic characteristics of Jeavons syndrome]."
authors:
- Yang ZX
- Liu XY
- Qin J
- Zhang YH
journal: Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi
year: '2012'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Clinical and electroencephalographic characteristics of Jeavons syndrome].
**Authors:** Yang ZX, Liu XY, Qin J, Zhang YH
**Journal:** Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi (2012)

## Content

1. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2012 Jun;50(6):445-9.

[Clinical and electroencephalographic characteristics of Jeavons syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang ZX(1), Liu XY, Qin J, Zhang YH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: The study was designed to examine the clinical and 
electroencephalographic characteristics of children with Jeavons syndrome.
METHOD: Video-electroencephalography (VEEG) monitoring was carried out in 9 
patients with Jeavons syndrome. The clinical and electroencephalographic 
characteristics, treatment and prognoses were analyzed.
RESULT: Of the 9 patients, 8 were female, and 1 was male. The onset age of 
children with eyelid myoclonia (EM) was from 3 to 9 years old. It was obtained 
through the chief complaint, prosecution or VEEG monitoring. Three cases were 
misdiagnosed and 2 cases were overlooked initially. Seven out of 9 patients had 
generalized tonic clonic seizures (GTCS) during the course of disease, of whom 5 
experienced only one episode. GTCS was the cause for the first visits to 
hospital in 5 patients. Since the clinical manifestations of EM with or without 
absence were often slight, VEEG monitoring with eye closure and intermittent 
photic stimulation tests helped to induce discharges and seizures. Eye closure 
was more potent than intermittent photic stimulation as a triggering factor. 
Ictal EEG showed 3 - 6 Hz generalized spike and waves and polyspikes burst. The 
main treatment option was valproate monotherapy (6 cases) or combined with other 
antiepileptic drugs (1 case). Levetiracetam, lamotrigine and topiramate were 
also used in patients and effective to some degree. Two patients lost follow up. 
The age of 7 patients at follow-up ranged from 9 y to 15 y. Seizures were 
controlled in 1 case, suspiciously controlled in 1 case, decreased in frequency 
in 4 cases and were still frequent in 1 case. During follow-up, normal 
intelligence was found in the former 2 cases, difficult learning in 2 cases, and 
slightly intellectual impairment in 2 cases.
CONCLUSION: Jeavons syndrome is one of the idiopathic generalized epilepsies 
characterized by EM with or without absence. The age of seizure onset might be 
difficult to be exactly established, as EM was often misinterpreted and 
overlooked initially. Clinical history combined with VEEG monitoring with eye 
closure and intermittent photic stimulation tests could diagnose this disease. 
Valproate and other new antiepileptic drugs were effective for this disease. 
Jeavons syndrome is a lifelong disorder. Seizures sometimes could be well 
controlled. When seizures were resistant to treatment, cognitive and 
intellectual impairment might occur.

PMID: 22931943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]