---
reference_id: "PMID:27613073"
title: "\"Classical organic acidurias\": diagnosis and pathogenesis."
authors:
- Villani GR
- Gallo G
- Scolamiero E
- Salvatore F
- Ruoppolo M
journal: Clin Exp Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s10238-016-0435-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# "Classical organic acidurias": diagnosis and pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Villani GR, Gallo G, Scolamiero E, Salvatore F, Ruoppolo M
**Journal:** Clin Exp Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10238-016-0435-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10238-016-0435-0)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Med. 2017 Aug;17(3):305-323. doi: 10.1007/s10238-016-0435-0. Epub
2016  Sep 9.

"Classical organic acidurias": diagnosis and pathogenesis.

Villani GR(1)(2), Gallo G(3)(4), Scolamiero E(4), Salvatore F(4), Ruoppolo 
M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli 
Studi di Napoli "Federico II", Naples, Italy. 
guglielmorosariodomeni.villani@unina.it.
(2)CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy. 
guglielmorosariodomeni.villani@unina.it.
(3)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli 
Studi di Napoli "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(4)CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy.

Organic acidurias are inherited metabolic diseases due to the deficiency of an 
enzyme or a transport protein involved in one of the several cellular metabolic 
pathways devoted to the catabolism of amino acids, carbohydrates or lipids. 
These deficiencies result in abnormal accumulation of organic acids in the body 
and their abnormal excretion in urine. More than 65 organic acidurias have been 
described; the incidence varies, individually, from 1 out of 10,000 to >1 out of 
1000,000 live births. Collectively, their incidence approximates 1 out of 3000 
live births. Among these disorders, methyl malonic aciduria, propionic aciduria, 
maple syrup urine disease and isovaleric aciduria are sometimes referred to as 
classical organic acidurias. In this review, we focused on the basic GC-MS-based 
methodologies employed in the diagnosis of classical organic acidurias and 
provided updated reference values for the most common involved organic acids. We 
also attempted to provide the most recent updates on the pathogenetic bases of 
these diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s10238-016-0435-0
PMID: 27613073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]