---
reference_id: "PMID:39227073"
title: Effect of sotatercept on circulating proteomics in pulmonary arterial hypertension.
authors:
- Savale L
- Tu L
- Normand C
- Boucly A
- Sitbon O
- Montani D
- Olsson KM
- Park DH
- Fuge J
- Kamp JC
- Humbert M
- Hoeper MM
- Guignabert C
journal: Eur Respir J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1183/13993003.01483-2024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of sotatercept on circulating proteomics in pulmonary arterial hypertension.
**Authors:** Savale L, Tu L, Normand C, Boucly A, Sitbon O, Montani D, Olsson KM, Park DH, Fuge J, Kamp JC, Humbert M, Hoeper MM, Guignabert C
**Journal:** Eur Respir J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1183/13993003.01483-2024](https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.01483-2024)

## Content

1. Eur Respir J. 2024 Oct 31;64(4):2401483. doi: 10.1183/13993003.01483-2024.
Print  2024 Oct.

Effect of sotatercept on circulating proteomics in pulmonary arterial 
hypertension.

Savale L(1)(2)(3), Tu L(1)(2), Normand C(1)(2), Boucly A(1)(2)(3), Sitbon 
O(1)(2)(3), Montani D(1)(2)(3), Olsson KM(4), Park DH(4), Fuge J(4), Kamp JC(4), 
Humbert M(1)(2)(3), Hoeper MM(4), Guignabert C(5)(2).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris-Saclay, Hypertension Pulmonaire: Physiopathology and 
Innovation Thérapeutique, HPPIT, Faculté de Médecine, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, 
France.
(2)INSERM UMR_S 999, HPPIT, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(3)Department of Respiratory and Intensive Care Medicine, Assistance Publique 
Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Bicêtre, ERN-LUNG, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(4)Department for Respiratory Medicine and Infectious Diseases and German Centre 
of Lung Research (DZL), Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(5)Université Paris-Saclay, Hypertension Pulmonaire: Physiopathology and 
Innovation Thérapeutique, HPPIT, Faculté de Médecine, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France 
christophe.guignabert@inserm.fr.

Proteomic analysis of circulating biomarkers reveals that sotatercept's impact 
extends beyond activins to influence BMP-9 and BMP-10, along with essential 
metabolic and inflammatory factors https://bit.ly/3Z5AZJ3

Alterations in specific signalling pathways within the bone morphogenetic 
protein/transforming growth factor-β (BMP/TGF-β) family, involving several 
precisely regulated activator or inhibitor ligands, have been identified as 
pathogenic drivers of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). These alterations, 
particularly affecting BMPRII and activin-dependent pathways, have led to 
innovative therapies, notably the development of sotatercept [1, 2]. 
Sotatercept, a fusion protein of the extracellular domain of human ACTRIIA and 
the Fc domain of human IgG1, has shown promising results in improving key 
clinical, functional, and haemodynamic parameters in PAH patients, as evidenced 
by positive results in the phase 2 PULSAR and phase 3 STELLAR trials [3, 4]. 
This progress was partly based on preclinical studies showing that reducing 
activin-induced Smad2/3 phosphorylation levels, by suppressing activin 
production in mice [5] or using soluble receptors in rats [6, 7], can attenuate 
pulmonary vascular remodelling. Despite these advancements, the precise 
mechanisms of action of these approaches in humans and rodents need to be better 
understood to enhance these valuable tools. Sotatercept raises several critical 
questions regarding its mechanism of action, and a deeper understanding could 
reveal the pathophysiological mechanisms of PAH, leading to more effective 
therapeutic approaches.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.01483-2024
PMCID: PMC11525346
PMID: 39227073

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: Over the past three years, 
L. Savale reports personal fees from Bayer, MSD and Janssen, and grants from 
Acceleron, Janssen and MSD, outside the submitted work. A. Boucly reports 
honoraria for speaking and scientific advisory boards from AOP Orphan, 
AstraZeneca, Ferrer, Janssen and Merck. O. Sitbon reports grants from Aerovate, 
AOP Orphan, Ferrer, Janssen (formerly Actelion) and MSD, consultancy fees from 
MSD, Enzyvant, AOP Orphan, Ferrer, Gossamer Bio, Janssen, Liquidia and Respira 
Therapeutics, payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, manuscript 
writing or educational events from AOP Orphan, Bayer, Janssen, Ferrer, United 
Therapeutics and MSD, and participation on a data safety monitoring board or 
advisory board with Bayer, Enzyvant, Gossamer Bio, Janssen, United Therapeutics 
and MSD. D. Montani reports grants from Acceleron, Janssen and Merck MSD, 
consultancy fees from Acceleron, Merck MSD, Janssen and Ferrer, and payment or 
honoraria for lectures, presentations, manuscript writing or educational events 
from Bayer, Janssen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GSK, Ferrer and Merck MSD. 
K.M. Olsson reports honoraria for speaking, steering committees and scientific 
advisory boards from Acceleron, Actelion, AOP Health, Bayer, Ferrer, Janssen and 
MSD. D-H. Park is supported by Program of Hannover Medical School for Clinician 
Scientists (PRACTIS), funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, ME 
3696/3-1) and the German Center for Lung Research (DZL). J. Fuge has received 
fees for lectures and/or consultations for AstraZeneca, outside the present 
work. J.C. Kamp is supported by PRACTIS – Clinician Scientist Program at 
Hannover Medical School, funded by the German Research Foundation (DGF, ME 
3696/3-1). M. Humbert reports grants and personal fees from 35 Pharma, 
Acceleron, Aerovate, Altavant, AOP Orphan, Bayer, Chiesi, Ferrer, Gossamer, 
Janssen, Keros, Liquidia, Merck, MorphogenIX, Respira and United Therapeutics, 
outside the submitted work. M.M. Hoeper reports honoraria for speaking, steering 
committees and scientific advisory boards from Acceleron, Actelion, AOP Health, 
Bayer, Ferrer, Gossamer Bio, Janssen, Keros and MSD. C. Guignabert reports 
grants from Acceleron, Corteria, Diagonal Therapeutics, Structure Therapeutics 
(ex ShouTi) and Janssen, grants and personal fees from Merck, outside the 
submitted work, and patents planned, issued or pending (WO/2024/023139, 
WO/2018/011376). The remaining authors have no potential conflicts of interest 
to disclose.