---
reference_id: "PMID:38716930"
title: "Bone morphogenetic protein signalling in pulmonary arterial hypertension: revisiting the BMPRII connection."
authors:
- Li W
- Quigley K
journal: Biochem Soc Trans
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1042/BST20231547
keywords:
- Humans
- "Bone Morphogenetic Protein Receptors, Type II/metabolism, genetics"
- Signal Transduction
- Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/metabolism
- "Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension/metabolism, genetics"
- Animals
- Endothelial Cells/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone morphogenetic protein signalling in pulmonary arterial hypertension: revisiting the BMPRII connection.
**Authors:** Li W, Quigley K
**Journal:** Biochem Soc Trans (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BST20231547](https://doi.org/10.1042/BST20231547)

## Content

1. Biochem Soc Trans. 2024 Jun 26;52(3):1515-1528. doi: 10.1042/BST20231547.

Bone morphogenetic protein signalling in pulmonary arterial hypertension: 
revisiting the BMPRII connection.

Li W(1), Quigley K(1).

Author information:
(1)VPD Heart and Lung Research Institute, Department of Medicine, University of 
Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Cambridge CB2 0BB, U.K.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a rare and life-threatening vascular 
disorder, characterised by abnormal remodelling of the pulmonary vessels and 
elevated pulmonary artery pressure, leading to right ventricular hypertrophy and 
right-sided heart failure. The importance of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) 
signalling in the pathogenesis of PAH is demonstrated by human genetic studies. 
Many PAH risk genes are involved in the BMP signalling pathway and are highly 
expressed or preferentially act on vascular endothelial cells. Endothelial 
dysfunction is recognised as an initial trigger for PAH, and endothelial BMP 
signalling plays a crucial role in the maintenance of endothelial integrity. 
BMPR2 is the most prevalent PAH gene, found in over 80% of heritable cases. As 
BMPRII protein is the major type II receptor for a large family of BMP ligands 
and expressed ubiquitously in many tissues, dysregulated BMP signalling in other 
cells may also contribute to PAH pathobiology. Sotatercept, which contains the 
extracellular domain of another transforming growth factor-β family type II 
receptor ActRIIA fused to immunoglobin Fc domain, was recently approved by the 
FDA as a treatment for PAH. Neither its target cells nor its mechanism of action 
is fully understood. This review will revisit BMPRII function and its 
extracellular regulation, summarise how dysregulated BMP signalling in 
endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells may contribute to PAH pathogenesis, 
and discuss how novel therapeutics targeting the extracellular regulation of BMP 
signalling, such as BMP9 and Sotatercept, can be related to restoring BMPRII 
function.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BST20231547
PMCID: PMC11346422
PMID: 38716930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests associated with the manuscript.