---
reference_id: "PMID:20440503"
title: "Primary tonsillar lymphomas according to the new World Health Organization classification: to report 87 cases and literature review and analysis."
authors:
- Mohammadianpanah M
- Daneshbod Y
- Ramzi M
- Hamidizadeh N
- Dehghani SJ
- Bidouei F
- Khademi B
- Ahmadloo N
- Ansari M
- Omidvari S
- Mosalaei A
- Dehghani M
journal: Ann Hematol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s00277-010-0970-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary tonsillar lymphomas according to the new World Health Organization classification: to report 87 cases and literature review and analysis.
**Authors:** Mohammadianpanah M, Daneshbod Y, Ramzi M, Hamidizadeh N, Dehghani SJ, Bidouei F, Khademi B, Ahmadloo N, Ansari M, Omidvari S, Mosalaei A, Dehghani M
**Journal:** Ann Hematol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00277-010-0970-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00277-010-0970-9)

## Content

1. Ann Hematol. 2010 Oct;89(10):993-1001. doi: 10.1007/s00277-010-0970-9. Epub
2010  May 4.

Primary tonsillar lymphomas according to the new World Health Organization 
classification: to report 87 cases and literature review and analysis.

Mohammadianpanah M(1), Daneshbod Y, Ramzi M, Hamidizadeh N, Dehghani SJ, Bidouei 
F, Khademi B, Ahmadloo N, Ansari M, Omidvari S, Mosalaei A, Dehghani M.

Author information:
(1)Hematology Research Center, Department of Radiation Oncology, Shiraz 
University of Medical Sciences, Iran.

The present study aimed to define the natural history, World Health Organization 
(WHO) classification, prognostic factors, and treatment outcome of 87 patients 
with primary lymphoma of the palatine tonsil and literature review and analysis. 
Between 1990 and March 2008, 87 consecutive patients diagnosed with primary 
lymphoid malignancy of the palatine tonsil. All pathologic specimens were 
reviewed and reclassified according to the recent WHO classification. To 
investigate the association of tonsillar lymphomas with Epstein-Barr virus 
(EBV), in situ hybridization was performed for 24 tonsillar lymphomas (23 
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBC) and one classic Hodgkin's disease) and ten 
normal tonsils as control group. In literature review, we found 26 major related 
series including 1,602 patients with primary tonsillar lymphoma. The median age 
of our patients was 52 years (range 11-86 years). There were 39 women and 48 men 
with a median follow-up of 67 months for living patients. The vast majority 
(95%) of patients had B-cell phenotype. DLBC was the most frequent histology. In 
situ hybridization revealed none of 23 DLBC to be positive for EBV. The 5-year 
disease-free and overall survival rates were 78.9% and 86%, respectively. In the 
literature review and by analyzing the data collection from 26 major reported 
series, the median age was 55 years and male/female ratio was 1.3:1. 
Intermediate grade tumors consisted of 72% of all tonsillar lymphomas and B-cell 
lymphomas constituted 82% of all cell immunophenotypes. The 5-year disease-free 
and overall survival rates were 61% and 67%, respectively. The vast majority of 
tonsillar lymphomas are of B-cell origin and with intermediate to high-grade 
histology. These neoplasms tend to present in early stage disease and to have 
favorable outcome. WHO classification predicts more accurately treatment outcome 
of patients with tonsillar lymphoma. The association of DLBC in the palatine 
tonsil with EBV infection is infrequent.

DOI: 10.1007/s00277-010-0970-9
PMID: 20440503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]