---
reference_id: "PMID:37021642"
title: "Genetics of familial adult myoclonus epilepsy: From linkage studies to noncoding repeat expansions."
authors:
- Corbett MA
- Depienne C
- Veneziano L
- Klein KM
- Brancati F
- Guerrini R
- Zara F
- Tsuji S
- Gecz J
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/epi.17610
keywords:
- Humans
- "Epilepsies, Myoclonic/genetics, pathology"
- Pedigree
- Research
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of familial adult myoclonus epilepsy: From linkage studies to noncoding repeat expansions.
**Authors:** Corbett MA, Depienne C, Veneziano L, Klein KM, Brancati F, Guerrini R, Zara F, Tsuji S, Gecz J
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/epi.17610](https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.17610)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2023 Jun;64 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S14-S21. doi: 10.1111/epi.17610. Epub 
2023 Apr 17.

Genetics of familial adult myoclonus epilepsy: From linkage studies to noncoding 
repeat expansions.

Corbett MA(1), Depienne C(2), Veneziano L(3), Klein KM(4)(5), Brancati 
F(3)(6)(7), Guerrini R(8), Zara F(9), Tsuji S(10)(11), Gecz J(1)(12).

Author information:
(1)Robinson Research Institute and Adelaide Medical School, University of 
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Essen, University 
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(3)Institute of Translational Pharmacology, National Research Council, Rome, 
Italy.
(4)Departments of Clinical Neurosciences, Medical Genetics, and Community Health 
Sciences, Hotchkiss Brain Institute and Alberta Children's Hospital, Research 
Institute, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada.
(5)Epilepsy Center Frankfurt Rhine-Main, Department of Neurology, Center of 
Neurology and Neurosurgery, Center for Personalized Translational Epilepsy 
Research, University Hospital, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany.
(6)Medical Genetics, Department of Life, Health, and Environmental Sciences, 
University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.
(7)Laboratory of Human Functional Genomics, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a 
Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS) San Raffaele, Rome, Italy.
(8)Neuroscience and Neurogenetics Department, Meyer Children's Hospital, 
Florence, Italy.
(9)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, IRCCS Institute "G. Gaslini", Genoa, Italy.
(10)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(11)Institute of Medical Genomics, International University of Health and 
Welfare, Chiba, Japan.
(12)South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute, Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia.

Familial adult myoclonus epilepsy (FAME) is a genetic epilepsy syndrome that for 
many years has resisted understanding of its underlying molecular cause. This 
review covers the history of FAME genetic studies worldwide, starting with 
linkage and culminating in the discovery of noncoding TTTTA and inserted TTTCA 
pentanucleotide repeat expansions within six different genes to date (SAMD12, 
STARD7, MARCHF6, YEATS2, TNRC6A, and RAPGEF2). FAME occurs worldwide; however, 
repeat expansions in particular genes have regional geographical distributions. 
FAME repeat expansions are dynamic in nature, changing in length and structure 
within germline and somatic tissues. This variation poses challenges for 
molecular diagnosis such that molecular methods used to identify FAME repeat 
expansions typically require a trade-off between cost and efficiency. A rigorous 
evaluation of the sensitivity and specificity of each molecular approach remains 
to be performed. The origin of FAME repeat expansions and the genetic and 
environmental factors that modulate repeat variability are not well defined. 
Longer repeats and particular arrangements of the TTTTA and TTTCA motifs within 
an expansion are correlated with earlier onset and increased severity of 
disease. Other factors such as maternal or paternal inheritance, parental age, 
and repeat length alone have been suggested to influence repeat variation; 
however, further research is required to confirm this. The history of FAME 
genetics to the present is a chronicle of perseverance and predominantly 
collaborative efforts that yielded a successful outcome. The discovery of FAME 
repeats will spark progress toward a deeper understanding of the molecular 
pathogenesis of FAME, discovery of new loci, and development of cell and animal 
models.

© 2023 The Authors. Epilepsia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of 
International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.17610
PMCID: PMC10952679
PMID: 37021642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare. We confirm that we have read the Journal's position on issues involved 
in ethical publication and affirm that this report is consistent with those 
guidelines.