---
reference_id: "PMID:35079510"
title: "Spinal Cord Diffuse Midline Glioma, H3K27M- mutant Effectively Treated with Bevacizumab: A Report of Two Cases."
authors:
- Yabuno S
- Kawauchi S
- Umakoshi M
- Uneda A
- Fujii K
- Ishida J
- Otani Y
- Hattori Y
- Tsuboi N
- Kohno S
- Noujima M
- Toji T
- Yanai H
- Yasuhara T
- Date I
journal: NMC Case Rep J
year: '2021'
doi: 10.2176/nmccrj.cr.2021-0033
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal Cord Diffuse Midline Glioma, H3K27M- mutant Effectively Treated with Bevacizumab: A Report of Two Cases.
**Authors:** Yabuno S, Kawauchi S, Umakoshi M, Uneda A, Fujii K, Ishida J, Otani Y, Hattori Y, Tsuboi N, Kohno S, Noujima M, Toji T, Yanai H, Yasuhara T, Date I
**Journal:** NMC Case Rep J (2021)
**DOI:** [10.2176/nmccrj.cr.2021-0033](https://doi.org/10.2176/nmccrj.cr.2021-0033)

## Content

1. NMC Case Rep J. 2021 Aug 21;8(1):505-511. doi: 10.2176/nmccrj.cr.2021-0033.
eCollection 2021.

Spinal Cord Diffuse Midline Glioma, H3K27M- mutant Effectively Treated with
Bevacizumab: A Report of Two Cases.

Yabuno S(1), Kawauchi S(1), Umakoshi M(1), Uneda A(1), Fujii K(1), Ishida J(1),
Otani Y(1), Hattori Y(2), Tsuboi N(1), Kohno S(3), Noujima M(4), Toji T(4),
Yanai H(4), Yasuhara T(1), Date I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School of
Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Okayama, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurological Surgery, Sumitomo Besshi Hospital, Niihama, Ehime,
Japan.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Japanese Red Cross Society Himeji Hospital,
Himeji, Hyogo, Japan.
(4)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Okayama University Graduate School of
Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Okayama, Japan.

"Diffuse midline glioma (DMG), H3K27M-mutant" was newly classified in the
revised World Health Organization (WHO) 2016 classification of central nervous
system tumors. Spinal cord DMG, H3K27M-mutant is relatively rare, with poor
prognosis, and there are no effective treatment protocols. In this study, we
report two cases of spinal cord DMG, H3K27M-mutant treated with bevacizumab. The
two patients were women in their 40s who initially presented with sensory
impairment. MRI showed spinal intramedullary tumors, and each patient underwent
laminectomy/laminoplasty and biopsy of the tumors. Histological examination
initially suggested low-grade astrocytoma in case 1 and glioblastoma in case 2.
Upon further immunohistochemical examination in case 1 and molecular examination
in case 2, however, both cases were diagnosed as DMG, H3K27M-mutant. Case 1 was
treated with radiation therapy and temozolomide (TMZ) chemotherapy, which
induced a transient improvement of symptoms; 3 months after surgery, however,
the patient's symptoms rapidly deteriorated. MRI showed tumor enlargement with
edema to the medulla. Triweekly administration of bevacizumab improved her
symptoms for the following 12 months. Case 2 was treated with bevacizumab from
the beginning because of acute deterioration of breathing. After bevacizumab
administration, both cases showed tumor regression on MRI and drastic
improvement of symptoms within a few days. Although spinal cord DMG,
H3K27M-mutant has an aggressive clinical course and poor prognosis, bevacizumab
administration may offer the significant clinical benefit of alleviating edema,
which improves patient's capacity for activities of daily life.

© 2021 The Japan Neurosurgical Society.

DOI: 10.2176/nmccrj.cr.2021-0033
PMCID: PMC8769434
PMID: 35079510

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest Disclosure The authors
declare that they have no conflict of interest.
