---
reference_id: "PMID:20301444"
title: Alström Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Paisey RB
- Steeds R
- Barrett T
- Williams D
- Geberhiwot T
- Gunay-Aygun M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alström Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Paisey RB, Steeds R, Barrett T, Williams D, Geberhiwot T, Gunay-Aygun M

## Content

1. Alström Syndrome.

Paisey RB(1), Steeds R(2), Barrett T(3), Williams D(4), Geberhiwot T(5),
Gunay-Aygun M(6)(7).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2003 Feb 7 [updated 2019 Jun 13].

Author information:
(1)Consultant Endocrinologist, Torbay Hospital Torquay, Devon, United Kingdom
(2)Consultant Cardiologist, University Hospitals Birmingham, United Kingdom
(3)Pediatric Endocrinologist, University of Birmingham Birmingham, United
Kingdom
(4)Consultant Clinical Geneticist, Birmingham Women's Hospital Birmingham,
United Kingdom
(5)Consultant in Inherited Metabolic Disorders, University Hospitals Birmingham,
United Kingdom
(6)Professor, Departments of Pediatrics and Genetics Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine Baltimore, Maryland
(7)National Human Genome Research Institute Medical Genetics Branch Section on
Human Biochemical Genetics Intramural Office of Rare Diseases National
Institutes of Health Bethesda, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Alström syndrome is characterized by cone-rod
dystrophy, obesity, progressive bilateral sensorineural hearing impairment,
acute infantile-onset cardiomyopathy and/or adolescent- or adult-onset
restrictive cardiomyopathy, insulin resistance / type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM), nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), and chronic progressive kidney
disease. Cone-rod dystrophy presents as progressive visual impairment,
photophobia, and nystagmus usually starting between birth and age 15 months.
Many individuals lose all perception of light by the end of the second decade,
but a minority retain the ability to read large print into the third decade.
Children usually have normal birth weight but develop truncal obesity during
their first year. Sensorineural hearing loss presents in the first decade in as
many as 70% of individuals and may progress to the severe or moderately severe
range (40-70 db) by the end of the first to second decade. Insulin resistance is
typically accompanied by the skin changes of acanthosis nigricans, and proceeds
to T2DM in the majority by the third decade. Nearly all demonstrate
hypertriglyceridemia. Other findings can include endocrine abnormalities
(hypothyroidism, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in males, and hyperandrogenism in
females), urologic dysfunction / detrusor instability, progressive decrease in
renal function, and hepatic disease (ranging from elevated transaminases to
steatohepatitis/NAFLD). Approximately 20% of affected individuals have delay in
early developmental milestones, most commonly in gross and fine motor skills.
About 30% have a learning disability. Cognitive impairment (IQ <70) is very
rare. Wide clinical variability is observed among affected individuals, even
within the same family.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The clinical diagnosis of Alström syndrome is based on
cardinal clinical features that emerge throughout infancy, childhood, and young
adulthood. The molecular diagnosis of Alström syndrome is established in
individuals of all ages by identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in
ALMS1 on molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: No therapy exists to prevent the
progressive organ involvement of Alström syndrome. Individuals with Alström
syndrome require coordinated multidisciplinary care to formulate management and
therapeutic interventions. Red-orange tinted prescription lenses may reduce
symptoms of photodysphoria; early educational planning should be based on the
certainty of blindness. Obesity and insulin resistance are managed by a
healthful, reduced-calorie diet with restricted simple carbohydrate intake and
regular aerobic exercise. Myringotomy and/or hearing aids as needed for hearing
impairment. Standard therapy for heart failure / cardiomyopathy. Standard
treatment of insulin resistance / T2DM as in the general population. Consider
nicotinic acid derivatives for hyperlipidemia; consultation with an
endocrinologist if pubertal development and/or menses are abnormal; urinary
diversion or self-catheterization in those with voiding difficulties; renal
transplantation has been successful in a number of cases; appropriate therapy
for portal hypertension and esophageal varices. Surveillance: Routine assessment
of vision and hearing; weight, height, and body mass index; heart (including
echocardiography and EKG in all individuals, and MRI in those age >18 years);
postprandial c-peptide and glucose and HbA1C starting at age four years; lipid
profile; plasma ALT, AST, and GGT concentrations; thyroid function. Twice-yearly
CBC, electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, cystatin-C, uric acid, urinalysis. Renal and
bladder ultrasound examinations every one to two years if symptomatic and/or if
urinalysis is abnormal. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Any substance
contraindicated in persons with renal, hepatic, and/or myocardial disease.
Therapy directed at one system may have adverse effects on other systems; for
example, the use of glitazone therapy in diabetes mellitus is contraindicated in
the presence of cardiac failure. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is
appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and
younger at-risk sibs of an individual with Alström syndrome in order to identify
as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt evaluation for
manifestations of Alström syndrome, initiation of treatment, and/or surveillance
for age-related manifestations.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Alström syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. At conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of
being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance
of being unaffected and not a carrier. When the ALMS1 pathogenic variants have
been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk
relatives, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, and
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301444
