---
reference_id: "PMID:27628078"
title: "Official American Thoracic Society/Japanese Respiratory Society Clinical Practice Guidelines: Lymphangioleiomyomatosis Diagnosis and Management."
authors:
- McCormack FX
- Gupta N
- Finlay GR
- Young LR
- Taveira-DaSilva AM
- Glasgow CG
- Steagall WK
- Johnson SR
- Sahn SA
- Ryu JH
- Strange C
- Seyama K
- Sullivan EJ
- Kotloff RM
- Downey GP
- Chapman JT
- Han MK
- "D'Armiento JM"
- Inoue Y
- Henske EP
- Bissler JJ
- Colby TV
- Kinder BW
- Wikenheiser-Brokamp KA
- Brown KK
- Cordier JF
- Meyer C
- Cottin V
- Brozek JL
- Smith K
- Wilson KC
- Moss J
- ATS/JRS Committee on Lymphangioleiomyomatosis
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1164/rccm.201607-1384ST
keywords:
- Biopsy
- Female
- Humans
- "Lung/diagnostic imaging, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Lymphangioleiomyomatosis/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Male
- Sirolimus/therapeutic use
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor D/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Official American Thoracic Society/Japanese Respiratory Society Clinical Practice Guidelines: Lymphangioleiomyomatosis Diagnosis and Management.
**Authors:** McCormack FX, Gupta N, Finlay GR, Young LR, Taveira-DaSilva AM, Glasgow CG, Steagall WK, Johnson SR, Sahn SA, Ryu JH, Strange C, Seyama K, Sullivan EJ, Kotloff RM, Downey GP, Chapman JT, Han MK, D'Armiento JM, Inoue Y, Henske EP, Bissler JJ, Colby TV, Kinder BW, Wikenheiser-Brokamp KA, Brown KK, Cordier JF, Meyer C, Cottin V, Brozek JL, Smith K, Wilson KC, Moss J, ATS/JRS Committee on Lymphangioleiomyomatosis
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1164/rccm.201607-1384ST](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.201607-1384ST)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2016 Sep 15;194(6):748-61. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201607-1384ST.

Official American Thoracic Society/Japanese Respiratory Society Clinical 
Practice Guidelines: Lymphangioleiomyomatosis Diagnosis and Management.

McCormack FX, Gupta N, Finlay GR, Young LR, Taveira-DaSilva AM, Glasgow CG, 
Steagall WK, Johnson SR, Sahn SA, Ryu JH, Strange C, Seyama K, Sullivan EJ, 
Kotloff RM, Downey GP, Chapman JT, Han MK, D'Armiento JM, Inoue Y, Henske EP, 
Bissler JJ, Colby TV, Kinder BW, Wikenheiser-Brokamp KA, Brown KK, Cordier JF, 
Meyer C, Cottin V, Brozek JL, Smith K, Wilson KC, Moss J; ATS/JRS Committee on 
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2017 Sep 1;196(5):659-660. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201702-0272LE.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2017 Sep 1;196(5):660-661. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201702-0417LE.

BACKGROUND: Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is a rare cystic lung disease that 
primarily affects women. The purpose of these guidelines is to provide 
recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of LAM.
METHODS: Systematic reviews were performed to summarize evidence pertinent to 
our questions. The evidence was summarized and discussed by a multidisciplinary 
panel. Evidence-based recommendations were then formulated, written, and graded 
using the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation 
approach.
RESULTS: After considering the panel's confidence in the estimated effects, the 
balance of desirable (i.e., benefits) and undesirable (i.e., harms and burdens) 
consequences of treatment, patient values and preferences, cost, and 
feasibility, recommendations were formulated for or against specific 
interventions. These included recommendations for sirolimus treatment and 
vascular endothelial growth factor D testing and recommendations against 
doxycycline and hormonal therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Evidence-based recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of 
patients with LAM are provided. Frequent reassessment and updating will be 
needed.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201607-1384ST
PMCID: PMC5803656
PMID: 27628078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]