---
reference_id: "PMID:12655218"
title: "A history of noma, the \"Face of Poverty\"."
authors:
- Marck KW
journal: Plast Reconstr Surg
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1097/01.PRS.0000055445.84307.3C
keywords:
- Child
- "History, 16th Century"
- "History, 17th Century"
- "History, 18th Century"
- "History, 19th Century"
- "History, 20th Century"
- "History, Ancient"
- "History, Medieval"
- Humans
- "Noma/etiology, history, surgery"
- Poverty/history
- "Protein-Energy Malnutrition/complications, history"
- "Surgery, Plastic/history"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A history of noma, the "Face of Poverty".
**Authors:** Marck KW
**Journal:** Plast Reconstr Surg (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.PRS.0000055445.84307.3C](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.PRS.0000055445.84307.3C)

## Content

1. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2003 Apr 15;111(5):1702-7. doi:
10.1097/01.PRS.0000055445.84307.3C.

A history of noma, the "Face of Poverty".

Marck KW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery and Hand Surgery, Medisch Centrum Leeuwarden,
The Netherlands. kwmarck@knmg.nl

Noma (necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis, stomatitis gangrenosa, or cancrum oris)
is a devastating orofacial gangrene that occurs mainly among children. The
disease has a global yearly incidence of 140,000 cases and a mortality rate of
approximately 90 percent. Patients who survive noma generally suffer from its
sequelae, including serious facial disfigurement, trismus, oral incontinence,
and speech problems. The medical history of noma indicates that the disease was
already known in classical and medieval civilizations in Europe. In the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, Dutch chirurgeons clearly described noma as
a clinical entity and realized that the popular name "water canker" was not
sufficient, because this quickly spreading ulceration in the faces of children
was different from "cancer." In the eighteenth century, awareness that noma is
related to poverty, malnutrition, and preceding diseases such as measles
increased in northwestern Europe. In the first half of the nineteenth century,
extensive surgical procedures were described for the treatment of the sequelae
of noma. At the end of that century, noma gradually disappeared in the Western
world because of economic progress, which gave the poorest in society the
opportunity to feed their children sufficiently. Only in the twentieth century
were effective drugs (sulfonamides and penicillin) against noma developed, as
well as adequate surgical treatment for the sequelae of noma. These modes of
treatment remain inaccessible for the many present-day victims of noma because
of their extreme poverty. The only truly effective approach to the problem of
noma throughout the world is prevention, namely, combating the extreme poverty
with measures that lead to economic progress. In the meantime, medical doctors
in the Western world should not forget their own history and ignore this global
health problem; rather, they should face "the face of poverty" with the eyes of
mercy and concern suited to their profession.

DOI: 10.1097/01.PRS.0000055445.84307.3C
PMID: 12655218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
