---
reference_id: "PMID:37353334"
title: Oxygen Therapy in COPD.
authors:
- Hess MW
journal: Respir Care
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4187/respcare.10876
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oxygen Therapy in COPD.
**Authors:** Hess MW
**Journal:** Respir Care (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4187/respcare.10876](https://doi.org/10.4187/respcare.10876)

## Content

1. Respir Care. 2023 Jul;68(7):998-1012. doi: 10.4187/respcare.10876.

Oxygen Therapy in COPD.

Hess MW(1).

Author information:
(1)COPD Foundation, Miami, Florida. mhess@copdfoundation.org.

Long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) is a mainstay treatment for patients with severe 
resting hypoxemia secondary to chronic respiratory conditions including COPD. 
The evidence for LTOT is based on two trials that are now several decades old 
but have been insufficiently revisited. Therefore, many questions remain about 
precisely which patients experience the most benefit from LTOT, as well as how 
to define that benefit. Most studies have examined LTOT's effect on longevity 
rather than its impact on quality of life. In addition, many challenges exist in 
training both clinicians and patients on best practices for LTOT and associated 
equipment. Reimbursement policies have reduced the kinds of equipment available 
to the LTOT patient community, presenting additional challenges. This paper will 
review the current evidence for LTOT in COPD, the challenges involved with 
providing optimal therapy, and potential avenues of modernizing this essential 
intervention.

Copyright © 2023 by Daedalus Enterprises.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.10876
PMCID: PMC10289616
PMID: 37353334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Mr Hess has disclosed no conflicts of interest.