---
reference_id: "PMID:40256763"
title: Alpha-smooth muscle actin-expressing dermal sheath cells are a major cellular contributor to heterotopic subcutaneous ossifications in a mouse model of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy.
authors:
- McMullan P
- Maye P
- Root SH
- Yang Q
- Edie S
- Rowe D
- Kalajzic I
- Germain-Lee EL
journal: JBMR Plus
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/jbmrpl/ziaf038
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-smooth muscle actin-expressing dermal sheath cells are a major cellular contributor to heterotopic subcutaneous ossifications in a mouse model of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy.
**Authors:** McMullan P, Maye P, Root SH, Yang Q, Edie S, Rowe D, Kalajzic I, Germain-Lee EL
**Journal:** JBMR Plus (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jbmrpl/ziaf038](https://doi.org/10.1093/jbmrpl/ziaf038)

## Content

1. JBMR Plus. 2025 Mar 2;9(5):ziaf038. doi: 10.1093/jbmrpl/ziaf038. eCollection
2025 May.

Alpha-smooth muscle actin-expressing dermal sheath cells are a major cellular
contributor to heterotopic subcutaneous ossifications in a mouse model of
Albright hereditary osteodystrophy.

McMullan P(1)(2), Maye P(2), Root SH(2), Yang Q(1)(2), Edie S(3), Rowe D(2),
Kalajzic I(2), Germain-Lee EL(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Connecticut School of Medicine,
Farmington, CT 06030, United States.
(2)Department of Reconstructive Sciences, Center for Regenerative Medicine and
Skeletal Development, University of Connecticut School of Dental Medicine,
Farmington, CT 06030, United States.
(3)The Jackson Laboratory, Farmington, CT 06032, United States.
(4)Division of Endocrinology & Diabetes, Albright Center, Connecticut
Children's, Farmington, CT 06032, United States.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Jun 21:2024.06.18.599506. doi: 10.1101/2024.06.18.599506.

Heterotopic ossifications (HOs) are the pathologic process by which bone
inappropriately forms outside of the skeletal system. Despite HOs being a
persistent clinical problem in the general population, there are no definitive
strategies for their prevention and treatment due to a limited understanding of
the cellular and molecular mechanisms contributing to lesion development. One
disease in which the development of heterotopic subcutaneous ossifications
(SCOs) leads to morbidity is Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO). Albright
hereditary osteodystrophy is caused by heterozygous inactivation of GNAS, the
gene that encodes the α-stimulatory subunit (Gαs) of G proteins. Previously, we
had shown using our laboratory's AHO mouse model that SCOs develop around hair
follicles. Here we show that SCO formation occurs due to inappropriate expansion
and osteogenic differentiation of cells that express alpha-smooth muscle actin
and that are located within the dermal sheath. We also show in AHO patients and
mice that secreted frizzled related protein 2 (SFRP2) expression is upregulated
in regions of SCO formation and that elimination of Sfrp2 in male AHO mice leads
to earlier development, greater severity, and acceleration of formation of SCOs.
These studies provide key insights into the cellular and molecular mechanisms
contributing to SCO development and have implications for potential therapeutic
modalities not only for AHO patients but also for patients suffering from HOs
with other etiologies.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1093/jbmrpl/ziaf038
PMCID: PMC12009542
PMID: 40256763

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.
