---
reference_id: "PMID:27824615"
title: A case of 46,XX dysgenesis and marked tall stature; the need for caution in interpreting array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH).
authors:
- Narayanan VK
- Kharbanda M
- Donaldson M
journal: J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1515/jpem-2016-0182
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of 46,XX dysgenesis and marked tall stature; the need for caution in interpreting array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH).
**Authors:** Narayanan VK, Kharbanda M, Donaldson M
**Journal:** J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1515/jpem-2016-0182](https://doi.org/10.1515/jpem-2016-0182)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2016 Dec 1;29(12):1407-1412. doi: 
10.1515/jpem-2016-0182.

A case of 46,XX dysgenesis and marked tall stature; the need for caution in 
interpreting array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH).

Narayanan VK, Kharbanda M, Donaldson M.

BACKGROUND: Gonadal dysgenesis with an apparently normal 46,XX karyotype is a 
rare cause of hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism. Tall stature is not a widely 
recognized association.
CASE REPORT: A 15-year-old girl presented with primary amenorrhoea. Examination 
showed a non-dysmorphic girl of normal intellect with no breast development 
(Tanner stage B1P4A1) who was tall compared with her parents: height standard 
deviation score (SDS) +1.56 vs. midparental height of +0.23 SDS, and slim build 
(weight -0.13 SDS). Investigations showed a 46,XX karyotype, elevated 
gonadotropins (FSH 119 and LH 33.7 IU/L), serum estradiol <5 pmol/L, uterine 
length 3.75 cm with cylindrical shape, and absent ovaries on ultrasound. 
Initially, a 364055-bp deletion on Xp21.2 was reported on array CGH. However, 
repeat analysis using BlueGnome CytoChip ISCA 4x180k v2.0 array was normal. With 
oral ethinyl estradiol induction puberty progressed to B4P4A2 but aged 18.4 
years, the patient was remarkably tall with height SDS +2.88, weight SDS +0.97.
CONCLUSIONS: Caution is needed in interpreting small changes with array CGH, 
particularly with the older assays. We postulate that the genetic change causing 
46,XX gonadal dysgenesis in our patient may have also resulted in unsuppressed 
somatic growth. More critical height assessment, including parental height 
measurement, of future patients with 46,XX gonadal dysgenesis is recommended in 
order to determine whether or not a true association with tall stature may be 
present in certain cases.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem-2016-0182
PMID: 27824615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]