---
reference_id: "PMID:26631233"
title: Prevalence, incidence, and age at diagnosis in Marfan Syndrome.
authors:
- Groth KA
- Hove H
- Kyhl K
- Folkestad L
- Gaustadnes M
- Vejlstrup N
- Stochholm K
- Østergaard JR
- Andersen NH
- Gravholt CH
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0369-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence, incidence, and age at diagnosis in Marfan Syndrome.
**Authors:** Groth KA, Hove H, Kyhl K, Folkestad L, Gaustadnes M, Vejlstrup N, Stochholm K, Østergaard JR, Andersen NH, Gravholt CH
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-015-0369-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-015-0369-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2015 Dec 2;10:153. doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0369-8.

Prevalence, incidence, and age at diagnosis in Marfan Syndrome.

Groth KA(1)(2), Hove H(3)(4), Kyhl K(5), Folkestad L(6)(7), Gaustadnes M(8), 
Vejlstrup N(5), Stochholm K(9)(10), Østergaard JR(9), Andersen NH(11), Gravholt 
CH(8)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Aarhus University Hospital, DK-8200, Aarhus N, 
Denmark. kristian.groth@ki.au.dk.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Palle 
Juul-Jensens Boulevard 99, DK-8200, Aarhus N, Denmark. kristian.groth@ki.au.dk.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, 
Rigshospitalet, DK-2100, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)The RAREDIS Database, Section of Rare Diseases, Department of Clinical 
Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, DK-2100, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Rigshospitalet, DK-2100, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Department of Endocrinology, Odense University Hospital, DK-5000, Odense C, 
Denmark.
(7)Institute of Clinical Reasearch, University of Southern Denmark, DK-5000, 
Odense C, Denmark.
(8)Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Palle 
Juul-Jensens Boulevard 99, DK-8200, Aarhus N, Denmark.
(9)Centre for Rare Diseases, Department of Paediatrics, Aarhus University 
Hospital, DK-8200, Aarhus N, Denmark.
(10)Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University 
Hospital, DK-8000, Aarhus C, Denmark.
(11)Department of Cardiology, Aarhus University Hospital, DK-8200, Aarhus N, 
Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Marfan syndrome is a genetic disorder with considerable morbidity 
and mortality. Presently, clinicians use the 2010 revised Ghent nosology, which 
includes optional genetic sequencing of the FBN1 gene, to diagnose patients. So 
far, only a few studies based on older diagnostic criteria have reported a wide 
range of prevalence and incidence. Our aim was to study prevalence, incidence, 
and age at diagnosis in patients with Marfan syndrome.
METHOD: Using unique Danish patient-registries, we identified all possible 
Marfan syndrome patients recorded by the Danish healthcare system (1977-2014). 
Following, we confirmed or rejected the diagnosis according to the 2010 revised 
Ghent nosology.
RESULTS: We identified a total of 1628 persons with possible Marfan syndrome. We 
confirmed the diagnosis in 412, whereof 46 were deceased, yielding a maximum 
prevalence of 6.5/100,000 at the end of 2014. The annual median incidence was 
0.19/100,000 (range: 0.0-0.7) which increased significantly with an incidence 
rate ratio of 1.03 (95% CI: 1.02-1.04, p < 0.001). We found a median age at 
diagnose of 19.0 years (range: 0.0-74). The age at diagnosis increased during 
the study period, uninfluenced by the changes in diagnostic criteria. We found 
no gender differences.
CONCLUSION: The increasing prevalence of Marfan syndrome during the study period 
is possibly due to build-up of a registry. Since early diagnosis is essential in 
preventing aortic events, diagnosing Marfan syndrome remains a task for both 
pediatricians and physicians caring for adults.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-015-0369-8
PMCID: PMC4668669
PMID: 26631233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]