---
reference_id: "PMID:30559466"
title: Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibodies in neurological disease.
authors:
- Reindl M
- Waters P
journal: Nat Rev Neurol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41582-018-0112-x
keywords:
- Animals
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Biomarkers/blood
- Humans
- Myelin-Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein/blood
- "Nervous System Diseases/blood, diagnostic imaging"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibodies in neurological disease.
**Authors:** Reindl M, Waters P
**Journal:** Nat Rev Neurol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41582-018-0112-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41582-018-0112-x)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Neurol. 2019 Feb;15(2):89-102. doi: 10.1038/s41582-018-0112-x.

Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibodies in neurological disease.

Reindl M(1), Waters P(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Department of Neurology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck,
Austria. Markus.Reindl@i-med.ac.at.
(2)Oxford Autoimmune Neurology Group, Nuffield Department of Clinical
Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) antibodies (MOG-Abs) were first
detected by immunoblot and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay nearly 30 years
ago, but their association with multiple sclerosis (MS) was not specific. Use of
cell-based assays with native MOG as the substrate enabled identification of a
group of MOG-Ab-positive patients with demyelinating phenotypes. Initially,
MOG-Abs were reported in children with acute disseminated encephalomyelitis
(ADEM). Further studies identified MOG-Abs in adults and children with ADEM,
seizures, encephalitis, anti-aquaporin-4-antibody (AQP4-Ab)-seronegative
neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) and related syndromes (optic
neuritis, myelitis and brainstem encephalitis), but rarely in MS. This shift in
our understanding of the diagnostic assays has re-invigorated the examination of
MOG-Abs and their role in autoimmune and demyelinating disorders of the CNS. The
clinical phenotypes, disease courses and responses to treatment that are
associated with MOG-Abs are currently being defined. MOG-Ab-associated disease
is different to AQP4-Ab-positive NMOSD and MS. This Review provides an overview
of the current knowledge of MOG, the metrics of MOG-Ab assays and the clinical
associations identified. We collate the data on antibody pathogenicity and the
mechanisms that are thought to underlie this. We also highlight differences
between MOG-Ab-associated disease, NMOSD and MS, and describe our current
understanding on how best to treat MOG-Ab-associated disease.

DOI: 10.1038/s41582-018-0112-x
PMID: 30559466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
