---
reference_id: "PMID:39986708"
title: "Childhood Dementia: The Collective Impact and the Urgent Need for Greater Awareness and Action."
authors:
- Elvidge KL
- Farrar MA
- Christodoulou J
- Kava MP
- Johnson AM
- Patterson MC
- Jones SA
- Zuberi S
- Wilmshurst JM
- Smith NJC
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2025.02.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Childhood Dementia: The Collective Impact and the Urgent Need for Greater Awareness and Action.
**Authors:** Elvidge KL, Farrar MA, Christodoulou J, Kava MP, Johnson AM, Patterson MC, Jones SA, Zuberi S, Wilmshurst JM, Smith NJC
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2025.02.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2025.02.005)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2025 Mar;164:A6-A7. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2025.02.005.

Childhood Dementia: The Collective Impact and the Urgent Need for Greater 
Awareness and Action.

Elvidge KL(1), Farrar MA(2), Christodoulou J(3), Kava MP(4), Johnson AM(2), 
Patterson MC(5), Jones SA(6), Zuberi S(7), Wilmshurst JM(8), Smith NJC(9).

Author information:
(1)Childhood Dementia Initiative, Sydney, NSW, Australia. Electronic address: 
kris@childhooddementia.org.
(2)Department of Neurology, Sydney Children's Hospital Network, Randwick, NSW, 
Australia; Discipline of Paediatrics, School of Clinical Medicine, UNSW Medicine 
and Health, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Brain and Mitochondrial Research Group, Murdoch Children's Research 
Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; Department of Paediatrics, University 
of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Departments of Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Perth Children's Hospital, 
Perth, Australia; School of Paediatrics and Child Health, UWA Medical School, 
University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia.
(5)Departments of Neurology, Pediatrics and Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic 
Children's Center, Rochester, Minnesota.
(6)Genomic Medicine, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(7)Paediatric Neurosciences Research Group, School of Health and Wellbeing, 
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK; Royal Hospital for Children, Glasgow, UK.
(8)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Red Cross War Memorial Children's 
Hospital, Neuroscience Institute, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South 
Africa.
(9)Discipline of Paediatrics, University of Adelaide, Women's and Children's 
Hospital, North Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; Department of Neurology 
and Clinical Neurophysiology, Women's and Children's Health Network, North 
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2025.02.005
PMID: 39986708