---
reference_id: "PMID:40065168"
title: Selection for somatic escape variants in SERPINA1 in the liver of patients with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.
authors:
- Brzozowska N
- Wu LYD
- Khodzhaeva V
- Griffiths WJ
- Duckworth A
- Jung H
- Coorens THH
- Hooks Y
- Chambers JE
- Campbell PJ
- Marciniak SJ
- Hoare M
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41588-025-02125-1
keywords:
- Humans
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin/genetics, metabolism"
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/genetics
- "Liver/metabolism, pathology"
- Liver Diseases/genetics
- Genetic Variation
- "Selection, Genetic"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Selection for somatic escape variants in SERPINA1 in the liver of patients with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.
**Authors:** Brzozowska N, Wu LYD, Khodzhaeva V, Griffiths WJ, Duckworth A, Jung H, Coorens THH, Hooks Y, Chambers JE, Campbell PJ, Marciniak SJ, Hoare M
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41588-025-02125-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-025-02125-1)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2025 Apr;57(4):875-883. doi: 10.1038/s41588-025-02125-1. Epub 2025 
Mar 10.

Selection for somatic escape variants in SERPINA1 in the liver of patients with 
alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.

Brzozowska N(1), Wu LYD(2)(3), Khodzhaeva V(2)(3), Griffiths WJ(3), Duckworth 
A(4), Jung H(1), Coorens THH(1)(5), Hooks Y(1), Chambers JE(6)(7), Campbell 
PJ(8), Marciniak SJ(9)(10), Hoare M(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK.
(2)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Keith Peters Building, Cambridge 
Biomedical Campus, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Department of Pathology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(6)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Keith Peters Building, Cambridge 
Biomedical Campus, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. jec202@cam.ac.uk.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 
jec202@cam.ac.uk.
(8)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK. pc8@sanger.ac.uk.
(9)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Keith Peters Building, Cambridge 
Biomedical Campus, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. sjm20@cam.ac.uk.
(10)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 
sjm20@cam.ac.uk.
(11)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 
mwh20@cam.ac.uk.
(12)Early Cancer Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 
mwh20@cam.ac.uk.

Somatic variants accumulate in non-malignant tissues with age. Functional 
variants, leading to clonal advantage of hepatocytes, accumulate in the liver of 
patients with acquired chronic liver disease (CLD). Whether somatic variants are 
common to CLD from differing etiologies is unknown. We analyzed liver somatic 
variants in patients with genetic CLD from alpha-1 antitrypsin (A1AT) deficiency 
or hemochromatosis. We show that somatic variants in SERPINA1, the gene encoding 
A1AT, are strongly selected for in A1AT deficiency, with evidence of convergent 
evolution. Acquired SERPINA1 variants are clustered at the carboxyl terminus of 
A1AT, leading to truncation. In vitro and in vivo, C-terminal truncation 
variants reduce disease-associated Z-A1AT polymer accumulation and disruption of 
the endoplasmic reticulum, supporting the C-terminal domain swap mechanism. 
Therefore, somatic escape variants from a deleterious germline variant are 
selected for in A1AT deficiency, suggesting that functional somatic variants are 
disease-specific in CLD and point to disease-associated mechanisms.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41588-025-02125-1
PMCID: PMC11985350
PMID: 40065168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: P.J.C. is a co-founder, 
shareholder, consultant and, since acceptance of this report, employee of 
Quotient Therapeutics. M.H. is a consultant for Quotient Therapeutics, 
AstraZeneca and Boston Scientific and has received unrestricted scientific 
grants from Pfizer. The other authors declare no competing interests.