---
reference_id: "PMID:11242109"
title: X-linked anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency is caused by impaired NF-kappaB signaling.
authors:
- Döffinger R
- Smahi A
- Bessia C
- Geissmann F
- Feinberg J
- Durandy A
- Bodemer C
- Kenwrick S
- Dupuis-Girod S
- Blanche S
- Wood P
- Rabia SH
- Headon DJ
- Overbeek PA
- Le Deist F
- Holland SM
- Belani K
- Kumararatne DS
- Fischer A
- Shapiro R
- Conley ME
- Reimund E
- Kalhoff H
- Abinun M
- Munnich A
- Israël A
- Courtois G
- Casanova JL
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/85837
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-linked anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency is caused by impaired NF-kappaB signaling.
**Authors:** Döffinger R, Smahi A, Bessia C, Geissmann F, Feinberg J, Durandy A, Bodemer C, Kenwrick S, Dupuis-Girod S, Blanche S, Wood P, Rabia SH, Headon DJ, Overbeek PA, Le Deist F, Holland SM, Belani K, Kumararatne DS, Fischer A, Shapiro R, Conley ME, Reimund E, Kalhoff H, Abinun M, Munnich A, Israël A, Courtois G, Casanova JL
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/85837](https://doi.org/10.1038/85837)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2001 Mar;27(3):277-85. doi: 10.1038/85837.

X-linked anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency is caused by 
impaired NF-kappaB signaling.

Döffinger R(1), Smahi A, Bessia C, Geissmann F, Feinberg J, Durandy A, Bodemer 
C, Kenwrick S, Dupuis-Girod S, Blanche S, Wood P, Rabia SH, Headon DJ, Overbeek 
PA, Le Deist F, Holland SM, Belani K, Kumararatne DS, Fischer A, Shapiro R, 
Conley ME, Reimund E, Kalhoff H, Abinun M, Munnich A, Israël A, Courtois G, 
Casanova JL.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Humaine des Maladies Infectieuses, Faculté de 
Médecine Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

The molecular basis of X-linked recessive anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with 
immunodeficiency (EDA-ID) has remained elusive. Here we report hypomorphic 
mutations in the gene IKBKG in 12 males with EDA-ID from 8 kindreds, and 2 
patients with a related and hitherto unrecognized syndrome of EDA-ID with 
osteopetrosis and lymphoedema (OL-EDA-ID). Mutations in the coding region of 
IKBKG are associated with EDA-ID, and stop codon mutations, with OL-EDA-ID. 
IKBKG encodes NEMO, the regulatory subunit of the IKK (IkappaB kinase) complex, 
which is essential for NF-kappaB signaling. Germline loss-of-function mutations 
in IKBKG are lethal in male fetuses. We show that IKBKG mutations causing 
OL-EDA-ID and EDA-ID impair but do not abolish NF-kappaB signaling. We also show 
that the ectodysplasin receptor, DL, triggers NF-kappaB through the NEMO 
protein, indicating that EDA results from impaired NF-kappaB signaling. Finally, 
we show that abnormal immunity in OL-EDA-ID patients results from impaired cell 
responses to lipopolysaccharide, interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-18, TNFalpha and 
CD154. We thus report for the first time that impaired but not abolished 
NF-kappaB signaling in humans results in two related syndromes that associate 
specific developmental and immunological defects.

DOI: 10.1038/85837
PMID: 11242109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]