---
reference_id: "PMID:38933431"
title: A review of epidemiology of lymphatic filariasis in Nigeria.
authors:
- Waje T
- Iliyasu C
- Yaki LM
- Auta IK
journal: Pan Afr Med J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.11604/pamj.2024.47.142.39746
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A review of epidemiology of lymphatic filariasis in Nigeria.
**Authors:** Waje T, Iliyasu C, Yaki LM, Auta IK
**Journal:** Pan Afr Med J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.11604/pamj.2024.47.142.39746](https://doi.org/10.11604/pamj.2024.47.142.39746)

## Content

1. Pan Afr Med J. 2024 Mar 27;47:142. doi: 10.11604/pamj.2024.47.142.39746. 
eCollection 2024.

A review of epidemiology of lymphatic filariasis in Nigeria.

Waje T(1), Iliyasu C(2), Yaki LM(3), Auta IK(3).

Author information:
(1)Microbiology in Biological Sciences, Abubakar Tafawa Balewa University, 
P.M.B. 0248, Bauchi, Nigeria.
(2)Biological Sciences, Nigerian Defense Academy, Kaduna, Nigeria.
(3)Microbiology Department, Kaduna State University, P.M.B. 2335, Kaduna, 
Nigeria.

Lymphatic filariasis is a neglected tropical disease that affects the lymphatic 
system of humans. The major etiologic agent is a nematode called Wuchereria 
bancrofti, but Brugia malayi and Brugia timoriare sometimes encountered as 
causative agents. Mosquitoes are the vectors while humans the definitive hosts 
respectively. The burden of the disease is heavier in Nigeria than in other 
endemic countries in Africa. This occurs with increasing morbidity and mortality 
at different locations within the country, the World Health Organization 
recommended treatments for lymphatic filariasis include the use of Albendazole 
(400mg) twice per year in co-endemic areas with loa loa, Ivermectin (200mcg/kg) 
in combination with Albendazole (400mg) in areas that are co-endemic with 
onchocerciasis, ivermectin (200mcg/kg) with diethylcarbamazine citrate (DEC) 
(6mg/kg) and albendazole (400mg) in areas without onchocerciasis. This paper 
covered a systematic review, meta-analysis, and scoping review on lymphatic 
filariasis in the respective geopolitical zones within the country. The 
literature used was obtained through online search engines including PubMed and 
Google Scholar with the heading "lymphatic filariasis in the name of the state", 
Nigeria. This review revealed an overall prevalence of 11.18% with regional 
spread of Northwest (1.59%), North Central and North East, (4.52%), South West 
(1.26%), and South-South with South East (3.81%) prevalence. The disease has 
been successfully eliminated in Argungu local government areas (LGAs) of Kebbi 
State, Plateau, and Nasarawa States respectively. Most clinical manifestations 
(31.12%) include hydrocele, lymphedema, elephantiasis, hernia, and dermatitis. 
Night blood samples are appropriate for microfilaria investigation. Sustained 
MDAs, the right testing methods, early treatment of infected cases, and vector 
control are useful for the elimination of lymphatic filariasis for morbidity 
management and disability prevention in the country. Regional control 
strategies, improved quality monitoring of surveys and intervention programs 
with proper records of morbidity and disability requiring intervention are 
important approaches for the timely elimination of the disease in Nigeria.

Copyright: Timothy Waje et al.

DOI: 10.11604/pamj.2024.47.142.39746
PMCID: PMC11204990
PMID: 38933431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no competing interests.