---
reference_id: "PMID:11270760"
title: Fibroadenoma of the breast.
authors:
- Houssami N
- Cheung MN
- Dixon JM
journal: Med J Aust
year: '2001'
doi: 10.5694/j.1326-5377.2001.tb143215.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibroadenoma of the breast.
**Authors:** Houssami N, Cheung MN, Dixon JM
**Journal:** Med J Aust (2001)
**DOI:** [10.5694/j.1326-5377.2001.tb143215.x](https://doi.org/10.5694/j.1326-5377.2001.tb143215.x)

## Content

1. Med J Aust. 2001 Feb 19;174(4):185-8. doi:
10.5694/j.1326-5377.2001.tb143215.x.

Fibroadenoma of the breast.

Houssami N(1), Cheung MN, Dixon JM.

Author information:
(1)Sydney Square Breast Clinic, NSW, Medical Benefits Fund of Australia. 
n.houssami@mbf.com.au

Fibroadenoma of the breast is a common cause of a benign breast lump in 
premenopausal women. The consensus view is that women with fibroadenomas are not 
at significant increased risk of developing breast cancer. Diagnosis is based on 
the combination of clinical examination, imaging and non-surgical tissue biopsy 
(the triple test). A clinical diagnosis of fibroadenoma alone is unreliable and 
does not exclude malignancy even in younger women. The choice of imaging is 
mammography, combined with ultrasound in older women, and ultrasound alone in 
younger women. Tissue biopsy, by either fine-needle aspiration or core biopsy, 
is the most accurate means of establishing the diagnosis. Traditionally, 
symptomatic fibroadenomas were treated by surgical excision, and this option 
should always be offered. There is increasing evidence that a conservative 
approach is safe and acceptable, provided the result of an adequate triple test 
is both negative for cancer and consistent with a fibroadenoma. Patients who 
choose conservative management need to be informed of the limitation of the 
tests, and must be assessed promptly if there is symptomatic or clinical change.

DOI: 10.5694/j.1326-5377.2001.tb143215.x
PMID: 11270760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]