---
reference_id: "PMID:18710423"
title: "Extrahepatic metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma: incidence and risk factors."
authors:
- Kanda M
- Tateishi R
- Yoshida H
- Sato T
- Masuzaki R
- Ohki T
- Imamura J
- Goto T
- Yoshida H
- Hamamura K
- Obi S
- Kanai F
- Shiina S
- Omata M
journal: Liver Int
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2008.01864.x
keywords:
- Adrenal Gland Neoplasms/secondary
- Aged
- Bone Neoplasms/secondary
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/pathology"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Liver Neoplasms/pathology
- Lung Neoplasms/secondary
- Lymphatic Metastasis
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Metastasis/pathology
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extrahepatic metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma: incidence and risk factors.
**Authors:** Kanda M, Tateishi R, Yoshida H, Sato T, Masuzaki R, Ohki T, Imamura J, Goto T, Yoshida H, Hamamura K, Obi S, Kanai F, Shiina S, Omata M
**Journal:** Liver Int (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1478-3231.2008.01864.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1478-3231.2008.01864.x)

## Content

1. Liver Int. 2008 Nov;28(9):1256-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2008.01864.x. Epub
 2008 Jul 15.

Extrahepatic metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma: incidence and risk factors.

Kanda M(1), Tateishi R, Yoshida H, Sato T, Masuzaki R, Ohki T, Imamura J, Goto 
T, Yoshida H, Hamamura K, Obi S, Kanai F, Shiina S, Omata M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, the University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Liver Int. 2008 Nov;28(9):1183-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2008.01863.x.

BACKGROUND: Extrahepatic metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is of 
growing importance as the survival of patients has been improved owing to 
advances in treatments to intrahepatic lesions.
METHODS: To elucidate the incidence and risk factors of extrahepatic metastasis 
of HCC, we enrolled 1573 (1131 treatment-naïve and 442 previously treated on 
referral) patients with HCC without extrahepatic tumour spread treated at the 
authors' department between 1990 and 2003. Patients received medical treatment 
including percutaneous ablation and transcatheter arterial chemoembolization, 
and followed by dynamic computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) and tumour markers every 3-4 months. Extrahepatic metastasis was diagnosed 
by plain X-ray, CT, MRI and scintigraphy. Clinical parameters at the time of 
treatment to intrahepatic lesions were evaluated as a predictor of subsequent 
extrahepatic metastasis among the 1131 treatment-naïve patients by Cox's 
proportional hazard model.
RESULTS: During the average observation period of 3.9 years, extrahepatic 
metastasis was diagnosed in 123 in the treatment-naïve and 53 in the patients 
treated previously. The incidence rate of extrahepatic metastasis, as detected 
during the lifetime after medical treatment of HCC, was approximately 13% at 5 
years. Multivariate analysis with Cox proportional hazard model revealed that 
positivity for viral markers, lager tumour diameter, multiple tumour nodules, 
presence of vascular tumour invasion and elevated tumour markers were associated 
with the development of extrahepatic metastasis.
CONCLUSION: The incidence of extrahepatic metastasis of HCC diagnosed during 
clinical course was not frequent. Advanced intrahepatic lesions, presence of 
vascular tumour invasion, elevated tumour markers and presence of viral 
hepatitis were risk factors for extrahepatic metastasis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2008.01864.x
PMID: 18710423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]