---
reference_id: "PMID:25437880"
title: Exome sequencing reveals MCM8 mutation underlies ovarian failure and chromosomal instability.
authors:
- AlAsiri S
- Basit S
- Wood-Trageser MA
- Yatsenko SA
- Jeffries EP
- Surti U
- Ketterer DM
- Afzal S
- Ramzan K
- Faiyaz-Ul Haque M
- Jiang H
- Trakselis MA
- Rajkovic A
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1172/JCI78473
keywords:
- Chromosomal Instability
- Consanguinity
- DNA Repair
- Exome
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Lod Score
- Middle Aged
- Minichromosome Maintenance Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/genetics
- Protein Binding
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exome sequencing reveals MCM8 mutation underlies ovarian failure and chromosomal instability.
**Authors:** AlAsiri S, Basit S, Wood-Trageser MA, Yatsenko SA, Jeffries EP, Surti U, Ketterer DM, Afzal S, Ramzan K, Faiyaz-Ul Haque M, Jiang H, Trakselis MA, Rajkovic A
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI78473](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI78473)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2015 Jan;125(1):258-62. doi: 10.1172/JCI78473. Epub 2014 Dec 1.

Exome sequencing reveals MCM8 mutation underlies ovarian failure and chromosomal 
instability.

AlAsiri S, Basit S, Wood-Trageser MA, Yatsenko SA, Jeffries EP, Surti U, 
Ketterer DM, Afzal S, Ramzan K, Faiyaz-Ul Haque M, Jiang H, Trakselis MA, 
Rajkovic A.

Comment in
    Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 30;6(18):15750-1. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4589.

Premature ovarian failure (POF) is a genetically and phenotypically 
heterogeneous disorder that includes individuals with manifestations ranging 
from primary amenorrhea to loss of menstrual function prior to age 40. POF 
presents as hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and can be part of a syndrome or 
occur in isolation. Here, we studied 3 sisters with primary amenorrhea, 
hypothyroidism, and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. The sisters were born to 
parents who are first cousins. SNP analysis and whole-exome sequencing revealed 
the presence of a pathogenic variant of the minichromosome maintenance 8 gene 
(MCM8, c.446C>G; p.P149R) located within a region of homozygosity that was 
present in the affected daughters but not in their unaffected sisters. Because 
MCM8 participates in homologous recombination and dsDNA break repair, we tested 
fibroblasts from the affected sisters for hypersensitivity to chromosomal 
breaks. Compared with fibroblasts from unaffected daughters, chromosomal break 
repair was deficient in fibroblasts from the affected individuals, likely due to 
inhibited recruitment of MCM8 p.P149R to sites of DNA damage. Our study 
identifies an autosomal recessive disorder caused by an MCM8 mutation that 
manifests with endocrine dysfunction and genomic instability.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI78473
PMCID: PMC4382257
PMID: 25437880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]