---
reference_id: "PMID:32044412"
title: Patterns of Failure in Parameningeal Alveolar Rhabdomyosarcoma.
authors:
- Bradley JA
- Indelicato DJ
- Uezono H
- Morris CG
- Sandler E
- de Soto H
- Mailhot Vega RB
- Rotondo R
journal: Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2020.01.035
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Meningeal Neoplasms/radiotherapy
- "Radiotherapy, Adjuvant"
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma, Alveolar/radiotherapy"
- Treatment Failure
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patterns of Failure in Parameningeal Alveolar Rhabdomyosarcoma.
**Authors:** Bradley JA, Indelicato DJ, Uezono H, Morris CG, Sandler E, de Soto H, Mailhot Vega RB, Rotondo R
**Journal:** Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijrobp.2020.01.035](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2020.01.035)

## Content

1. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2020 Jun 1;107(2):325-333. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2020.01.035. Epub 2020 Feb 7.

Patterns of Failure in Parameningeal Alveolar Rhabdomyosarcoma.

Bradley JA(1), Indelicato DJ(2), Uezono H(2), Morris CG(2), Sandler E(3), de
Soto H(4), Mailhot Vega RB(2), Rotondo R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Florida College of Medicine,
Jacksonville, Florida. Electronic address: jbradley@floridaproton.org.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Florida College of Medicine,
Jacksonville, Florida.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology Clinic,
Nemours Children's Specialty Care, Jacksonville, Florida.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Florida College of Medicine,
Jacksonville, Florida.

PURPOSE: To determine patterns of failure, clinical outcomes, and prognostic
factors among pediatric patients treated with radiation therapy for
parameningeal alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: We evaluated clinical and treatment planning records of
patients aged ≤21 years with parameningeal alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma treated
with definitive or adjuvant radiation therapy at our institution. The
Kaplan-Meier product limit method assessed disease control and survival; the
log-rank test was used to evaluate prognostic impact.
RESULTS: We identified 24 patients with a median age of 3.5 years (range, 1-20)
treated between 2009 and 2016. The median follow-up was 2.4 years for all
(range, 0.3-5.6) and 3.2 years for living patients (range, 0.7-5.6). Most
patients had group III (96%), node-negative (67%), positive FOX fusion status
(63%) disease, and intracranial extension (54%). The paranasal sinus was the
most common subsite (29%). All patients were treated with concurrent
chemotherapy and proton radiation therapy with a median dose of 50.4 Gy relative
biological effectiveness (range, 41.4-59.4) at a median 13 weeks after induction
chemotherapy (range, 3-25). The 3-year local control, regional control,
disease-free survival, and overall survival rates were 66%, 94%, 40%, and 58%,
respectively. Median time to any failure was 0.5 years (range, 0.2-2.1). N1
disease and intracranial extension (ICE) portended inferior overall survival (P
= .002 and .02, respectively). Female sex portended better local control (P =
.05). All 7 patients with distant metastases as the first site of recurrence had
central nervous system metastases. Age <4 years, absence of ICE, N0 disease, and
primary tumor <5 cm were associated with a statistically significant improvement
in freedom from distant metastases.
CONCLUSIONS: Although regional nodal failures were rare, in-field local
recurrences and leptomeiningeal progression in those with ICE suggest the need
for modification of local and central nervous system therapies.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2020.01.035
PMID: 32044412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
