---
reference_id: "PMID:24291220"
title: "The genetic basis of DOORS syndrome: an exome-sequencing study."
authors:
- Campeau PM
- Kasperaviciute D
- Lu JT
- Burrage LC
- Kim C
- Hori M
- Powell BR
- Stewart F
- Félix TM
- van den Ende J
- Wisniewska M
- Kayserili H
- Rump P
- Nampoothiri S
- Aftimos S
- Mey A
- Nair LD
- Begleiter ML
- De Bie I
- Meenakshi G
- Murray ML
- Repetto GM
- Golabi M
- Blair E
- Male A
- Giuliano F
- Kariminejad A
- Newman WG
- Bhaskar SS
- Dickerson JE
- Kerr B
- Banka S
- Giltay JC
- Wieczorek D
- Tostevin A
- Wiszniewska J
- Cheung SW
- Hennekam RC
- Gibbs RA
- Lee BH
- Sisodiya SM
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70265-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Carrier Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics"
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- GTPase-Activating Proteins
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics"
- Internationality
- Male
- Membrane Proteins
- "Nails, Malformed/diagnosis, genetics"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins
- Phenotype
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA/methods"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The genetic basis of DOORS syndrome: an exome-sequencing study.
**Authors:** Campeau PM, Kasperaviciute D, Lu JT, Burrage LC, Kim C, Hori M, Powell BR, Stewart F, Félix TM, van den Ende J, Wisniewska M, Kayserili H, Rump P, Nampoothiri S, Aftimos S, Mey A, Nair LD, Begleiter ML, De Bie I, Meenakshi G, Murray ML, Repetto GM, Golabi M, Blair E, Male A, Giuliano F, Kariminejad A, Newman WG, Bhaskar SS, Dickerson JE, Kerr B, Banka S, Giltay JC, Wieczorek D, Tostevin A, Wiszniewska J, Cheung SW, Hennekam RC, Gibbs RA, Lee BH, Sisodiya SM
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70265-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70265-5)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2014 Jan;13(1):44-58. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70265-5. Epub 
2013 Nov 29.

The genetic basis of DOORS syndrome: an exome-sequencing study.

Campeau PM(1), Kasperaviciute D(2), Lu JT(3), Burrage LC(1), Kim C(4), Hori 
M(5), Powell BR(6), Stewart F(7), Félix TM(8), van den Ende J(9), Wisniewska 
M(10), Kayserili H(11), Rump P(12), Nampoothiri S(13), Aftimos S(14), Mey A(15), 
Nair LD(16), Begleiter ML(17), De Bie I(18), Meenakshi G(19), Murray ML(20), 
Repetto GM(21), Golabi M(22), Blair E(23), Male A(24), Giuliano F(25), 
Kariminejad A(26), Newman WG(27), Bhaskar SS(27), Dickerson JE(27), Kerr B(27), 
Banka S(27), Giltay JC(28), Wieczorek D(29), Tostevin A(2), Wiszniewska J(1), 
Cheung SW(1), Hennekam RC(30), Gibbs RA(31), Lee BH(32), Sisodiya SM(33).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy, UCL Institute of Neurology, 
London, UK.
(3)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA; 
Department of Structural and Computational Biology and Molecular Biophysics, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Toyohashi Municipal Hospital, Toyohashi, Aichi, 
Japan.
(6)Children's Hospital Central California, Madera, California, USA.
(7)Genetics Service, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, Ireland.
(8)Medical Genetics Service, Clinical Hospital of Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, 
Brazil.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Antwerp, 2650 Antwerp, 
Belgium.
(10)Department of Medical Genetics, Poznañ University of Medical Sciences, 
Poznañ, Poland.
(11)Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, 
Turkey.
(12)Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
(13)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and 
Research Centre, Kerala, India.
(14)Genetic Health Service New Zealand-Northern Hub, Auckland City Hospital, 
Auckland, New Zealand.
(15)Pediatric Neurology, Braunschweig Hospital, Braunschweig, Germany.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Saveetha Medical College and Hospital, Saveetha 
University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, 600077, India.
(17)Division of Genetics, Children's Mercy Hospitals and Clinics and the 
University of Missouri-Kansas City School of Medicine, Kansas City, MO, USA.
(18)Department of Medical Genetics, Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill 
University Health Center, Quebec, Canada.
(19)Department of Pediatrics, NKP Salve Institute of Medical Sciences and Lata 
Mangeshkar Hospital, Maharashtra, India.
(20)University of Washington Medical Center, Seattle, WA, USA.
(21)Center for Human Genetics, Facultad de Medicina, Clínica Alemana-Universidad 
del Desarrollo, Santiago, Chile.
(22)Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(23)Department of Clinical Genetics, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, UK.
(24)Clinical Genetics Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(25)Centre Référence Anomalie Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire de Nice, France.
(26)Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Tehran, Iran.
(27)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Institute of Human Development, 
Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK; 
Manchester Centre for Genomic Centre for Genetic Medicine, Institute of Human 
Development, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK; St Mary's Hospital, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, 
Manchester, UK.
(28)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
Netherlands.
(29)Institut für Humangenetik, University of Duisburg-Essen, University Hospital 
Essen, Essen, Germany.
(30)Department of Pediatrics and Translational Genetics, Academic Medical 
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(31)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 
USA.
(32)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institutes, Houston, TX, USA. Electronic 
address: blee@bcm.edu.
(33)Department of Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy, UCL Institute of 
Neurology, London, UK; Epilepsy Society, Buckinghamshire, UK. Electronic 
address: s.sisodiya@ucl.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2014 Jan;13(1):24-5. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70237-0.
    J Neurol. 2014 Jun;261(6):1244-6. doi: 10.1007/s00415-014-7372-1.

BACKGROUND: Deafness, onychodystrophy, osteodystrophy, mental retardation, and 
seizures (DOORS) syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of unknown 
cause. We aimed to identify the genetic basis of this syndrome by sequencing 
most coding exons in affected individuals.
METHODS: Through a search of available case studies and communication with 
collaborators, we identified families that included at least one individual with 
at least three of the five main features of the DOORS syndrome: deafness, 
onychodystrophy, osteodystrophy, intellectual disability, and seizures. 
Participants were recruited from 26 centres in 17 countries. Families described 
in this study were enrolled between Dec 1, 2010, and March 1, 2013. 
Collaborating physicians enrolling participants obtained clinical information 
and DNA samples from the affected child and both parents if possible. We did 
whole-exome sequencing in affected individuals as they were enrolled, until we 
identified a candidate gene, and Sanger sequencing to confirm mutations. We did 
expression studies in human fibroblasts from one individual by real-time PCR and 
western blot analysis, and in mouse tissues by immunohistochemistry and 
real-time PCR.
FINDINGS: 26 families were included in the study. We did exome sequencing in the 
first 17 enrolled families; we screened for TBC1D24 by Sanger sequencing in 
subsequent families. We identified TBC1D24 mutations in 11 individuals from nine 
families (by exome sequencing in seven families, and Sanger sequencing in two 
families). 18 families had individuals with all five main features of DOORS 
syndrome, and TBC1D24 mutations were identified in half of these families. The 
seizure types in individuals with TBC1D24 mutations included generalised 
tonic-clonic, complex partial, focal clonic, and infantile spasms. Of the 18 
individuals with DOORS syndrome from 17 families without TBC1D24 mutations, 
eight did not have seizures and three did not have deafness. In expression 
studies, some mutations abrogated TBC1D24 mRNA stability. We also detected 
Tbc1d24 expression in mouse phalangeal chondrocytes and calvaria, which suggests 
a role of TBC1D24 in skeletogenesis.
INTERPRETATION: Our findings suggest that mutations in TBC1D24 seem to be an 
important cause of DOORS syndrome and can cause diverse phenotypes. Thus, 
individuals with DOORS syndrome without deafness and seizures but with the other 
features should still be screened for TBC1D24 mutations. More information is 
needed to understand the cellular roles of TBC1D24 and identify the genes 
responsible for DOORS phenotypes in individuals who do not have a mutation in 
TBC1D24.
FUNDING: US National Institutes of Health, the CIHR (Canada), the NIHR (UK), the 
Wellcome Trust, the Henry Smith Charity, and Action Medical Research.

Copyright © 2014 Campeau et al. Open Access article distributed under the terms 
of CC BY. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70265-5
PMCID: PMC3895324
PMID: 24291220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]