---
reference_id: "PMID:33860896"
title: "Current recommendations for cancer surveillance in Gorlin syndrome: a report from the SIOPE host genome working group (SIOPE HGWG)."
authors:
- Guerrini-Rousseau L
- Smith MJ
- Kratz CP
- Doergeloh B
- Hirsch S
- Hopman SMJ
- Jorgensen M
- Kuhlen M
- Michaeli O
- Milde T
- Ridola V
- Russo A
- Salvador H
- Waespe N
- Claret B
- Brugieres L
- Evans DG
journal: Fam Cancer
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10689-021-00247-z
keywords:
- "Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Cerebellar Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Hedgehog Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Patched-1 Receptor/genetics
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- Skin Neoplasms
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current recommendations for cancer surveillance in Gorlin syndrome: a report from the SIOPE host genome working group (SIOPE HGWG).
**Authors:** Guerrini-Rousseau L, Smith MJ, Kratz CP, Doergeloh B, Hirsch S, Hopman SMJ, Jorgensen M, Kuhlen M, Michaeli O, Milde T, Ridola V, Russo A, Salvador H, Waespe N, Claret B, Brugieres L, Evans DG
**Journal:** Fam Cancer (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10689-021-00247-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10689-021-00247-z)

## Content

1. Fam Cancer. 2021 Oct;20(4):317-325. doi: 10.1007/s10689-021-00247-z. Epub 2021
 Apr 16.

Current recommendations for cancer surveillance in Gorlin syndrome: a report 
from the SIOPE host genome working group (SIOPE HGWG).

Guerrini-Rousseau L(1)(2), Smith MJ(3), Kratz CP(4), Doergeloh B(4), Hirsch 
S(5)(6), Hopman SMJ(7), Jorgensen M(8), Kuhlen M(9), Michaeli O(10), Milde T(6), 
Ridola V(11), Russo A(12), Salvador H(13), Waespe N(14)(15), Claret B(16), 
Brugieres L(17)(18), Evans DG(19).

Author information:
(1)Gustave Roussy Cancer Center, Department of Pediatric and Adolescent 
Oncology, Paris-Saclay University, Villejuif, France. 
lea.guerrini-rousseau@gustaveroussy.fr.
(2)« Génomique Et Oncogénèse Des Tumeurs Cérébrales Pédiatriques » INSERM U981, 
Gustave Roussy Cancer Center and Paris-Saclay University, Villejuif, France. 
lea.guerrini-rousseau@gustaveroussy.fr.
(3)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester 
Academic Health Science Centre, School of Biological Sciences, Division of 
Evolution and Genomic Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9WL, 
UK.
(4)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical School, 
Hannover, Germany.
(5)Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(6)Hopp Children's Cancer Center Heidelberg (KiTZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(8)MJ Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, 
WC1N 3JH, UK.
(9)Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center Augsburg, 
Augsburg, Germany.
(10)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Schneider Children's Medical Center of 
Israel, Petah Tikva, Israel.
(11)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, MITERA Children's Hospital, 
Athens, Greece.
(12)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Center for Pediatric and 
Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center of the Johannes 
Gutenberg-University Mainz, 55131, Mainz, Germany.
(13)Pediatric Oncology Department, Sant Joan de Deu Children's Hospital, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(14)Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(15)Research Platform for Pediatric Oncology and Hematology, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(16)Gustave Roussy Cancer Center, Psycho-oncology Unit, Paris-Saclay University, 
Villejuif, France.
(17)Gustave Roussy Cancer Center, Department of Pediatric and Adolescent 
Oncology, Paris-Saclay University, Villejuif, France.
(18)« Génomique Et Oncogénèse Des Tumeurs Cérébrales Pédiatriques » INSERM U981, 
Gustave Roussy Cancer Center and Paris-Saclay University, Villejuif, France.
(19)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester 
Academic Health Science Centre, School of Biological Sciences, Division of 
Evolution and Genomic Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9WL, 
UK. Gareth.evans@mft.nhs.uk.

Gorlin syndrome (MIM 109,400), a cancer predisposition syndrome related to a 
constitutional pathogenic variation (PV) of a gene in the Sonic Hedgehog pathway 
(PTCH1 or SUFU), is associated with a broad spectrum of benign and malignant 
tumors. Basal cell carcinomas (BCC), odontogenic keratocysts and 
medulloblastomas are the main tumor types encountered, but meningiomas, ovarian 
or cardiac fibromas and sarcomas have also been described. The clinical features 
and tumor risks are different depending on the causative gene. Due to the rarity 
of this condition, there is little data on phenotype-genotype correlations. This 
report summarizes genotype-based recommendations for screening patients with 
PTCH1 and SUFU-related Gorlin syndrome, discussed during a workshop of the Host 
Genome Working Group of the European branch of the International Society of 
Pediatric Oncology (SIOPE HGWG) held in January 2020. In order to allow early 
detection of BCC, dermatologic examination should start at age 10 in PTCH1, and 
at age 20 in SUFU PV carriers. Odontogenic keratocyst screening, based on 
odontologic examination, should begin at age 2 with annual orthopantogram 
beginning around age 8 for PTCH1 PV carriers only. For medulloblastomas, 
repeated brain MRI from birth to 5 years should be proposed for SUFU PV carriers 
only. Brain MRI for meningiomas and pelvic ultrasound for ovarian fibromas 
should be offered to both PTCH1 and SUFU PV carriers. Follow-up of patients 
treated with radiotherapy should be prolonged and thorough because of the risk 
of secondary malignancies. Prospective evaluation of evidence of the 
effectiveness of these surveillance recommendations is required.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10689-021-00247-z
PMCID: PMC8484213
PMID: 33860896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.