---
reference_id: "PMID:35633020"
title: Kleefstra Syndrome.
authors:
- Aydin H
- Bucak IH
- Bagis H
journal: J Coll Physicians Surg Pak
year: '2022'
doi: 10.29271/jcpsp.2022.Supp1.S76
keywords:
- Child
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 9"
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- "Heart Defects, Congenital"
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/epidemiology, genetics"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kleefstra Syndrome.
**Authors:** Aydin H, Bucak IH, Bagis H
**Journal:** J Coll Physicians Surg Pak (2022)
**DOI:** [10.29271/jcpsp.2022.Supp1.S76](https://doi.org/10.29271/jcpsp.2022.Supp1.S76)

## Content

1. J Coll Physicians Surg Pak. 2022 Apr;32(4):S76-S78. doi: 
10.29271/jcpsp.2022.Supp1.S76.

Kleefstra Syndrome.

Aydin H(1), Bucak IH(2), Bagis H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Balikesir University, Faculty of Medicine, 
Balikesir, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Adiyaman University, Adiyaman, 
Turkey.
(3)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Adiyaman University, Adiyaman, 
Turkey.

Kleefstra syndrome (KS), previously referred to as 9q subtelomeric deletion 
syndrome (9qSTDS), is characterised by moderate to severe developmental 
delay/mental retardation, childhood hypotonia, and brachy-microcephaly (main 
clinical phenotype), midface hypoplasia, prognathism, lip and eyebrow shape 
anomalies. The true prevalence of KS is unknown, but it is estimated that it 
occurs with a frequency of 1/200.000 in cases with mental retardation. On 
literature search, approximately 110 patients have been reported so far. Genetic 
analysis should be planned and interdisciplinary monitoring should be provided 
in cases suspected to have KS.   Key Words: Child, Genetic disorder, Kleefstra 
Syndrome, Dysmorphism.

DOI: 10.29271/jcpsp.2022.Supp1.S76
PMID: 35633020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]