---
reference_id: "PMID:30010889"
title: Carbamazepine reduces disease severity in a mouse model of metaphyseal chondrodysplasia type Schmid caused by a premature stop codon (Y632X) in the Col10a1 gene.
authors:
- Forouhan M
- Sonntag S
- Boot-Handford RP
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy253
keywords:
- Animals
- "Carbamazepine/administration & dosage"
- "Chondrocytes/drug effects, pathology"
- "Codon, Nonsense/drug effects, genetics"
- Collagen Type X/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress/drug effects
- "Growth Plate/drug effects, growth & development, physiopathology"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Unfolded Protein Response/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Carbamazepine reduces disease severity in a mouse model of metaphyseal chondrodysplasia type Schmid caused by a premature stop codon (Y632X) in the Col10a1 gene.
**Authors:** Forouhan M, Sonntag S, Boot-Handford RP
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddy253](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddy253)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2018 Nov 15;27(22):3840-3853. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy253.

Carbamazepine reduces disease severity in a mouse model of metaphyseal 
chondrodysplasia type Schmid caused by a premature stop codon (Y632X) in the 
Col10a1 gene.

Forouhan M(1), Sonntag S(2), Boot-Handford RP(1).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and 
Health and Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK.
(2)PolyGene AG, Riedmattstr. 9, CH-8153 Rümlang, Switzerland.

Mutations, mostly in the region of the COL10A1 gene encoding the C-terminal 
non-collagenous domain, cause the dwarfism metaphyseal chondrodysplasia type 
Schmid (MCDS). In most cases, the disease mechanism involves the misfolding of 
the mutant protein causing increased endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and an 
unfolded protein response (UPR). However, in an iliac crest biopsy, the COL10A1 
p.Y632X mutation was found to produce instability of the mutant mRNA such that 
little mutant protein may be produced. To investigate the disease mechanism 
further, a gene-targeted mouse model of the Col10a1 p.Y632X mutation was 
generated. In this model, the mutant mRNA showed no instability, and in mice 
heterozygous for the mutation, mutant and wild-type mRNAs were present at equal 
concentrations. The protein was translated from the mutant allele and retained 
within the cell, triggering increased ER stress and a UPR. The mutation produced 
a relatively severe form of MCDS. Nevertheless, treatment of the mice with 
carbamazepine (CBZ), a drug which stimulates intracellular proteolysis and 
alleviates ER stress, effectively reduced the disease severity in this model of 
MCDS caused by a premature stop codon in the Col10a1 gene. Specifically, the 
drug reduced ER stress in the growth plate, restored growth plate architecture 
toward the wild-type state, significantly increased bone growth and within 
2 weeks of treatment corrected the MCDS-induced hip distortion. These results 
indicate that CBZ is likely to be effective in ongoing clinical trials against 
all forms of MCDS whether caused by premature stop codons or substitutions.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddy253
PMCID: PMC6216233
PMID: 30010889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]