---
reference_id: "PMID:11096525"
title: "Thromboangiitis Obliterans (Buerger's Disease)."
authors:
- Jaff MR
journal: Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1007/s11936-000-0014-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thromboangiitis Obliterans (Buerger's Disease).
**Authors:** Jaff MR
**Journal:** Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11936-000-0014-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11936-000-0014-1)

## Content

1. Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med. 2000 Jun;2(3):205-212. doi: 
10.1007/s11936-000-0014-1.

Thromboangiitis Obliterans (Buerger's Disease).

Jaff MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Washington Hospital Center, 110 Irving Street, NW, Suite 4B-1, Washington, DC 
20010, USA.

Thromboangiitis obliterans (TAO) is a devastating nonatherosclerotic disease 
that often leads to digit and limb loss as well as intractable ischemic rest 
pain. Patients with TAO are uniformly heavy users of tobacco. This disorder is 
characterized as a miscellaneous form of vasculitis affecting small- and 
medium-sized arteries and veins. TAO causes painful ischemic ulcers of the 
digits and unusually painful and inflammatory superficial thrombophlebitis. The 
key to early diagnosis of TAO is a high clinical index of suspicion in the 
appropriate patient scenario, exclusion of any other potential cause, abnormal 
results from an Allen's test, and arteriographic findings of segmental digital 
arterial occlusions with "corkscrew" collateral vessels. The primary and clearly 
most effective therapy for TAO is cessation of the use of all tobacco products, 
with avoidance of any environmental tobacco smoke inhalation. There has been 
recent enthusiasm for prostaglandin E therapy and the intramuscular injection of 
angiogenic growth factors. For patients in whom the disease is identified late 
or for those who are unable to discontinue cigarette smoking, however, a 
frequent result is multiple limb amputations.

DOI: 10.1007/s11936-000-0014-1
PMID: 11096525