---
reference_id: "PMID:31356215"
title: Abnormal Excitation-Contraction Coupling and Calcium Homeostasis in Myopathies and Cardiomyopathies.
authors:
- Schartner V
- Laporte J
- Böhm J
journal: J Neuromuscul Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3233/JND-180314
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcium/metabolism
- "Cardiomyopathies/genetics, metabolism"
- Excitation Contraction Coupling/physiology
- Homeostasis
- Humans
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- "Muscular Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- Myocardium/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal Excitation-Contraction Coupling and Calcium Homeostasis in Myopathies and Cardiomyopathies.
**Authors:** Schartner V, Laporte J, Böhm J
**Journal:** J Neuromuscul Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JND-180314](https://doi.org/10.3233/JND-180314)

## Content

1. J Neuromuscul Dis. 2019;6(3):289-305. doi: 10.3233/JND-180314.

Abnormal Excitation-Contraction Coupling and Calcium Homeostasis in Myopathies
and Cardiomyopathies.

Schartner V(1)(2)(3)(4), Laporte J(1)(2)(3)(4), Böhm J(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC),
Illkirch, France.
(2)INSERM U1258, Illkirch, France.
(3)CNRS UMR7104, Illkirch, France.
(4)Strasbourg University, Illkirch, France.

Muscle contraction requires specialized membrane structures with precise
geometry and relies on the concerted interplay of electrical stimulation and
Ca2+ release, known as excitation-contraction coupling (ECC). The membrane
structure hosting ECC is called triad in skeletal muscle and dyad in cardiac
muscle, and structural or functional defects of triads and dyads have been
observed in a variety of myopathies and cardiomyopathies. Based on their
function, the proteins localized at the triad/dyad can be classified into three
molecular pathways: the Ca2+ release complex (CRC), store-operated Ca2+ entry
(SOCE), and membrane remodeling. All three are mechanistically linked, and
consequently, aberrations in any of these pathways cause similar disease
entities. This review provides an overview of the clinical and genetic spectrum
of triad and dyad defects with a main focus of attention on the underlying
pathomechanisms.

DOI: 10.3233/JND-180314
PMID: 31356215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
