---
reference_id: "PMID:36496445"
title: Sirt6 attenuates chondrocyte senescence and osteoarthritis progression.
authors:
- Ji ML
- Jiang H
- Li Z
- Geng R
- Hu JZ
- Lin YC
- Lu J
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-35424-w
keywords:
- Humans
- Interleukin-15/pharmacology
- "Cartilage, Articular"
- Lysine/pharmacology
- Cellular Senescence/genetics
- Chondrocytes
- Osteoarthritis/genetics
- Sirtuins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sirt6 attenuates chondrocyte senescence and osteoarthritis progression.
**Authors:** Ji ML, Jiang H, Li Z, Geng R, Hu JZ, Lin YC, Lu J
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-022-35424-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-35424-w)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2022 Dec 10;13(1):7658. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-35424-w.

Sirt6 attenuates chondrocyte senescence and osteoarthritis progression.

Ji ML(1), Jiang H(2), Li Z(3), Geng R(3), Hu JZ(3), Lin YC(3), Lu J(4).

Author information:
(1)The Center of Joint and Sports Medicine, Orthopedics Department, Zhongda
Hospital, Southeast University, Nanjing, China. jimingliang558@outlook.com.
(2)Department of Spine Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, China.
(3)The Center of Joint and Sports Medicine, Orthopedics Department, Zhongda
Hospital, Southeast University, Nanjing, China.
(4)The Center of Joint and Sports Medicine, Orthopedics Department, Zhongda
Hospital, Southeast University, Nanjing, China. junlusuper@outlook.com.

Sirt6 has been implicated as a key regulator in aging-related diseases,
including osteoarthritis. However, its functional role and molecular mechanism
in chondrocyte senescence and osteoarthritis pathophysiology remain largely
undefined. Here we show that Sirt6 deficiency exaggerates chondrocyte senescence
and osteoarthritis progression, whereas intra-articular injection of
adenovirus-Sirt6 markedly attenuates surgical destabilization of medial
meniscus-induced osteoarthritis. Mechanistically, Sirt6 can directly interact
with STAT5 and deacetylate STAT5, thus inhibiting the IL-15/JAK3-induced STAT5
translocation from cytoplasm to nucleus, which inactivates IL-15/JAK3/STAT5
signaling. Mass spectrometry revealed that Sirt6 deacetylated conserved lysine
163 on STAT5. Mutation of lysine 163 to arginine in STAT5 abolished the
regulatory effect of Sirt6. In vivo, specific ablation of Sirt6 in chondrocytes
exacerbated osteoarthritis. Pharmacological activation of Sirt6 substantially
alleviated chondrocyte senescence. Taken together, Sirt6 attenuates chondrocyte
senescence by inhibiting IL-15/JAK3/STAT5 signaling. Targeting Sirt6 represents
a promising new approach for osteoarthritis.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-35424-w
PMCID: PMC9741608
PMID: 36496445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
