---
reference_id: "PMID:18479855"
title: Biopsy of cervical lymph node.
authors:
- Matsumoto F
- Itoh S
- Ohba S
- Yokoi H
- Furukawa M
- Ikeda K
journal: Auris Nasus Larynx
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2008.03.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biopsy of cervical lymph node.
**Authors:** Matsumoto F, Itoh S, Ohba S, Yokoi H, Furukawa M, Ikeda K
**Journal:** Auris Nasus Larynx (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.anl.2008.03.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anl.2008.03.008)

## Content

1. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2009 Feb;36(1):71-4. doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2008.03.008. Epub 
2008 May 13.

Biopsy of cervical lymph node.

Matsumoto F(1), Itoh S, Ohba S, Yokoi H, Furukawa M, Ikeda K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 
2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan. fmatsu@med.juntendo.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: This report examines 60 non-cancer patients who underwent a cervical 
lymph node biopsy, and discusses the value of the cervical lymph node biopsy as 
a diagnostic tool.
METHODS: Sixty patients with cervical lymph node enlargement who had lymph node 
biopsies at the Juntendo University between 2004 and 2007 were examined. The 
clinical parameters including age, size of the lymph node, white blood cell 
(WBC), C reactive protein (CRP), lactate dehydrase (LDH), soluble interleukin-2 
receptor (sIL-2r) were measured at initial examination. Fine needle aspiration 
cytology was carried out in all patients. The patients were divided into 2 
groups, including the malignant lymphoma (ML) group and the benign disease 
group. These groups were compared based on the patient's clinical parameters.
RESULTS: Serum levels of LDH, sIL-2r, age and lymph node size in the ML group 
were significantly higher than in the benign group. WBC and CRP showed no 
significant differences. Simple regression analysis showed that there are 
correlation between the size of enlargement lymph node and serum levels of LDH 
and sIL-2r in ML group.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study suggest that a biopsy should be considered 
early to patients with an advanced age, large swollen lymph nodes or high levels 
of serum sIL-2r or LDH.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anl.2008.03.008
PMID: 18479855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]