---
reference_id: "PMID:24481935"
title: Clinical and genomic evaluation of 201 patients with Phelan-McDermid syndrome.
authors:
- Sarasua SM
- Boccuto L
- Sharp JL
- Dwivedi A
- Chen CF
- Rollins JD
- Rogers RC
- Phelan K
- DuPont BR
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1423-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genomic evaluation of 201 patients with Phelan-McDermid syndrome.
**Authors:** Sarasua SM, Boccuto L, Sharp JL, Dwivedi A, Chen CF, Rollins JD, Rogers RC, Phelan K, DuPont BR
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-014-1423-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-014-1423-7)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2014 Jul;133(7):847-59. doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1423-7. Epub 2014
Jan  31.

Clinical and genomic evaluation of 201 patients with Phelan-McDermid syndrome.

Sarasua SM(1), Boccuto L, Sharp JL, Dwivedi A, Chen CF, Rollins JD, Rogers RC, 
Phelan K, DuPont BR.

Author information:
(1)Office of Bioinformatics and Epidemiology, Greenwood Genetic Center, 101 
Gregor Mendel Circle, Greenwood, SC, 29646, USA, ssarasua@ggc.org.

This study is the first to describe age-related changes in a large cohort of 
patients with Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS), also known as 22q13 deletion 
syndrome. Over a follow-up period of up to 12 years, physical examinations and 
structured interviews were conducted for 201 individuals diagnosed with PMS, 120 
patients had a focused, high-resolution 22q12q13 array CGH, and 92 patients' 
deletions were assessed for parent-of-origin. 22q13 genomic anomalies include 
terminal deletions of 22q13 (89 %), terminal deletions and interstitial 
duplications (9 %), and interstitial deletions (2 %). Considering different age 
groups, in older patients, behavioral problems tended to subside, developmental 
abilities improved, and some features such as large or fleshy hands, full or 
puffy eyelids, hypotonia, lax ligaments, and hyperextensible joints were less 
frequent. However, the proportion reporting an autism spectrum disorder, 
seizures, and cellulitis, or presenting with lymphedema or abnormal reflexes 
increased with age. Some neurologic and dysmorphic features such as speech and 
developmental delay and macrocephaly correlated with deletion size. Deletion 
sizes in more recently diagnosed patients tend to be smaller than those 
diagnosed a decade earlier. Seventy-three percent of de novo deletions were of 
paternal origin. Seizures were reported three times more often among patients 
with a de novo deletion of the maternal rather than paternal chromosome 22. This 
analysis improves the understanding of the clinical presentation and natural 
history of PMS and can serve as a reference for the prevalence of clinical 
features in the syndrome.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-014-1423-7
PMID: 24481935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]