---
reference_id: "PMID:41042158"
title: "c-KIT Small Molecule Inhibitors as a Therapeutic Strategy for Melanoma: Clinical Insights, SAR, and Future Directions."
authors:
- Rivonker SC
- Nada H
- Jaemin C
- Kwon YJ
- Lee K
journal: Arch Pharm (Weinheim)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/ardp.70113
content_type: abstract_only
---

# c-KIT Small Molecule Inhibitors as a Therapeutic Strategy for Melanoma: Clinical Insights, SAR, and Future Directions.
**Authors:** Rivonker SC, Nada H, Jaemin C, Kwon YJ, Lee K
**Journal:** Arch Pharm (Weinheim) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ardp.70113](https://doi.org/10.1002/ardp.70113)

## Content

1. Arch Pharm (Weinheim). 2025 Oct;358(10):e70113. doi: 10.1002/ardp.70113.

c-KIT Small Molecule Inhibitors as a Therapeutic Strategy for Melanoma: Clinical 
Insights, SAR, and Future Directions.

Rivonker SC(1), Nada H(1)(2), Jaemin C(1), Kwon YJ(3), Lee K(1).

Author information:
(1)BK21 FOUR Team and Integrated Research, Institute for Drug Development, 
College of Pharmacy, Dongguk University, Seoul, Goyang, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Radiology, Molecular Imaging Innovations Institute (MI3), Weill 
Cornell Medicine, New York, USA.
(3)Translational Medicine Operations Hub, Luxembourg Institute of Health, 
Luxembourg.

The proto-oncogene c-KIT plays a key role in several cellular processes such as 
cell growth, survival, and proliferation. The overexpression of c-KIT has been 
implicated with the pathogenesis of several malignancies, such as 
gastrointestinal stromal tumors, acute myeloid leukemia (AML), mastocytosis, and 
melanoma. Mutation of c-KIT has been observed in acral, mucosal, and chronically 
sun-damaged melanoma subtypes marking it as a key therapeutic target for 
melanoma. Moreover, the increasing incidence and mortality rate associated with 
melanoma further marks the importance of developing new therapeutic modalities. 
Herein, the progress in the design, structure-activity relationship, mechanisms, 
and development of c-KIT small molecule inhibitors for melanoma is discussed 
with the aim of guiding future c-KIT-based melanoma therapeutics.

© 2025 Deutsche Pharmazeutische Gesellschaft.

DOI: 10.1002/ardp.70113
PMID: 41042158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]