---
reference_id: "PMID:28368924"
title: "SMARCB1/INI1 Loss in Epithelioid Schwannoma: A Clinicopathologic and Immunohistochemical Study of 65 Cases."
authors:
- Jo VY
- Fletcher CDM
journal: Am J Surg Pathol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000849
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Female
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neurilemmoma/genetics, pathology"
- SMARCB1 Protein/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SMARCB1/INI1 Loss in Epithelioid Schwannoma: A Clinicopathologic and Immunohistochemical Study of 65 Cases.
**Authors:** Jo VY, Fletcher CDM
**Journal:** Am J Surg Pathol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PAS.0000000000000849](https://doi.org/10.1097/PAS.0000000000000849)

## Content

1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2017 Aug;41(8):1013-1022. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000849.

SMARCB1/INI1 Loss in Epithelioid Schwannoma: A Clinicopathologic and 
Immunohistochemical Study of 65 Cases.

Jo VY(1), Fletcher CDM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA.

The epithelioid variant of schwannoma is rare, and loss of SMARCB1/INI1 
expression has been observed in a subset of cases. Our aim was to further define 
the clinicopathologic features and to evaluate SMARCB1/INI1 deficiency in a 
large cohort of 65 epithelioid schwannomas diagnosed between 2002 and 2015, 
which consisted of 32 men and 33 women with median age at diagnosis of 45 years 
(range, 13 to 75 y). Most tumors arose in the extremities (upper, 20, lower, 15) 
and trunk (17); 9 were visceral (8 gastrointestinal). Most somatic tumors were 
in dermis/subcutis (53/54) and encapsulated (53/54) with an epithelial membrane 
antigen-positive perineurial capsule in 46 cases; visceral tumors were 
unencapsulated. No patients were reported to have any neurocristopathy. Three 
patients had multiple lesions (2 each). Tumor size range was 0.4 to 22.7 cm 
(median, 1.2 cm). Tumors showed multilobulated growth of uniform epithelioid 
cells in sheets and nests or singly dispersed within a frequently myxoid or 
hyalinized stroma. Tumor cells had round vesicular nuclei and abundant palely 
eosinophilic cytoplasm, usually lacking significant pleomorphism or 
hyperchromasia. Some tumors showed foci resembling conventional schwannoma 
(spindled morphology, 29; Antoni B foci or Verocay bodies, 8; hyalinized 
thick-walled vessels, 16). Mitoses ranged from 0 to 9 per 10 high-power fields 
(median count, 1). No tumor had necrosis. Twenty-three cases showed degenerative 
nuclear atypia. Focally striking cytologic atypia was present in 7 tumors, 3 of 
which showed transformation to epithelioid malignant peripheral nerve sheath 
tumor. All tumors showed diffuse positivity for S-100 protein and consistent 
positivity for SOX10 (50/50), while INI1 expression was lost in 24 of 57. Other 
positive immunohistochemical results were: glial fibrillary acidic protein 
(15/37) and focal keratin (2/40); epithelial membrane antigen (0/53) and 
melanocytic markers were negative (Mart-1 0/29; HMB-45 0/23). Most patients 
underwent local excision (13 complete; 47 marginal/positive margins). Follow-up 
data available for 31 patients (range, 1 to 108 mo; median, 37) indicated that 
no patient had developed metastatic disease, including 3 cases with cytologic 
atypia, one of which showed malignant transformation. One tumor without atypia 
developed local recurrence 48 months after marginal excision; all other patients 
were alive with no evidence of disease. Epithelioid schwannoma most commonly 
occurs as a superficial tumor on the extremities or trunk in adults. Loss of 
SMARCB1/INI1 expression is seen in 42% of tumors. Tumors follow a generally 
benign clinical course, although recurrence and malignant transformation are 
infrequent. Some tumors are characterized by notable cytologic atypia, the 
significance of which is uncertain but which may indicate a morphologic 
continuum with low-grade epithelioid malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000849
PMID: 28368924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]