---
reference_id: "PMID:11134073"
title: "Actopaxin, a new focal adhesion protein that binds paxillin LD motifs and actin and regulates cell adhesion."
authors:
- Nikolopoulos SN
- Turner CE
journal: J Cell Biol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1083/jcb.151.7.1435
keywords:
- Actinin
- Actins/metabolism
- Amino Acid Motifs
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Blotting, Western"
- Cell Adhesion
- Cell Line
- Cell Movement
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- "Cytoskeletal Proteins/chemistry, metabolism"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Focal Adhesions/chemistry
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- LIM Domain Proteins
- "Microfilament Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Paxillin
- "Phosphoproteins/chemistry, metabolism"
- Protein Binding
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- Protein Transport
- "RNA, Messenger/analysis, genetics"
- Rats
- Recombinant Fusion Proteins/metabolism
- Sequence Alignment
- Substrate Specificity
- Wound Healing
- Calponins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Actopaxin, a new focal adhesion protein that binds paxillin LD motifs and actin and regulates cell adhesion.
**Authors:** Nikolopoulos SN, Turner CE
**Journal:** J Cell Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1083/jcb.151.7.1435](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.151.7.1435)

## Content

1. J Cell Biol. 2000 Dec 25;151(7):1435-48. doi: 10.1083/jcb.151.7.1435.

Actopaxin, a new focal adhesion protein that binds paxillin LD motifs and actin
and regulates cell adhesion.

Nikolopoulos SN(1), Turner CE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, State University of New York
Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.

Paxillin is a focal adhesion adapter protein involved in the integration of
growth factor- and adhesion-mediated signal transduction pathways. Paxillin LD
motifs have been demonstrated to bind to several proteins associated with
remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton including the focal adhesion kinase,
vinculin, and a complex of proteins comprising p95PKL, PIX, and PAK (Turner,
C.E., M. C. Brown, J.A. Perrotta, M.C. Riedy, S.N. Nikolopoulos, A.R. McDonald,
S. Bagrodia, S. Thomas, and P.S. Leventhal. 1999. J. Cell Biol. 145:851-863). In
this study, we report the cloning and initial characterization of a new paxillin
LD motif-binding protein, actopaxin. Analysis of the deduced amino acid sequence
of actopaxin reveals a 42-kD protein with two calponin homology domains and a
paxillin-binding subdomain (PBS). Western blotting identifies actopaxin as a
widely expressed protein. Actopaxin binds directly to both F-actin and paxillin
LD1 and LD4 motifs. It exhibits robust focal adhesion localization in several
cultured cell types but is not found along the length of the associated
actin-rich stress fibers. Similar to paxillin, it is absent from actin-rich
cell-cell adherens junctions. Also, actopaxin colocalizes with paxillin to
rudimentary focal complexes at the leading edge of migrating cells. An actopaxin
PBS mutant incapable of binding paxillin in vitro cannot target to focal
adhesions when expressed in fibroblasts. In addition, ectopic expression of the
PBS mutant and/or the COOH terminus of actopaxin in HeLa cells resulted in
substantial reduction in adhesion to collagen. Together, these results suggest
an important role for actopaxin in integrin-dependent remodeling of the actin
cytoskeleton during cell motility and cell adhesion.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.151.7.1435
PMCID: PMC2150668
PMID: 11134073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
