---
reference_id: "PMID:17938197"
title: "UBE2T, the Fanconi anemia core complex, and FANCD2 are recruited independently to chromatin: a basis for the regulation of FANCD2 monoubiquitination."
authors:
- Alpi A
- Langevin F
- Mosedale G
- Machida YJ
- Dutta A
- Patel KJ
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00504-07
keywords:
- Animals
- Catalytic Domain
- Cell Cycle
- Cell Line
- Chickens
- Chromatin/enzymology
- DNA Damage
- Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group D2 Protein/metabolism
- Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group L Protein/metabolism
- Humans
- Protein Binding
- Ubiquitin-Conjugating Enzymes/metabolism
- Ubiquitination
content_type: abstract_only
---

# UBE2T, the Fanconi anemia core complex, and FANCD2 are recruited independently to chromatin: a basis for the regulation of FANCD2 monoubiquitination.
**Authors:** Alpi A, Langevin F, Mosedale G, Machida YJ, Dutta A, Patel KJ
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00504-07](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00504-07)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;27(24):8421-30. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00504-07. Epub 2007
Oct  15.

UBE2T, the Fanconi anemia core complex, and FANCD2 are recruited independently 
to chromatin: a basis for the regulation of FANCD2 monoubiquitination.

Alpi A(1), Langevin F, Mosedale G, Machida YJ, Dutta A, Patel KJ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Medical Research Council, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.

The Fanconi anemia (FA) nuclear core complex and the E2 ubiquitin-conjugating 
enzyme UBE2T are required for the S phase and DNA damage-restricted 
monoubiquitination of FANCD2. This constitutes a key step in the FA tumor 
suppressor pathway, and much attention has been focused on the regulation at 
this point. Here, we address the importance of the assembly of the FA core 
complex and the subcellular localization of UBE2T in the regulation of FANCD2 
monoubiquitination. We establish three points. First, the stable assembly of the 
FA core complex can be dissociated of its ability to function as an E3 ubiquitin 
ligase. Second, the actual E3 ligase activity is not determined by the assembly 
of the FA core complex but rather by its DNA damage-induced localization to 
chromatin. Finally, UBE2T and FANCD2 access this subcellular fraction 
independently of the FA core complex. FANCD2 monoubiquitination is therefore not 
regulated by multiprotein complex assembly but by the formation of an active 
E2/E3 holoenzyme on chromatin.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00504-07
PMCID: PMC2169426
PMID: 17938197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]