---
reference_id: "PMID:17581673"
title: "Estrogens and male reproduction: a new concept."
authors:
- Carreau S
- Silandre D
- Bourguiba S
- Hamden K
- Said L
- Lambard S
- Galeraud-Denis I
- Delalande C
journal: Braz J Med Biol Res
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1590/s0100-879x2007000600003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estrogens and male reproduction: a new concept.
**Authors:** Carreau S, Silandre D, Bourguiba S, Hamden K, Said L, Lambard S, Galeraud-Denis I, Delalande C
**Journal:** Braz J Med Biol Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1590/s0100-879x2007000600003](https://doi.org/10.1590/s0100-879x2007000600003)

## Content

1. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2007 Jun;40(6):761-8. doi:
10.1590/s0100-879x2007000600003.

Estrogens and male reproduction: a new concept.

Carreau S(1), Silandre D, Bourguiba S, Hamden K, Said L, Lambard S, 
Galeraud-Denis I, Delalande C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Caen, Caen, France. 
serge.carreau@unicaen.fr

The mammalian testis serves two main functions: production of spermatozoa and 
synthesis of steroids; among them estrogens are the end products obtained from 
the irreversible transformation of androgens by a microsomal enzymatic complex 
named aromatase. The aromatase is encoded by a single gene (cyp19) in humans 
which contains 18 exons, 9 of them being translated. In rats, the aromatase 
activity is mainly located in Sertoli cells of immature rats and then in Leydig 
cells of adult rats. We have demonstrated that germ cells represent an important 
source of estrogens: the amount of P450arom transcript is 3-fold higher in 
pachytene spermatocytes compared to gonocytes or round spermatids; conversely, 
aromatase activity is more intense in haploid cells. Male germ cells of mice, 
bank voles, bears, and monkeys express aromatase. In humans, we have shown the 
presence of a biologically active aromatase and of estrogen receptors (alpha and 
ss) in ejaculated spermatozoa and in immature germ cells in addition to Leydig 
cells. Moreover, we have demonstrated that the amount of P450arom transcripts is 
30% lower in immotile than in motile spermatozoa. Alterations of spermatogenesis 
in terms of number and motility of spermatozoa have been described in men 
genetically deficient in aromatase. These last observations, together with our 
data showing a significant decrease of aromatase in immotile spermatozoa, 
suggest that aromatase could be involved in the acquisition of sperm motility. 
Thus, taking into account the widespread localization of aromatase and estrogen 
receptors in testicular cells, it is obvious that, besides gonadotrophins and 
androgens, estrogens produced locally should be considered to be physiologically 
relevant hormones involved in the regulation of spermatogenesis and 
spermiogenesis.

DOI: 10.1590/s0100-879x2007000600003
PMID: 17581673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]