---
reference_id: PMID:20953052
title: Identification and characterization of new degradation products of cefepime dihydrochloride monohydrate drug substance during stress stability studies.
authors:
- Jagadeesh Kumar V
- Badarinadh Gupta P
- Pavan Kumar KS
- Prasada Rao KV
- Rao KR
- Prasanna SJ
- Kumar Sharma H
- Mukkanti K
journal: Anal Sci
year: '2010'
doi: 10.2116/analsci.26.1081
keywords:
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/chemistry
- Cefepime
- "Cephalosporins/analysis, chemistry"
- Drug Contamination
- Drug Stability
- "Furans/analysis, chemistry"
- Hot Temperature
- Molecular Structure
- Oxidation-Reduction
- Photolysis
- "Thiazines/analysis, chemistry"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification and characterization of new degradation products of cefepime dihydrochloride monohydrate drug substance during stress stability studies.
**Authors:** Jagadeesh Kumar V, Badarinadh Gupta P, Pavan Kumar KS, Prasada Rao KV, Rao KR, Prasanna SJ, Kumar Sharma H, Mukkanti K
**Journal:** Anal Sci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.2116/analsci.26.1081](https://doi.org/10.2116/analsci.26.1081)

## Content

1. Anal Sci. 2010;26(10):1081-6. doi: 10.2116/analsci.26.1081.

Identification and characterization of new degradation products of cefepime 
dihydrochloride monohydrate drug substance during stress stability studies.

Jagadeesh Kumar V(1), Badarinadh Gupta P, Pavan Kumar KS, Prasada Rao KV, Rao 
KR, Prasanna SJ, Kumar Sharma H, Mukkanti K.

Author information:
(1)Aurobindo Pharma Ltd., Research Centre, 313, Bachupally, Qutubullapur Mandal, 
Hyderabad 500090, Andhra Pradesh, India. jagadishkumar28@rediffmail.com

The degradation products of Cefepime dihydrochloride that emerged throughout 
stress stability studies have been determined, identified and characterized. The 
two new impurities were detected by gradient reverse-phase high performance 
liquid chromatography (HPLC), and Impurity-I was formed in the range from 0.2 to 
11.0% and Impurity-II range from 0.2 to 3.5%. These impurities have been 
identified by LC/MS, and were not reported in the literature. These impurities 
were synthesized, isolated and characterized. Based on the spectral data, the 
impurities were named 
(6R,7R)-7-[(Z)-2-(2-amino-4-thiazolyl)-2-(methoxyimino)acetamido]-3-[(1-methyl-1-pyrrolidinium)methyl]-3-cephem-4-carboxylate-1-oxide 
(Impurity-I); 
(2RS)-2[[(Z)-2-(2-amino-4-thiazolyl)-2-(methoxyimino)acetamido]-methyl]-1,2,5,7-tetrahydro-7-oxo-4H-furo[3,4-d][1,3]thiazine 
(Impurity-II). The structures were established unambiguously by independent 
synthesis and co-injection in HPLC to confirm the retention times and relative 
retention times. The structural elucidation of these impurities by spectral data 
((1)H NMR, (13)C NMR, 2D-NMR (COSY, HSQC and HMBC), LC/MS, TOF-MS, elemental 
analysis and IR), synthesis, isolation and the formation of these impurities are 
discussed in detail.

DOI: 10.2116/analsci.26.1081
PMID: 20953052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]