---
reference_id: "PMID:11114720"
title: Up-regulation of hypoxia-inducible factors HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha under normoxic conditions in renal carcinoma cells by von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene loss of function.
authors:
- Krieg M
- Haas R
- Brauch H
- Acker T
- Flamme I
- Plate KH
journal: Oncogene
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203938
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Up-regulation of hypoxia-inducible factors HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha under normoxic conditions in renal carcinoma cells by von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene loss of function.
**Authors:** Krieg M, Haas R, Brauch H, Acker T, Flamme I, Plate KH
**Journal:** Oncogene (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1203938](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1203938)

## Content

1. Oncogene. 2000 Nov 16;19(48):5435-43. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203938.

Up-regulation of hypoxia-inducible factors HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha under 
normoxic conditions in renal carcinoma cells by von Hippel-Lindau tumor 
suppressor gene loss of function.

Krieg M(1), Haas R, Brauch H, Acker T, Flamme I, Plate KH.

Author information:
(1)Neurocenter, Freiburg University Medical School, Germany.

Hypoxia induces transcription of a range of physiologically important genes 
including erythropoietin and vascular endothelial growth factor. The 
transcriptional activation is mediated by the hypoxia-inducible factor-1 
(HIF-1), a heterodimeric member of the basic helix-loop-helix PAS family, 
composed of alpha and beta subunits. HIF-1alpha shares 48 per cent identity with 
the recently identified HIF-2alpha protein that is also stimulated by hypoxia. 
In a previous study of hemangioblastomas, the most frequent manifestation of 
hereditary von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL), we found elevated levels of vascular 
endothelial growth factor and HIF-2alpha mRNA in stromal cells of the tumors. 
Mutations of the VHL tumor suppressor gene are associated with a variety of 
tumors such as renal clear cell carcinomas (RCC). In this study, we analysed the 
expression of the hypoxia-inducible factors HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha in a range 
of VHL wildtype and VHL deficient RCC cell lines. In the presence of functional 
VHL protein, HIF-1alpha mRNA levels are elevated, whereas HIF-2alpha mRNA 
expression is increased only in cells lacking a functional VHL gene product. On 
the protein levels, however, in VHL deficient cell lines, both HIF-alpha 
subunits are constitutively expressed, whereas re-introduction of a functional 
VHL gene restores the instability of HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha proteins under 
normoxic conditions. Moreover, immunohistochemical analyses of RCCs and 
hemangioblastomas demonstrate up-regulation of HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha in the 
tumor cells. The data presented here provide evidence for a role of the VHL 
protein in regulation of angiogenesis and erythropoiesis mediated by the 
HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha proteins.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203938
PMID: 11114720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]