---
reference_id: "PMID:20301469"
title: Fabry Disease.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Mehta A
- Hughes DA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fabry Disease.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Mehta A, Hughes DA

## Content

1. Fabry Disease.

Mehta A(1), Hughes DA(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2002 Aug 5 [updated 2024 Apr 11].

Author information:
(1)Emeritus Professor, Department of Haematology, University College London
School of Medicine, London, United Kingdom
(2)Professor, Experimental Haematology, Lysosomal Storage Disorders Unit,
Department of Haematology, Royal Free Hospital, University College London,
London, United Kingdom

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Fabry disease is the most common of the lysosomal
storage disorders and results from deficient activity of the enzyme
alpha-galactosidase A (α-Gal A), leading to progressive lysosomal deposition of
globotriaosylceramide and its derivatives in cells throughout the body. The
classic form, occurring in males with less than 1% α-Gal A enzyme activity,
usually has its onset in childhood or adolescence with periodic crises of severe
pain in the extremities (acroparesthesia), the appearance of vascular cutaneous
lesions (angiokeratomas), sweating abnormalities (anhidrosis, hypohidrosis, and
rarely hyperhidrosis), characteristic corneal and lenticular opacities, and
proteinuria. Gradual deterioration of kidney function to end-stage kidney
disease (ESKD) usually occurs in men in the third to fifth decade. In middle
age, most males successfully treated for ESKD develop cardiac and/or
cerebrovascular disease, a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Heterozygous
females typically have milder symptoms at a later age of onset than males.
Rarely, females may be relatively asymptomatic throughout a normal life span or
may have symptoms as severe as those observed in males with the classic
phenotype. In contrast, late-onset forms occur in males with greater than 1%
α-Gal A activity. Clinical manifestations include cardiac disease, which usually
presents in the sixth to eighth decade with left ventricular hypertrophy,
cardiomyopathy, arrhythmia, and proteinuria; kidney failure, associated with
ESKD but without the skin lesions or pain; or cerebrovascular disease presenting
as stroke or transient ischemic attack.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Identification of deficient α-Gal A enzyme activity in
plasma, isolated leukocytes, and/or cultured cells is the most efficient and
reliable method of diagnosing Fabry disease in males. Identification of a
hemizygous GLA pathogenic variant by molecular genetic testing confirms the
diagnosis in a male proband. Identification of a heterozygous GLA pathogenic
variant by molecular genetic testing establishes the diagnosis in a heterozygous
female.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with or without
chaperone therapy (e.g., migalastat) to prevent and/or delay the progression of
renal, cardiac, and cerebrovascular manifestations. Experts recommend that ERT
be initiated as early as possible in all males with Fabry disease (including
children and those with ESKD undergoing dialysis and kidney transplantation) and
in females with clinical disease manifestations, as all are at high risk for
renal, cardiac, and cerebrovascular complications. Supportive care:
Diphenylhydantoin, carbamazepine, or gabapentin to reduce pain
(acroparesthesia); aspirin, lipid-lowering agents, and blood pressure control
for cardiac ischemia; aspirin and/or other antiplatelet agents may be
recommended for stroke prophylaxis; ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor
blockers to reduce proteinuria; chronic hemodialysis and/or kidney
transplantation for ESKD; rehabilitation and hearing aids for auditory and
vestibular symptoms; management of psychiatric manifestations per psychologist.
Surveillance: Annual assessment for angiokeratomas, acroparesthesia, sweating
abnormalities, and gastrointestinal, pulmonary, and vascular manifestations;
annual cardiology assessment with EKG and echocardiogram as recommended by
cardiologist from age 18 years in males, biannual cardiology assessments in
females from age 18 years; annual neurologic assessment with brain MRI\MRA every
two to three years beginning at age 18 years; assessment of renal function
including blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and urinalysis annually or more
frequently as needed; annual audiology evaluations in males beginning at age 18
years and biannually in females; psychological assessment beginning at age 18
years annually or more frequently as needed. Agents/circumstances to avoid:
Smoking. Amiodarone may or may not have detrimental effects in individuals with
Fabry disease; evidence is insufficient. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Early
identification of affected male and female relatives by molecular genetic
testing (if the GLA pathogenic variant in the family is known) or, in males
only, measurement of α-Gal A enzyme activity (if the GLA pathogenic variant in
the family is not known) in order to initiate appropriate management as early as
possible in affected individuals.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Fabry disease is inherited in an X-linked manner: hemizygous
males are affected; heterozygous females may be as severely affected as males or
asymptomatic throughout a normal life span. In a family with more than one
affected individual, the mother of an affected male is an obligate heterozygote.
If a male is the only affected family member, his mother is likely heterozygous
for the GLA pathogenic variant; rarely, a single affected male in a family may
have a de novo pathogenic variant. A heterozygous female has a 50% chance of
transmitting the GLA pathogenic variant in each pregnancy. An affected male
transmits the pathogenic variant to all his daughters and none of his sons. Once
the GLA pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member,
molecular genetic testing for at-risk relatives, prenatal testing for a
pregnancy at increased risk, and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301469
