---
reference_id: "PMID:4364505"
title: "Action of Escherichia coli enterotoxin: adenylate cyclase behavior of intestinal epithelial cells in culture."
authors:
- Kantor HS
- Tao P
- Wisdom C
journal: Infect Immun
year: '1974'
doi: 10.1128/iai.9.6.1003-1010.1974
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Action of Escherichia coli enterotoxin: adenylate cyclase behavior of intestinal epithelial cells in culture.
**Authors:** Kantor HS, Tao P, Wisdom C
**Journal:** Infect Immun (1974)
**DOI:** [10.1128/iai.9.6.1003-1010.1974](https://doi.org/10.1128/iai.9.6.1003-1010.1974)

## Content

1. Infect Immun. 1974 Jun;9(6):1003-10. doi: 10.1128/iai.9.6.1003-1010.1974.

Action of Escherichia coli enterotoxin: adenylate cyclase behavior of intestinal 
epithelial cells in culture.

Kantor HS, Tao P, Wisdom C.

Heat-labile enterotoxin preparations obtained from two enteropathogenic strains 
of Escherichia coli of porcine and human origin were shown to stimulate 
adenylate cyclase activity of human embryonic intestinal epithelial cells in 
culture. Comparable results were also obtained when cholera toxin was used. The 
degree of enzyme stimulation was proportional to the concentration of 
enterotoxin. Similar preparations from two strains of non-enterotoxigenic E. 
coli had no effect on adenylate cyclase activity. Cells exposed to enterotoxin 
could be washed after 1 min of contact time without altering the subsequent 
course of maximum adenylate cyclase activity, which was maintained for at least 
18 h at 37 C. During long periods (18 h) of tissue culture incubation, the 
determination of adenylate cyclase activity was 200- to 300-fold more sensitive 
than quantitating fluid accumulation in the adult rabbit ileal loop model. 
Decreasing the incubation time appreciably reduced the sensitivity of the 
epithelial cells to enterotoxin. E. coli enterotoxin is an effective activator 
of nonintestinal adenylate cyclase systems. Treatment of KB and HEp-2 cell lines 
with enterotoxin also resulted in significant enzyme stimulation. The intestinal 
epithelial cell tissue culture model provides a sensitive homogenous biological 
system for studying the response of intestinal adenylate cyclase to enterotoxin 
while eliminating the numerous cellular and tissue components present in the 
ligated ileal loop model.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.9.6.1003-1010.1974
PMCID: PMC414924
PMID: 4364505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]