---
reference_id: "PMID:31489115"
title: Transcriptome analysis of Sézary syndrome and lymphocytic-variant hypereosinophilic syndrome T cells reveals common and divergent genes.
authors:
- Moerman-Herzog AM
- Acheampong DA
- Brooks AG
- Blair SM
- Hsu PC
- Wong HK
journal: Oncotarget
year: '2019'
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.27120
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcriptome analysis of Sézary syndrome and lymphocytic-variant hypereosinophilic syndrome T cells reveals common and divergent genes.
**Authors:** Moerman-Herzog AM, Acheampong DA, Brooks AG, Blair SM, Hsu PC, Wong HK
**Journal:** Oncotarget (2019)
**DOI:** [10.18632/oncotarget.27120](https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.27120)

## Content

1. Oncotarget. 2019 Aug 20;10(49):5052-5069. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.27120.
eCollection 2019 Aug 20.

Transcriptome analysis of Sézary syndrome and lymphocytic-variant
hypereosinophilic syndrome T cells reveals common and divergent genes.

Moerman-Herzog AM(1), Acheampong DA(1)(2), Brooks AG(1), Blair SM(1), Hsu PC(3),
Wong HK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences,
Little Rock, Arkansas, USA.
(2)Joint Graduate Program in Bioinformatics, University of Arkansas at Little
Rock and University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas,
USA.
(3)Fay W. Boozman College of Public Health, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas, USA.

Sézary syndrome (SS) is an aggressive cutaneous T cell lymphoma with pruritic
skin inflammation and immune dysfunction, driven by neoplastic, clonal memory T
cells in both peripheral blood and skin. To gain insight into abnormal gene
expression promoting T cell dysfunction, lymphoproliferation and transformation
in SS, we first compared functional transcriptomic profiles of both resting and
activated CD4+CD45RO+ T cells from SS patients and normal donors to identified
differential expressed genes. Next, a meta-analysis was performed to compare our
SS data to public microarray data from a novel benign disease control,
lymphocytic-variant hypereosinophilic syndrome (L-HES). L-HES is a rare, clonal
lymphoproliferation of abnormal memory T cells that produces similar clinical
symptoms as SS, including severe pruritus and eosinophilia. Comparison revealed
gene sets specific for either SS (370 genes) or L-HES (519 genes), and a subset
of 163 genes that were dysregulated in both SS and L-HES T cells compared to
normal donor T cells. Genes confirmed by RT-qPCR included elevated expression of
PLS3, TWIST1 and TOX only in SS, while IL17RB mRNA was increased only in L-HES.
CDCA7 was increased in both diseases. In an L-HES patient who progressed to
peripheral T cell lymphoma, the malignant transformation identified increases in
the expression of CDCA7, TIGIT, and TOX, which are highly expressed in SS,
suggesting that these genes contribute to neoplastic transformation. In summary,
we have identified gene expression biomarkers that implicate a common
transformative mechanism and others that are unique to differentiate SS from
L-HES.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.27120
PMCID: PMC6707948
PMID: 31489115

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no
competing financial interests.
