---
reference_id: "PMID:19571225"
title: "Can dietary supplementation of monosodium glutamate improve the health of the elderly?"
authors:
- Yamamoto S
- Tomoe M
- Toyama K
- Kawai M
- Uneyama H
journal: Am J Clin Nutr
year: '2009'
doi: 10.3945/ajcn.2009.27462X
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Can dietary supplementation of monosodium glutamate improve the health of the elderly?
**Authors:** Yamamoto S, Tomoe M, Toyama K, Kawai M, Uneyama H
**Journal:** Am J Clin Nutr (2009)
**DOI:** [10.3945/ajcn.2009.27462X](https://doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.2009.27462X)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Sep;90(3):844S-849S. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.2009.27462X. Epub 
2009 Jul 1.

Can dietary supplementation of monosodium glutamate improve the health of the 
elderly?

Yamamoto S(1), Tomoe M, Toyama K, Kawai M, Uneyama H.

Author information:
(1)Ochanomizu University Graduate School, Tokyo, Japan. 
yamamoto.shigeru@ocha.ac.jp

Dietary free l-glutamate has been known for a century to improve taste and 
palatability. Recent evidence suggests that this effect is mediated through 
specific l-glutamate receptors located on the taste buds. However, l-glutamate 
receptors are also present elsewhere in the gastrointestinal tract, such as the 
stomach. Here, l-glutamate exerts physiologic actions beneficial to gut function 
by stimulating l-glutamate receptors linked to the gastric vagus nerve. In 
addition, dietary l-glutamate also appears to be an important energy substrate 
for gut tissue. Can such l-glutamate effects on taste and gut function be 
clinically useful? Elderly people often develop health problems related to their 
nutritional status that can be linked to insufficient energy and nutrient 
intake. A number of studies have examined the potential usefulness of 
l-glutamate, added to food in the form of monosodium glutamate (MSG), in 
promoting better nutrition in the elderly and in patients with poor nutrition. 
Some positive effects have been observed. This article reviews the physiologic 
roles of dietary l-glutamate in relation to alimentation and examines the 
evidence linking the utility of MSG supplementation to the improvement of 
nutrition in elderly and hospitalized patients.

DOI: 10.3945/ajcn.2009.27462X
PMID: 19571225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]