---
reference_id: "PMID:19399792"
title: The natural history of chronic hepatitis B virus infection.
authors:
- McMahon BJ
journal: Hepatology
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/hep.22898
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The natural history of chronic hepatitis B virus infection.
**Authors:** McMahon BJ
**Journal:** Hepatology (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/hep.22898](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.22898)

## Content

1. Hepatology. 2009 May;49(5 Suppl):S45-55. doi: 10.1002/hep.22898.

The natural history of chronic hepatitis B virus infection.

McMahon BJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Liver Disease and Hepatitis Program, Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium, 
Anchorage, AK 99508, USA. bdm9@cdc.gov

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection has a complicated course. Three phases 
are identified: an immune tolerant phase with high HBV DNA and normal alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT) levels associated with minimal liver disease; an immune 
active phase with high HBV DNA and elevated ALT levels with active liver 
inflammation; and an inactive phase with HBV DNA levels < 2000 IU/mL and normal 
ALT levels with minimal inflammation and fibrosis on liver biopsy. Affected 
persons can move progressively from one phase to the next and may revert 
backward. The primary adverse outcomes of chronic HBV infection are 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and cirrhosis. Published natural history studies 
were reviewed and ranked by the strength of evidence regarding the study design. 
Factors with the highest evidence of risk for development of HCC or cirrhosis 
from population-based prospective cohort studies include male sex, family 
history of HCC, HBV DNA level above 2000 IU/mL in persons above age 40, HBV 
genotypes C and F, and basal core promoter mutation. Those with the next highest 
level of evidence include aflatoxin exposure, and heavy alcohol and tobacco use. 
Improved methods to identify persons at highest risk of developing HCC or 
cirrhosis are needed to allow intervention earlier with antiviral therapy in 
appropriate patients. Future studies should include prospective follow-up of 
established population-based cohorts as well as new cohorts recruited from 
multiple centers stratified by HBV genotypes/subgenotypes and clinical phase to 
determine the incidence of the various HBV phases, HCC, and cirrhosis. Also, 
nested case-control studies assessing immunological and host genetic factors 
among persons with active and inactive disease phases, HCC, and cirrhosis could 
be conducted using these types of cohorts.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.22898
PMID: 19399792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]