---
reference_id: "PMID:31901628"
title: "Arsenic: Geochemical distribution and age-related health risk in Italy."
authors:
- Zuzolo D
- Cicchella D
- Demetriades A
- Birke M
- Albanese S
- Dinelli E
- Lima A
- Valera P
- De Vivo B
journal: Environ Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2019.109076
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Arsenic/toxicity
- Cities
- Environmental Exposure
- Humans
- Italy
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasms/epidemiology
- Risk Assessment
- Rome
- "Water Pollutants, Chemical/toxicity"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenic: Geochemical distribution and age-related health risk in Italy.
**Authors:** Zuzolo D, Cicchella D, Demetriades A, Birke M, Albanese S, Dinelli E, Lima A, Valera P, De Vivo B
**Journal:** Environ Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.envres.2019.109076](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2019.109076)

## Content

1. Environ Res. 2020 Mar;182:109076. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2019.109076. Epub 2019
 Dec 23.

Arsenic: Geochemical distribution and age-related health risk in Italy.

Zuzolo D(1), Cicchella D(2), Demetriades A(3), Birke M(4), Albanese S(5),
Dinelli E(6), Lima A(5), Valera P(7), De Vivo B(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Science and Technology, University of Sannio, 82100, Benevento,
Italy. Electronic address: dzuzolo@unisannio.it.
(2)Department of Science and Technology, University of Sannio, 82100, Benevento,
Italy.
(3)Institute of Geology and Mineral Exploration (retired), 1 Spirou Louis St.,
Olympic Village, 136 77, Acharnae, Athens, Hellas, Greece.
(4)Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources, Stilleweg 2, 30655,
Hannover, Germany.
(5)Department of Earth Sciences, Environment and Resources, University of Napoli
"Federico II", 80125, Napoli, Italy.
(6)Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University
of Bologna, 40100, Bologna, Italy.
(7)Department of Civil-Environmental Engineering and Architecture, University of
Cagliari, 09123, Cagliari, Italy.
(8)Norwest Italia Srl, 80138, Napoli, Italy; Pegaso University, 80132, Napoli,
Italy.

This study is the first attempt to evaluate occurrence, distribution and
potential health impacts of As at a national scale in Italy. In various
environmental matrices, As geochemical distribution was investigated and
carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic risks were assessed with respect to different
exposure routes and age groups. Both deterministic and probabilistic methods
were used to determine the health risks. Geochemical mapping at a
sub-continental scale provided a useful tool to spatially represent As
concentration and the critical areas posing a health threat to inhabitants. The
results show that significant As concentrations in tap water and soil (up to
27.20 μg/l and 62.20 mg/kg, respectively) are mainly governed by geological
features. In the central parts of Italy, where alkaline volcanic materials and
consequently high levels of As occur, the residents are prone to health issues.
Daily exposure to As in tap water is unparalleled playing an important role in
the potential cancer and non-cancer risks. The Incremental Lifetime Cancer Risk
for skin cancer and also lung and bladder cancer associated with tap water
ingestion interestingly shows that (i) almost 80% of the computed values fall
above the internationally accepted benchmark value of 1 × 10-5; (ii) majority of
the data exceed the acceptable risk proposed by most jurisdictions, such as that
of Italian law (1 × 10-6). Further, geographical variation of health risk
highlights high carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic risk associated with water
ingestion for those living in the northern Alps (including the city of Trento)
and the central and southern Italy (including the capital Rome and the cities of
Napoli and Catanzaro). According to the results, application of the
probabilistic method which considers variability and uncertainty is preferred to
the deterministic approach for risk assessment. The sensitivity analysis showed
that As concentration in drinking water and exposure duration are the factors
with the greatest impact on the outcome of risk assessment (for all age groups).
The results of the current study may be a good starting point for authorities to
urgently decide about the needed policy actions in order to prevent the adverse
health effects and to reduce the human health risk due to As exposure.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2019.109076
PMID: 31901628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.
