---
reference_id: PMID:38018736
title: "Vagus nerve SARS-CoV-2 infection and inflammatory reflex dysfunction: Is there a causal relationship?"
authors:
- Andersson U
- Tracey KJ
journal: J Intern Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/joim.13746
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vagus nerve SARS-CoV-2 infection and inflammatory reflex dysfunction: Is there a causal relationship?
**Authors:** Andersson U, Tracey KJ
**Journal:** J Intern Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/joim.13746](https://doi.org/10.1111/joim.13746)

## Content

1. J Intern Med. 2024 Jan;295(1):91-102. doi: 10.1111/joim.13746. Epub 2023 Nov
29.

Vagus nerve SARS-CoV-2 infection and inflammatory reflex dysfunction: Is there a 
causal relationship?

Andersson U(1), Tracey KJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Feinstein Institutes for Medical Research, Northwell Health, Manhasset, New 
York, USA.

Autonomic dysfunction is a clinical hallmark of infection caused by SARS-CoV-2, 
but the underlying mechanisms are unknown. The vagus nerve inflammatory reflex 
is an important, well-characterized mechanism for the reflexive suppression of 
cytokine storm, and its experimental or clinical impairment facilitates the 
onset and progression of hyperinflammation. Recent pathological evidence from 
COVID-19 victims reveals viral infection and inflammation in the vagus nerve and 
associated nuclei in the medulla oblongata. Although it has been suggested that 
vagus nerve inflammation in these patients mediates dysregulated respiration, 
whether it also contributes to dysfunction of the vagus nerve inflammatory 
reflex has not been addressed. Because lethality and tissue injury in acute 
COVID-19 are characterized by cytokine storm, it is plausible to consider 
evidence that impairment of the inflammatory reflex may contribute to 
overproduction of cytokines and resultant hyperinflammatory pathogenesis. 
Accordingly, here the authors discuss the inflammatory reflex, the consequences 
of its dysfunction in COVID-19, and whether there are opportunities for 
therapeutic intervention.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Internal Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd on behalf of Association for Publication of The Journal of Internal 
Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/joim.13746
PMID: 38018736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]