---
reference_id: "PMID:40072535"
title: Intrapancreatic adipocytes and beta cell dedifferentiation in human type 2 diabetes.
authors:
- Zhang N
- Sun Q
- Zhang J
- Zhang R
- Liu S
- Zhao X
- Ma J
- Li X
journal: Diabetologia
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00125-025-06392-9
keywords:
- Humans
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/metabolism, pathology"
- "Insulin-Secreting Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Dedifferentiation/physiology
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- "Adipocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Pancreas/metabolism, pathology"
- Aged
- Adult
- Glucagon-Secreting Cells/metabolism
- Islets of Langerhans/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intrapancreatic adipocytes and beta cell dedifferentiation in human type 2 diabetes.
**Authors:** Zhang N, Sun Q, Zhang J, Zhang R, Liu S, Zhao X, Ma J, Li X
**Journal:** Diabetologia (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00125-025-06392-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-025-06392-9)

## Content

1. Diabetologia. 2025 Jun;68(6):1242-1260. doi: 10.1007/s00125-025-06392-9. Epub
2025 Mar 12.

Intrapancreatic adipocytes and beta cell dedifferentiation in human type 2
diabetes.

Zhang N(#)(1), Sun Q(#)(2), Zhang J(#)(1), Zhang R(1), Liu S(3), Zhao X(4), Ma
J(1), Li X(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Liver Surgery and Transplantation, Liver Cancer Institute,
Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.
(5)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. li.xiaomu@zs-hospital.sh.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Fat deposition in the pancreas is implicated in beta cell
dysfunction and the progress of type 2 diabetes. However, there is limited
evidence to confirm the correlation and explore how pancreatic fat links with
beta cell dysfunction in human type 2 diabetes. This study aimed to examine the
spatial relationship between pancreatic fat and islets in human pancreases.
METHODS: Histological analysis of pancreatic specimens from 50 organ donors (15
with type 2 diabetes, 35 without) assessed pancreatic fat content variation
among individuals with diabetes and its correlation with estimated beta cell
mass and cell distribution within islets. Bioinformatic analysis of single-cell
RNA-seq of 11 type 2 diabetic donors (from the Human Pancreatic Analysis Project
database) explored the impact of high pancreatic fat content on beta cell gene
expression and cell fate. Validation of bioinformatic results was performed with
the above diabetic pancreases.
RESULTS: Pancreatic fat content was higher in individuals with type 2 diabetes
(10.24% [3.29-13.89%] vs 0.74% [0.34-5.11%], p<0.001), negatively correlated
with estimated beta cell mass (r=-0.675, p=0.006) and positively with
alpha-to-beta cell ratio (r=0.608, p=0.016). Enrichment analysis indicated that
in diabetic donors with higher pancreatic fat content, the expression of
ALDH1A3, beta cell dedifferentiation marker, in both alpha and beta cells was
significantly increased, and in beta cells, the expression of NPY decreased.
Pseudotime analysis revealed beta cell dedifferentiation and
transdifferentiation towards alpha cells in diabetic donors with higher
pancreatic fat content, with decreased expression of genes related to beta cell
maturation and function, including INSM1, MafA and NPY. Concurrently, pathways
related to inflammation and immune response were activated. Histologically,
pancreatic fat content correlated positively with the percentage of beta cells
positive for aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 family member A3 (ALDH1A3) within the
islets (r=0.594, p=0.020) and the ALDH1A3 positivity rate in beta cells
(r=0.615, p=0.015). And the number of T cells adjacent to adipocytes was related
to the distribution pattern of adipocytes and the dedifferentiation phenotype in
islets.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Higher pancreatic fat content was accompanied by
increased beta cell dedifferentiation in the individuals with diabetes. Clusters
of adipocytes significantly contribute to higher pancreatic fat content and
immune cell recruitment. Overall, the interactions among adipocytes, immune
cells and beta cells in the pancreas microenvironment might contribute to beta
cell failure and dedifferentiation in type 2 diabetes.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00125-025-06392-9
PMID: 40072535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Acknowledgements: The authors would like to
thank J. Zhou, X. Huang and X. Li from Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, as
well as K. K. Cheng from The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, and T. Wu from
West China Hospital, Sichuan University, for their valuable advice and
assistance. They also thank J. Gong from Servicebio Biotechnology Co., Ltd. for
supplying the necessary reagents. Data availability: All data are available in
the main text, ESM figure analysis data or the ESM. Funding: This study was
supported by excellent clinical grants from the Shanghai Municipal Health
Commission (20224Z0004) and the National Nature Science Foundation of China
(82170808, 82370825). Authors’ relationships and activities: The authors declare
that there are no relationships or activities that might bias, or be perceived
to bias, their work. Contribution statement: XL designed the research studies
and interpreted the results. NZ, QS and JZ performed the experiments and wrote
the first draft of the manuscript. JM and XZ contributed to the preparation and
analysis of human pancreas samples. RZ and SL performed computational analysis
and contributed to data interpretation. All authors made substantial
contributions to editing and revising the manuscript and approved the final
version to be published. XL is the guarantor of this work.
