---
reference_id: "PMID:26362252"
title: Myofibrillar disruption and RNA-binding protein aggregation in a mouse model of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy 1D.
authors:
- Bengoechea R
- Pittman SK
- Tuck EP
- True HL
- Weihl CC
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv363
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "HSP40 Heat-Shock Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Heterogeneous-Nuclear Ribonucleoprotein Group A-B/metabolism
- Humans
- Keratins/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Molecular Chaperones/genetics, metabolism"
- "Muscular Dystrophies, Limb-Girdle/metabolism, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Myofibrils/metabolism, pathology"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Protein Isoforms/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myofibrillar disruption and RNA-binding protein aggregation in a mouse model of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy 1D.
**Authors:** Bengoechea R, Pittman SK, Tuck EP, True HL, Weihl CC
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddv363](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddv363)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Dec 1;24(23):6588-602. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv363. Epub 2015 
Sep 11.

Myofibrillar disruption and RNA-binding protein aggregation in a mouse model of 
limb-girdle muscular dystrophy 1D.

Bengoechea R(1), Pittman SK(1), Tuck EP(1), True HL(2), Weihl CC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology and and The Hope Center for 
Neurological Diseases, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 
63110, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, The Hope Center for Neurological Diseases, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA 
weihlc@neuro.wustl.edu.

Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 1D (LGMD1D) is caused by dominantly 
inherited missense mutations in DNAJB6, an Hsp40 co-chaperone. LGMD1D muscle has 
rimmed vacuoles and inclusion bodies containing DNAJB6, Z-disc proteins and 
TDP-43. DNAJB6 is expressed as two isoforms; DNAJB6a and DNAJB6b. Both isoforms 
contain LGMD1D mutant residues and are expressed in human muscle. To identify 
which mutant isoform confers disease pathogenesis and generate a mouse model of 
LGMD1D, we evaluated DNAJB6 expression and localization in skeletal muscle as 
well as generating DNAJB6 isoform specific expressing transgenic mice. DNAJB6a 
localized to myonuclei while DNAJB6b was sarcoplasmic. LGMD1D mutations in 
DNAJB6a or DNAJB6b did not alter this localization in mouse muscle. Transgenic 
mice expressing the LGMD1D mutant, F93L, in DNAJB6b under a muscle-specific 
promoter became weak, had early lethality and developed muscle pathology 
consistent with myopathy after 2 months; whereas mice expressing the same F93L 
mutation in DNAJB6a or overexpressing DNAJB6a or DNAJB6b wild-type transgenes 
remained unaffected after 1 year. DNAJB6b localized to the Z-disc and 
DNAJB6b-F93L expressing mouse muscle had myofibrillar disorganization and desmin 
inclusions. Consistent with DNAJB6 dysfunction, keratin 8/18, a DNAJB6 client 
also accumulated in DNAJB6b-F93L expressing mouse muscle. The RNA-binding 
proteins hnRNPA1 and hnRNPA2/B1 accumulated and co-localized with DNAJB6 at 
sarcoplasmic stress granules suggesting that these proteins maybe novel DNAJB6b 
clients. Similarly, hnRNPA1 and hnRNPA2/B1 formed sarcoplasmic aggregates in 
patients with LGMD1D. Our data support that LGMD1D mutations in DNAJB6 disrupt 
its sarcoplasmic function suggesting a role for DNAJB6b in Z-disc organization 
and stress granule kinetics.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv363
PMCID: PMC4634370
PMID: 26362252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]