---
reference_id: "PMID:33002134"
title: Outcomes in patients with DLBCL treated with commercial CAR T cells compared with alternate therapies.
authors:
- Sermer D
- Batlevi C
- Palomba ML
- Shah G
- Lin RJ
- Perales MA
- Scordo M
- Dahi P
- Pennisi M
- Afuye A
- Silverberg ML
- Ho C
- Flynn J
- Devlin S
- Caron P
- Hamilton A
- Hamlin P
- Horwitz S
- Joffe E
- Kumar A
- Matasar M
- Noy A
- Owens C
- Moskowitz A
- Straus D
- von Keudell G
- Rodriguez-Rivera I
- Falchi L
- Zelenetz A
- Yahalom J
- Younes A
- Sauter C
journal: Blood Adv
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2020002118
keywords:
- "Antigens, CD19"
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, Large B-Cell, Diffuse/therapy"
- Prospective Studies
- Retrospective Studies
- T-Lymphocytes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes in patients with DLBCL treated with commercial CAR T cells compared with alternate therapies.
**Authors:** Sermer D, Batlevi C, Palomba ML, Shah G, Lin RJ, Perales MA, Scordo M, Dahi P, Pennisi M, Afuye A, Silverberg ML, Ho C, Flynn J, Devlin S, Caron P, Hamilton A, Hamlin P, Horwitz S, Joffe E, Kumar A, Matasar M, Noy A, Owens C, Moskowitz A, Straus D, von Keudell G, Rodriguez-Rivera I, Falchi L, Zelenetz A, Yahalom J, Younes A, Sauter C
**Journal:** Blood Adv (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1182/bloodadvances.2020002118](https://doi.org/10.1182/bloodadvances.2020002118)

## Content

1. Blood Adv. 2020 Oct 13;4(19):4669-4678. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2020002118.

Outcomes in patients with DLBCL treated with commercial CAR T cells compared 
with alternate therapies.

Sermer D(1), Batlevi C(1)(2), Palomba ML(1)(2), Shah G(2)(3), Lin RJ(2)(3), 
Perales MA(2)(3), Scordo M(2)(3), Dahi P(2)(3), Pennisi M(3), Afuye A(3), 
Silverberg ML(3), Ho C(4), Flynn J(5), Devlin S(5), Caron P(1)(2), Hamilton 
A(1)(2), Hamlin P(1)(2), Horwitz S(1)(2), Joffe E(1)(2), Kumar A(1)(2), Matasar 
M(1)(2), Noy A(1)(2), Owens C(1)(2), Moskowitz A(1)(2), Straus D(1)(2), von 
Keudell G(1)(2), Rodriguez-Rivera I(1)(2), Falchi L(1)(2), Zelenetz A(1)(2), 
Yahalom J(6), Younes A(1)(2), Sauter C(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Lymphoma Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY.
(2)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY; and.
(3)Adult Bone Marrow Transplant Service, Department of Medicine.
(4)Department of Pathology.
(5)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, and.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY.

The prognosis of patients with relapsed or refractory (R/R) diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma (DLBCL) is poor. Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy has 
been approved for R/R DLBCL after 2 prior lines of therapy based on data from 
single-arm phase 2 trials, with complete responses (CRs) in 40% to 60% of 
patients. However, a direct comparison with other treatments is not available 
and, moreover, its true efficacy in real-world patients is unknown. In this 
single center, retrospective, observational study of 215 patients, we compared 
outcomes in patients treated with CAR T-cell therapy (n = 69) with a historical 
population treated with alternate therapies (n = 146). Patients treated with CAR 
T cell vs alternate therapies demonstrated a CR rate of 52% vs 22% (P < .001), 
median progression-free survival (PFS) of 5.2 vs 2.3 months (P = .01), and 
median overall survival (OS) of 19.3 vs 6.5 months (P = .006), and this 
advantage appeared to persist irrespective of the number of lines of prior 
therapy. After adjusting for unfavorable pretreatment disease characteristics, 
superior overall response rate in the CAR T cohort remained significant; 
however, differences in PFS and OS between cohorts did not. In addition, 
patients who responded to alternate therapies demonstrated prolonged remissions 
comparable to those who responded to CAR T therapy. We contend that in select 
clinical scenarios alternate therapies may be as efficacious as CAR T therapy; 
thus, additional study is warranted, ideally with randomized prospective trials.

© 2020 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2020002118
PMCID: PMC7556134
PMID: 33002134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: C.B. received 
grant funding from Janssen, Novartis, Epizyme, Xynomics, Bayer, BMS; served as a 
consultant for Life Sci, GLG, Celgene, Seattle Genetics, Xynomics; and holds 
honorarium from Dava Oncology. C.H. received honorarium from Invivoscribe Inc. 
G.S. received research funding from Janssen and Amgen. M.-A.P. reports honoraria 
from AbbVie, Bellicum, Celgene, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Incyte, Kite/Gilead, 
Merck, Novartis, Nektar Therapeutics, Omeros, and Takeda; serves on DSMBs for 
Cidara Therapeutics, Servier and Medigene and the scientific advisory boards of 
MolMed and NexImmune; received research support for clinical trials from Incyte, 
Kite/Gilead and Miltenyi Biotec; and serves in a volunteer capacity as a member 
of the Board of Directors of American Society for Transplantation and Cellular 
Therapy (ASTCT) and Be The Match (National Marrow Donor Program, NMDP), as well 
as on the CIBMTR Cellular Immunotherapy Data Resource (CIDR) Committee. M.S. has 
served as a consultant for McKinsey & Company, Angiocrine Bioscience, Inc., 
Omeros Corporation; received research funding from Angiocrine Bioscience, Inc., 
and has served on an ad hoc advisory board for Kite–A Gilead Company. P.D. 
serves on the advisory board for Kite/Gilead. P.H. receives research support 
from Portola, Novartis/GSK, Molecular Templates, and Janssen Pharmaceuticals and 
served as consultant for Karyopharm, Juno, Portola, Celgene, and AstraZeneca. 
S.H. received research funding from ADCT therapeutics, Aileron, Forty-Seven, 
Verastem, Kyowa Hakko Kirin, Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc, Celgene, Trillium, 
and Daiichii Sankyo and consults for Astex, Affimed, Merck Sharp and Dome, Kyowa 
Hakko Kirin Pharma, Corvus Pharmaceuticals Inc., Celgene, Portola 
Pharmaceuticals, Takeda Millennium, Innate Pharma, Verastem, Miragen 
Therapeutics Inc, Seattle Genetics, and ADCT. A.K. receives research funding 
from AbbVie Pharmaceuticals, Adaptive Biotechnologies, Pharmacyclics, and 
Seattle Genetics and serves on advisory board for Celgene and Astra Zeneca. A.N. 
receives honoraria from Janssen, Pharmacyclics, and Prime Oncology; consults for 
Medscape; serves on advisory board for Janssen; serves on the speakers bureau 
for Prime Oncology; and receives research funding for Rafael Pharma and 
Pharmacyclics. A.M. receives research support from Seattle Genetics, Merck, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Incyte and receives honorarium from Kyowa Hakko Kirin 
Pharma, Miragen Therapeutics, Takeda Pharmaceuticals, ADC Therapeutics, Seattle 
Genetics, Cell Medica, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Erytech Pharma. D. Straus 
consults for InPractice Elselvier and Seattle Genetics and is on speakers bureau 
for Medical Crossfire. A.Z. consults for Genentech/Roche, Gilead, Celgene, 
Janssen, Amgen, Novartis, Adaptive Biotechnology, and Verastem; serves on 
advisory boards for MorphoSys, Gilead, Genentech, AbbVie, AstraZeneca, and 
Pharmacyclics; and receives research funding from MEI Pharmaceuticals, Roche, 
Gilead, and Beigene. A.Y. receives research support from Janssen, Curis, Merck, 
BMS, Syndax, and Roche and honorarium from Janssen, AbbVie, Merck, Curis, 
Epizyme, Roche, and Takeda and consults for Biopath, Xynomics, Epizyme, Roche, 
Celgene, and HCM. C.S. receives research support from Juno Therapeutics, 
Celgene, Precision Biosciences, and Sanofi-Genzyme and consults for Juno 
Therapeutics, Sanofi-Genzyme, Spectrum Pharmaceuticals, Novartis, Genmab, 
Precision Biosciences, Kite, Celgene, Gamida Cell, and GSK. The remaining 
authors declare no competing financial interests.