---
reference_id: "PMID:39489913"
title: Liver-directed AAV gene therapy normalizes disease symptoms and provides cross-correction in a model of lysosomal acid lipase deficiency.
authors:
- Lam P
- Zygmunt DA
- Ashbrook A
- Yan C
- Du H
- Martin PT
journal: Mol Ther
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2024.10.022
keywords:
- Animals
- Dependovirus/genetics
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- "Wolman Disease/therapy, genetics"
- Mice
- "Liver/metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Genetic Vectors/genetics, administration & dosage"
- "Sterol Esterase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver-directed AAV gene therapy normalizes disease symptoms and provides cross-correction in a model of lysosomal acid lipase deficiency.
**Authors:** Lam P, Zygmunt DA, Ashbrook A, Yan C, Du H, Martin PT
**Journal:** Mol Ther (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymthe.2024.10.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2024.10.022)

## Content

1. Mol Ther. 2024 Dec 4;32(12):4272-4284. doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2024.10.022. Epub 
2024 Oct 28.

Liver-directed AAV gene therapy normalizes disease symptoms and provides 
cross-correction in a model of lysosomal acid lipase deficiency.

Lam P(1), Zygmunt DA(1), Ashbrook A(1), Yan C(2), Du H(2), Martin PT(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Gene Therapy, Abigail Wexner Research Institute, Nationwide 
Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH 43215, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
(3)Center for Gene Therapy, Abigail Wexner Research Institute, Nationwide 
Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH 43215, USA; Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio 
State University School of Medicine, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Electronic 
address: paul.martin@nationwidechildrens.org.

Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency (LAL-D) is caused by mutations in the LIPA 
gene, which encodes the lysosomal enzyme that hydrolyzes triglycerides and 
cholesteryl esters to free fatty acids and free cholesterol. The objective of 
this study was to develop a curative single-treatment therapy for LAL-D using 
adeno-associated virus (AAV). Treatment at both early (1-2 days) and late 
(8-week) timepoints with rscAAVrh74.LP1.LIPA, a liver-directed AAV gene therapy, 
normalized many disease measures in Lipa-/- mice when measured at 24 weeks of 
age, including hepatosplenomegaly, serum transaminase activity, organ 
triglyceride and cholesterol levels, and biomarkers of liver inflammation and 
fibrosis. For most measures, liver-directed therapy was superior to therapy 
utilizing a constitutive tissue expression approach. rscAAVrh74.LP1.LIPA 
treatment elevated LAL enzyme activity above wild-type levels in all tissues 
tested, including liver, spleen, intestine, muscle, and brain, and treatment 
elicited minimal serum antibody responses to transgenic protein. AAV treatment 
at 8 weeks of age with 1 × 1013 vg/kg extended survival significantly, with all 
AAV-treated mice surviving beyond the maximal lifespan of untreated Lipa-/- 
mice. These results show that this liver-directed LIPA gene therapy has the 
potential to be a transformative treatment for LAL-D.

Copyright © 2024 The American Society of Gene and Cell Therapy. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2024.10.022
PMCID: PMC11638878
PMID: 39489913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests P.T.M. has financial 
conflicts of interest with Genosera Inc. A patent has been filed on this 
technology.