---
reference_id: PMID:18641328
title: "Th1, Th2, and Th17 effector T cell-induced autoimmune gastritis differs in pathological pattern and in susceptibility to suppression by regulatory T cells."
authors:
- Stummvoll GH
- DiPaolo RJ
- Huter EN
- Davidson TS
- Glass D
- Ward JM
- Shevach EM
journal: J Immunol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.181.3.1908
keywords:
- Animals
- "Autoimmune Diseases/blood, immunology, pathology"
- Cell Differentiation/immunology
- Cell Separation
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Disease Susceptibility/immunology, pathology"
- Female
- "Gastric Mucosa/immunology, pathology"
- "Gastritis/blood, immunology, pathology"
- Immunoglobulin G/blood
- Interleukin-17/immunology
- "Lymph Nodes/cytology, immunology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Nude"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Helper-Inducer/cytology, immunology"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Regulatory/immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Th1, Th2, and Th17 effector T cell-induced autoimmune gastritis differs in pathological pattern and in susceptibility to suppression by regulatory T cells.
**Authors:** Stummvoll GH, DiPaolo RJ, Huter EN, Davidson TS, Glass D, Ward JM, Shevach EM
**Journal:** J Immunol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.181.3.1908](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.181.3.1908)

## Content

1. J Immunol. 2008 Aug 1;181(3):1908-16. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.181.3.1908.

Th1, Th2, and Th17 effector T cell-induced autoimmune gastritis differs in 
pathological pattern and in susceptibility to suppression by regulatory T cells.

Stummvoll GH(1), DiPaolo RJ, Huter EN, Davidson TS, Glass D, Ward JM, Shevach 
EM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Cellular Immunology Section, National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA.

Th cells can be subdivided into IFN-gamma-secreting Th1, IL-4/IL-5-secreting 
Th2, and IL-17-secreting Th17 cells. We have evaluated the capacity of fully 
differentiated Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells derived from a mouse bearing a 
transgenic TCR specific for the gastric parietal cell antigen, H(+)K(+)-ATPase, 
to induce autoimmune gastritis after transfer to immunodeficient recipients. We 
have also determined the susceptibility of the disease induced by each of the 
effector T cell types to suppression by polyclonal regulatory T cells (Treg) in 
vivo. Each type of effector cell induced autoimmune gastritis with distinct 
histological patterns. Th17 cells induced the most destructive disease with 
cellular infiltrates composed primarily of eosinophils accompanied by high 
levels of serum IgE. Polyclonal Treg could suppress the capacity of Th1 cells, 
could moderately suppress Th2 cells, but could suppress Th17-induced disease 
only at early time points. The major effect of the Treg was to inhibit the 
expansion of the effector T cells. However, effector cells isolated from 
protected animals were not anergic and were fully competent to proliferate and 
produce effector cytokines ex vivo. The strong inhibitory effect of polyclonal 
Treg on the capacity of some types of differentiated effector cells to induce 
disease provides an experimental basis for the clinical use of polyclonal Treg 
in the treatment of autoimmune disease in humans.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.181.3.1908
PMCID: PMC2561289
PMID: 18641328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]