---
reference_id: "PMID:30307321"
title: "Potential of dry powder inhalers for tuberculosis therapy: facts, fidelity and future."
authors:
- Mehta P
- Bothiraja C
- Kadam S
- Pawar A
journal: Artif Cells Nanomed Biotechnol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1080/21691401.2018.1513938
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Potential of dry powder inhalers for tuberculosis therapy: facts, fidelity and future.
**Authors:** Mehta P, Bothiraja C, Kadam S, Pawar A
**Journal:** Artif Cells Nanomed Biotechnol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21691401.2018.1513938](https://doi.org/10.1080/21691401.2018.1513938)

## Content

1. Artif Cells Nanomed Biotechnol. 2018;46(sup3):S791-S806. doi: 
10.1080/21691401.2018.1513938. Epub 2018 Oct 11.

Potential of dry powder inhalers for tuberculosis therapy: facts, fidelity and 
future.

Mehta P(1), Bothiraja C(2), Kadam S(3), Pawar A(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Quality Assurance Technique, Poona College of Pharmacy , 
Bharati Vidyapeeth (Deemed-to-be-University) , Pune , India.
(2)b Department of Pharmaceutics, Poona College of Pharmacy , Bharati Vidyapeeth 
(Deemed-to-be-University) , Pune , India.
(3)c Bharati Vidyapeeth Bhavan , Bharati Vidyapeeth (Deemed-to-be-University) , 
Pune , India.

Tuberculosis (TB) is a contagious and airborne infectious disease caused by the 
pathogen Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb). In spite of substantial research 
efforts, continuous multiple high-dose drug therapy regularly for 4-7 months can 
impede patient quality of life. The pathology of TB and biology of pulmonary 
airways permits for a variety of drug delivery strategies and natural route of 
infection denotes a more logical remedial approach for treatment of TB. 
Pulmonary delivery is non-invasive, allow easy transcytosis in alveolar region, 
avoids first-pass metabolism and extensive vascularization facilitates delivery 
of therapeutic agents to infection site. It also potentially reduces the 
frequency with dose requirement and linked side effects. Dry powder is a most 
preferred inhalation option due to their greater physiochemical stability over 
liquid or suspension based formulations. Dry powder inhalers (DPIs) are easy to 
handle and appropriate for high-dose formulations. Moreover, the progress of 
disciplines such as nanotechnology, particle engineering, material science and 
molecular biology permits further expansion of treatment capability and 
efficiency. Thus, this article will focus on the role of novel DPIs systems for 
treatment of TB. This article also contains a dedicated section discussing about 
technical limitations and clinical challenges with help of strengths, 
weaknesses, opportunities and threats (SWOT) analysis. Additionally, it will 
also offer some basic background information for drug repurposing, formulation 
development and drug delivery systems.

DOI: 10.1080/21691401.2018.1513938
PMID: 30307321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]