---
reference_id: "PMID:18536048"
title: "Peroxisomal acyl-CoA-oxidase deficiency: two new cases."
authors:
- Carrozzo R
- Bellini C
- Lucioli S
- Deodato F
- Cassandrini D
- Cassanello M
- Caruso U
- Rizzo C
- Rizza T
- Napolitano ML
- Wanders RJ
- Jakobs C
- Bruno C
- Santorelli FM
- Dionisi-Vici C
- Bonioli E
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32298
keywords:
- "Acyl-CoA Oxidase/deficiency, genetics"
- Base Sequence
- Brain/abnormalities
- "Child, Preschool"
- Consanguinity
- DNA/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Peroxisomal Disorders/diagnosis, enzymology, genetics"
- Peroxisomes/enzymology
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peroxisomal acyl-CoA-oxidase deficiency: two new cases.
**Authors:** Carrozzo R, Bellini C, Lucioli S, Deodato F, Cassandrini D, Cassanello M, Caruso U, Rizzo C, Rizza T, Napolitano ML, Wanders RJ, Jakobs C, Bruno C, Santorelli FM, Dionisi-Vici C, Bonioli E
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.32298](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.32298)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Jul 1;146A(13):1676-81. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32298.

Peroxisomal acyl-CoA-oxidase deficiency: two new cases.

Carrozzo R(1), Bellini C, Lucioli S, Deodato F, Cassandrini D, Cassanello M, 
Caruso U, Rizzo C, Rizza T, Napolitano ML, Wanders RJ, Jakobs C, Bruno C, 
Santorelli FM, Dionisi-Vici C, Bonioli E.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Molecular Medicine, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy.

We report on two new patients with straight-chain acyl-coenzyme A oxidase 
deficiency. Early onset hypotonia, seizures and psychomotor delay were observed 
in both cases. Plasma very-long-chain fatty acids were abnormal in both 
patients, whereas the plasma levels of phytanic acid, pristanic acid, the bile 
acid intermediates DHCA and THCA, and erythrocyte plasmalogen levels were 
normal. Studies in fibroblasts from the two patients revealed a deficiency of 
one of the two peroxisomal acyl-CoA oxidases, that is, straight-chain acyl-CoA 
oxidase (ACOX1). Subsequent molecular analysis of ACOX1 showed a homozygous 
deletion, which removes a large part of intron 3 and exons 4-14 in the first 
patient. Mutation analysis in the second patient revealed compound 
heterozygosity for two mutations, including: (1) a c.692 G > T (p.G231V) 
mutation and (2) skipping of exon 13 (c.1729_1935del (p.G577_E645del).

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32298
PMID: 18536048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]