---
reference_id: "PMID:36288726"
title: The neurobiology of long COVID.
authors:
- Monje M
- Iwasaki A
journal: Neuron
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2022.10.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The neurobiology of long COVID.
**Authors:** Monje M, Iwasaki A
**Journal:** Neuron (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2022.10.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2022.10.006)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2022 Nov 2;110(21):3484-3496. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2022.10.006. Epub 
2022 Oct 7.

The neurobiology of long COVID.

Monje M(1), Iwasaki A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, USA. Electronic address: 
mmonje@stanford.edu.
(2)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA; 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University, USA. Electronic address: 
akiko.iwasaki@yale.edu.

Persistent neurological and neuropsychiatric symptoms affect a substantial 
fraction of people after COVID-19 and represent a major component of the 
post-acute COVID-19 syndrome, also known as long COVID. Here, we review what is 
understood about the pathobiology of post-acute COVID-19 impact on the CNS and 
discuss possible neurobiological underpinnings of the cognitive symptoms 
affecting COVID-19 survivors. We propose the chief mechanisms that may 
contribute to this emerging neurological health crisis.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2022.10.006
PMCID: PMC9537254
PMID: 36288726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests M.M. holds equity in 
MapLight Therapeutics and Syncopation Life Sciences. A.I. holds equity in 
RIGImmune and Xanadu Bio. M.M. is on the advisory board for Neuron.