---
reference_id: "PMID:39407852"
title: "The Definition, Diagnosis, and Management of Giant Splenic Artery Aneurysms and Pseudoaneurysms: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Rinaldi V
- Illuminati G
- Caronna R
- Prezioso G
- Palumbo P
- Saullo P
- "D'Andrea V"
- Nardi P
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13195793
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Definition, Diagnosis, and Management of Giant Splenic Artery Aneurysms and Pseudoaneurysms: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Rinaldi V, Illuminati G, Caronna R, Prezioso G, Palumbo P, Saullo P, D'Andrea V, Nardi P
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13195793](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13195793)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Sep 28;13(19):5793. doi: 10.3390/jcm13195793.

The Definition, Diagnosis, and Management of Giant Splenic Artery Aneurysms and 
Pseudoaneurysms: A Systematic Review.

Rinaldi V(1), Illuminati G(1), Caronna R(1), Prezioso G(1), Palumbo P(1), Saullo 
P(1), D'Andrea V(1), Nardi P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale Regina Elena 324, 
00161 Rome, Italy.

Background/Objectives: Giant splenic artery aneurysms (SAAs) and pseudoaneurysms 
(SAPs) represent rare conditions, characterized by a diameter greater than or 
equal to 5 cm. The risk of rupture is increased compared to common SAAs and 
SAPs, necessitating urgent treatments to prevent it. Methods: This systematic 
review was conducted through a comprehensive search involving the PubMed, Google 
Scholar, and Scopus databases. A total of 82 patients and 65 articles were 
included in the analysis. For each patient, we investigated age, sex, symptoms, 
comorbidities, the presence of a true or a false aneurysm, the dimensional 
criteria used to define dilations as giant aneurysms or pseudoaneurysms, the 
dimension of the two greatest diameters, imaging studies, surgical treatment, 
post-operative length of stay (LOS), and post-operative follow-up. Results: The 
results revealed a similar incidence in both genders (43 males vs. 39 females) 
with a median age of 55.79 years. The most frequently described symptom was pain 
(59.76%). Thirteen cases were false aneurysms and 69 were true aneurysms. The 
mean greatest diameter was 9.90 cm. The CT scan was the most utilized imaging 
study (80.49%). Open, endovascular, and hybrid surgery were performed in 47, 26, 
and 9 patients, respectively, with complication rates of 14.89%, 23.08%, and 
22.22% occurring for each treatment. The post-operative LOS was 12.29 days, 2.36 
days, and 5 days, respectively. The median follow-up was 17.28 months overall. 
No recanalization was observed after endovascular procedures during the 
follow-up period. Conclusions: The dimensional criterion to define SAAs and SAPs 
as giant was most frequently that at least one diameter was ≥ 5 cm. The CT scan 
was the most frequently utilized radiological study to diagnose giant SAAs and 
SAPs. Finally, endovascular procedures, open surgeries, and hybrid treatments 
presented similar post-operative complication rates. The post-operative LOS was 
lower for the endovascular group, and the follow-up period did not show aneurysm 
recanalization in any patients.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13195793
PMCID: PMC11477110
PMID: 39407852

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.