---
reference_id: "PMID:10655064"
title: A role for smad6 in development and homeostasis of the cardiovascular system.
authors:
- Galvin KM
- Donovan MJ
- Lynch CA
- Meyer RI
- Paul RJ
- Lorenz JN
- Fairchild-Huntress V
- Dixon KL
- Dunmore JH
- Gimbrone MA Jr
- Falb D
- Huszar D
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1038/72835
keywords:
- Animals
- Cardiovascular Abnormalities/genetics
- "Cardiovascular System/embryology, growth & development"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Genomic Library
- Homeostasis
- Homozygote
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Inbred Strains"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Muscle, Smooth, Vascular/pathology, physiology"
- "Mutagenesis, Insertional"
- Recombinant Fusion Proteins/metabolism
- Restriction Mapping
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- Smad6 Protein
- "Trans-Activators/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A role for smad6 in development and homeostasis of the cardiovascular system.
**Authors:** Galvin KM, Donovan MJ, Lynch CA, Meyer RI, Paul RJ, Lorenz JN, Fairchild-Huntress V, Dixon KL, Dunmore JH, Gimbrone MA Jr, Falb D, Huszar D
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/72835](https://doi.org/10.1038/72835)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2000 Feb;24(2):171-4. doi: 10.1038/72835.

A role for smad6 in development and homeostasis of the cardiovascular system.

Galvin KM(1), Donovan MJ, Lynch CA, Meyer RI, Paul RJ, Lorenz JN,
Fairchild-Huntress V, Dixon KL, Dunmore JH, Gimbrone MA Jr, Falb D, Huszar D.

Author information:
(1)Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. galvin@mpi.com

Smad proteins are intracellular mediators of signalling initiated by
Tgf-betasuperfamily ligands (Tgf-betas, activins and bone morphogenetic proteins
(Bmps)). Smads 1, 2, 3, 5 and 8 are activated upon phosphorylation by specific
type I receptors, and associate with the common partner Smad4 to trigger
transcriptional responses. The inhibitory Smads (6 and 7) are transcriptionally
induced in cultured cells treated with Tgf-beta superfamily ligands, and
downregulate signalling in in vitro assays. Gene disruption in mice has begun to
reveal specific developmental and physiological functions of the
signal-transducing Smads. Here we explore the role of an inhibitory Smad in vivo
by targeted mutation of Madh6 (which encodes the Smad6 protein). Targeted
insertion of a LacZ reporter demonstrated that Smad6 expression is largely
restricted to the heart and blood vessels, and that Madh6 mutants have multiple
cardiovascular abnormalities. Hyperplasia of the cardiac valves and outflow
tract septation defects indicate a function for Smad6 in the regulation of
endocardial cushion transformation. The role of Smad6 in the homeostasis of the
adult cardiovascular system is indicated by the development of aortic
ossification and elevated blood pressure in viable mutants. These defects
highlight the importance of Smad6 in the tissue-specific modulation of Tgf-beta
superfamily signalling pathways in vivo.

DOI: 10.1038/72835
PMID: 10655064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
