---
reference_id: "PMID:31485575"
title: "Clinical Manifestations, Diagnosis, and Treatment of Sarcoidosis."
authors:
- Ungprasert P
- Ryu JH
- Matteson EL
journal: Mayo Clin Proc Innov Qual Outcomes
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.mayocpiqo.2019.04.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Manifestations, Diagnosis, and Treatment of Sarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Ungprasert P, Ryu JH, Matteson EL
**Journal:** Mayo Clin Proc Innov Qual Outcomes (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mayocpiqo.2019.04.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocpiqo.2019.04.006)

## Content

1. Mayo Clin Proc Innov Qual Outcomes. 2019 Aug 2;3(3):358-375. doi: 
10.1016/j.mayocpiqo.2019.04.006. eCollection 2019 Sep.

Clinical Manifestations, Diagnosis, and Treatment of Sarcoidosis.

Ungprasert P(1), Ryu JH(2), Matteson EL(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Epidemiology Unit, Department of Research and Development, Faculty 
of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN.
(4)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Health Sciences Research (E.L.M.), 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.

The focus of this review is current knowledge about the epidemiology, clinical 
manifestations, diagnosis, and treatment of both pulmonary sarcoidosis and 
extrapulmonary sarcoidosis. Although intrathoracic involvement is the hallmark 
of the disease, present in over 90% of patients, sarcoidosis can affect 
virtually any organ. Clinical presentations of sarcoidosis are diverse, ranging 
from asymptomatic, incidental findings to organ failure. Diagnosis requires the 
presence of noncaseating granuloma and compatible presentations after exclusion 
of other identifiable causes. Spontaneous remission is frequent, so treatment is 
not always indicated unless the disease is symptomatic or causes progressive 
organ damage/dysfunction. Glucocorticoids are the cornerstone of treatment of 
sarcoidosis even though evidence from randomized controlled studies is lacking. 
Glucocorticoid-sparing agents and biologic agents are often used as second- and 
third-line therapy for patients who do not respond to glucocorticoids or 
experience serious adverse effects.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mayocpiqo.2019.04.006
PMCID: PMC6713839
PMID: 31485575