---
reference_id: "PMID:41372401"
title: Uncovering the role of LINE-1 in the evolution of lung adenocarcinoma.
authors:
- Zhang T
- Zhao W
- Wirth C
- Díaz-Gay M
- Yin J
- Cecati M
- Marchegiani F
- Hoang PH
- Leduc C
- Baine MK
- Travis WD
- Sholl LM
- Joubert P
- Sang J
- McElderry JP
- Antony M
- Klein A
- Khandekar A
- Hartman C
- Rosenbaum J
- Colón-Matos FJ
- Miraftab M
- Saha M
- Lee OW
- Jones KM
- Caporaso NE
- Wong MP
- Leung KC
- Hsiung CA
- Chen CY
- Edell ES
- Santamaría JM
- Schabath MB
- Yendamuri SS
- Manczuk M
- Lissowska J
- Świątkowska B
- Mukeria A
- Shangina O
- Zaridze D
- Holcatova I
- Mates D
- Milosavljevic S
- Savic M
- Bossé Y
- Rothberg BEG
- Christiani DC
- Gaborieau V
- Brennan P
- Liu G
- Hofman P
- Homer R
- Yang SR
- Pesatori AC
- Consonni D
- Yang L
- Zhu B
- Shi J
- Brown K
- Rothman N
- Chanock SJ
- Alexandrov LB
- Choi J
- Cardelli M
- Lan Q
- Nowak MA
- Wedge DC
- Landi MT
journal: Nature
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-025-09825-y
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Adenocarcinoma of Lung/genetics, pathology"
- Clonal Evolution/genetics
- DNA Copy Number Variations/genetics
- DNA Methylation
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Genomic Instability
- Long Interspersed Nucleotide Elements/genetics
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic/genetics"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics
- Smoking/adverse effects
- Whole Genome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Uncovering the role of LINE-1 in the evolution of lung adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Zhang T, Zhao W, Wirth C, Díaz-Gay M, Yin J, Cecati M, Marchegiani F, Hoang PH, Leduc C, Baine MK, Travis WD, Sholl LM, Joubert P, Sang J, McElderry JP, Antony M, Klein A, Khandekar A, Hartman C, Rosenbaum J, Colón-Matos FJ, Miraftab M, Saha M, Lee OW, Jones KM, Caporaso NE, Wong MP, Leung KC, Hsiung CA, Chen CY, Edell ES, Santamaría JM, Schabath MB, Yendamuri SS, Manczuk M, Lissowska J, Świątkowska B, Mukeria A, Shangina O, Zaridze D, Holcatova I, Mates D, Milosavljevic S, Savic M, Bossé Y, Rothberg BEG, Christiani DC, Gaborieau V, Brennan P, Liu G, Hofman P, Homer R, Yang SR, Pesatori AC, Consonni D, Yang L, Zhu B, Shi J, Brown K, Rothman N, Chanock SJ, Alexandrov LB, Choi J, Cardelli M, Lan Q, Nowak MA, Wedge DC, Landi MT
**Journal:** Nature (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-025-09825-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-09825-y)

## Content

1. Nature. 2026 Feb;650(8100):230-241. doi: 10.1038/s41586-025-09825-y. Epub 2025
 Dec 10.

Uncovering the role of LINE-1 in the evolution of lung adenocarcinoma.

Zhang T(1), Zhao W(1), Wirth C(2), Díaz-Gay M(3)(4)(5)(6), Yin J(1), Cecati
M(7), Marchegiani F(8), Hoang PH(1), Leduc C(9), Baine MK(10), Travis WD(10),
Sholl LM(11), Joubert P(12), Sang J(1), McElderry JP(1), Antony M(1), Klein
A(1), Khandekar A(1)(3)(4)(5), Hartman C(1), Rosenbaum J(13), Colón-Matos FJ(1),
Miraftab M(1), Saha M(1), Lee OW(1), Jones KM(1)(14), Caporaso NE(1)(14), Wong
MP(15), Leung KC(16), Hsiung CA(17), Chen CY(18)(19), Edell ES(20), Santamaría
JM(21)(22), Schabath MB(23), Yendamuri SS(24), Manczuk M(25), Lissowska J(25),
Świątkowska B(26), Mukeria A(27), Shangina O(27), Zaridze D(27), Holcatova
I(28)(29), Mates D(30), Milosavljevic S(31), Savic M(32), Bossé Y(12), Rothberg
BEG(33), Christiani DC(34)(35), Gaborieau V(36), Brennan P(36), Liu G(37),
Hofman P(38), Homer R(39), Yang SR(10), Pesatori AC(40)(41), Consonni D(41),
Yang L(42)(43)(44), Zhu B(1), Shi J(1), Brown K(1), Rothman N(1), Chanock SJ(1),
Alexandrov LB(3)(4)(5)(45), Choi J(1), Cardelli M(7), Lan Q(1), Nowak
MA(46)(47), Wedge DC(2)(48), Landi MT(49).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Manchester Cancer Research Centre, The University of Manchester, Manchester,
UK.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
CA, USA.
(5)Moores Cancer Center, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(6)Digital Genomics Group, Structural Biology Program, Spanish National Cancer
Research Center (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.
(7)Advanced Technology Center for Aging Research, IRCCS INRCA, Ancona, Italy.
(8)Clinic of Laboratory and Precision Medicine, IRCCS INRCA, Ancona, Italy.
(9)Department of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(10)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(11)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(12)Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et de Pneumologie de Québec-Université
Laval, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.
(13)Westat, Rockville, MD, USA.
(14)Cancer Genomics Research Laboratory, Leidos Biomedical Research, Frederick
National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, MD, USA.
(15)Queen Mary Hospital, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(16)Department of Pathology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(17)Institute of Population Health Sciences, National Health Research
Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan.
(18)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(19)Department of Surgery, Division of Thoracic Surgery, Chung Shan Medical
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(20)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
MN, USA.
(21)Biobanco IBSP-CV FISABIO, Valencia, Spain.
(22)Red Valenciana de Biobancos FISABIO, Valencia, Spain.
(23)Department of Cancer Epidemiology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL, USA.
(24)Thoracic Surgery, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo, NY,
USA.
(25)Department of Cancer Epidemiology and Primary Prevention, Maria
Skłodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology, Warshaw, Poland.
(26)Department of Environmental Epidemiology, Nofer Institute of Occupational
Medicine, Łódź, Poland.
(27)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, N.N. Blokhin National Medical Research
Centre of Oncology, Moscow, Russia.
(28)Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(29)Department of Oncology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and
Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
(30)Department of Occupational Health and Toxicology, National Center for
Environmental Risk Monitoring, National Institute of Public Health, Bucharest,
Romania.
(31)International Organisation for Cancer Prevention and Research (IOCPR),
Belgrade, Serbia.
(32)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.
(33)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Medicine, University of
Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.
(34)Department of Environmental Health, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public
Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(35)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(36)Genomic Epidemiology Branch, International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC/WHO), Lyon, France.
(37)Princess Margaret Cancer Center, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(38)IHU RespirERA, Biobank-BB-0033-0025, Côte d'Azur University, Nice, France.
(39)Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(40)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan,
Milan, Italy.
(41)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(42)Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago, Chicago,
IL, USA.
(43)Department of Human Genetics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(44)The University of Chicago Medicine Comprehensive Cancer Center, The
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(45)Sanford Stem Cell Institute, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
CA, USA.
(46)Department of Mathematics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(47)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(48)Manchester NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Manchester, UK.
(49)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, MD, USA. landim@mail.nih.gov.

Understanding lung cancer evolution can identify tools for intercepting its
growth1,2. Here, in a landscape analysis of 1,024 lung adenocarcinomas (LUADs)
with deep whole-genome sequencing integrated with multiomic data, we identified
542 LUADs with a diverse clonal architecture. In this group, we observed
divergent evolutionary trajectories based on tobacco smoking exposure, ancestry
and sex. LUAD from smokers showed an abundance of tobacco-related C:G>A:T driver
mutations3 in KRAS and short subclonal diversification. LUAD in people who have
never smoked (hereafter, never-smokers) showed early occurrence of copy-number
alterations and EGFR mutations associated with SBS5 and SBS40a mutational
signatures. Tumours containing EGFR mutations exhibited long latency,
particularly in female individuals of European-ancestry. Tumours from Asian
never-smokers showed a short clonal evolution. Importantly, we found that the
mutational signature ID24 is a marker of a previously unrecognized mechanism for
LUAD evolution. Tumours with ID2 showed short latency and high long interspersed
nuclear element-1 (LINE-1, hereafter L1) retrotransposon activity linked to L1
promoter demethylation. These tumours exhibited an aggressive phenotype with
genomic instability, elevated hypoxia scores, low neoantigen burden, metastasis
propensity and poor overall survival. Reactivated L1-retrotransposition-induced
mutagenesis probably contributes to the mutational signature ID2, including
through the regulation of the transcriptional factor ZNF695, a member of the
KZFP family5. The complex nature of LUAD evolution creates both challenges and
opportunities for screening and treatment plans.

© 2025. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-025-09825-y
PMCID: PMC12823094
PMID: 41372401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: L.B.A. is a co-founder,
CSO, scientific advisory member and consultant for io9, has equity and receives
income. The terms of this arrangement have been reviewed and approved by the
University of California, San Diego in accordance with its conflict of interest
policies. L.B.A. is also a compensated member of the scientific advisory board
of Inocras. L.B.A.’s spouse is an employee of Biotheranostics. L.B.A. declares
US provisional applications filed with UCSD with serial numbers: 63/269,033,
63/366,392, 63/289,601, 63/483,237, 63/412,835 and 63/492,348. L.B.A. is also
listed as an inventor of a US patent 10,776,718 for source identification by
non-negative matrix factorization. S.-R.Y. has received consulting fees from
AstraZeneca, Sanofi, Amgen, AbbVie and Sanofi; and received speaking fees from
AstraZeneca, Medscape, PRIME Education and Medical Learning Institute. The other
authors declare no competing interests.
