---
reference_id: "PMID:18256171"
title: Thioredoxin-1 ameliorates cigarette smoke-induced lung inflammation and emphysema in mice.
authors:
- Sato A
- Hoshino Y
- Hara T
- Muro S
- Nakamura H
- Mishima M
- Yodoi J
journal: J Pharmacol Exp Ther
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1124/jpet.107.134007
keywords:
- Animals
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/therapeutic use
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- "Bronchoalveolar Lavage Fluid/cytology, immunology"
- Chemokine CXCL2/genetics
- Humans
- "Macrophages/drug effects, immunology"
- Male
- Matrix Metalloproteinase 12/genetics
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Neutrophils/drug effects, immunology"
- Oxidative Stress/drug effects
- "Pneumonia/chemically induced, drug therapy, immunology, pathology"
- "Pulmonary Emphysema/chemically induced, drug therapy, immunology, pathology"
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- "Recombinant Proteins/genetics, therapeutic use"
- Smoke/adverse effects
- "Thioredoxins/genetics, immunology, therapeutic use"
- Nicotiana/adverse effects
- "Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/blood, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thioredoxin-1 ameliorates cigarette smoke-induced lung inflammation and emphysema in mice.
**Authors:** Sato A, Hoshino Y, Hara T, Muro S, Nakamura H, Mishima M, Yodoi J
**Journal:** J Pharmacol Exp Ther (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1124/jpet.107.134007](https://doi.org/10.1124/jpet.107.134007)

## Content

1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2008 May;325(2):380-8. doi: 10.1124/jpet.107.134007.
Epub  2008 Feb 6.

Thioredoxin-1 ameliorates cigarette smoke-induced lung inflammation and 
emphysema in mice.

Sato A(1), Hoshino Y, Hara T, Muro S, Nakamura H, Mishima M, Yodoi J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, Translational Research Center, Kyoto 
University Hospital, 54 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 6068507 Japan.

Cigarette smoking is associated with the development of inflammatory lung 
diseases representing major health problems world-wide. We hypothesized that the 
redox-regulating molecule thioredoxin-1 (TRX), which shows anti-inflammatory, 
antioxidative, and antiapoptotic effects, could be induced by cigarette smoke 
(CS) and contribute to protect against CS-induced inflammation and lung 
destruction. In an acute study, human TRX transgenic mice and C57BL6/J mice were 
exposed to mainstream CS for 3 days. In the lungs of CS-exposed mice, bronchial 
epithelial injury and bronchoalveolar lavage neutrophilia were observed. 
Oxidative stress and apoptosis were enhanced, and the expression of cytokines 
macrophage inflammatory protein-2 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha was 
increased 15.3- and 2.4-fold, respectively. Compared with C57BL6/J mice, 
TRX-transgenic mice had significantly less inflammation, oxidative damage, and 
apoptosis, as well as decreased levels of matrix metalloprotease-12 mRNA and 
serum TNF-alpha. When recombinant human TRX (40 microg/body/day, 3 days) was 
injected i.p. into CS-exposed C57BL6/J mice, a significant effect to offer 
protection against CS-induced lung injury was observed through suppression of 
neutrophil influx. In the chronic study, TRX-transgenic mice and C57BL6/J mice 
were exposed to CS for 6 months. This chronic exposure caused pulmonary 
emphysema in C57BL6/J mice accompanying prominent infiltration of macrophages 
and neutrophils to lung. These pathological changes were significantly 
suppressed in TRX-transgenic mice. In conclusion, TRX induction ameliorated 
CS-induced lung inflammation and emphysema in mice. TRX-1 may therefore play a 
preventive or therapeutic role in lung inflammatory disorders such as chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.107.134007
PMID: 18256171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]