---
reference_id: "PMID:27423434"
title: "Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) revisited: Would migraine headaches be included in future classification criteria?"
authors:
- Noureldine MHA
- Haydar AA
- Berjawi A
- Elnawar R
- Sweid A
- Khamashta MA
- Hughes GRV
- Uthman I
journal: Immunol Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s12026-016-8831-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) revisited: Would migraine headaches be included in future classification criteria?
**Authors:** Noureldine MHA, Haydar AA, Berjawi A, Elnawar R, Sweid A, Khamashta MA, Hughes GRV, Uthman I
**Journal:** Immunol Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12026-016-8831-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12026-016-8831-9)

## Content

1. Immunol Res. 2017 Feb;65(1):230-241. doi: 10.1007/s12026-016-8831-9.

Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) revisited: Would migraine headaches be included 
in future classification criteria?

Noureldine MHA(1), Haydar AA(1), Berjawi A(1), Elnawar R(2), Sweid A(3), 
Khamashta MA(4)(5), Hughes GRV(6), Uthman I(7).

Author information:
(1)Gilbert and Rose-Marie Chagoury School of Medicine, Lebanese American 
University Medical Center, Beirut, Lebanon.
(2)Department of Neurology, Lebanese American University Medical Center-Rizk 
Hospital, Beirut, Lebanon.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Lebanese American University Medical Center-Rizk 
Hospital, Beirut, Lebanon.
(4)Lupus Research Unit, The Rayne Institute, Division of Women's Health, St 
Thomas Hospital, London, UK.
(5)Department of Rheumatology, Dubai Hospital, Dubai, UAE.
(6)Head of the London Lupus Center, London Bridge Hospital, London, UK.
(7)Division of Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine, American University of Beirut, 
P.O. Box 11-0236, Riad El-Solh, Beirut, 1107 2020, Lebanon. iuthman@aub.edu.lb.

Headaches have been extensively reported in Antiphospholipid syndrome 
(APS)/Antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL)-positive patients. The aim of this study 
was to highlight the prevalence of headaches among APS/aPL-positive patients and 
discuss its association with laboratory, clinical and imaging findings. We 
searched the literature through Google Scholar and PubMed for publications on 
the epidemiology, pathogenesis, laboratory, imaging and clinical findings, and 
management of headaches in APS/aPL-positive patients. The following keywords 
were used: Antiphospholipid, Hughes syndrome, anticardiolipin, lupus 
anticoagulant, anti-β2 glycoprotein I, headache, migraine, tension, and cluster. 
All reports published between 1969 and 2015 were included. Migraine is the most 
commonly reported type of headache in APS/aPL-positive patients. Thrombotic and 
platelet dysfunction hypotheses have been studied to uncover the pathogenic role 
of aPL in the development of headaches. Several studies are reporting higher 
levels of aPL in primary and secondary APS migraineurs, but only few reached 
statistical significance. Migraine patients without clinical signs/symptoms of 
cerebral infarction rarely show positive imaging findings. Digital subtraction 
angiography shows promise in demonstrating small vascular lesions otherwise not 
detected on computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, or cerebral 
angiograms. Although it may be solitary and harmless in many cases, the 
deleterious effect of migraine on the quality of life of APS patients prompts 
rapid diagnosis and proper management. An anticoagulation trial is advisable in 
APS patients with migraine as many cases of severe, refractory migraine resolved 
with anticoagulation therapy. The profile of migraine headaches discussed in 
this study permits its candidacy for inclusion in future APS classification 
criteria.

DOI: 10.1007/s12026-016-8831-9
PMID: 27423434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]