---
reference_id: "PMID:36768300"
title: "Eosinophilic Fasciitis: Current and Remaining Challenges."
authors:
- Mazilu D
- Boltașiu Tătaru LA
- Mardale DA
- Bijă MS
- Ismail S
- Zanfir V
- Negoi F
- Balanescu AR
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24031982
keywords:
- Humans
- "Fasciitis/diagnosis, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Eosinophilia/diagnosis, pathology"
- Skin/pathology
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eosinophilic Fasciitis: Current and Remaining Challenges.
**Authors:** Mazilu D, Boltașiu Tătaru LA, Mardale DA, Bijă MS, Ismail S, Zanfir V, Negoi F, Balanescu AR
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24031982](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24031982)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jan 19;24(3):1982. doi: 10.3390/ijms24031982.

Eosinophilic Fasciitis: Current and Remaining Challenges.

Mazilu D(1)(2), Boltașiu Tătaru LA(1), Mardale DA(1)(2), Bijă MS(1), Ismail 
S(1), Zanfir V(1), Negoi F(1), Balanescu AR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)"Sfanta Maria" Clinical Hospital, Ion Mihalache blvd, 37-39, 011172 
Bucharest, Romania.
(2)"Carol Davila" University of Medicine, Dionisie Lupu Street, nr 37, 020021 
Bucharest, Romania.

Eosinophilic fasciitis (EF), defined as diffuse fasciitis with eosinophilia by 
Shulman in 1974, is a disease with unknown etiology and whose pathogenesis is 
still being researched. The diagnosis is based on the clinical aspects (skin 
induration with an "orange peel" appearance), the lab results (eosinophilia, 
increased inflammatory markers), the skin biopsy with the pathognomonic 
histopathological result, as well as the typical MRI changes. The treatment 
includes glucocorticoids and immunosuppressive drugs. Due to severe refractory 
cases, the treatment remains a challenge. EF is still a disease with potential 
for further research.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24031982
PMCID: PMC9916848
PMID: 36768300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.