---
reference_id: "PMID:28576543"
title: Pycnodysostosis at otorhinolaryngology.
authors:
- Baglam T
- Binnetoglu A
- Fatih Topuz M
- Baş Ikizoglu N
- Ersu R
- Turan S
- Sarı M
journal: Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2017.02.009
keywords:
- "Adenoidectomy/adverse effects, methods"
- Adenoids/pathology
- Adolescent
- Cephalometry
- Child
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Otolaryngology
- Palatine Tonsil/pathology
- Polysomnography
- "Pycnodysostosis/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Quality of Life
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sleep Apnea Syndromes/etiology, surgery"
- "Sleep Apnea, Obstructive/surgery"
- "Tonsillectomy/adverse effects, methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pycnodysostosis at otorhinolaryngology.
**Authors:** Baglam T, Binnetoglu A, Fatih Topuz M, Baş Ikizoglu N, Ersu R, Turan S, Sarı M
**Journal:** Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijporl.2017.02.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijporl.2017.02.009)

## Content

1. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2017 Apr;95:91-96. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijporl.2017.02.009. Epub 2017 Feb 11.

Pycnodysostosis at otorhinolaryngology.

Baglam T(1), Binnetoglu A(2), Fatih Topuz M(3), Baş Ikizoglu N(4), Ersu R(5), 
Turan S(6), Sarı M(7).

Author information:
(1)Marmara University, School of Medicine, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, 
Fevzi Çakmak Parish MuhsinYazıcıoğlust. No: 10, Kaynarca, Pendik, Istanbul, 
Turkey. Electronic address: tekinbaglam@yahoo.com.
(2)Marmara University, School of Medicine, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, 
Fevzi Çakmak Parish MuhsinYazıcıoğlust. No: 10, Kaynarca, Pendik, Istanbul, 
Turkey. Electronic address: adembinnet@hotmail.com.
(3)Dumlupinar University, School of Medicine, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, 
Istiklal Parish Okmeydani St. No:10, Merkez, Kütahya, Turkey. Electronic 
address: drfatihtopuz@yahoo.com.
(4)Marmara University, School of Medicine, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, 
Fevzi Çakmak Parish MuhsinYazıcıoğlust. No: 10, Kaynarca, Pendik, Istanbul, 
Turkey. Electronic address: nilaybas@yahoo.com.
(5)Marmara University, School of Medicine, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, 
Fevzi Çakmak Parish MuhsinYazıcıoğlust. No: 10, Kaynarca, Pendik, Istanbul, 
Turkey. Electronic address: rersu@yahoo.com.
(6)Marmara University, School of Medicine, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, 
Fevzi Çakmak Parish MuhsinYazıcıoğlust. No: 10, Kaynarca, Pendik, Istanbul, 
Turkey. Electronic address: serap.turan@marmara.edu.tr.
(7)Marmara University, School of Medicine, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, 
Fevzi Çakmak Parish MuhsinYazıcıoğlust. No: 10, Kaynarca, Pendik, Istanbul, 
Turkey. Electronic address: drmuratsari@yahoo.com.

AIM: Pycnodysostosis is a rare autosomal, recessive, skeletal dysplasia caused 
by a mutation in the cathepsin k gene. Pycnodysostosis is characterized by short 
stature, characteristic facial appearance (delayed closure of fontanelles and 
cranial sutures, mandibular hypoplasia and angle disorder, blue sclera), and 
acroosteolysis of the distal phalanges. Our aim was to describe the 
otorhinolaryngologic findings, differential diagnoses, various treatment 
options, and followup in eight cases of pycnodysostosis.
METHOD: This retrospective clinical study used data from eight patients 
diagnosed with pycnodysostosis by a single pediatric endocrinologist primarily 
based on clinical and radiographic findings. All patients were referred to the 
otorhinolaryngology outpatient clinic by the pediatric endocrinology unit of the 
Marmara University between February 2013 and March 2015. Detailed medical 
histories were obtained in all cases and otorhinolaryngologic physical 
examination, blood assays, electrocardiogram, lateral skull X-rays, chest 
radiograph, cephalometric investigations, tympanograms, and audiograms were also 
carried out. Sleep videos of patients were recorded and those with upper airway 
problems were evaluated for sleep apnea by polysomnography. Informed consent 
form was obtained from the parents of all patients.
RESULTS: Eight patients (7 females and 1 male) displaying proportionate dwarfism 
were included in the study. They had a mean age of 14.7 years (range: 13-16 y), 
the mean height of 141.3 cm (range 132-155 cm), and mean weight of 44.4 kg 
(range: 39.6-49.3 kg). All patients had facial dysmorphism with frontal bossing 
and the hands and feet had short digits with overlying cutaneous wrinkles that 
tapered off with large overriding nails. Midfacial hypoplasia and malocclusion 
were observed in seven of the eight patients (87.5%), four (50%) had 
micrognathia, and five (62.5%) had proptosis. Tympanograms and audiograms of all 
patients were type A and normal, and the mean of the pure tone audiogram was 
13.3 dB (range: 10-16 dB). All patients had a narrow and grooved palate with 
disturbed dentition; two of them (25%) had mild markedness of the tongue base, 
five (62.5%) had grade 3 and three (37.5%) had grade 2 tonsillar hypertrophy, 
and five (62.5%) had adenoid hypertrophy. One patient (12.5%) had grade 3 
Mallampati, four (50%) showed grade 2 Mallampati while three (37.5%) patients 
displayed grade 1 Mallampati score. Further, while six (75%) patients had no 
uvular pathology, one (12.5%) patient presented with uvular elongation and 
another patient had a bifid uvula. Cephalometric measurements such as PAS-UP 
(mean 5.67 mm; range: 5.0-7.6 mm) and PAS-TP (mean 9.61 mm; range: 8.5-12.2 mm) 
were lower than that of normal subjects. Video recordings showed that six of the 
eight patients (75%) had respiratory distress and four (50%) had sleep apnea. 
Polysomnography in these patients with sleep apnea showed that two had mild OSA 
(AHI: 18.2 and 20.1 events/hour) and two had severe OSA (AHI: 53.4 and 62.8 
events/hour). For upper airway problems, an adenotonsillectomy was performed in 
two (25%) patients while two others required an adenoidectomy. Positive pressure 
ventilation was recommended in two patients with persistent sleep apnea after 
adeno/adenotonsillectomy. However, because of the parental objections, the 
follow-up polysomnographs could not be obtained.
CONCLUSION: Pycnodysostosis is a very rare form of bone dysplasia. 
Otorhinolaryngologically, proper follow-up of these patients and appropriate 
treatment of upper airway problems are important to achieve an acceptable 
quality of life. Adeno/adenotonsillectomy and positive pressure ventilation, 
used as conservative approaches in treating upper airway problems, are effective 
and could be used instead of an aggressive surgery such as tracheotomy or 
maxillomandibular advancement. This study, to the best of our knowledge, is the 
largest ENT case series on pycnodysostosis.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2017.02.009
PMID: 28576543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]