---
reference_id: "PMID:31615790"
title: Clinical Factors Associated with Urinary Tract Cancer in Individuals with Lynch Syndrome.
authors:
- Wischhusen JW
- Ukaegbu C
- Dhingra TG
- Uno H
- Kastrinos F
- Syngal S
- Yurgelun MB
journal: Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-19-0213
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Factors Associated with Urinary Tract Cancer in Individuals with Lynch Syndrome.
**Authors:** Wischhusen JW, Ukaegbu C, Dhingra TG, Uno H, Kastrinos F, Syngal S, Yurgelun MB
**Journal:** Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-19-0213](https://doi.org/10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-19-0213)

## Content

1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2020 Jan;29(1):193-199. doi: 
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-19-0213. Epub 2019 Oct 15.

Clinical Factors Associated with Urinary Tract Cancer in Individuals with Lynch 
Syndrome.

Wischhusen JW(1), Ukaegbu C(2), Dhingra TG(2), Uno H(2), Kastrinos F(3), Syngal 
S(2)(4)(5), Yurgelun MB(6)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(2)Division of Population Sciences, Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber 
Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Division of Digestive and Liver 
Diseases, Columbia University Medical Cancer, New York, New York.
(4)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(5)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(6)Division of Population Sciences, Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber 
Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts. matthew_yurgelun@dfci.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: Lynch syndrome confers markedly increased risks of various 
malignancies, including urinary tract cancers (UTC; renal pelvis, ureter, 
bladder, and possibly kidney cancers). It is unknown how to determine which 
Lynch syndrome carriers are at highest UTC risk. Our aim was to identify 
clinical factors associated with UTC among Lynch syndrome carriers.
METHODS: The study population was a cohort of 52,758 consecutively ascertained 
individuals undergoing Lynch syndrome testing at a commercial laboratory. 
Clinical data were obtained from test request forms completed by the ordering 
provider. Univariate analysis and multivariate logistic regression were 
performed to identify factors associated with UTC among Lynch syndrome carriers.
RESULTS: Compared with noncarriers, Lynch syndrome carriers were significantly 
more likely to have had UTC (4.1% vs. 1.2%; P < 0.0001). Lynch 
syndrome-associated UTC was independently associated with male sex [OR 1.95; 95% 
confidence interval (CI), 1.38-2.76], increased age (OR 2.44 per 10 years; 95% 
CI, 2.11-2.82), familial burden of UTC (OR 2.69 per first-/second-degree 
relative with UTC; 95% CI, 1.99-3.63), and pathogenic EPCAM/MSH2 variants (OR 
4.01; 95% CI, 2.39-6.72) but not MLH1 variants (OR 1.17; 95% CI, 0.63-2.17), 
race, or history of other Lynch syndrome-associated malignancy. A total of 143 
of 158 (90.5%) Lynch syndrome carriers with UTC had ≥1 of the following 
characteristics: male sex, EPCAM/MSH2 variants, or family history of UTC; 1,236 
of 1,251 (98.8%) Lynch syndrome carriers lacking all of these characteristics 
had no history of UTC.
CONCLUSIONS: Specific clinical factors can reliably identify Lynch syndrome 
carriers most likely to be at risk for UTC.
IMPACT: A predictable subset of Lynch syndrome carriers may be most likely to 
benefit from UTC surveillance/prevention.

©2019 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-19-0213
PMCID: PMC6954282
PMID: 31615790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: S. Syngal is a 
consultant for Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc. and Digital China Health, and 
has rights to an inventor portion of licensing revenues from PREMM5. The authors 
report no other conflicts of interest.