---
reference_id: "PMID:36574323"
title: Diagnostic Accuracy of MRI for Detection of Meningitis in Infants.
authors:
- Kralik SF
- Vallejo JG
- Kukreja MK
- Salman R
- Orman G
- Huisman TAGM
- Desai NK
journal: AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A7610
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic Accuracy of MRI for Detection of Meningitis in Infants.
**Authors:** Kralik SF, Vallejo JG, Kukreja MK, Salman R, Orman G, Huisman TAGM, Desai NK
**Journal:** AJNR Am J Neuroradiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3174/ajnr.A7610](https://doi.org/10.3174/ajnr.A7610)

## Content

1. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2022 Sep;43(9):1350-1355. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A7610.

Diagnostic Accuracy of MRI for Detection of Meningitis in Infants.

Kralik SF(1), Vallejo JG(2), Kukreja MK(3), Salman R(3), Orman G(3), Huisman 
TAGM(3), Desai NK(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Radiology (S.F.K., M.K.K., R.S., G.O., T.A.G.M.H., 
N.K.D.), Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas steve.kralik@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pediatrics (J.G.V.), Baylor College of Medicine, Houston Texas.
(3)From the Department of Radiology (S.F.K., M.K.K., R.S., G.O., T.A.G.M.H., 
N.K.D.), Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas.

PURPOSE: To determine the accuracy of MR imaging for diagnosis of meningitis in 
infants.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Retrospective review of infants less than 1 year of age 
who underwent a brain MR imaging for meningitis from 2010-2018. Gold standard 
for diagnosis of bacterial meningitis was a positive bacterial CSF culture or a 
positive blood culture with an elevated CSF WBC count, and diagnosis of viral 
meningitis was a positive CSF PCR result and elevated CSF WBC count. 
Sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, and accuracy for MR imaging diagnosis of 
meningitis were calculated.
RESULTS: Two hundred nine infants with mean age 80 days (range 0-347 days) were 
included. There were 178 true positives with the most common pathogens being: 
Group B Streptococcus (58), E. coli (50), Streptococcus pneumoniae (21), H. 
influenzae (4); Herpes simplex virus 1 or 2 (18); Enterovirus (4); and other 
(23). There were 31 true negatives. Range of sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, 
and accuracy of MR imaging for detection of meningitis was 67.4-83.5%, 
92.3-95.7%, 95.0-98.6%, 33.3-76.5%, and 71.3-86.5% respectively. MR imaging 
sensitivity decreased after 10 days from time of presentation while specificity 
remained stable. Among individual MR imaging findings, leptomeningeal 
enhancement was the most sensitive finding, while cerebritis, infarction, 
ventriculitis, abscess, and intraventricular purulent material were the most 
specific findings.
CONCLUSIONS: MR imaging of the brain demonstrates high specificity and moderate 
sensitivity for diagnosis among infants presenting with signs and symptoms of 
meningitis. The results reflect current standard of care for imaging of infants 
with meningitis however a selection bias for imaging of more severe meningitis 
may affect these results.

© 2022 by American Journal of Neuroradiology.

DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A7610
PMCID: PMC9451630
PMID: 36574323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]