---
reference_id: "PMID:26878173"
title: Genomic and transcriptomic hallmarks of poorly differentiated and anaplastic thyroid cancers.
authors:
- Landa I
- Ibrahimpasic T
- Boucai L
- Sinha R
- Knauf JA
- Shah RH
- Dogan S
- Ricarte-Filho JC
- Krishnamoorthy GP
- Xu B
- Schultz N
- Berger MF
- Sander C
- Taylor BS
- Ghossein R
- Ganly I
- Fagin JA
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1172/JCI85271
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Eukaryotic Initiation Factor-1/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Genome, Human"
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Telomerase/genetics
- "Thyroid Carcinoma, Anaplastic/genetics, metabolism, mortality, pathology"
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, mortality, pathology"
- Transcriptome
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
- Young Adult
- ras Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic and transcriptomic hallmarks of poorly differentiated and anaplastic thyroid cancers.
**Authors:** Landa I, Ibrahimpasic T, Boucai L, Sinha R, Knauf JA, Shah RH, Dogan S, Ricarte-Filho JC, Krishnamoorthy GP, Xu B, Schultz N, Berger MF, Sander C, Taylor BS, Ghossein R, Ganly I, Fagin JA
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI85271](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI85271)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2016 Mar 1;126(3):1052-66. doi: 10.1172/JCI85271. Epub 2016 Feb
 15.

Genomic and transcriptomic hallmarks of poorly differentiated and anaplastic 
thyroid cancers.

Landa I, Ibrahimpasic T, Boucai L, Sinha R, Knauf JA, Shah RH, Dogan S, 
Ricarte-Filho JC, Krishnamoorthy GP, Xu B, Schultz N, Berger MF, Sander C, 
Taylor BS, Ghossein R, Ganly I, Fagin JA.

BACKGROUND: Poorly differentiated thyroid cancer (PDTC) and anaplastic thyroid 
cancer (ATC) are rare and frequently lethal tumors that so far have not been 
subjected to comprehensive genetic characterization.
METHODS: We performed next-generation sequencing of 341 cancer genes from 117 
patient-derived PDTCs and ATCs and analyzed the transcriptome of a 
representative subset of 37 tumors. Results were analyzed in the context of The 
Cancer Genome Atlas study (TCGA study) of papillary thyroid cancers (PTC).
RESULTS: Compared to PDTCs, ATCs had a greater mutation burden, including a 
higher frequency of mutations in TP53, TERT promoter, PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway 
effectors, SWI/SNF subunits, and histone methyltransferases. BRAF and RAS were 
the predominant drivers and dictated distinct tropism for nodal versus distant 
metastases in PDTC. RAS and BRAF sharply distinguished between PDTCs defined by 
the Turin (PDTC-Turin) versus MSKCC (PDTC-MSK) criteria, respectively. Mutations 
of EIF1AX, a component of the translational preinitiation complex, were markedly 
enriched in PDTCs and ATCs and had a striking pattern of co-occurrence with RAS 
mutations. While TERT promoter mutations were rare and subclonal in PTCs, they 
were clonal and highly prevalent in advanced cancers. Application of the 
TCGA-derived BRAF-RAS score (a measure of MAPK transcriptional output) revealed 
a preserved relationship with BRAF/RAS mutation in PDTCs, whereas ATCs were 
BRAF-like irrespective of driver mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: These data support a model of tumorigenesis whereby PDTCs and ATCs 
arise from well-differentiated tumors through the accumulation of key additional 
genetic abnormalities, many of which have prognostic and possible therapeutic 
relevance. The widespread genomic disruptions in ATC compared with PDTC 
underscore their greater virulence and higher mortality.
FUNDING: This work was supported in part by NIH grants CA50706, CA72597, 
P50-CA72012, P30-CA008748, and 5T32-CA160001; the Lefkovsky Family Foundation; 
the Society of Memorial Sloan Kettering; the Byrne fund; and Cycle for Survival.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI85271
PMCID: PMC4767360
PMID: 26878173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]