---
reference_id: "PMID:39429201"
title: "2024 Guideline for the Primary Prevention of Stroke: A Guideline From the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association."
authors:
- Bushnell C
- Kernan WN
- Sharrief AZ
- Chaturvedi S
- Cole JW
- Cornwell WK 3rd
- Cosby-Gaither C
- Doyle S
- Goldstein LB
- Lennon O
- Levine DA
- Love M
- Miller E
- Nguyen-Huynh M
- Rasmussen-Winkler J
- Rexrode KM
- Rosendale N
- Sarma S
- Shimbo D
- Simpkins AN
- Spatz ES
- Sun LR
- Tangpricha V
- Turnage D
- Velazquez G
- Whelton PK
journal: Stroke
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000475
keywords:
- Humans
- American Heart Association
- "Stroke/prevention & control"
- "Primary Prevention/methods, standards"
- United States
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 2024 Guideline for the Primary Prevention of Stroke: A Guideline From the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association.
**Authors:** Bushnell C, Kernan WN, Sharrief AZ, Chaturvedi S, Cole JW, Cornwell WK 3rd, Cosby-Gaither C, Doyle S, Goldstein LB, Lennon O, Levine DA, Love M, Miller E, Nguyen-Huynh M, Rasmussen-Winkler J, Rexrode KM, Rosendale N, Sarma S, Shimbo D, Simpkins AN, Spatz ES, Sun LR, Tangpricha V, Turnage D, Velazquez G, Whelton PK
**Journal:** Stroke (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1161/STR.0000000000000475](https://doi.org/10.1161/STR.0000000000000475)

## Content

1. Stroke. 2024 Dec;55(12):e344-e424. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000475. Epub
2024  Oct 21.

2024 Guideline for the Primary Prevention of Stroke: A Guideline From the
American Heart Association/American Stroke Association.

Bushnell C, Kernan WN, Sharrief AZ, Chaturvedi S(1), Cole JW, Cornwell WK 3rd,
Cosby-Gaither C, Doyle S, Goldstein LB, Lennon O, Levine DA, Love M, Miller
E(2), Nguyen-Huynh M, Rasmussen-Winkler J(3), Rexrode KM, Rosendale N, Sarma S,
Shimbo D, Simpkins AN(4), Spatz ES, Sun LR, Tangpricha V, Turnage D, Velazquez
G(5), Whelton PK.

Author information:
(1)American Academy of Neurology representative.
(2)American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists liaison.
(3)American Heart Association Stroke Council Stroke Performance Measures
Oversight Committee liaison.
(4)American Heart Association Stroke Council Scientific Statement Oversight
Committee on Clinical Practice Guideline liaison.
(5)Society for Vascular Surgery representative.

Erratum in
    Stroke. 2024 Dec;55(12):e439. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000482.
    Stroke. 2025 Feb;56(2):e98. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000486.

AIM: The "2024 Guideline for the Primary Prevention of Stroke" replaces the 2014
"Guidelines for the Primary Prevention of Stroke." This updated guideline is
intended to be a resource for clinicians to use to guide various prevention
strategies for individuals with no history of stroke.
METHODS: A comprehensive search for literature published since the 2014
guideline; derived from research involving human participants published in
English; and indexed in MEDLINE, PubMed, Cochrane Library, and other selected
and relevant databases was conducted between May and November 2023. Other
documents on related subject matter previously published by the American Heart
Association were also reviewed.
STRUCTURE: Ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes lead to significant disability but,
most important, are preventable. The 2024 primary prevention of stroke guideline
provides recommendations based on current evidence for strategies to prevent
stroke throughout the life span. These recommendations align with the American
Heart Association's Life's Essential 8 for optimizing cardiovascular and brain
health, in addition to preventing incident stroke. We also have added
sex-specific recommendations for screening and prevention of stroke, which are
new compared with the 2014 guideline. Many recommendations for similar risk
factor prevention were updated, new topics were reviewed, and recommendations
were created when supported by sufficient-quality published data.

DOI: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000475
PMID: 39429201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]