---
reference_id: "PMID:37740125"
title: "Rheumatoid arthritis with pulmonary accelerated rheumatoid nodules treated by baricitinib: a case-based review."
authors:
- Liu H
- Li Q
- Long K
- Xia O
- Ye Y
- Wang H
- Dai L
journal: Clin Rheumatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s10067-023-06773-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rheumatoid arthritis with pulmonary accelerated rheumatoid nodules treated by baricitinib: a case-based review.
**Authors:** Liu H, Li Q, Long K, Xia O, Ye Y, Wang H, Dai L
**Journal:** Clin Rheumatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10067-023-06773-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10067-023-06773-8)

## Content

1. Clin Rheumatol. 2024 Feb;43(2):775-784. doi: 10.1007/s10067-023-06773-8. Epub 
2023 Sep 23.

Rheumatoid arthritis with pulmonary accelerated rheumatoid nodules treated by 
baricitinib: a case-based review.

Liu H(#)(1), Li Q(#)(2), Long K(#)(1), Xia O(1), Ye Y(3), Wang H(4), Dai L(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Panyu Central Hospital, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, No. 107 Yanjiang West Road, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Panyu Central Hospital, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Panyu Central Hospital, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Department of Rheumatology, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, No. 107 Yanjiang West Road, Guangzhou, China. 
dailie@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Pulmonary accelerated rheumatoid nodules (ARN) represent a rare occurrence 
within the context of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), with conventional treatment 
typically involving corticosteroids. In this report, we present a unique case of 
pulmonary ARN managed with baricitinib, a Janus kinase inhibitor. The patient, a 
46-year-old woman diagnosed with RA, initially displayed no evident pulmonary 
nodules upon pulmonary imaging. Her treatment regimen encompassed 
corticosteroids, methotrexate, and leflunomide. Nevertheless, a chest computed 
tomography (CT) scan conducted after a year unveiled the presence of multiple 
bilateral pulmonary nodules. A thoracoscopic biopsy of these nodules confirmed 
the presence of rheumatoid nodules. Treatment with baricitinib, a Janus kinase 
inhibitor or synthetic disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD), effectively 
reduced the size of the nodules. Our review of 45 articles on ARN published 
since 1986 found that nine of them reported 13 cases of pulmonary ARN. These 
nodules may be caused by certain synthetic and biological DMARDs and often 
present with respiratory symptoms. CT scans typically reveal multiple solid 
nodules or ground-glass opacities, some of which may have cavities. Treatment 
customarily involves discontinuing the suspected drugs and administering 
corticosteroids. This case suggests that Janus kinase inhibitors may be an 
effective treatment option for ARN.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to International League of 
Associations for Rheumatology (ILAR).

DOI: 10.1007/s10067-023-06773-8
PMID: 37740125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]