---
reference_id: "PMID:40946705"
title: "Home Training for Cerebellar Ataxias: A Randomized Clinical Trial."
authors:
- Barbuto S
- Lee S
- Stein J
- Kuo SH
- Quinn L
- Spinner M
- Stern Y
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2025.3421
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/rehabilitation, physiopathology, therapy"
- Middle Aged
- Exercise Therapy/methods
- Postural Balance/physiology
- Aged
- Adult
- Exercise/physiology
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Home Training for Cerebellar Ataxias: A Randomized Clinical Trial.
**Authors:** Barbuto S, Lee S, Stein J, Kuo SH, Quinn L, Spinner M, Stern Y
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2025.3421](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2025.3421)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2025 Nov 1;82(11):1162-1170. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2025.3421.

Home Training for Cerebellar Ataxias: A Randomized Clinical Trial.

Barbuto S(1), Lee S(2)(3), Stein J(1)(4), Kuo SH(5), Quinn L(6), Spinner M(1),
Stern Y(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, College of Physicians and
Surgeons, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York.
(2)Departments of Psychiatry and Biostatistics, College of Physicians and
Surgeons, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York.
(3)Department of Mental Health Data Science, New York State Psychiatric
Institute, New York.
(4)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, New York.
(5)Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, New York.
(6)Department of Biobehavioral Sciences, Teachers College, Columbia University,
New York, New York.
(7)Sergievsky Center and Taub Institute, Departments of Neurology and
Psychiatry, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University Medical
Center, New York, New York.

IMPORTANCE: Clinical practice guidelines advise balance training for cerebellar
ataxia, but little is known regarding high-intensity aerobic exercise.
OBJECTIVE: To compare home high-intensity aerobic training to home balance
training on improvements of ataxia symptoms using the Scale for the Assessment
and Rating of Ataxia (SARA).
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This assessor-masked randomized clinical
trial was conducted between January 1, 2021, and September 1, 2024, through home
training, with in-person assessments at a single ataxia care center in a large
urban US city. Individuals with various cerebellar ataxia types were eligible
for inclusion. Data analysis was performed from November 2024 to February 2025.
INTERVENTIONS: Individuals in the aerobic group trained for 30 minutes/session,
5 times/week, at up to 85% predicted maximum heart rate. Individuals in the
balance group performed 30 minutes of balance exercises of varying difficulty 5
times/week. Participants were given study support of biweekly phone calls for
only the first 6 months of this 12-month study.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was SARA score to measure ataxia
symptoms (range, 0-40 points, with higher scores indicating more ataxia).
Secondary outcomes included number of adverse events, training adherence,
balance measures, gait speed, quality of life, fatigue, and fitness levels
(assessed via V̇o2max). Assessments were conducted at baseline and at 6, 9, and
12 months.
RESULTS: A total of 114 individuals with various cerebellar ataxia types were
approached: 52 individuals declined participation or did not meet inclusion
criteria, while 62 individuals were enrolled. The 62 participants included 29
women (46.8%), with a mean (SD) age of 54.4 (12.9) years and mean (SD) SARA
score of 12.1 (4.1) points. Linear mixed-effects model analysis revealed that
the home aerobic group had significantly larger improvement in outcomes than the
balance group, particularly for SARA score (β, -1.53; 95% CI, -2.44 to -0.61;
P = .001), fatigue (β, -9.38; 95% CI, -15.1 to -3.7; P = .001), and Vo2max (β,
4.26; 95% CI, 2.1-6.4; P < .001). At 6 months, the aerobic and balance groups
had changes in SARA scores of -2.4 points (95% CI, -3.1 to -1.80) and -0.9
points (95% CI, -1.5 to -0.2), respectively. For the aerobic group, individuals
who continued training maintained benefits in SARA score (change from baseline,
-3.81 points; 95% CI, -2.2 to -5.4), whereas those who limited or stopped
training had benefits trend back to baseline levels (change from baseline, 0.4
points; 95% CI, -0.4 to 1.2) at 1 year.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this randomized clinical trial, home
high-intensity aerobic training improved ataxia symptoms, fatigue, and aerobic
fitness more than dose-matched home balance training among individuals with
cerebellar ataxias. Individuals in the aerobic group who continued to train
regularly maintained benefits at 1 year.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT05002218.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2025.3421
PMCID: PMC12434599
PMID: 40946705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests The authors
declare no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
