---
reference_id: "PMID:23188108"
title: EFTUD2 haploinsufficiency leads to syndromic oesophageal atresia.
authors:
- Gordon CT
- Petit F
- Oufadem M
- Decaestecker C
- Jourdain AS
- Andrieux J
- Malan V
- Alessandri JL
- Baujat G
- Baumann C
- Boute-Benejean O
- Caumes R
- Delobel B
- Dieterich K
- Gaillard D
- Gonzales M
- Lacombe D
- Escande F
- Manouvrier-Hanu S
- Marlin S
- Mathieu-Dramard M
- Mehta SG
- Simonic I
- Munnich A
- Vekemans M
- Porchet N
- de Pontual L
- Sarnacki S
- Attie-Bitach T
- Lyonnet S
- Holder-Espinasse M
- Amiel J
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101173
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Esophageal Atresia/genetics
- Facies
- Female
- Haploinsufficiency
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Peptide Elongation Factors/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Ribonucleoprotein, U5 Small Nuclear"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EFTUD2 haploinsufficiency leads to syndromic oesophageal atresia.
**Authors:** Gordon CT, Petit F, Oufadem M, Decaestecker C, Jourdain AS, Andrieux J, Malan V, Alessandri JL, Baujat G, Baumann C, Boute-Benejean O, Caumes R, Delobel B, Dieterich K, Gaillard D, Gonzales M, Lacombe D, Escande F, Manouvrier-Hanu S, Marlin S, Mathieu-Dramard M, Mehta SG, Simonic I, Munnich A, Vekemans M, Porchet N, de Pontual L, Sarnacki S, Attie-Bitach T, Lyonnet S, Holder-Espinasse M, Amiel J
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101173](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101173)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2012 Dec;49(12):737-46. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101173.

EFTUD2 haploinsufficiency leads to syndromic oesophageal atresia.

Gordon CT(1), Petit F, Oufadem M, Decaestecker C, Jourdain AS, Andrieux J, Malan 
V, Alessandri JL, Baujat G, Baumann C, Boute-Benejean O, Caumes R, Delobel B, 
Dieterich K, Gaillard D, Gonzales M, Lacombe D, Escande F, Manouvrier-Hanu S, 
Marlin S, Mathieu-Dramard M, Mehta SG, Simonic I, Munnich A, Vekemans M, Porchet 
N, de Pontual L, Sarnacki S, Attie-Bitach T, Lyonnet S, Holder-Espinasse M, 
Amiel J.

Author information:
(1)Unité INSERM U781, Faculté Paris-Descartes, Institut IMAGINE, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Oesophageal atresia (OA) and mandibulofacial dysostosis (MFD) are 
two congenital malformations for which the molecular bases of syndromic forms 
are being identified at a rapid rate. In particular, the EFTUD2 gene encoding a 
protein of the spliceosome complex has been found mutated in patients with MFD 
and microcephaly (MIM610536). Until now, no syndrome featuring both MFD and OA 
has been clearly delineated.
RESULTS: We report on 10 cases presenting with MFD, eight of whom had OA, either 
due to de novo 17q21.31 deletions encompassing EFTUD2 and neighbouring genes or 
de novo heterozygous EFTUD2 loss-of-function mutations. No EFTUD2 deletions or 
mutations were found in a series of patients with isolated OA or isolated 
oculoauriculovertebral spectrum (OAVS).
CONCLUSIONS: These data exclude a contiguous gene syndrome for the association 
of MFD and OA, broaden the spectrum of clinical features ascribed to EFTUD2 
haploinsufficiency, define a novel syndromic OA entity, and emphasise the 
necessity of mRNA maturation through the spliceosome complex for global growth 
and within specific regions of the embryo during development. Importantly, the 
majority of patients reported here with EFTUD2 lesions were previously diagnosed 
with Feingold or CHARGE syndromes or presented with OAVS plus OA, highlighting 
the variability of expression and the wide range of differential diagnoses.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101173
PMID: 23188108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]