---
reference_id: "PMID:35973665"
title: "Safety and efficacy of pralsetinib in RET fusion-positive non-small-cell lung cancer including as first-line therapy: update from the ARROW trial."
authors:
- Griesinger F
- Curigliano G
- Thomas M
- Subbiah V
- Baik CS
- Tan DSW
- Lee DH
- Misch D
- Garralda E
- Kim DW
- van der Wekken AJ
- Gainor JF
- Paz-Ares L
- Liu SV
- Kalemkerian GP
- Houvras Y
- Bowles DW
- Mansfield AS
- Lin JJ
- Smoljanovic V
- Rahman A
- Kong S
- Zalutskaya A
- Louie-Gao M
- Boral AL
- Mazières J
journal: Ann Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.annonc.2022.08.002
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics
- Pyrazoles/therapeutic use
- Pyrimidines/adverse effects
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Pyridines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety and efficacy of pralsetinib in RET fusion-positive non-small-cell lung cancer including as first-line therapy: update from the ARROW trial.
**Authors:** Griesinger F, Curigliano G, Thomas M, Subbiah V, Baik CS, Tan DSW, Lee DH, Misch D, Garralda E, Kim DW, van der Wekken AJ, Gainor JF, Paz-Ares L, Liu SV, Kalemkerian GP, Houvras Y, Bowles DW, Mansfield AS, Lin JJ, Smoljanovic V, Rahman A, Kong S, Zalutskaya A, Louie-Gao M, Boral AL, Mazières J
**Journal:** Ann Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.annonc.2022.08.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.08.002)

## Content

1. Ann Oncol. 2022 Nov;33(11):1168-1178. doi: 10.1016/j.annonc.2022.08.002. Epub
2022 Aug 13.

Safety and efficacy of pralsetinib in RET fusion-positive non-small-cell lung
cancer including as first-line therapy: update from the ARROW trial.

Griesinger F(1), Curigliano G(2), Thomas M(3), Subbiah V(4), Baik CS(5), Tan
DSW(6), Lee DH(7), Misch D(8), Garralda E(9), Kim DW(10), van der Wekken AJ(11),
Gainor JF(12), Paz-Ares L(13), Liu SV(14), Kalemkerian GP(15), Houvras Y(16),
Bowles DW(17), Mansfield AS(18), Lin JJ(12), Smoljanovic V(19), Rahman A(19),
Kong S(20), Zalutskaya A(21), Louie-Gao M(21), Boral AL(21), Mazières J(22).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Pius-Hospital, University of
Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.
(2)European Institute of Oncology, IRCCS, Milan, Italy; Department of Oncology
and Hemato-Oncology, University of Milano, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Thoraxklinik, University Heidelberg and
Translational Lung Research Center Heidelberg (TLRC-H), Member of the German
Center for Lung Research (DZL), Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics, Division of Cancer
Medicine, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, USA.
(5)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Washington School
of Medicine, Seattle, USA.
(6)Division of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore.
(7)Department of Oncology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical
Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(8)Lungenklinik Heckeshorn, Helios Clinic Emil von Behring, Berlin, Germany.
(9)Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine and Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(11)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, University of Groningen and University
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
(12)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, USA.
(13)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid,
Spain.
(14)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC,
USA.
(15)Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA.
(16)Department of Surgery/Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College University,
New York, USA.
(17)University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, USA.
(18)Division of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, USA.
(19)F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Ltd, Basel, Switzerland.
(20)Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, USA.
(21)Blueprint Medicines Corporation, Cambridge, USA.
(22)Institut Universitaire du Cancer, Toulouse, France. Electronic address:
mazieres.j@chuc-toulouse.fr.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2022 Oct;19(10):615. doi: 10.1038/s41571-022-00683-5.

BACKGROUND: RET fusions are present in 1%-2% of non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Pralsetinib, a highly potent, oral, central nervous system-penetrant,
selective RET inhibitor, previously demonstrated clinical activity in patients
with RET fusion-positive NSCLC in the phase I/II ARROW study, including among
treatment-naive patients. We report an updated analysis from the ARROW study.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: ARROW is a multi-cohort, open-label, phase I/II study.
Eligible patients were ≥18 years of age with locally advanced or metastatic
solid tumours and an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of
0-2 (later 0-1). Patients initiated pralsetinib at the recommended phase II dose
of 400 mg once daily until disease progression, intolerance, consent withdrawal,
or investigator's decision. The co-primary endpoints (phase II) were overall
response rate (ORR) by blinded independent central review and safety.
RESULTS: Between 17 March 2017 and 6 November 2020 (data cut-off), 281 patients
with RET fusion-positive NSCLC were enrolled. The ORR was 72% [54/75; 95%
confidence interval (CI) 60% to 82%] for treatment-naive patients and 59%
(80/136; 95% CI 50% to 67%) for patients with prior platinum-based chemotherapy
(enrolment cut-off for efficacy analysis: 22 May 2020); median duration of
response was not reached for treatment-naive patients and 22.3 months for prior
platinum-based chemotherapy patients. Tumour shrinkage was observed in all
treatment-naive patients and in 97% of patients with prior platinum-based
chemotherapy; median progression-free survival was 13.0 and 16.5 months,
respectively. In patients with measurable intracranial metastases, the
intracranial response rate was 70% (7/10; 95% CI 35% to 93%); all had received
prior systemic treatment. In treatment-naive patients with RET fusion-positive
NSCLC who initiated pralsetinib by the data cut-off (n = 116), the most common
grade 3-4 treatment-related adverse events (TRAEs) were neutropenia (18%),
hypertension (10%), increased blood creatine phosphokinase (9%), and lymphopenia
(9%). Overall, 7% (20/281) discontinued due to TRAEs.
CONCLUSIONS: Pralsetinib treatment produced robust efficacy and was generally
well tolerated in treatment-naive patients with advanced RET fusion-positive
NSCLC. Results from the confirmatory phase III AcceleRET Lung study
(NCT04222972) of pralsetinib versus standard of care in the first-line setting
are pending.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.annonc.2022.08.002
PMID: 35973665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure FG has consulted or provided expert
opinion for Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, BMS, Boehringer Ingelheim, Celgene, GSK,
Lilly, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Siemens, and Takeda; has received fees from
Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, BMS, Celgene, GSK, Lilly, MSD,
Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Siemens, and Takeda; and has received funding for
scientific research from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, BMS, Celgene,
GSK, Lilly, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Siemens, and Takeda. GC has consulted
and/or had advisory roles for AstraZeneca, BMS, Boehringer Ingelheim, Daiichi
Sankyo, Foundation Medicine, GlaxoSmithKline, Lilly, Novartis, Pfizer,
Roche/Genentech, Samsung, and Seattle Genetics; served on speakers’ bureaus for
Daiichi Sankyo, Foundation Medicine, Lilly, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche/Genentech,
and Samsung; received travel, accommodations, and expenses from Pfizer,
Roche/Genentech; received honoraria from Ellipses Pharma and research funding
from Merck; and is supported by the OPTIMA [grant number 101034347]. MT has
received honoraria for scientific meetings (self) from AstraZeneca, BMS,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Celgene, Chugai, Lilly, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, and
Takeda; advisory-board honoraria (self) from AstraZeneca, BMS, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Lilly, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, and Takeda; travelling support
(self) from AstraZeneca, BMS, Boehringer Ingelheim, Celgene, Chugai, Lilly, MSD,
Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, and Takeda; and has received research funding
(institution) from AstraZeneca, BMS, Roche, and Takeda. VS reports research
funding/grant support for clinical trials from AbbVie, Agensys, Alfa-sigma,
Altum, Amgen, Bayer, Berg Health, Biotherapeutics, Blueprint Medicines
Corporation, Boston Biomedical, Boston Pharmaceuticals, Celgene, D3, Dragonfly
Therapeutics, Exelixis, Fujifilm, GSK, Idera Pharma, Incyte, Inhibrx, Loxo
Oncology, MedImmune, MultiVir, Nanocarrier, National Comprehensive Cancer
Network, NCI-CTEP, Novartis, Northwest Biotherapeutics, Pfizer, PharmaMar,
Roche/Genentech, Takeda, Turning Point Therapeutics, UT MD Anderson Cancer
Center, and Vegenics; travel support from ASCO, ESMO, Helsinn, Incyte, Novartis,
and PharmaMar; consultancy/advisory board participation for Helsinn, Incyte,
Loxo Oncology/Eli Lilly, MedImmune, Novartis, R-Pharma US, QED Pharma; and other
relationship with Medscape. CSB has received consulting fees from AstraZeneca,
Blueprint Medicines Corporation, Daiichi Sankyo, Turning Point Therapeutics,
Guardant, Regeneron, Silverback, and Takeda; and has received research funding
to their institution from AbbVie, AstraZeneca, Blueprint Medicines Corporation,
Daiichi Sankyo, Genentech Inc., Janssen, Lilly, Loxo Oncology, Novartis, Pfizer,
Rain Therapeutics, Spectrum Pharmaceuticals, and Turning Point Therapeutics.
DSWT has consulted and/or had advisory roles for AstraZeneca, Bayer, Lilly, Loxo
Oncology, Merrimack, Novartis, Pfizer, and Takeda; received honoraria from
Boehringer Ingelheim, Merck, and Roche; and research funding to their
institution from AstraZeneca, Bayer, GSK, and Novartis. DHL has received
personal fees from AbbVie, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, BMS, Chong Keun
Dang, CJ Healthcare, Genexine, Janssen, Lilly, Merck, Menarini, MSD,
Mundipharma, Novartis, Ono, Pfizer, Roche, Samyang Biopharm, ST Cube, and
Takeda; and non-financial support from Blueprint Medicines Corporation and
Takeda. DM has consulted and/or had advisory roles at scientific meetings for
AstraZeneca, BMS, Boehringer Ingelheim, Lilly, MSD, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi, and
Takeda (institution, no personal honoraria). EG has consulted and/or had
advisory roles for Alkermes, BMS, Boehringer Ingelheim, Ellipses Pharma,
Janssen, NeoMed, Roche, Seattle Genetics, TFS, Thermo Fisher Scientific; served
on speakers’ bureaus for MSD, Roche, and Thermo Fisher Scientific; received
travel and accommodation expenses from BMS, Glycotope GmbH, Menarini, and MSD;
research funding to their institution from Novartis, Roche, and Thermo Fisher
Scientific; and is supported by a grant from the ‘la Caixa’ Foundation [grant
number LCF/PR/CE07/50610001]. DWK has received travel and accommodation expenses
from Amgen and Daiichi Sankyo; and research funding to their institution from
Alpha Biopharma, Amgen, AstraZeneca/MedImmune, Boehringer Ingelheim, Daiichi
Sankyo, Hanmi, Janssen, Merus, Mirati Therapeutics, MSD, Novartis, Ono
Pharmaceutical, Pfizer, Roche/Genentech, Takeda, TP Therapeutics, Xcovery, and
Yuhan. AJvdW reports research funding/grant support for clinical trials from
AstraZeneca [grant number ESR-16-12212], Boehringer Ingelheim, Pfizer, Roche,
and Takeda [grant number 2019N0853/2020N0366]; and consultancy/advisory board
participation for AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Janssen, Lilly, Merck,
Pfizer, Roche, and Takeda. JFG has an immediate family member who is an employee
of Ironwood Pharmaceuticals; has consulted and/or had advisory roles for Agios,
Amgen, Array BioPharma, Blueprint Medicines Corporation, BMS, Genentech, Gilead
Sciences, Jounce Therapeutics, Lilly, Loxo Oncology, Merck, Mirati, Silverback
Therapeutics, GlydeBio, Moderna Therapeutics, Oncorus, Regeneron, Takeda, and
Theravance; has stock and ownership in Ironwood Pharmaceuticals; has received
honoraria from ARIAD, Incyte, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, and Takeda; and research
funding from Adaptimmune, ALX Oncology, ARIAD, Array BioPharma, AstraZeneca,
Blueprint Medicines Corporation, BMS, Genentech, Jounce Therapeutics, Merck,
Novartis, and Tesaro. LPA has a leadership role in ALTUM Sequencing and
Genomica; served on speakers’ bureaus for AstraZeneca, BMS, Lilly, MSD Oncology,
Merck Serono, Pfizer, Roche/Genentech; received travel, accommodation, and
expenses from AstraZeneca, BMS, MSD, Pfizer, Roche, and Takeda; honoraria from
Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Blueprint Medicines Corporation, BMS, Celgene, Ipsen,
Lilly, Merck Serono, Mirati Therapeutics, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, PharmaMar,
Roche/Genentech, Sanofi, Servier, and Takeda; research funding to their
institution from AstraZeneca, BMS, Kura Oncology, MSD, and PharmaMar; other
relationships with Roche; and an immediate family member has other relationships
with Amgen, Ipsen, Merck Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi, Servier, and Roche. SVL
served as a consultant or advisory board member to Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer,
BeiGene, Blueprint Medicines Corporation, BMS, Daiichi Sankyo, Eisai, Elevation
Oncology, Genentech/Roche, Gilead, Guardant Health, Janssen, Jazz
Pharmaceuticals, Lilly, Merck/MSD, Novartis, Regeneron, Sanofi, Takeda, and
Turning Point Therapeutics; received research funding (to institution) from
Alkermes, Bayer, Blueprint Medicines Corporation, BMS, Elevation Oncology,
Genentech, Lilly, Merck, Merus, Pfizer, Rain Therapeutics, RAPT Therapeutics,
Turning Point Therapeutics; and is supported by the National Cancer Institute
[grant number UM1CA186691]. GPK received research grants from Blueprint
Medicines Corporation, Merck, AbbVie, Takeda, Daiichi, and Cullinan. DWB served
on an advisory board for Blueprint Medicines Corporation. ASM received research
funding from DoD, Mark Foundation, NIH, Novartis, and Verily; honoraria to
institution for participation in advisory boards: AbbVie, BeiGene, BMS,
Genentech, Inc., Janssen; travel support from: Roche; is a non-remunerated
member of the Mesothelioma Applied Research Foundation Board of Directors; and
is supported by the Mark Foundation for Cancer Research ASPIRE Award, the
National Cancer Institute [grant number R21 CA251923], and Department of Defense
Concept Award [grant number W81XWH-22-1-0021]. JJL served as a compensated
consultant or advisory board member for Genentech, C4 Therapeutics, Blueprint
Medicines Corporation, Nuvalent, Bayer, Elevation Oncology, Novartis, Mirati
Therapeutics, and Turning Point Therapeutics; received honorarium and travel
support from Pfizer; received institutional research funding from Hengrui
Therapeutics, Turning Point Therapeutics, Neon Therapeutics, Relay Therapeutics,
Bayer, Elevation Oncology, Roche, Linnaeus Therapeutics, Nuvalent, and Novartis;
and received CME funding from OncLive, MedStar Health, and Northwell Health. VSm
is an employee and/or equity holder of F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Ltd. AR is an
employee and/or equity holder of F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Ltd and equity holder of
Merck/MSD. SK is a former employee and/or equity holder of F. Hoffmann-La Roche,
Ltd. AZ, MLG and ALB are employees and/or equity holders of Blueprint Medicines
Corporation. JM has provided expertise for Amgen, AstraZeneca, Blueprint
Medicines Corporation, BMS, Daiichi Sankyo, Hengrui, MSD, Novartis, Pierre
Fabre, Roche, and Takeda; and received research funding from AstraZeneca, BMS,
Pierre Fabre, and Roche. YH has declared no conflicts of interest. Data sharing
The anonymized derived data from this study that underlie the results reported
in this article will be made available, beginning 12 months and ending 5 years
after this article’s publication, to any investigators who sign a data access
agreement and provide a methodologically sound proposal to
medinfo@blueprintmedicines.com. The trial protocol will also be made available,
as will a data fields dictionary.
