---
reference_id: "PMID:36645631"
title: A novel variant in the GJB6 gene in a large Chinese family with a unique phenotype of Clouston syndrome.
authors:
- Huang H
- Chen M
- Liu X
- Xiong X
- Zhou L
- Su Z
- Lu Y
- Liang B
journal: Front Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s11684-022-0933-2
keywords:
- Humans
- Connexin 30/genetics
- Connexins/genetics
- East Asian People
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel variant in the GJB6 gene in a large Chinese family with a unique phenotype of Clouston syndrome.
**Authors:** Huang H, Chen M, Liu X, Xiong X, Zhou L, Su Z, Lu Y, Liang B
**Journal:** Front Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11684-022-0933-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11684-022-0933-2)

## Content

1. Front Med. 2023 Apr;17(2):330-338. doi: 10.1007/s11684-022-0933-2. Epub 2023
Jan  16.

A novel variant in the GJB6 gene in a large Chinese family with a unique 
phenotype of Clouston syndrome.

Huang H(#)(1)(2)(3), Chen M(#)(1)(2)(3), Liu X(4), Xiong X(5), Zhou L(5), Su 
Z(5), Lu Y(6), Liang B(7)(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Dermatology and Department of Dermatology, the First Affiliated 
Hospital, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230000, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Dermatology (Anhui Medical University), Ministry of 
Education, Hefei, 230000, China.
(3)Inflammation and Immune Mediated Diseases Laboratory of Anhui Province, 
Hefei, 230000, China.
(4)Huai'an District Skin Disease Prevention and Treatment Hospital, Huai'an, 
223000, China.
(5)Department of Dermatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, 210000, China.
(6)Department of Dermatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, 210000, China. luyan6289@163.com.
(7)Institute of Dermatology and Department of Dermatology, the First Affiliated 
Hospital, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230000, China. 
anyiliangbo@vip.126.com.
(8)Key Laboratory of Dermatology (Anhui Medical University), Ministry of 
Education, Hefei, 230000, China. anyiliangbo@vip.126.com.
(9)Inflammation and Immune Mediated Diseases Laboratory of Anhui Province, 
Hefei, 230000, China. anyiliangbo@vip.126.com.
(10)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital, Anhui 
Medical University, Hefei, 230000, China. anyiliangbo@vip.126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Clouston syndrome (OMIM #129500), also known as hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia 
type 2, is a rare autosomal dominant skin disorder. To date, four mutations in 
the GJB6 gene, G11R, V37E, A88V, and D50N, have been confirmed to cause this 
condition. In previous studies, the focus has been mainly on gene sequencing, 
and there has been a lack of research on clinical manifestations and 
pathogenesis. To confirm the diagnosis of this pedigree at the molecular level 
and summarize and analyse the clinical phenotype of patients and to provide a 
basis for further study of the pathogenesis of the disease, we performed 
whole-exome and Sanger sequencing on a large Chinese Clouston syndrome pedigree. 
Detailed clinical examination included histopathology, hair microscopy, and 
scanning electron microscopy. We found a novel heterozygous missense variant 
(c.134G>C:p.G45A) for Clouston syndrome. We identified a new clinical phenotype 
involving all nail needling pain in all patients and found a special honeycomb 
hole structure in the patients' hair under scanning electron microscopy. Our 
data reveal that a novel variant (c.134G>C:p.G45A) plays a likely pathogenic 
role in this pedigree and highlight that genetic testing is necessary for the 
diagnosis of Clouston syndrome.

© 2023. Higher Education Press.

DOI: 10.1007/s11684-022-0933-2
PMID: 36645631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]