---
reference_id: "PMID:17377384"
title: "Congenital melanocytic nevus: an epidemiologic study in Italy."
authors:
- Ingordo V
- Gentile C
- Iannazzone SS
- Cusano F
- Naldi L
journal: Dermatology
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1159/000099587
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital melanocytic nevus: an epidemiologic study in Italy.
**Authors:** Ingordo V, Gentile C, Iannazzone SS, Cusano F, Naldi L
**Journal:** Dermatology (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000099587](https://doi.org/10.1159/000099587)

## Content

1. Dermatology. 2007;214(3):227-30. doi: 10.1159/000099587.

Congenital melanocytic nevus: an epidemiologic study in Italy.

Ingordo V(1), Gentile C, Iannazzone SS, Cusano F, Naldi L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Italian Navy Main Hospital G. Venticinque, 
Taranto, Italy. vito.ingordo@alice.it

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of congenital melanocytic nevi (CMN) among newborns 
ranges between 0.2 and 6% in the worldwide literature. In the only available 
study from Italy the rate was 1% at birth and 1.4% at 2 years of age. Some 
surveys performed among samples of children and adolescents in other countries 
showed a prevalence which ranged from 1.4 to 4.4%. Additional data on the 
frequency in adults are not available.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to estimate the prevalence of CMN in a 
large sample of a young male Italian population, which is deemed to be 
representative of the general population of the same age and sex.
METHODS: The potential conscripts resident in the coastal regions of southern 
Italy, enlisted for the compulsory service in the Italian Navy, were called at 
the age of 18 to the Draft's Council Medical Unit of the Italian Navy in Taranto 
to evaluate their psychophysical fitness to recruitment. All the subjects 
examined from September 2002 to March 2004 showing skin lesions evocative of CMN 
were referred by general practitioners of the Draft's Council Medical Unit to 
the Department of Dermatology of the Italian Navy Hospital for confirming the 
diagnosis, which was based on the clinical features and the personal history. 
The confirmed cases were recorded in a predefined patient card, containing the 
main anamnestic and clinical data. Since the screening of small CMN in such a 
large sample of subjects was believed to be difficult, only CMN with a diameter 
>or=1.5 cm were recorded.
RESULTS: In 23,354 examined persons 157 CMN were diagnosed, with a prevalence of 
0.67% (Bayesian 95% confidence interval 0.57-0.79); 126 (80.3%) CMN were 
medium-sized (>or=1.5 and <or=19.9 cm in diameter), and 31 (19.7%) were large 
(>or=20 cm in diameter). Three CMN (1.9%) were located on the face, 23 (14.6%) 
on the chest, 24 (15.2%) on the abdomen, 36 (22.9%) on the back, 48 (30.5%) on 
the lumbar area, 15 (9.5%) on the upper limb, 19 (12.1%) on the lower limb and 
15 (9.5%) on the shoulder. No CMN was located on the head. In 19 cases (12.1%) 
>or=2 adjacent anatomical sites (shoulder/chest, shoulder/arm, etc.) were 
involved. In 73 moles (46.4%) terminal hairs were present. Eight CMN (5.1%) 
showed a zosteriform (i.e. segmental) feature. None of the examined subjects 
reported a personal history of malignant melanoma (MM), and no person with a 
history of MM was observed among all the enlisted men referred to the Department 
of Dermatology during the time of the study.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of CMN in the Italian young male general population 
is roughly in agreement with the rates detected in general populations from 
other European studies. The observations of this study also suggest that the 
risk of appearance of MM, at least in childhood and adolescence, is limited for 
medium-sized CMN.

Copyright (c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000099587
PMID: 17377384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]