---
reference_id: "PMID:35567766"
title: "Genetic modifiers of penetrance to liver endpoints in HFE hemochromatosis: Associations in a large community cohort."
authors:
- Pilling LC
- Atkins JL
- Melzer D
journal: Hepatology
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/hep.32575
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- "Hemochromatosis/complications, genetics, diagnosis"
- Hemochromatosis Protein/genetics
- Penetrance
- Histocompatibility Antigens Class I/genetics
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Homozygote
- Genotype
- Iron
- "Liver Cirrhosis/genetics, complications"
- Liver Neoplasms/complications
- Osteoarthritis/complications
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic modifiers of penetrance to liver endpoints in HFE hemochromatosis: Associations in a large community cohort.
**Authors:** Pilling LC, Atkins JL, Melzer D
**Journal:** Hepatology (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/hep.32575](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.32575)

## Content

1. Hepatology. 2022 Dec;76(6):1735-1745. doi: 10.1002/hep.32575. Epub 2022 Jun
17.

Genetic modifiers of penetrance to liver endpoints in HFE hemochromatosis: 
Associations in a large community cohort.

Pilling LC(1), Atkins JL, Melzer D.

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology and Public Health GroupUniversity of ExeterExeterUK.

BACKGROUND: The iron overload condition hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) can 
cause liver cirrhosis and cancer, diabetes, and arthritis. Males homozygous for 
the p.C282Y missense mutation in the Homeostatin Iron Regulator (HFE) gene have 
greatest risk; yet, only a minority develop these conditions. We aimed to 
determine whether common genetic variants influencing iron levels or liver 
disease risk in the general population also modify clinical penetrance in HFE 
p.C282Y and p.H63D carriers.
METHODS: We studied 1294 male and 1596 female UK Biobank HFE p.C282Y homozygous 
participants of European ancestry with medical records up to 14 years after 
baseline assessment. Polygenic scores quantified genetic effects of blood iron 
biomarkers and relevant diseases (identified in the general population). 
Analyses were also performed in other HFE p.C282Y/p.H63D genotype groups.
RESULTS: In male p.C282Y homozygotes, a higher iron polygenic score increased 
the risk of liver fibrosis or cirrhosis diagnoses (odds ratio for the top 20% of 
iron polygenic score vs. the bottom 20% = 4.90: 95% confidence intervals, 
1.63-14.73; p = 0.005), liver cancer, and osteoarthritis but not diabetes. A 
liver cirrhosis polygenic score was associated with liver cancer diagnoses. In 
female p.C282Y homozygotes, the osteoarthritis polygenic score was associated 
with increased osteoarthritis diagnoses and type-2 diabetes polygenic score with 
diabetes. However, the iron polygenic score was not robustly associated with 
diagnoses in p.C282Y female homozygotes or in other p.C282Y/p.H63D genotypes.
CONCLUSIONS: HFE p.C282Y homozygote penetrance to clinical disease in a large 
community cohort was partly explained by common genetic variants that influence 
iron and risks of related diagnoses in the general population, including 
polygenic scores in HH screening and diagnosis, may help in estimating prognosis 
and treatment planning.

© 2022 The Authors. Hepatology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of 
American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.32575
PMCID: PMC9796074
PMID: 35567766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflicts of interest.