---
reference_id: PMID:22886088
title: Targeted deletion of Sost distal enhancer increases bone formation and bone mass.
authors:
- Collette NM
- Genetos DC
- Economides AN
- Xie L
- Shahnazari M
- Yao W
- Lane NE
- Harland RM
- Loots GG
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1207188109
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Age Factors
- Animals
- Bone Remodeling/genetics
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics, metabolism"
- "Enhancer Elements, Genetic/genetics"
- Female
- "Femur/cytology, physiology"
- Gene Deletion
- "Glycoproteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Hyperostosis/genetics, metabolism"
- Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Lac Operon
- MEF2 Transcription Factors
- Male
- "Mandible/abnormalities, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Myogenic Regulatory Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Osteochondrodysplasias
- Osteocytes/physiology
- "Osteosclerosis/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "Skull/abnormalities, metabolism"
- "Syndactyly/genetics, metabolism"
- Transcriptional Activation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted deletion of Sost distal enhancer increases bone formation and bone mass.
**Authors:** Collette NM, Genetos DC, Economides AN, Xie L, Shahnazari M, Yao W, Lane NE, Harland RM, Loots GG
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1207188109](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1207188109)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Aug 28;109(35):14092-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1207188109. Epub 2012 Aug 10.

Targeted deletion of Sost distal enhancer increases bone formation and bone 
mass.

Collette NM(1), Genetos DC, Economides AN, Xie L, Shahnazari M, Yao W, Lane NE, 
Harland RM, Loots GG.

Author information:
(1)Physical and Life Sciences Directorate, Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratories, Livermore, CA 94550, USA.

The Wnt antagonist Sost has emerged as a key regulator of bone homeostasis 
through the modulation of Lrp4/5/6 Wnt coreceptors. In humans, lack of 
Sclerostin causes sclerosteosis and van Buchem (VB) disease, two generalized 
skeletal hyperostosis disorders that result from hyperactive Wnt signaling. 
Unlike sclerosteosis, VB patients lack SOST coding mutations but carry a 
homozygous 52 kb noncoding deletion that is essential for the transcriptional 
activation of SOST in bone. We recently identified a putative bone enhancer, 
ECR5, in the VB deletion region, and showed that the transcriptional activity of 
ECR5 is controlled by Mef2C transcription factor in vitro. Here we report that 
mice lacking ECR5 or Mef2C through Col1-Cre osteoblast/osteocyte-specific 
ablation result in high bone mass (HBM) due to elevated bone formation rates. We 
conclude that the absence of the Sost-specific long-range regulatory element 
ECR5 causes VB disease in rodents, and that Mef2C is the main transcription 
factor responsible for ECR5-dependent Sost transcriptional activation in the 
adult skeleton.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1207188109
PMCID: PMC3435175
PMID: 22886088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.