---
reference_id: "PMID:32639329"
title: Electrocardiographic voltage criteria in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Monzo L
- Martino A
- Lanzillo C
- Bencivenga S
- Acitelli A
- Fedele E
- Salustri E
- Bona RD
- Maresca L
- Silvetti E
- Canestrelli S
- Minati M
- Penco M
- Calò L
journal: J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.2459/JCM.0000000000001034
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Electrocardiographic voltage criteria in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Monzo L, Martino A, Lanzillo C, Bencivenga S, Acitelli A, Fedele E, Salustri E, Bona RD, Maresca L, Silvetti E, Canestrelli S, Minati M, Penco M, Calò L
**Journal:** J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2459/JCM.0000000000001034](https://doi.org/10.2459/JCM.0000000000001034)

## Content

1. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2020 Sep;21(9):696-703. doi: 
10.2459/JCM.0000000000001034.

Electrocardiographic voltage criteria in patients with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy.

Monzo L(1)(2), Martino A(1), Lanzillo C(1), Bencivenga S(1)(3), Acitelli 
A(1)(3), Fedele E(1), Salustri E(1), Bona RD(1), Maresca L(4), Silvetti E(1), 
Canestrelli S(1), Minati M(1), Penco M(3), Calò L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Policlinico Casilino.
(2)Department of Clinical, Anaesthetic and Cardiovascular Sciences, 'Sapienza' 
University, Rome.
(3)Department of Cardiology, University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila.
(4)Department of Radiology, Policlinico Casilino, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Several ECG voltage criteria have been proposed for the diagnosis of 
left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). Notably, ECG criteria have been historically 
validated in concentric LVH but not in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 
wherein the hypertrophy pattern is typically asymmetric.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of our study was to evaluate the performance of ECG voltage 
criteria for LVH diagnosis in the HCM population.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The electrocardiograms of 92 HCM patients and 41 sex- and 
age-matched controls were evaluated with the most frequently used ECG voltage 
criteria for LVH diagnosis. Cardiac magnetic resonance (MRI) was performed in 
HCM and controls in order to quantify LVH and its distribution.
RESULTS: In the HCM population, the maximal diagnostic accuracy was achieved by 
Amplitude total and Amplitude total product criteria (58% for both), while the 
Cornell Voltage best performed in septal HCM (62%), the Sokolov in aVL and 
Gubner criteria in apical HCM (79% for both) and the Cornell Voltage and Product 
in anterior HCM (86% for both). All the ECG voltage criteria showed a poor 
correlation with left ventricular mass and maximal thickness measured by cardiac 
MRI.
CONCLUSIONS: In our study, only a few ECG voltage criteria used for the 
detection of LVH in clinical practice showed an acceptable performance in the 
HCM population. Further studies are needed to clarify the role of ECG for LVH 
detection in HCM patients.

DOI: 10.2459/JCM.0000000000001034
PMID: 32639329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]