---
reference_id: "PMID:10082190"
title: Criteria defining refractory schizophrenia.
authors:
- Hori A
- Tsunashima K
- Takekawa Y
- Ishihara I
- Terada T
- Uno M
journal: Acta Psychiatr Scand
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0447.1999.tb07212.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Criteria defining refractory schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Hori A, Tsunashima K, Takekawa Y, Ishihara I, Terada T, Uno M
**Journal:** Acta Psychiatr Scand (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0447.1999.tb07212.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0447.1999.tb07212.x)

## Content

1. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 1999 Feb;99(2):141-7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0447.1999.tb07212.x.

Criteria defining refractory schizophrenia.

Hori A(1), Tsunashima K, Takekawa Y, Ishihara I, Terada T, Uno M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, National Center Hospital for Mental, Nervous and 
Muscular Disorders, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.

To date there has been no agreement with regard to the criteria that define 
refractory schizophrenia. In this study, we intended to clarify the criteria 
which psychiatrists use to judge schizophrenic patients as being refractory in 
Japan. Based on 258 schizophrenic in-patients (ICD-10) and their likelihood of 
discharge, level of psychosocial functioning, mental state and use of 
medication, the common features of patients who are viewed as non-dischargeable 
because of their severe mental state, compared to those of dischargeable 
patients, were extracted and used as the criteria. The criteria proposed 
necessitate (i) diagnosis of schizophrenia by standard operational criteria, 
(ii) continuous hospitalization for at least the past 2 years, (iii) a level of 
psychosocial functioning of < or = 40 as measured by the Global Assessment 
Scale, and (iv) an intensity score of 'marked' or 'severe' on at least three of 
the six Manchester Scale items (flattened affect, psychomotor retardation, 
delusions, hallucinations, incoherence of speech and poverty of speech).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0447.1999.tb07212.x
PMID: 10082190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]