---
reference_id: "PMID:26067933"
title: "Detection of the KIT D816V mutation in peripheral blood of systemic mastocytosis: diagnostic implications."
authors:
- Jara-Acevedo M
- Teodosio C
- Sanchez-Muñoz L
- Álvarez-Twose I
- Mayado A
- Caldas C
- Matito A
- Morgado JM
- Muñoz-González JI
- Escribano L
- Garcia-Montero AC
- Orfao A
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2015.72
keywords:
- Bone Marrow Cells/pathology
- Bone Marrow Examination
- Cell Lineage
- DNA Mutational Analysis/methods
- Exons
- Genetic Markers
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Hematopoiesis/genetics
- Humans
- Mast Cells/pathology
- "Mastocytosis, Systemic/blood, diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction/methods
- Predictive Value of Tests
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit/blood, genetics"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Spain
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection of the KIT D816V mutation in peripheral blood of systemic mastocytosis: diagnostic implications.
**Authors:** Jara-Acevedo M, Teodosio C, Sanchez-Muñoz L, Álvarez-Twose I, Mayado A, Caldas C, Matito A, Morgado JM, Muñoz-González JI, Escribano L, Garcia-Montero AC, Orfao A
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/modpathol.2015.72](https://doi.org/10.1038/modpathol.2015.72)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2015 Aug;28(8):1138-49. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2015.72. Epub 2015 
Jun 12.

Detection of the KIT D816V mutation in peripheral blood of systemic 
mastocytosis: diagnostic implications.

Jara-Acevedo M(1), Teodosio C(2), Sanchez-Muñoz L(3), Álvarez-Twose I(3), Mayado 
A(1), Caldas C(1), Matito A(3), Morgado JM(3), Muñoz-González JI(1), Escribano 
L(1), Garcia-Montero AC(1), Orfao A(1).

Author information:
(1)Servicio General de Citometría (NUCLEUS), Centro de Investigación del Cáncer 
(IBMCC-CSIC/USAL and IBSAL) and Departamento de Medicina, Universidad de 
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(2)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Centro de Estudios de Mastocitosis de Castilla La Mancha (CLMast), Hospital 
Virgen del Valle, Toledo, Spain.

Recent studies have found the KIT D816V mutation in peripheral blood of 
virtually all adult systemic mastocytosis patients once highly sensitive PCR 
techniques were used; thus, detection of the KIT D816V mutation in peripheral 
blood has been proposed to be included in the diagnostic work-up of systemic 
mastocytosis algorithms. However, the precise frequency of the mutation, the 
biological significance of peripheral blood-mutated cells and their potential 
association with involvement of bone marrow hematopoietic cells other than mast 
cells still remain to be investigated. Here, we determined the frequency of 
peripheral blood involvement by the KIT D816V mutation, as assessed by two 
highly sensitive PCR methods, and investigated its relationship with 
multilineage involvement of bone marrow hematopoiesis. Overall, our results 
confirmed the presence of the KIT D816V mutation in peripheral blood of most 
systemic mastocytosis cases (161/190; 85%)--with an increasing frequency from 
indolent systemic mastocytosis without skin lesions (29/44; 66%) to indolent 
systemic mastocytosis with skin involvement (124/135; 92%), and more aggressive 
disease subtypes (11/11; 100%)--as assessed by the allele-specific 
oligonucleotide-qPCR method, which was more sensitive (P<.0001) than the peptide 
nucleic acid-mediated PCR approach (84/190; 44%). Although the presence of the 
KIT mutation in peripheral blood, as assessed by the allele-specific 
oligonucleotide-qPCR technique, did not accurately predict for multilineage bone 
marrow involvement of hematopoiesis, the allele-specific oligonucleotide-qPCR 
allele burden and the peptide nucleic acid-mediated-PCR approach did. These 
results suggest that both methods provide clinically useful and complementary 
information through the identification and/or quantification of the KIT D816V 
mutation in peripheral blood of patients suspected of systemic mastocytosis.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2015.72
PMID: 26067933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]