---
reference_id: "PMID:19708017"
title: "Seeing clearly: the dominant and recessive nature of FOXE3 in eye developmental anomalies."
authors:
- Iseri SU
- Osborne RJ
- Farrall M
- Wyatt AW
- Mirza G
- Nürnberg G
- Kluck C
- Herbert H
- Martin A
- Hussain MS
- Collin JR
- Lathrop M
- Nürnberg P
- Ragoussis J
- Ragge NK
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21079
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- DNA Primers
- Eye Abnormalities/genetics
- Female
- "Forkhead Transcription Factors/chemistry, genetics"
- "Genes, Dominant"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genotype
- Humans
- In Situ Hybridization
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seeing clearly: the dominant and recessive nature of FOXE3 in eye developmental anomalies.
**Authors:** Iseri SU, Osborne RJ, Farrall M, Wyatt AW, Mirza G, Nürnberg G, Kluck C, Herbert H, Martin A, Hussain MS, Collin JR, Lathrop M, Nürnberg P, Ragoussis J, Ragge NK
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21079](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21079)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2009 Oct;30(10):1378-86. doi: 10.1002/humu.21079.

Seeing clearly: the dominant and recessive nature of FOXE3 in eye developmental 
anomalies.

Iseri SU(1), Osborne RJ, Farrall M, Wyatt AW, Mirza G, Nürnberg G, Kluck C, 
Herbert H, Martin A, Hussain MS, Collin JR, Lathrop M, Nürnberg P, Ragoussis J, 
Ragge NK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy, and Genetics, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, United Kingdom.

FOXE3 is a lens-specific transcription factor with a highly conserved forkhead 
domain previously implicated in congenital primary aphakia and anterior segment 
dysgenesis. Here, we identify new recessive FOXE3 mutations causative for 
microphthalmia, sclerocornea, primary aphakia, and glaucoma in two extended 
consanguineous families by SNP array genotyping followed by a candidate gene 
approach. Following an additional screen of 236 subjects with developmental eye 
anomalies, we report two further novel heterozygous mutations segregating in a 
dominant fashion in two different families. Although the dominant mutations were 
penetrant, they gave rise to highly variable phenotypes including iris and 
chorioretinal colobomas, Peters' anomaly, and isolated cataract (cerulean type 
and early onset adult nuclear and cortical cataract). Using in situ 
hybridization in human embryos, we demonstrate expression of FOXE3 restricted to 
lens tissue, predominantly in the anterior epithelium, suggesting that the 
extralenticular phenotypes caused by FOXE3 mutations are most likely to be 
secondary to abnormal lens formation. Our findings suggest that mutations in 
FOXE3 can give rise to a broad spectrum of eye anomalies, largely, but not 
exclusively related to lens development, and that both dominant and recessive 
inheritance patterns can be represented. We suggest including FOXE3 in the 
diagnostic genetic screening for these anomalies.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21079
PMID: 19708017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]