---
reference_id: "PMID:10840606"
title: "[Transmission of HBV, HCV and HIV by infectious medical personnel--presentation of an overview]."
authors:
- Hasselhorn HM
- Hofmann F
journal: Chirurg
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1007/s001040051070
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Transmission of HBV, HCV and HIV by infectious medical personnel--presentation of an overview].
**Authors:** Hasselhorn HM, Hofmann F
**Journal:** Chirurg (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s001040051070](https://doi.org/10.1007/s001040051070)

## Content

1. Chirurg. 2000 Apr;71(4):389-95. doi: 10.1007/s001040051070.

[Transmission of HBV, HCV and HIV by infectious medical personnel--presentation 
of an overview].

[Article in German]

Hasselhorn HM(1), Hofmann F.

Author information:
(1)Lehrstuhl für Arbeitsphysiologie, Arbeitsmedizin und Infektionsschutz, 
Bergische Universität/Gesamthochschule, Wuppertal. 
hans-martin.hasselhorn@arbmed.uni-wuppertal.de

This report analyzes 46 cases of personnel-to-patient transmissions of hepatitis 
B (HB), hepatitis C (HC) and HIV in health care settings. Similar circumstances 
were found for transmission of HB (40 cases, 404 infected patients), HC (4 
cases, 224 infected patients) and HIV (2 cases, 7 infected patients). Cases with 
the highest number of transmissions (one anesthesiologist with 217 HC 
transmissions, and one EEG technologist with 75 HB transmissions) were 
attributed to poor infection control practices. As long as infected health care 
workers (HCW) adhere to general infection control measures, a risk for 
transmission to patients exists only from infected surgeons who perform 
'exposure-prone invasive procedures'. Whether changes in duties of infected HCW 
are necessary should be decided on an individual basis. Often, the infected 
personnel were assumed to have acquired the disease occupationally. Medical 
practices and devices bearing a risk of infection should constantly be reviewed 
with regard to risk for patients and personnel.

DOI: 10.1007/s001040051070
PMID: 10840606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]