---
reference_id: "PMID:25251565"
title: Variable expressivity of pfeiffer syndrome in a family with FGFR1 p.Pro252Arg mutation.
authors:
- Bessenyei B
- Tihanyi M
- Hartwig M
- Szakszon K
- Oláh É
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36774
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variable expressivity of pfeiffer syndrome in a family with FGFR1 p.Pro252Arg mutation.
**Authors:** Bessenyei B, Tihanyi M, Hartwig M, Szakszon K, Oláh É
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36774](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36774)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Dec;164A(12):3176-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36774. Epub
2014  Sep 23.

Variable expressivity of pfeiffer syndrome in a family with FGFR1 p.Pro252Arg 
mutation.

Bessenyei B(1), Tihanyi M, Hartwig M, Szakszon K, Oláh É.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.

Pfeiffer syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder classically characterized by 
craniosynostosis, facial dysmorphism and limb anomalies. The majority of cases 
are caused by mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) gene. 
A specific, rare mutation p.Pro252Arg, located between the second and third 
extracellular immunoglobulin-like domain of FGFR1, is associated with mild 
clinical signs. We report on a three-generation family with five members having 
a heterozygous FGFR1 p.Pro252Arg mutation. Phenotypic features within the family 
showed high variability from the apparently normal skull and limbs to the 
characteristic brachycephaly and digital anomalies. The typical features of 
Pfeiffer syndrome appeared only in the third generation allowing us to unveil 
the syndrome in several further family members in two previous generations. 
Variable expressivity can complicate the recognition of Pfeiffer syndrome, 
principally the mild type 1, requiring careful phenotyping and genetic 
counseling.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36774
PMID: 25251565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]