---
reference_id: "PMID:35662501"
title: Identification of potential biomarkers and novel therapeutic targets through genomic analysis of small cell bladder carcinoma and associated clinical outcomes.
authors:
- Burgess EF
- Sanders JA
- Livasy C
- Symanowski J
- Gatalica Z
- Steuerwald NM
- Arguello D
- Brouwer CR
- Korn WM
- Grigg CM
- Zhu J
- Matulay JT
- Clark PE
- Heath EI
- Raghavan D
journal: Urol Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2022.04.019
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Carcinoma
- Genomics
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/genetics"
- Prognosis
- Urinary Bladder/pathology
- "Urinary Bladder Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Xeroderma Pigmentosum Group D Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of potential biomarkers and novel therapeutic targets through genomic analysis of small cell bladder carcinoma and associated clinical outcomes.
**Authors:** Burgess EF, Sanders JA, Livasy C, Symanowski J, Gatalica Z, Steuerwald NM, Arguello D, Brouwer CR, Korn WM, Grigg CM, Zhu J, Matulay JT, Clark PE, Heath EI, Raghavan D
**Journal:** Urol Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.urolonc.2022.04.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.urolonc.2022.04.019)

## Content

1. Urol Oncol. 2022 Aug;40(8):383.e1-383.e10. doi: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2022.04.019.
 Epub 2022 May 31.

Identification of potential biomarkers and novel therapeutic targets through 
genomic analysis of small cell bladder carcinoma and associated clinical 
outcomes.

Burgess EF(1), Sanders JA(2), Livasy C(3), Symanowski J(4), Gatalica Z(5), 
Steuerwald NM(4), Arguello D(6), Brouwer CR(2), Korn WM(6), Grigg CM(4), Zhu 
J(4), Matulay JT(4), Clark PE(4), Heath EI(7), Raghavan D(4).

Author information:
(1)Levine Cancer Institute, Atrium Health, Charlotte, NC. Electronic address: 
earle.burgess@atriumhealth.org.
(2)Department of Bioinformatics and Genomics, University of North Carolina at 
Charlotte, Charlotte, NC.
(3)Carolinas Pathology Group, Charlotte, NC.
(4)Levine Cancer Institute, Atrium Health, Charlotte, NC.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
Oklahoma City, OK.
(6)Caris Life Sciences, Irving, TX.
(7)Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI.

OBJECTIVES: Small cell bladder carcinoma (SCBC) represents a rare histologic 
variant with a poor prognosis and for which no routine biomarkers exist. Limited 
reports of genomic sequencing in SCBC have demonstrated a high prevalence of 
TP53 and RB1 gene mutations, though the prognostic value of these and other gene 
variants in SCBC remains undefined. In this study, we performed targeted genomic 
sequencing on a cohort of SCBC patients and correlated genomic findings with 
clinical outcomes to identify potential novel biomarkers.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty-one patients with SCBC and available 
treatment-naïve tumor specimens were identified from an institutional database 
(23 limited stage [LS], 8 extensive stage [ES]). Small cell carcinoma specimens 
were microdissected and subjected to tumor next-generation whole-exon sequencing 
with a 592 gene panel. Kaplan-Meier techniques and Cox proportional hazards 
models were used to evaluate genomic aberration association with relapse-free 
survival (RFS) and overall survival (OS) in the limited stage cohort.
RESULTS: The most common pathogenic gene variants included ARID1A (48%), TP53 
(48%) and RB1 (48%). Mutations in genes with potential therapeutic targets not 
routinely evaluated in SCBC included BRCA1/2 (16%), POLE (13%), JAK2 (13%), 
PDGFB (13%) and FGFR3 (3%). Multiple novel biomarker candidates showed trends 
for improvements in OS in the LS subset including ERCC2 (HR 0.322, P = 0.122) 
and RB1 (HR 0.481, P = 0.182), while LS patients with TP53 mutations (HR 2.730, 
P = 0.056), and MCL1 gene amplification (HR 4.183, P = 0.018) suggested inferior 
OS. Additionally, gene or copy number variants with potential prognostic benefit 
included UBR5 and DAXX (P = 0.02, [hazard ratios nonestimable due to zero events 
in biomarker positive groups]).
CONCLUSIONS: These results support the role for tumor genomic profiling in SCBC 
and identify multiple potential novel biomarkers and therapeutic targets in this 
rare disease. Efforts to validate these findings should lead to improved 
decision-making and treatment outcomes in SCBC.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2022.04.019
PMID: 35662501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.