---
reference_id: "PMID:32471315"
title: Mathematical Analyses on the Effects of Control Measures for a Waterborne Disease Model with Socioeconomic Conditions.
authors:
- Collins OC
- Duffy KJ
journal: J Comput Biol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1089/cmb.2019.0352
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mathematical Analyses on the Effects of Control Measures for a Waterborne Disease Model with Socioeconomic Conditions.
**Authors:** Collins OC, Duffy KJ
**Journal:** J Comput Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1089/cmb.2019.0352](https://doi.org/10.1089/cmb.2019.0352)

## Content

1. J Comput Biol. 2021 Jan;28(1):19-32. doi: 10.1089/cmb.2019.0352. Epub 2020 May
 29.

Mathematical Analyses on the Effects of Control Measures for a Waterborne 
Disease Model with Socioeconomic Conditions.

Collins OC(1), Duffy KJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Systems Science, Durban University of Technology, Durban, South 
Africa.

Waterborne diseases are present major health problems to humanity especially in 
rural communities where many individuals belong to the lower socioeconomic 
classes (SECs). The impacts of introducing waterborne disease control measures 
for such communities are investigated by considering a waterborne disease model. 
The model is extended by introducing treatment of infected individuals and water 
purification as control measures. The possible benefits of considering these 
control measures for the various SECs are investigated. Further analyses show 
how different degrees of control impact the rate at which waterborne diseases 
are spread across SECs. The disease control model is validated by using it to 
study the cholera outbreak in Haiti.

DOI: 10.1089/cmb.2019.0352
PMID: 32471315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]