---
reference_id: "PMID:11309366"
title: "A novel mutation in the coding region of the prosaposin gene leads to a complete deficiency of prosaposin and saposins, and is associated with a complex sphingolipidosis dominated by lactosylceramide accumulation."
authors:
- Hulková H
- Cervenková M
- Ledvinová J
- Tochácková M
- Hrebícek M
- Poupetová H
- Befekadu A
- Berná L
- Paton BC
- Harzer K
- Böör A
- Smíd F
- Elleder M
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.9.927
keywords:
- "Antigens, CD"
- Base Sequence
- Codon
- DNA Primers/chemistry
- Female
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Gangliosides/metabolism
- Glycolipids/metabolism
- "Glycoproteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Glycosphingolipids/metabolism
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Lactosylceramides/biosynthesis
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Saposins
- "Sphingolipidoses/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Sulfoglycosphingolipids/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel mutation in the coding region of the prosaposin gene leads to a complete deficiency of prosaposin and saposins, and is associated with a complex sphingolipidosis dominated by lactosylceramide accumulation.
**Authors:** Hulková H, Cervenková M, Ledvinová J, Tochácková M, Hrebícek M, Poupetová H, Befekadu A, Berná L, Paton BC, Harzer K, Böör A, Smíd F, Elleder M
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/10.9.927](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/10.9.927)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Apr 15;10(9):927-40. doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.9.927.

A novel mutation in the coding region of the prosaposin gene leads to a complete 
deficiency of prosaposin and saposins, and is associated with a complex 
sphingolipidosis dominated by lactosylceramide accumulation.

Hulková H(1), Cervenková M, Ledvinová J, Tochácková M, Hrebícek M, Poupetová H, 
Befekadu A, Berná L, Paton BC, Harzer K, Böör A, Smíd F, Elleder M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles University, First Faculty 
of Medicine, Ke Karlovu 2, 128 08 Prague 2, Czech Republic.

A fatal infantile storage disorder with hepatosplenomegaly and severe 
neurological disease is described. Sphingolipids, including monohexosylceramides 
(mainly glucosylceramide), dihexosylceramides (mainly lactosylceramide), 
globotriaosyl ceramide, sulphatides, ceramides and globotetraosyl ceramide, were 
stored in the tissues. In general, cholesterol and sphingomyelin levels were 
unaltered. The storage process was generalized and affected a number of cell 
types, with histiocytes, which infiltrated a number of visceral organs and the 
brain, especially involved. The ultrastructure of the storage lysosomes was 
membranous with oligolamellar, mainly vesicular, profiles. Infrequently, there 
were Gaucher-like lysosomes in histiocytes. The neuropathology was severe and 
featured neuronal storage and loss with a massive depopulation of cortical 
neurons and pronounced fibrillary astrocytosis. There was a paucity of myelin 
and stainable axons in the white matter with signs of active demyelination. 
Immunohistochemical investigations indicated that saposins A, B, C and D were 
all deficient. The patient was homozygous for a 1 bp deletion (c.803delG) within 
the SAP-B domain of the prosaposin gene which leads to a frameshift and 
premature stop codon. In the heterozygous parents, mutant cDNA was detected by 
amplification refractory mutation analysis in the nuclear, but not the 
cytoplasmic, fraction of fibroblast RNA, indicating that the mutant mRNA was 
rapidly degraded. The storage process in the proband resembled that of a 
published case from an unrelated family. Saposins were also deficient in this 
case, leading to its reclassification as prosaposin deficiency, and her mother 
was found to be a carrier for the same c.803delG mutation. Both of the 
investigated families came from the same district of eastern Slovakia.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/10.9.927
PMID: 11309366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]