---
reference_id: "PMID:15804703"
title: Anticardiolipin and anti-beta-2-glycoprotein I antibodies.
authors:
- Marai I
- Tincani A
- Balestrieri G
- Shoenfeld Y
journal: Autoimmunity
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1080/08916930400022608
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anticardiolipin and anti-beta-2-glycoprotein I antibodies.
**Authors:** Marai I, Tincani A, Balestrieri G, Shoenfeld Y
**Journal:** Autoimmunity (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1080/08916930400022608](https://doi.org/10.1080/08916930400022608)

## Content

1. Autoimmunity. 2005 Feb;38(1):33-8. doi: 10.1080/08916930400022608.

Anticardiolipin and anti-beta-2-glycoprotein I antibodies.

Marai I(1), Tincani A, Balestrieri G, Shoenfeld Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine B and Center of Autoimmune Diseases Sheba 
Medical Center, Sackler Faculty of Medicine Tel-Hashomer, Tel-Aviv University, 
Israel.

The anticardiolipin (aCL) antibody test was first established in 1983, using 
cardiolipin (negatively charged phospholipid) as an antigen in a solid-phase 
immunoassAy. It was first applied to the study of systemic lupus erythematosus 
patients, and was found associated with thromboses and recurrent pregnancy 
losses. The wide use of this test was determinant in the definition of the "aCL 
or antiphospholipid syndrome" (APS).Later, it was demonstrated that aCL 
antibodies do not recognize anionic phospholipids but are directed against 
plasma proteins bound to anionic phospholipids, mainly beta-2-glycoprotein I, 
which is now considered as the autoantigen in APS. Anti-beta-2-glycoprotein I 
(anti-beta2GPI) is not yet accepted as a serological criterion for APS, but most 
investigators would consider a patient with anti-beta2GPI antibodies and 
clinical features of APS to have the syndrome. aCL and anti-beta2GPI are a 
heterogeneous group of antibodies with different clinical significances and can 
be present in different autoimmune diseases as well as in infectious diseases.

DOI: 10.1080/08916930400022608
PMID: 15804703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]