---
reference_id: "PMID:33604773"
title: "Dystonia updates: definition, nomenclature, clinical classification, and etiology."
authors:
- Grütz K
- Klein C
journal: J Neural Transm (Vienna)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00702-021-02314-2
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Causality
- "Dystonia/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Dystonic Disorders/diagnosis, etiology"
- Humans
- Movement Disorders
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dystonia updates: definition, nomenclature, clinical classification, and etiology.
**Authors:** Grütz K, Klein C
**Journal:** J Neural Transm (Vienna) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00702-021-02314-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-021-02314-2)

## Content

1. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2021 Apr;128(4):395-404. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-021-02314-2. Epub 2021 Feb 19.

Dystonia updates: definition, nomenclature, clinical classification, and 
etiology.

Grütz K(1), Klein C(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 
23538, Lübeck, Germany.
(2)Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 
23538, Lübeck, Germany. christine.klein@neuro.uni-luebeck.de.

A plethora of heterogeneous movement disorders is grouped under the umbrella 
term dystonia. The clinical presentation ranges from isolated dystonia to 
multi-systemic disorders where dystonia is only a co-occurring sign. In the 
past, definitions, nomenclature, and classifications have been repeatedly 
refined, adapted, and extended to reflect novel findings and increasing 
knowledge about the clinical, etiologic, and scientific background of dystonia. 
Currently, dystonia is suggested to be classified according to two axes. The 
first axis offers precise categories for the clinical presentation grouped into 
age at onset, body distribution, temporal pattern and associated features. The 
second, etiologic, axis discriminates pathological findings, as well as 
inheritance patterns, mode of acquisition, or unknown causality. Furthermore, 
the recent recommendations regarding terminology and nomenclature of inherited 
forms of dystonia and related syndromes are illustrated in this article. 
Harmonized, specific, and internationally widely used classifications provide 
the basis for future systematic dystonia research, as well as for more 
personalized patient counseling and treatment approaches.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-021-02314-2
PMCID: PMC8099848
PMID: 33604773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CK serves as a medical advisor to Centogene for 
genetic testing reports in the fields of movement disorders and dementia, 
excluding Parkinson’s disease.