---
reference_id: "PMID:12587513"
title: "[Health needs from the perspective of the client]."
authors:
- Bedregal P
- Quezada M
- Torres M
- Scharager J
- García J
journal: Rev Med Chil
year: '2002'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Health needs from the perspective of the client].
**Authors:** Bedregal P, Quezada M, Torres M, Scharager J, García J
**Journal:** Rev Med Chil (2002)

## Content

1. Rev Med Chil. 2002 Nov;130(11):1287-94.

[Health needs from the perspective of the client].

[Article in Spanish]

Bedregal P(1), Quezada M, Torres M, Scharager J, García J.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Salud Pública, Facultad de Medicina, Escuela de Trabajo 
Social, Facultad de Ciencias Sociales, Escuela de Psicología, Facultad de 
Ciencias Sociales, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile. pbedrega@med.puc.cl

BACKGROUND: The perception of the population about their needs must be 
considered in health care planning.
AIM: To describe health care needs from the perspective of potential clients of 
public health services.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: An inquiry to a representative sample of 202 dwellings, 
ascribed to a Family Health Service, was done. Subjects were asked about the 
health problems in their family and neighborhood. Twelve families from this 
sample were randomly chosen and interviewed about their health conception, needs 
and demands.
RESULTS: The mean age of subjects, per dwelling, was 31 years. Fifty percent 
were nuclear families and 6% were mono parental. Perceived problems were 
economical in 60% and health related in 12%. Eighty percent of health problems 
were related to addictions and violence. Interviewed subjects associated health 
with lack of services, with their experience with illness and pain and with a 
risk of social isolation and incommunication. Health care demands were referred 
to a better medical care. People declared needs in environmental hygiene, 
physical and mental health self care, food and jobs.
CONCLUSIONS: Using this information, simple strategies could be implemented to 
cope with health care demands of the population.

PMID: 12587513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]