---
reference_id: "PMID:25899809"
title: "Neuropsychology and socioeconomic aspects of Klinefelter syndrome: new developments."
authors:
- Skakkebæk A
- Wallentin M
- Gravholt CH
journal: Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/MED.0000000000000157
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropsychology and socioeconomic aspects of Klinefelter syndrome: new developments.
**Authors:** Skakkebæk A, Wallentin M, Gravholt CH
**Journal:** Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MED.0000000000000157](https://doi.org/10.1097/MED.0000000000000157)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2015 Jun;22(3):209-16. doi: 
10.1097/MED.0000000000000157.

Neuropsychology and socioeconomic aspects of Klinefelter syndrome: new 
developments.

Skakkebæk A(1), Wallentin M, Gravholt CH.

Author information:
(1)aDepartment Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital bDepartment of 
Endocrinology and Internal Medicine cCenter of Functionally Integrative 
Neuroscience dCenter for Semiotics eDepartment of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus 
University Hospital, Denmark.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To summarize recent important studies on neuropsychology and 
epidemiology of Klinefelter syndrome. PubMed was searched for 'Klinefelter', 
'Klinefelter's' and 'XXY' in titles and abstracts. Relevant studies were 
obtained and reviewed, as well as other articles selected by the authors.
RECENT FINDINGS: Klinefelter syndrome is the most common sex-chromosome disorder 
in humans, affecting one in 660 men. The key findings in Klinefelter syndrome 
are small testes, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and cognitive impairment. 
Klinefelter syndrome scores significantly below education matched controls on a 
range of cognitive tests with verbal skills displaying the largest effects. Boys 
with Klinefelter syndrome are often in the need of speech therapy and many 
suffer from learning disability and may benefit from special education. New 
studies are elucidating aspects of cognitive functioning and suggesting that 
neuropsychological treatment may be of value. The socioeconomic status and 
educational level of Klinefelter syndrome is severely affected with many 
struggling to achieve any or only shorter education, resulting in low-income 
levels and early retirement. In addition, few become fathers and fewer live with 
a partner compared with controls. Medical treatment is mainly testosterone 
replacement therapy in order to alleviate acute and long-term consequences of 
hypogonadism, as well as, treating or preventing the frequent comorbidity.
SUMMARY: The neurocognitive phenotype of Klinefelter syndrome is being unraveled 
and the need for psychological and cognitive treatment in many cases is evident. 
The neurocognitive deficits no doubt influence the socioeconomic status of many 
Klinefelter syndrome patients, which is clearly inferior to age-matched 
controls.

DOI: 10.1097/MED.0000000000000157
PMID: 25899809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]