---
reference_id: "PMID:21222627"
title: "PREPL, a prolyl endopeptidase-like enzyme by name only?--Lessons from patients."
authors:
- Boonen K
- Régal L
- Jaeken J
- Creemers JW
journal: CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets
year: '2011'
doi: 10.2174/187152711794653760
keywords:
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2"
- "Cystinuria/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Failure to Thrive/genetics, physiopathology"
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- "Muscle Hypotonia/genetics, physiopathology"
- Phenotype
- Prolyl Oligopeptidases
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary/genetics, physiology"
- "Serine Endopeptidases/chemistry, deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PREPL, a prolyl endopeptidase-like enzyme by name only?--Lessons from patients.
**Authors:** Boonen K, Régal L, Jaeken J, Creemers JW
**Journal:** CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets (2011)
**DOI:** [10.2174/187152711794653760](https://doi.org/10.2174/187152711794653760)

## Content

1. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2011 May;10(3):355-60. doi:
10.2174/187152711794653760.

PREPL, a prolyl endopeptidase-like enzyme by name only?--Lessons from patients.

Boonen K(1), Régal L, Jaeken J, Creemers JW.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Biochemical Neuroendocrinology, Center for Human Genetics,
University of Leuven, Belgium.

Deletion of the Prolyl Endopeptidase-like (PREPL) gene has been described in
three contiguous gene deletion syndromes at the 2p21 locus and current
developments in high resolution microarrays and whole genome sequencing will no
doubt soon result in the identification of isolated PREPL deficiency. But by
comparing the differences in phenotypes with the number of genes deleted, the
contribution of PREPL deficiency can already be deduced. Homozygous or compound
heterozygous loss of PREPL is predicted to cause neonatal hypotonia and severe
feeding problems. Failure to thrive usually persists for several years, followed
by a period of hyperphagia and excessive weight gain. Growth retardation is
usually observed, which responds well to growth hormone therapy. In addition,
minor facial dysmorphism, nasal speech, viscous saliva, hypergonadotropic
hypogonadism and learning problems are frequently observed. How PREPL deficiency
causes these clinical manifestations remains unknown. PREPL is highly expressed
in brain and based on gene coexpression network architecture it has been placed
in a group enriched with markers of neurons and synaptic proteins. PREPL is
predicted to be a serine oligopeptidase based on its homology with prolyl
endopeptidase (PREP) and the presence of an active catalytic triad. However,
until now no substrates have been found. Recent observations that PREP has
non-catalytic functions in the cytoplasm through interactions with its amino-
terminal propeller domain, suggests that of PREPL may also have biological
functions independent of its predicted peptidase activity. This raises the
possibility that PREP and PREPL are homologous, not just by name but also by
nature.

DOI: 10.2174/187152711794653760
PMID: 21222627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
