---
reference_id: PMID:25646159
title: "Anemia in inflammatory bowel disease: an under-estimated problem?"
authors:
- Rogler G
- Vavricka S
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2014.00058
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anemia in inflammatory bowel disease: an under-estimated problem?
**Authors:** Rogler G, Vavricka S
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2014.00058](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2014.00058)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2015 Jan 19;1:58. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2014.00058.
eCollection 2014.

Anemia in inflammatory bowel disease: an under-estimated problem?

Rogler G(1), Vavricka S(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital Zürich ,
Zürich , Switzerland.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital Zürich ,
Zürich , Switzerland ; Division of Gastroenterology, Triemlispital , Zürich ,
Switzerland.

Anemia is one of the most frequent complications and/or extraintestinal
manifestations of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Iron deficiency is the most
important cause of anemia in Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis patients.
Iron deficiency even without anemia may impact the quality of life of our IBD
patients. In the last 10 years, the understanding of the pathology of
iron-deficiency anemia and "anemia of chronic diseases" has increased; new
diagnostic tools have been developed and new therapeutic strategies have been
discussed. Hepcidin has been identified to be a central regulator of iron
absorption from the intestine and of iron plasma levels. Hepcidin is regulated
by iron deficiency but also as an acute phase protein by pro-inflammatory
mediators such as interleukin-6. Innovative diagnostic tools have not been
introduced in clinical routine or are not available for routine diagnostics. As
iron substitution therapy is easy these days with a preference for intravenous
substitution, the impact of differential diagnosis of anemia in IBD patients is
underestimated.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2014.00058
PMCID: PMC4298217
PMID: 25646159
