---
reference_id: "PMID:39608576"
title: "New insight into the molecular etiopathogenesis of konzo: Cyanate could be a plausible neurotoxin contributing to konzo, contrary to thiocyanate."
authors:
- Baguma M
- Kessels S
- Bito V
- Brône B
- Triller A
- Maynard S
- Legendre P
- Rigo JM
- Le Corronc H
- Chabwine JN
journal: Neurotoxicology
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2024.11.004
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Thiocyanates
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- Cyanates/toxicity
- Humans
- "Neurons/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- "Spinal Cord/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- Cell Survival/drug effects
- Neurotoxins/toxicity
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Rats
- Manihot
- Caspases/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New insight into the molecular etiopathogenesis of konzo: Cyanate could be a plausible neurotoxin contributing to konzo, contrary to thiocyanate.
**Authors:** Baguma M, Kessels S, Bito V, Brône B, Triller A, Maynard S, Legendre P, Rigo JM, Le Corronc H, Chabwine JN
**Journal:** Neurotoxicology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuro.2024.11.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2024.11.004)

## Content

1. Neurotoxicology. 2024 Dec;105:323-333. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2024.11.004. Epub 
2024 Nov 26.

New insight into the molecular etiopathogenesis of konzo: Cyanate could be a 
plausible neurotoxin contributing to konzo, contrary to thiocyanate.

Baguma M(1), Kessels S(2), Bito V(3), Brône B(2), Triller A(4), Maynard S(4), 
Legendre P(5), Rigo JM(2), Le Corronc H(6), Chabwine JN(7).

Author information:
(1)UHasselt, Neuroscience Research Group (NEURO), BIOMED, Agoralaan, 3590 
Diepenbeek, Belgium; Université Catholique de Bukavu (UCB), Center for Tropical 
Diseases and Global Health (CTDGH), Bukavu, Democratic Republic Congo; Hôpital 
Provincial Général de Référence de Bukavu (HPGRB), Neurology 
Ward, Bukavu, Democratic Republic Congo. Electronic address: 
baguma.akonkwa@ucbukavu.ac.cd.
(2)UHasselt, Neuroscience Research Group (NEURO), BIOMED, Agoralaan, 3590 
Diepenbeek, Belgium.
(3)UHasselt, Cardio & Organ Systems (COST), BIOMED, Agoralaan, 3590 
Diepenbeek, Belgium.
(4)Institut de Biologie de l'École Normale Supérieure (IBENS), CNRS, Inserm, 
Université PSL, Paris, France.
(5)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Neurosciences Paris Seine - Institut de 
Biologie, Paris Seine (NPS - IBPS), Paris 75005, France.
(6)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Neurosciences Paris Seine - Institut de 
Biologie, Paris Seine (NPS - IBPS), Paris 75005, France; Université 
d'Angers, Angers, France.
(7)Université Catholique de Bukavu (UCB), Center for Tropical Diseases and 
Global Health (CTDGH), Bukavu, Democratic Republic Congo; University of 
Fribourg, Faculty of Science and Medicine, Department of Neuroscience and 
Movement Science, Fribourg, Switzerland.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic cassava-derived cyanide poisoning is associated with the 
appearance of konzo, a tropical spastic paraparesis due to selective upper motor 
neuron damage. Whether the disease is caused by a direct action of cyanide or 
its metabolites is still an open question. This preliminary study assessed the 
neurotoxic effects of thiocyanate (SCN) and cyanate (OCN), two cyanide 
metabolites hypothesized to be plausible toxic agents in konzo.
METHODS: Cultured mouse neuroblastoma (Neuro-2A) and human neuroblastoma 
(SH-SY5Y) cell lines were incubated (24, 48, and 72 hours) in sodium OCN or 
sodium SCN in a disease-relevant concentration range. Cell viability, caspase 
(3, 8, and 9) activities, and reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation were 
evaluated using appropriate assay kits. Additionally, electrophysiological 
responses induced by OCN and SCN in primary spinal cord neurons (from Sprague 
Dawley rats) were assessed by whole-cell patch-clamp techniques.
RESULTS: Both OCN and SCN were toxic in a dose-dependent way, even if SCN 
toxicity appeared at very high concentrations (30 mM, corresponding to more than 
100-fold higher than normal plasmatic levels), contrary to OCN (0.3-3 mM). OCN 
was markedly more toxic in a poor culture medium (MEM; IC50 = 3.2 mM) compared 
to a glucose- and amino acid-rich medium (DMEM; IC50=7.6 mM). OCN treatment 
increased the ROS generation by 8.9 folds, as well as the Caspase-3, Caspase-8, 
and Caspase-9 activities by 3.2, 2.5, and 2.6 folds, respectively. Finally, OCN 
(and SCN to a lesser extent) induced depolarizing currents in primary spinal 
cord neurons, through an activation of ionotropic glutamate receptors.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest OCN as the most plausible neurotoxic agent 
involved in konzo, while SCN toxicity could be questioned at such high 
concentrations. Also, they support apoptosis, oxidative stress, and 
excitotoxicity as probable mechanisms of OCN neurotoxicity.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuro.2024.11.004
PMID: 39608576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Marius Baguma reports financial 
support was provided by VLIR-UOS Team Project 2017 (Ref. No. CD2017TEA439A104), 
by The Board of Directors of UHasselt (Special Research Fund, BOF 2017 - 
Bilateral Scientific Cooperation. Ref. BOF17BL19), and by by The Doctoral 
Schools of UHasselt (Doctoral Schools Mobility grant - call 1 2020). The funders 
had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results. The other authors declare that they have no known competing 
financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.