---
reference_id: "PMID:37697396"
title: Effects of family-based treatment on adolescent outpatients treated for anorexia nervosa in the Eating Disorder Unit of Helsinki University Hospital.
authors:
- Oshukova S
- Suokas J
- Nordberg M
- Ålgars M
journal: J Eat Disord
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s40337-023-00879-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of family-based treatment on adolescent outpatients treated for anorexia nervosa in the Eating Disorder Unit of Helsinki University Hospital.
**Authors:** Oshukova S, Suokas J, Nordberg M, Ålgars M
**Journal:** J Eat Disord (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40337-023-00879-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40337-023-00879-9)

## Content

1. J Eat Disord. 2023 Sep 11;11(1):154. doi: 10.1186/s40337-023-00879-9.

Effects of family-based treatment on adolescent outpatients treated for anorexia
nervosa in the Eating Disorder Unit of Helsinki University Hospital.

Oshukova S(1), Suokas J(2), Nordberg M(3), Ålgars M(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Eating Disorder Unit, University of Helsinki and
Helsinki University Hospital (HUS), P.O. Box 282, 00029, Helsinki, Finland.
svetlana.oshukova@hus.fi.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Eating Disorder Unit, University of Helsinki and
Helsinki University Hospital (HUS), P.O. Box 282, 00029, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Psychiatric Hospital, City of Helsinki, Nordenskiöldinkatu 20, 00250,
Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Department of Psychology and Logopedics, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Helsinki, Haartmaninkatu 8, P.O. Box 63 00014, Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Department of Psychology, Åbo Akademi University, Arken, Tehtaankatu 2,
20500, Turku, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Family therapy for adolescent anorexia nervosa (AN) has stronger
evidence of efficacy in comparison with individual therapy, and family-based
treatment (FBT) is the most evaluated in numerous randomized clinical trials.
However, few studies have focused on how FBT performs outside of research
settings. The current study is the first to assess clinical outcomes of FBT for
adolescent AN in Finland, in a specialized outpatient clinic.
AIM: The naturalistic outcome of outpatient FBT for adolescent AN was
investigated.
METHODS: Fifty-two female patients and their families who received FBT at a
tertiary eating disorders unit participated in the study. Data on their
pre-treatment parameters, treatment details, and condition at the end of
treatment (EOT) was collected from their medical records.
RESULTS: At EOT, a majority (61.5%) had achieved a full weight restoration
[percentage of expected body weight (%EBW) ≥ 95%]. Participants with an
%EBW ≥ 95 at EOT had a significantly higher pre-treatment %EBW than those with
an EBW < 95% at EOT. Participants with an EBW ≥ 95% at EOT showed significantly
higher total weight gain during the treatment period, a higher rate of regular
menstrual periods at EOT, significantly lower rates of dietary restrictions, and
less cognitive or behavioral symptoms of the eating disorder overall, compared
to participants who did not achieve a normal body weight. In 22 cases (42.3%),
there was no need for further treatment at the end of FBT. Participants who
needed further treatment after FBT, compared to those who did not, showed
significantly higher rates of psychiatric comorbidity, history of mental health
treatment, and need for psychopharmacological treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: In this naturalistic study, and in line with previous studies, FBT
for AN appeared to be an effective and sometimes sufficient intervention,
especially for patients with milder weight deficit and less severe psychiatric
comorbidities. The results show that FBT can be successfully implemented in
Finland and suggest that training more ED clinicians in FBT would be beneficial.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: The study was retrospectively registered on February 8th,
2023, in ClinicalTrials.gov Protocol Registration and Results System,
identifier: NCT05734573.

Plain Language Summary: Family-based treatment (FBT), a form of family therapy
for eating disorders (ED) in young patients, has proven to be effective in
numerous large-scale studies. This study aims to evaluate outcomes of the
treatment for anorexia nervosa (AN) in a ‘real-world’ setting in a specialized
outpatient clinic in Helsinki, Finland. Fifty-two young female patients seen for
treatment between June 2013 and December 2017 were included in the study.
Demographic and treatment characteristics, weight, and ED symptoms before and
after treatment are reported. At the end of treatment, most patients had a good
outcome, including normalization of their body weight and reduced ED symptoms.
The majority of patients who needed further treatment after FBT suffered from an
additional psychiatric disorder together with AN.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s40337-023-00879-9
PMCID: PMC10496370
PMID: 37697396

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
