---
reference_id: "PMID:9336601"
title: Preventing and treating major opportunistic infections in AIDS. What's new and what's still true.
authors:
- Cavert W
journal: Postgrad Med
year: '1997'
doi: 10.3810/pgm.1997.10.332
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preventing and treating major opportunistic infections in AIDS. What's new and what's still true.
**Authors:** Cavert W
**Journal:** Postgrad Med (1997)
**DOI:** [10.3810/pgm.1997.10.332](https://doi.org/10.3810/pgm.1997.10.332)

## Content

1. Postgrad Med. 1997 Oct;102(4):125-6, 129-35, 139-40. doi: 
10.3810/pgm.1997.10.332.

Preventing and treating major opportunistic infections in AIDS. What's new and 
what's still true.

Cavert W(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Minnesota Delaware Street (HIV) Clinic, Minneapolis, USA. 
winston@lenti.med.umn.edu

New highly active antiretroviral therapies are boosting the blood absolute CD4+ 
counts of many patients with AIDS and are decreasing the prevalence of 
AIDS-related opportunistic infections. Nevertheless, the prevention, diagnosis, 
and treatment of opportunistic infections remain important features of 
management of HIV infection. In recent years, significant advances have been 
made in the prevention and treatment of opportunistic diseases such as 
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, Cytomegalovirus retinitis, disseminated 
Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare infection, and mucosal candidiasis. 
Tuberculosis, cryptococcal meningitis, herpes simplex virus infection, shingles, 
and infectious enteritis also continue to be troublesome. Kaposi's sarcoma may 
be the newest AIDS-related opportunistic infection to be identified. The immune 
system effects of highly active antiretroviral therapy are as yet poorly 
understood. Therefore, an aggressive approach to diagnosis and treatment of 
opportunistic infections remains mandatory, and patients receiving 
antiretroviral therapy should continue to adhere to recommendations for 
prophylaxis against such infections.

DOI: 10.3810/pgm.1997.10.332
PMID: 9336601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]