---
reference_id: "PMID:37159031"
title: "Diagnosis and Management of Cirrhosis and Its Complications: A Review."
authors:
- Tapper EB
- Parikh ND
journal: JAMA
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2023.5997
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Male
- Ascites/etiology
- Carvedilol/therapeutic use
- Esophageal and Gastric Varices/etiology
- Gastrointestinal Hemorrhage/etiology
- "Hepatic Encephalopathy/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- Hepatorenal Syndrome/etiology
- Lactulose/therapeutic use
- "Liver Cirrhosis/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Liver Neoplasms/etiology
- Muscle Cramp/etiology
- Propranolol/therapeutic use
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Sodium Potassium Chloride Symporter Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Terlipressin/therapeutic use
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and Management of Cirrhosis and Its Complications: A Review.
**Authors:** Tapper EB, Parikh ND
**Journal:** JAMA (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2023.5997](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2023.5997)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2023 May 9;329(18):1589-1602. doi: 10.1001/jama.2023.5997.

Diagnosis and Management of Cirrhosis and Its Complications: A Review.

Tapper EB(1), Parikh ND(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2023 Sep 12;330(10):969. doi: 10.1001/jama.2023.11878.

IMPORTANCE: Cirrhosis affects approximately 2.2 million adults in the US. From 
2010 to 2021, the annual age-adjusted mortality of cirrhosis increased from 14.9 
per 100 000 to 21.9 per 100 000 people.
OBSERVATIONS: The most common causes of cirrhosis in the US, which can overlap, 
include alcohol use disorder (approximately 45% of all cases of cirrhosis), 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (26%), and hepatitis C (41%). Patients with 
cirrhosis experience symptoms including muscle cramps (approximately 64% 
prevalence), pruritus (39%), poor-quality sleep (63%), and sexual dysfunction 
(53%). Cirrhosis can be diagnosed by liver biopsy but may also be diagnosed 
noninvasively. Elastography, a noninvasive assessment of liver stiffness 
measured in kilopascals, can typically confirm cirrhosis at levels of 15 kPa or 
greater. Approximately 40% of people with cirrhosis are diagnosed when they 
present with complications such as hepatic encephalopathy or ascites. The median 
survival time following onset of hepatic encephalopathy and ascites is 0.92 and 
1.1 years, respectively. Among people with ascites, the annual incidence of 
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis is 11% and of hepatorenal syndrome is 8%; the 
latter is associated with a median survival of less than 2 weeks. Approximately 
1% to 4% of patients with cirrhosis develop hepatocellular carcinoma each year, 
which is associated with a 5-year survival of approximately 20%. In a 3-year 
randomized clinical trial of 201 patients with portal hypertension, nonselective 
β-blockers (carvedilol or propranolol) reduced the risk of decompensation or 
death compared with placebo (16% vs 27%). Compared with sequential initiation, 
combination aldosterone antagonist and loop diuretics were more likely to 
resolve ascites (76% vs 56%) with lower rates of hyperkalemia (4% vs 18%). In 
meta-analyses of randomized trials, lactulose was associated with reduced 
mortality relative to placebo (8.5% vs 14%) in randomized trials involving 705 
patients and reduced risk of recurrent overt hepatic encephalopathy (25.5% vs 
46.8%) in randomized trials involving 1415 patients. In a randomized clinical 
trial of 300 patients, terlipressin improved the rate of reversal of hepatorenal 
syndrome from 39% to 18%. Trials addressing symptoms of cirrhosis have 
demonstrated efficacy for hydroxyzine in improving sleep dysfunction, pickle 
brine and taurine for reducing muscle cramps, and tadalafil for improving sexual 
dysfunction in men.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Approximately 2.2 million US adults have cirrhosis. 
Many symptoms, such as muscle cramps, poor-quality sleep, pruritus, and sexual 
dysfunction, are common and treatable. First-line therapies include carvedilol 
or propranolol to prevent variceal bleeding, lactulose for hepatic 
encephalopathy, combination aldosterone antagonists and loop diuretics for 
ascites, and terlipressin for hepatorenal syndrome.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2023.5997
PMCID: PMC10843851
PMID: 37159031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Tapper 
reported grants from Salix Pharmaceuticals and consulting fees from Madrigal 
Pharmaceuticals and Novo Nordisk, all paid to his institution, and consulting 
fees from Bausch Health, Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals, Axcella Health, Novo 
Nordisk, Ambys Medicines, Lipocine, Kaleido, and Takeda Pharmaceutical Company, 
Dr Parikh reported receiving grants from Exact Sciences, Genentech, Glycotest 
Inc, and Target PharmaSolutions and Personal fees from Eli Lilly, Freenome, 
Eisai, Gilead Sciences, Bayer, Exelixis, and Fujifilm Medical.