---
reference_id: "PMID:28753096"
title: Conservative treatment of patients with thromboangiitis obliterans or cannabis-associated arteritis presenting with critical lower limb ischaemia.
authors:
- Galyfos G
- Kerasidis S
- Kastrisios G
- Giannakakis S
- Sachmpazidis I
- Anastasiadou C
- Geropapas G
- Papapetrou A
- Papacharalampous G
- Maltezos C
journal: Vasa
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1024/0301-1526/a000649
keywords:
- Adult
- "Amputation, Surgical"
- Ankle Brachial Index
- "Anticoagulants/administration & dosage"
- "Arteritis/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- "Aspirin/administration & dosage"
- "Cardiovascular Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Cilostazol
- Critical Illness
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Female
- "Heparin, Low-Molecular-Weight/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- "Iloprost/administration & dosage"
- "Infusions, Intravenous"
- "Ischemia/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- Limb Salvage
- Lower Extremity/blood supply
- Male
- "Marijuana Abuse/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- "Marijuana Smoking/adverse effects, prevention & control"
- Middle Aged
- "Platelet Aggregation Inhibitors/administration & dosage"
- Recurrence
- Remission Induction
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Smoking/adverse effects
- Smoking Cessation
- "Tetrazoles/administration & dosage"
- "Thromboangiitis Obliterans/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vasodilator Agents/administration & dosage"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Conservative treatment of patients with thromboangiitis obliterans or cannabis-associated arteritis presenting with critical lower limb ischaemia.
**Authors:** Galyfos G, Kerasidis S, Kastrisios G, Giannakakis S, Sachmpazidis I, Anastasiadou C, Geropapas G, Papapetrou A, Papacharalampous G, Maltezos C
**Journal:** Vasa (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1024/0301-1526/a000649](https://doi.org/10.1024/0301-1526/a000649)

## Content

1. Vasa. 2017 Oct;46(6):471-475. doi: 10.1024/0301-1526/a000649. Epub 2017 Jul
28.

Conservative treatment of patients with thromboangiitis obliterans or 
cannabis-associated arteritis presenting with critical lower limb ischaemia.

Galyfos G(1), Kerasidis S(1), Kastrisios G(1), Giannakakis S(1), Sachmpazidis 
I(1), Anastasiadou C(1), Geropapas G(1), Papapetrou A(1), Papacharalampous G(1), 
Maltezos C(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Vascular Surgery, KAT General Hospital, Kifissia, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Proper management of patients with thromboangiitis obliterans (TAO) 
or cannabis-associated arteritis (CAA), presenting with critical lower limb 
ischaemia (CLI) remains controversial, and data are limited.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with TAO or CAA presenting with CLI between 2011 
and 2016 were retrospectively evaluated. Patients requiring primary intervention 
were excluded. Conservative treatment included: (a) weight-adjusted bemiparin 
plus six hours/day intravenous iloprost for 28 days, (b) aspirin (100 mg/day) 
plus cilostazol (100 mg twice/day) after discharge, and (c) strict 
recommendations/monitoring for smoking cessation. Main outcomes included symptom 
recession, ankle-brachial index (ABI) improvement, and healing of lesions at the 
time of discharge as well as amputation, revascularization, and abstinence rate 
during follow-up.
RESULTS: Overall, 23 patients (TAO: 15; CAA: 8) were included within six years, 
none of the patients reported any other factor than smoking. All patients 
presented with rest pain and 12 patients with ulcer or necrotic lesions. Mean 
ABI measurement at presentation was 0.46 ± 0.2, after 28 days of treatment, all 
patients showed improvement regarding clinical picture and ABI measurement (0.54 
± 0.1; p < 0.05). During follow-up, only three patients underwent bypass surgery 
and two patients underwent major amputation, although the smoking abstinence 
rate was very low (13 %).
CONCLUSIONS: Intravenous iloprost plus bemiparin for 28 days together with per 
os aspirin plus cilostazol seem to produce promising results in patients with 
TAO/CAA, treated for CLI, even with a low smoking abstinence rate. However, 
larger series are needed to further evaluate inter-group differences and 
potential prognostic factors.

DOI: 10.1024/0301-1526/a000649
PMID: 28753096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]