---
reference_id: "PMID:10804945"
title: "Chronic hepatitis B virus in children in Israel: clinical and epidemiological characteristics and response to interferon therapy."
authors:
- Neudorf-Grauss R
- Bujanover Y
- Dinari G
- Broide E
- Neveh Y
- Zahavi I
- Reif S
journal: Isr Med Assoc J
year: '2000'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic hepatitis B virus in children in Israel: clinical and epidemiological characteristics and response to interferon therapy.
**Authors:** Neudorf-Grauss R, Bujanover Y, Dinari G, Broide E, Neveh Y, Zahavi I, Reif S
**Journal:** Isr Med Assoc J (2000)

## Content

1. Isr Med Assoc J. 2000 Feb;2(2):164-8.

Chronic hepatitis B virus in children in Israel: clinical and epidemiological 
characteristics and response to interferon therapy.

Neudorf-Grauss R(1), Bujanover Y, Dinari G, Broide E, Neveh Y, Zahavi I, Reif S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Dana Children's Hospital, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical 
Center, Israel.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the clinical and epidemiological features of hepatitis B 
virus infection in Israeli children, and to evaluate their response and 
compliance to therapy.
METHODS: We retrospectively studied 51 patients (34 males, 17 females), aged 
2-18 years, from several medical centers in Israel.
RESULTS: Of the 51 patients, 38 with elevated transaminase, positive hepatitis B 
e antigen and/or HBV DNA, and histologic evidence of liver inflammation were 
treated. Interferon was administered by subcutaneous injections three times a 
week for 3-12 months (dosage range 3-6 MU/m2). Only 16% were native Israelis, 
while 78% of the children were of USSR origin. A family history of HBV infection 
was recorded in 25 of the 51 patients (9 mothers, 16 fathers or siblings). Five 
children had a history of blood transfusion. The histological findings were 
normal in 3 patients, 24 had chronic persistent hepatitis, 14 had chronic active 
hepatitis and 2 had chronic lobular hepatitis. Five children also had 
anti-hepatitis D virus antibodies. Twelve of the 38 treated patients (31.5%) 
responded to IFN completely, with normalization of the transaminase levels and 
disappearance of HBeAg and HBV DNA. In no patient was there a loss of hepatitis 
B surface antigen. The main side effects of IFN were fever in 20 children, 
weakness in 10, headaches in 9, and anorexia in 6; nausea, abdominal pain, and 
leukopenia were present in 3 cases each. The response rate was not affected by 
age, country of origin, alanine/aspartate aminotransferase levels, or 
histological findings. However, a history of blood transfusion was a predictor 
of good response, 60% vs 27% (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: We found IFN to be a safe and adequate mode of treatment in 
children with chronic HBV infection, regardless of their liver histology and 
transaminase levels. Therefore, in view of the transient side effects associated 
with this drug, we recommend considering its use in all children with chronic 
hepatitis B.

PMID: 10804945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]