---
reference_id: "PMID:15357832"
title: Functional genomics tools for the analysis of zebrafish pigment.
authors:
- Pickart MA
- Sivasubbu S
- Nielsen AL
- Shriram S
- King RA
- Ekker SC
journal: Pigment Cell Res
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0749.2004.00189.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional genomics tools for the analysis of zebrafish pigment.
**Authors:** Pickart MA, Sivasubbu S, Nielsen AL, Shriram S, King RA, Ekker SC
**Journal:** Pigment Cell Res (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0749.2004.00189.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0749.2004.00189.x)

## Content

1. Pigment Cell Res. 2004 Oct;17(5):461-70. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-0749.2004.00189.x.

Functional genomics tools for the analysis of zebrafish pigment.

Pickart MA(1), Sivasubbu S, Nielsen AL, Shriram S, King RA, Ekker SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Sciences and Minnesota Craniofacial Research Training 
Program (MinnCResT), University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

Genetic model organisms are increasingly valuable in the post-genomics era to 
provide a basis for comparative analysis of the human genome. For higher order 
processes of vertebrate pigment cell biology and development, the mouse has 
historically been the model of choice. A complementary organism, the zebrafish 
(Danio rerio), shares many of the signaling and biological processes of 
vertebrates, e.g. neural crest development. The zebrafish has a number of 
characteristics that make it an especially valuable model for the study of 
pigment cell biology and disease. Large-scale genetic screens have identified a 
collection of pigmentation mutants that have already made valuable contributions 
to pigment research. An increasing repertoire of genomic resources such as an 
expressed sequence tag-based Gene Index (The Institute for Genomic Research) and 
improving methods of mutagenesis, transgenesis, and gene targeting make 
zebrafish a particularly attractive model. Morpholino phosphorodiamidate 
oligonucleotide (MO) 'knockdown' of pigment gene expression provides a 
non-conventional antisense tool for the analysis of genes involved in pigment 
cell biology and disease. In addition, an ongoing, reverse-genetic, MO-based 
screen for the rapid identification of gene function promises to be a valuable 
complement to other high-throughput microarray and proteomic approaches for 
understanding pigment cell biology. Novel reagents for zebrafish transgenesis, 
such as the Sleeping Beauty transposon system, continue to improve the capacity 
for genetic analysis in this system and ensure that the zebrafish will be a 
valuable genetic model for understanding a variety of biological processes and 
human diseases for years to come.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0749.2004.00189.x
PMID: 15357832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]