---
reference_id: "PMID:36077423"
title: "Disorder of Sex Development Due to 17-Beta-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Type 3 Deficiency: A Case Report and Review of 70 Different HSD17B3 Mutations Reported in 239 Patients."
authors:
- Gonçalves CI
- Carriço J
- Bastos M
- Lemos MC
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms231710026
keywords:
- "17-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenases/deficiency, genetics"
- Child
- "Disorder of Sex Development, 46,XY"
- Female
- Gynecomastia
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Sexual Development
- "Steroid Metabolism, Inborn Errors"
- Testosterone
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disorder of Sex Development Due to 17-Beta-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Type 3 Deficiency: A Case Report and Review of 70 Different HSD17B3 Mutations Reported in 239 Patients.
**Authors:** Gonçalves CI, Carriço J, Bastos M, Lemos MC
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms231710026](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms231710026)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Sep 2;23(17):10026. doi: 10.3390/ijms231710026.

Disorder of Sex Development Due to 17-Beta-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Type 3
Deficiency: A Case Report and Review of 70 Different HSD17B3 Mutations Reported
in 239 Patients.

Gonçalves CI(1), Carriço J(1), Bastos M(2), Lemos MC(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)CICS-UBI, Health Sciences Research Centre, University of Beira Interior,
6200-506 Covilha, Portugal.
(2)Serviço de Endocrinologia, Diabetes e Metabolismo, Centro Hospitalar
Universitário de Coimbra, 3000-075 Coimbra, Portugal.
(3)C4-UBI, Cloud Computing Competence Centre, University of Beira Interior,
6200-501 Covilha, Portugal.

The 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 3 (17-β-HSD3) enzyme converts
androstenedione to testosterone and is encoded by the HSD17B3 gene. Homozygous
or compound heterozygous HSD17B3 mutations block the synthesis of testosterone
in the fetal testis, resulting in a Disorder of Sex Development (DSD). We
describe a child raised as a female in whom the discovery of testes in the
inguinal canals led to a genetic study by whole exome sequencing (WES) and to
the identification of a compound heterozygous mutation of the HSD17B3 gene
(c.608C>T, p.Ala203Val, and c.645A>T, p.Glu215Asp). Furthermore, we review all
HSD17B3 mutations published so far in cases of 17-β-HSD3 deficiency. A total of
70 different HSD17B3 mutations have so far been reported in 239 patients from
187 families. A total of 118 families had homozygous mutations, 63 had compound
heterozygous mutations and six had undetermined genotypes. Mutations occurred in
all 11 exons and were missense (55%), splice-site (29%), small deletions and
insertions (7%), nonsense (5%), and multiple exon deletions and duplications
(2%). Several mutations were recurrent and missense mutations at codon 80 and
the splice-site mutation c.277+4A>T each represented 17% of all mutated alleles.
These findings may be useful to those involved in the clinical management and
genetic diagnosis of this disorder.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms231710026
PMCID: PMC9456484
PMID: 36077423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
