---
reference_id: "PMID:26691189"
title: "[Inflammation and Hepatic Fibrosis, Then Hepatocellular Carcinoma]."
authors:
- Kwon OS
- Choi SH
- Kim JH
journal: Korean J Gastroenterol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.4166/kjg.2015.66.6.320
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Inflammation and Hepatic Fibrosis, Then Hepatocellular Carcinoma].
**Authors:** Kwon OS, Choi SH, Kim JH
**Journal:** Korean J Gastroenterol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.4166/kjg.2015.66.6.320](https://doi.org/10.4166/kjg.2015.66.6.320)

## Content

1. Korean J Gastroenterol. 2015 Dec;66(6):320-4. doi: 10.4166/kjg.2015.66.6.320.

[Inflammation and Hepatic Fibrosis, Then Hepatocellular Carcinoma].

[Article in Korean]

Kwon OS(1), Choi SH(1), Kim JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Gachon University Gil Medical Center, Gachon 
University School of Medicine, Incheon, Korea.

Inflammation is one of the most prominent characteristic features of chronic 
liver disease, liver fibrosis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). 
Most of HCC cases develop in patients with cirrhosis and cirrhosis develops in 
patients with chronic liver inflammation. Therefore, there is no doubt that 
there exist some strong connection among inflammation, fibrosis, and cancer. In 
fact, chronic unresolved inflammation is associated with persistent hepatic 
injury and concurrent regeneration, leading to sequential development of 
fibrosis, cirrhosis, and eventually HCC. This review will discuss the common 
mechanism of inflammation and fibrosis in chronic liver diseases, and then 
demonstrate why HCC develops in inflammatory and fibrotic conditions.

DOI: 10.4166/kjg.2015.66.6.320
PMID: 26691189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]