---
reference_id: "PMID:11340066"
title: Molecular basis of aberrant apical protein transport in an intestinal enzyme disorder.
authors:
- Spodsberg N
- Jacob R
- Alfalah M
- Zimmer KP
- Naim HY
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.C100219200
keywords:
- Animals
- "Carbohydrate Metabolism, Inborn Errors/enzymology, genetics"
- Cell Line
- Cell Membrane/metabolism
- Cell Polarity
- "Child, Preschool"
- Dogs
- Humans
- Membrane Microdomains/metabolism
- Phenotype
- Point Mutation
- Protein Transport
- "Sucrase-Isomaltase Complex/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular basis of aberrant apical protein transport in an intestinal enzyme disorder.
**Authors:** Spodsberg N, Jacob R, Alfalah M, Zimmer KP, Naim HY
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.C100219200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C100219200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 29;276(26):23506-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C100219200. Epub 
2001 May 4.

Molecular basis of aberrant apical protein transport in an intestinal enzyme 
disorder.

Spodsberg N(1), Jacob R, Alfalah M, Zimmer KP, Naim HY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
Bünteweg 17, D-30559 Hannover, Germany.

The impaired sorting profile to the apical membrane of human intestinal 
sucrase-isomaltase is the underlying cause in the pathogenesis of a novel 
phenotype of intestinal congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency. Molecular 
characterization of this novel phenotype reveals a point mutation in the coding 
region of the sucrase-isomaltase (SI) gene that results in an amino acid 
substitution of a glutamine by arginine at residue 117 of the isomaltase 
subunit. This substitution is located in a domain revealing features of a 
trefoil motif or a P-domain in immediate vicinity of the heavily O-glycosylated 
stalk domain. Expression of the mutant SI phenotype in epithelial Madin-Darby 
canine kidney cells reveals a randomly targeted SI protein to the apical and 
basolateral membranes confirming an exclusive role of the Q117R mutation in 
generating this phenotype. Unlike wild type SI, the mutant protein is completely 
extractable with Triton X-100 despite the presence of O-glycans that serve in 
the wild type protein as an apical sorting signal and are required for the 
association of SI with detergent-insoluble lipid microdomains. Obviously the 
O-glycans are not adequately recognized in the context of the mutant SI, most 
likely due to altered folding of the P-domain that ultimately affects the access 
of the O-glycans to a putative sorting element.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C100219200
PMID: 11340066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]