---
reference_id: "PMID:10336501"
title: Specificity for fibroblast growth factors determined by heparan sulfate in a binary complex with the receptor kinase.
authors:
- Kan M
- Wu X
- Wang F
- McKeehan WL
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.22.15947
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Specificity for fibroblast growth factors determined by heparan sulfate in a binary complex with the receptor kinase.
**Authors:** Kan M, Wu X, Wang F, McKeehan WL
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.22.15947](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.22.15947)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 28;274(22):15947-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.22.15947.

Specificity for fibroblast growth factors determined by heparan sulfate in a 
binary complex with the receptor kinase.

Kan M(1), Wu X, Wang F, McKeehan WL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Texas A&M University, Texas A&M University System 
Health Science Center, Houston, Texas 77030-3303, USA.

A divalent cation-dependent association between heparin or heparan sulfate and 
the ectodomain of the FGF receptor kinase (FGFR) restricts FGF-independent 
trans-phosphorylation and supports the binding of activating FGF to 
self-associated FGFR. Here we show that in contrast to heparin, cellular heparan 
sulfate forms a binary complex with FGFR that discriminates between FGF-1 and 
FGF-2. FGFR type 4 (FGFR4) in liver parenchymal cells binds only FGF-1, whereas 
FGFR1 binds FGF-1 and FGF-2 equally. Cell-free complexes of heparin and 
recombinant FGFR4 bound FGF-1 and FGF-2 equally. However, in contrast to FGFR1, 
when recombinant FGFR4 was expressed back in epithelial cells by transfection, 
it failed to bind FGF-2 unless heparan sulfate was depressed by chlorate or 
heparinase treatment. Isolated heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) from liver 
cells in cell-free complexes with FGFR4 restored the specificity for FGF-1 and 
supported the binding of both FGF-1 and FGF-2 when complexed with FGFR1. In 
contrast, FGF-2 bound equally well to complexes of both FGFR1 and FGFR4 formed 
with endothelial cell-derived HSPG, but the endothelial HSPG was deficient for 
the binding of FGF-1 to both FGFR complexes. These data suggest that a heparan 
sulfate subunit is a cell type- and FGFR-specific determinant of the selectivity 
of the FGFR signaling complex for FGF. In a physiological context, the heparan 
sulfate subunit may limit the redundancy among the current 18 FGF polypeptides 
for the 4 known FGFR.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.22.15947
PMID: 10336501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]