---
reference_id: "PMID:34691077"
title: "Partners in Crime: Beta-Cells and Autoimmune Responses Complicit in Type 1 Diabetes Pathogenesis."
authors:
- Toren E
- Burnette KS
- Banerjee RR
- Hunter CS
- Tse HM
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.756548
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Partners in Crime: Beta-Cells and Autoimmune Responses Complicit in Type 1 Diabetes Pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Toren E, Burnette KS, Banerjee RR, Hunter CS, Tse HM
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2021.756548](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.756548)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 7;12:756548. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.756548.
eCollection  2021.

Partners in Crime: Beta-Cells and Autoimmune Responses Complicit in Type 1 
Diabetes Pathogenesis.

Toren E(1)(2), Burnette KS(2)(3), Banerjee RR(4), Hunter CS(1)(2), Tse HM(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology Diabetes and Metabolism, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States.
(2)Comprehensive Diabetes Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, AL, United States.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
AL, United States.
(4)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States.

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an autoimmune disease characterized by autoreactive T 
cell-mediated destruction of insulin-producing pancreatic beta-cells. Loss of 
beta-cells leads to insulin insufficiency and hyperglycemia, with patients 
eventually requiring lifelong insulin therapy to maintain normal glycemic 
control. Since T1D has been historically defined as a disease of immune system 
dysregulation, there has been little focus on the state and response of 
beta-cells and how they may also contribute to their own demise. Major hurdles 
to identifying a cure for T1D include a limited understanding of disease 
etiology and how functional and transcriptional beta-cell heterogeneity may be 
involved in disease progression. Recent studies indicate that the beta-cell 
response is not simply a passive aspect of T1D pathogenesis, but rather an 
interplay between the beta-cell and the immune system actively contributing to 
disease. Here, we comprehensively review the current literature describing 
beta-cell vulnerability, heterogeneity, and contributions to pathophysiology of 
T1D, how these responses are influenced by autoimmunity, and describe pathways 
that can potentially be exploited to delay T1D.

Copyright © 2021 Toren, Burnette, Banerjee, Hunter and Tse.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.756548
PMCID: PMC8529969
PMID: 34691077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.