---
reference_id: "PMID:36454631"
title: Chronic viral coinfections differentially affect the likelihood of developing long COVID.
authors:
- Peluso MJ
- Deveau TM
- Munter SE
- Ryder D
- Buck A
- Beck-Engeser G
- Chan F
- Lu S
- Goldberg SA
- Hoh R
- Tai V
- Torres L
- Iyer NS
- Deswal M
- Ngo LH
- Buitrago M
- Rodriguez A
- Chen JY
- Yee BC
- Chenna A
- Winslow JW
- Petropoulos CJ
- Deitchman AN
- Hellmuth J
- Spinelli MA
- Durstenfeld MS
- Hsue PY
- Kelly JD
- Martin JN
- Deeks SG
- Hunt PW
- Henrich TJ
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1172/JCI163669
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- COVID-19/epidemiology
- SARS-CoV-2
- Post-Acute COVID-19 Syndrome
- "HIV Infections/complications, epidemiology"
- Coinfection/epidemiology
- "Fatigue/epidemiology, etiology"
- Cytomegalovirus Infections
- Immunoglobulin G
- "Antibodies, Viral"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic viral coinfections differentially affect the likelihood of developing long COVID.
**Authors:** Peluso MJ, Deveau TM, Munter SE, Ryder D, Buck A, Beck-Engeser G, Chan F, Lu S, Goldberg SA, Hoh R, Tai V, Torres L, Iyer NS, Deswal M, Ngo LH, Buitrago M, Rodriguez A, Chen JY, Yee BC, Chenna A, Winslow JW, Petropoulos CJ, Deitchman AN, Hellmuth J, Spinelli MA, Durstenfeld MS, Hsue PY, Kelly JD, Martin JN, Deeks SG, Hunt PW, Henrich TJ
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI163669](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI163669)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2023 Feb 1;133(3):e163669. doi: 10.1172/JCI163669.

Chronic viral coinfections differentially affect the likelihood of developing
long COVID.

Peluso MJ(1), Deveau TM(2), Munter SE(2), Ryder D(2), Buck A(2), Beck-Engeser
G(2), Chan F(2), Lu S(3), Goldberg SA(3), Hoh R(1), Tai V(1), Torres L(2), Iyer
NS(2), Deswal M(1), Ngo LH(1), Buitrago M(1), Rodriguez A(1), Chen JY(1), Yee
BC(4), Chenna A(4), Winslow JW(4), Petropoulos CJ(4), Deitchman AN(5), Hellmuth
J(6), Spinelli MA(1), Durstenfeld MS(7), Hsue PY(7), Kelly JD(3), Martin JN(3),
Deeks SG(1), Hunt PW(2), Henrich TJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of HIV, Infectious Diseases, and Global Medicine.
(2)Division of Experimental Medicine, and.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, UCSF, San Francisco,
California, USA.
(4)Monogram Biosciences Inc., South San Francisco, California, USA.
(5)School of Pharmacy.
(6)Department of Neurology, and.
(7)Division of Cardiology, UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2022 Jul 22:2022.06.21.22276660. doi: 10.1101/2022.06.21.22276660.

BACKGROUNDThe presence and reactivation of chronic viral infections, such as
EBV, CMV, and HIV, have been proposed as potential contributors to long COVID
(LC), but studies in well-characterized postacute cohorts of individuals with
COVID-19 over a longer time course consistent with current case definitions of
LC are limited.METHODSIn a cohort of 280 adults with prior SARS-CoV-2 infection,
we assessed the presence and types of LC symptoms and prior medical history
(including COVID-19 history and HIV status) and performed serological testing
for EBV and CMV using a commercial laboratory. We used covariate-adjusted binary
logistic regression models to identify independent associations between
variables and LC symptoms.RESULTSWe observed that LC symptoms, such as fatigue
and neurocognitive dysfunction, at a median of 4 months following initial
diagnosis were independently associated with serological evidence suggesting
recent EBV reactivation (early antigen-diffuse IgG positivity) or high nuclear
antigen (EBNA) IgG levels but not with ongoing EBV viremia. Serological evidence
suggesting recent EBV reactivation (early antigen-diffuse IgG positivity) was
most strongly associated with fatigue (OR = 2.12). Underlying HIV infection was
also independently associated with neurocognitive LC (OR = 2.5). Interestingly,
participants who had serologic evidence of prior CMV infection were less likely
to develop neurocognitive LC (OR = 0.52).CONCLUSIONOverall, these findings
suggest differential effects of chronic viral coinfections on the likelihood of
developing LC and association with distinct syndromic patterns. Further
assessment during the acute phase of COVID-19 is warranted.TRIAL
REGISTRATIONLong-term Impact of Infection with Novel Coronavirus;
ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04362150.FUNDINGThis work was supported by NIH/National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases grants (3R01AI141003-03S1,
R01AI158013, and K24AI145806); the Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital
Department of Medicine and Division of HIV, Infectious Diseases, and Global
Medicine; and the UCSF-Bay Area Center for AIDS Research (P30-AI027763).

DOI: 10.1172/JCI163669
PMCID: PMC9888380
PMID: 36454631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
