---
reference_id: "PMID:34533409"
title: "Living with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a patient's perspective."
authors:
- Borsari W
- Davis L
- Meiers E
- Salberg L
- Barbara McDonough
journal: Future Cardiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2217/fca-2021-0091
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Living with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a patient's perspective.
**Authors:** Borsari W, Davis L, Meiers E, Salberg L, Barbara McDonough
**Journal:** Future Cardiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2217/fca-2021-0091](https://doi.org/10.2217/fca-2021-0091)

## Content

1. Future Cardiol. 2022 Jan;18(1):43-50. doi: 10.2217/fca-2021-0091. Epub 2021
Sep  17.

Living with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a patient's perspective.

Borsari W(1)(2), Davis L(3)(2), Meiers E(4)(2), Salberg L(5)(2), Barbara 
McDonough(6).

Author information:
(1)Medical consultant, HCM patient, Plymouth, MA 02360, USA.
(2)Patient author.
(3)Former Miss Ohio/heart health advocate, HCM patient, New York, NY 10019, USA.
(4)HCM patient, Arlington, VA 22206, USA.
(5)Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Association, HCM patient, Denville, NJ 07834, 
USA.
(6)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a complex disease characterized by 
thickening of the cardiac muscle. Common symptoms include chest pain, shortness 
of breath, palpitations, fatigue and syncope (fainting), which are often 
confused for other conditions. Clinical treatment focuses on the relief of 
symptoms with medical therapies, which provide adequate to more variable 
symptomatic relief. Patients may experience more severe complications that 
require surgical intervention, such as implantable cardioverter-defibrillator 
therapy or septal myectomy. Despite the potential impact on quality of life, the 
humanistic burden of HCM is not well established. Here, we present four patient 
testimonials that highlight challenges faced by patients and clinicians in 
diagnosing HCM and managing symptoms. These testimonials provide valuable 
information on the spectrum and expression of HCM across generations. Such 
testimonials can better inform disease diagnosis and monitoring, maximizing 
quality of life and improving disease outcome.

DOI: 10.2217/fca-2021-0091
PMID: 34533409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]