---
reference_id: "PMID:40515583"
title: "Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A synthase deficiency: From metabolism to clinical implications."
authors:
- Grünert SC
- Baumgartner MR
- Bouchereau J
- Burlina A
- Clayton PT
- de Las Heras J
- Dionisi-Vici C
- Gemperle-Britschgi C
- Haase C
- Korman SH
- Krämer J
- Kühlwein E
- Maier EM
- Maiorana A
- Schiff M
- Schmid CU
- Tangeraas T
- Yamamoto R
- Zschocke J
- Sass JO
journal: Genet Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2025.101484
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Synthase/genetics, deficiency, metabolism"
- Ketone Bodies/metabolism
- "Mitochondria/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A synthase deficiency: From metabolism to clinical implications.
**Authors:** Grünert SC, Baumgartner MR, Bouchereau J, Burlina A, Clayton PT, de Las Heras J, Dionisi-Vici C, Gemperle-Britschgi C, Haase C, Korman SH, Krämer J, Kühlwein E, Maier EM, Maiorana A, Schiff M, Schmid CU, Tangeraas T, Yamamoto R, Zschocke J, Sass JO
**Journal:** Genet Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gim.2025.101484](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gim.2025.101484)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2025 Sep;27(9):101484. doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2025.101484. Epub 2025
Jun  11.

Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A synthase deficiency: From
metabolism to clinical implications.

Grünert SC(1), Baumgartner MR(2), Bouchereau J(3), Burlina A(4), Clayton PT(5),
de Las Heras J(6), Dionisi-Vici C(7), Gemperle-Britschgi C(8), Haase C(9),
Korman SH(10), Krämer J(11), Kühlwein E(12), Maier EM(13), Maiorana A(7), Schiff
M(14), Schmid CU(15), Tangeraas T(16), Yamamoto R(17), Zschocke J(18), Sass
JO(19).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology,
Medical Center-University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
Electronic address: sarah.gruenert@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(2)Division of Metabolism and Children's Research Center, University Children's
Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Reference Center for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Hôpital Necker-Enfants
Malades, APHP and Université Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(4)Division of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, University Hospital Padua, Padua,
Italy.
(5)Genetics and Genomic Medicine, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child
Health, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Division of Paediatric Metabolism, CIBERER, MetabERN, Cruces University
Hospital, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Biobizkaia Health Research
Institute, Bilbao, Spain.
(7)Division of Metabolic Diseases and Hepatology, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino
Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(8)Division of Metabolism, University Children's Hospital Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
(9)Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Erfurt, Germany.
(10)Wilf Children's Hospital, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(11)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Metabolics and Social Pediatrics,
Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Ulm University Medical Center,
Ulm University, Ulm, Germany.
(12)University Children's Hospital Zurich - Eleonore Foundation, Zürich,
Switzerland.
(13)Department of Inborn Errors of Metabolism, Dr. von Hauner Children's
Hospital, LMU University Hospital, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany.
(14)Reference Center for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Hôpital Necker-Enfants
Malades, APHP and Université Paris Cité, Paris, France; Inserm UMRS_1163,
Institut Imagine, Paris, France.
(15)Praxis für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Miltenberg, Germany.
(16)Norwegian National Unit for Newborn Screening, Division of Pediatric and
Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(17)MVZ Dr Eberhard Partner Dortmund ÜBAG, Dortmund, Germany.
(18)Institute for Human Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck,
Austria.
(19)Research Group Inborn Errors of Metabolism, Department of Natural Sciences
and Institute for Functional Gene Analytics (IFGA), Bonn-Rhein-Sieg University
of Applied Sciences, Rheinbach, Germany. Electronic address:
joern.oliver.sass@h-brs.de.

PURPOSE: Ketone bodies represent an important energy source and can contribute
much to the energy supply of the brain. Mitochondrial
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A synthase deficiency (HMGCS2D) is an
autosomal recessive disorder of ketogenesis caused by biallelic variants in
HMGCS2. Only 59 patients with this disorder have been reported so far.
METHODS: We performed a comprehensive literature search to identify all
published cases of HMGCS2D (n = 59). Additionally, the data of 16 patients with
this disorder who are yet undescribed were collected. Clinical course,
biochemical findings, and mutation data are highlighted and discussed. An
overview on all HMGCS2 variants reported in patients is provided.
RESULTS: Sixty-eight patients (91%) presented with an acute metabolic
decompensation, mostly within the first year of life but beyond the neonatal
period. Asymptomatic individuals were identified in several families. Six
patients (8%) had died, mainly during the initial metabolic crisis. The
neurologic long-term outcome of surviving patients was favorable with almost all
patients (98%) showing normal development. Only 1 variant was identified to be
common, (HMGCS2) NM_005518.4:c.634G>A p.(Gly212Arg), and found in 6 families. No
genotype-phenotype correlation can be established.
CONCLUSION: This comprehensive data analysis provides an overview on all
published patients reported with HMGCS2D, including a list of HMGCS2 variants
identified in affected individuals.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gim.2025.101484
PMID: 40515583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Sarah C. Grünert reports no
conflicts of interest relevant to this work. She has received honoraria for
educational lectures from Vitaflo GmbH and Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical Inc, as
well as the creation of patient information material for Danone Deutschland GmbH
and received support for attending metabolic expert meetings from Nutricia
Metabolics GmbH. Sarah C. Grünert participated in an advisory board for
Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical, Inc. Jörn Oliver Sass or his university (for work
performed by him) have received honoraria for counselling CoA Therapeutics,
Danone Deutschland GmbH and a medical diagnostic laboratory. The authors declare
no conflicts of interest.
