---
reference_id: "PMID:17637824"
title: Genetic variations in NALP1 are associated with generalized vitiligo in a Romanian population.
authors:
- Jin Y
- Birlea SA
- Fain PR
- Spritz RA
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/sj.jid.5700953
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic variations in NALP1 are associated with generalized vitiligo in a Romanian population.
**Authors:** Jin Y, Birlea SA, Fain PR, Spritz RA
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.jid.5700953](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jid.5700953)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2007 Nov;127(11):2558-62. doi: 10.1038/sj.jid.5700953. Epub
 2007 Jul 19.

Genetic variations in NALP1 are associated with generalized vitiligo in a 
Romanian population.

Jin Y(1), Birlea SA, Fain PR, Spritz RA.

Author information:
(1)Human Medical Genetics Program, University of Colorado at Denver and Health 
Sciences Center, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

Generalized vitiligo is a common, multifactorial, polygenic disease in which 
autoimmune loss of melanocytes results in depigmented spots of skin, overlying 
hair, and mucous membranes. In Caucasian families from the United States of 
America and United Kingdom, susceptibility to generalized vitiligo and 
associated autoimmune diseases is genetically associated with variants of NALP1, 
encoding NACHT leucine-rich repeat protein 1. Here, we describe a 
population-based case-control association analysis of single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) distributed through the NALP1 region in Caucasian 
generalized vitiligo patients and controls from Romania. This study confirms 
genetic association of generalized vitiligo with variation in NALP1, which 
contains at least two independent risk signals, one tagged by SNP rs6502867 and 
another tagged by SNPs rs2670660 and rs8182352. Individuals carrying high-risk 
alleles of both rs6502867 and rs2670660 had an odds ratio of 4.20 compared with 
individuals carrying a high-risk allele from only one signal. These findings 
support the involvement of NALP1 in predisposition to generalized vitiligo.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.jid.5700953
PMID: 17637824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]