---
reference_id: "PMID:29653686"
title: "Pegvaliase for the treatment of phenylketonuria: Results of a long-term phase 3 clinical trial program (PRISM)."
authors:
- Thomas J
- Levy H
- Amato S
- Vockley J
- Zori R
- Dimmock D
- Harding CO
- Bilder DA
- Weng HH
- Olbertz J
- Merilainen M
- Jiang J
- Larimore K
- Gupta S
- Gu Z
- Northrup H
- PRISM investigators
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.03.006
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Phenylalanine/blood
- "Phenylalanine Ammonia-Lyase/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Phenylketonurias/drug therapy
- "Recombinant Proteins/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Time Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pegvaliase for the treatment of phenylketonuria: Results of a long-term phase 3 clinical trial program (PRISM).
**Authors:** Thomas J, Levy H, Amato S, Vockley J, Zori R, Dimmock D, Harding CO, Bilder DA, Weng HH, Olbertz J, Merilainen M, Jiang J, Larimore K, Gupta S, Gu Z, Northrup H, PRISM investigators
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.03.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.03.006)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2018 May;124(1):27-38. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.03.006. Epub
 2018 Mar 31.

Pegvaliase for the treatment of phenylketonuria: Results of a long-term phase 3 
clinical trial program (PRISM).

Thomas J(1), Levy H(2), Amato S(3), Vockley J(4), Zori R(5), Dimmock D(6), 
Harding CO(7), Bilder DA(8), Weng HH(9), Olbertz J(10), Merilainen M(11), Jiang 
J(12), Larimore K(13), Gupta S(14), Gu Z(15), Northrup H(16); PRISM 
investigators.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, 
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Electronic 
address: Janet.Thomas@childrenscolorado.org.
(2)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 
02115, USA. Electronic address: harvey.levy@childrens.harvard.edu.
(3)Pediatric Genetics and Metabolism, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 
40506, USA. Electronic address: stephen.amato@uky.edu.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, University of 
Pittsburgh and Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15224, USA. 
Electronic address: vockleyg@upmc.edu.
(5)Genetics and Metabolism, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. 
Electronic address: zorirt@peds.ufl.edu.
(6)Rady Children's Institute for Genomic Medicine, San Diego, CA 92123, USA. 
Electronic address: ddimmock@rchsd.org.
(7)Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, 
OR 97239, USA. Electronic address: hardingc@ohsu.edu.
(8)Psychiatry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA. Electronic 
address: deborah.bilder@hsc.utah.edu.
(9)Research and Development, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, CA 94949, 
USA. Electronic address: holly.weng@bmrn.com.
(10)Research and Development, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, CA 94949, 
USA. Electronic address: joy.olbertz@bmrn.com.
(11)Research and Development, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, CA 94949, 
USA. Electronic address: mmerilainen@bmrn.com.
(12)Research and Development, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, CA 94949, 
USA. Electronic address: joy.jiang@bmrn.com.
(13)Research and Development, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, CA 94949, 
USA. Electronic address: KLarimore@bmrn.com.
(14)Research and Development, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, CA 94949, 
USA. Electronic address: soumi.gupta@bmrn.com.
(15)Research and Development, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, CA 94949, 
USA. Electronic address: kgu@bmrn.com.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, McGovern Medical 
School, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 
77030, USA. Electronic address: Hope.Northrup@uth.tmc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Phenylketonuria (PKU) is caused by phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) 
deficiency that results in phenylalanine (Phe) accumulation. Pegvaliase, 
PEGylated recombinant Anabaena variabilis phenylalanine ammonia lyase (PAL), 
converts Phe to trans-cinnamic acid and ammonia, and is a potential enzyme 
substitution therapy to lower blood Phe in adults with PKU.
METHODS: Two Phase 3 studies, PRISM-1 and PRISM-2, evaluated the efficacy and 
safety of pegvaliase treatment using an induction, titration, and maintenance 
dosing regimen in adults with PKU. In PRISM-1, pegvaliase-naïve participants 
with blood Phe >600 μmol/L were randomized 1:1 to a maintenance dose of 
20 mg/day or 40 mg/day of pegvaliase. Participants in PRISM-1 continued 
pegvaliase treatment in PRISM-2, a 4-part clinical trial that includes an 
ongoing, open-label, long-term extension study of pegvaliase doses of 5 mg/day 
to 60 mg/day.
RESULTS: Of 261 participants who received pegvaliase treatment, 72.0% and 32.6% 
reached ≥12 months and ≥ 24 months of study treatment, respectively, and 65% are 
still actively receiving treatment. Mean (SD) blood Phe was 1232.7 (386.4) 
μmol/L at baseline, 564.5 (531.2) μmol/L at 12 months, and 311.4 (427) μmol/L at 
24 months, a decrease from baseline of 51.1% and 68.7%, respectively. Within 
24 months, 68.4% of participants achieved blood Phe ≤600 μmol/L, 60.7% of 
participants achieved blood Phe ≤360 μmol/L, below the upper limit recommended 
in the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics PKU management 
guidelines, and 51.2% achieved blood Phe ≤120 μmol/L, below the upper limit of 
normal in the unaffected population. Improvements in neuropsychiatric outcomes 
were associated with reductions in blood Phe and were sustained with long-term 
pegvaliase treatment. Adverse events (AEs) were more frequent in the first 
6 months of exposure (early treatment phase) than after 6 months of exposure 
(late treatment phase); 99% of AEs were mild or moderate in severity and 96% 
resolved without dose interruption or reduction. The most common AEs were 
arthralgia (70.5%), injection-site reaction (62.1%), injection-site erythema 
(47.9%), and headache (47.1%). Acute systemic hypersensitivity events consistent 
with clinical National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and the Food 
Allergy and Anaphylaxis Network anaphylaxis criteria were observed in 12 
participants (17 events); of these, 6 participants remained on treatment. Acute 
systemic hypersensitivity events including potential events of anaphylaxis were 
not associated with immunoglobulin E, and all events resolved without sequelae.
CONCLUSION: Results from the PRISM Phase 3 program support the efficacy of 
pegvaliase for the treatment of adults with PKU, with a manageable safety 
profile in most participants. The PRISM-2 extension study will continue to 
assess the long-term effects of pegvaliase treatment.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.03.006
PMID: 29653686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]