---
reference_id: "PMID:30876954"
title: "More than words: Social cognition across variants of primary progressive aphasia."
authors:
- Fittipaldi S
- Ibanez A
- Baez S
- Manes F
- Sedeno L
- Garcia AM
journal: Neurosci Biobehav Rev
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.02.020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# More than words: Social cognition across variants of primary progressive aphasia.
**Authors:** Fittipaldi S, Ibanez A, Baez S, Manes F, Sedeno L, Garcia AM
**Journal:** Neurosci Biobehav Rev (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.02.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.02.020)

## Content

1. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2019 May;100:263-284. doi: 
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.02.020. Epub 2019 Mar 13.

More than words: Social cognition across variants of primary progressive 
aphasia.

Fittipaldi S(1), Ibanez A(2), Baez S(3), Manes F(4), Sedeno L(1), Garcia AM(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Psychology and Neuroscience (LPEN), Institute of 
Cognitive and Translational Neuroscience (INCYT), INECO Foundation, Favaloro 
University, Buenos Aires, Argentina; National Scientific and Technical Research 
Council (CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Laboratory of Experimental Psychology and Neuroscience (LPEN), Institute of 
Cognitive and Translational Neuroscience (INCYT), INECO Foundation, Favaloro 
University, Buenos Aires, Argentina; National Scientific and Technical Research 
Council (CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina; Universidad Autónoma del Caribe, 
Barranquilla, Colombia; Center for Social and Cognitive Neuroscience (CSCN), 
School of Psychology, Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Santiago, Chile; Centre of 
Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders, Australian Research Council (ACR), 
Sydney, Australia.
(3)Departamento de Psicología, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia.
(4)Laboratory of Experimental Psychology and Neuroscience (LPEN), Institute of 
Cognitive and Translational Neuroscience (INCYT), INECO Foundation, Favaloro 
University, Buenos Aires, Argentina; National Scientific and Technical Research 
Council (CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina; Centre of Excellence in Cognition 
and its Disorders, Australian Research Council (ACR), Sydney, Australia.
(5)Laboratory of Experimental Psychology and Neuroscience (LPEN), Institute of 
Cognitive and Translational Neuroscience (INCYT), INECO Foundation, Favaloro 
University, Buenos Aires, Argentina; National Scientific and Technical Research 
Council (CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina; Faculty of Education, National 
University of Cuyo (UNCuyo), Mendoza, Argentina. Electronic address: 
adolfomartingarcia@gmail.com.

Although primary progressive aphasia (PPA) is clinically typified by linguistic 
impairments, emerging evidence highlights the presence of early deficits in 
social cognition. This review systematically describes the latter patterns, 
specifying their relation to the characteristic linguistic dysfunctions and 
atrophy patterns of non-fluent, semantic, and logopenic variants of the disease 
(nfvPPA, svPPA, and lvPPA, respectively), relative to closely related dementia 
types. Whereas the evidence on lvPPA proves scant, studies on nfvPPA and svPPA 
patients show consistent deficits in emotion recognition, theory of mind, and 
empathy. Notably, these seem to be intertwined with language impairments in 
nfvPPA, but they prove primary and independent of language disturbances in 
svPPA. Also, only the profile of svPPA resembles that of behavioral variant 
frontotemporal dementia, probably reflecting the overlap of fronto-temporal 
disruptions in both conditions. In short, the neurocognitive relationship 
between linguistic and socio-cognitive deficits cannot be precisely predicated 
for PPA as a whole; instead, specific links must be acknowledged in each 
variant. These emergent patterns pave the way for fruitful dimensional research 
in the field.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.02.020
PMID: 30876954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]