---
reference_id: "PMID:36202092"
title: "An Aspirin a Day: New Pharmacological Developments and Cancer Chemoprevention."
authors:
- Menter DG
- Bresalier RS
journal: Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-052020-023107
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An Aspirin a Day: New Pharmacological Developments and Cancer Chemoprevention.
**Authors:** Menter DG, Bresalier RS
**Journal:** Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-052020-023107](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-052020-023107)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2023 Jan 20;63:165-186. doi: 
10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-052020-023107. Epub 2022 Oct 6.

An Aspirin a Day: New Pharmacological Developments and Cancer Chemoprevention.

Menter DG(1), Bresalier RS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, The University of 
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA; email: 
rbresali@mdanderson.org.

Chemoprevention refers to the use of natural or synthetic agents to reverse, 
suppress, or prevent the progression or recurrence of cancer. A large body of 
preclinical and clinical data suggest the ability of aspirin to prevent 
precursor lesions and cancers, but much of the clinical data are inferential and 
based on descriptive epidemiology, case control, and cohort studies or studies 
designed to answer other questions (e.g., cardiovascular mortality). Multiple 
pharmacological, clinical, and epidemiologic studies suggest that aspirin can 
prevent certain cancers but may also cause other effects depending on the tissue 
or disease and organ site in question. The best-known biological targets of 
aspirin are cyclooxygenases, which drive a wide variety of functions, including 
hemostasis, inflammation, and immune modulation. Newly recognized molecular and 
cellular interactions suggest additional modifiable functional targets, and the 
existence of consensus molecular cancer subtypes suggests that aspirin may have 
differential effects based on tumor heterogeneity. This review focuses on new 
pharmacological developments and innovations in biopharmacology that clarify the 
potential role of aspirin in cancer chemoprevention.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-052020-023107
PMID: 36202092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]