---
reference_id: "PMID:30265743"
title: Novel therapeutic approaches to xeroderma pigmentosum.
authors:
- Weon JL
- Glass DA 2nd
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.17253
keywords:
- "Acetohexamide/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Administration, Cutaneous"
- Animals
- Caloric Restriction
- "DNA Damage/drug effects, radiation effects"
- DNA Repair/drug effects
- "Dermatology/methods, trends"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- "Niacinamide/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Protective Clothing
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Sulfonylurea Compounds/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Sunlight/adverse effects
- "Sunscreening Agents/administration & dosage"
- Treatment Outcome
- Ultraviolet Rays/adverse effects
- "Xeroderma Pigmentosum/genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel therapeutic approaches to xeroderma pigmentosum.
**Authors:** Weon JL, Glass DA 2nd
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.17253](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.17253)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2019 Aug;181(2):249-255. doi: 10.1111/bjd.17253. Epub 2018 Nov 
25.

Novel therapeutic approaches to xeroderma pigmentosum.

Weon JL(1), Glass DA 2nd(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, 75390, U.S.A.
(2)McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 75390, U.S.A.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2019 Aug;181(2):236-237. doi: 10.1111/bjd.18140.

BACKGROUND: The study of xeroderma pigmentosum has yielded unforeseen advances 
regarding how defects in the nucleotide excision repair pathway result in this 
devastating disease, but development of therapeutic strategies has trailed 
behind the mechanistic discoveries.
OBJECTIVES: This review aims to cover clinical presentation, molecular 
mechanisms and current management, and highlights more recent insights into 
targeting the deficiencies secondary to the DNA repair defects to prevent skin 
cancer and/or neurological degeneration.
METHODS: This review article discusses novel therapeutic approaches to xeroderma 
pigmentosum that focus on metabolic defects downstream of nucleotide excision 
repair.
RESULTS: Current research demonstrates that specific sulfonylureas promote 
clearance of DNA damage and increase resistance to ultraviolet radiation in a 
cellular model of xeroderma pigmentosum. Moreover, nicotinamide attenuates the 
effects of ultraviolet radiation in cells, and caloric restriction decreases DNA 
damage burden in animal models of xeroderma pigmentosum.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical management of patients with xeroderma pigmentosum still 
focuses on preventative avoidance of sun exposure as opposed to therapies that 
would improve the patients' condition; thus, novel approaches to this disease 
are warranted.

© 2018 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.17253
PMID: 30265743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]