---
reference_id: "PMID:36990989"
title: "Oculo-dento-digital dysplasia: a systematic analysis of published dental literature."
authors:
- Hindu KD
- Umer F
journal: BDJ Open
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41405-023-00139-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oculo-dento-digital dysplasia: a systematic analysis of published dental literature.
**Authors:** Hindu KD, Umer F
**Journal:** BDJ Open (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41405-023-00139-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41405-023-00139-7)

## Content

1. BDJ Open. 2023 Mar 29;9(1):13. doi: 10.1038/s41405-023-00139-7.

Oculo-dento-digital dysplasia: a systematic analysis of published dental 
literature.

Hindu KD(1), Umer F(2).

Author information:
(1)Aga Khan University Hospital, Stadium Road, Karachi, 74800, Pakistan.
(2)Aga Khan University Hospital, Stadium Road, Karachi, 74800, Pakistan. 
fahad.umer@aku.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Oculo-dento-digital dysplasia (ODDD, OMIM# 164200) is a rare 
genetic disorder caused by mutation in Gap junction alpha gene that encodes 
connexin 43 (Cx43) protein. In this paper, the case of a 16-year-old boy is 
reported who presented with the complaint of toothache. Examination revealed 
unusual facial features, i.e., long narrow nose, hypertelorism, prominent 
epicanthal folds along with syndactyly and camptodactyly. We have also compiled 
available dental literature on ODDD that will help clinicians in early diagnosis 
and management of this condition.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A literature search was performed in PubMed NLM, EBSCO 
Dentistry & Oral Sciences Source, and EBSCO CINAHL Plus.
RESULTS: A total of 309 articles were identified in the literature search. Only 
17 articles were included based on the predetermined inclusion and exclusion 
criteria in the review synthesis. The included articles were case reports 
(n = 15), a case report and review (n = 1), and an original article (n = 1). 
Enamel hypoplasia, hypomineralization, microdontia, pulp stones, curved roots, 
and taurodontism were common dental findings in ODDD.
CONCLUSIONS: After establishing definitive diagnosis, a multidisciplinary team 
should work in cohesion to improve the quality of life of patients. Immediate 
treatment should be focused on the correction of current oral condition and 
symptomatic treatment. In the long term, attention should be diverted to prevent 
tooth wear and maintaining the occlusal vertical dimension to establish adequate 
function.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41405-023-00139-7
PMCID: PMC10060216
PMID: 36990989

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests. The 
authors have no financial interest or affiliations that would constitute a 
conflict of interest. Informed written consent was obtained from the patient for 
participation in this study, who allowed us to use the relevant data and 
pictures for publication.