---
reference_id: "PMID:34922822"
title: Surveillance for disease progression of transthyretin amyloidosis after heart transplantation in the era of novel disease modifying therapies.
authors:
- Griffin JM
- Baughan E
- Rosenblum H
- Clerkin KJ
- Fried JA
- Raikhelkar J
- Uriel N
- Brannagan TH
- Takeda K
- Grodin JL
- Marboe C
- Maurer MS
- Farr MA
journal: J Heart Lung Transplant
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2021.10.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surveillance for disease progression of transthyretin amyloidosis after heart transplantation in the era of novel disease modifying therapies.
**Authors:** Griffin JM, Baughan E, Rosenblum H, Clerkin KJ, Fried JA, Raikhelkar J, Uriel N, Brannagan TH, Takeda K, Grodin JL, Marboe C, Maurer MS, Farr MA
**Journal:** J Heart Lung Transplant (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.healun.2021.10.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healun.2021.10.007)

## Content

1. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2022 Feb;41(2):199-207. doi: 
10.1016/j.healun.2021.10.007. Epub 2021 Oct 25.

Surveillance for disease progression of transthyretin amyloidosis after heart 
transplantation in the era of novel disease modifying therapies.

Griffin JM(1), Baughan E(2), Rosenblum H(3), Clerkin KJ(3), Fried JA(3), 
Raikhelkar J(3), Uriel N(3), Brannagan TH(4), Takeda K(2), Grodin JL(5), Marboe 
C(6), Maurer MS(3), Farr MA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Columbia University Irving 
Medical Center, New York, New York. Electronic address: 
jmg2244@cumc.columbia.edu.
(2)Department of Surgery, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, 
New York.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Columbia University Irving 
Medical Center, New York, New York.
(4)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, 
New York.
(5)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas 
Southwestern, Dallas, Texas.
(6)Department of Pathology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, 
New York.

BACKGROUND: Heart Transplantation (HT) is a rational therapy for advanced 
transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis (ATTR-CA), but the impact of ongoing amyloid 
deposition is not well defined. We evaluated a cohort of patients who underwent 
HT for ATTR-CA to determine the incidence of de novo or progression of post-HT 
ATTR deposition.
METHODS: All patients who were followed post-HT for ATTR-CA at our center were 
included. Baseline demographics and post-HT manifestations of TTR deposition 
were collected. All patients completed the Composite Autonomic Symptom Score 
(COMPASS-31 quantifies autonomic symptoms, with a higher score [0-100] 
indicating more severe autonomic dysfunction) and Polyneuropathy Disability 
Score (PND, range from 0 [asymptomatic] to IV [confined to wheelchair/bed]) 
questionnaires.
RESULTS: Twelve patients (5 wild-type, 7 variant [6 p.Val142Ile, 1 p.Thr80Ala]) 
were included. Mean age at HT was 64.6 (SD: 4.8) years, 83.3% male, and 50% 
Black. At a median of 4.0 years (IQR 2.4, 5.9) post-HT, 8 patients had symptoms 
of ATTR deposition (5 with gastrointestinal involvement, 4 orthopedic and 4 
neurologic), with 4 patients having ≥2 body systems involved. There were no 
patients with recurrent cardiac involvement. Median COMPASS-31 score was 17.3 
(IQR 11.3, 23.5) at 3.9 years (IQR 2.4, 5.9) post-HT. Four patients had a PND 
score of stage 1 (sensory disturbance), 1 patient was stage 2 (impaired walking) 
and 1 patient stage 3b (required a walking aid).
CONCLUSIONS: More than 50% of patients had evidence of progressive or de novo 
ATTR deposition post-HT, impairing quality of life despite a well-functioning 
cardiac allograft. These observations highlight an unmet need to establish the 
role of formal surveillance and treatment of TTR using TTR disease-modifying 
therapies, which may maintain or improve quality of life post-HT for ATTR-CA.

Copyright © 2021 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.healun.2021.10.007
PMID: 34922822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]