---
reference_id: "PMID:32906116"
title: Living-Related Kidney Transplantation in a Patient with Juvenile Nephronophthisis.
authors:
- Vnučák M
- Graňák K
- Skálová P
- Laca Ľ
- Mokáň M
- Dedinská I
journal: Nephron
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1159/000508501
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Living-Related Kidney Transplantation in a Patient with Juvenile Nephronophthisis.
**Authors:** Vnučák M, Graňák K, Skálová P, Laca Ľ, Mokáň M, Dedinská I
**Journal:** Nephron (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000508501](https://doi.org/10.1159/000508501)

## Content

1. Nephron. 2020;144(11):583-588. doi: 10.1159/000508501. Epub 2020 Sep 9.

Living-Related Kidney Transplantation in a Patient with Juvenile 
Nephronophthisis.

Vnučák M(1), Graňák K(2), Skálová P(1), Laca Ľ(1), Mokáň M(3), Dedinská I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery and Transplantation Center, University Hospital Martin 
and Jessenius Medical Faculty of Comenius University, Martin, Slovakia.
(2)Department of Surgery and Transplantation Center, University Hospital Martin 
and Jessenius Medical Faculty of Comenius University, Martin, Slovakia , 
granak.k@gmail.com.
(3)1st Department of Internal Diseases, University Hospital Martin and Jessenius 
Medical Faculty of Comenius University, Martin, Slovakia.

Nephronophthisis (NPHP) is an autosomal recessive disease manifesting as 
tubulointerstitial nephritis uniformly progressing to ESRD in approximately 
5-10% patients in childhood. Living donor transplantation is the most beneficial 
mean of renal replacement therapy compared to other methods. However, living 
kidney donation is contraindicated in potential donor with diseases of autosomal 
dominant mode of inheritance potentially leading to kidney failure in future. On 
the other hand, autosomal recessive genetic kidney diseases, such as NPHP, are 
not usually contraindication to living kidney donation. Herein, we are reporting 
related living kidney transplantation with a family history of NPHP form 
46-year-old mother (heterozygote) to 17-year-old daughter with (autosomal 
recessive homozygote) with focus on donor follow-up after nephrectomy.

© 2020 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000508501
PMID: 32906116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]