---
reference_id: "PMID:37603152"
title: NLRP3 Activation Contributes to Memory Impairment in an Experimental Model of Pneumococcal Meningitis.
authors:
- Generoso JS
- Faller CJ
- Collodel A
- Catalão CHR
- Dominguini D
- Petronilho F
- Barichello T
- Giridharan VV
journal: Mol Neurobiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12035-023-03549-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NLRP3 Activation Contributes to Memory Impairment in an Experimental Model of Pneumococcal Meningitis.
**Authors:** Generoso JS, Faller CJ, Collodel A, Catalão CHR, Dominguini D, Petronilho F, Barichello T, Giridharan VV
**Journal:** Mol Neurobiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12035-023-03549-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-023-03549-8)

## Content

1. Mol Neurobiol. 2024 Jan;61(1):239-251. doi: 10.1007/s12035-023-03549-8. Epub 
2023 Aug 21.

NLRP3 Activation Contributes to Memory Impairment in an Experimental Model of 
Pneumococcal Meningitis.

Generoso JS(1), Faller CJ(2), Collodel A(3), Catalão CHR(4), Dominguini D(3), 
Petronilho F(2), Barichello T(2)(4), Giridharan VV(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Neurology, Graduate Program in Health Sciences, 
University of Southern Santa Catarina (UNESC), Criciúma, SC, Brazil. 
jsg@unesc.net.
(2)Laboratory of Experimental Neurology, Graduate Program in Health Sciences, 
University of Southern Santa Catarina (UNESC), Criciúma, SC, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Experimental Pathophysiology, Graduate Program in Health 
Sciences, University of Southern Santa Catarina (UNESC), Criciúma, SC, Brazil.
(4)Faillace Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Translational 
Psychiatry Program, McGovern Medical School, The University of Texas Health 
Science Center at Houston (UTHealth), Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Faillace Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Translational 
Psychiatry Program, McGovern Medical School, The University of Texas Health 
Science Center at Houston (UTHealth), Houston, TX, USA. 
Vijayasree.V.Giridharan@uth.tmc.edu.

Bacterial meningitis is considered a life-threatening condition with high 
mortality rates. In response to the infection, signaling cascades, producing 
pro-inflammatory mediators trigger an exacerbated host immune response. Another 
inflammatory pathway occurs through the activation of inflammasomes. Studies 
highlight the role of the NLR family pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3) in 
central nervous system disorders commonly involved in neuroinflammation. We 
aimed to investigate the role of NLRP3 and its inhibitor MCC950 on 
neurochemical, immunological, and behavioral parameters in the early and late 
stages of experimental pneumococcal meningitis. For this, adult male Wistar rats 
received an intracisternal injection of Streptococcus pneumoniae or artificial 
cerebrospinal fluid as a placebo. The animals were divided into control/saline, 
control/MCC950, meningitis/saline, and meningitis/MCC950. Immediately after the 
meningitis induction, the animals received 140 ng/kg MCC950 via intracisternal 
injection. For the acute protocol, 24 h after induction, brain structures were 
collected to evaluate cytokines, NLRP3, and microglia. In the long-term group, 
the animals were submitted to open field and recognition of new objects tests at 
ten days after the meningitis induction. After the behavioral tests, the same 
markers were evaluated. The animals in the meningitis group at 24 h showed 
increased levels of cytokines, NLRP3, and IBA-1 expression, and the use of the 
MCC950 significantly reduced those levels. Although free from infection, ten 
days after meningitis induction, the animals in the meningitis group had 
elevated cytokine levels and demonstrated behavioral deficits; however, the 
single dose of NLRP3 inhibitor rescued the behavior deficits and decreased the 
brain inflammatory profile.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-023-03549-8
PMCID: PMC11409915
PMID: 37603152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests The authors have no relevant 
financial or non-financial interests to disclose.