---
reference_id: "PMID:33186245"
title: "Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis: pathophysiological mechanisms and diagnosis."
authors:
- Kolopp-Sarda MN
- Miossec P
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000757
keywords:
- Cold Temperature
- "Cryoglobulinemia/complications, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Cryoglobulins/analysis
- Glomerulonephritis/complications
- Hepacivirus/immunology
- Hepatitis C/complications
- Humans
- Kidney/pathology
- Rheumatoid Factor
- Skin/pathology
- "Vasculitis/complications, diagnosis, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis: pathophysiological mechanisms and diagnosis.
**Authors:** Kolopp-Sarda MN, Miossec P
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0000000000000757](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0000000000000757)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2021 Jan;33(1):1-7. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000757.

Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis: pathophysiological mechanisms and diagnosis.

Kolopp-Sarda MN(1)(2), Miossec P(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Immunogenomics and inflammation research Unit EA 4130, University of Lyon.
(2)Immunology Laboratory.
(3)Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, Clinical Immunology Unit, Hospices 
Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Cryoglobulins (CG) are immunoglobulins that precipitate in 
the cold, and dissolve at 37°C. In vivo, in cold exposed tissues and organs, 
they can induce vasculitis and occlusive vasculopathy after deposition on 
vascular endothelium under low temperature and high concentration conditions. 
Clinical manifestations are cutaneous (purpura, ulcers, vasomotor symptoms, and 
livedo reticularis), rheumatological (arthralgia and arthritis), and peripheral 
neuropathy (paresthesia and pain in the lower limbs). In profound organs such as 
the kidneys, CG deposition is less temperature-dependent, favored by local 
protein and anion concentrations, and can lead to glomerulonephritis. This 
review will focus on cryoglobulinemic vasculitis and vascular lesion, and their 
diagnosis.
RECENT FINDINGS: The mechanisms of vascular lesions of pathogenic CG in function 
of CG type and their characteristics are better defined. Optimal conditions for 
CG detection are critical. The importance of looking for underlying diseases, 
especially hepatitis C virus status in mixed CG, is reminded.
SUMMARY: A decision diagram for CG vasculitis diagnosis based on clinical and 
biological parameters is proposed.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000757
PMID: 33186245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]