---
reference_id: "PMID:39129838"
title: "Is 5-Oxoprolinase Deficiency More than Just a Benign Condition?"
authors:
- Kasapkara ÇS
- Kıreker Köylü O
- Engin Erdal A
- Yürek B
- Ceylan N
- Ceylaner S
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000536295
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is 5-Oxoprolinase Deficiency More than Just a Benign Condition?
**Authors:** Kasapkara ÇS, Kıreker Köylü O, Engin Erdal A, Yürek B, Ceylan N, Ceylaner S
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000536295](https://doi.org/10.1159/000536295)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2024 Aug;15(4):303-310. doi: 10.1159/000536295. Epub 2024 Feb
23.

Is 5-Oxoprolinase Deficiency More than Just a Benign Condition?

Kasapkara ÇS(1), Kıreker Köylü O(2), Engin Erdal A(2), Yürek B(2), Ceylan N(3),
Ceylaner S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Metabolic Diseases, Ankara Bilkent City Hospital,
Faculty of Medicine, Ankara Yıldırım Beyazıt University, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatric Metabolic Diseases, Ankara Bilkent City Hospital,
Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Ankara Bilkent City Hospital, Ankara,
Turkey.
(4)Intergen Genetics and Rare Diseases Diagnosis Center, Ankara, Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Inherited 5-oxoprolinase (OPLAH) deficiency is a rare inborn
condition characterized by 5-oxoprolinuria. The inherited condition of
5-oxoprolinuria, or pyroglutamic aciduria, is primarily caused by mutations in
the genes that encode glutathione synthetase (GSS) and 5-oxoprolinase (OPLAH),
which are enzymes involved in the gamma-glutamyl cycle in glutathione
metabolism. We report a 3-year-old male patient with epilepsy and speech
difficulty diagnosed as primary 5-oxoprolinuria due to a novel OPLAH gene
mutation.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 3-year-old boy who was delivered at full term in an
uncomplicated birth to consanguineous parents presented with epilepsy at the age
of 2 years. He did not speak fluently. He was using 5-10 words with decreased
language fluency. His past medical history revealed postnatal macrocephaly,
hydrocephalus, and well-controlled epilepsy with levetiracetam. Progressive
cerebral atrophy, hypomyelination, ventriculomegaly, and corpus callosum
hypoplasia were striking features in brain MRI. A urine sample was sent for
organic acid analysis by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS);
quantitation of 5-oxoproline by stable isotope dilution gave a value of 177.9
mmol/mol creatinine (reference values 25.8-92.2). Molecular genetic analysis of
the OPLAH gene revealed a novel homozygous variant (OPLAH (NM_017570.5):
c.1909C>T p.Arg637Trp).
CONCLUSION: We conclude that inherited 5-oxoprolinase deficiency is not a benign
biochemical condition, and patients with 5-oxoprolinuria should be screened for
it. The nature of this inherited metabolic disorder must be determined through
long-term observation. We wish to emphasize the significance of molecular
genetic analysis in symptomatic patients with persistently elevated levels of
5-oxoproline in the urine, as measured by organic acid analysis.

© 2024 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000536295
PMCID: PMC11316440
PMID: 39129838

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
declare.
