---
reference_id: "PMID:34467242"
title: Molecular analysis of the 2012 Bundibugyo virus disease outbreak.
authors:
- Hulseberg CE
- Kumar R
- Di Paola N
- Larson P
- Nagle ER
- Richardson J
- Hanson J
- Wauquier N
- Fair JN
- Makuwa M
- Mulembakani P
- Muyembe-Tamfum JJ
- Schoepp RJ
- Sanchez-Lockhart M
- Palacios GF
- Kuhn JH
- Kugelman JR
journal: Cell Rep Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2021.100351
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular analysis of the 2012 Bundibugyo virus disease outbreak.
**Authors:** Hulseberg CE, Kumar R, Di Paola N, Larson P, Nagle ER, Richardson J, Hanson J, Wauquier N, Fair JN, Makuwa M, Mulembakani P, Muyembe-Tamfum JJ, Schoepp RJ, Sanchez-Lockhart M, Palacios GF, Kuhn JH, Kugelman JR
**Journal:** Cell Rep Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xcrm.2021.100351](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2021.100351)

## Content

1. Cell Rep Med. 2021 Jul 27;2(8):100351. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2021.100351. 
eCollection 2021 Aug 17.

Molecular analysis of the 2012 Bundibugyo virus disease outbreak.

Hulseberg CE(1), Kumar R(1), Di Paola N(1), Larson P(1), Nagle ER(2), Richardson 
J(1), Hanson J(1), Wauquier N(3), Fair JN(3), Makuwa M(3), Mulembakani P(3), 
Muyembe-Tamfum JJ(4), Schoepp RJ(5), Sanchez-Lockhart M(1), Palacios GF(1), Kuhn 
JH(6), Kugelman JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genome Sciences, United States Army Medical Research Institute of 
Infectious Diseases, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.
(2)National Biodefense Analysis and Countermeasures Center, Frederick, MD 21702, 
USA.
(3)Metabiota, Inc., Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(4)Institut National de Recherche Biomédicale, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of 
the Congo.
(5)Diagnostic Systems Division, United States Army Medical Research Institute of 
Infectious Diseases, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.
(6)Integrated Research Facility at Fort Detrick, National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Frederick, MD 21702, 
USA.

Bundibugyo virus (BDBV) is one of four ebolaviruses known to cause disease in 
humans. Bundibugyo virus disease (BVD) outbreaks occurred in 2007-2008 in 
Bundibugyo District, Uganda, and in 2012 in Isiro, Province Orientale, 
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The 2012 BVD outbreak resulted in 38 
laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection, 13 of whom died. However, only 4 
BDBV specimens from the 2012 outbreak have been sequenced. Here, we provide BDBV 
sequences from seven additional patients. Analysis of the molecular epidemiology 
and evolutionary dynamics of the 2012 outbreak with these additional isolates 
challenges the current hypothesis that the outbreak was the result of a single 
spillover event. In addition, one patient record indicates that BDBV's initial 
emergence in Isiro occurred 50 days earlier than previously accepted. 
Collectively, this work demonstrates how retrospective sequencing can be used to 
elucidate outbreak origins and provide epidemiological contexts to a medically 
relevant pathogen.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2021.100351
PMCID: PMC8385243
PMID: 34467242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.