---
reference_id: "PMID:37921158"
title: Multi-level Analysis of HbA1c in Diagnosis and Prognosis of Diabetic Patients.
authors:
- Mukherjee S
- Ray SK
- Jadhav AA
- Wakode SL
journal: Curr Diabetes Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2174/0115733998262501231015051317
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multi-level Analysis of HbA1c in Diagnosis and Prognosis of Diabetic Patients.
**Authors:** Mukherjee S, Ray SK, Jadhav AA, Wakode SL
**Journal:** Curr Diabetes Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2174/0115733998262501231015051317](https://doi.org/10.2174/0115733998262501231015051317)

## Content

1. Curr Diabetes Rev. 2024;20(7):e251023222697. doi: 
10.2174/0115733998262501231015051317.

Multi-level Analysis of HbA1c in Diagnosis and Prognosis of Diabetic Patients.

Mukherjee S(1), Ray SK(2), Jadhav AA(1), Wakode SL(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Bhopal, 
Madhya Pradesh, 462020, India.
(2)Independent Researcher, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, 462020, India.
(3)Department of Physiology All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Bhopal, 
Madhya Pradesh, 462020, India.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes (T2D), a multifaceted metabolic disorder, may cause 
health tribulations and changes in biochemical blood markers. Other research has 
examined the relationships between several biomarkers and the risk of T2D. Few 
studies have examined the relationships between these biomarkers and potential 
changes to the network of biomarkers associated with diabetes.
METHOD: Glycated hemoglobin, or HbA1c, is used to evaluate and track the blood 
glucose history throughout the previous two to three months of testing. The 
ability to reflect the cumulative glycemic history of the previous two to three 
months makes HbA1c an essential biomarker of long-term glycemic control. HbA1c 
offers a trustworthy indicator of chronic hyperglycemia and strongly correlates 
with the likelihood of long-term consequences from diabetes.
RESULT: Additionally, elevated HbA1c has been recognized as a stand-alone risk 
factor for patients with and without diabetes developing coronary heart disease 
and stroke. One HbA1c test offers a wealth of information that makes it a 
reliable biomarker for the diagnosis and prognosis of diabetes. A clinical 
examination may be required to establish the connection between diabetes, 
prediabetes, biochemical blood indicators, age, and body mass index (BMI).
CONCLUSION: We observed that diabetes, BMI, age, HbA1c, cholesterol, 
triglycerides, LDL, VLDL, and HDL were all linked using multivariate analysis.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/0115733998262501231015051317
PMID: 37921158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]