---
reference_id: "PMID:16451810"
title: "Cerebellar neurotransmission in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: does dopamine neurotransmission occur in the cerebellar vermis?"
authors:
- Glaser PE
- Surgener SP
- Grondin R
- Gash CR
- Palmer M
- Castellanos FX
- Gerhardt GA
journal: J Neurosci Methods
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2005.09.019
keywords:
- "1-Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine"
- "3,4-Dihydroxyphenylacetic Acid/metabolism"
- Analysis of Variance
- Animals
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/chemically induced, metabolism, pathology"
- "Brain Chemistry/drug effects, physiology"
- "Cerebellum/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid/methods"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Dopamine/metabolism
- Female
- Homovanillic Acid/metabolism
- Macaca mulatta
- Male
- Microdialysis/methods
- Norepinephrine/metabolism
- Rats
- "Rats, Inbred F344"
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebellar neurotransmission in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: does dopamine neurotransmission occur in the cerebellar vermis?
**Authors:** Glaser PE, Surgener SP, Grondin R, Gash CR, Palmer M, Castellanos FX, Gerhardt GA
**Journal:** J Neurosci Methods (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jneumeth.2005.09.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2005.09.019)

## Content

1. J Neurosci Methods. 2006 Feb 15;151(1):62-7. doi:
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2005.09.019. Epub 2006 Jan 31.

Cerebellar neurotransmission in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: does
dopamine neurotransmission occur in the cerebellar vermis?

Glaser PE(1), Surgener SP, Grondin R, Gash CR, Palmer M, Castellanos FX,
Gerhardt GA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Kentucky Chandler Medical Center,
Lexington, 40536, USA. pglas0@uky.edu

Children and adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
have smaller cerebellar volumes, particularly in the posterior-inferior
cerebellar vermis (lobules VIII-X). Functional activation of the human
cerebellar vermis following stimulant administration has also been repeatedly
demonstrated. There is no well-characterized dopaminergic pathway that projects
to the posterior-inferior cerebellar vermis, although the dopamine transporter
(DAT) and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) have been localized in the
posterior-inferior vermis in the non-human primate by immunohistochemistry. We
hypothesized that DA neurotransmission may occur in localized "hot spots" in the
cerebellar vermis, and if so, that differences in such neurotransmission might
be relevant to the pathophysiology of ADHD. To investigate this hypothesis,
cerebellar tissue was obtained from rats and non-human primates. Catecholamines
were extracted and analyzed using HPLC with coulometric detection. A regional
gradient of norepinephrine (NE) and DA was found throughout the cerebellum with
NE levels always roughly 10-40-fold higher than DA in both rats and monkeys. In
addition, in vivo microdialysis studies were performed in the rat
posterior-inferior cerebellar vermis in anesthetized animals. Significant NE
overflow was observed over baseline following reverse microdialysis induced
release by potassium or d-amphetamine. DA overflow was not observed over
baseline for potassium stimulation, but was significant for d-amphetamine
stimulation. These studies refute the hypothesis that DA neurotransmission
normally occurs in the rat cerebellar vermis, but highlight that vermal DA is
released by d-amphetamine. The presence of DAT may therefore allow for enhanced
regulation of NE and not regulation of released DA.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2005.09.019
PMID: 16451810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
