---
reference_id: "PMID:12426152"
title: Pathology related to chronic arsenic exposure.
authors:
- Centeno JA
- Mullick FG
- Martinez L
- Page NP
- Gibb H
- Longfellow D
- Thompson C
- Ladich ER
journal: Environ Health Perspect
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1289/ehp.02110s5883
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Arsenic/adverse effects
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/chemically induced, pathology"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/chemically induced, pathology"
- Environmental Exposure
- Female
- "Hemangiosarcoma/chemically induced, pathology"
- Humans
- "Liver Cirrhosis/chemically induced, pathology"
- "Liver Neoplasms/chemically induced, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Skin Diseases/chemically induced, pathology"
- Water Supply
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathology related to chronic arsenic exposure.
**Authors:** Centeno JA, Mullick FG, Martinez L, Page NP, Gibb H, Longfellow D, Thompson C, Ladich ER
**Journal:** Environ Health Perspect (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1289/ehp.02110s5883](https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.02110s5883)

## Content

1. Environ Health Perspect. 2002 Oct;110 Suppl 5(Suppl 5):883-6. doi:
10.1289/ehp.02110s5883.

Pathology related to chronic arsenic exposure.

Centeno JA(1), Mullick FG, Martinez L, Page NP, Gibb H, Longfellow D, Thompson
C, Ladich ER.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biophysical Toxicology, U.S. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology,
Washington, DC 20306-6000, USA. centeno@afip.osd.mil

Millions now suffer the effects of chronic arseniasis related to environmental
arsenic exposure. The biological mechanisms responsible for arsenic-induced
toxicity and especially chronic effects, including cancer, are not well known.
The U.S. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology (AFIP) is participating in an
international research effort to improve this understanding by the development
of the International Tissue and Tumor Repository for Chronic Arsenosis (ITTRCA).
The ITTRCA obtains, archives, and makes available for research purposes, tissues
from subjects exposed to arsenic. We provide here a short overview of
arsenic-induced pathology, briefly describe arsenic-induced lesions in the skin
and liver, and present five case reports from the ITTRCA. Arsenic-induced skin
pathology includes hyperkeratosis, pigmentation changes, Bowen disease, squamous
cell carcinoma, and basal cell carcinomas. A unique spectrum of skin lesions,
known as arsenical keratosis, is rather characteristic of chronic arseniasis.
Bowen disease, or squamous cell carcinoma in situ of the skin, has been well
documented as a consequence of arsenical exposure. A spectrum of liver lesions
has also been attributed to chronic arseniasis. Of these, hepatocellular
carcinoma, angiosarcoma, cirrhosis, and hepatoportal sclerosis have been
associated with arsenic exposure. We present case reports that relate to these
health conditions, namely, squamous cell carcinoma, basal cell carcinoma, and
Bowen disease of the skin and hepatocellular carcinoma and angiosarcoma of the
liver. Four patients had been treated with arsenical medications for such
conditions as asthma, psoriasis, and syphilis, and one case occurred in a boy
chronically exposed to arsenic in drinking water.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.02110s5883
PMCID: PMC1241266
PMID: 12426152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
