---
reference_id: "PMID:31399984"
title: Renal Interstitial Lymphangiogenesis in Renal Fibrosis.
authors:
- Xu G
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/978-981-13-8871-2_27
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renal Interstitial Lymphangiogenesis in Renal Fibrosis.
**Authors:** Xu G
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-981-13-8871-2_27](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-8871-2_27)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2019;1165:543-555. doi: 10.1007/978-981-13-8871-2_27.

Renal Interstitial Lymphangiogenesis in Renal Fibrosis.

Xu G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Tongji Hospital Affiliated with Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China. 
gangxu99@163.com.

The basic physiological functions of the lymphatic system include absorption of 
water and macromolecular substances in the interstitial fluid to maintain the 
fluid homeostasis, promoting the intestinal absorption of nutrients such as 
lipids and vitamins from food. Recent studies have found that lymphangiogenesis 
is associated with some pathological conditions, such as tumor metastasis, 
injury repair, and chronic inflammation. For a long time, the study of lymphatic 
vessels (LVs) has been stagnant because of the lack of lymphatic-specific 
cytology and molecular markers. Renal interstitial lymphangiogenesis is found in 
patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) and a series of animal models of 
renal fibrosis. Intervention of the formation or maturation of LVs in renal 
tissue of CKD may reduce the drainage of inflammatory cells, attenuate chronic 
inflammation, delay the progression of renal fibrosis, and improve renal 
function. This review will summarize the latest findings on renal interstitial 
lymphangiogenesis in CKD.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-13-8871-2_27
PMID: 31399984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]