---
reference_id: "PMID:33410365"
title: "Recurrent spinal meningeal melanocytoma at lumbar spine level: a case report."
authors:
- Tsai MH
- Lin WP
- Liao WA
- Chiang PY
- Lin YC
journal: Br J Neurosurg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/02688697.2020.1867062
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Male
- "Melanoma/diagnosis, surgery"
- Lumbosacral Region/pathology
- "Meningeal Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Lumbar Vertebrae/pathology
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent spinal meningeal melanocytoma at lumbar spine level: a case report.
**Authors:** Tsai MH, Lin WP, Liao WA, Chiang PY, Lin YC
**Journal:** Br J Neurosurg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/02688697.2020.1867062](https://doi.org/10.1080/02688697.2020.1867062)

## Content

1. Br J Neurosurg. 2023 Oct;37(5):1163-1166. doi: 10.1080/02688697.2020.1867062. 
Epub 2021 Jan 7.

Recurrent spinal meningeal melanocytoma at lumbar spine level: a case report.

Tsai MH(1), Lin WP(1), Liao WA(2), Chiang PY(1), Lin YC(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, National Cheng Kung 
University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, 
Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pathology, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of 
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, College of Medicine, 
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.

INTRODUCTION: Spinal meningeal melanocytoma is an extremely rare tumour with an 
estimated annual incidence of 1 per 10 million people. It usually arises from 
the intradural extramedullary compartment at the cervical levels. Although these 
tumours are histologically benign, they may behave aggressively. Local 
recurrence could occur even after total tumour excision.
CASE REPORT: We report a case of a 33-year-old Asian male who developed 
progressive weakness and numbness of the bilateral lower extremities as well as 
urinary retention five years after complete tumour resection of lumbar spinal 
meningeal melanocytoma. Magnetic resonance imaging of the lumbar spine revealed 
a mass with thecal sac compression which was hypointense on T2-weighted images 
and hyperintense on T1-weighted images. The patient underwent total tumour 
removal. Histologic examination was compatible with recurrent meningeal 
melanocytoma. After a 4-week inpatient rehabilitation programme, he was able to 
ambulate without assistance and to do clean intermittent catheterisation for 
micturition on a regular basis.
DISCUSSION: This is the first reported case of intradural extramedullary 
meningeal melanocytoma located at the lumbar region. Clinicians should consider 
the possibility of these rare tumours at any level of the spine, and be aware of 
sphincter dysfunction in addition to motor and sensory deficits of extremities.

DOI: 10.1080/02688697.2020.1867062
PMID: 33410365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]