---
reference_id: "PMID:2122121"
title: "Schindler disease: an inherited neuroaxonal dystrophy due to alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase deficiency."
authors:
- Desnick RJ
- Wang AM
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1007/BF01799512
keywords:
- Axons/pathology
- Carbohydrate Sequence
- "Hexosaminidases/deficiency, genetics"
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/enzymology, genetics"
- Pedigree
- alpha-N-Acetylgalactosaminidase
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schindler disease: an inherited neuroaxonal dystrophy due to alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase deficiency.
**Authors:** Desnick RJ, Wang AM
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF01799512](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01799512)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 1990;13(4):549-59. doi: 10.1007/BF01799512.

Schindler disease: an inherited neuroaxonal dystrophy due to 
alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase deficiency.

Desnick RJ(1), Wang AM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 
New York, NY 10029.

The clinical, pathological and biochemical features of a neuroaxonal dystrophy 
resulting from the deficient activity of lysosomal 
alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase are described. This neurodegenerative disorder 
was recognized in two brothers who had the typical clinical manifestations and 
neuropathological lesions observed in patients with Seitelberger disease, the 
infantile form of neuroaxonal dystrophy. Axonal 'spheroids' were observed 
histologically in the grey matter, and ultrastructural examination revealed the 
characteristic formations in dystrophic axons in the myenteric plexus and 
neocortex. Using a newly synthesized fluorogenic substrate, 
4-methylumbelliferyl-alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminide, the markedly deficient 
activity of alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase was demonstrated in the affected 
brothers while their consanguineous parents had intermediate activities, 
consistent with the autosomal recessive transmission of this disease. No 
detectable alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase was seen in immunoblots using 
monospecific rabbit antihuman alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase antibodies. 
Abnormally increased amounts of urinary glycopeptides were observed by high 
resolution thin layer chromatography. Analytical studies identified four of the 
accumulating urinary compounds, the blood group A trisaccharide GalNAc alpha 
1----3(Fuc alpha 1----2)Gal and three O-linked glycopeptides, GalNAc alpha 
1----O-serine and -threonine, NeuNAc alpha 2----3Gal beta 1----3(NeuNAc alpha 
2----6)GalNAc alpha 1----O-serine and -threonine, and NeuNAc alpha 2----3Gal 
beta 1----4GlcNAc beta 1----6(NeuNAc alpha 2----3Gal beta 1----3)GalNAc alpha 
1----O-serine and -threonine. Of eight unrelated patients diagnosed as having 
infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy by pathological studies, none had deficient 
alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase activity, emphasizing the biochemical 
heterogeneity underlying this diagnostic entity. These findings document the 
first delineation of a metabolic defect in an inherited neuroaxonal dystrophy 
and suggest that the axonal pathology in this disorder, and perhaps in the other 
neuroaxonal dystrophies, results from abnormal glycoprotein metabolism involving 
O-linked glycopeptides.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01799512
PMID: 2122121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]