---
reference_id: "PMID:36749126"
title: Genome-Wide Association Study in Acute Tubulointerstitial Nephritis.
authors:
- Zhou XJ
- Su T
- Xie J
- Xie QH
- Wang LZ
- Hu Y
- Chen G
- Jia Y
- Huang JW
- Li G
- Liu Y
- Yu XJ
- Nath SK
- Tsoi LC
- Patrick MT
- Berthier CC
- Liu G
- Wang SX
- Xu H
- Chen N
- Hao CM
- Zhang H
- Yang L
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.0000000000000091
keywords:
- Humans
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- HLA-DRB1 Chains/genetics
- "Nephritis, Interstitial/genetics"
- Genotype
- HLA-DQ alpha-Chains/genetics
- Haplotypes
- Alleles
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-Wide Association Study in Acute Tubulointerstitial Nephritis.
**Authors:** Zhou XJ, Su T, Xie J, Xie QH, Wang LZ, Hu Y, Chen G, Jia Y, Huang JW, Li G, Liu Y, Yu XJ, Nath SK, Tsoi LC, Patrick MT, Berthier CC, Liu G, Wang SX, Xu H, Chen N, Hao CM, Zhang H, Yang L
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.0000000000000091](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.0000000000000091)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2023 May 1;34(5):895-908. doi: 10.1681/ASN.0000000000000091.
 Epub 2023 Feb 2.

Genome-Wide Association Study in Acute Tubulointerstitial Nephritis.

Zhou XJ(1)(2)(3), Su T(1)(2)(3), Xie J(4), Xie QH(5), Wang LZ(6)(7)(8), Hu Y(9), 
Chen G(6)(7)(8), Jia Y(1)(2)(3), Huang JW(1)(2)(3), Li G(1)(2)(3), Liu 
Y(1)(2)(3), Yu XJ(1)(2)(3), Nath SK(10), Tsoi LC(11)(12)(13), Patrick 
MT(11)(12)(13), Berthier CC(14), Liu G(1)(2)(3), Wang SX(1)(2)(3), Xu 
H(15)(16)(17), Chen N(4), Hao CM(5), Zhang H(1)(2)(3), Yang L(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Renal Division, Peking University First Hospital, Peking University Institute 
of Nephrology, Beijing, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Renal Disease, Ministry of Health of China, Beijing, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Chronic Kidney Disease Prevention and Treatment (Peking 
University), Ministry of Education, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Institute of Nephrology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(5)Division of Nephrology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(6)WeGene, Shenzhen Zaozhidao Technology Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China.
(7)Human Provincial Key Lab on Bioinformatics, School of Computer Science and 
Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(8)Shenzhen WeGene Clinical Laboratory, Shenzhen, China.
(9)Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, Beijing, China.
(10)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Program, Oklahoma Medical Research 
Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
(11)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan.
(12)Center for Statistical Genetics, Department of Biostatistics, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(13)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(14)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(15)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Shanghai Changzheng Hospital, 
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.
(16)Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 
China.
(17)School of Clinical Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

Comment in
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2023 May 1;34(5):732-735. doi: 
10.1681/ASN.0000000000000121.

SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Polymorphisms of HLA genes may confer susceptibility to 
acute tubulointerstitial nephritis (ATIN), but small sample sizes and candidate 
gene design have hindered their investigation. The first genome-wide association 
study of ATIN identified two significant loci, risk haplotype 
DRB1*14-DQA1*0101-DQB1*0503 (DR14 serotype) and protective haplotype 
DRB1*1501-DQA1*0102-DQB1*0602 (DR15 serotype), with amino acid position 60 in 
the peptide-binding groove P10 of HLA-DR β 1 key. Risk alleles were shared among 
different causes of ATIN and HLA genotypes associated with kidney injury and 
immune therapy response. HLA alleles showed the strongest association. The 
findings suggest that a genetically conferred risk of immune dysregulation is 
part of the pathogenesis of ATIN.
BACKGROUND: Acute tubulointerstitial nephritis (ATIN) is a rare immune-related 
disease, accounting for approximately 10% of patients with unexplained AKI. 
Previous elucidation of the relationship between genetic factors that contribute 
to its pathogenesis was hampered because of small sample sizes and candidate 
gene design.
METHODS: We undertook the first two-stage genome-wide association study and 
meta-analysis involving 544 kidney biopsy-defined patients with ATIN and 2346 
controls of Chinese ancestry. We conducted statistical fine-mapping analysis, 
provided functional annotations of significant variants, estimated single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based heritability, and checked genotype and 
subphenotype correlations.
RESULTS: Two genome-wide significant loci, rs35087390 of HLA-DQA1 ( P =3.01×10 
-39 ) on 6p21.32 and rs2417771 of PLEKHA5 on 12p12.3 ( P =2.14×10 -8 ), emerged 
from the analysis. HLA imputation using two reference panels suggested that 
HLA-DRB1*14 mainly drives the HLA risk association . HLA-DRB1 residue 60 
belonging to pocket P10 was the key amino acid position. The SNP-based 
heritability estimates with and without the HLA locus were 20.43% and 10.35%, 
respectively. Different clinical subphenotypes (drug-related or 
tubulointerstitial nephritis and uveitis syndrome) seemed to share the same risk 
alleles. However, the HLA risk genotype was associated with disease severity and 
response rate to immunosuppressive therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified two candidate genome regions associated with 
susceptibility to ATIN. The findings suggest that a genetically conferred risk 
of immune dysregulation is involved in the pathogenesis of ATIN.

Copyright © 2023 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.0000000000000091
PMCID: PMC10125656
PMID: 36749126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]