---
reference_id: "PMID:1535611"
title: The epidemiology of Huntington's disease.
authors:
- Harper PS
journal: Hum Genet
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1007/BF00194305
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The epidemiology of Huntington's disease.
**Authors:** Harper PS
**Journal:** Hum Genet (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00194305](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00194305)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 1992 Jun;89(4):365-76. doi: 10.1007/BF00194305.

The epidemiology of Huntington's disease.

Harper PS(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Wales College of Medicine, Heath 
Park, Cardiff, UK.

The available information on the world distribution of Huntington's disease (HD) 
from population surveys and death rate analysis is summarised and discussed in 
the light of genetic studies. It is concluded that most European populations, 
both Northern and Southern, show a relatively high prevalence (4-8 per 100,000), 
and that the disorder may also be frequent in India and parts of central Asia. 
HD is notably rare in Finland and in Japan, but data for Eastern Asia and Africa 
are inadequate. The disorder may have been underestimated in the American black 
population. Populations derived from recent European immigration show 
frequencies and origins of HD comparable to those expected from their own 
origins and expansion; there is no evidence to suggest that the HD gene has 
spread disproportionally and its selective effect may be close to neutral. 
Multiple separate introductions of the gene have been the rule in large 
populations. Several major foci of HD exist as the result of rapid population 
expansion. It is likely that a number of separate mutations for HD will be shown 
to be responsible for the disease, but that the high frequency of HD in European 
populations will prove to be the result of one or a very small number of 
mutations, probably of great antiquity.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00194305
PMID: 1535611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]