---
reference_id: "PMID:14751560"
title: "Overexpression of FGFR3, Stat1, Stat5 and p21Cip1 correlates with phenotypic severity and defective chondrocyte differentiation in FGFR3-related chondrodysplasias."
authors:
- Legeai-Mallet L
- Benoist-Lasselin C
- Munnich A
- Bonaventure J
journal: Bone
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2003.09.002
keywords:
- 3T3 Cells
- "Aborted Fetus/metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Division
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Chondrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- Collagen Type X/metabolism
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p21
- "Cyclins/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Expression
- Gestational Age
- "Growth Plate/metabolism, pathology"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Hyperostosis/metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- Milk Proteins
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3"
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- STAT1 Transcription Factor
- STAT5 Transcription Factor
- "Trans-Activators/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Overexpression of FGFR3, Stat1, Stat5 and p21Cip1 correlates with phenotypic severity and defective chondrocyte differentiation in FGFR3-related chondrodysplasias.
**Authors:** Legeai-Mallet L, Benoist-Lasselin C, Munnich A, Bonaventure J
**Journal:** Bone (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2003.09.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2003.09.002)

## Content

1. Bone. 2004 Jan;34(1):26-36. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2003.09.002.

Overexpression of FGFR3, Stat1, Stat5 and p21Cip1 correlates with phenotypic 
severity and defective chondrocyte differentiation in FGFR3-related 
chondrodysplasias.

Legeai-Mallet L(1), Benoist-Lasselin C, Munnich A, Bonaventure J.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Recherches sur les Handicaps Génétiques de l'Enfant, INSERM U 393, 
Institut Necker, 75743, Paris15, France.

Achondroplasia (ACH) and thanatophoric dysplasia (TD) are human skeletal 
disorders of increasing severity accounted for by mutations in the fibroblast 
growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3). Attempts to elucidate the molecular signaling 
pathways leading to these phenotypes through mouse model engineering have 
provided relevant information mostly in the postnatal period. The availability 
of a large series of human fetuses including 14 ACH and 26 TD enabled the 
consequences of FGFR3 mutations on endogenous receptor expression during the 
prenatal period to be assessed by analysis of primary cultured chondrocytes and 
cartilage growth plates. Overexpression and ligand-independent phosphorylation 
of the fully glycosylated isoform of FGFR3 were observed in ACH and TD cells. 
Immunohistochemical analysis of fetal growth plates showed a phenotype-related 
reduction of the collagen type X-positive hypertrophic zone. Abnormally high 
amounts of Stat1, Stat5 and p21Cip1 proteins were found in 
prehypertrophic-hypertrophic chondrocytes, the extent of overexpression being 
directly related to the severity of the disease. Double immunostaining 
procedures revealed an overlap of FGFR3 and Stat1 expression in the 
prehypertrophic-hypertrophic zone, suggesting that constitutive activation of 
the receptor accounts for Stat overexpression. By contrast, expression of Stat 
and p21Cip1 proteins in the proliferative zone differed only slightly from 
control cartilage and differences were restricted to the last arrays of 
proliferative cells. Our results indicate that FGFR3 mutations in the prenatal 
period upregulate FGFR3 and Stat-p21Cip1 expression, thus inducing premature 
exit of proliferative cells from the cell cycle and their differentiation into 
prehypertrophic chondrocytes. We conclude that defective differentiation of 
chondrocytes is the main cause of longitudinal bone growth retardation in 
FGFR3-related human chondrodysplasias.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2003.09.002
PMID: 14751560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]