---
reference_id: "PMID:34418241"
title: Determinants of severe bradycardia in adolescents hospitalized for anorexia nervosa.
authors:
- Assalone C
- Leonardi L
- Franceschi R
- Fumanelli J
- Maines E
- Marini M
- Quintarelli S
- Genovese A
- Soffiati M
journal: Pediatr Int
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/ped.14967
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Anorexia Nervosa/complications, epidemiology, therapy"
- "Bradycardia/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- Hospitalization
- Humans
- Overweight
- Weight Gain
- Weight Loss
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Determinants of severe bradycardia in adolescents hospitalized for anorexia nervosa.
**Authors:** Assalone C, Leonardi L, Franceschi R, Fumanelli J, Maines E, Marini M, Quintarelli S, Genovese A, Soffiati M
**Journal:** Pediatr Int (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ped.14967](https://doi.org/10.1111/ped.14967)

## Content

1. Pediatr Int. 2022 Jan;64(1):e14967. doi: 10.1111/ped.14967.

Determinants of severe bradycardia in adolescents hospitalized for anorexia 
nervosa.

Assalone C(1)(2), Leonardi L(1), Franceschi R(1), Fumanelli J(1), Maines E(1), 
Marini M(3), Quintarelli S(3), Genovese A(2), Soffiati M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Paediatrics, S. Chiara General Hospital, Trento, Italy.
(2)Provincial Centre for Eating Disorders, Trento, Italy.
(3)Division of Cardiology, S. Chiara General Hospital, Trento, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Severe bradycardia is an indication supporting hospitalization in 
adolescents with eating disorders. Some adolescents with anorexia nervosa (AN) 
and significant weight loss present with a normal pulse rate at admission, 
whereas others have severe bradycardia, suggesting that total weight loss is not 
the most important determinant of bradycardia. The aims of this study were to 
define the prevalence of severe bradycardia as the cause for hospital admission 
in adolescents with AN, to evaluate correlations between known determinants of 
severe bradycardia and pulse rate at admission, and to evaluate the average time 
required to recover from severe bradycardia after re-feeding.
METHODS: Ninety-nine hospitalized patients with AN were enrolled. Weight loss 
history, anthropometric, laboratory, and electrocardiogram data were collected 
at admission to and at discharge from hospital. Multivariate analysis was 
performed to detect the most important determinants of severe bradycardia.
RESULTS: Forty-eight percent of the AN patient admissions were due to severe 
bradycardia (AN-B+ group). Patients in this group had a higher maximum lifetime 
weight (P = 0.0045), greater premorbid weight loss (P = 0.0011), and more rapid 
weight loss (P = 0.0001). Multivariate analysis showed that recent weight loss 
is an independent predictor of bradycardia at hospital admission (R2 : 0.35, P = 
0.0001). Severe bradycardia normalized after minimal weight gain of 
0.25 ± 0.18 kg/day for 3-10 days.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms that recent weight loss is probably the most 
important determinant of severe bradycardia in adolescents with AN.

© 2021 Japan Pediatric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/ped.14967
PMID: 34418241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]