---
reference_id: "PMID:25488886"
title: "A successful spontaneous pregnancy in abetalipoproteinemia: Amsterdam or the art of vitamin replacement?"
authors:
- Ferreira F
- Patel V
- Matts S
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2014-206754
keywords:
- "Abetalipoproteinemia/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Adult
- Dietary Supplements
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Drug Administration Schedule
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Female
- Gestational Age
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Maternal Age
- "Monitoring, Physiologic/methods"
- "Pregnancy/drug effects, physiology"
- Pregnancy Outcome
- "Pregnancy, High-Risk"
- Term Birth
- "Vitamin A/administration & dosage"
- "Vitamin E/administration & dosage"
- "Vitamin K/administration & dosage"
- "Vitamins/administration & dosage"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A successful spontaneous pregnancy in abetalipoproteinemia: Amsterdam or the art of vitamin replacement?
**Authors:** Ferreira F, Patel V, Matts S
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2014-206754](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2014-206754)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2014 Dec 8;2014:bcr2014206754. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2014-206754.

A successful spontaneous pregnancy in abetalipoproteinemia: Amsterdam or the art
of vitamin replacement?

Ferreira F(1), Patel V(2), Matts S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Acute Medicine, George Eliot Hospital, Nuneaton, UK.
(2)Warwick Medical School University of Warwick, Coventry, UK Departments of
Endocrinology and Diabetes, General Internal Medicine, Medical Obstetrics,
George Eliot Hospital NHS Trust, Nuneaton, UK.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, George Eliot Hospital, Nuneaton,
UK.

Abetalipoproteinemia is a rare metabolic disorder that causes disturbed lipid
absorption with consequent hypocholesterolaemia and liposoluble avitaminosis.
The broad spectrum of presentations includes malabsorption, failure to thrive
and acanthocytosis in children, while later in life expected manifestations
include coagulopathy, myopathy, retinitis pigmentosa, peripheral neuropathy,
hyporeflexia and ataxia. These neurological complications stem from
demyelination secondary to vitamin E deficiency. Another complication is reduced
fertility in women. In the event of a successful conception, issues arise in
vitamin supplementation, the mainstay of treatment of abetalipoproteinemia. The
skilful clinician must master the delicate balance between the teratogenic
effects on the fetus of over as well as under replacement of vitamins, pregnancy
complications such as premature rupture of membranes and eclampsia, and,
finally, maternal complications such as corneal ulcers. We describe the
management of a patient ranging from pubertal growth to bearing a successful
spontaneous pregnancy with an outcome of a completely healthy mother and child.

2014 BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2014-206754
PMCID: PMC4265040
PMID: 25488886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
