---
reference_id: "PMID:29226998"
title: Antisense suppression of glial fibrillary acidic protein as a treatment for Alexander disease.
authors:
- Hagemann TL
- Powers B
- Mazur C
- Kim A
- Wheeler S
- Hung G
- Swayze E
- Messing A
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ana.25118
keywords:
- "Alexander Disease/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Animals
- Biomarkers/cerebrospinal fluid
- Brain Chemistry/drug effects
- Gene Expression Regulation/drug effects
- "Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein/antagonists & inhibitors, biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Hippocampus/drug effects, growth & development, pathology"
- Humans
- "Injections, Intraventricular"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Mutation/genetics
- Neurogenesis/drug effects
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/therapeutic use"
- "Spinal Cord/drug effects, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antisense suppression of glial fibrillary acidic protein as a treatment for Alexander disease.
**Authors:** Hagemann TL, Powers B, Mazur C, Kim A, Wheeler S, Hung G, Swayze E, Messing A
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.25118](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.25118)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2018 Jan;83(1):27-39. doi: 10.1002/ana.25118. Epub 2018 Jan 14.

Antisense suppression of glial fibrillary acidic protein as a treatment for 
Alexander disease.

Hagemann TL(1), Powers B(2), Mazur C(2), Kim A(2), Wheeler S(1), Hung G(2), 
Swayze E(2), Messing A(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI.
(2)Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, CA.
(3)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI.

OBJECTIVE: Alexander disease is a fatal leukodystrophy caused by autosomal 
dominant gain-of-function mutations in the gene for glial fibrillary acidic 
protein (GFAP), an intermediate filament protein primarily expressed in 
astrocytes of the central nervous system. A key feature of pathogenesis is 
overexpression and accumulation of GFAP, with formation of characteristic 
cytoplasmic aggregates known as Rosenthal fibers. Here we investigate whether 
suppressing GFAP with antisense oligonucleotides could provide a therapeutic 
strategy for treating Alexander disease.
METHODS: In this study, we use GFAP mutant mouse models of Alexander disease to 
test the efficacy of antisense suppression and evaluate the effects on molecular 
and cellular phenotypes and non-cell-autonomous toxicity. Antisense 
oligonucleotides were designed to target the murine Gfap transcript, and 
screened using primary mouse cortical cultures. Lead oligonucleotides were then 
tested for their ability to reduce GFAP transcripts and protein, first in 
wild-type mice with normal levels of GFAP, and then in adult mutant mice with 
established pathology and elevated levels of GFAP.
RESULTS: Nearly complete and long-lasting elimination of GFAP occurred in brain 
and spinal cord following single bolus intracerebroventricular injections, with 
a striking reversal of Rosenthal fibers and downstream markers of microglial and 
other stress-related responses. GFAP protein was also cleared from cerebrospinal 
fluid, demonstrating its potential utility as a biomarker in future clinical 
applications. Finally, treatment led to improved body condition and rescue of 
hippocampal neurogenesis.
INTERPRETATION: These results demonstrate the efficacy of antisense suppression 
for an astrocyte target, and provide a compelling therapeutic approach for 
Alexander disease. Ann Neurol 2018;83:27-39.

© 2017 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.25118
PMCID: PMC5876100
PMID: 29226998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential Conflicts of Interest BP, CM, AK, GH 
and ES receive salaries from and are shareholders in Ionis Pharmaceuticals. TLH, 
SW, and AM have no conflicts of interest.