---
reference_id: "PMID:41625720"
title: Horseshoe Lung Associated with Left-sided Scimitar Syndrome in an Infant with Complex Congenital Heart Disease.
authors:
- Spinelli E
- Sirico D
- Vida V
- Salvo GD
journal: J Cardiovasc Echogr
year: '2025'
doi: 10.4103/jcecho.jcecho_125_25
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Horseshoe Lung Associated with Left-sided Scimitar Syndrome in an Infant with Complex Congenital Heart Disease.
**Authors:** Spinelli E, Sirico D, Vida V, Salvo GD
**Journal:** J Cardiovasc Echogr (2025)
**DOI:** [10.4103/jcecho.jcecho_125_25](https://doi.org/10.4103/jcecho.jcecho_125_25)

## Content

1. J Cardiovasc Echogr. 2025 Dec 31;35(4):420-422. doi: 
10.4103/jcecho.jcecho_125_25. eCollection 2025 Oct-Dec.

Horseshoe Lung Associated with Left-sided Scimitar Syndrome in an Infant with 
Complex Congenital Heart Disease.

Spinelli E(1), Sirico D(2), Vida V(3), Salvo GD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Pediatric Residency Program, 
University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(2)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Pediatric and Congenital 
Cardiology Unit, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(3)Department of Cardiac, Thoracic, Vascular Sciences and Public Health, 
Pediatric and Congenital Cardiac Surgery Unit, University of Padua, Padua, 
Italy.

We report a unique case of left-sided scimitar syndrome associated with 
horseshoe lung (HL) in a newborn with a prenatal diagnosis, confirmed at birth, 
of complex congenital heart disease (CHD). The cardiac anomalies included right 
atrial isomerism, persistent left superior vena cava, unbalanced complete 
atrioventricular (AV) atrial septal defect with atresia of the left component of 
the AV valve and a hypoplastic left ventricle, double outlet right ventricle, 
malposition of the great arteries, and anomalous origin of left pulmonary artery 
(AOLPA) from the perihilar portion of the right pulmonary artery. The 
combination of echocardiography, cardiac computed tomography, three-dimensional 
virtual reconstruction, and diagnostic heart catheterization provided 
complementary insights, each contributing critically to the final diagnosis. 
This case represents the first reported association of HL with left-sided 
scimitar syndrome and pseudo-pulmonary sling in a neonate with complex CHD, 
emphasizing the role of multimodality imaging for accurate diagnosis and 
clinical decision-making.

Copyright: © 2025 Journal of Cardiovascular Echography.

DOI: 10.4103/jcecho.jcecho_125_25
PMCID: PMC12857799
PMID: 41625720

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.