---
reference_id: "PMID:15254046"
title: Gene expression alterations in prostate cancer predicting tumor aggression and preceding development of malignancy.
authors:
- Yu YP
- Landsittel D
- Jing L
- Nelson J
- Ren B
- Liu L
- McDonald C
- Thomas R
- Dhir R
- Finkelstein S
- Michalopoulos G
- Becich M
- Luo JH
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2004.05.158
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene expression alterations in prostate cancer predicting tumor aggression and preceding development of malignancy.
**Authors:** Yu YP, Landsittel D, Jing L, Nelson J, Ren B, Liu L, McDonald C, Thomas R, Dhir R, Finkelstein S, Michalopoulos G, Becich M, Luo JH
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2004.05.158](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2004.05.158)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2004 Jul 15;22(14):2790-9. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2004.05.158.

Gene expression alterations in prostate cancer predicting tumor aggression and 
preceding development of malignancy.

Yu YP(1), Landsittel D, Jing L, Nelson J, Ren B, Liu L, McDonald C, Thomas R, 
Dhir R, Finkelstein S, Michalopoulos G, Becich M, Luo JH.

Author information:
(1)University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute and Department of Pathology, 
University of Pittsburgh, 3550 Terrace Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

PURPOSE: The incidence of prostate cancer is frequent, occurring in almost 
one-third of men older than 45 years. Only a fraction of the cases reach the 
stages displaying clinical significance. Despite the advances in our 
understanding of prostate carcinogenesis and disease progression, our knowledge 
of this disease is still fragmented. Identification of the genes and patterns of 
gene expression will provide a more cohesive picture of prostate cancer biology.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this study, we performed a comprehensive gene 
expression analysis on 152 human samples including prostate cancer tissues, 
prostate tissues adjacent to tumor, and organ donor prostate tissues, obtained 
from men of various ages, using the Affymetrix (Santa Clara, CA) U95a, U95b, and 
U95c chip sets (37,777 genes and expression sequence tags).
RESULTS: Our results confirm an alteration of gene expression in prostate cancer 
when comparing with nontumor adjacent prostate tissues. However, our study also 
indicates that the gene expression pattern in tissues adjacent to cancer is so 
substantially altered that it resembles a cancer field effect.
CONCLUSION: We also found that gene expression patterns can be used to predict 
the aggressiveness of prostate cancer using a novel model.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2004.05.158
PMID: 15254046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]