---
reference_id: "PMID:27876815"
title: "Variable expressivity and genetic heterogeneity involving DPT and SEMA3D genes in autosomal dominant familial Meniere's disease."
authors:
- Martín-Sierra C
- Gallego-Martinez A
- Requena T
- Frejo L
- Batuecas-Caletrío A
- Lopez-Escamez JA
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2016.154
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variable expressivity and genetic heterogeneity involving DPT and SEMA3D genes in autosomal dominant familial Meniere's disease.
**Authors:** Martín-Sierra C, Gallego-Martinez A, Requena T, Frejo L, Batuecas-Caletrío A, Lopez-Escamez JA
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2016.154](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2016.154)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2017 Feb;25(2):200-207. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2016.154. Epub 2016
 Nov 23.

Variable expressivity and genetic heterogeneity involving DPT and SEMA3D genes 
in autosomal dominant familial Meniere's disease.

Martín-Sierra C(1), Gallego-Martinez A(1), Requena T(1), Frejo L(1), 
Batuecas-Caletrío A(2), Lopez-Escamez JA(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Otology & Neurotology Group CTS495, Department of Genomic Medicine, 
GENYO-Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research-Pfizer/University of 
Granada/Junta de Andalucía, PTS, Granada, Spain.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, 
Spain.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria ibs. 
Granada Complejo Hospital Universitario, Granada (CHUGRA), Granada, Spain.

Autosomal dominant (AD) familial Meniere's disease (FMD) is a rare disorder 
involving the inner ear defined by sensorineural hearing loss, tinnitus and 
episodic vertigo. Here, we have identified two novel and rare heterozygous 
variants in the SEMA3D and DPT genes segregating with the complete phenotype 
that have variable expressivity in two pedigrees with AD-FMD. A detailed 
characterization of the phenotype within each family illustrates the clinical 
heterogeneity in the onset and progression of the disease. We also showed the 
expression of both genes in the human cochlea and performed in silico analyses 
of these variants. Three-dimensional protein modelling showed changes in the 
structure of the protein indicating potential physical interactions. These 
results confirm a genetic heterogeneity in FMD with incomplete penetrance and 
variable expressivity.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2016.154
PMCID: PMC5255954
PMID: 27876815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.