---
reference_id: "PMID:32559661"
title: Diagnosis of intrauterine parvovirus B19 infection at birth - Value of DNA detection in neonatal blood and dried blood spots.
authors:
- Russcher A
- Enders A
- de Brouwer CS
- Oepkes D
- Hahn R
- Enders M
- Kroes ACM
- Vossen ACTM
journal: J Clin Virol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104482
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis of intrauterine parvovirus B19 infection at birth - Value of DNA detection in neonatal blood and dried blood spots.
**Authors:** Russcher A, Enders A, de Brouwer CS, Oepkes D, Hahn R, Enders M, Kroes ACM, Vossen ACTM
**Journal:** J Clin Virol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104482](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104482)

## Content

1. J Clin Virol. 2020 Aug;129:104482. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104482. Epub 2020
Jun  2.

Diagnosis of intrauterine parvovirus B19 infection at birth - Value of DNA 
detection in neonatal blood and dried blood spots.

Russcher A(1), Enders A(2), de Brouwer CS(3), Oepkes D(4), Hahn R(2), Enders 
M(2), Kroes ACM(3), Vossen ACTM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
the Netherlands. Electronic address: a.russcher@lumc.nl.
(2)Laboratory Prof. Gisela Enders and Colleagues, MVZ, Stuttgart, Germany.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Diagnosis of congenital viral infection at birth is generally 
attempted by direct detection of the virus by PCR in various neonatal materials. 
How to reliably diagnose intrauterine infection with parvovirus B19 (B19 V) at 
birth is unknown.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the performance of B19 V DNA detection in cord blood 
(CB) or neonatal dried blood spots (DBS) in diagnosing fetal infection.
STUDY DESIGN: Two cohorts of children diagnosed prenatally with an intrauterine 
B19 V infection were included in this study. CB samples of intrauterine B19 V 
infections that were sent to a reference laboratory for congenital infections in 
Stuttgart, Germany in the period 1995-2014 were tested in triplicate for B19 V 
DNA by quantitative PCR. DBS from children with intrauterine B19 V infection 
that underwent IUT at the LUMC, Leiden, the Netherlands in the period 2009-2014 
were tested for B19 V DNA by quantitative B19 V PCR in triplicate.
RESULTS: Fourteen of twenty (70 %) CB samples tested positive for B19 V DNA. The 
positivity rate was 40 % (4/10) in those with a prenatal diagnosis <20 weeks 
gestation. When intrauterine B19 V infection was diagnosed thereafter, 100 % 
(10/10) samples were B19 V DNA positive. Of the thirteen available DBS, twelve 
(92 %) tested positive. Viral load in CB and DBS corresponded inversely with 
time from fetal diagnosis to birth.
CONCLUSION: B19 V DNA can be detected in neonatal blood samples of children 
following intrauterine B19 V infection, although the possibility of 
false-negatives, even in severe infections, should be considered. B19 V viral 
load at birth correlates with timing of infection.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104482
PMID: 32559661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.