---
reference_id: "PMID:158982"
title: Immune complex injury of the lung.
authors:
- Ward PA
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '1979'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune complex injury of the lung.
**Authors:** Ward PA
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (1979)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 1979 Oct;97(1):85-92.

Immune complex injury of the lung.

Ward PA.

Abundant evidence currently exists to suggest that immune complexes play an 
important role in inflammatory diseases of the lung. Clinically, idiopathic 
pulmonary fibrosis, eosinophilic granuloma of lung, and systemic lupus 
erythematosus have been shown to be associated with the presence of immune 
complexes both in lung and in the serum. Experimentally, there is compelling 
evidence that acute lung injury can be triggered by the deposition of complexes 
in vascular walls or by the presence of performed immune complexes instilled 
into the airways. The observed reactions are, as expected, complement- and 
neutrophil-dependent. The morphologic changes in lung caused by products of 
complement activation (C5a and related peptides) depend on whether complement 
activation occurs within the vasculature or within the airways. Airway 
activation is associated with intraalveolar accumulations of neutrophils, while 
intravascular activation leads to intracapillary sequestration of neutrophils. 
The chronic formation of immune complexes within the vasculature (in the model 
of "chronic serum sickness") leads to an interstitial fibrotic reaction and a 
thickening of basement membranes. Recent studies of intravascularly infused 
preformed immune complexes indicate a proclivity for certain types of complexes 
to localize within lung. These "lung-seeking" complexes differ from 
non-lung-seeking complexes only in the ratio of antigen to antibody. Complement 
does not seem to alter the tendancy for certain complexes to localize within 
lung. These studies emphasize the potential importance of immune complexes in 
lung injury and point out the variety of mechanisms involved in both the 
localization process and the injury process.

PMCID: PMC2042385
PMID: 158982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]