---
reference_id: "PMID:38726585"
title: "Clostridioides Difficile: A Concise Review of Best Practices and Updates."
authors:
- Yakout A
- Bi Y
- Harris DM
journal: J Prim Care Community Health
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/21501319241249645
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clostridioides Difficile: A Concise Review of Best Practices and Updates.
**Authors:** Yakout A, Bi Y, Harris DM
**Journal:** J Prim Care Community Health (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/21501319241249645](https://doi.org/10.1177/21501319241249645)

## Content

1. J Prim Care Community Health. 2024 Jan-Dec;15:21501319241249645. doi: 
10.1177/21501319241249645.

Clostridioides Difficile: A Concise Review of Best Practices and Updates.

Yakout A(1), Bi Y(1), Harris DM(1).

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.

Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) is one of the most common and severe 
nosocomial infections worldwide. It can also affect healthy individuals in the 
community. The incidence of CDI has been on the rise globally for the past 
decade, necessitating a proactive approach to combat its spread; new strategies 
are being developed to enhance diagnostic accuracy and optimize treatment 
outcomes. Implementing the 2-step testing has increased diagnostic specificity, 
reducing the usage of CD-specific antibiotics with no concomitant increase in 
surgical complication rates. In 2021, the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America/Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (IDSA/SHEA) shifted its 
preference for initial treatment to fidaxomicin over vancomycin and 
metronidazole due to its lower recurrence rate. It also prioritized fidaxomicin 
for the treatment of recurrent CDI. There are new developments on the frontiers 
of fecal microbiota therapies, with RBX2660 and SER-109 approved recently by the 
FDA for prevention, with other microbiome-based therapies in various development 
and clinical trials. This review offers providers an updated and practical guide 
for CDI management.

DOI: 10.1177/21501319241249645
PMCID: PMC11085020
PMID: 38726585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.