---
reference_id: "PMID:40319207"
title: "The Landmark Series: Surgical Management of Functioning and Non-Functioning Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors."
authors:
- Tobias J
- Clarke CN
- Gangi A
- Keutgen XM
journal: Ann Surg Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1245/s10434-025-17390-x
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pancreatic Neoplasms/surgery, pathology"
- "Neuroendocrine Tumors/surgery, pathology"
- Pancreatectomy/methods
- Prognosis
- Practice Guidelines as Topic/standards
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Landmark Series: Surgical Management of Functioning and Non-Functioning Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors.
**Authors:** Tobias J, Clarke CN, Gangi A, Keutgen XM
**Journal:** Ann Surg Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1245/s10434-025-17390-x](https://doi.org/10.1245/s10434-025-17390-x)

## Content

1. Ann Surg Oncol. 2025 Jul;32(7):4720-4728. doi: 10.1245/s10434-025-17390-x.
Epub  2025 May 3.

The Landmark Series: Surgical Management of Functioning and Non-Functioning 
Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors.

Tobias J(1), Clarke CN(2), Gangi A(3), Keutgen XM(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Surgical Oncology, Section of Endocrine Surgery, University of 
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Division of Surgical Oncology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, 
USA.
(3)Division of Surgical Oncology, Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA.
(4)Division of Surgical Oncology, Section of Endocrine Surgery, University of 
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. xkeutgen@bsd.uchicago.edu.

Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PNETs) are comparatively rare pancreatic 
malignancies that exhibit diverse biologic behavior, ranging from indolent 
tumors to widely metastatic cancers, with up to 15 % secreting hormones that 
cause symptoms. As a consequence, the management of PNETs is highly 
individualized and can include active surveillance of small (1-2 cm) and very 
small (< 1 cm) nonfunctioning tumors without worrisome features, 
parenchymal-sparing resection of appropriately located tumors, anatomic 
pancreatectomy and, in select cases, debulking of metastatic disease, 
particularly in the liver. This review synthesizes society recommendations and 
contemporary evidence guiding the surgical management of PNETs. Innovations in 
molecular profiling and systemic therapies hold promise to refine surgical 
algorithms for this heterogeneous tumor.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1245/s10434-025-17390-x
PMCID: PMC12130066
PMID: 40319207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: There are no conflicts of interest.