---
reference_id: "PMID:30199040"
title: "Differentiation, Maintenance, and Analysis of Human Retinal Pigment Epithelium Cells: A Disease-in-a-dish Model for BEST1 Mutations."
authors:
- Kittredge A
- Ji C
- Zhang Y
- Yang T
journal: J Vis Exp
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3791/57791
keywords:
- "Bestrophins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- Cytological Techniques/methods
- Humans
- Immunoblotting/methods
- Mutation
- Patch-Clamp Techniques/methods
- "Pluripotent Stem Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- Retinal Diseases/genetics
- "Retinal Pigment Epithelium/cytology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differentiation, Maintenance, and Analysis of Human Retinal Pigment Epithelium Cells: A Disease-in-a-dish Model for BEST1 Mutations.
**Authors:** Kittredge A, Ji C, Zhang Y, Yang T
**Journal:** J Vis Exp (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3791/57791](https://doi.org/10.3791/57791)

## Content

1. J Vis Exp. 2018 Aug 24;(138):57791. doi: 10.3791/57791.

Differentiation, Maintenance, and Analysis of Human Retinal Pigment Epithelium
Cells: A Disease-in-a-dish Model for BEST1 Mutations.

Kittredge A(1), Ji C(1), Zhang Y(2), Yang T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Rochester, School of
Medicine and Dentistry.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Rochester, School of
Medicine and Dentistry; yu_zhang@urmc.rochester.edu.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Rochester, School of
Medicine and Dentistry; tingting_yang@urmc.rochester.edu.

Although over 200 genetic mutations in the human BEST1 gene have been identified
and linked to retinal degenerative diseases, the pathological mechanisms remain
elusive mainly due to the lack of a good in vivo model for studying BEST1 and
its mutations under physiological conditions. BEST1 encodes an ion channel,
namely BESTROPHIN1 (BEST1), which functions in retinal pigment epithelium (RPE);
however, the extremely limited accessibility to native human RPE cells
represents a major challenge for scientific research. This protocol describes
how to generate human RPEs bearing BEST1 disease-causing mutations by induced
differentiation from human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs). As hPSCs are
self-renewable, this approach allows researchers to have a steady source of
hPSC-RPEs for various experimental analyses, such as immunoblotting,
immunofluorescence, and patch clamp, and thus provides a very powerful
disease-in-a-dish model for BEST1-associated retinal conditions. Notably, this
strategy can be applied to study RPE (patho)physiology and other genes of
interest natively expressed in RPE.

DOI: 10.3791/57791
PMCID: PMC6144140
PMID: 30199040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
