---
reference_id: "PMID:29565525"
title: KBG Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Morel Swols D
- Tekin M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# KBG Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Morel Swols D, Tekin M

## Content

1. KBG Syndrome.

Morel Swols D(1), Tekin M(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2018 Mar 22.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical and Translational Genetics, Dr John T Macdonald 
Foundation Department of Human Genetics, John P Hussman Institute for Human 
Genomics, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, Florida

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: KBG syndrome is typically characterized by macrodontia 
(especially of the upper central incisors), characteristic facial features 
(triangular face, brachycephaly, synophrys, widely spaced eyes, broad or bushy 
eyebrows, prominent ears, prominent nasal bridge, bulbous nose, anteverted 
nares, long philtrum, and thin vermilion of the upper lip), short stature, 
developmental delay / intellectual disability, and behavioral issues. Affected 
individuals may have feeding difficulties (particularly in infancy), skeletal 
anomalies (brachydactyly, large anterior fontanelle with delayed closure, 
scoliosis), hearing loss (conductive, mixed, and sensorineural), seizure 
disorder, and brain malformations. There is significant variability in the 
clinical findings, even between affected members of the same family.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of KBG syndrome is confirmed in a proband by 
detection of either a heterozygous pathogenic variant in ANKRD11 or deletion of 
16q24.3 that includes ANKRD11.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Surgical corrections and/or speech 
therapy for palatal anomalies; nasogastric tube feeding in infants; 
pharmacologic treatment for gastroesophageal reflux disease; pressure-equalizing 
tubes and/or tonsillectomy/adenoidectomy for chronic otitis media; consideration 
of amplification for hearing loss; consideration of growth hormone therapy for 
short stature and medication to arrest puberty for premature pubertal 
development; standard treatment of seizure disorder, undescended testis in 
males, congenital heart defects, strabismus / refractive errors, and 
developmental disabilities. Surveillance: Routine monitoring of hearing, vision, 
growth, pubertal status (in prepubertal individuals), and cognitive development. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Ototoxic drugs should be avoided because of the 
risk for hearing loss. Pregnancy management: Pregnancy management should be 
tailored to the specific features in the affected woman. For example, 
involvement of a cardiologist and maternal fetal medicine physician for a 
pregnant woman with a history of a congenital heart defect; control of seizures 
during pregnancy for those with a seizure disorder.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Recurrence risk for sibs of a proband with KBG syndrome 
depends on the genetic alteration: Deletion of 16q24.3 (~75% of reported 
pathogenic variants are de novo and the remainder are inherited in an autosomal 
dominant manner.). ANKRD11 sequence variants (~66% of reported pathogenic 
variants are de novo and the remainder are inherited in an autosomal dominant 
manner.). Prenatal testing and preimplantation genetic testing are possible if 
the causative genetic alteration has been identified in an affected family 
member.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 29565525