---
reference_id: "PMID:10745745"
title: "Aganglionosis of the small intestine: a rare form of Hirschsprung's disease."
authors:
- Rayhorn NJ
- Ingebo KR
journal: Gastroenterol Nurs
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1097/00001610-199907000-00004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aganglionosis of the small intestine: a rare form of Hirschsprung's disease.
**Authors:** Rayhorn NJ, Ingebo KR
**Journal:** Gastroenterol Nurs (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00001610-199907000-00004](https://doi.org/10.1097/00001610-199907000-00004)

## Content

1. Gastroenterol Nurs. 1999 Jul-Aug;22(4):164-6. doi: 
10.1097/00001610-199907000-00004.

Aganglionosis of the small intestine: a rare form of Hirschsprung's disease.

Rayhorn NJ(1), Ingebo KR.

Author information:
(1)Phoenix Children's Hospital, Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and 
Nutrition, AZ 850006, USA.

Absence of ganglion cells in the small intestine, a rare form of Hirschsprung's 
disease, is a condition found in newborns and associated with increased 
morbidity and mortality. Families are faced with numerous challenges, including 
maintenance of nutrition, the need for surgical interventions, and the potential 
for complications associated with the medical technologies necessary to maintain 
children with aganglionosis. Home care needs are not unlike those of other 
children with severe intestinal dysfunction such as short bowel syndrome. This 
article gives an overview of Hirschsprung's disease and presents three case 
studies of small bowel Hirschsprung's. One center's experience with 
Hirschsprung's disease supports the need for a multidisciplinary approach to 
long-term management and home care.

DOI: 10.1097/00001610-199907000-00004
PMID: 10745745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]