---
reference_id: "PMID:40528683"
title: Linking Skin and Joint Inflammation in Psoriatic Arthritis through Shared CD8(+) T Cell Clones.
authors:
- Durham LE
- Humby F
- Ng N
- Laddach R
- Gray EH
- Ryan SE
- Steel KJA
- Ross R
- Povoleri GAM
- Nuamah R
- Fung K
- Kallayil AM
- Dhami P
- Kirkham BW
- Taams LS
journal: Arthritis Rheumatol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1002/art.43286
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Linking Skin and Joint Inflammation in Psoriatic Arthritis through Shared CD8(+) T Cell Clones.
**Authors:** Durham LE, Humby F, Ng N, Laddach R, Gray EH, Ryan SE, Steel KJA, Ross R, Povoleri GAM, Nuamah R, Fung K, Kallayil AM, Dhami P, Kirkham BW, Taams LS
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheumatol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.43286](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.43286)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2026 Jan;78(1):152-165. doi: 10.1002/art.43286. Epub 2025
 Sep 21.

Linking Skin and Joint Inflammation in Psoriatic Arthritis through Shared CD8(+) 
T Cell Clones.

Durham LE(1), Humby F(2), Ng N(2), Laddach R(3), Gray EH(1), Ryan SE(1), Steel 
KJA(1), Ross R(1), Povoleri GAM(1), Nuamah R(4), Fung K(5), Kallayil AM(5), 
Dhami P(5), Kirkham BW(2), Taams LS(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Inflammation Biology and Cancer Immunology, Department of 
Inflammation Biology, School of Immunology and Microbial Sciences, King's 
College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, United Kingdom.
(3)Spatial Biology Facility, Guy's Cancer Centre, Faculty of Life Sciences and 
Medicine and Faculty of Dentistry, Oral and Craniofacial Sciences, King's 
College London, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Spatial Biology Facility, Guy's Cancer Centre, Faculty of Life Sciences and 
Medicine and Faculty of Dentistry, Oral and Craniofacial Sciences, King's 
College London and Genomics Facility, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, United Kingdom.
(5)Genomics Facility, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, United 
Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is an HLA class I-associated inflammatory 
arthritis that develops in up to 30% of people with psoriasis. We tested the 
hypothesis that skin and joint inflammation in PsA is linked in terms of CD8+ T 
cell phenotype and clonality.
METHODS: Using single-cell RNA sequencing (n = 6 skin samples with n = 5 paired 
synovial tissue samples and/or n = 5 paired synovial fluid samples) and spatial 
transcriptomics (n = 1 paired skin and synovial biopsy sample, n = 4 unpaired 
biopsy samples), we compared the transcriptional signature, T cell receptor 
repertoire, and cell neighborhoods of T cells from skin and synovial tissue 
and/or fluid samples from patients with PsA.
RESULTS: We identified an enrichment of type 17 CD8+ tissue-resident memory T 
(Trm) cells in both the skin and joint, with a stronger interleukin-17 signature 
in the skin than the joint. CD8+ Trm cells resided in distinct cell 
neighborhoods in the skin and joint but were located adjacent to 
antigen-presenting cells in both sites. Several T cell clones were shared 
between the skin and joint. Across the six patients, 155 CD8+ T cell clones were 
shared between the two sites, comprising 1,071 CD8+ T cells and taking up a 
median of 13% of the skin and 8% of the joint CD8+ T cell receptor repertoire. 
CD8+ skin-joint shared clones tended to have a similar phenotype at both sites, 
characterized by increased expression of genes associated with a cytotoxic, 
tissue-resident phenotype.
CONCLUSION: Our findings support the hypothesis that skin and joint inflammation 
in PsA is linked in terms of CD8+ T cell clonality and that specific T cells 
migrate between these compartments to propagate inflammation across both sites.

© 2025 The Author(s). Arthritis & Rheumatology published by Wiley Periodicals 
LLC on behalf of American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.43286
PMCID: PMC12854012
PMID: 40528683