---
reference_id: "PMID:39636943"
title: Human iPSC-derived myelinating organoids and globoid cells to study Krabbe disease.
authors:
- Evans LMP
- Gawron J
- Sim FJ
- Feltri ML
- Marziali LN
journal: PLoS One
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0314858
keywords:
- Humans
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism, cytology"
- "Leukodystrophy, Globoid Cell/pathology, metabolism"
- "Organoids/metabolism, pathology"
- Myelin Sheath/metabolism
- "Microglia/metabolism, pathology"
- Autophagy
- "Galactosylceramidase/metabolism, genetics"
- TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Galactosylceramides/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human iPSC-derived myelinating organoids and globoid cells to study Krabbe disease.
**Authors:** Evans LMP, Gawron J, Sim FJ, Feltri ML, Marziali LN
**Journal:** PLoS One (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0314858](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314858)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2024 Dec 5;19(12):e0314858. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0314858. 
eCollection 2024.

Human iPSC-derived myelinating organoids and globoid cells to study Krabbe 
disease.

Evans LMP(1), Gawron J(1), Sim FJ(2), Feltri ML(1)(3), Marziali LN(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology, Jacobs School of Medicine and 
Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, United States of 
America.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Jacobs School of Medicine and 
Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, United States of 
America.
(3)Biometra Department and IRCcs Carlo Besta, Università degli Studi di Milano, 
Milano, Italy.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Jul 23:2024.07.19.604372. doi: 10.1101/2024.07.19.604372.

Krabbe disease (Kd) is a lysosomal storage disorder (LSD) caused by the 
deficiency of the lysosomal galactosylceramidase (GALC) which cleaves the myelin 
enriched lipid galactosylceramide (GalCer). Accumulated GalCer is catabolized 
into the cytotoxic lipid psychosine that causes myelinating cells death and 
demyelination which recruits microglia/macrophages that fail to digest myelin 
debris and become globoid cells. Here, to understand the pathological mechanisms 
of Kd, we used induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from Kd patients to 
produce myelinating organoids and microglia. We show that Kd organoids have no 
obvious defects in neurogenesis, astrogenesis, and oligodendrogenesis but 
manifest early myelination defects. Specifically, Kd organoids showed shorter 
but a similar number of myelin internodes than Controls at the peak of 
myelination and a reduced number and shorter internodes at a later time point. 
Interestingly, myelin is affected in the absence of autophagy and mTOR pathway 
dysregulation, suggesting lack of lysosomal dysfunction which makes this 
organoid model a very valuable tool to study the early events that drive 
demyelination in Kd. Kd iPSC-derived microglia show a marginal rate of globoid 
cell formation under normal culture conditions that is drastically increased 
upon GalCer feeding. Under normal culture conditions, Kd microglia show a minor 
LAMP1 content decrease and a slight increase in the autophagy protein LC3B. Upon 
GalCer feeding, Kd cells show accumulation of autophagy proteins and strong 
LAMP1 reduction that at a later time point are reverted showing the compensatory 
capabilities of globoid cells. Altogether, this supports the value of our 
cultures as tools to study the mechanisms that drive globoid cell formation and 
the compensatory mechanism in play to overcome GalCer accumulation in Kd.

Copyright: © 2024 Evans et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0314858
PMCID: PMC11620608
PMID: 39636943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.