---
reference_id: "PMID:36689546"
title: Small-Molecule Polθ Inhibitors Provide Safe and Effective Tumor Radiosensitization in Preclinical Models.
authors:
- Rodriguez-Berriguete G
- Ranzani M
- Prevo R
- Puliyadi R
- Machado N
- Bolland HR
- Millar V
- Ebner D
- Boursier M
- Cerutti A
- Cicconi A
- Galbiati A
- Grande D
- Grinkevich V
- Majithiya JB
- Piscitello D
- Rajendra E
- Stockley ML
- Boulton SJ
- Hammond EM
- Heald RA
- Smith GCM
- Robinson HMR
- Higgins GS
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-2977
keywords:
- Humans
- "Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, radiotherapy"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Small-Molecule Polθ Inhibitors Provide Safe and Effective Tumor Radiosensitization in Preclinical Models.
**Authors:** Rodriguez-Berriguete G, Ranzani M, Prevo R, Puliyadi R, Machado N, Bolland HR, Millar V, Ebner D, Boursier M, Cerutti A, Cicconi A, Galbiati A, Grande D, Grinkevich V, Majithiya JB, Piscitello D, Rajendra E, Stockley ML, Boulton SJ, Hammond EM, Heald RA, Smith GCM, Robinson HMR, Higgins GS
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-2977](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-2977)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2023 Apr 14;29(8):1631-1642. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-2977.

Small-Molecule Polθ Inhibitors Provide Safe and Effective Tumor
Radiosensitization in Preclinical Models.

Rodriguez-Berriguete G(#)(1), Ranzani M(#)(2), Prevo R(#)(1), Puliyadi R(1),
Machado N(1), Bolland HR(1), Millar V(3), Ebner D(3), Boursier M(2), Cerutti
A(2), Cicconi A(2), Galbiati A(2), Grande D(2), Grinkevich V(2), Majithiya
JB(2), Piscitello D(2), Rajendra E(2), Stockley ML(2), Boulton SJ(2)(4), Hammond
EM(1), Heald RA(2), Smith GCM(2), Robinson HMR(2), Higgins GS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Artios Pharma, Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)The Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: DNA polymerase theta (Polθ, encoded by the POLQ gene) is a DNA repair
enzyme critical for microhomology mediated end joining (MMEJ). Polθ has limited
expression in normal tissues but is frequently overexpressed in cancer cells
and, therefore, represents an ideal target for tumor-specific
radiosensitization. In this study we evaluate whether targeting Polθ with novel
small-molecule inhibitors is a feasible strategy to improve the efficacy of
radiotherapy.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We characterized the response to Polθ inhibition in
combination with ionizing radiation in different cancer cell models in vitro and
in vivo.
RESULTS: Here, we show that ART558 and ART899, two novel and specific allosteric
inhibitors of the Polθ DNA polymerase domain, potently radiosensitize tumor
cells, particularly when combined with fractionated radiation. Importantly,
noncancerous cells were not radiosensitized by Polθ inhibition. Mechanistically,
we show that the radiosensitization caused by Polθ inhibition is most effective
in replicating cells and is due to impaired DNA damage repair. We also show that
radiosensitization is still effective under hypoxia, suggesting that these
inhibitors may help overcome hypoxia-induced radioresistance. In addition, we
describe for the first time ART899 and characterize it as a potent and specific
Polθ inhibitor with improved metabolic stability. In vivo, the combination of
Polθ inhibition using ART899 with fractionated radiation is well tolerated and
results in a significant reduction in tumor growth compared with radiation
alone.
CONCLUSIONS: These results pave the way for future clinical trials of Polθ
inhibitors in combination with radiotherapy.

©2023 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-2977
PMCID: PMC10102842
PMID: 36689546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
