---
reference_id: "PMID:32176765"
title: "Inhibition of complement C1s in patients with cold agglutinin disease: lessons learned from a named patient program."
authors:
- Gelbenegger G
- Schoergenhofer C
- Derhaschnig U
- Buchtele N
- Sillaber C
- Fillitz M
- Schenk TM
- "D'Sa S"
- Cartwright R
- Gilbert JC
- Jilma B
- Jaeger U
journal: Blood Adv
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2019001321
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhibition of complement C1s in patients with cold agglutinin disease: lessons learned from a named patient program.
**Authors:** Gelbenegger G, Schoergenhofer C, Derhaschnig U, Buchtele N, Sillaber C, Fillitz M, Schenk TM, D'Sa S, Cartwright R, Gilbert JC, Jilma B, Jaeger U
**Journal:** Blood Adv (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1182/bloodadvances.2019001321](https://doi.org/10.1182/bloodadvances.2019001321)

## Content

1. Blood Adv. 2020 Mar 24;4(6):997-1005. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2019001321.

Inhibition of complement C1s in patients with cold agglutinin disease: lessons 
learned from a named patient program.

Gelbenegger G(1), Schoergenhofer C(1), Derhaschnig U(2), Buchtele N(3), Sillaber 
C(4), Fillitz M(5), Schenk TM(6), D'Sa S(7), Cartwright R(8), Gilbert JC(9), 
Jilma B(1), Jaeger U(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine I, and.
(4)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine I, Medical University 
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Hanusch Krankenhaus, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Universitätsklinikum St. Pölten, St. Pölten, 
Austria.
(7)University College London Hospitals (UCLH) Centre for Waldenströms 
Macroglobulinaemia and Related Conditions, UCLH, National Health Service (NHS) 
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(8)Worthing Hospital, Western Sussex Hospitals, NHS Foundation Trust, Worthing, 
United Kingdom; and.
(9)Band Therapeutics, LLC, Lexington, MA.

Cold agglutinin disease (CAD) causes predominantly extravascular hemolysis and 
anemia via complement activation. Sutimlimab is a novel humanized monoclonal 
antibody directed against classical pathway complement factor C1s. We aimed to 
evaluate the safety and efficacy of long-term maintenance treatment with 
sutimlimab in patients with CAD. Seven CAD patients treated with sutimlimab as 
part of a phase 1B study were transitioned to a named patient program. After a 
loading dose, patients received biweekly (once every 2 weeks) infusions of 
sutimlimab at various doses. When a patient's laboratory data showed signs of 
breakthrough hemolysis, the dose of sutimlimab was increased. Three patients 
started with a dose of 45 mg/kg, another 3 with 60 mg/kg, and 1 with a fixed 
dose of 5.5 g every other week. All CAD patients responded to re-treatment, and 
sutimlimab increased hemoglobin from a median initial level of 7.7 g/dL to a 
median peak of 12.5 g/dL (P = .016). Patients maintained near normal hemoglobin 
levels except for a few breakthrough events that were related to underdosing and 
which resolved after the appropriate dose increase. Four of the patients 
included were eventually treated with a biweekly 5.5 g fixed-dose regimen of 
sutimlimab. None of them had any breakthrough hemolysis. All patients remained 
transfusion free while receiving sutimlimab. There were no treatment-related 
serious adverse events. Overlapping treatment with erythropoietin, rituximab, or 
ibrutinib in individual patients was safe and did not cause untoward drug 
interactions. Long-term maintenance treatment with sutimlimab was safe, 
effectively inhibited hemolysis, and significantly increased hemoglobin levels 
in re-exposed, previously transfusion-dependent CAD patients.

© 2020 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2019001321
PMCID: PMC7094024
PMID: 32176765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: U.G. received 
personal fees from True North Therapeutics, Amgen, Takeda, and AbbVie and grants 
and personal fees from Roche, Celgene, Gilead, Novartis, and True North 
Therapeutics. J.C.G. was an employee and stockholder of True North Therapeutics. 
B.J. received reimbursement for travel costs and scientific advice from True 
North Therapeutics. The remaining authors declare no competing financial 
interests.