---
reference_id: "PMID:38355834"
title: Convergent evolution of BRCA2 reversion mutations under therapeutic pressure by PARP inhibition and platinum chemotherapy.
authors:
- Walmsley CS
- Jonsson P
- Cheng ML
- McBride S
- Kaeser C
- Vargas HA
- Laudone V
- Taylor BS
- Kappagantula R
- Baez P
- Richards AL
- Noronha AM
- Perera D
- Berger M
- Solit DB
- Iacobuzio-Donahue CA
- Scher HI
- Donoghue MTA
- Abida W
- Schram AM
journal: NPJ Precis Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41698-024-00526-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Convergent evolution of BRCA2 reversion mutations under therapeutic pressure by PARP inhibition and platinum chemotherapy.
**Authors:** Walmsley CS, Jonsson P, Cheng ML, McBride S, Kaeser C, Vargas HA, Laudone V, Taylor BS, Kappagantula R, Baez P, Richards AL, Noronha AM, Perera D, Berger M, Solit DB, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, Scher HI, Donoghue MTA, Abida W, Schram AM
**Journal:** NPJ Precis Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41698-024-00526-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41698-024-00526-9)

## Content

1. NPJ Precis Oncol. 2024 Feb 14;8(1):34. doi: 10.1038/s41698-024-00526-9.

Convergent evolution of BRCA2 reversion mutations under therapeutic pressure by
PARP inhibition and platinum chemotherapy.

Walmsley CS(1)(2), Jonsson P(3), Cheng ML(3), McBride S(3), Kaeser C(3), Vargas
HA(3), Laudone V(3), Taylor BS(4), Kappagantula R(3), Baez P(3), Richards AL(3),
Noronha AM(3), Perera D(3), Berger M(3), Solit DB(3), Iacobuzio-Donahue CA(3),
Scher HI(3), Donoghue MTA(3), Abida W(3), Schram AM(5).

Author information:
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York City, NY, USA.
(4)Loxo Oncology at Lilly, Stamford, CT, USA.
(5)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York City, NY, USA.
schrama@mskcc.org.

Reversion mutations that restore wild-type function of the BRCA gene have been
described as a key mechanism of resistance to Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)
inhibitor therapy in BRCA-associated cancers. Here, we report a case of a
patient with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) with a
germline BRCA2 mutation who developed acquired resistance to PARP inhibition.
Extensive genomic interrogation of cell-free DNA (cfDNA) and tissue at baseline,
post-progression, and postmortem revealed ten unique BRCA2 reversion mutations
across ten sites. While several of the reversion mutations were private to a
specific site, nine out of ten tumors contained at least one mutation,
suggesting a powerful clonal selection for reversion mutations in the presence
of therapeutic pressure by PARP inhibition. Variable cfDNA shed was seen across
tumor sites, emphasizing a potential shortcoming of cfDNA monitoring for PARPi
resistance. This report provides a genomic portrait of the temporal and spatial
heterogeneity of prostate cancer under the selective pressure of a PARP
inhibition and exposes limitations in the current strategies for detection of
reversion mutations.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41698-024-00526-9
PMCID: PMC10866935
PMID: 38355834

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following competing
interests: AMS has received advisory board compensation from Relay Therapeutics
and Mersana, and research funding paid to institution from AstraZeneca, ArQule,
BeiGene, Black Diamond Therapeutics, Kura, Lilly, Merus, Northern Biologics,
Pfizer, Relay, and Surface Oncology. Grant funding from ASCO Conquer Cancer
Foundation CDA, NCI P30CA008748 CCITLA, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
Support Grant (P30 CA008748). MLC has received honoraria from The Lynx Group,
WebMD, and Potomac Center for Medical Education, advisory board compensation
from AstraZeneca, Inivata, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Mirati, research funding
paid to institution from Palleon Pharmaceuticals, and travel, accommodations and
expenses paid for by Daiichi Sankyo, AstraZeneca, and Genzyme. WA has received
honoraria from Roche, Medscape, Aptitude Health, Clinical Education Alliance,
OncLive/MJH Life Sciences, touchIME, Pfizer, and the MedNet. WA has also
received advisory board compensation from Clovis Oncology, ORIC pharmaceuticals,
Daiichi Sankyo, AstraZeneca/MedImmune, Pfizer and Laekna Therapeutics, and
research funding from AstraZeneca, Zenith Epigenetics, Clovis Oncology, ORIC
Pharmaceuticals, Epizyme, Nuvation Bio, Merus, and Transthera. The remaining
authors declare no competing interests.
