---
reference_id: "PMID:20301399"
title: Tuberous Sclerosis Complex.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Northrup H
- Koenig MK
- Pearson DA
- Au KS
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tuberous Sclerosis Complex.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Northrup H, Koenig MK, Pearson DA, Au KS

## Content

1. Tuberous Sclerosis Complex.

Northrup H(1), Koenig MK(2), Pearson DA(3), Au KS(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
1999 Jul 13 [updated 2024 Aug 1].

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, McGovern Medical 
School at the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston (UTHealth);, 
Children's Memorial Hermann Hospital, Houston, Texas
(2)Division of Child and Adolescent Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, 
McGovern Medical School at the University of Texas Health Science Center at 
Houston (UTHealth);, Children's Memorial Hermann Hospital, Houston, Texas
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Division of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, McGovern Medical School at the University of Texas Health 
Science Center at Houston (UTHealth), Houston, Texas

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) involves 
abnormalities of the skin (hypomelanotic macules, confetti skin lesions, facial 
angiofibromas, shagreen patches, fibrous cephalic plaques, ungual fibromas); 
brain (subependymal nodules, cortical tubers, and subependymal giant cell 
astrocytomas [SEGAs], seizures, TSC-associated neuropsychiatric disorder 
[TAND]); kidneys (benign renal angiomyolipomas, epithelial cysts, oncocytoma, 
renal cell carcinoma); heart (rhabdomyomas, arrhythmias); and lungs 
(lymphangioleiomyomatosis [LAM], multifocal micronodular pneumonocyte 
hyperplasia). Central nervous system-related problems (including TAND) are the 
leading cause of morbidity, whereas kidney disease is the leading cause of 
mortality.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The clinical diagnosis of TSC can be established in a proband 
based on clinical diagnostic criteria (presence of two major clinical features 
or one major clinical feature and two or more minor features). The molecular 
diagnosis can be established in a proband with a heterozygous pathogenic variant 
in TSC1 or TSC2 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Treatment with an mTOR inhibitor for enlarging 
SEGAs, intractable epilepsy, renal angiomyolipomas that are >4 cm, rapidly 
growing renal angiomyolipomas that are >3 cm, and LAM. Topical mTOR inhibitors 
for facial angiofibromas. Treatment of manifestations: Neurosurgery for 
enlarging SEGAs that are causing life-threatening neurologic symptoms. Seizure 
treatments include vigabatrin, other anti-seizure medications, dietary therapy, 
and epilepsy surgery. Referral to a neurodevelopmental specialist and/or 
psychiatrist for TAND; applied behavior analysis for autism spectrum disorder; 
consideration of medication for those with attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder. Treatment of renal cysts per nephrologist and surgical specialists. 
Secondary therapy options for renal angiomyolipomas that are >4 cm or rapidly 
growing renal angiomyolipomas that are >3 cm include selective embolization 
followed by corticosteroids, kidney-sparing resection, or ablative therapy. 
Embolization followed by corticosteroids for renal angiomyolipomas with acute 
hemorrhage. Treatment of retinal astrocytic hamartoma per ophthalmologist; 
treatment of extrarenal angiomyolipomas per surgeon and/or oncologist; treatment 
of neuroendocrine tumors per endocrinologist, surgeon, and/or oncologist. 
Surveillance: Detailed annual dermatologic examination. Brain MRI every one to 
three years in asymptomatic individuals with TSC younger than age 25 years to 
monitor for new occurrence of SEGAs; those with asymptomatic SEGAs in childhood 
should continue to be imaged periodically in adulthood; for those with large or 
growing SEGAs or SEGA-causing ventricular enlargement, more frequent brain MRIs 
as deemed clinically appropriate. Assessment with neurologist for manifestations 
of seizures at each visit; EEG in asymptomatic infants every six weeks up to age 
12 months, every three months up to age 24 months, and in individuals with known 
or suspected seizure activity as clinically indicated; prolonged video EEG in 
those with suspected seizures and normal routine EEG. Screening for TAND at 
least annually with comprehensive formal evaluation for TAND at key 
developmental time points. Abdominal MRI to assess for new or progression of 
angiomyolipoma and cystic kidney disease every one to three years; assess kidney 
function (glomerular filtration rate and blood pressure) at least annually. 
Echocardiogram every one to three years in asymptomatic infants and children 
with cardiac rhabdomyomas until regression is documented; echocardiogram in 
those with symptomatic cardiac rhabdomyomas per cardiologist. Clinical screening 
for LAM symptoms (exertional dyspnea and shortness of breath) at each visit in 
females older than age 18 years and males and females with respiratory symptoms; 
high-resolution CT every five to seven years in asymptomatic females without 
lung cysts beginning after age 18 years and continuing through menopause; for 
those with LAM-related cystic lung disease on CT, follow-up scan intervals are 
determined on an individual basis. Annual ophthalmology evaluation; vision 
testing for those on vigabatrin therapy. Surveillance for neuroendocrine tumors 
per endocrinologist. Detailed dental examination every six months with panoramic 
radiographs by age seven years. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Smoking; estrogen 
use; nephrectomy. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to evaluate 
apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives (including children) 
of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who 
would benefit from surveillance and early treatment. Pregnancy management: 
Discussion of the risks and benefits of using a given anti-seizure medication 
during pregnancy should ideally take place prior to conception.
GENETIC COUNSELING: TSC is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. About one 
third of individuals diagnosed with TSC have an affected parent; two thirds of 
individuals with TSC have the disorder as the result of a de novo pathogenic 
variant. Each child of an individual with TSC has a 50% chance of inheriting the 
TSC-related pathogenic variant. If the TSC-related pathogenic variant has been 
identified in an affected family member, predictive testing for at-risk 
asymptomatic family members and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing is 
possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301399