---
reference_id: "PMID:10946006"
title: Novel mutations in the microsomal triglyceride transfer protein gene causing abetalipoproteinemia.
authors:
- Ohashi K
- Ishibashi S
- Osuga J
- Tozawa R
- Harada K
- Yahagi N
- Shionoiri F
- Iizuka Y
- Tamura Y
- Nagai R
- Illingworth DR
- Gotoda T
- Yamada N
journal: J Lipid Res
year: '2000'
keywords:
- Abetalipoproteinemia/genetics
- Adenine
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- COS Cells
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- "DNA, Complementary/chemistry"
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- Gene Expression
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- RNA Splicing
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel mutations in the microsomal triglyceride transfer protein gene causing abetalipoproteinemia.
**Authors:** Ohashi K, Ishibashi S, Osuga J, Tozawa R, Harada K, Yahagi N, Shionoiri F, Iizuka Y, Tamura Y, Nagai R, Illingworth DR, Gotoda T, Yamada N
**Journal:** J Lipid Res (2000)

## Content

1. J Lipid Res. 2000 Aug;41(8):1199-204.

Novel mutations in the microsomal triglyceride transfer protein gene causing
abetalipoproteinemia.

Ohashi K(1), Ishibashi S, Osuga J, Tozawa R, Harada K, Yahagi N, Shionoiri F,
Iizuka Y, Tamura Y, Nagai R, Illingworth DR, Gotoda T, Yamada N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.

Abetalipoproteinemia (ABL) is an inherited disease characterized by the virtual
absence of apolipoprotein B (apoB)-containing lipoproteins from plasma. Only
limited numbers of families have been screened for mutations in the microsomal
triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) gene. To clarify the genetic basis of
clinical diversity of ABL, mutations of the MTP gene have been screened in 4
unrelated patients with ABL. Three novel mutations have been identified: a
frameshift mutation caused by a single adenine deletion at position 1389 of the
cDNA, and a missense mutation, Asn780Tyr, each in homozygous forms; and a splice
site mutation, 2218-2A-->G, in a compound heterozygous form. The frameshift and
splice site mutations are predicted to encode truncated forms of MTP. When
transiently expressed in Cos-1 cells, the Asn780Tyr mutant MTP bound protein
disulfide isomerase (PDI) but displayed negligible MTP activity. It is of
interest that the patient having the Asn780Tyr mutation, a 27-year-old male, has
none of the manifestations characteristic of classic ABL even though his plasma
apoB and vitamin E were virtually undetectable. These results indicated that
defects of the MTP gene are the proximal cause of ABL.

PMID: 10946006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
