---
reference_id: "PMID:25367097"
title: "Total colonic aganglionosis and Hirschsprung's disease: a review."
authors:
- Moore SW
journal: Pediatr Surg Int
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00383-014-3634-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Total colonic aganglionosis and Hirschsprung's disease: a review.
**Authors:** Moore SW
**Journal:** Pediatr Surg Int (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00383-014-3634-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00383-014-3634-3)

## Content

1. Pediatr Surg Int. 2015 Jan;31(1):1-9. doi: 10.1007/s00383-014-3634-3. Epub
2014  Oct 31.

Total colonic aganglionosis and Hirschsprung's disease: a review.

Moore SW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Stellenbosch, P.O. Box 19063, Tygerberg, 7505, South Africa, swm@sun.ac.za.

Total colonic aganglionosis is a relatively uncommon form of Hirschsprung's 
disease (HSCR). It occurs in approximately 2-13 % of HSCR cases and involves the 
entire colon which is aganglionic but may extend proximally into varying lengths 
of small bowel. As a result, it should be separated into Total colonic 
aganglionosis (TCA) [defined as aganglionosis extending from the anus to at 
least the ileocaecal valve but no more than 50 cm small bowel proximal to the 
ileocaecal valve] and total colonic and small bowel aganglionosis (TCSA) which 
may involve very long segments of small bowel aganglionosis. Clinically, TCA 
appears to represent a different spectrum of disease in terms of presentation 
and difficulties which may be experienced in diagnosis suggesting a different 
pathophysiology from the more common forms of HSCR. It is therefore not yet 
clear whether TCA merely represents a long form of HSCR or a different 
expression of the disease. A number of differences exist between TCA and other 
forms of HSCR which require explanation if its ubiquitous clinical features are 
to be understood. In addition to the usual explanations for the aganglionosis of 
HSCR, there is some evidence suggesting that in place of being purely 
congenital, it may represent certain different pathophysiologic mechanisms, some 
of which may continue to be active after birth. This study reviews what is known 
about the clinical, radiological and histopathologic differences between TCA and 
the more frequently encountered recto-sigmoid (or short-segment; S-HSCR) and 
correlates them with what is currently known about the genetic and molecular 
biologic background to find possible pathogenetic mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1007/s00383-014-3634-3
PMID: 25367097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]