---
reference_id: "PMID:38186555"
title: Frequency of cardiotoxicity following intramuscular administration of epinephrine in emergency department patients with anaphylaxis.
authors:
- Pauw EK
- Stubblefield WB
- Wrenn JO
- Brown SK
- Cosse MS
- Curry ZS
- Darcy TP
- James TE
- Koetter PE
- Nicholson CE
- Parisi FN
- Shepherd LG
- Soppet SL
- Stocker MD
- Walston BM
- Self WH
- Han JH
- Ward MJ
journal: J Am Coll Emerg Physicians Open
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/emp2.13095
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequency of cardiotoxicity following intramuscular administration of epinephrine in emergency department patients with anaphylaxis.
**Authors:** Pauw EK, Stubblefield WB, Wrenn JO, Brown SK, Cosse MS, Curry ZS, Darcy TP, James TE, Koetter PE, Nicholson CE, Parisi FN, Shepherd LG, Soppet SL, Stocker MD, Walston BM, Self WH, Han JH, Ward MJ
**Journal:** J Am Coll Emerg Physicians Open (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/emp2.13095](https://doi.org/10.1002/emp2.13095)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Emerg Physicians Open. 2024 Jan 6;5(1):e13095. doi: 
10.1002/emp2.13095. eCollection 2024 Feb.

Frequency of cardiotoxicity following intramuscular administration of 
epinephrine in emergency department patients with anaphylaxis.

Pauw EK(1), Stubblefield WB(1), Wrenn JO(1), Brown SK(1), Cosse MS(1), Curry 
ZS(1), Darcy TP(1), James TE(1), Koetter PE(1), Nicholson CE(1), Parisi FN(1), 
Shepherd LG(1), Soppet SL(1), Stocker MD(1), Walston BM(1), Self WH(1)(2), Han 
JH(1)(3), Ward MJ(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine Vanderbilt University Medical Center 
Nashville Tennessee USA.
(2)Vanderbilt Institute for Clinical and Translational Research Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center Nashville Tennessee USA.
(3)Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center (GRECC) VA Tennessee 
Valley Healthcare Center Nashville Tennessee USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical Informatics Vanderbilt University Medical Center 
Nashville Tennessee USA.

OBJECTIVES: Epinephrine can be a life-saving treatment for patients with 
anaphylaxis. Potential cardiovascular side effects of epinephrine may contribute 
to clinician hesitancy to use it. However, the frequency of cardiotoxicity 
resulting from epinephrine treatment for anaphylaxis is not well described. We 
sought to describe the frequency of cardiotoxicity following intramuscular (IM) 
administration of epinephrine in adult emergency department (ED) patients with 
anaphylaxis.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective observational study at a single, 
quaternary care academic ED in Tennessee. We identified consecutive ED visits 
with the diagnosis of anaphylaxis from 2017 to 2021 who received at least one 
intramuscular (IM) dose of epinephrine in the ED. Analysis was primarily 
descriptive. The primary outcome was cardiotoxicity, the occurrence of any of 
the following after epinephrine administration: ischemic electrocardiogram 
changes, systolic blood pressure >200 mmHg, or cardiac arrest ≤4 h; elevated 
troponin ≤12 h; or percutaneous coronary intervention or depressed ejection 
fraction ≤72 h.
RESULTS: Among 338 included patients, 16 (4.7%; 95%CI: 2.8-7.6%) experienced 
cardiotoxicity. Cardiotoxic events included eight (2.4%) ischemic 
electrocardiogram changes, six (1.8%) episodes of elevated troponin, five (1.5%) 
atrial arrhythmias, one (0.3%) ventricular arrythmia, and one (0.3%) depressed 
ejection fraction. Patients with cardiotoxicity were significantly older, had 
more comorbidities, and were more likely to have received multiple doses of 
epinephrine or an epinephrine infusion compared with a single IM dose of 
epinephrine.
CONCLUSIONS: Among 338 consecutive adult ED patients who received IM epinephrine 
for anaphylaxis during a recent 4-year period, cardiotoxic side effects were 
observed in approximately 5% of patients.

© 2024 The Authors. JACEP Open published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of 
American College of Emergency Physicians.

DOI: 10.1002/emp2.13095
PMCID: PMC10771040
PMID: 38186555

Conflict of interest statement: None.