---
reference_id: "PMID:20301526"
title: Spinal Muscular Atrophy.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Prior TW
- Leach ME
- Finanger EL
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal Muscular Atrophy.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Prior TW, Leach ME, Finanger EL

## Content

1. Spinal Muscular Atrophy.

Prior TW(1), Leach ME(2), Finanger EL(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2000 Feb 24 [updated 2026 Feb 12].

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Genetics Laboratory, UH Cleveland Medical Center, Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio
(2)Department of Neurology and Pediatrics, Oregon Health and Science University,
Portland, Oregon

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is characterized by
muscle weakness and atrophy resulting from progressive degeneration and
irreversible loss of the anterior horn cells in the spinal cord (i.e., lower
motor neurons) and the brain stem nuclei. The onset of weakness ranges from
before birth to adulthood. The weakness is symmetric, proximal greater than
distal, and progressive. Before the genetic basis of SMA was understood, it was
classified into clinical subtypes based on maximum motor function achieved;
however, it is now apparent that the phenotype of SMN1-associated SMA spans a
continuum without clear delineation of subtypes. With supportive care only, poor
weight gain with growth failure, restrictive lung disease, scoliosis, and joint
contractures are common complications; however, newly available targeted
treatment options are changing the natural history of the disease.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SMA is established in a proband with a
history of motor difficulties or regression, proximal muscle weakness,
reduced/absent deep tendon reflexes, evidence of motor unit disease, and/or
biallelic pathogenic variants in SMN1 identified by molecular genetic testing.
Increases in SMN2 copy number often modify the phenotype.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Therapies targeted to the underlying disease
mechanism include risdiplam (Evrysdi®; SMN2-directed RNA splicing modifier),
nusinersen (Spinraza®; antisense oligonucleotide), and onasemnogene
abeparvovec-xioi (Zolgensma®; gene replacement therapy) for the treatment of all
types of SMA. Onasemnogene abeparvovec-brve (Itvisma®; gene replacement therapy)
can also be given as a one-time intrathecal treatment for affected individuals
ages 2 years and older. Treatment with an SMA-specific disease-modifying
treatment is most efficacious when initiated presymptomatically. The FDA has
issued a black box warning about Zolgensma®, noting the possibility of serious
liver injury and acute liver failure. The FDA has also issued a black box
warning about Itvisma®, noting the possibility of serious liver injury and
elevated aminotransferases. Close monitoring of liver function prior to and in
the months following infusion with either Zolgensma® or Itvisma® is indicated.
These targeted treatments may prevent the development or slow the progression of
some features of SMA but cannot restore motor neurons that have degenerated or
been lost already. New phenotypes in treated individuals are arising, and
long-term effects of these treatments are unknown. Supportive care: Proactive
supportive treatment by a multidisciplinary team is essential to reduce symptom
severity, particularly in the most severe cases of SMA and/or in untreated
individuals. When nutrition or dysphagia is a concern, placement of a
gastrostomy tube early in the course of the disease is appropriate. Standard
therapy for gastroesophageal reflux disease and chronic constipation is
recommended. Formal consultation and frequent follow up with a pulmonologist
familiar with SMA is necessary. As respiratory function deteriorates,
tracheotomy or noninvasive respiratory support may be offered. Surgical repair
for scoliosis should be considered based on progression of the curvature,
pulmonary function, and bone maturity. Surgical intervention for hip dislocation
for those with pain may be indicated. Surveillance: Individuals with SMA require
monitoring for the development of symptoms to determine appropriate timing to
initiate supportive therapies. Surveillance recommendations for potential side
effects and new phenotypes associated with the targeted treatments are emerging.
Multidisciplinary evaluation every six months or more frequently for weaker
children is indicated to assess nutritional state, respiratory function, motor
function, and orthopedic status, and to determine appropriate interventions.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Prolonged fasting, particularly in the acutely
ill infant with SMA. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to
determine the genetic status of younger, apparently asymptomatic sibs of an
affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would
benefit from prompt initiation of disease-modifying treatments. Pregnancy
management: Women with SMA may have an increased rate of preterm birth and need
for cesarean section compared to unaffected women. Women with SMA may also
experience a persistent worsening of their general muscle weakness after
delivery, particularly if disease-modifying therapies are discontinued due to
pregnancy status. Due to the risk of respiratory failure, it is recommended that
women with neuromuscular disorders, including those with SMA, obtain baseline
pulmonary function prior to becoming pregnant, with frequent monitoring during
pregnancy. There is limited to no data on the effects of disease-modifying
treatments on the developing human fetus. However, based on animal models,
risdiplam use should be avoided in pregnant women.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SMA is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Each
pregnancy of a couple who have had a child with SMA has an approximately 25%
chance of producing an affected child, an approximately 50% chance of producing
an asymptomatic carrier, and an approximately 25% chance of producing an
unaffected child who is not a carrier. These recurrence risks deviate slightly
from the norm for autosomal recessive inheritance because about 2% of affected
individuals have a de novo SMN1 pathogenic variant on one allele; in these
instances, only one parent is a carrier of an SMN1 variant, and thus the sibs
are not at increased risk for SMA. Ideally preconception (but also prenatal)
carrier testing for all individuals in the general population and prenatal
testing for pregnancies at increased risk are possible if the diagnosis of SMA
has either been confirmed by molecular genetic testing in an affected family
member and/or if both parents are found to be carriers of SMA on carrier
screening testing.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301526
