---
reference_id: "PMID:28457683"
title: "[Epidemiology and natural history of giant cell arteritis]."
authors:
- Mahr A
- Aouba A
- Richebé P
- Gonzalez-Chiappe S
journal: Rev Med Interne
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2017.03.007
keywords:
- Disease Progression
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Prognosis
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Epidemiology and natural history of giant cell arteritis].
**Authors:** Mahr A, Aouba A, Richebé P, Gonzalez-Chiappe S
**Journal:** Rev Med Interne (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.revmed.2017.03.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.revmed.2017.03.007)

## Content

1. Rev Med Interne. 2017 Oct;38(10):663-669. doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2017.03.007.
Epub 2017 Apr 28.

[Epidemiology and natural history of giant cell arteritis].

[Article in French]

Mahr A(1), Aouba A(2), Richebé P(3), Gonzalez-Chiappe S(3).

Author information:
(1)Unité de médecine interne-maladies systémiques, unité de médecine
interne-maladies systémiques, CHU Saint-Louis, université Paris-Diderot, 1,
avenue Claude-Vellefaux, 75475 Paris cedex 10, France; Équipe ECSTRA, centre de
recherche épidémiologie et biostatistique Sorbonne Paris Cité, UMR 1153, Inserm,
université Paris-Diderot, 75010 Paris, France. Electronic address:
alfred.mahr@aphp.fr.
(2)Service de médecine interne, centre hospitalier universitaire de Caen,
Normandie université, 14033 Caen, France.
(3)Unité de médecine interne-maladies systémiques, unité de médecine
interne-maladies systémiques, CHU Saint-Louis, université Paris-Diderot, 1,
avenue Claude-Vellefaux, 75475 Paris cedex 10, France.

Knowledge of the natural history and epidemiology of giant cell arteritis (GCA)
is growing. With the recent conceptual change, GCA is no longer considered a
disease with mandatory cranial symptoms but, rather, a larger disease spectrum
also including idiopathic aortitis in people older than 50 and polymyalgia
rheumatica with large-vessel involvement. The incidence peak between age 70 and
80 years, greater frequency in females and greater occurrence in Nordic
countries are well-established epidemiological characteristics. Conversely, the
notion that the incidence of GCA is increasing is challenged by several recent
population-based studies suggesting a trend reversal for about 15 to 20 years.
The known link with the allele HLA-DRB1*04 was confirmed by a genome-wide
association study that also found associations with two other genetic
polymorphisms. Recent studies indicating a link with varicella zoster virus
infection have invigorated the hypothesis of an infectious cause for GCA.
Smoking is the most solidly recognized environmental risk factor, but other
traditional cardiovascular risk factors do not seem to predispose to GCA.
Evidence is mounting that overall mortality in GCA patients is at best slightly
higher than expected in relation to general population mortality data, but GCA
is associated with an increase in morbidity and mortality specifically related
to aortic aneurysm or other cardiovascular causes. Further studies are needed to
integrate the current knowledge into a single etiological model.

Copyright © 2017 Société Nationale Française de Médecine Interne (SNFMI).
Published by Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.revmed.2017.03.007
PMID: 28457683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
