---
reference_id: "PMID:24030745"
title: High-risk human papillomavirus is transcriptionally active in a subset of sinonasal squamous cell carcinomas.
authors:
- Larque AB
- Hakim S
- Ordi J
- Nadal A
- Diaz A
- del Pino M
- Marimon L
- Alobid I
- Cardesa A
- Alos L
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.155
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/mortality, pathology, virology"
- "Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p16/analysis, biosynthesis"
- "DNA, Viral/analysis"
- Female
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- In Situ Hybridization
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Papillomavirus E7 Proteins/analysis
- "Papillomavirus Infections/complications, mortality"
- "Paranasal Sinus Neoplasms/mortality, pathology, virology"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Transcription, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High-risk human papillomavirus is transcriptionally active in a subset of sinonasal squamous cell carcinomas.
**Authors:** Larque AB, Hakim S, Ordi J, Nadal A, Diaz A, del Pino M, Marimon L, Alobid I, Cardesa A, Alos L
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/modpathol.2013.155](https://doi.org/10.1038/modpathol.2013.155)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2014 Mar;27(3):343-51. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.155. Epub 2013 
Sep 13.

High-risk human papillomavirus is transcriptionally active in a subset of 
sinonasal squamous cell carcinomas.

Larque AB(1), Hakim S(1), Ordi J(1), Nadal A(1), Diaz A(1), del Pino M(2), 
Marimon L(1), Alobid I(3), Cardesa A(1), Alos L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Gynecology, Obstetrics and Neonatology, Hospital Clínic, 
IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Hospital Clinic, IDIBAPS, University of 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

It has been reported that high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) is a causative 
agent of a subgroup of oropharyngeal carcinomas. In these tumors, the presence 
of the transcriptionally active HPV has been proved through the identification 
of HPV E6 or E7 messenger RNA (mRNA) transcripts. The aim of the study was to 
assess the HPV-active transcription in a series of sinonasal carcinomas, in 
correlation with the HPV DNA identification and the p16 immunohistochemistry. 
Seventy patients with squamous cell carcinomas of the sinonasal tract were 
included in the survey. The main clinicopathological characteristics were 
recorded. All tumors were investigated for HPV through the HPV DNA detection by 
PCR, using the SPF10 primers and by in situ hybridization, using the high-risk 
GenPoint probe (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark). HPV16 E7 mRNA transcripts detection 
was performed by RT-PCR in 27 cases. The immunostaining for p16 was performed in 
all cases. Fourteen carcinomas (20%) were positive for high-risk HPV by PCR: 13 
HPV16 and one HPV35. In situ hybridization showed a dotted nuclear positivity in 
all these cases. HPV16 E7 mRNA was detected in seven tumors harboring HPV16; in 
the remaining HPV-positive cases, RNA did not reach the quality for analysis. 
Strong, diffuse positivity for p16 was observed only in the HPV-positive cases. 
The 14 HPV-positive squamous cell carcinomas were non-keratinizing or scarcely 
keratinizing tumors. No significant differences were found in terms of gender, 
age, or staging at diagnosis between HPV-positive and HPV-negative tumors. 
However, differences in disease-free survival and overall survival between both 
groups of patients were significant (P=0.004 and P=0.028, respectively). In 
conclusion, we have shown that HPV is the etiological agent of a subset of 
sinonasal carcinomas demonstrating the transcriptionally active HPV in these 
tumors. Immunostaining for p16 can be used as a surrogate marker to identify 
these tumors.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.155
PMID: 24030745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]