---
reference_id: "PMID:36115752"
title: "[Markers of severity and predictors of response to treatment in severe asthma]."
authors:
- Sesé L
- Mahay G
- Barnig C
- Guibert N
- Leroy S
- Guilleminault L
journal: Rev Mal Respir
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2022.08.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Markers of severity and predictors of response to treatment in severe asthma].
**Authors:** Sesé L, Mahay G, Barnig C, Guibert N, Leroy S, Guilleminault L
**Journal:** Rev Mal Respir (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rmr.2022.08.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmr.2022.08.009)

## Content

1. Rev Mal Respir. 2022 Nov;39(9):740-757. doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2022.08.009. Epub 
2022 Sep 15.

[Markers of severity and predictors of response to treatment in severe asthma].

[Article in French]

Sesé L(1), Mahay G(2), Barnig C(3), Guibert N(1), Leroy S(4), Guilleminault 
L(5).

Author information:
(1)AP-HP, service de physiologie, hôpital Avicenne, Bobigny, France.
(2)Service de pneumologie, oncologie thoracique et soins intensifs 
respiratoires, CHU Rouen, Rouen, France.
(3)INSERM, EFS BFC, LabEx LipSTIC, UMR1098, Interactions 
Hôte-Greffon-Tumeur/Ingénierie Cellulaire et Génique, University Bourgogne 
Franche-Comté, Besançon, France; Service de pneumologie, oncologie thoracique et 
allergologie respiratoire, CHRU Besançon, Besançon, France.
(4)Université Côte d'Azur, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nice, CNRS UMR 
7275-FHU OncoAge, service de pneumologie oncologie thoracique et soins intensifs 
respiratoires, CHU de Nice, hôpital Pasteur, Nice, France.
(5)AP-HP, service de physiologie, hôpital Avicenne, Bobigny, France; Institut 
Toulousain des maladies infectieuses et inflammatoires (Infinity) inserm 
UMR1291-CNRS UMR5051-université Toulouse III, CRISALIS F-CRIN, Toulouse, France. 
Electronic address: guilleminault.l@chu-toulouse.fr.

Asthma is a multifactorial disease with complex pathophysiology. Knowledge of 
its immunopathology and inflammatory mechanisms is progressing and has led to 
the development over recent years of increasingly targeted therapeutic 
strategies. The objective of this review is to pinpoint the different predictive 
markers of asthma severity and therapeutic response. Obesity, nasal polyposis, 
gastroesophageal reflux disease and intolerance to aspirin have all been 
considered as clinical markers associated with asthma severity, as have 
functional markers such as bronchial obstruction, low FEV1, small daily 
variations in FEV1, and high FeNO. While sinonasal polyposis and allergic 
comorbidities are associated with better response to omalizumab, nasal polyposis 
or long-term systemic steroid use are associated with better response to 
antibodies targeting the IL5 pathway. Elevated total IgE concentrations and 
eosinophil counts are classic biological markers regularly found in severe 
asthma. Blood eosinophils are predictive biomarkers of response to anti-IgE, 
anti-IL5, anti-IL5R and anti-IL4R biotherapies. Dupilumab is particularly 
effective in a subgroup of patients with marked type 2 inflammation (long-term 
systemic corticosteroid therapy, eosinophilia≥150/μl or FENO>20 ppb). Chest 
imaging may help to identify severe patients by seeking out bronchial wall 
thickening and bronchial dilation. Study of the patient's environment is crucial 
insofar as exposure to tobacco, dust mites and molds, as well as outdoor and 
indoor air pollutants (cleaning products), can trigger asthma exacerbation. 
Wider and more systematic use of markers of severity or response to treatment 
could foster increasingly targeted and tailored approaches to severe asthma.

Copyright © 2022 SPLF. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmr.2022.08.009
PMID: 36115752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]