---
reference_id: "PMID:39556629"
title: "Diabetic Ketoacidosis: Evaluation and Treatment."
authors:
- Veauthier B
- Levy-Grau B
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2024'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diabetic Ketoacidosis: Evaluation and Treatment.
**Authors:** Veauthier B, Levy-Grau B
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2024)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2024 Nov;110(5):476-486.

Diabetic Ketoacidosis: Evaluation and Treatment.

Veauthier B(1), Levy-Grau B(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Wyoming Family Medicine Residency Program, Casper.

Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is a life-threatening complication of type 1 and 
type 2 diabetes resulting from an absolute or relative insulin deficiency. It 
can occur in patients of all ages and can be the initial presentation of 
diabetes, especially in young children. Polyuria and polydipsia are the most 
common symptoms, followed by nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, weight loss, 
severe fatigue, dyspnea, and preceding febrile illness. Traditionally, DKA has 
been diagnosed by the triad of hyperglycemia (blood glucose greater than 250 
mg/dL), metabolic acidosis (pH less than 7.3, serum bicarbonate less than 18 
mEq/L, anion gap greater than 10 mEq/L), and elevated serum (preferred) or urine 
ketones. However, hyperglycemia has been de-emphasized in recent guidelines 
because of the increasing incidence of euglycemic DKA. The use of sodium-glucose 
cotransporter-2 inhibitors modestly increases the risk of DKA and euglycemic 
DKA. Electrolytes, phosphate, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, urinalysis, 
complete blood cell count with differential, A1C, and electrocardiography should 
be evaluated for all patients diagnosed with DKA to identify causes and 
complications of DKA. Amylase, lipase, hepatic transaminase levels, troponin, 
creatine kinase, blood and urine cultures, and chest radiography are additional 
tests to consider. Treatment involves fluid and electrolyte replacement, 
insulin, treatment of precipitating causes, and close monitoring to adjust 
therapy and identify complications. Prevention strategies include identifying 
diabetes before DKA develops, educating patients to manage high-risk situations, 
and ensuring uninterrupted access to therapies for diabetes.

PMID: 39556629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]