---
reference_id: "PMID:36733446"
title: "Case report: SCN4A p.R1135H gene variant in combination with thyrotoxicosis causing hypokalemic periodic paralysis."
authors:
- Zhang Z
- Xiao B
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.1078784
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: SCN4A p.R1135H gene variant in combination with thyrotoxicosis causing hypokalemic periodic paralysis.
**Authors:** Zhang Z, Xiao B
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2022.1078784](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2022.1078784)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2023 Jan 17;13:1078784. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.1078784.
eCollection 2022.

Case report: SCN4A p.R1135H gene variant in combination with thyrotoxicosis
causing hypokalemic periodic paralysis.

Zhang Z(1), Xiao B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou
Medical University, Guiyang, China.

Hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HPP) is a heterogeneous group of diseases
characterized by intermittent episodes of delayed paralysis of skeletal muscle
with episodes of hypokalemia, caused by variants in CACNA1S or SCN4A genes, or
secondary to thyrotoxicosis, Sjogren syndrome, primary aldosteronism, etc. HPP
may be the only presentation in Andersen-Tawil syndrome in which the majority of
cases are caused by pathogenic variants in the KCNJ2 gene. We present a case of
a 29-year-old male with hypokalemic periodic paralysis. The patient began to
experience recurrent weakness of the extremities at the age of 26, which was
effectively treated with potassium supplementation. He had recently developed
dry mouth, palpitations, weight loss, and even dyspnea, with a serum potassium
level as low as 1.59 mmol/L. The results of auxiliary examinations showed
Graves' disease, and genetic testing indicated a missense variant, NM_000334.4
(SCN4A):c.3404G>A (p.R1135H). He did not experience periodic paralysis during
follow-up after lifestyle guidance and treatment of thyrotoxicosis with
radioactive iodine. It is a rare case of SCN4A p.R1135H gene variant combined
with hyperthyroidism resulting in HPP with respiratory muscle paralysis to raise
awareness of the disease and avoid misdiagnosis and missed diagnosis.

Copyright © 2023 Zhang and Xiao.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.1078784
PMCID: PMC9886676
PMID: 36733446

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
