---
reference_id: "PMID:33275525"
title: Altered calcium handling in cardiomyocytes from arginine-glycine amidinotransferase-knockout mice is rescued by creatine.
authors:
- Laasmaa M
- Branovets J
- Barsunova K
- Karro N
- Lygate CA
- Birkedal R
- Vendelin M
journal: Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00300.2020
keywords:
- Age Factors
- "Amidinotransferases/deficiency, genetics"
- Animals
- Calcium/metabolism
- "Calcium Channels, L-Type/metabolism"
- Calcium Signaling/drug effects
- Creatine/pharmacology
- Female
- Kinetics
- Male
- Membrane Potentials
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Models, Cardiovascular"
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/drug effects, enzymology"
- "Sarcoplasmic Reticulum/drug effects, metabolism"
- Sarcoplasmic Reticulum Calcium-Transporting ATPases/metabolism
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Altered calcium handling in cardiomyocytes from arginine-glycine amidinotransferase-knockout mice is rescued by creatine.
**Authors:** Laasmaa M, Branovets J, Barsunova K, Karro N, Lygate CA, Birkedal R, Vendelin M
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpheart.00300.2020](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00300.2020)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2021 Feb 1;320(2):H805-H825. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00300.2020. Epub 2020 Dec 4.

Altered calcium handling in cardiomyocytes from arginine-glycine
amidinotransferase-knockout mice is rescued by creatine.

Laasmaa M(1), Branovets J(1), Barsunova K(1), Karro N(1), Lygate CA(2), Birkedal
R(1), Vendelin M(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Systems Biology, Department of Cybernetics, School of Science,
Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, and
the British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, University of
Oxford, Tallinn, United Kingdom.

The creatine kinase system facilitates energy transfer between mitochondria and
the major ATPases in the heart. Creatine-deficient mice, which lack
arginine-glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT) to synthesize creatine and
homoarginine, exhibit reduced cardiac contractility. We studied how the absence
of a functional CK system influences calcium handling in isolated cardiomyocytes
from AGAT-knockouts and wild-type littermates as well as in AGAT-knockout mice
receiving lifelong creatine supplementation via the food. Using a combination of
whole cell patch clamp and fluorescence microscopy, we demonstrate that the
L-type calcium channel (LTCC) current amplitude and voltage range of activation
were significantly lower in AGAT-knockout compared with wild-type littermates.
Additionally, the inactivation of LTCC and the calcium transient decay were
significantly slower. According to our modeling results, these changes can be
reproduced by reducing three parameters in knockout mice when compared with
wild-type: LTCC conductance, the exchange constant of Ca2+ transfer between
subspace and cytosol, and SERCA activity. Because tissue expression of LTCC and
SERCA protein were not significantly different between genotypes, this suggests
the involvement of posttranslational regulatory mechanisms or structural
reorganization. The AGAT-knockout phenotype of calcium handling was fully
reversed by dietary creatine supplementation throughout life. Our results
indicate reduced calcium cycling in cardiomyocytes from AGAT-knockouts and
suggest that the creatine kinase system is important for the development of
calcium handling in the heart.NEW & NOTEWORTHY Creatine-deficient mice lacking
arginine-glycine amidinotransferase exhibit compromised cardiac function. Here,
we show that this is at least partially due to an overall slowing of calcium
dynamics. Calcium influx into the cytosol via the L-type calcium current (LTCC)
is diminished, and the rate of the sarcoendoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase
(SERCA) pumping calcium back into the sarcoplasmic reticulum is slower. The
expression of LTCC and SERCA did not change, suggesting that the changes are
regulatory.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00300.2020
PMID: 33275525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
