---
reference_id: "PMID:31292198"
title: "Performance of GFR Slope as a Surrogate End Point for Kidney Disease Progression in Clinical Trials: A Statistical Simulation."
authors:
- Greene T
- Ying J
- Vonesh EF
- Tighiouart H
- Levey AS
- Coresh J
- Herrick JS
- Imai E
- Jafar TH
- Maes BD
- Perrone RD
- Del Vecchio L
- Wetzels JFM
- Heerspink HJL
- Inker LA
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2019010009
keywords:
- Biomarkers
- Computer Simulation
- Disease Progression
- Endpoint Determination
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Humans
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/physiopathology"
- "Models, Statistical"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/physiopathology, therapy"
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Performance of GFR Slope as a Surrogate End Point for Kidney Disease Progression in Clinical Trials: A Statistical Simulation.
**Authors:** Greene T, Ying J, Vonesh EF, Tighiouart H, Levey AS, Coresh J, Herrick JS, Imai E, Jafar TH, Maes BD, Perrone RD, Del Vecchio L, Wetzels JFM, Heerspink HJL, Inker LA
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2019010009](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2019010009)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2019 Sep;30(9):1756-1769. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2019010009. Epub 
2019 Jul 10.

Performance of GFR Slope as a Surrogate End Point for Kidney Disease Progression 
in Clinical Trials: A Statistical Simulation.

Greene T(1), Ying J(1), Vonesh EF(2), Tighiouart H(3)(4), Levey AS(5), Coresh 
J(6), Herrick JS(1), Imai E(7), Jafar TH(8)(9), Maes BD(10), Perrone RD(5), Del 
Vecchio L(11), Wetzels JFM(12), Heerspink HJL(13), Inker LA(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(2)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, Illinois.
(3)Institute for Clinical Research and Health Policy Studies and.
(4)Tufts Clinical and Translational Science Institute, Tufts University, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(5)Division of Nephrology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, Maryland.
(7)Nakayamadera Imai Clinic, Takarazuka, Japan.
(8)Program in Health Services and Systems Research, Duke-NUS Medical School, 
Singapore.
(9)Duke Global Health Institute, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.
(10)AZ Delta, Roeselare, Belgium.
(11)Department of Nephrology and Dialysis, Alessandro Manzoni Hospital, Lecco, 
Italy.
(12)Department of Nephrology, Radboud University Medical Center, Radboud 
Institute for Health Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; and.
(13)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University Medical Center 
Groningen, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.
(14)Division of Nephrology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts; 
LInker@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.

BACKGROUND: Randomized trials of CKD treatments traditionally use clinical 
events late in CKD progression as end points. This requires costly studies with 
large sample sizes and long follow-up. Surrogate end points like GFR slope may 
speed up the evaluation of new therapies by enabling smaller studies with 
shorter follow-up.
METHODS: We used statistical simulations to identify trial situations where GFR 
slope provides increased statistical power compared with the clinical end point 
of doubling of serum creatinine or kidney failure. We simulated GFR trajectories 
based on data from 47 randomized treatment comparisons. We evaluated the sample 
size required for adequate statistical power based on GFR slopes calculated from 
baseline and from 3 months follow-up.
RESULTS: In most scenarios where the treatment has no acute effect, analyses of 
GFR slope provided similar or improved statistical power compared with the 
clinical end point, often allowing investigators to shorten follow-up by at 
least half while simultaneously reducing sample size. When patients' GFRs are 
higher, the power advantages of GFR slope increase. However, acute treatment 
effects within several months of randomization can increase the risk of false 
conclusions about therapies based on GFR slope. Care is needed in study design 
and analysis to avoid such false conclusions.
CONCLUSIONS: Use of GFR slope can substantially increase statistical power 
compared with the clinical end point, particularly when baseline GFR is high and 
there is no acute effect. The optimum GFR-based end point depends on multiple 
factors including the rate of GFR decline, type of treatment effect and study 
design.

Copyright © 2019 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2019010009
PMCID: PMC6727266
PMID: 31292198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]