---
reference_id: "PMID:37371259"
title: "Microcephaly, Short Stature, Intellectual Disability, Speech Absence and Cataract Are Associated with Novel Bi-Allelic Missense Variant in RTTN Gene: A Seckel Syndrome Case Report."
authors:
- Mudassir BU
- Agha Z
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/children10061027
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microcephaly, Short Stature, Intellectual Disability, Speech Absence and Cataract Are Associated with Novel Bi-Allelic Missense Variant in RTTN Gene: A Seckel Syndrome Case Report.
**Authors:** Mudassir BU, Agha Z
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children10061027](https://doi.org/10.3390/children10061027)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2023 Jun 8;10(6):1027. doi: 10.3390/children10061027.

Microcephaly, Short Stature, Intellectual Disability, Speech Absence and 
Cataract Are Associated with Novel Bi-Allelic Missense Variant in RTTN Gene: A 
Seckel Syndrome Case Report.

Mudassir BU(1), Agha Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Translational Genomics Laboratory, Department of Biosciences, COMSATS 
University, Islamabad 45550, Pakistan.

The RTTN gene encodes centriole biogenesis, replication, symmetry and cohesion, 
basal body organization and has recently been associated with the appearance of 
microcephaly syndromes. RTTN-related neurological defects including 
microcephaly, intellectual disability, congenital dwarfism, ophthalmic 
manifestations, and epilepsy are mainly due to abnormal brain development 
pathways and loss-of-function protein mutations. We present a consanguineous 
Pakistani family clinically suspected of Seckel syndrome with severe 
microcephaly, severe intellectual disability, short stature, absence of speech, 
pointed nose, narrow face and bilateral cataract in two siblings residing in the 
suburbs of Islamabad. Forty cases of Seckel syndrome have been reported to date 
in the literature due to mutations in the ATR, TRAIP, RBBP8, NSMCE2, NIN, CENPJ, 
DNA2, CEP152 and CEP63 genes. The objective of the study was to perform a 
clinical diagnosis, genetic analysis, and pathophysiology of Seckel syndrome in 
the proband. Whole-exome sequencing discovered NM_173630.4: c.57G > T(pGlu19Asp) 
missense variant in exon 2 of the RTTN gene that co-segregates in the family. 
This novel variant, to the best of our knowledge, is pathogenic and with 
autosomal recessive inheritance expressed as Seckel syndrome in the affected 
members of the family. The present study has expanded the genetic knowledge of 
novel RTTN gene variants associated with Seckel syndrome and has broadened its 
phenotype spectrum in the Pakistani population, which comprises diverse 
ethnicities. We hope that our study will open new horizons for individual 
molecular diagnosis and therapeutics to improve the life of patients with this 
congenital syndrome.

DOI: 10.3390/children10061027
PMCID: PMC10297240
PMID: 37371259

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.