---
reference_id: "PMID:27373538"
title: Effector-Triggered Immunity Determines Host Genotype-Specific Incompatibility in Legume-Rhizobium Symbiosis.
authors:
- Yasuda M
- Miwa H
- Masuda S
- Takebayashi Y
- Sakakibara H
- Okazaki S
journal: Plant Cell Physiol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcw104
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effector-Triggered Immunity Determines Host Genotype-Specific Incompatibility in Legume-Rhizobium Symbiosis.
**Authors:** Yasuda M, Miwa H, Masuda S, Takebayashi Y, Sakakibara H, Okazaki S
**Journal:** Plant Cell Physiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/pcp/pcw104](https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pcw104)

## Content

1. Plant Cell Physiol. 2016 Aug;57(8):1791-800. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcw104. Epub
2016  Jun 3.

Effector-Triggered Immunity Determines Host Genotype-Specific Incompatibility in 
Legume-Rhizobium Symbiosis.

Yasuda M(1), Miwa H(1), Masuda S(1), Takebayashi Y(2), Sakakibara H(2), Okazaki 
S(3).

Author information:
(1)International Environmental and Agricultural Science, Graduate School of 
Agriculture, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, 3-5-8 Saiwaicho, 
Fuchu, Tokyo, 183-8509 Japan.
(2)Plant Productivity Systems Research Group, RIKEN Center for Sustainable 
Resource Science 1-7-22, Suehiro, Tsurumi, Yokohama, 230-0045 Japan.
(3)International Environmental and Agricultural Science, Graduate School of 
Agriculture, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, 3-5-8 Saiwaicho, 
Fuchu, Tokyo, 183-8509 Japan sokazaki@cc.tuat.ac.jp.

Symbiosis between legumes and rhizobia leads to the formation of N2-fixing root 
nodules. In soybean, several host genes, referred to as Rj genes, control 
nodulation. Soybean cultivars carrying the Rj4 gene restrict nodulation by 
specific rhizobia such as Bradyrhizobium elkanii We previously reported that the 
restriction of nodulation was caused by B. elkanii possessing a functional type 
III secretion system (T3SS), which is known for its delivery of virulence 
factors by pathogenic bacteria. In the present study, we investigated the 
molecular basis for the T3SS-dependent nodulation restriction in Rj4 soybean. 
Inoculation tests revealed that soybean cultivar BARC-2 (Rj4/Rj4) restricted 
nodulation by B. elkanii USDA61, whereas its nearly isogenic line BARC-3 
(rj4/rj4) formed nitrogen-fixing nodules with the same strain. Root-hair curling 
and infection threads were not observed in the roots of BARC-2 inoculated with 
USDA61, indicating that Rj4 blocked B. elkanii infection in the early stages. 
Accumulation of H2O2 and salicylic acid (SA) was observed in the roots of BARC-2 
inoculated with USDA61. Transcriptome analyses revealed that inoculation of 
USDA61, but not its T3SS mutant in BARC-2, induced defense-related genes, 
including those coding for hypersensitive-induced responsive protein, which act 
in effector-triggered immunity (ETI) in Arabidopsis. These findings suggest that 
B. elkanii T3SS triggers the SA-mediated ETI-type response in Rj4 soybean, which 
consequently blocks symbiotic interactions. This study revealed a common 
molecular mechanism underlying both plant-pathogen and plant-symbiont 
interactions, and suggests that establishment of a root nodule symbiosis 
requires the evasion or suppression of plant immune responses triggered by 
rhizobial effectors.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Japanese 
Society of Plant Physiologists. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pcw104
PMID: 27373538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]