---
reference_id: "PMID:12967526"
title: "Antiphospholipid syndrome: genetic review."
authors:
- Namjou B
journal: Curr Rheumatol Rep
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1007/s11926-003-0030-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiphospholipid syndrome: genetic review.
**Authors:** Namjou B
**Journal:** Curr Rheumatol Rep (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11926-003-0030-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11926-003-0030-8)

## Content

1. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2003 Oct;5(5):391-4. doi: 10.1007/s11926-003-0030-8.

Antiphospholipid syndrome: genetic review.

Namjou B(1).

Author information:
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 825 Northeast 13th Street, Oklahoma 
City, OK 73104, USA. namjoub@omrf.ouhsc.edu

The possibility of a genetic predisposition to develop the antiphospholipid 
syndrome (APS) and to produce anticardiolipin antibodies and lupus anticoagulant 
has been addressed by family studies and by population studies. Various studies 
suggest a familial occurrence of anticardiolipin antibodies and lupus 
anticoagulant, with or without clinical evidence of APS. This familial tendency 
could be genetically determined. Multiple human leukocyte antigen-DR or -DQ 
associations with antiphospholipid antibodies have been described. Genetic 
studies of beta(2)-glycoprotein-1(GP1) polymorphisms have been determined and 
valine/leucine polymorphism could be a genetic risk for having anti-beta(2)-GP1 
antibodies and APS. Compared with polymorphism of beta(2)-GP1 as a genetic risk 
factor for APS, beta(2)-GP1 deficiency is not associated with thrombosis and 
patients with APS usually have normal or somewhat elevated levels of 
beta(2)-GP1. The antigen specificity of antiphospholipid antibodies and the 
pathophysiology of thrombosis in APS are highly heterogeneous and 
multifactorial.

DOI: 10.1007/s11926-003-0030-8
PMID: 12967526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]