---
reference_id: "PMID:25604898"
title: A study of the clinical and radiological features in a cohort of 93 patients with a COL2A1 mutation causing spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita or a related phenotype.
authors:
- Terhal PA
- Nievelstein RJ
- Verver EJ
- Topsakal V
- van Dommelen P
- Hoornaert K
- Le Merrer M
- Zankl A
- Simon ME
- Smithson SF
- Marcelis C
- Kerr B
- Clayton-Smith J
- Kinning E
- Mansour S
- Elmslie F
- Goodwin L
- van der Hout AH
- Veenstra-Knol HE
- Herkert JC
- Lund AM
- Hennekam RC
- Mégarbané A
- Lees MM
- Wilson LC
- Male A
- Hurst J
- Alanay Y
- Annerén G
- Betz RC
- Bongers EM
- Cormier-Daire V
- Dieux A
- David A
- Elting MW
- van den Ende J
- Green A
- van Hagen JM
- Hertel NT
- Holder-Espinasse M
- den Hollander N
- Homfray T
- Hove HD
- Price S
- Raas-Rothschild A
- Rohrbach M
- Schroeter B
- Suri M
- Thompson EM
- Tobias ES
- Toutain A
- Vreeburg M
- Wakeling E
- Knoers NV
- Coucke P
- Mortier GR
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36922
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Collagen Type II/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/congenital, diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Phenotype
- Radiography
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A study of the clinical and radiological features in a cohort of 93 patients with a COL2A1 mutation causing spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita or a related phenotype.
**Authors:** Terhal PA, Nievelstein RJ, Verver EJ, Topsakal V, van Dommelen P, Hoornaert K, Le Merrer M, Zankl A, Simon ME, Smithson SF, Marcelis C, Kerr B, Clayton-Smith J, Kinning E, Mansour S, Elmslie F, Goodwin L, van der Hout AH, Veenstra-Knol HE, Herkert JC, Lund AM, Hennekam RC, Mégarbané A, Lees MM, Wilson LC, Male A, Hurst J, Alanay Y, Annerén G, Betz RC, Bongers EM, Cormier-Daire V, Dieux A, David A, Elting MW, van den Ende J, Green A, van Hagen JM, Hertel NT, Holder-Espinasse M, den Hollander N, Homfray T, Hove HD, Price S, Raas-Rothschild A, Rohrbach M, Schroeter B, Suri M, Thompson EM, Tobias ES, Toutain A, Vreeburg M, Wakeling E, Knoers NV, Coucke P, Mortier GR
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36922](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36922)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Mar;167A(3):461-75. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36922. Epub
2015  Jan 21.

A study of the clinical and radiological features in a cohort of 93 patients 
with a COL2A1 mutation causing spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita or a 
related phenotype.

Terhal PA(1), Nievelstein RJ, Verver EJ, Topsakal V, van Dommelen P, Hoornaert 
K, Le Merrer M, Zankl A, Simon ME, Smithson SF, Marcelis C, Kerr B, 
Clayton-Smith J, Kinning E, Mansour S, Elmslie F, Goodwin L, van der Hout AH, 
Veenstra-Knol HE, Herkert JC, Lund AM, Hennekam RC, Mégarbané A, Lees MM, Wilson 
LC, Male A, Hurst J, Alanay Y, Annerén G, Betz RC, Bongers EM, Cormier-Daire V, 
Dieux A, David A, Elting MW, van den Ende J, Green A, van Hagen JM, Hertel NT, 
Holder-Espinasse M, den Hollander N, Homfray T, Hove HD, Price S, 
Raas-Rothschild A, Rohrbach M, Schroeter B, Suri M, Thompson EM, Tobias ES, 
Toutain A, Vreeburg M, Wakeling E, Knoers NV, Coucke P, Mortier GR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Mar;167A(3):476-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36931.

Type 2 collagen disorders encompass a diverse group of skeletal dysplasias that 
are commonly associated with orthopedic, ocular, and hearing problems. However, 
the frequency of many clinical features has never been determined. We 
retrospectively investigated the clinical, radiological, and genotypic data in a 
group of 93 patients with molecularly confirmed SEDC or a related disorder. The 
majority of the patients (80/93) had short stature, with radiological features 
of SEDC (n = 64), others having SEMD (n = 5), Kniest dysplasia (n = 7), 
spondyloperipheral dysplasia (n = 2), or Torrance-like dysplasia (n = 2). The 
remaining 13 patients had normal stature with mild SED, Stickler-like syndrome 
or multiple epiphyseal dysplasia. Over 50% of the patients had undergone 
orthopedic surgery, usually for scoliosis, femoral osteotomy or hip replacement. 
Odontoid hypoplasia was present in 56% (95% CI 38-74) and a correlation between 
odontoid hypoplasia and short stature was observed. Atlanto-axial instability, 
was observed in 5 of the 18 patients (28%, 95% CI 10-54) in whom 
flexion-extension films of the cervical spine were available; however, it was 
rarely accompanied by myelopathy. Myopia was found in 45% (95% CI 35-56), and 
retinal detachment had occurred in 12% (95% CI 6-21; median age 14 years; 
youngest age 3.5 years). Thirty-two patients complained of hearing loss (37%, 
95% CI 27-48) of whom 17 required hearing aids. The ophthalmological features 
and possibly also hearing loss are often relatively frequent and severe in 
patients with splicing mutations. Based on clinical findings, age at onset and 
genotype-phenotype correlations in this cohort, we propose guidelines for the 
management and follow-up in this group of disorders.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36922
PMID: 25604898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]