---
reference_id: "PMID:40843044"
title: "Was an aortic valve replacement with a mechanical valve the right option all along? Cogan's syndrome with recurrent aortic regurgitation: a case of evolving surgical decisions."
authors:
- Gad M
- Faiq L
- Arifagic E
- Kamougeros A
- Ioannou S
- Shiakos G
- Tzanavaros I
journal: Oxf Med Case Reports
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/omcr/omaf143
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Was an aortic valve replacement with a mechanical valve the right option all along? Cogan's syndrome with recurrent aortic regurgitation: a case of evolving surgical decisions.
**Authors:** Gad M, Faiq L, Arifagic E, Kamougeros A, Ioannou S, Shiakos G, Tzanavaros I
**Journal:** Oxf Med Case Reports (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/omcr/omaf143](https://doi.org/10.1093/omcr/omaf143)

## Content

1. Oxf Med Case Reports. 2025 Aug 20;2025(8):omaf143. doi: 10.1093/omcr/omaf143. 
eCollection 2025 Aug.

Was an aortic valve replacement with a mechanical valve the right option all 
along? Cogan's syndrome with recurrent aortic regurgitation: a case of evolving 
surgical decisions.

Gad M(1), Faiq L(1), Arifagic E(1), Kamougeros A(2), Ioannou S(3), Shiakos 
G(1)(3), Tzanavaros I(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)European University Cyprus, School of Medicine, 6 Diogenous Street, Nicosia, 
Engomi 2404, Cyprus.
(2)Apollonion Private Hospital, Cardiac Innovation Center, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(3)Adult and Pediatric Cardiac Surgery Department, Cardiac Innovation Center of 
Apollonion Private Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(4)University of Nicosia Medical School, School of Medicine, Nicosia, Cyprus.

Cogan Syndrome (CS) is a rare autoimmune disease, complicated by a variety of 
cardiac manifestations. This case report represents the only documented case in 
the Republic of Cyprus. It describes the experience of a 23- year-old woman with 
CS who presented with newly diagnosed, severe aortic regurgitation (AR) and 
suspected endocarditis. The patient was initially treated successfully with a 
Ross procedure, but the recurrence of acute AR a few years later, led to the 
decision to treat her with a mechanical valve replacement, minimising 
complications and providing as permanent of a surgical solution as possible. 
This case demonstrates the importance of individualising treatment for such 
patients.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/omcr/omaf143
PMCID: PMC12365956
PMID: 40843044

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.