---
reference_id: "PMID:37284659"
title: "Risk factors associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis based on the observational study: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Zhu Q
- Zhou J
- Zhang Y
- Huang H
- Han J
- Cao B
- Xu D
- Zhao Y
- Chen G
journal: Front Neurosci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1196722
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk factors associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis based on the observational study: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Zhu Q, Zhou J, Zhang Y, Huang H, Han J, Cao B, Xu D, Zhao Y, Chen G
**Journal:** Front Neurosci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnins.2023.1196722](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2023.1196722)

## Content

1. Front Neurosci. 2023 May 22;17:1196722. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1196722. 
eCollection 2023.

Risk factors associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis based on the 
observational study: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Zhu Q(#)(1), Zhou J(#)(2)(3)(4)(5), Zhang Y(6), Huang H(2)(3)(4), Han 
J(2)(3)(4), Cao B(2)(3)(4), Xu D(2)(3)(4), Zhao Y(2)(3)(4)(5), Chen 
G(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Acupuncture and Orthopedics, Hubei University of Chinese 
Medicine, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Tuina and Rehabilitation Medicine, Hubei Provincial Hospital of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Tuina and Rehabilitation Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Hubei 
University of Chinese Medicine, Wuhan, China.
(4)Department of Tuina and Rehabilitation Medicine, Hubei Institute of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Wuhan, China.
(5)Department of First Clinical Medical College, Hubei University of Chinese 
Medicine, Wuhan, China.
(6)School of Sports Medicine, Wuhan Sports University, Wuhan, China.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative 
disorder affecting the upper and lower motor neurons. Though the pathogenesis of 
ALS is still unclear, exploring the associations between risk factors and ALS 
can provide reliable evidence to find the pathogenesis. This meta-analysis aims 
to synthesize all related risk factors of ALS to understand this disease 
comprehensively.
METHODS: We searched the following databases: PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane library, 
Web of Science, and Scopus. Moreover, observational studies, including cohort 
studies, and case-control studies, were included in this meta-analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 36 eligible observational studies were included, and 10 of 
them were cohort studies and the rest were case-control studies. We found six 
factors exacerbated the progression of disease: head trauma (OR = 1.26, 95% CI = 
1.13, 1.40), physical activity (OR = 1.06, 95% CI = 1.04, 1.09), electric shock 
(OR = 2.72, 95% CI = 1.62, 4.56), military service (OR = 1.34, 95% CI = 1.11, 
1.61), pesticides (OR = 1.96, 95% CI = 1.7, 2.26), and lead exposure (OR = 2.31, 
95% CI = 1.44, 3.71). Of note, type 2 diabetes mellitus was a protective factor 
for ALS. However, cerebrovascular disease (OR = 0.99, 95% CI = 0.75, 1.29), 
agriculture (OR = 1.22, 95% CI = 0.74, 1.99), industry (OR = 1.24, 95% CI = 
0.81, 1.91), service (OR = 0.47, 95% CI = 0.19, 1.17), smoking (OR = 1.25, 95% 
CI = 0.5, 3.09), chemicals (OR = 2.45, 95% CI = 0.89, 6.77), and heavy metal (OR 
= 1.5, 95% CI = 0.47, 4.84) were not risk factors for ALS based on 
meta-analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: Head trauma, physical activity, electric shock, military service, 
pesticides, and lead were risk factors for ALS onset and progression. But DM was 
a protective factor. This finding provides a better understanding of ALS risk 
factors with strong evidence for clinicians to rationalize clinical intervention 
strategies.
INPLSY REGISTRATION NUMBER: https://inplasy.com/inplasy-2022-9-0118/, 
INPLASY202290118.

Copyright © 2023 Zhu, Zhou, Zhang, Huang, Han, Cao, Xu, Zhao and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1196722
PMCID: PMC10239956
PMID: 37284659

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.