---
reference_id: "PMID:38462462"
title: Clinical and molecular analyses of isolated central congenital hypothyroidism based on a survey conducted in Japan.
authors:
- Shibata N
- Numakura C
- Hamajima T
- Miyako K
- Fujiwara I
- Mori J
- Saitoh A
- Nagasaki K
journal: Endocr J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ23-0391
keywords:
- Humans
- "Congenital Hypothyroidism/genetics, diagnosis, blood"
- Female
- Japan/epidemiology
- Male
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Neonatal Screening
- Infant
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- "Immunoglobulins/blood, genetics"
- Mutation
- Transducin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and molecular analyses of isolated central congenital hypothyroidism based on a survey conducted in Japan.
**Authors:** Shibata N, Numakura C, Hamajima T, Miyako K, Fujiwara I, Mori J, Saitoh A, Nagasaki K
**Journal:** Endocr J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1507/endocrj.EJ23-0391](https://doi.org/10.1507/endocrj.EJ23-0391)

## Content

1. Endocr J. 2024 May 23;71(5):471-480. doi: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ23-0391. Epub 2024
 Mar 8.

Clinical and molecular analyses of isolated central congenital hypothyroidism 
based on a survey conducted in Japan.

Shibata N(1), Numakura C(2), Hamajima T(3), Miyako K(4), Fujiwara I(5), Mori 
J(6), Saitoh A(1), Nagasaki K(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Homeostatic Regulation and Development, 
Faculty of Medicine, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata 
University, Niigata 951-8510, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Yamagata 
990-2331, Japan.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Aichi Children's Health and 
Medical Center, Obu 474-8710, Japan.
(4)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Fukuoka Children's Hospital, 
Fukuoka 813-0017, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Environmental Medicine, Graduate 
School of Medicine, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto 
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.

Central congenital hypothyroidism (CH) can occur as an isolated deficiency or as 
part of combined pituitary hormone deficiency. Unlike primary CH, central CH 
cannot be detected by newborn screening (NBS) using dry filter paper blood TSH 
levels, and early diagnosis remains challenging. In this study, the clinical and 
genetic backgrounds of patients with isolated central CH were determined through 
a questionnaire-based survey among members of the Japanese Society for Pediatric 
Endocrinology. The known causes of isolated central CH were studied in 14 
patients, including six with previously reported patient data. The results 
revealed IGSF1 and TBL1X pathogenic variants in nine and one patient, 
respectively. All six patients with low free thyroxine (FT4) levels detected in 
NBS carried IGSF1 pathogenic variants. Five patients with isolated central CH 
diagnosed after 3 months of age were variant-negative, except for one female 
patient with a heterozygous IGSF1 variant. Two of the four variant-negative 
patients and a variant-positive patient were diagnosed with pituitary 
hypoplasia. One and two patients with IGSF1 variant had obesity and intellectual 
disability, respectively. Left amblyopia was identified in the patient with a 
TBL1X variant. The study revalidated that IGSF1 variants comprise the most 
frequent pathogenic variant in patients with isolated central CH in Japan. The 
neonatal period is the optimal time for the diagnosis of central CH, 
particularly IGSF1 abnormalities, and the introduction of T4 screening should be 
considered in the future, taking cost-effectiveness into consideration.

DOI: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ23-0391
PMID: 38462462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]