---
reference_id: "PMID:8756384"
title: "Is there a correlation between duration of presenting symptoms and stage of medulloblastoma at the time of diagnosis?"
authors:
- Halperin EC
- Friedman HS
journal: Cancer
year: '1996'
doi: "10.1002/(SICI)1097-0142(19960815)78:4<874::AID-CNCR26>3.0.CO;2-R"
keywords:
- "Cerebellar Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology"
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Medulloblastoma/diagnosis, pathology"
- Neoplasm Staging
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is there a correlation between duration of presenting symptoms and stage of medulloblastoma at the time of diagnosis?
**Authors:** Halperin EC, Friedman HS
**Journal:** Cancer (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(SICI)1097-0142(19960815)78:4<874::AID-CNCR26>3.0.CO;2-R](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0142(19960815)78:4<874::AID-CNCR26>3.0.CO;2-R)

## Content

1. Cancer. 1996 Aug 15;78(4):874-80. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1097-0142(19960815)78:4<874::AID-CNCR26>3.0.CO;2-R.

Is there a correlation between duration of presenting symptoms and stage of 
medulloblastoma at the time of diagnosis?

Halperin EC(1), Friedman HS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, 
North Carolina 27710, USA.

BACKGROUND: Does a "delay in diagnosis" lead to a child being diagnosed with 
advanced stage as opposed to early stage medulloblastoma? Correlation between 
the duration of a patient's presenting symptoms and stage at diagnosis was 
examined.
METHODS: The population consisted of 72 consecutive patients with histologically 
proven medulloblastoma diagnosed between July 1, 1983 and July 31, 1995. A 
standard history and physical examination format was used to record the nature 
and duration of presenting symptoms. Patients were staged by use of the 
operative findings, pre- and postoperative cranial computed tomography (CT) 
scans and, later in the series, cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies 
and, for determination of the M stage, myelography, spinal MRI, and 
postoperative cerebrospinal fluid cytology.
RESULTS: There were 40 males (56%) and 32 females (44%) with a mean age of 11.8 
years. The most common presenting symptoms were vomiting (67%), headache (60%), 
ataxia (40%), and nausea (39%). By the Chang-Harisiadis (CH) system, 39 patients 
(54%) were found to have high stage medulloblastoma (T3b-4M0 or any TM1-4), 27 
(38%) had low stage disease (T1-3aM0), and in 6 (8%) the stage could not be 
fully determined. By the Langston modification of the Change-Harisiadis system 
(LCH) 38 patients (54%) had high stage, 24 (32%) had low stage, and in 10 (14%) 
the stage could not be fully determined. Fifty of the 66 patients for whom the 
duration of symptoms was known (76%) had < or = 3 months of symptoms prior to 
stage. High CH stage patients had a mean duration of symptoms of 7.4 +/- 6.9 
weeks versus 19.5 +/- 22.5 weeks for low stage patients. (P < 0.001). High LCH 
stage patients had a mean duration of symptoms of 7 +/- 6.6 weeks versus 15.4 
+/- 16.4 weeks for low stage patients (P < 0.01). Patients ultimately found to 
have MO disease were diagnosed more slowly (16.1 +/- 20 weeks) than those with 
M1 (7.3 +/- 5.3 weeks), M2 (6 +/- 5.3 weeks), or M3 disease (6.8 +/- 5.9 weeks) 
M0 vs. M1-3, P < 0.02). No patients had M4 disease. Using an alternative 
definition of high versus low stage (T4M0 or any TM1-4 vs. T1-3bM0) currently 
under consideration by pediatric oncologists, the duration of symptoms remained 
significantly longer for low stage disease in the CH system (high vs. low, 7.2 
+/- 5.8 weeks vs. 17.5 +/- 19.1 weeks, P < 0.01) but not in the LH system (high 
vs. low, 10.6 +/- 16.1 weeks vs. 13.9 +/- 15.9 weeks, P not significant).
CONCLUSIONS: A short duration of symptoms is associated with the diagnosis of 
more advanced medulloblastoma. This finding has significant potential 
implications for the identification of prognostic groups in medulloblastoma as 
well as medical-legal claims of "delay in diagnosis" and capitated health care 
issues.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0142(19960815)78:4<874::AID-CNCR26>3.0.CO;2-R
PMID: 8756384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]