---
reference_id: "PMID:36450478"
title: Impairments to executive function in emerging adults with Huntington disease.
authors:
- Pfalzer AC
- Watson KH
- Ciriegio AE
- Hale L
- Diehl S
- McDonell KE
- Vnencak-Jones C
- Huitz E
- Snow A
- Roth MC
- Guthrie CS
- Riordan H
- Long JD
- Compas BE
- Claassen DO
journal: J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2022-329812
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impairments to executive function in emerging adults with Huntington disease.
**Authors:** Pfalzer AC, Watson KH, Ciriegio AE, Hale L, Diehl S, McDonell KE, Vnencak-Jones C, Huitz E, Snow A, Roth MC, Guthrie CS, Riordan H, Long JD, Compas BE, Claassen DO
**Journal:** J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jnnp-2022-329812](https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp-2022-329812)

## Content

1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2023 Feb;94(2):130-135. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2022-329812. Epub 2022 Nov 30.

Impairments to executive function in emerging adults with Huntington disease.

Pfalzer AC(1), Watson KH(2), Ciriegio AE(2), Hale L(3), Diehl S(3), McDonell 
KE(3), Vnencak-Jones C(4), Huitz E(3), Snow A(3), Roth MC(5), Guthrie CS(5), 
Riordan H(4), Long JD(6), Compas BE(2), Claassen DO(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA anna.c.pfalzer@vumc.org.
(2)Psychology and Human Development, Vanderbilt University Peabody College of 
Education and Human Development, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(5)Department of Psychology and Human Development, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The clinical diagnosis of Huntington disease (HD) is 
typically made once motor symptoms and chorea are evident. Recent reports 
highlight the onset of cognitive and psychiatric symptoms before motor 
manifestations. These findings support further investigations of cognitive 
function across the lifespan of HD sufferers.
METHODS: To assess cognitive symptoms in the developing brain, we administered 
assessments from the National Institutes of Health Toolbox Cognitive Battery, an 
age-appropriate cognitive assessment with population norms, to a cohort of 
children, adolescents and young adults with (gene-expanded; GE) and without 
(gene-not-expanded; GNE) the trinucleotide cytosine, adenine, guanine (CAG) 
expansion in the Huntingtin gene. These five assessments that focus on executive 
function are well validated and form a composite score, with population norms. 
We modelled these scores across age, and CAP score to estimate the slope of 
progression, comparing these results to motor symptoms.
RESULTS: We find significant deficits in the composite measure of executive 
function in GE compared with GNE participants. GE participant performance on 
working memory was significantly lower compared with GNE participants. Modelling 
these results over age suggests that these deficits occur as early as 18 years 
of age, long before motor manifestations of HD.
CONCLUSIONS: This work provides strong evidence that impairments in executive 
function occur as early as the second decade of life, well before anticipated 
motor onset. Future investigations should delineate whether these impairments in 
executive function are due to abnormalities in neurodevelopment or early 
sequelae of a neurodegenerative process.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2022-329812
PMID: 36450478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.