---
reference_id: "PMID:31525528"
title: "Serial brain MRI changes related to autoimmune pathophysiology in Hashimoto encephalopathy with anti-NAE antibodies: A case-series study."
authors:
- Matsunaga A
- Ikawa M
- Kawamura Y
- Kishitani T
- Yamamura O
- Hamano T
- Kimura H
- Nakamoto Y
- Yoneda M
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2019.116453
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Biomarkers/blood
- Brain/diagnostic imaging
- "Encephalitis/blood, diagnostic imaging"
- Female
- "Hashimoto Disease/blood, diagnostic imaging"
- Humans
- Longitudinal Studies
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/trends
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Phosphopyruvate Hydratase/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serial brain MRI changes related to autoimmune pathophysiology in Hashimoto encephalopathy with anti-NAE antibodies: A case-series study.
**Authors:** Matsunaga A, Ikawa M, Kawamura Y, Kishitani T, Yamamura O, Hamano T, Kimura H, Nakamoto Y, Yoneda M
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jns.2019.116453](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2019.116453)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 2019 Nov 15;406:116453. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2019.116453. Epub
2019  Sep 7.

Serial brain MRI changes related to autoimmune pathophysiology in Hashimoto 
encephalopathy with anti-NAE antibodies: A case-series study.

Matsunaga A(1), Ikawa M(2), Kawamura Y(3), Kishitani T(1), Yamamura O(1), Hamano 
T(4), Kimura H(5), Nakamoto Y(1), Yoneda M(6).

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, 
University of Fukui, Fukui, Japan.
(2)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, 
University of Fukui, Fukui, Japan; Department of Advanced Medicine for Community 
Healthcare, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Fukui, Fukui, Japan; 
Biomedical Imaging Research Center, University of Fukui, Fukui, Japan.
(3)Department of Radiology, Harue Hospital, Fukui, Japan.
(4)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, 
University of Fukui, Fukui, Japan; Department of Aging and Dementia (DAD), 
Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Fukui, Fukui, Japan.
(5)Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Fukui, 
Fukui, Japan.
(6)Biomedical Imaging Research Center, University of Fukui, Fukui, Japan; 
Faculty of Nursing and Social Welfare Sciences, Fukui Prefectural University, 
Fukui, Japan. Electronic address: myoneda@fpu.ac.jp.

PURPOSE: Hashimoto encephalopathy (HE) is an autoimmune-mediated encephalopathy 
associated with anti-thyroid antibodies. We previously discovered serum 
autoantibodies against the NH2-terminal of α-enolase (NAE), which serve as a 
specific diagnostic biomarker for HE and may be involved in the autoimmune 
pathophysiology of HE, including vasculitis. Although the common findings of 
brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in HE have been recognized as normal or 
non-specific white matter lesions, serial MRI changes have been less well 
studied. The aim of this study was to clarify detailed and longitudinal MRI 
changes in HE associated with anti-NAE antibodies.
METHODS: We investigated serial brain MR images in 12 Japanese patients with HE 
who had serum anti-NAE antibodies.
RESULTS: Brain MRI showed diffuse white matter abnormalities and/or multiple 
small subcortical lesions in 10 patients. These lesions were apparently 
non-specific; however, in 7 of these patients we observed expanding and 
diminishing white matter lesions, emerging subcortical high-intensity spots on 
diffusion-weighted images, or reversible limbic lesions, which worsened at 
relapse and improved after recovery following immunotherapies.
CONCLUSION: MRI lesions that fluctuate according to the disease condition were 
frequently observed in HE patients with anti-NAE antibodies, which suggests that 
these fluctuation may be associated with the autoimmune pathophysiology of HE.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2019.116453
PMID: 31525528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]