---
reference_id: "PMID:31321477"
title: Molecular changes in solitary fibrous tumor progression.
authors:
- Park HK
- Yu DB
- Sung M
- Oh E
- Kim M
- Song JY
- Lee MS
- Jung K
- Noh KW
- An S
- Song K
- Nam DH
- Kim YJ
- Choi YL
journal: J Mol Med (Berl)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00109-019-01815-8
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis/genetics
- "Apoptotic Protease-Activating Factor 1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics, metabolism"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- NIH 3T3 Cells
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- "Solitary Fibrous Tumors/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular changes in solitary fibrous tumor progression.
**Authors:** Park HK, Yu DB, Sung M, Oh E, Kim M, Song JY, Lee MS, Jung K, Noh KW, An S, Song K, Nam DH, Kim YJ, Choi YL
**Journal:** J Mol Med (Berl) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00109-019-01815-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00109-019-01815-8)

## Content

1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2019 Oct;97(10):1413-1425. doi: 10.1007/s00109-019-01815-8. 
Epub 2019 Jul 18.

Molecular changes in solitary fibrous tumor progression.

Park HK(1), Yu DB(2)(3), Sung M(3), Oh E(3), Kim M(2)(3), Song JY(3), Lee 
MS(2)(3), Jung K(2)(3), Noh KW(2)(3), An S(2)(3), Song K(4), Nam DH(2), Kim 
YJ(5), Choi YL(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Konkuk University Medical Center, Konkuk University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, SAIHST, Sungkyunkwan 
University, Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Laboratory of Cancer Genomics and Molecular Pathology, Samsung Medical 
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Irwon-ro 81, Gangnam-gu, 
Seoul, 06351, South Korea.
(4)The Center for Companion Diagnostics, LOGONE Bio Convergence Research 
Foundation, Seoul, South Korea.
(5)Laboratory of Cancer Genomics and Molecular Pathology, Samsung Medical 
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Irwon-ro 81, Gangnam-gu, 
Seoul, 06351, South Korea. bubble@skku.edu.
(6)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, SAIHST, Sungkyunkwan 
University, Seoul, South Korea. ylachoi@skku.edu.
(7)Laboratory of Cancer Genomics and Molecular Pathology, Samsung Medical 
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Irwon-ro 81, Gangnam-gu, 
Seoul, 06351, South Korea. ylachoi@skku.edu.
(8)Department of Pathology and Translational Genomics, Samsung Medical Center, 
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Irwon-ro 81, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, 
06351, South Korea. ylachoi@skku.edu.

Solitary fibrous tumors (SFTs) are NAB2-STAT6 fusion-associated neoplasms. There 
are several subtypes of NAB2-STAT6 fusions, but their clinical significances are 
still unclear. Moreover, the mechanisms of malignant progression are also poorly 
understood. In this study, using 91 SFT cases, we examined whether fusion 
variants are associated with clinicopathological parameters and also 
investigated the molecular mechanism of malignant transformation using 
whole-exome sequencing. We detected variant 1b (NAB2ex4-STAT6ex2) in 51/91 (56%) 
cases and variants 2a/2b (NAB2ex6-STAT6ex16/17) in 17/91 (19%) cases. The 
NAB2-STAT6 fusion variant types were significantly associated with their primary 
site (P < 0.001). In addition, a TERT promoter mutation was detected in 7/73 
(10%) cases, and it showed a significant association with malignant SFTs 
(P = 0.003). To identify molecular changes during malignant progression, we 
selected an index patient to obtain parallel tissue samples from the primary and 
metastatic tumors. In the metastatic tissue, 10 unique molecular alterations, 
including those in TP53 and APAF1, were detected. In vitro functional 
experiments showed that APAF1 depletion increased the tumor potency of cells 
expressing NAB2-STAT6 fusion protein under treatment with staurosporine. We 
found that TP53 immunopositivity (P = 0.006) and loss of APAF1 immunoreactivity 
(P < 0.001) were significantly associated with malignant SFTs. Our study 
suggests that dysfunction of TP53 and APAF1 leads to impaired apoptotic 
function, and eventually contributes toward malignant SFT transformation. KEY 
MESSAGES: We firstly found that the TERT promoter mutation was strongly 
associated with malignant SFTs (P = 0.003) and the representative 1b 
(NAB2ex4-STAT6ex2) or 2a (NAB2ex6-STAT6ex16) fusion variants similarly 
contribute to tumorigenicity. We also found that TP53 immunopositivity 
(P = 0.006) and loss of APAF1 immunoreactivity (P < 0.001) were significantly 
associated with malignant SFTs. Our study suggests that dysfunction of TP53 and 
APAF1 leads to impaired apoptotic function, and eventually contributes toward 
malignant SFT transformation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-019-01815-8
PMCID: PMC6746689
PMID: 31321477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.