---
reference_id: "PMID:37279826"
title: "An unusual presentation of invasive Fusarium aortitis in a patient who is immunocompromised: A case report."
authors:
- Furaijat G
- Bettac L
- Kächele M
- Grüner B
- Skrabal C
- Barth TFE
- Parlak M
- Hagemann JB
- Peters L
- Walther G
- Kersten J
journal: Int J Infect Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2023.05.069
keywords:
- Humans
- Fusarium
- "Fusariosis/diagnosis, drug therapy, microbiology"
- Aortitis/diagnostic imaging
- Immunocompromised Host
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Antifungal Agents/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An unusual presentation of invasive Fusarium aortitis in a patient who is immunocompromised: A case report.
**Authors:** Furaijat G, Bettac L, Kächele M, Grüner B, Skrabal C, Barth TFE, Parlak M, Hagemann JB, Peters L, Walther G, Kersten J
**Journal:** Int J Infect Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijid.2023.05.069](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2023.05.069)

## Content

1. Int J Infect Dis. 2023 Sep;134:102-105. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2023.05.069. Epub
2023 Jun 5.

An unusual presentation of invasive Fusarium aortitis in a patient who is
immunocompromised: A case report.

Furaijat G(1), Bettac L(1), Kächele M(1), Grüner B(2), Skrabal C(3), Barth
TFE(4), Parlak M(5), Hagemann JB(6), Peters L(2), Walther G(7), Kersten J(8).

Author information:
(1)University of Ulm, Department of Internal Medicine I, Ulm, Germany.
(2)University of Ulm, Department of Internal Medicine III, Division of
Infectious Diseases, Ulm, Germany.
(3)University of Ulm, Department of Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, Ulm,
Germany.
(4)University of Ulm, Institute of Pathology, Ulm, Germany.
(5)University of Ulm, Department of Ophthalmology, Ulm, Germany.
(6)University of Ulm, Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Ulm,
Germany.
(7)German National Reference Center for Invasive Fungal Infections, Leibniz
Institute for Natural Product Research, and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll
Institute, Jena, Germany.
(8)University of Ulm, Division of Sports and Rehabilitation Medicine, Ulm,
Germany. Electronic address: Johannes.kersten@uni-ulm.de.

Fusarium (F.) species are ubiquitous filamentous fungi that may cause various
opportunistic infections, especially in patients who are immunocompromised. A
rare manifestation of disseminated fusariosis affects the aortic valve and
results in invasive aortitis, which poses a significant challenge for clinicians
in diagnosis and treatment. Here, we report a case of a patient, aged 54 years,
who is immunocompromised, presenting initially with Fusarium keratitis and
chorioretinitis in both eyes and a new endovascular aortic mass. Positron
emission tomography/computed tomography was performed, suggesting aortitis.
Transoesophageal echocardiography and electrocardiogram-guided computed
tomography-angiography confirmed a large intraluminal mass in the ascending
aorta. The aortic mass and a part of the ascending aorta were resected
surgically, and a filamentous fungus with the microscopic features of the genus
Fusarium was isolated and later identified molecularly as F. petroliphilum. The
course of the treatment was complicated by perioperative cerebral embolization
and mesenteric ischemia. These complications could be attributed to a
preoperatively existing occlusion of the superior and inferior mesenteric artery
and a subtotal stenosis of the celiac trunk. This case report describes a rare
manifestation of disseminated fusariosis, frequently characterized by protracted
clinical courses with poor prognosis. Fusariosis may manifest at different sites
at different times or persist as a long-lasting disease with reactivation. This
case highlights the importance of the interdisciplinary approach for effectively
treating invasive mycoses.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2023.05.069
PMID: 37279826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
have no competing interest to declare.
