---
reference_id: "PMID:23624135"
title: Salivary cortisol day curves in assessing glucocorticoid replacement therapy in Addison's disease.
authors:
- Smans L
- Lentjes E
- Hermus A
- Zelissen P
journal: Hormones (Athens)
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/BF03401290
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Salivary cortisol day curves in assessing glucocorticoid replacement therapy in Addison's disease.
**Authors:** Smans L, Lentjes E, Hermus A, Zelissen P
**Journal:** Hormones (Athens) (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF03401290](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03401290)

## Content

1. Hormones (Athens). 2013 Jan-Mar;12(1):93-100. doi: 10.1007/BF03401290.

Salivary cortisol day curves in assessing glucocorticoid replacement therapy in 
Addison's disease.

Smans L(1), Lentjes E, Hermus A, Zelissen P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Endocrinology, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. L.C.C.J.Smans@umcutrcht.nl

OBJECTIVE: Patients with Addison's disease require lifelong treatment with 
glucocorticoids. At present, no glucocorticoid replacement therapy (GRT) can 
exactly mimic normal physiology. As a consequence, under- and especially 
overtreatment can occur. Suboptimal GRT may lead to various side effects. The 
aim of this study was to investigate the use of salivary cortisol day curves 
(SCDC) in the individual adjustment of GRT in order to approach normal cortisol 
levels as closely as possible, reduce over- and underreplacement and study the 
short-term effects on quality of life (QoL).
DESIGN AND METHODS: Twenty patients with Addison's disease were included in this 
prospective study. A SCDC was obtained and compared to normal controls; general 
and disease specific QoL-questionnaires were completed. Based on SCDC assessment 
of over- and undertreatment (calculated as duration (h) × magnitude (nmol/L) at 
different time points, glucocorticoid dose and regime were adjusted. After 4 
weeks SCDC and QoL assessment were repeated and the effect of adjusting GRT was 
analysed.
RESULTS: At baseline, underreplacement was present in 3 and overreplacement in 
18 patients; total calculated overreplacement was 32.8 h.nmol/L. Overreplacement 
decreased significantly to 13.3 h. nmol/L (p =0.005) after adjustment of GRT. 
Overreplacement was found particularly in the afternoon and evening. After 
reducing overreplacement in the evening, complaints about sleep disturbances 
significantly decreased.
CONCLUSIONS: Individual adjustment of GRT based on SCDC to approach normal 
cortisol concentrations during the day can reduce overreplacement, especially in 
the evening. This can lead to a reduction of sleep disturbances and fatigue in 
patients with Addison's disease. A SCDC is a simple and patient-friendly tool 
for adjusting GRT and can be useful in the follow-up of patients with Addison's 
disease.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03401290
PMID: 23624135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]