---
reference_id: "PMID:28212759"
title: "Psoriasis and comorbid diseases: Epidemiology."
authors:
- Takeshita J
- Grewal S
- Langan SM
- Mehta NN
- Ogdie A
- Van Voorhees AS
- Gelfand JM
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2016.07.064
keywords:
- Cardiovascular Diseases/epidemiology
- Comorbidity
- Diabetes Mellitus/epidemiology
- Dyslipidemias/epidemiology
- Humans
- Infections/epidemiology
- Inflammatory Bowel Diseases/epidemiology
- Liver Diseases/epidemiology
- Mood Disorders/epidemiology
- Neoplasms/epidemiology
- Obesity/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Psoriasis/epidemiology
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/epidemiology"
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Psoriasis and comorbid diseases: Epidemiology.
**Authors:** Takeshita J, Grewal S, Langan SM, Mehta NN, Ogdie A, Van Voorhees AS, Gelfand JM
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2016.07.064](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2016.07.064)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2017 Mar;76(3):377-390. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2016.07.064.

Psoriasis and comorbid diseases: Epidemiology.

Takeshita J(1), Grewal S(2), Langan SM(3), Mehta NN(4), Ogdie A(5), Van Voorhees 
AS(6), Gelfand JM(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Department of Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics, Center for Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of 
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Electronic 
address: Junko.Takeshita@uphs.upenn.edu.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(3)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and St. John's Institute of 
Dermatology, London, United Kingdom.
(4)National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.
(5)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Center for Clinical 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Division of Rheumatology, University of 
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, 
Virginia.
(7)Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Department of Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics, Center for Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of 
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Psoriasis is a common chronic inflammatory disease of the skin that is 
increasingly being recognized as a systemic inflammatory disorder. Psoriatic 
arthritis is a well-known comorbidity of psoriasis. A rapidly expanding body of 
literature in various populations and settings supports additional associations 
between psoriasis and cardiometabolic diseases, gastrointestinal diseases, 
kidney disease, malignancy, infection, and mood disorders. The pathogenesis of 
comorbid disease in patients with psoriasis remains unknown; however, shared 
inflammatory pathways, cellular mediators, genetic susceptibility, and common 
risk factors are hypothesized to be contributing elements. As additional 
psoriasis comorbidities continue to emerge, education of health care providers 
is essential to ensuring comprehensive medical care for patients with psoriasis.

Copyright © 2016 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2016.07.064
PMCID: PMC5731650
PMID: 28212759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr. Takeshita 
receives a research grant (to the Trusteees of the University of Pennyslvania) 
from Pfizer and payment for continuing medical education work related to 
psoriasis. Dr. Mehta is a full time U.S. Government employee. Dr. Ogdie receives 
research grants from AbbVie (to the Group for Research and Assessment of 
Psoriasis and Psoriatic Arthritis [GRAPPA]), Celgene (to GRAPPA), and Pfizer 
Inc. (to the Trustees of the University of Pennsylvania and GRAPPA), and has 
served as a consultant for Novartis, receiving honoraria. Dr. Van Voorhees has 
served as a consultant for AbbVie, Amgen, Aqua, Astra Zeneca, Celgene, Corrona, 
Dermira, Janssen, Leo, Novartis, and Pfizer, receiving honoraria; received a 
research grant from AbbVie; and has other relationship with Merck. Dr. Gelfand 
has served as a consultant for AbbVie, AstraZeneca, Celgene Corp, Coherus, Eli 
Lilly, Janssen Biologics (formerly Centocor), Sanofi, Merck, Novartis Corp, 
Endo, and Pfizer Inc., receiving honoraria; and receives research grants (to the 
Trustees of the University of Pennsylvania) from AbbVie, Amgen, Eli Lilly, 
Janssen, Novartis Corp, Regeneron, and Pfizer Inc.; and received payment for 
continuing medical education work related to psoriasis. Dr. Gelfand is a 
co-patent holder of resiquimod for treatment of cutaneous T cell lymphoma.

Psoriasis is a common chronic inflammatory disease that affects over 7.5 million people in the United States (U.S.) and approximately 125 million people worldwide.1–3 It has significant impacts on both physical and emotional health-related quality of life comparable to other major illnesses.4 In the last decade, tremendous progress has been made in furthering our understanding of the genetics, pathophysiology, and treatment of psoriasis. Epidemiologic and basic scientific evidence contributing to our knowledge of the natural history and biology of psoriasis, respectively, have led to the recognition of psoriasis as a disorder with important health implications that extend beyond the skin.

The first observation of comorbid disease among patients with psoriasis was made in 1897 when Strauss5 reported an association between psoriasis and diabetes. In 1961, Reed, et al.6 described a high prevalence of heart disease including coronary thrombosis and myocardial infarction (MI) in postmortem examinations of psoriasis patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA). Subsequently, in 1978, McDonald, et al.7 observed an increased prevalence of venous and arterial vascular disease in hospitalized psoriasis patients. Now many years later, a quickly evolving body of literature using modern epidemiological techniques has demonstrated that psoriasis, particularly severe disease, is associated with increased mortality8 and comorbid disease burden 9,10 that are hypothesized to be the result of chronic inflammation associated with the skin disease.

We review the epidemiologic data supporting associations between psoriasis and cardiometabolic diseases, gastrointestinal diseases, kidney disease, malignancy, infection, mood disorders, PsA, and other emerging comorbid diseases. Recognition of the comorbid disease burden associated with psoriasis is essential for comprehensive medical care for patients with this chronic skin disorder.

Cardiometabolic disease is prevalent among patients with psoriasis, especially those with more severe skin disease.

Psoriasis may be an independent risk factor for diabetes and major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE); risk of MACE is greatest among those with severe psoriasis.

Chronic systemic, specifically vascular, inflammation may be increased in patients with psoriasis and may contribute to atherogenesis.

Cardiovascular (CV) risk factors are prevalent among patients with psoriasis, thus, an increased risk of CV disease (CVD) may be expected. However, in 2006, a large, population-based cohort study in the United Kingdom (U.K.) demonstrated that psoriasis was associated with an increased risk of MI, independent of traditional risk factors such as body mass index (BMI), smoking, hypertension, diabetes, and dyslipidemia.11 Moreover, a dose-response was demonstrated with stronger, more clinically significant risks in patients with more severe disease as defined by receipt of phototherapy or systemic therapies indicated for severe psoriasis. Subsequently, numerous epidemiologic studies have similarly suggested psoriasis to be an independent risk factor for MI, stroke, and death due to CVD, collectively termed MACE. While a few studies have reported non-statistically significant associations between psoriasis and MACE12–15 as discussed in detail elsewhere,16–18 results from these studies remain consistent with the larger body of work that have found statistically significant associations. Many of the studies, to date, have been summarized in at least one of eight meta-analyses of psoriasis and CVD (Table I).19–26 Two meta-analyses19,25 specifically examined the risks of MI, stroke, and CV mortality according to psoriasis severity and reported the greatest risks to be among those with severe disease. Risk of MI among patients with mild psoriasis was found to be significantly increased in both meta-analyses,19,25 albeit to a lesser extent, suggesting that CV risk is not limited to those with severe disease. Longer duration of psoriasis has also been associated with increased risk of CVD.27,28 Collectively, these data provide evidence for psoriasis as an independent risk factor for CVD.

Additional analyses have identified the clinical importance of and provided practical measures for the increased risk of MACE associated with psoriasis.29,30 In a cohort study of severe psoriasis patients in the U.K., Mehta, et al.29 found the attributable risk of severe psoriasis on MACE over a 10 year period to be 6.2%. Importantly, in a study to determine the impact of psoriasis on the Framingham Risk Score (FRS), adding psoriasis to the FRS resulted in reclassification of a majority of patients to a higher CV risk category whereby 73% of patients at low risk were reclassified as intermediate risk and 53% of patients at intermediate risk as high risk.31 Putting the psoriasis-associated CV risk into context with other chronic inflammatory diseases, Ahlehoff, et al.30 found the increased risk of MACE associated with severe psoriasis to be nearly identical to that conferred by diabetes alone. Similarly, a single observational study of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and psoriasis suggests that patients treated with similar systemic treatments (e.g., methotrexate) each have similarly elevated risks of MACE, independent of traditional risk factors.32

Shared pathophysiologic pathways between psoriasis and CVD including chronic type 1 helper (Th1) T cell- and Th17-mediated inflammation33–38, monocyte and neutrophil modulation39–41, increased oxidative stress35, endothelial cell dysfunction42, increased uric acid43,44, angiogenesis35, and increased circulating microparticles45–48 may explain the increased CVD risk associated with psoriasis. Additionally, persistent pathophysiologic processes that drive psoriasis (e.g., epidermal hyper-proliferation, inflammation,49,50 and angiogenesis) may also exert pleiotropic adverse effects on the CV system that contribute to atherogenesis. Mouse models of psoriasis have demonstrated that chronic skin-specific inflammation has systemic effects including arterial hypertension51, endothelial dysfunction51, and vascular inflammation and thrombosis.38 Studies in psoriasis patients yield similarly consistent findings using [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT), a sensitive tool for measuring vascular inflammation and visualizing macrophage activity in vivo. Aortic inflammation measured by PET/CT is a predictor of future CV events and has been shown to rapidly decrease when patients are exposed to interventions known to lower CV risk (i.e., statins), thus making it an attractive surrogate endpoint to study.52 Aortic inflammation has been observed to be increased in psoriasis patients in a manner that is independent of CV risk factors and correlates with severity of skin disease,53 lending further support to the idea that inflammatory pathways in psoriasis exert systemic effects. Lastly, common genetics between psoriasis, diabetes, and CVD such as CDKAL1, ApoE4, and others have been suggested, 54–64 and genes relevant to metabolic disease and CVD have been found to be dysregulated in lesional skin and in the serum of psoriasis patients.64–66 On the other hand, other work suggests that shared genetic pathways are unlikely to explain the association between psoriasis and CVD.67

Obesity is an independent risk factor for psoriasis. In studies of incident psoriasis,68–70 the risk of psoriasis was found to increase with higher BMI.69 A meta-analysis of 16 observational studies found a pooled odds ratio [OR] for the association between psoriasis and obesity to be 1.66 (95% confidence interval [CI] 1.46–1.89) (Table II).71 Among studies that accounted for psoriasis severity, generally defined by treatment patterns, the pooled ORs for the association between obesity and mild and severe psoriasis were 1.46 (95%CI 1.17–1.82) and 2.23 (95% CI 1.63–3.05), respectively. As further support for a relationship between psoriasis severity and obesity, Langan, et al. performed a cross-sectional study of patients with psoriasis in the U.K. for whom information on body surface area (BSA) involvement by psoriasis was available and found a positive dose-dependent relationship between objective measures of psoriasis severity and obesity.72

Hypertension is more prevalent among patients with versus without psoriasis. A meta-analysis of 24 observational studies found a pooled OR for the association between psoriasis and hypertension to be 1.58 (95% CI 1.42–1.76).73 The odds of hypertension among patients with psoriasis increased with greater disease severity with ORs of 1.30 (95% CI 1.15–1.47) for mild and 1.49 (95% CI 1.20–1.86) for severe psoriasis as defined by treatment patterns.42 Two cohort studies also observed psoriasis to be associated with an increased risk of incident hypertension.74,75

Importantly, studies of patients with hypertension suggest more severe hypertension and poorly controlled blood pressure among patients with psoriasis compared with those without psoriasis.76,77 Furthermore, the likelihood of poorly controlled hypertension appears to increase with more severe skin disease, independent of BMI and other risk factors77.

Psoriasis is associated with an increased risk of diabetes, independent of traditional risk factors. A meta-analysis of five cohort studies assessing the risk of incident diabetes among patients with psoriasis found a pooled relative risk (RR) for diabetes of 1.27 (95% CI, 1.16–1.40).78 The risk of diabetes and likelihood of insulin resistance and diabetic complications are suggested to increase with greater psoriasis severity as defined by treatment patterns or BSA affected, respectively, independent of traditional risk factors such as BMI.72,79 Moreover, diabetic patients with psoriasis appear to be more likely to require pharmacological management79 and suffer from micro- and macrovascular diabetes complications than diabetic patients without psoriasis.80

Dyslipidemia may be more prevalent among patients with than without psoriasis. In a systematic review, 20 of 25 included studies found significant associations between psoriasis and dyslipidemia with ORs ranging from 1.04 to 5.55.81 Among three of the studies included in the systematic review, the ORs for dyslipidemia ranged from 1.10 to 3.38 for patients with mild psoriasis and from 1.36–5.55 for patients with severe psoriasis. The directionality of the association between the two conditions remains unclear as some studies suggest dyslipidemia may be a risk factor for developing psoriasis.82,83

Advanced lipid testing techniques have demonstrated a more atherogenic lipid profile and decreased high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol efflux capacity (CEC) among patients with versus without psoriasis, beyond CV risk factors.84,85 Increasing psoriasis severity has also been found to correlate negatively with HDL CEC in both adults and children with psoriasis.85,86 Furthermore, HDL CEC is directly related to coronary artery disease burden in patients with psoriasis87 and is suggested to be an important proxy for vascular disease.

Metabolic syndrome is generally defined by the presence of a combination of central obesity, hypertension, insulin resistance, and dyslipidemia.88 Studies have found metabolic syndrome as well as its individual components to be more prevalent among patients with than without psoriasis in both adult and pediatric populations.89,90 A meta-analysis of 12 observational studies found a pooled OR of 2.26 (95% CI 1.70–3.01) for the association between psoriasis and metabolic syndrome, though the analysis was limited by presence of publication bias and absence of small studies in the published literature.89 Importantly, in Langan, et al.’s cross-sectional study in the U.K., the prevalence of metabolic syndrome correlated directly with BSA affected by psoriasis.72

Psoriasis may be associated with an increased incidence and prevalence of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), particularly Crohn’s disease (CD).

Few studies suggest that psoriasis is associated with an increased prevalence of hepatic diseases, particularly nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD).

Common genetic and inflammatory pathways have been implicated in psoriasis and IBD which includes CD and ulcerative colitis (UC).59,91–94 The epidemiology of this relationship remains poorly defined. Several studies have observed increased prevalence and incidence of IBD among patients with psoriasis95,96 and vice versa97–99 with varying degrees of association, and a Taiwanese study suggested an absence of association.100 Cohen, et al.95 observed that psoriasis may be more strongly associated with CD than UC (OR 2.49 [95% CI, 1.71–3.62] and 1.64 [95% CI, 1.15–2.23], respectively). Similarly, a cohort study of U.S. women found an increased risk of CD among patients with psoriasis (RR 3.86 [95% CI, 2.23–6.67]) while the risk of UC was attenuated and not statistically significant (RR 1.17 [95% CI, 0.41–3.36]).96

NAFLD is a common chronic liver disease in Western industrialized countries101 and encompasses a spectrum of liver disorders from mild hepatic steatosis to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). Associations between psoriasis and NAFLD have been reported in the literature. In a meta-analysis of seven observational studies which were considered low to moderate quality and, for the most part, did not adjust for potential confounding factors such as metabolic syndrome, NAFLD was found to be more prevalent among patients with versus without psoriasis (pooled OR 2.15 [95% CI, 1.57–2.94]).102 Beyond NAFLD, a cross-sectional study in the U.K. found that psoriasis is associated with a higher prevalence of “mild” liver disease including chronic hepatitis, alcoholic liver disease, and NAFLD (OR 1.41 [95% CI 1.12–1.76]).9 A positive dose-response relationship between psoriasis severity based on BSA involvement and “mild” liver disease was also observed.

Moderate-to-severe psoriasis may be an independent risk factor for chronic kidney disease (CKD) and end-stage renal disease (ESRD).

The odds of CKD increase in a dose-dependent manner with greater psoriasis severity.

The term “psoriatic nephropathy” was first introduced based on case reports of glomerulonephritides in patients with psoriasis.103 Until recently, most studies assessing the association between psoriasis and kidney disease have been small and cross-sectional with varying results. In a U.K. cohort study of cause-specific mortality among patients with psoriasis, severe psoriasis was associated with a four-fold increased risk of death from nephritic or non-hypertensive kidney disease.104 A Swedish cohort study also found mild psoriasis to be associated with more than a two-fold increased risk of death from kidney disease.105 In 2013, another U.K. cohort study found that severe psoriasis may, in fact, be a risk factor for CKD and ESRD, independent of traditional risk factors such as age, sex, BMI, CVD, diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and nephrotoxic medications (hazard ratio [HR] for CKD 1.93, 95% CI 1.79–2.08, and HR for ESRD 4.15, 95% CI 1.70–10.11).106 A nested cross-sectional analysis of patients with psoriasis for whom information on BSA involvement was available found the prevalence of CKD to increase in a dose-dependent manner with more severe psoriasis. A cohort study in Taiwan similarly found severe psoriasis to be associated with nearly two- and three-fold increased risks of CKD and ESRD, respectively.107

Psoriasis, particularly severe disease, may be associated with an increased risk of cancer.

Lymphoma has been most consistently associated with psoriasis, and risk for cutaneous T cell lymphoma is suggested to be the highest.

Patients receiving treatments for severe psoriasis have a 41% increased risk of dying from malignancy than patients without psoriasis.104 Risk of malignancy due to psoriasis, itself, remains uncertain. A meta-analysis of 11 observational studies evaluating the risk of malignancy among patients with psoriasis suggests that overall risk of cancer, excluding non-melanoma skin cancers (NMSC), is increased (standardized incidence ratio 1.16 (95% CI, 1.07–1.25).108 Greater risks of upper aerodigestive tract, respiratory tract, liver, pancreas, and urinary tract cancers, and lymphoma were also suggested.108 The level of heterogeneity among the included studies was high, though, making interpretation challenging. Furthermore, many studies did not account for important confounding factors such as smoking and drinking and/or assess psoriasis treatment effects on the risk of subsequent malignancy calling into question the validity of attributing the increased risk of cancer to psoriasis, alone. A subsequent cohort study of cancer risk among patients with psoriasis in the U.K. that included information on BMI, smoking, and drinking also found increased risks of lung cancer, NMSC, and lymphoma, supporting some of Pouplard, et al.’s findings.109 The greatest risks of cancer were among those receiving treatments for severe psoriasis. The association between psoriasis and lung cancer was lost, however, after stratification by smoking status. Additional studies110–112 assessing lymphoma risk in patients with psoriasis also found persistently increased risks of lymphoma (1.3 to 2-fold increased risk) even among those without a history of immunosuppressive therapy, though absolute risks remained low. Of the specific lymphoma types, the association between psoriasis and cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL) was suggested to be the strongest.109,112 It remains unclear what role psoriasis therapies and/or misdiagnosis of CTCL as psoriasis may play in explaining this observation.

Streptococcal pharyngitis is a trigger of guttate psoriasis, and exacerbation of psoriasis in the setting of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection is known.

Psoriasis may be associated with an increased risk of serious infection (i.e., infection requiring hospitalization), especially respiratory infections.

Infection is the second leading cause of excess death among patients receiving therapies for severe psoriasis, and patients with severe psoriasis have a 65% increased risk of dying from infection than patients without psoriasis.104 With the advent of targeted biologic therapies, much attention has been paid to measuring the risk of infection associated with these therapies for psoriasis. However, infection risk attributable to psoriasis itself remains poorly understood. The most well-recognized association between psoriasis and infection is that of guttate psoriasis and streptococcal pharyngitis which is thought to be caused by molecular mimicry of streptococcal M peptides and human keratins.113,114 Exacerbation of psoriasis in the setting of HIV infection has also been documented.115,116 The risk of serious infection among patients with psoriasis has only more recently been evaluated.117,118 A Dutch cohort study found psoriasis to be an independent risk factor for serious infection (HR 1.54, 95% CI 1.44–1.65) whereby the greatest risk was among patients with severe psoriasis as defined by treatment patterns (HR 1.81, 95% CI 1.57–2.08).117 Respiratory tract, abdominal, and skin infections were the most common infections among psoriasis patients. Similarly, a cohort study in Taiwan reported an increased risk of hospitalized pneumonia among patients with psoriasis, independent of other potential risk factors for pneumonia (HR 1.40, 95% CI 1.12–1.73). Severe psoriasis was associated with the greatest risk of hospitalized pneumonia (HR 1.68, 95% CI 1.12–2.52).118 While neither study had access to information on potential confounders such as obesity, smoking, and drinking, subsequent cohort studies in the U.K. including this information confirmed that psoriasis is associated with increased risks of serious infection119 including hospitalized pneumonia,120 and further suggested that the risks may increase with greater BSA involvement by psoriasis.

Mood disorders are common among patients with psoriasis.

Psoriasis is associated with an increased risk of depression, anxiety, and suicidal ideation.

Psoriasis has a major impact on patients’ physical and emotional health-related quality of life comparable to other major illnesses4 that may predispose patients to the development of mood disorders such as depression, anxiety, and suicidality. Mood disorders, particularly depression, have been suggested to be more prevalent in patients with psoriasis than in the general population (up to 62% prevalence).121 In a meta-analysis of 98, mostly cross-sectional, studies examining the association between psoriasis and depression, patients with psoriasis had more depressive symptoms (pooled standardized mean difference 1.16; 95% CI 0.67–1.66]) and were nearly 1.6-fold more likely to experience depression (pooled OR 1.57; 95% CI 1.40–1.76) than patients without psoriasis.121

The risk of depression in psoriasis has been evaluated in two cohort studies. In a U.K. study, psoriasis was found to be associated with increased risks of depression (HR 1.39; 95% CI 1.37–1.41), anxiety (HR 1.31; 95% CI 1.29–1.34), and suicidality (HR 1.44; 95% CI 1.32–1.57).122 The risk of depression was greatest among patients receiving therapies for severe psoriasis (HR 1.72; 95% CI 1.57–1.88). Similarly, a study of women in the Nurses’ Health Study123 found psoriasis to be associated with a nearly 30% increased risk of depression (RR 1.29; 95% CI 1.10–1.52), independent of age, BMI, lifestyle factors, and comorbid conditions.

PsA is an inflammatory arthritis that is present in 6–42% of patients with psoriasis.

PsA is more prevalent among patients with more extensive skin disease.

Approximately 15% of patients with psoriasis have undiagnosed PsA.

PsA is the most well-recognized comorbidity of psoriasis and is a heterogeneous inflammatory arthritis characterized by joint and/or entheseal inflammation and extra-articular manifestations.124 The prevalence of inflammatory arthritis in psoriasis patients ranges between 6–42% depending on the definitions used and populations studied.125–138 The prevalence of PsA increases with greater psoriasis severity125,133,139 and duration,125,140 however, the severity of skin disease is only weakly associated with severity of joint disease. PsA has been associated with the distribution of psoriasis involvement (i.e., scalp, intergluteal, perianal)141 and the presence of nail dystrophy, which is suggested to indicate early enthesial inflammation124,141,142.

The diagnosis of PsA can be especially challenging. The differential diagnosis includes osteoarthritis, RA, crystal arthropathy (e.g., gout or calcium pyrophosphate disease), and fibromyalgia.124,143–147. Undiagnosed PsA among psoriasis patients seen in the dermatology setting is prevalent and estimated at 15.5%.148 PsA generally occurs after the onset of psoriasis142,148 and can be progressive and result in permanent joint damage. Therefore, early detection is essential as early treatment improves outcomes.124,149,150 The varied clinical features of and classification criteria for PsA as well as associations with cardiometabolic and other comorbid diseases are reviewed elsewhere.124,151

Other emerging comorbidities of psoriasis include chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, peptic ulcer disease, sexual dysfunction, and obstructive sleep apnea.

Additional epidemiologic studies have suggested associations between psoriasis and other emerging comorbid conditions including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,9,152,153 peptic ulcer disease,9,154 sexual dysfunction,155 and obstructive sleep apnea,156–158 among others. Further characterization of known comorbidities and identification of new comorbid disease associations with psoriasis are anticipated as research efforts continue.

In summary, it is essential for both clinicians and patients to recognize the potentially heightened risk of CVD and other comorbidities associated with psoriasis which may increase with greater disease severity and duration. Particularly as psoriasis remains largely undertreated159,160, the disease remains active for decades in most patients, potentially placing them at increased risk for associated comorbidities and mortality. Patient and provider education as well as increased awareness of psoriasis comorbidities are critical to improving the care and quality of life for those living with psoriasis.