---
reference_id: "PMID:38334933"
title: "Hereditary spastic paraparesis type 46 (SPG46): new GBA2 variants in a large Italian case series and review of the literature."
authors:
- Cioffi E
- Coppola G
- Musumeci O
- Gallone S
- Silvestri G
- Rossi S
- Piemonte F
- "D'Amico J"
- Tessa A
- Santorelli FM
- Casali C
journal: Neurogenetics
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s10048-024-00749-9
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Glucosylceramidase/genetics
- Italy
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Spastic Paraplegia, Hereditary/genetics, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary spastic paraparesis type 46 (SPG46): new GBA2 variants in a large Italian case series and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Cioffi E, Coppola G, Musumeci O, Gallone S, Silvestri G, Rossi S, Piemonte F, D'Amico J, Tessa A, Santorelli FM, Casali C
**Journal:** Neurogenetics (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10048-024-00749-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10048-024-00749-9)

## Content

1. Neurogenetics. 2024 Apr;25(2):51-67. doi: 10.1007/s10048-024-00749-9. Epub
2024  Feb 9.

Hereditary spastic paraparesis type 46 (SPG46): new GBA2 variants in a large 
Italian case series and review of the literature.

Cioffi E(1), Coppola G(2), Musumeci O(3), Gallone S(4), Silvestri G(5)(6), Rossi 
S(5), Piemonte F(7), D'Amico J(7), Tessa A(8), Santorelli FM(8), Casali C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medico-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies, University of 
Rome Sapienza, Latina, Italy. ettore.cioffi@uniroma1.it.
(2)Department of Medico-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies, University of 
Rome Sapienza, Latina, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Messina, 
Messina, Italy.
(4)Department of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Neurologia 1, A.O.U. Città 
Della Salute E Della Scienza, 10126, Turin, Italy.
(5)Dipartimento Di Neuroscienze, Sez. Neurologia, Facoltà Di Medicina E 
Chirurgia, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.
(6)Dipartimento Di Neuroscienze, Organi Di Senso E Torace, UOC Neurologia, 
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(7)Unit of Muscular and Neurodegenerative Diseases, Children's Hospital Bambino 
Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(8)IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation, Calambrone, Via Dei Giacinti 2, 56128, Pisa, 
Italy.

Hereditary spastic paraparesis (HSP) is a group of central nervous system 
diseases primarily affecting the spinal upper motor neurons, with different 
inheritance patterns and phenotypes. SPG46 is a rare, early-onset and autosomal 
recessive HSP, linked to biallelic GBA2 mutations. About thirty families have 
been described worldwide, with different phenotypes like complicated HSP, 
recessive cerebellar ataxia or Marinesco-Sjögren Syndrome. Herein, we report 
five SPG46 patients harbouring five novel GBA2 mutations, the largest series 
described in Italy so far. Probands were enrolled in five different centres and 
underwent neurological examination, clinical cognitive assessment, column 
imaging for scoliosis assessment, ophthalmologic examination, brain imaging, 
GBA2 activity in peripheral blood cells and genetic testing. Their phenotype was 
consistent with HSP, with notable features like upper gaze palsy and movement 
disorders. We review demographic, genetic, biochemical and clinical information 
from all documented cases in the existing literature, focusing on the global 
distribution of cases, the features of the syndrome, its variable presentation, 
new potential identifying features and the significance of measuring GBA2 enzyme 
activity.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10048-024-00749-9
PMCID: PMC11076336
PMID: 38334933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This multicentric case series study was 
performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki statements. Written 
informed consent and ethical approval (CE Lazio) were obtained. We thank the 
contribution of Ricerca Corrente 2023 of the Italian Ministry of Health. The 
authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.