---
reference_id: "PMID:30604053"
title: Limb girdle muscular dystrophy D3 HNRNPDL related in a Chinese family with distal muscle weakness caused by a mutation in the prion-like domain.
authors:
- Sun Y
- Chen H
- Lu Y
- Duo J
- Lei L
- OuYang Y
- Hao Y
- Da Y
- Shen XM
journal: J Neurol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-018-9165-4
keywords:
- Adult
- China
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Muscular Dystrophies, Limb-Girdle/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Pedigree
- Ribonucleoproteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Limb girdle muscular dystrophy D3 HNRNPDL related in a Chinese family with distal muscle weakness caused by a mutation in the prion-like domain.
**Authors:** Sun Y, Chen H, Lu Y, Duo J, Lei L, OuYang Y, Hao Y, Da Y, Shen XM
**Journal:** J Neurol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-018-9165-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-018-9165-4)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2019 Feb;266(2):498-506. doi: 10.1007/s00415-018-9165-4. Epub 2019
Jan  2.

Limb girdle muscular dystrophy D3 HNRNPDL related in a Chinese family with 
distal muscle weakness caused by a mutation in the prion-like domain.

Sun Y(1)(2), Chen H(1), Lu Y(1), Duo J(1), Lei L(1), OuYang Y(1), Hao Y(3), Da 
Y(4), Shen XM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital, Medical University, Chang 
Chun Street, Beijing, 100053, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Dalian Municipal Friendship Hospital, Dalian, 
116100, Liao Ning, China.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation, Dalian hospital of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Dalian, 116013, Liao Ning, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital, Medical University, Chang 
Chun Street, Beijing, 100053, China. dayuwei100@hotmail.com.
(5)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. 
shen.xinming@mayo.edu.

Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMD) are a group of clinically and 
genetically heterogeneous diseases characterized by weakness and wasting of the 
pelvic and shoulder girdle muscles. Twenty-four recessive LGMD (types R1-R24) 
and five dominant LGMD (types D1-D5) have been identified with characterization 
of mutations in various genes. To date, LGMD D3 (previously known as LGMD1G) has 
been characterized in only two families with Brazilian or Uruguayan origin. Each 
was caused by a distinct mutation at codon 378 in the prion-like domain of 
HNRNPDL encoding heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein D like (HNRNPDL), an 
RNA processing protein. Our study characterized eight patients suffering from 
LGMD D3 in a Chinese family spanning three generations. Muscle biopsy specimens 
from two patients showed a myopathy with rimmed vacuoles. Sequencing analysis 
revealed a heterozygous c.1132G > A (p.D378N) mutation in HNRNPDL that 
co-segregated with disease phenotype in the family. The same mutation has been 
identified previously in the Brazilian family with LGMD D3. However, most 
patients in the current family showed distal as well as proximal limb weakness 
rather than weakness of toe and finger flexor muscles that were typical features 
in the other two LGMD D3 families reported previously. The present study 
indicates that the same mutation in HNRNPDL results in various phenotypes of 
LGMD D3. That all mutations in three unrelated families with different ethnic 
background occur at the same position in codon 378 of HNRNPDL gene suggests a 
mutation hotspot. Acceleration of intrinsic self-aggregation of HNRNPDL caused 
by mutation of the prior-like domain may contribute to the pathogenesis of the 
disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-018-9165-4
PMID: 30604053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]