---
reference_id: "PMID:34978271"
title: PopP2 interacts with PAD4 in an acetyltransferase activity-dependent manner and affects plant immunity.
authors:
- Huh SU
journal: Plant Signal Behav
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/15592324.2021.2017631
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PopP2 interacts with PAD4 in an acetyltransferase activity-dependent manner and affects plant immunity.
**Authors:** Huh SU
**Journal:** Plant Signal Behav (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15592324.2021.2017631](https://doi.org/10.1080/15592324.2021.2017631)

## Content

1. Plant Signal Behav. 2021 Dec 2;16(12):2017631. doi: 
10.1080/15592324.2021.2017631. Epub 2022 Jan 3.

PopP2 interacts with PAD4 in an acetyltransferase activity-dependent manner and 
affects plant immunity.

Huh SU(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Kunsan National University, Gunsan, Republic of Korea.

Plant pathogenic bacteria inject many of the effector proteins into host cell to 
manipulate host protein and promote pathogen development. Only a few effectors 
can be recognized by plant immune receptors called nucleotide-binding domain and 
leucine-rich repeat-containing proteins (NLRs). Enhanced disease susceptibility1 
(EDS1) is an important regulator of plant basal and NLR receptor-triggered 
immunity. EDS1/PAD4 or EDS1/SAG101 heterodimers are recruited by 
Toll-interleukin1-receptor domain NLRs (TNLs) to transcriptionally mobilize 
resistance pathways. Type III effector PopP2 contributes to Ralstonia 
solanacearum virulence. PopP2 has an acetyltransferase activity and is 
recognized by Arabidopsis NLR pair RPS4/RRS1-R. On the other hand, PopP2 
avirulence function is dependent on its enzymatic activity but target proteins 
in the host cell are still largely unknown. In this study, we found EDS1 and 
PAD4 are new host targets of PopP2 effector. Arabidopsis PAD4 lipase-like domain 
protein physically associates with enzymatic active PopP2 protein but not 
inactive PopP2C321A. PAD4-PopP2 interaction is disrupted by EDS1 immune 
regulator but not SAG101. We propose that acetyltransferase activity of PopP2 
might confer specificity to PAD4 to manipulate plant immunity. As a counter 
strategy, EDS1 associates with PAD4 to form heterodimeric immune regulator 
complexes for activating basal resistance and interfering PopP2 physical 
interaction.

DOI: 10.1080/15592324.2021.2017631
PMCID: PMC9208800
PMID: 34978271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).