---
reference_id: "PMID:29196066"
title: "Cough Due to TB and Other Chronic Infections: CHEST Guideline and Expert Panel Report."
authors:
- Field SK
- Escalante P
- Fisher DA
- Ireland B
- Irwin RS
- CHEST Expert Cough Panel
journal: Chest
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2017.11.018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cough Due to TB and Other Chronic Infections: CHEST Guideline and Expert Panel Report.
**Authors:** Field SK, Escalante P, Fisher DA, Ireland B, Irwin RS, CHEST Expert Cough Panel
**Journal:** Chest (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.chest.2017.11.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2017.11.018)

## Content

1. Chest. 2018 Feb;153(2):467-497. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2017.11.018. Epub 2017
Nov  28.

Cough Due to TB and Other Chronic Infections: CHEST Guideline and Expert Panel 
Report.

Field SK(1), Escalante P(2), Fisher DA(3), Ireland B(4), Irwin RS(5); CHEST 
Expert Cough Panel.

Collaborators: Adams TM, Altman KW, Azoulay E, Barker AF, Birring SS, Blackhall 
F, Bolser DC, Boulet LP, Braman SS, Brightling C, Callahan-Lyon P, Chang AB, 
Coté A, Cowley T, Davenport P, Ebihara S, El Solh AA, Escalante P, Field SK, 
Fisher D, French CT, Gibson P, Gold P, Grant C, Harding SM, Harnden A, Hill AT, 
Irwin RS, Kahrilas PJ, Kavanagh J, Keogh KA, Lai K, Lane AP, Lim K, Madison JM, 
Malesker MA, Mazzone S, McGarvey L, Molasoitis A, Moore A, Murad MH, Narasimhan 
M, Nguyen HQ, Newcombe P, Oppenheimer J, Restrepo MI, Rosen M, Rubin B, Ryu JH, 
Singh S, Smith J, Tarlo SM, Turmel J, Vertigan AE, Wang G, Weinberger M, Weir K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Respirology and TB Services, Department of Medicine, Cumming 
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. Electronic 
address: sfield@ucalgary.ca.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Mayo Clinic Center for Tuberculosis, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(3)Division of Respirology and TB Services, Department of Medicine, Cumming 
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(4)The Evidence Doc, Pacific, MO.
(5)University of Massachusetts Memorial Medical Center, Worcester, MA.

BACKGROUND: Cough is common in pulmonary TB and other chronic respiratory 
infections. Identifying features that predict whether pulmonary TB is the cause 
would help target appropriate individuals for rapid and cost-effective 
screening, potentially limiting disease progression and preventing transmission 
to others.
METHODS: A systematic literature search for individual studies to answer eight 
key questions (KQs) was conducted according to established Chest Organization 
methods by using the following databases: MEDLINE via PubMed, Embase, Scopus, 
and the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews from January 1, 1984, to April 
2014. Searches for KQ 1 and KQ 3 were updated in February 2016. An updated KQ 2 
search was undertaken in March 2017.
RESULTS: Even where TB prevalence is greatest, most individuals with cough do 
not have pulmonary TB. There was no evidence that 1, 3, or 4 weeks' duration 
were better predictors than cough lasting ≥ 2 weeks to screen for pulmonary TB. 
In people living with HIV (PLWHIV), screening for fever, night sweats, 
hemoptysis, and/or weight loss in addition to cough (any World Health 
Organization [WHO]-endorsed symptom) increases the diagnostic sensitivity for 
TB. Although the diagnostic accuracy of symptom-based screening remains low, the 
negative predictive value of the WHO-endorsed symptom screen in PLWHIV may help 
to risk-stratify individuals who are not close TB contacts and who do not 
require further testing for pulmonary TB in resource-limited settings. However, 
pregnant PLWHIV are more likely to be asymptomatic, and the WHO-endorsed symptom 
screen is not sensitive enough to be reliable. Combined with passive case 
finding (PCF), active case finding (ACF) identifies pulmonary TB cases earlier 
and possibly when less advanced. Whether outcomes are improved or transmission 
is reduced is unclear. Screening asymptomatic patients is cost-effective only in 
populations with a very high TB prevalence. The Xpert MTB/RIF assay on sputum is 
more cost-effective than clinical diagnosis. To our knowledge, no published 
comparative studies addressed whether the rate of cough resolution is a reliable 
determinant of the response to treatment or whether the rate of cough resolution 
was faster in the absence of cavitary lung disease. All studies on cough 
prevalence in Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) lung disease, other 
nontuberculous mycobacterial infections, fungal lung disease, and paragonimiasis 
were of poor quality and were excluded from the evidence review.
CONCLUSIONS: On the basis of relatively few studies of fair to good quality, we 
conclude that most individuals at high risk and household contacts with cough ≥ 
2 weeks do not have pulmonary TB, but we suggest screening them regardless of 
cough duration. In PLWHIV, the addition of the other WHO-endorsed symptoms 
increases the diagnostic sensitivity of cough. Earlier screening of patients 
with cough will help diagnose pulmonary TB sooner but will increase the cost of 
screening. The addition of ACF to PCF will increase the number of pulmonary TB 
cases identified. Screening asymptomatic individuals is cost-effective only in 
groups with a very high TB prevalence. Data are insufficient to determine 
whether cough resolution is delayed in individuals with cavitary lung disease or 
in those for whom treatment fails because of drug resistance, poor adherence, 
and/or drug malabsorption compared with results in other individuals with 
pulmonary TB. Cough is common in patients with lung infections due to MAC, other 
nontuberculous mycobacteria, fungal diseases, and paragonimiasis.

Copyright © 2017 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2017.11.018
PMCID: PMC6689101
PMID: 29196066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]