---
reference_id: "PMID:18301444"
title: "Mutation screening of PTPN22: association of the 1858T-allele with Addison's disease."
authors:
- Skinningsrud B
- Husebye ES
- Gervin K
- Løvås K
- Blomhoff A
- Wolff AB
- Kemp EH
- Egeland T
- Undlien DE
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.33
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation screening of PTPN22: association of the 1858T-allele with Addison's disease.
**Authors:** Skinningsrud B, Husebye ES, Gervin K, Løvås K, Blomhoff A, Wolff AB, Kemp EH, Egeland T, Undlien DE
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2008.33](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2008.33)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2008 Aug;16(8):977-82. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.33. Epub 2008
Feb  27.

Mutation screening of PTPN22: association of the 1858T-allele with Addison's 
disease.

Skinningsrud B(1), Husebye ES, Gervin K, Løvås K, Blomhoff A, Wolff AB, Kemp EH, 
Egeland T, Undlien DE.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Oslo, Department of Medical 
Genetics, Ullevaal University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. 
beate.skinningsrud@medisin.uio.no

The tyrosine-protein phosphatase non-receptor type 22 (PTPN22) gene was recently 
identified as an important genetic susceptibility factor in several autoimmune 
diseases. The increased risk has been broadly explained by the 1858T-allele 
(rs2476601). As two smaller studies on Addison's disease (AD) have shown 
diverging results, we aimed to elucidate the predisposing effect of the 
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 1858CT in a larger population of AD 
patients, especially focusing on the AD patients with known autoimmune etiology. 
We also screened for unknown rare or common variants in the PTPN22 gene that 
could predispose for AD. The case-control study of Norwegian AD patients (n=332) 
and controls (n=990) showed a significant association between autoimmune AD 
(n=302) and the PTPN22 1858T risk allele (P=0.016). The association of AD with 
1858T was supported by a meta-analysis combining our genotype data with that of 
others published previously (P=0.003). The mutation screening of PTPN22 in AD 
patients (n=332) and controls (n=112) revealed eight missense variants, five of 
which have not been reported previously. In conclusion, the 1858T-allele is a 
PTPN22 genetic susceptibility factor for autoimmune AD. Other rare variants in 
PTPN22 do occur, and may also be involved in the pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.33
PMID: 18301444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]