---
reference_id: "PMID:38609428"
title: Possible involvement of zinc transporter ZIP13 in myogenic differentiation.
authors:
- Shoji M
- Ohashi T
- Nagase S
- Yuri H
- Ichihashi K
- Takagishi T
- Nagata Y
- Nomura Y
- Fukunaka A
- Kenjou S
- Miyake H
- Hara T
- Yoshigai E
- Fujitani Y
- Sakurai H
- Dos Santos HG
- Fukada T
- Kuzuhara T
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-56912-7
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Mice
- Carrier Proteins
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome
- Osteochondrodysplasias
- Cation Transport Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Possible involvement of zinc transporter ZIP13 in myogenic differentiation.
**Authors:** Shoji M, Ohashi T, Nagase S, Yuri H, Ichihashi K, Takagishi T, Nagata Y, Nomura Y, Fukunaka A, Kenjou S, Miyake H, Hara T, Yoshigai E, Fujitani Y, Sakurai H, Dos Santos HG, Fukada T, Kuzuhara T
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-56912-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-56912-7)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Apr 12;14(1):8052. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-56912-7.

Possible involvement of zinc transporter ZIP13 in myogenic differentiation.

Shoji M(#)(1), Ohashi T(#)(2), Nagase S(3), Yuri H(3), Ichihashi K(3), Takagishi 
T(2), Nagata Y(2), Nomura Y(2), Fukunaka A(4), Kenjou S(2), Miyake H(2), Hara 
T(2), Yoshigai E(2), Fujitani Y(4), Sakurai H(5), Dos Santos HG(6), Fukada T(7), 
Kuzuhara T(8).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokushima 
Bunri University, 180 Nishihamahouji, Yamashirocho, Tokushima-City, Tokushima, 
770-8514, Japan. masaki-shoji@ph.bunri-u.ac.jp.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Tokushima Bunri University, 180 Nishihamahouji, Yamashirocho, 
Tokushima-City, Tokushima, 770-8514, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokushima 
Bunri University, 180 Nishihamahouji, Yamashirocho, Tokushima-City, Tokushima, 
770-8514, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Developmental Biology and Metabolism, Institute for Molecular 
and Cellular Regulation, Gunma University, Maebashi-City, Gunma, Japan.
(5)Center for iPS Cell Research and Application (CiRA), Kyoto University, 
Kyoto-City, Kyoto, Japan.
(6)Serviço Genética Médica, Hospital S. Maria, Lisboa, Portugal.
(7)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Tokushima Bunri University, 180 Nishihamahouji, Yamashirocho, 
Tokushima-City, Tokushima, 770-8514, Japan. fukada@ph.bunri-u.ac.jp.
(8)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokushima 
Bunri University, 180 Nishihamahouji, Yamashirocho, Tokushima-City, Tokushima, 
770-8514, Japan. kuzuhara@ph.bunri-u.ac.jp.
(#)Contributed equally

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome spondylodysplastic type 3 (EDSSPD3, OMIM 612350) is an 
inherited recessive connective tissue disorder that is caused by loss of 
function of SLC39A13/ZIP13, a zinc transporter belonging to the Slc39a/ZIP 
family. We previously reported that patients with EDSSPD3 harboring a homozygous 
loss of function mutation (c.221G > A, p.G64D) in ZIP13 exon 2 (ZIP13G64D) 
suffer from impaired development of bone and connective tissues, and muscular 
hypotonia. However, whether ZIP13 participates in the early differentiation of 
these cell types remains unclear. In the present study, we investigated the role 
of ZIP13 in myogenic differentiation using a murine myoblast cell line (C2C12) 
as well as patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). We found that 
ZIP13 gene expression was upregulated by myogenic stimulation in C2C12 cells, 
and its knockdown disrupted myotubular differentiation. Myocytes differentiated 
from iPSCs derived from patients with EDSSPD3 (EDSSPD3-iPSCs) also exhibited 
incomplete myogenic differentiation. Such phenotypic abnormalities of 
EDSSPD3-iPSC-derived myocytes were corrected by genomic editing of the 
pathogenic ZIP13G64D mutation. Collectively, our findings suggest the possible 
involvement of ZIP13 in myogenic differentiation, and that EDSSPD3-iPSCs 
established herein may be a promising tool to study the molecular basis 
underlying the clinical features caused by loss of ZIP13 function.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-56912-7
PMCID: PMC11014994
PMID: 38609428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.