---
reference_id: "PMID:30902613"
title: Updated Efficacy and Safety Data and Impact of the EML4-ALK Fusion Variant on the Efficacy of Alectinib in Untreated ALK-Positive Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer in the Global Phase III ALEX Study.
authors:
- Camidge DR
- Dziadziuszko R
- Peters S
- Mok T
- Noe J
- Nowicka M
- Gadgeel SM
- Cheema P
- Pavlakis N
- de Marinis F
- Cho BC
- Zhang L
- Moro-Sibilot D
- Liu T
- Bordogna W
- Balas B
- Müller B
- Shaw AT
journal: J Thorac Oncol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2019.03.007
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics, metabolism"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Brain Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, secondary"
- "Carbazoles/administration & dosage"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Cohort Studies
- "Crizotinib/administration & dosage"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- "Piperidines/administration & dosage"
- Prognosis
- Survival Rate
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Updated Efficacy and Safety Data and Impact of the EML4-ALK Fusion Variant on the Efficacy of Alectinib in Untreated ALK-Positive Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer in the Global Phase III ALEX Study.
**Authors:** Camidge DR, Dziadziuszko R, Peters S, Mok T, Noe J, Nowicka M, Gadgeel SM, Cheema P, Pavlakis N, de Marinis F, Cho BC, Zhang L, Moro-Sibilot D, Liu T, Bordogna W, Balas B, Müller B, Shaw AT
**Journal:** J Thorac Oncol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtho.2019.03.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtho.2019.03.007)

## Content

1. J Thorac Oncol. 2019 Jul;14(7):1233-1243. doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2019.03.007.
Epub  2019 Mar 20.

Updated Efficacy and Safety Data and Impact of the EML4-ALK Fusion Variant on
the Efficacy of Alectinib in Untreated ALK-Positive Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung
Cancer in the Global Phase III ALEX Study.

Camidge DR(1), Dziadziuszko R(2), Peters S(3), Mok T(4), Noe J(5), Nowicka M(5),
Gadgeel SM(6), Cheema P(7), Pavlakis N(8), de Marinis F(9), Cho BC(10), Zhang
L(11), Moro-Sibilot D(12), Liu T(5), Bordogna W(5), Balas B(5), Müller B(5),
Shaw AT(13).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, University of Colorado, Denver, Colorado.
(2)Medical University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland.
(3)Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)State Key Laboratory of South China, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin,
New Territories, Hong Kong.
(5)F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(7)University of Toronto, Sunnybrook Odette Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(8)Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney University, Sydney, Australia.
(9)European Institute of Oncology, Scientific Institute for Research and
Healthcare, Milan, Italy.
(10)Severence Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(11)Sun Yet-sen University Cancer Center, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.
(12)Grenoble University Hospital Center, La Tronche, France.
(13)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
Electronic address: Ashaw1@partners.org.

Erratum in
    J Thorac Oncol. 2019 Nov;14(11):2023. doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2019.09.004.

Comment in
    J Thorac Oncol. 2019 Sep;14(9):e195-e196. doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2019.04.011.
    J Thorac Oncol. 2019 Sep;14(9):e196-e197. doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2019.05.043.

INTRODUCTION: At the prior data cutoff (February 9, 2017) the ALEX trial showed
superior investigator-assessed progression-free survival (PFS) for alectinib
versus crizotinib in untreated, anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-positive,
advanced NSCLC (hazard ratio = 0.47, 95% confidence interval: 0.34-0.65, p <
0.001). The median PFS in the alectinib arm was not reached versus 11.1 months
with crizotinib. Retrospective analyses suggest that the echinoderm
microtubule-associated protein-like 4 gene-ALK variant (EML4-ALK) may influence
ALK-inhibitor treatment benefit. We present updated analyses, including
exploratory subgroup analysis by EML4-ALK variant, after an additional 10
months' follow-up (cutoff December 1, 2017).
METHODS: Patients were randomized to receive twice-daily alectinib, 600 mg, or
crizotinib, 250 mg, until disease progression, toxicity, death, or withdrawal.
PFS was determined by the investigators. Baseline plasma and tissue biomarker
samples were analyzed by using hybrid-capture, next-generation sequencing to
determine EML4-ALK variant.
RESULTS: Baseline characteristics were balanced. Investigator-assessed PFS was
prolonged with alectinib (stratified hazard ratio = 0.43, 95% confidence
interval: 0.32-0.58). The median PFS times were 34.8 months with alectinib
and 10.9 months with crizotinib. EML4-ALK fusions were detectable in 129 patient
plasma samples and 124 tissue samples; variants 1, 2, and 3/ab did not affect
PFS, objective response rate, or duration of response. Investigator-assessed PFS
was longer for alectinib than for crizotinib across EML4-ALK variants 1, 2, and
3a/b in plasma and tissue. Despite longer treatment duration (27.0 months in the
case of alectinib versus 10.8 months in the case of crizotinib), the safety of
alectinib compared favorably with that of crizotinib.
CONCLUSION: Alectinib continues to demonstrate superior investigator-assessed
PFS versus crizotinib in untreated ALK-positive NSCLC, irrespective of EML4-ALK
variant.

Copyright © 2019 International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtho.2019.03.007
PMID: 30902613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
