---
reference_id: "PMID:21462283"
title: A TCTN2 mutation defines a novel Meckel Gruber syndrome locus.
authors:
- Shaheen R
- Faqeih E
- Seidahmed MZ
- Sunker A
- Alali FE
- AlQahtani K
- Alkuraya FS
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21507
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A TCTN2 mutation defines a novel Meckel Gruber syndrome locus.
**Authors:** Shaheen R, Faqeih E, Seidahmed MZ, Sunker A, Alali FE, AlQahtani K, Alkuraya FS
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21507](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21507)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2011 Jun;32(6):573-8. doi: 10.1002/humu.21507. Epub 2011 May 5.

A TCTN2 mutation defines a novel Meckel Gruber syndrome locus.

Shaheen R(1), Faqeih E, Seidahmed MZ, Sunker A, Alali FE, AlQahtani K, Alkuraya 
FS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Meckel Gruber syndrome (MKS) is an autosomal recessive multisystem disorder that 
represents a severe form of ciliopathy in humans and is characterized by 
significant genetic heterogeneity. In this article, we describe the 
identification of a novel MKS locus MKS8 that we map to TCTN2, in a multiplex 
consanguineous family. TCTN2 is a paralog of the recently identified Tectonic 1, 
which has been shown to modulate sonic hedgehog signaling. Expression analysis 
at different developmental stages of the murine ortholog revealed a spatial and 
temporal pattern consistent with the MKS phenotype observed in our patient. The 
exclusion of this and the other seven MKS genes in our collection of 
consanguineous Arab MKS families confirms the existence of two additional MKS 
loci.

© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21507
PMID: 21462283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]