---
reference_id: "PMID:38146370"
title: Epstein-Barr virus infection as potential indicator of the occurrence and clinical presentation of systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Banko A
- Cirkovic A
- Miskovic R
- Jeremic I
- Grk M
- Basaric M
- Lazarevic I
- Raskovic S
- Despotovic A
- Miljanovic D
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1307589
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epstein-Barr virus infection as potential indicator of the occurrence and clinical presentation of systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Banko A, Cirkovic A, Miskovic R, Jeremic I, Grk M, Basaric M, Lazarevic I, Raskovic S, Despotovic A, Miljanovic D
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1307589](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1307589)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Dec 7;14:1307589. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1307589. 
eCollection 2023.

Epstein-Barr virus infection as potential indicator of the occurrence and 
clinical presentation of systemic lupus erythematosus.

Banko A(1), Cirkovic A(2), Miskovic R(3)(4), Jeremic I(4)(5), Grk M(6), Basaric 
M(5), Lazarevic I(1), Raskovic S(3)(4), Despotovic A(2), Miljanovic D(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)Institute for Medical Statistics and Informatics, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(3)Clinic of Allergy and Immunology, University Clinical Center of Serbia, 
Belgrade, Serbia.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(5)Institute of Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, 
Belgrade, Serbia.
(6)Institute of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, 
Belgrade, Serbia.

INTRODUCTION: The relationship between Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and 
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection has been suggested for decades, but the 
underlying mechanism of the EBV influence on SLE development remains to be 
elucidated.
METHODS: The goals of this research, which included 103 SLE patients and 99 
controls, were to investigate the association of the parameters of EBV infection 
and SLE, to explore whether pooled demographic, clinical and EBV markers achieve 
a more significant effect on SLE development than each of them individually, and 
to evaluate EBV nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA1) and latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) 
gene polymorphisms in isolates from SLE patients.
RESULTS: Comprehensive results related to serological, molecular and sequence 
markers of EBV infection in SLE patients demonstrated even 24 times higher 
possibility of having SLE if there is the presence of anti-EBV-EA(D) (early 
antigen) IgG antibodies (OR=24.086 95%CI OR=2.86-216.07, p=0.004). There was the 
same distribution of glucocorticoids (p=0.130), antimalarials (p=0.213), and 
immunosuppressives (p=0.712) in anti-EBV-EA(D) IgG positive and negative SLE 
patients. Further, higher anti-EBV-EA(D) IgG antibodies titers were identified 
as independent factors associated with lymphopenia, hematological SLE 
manifestation (OR=1.041, 95%CI OR=1.01-1.08, p=0.025, while a higher titer of 
anti-CA (viral capsid antigen) IgG antibodies (OR=1.015, 95%CI OR=1.01-1.03, 
p=0.019) and positive RF (rheumatoid factors) (OR=4.871, 95%CI OR=1.52-15.61, 
p=0.008) were identified as independent factors associated with alopecia within 
SLE. Finally, novel data on EBV EBNA1 and LMP1 gene polymorphisms in lupus are 
reported.
CONCLUSION: The results support further investigation targeting EBV as a 
prognostic marker and therapeutic goal for lupus.

Copyright © 2023 Banko, Cirkovic, Miskovic, Jeremic, Grk, Basaric, Lazarevic, 
Raskovic, Despotovic and Miljanovic.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1307589
PMCID: PMC10749334
PMID: 38146370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.