---
reference_id: "PMID:39125760"
title: "The New Face of Dynamic Mutation-The CAA [CAG]n CAA CAG Motif as a Mutable Unit in the TBP Gene Causative for Spino-Cerebellar Ataxia Type 17."
authors:
- Hoffman-Zacharska D
- Sulek A
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25158190
keywords:
- Humans
- Alleles
- Mutation
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics
- Spinocerebellar Degenerations/genetics
- TATA-Box Binding Protein/genetics
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
- Trinucleotide Repeats/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The New Face of Dynamic Mutation-The CAA [CAG]n CAA CAG Motif as a Mutable Unit in the TBP Gene Causative for Spino-Cerebellar Ataxia Type 17.
**Authors:** Hoffman-Zacharska D, Sulek A
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25158190](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25158190)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jul 26;25(15):8190. doi: 10.3390/ijms25158190.

The New Face of Dynamic Mutation-The CAA [CAG]n CAA CAG Motif as a Mutable Unit 
in the TBP Gene Causative for Spino-Cerebellar Ataxia Type 17.

Hoffman-Zacharska D(1)(2), Sulek A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, 02-106 Warsaw, 
Poland.
(2)Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, 02-957 Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Lazarski University, 02-662 Warsaw, Poland.

Since 1991, several genetic disorders caused by unstable trinucleotide repeats 
(TNRs) have been identified, collectively referred to as triplet repeat diseases 
(TREDs). They share a common mutation mechanism: the expansion of repeats 
(dynamic mutations) due to the propensity of repeated sequences to form unusual 
DNA structures during replication. TREDs are characterized as neurodegenerative 
diseases or complex syndromes with significant neurological components. 
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17) falls into the former category and is 
caused by the expansion of mixed CAA/CAG repeats in the TBP gene. To date, a 
five-unit organization of this region [(CAG)3 (CAA)3] [(CAG)n] [CAA CAG CAA] 
[(CAG)n] [CAA CAG], with expansion in the second [(CAG)n] unit being the most 
common, has been proposed. In this study, we propose an alternative organization 
scheme for the repeats. A search of the PubMed database was conducted to 
identify articles reporting both the number and composition of GAC/CAA repeats 
in TBP alleles. Nineteen reports were selected. The sequences of all identified 
CAG/CAA repeats in the TBP locus, including 67 cases (probands and b relatives), 
were analyzed in terms of their repetition structure and stability in 
inheritance, if possible. Based on the analysis of three units [(CAG)3 (CAA)2] 
[CAA (CAG)n CAA CAG] [CAA (CAG)n CAA CAG], the organization of repeats is 
proposed. Detailed analysis of the CAG/CAA repeat structure, not just the number 
of repeats, in TBP-expanded alleles should be performed, as it may have a 
prognostic value in the prediction of stability/instability during transmission 
and the possible anticipation of the disease.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25158190
PMCID: PMC11312008
PMID: 39125760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.