---
reference_id: "PMID:39200964"
title: "Pathogenesis and Surgical Treatment of Dextro-Transposition of the Great Arteries (D-TGA): Part II."
authors:
- Zubrzycki M
- Schramm R
- Costard-Jäckle A
- Morshuis M
- Gummert JF
- Zubrzycka M
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13164823
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis and Surgical Treatment of Dextro-Transposition of the Great Arteries (D-TGA): Part II.
**Authors:** Zubrzycki M, Schramm R, Costard-Jäckle A, Morshuis M, Gummert JF, Zubrzycka M
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13164823](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13164823)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Aug 15;13(16):4823. doi: 10.3390/jcm13164823.

Pathogenesis and Surgical Treatment of Dextro-Transposition of the Great 
Arteries (D-TGA): Part II.

Zubrzycki M(1), Schramm R(2), Costard-Jäckle A(2), Morshuis M(2), Gummert JF(2), 
Zubrzycka M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery for Congenital Heart Defects, Heart and Diabetes Center 
NRW, University Hospital, Ruhr-University Bochum, Georgstr. 11, 32545 Bad 
Oeynhausen, Germany.
(2)Clinic for Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Heart and Diabetes Center 
NRW, University Hospital, Ruhr-University Bochum, Georgstr. 11, 32545 Bad 
Oeynhausen, Germany.
(3)Department of Clinical Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Medical University of 
Lodz, Mazowiecka 6/8, 92-215 Lodz, Poland.

Dextro-transposition of the great arteries (D-TGA) is the second most common 
cyanotic heart disease, accounting for 5-7% of all congenital heart defects 
(CHDs). It is characterized by ventriculoarterial (VA) connection discordance, 
atrioventricular (AV) concordance, and a parallel relationship with D-TGA. As a 
result, the pulmonary and systemic circulations are separated [the morphological 
right ventricle (RV) is connected to the aorta and the morphological left 
ventricle (LV) is connected to the pulmonary artery]. This anomaly is included 
in the group of developmental disorders of embryonic heart conotruncal 
irregularities, and their pathogenesis is multifactorial. The anomaly's 
development is influenced by genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors. It 
can occur either as an isolated anomaly, or in association with other cardiac 
defects. The typical concomitant cardiac anomalies that may occur in patients 
with D-TGA include ventriculoseptal defects, patent ductus arteriosus, left 
ventricular outflow tract obstruction (LVOTO), mitral and tricuspid valve 
abnormalities, and coronary artery variations. Correction of the defect during 
infancy is the preferred treatment for D-TGA. Balloon atrial septostomy (BAS) is 
necessary prior to the operation. The recommended surgical correction methods 
include arterial switch operation (ASO) and atrial switch operation (AtrSR), as 
well as the Rastelli and Nikaidoh procedures. The most common postoperative 
complications include coronary artery stenosis, neoaortic root dilation, 
neoaortic insufficiency and neopulmonic stenosis, right ventricular (RV) outflow 
tract obstruction (RVOTO), left ventricular (LV) dysfunction, arrhythmias, and 
heart failure. Early diagnosis and treatment of D-TGA is paramount to the 
prognosis of the patient. Improved surgical techniques have made it possible for 
patients with D-TGA to survive into adulthood.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13164823
PMCID: PMC11355351
PMID: 39200964

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.