---
reference_id: "PMID:17515829"
title: Atypical measles and enhanced respiratory syncytial virus disease (ERD) made simple.
authors:
- Polack FP
journal: Pediatr Res
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3180686ce0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical measles and enhanced respiratory syncytial virus disease (ERD) made simple.
**Authors:** Polack FP
**Journal:** Pediatr Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1203/PDR.0b013e3180686ce0](https://doi.org/10.1203/PDR.0b013e3180686ce0)

## Content

1. Pediatr Res. 2007 Jul;62(1):111-5. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3180686ce0.

Atypical measles and enhanced respiratory syncytial virus disease (ERD) made 
simple.

Polack FP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine 
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. fpolack@jhsph.edu

Atypical measles and enhanced respiratory syncytial virus disease (ERD) were 
serious diseases that resulted from exposure of children immunized with 
inactivated vaccines against measles virus (MV) and respiratory syncytial virus 
(RSV) to the respective wild-type agents in the 1960s. Although the clinical 
manifestations of both illnesses were different, the immune responses elicited 
and primed for by the vaccines shared important similarities. Both vaccines 
failed to elicit long-lived protective antibody and to promote cytotoxic T 
lymphocyte responses. In both cases, postvaccination exposure to wild type virus 
during community outbreaks was associated with immune complex deposition in 
affected tissues, vigorous CD4 T lymphocyte proliferative responses, and a Th2 
bias of the immune response. No relapses of atypical measles or ERD were ever 
reported. In this manuscript, the pathogeneses of both enhanced diseases and the 
requirements for the generation of protective antibodies against MV and RSV are 
discussed, to contribute to the development of newer safe and effective vaccines 
against these important pathogens.

DOI: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3180686ce0
PMID: 17515829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]