---
reference_id: "PMID:20410287"
title: "Inclusion body myopathy, Paget's disease of the bone and fronto-temporal dementia: a disorder of autophagy."
authors:
- Ju JS
- Weihl CC
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq157
keywords:
- "Adenosine Triphosphatases/genetics, physiology"
- Autophagy
- "Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- "Frontotemporal Dementia/complications, genetics"
- Homeostasis
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Myositis, Inclusion Body/complications, genetics"
- "Osteitis Deformans/complications, genetics"
- Valosin Containing Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inclusion body myopathy, Paget's disease of the bone and fronto-temporal dementia: a disorder of autophagy.
**Authors:** Ju JS, Weihl CC
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddq157](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddq157)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Apr 15;19(R1):R38-45. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq157. Epub 2010
Apr  21.

Inclusion body myopathy, Paget's disease of the bone and fronto-temporal
dementia: a disorder of autophagy.

Ju JS(1), Weihl CC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint
Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Inclusion body myopathy associated with Paget's disease of the bone and
fronto-temporal dementia (IBMPFD) is a progressive autosomal dominant disorder
caused by mutations in p97/VCP (valosin-containing protein). p97/VCP is a member
of the AAA+ (ATPase associated with a variety of activities) protein family and
participates in multiple cellular processes. One particularly important role for
p97/VCP is facilitating intracellular protein degradation. p97/VCP has
traditionally been thought to mediate the ubiquitin-proteasome degradation of
proteins; however, recent studies challenge this dogma. p97/VCP clearly
participates in the degradation of aggregate-prone proteins, a process
principally mediated by autophagy. In addition, IBMPFD mutations in p97/VCP lead
to accumulation of autophagic structures in patient and transgenic animal
tissue. This is likely due to a defect in p97/VCP-mediated autophagosome
maturation. The following review will discuss the evidence for p97/VCP in
autophagy and how a disruption in this process contributes to IBMPFD
pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq157
PMCID: PMC2875057
PMID: 20410287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
