---
reference_id: "PMID:35088581"
title: "Association between idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis and celiac disease in pediatric patients: A scoping review of the literature over the past 50 years."
authors:
- Saha BK
- Saha S
- Bonnier A
- Saha BN
journal: Pediatr Pulmonol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ppul.25847
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association between idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis and celiac disease in pediatric patients: A scoping review of the literature over the past 50 years.
**Authors:** Saha BK, Saha S, Bonnier A, Saha BN
**Journal:** Pediatr Pulmonol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ppul.25847](https://doi.org/10.1002/ppul.25847)

## Content

1. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2022 May;57(5):1127-1144. doi: 10.1002/ppul.25847. Epub 2022
 Feb 11.

Association between idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis and celiac disease in 
pediatric patients: A scoping review of the literature over the past 50 years.

Saha BK(1), Saha S(2), Bonnier A(3), Saha BN(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Ozarks Medical Center, 
West Plains, Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Bangladesh Medical College, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh.
(3)Department of Critical Care Nursing, Goldfarb School of Nursing, Barnes 
Jewish College, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Saha Clinic, Narail, Bangladesh.

INTRODUCTION: Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis (IPH) is a rare cause of 
diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, the mechanism of which is currently unknown. Nearly 
one-third of pediatric patients with IPH test positive for Celiac disease (CD) 
serology. Several hypothetical mechanisms have been proposed to unify the 
coexistence of these two entities, also referred to as Lane-Hamilton syndrome 
(LHS).
METHOD: This manuscript is a scoping review of the medical literature. Medline, 
Embase, and PubMed Central databases were searched between 1971 and 2021 with 
appropriate search words to identify all cases of pediatric LHS.
RESULTS: A total of 20 manuscripts with 23 pediatric patients with LHS were 
identified. The mean age was 11 years, and 13/23 (56.5%) of the children were 
boys. Hemoptysis was present in 57% of patients during diagnosis. Bronchoscopy 
with bronchoalveolar lavage demonstrating hemosiderin laden macrophages was the 
primary mode of diagnostic confirmation. Only three patients underwent lung 
biopsy. Any significant GI symptom was reported in a minority of patients (22%). 
Iron deficiency anemia on presentation was described in 83% of children. The 
majority of patients were malnourished. Serology for CD was positive in all 
patients, as was the histopathologic analysis of the small bowel biopsy. No 
patients had any other autoantibody positivity. The introduction of gluten free 
diet (GFD) was associated with a positive response in 20/23 patients.
CONCLUSION: All pediatric patients with IPH should undergo screening for CD. Low 
serum ferritin in patients with IPH could be suggestive of coexisting CD. Strict 
GFD should be tried as the initial therapy.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ppul.25847
PMID: 35088581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]