---
reference_id: "PMID:20224884"
title: "Alcohol drinking, cigarette smoking, and the development of squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus: epidemiology, clinical findings, and prevention."
authors:
- Morita M
- Kumashiro R
- Kubo N
- Nakashima Y
- Yoshida R
- Yoshinaga K
- Saeki H
- Emi Y
- Kakeji Y
- Sakaguchi Y
- Toh Y
- Maehara Y
journal: Int J Clin Oncol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s10147-010-0056-7
keywords:
- "Alcohol Drinking/adverse effects, epidemiology"
- Aldehyde Dehydrogenase/genetics
- "Aldehyde Dehydrogenase, Mitochondrial"
- Animals
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, genetics, prevention & control"
- Case-Control Studies
- Early Detection of Cancer
- "Esophageal Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, genetics, prevention & control"
- Esophagoscopy
- Female
- Flushing/etiology
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Odds Ratio
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- "Smoking/adverse effects, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alcohol drinking, cigarette smoking, and the development of squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus: epidemiology, clinical findings, and prevention.
**Authors:** Morita M, Kumashiro R, Kubo N, Nakashima Y, Yoshida R, Yoshinaga K, Saeki H, Emi Y, Kakeji Y, Sakaguchi Y, Toh Y, Maehara Y
**Journal:** Int J Clin Oncol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10147-010-0056-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10147-010-0056-7)

## Content

1. Int J Clin Oncol. 2010 Apr;15(2):126-34. doi: 10.1007/s10147-010-0056-7. Epub
2010 Mar 12.

Alcohol drinking, cigarette smoking, and the development of squamous cell
carcinoma of the esophagus: epidemiology, clinical findings, and prevention.

Morita M(1), Kumashiro R, Kubo N, Nakashima Y, Yoshida R, Yoshinaga K, Saeki H,
Emi Y, Kakeji Y, Sakaguchi Y, Toh Y, Maehara Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery and Science, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
masarum@surg2.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Both cigarette smoking and alcohol drinking are well-established risk factors
for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), and the relationship of dose to
cancer risk has already been described. Furthermore, the synergistic effect of
these two factors has been reported. Our case-control study revealed the odds
ratio of ESCC to be 50.1 for those who were both heavy smokers and heavy
drinkers in comparison to people who neither drank nor smoked. In patients with
ESCC, head and neck cancers as well as dysplastic lesions are frequently
observed. Heavy smoking and heavy drinking are closely related to such
multicentric carcinogenesis events in the upper aerodigestive tract (UADT),
including the esophagus and head andneck region. Polymorphisms in acetaldehyde
dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2) are reported to be a key event in deciding individual
susceptibility to UADT cancer. Patients with inactive ALDH2, in whom facial
flushing is usually observed after the drinking of alcohol, are at high risk for
ESCC as well as multiple UADT cancers. For the early detection of the disease,
effective follow up using endoscopy with Lugol staining or narrow band imaging
endoscopy is strongly recommended for high-risk populations, such as smokers,
heavy drinkers, people with experience of flushing after the drinking of
alcohol, and patients with UADT cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s10147-010-0056-7
PMID: 20224884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
