---
reference_id: "PMID:27453302"
title: (Neo)adjuvant systemic therapy for melanoma.
authors:
- van Zeijl MC
- van den Eertwegh AJ
- Haanen JB
- Wouters MW
journal: Eur J Surg Oncol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2016.07.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# (Neo)adjuvant systemic therapy for melanoma.
**Authors:** van Zeijl MC, van den Eertwegh AJ, Haanen JB, Wouters MW
**Journal:** Eur J Surg Oncol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejso.2016.07.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejso.2016.07.001)

## Content

1. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2017 Mar;43(3):534-543. doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2016.07.001.
Epub  2016 Jul 11.

(Neo)adjuvant systemic therapy for melanoma.

van Zeijl MC(1), van den Eertwegh AJ(2), Haanen JB(3), Wouters MW(4).

Author information:
(1)Dutch Institute for Clinical Auditing, Rijnsburgerweg 10, 2333AA Leiden, The 
Netherlands; Department of Surgery, Leiden University Medical Centre, 
Albinusdreef 2, 2333ZA Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
m.vanzeijl@dica.nl.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, De Boelelaan 
1118, 1081HZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology and Immunology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, 
Plesmanlaan 121, 1066CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Dutch Institute for Clinical Auditing, Rijnsburgerweg 10, 2333AA Leiden, The 
Netherlands; Department of Surgical Oncology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, 
Plesmanlaan 121, 1066CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Surgery still is the cornerstone of treatment for patients with stage II and III 
melanoma, but despite great efforts to gain or preserve locoregional control 
with excision of the primary tumour, satellites, intransits, sentinel node 
biopsy and lymphadenectomy, surgery alone does not seem to improve survival any 
further. Prognosis for patients with high risk melanoma remains poor with 5-year 
survival rates of 40 to 80%. Only interferon-2b has been approved as adjuvant 
therapy since 1995, but clinical integration is low considering the high 
risk-benefit ratio. In recent years systemic targeted- and immunotherapy have 
proven to be beneficial in advanced melanoma and could be a promising strategy 
for (neo)adjuvant treatment of patients with resectable high risk melanomas as 
well. Randomised, placebo- controlled phase III trials on adjuvant systemic 
targeted- and immunotherapy are currently being performed using new agents like 
ipilimumab, pembrolizumab, nivolumab, vemurafenib and dabrafenib plus 
trametinib. In this article we review the literature on currently known adjuvant 
therapies and currently ongoing trials of (neo)adjuvant therapies in high risk 
melanomas.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd, BASO ~ the Association for Cancer Surgery, and 
the European Society of Surgical Oncology. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejso.2016.07.001
PMID: 27453302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]