---
reference_id: "PMID:11525595"
title: Associations of plasma aflatoxin B1-albumin adduct level with plasma selenium level and genetic polymorphisms of glutathione S-transferase M1 and T1.
authors:
- Chen SY
- Chen CJ
- Tsai WY
- Ahsan H
- Liu TY
- Lin JT
- Santella RM
journal: Nutr Cancer
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1207/S15327914NC382_6
keywords:
- Adult
- "Aflatoxin B1/blood, chemistry"
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/blood, epidemiology, etiology"
- DNA Adducts/blood
- Diet
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- Glutathione Transferase/genetics
- Hepatitis B/complications
- Hepatitis B Surface Antigens/blood
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/blood, epidemiology, etiology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Risk Factors
- Selenium/blood
- "Serum Albumin/chemistry, genetics"
- Sex Factors
- "Spectrophotometry, Atomic"
- Taiwan/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Associations of plasma aflatoxin B1-albumin adduct level with plasma selenium level and genetic polymorphisms of glutathione S-transferase M1 and T1.
**Authors:** Chen SY, Chen CJ, Tsai WY, Ahsan H, Liu TY, Lin JT, Santella RM
**Journal:** Nutr Cancer (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1207/S15327914NC382_6](https://doi.org/10.1207/S15327914NC382_6)

## Content

1. Nutr Cancer. 2000;38(2):179-85. doi: 10.1207/S15327914NC382_6.

Associations of plasma aflatoxin B1-albumin adduct level with plasma selenium
level and genetic polymorphisms of glutathione S-transferase M1 and T1.

Chen SY(1), Chen CJ, Tsai WY, Ahsan H, Liu TY, Lin JT, Santella RM.

Author information:
(1)Columbia University School of Public Health, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Mortality from hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is extraordinarily high in Matzu,
an island off the coast of Southeastern China. To investigate factors associated
with plasma aflatoxin B1 (AFB1)-albumin adduct level, we studied 304 healthy
adult residents from Matzu. AFB1-albumin adducts were determined by competitive
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, hepatitis B surface antigen status by enzyme
immunoassay, genotypes of glutathione S-transferase (GST) M1 and T1 by
polymerase chain reaction, plasma selenium by atomic absorption spectrometry,
and plasma retinol, alpha-tocopherol, alpha-carotene, and beta-carotene levels
by high-performance liquid chromatography. Men had higher AFB1-albumin adduct
levels than women. GSTM1-nonnull and GSTT1-null genotypes and low plasma
selenium level were significantly associated with an increased level of
AFB1-albumin adducts among men, whereas age was significantly correlated with
adduct level among women. High intake of fermented beans was associated with an
increased adduct level among men and women. The inverse associations between
plasma selenium level and AFB1-albumin adducts were statistically significant
among those with null genotypes of GSTM1 and GSTT1, but not among the nonnull
genotypes. This study provides insight into the dietary and genetic factors
influencing AFB1-albumin adduct formation in an isolated population with high
liver cancer mortality.

DOI: 10.1207/S15327914NC382_6
PMID: 11525595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
