---
reference_id: "PMID:35490395"
title: An integrated analysis of herpes virus infections from eight randomized clinical studies of baricitinib in adults with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis.
authors:
- Werfel T
- Irvine AD
- Bangert C
- Seneschal J
- Grond S
- Cardillo T
- Brinker D
- Zhong J
- Riedl E
- Wollenberg A
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/jdv.18193
keywords:
- Adult
- Azetidines/adverse effects
- "Dermatitis, Atopic/drug therapy"
- Herpes Simplex/epidemiology
- Herpes Zoster/epidemiology
- "Herpesvirus 3, Human"
- Humans
- Purines/adverse effects
- Pyrazoles/adverse effects
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Sulfonamides/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An integrated analysis of herpes virus infections from eight randomized clinical studies of baricitinib in adults with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis.
**Authors:** Werfel T, Irvine AD, Bangert C, Seneschal J, Grond S, Cardillo T, Brinker D, Zhong J, Riedl E, Wollenberg A
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdv.18193](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.18193)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2022 Sep;36(9):1486-1496. doi:
10.1111/jdv.18193.  Epub 2022 May 18.

An integrated analysis of herpes virus infections from eight randomized clinical 
studies of baricitinib in adults with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis.

Werfel T(1)(2), Irvine AD(3), Bangert C(4), Seneschal J(5), Grond S(6), Cardillo 
T(6), Brinker D(6), Zhong J(7), Riedl E(6), Wollenberg A(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Immunodermatology and Allergy Research, Department of Dermatology 
and Allergy, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(2)Cluster of Excellence RESIST (EXC 2155), Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Clinical Medicine, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Department of Dermatology and Pediatric Dermatology and National Reference 
Center for Rare Skin Disorders, Hôpital Saint-André, Bordeaux, France.
(6)Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(7)IQVIA, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(8)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, University Hospital, Ludwig 
Maximillian University, Munich, Germany.
(9)Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel (UZ 
Brussel), Department of Dermatology, Brussels, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Atopic dermatitis (AD) is associated with an increased risk for 
viral infections including those caused by herpes simplex virus and varicella 
zoster virus.
OBJECTIVES: This study examined treatment-emergent (TE) herpes simplex infection 
including eczema herpeticum (EH), and herpes zoster (HZ), in adult patients with 
AD receiving ≥1 dose of baricitinib (BARI), an oral selective inhibitor of Janus 
kinase 1/2.
METHODS: We evaluated data from six double-blinded, randomized, 
placebo-controlled (PC) trials and two long-term extension studies, within three 
analysis sets: PC, 2-4-mg BARI extended and All-BARI-AD. Frequency, incidence 
rate (IR)/100 person-years (PYs) and clinical characteristics of TE-herpes 
simplex, EH and HZ were reported.
RESULTS: In the All-BARI-AD dataset (n = 2531; 2247 PYs), herpes simplex was 
reported in 8.9% of patients (n = 224; IR = 10.3). Most herpes simplex events 
were rated as mild or moderate (93.3%), rarely led to permanent discontinuation 
(2.2%) and presented mostly as oral/perioral herpes simplex (51.3%). TE-EH 
occurred at a low frequency (All-BARI-AD 1.7% n = 43; IR = 2.0) and were 
reported in 0.5%, 0.2% and 1.4% of patients receiving placebo, 2-mg or 4-mg BARI 
respectively. In the All-BARI-AD dataset, most events were investigator-rated as 
mild/moderate (79.1%), affected ≤2% of the body surface area (74.2%) and 
occurred as single events (88.4%). Serious TE-EH (n = 11) occurred exclusively 
in patients with poor disease control (vIGA-AD™ score ≥3) at infection onset. 
TE-HZ was reported in 2.1% of BARI patients (n = 53; IR = 2.3), without a dose 
relationship during the PC period (IR = 2.7 and IR = 0.0) or the extended 
dataset (IR = 3.7 and IR = 1.7) for 2- or 4-mg BARI respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: TE-herpes simplex was common, while occurrence of EH was uncommon. 
Most events of EH were localized with involvement of a small BSA and were linked 
to poor disease control. Events of HZ were rare in the PC dataset and without a 
dose dependent increase in frequency.

© 2022 The Authors. Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and 
Venereology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of European Academy of 
Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.18193
PMID: 35490395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]