---
reference_id: "PMID:23342068"
title: Contributions of PHOX2B in the pathogenesis of Hirschsprung disease.
authors:
- Fernández RM
- Mathieu Y
- Luzón-Toro B
- Núñez-Torres R
- González-Meneses A
- Antiñolo G
- Amiel J
- Borrego S
journal: PLoS One
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054043
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contributions of PHOX2B in the pathogenesis of Hirschsprung disease.
**Authors:** Fernández RM, Mathieu Y, Luzón-Toro B, Núñez-Torres R, González-Meneses A, Antiñolo G, Amiel J, Borrego S
**Journal:** PLoS One (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0054043](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0054043)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54043. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054043. Epub 2013 Jan
14.

Contributions of PHOX2B in the pathogenesis of Hirschsprung disease.

Fernández RM(1), Mathieu Y, Luzón-Toro B, Núñez-Torres R, González-Meneses A, 
Antiñolo G, Amiel J, Borrego S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Reproduction and Fetal Medicine, Institute of 
Biomedicine of Seville, University Hospital Virgen del Rocío/Centro Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas/University of Seville, Seville, Spain.

Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is a congenital malformation of the hindgut 
resulting from a disruption of neural crest cell migration during embryonic 
development. It has a complex genetic aetiology with several genes involved in 
its pathogenesis. PHOX2B plays a key function in the development of neural crest 
derivatives, and heterozygous mutations cause a complex dysautonomia associating 
HSCR, Congenital Central Hypoventilation Syndrome (CCHS) and neuroblastoma (NB) 
in various combinations. In order to determine the role of PHOX2B in isolated 
HSCR, we performed a mutational screening in a cohort of 207 Spanish HSCR 
patients. Our most relevant finding has been the identification of a de novo and 
novel deletion (c.393_410del18) in a patient with HSCR. Results of in silico and 
functional assays support its pathogenic effect related to HSCR. Therefore our 
results support that PHOX2B loss-of-function is a rare cause of HSCR phenotype.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054043
PMCID: PMC3544660
PMID: 23342068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.