---
reference_id: "PMID:25349947"
title: Effect of neoadjuvant chemotherapy on resectability of stage III and IV hepatoblastoma.
authors:
- Venkatramani R
- Stein JE
- Sapra A
- Genyk Y
- Jhaveri V
- Malogolowkin M
- Mascarenhas L
journal: Br J Surg
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/bjs.9681
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Chemotherapy, Adjuvant"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Hepatectomy/methods
- Hepatic Veins
- "Hepatoblastoma/drug therapy, pathology, surgery"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Liver Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology, surgery"
- Male
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vascular Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology, surgery"
- "Vena Cava, Inferior"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of neoadjuvant chemotherapy on resectability of stage III and IV hepatoblastoma.
**Authors:** Venkatramani R, Stein JE, Sapra A, Genyk Y, Jhaveri V, Malogolowkin M, Mascarenhas L
**Journal:** Br J Surg (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/bjs.9681](https://doi.org/10.1002/bjs.9681)

## Content

1. Br J Surg. 2015 Jan;102(1):108-13. doi: 10.1002/bjs.9681. Epub 2014 Oct 28.

Effect of neoadjuvant chemotherapy on resectability of stage III and IV 
hepatoblastoma.

Venkatramani R(1), Stein JE, Sapra A, Genyk Y, Jhaveri V, Malogolowkin M, 
Mascarenhas L.

Author information:
(1)Divisions of Hematology, Oncology and Blood and Marrow Transplantation, 
Children's Hospital Los Angeles, California, USA; Departments of Pediatrics, 
Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.

BACKGROUND: The potential for surgical resection of primary hepatoblastoma 
tumours was assessed at diagnosis, and after two and four cycles of neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy.
METHODS: Available radiographic images for patients with stage III and IV 
hepatoblastoma diagnosed between 1991 and 2008 were reviewed. The extent of 
disease was determined at diagnosis using the PRETEXT staging system, and after 
two and four cycles of therapy by POST-TEXT staging. Tumour resectability based 
on radiographic studies was assessed independently by two surgeons with 
expertise in hepatic surgery who were blinded to treatment and clinical outcome.
RESULTS: Radiographic images from 20 patients with hepatoblastoma were reviewed. 
Six of 20 tumours were downstaged after two cycles, and three additional tumours 
were downstaged following four cycles. All PRETEXT stage III and IV tumours were 
determined to be surgically unresectable at diagnosis. The number of tumours 
considered unresectable decreased from 16 of 20 at diagnosis to seven of 20 
after two cycles, and to four of 20 after four cycles. Five of the seven tumours 
that were unresectable after two cycles, and all four tumours that were 
unresectable after four cycles would have qualified for liver transplant based 
on radiographic studies.
CONCLUSION: The majority of stage III and IV hepatoblastomas achieved 
radiographic resectability after two cycles of chemotherapy. There may be an 
opportunity for earlier surgical intervention and potential for a reduction in 
chemotherapy in a considerable number of patients.

© 2014 BJS Society Ltd. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/bjs.9681
PMID: 25349947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]