---
reference_id: "PMID:36883320"
title: "Higher degree of keratinization correlated with severe bone destruction in acquired Cholesteatoma."
journal: Acta Otolaryngol
year: "2023"
doi: 10.1080/00016489.2023.2177341
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Higher degree of keratinization correlated with severe bone destruction in acquired Cholesteatoma.

## Content

BACKGROUND: Acquired cholesteatoma is characterized by hyper-keratinized
squamous epithelium and bone destruction. However, direct evidence for
hyper-keratinized epidermis promoting bone destruction is lacking.
AIMS/OBJECTIVES: To determine whether higher degree of keratinization correlated
with severe bone destruction and further offer direct evidence for
keratinocyte-inducing osteoclastogenesis. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Histological
changes and clinical relevance were analyzed in human-acquired cholesteatoma.
Animal models were established by implanting autologous epidermis with different
degrees of keratinization. The severity of bone resorption and the number of
osteoclasts were compared in different keratinized groups. An in vitro coculture
system was developed to mimic the progress of keratinocyte-inducing
osteoclastogenesis. RESULTS: The matrix of cholesteatoma was composed of a
thicker stratum corneum than normal skin. The stratum corneum thickness and the
expression of Keratin 10 positively correlated to the severity of bone
destruction. Animal models revealed that the bone destruction induced by a
higher keratinized epidermis was more severe. Osteoclasts were detected in bone
erosion areas, and the number of osteoclasts increased with the keratinization
degrees of the graft. In vitro studies showed that keratinocytes directly
promoted monocytes differentiating into osteoclasts. CONCLUSIONS AND
SIGNIFICANCE: In acquired cholesteatoma, the degree of keratinization correlated
with disease severity, and keratinocytes directly promote osteoclastogenesis.
