---
reference_id: "PMID:35930087"
title: "Characteristics of adult patients newly diagnosed with Crohn's disease: interim analysis of the nation-wide inception cohort registry study of patients with Crohn's disease in Japan (iCREST-CD)."
authors:
- Matsuoka K
- Fujii T
- Okamoto R
- Yamada A
- Kunisaki R
- Matsuura M
- Watanabe K
- Shiga H
- Takatsu N
- Bamba S
- Mikami Y
- Yamamoto T
- Shimoyama T
- Motoya S
- Torisu T
- Kobayashi T
- Ohmiya N
- Saruta M
- Matsuda K
- Matsumoto T
- Nakase H
- Maemoto A
- Shinzaki S
- Murata Y
- Yoshigoe S
- Sasaki A
- Yajima T
- Hisamatsu T
journal: J Gastroenterol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00535-022-01907-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characteristics of adult patients newly diagnosed with Crohn's disease: interim analysis of the nation-wide inception cohort registry study of patients with Crohn's disease in Japan (iCREST-CD).
**Authors:** Matsuoka K, Fujii T, Okamoto R, Yamada A, Kunisaki R, Matsuura M, Watanabe K, Shiga H, Takatsu N, Bamba S, Mikami Y, Yamamoto T, Shimoyama T, Motoya S, Torisu T, Kobayashi T, Ohmiya N, Saruta M, Matsuda K, Matsumoto T, Nakase H, Maemoto A, Shinzaki S, Murata Y, Yoshigoe S, Sasaki A, Yajima T, Hisamatsu T
**Journal:** J Gastroenterol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00535-022-01907-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00535-022-01907-2)

## Content

1. J Gastroenterol. 2022 Nov;57(11):867-878. doi: 10.1007/s00535-022-01907-2.
Epub  2022 Aug 5.

Characteristics of adult patients newly diagnosed with Crohn's disease: interim 
analysis of the nation-wide inception cohort registry study of patients with 
Crohn's disease in Japan (iCREST-CD).

Matsuoka K(1), Fujii T(2), Okamoto R(2), Yamada A(1), Kunisaki R(3), Matsuura 
M(4), Watanabe K(5), Shiga H(6), Takatsu N(7), Bamba S(8), Mikami Y(9), Yamamoto 
T(10), Shimoyama T(10), Motoya S(11), Torisu T(12), Kobayashi T(13), Ohmiya 
N(14), Saruta M(15), Matsuda K(16), Matsumoto T(17), Nakase H(18), Maemoto 
A(19), Shinzaki S(5)(20), Murata Y(21), Yoshigoe S(21), Sasaki A(21), Yajima 
T(22), Hisamatsu T(23).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Toho University Sakura Medical Center, Sakura, Chiba, Japan.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Center, Yokohama City University Medical Center, 
Minami-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Kyorin University School of 
Medicine, Mitaka, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Center for Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Division of Gastroenterology and 
Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Hyogo Medical University, 
Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.
(7)Department of Inflammatory Bowel Disease Center, Fukuoka University Chikushi 
Hospital, Chikushino, Fukuoka, Japan.
(8)Division of Digestive Endoscopy, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, 
Shiga, Japan.
(9)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Keio University School of Medicine, Shinjiku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(10)Department of Surgery and Inflammatory Bowel Disease Center, Yokkaichi Hazu 
Medical Center, Yokkaichi, Mie, Japan.
(11)IBD Center, Hokkaido Preventive Welfare Federation of Agricultural 
Cooperative, Sapporo-Kosei General Hospital, Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan.
(12)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences, Kyushu University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan.
(13)Center for Advanced IBD Research and Treatment, Kitasato University Kitasato 
Institute Hospital, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(14)Department of Advanced Endoscopy, Fujita Health University School of 
Medicine, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan.
(15)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal 
Medicine, The Jikei University School of Medicine, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(16)Department of Gastroenterology, Toyama Prefectural Central Hospital, Toyama, 
Toyama, Japan.
(17)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, School of 
Medicine, Iwate Medical University, Morioka, Iwate, Japan.
(18)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Sapporo Medical University 
School of Medicine, Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan.
(19)IBD Center, Sapporo Higashi Tokushukai Hospital, Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan.
(20)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Osaka University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(21)Medical Affairs Division, Janssen Pharmaceutical K.K., Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(22)Statistics & Decision Sciences, Janssen Pharmaceutical K.K., Chiyoda-ku, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(23)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Kyorin University School of 
Medicine, Mitaka, Tokyo, Japan. thisamatsu@ks.kyorin-u.ac.jp.

Erratum in
    J Gastroenterol. 2023 Jun;58(6):602-603. doi: 10.1007/s00535-023-01998-5.

BACKGROUND: The Inception Cohort Registry Study of Patients with Crohn's Disease 
aimed to clarify clinical characteristics and disease course of newly diagnosed 
Crohn's disease patients in Japan throughout a 4-year period. Results from an 
interim analysis of the largest nation-wide registry study that covers 
approximately 1% of Crohn's disease patient population in Japan are reported.
METHODS: This prospective, observational registry study was conducted at 19 
tertiary centers in Japan. Patients newly diagnosed with Crohn's disease after 
June 2016 (age ≥ 16 years at informed consent) were enrolled between December 
17, 2018 and June 30, 2020. Patient demographics, diagnostic procedures and 
categories, disease location and lesion behavior (Montreal classification) at 
the time of diagnosis were recorded.
RESULTS: Of 673 patients enrolled, 672 (99.9%) were analyzed (458: men, 214: 
women), male-to-female ratio: 2.1, median age at diagnosis 25 (range 13-86) 
years; peak age of disease diagnosis: 20-24 years. Most common disease location 
was L3 (ileocolonic; 60.1%). Non-stricturing, non-penetrating (B1) disease was 
most common behavior (62.8%); 48.9% reported perianal lesions. Notably, age-wise 
analysis revealed disease phenotypes varied between patients aged < 40 and 
≥ 40 years in terms of male-to-female ratio (2.5/1.3)/disease location (L3: 
66.3%/37.0%)/disease behavior (B1: 66.4%/50.0%)/perianal lesion: (55.7%/20.5%) 
at Crohn's disease diagnosis, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Interim analysis of this nation-wide Inception Cohort Registry 
Study of Patients with Crohn's Disease revealed the demographics and disease 
characteristics of newly diagnosed Crohn's disease patients in Japan and 
demonstrated that disease phenotype varied between patients aged < 40 and 
≥ 40 years, serving as important information for management of individual 
patients.

© 2022. Japanese Society of Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.1007/s00535-022-01907-2
PMID: 35930087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]