---
reference_id: "PMID:28751768"
title: Cytogenetically cryptic ZMYM2-FLT3 and DIAPH1-PDGFRB gene fusions in myeloid neoplasms with eosinophilia.
authors:
- Jawhar M
- Naumann N
- Knut M
- Score J
- Ghazzawi M
- Schneider B
- Kreuzer KA
- Hallek M
- Drexler HG
- Chacko J
- Wallis L
- Fabarius A
- Metzgeroth G
- Hofmann WK
- Chase A
- Tapper W
- Reiter A
- Cross NCP
journal: Leukemia
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/leu.2017.240
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Cytogenetically cryptic ZMYM2-FLT3 and DIAPH1-PDGFRB gene fusions in myeloid neoplasms with eosinophilia.
**Authors:** Jawhar M, Naumann N, Knut M, Score J, Ghazzawi M, Schneider B, Kreuzer KA, Hallek M, Drexler HG, Chacko J, Wallis L, Fabarius A, Metzgeroth G, Hofmann WK, Chase A, Tapper W, Reiter A, Cross NCP
**Journal:** Leukemia (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/leu.2017.240](https://doi.org/10.1038/leu.2017.240)

## Content

1. Leukemia. 2017 Oct;31(10):2271-2273. doi: 10.1038/leu.2017.240. Epub 2017 Jul 
28.

Cytogenetically cryptic ZMYM2-FLT3 and DIAPH1-PDGFRB gene fusions in myeloid 
neoplasms with eosinophilia.

Jawhar M(1), Naumann N(1), Knut M(2), Score J(2), Ghazzawi M(2), Schneider B(3), 
Kreuzer KA(3), Hallek M(3), Drexler HG(4), Chacko J(5), Wallis L(5), Fabarius 
A(1), Metzgeroth G(1), Hofmann WK(1), Chase A(2), Tapper W(2), Reiter A(1), 
Cross NCP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital Mannheim, 
Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(3)Department I of Internal Medicine, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, Leibniz-Institute DSMZ, German 
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.
(5)Department of Haematology, Royal Bournemouth Hospital, Bournemouth, UK.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2017.240
PMCID: PMC5630086
PMID: 28751768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest NCPC has received 
honoraria and research support from Novartis, and honoraria from Pfizer. AR has 
received honoraria and research support from Novartis.

More than 70 tyrosine kinase (TK) fusion genes have been identified in myeloid neoplasms as a consequence of reciprocal translocations or other genomic rearrangements. These TK fusions are generally primary drivers of myeloproliferation and important therapeutic targets, as well as being major criteria for the diagnosis of specific disorders. For example, chronic myeloid leukemia is defined by the presence of BCR-ABL1, and myeloid/lymphoid neoplasms with eosinophilia are defined by fusions involving PDGFRA, PDGFRB, FGFR1 or PCM1-JAK2.1 Other TK fusions have been described in patients with various subtypes of myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) or myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasms (MDS/MPN). Most of these individuals have pronounced eosinophilia,2 but occasional cases have other phenotypes such as polycythemia vera (PV) or systemic mastocytosis.2, 3 Apart from FIP1L1-PDGFRA, which is formed by a small deletion at 4q12,4 TK fusions are almost always associated with visible karyotypic abnormalities. Despite their apparent prominence in the literature, TK fusions are in fact uncommon and the pathogenesis of the majority of MPN with eosinophilia (MPN-eo) remains unexplained. Some TK-fusion negative cases test positive for KIT D816V or JAK2 V617F, whereas others are positive for mutations in a range of genes associated with myeloid disorders such as TET2, ASXL1, EZH2 and SETBP1.5,6,7 We hypothesized that hitherto undetected cryptic TK fusion genes may drive MPN-eo as well as other disorders such as JAK2-unmutated PV.

We used RNAseq to search for TK fusion genes in cases with MPN-eo or hypereosinophilia of unknown significance (HEUS) with a normal karyotype (n=14), PV with low or normal erythropoietin levels that tested negative for MPN phenotype driver mutations (n=6) and cell lines that were derived from MPN or MDS patients that had transformed to acute myeloid leukemia (F-36P, ELF-153, FKH-1, GDM-1, SKK-1, SKM-1). RNA extraction, polyA+ RNA-Seq library preparation, stranded RNAseq protocol and 100bp paired-end sequencing was performed with multiplexing for a minimum of 75 million reads/sample using an Illumina HiSeq 2000. Bowtie and TopHat-Fusion were used to align reads, resolve splice junctions, identify and filter potential TK fusions as previously described.8 Confirmation and screening of fusions was performed by RT-PCR and Sanger sequencing (Supplementary Table 1).

Of the 20 patient samples, two novel TK fusions were identified. In frame DIAPH1-PDGFRB and ZMYM2-FLT3 fusion mRNAs (Figure 1; Supplementary Figures 1 and 2) were found in single patients with MPN-eo. None of the cases were positive for TNIP1-PDGFRB, a recently described cryptic fusion in MPN-eo.9 Unusually, the fusion breakpoints in our cases fell within exons of both the partner and TK genes. No TK fusions were detected in the PV cases, but the FKH-1 and SKK-1 cell lines were positive for ETV6-ABL1 and ETV6-NTRK3, respectively (Supplementary Figure 3). Although these fusions have been described previously, neither line was known to be positive and the presence of these fusions was not suspected on the basis of the karyotype. 10, 11

DIAPH1 and PDGFRB are located 8.5Mb apart at 5q31.3 and 5q32, respectively. They are both oriented from telomere to centromere and thus the fusion presumably arose as a consequence of a tandem duplication or a translocation t(5;5)(q31.3;q32), both of which would be difficult to detect by routine cytogenetics. The affected patient, a 37-year-old male, was diagnosed with an MPN-eo and contemporaneous T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, most likely representing extramedullary lymphoid blast phase 12. The karyotype was normal. The patient received intensive chemotherapy and achieved complete hematological remission (CHR) with disappearance of the lymphadenopathy. Two weeks later he developed leukocytosis (119x109/L) with significant eosinophilia (21x109/L), hepatosplenomegaly but with no recurrence of lymphadenopathy. Consolidation intensive chemotherapy treatment was started without response. Molecular analyses revealed overexpression of PDGFRB
13 and the DIAPH1-PDGFRB fusion was subsequently identified by RNAseq analysis. He received imatinib 100 mg/day and achieved CHR within 4 weeks but died due to a rapidly progressive neurodegenerative disorder at month 27 whilst still in complete remission. To test if DIAPH1-PDGFRB is a recurrent abnormality, we screened 50 additional cases with MPN-eo by RT-PCR but did not identify any further positive cases.

ZMYM2 and FLT3 are both located at 13q12 and are in opposite orientations. ZMYM2-FLT3 is thus predicted to arise as a consequence of an 8Mb inversion (Supplementary Figure 3). ZMYM2 is the fourth gene reported to fuse to FLT3 in myeloid neoplasms2 but the first FLT3 fusion that is cytogenetically cryptic. We screened 105 additional cases with MPN-eo, HEUS or other atypical MPN by RT-PCR. One additional positive case was detected, with similar but not identical breakpoints to the initial case (Figure 1). PCR analysis of genomic DNA for the second case (DNA was not available from Case 1) revealed that the cDNA and genomic breakpoints were identical, indicating the formation of a fusion exon by the inversion. We note that a third case with ZMYM2-FLT3 has been reported recently in a patient with BCR-ABL1-like acute lymphoblastic leukemia.14

Both cases with ZMYM2-FLT3 had MPN-eo. Case 1, a 48 year old female, presented with leukocytosis (30 x 109/L), eosinophilia (2 x 109/L, elevated serum tryptase (37µg/L), splenomegaly and a hypercellular bone marrow (BM) with increased numbers of loosely scattered mast cells. Cytogenetics was normal, FIP1L1-PDGFRA, KIT D816V and JAK2 V617F were all negative and no relevant mutations were identified by myeloid panel analysis (28 genes). After 10 months, she progressed to myeloid blast phase. Because the disease was resistant to AML-induction chemotherapy, an allogeneic peripheral blood stem cell transplant was performed from an unrelated donor 13 months after diagnosis. She died 6 months later from chronic graft versus host disease and septic shock; the ZMYM2-FLT3 fusion was identified post mortem.

Case 2, a 47 year old male, presented with eosinophilia (4.7 x 109/L), elevated serum tryptase (42µg/L) and a hypercellular BM. Cytogenetics was normal and FIP1L1-PDGFRA, KIT D816V and JAK2 V617F were all negative. There was no response to steroids or hydroxyurea. Following the finding of ZMYM2-FLT3 positivity, treatment with sunitinib off-label at 50mg/day was commenced. Blood counts started to improve from day 4 and normalized after 3 weeks. During a pause of 3 weeks due to pulmonary infection, leukocytes/eosinophils rapidly increased, but normalized again within weeks after restart of sunitinib, initially at a dose of 25mg/day and then subsequently 35mg/day. The patient has been maintained on sunitinib for 10 months (since re-start) and remains in CHR (Figure 2).

In conclusion, we have found that ZMYM2-FLT3 and DIAPH1-PDGFRB fusion genes are novel, cytogenetically cryptic and therapeutically targetable abnormalities in MPN-eo, and are thus reminiscent of FIP1L1-PDGFRA positive myeloid neoplasms. Due to their extensive diversity and clinical importance, we believe that genome wide or targeted RNAseq is rapidly becoming the method of choice to detect rare TK fusions.