---
reference_id: "PMID:40112482"
title: Using multiple modalities to confirm diagnosis in patients with suspected peroxisome biogenesis disorders.
authors:
- Cheung ACT
- Di Pietro E
- Argyriou C
- Bareke E
- "D'Souza Y"
- Puri RD
- Muhammed Shabeer P
- Ganetzky R
- Goldstein A
- Vanderver A
- Mohan S
- Majewski J
- Yergeau C
- Braverman N
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109080
keywords:
- Humans
- Exome Sequencing
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- "Peroxisomal Disorders/diagnosis, genetics"
- Peroxisome-Targeting Signal 1 Receptor/genetics
- "Peroxisomes/metabolism, genetics, pathology"
- "Zellweger Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- ATPases Associated with Diverse Cellular Activities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Using multiple modalities to confirm diagnosis in patients with suspected peroxisome biogenesis disorders.
**Authors:** Cheung ACT, Di Pietro E, Argyriou C, Bareke E, D'Souza Y, Puri RD, Muhammed Shabeer P, Ganetzky R, Goldstein A, Vanderver A, Mohan S, Majewski J, Yergeau C, Braverman N
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109080](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109080)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2025 May;145(1):109080. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109080.
Epub  2025 Mar 11.

Using multiple modalities to confirm diagnosis in patients with suspected
peroxisome biogenesis disorders.

Cheung ACT(1), Di Pietro E(2), Argyriou C(3), Bareke E(4), D'Souza Y(2), Puri
RD(5), Muhammed Shabeer P(5), Ganetzky R(6), Goldstein A(6), Vanderver A(7),
Mohan S(8), Majewski J(4), Yergeau C(2), Braverman N(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Specialized Medicine, McGill
University Health Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada;
Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(5)Institute of Medical Genetics and Genomics, Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, Delhi,
India.
(6)Mitochondrial Medicine Frontier Program, Division of Human Genetics,
Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA,
USA; Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA,
USA; Department of Neurology, Perlman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(8)Department of Pathology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA.
(9)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Specialized Medicine, McGill
University Health Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Departments of Human
Genetics and Pediatrics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Research
Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Electronic address: nancy.braverman@mcgill.ca.

Zellweger spectrum disorder (ZSD) results from biallelic variants in any one of
13 PEX genes involved in peroxisome biogenesis and function. The majority of ZSD
cases result from pathogenic variants in PEX1. Here, we present 3 patients with
suspected PEX1-related ZSD and non-diagnostic whole exome sequencing and
describe the use of multiple modalities to ascertain their diagnosis. We
confirmed peroxisomal dysfunction in the patients by demonstrating abnormal
peroxisome metabolite levels in blood and peroxisome import dysfunction in
patient fibroblasts. RNA studies including RNA-seq and RT-PCR, followed by
Sanger sequencing showed leaky splice variants including an intron 13 variant
causing exon 14 skipping (Patient 1), an intron 22 variant causing intron 22
retention (Patient 2), and a synonymous splice-site variant causing exon 16
skipping (Patient 3). All three patients had very low amounts of canonical PEX1
transcripts on RNA-seq, as well as residual but reduced PEX1 protein levels on
immunoblotting, which likely explains their non-severe ZSD phenotype. This study
suggests that a multi-modality approach combining biochemical testing,
functional assays in fibroblasts and molecular investigations including
sequencing of non-coding regions and RNA analysis may aid in diagnosis of
patients with suspected PBD-ZSD and inconclusive WES.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109080
PMCID: PMC12301650
PMID: 40112482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no conflict of interest.
