---
reference_id: "PMID:28005215"
title: "ARSENIC: A Review on Exposure Pathways, Accumulation, Mobility and Transmission into the Human Food Chain."
authors:
- Arslan B
- Djamgoz MBA
- Akün E
journal: Rev Environ Contam Toxicol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/398_2016_18
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ARSENIC: A Review on Exposure Pathways, Accumulation, Mobility and Transmission into the Human Food Chain.
**Authors:** Arslan B, Djamgoz MBA, Akün E
**Journal:** Rev Environ Contam Toxicol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/398_2016_18](https://doi.org/10.1007/398_2016_18)

## Content

1. Rev Environ Contam Toxicol. 2017;243:27-51. doi: 10.1007/398_2016_18.

ARSENIC: A Review on Exposure Pathways, Accumulation, Mobility and Transmission 
into the Human Food Chain.

Arslan B(1), Djamgoz MBA(2)(3), Akün E(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Engineering, Biotechnology Research Centre, Cyprus International 
University, Haspolat, Mersin 10, Nicosia, Northern Cyprus, Turkey. 
barslan@ciu.edu.tr.
(2)Faculty of Engineering, Biotechnology Research Centre, Cyprus International 
University, Haspolat, Mersin 10, Nicosia, Northern Cyprus, Turkey.
(3)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Neuroscience Solutions to Cancer 
Research Group, Imperial College London, Sir Alexander Fleming Building, South 
Kensington Campus, London, SW7 2AZ, UK.

This review deals with exposure pathways of arsenic (As), as well as its 
transfer and uptake processes from its source to the human body. It is proven 
fact that uptake of inorganic As for a long period can lead to chronic As 
poisoning and a variety of adverse health effects such as skin, lung and bladder 
cancer, in addition to cardiovascular diseases, diabetes and gastrointestinal 
symptoms. As exposure occurs primarily from consumption of potable water 
containing high amounts of inorganic As and also from consumption of crops 
cultivated in As contaminated agricultural fields-either naturally or 
anthropogenically through contaminated air or pesticides-or irrigated with As 
containing water. In this review, light is shed on the transfer mechanism of As 
through the food chain and the parameters that enhance mobility of As in the 
environment. Amounts of As accumulation in plants and the transfer mechanisms 
are also quite different. These differences in As accumulation, such as in 
leaves, stems, fruits and roots, are discussed in detail. Moreover, presence of 
As in some vegetables consumed is given by investigating recent research 
articles that deal with As concentrations, especially in edible parts. Some 
comparative data are also presented, concerning the level of concentration of As 
in rice during washing, cooking and processing stages.

DOI: 10.1007/398_2016_18
PMID: 28005215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]