---
reference_id: "PMID:37628591"
title: "Danon Disease: Entire LAMP2 Gene Deletion with Unusual Clinical Presentation-Case Report and Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Shalata A
- Bar-Shai M
- Hadid Y
- Mahroum M
- Mintz H
- Shalata ZE
- Radzishevsky E
- Genizi J
- Lorber A
- Ben-Yosef T
- Yaniv L
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes14081539
keywords:
- Female
- Male
- Humans
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type IIb/diagnosis, genetics"
- Gene Deletion
- "Genes, Regulator"
- Heart Failure
- Cone-Rod Dystrophies
- Lysosomal-Associated Membrane Protein 2/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Danon Disease: Entire LAMP2 Gene Deletion with Unusual Clinical Presentation-Case Report and Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Shalata A, Bar-Shai M, Hadid Y, Mahroum M, Mintz H, Shalata ZE, Radzishevsky E, Genizi J, Lorber A, Ben-Yosef T, Yaniv L
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14081539](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14081539)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Jul 27;14(8):1539. doi: 10.3390/genes14081539.

Danon Disease: Entire LAMP2 Gene Deletion with Unusual Clinical
Presentation-Case Report and Review of the Literature.

Shalata A(1)(2), Bar-Shai M(3), Hadid Y(1), Mahroum M(1), Mintz H(1), Shalata
ZE(4), Radzishevsky E(2)(5), Genizi J(2)(6), Lorber A(2)(7), Ben-Yosef T(2),
Yaniv L(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)The Simon Winter Institute for Human Genetics, Bnai Zion Medical Center,
Haifa 32000, Israel.
(2)Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel.
(3)The Institute of Medical Genetics, Carmel Medical Center, Haifa 34362,
Israel.
(4)Siba Rihana, Medical Center, Sakhnin 30810, Israel.
(5)Cardiology Department, Bnai Zion Medical Center, Haifa 32000, Israel.
(6)Department of Pediatric, Bnai Zion Medical Center, Haifa 32000, Israel.
(7)Pediatric Cardiology Unit, Rambam Medical Centre, Haifa 31096, Israel.

Danon disease is a rare x-linked dominant multisystemic disorder with a clinical
triad of severe cardiomyopathy, skeletal myopathy, and intellectual disability.
It is caused by defects in the lysosome-associated membrane protein-2 (LAMP2)
gene. Numerous different mutations in the LAMP2 protein have been described.
Danon disease is typically lethal by the mid-twenties in male patients due to
cardiomyopathy and heart failure. Female patients usually present with milder
and variable symptoms. This report describes a 42-year-old father and his
3-year-old daughter presenting with mild manifestations of the disease. The
father has normal intellectual development and normal physical activity. At the
age of 13, he was diagnosed with mild ventricular pre-excitation known as
Wolf-Parkinson-White syndrome (WPWs), very mild and mostly asymptomatic
cardiomyopathy and left ventricular hypertrophy, and at about the age of 25
presented with visual impairment due to cone-rod dystrophy. His daughter showed
normal development and very mild asymptomatic electrocardiographic WPWs
abnormalities with left mild ventricular hypertrophy. Genetic testing revealed
an Xq24 microdeletion encompassing the entire LAMP2 gene. Relevant literature
was reviewed as a reference for the etiology, diagnosis, treatment and case
management.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14081539
PMCID: PMC10454823
PMID: 37628591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the case report was
written in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as potential conflict of interest.
