---
reference_id: "PMID:35139081"
title: "Viral Parkinsonism: An underdiagnosed neurological complication of Dengue virus infection."
authors:
- Hopkins HK
- Traverse EM
- Barr KL
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0010118
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Viral Parkinsonism: An underdiagnosed neurological complication of Dengue virus infection.
**Authors:** Hopkins HK, Traverse EM, Barr KL
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0010118](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0010118)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2022 Feb 9;16(2):e0010118. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0010118. eCollection 2022 Feb.

Viral Parkinsonism: An underdiagnosed neurological complication of Dengue virus 
infection.

Hopkins HK(1), Traverse EM(1), Barr KL(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Global Health and Infectious Disease Research, University of South 
Florida, Tampa, Florida, United States of America.

Dengue virus (DENV) is a flavivirus that is a significant cause of human disease 
costing billions of dollars per year in medical and mosquito control costs. It 
is estimated that up to 20% of DENV infections affect the brain. Incidence of 
DENV infections is increasing, which suggests more people are at risk of 
developing neurological complications. The most common neurological 
manifestations of DENV are encephalitis and encephalopathy, and movement 
disorders such as parkinsonism have been observed. Parkinsonism describes 
syndromes similar to Parkinson's Disease where tremors, stiffness, and slow 
movements are observed. Parkinsonism caused by viral infection is characterized 
by patients exhibiting at least two of the following symptoms: tremor, 
bradykinesia, rigidity, and postural instability. To investigate DENV-associated 
parkinsonism, case studies and reports of DENV-associated parkinsonism were 
obtained from peer-reviewed manuscripts and gray literature. Seven reports of 
clinically diagnosed DENV-associated parkinsonism and 15 cases of DENV 
encephalitis, where the patient met the case criteria for a diagnosis of viral 
parkinsonism were found. Clinically diagnosed DENV-associated parkinsonism 
patients were more likely to be male and exhibit expressionless face, speech 
problems, and lymphocytosis. Suspected patients were more likely to exhibit 
tremor, have thrombocytopenia and low hemoglobin. Viral parkinsonism can cause a 
permanent reduction in neurons with consequential cognitive and behavior 
changes, or it can leave a latent imprint in the brain that can cause 
neurological dysfunction decades after recovery. DENV-associated parkinsonism is 
underdiagnosed and better adherence to the case definition of viral parkinsonism 
is needed for proper management of potential sequalae especially if the patient 
has an ongoing or potential to develop a neurodegenerative disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0010118
PMCID: PMC8827468
PMID: 35139081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.