---
reference_id: "PMID:1676834"
title: L-homocysteic acid mediates synaptic excitation at NMDA receptors in the hippocampus.
authors:
- Ito S
- Provini L
- Cherubini E
journal: Neurosci Lett
year: '1991'
doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(91)90083-6
keywords:
- "6-Cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione"
- Animals
- Bicuculline/pharmacology
- Evoked Potentials/drug effects
- Glutamates/pharmacology
- Glycine/pharmacology
- "Hippocampus/drug effects, physiology"
- "Homocysteine/analogs & derivatives, physiology"
- In Vitro Techniques
- Male
- Piperazines/pharmacology
- Quinoxalines/pharmacology
- Rats
- "Rats, Inbred Strains"
- "Receptors, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate/antagonists & inhibitors, drug effects, physiology"
- Synapses/physiology
- Tetrodotoxin/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# L-homocysteic acid mediates synaptic excitation at NMDA receptors in the hippocampus.
**Authors:** Ito S, Provini L, Cherubini E
**Journal:** Neurosci Lett (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0304-3940(91)90083-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3940(91)90083-6)

## Content

1. Neurosci Lett. 1991 Apr 1;124(2):157-61. doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(91)90083-6.

L-homocysteic acid mediates synaptic excitation at NMDA receptors in the
hippocampus.

Ito S(1), Provini L, Cherubini E.

Author information:
(1)INSERM Unité 29, Paris, France.

beta-p-Chlorophenylglutamate (Chlorpheg), a specific L-homocysteate (L-HC)
uptake blocker, was tested on the L-HC- and L-glutamate-induced currents and on
the excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) evoked in CA1 rat hippocampal
neurons by Schaffer collaterals stimulation. In the presence of tetrodotoxin
(TTX; 1 microM), Chlorpheg (0.5-2 mM) potentiated L-HC- but not
L-glutamate-induced currents. In normal magnesium containing medium and at
resting membrane potential, Chlorpheg (1.5-1 mM) increased the amplitude and
duration of the EPSPs evoked by Schaffer collaterals stimulation. This effect
was prevented by bath application of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor
antagonist CPP (20 microM). Chlorpheg enhanced also the NMDA component of the
EPSP, evoked in the presence of 6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione (CNQX; 10
microM), bicuculline (20 microM) and glycine (100 microM). This effect was
blocked by CPP (20 microM). It is concluded that L-HC is an endogenous NMDA
agonist at the Schaffer collateral-CA1 synapse.

DOI: 10.1016/0304-3940(91)90083-6
PMID: 1676834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
