---
reference_id: "PMID:33717087"
title: "Autoimmune Addison's Disease as Part of the Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndrome Type 1: Historical Overview and Current Evidence."
authors:
- Perniola R
- Fierabracci A
- Falorni A
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.606860
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune Addison's Disease as Part of the Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndrome Type 1: Historical Overview and Current Evidence.
**Authors:** Perniola R, Fierabracci A, Falorni A
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2021.606860](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.606860)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2021 Feb 26;12:606860. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.606860. 
eCollection 2021.

Autoimmune Addison's Disease as Part of the Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndrome 
Type 1: Historical Overview and Current Evidence.

Perniola R(1), Fierabracci A(2), Falorni A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics-Neonatal Intensive Care, V. Fazzi Hospital, ASL LE, 
Lecce, Italy.
(2)Infectivology and Clinical Trials Research Department, Bambino Gesù 
Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(3)Section of Internal Medicine and Endocrinological and Metabolic Sciences, 
Department of Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

The autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS1) is caused by pathogenic 
variants of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene, located in the chromosomal 
region 21q22.3. The related protein, AIRE, enhances thymic self-representation 
and immune self-tolerance by localization to chromatin and anchorage to 
multimolecular complexes involved in the initiation and post-initiation events 
of tissue-specific antigen-encoding gene transcription. Once synthesized, the 
self-antigens are presented to, and cause deletion of, the self-reactive 
thymocyte clones. The clinical diagnosis of APS1 is based on the classic triad 
idiopathic hypoparathyroidism (HPT)-chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis-autoimmune 
Addison's disease (AAD), though new criteria based on early non-endocrine 
manifestations have been proposed. HPT is in most cases the first endocrine 
component of the syndrome; however, APS1-associated AAD has received the most 
accurate biochemical, clinical, and immunological characterization. Here is a 
comprehensive review of the studies on APS1-associated AAD from initial case 
reports to the most recent scientific findings.

Copyright © 2021 Perniola, Fierabracci and Falorni.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.606860
PMCID: PMC7953157
PMID: 33717087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.