---
reference_id: "PMID:24763893"
title: "Cauda equina syndrome: evaluation of the clinical outcome."
authors:
- Tamburrelli FC
- Genitiempo M
- Bochicchio M
- Donisi L
- Ratto C
journal: Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci
year: '2014'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cauda equina syndrome: evaluation of the clinical outcome.
**Authors:** Tamburrelli FC, Genitiempo M, Bochicchio M, Donisi L, Ratto C
**Journal:** Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci (2014)

## Content

1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2014;18(7):1098-105.

Cauda equina syndrome: evaluation of the clinical outcome.

Tamburrelli FC(1), Genitiempo M, Bochicchio M, Donisi L, Ratto C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Science and Traumatology, Spine Surgery Division and 
Department of Surgical Sciences; Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, School 
of Medicine, Rome, Italy. francesco.tamburrelli@rm.unicatt.it.

Comment in
    Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2014;18(23):3547-8.

AIM: Cauda equina syndrome is a rare but highly impairing syndrome involving 
lower limbs as well as urinary, defecatory and sexual function. In the 
literature the most investigated sphincter dysfunction is the urinary. Bowel and 
sexual function are often overlooked since they become more relevant after the 
acute phase.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eight consecutive male patients affected by cauda equina 
syndrome with sphincter dysfunction due to herniated disc disease of lumbar 
spine were treated between 2007 and 2009. Five patients were followed-up for at 
least two years. Sexual function was evaluated by IIEF-5 questionnaire; bowel 
function was investigated by means of clinical and instrumental investigation 
and manometry.
RESULTS: Although little clinical improved, patients still complained severe 
symptoms at first year follow-up while all but one improved significantly in the 
following year. At two years follow-up only the patient whose cauda equina 
syndrome was misdiagnosed and surgically treated late respect to the onset of 
the syndrome, complained a persistent severe sexual and bowel dysfunction.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that a long-term follow-up is mandatory to 
evaluate the real outcome of surgical managed cauda equine syndrome because 
short-term evaluation could be misleading about the residual capacity of late 
neurologic improving. Despite the relatively low number of cases evaluated, our 
results confirm that early diagnosing and treating the syndrome are relevant for 
the final outcome.

PMID: 24763893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]