---
reference_id: "PMID:18245597"
title: Proximal tibial osteochondromas in patients with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
authors:
- Deirmengian GK
- Hebela NM
- "O'Connell M"
- Glaser DL
- Shore EM
- Kaplan FS
journal: J Bone Joint Surg Am
year: '2008'
doi: 10.2106/JBJS.G.00774
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Bone Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Myositis Ossificans/complications
- "Osteochondroma/epidemiology, etiology"
- Prevalence
- Tibia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proximal tibial osteochondromas in patients with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
**Authors:** Deirmengian GK, Hebela NM, O'Connell M, Glaser DL, Shore EM, Kaplan FS
**Journal:** J Bone Joint Surg Am (2008)
**DOI:** [10.2106/JBJS.G.00774](https://doi.org/10.2106/JBJS.G.00774)

## Content

1. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2008 Feb;90(2):366-74. doi: 10.2106/JBJS.G.00774.

Proximal tibial osteochondromas in patients with fibrodysplasia ossificans
progressiva.

Deirmengian GK(1), Hebela NM, O'Connell M, Glaser DL, Shore EM, Kaplan FS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Silverstein-2, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce
Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

BACKGROUND: Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva is a rare autosomal dominant
disorder characterized by congenital malformation of the great toes and by
progressive heterotopic ossification of skeletal muscle and soft connective
tissues. The disorder is caused by a recurrent missense mutation in the
glycine-serine activation domain of activin A receptor type I, a bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) type-I receptor, in all classically affected
individuals. Osteochondromas of the proximal part of the tibia are benign
osteochondral neoplasms or orthotopic lesions of skeletal remodeling associated
with dysregulated BMP signaling and have been considered an atypical feature of
fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva, but they may be underdiagnosed because of
their often asymptomatic nature. The purpose of the present study was to
determine the prevalence and characteristics of proximal tibial osteochondromas
in individuals who have fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
METHODS: Over a period of thirty months, we evaluated all patients with new and
established fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva for the presence of proximal
tibial osteochondromas on the basis of medical history, physical examination,
and radiographic studies. We quantified the prevalence of osteochondromas and
characterized the types of osteochondromas to identify relevant trends.
RESULTS: Ninety-six patients (including fifty-two female patients and forty-four
male patients) with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva were evaluated on the
basis of a history and physical examination. Plain radiographs were available
for sixty-seven patients. Ninety percent of all patients had osteochondroma of
the proximal part of the tibia. These lesions usually were asymptomatic, most
commonly were bilateral, and typically were located at the pes anserinus.
Seventy-five percent of the lesions were pedunculated, and 25% were sessile.
CONCLUSIONS: Proximal tibial osteochondromas are a common phenotypic feature of
fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva, a finding that expands the recognized
consequences of recurrent activating mutations in activin A receptor type I to
include not only congenital skeletal malformations and heterotopic
skeletogenesis but also benign osteochondral neoplasms or orthotopic lesions of
skeletal modeling. The present study provides insight into the genetic basis of
osteochondroma formation in patients with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva
and possibly into that of more common conditions in which these lesions occur.

DOI: 10.2106/JBJS.G.00774
PMCID: PMC3516450
PMID: 18245597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
