---
reference_id: "PMID:38390446"
title: "Spontaneous coronary artery dissection in women in the generative period: clinical characteristics, treatment, and outcome-a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Apostolović S
- Ignjatović A
- Stanojević D
- Radojković DD
- Nikolić M
- Milošević J
- Filipović T
- Kostić K
- Miljković I
- Djoković A
- Krljanac G
- Mehmedbegović Z
- Ilić I
- Aleksandrić S
- Paradies V
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1277604
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spontaneous coronary artery dissection in women in the generative period: clinical characteristics, treatment, and outcome-a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Apostolović S, Ignjatović A, Stanojević D, Radojković DD, Nikolić M, Milošević J, Filipović T, Kostić K, Miljković I, Djoković A, Krljanac G, Mehmedbegović Z, Ilić I, Aleksandrić S, Paradies V
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2024.1277604](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2024.1277604)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2024 Feb 8;11:1277604. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1277604. 
eCollection 2024.

Spontaneous coronary artery dissection in women in the generative period: 
clinical characteristics, treatment, and outcome-a systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Apostolović S(1)(2), Ignjatović A(2), Stanojević D(1), Radojković DD(1)(2), 
Nikolić M(1), Milošević J(1), Filipović T(2), Kostić K(1), Miljković I(1), 
Djoković A(3)(4), Krljanac G(4)(5), Mehmedbegović Z(4)(5), Ilić I(4)(6), 
Aleksandrić S(4)(5), Paradies V(7).

Author information:
(1)Clinic for Cardiology, University Clinical Center Nis, Nis, Serbia.
(2)Medical Faculty, University of Nis, Nis, Serbia.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Clinical Hospital Bežanijska Kosa, Belgrade, 
Serbia.
(4)Medical Faculty, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(5)Clinic of Cardiology, University Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Institute for Cardiovascular Diseases Dedinje, 
Belgrade, Serbia.
(7)Department of Cardiology, Maasstad Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: Spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD) is a non-traumatic 
and non-iatrogenic separation of the coronary arterial wall.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This systematic review and meta-analysis is reported 
following the PRISMA guidelines and is registered in the PROSPERO database. A 
literature search was focused on female patients in generative period (16-55 of 
age) with acute coronary syndrome (ACS) caused by SCAD, and comparison from that 
database NP-SCAD (spontaneous coronary artery dissection in non pregnant women) 
and P-SCAD (spontaneous coronary artery dissection in pregnant women).
RESULTS: 14 studies with 2,145 females in the generative period with ACS caused 
by SCAD were analyzed. The median age was 41 years (33.4-52.3 years). The most 
common risk factor was previous smoking history in 24.9% cases. The most common 
clinical presentation of ACS was STEMI in 47.4%. Conservative treatment was 
reported in 41.1%. PCI was performed in 32.7%, and 3.8% of patients had CABG 
surgery. LAD was the most frequently affected (50.5%). The prevalence of 
composite clinical outcomes including mortality, non-fatal MI and recurrent SCAD 
was 3.3% (95% CI: 1.4-5.1), 37.7% (95% CI: 1.9-73.4) and 15.2% (95% CI: 
9.1-21.3) of patients. P-SCAD compared to NP-SCAD patients more frequently had 
STEMI (OR = 3.16; 95% CI: 2.30-4.34; I2 = 64%); with the left main and LAD more 
frequently affected [(OR = 14.34; 95% CI: 7.71-26.67; I2 = 54%) and (OR = 1.57; 
95% CI: 1.06-2.32; I2 = 23%)]; P-SCAD patients more frequently underwent CABG 
surgery (OR = 6.29; 95% CI: 4.08-9.70; I2 = 0%). NP-SCAD compared to P-SCAD 
patients were more frequently treated conservatevly (OR = 0.61; 95% CI: 
0.37-0.98; I2 = 0%). In P-SCAD compared to NP-SCAD mortality rates (OR = 1.13; 
95% CI: 0.06-21.16; I2 = not applicable) and reccurence of coronary artery 
dissection (OR = 2.54; 95% CI: 0.97-6.61; I2 = 0%) were not more prevalent.
CONCLUSION: The results of this meta-analysis indicated that patients with 
P-SCAD more frequently had STEMI, and events more frequently involved left main 
and LAD compared to NP-SCAD patients. Women with NP-SCAD were significantly more 
often treated conservatively compared to P-SCAD patients. P-SCAD compared to 
NP-SCAD patients did not have significantly higher mortality rates or recurrent 
coronary dissection.

© 2024 Apostolović, Ignjatović, Stanojević, Radojković, Nikolić, Milošević, 
Filipović, Kostić, Miljković, Djoković, Krljanac, Mehmedbegović, Ilić, 
Aleksandrić and Paradies.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1277604
PMCID: PMC10882101
PMID: 38390446

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.