---
reference_id: "PMID:18252749"
title: Increased capsaicin receptor TRPV1-expressing sensory fibres in irritable bowel syndrome and their correlation with abdominal pain.
authors:
- Akbar A
- Yiangou Y
- Facer P
- Walters JR
- Anand P
- Ghosh S
journal: Gut
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1136/gut.2007.138982
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased capsaicin receptor TRPV1-expressing sensory fibres in irritable bowel syndrome and their correlation with abdominal pain.
**Authors:** Akbar A, Yiangou Y, Facer P, Walters JR, Anand P, Ghosh S
**Journal:** Gut (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1136/gut.2007.138982](https://doi.org/10.1136/gut.2007.138982)

## Content

1. Gut. 2008 Jul;57(7):923-9. doi: 10.1136/gut.2007.138982. Epub 2008 Feb 5.

Increased capsaicin receptor TRPV1-expressing sensory fibres in irritable bowel 
syndrome and their correlation with abdominal pain.

Akbar A(1), Yiangou Y, Facer P, Walters JR, Anand P, Ghosh S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Imperial College London, UK.

Comment in
    Gut. 2008 Jul;57(7):882-4. doi: 10.1136/gut.2008.149724.
    Gut. 2009 Mar;58(3):465-6. doi: 10.1136/gut.2008.161760.

OBJECTIVE: The capsaicin receptor TRPV1 (transient receptor potential vanilloid 
type-1) may play an important role in visceral pain and hypersensitivity states. 
In irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), abdominal pain is a common and distressing 
symptom where the pathophysiology is still not clearly defined. 
TRPV1-immunoreactive nerve fibres were investigated in colonic biopsies from 
patients with IBS, and this was related to abdominal pain.
METHODS: Rectosigmoid biopsies were collected from 23 IBS patients fulfilling 
Rome II criteria, and from 22 controls. Abdominal pain scores were recorded 
using a validated questionnaire. TRPV1-, substance P- and neuronal marker 
protein gene product (PGP) 9.5-expressing nerve fibres, mast cells (c-kit) and 
lymphocytes (CD3 and CD4) were quantified, following immunohistochemistry with 
specific antibodies. The biopsy findings were related to the abdominal pain 
scores.
RESULTS: A significant 3.5-fold increase in median numbers of 
TRPV1-immunoreactive fibres was found in biopsies from IBS patients compared 
with controls (p<0.0001). Substance P-immunoreactive fibres (p = 0.01), total 
nerve fibres (PGP9.5) (p = 0.002), mast cells (c-kit) (p = 0.02) and lymphocytes 
(CD3) (p = 0.03) were also significantly increased in the IBS group. In 
multivariate regression analysis, only TRPV1-immuno-reactive fibres (p = 0.005) 
and mast cells (p = 0.008) were significantly related to the abdominal pain 
score.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased TRPV1 nerve fibres are observed in IBS, together with a 
low-grade inflammatory response. The increased TRPV1 nerve fibres may contribute 
to visceral hypersensitivity and pain in IBS, and provide a novel therapeutic 
target.

DOI: 10.1136/gut.2007.138982
PMCID: PMC2564830
PMID: 18252749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]