---
reference_id: "PMID:38488998"
title: Factors triggering familial mediterranean fever attacks, do they really exist?
authors:
- Parlar K
- Ates MB
- Onal ME
- Bostancı E
- Azman FN
- Uğurlu S
journal: Intern Emerg Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11739-024-03576-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Factors triggering familial mediterranean fever attacks, do they really exist?
**Authors:** Parlar K, Ates MB, Onal ME, Bostancı E, Azman FN, Uğurlu S
**Journal:** Intern Emerg Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11739-024-03576-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11739-024-03576-w)

## Content

1. Intern Emerg Med. 2024 Jun;19(4):1007-1013. doi: 10.1007/s11739-024-03576-w. 
Epub 2024 Mar 15.

Factors triggering familial mediterranean fever attacks, do they really exist?

Parlar K(#)(1), Ates MB(#)(1), Onal ME(#)(1), Bostancı E(1), Azman FN(1), Uğurlu 
S(2).

Author information:
(1)Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Cerrahpasa Medical 
Faculty, Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, 53 Kocamustafapasa Street, Fatih, 
Istanbul, 34098, Turkey. serdalugurlu@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Several possible factors are hypothesized to trigger familial Mediterranean 
fever (FMF) attacks; however, there is no consensus on this matter. We aimed to 
identify these triggering factors and analyze their relationship with the 
Mediterranean fever gene mutation status. We prepared a questionnaire that 
included the most commonly mentioned possible trigger factors of familial 
Mediterranean fever. We administered a questionnaire to 882 patients. We used a 
questionnaire assessing the following: psychological stress, consumption of tea 
and coffee, relationship with menses, menopause and post-menopausal alleviation, 
seasonal changes, traveling for long durations, relocation, starvation, 
sleeplessness, cold exposure, fatigue, wind exposure, and humidity. The most 
frequent triggering factor for familial Mediterranean fever attacks was 
psychological stress (75.2%). Cold exposure was a statistically significant 
trigger in patients with exon 10 mutations. Humidity was a statistically 
significant trigger in patients with exon 2 mutations. Seasonal changes, 
traveling for long durations, relocation, and cold exposure were statistically 
significant triggers of familial Mediterranean fever attacks in patients with 
homozygous M694V mutations. Identifying trigger factors can lead to better 
preventive measures and personalized therapies to decrease familial 
Mediterranean fever attacks. Patients can significantly decrease the number of 
familial Mediterranean fever attacks they experience by managing psychological 
stress and avoiding physical factors such as cold exposure and fatigue. 
Determining the relationship between trigger factors and patients' Mediterranean 
fever gene mutation status can lead to personalized therapy for the prevention 
of familial Mediterranean fever attacks.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11739-024-03576-w
PMCID: PMC11186929
PMID: 38488998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the 
public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.