---
reference_id: "PMID:26679613"
title: Endothelin-1 mediates intermittent hypoxia-induced inflammatory vascular remodeling through HIF-1 activation.
authors:
- Gras E
- Belaidi E
- Briançon-Marjollet A
- Pépin JL
- Arnaud C
- Godin-Ribuot D
journal: J Appl Physiol (1985)
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00641.2015
keywords:
- Animals
- "Aorta/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Carotid Intima-Media Thickness
- Cytokines/metabolism
- Endothelin-1/metabolism
- "Hypertension/metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Hypoxia/metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Hypoxia-Inducible Factor 1, alpha Subunit/metabolism"
- "Inflammation/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
- "Sleep Apnea, Obstructive/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Vascular Remodeling/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endothelin-1 mediates intermittent hypoxia-induced inflammatory vascular remodeling through HIF-1 activation.
**Authors:** Gras E, Belaidi E, Briançon-Marjollet A, Pépin JL, Arnaud C, Godin-Ribuot D
**Journal:** J Appl Physiol (1985) (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1152/japplphysiol.00641.2015](https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.00641.2015)

## Content

1. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2016 Feb 15;120(4):437-43. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00641.2015. Epub 2015 Dec 17.

Endothelin-1 mediates intermittent hypoxia-induced inflammatory vascular
remodeling through HIF-1 activation.

Gras E(1), Belaidi E(1), Briançon-Marjollet A(1), Pépin JL(2), Arnaud C(1),
Godin-Ribuot D(3).

Author information:
(1)Université Grenoble Alpes, Laboratoire HP2, Grenoble, France; INSERM, U1042,
Grenoble, France; and.
(2)Université Grenoble Alpes, Laboratoire HP2, Grenoble, France; INSERM, U1042,
Grenoble, France; and CHU de Grenoble, Grenoble, France.
(3)Université Grenoble Alpes, Laboratoire HP2, Grenoble, France; INSERM, U1042,
Grenoble, France; and diane.ribuot@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr.

Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a major risk factor for cardiovascular
mortality, and apnea-induced intermittent hypoxia (IH) is known to promote
various cardiovascular alterations such as vascular remodeling. However, the
mechanisms that underlie IH remain incompletely investigated. We previously
demonstrated that the hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) and endothelin-1 (ET-1)
are involved in arterial hypertension and myocardial susceptibility to
infarction induced by IH. Thus the objective of the present study was to
investigate whether both ET-1 and HIF-1 were also involved in the vascular
inflammatory remodeling induced by IH. Mice partially deficient for the Hif1α
gene (HIF-1α(+/-)) and their wild-type equivalents, as well as C57BL/6J mice,
treated or not with bosentan, a dual endothelin receptor antagonist, were
exposed to IH or normoxia for 2 wk, 8 h/day. Splenocyte proliferative and
secretory capacities, aortic nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and HIF-1 activities, and
expression of cytokines and intima-media thickness (IMT) were measured. IH
induced a systemic and aortic inflammation characterized by an increase in
splenocyte proliferative and secretory capacities, aortic NF-κB activity, and
cytokine expression in the aortic wall. This was accompanied by an increase in
IMT. These modifications were prevented in HIF-1α(+/-) and bosentan-treated
mice. The results of this study suggest that ET-1 is a major contributor to the
vascular inflammatory remodeling induced by OSA-related IH, probably through
HIF-1-dependent activation of NF-κB.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00641.2015
PMID: 26679613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
