---
reference_id: "PMID:31656153"
title: "Rheumatoid Arthritis: Seropositivity versus Seronegativity; A Comparative Cross-sectional Study Arising from Moroccan Context."
authors:
- Salma K
- Nessrine A
- Krystel E
- Khaoula EK
- Noura N
- Khadija E
- Taoufik H
journal: Curr Rheumatol Rev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.2174/1573397115666191018115337
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rheumatoid Arthritis: Seropositivity versus Seronegativity; A Comparative Cross-sectional Study Arising from Moroccan Context.
**Authors:** Salma K, Nessrine A, Krystel E, Khaoula EK, Noura N, Khadija E, Taoufik H
**Journal:** Curr Rheumatol Rev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1573397115666191018115337](https://doi.org/10.2174/1573397115666191018115337)

## Content

1. Curr Rheumatol Rev. 2020;16(2):143-148. doi:
10.2174/1573397115666191018115337.

Rheumatoid Arthritis: Seropositivity versus Seronegativity; A Comparative 
Cross-sectional Study Arising from Moroccan Context.

Salma K(1), Nessrine A(1), Krystel E(1), Khaoula EK(2), Noura N(1), Khadija 
E(1), Taoufik H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Hassan II University Medical Center, Faculty of 
Medicine, University Sidi Mohammed Ben Abdellah, Fes, Morocco.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Hassan II University Medical 
Center, Faculty of Medicine, University Sidi Mohammed Ben Abdellah, Fes, 
Morocco.

INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is biologically marked by a positive 
serum rate of rheumatoid factor (RA) and/or anti-citrullinated protein 
antibodies (ACPA). Nevertheless, 20% of RA cases remain seronegative.
OBJECTIVE: The main purpose of this study, is to bring out the clinical, 
biological, imaging, therapeutic, and evolutionary distinctions between 
seropositive RA and seronegative one.
METHODS: This is an observational cross-sectional study that involves patients 
with RA admitted in the rheumatology department, from the period between January 
2012 and January 2018. RA seronegativity is described as the absence of both RF 
and ACPA, while seropositivity is recognized by the presence of at least one of 
the two antibodies.
RESULTS: 294 patients were included, of which 90% were seropositive and 10% 
seronegative. Therefore, RA in this study is seropositive most often. The 
bivariate analysis underscored plenty of differences, statistically notable, 
according to the RA immune status. In fact, patients with seropositive RA had 
more synovitis (p=0.049), more deformities (p=0.01), and more bone destruction 
on radiographs (p=0.04). Furthermore, RA in this Moroccan study was quite severe 
(p=0.006) and got more complicated by systemic manifestations (p=0.02). Whereas, 
no distinction was brought up between the two groups, concerning the use of 
biotherapy. As for the multivariate study, seropositive RA in these patients, 
had greater severity (p=0.009, OR=4.53) and was more deforming (p=0.03 OR=2.45).
CONCLUSION: RA in our Moroccan context is dominated by the seropositive form. 
This seropositivity is often coupled with clinical severity and joint 
destruction, resulting in more deformities.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1573397115666191018115337
PMID: 31656153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]