---
reference_id: "PMID:19584497"
title: AIDS-associated parasitic diarrhoea.
authors:
- Arora DR
- Arora B
journal: Indian J Med Microbiol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.4103/0255-0857.53199
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AIDS-associated parasitic diarrhoea.
**Authors:** Arora DR, Arora B
**Journal:** Indian J Med Microbiol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0255-0857.53199](https://doi.org/10.4103/0255-0857.53199)

## Content

1. Indian J Med Microbiol. 2009 Jul-Sep;27(3):185-90. doi:
10.4103/0255-0857.53199.

AIDS-associated parasitic diarrhoea.

Arora DR(1), Arora B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Medical College, Agroha, Hisar, India. 
draroradr@rediffmail.com

Since the advent of human immunodeficiency virus infection, with its profound 
and progressive effect on the cellular immune system, a group of human 
opportunistic pathogens has come into prominence. Opportunistic parasitic 
infection can cause severe morbidity and mortality. Because many of these 
infections are treatable, an early and accurate diagnosis is important. This can 
be accomplished by a variety of methods such as direct demonstration of 
parasites and by serological tests to detect antigen and/or specific antibodies. 
However, antibody response may be poor in these patients and therefore 
immunodiagnostic tests have to be interpreted with caution. Cryptosporidium 
parvum, Isospora belli, Cyclospora cayetanensis, Microsporidia, Entamoeba 
histolytica and Strongyloides stercoralis are the commonly detected parasites. 
Detection of these parasites will help in proper management of these patients 
because drugs are available for most of these parasitic infections.

DOI: 10.4103/0255-0857.53199
PMID: 19584497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]