---
reference_id: PMID:33765230
title: Bone Mineral Disease After Kidney Transplantation.
authors:
- Torregrosa JV
- Ferreira AC
- Cucchiari D
- Ferreira A
journal: Calcif Tissue Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00223-021-00837-0
keywords:
- Bone Density
- Bone Diseases
- Female
- Fibroblast Growth Factor-23
- Humans
- "Hyperparathyroidism, Secondary"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Kidney Transplantation/adverse effects
- Minerals
- Parathyroid Hormone
- Vitamin D Deficiency
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone Mineral Disease After Kidney Transplantation.
**Authors:** Torregrosa JV, Ferreira AC, Cucchiari D, Ferreira A
**Journal:** Calcif Tissue Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00223-021-00837-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00223-021-00837-0)

## Content

1. Calcif Tissue Int. 2021 Apr;108(4):551-560. doi: 10.1007/s00223-021-00837-0. 
Epub 2021 Mar 25.

Bone Mineral Disease After Kidney Transplantation.

Torregrosa JV(1)(2), Ferreira AC(3)(4), Cucchiari D(5), Ferreira A(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Nephrology & Renal Transplant Department - Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain. 
vtorre@clinic.cat.
(2)Universidad de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. vtorre@clinic.cat.
(3)Nephrology Department, Centro Hospitalare, Universitário de Lisboa Central, 
Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)Nova Medical School, Nova University, Lisbon, Portugal.
(5)Nephrology & Renal Transplant Department - Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.

Chronic kidney disease-mineral bone disorder (CKD-MBD) after kidney 
transplantation is a mix of pre-existing disorders and new alterations. The 
final consequences are reflected fundamentally as abnormal mineral metabolism 
(hypercalcemia, hypophosphatemia) and bone alterations [high or low bone 
turnover disease (as fibrous osteitis or adynamic bone disease), an eventual 
compromise of bone mineralization, decrease bone mineral density and bone 
fractures]. The major cause of post-transplantation hypercalcemia is the 
persistence of severe secondary hyperparathyroidism, and treatment options 
include calcimimetics or parathyroidectomy. On turn, hypophosphatemia is caused 
by both the persistence of high blood levels of PTH and/or high blood levels of 
FGF23, with its correction being very difficult to achieve. The most frequent 
bone morphology alteration is low bone turnover disease, while high-turnover 
osteopathy decreases in frequency after transplantation. Although the pathogenic 
mechanisms of these abnormalities have not been fully clarified, the available 
evidence suggests that there are a number of factors that play a very important 
role, such as immunosuppressive treatment, persistently high levels of PTH, 
vitamin D deficiency and hypophosphatemia. Fracture risk is four-fold higher in 
transplanted patients compared to general population. The most relevant risk 
factors for fracture in the kidney transplant population are diabetes mellitus, 
female sex, advanced age (especially > 65 years), dialysis vintage, high PTH 
levels and low phosphate levels, osteoporosis, pre-transplant stress fracture 
and high doses or prolonged steroids therapy. Treatment alternatives for CKD-MBD 
after transplantation include minimization of corticosteroids, use of calcium 
and vitamin D supplements, antiresorptives (bisphosphonates or Denosumab) and 
osteoformers (synthetic parathyroid hormone). As both mineral metabolism and 
bone disorders lead to increased morbidity and mortality, the presence of these 
changes after transplantation has to be prevented (if possible), minimized, 
diagnosed, and treated as soon as possible.

DOI: 10.1007/s00223-021-00837-0
PMID: 33765230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]