---
reference_id: "PMID:23301694"
title: Cholera surveillance during the Haiti epidemic--the first 2 years.
authors:
- Barzilay EJ
- Schaad N
- Magloire R
- Mung KS
- Boncy J
- Dahourou GA
- Mintz ED
- Steenland MW
- Vertefeuille JF
- Tappero JW
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1204927
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholera surveillance during the Haiti epidemic--the first 2 years.
**Authors:** Barzilay EJ, Schaad N, Magloire R, Mung KS, Boncy J, Dahourou GA, Mintz ED, Steenland MW, Vertefeuille JF, Tappero JW
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1204927](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1204927)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2013 Feb 14;368(7):599-609. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1204927. Epub
2013  Jan 9.

Cholera surveillance during the Haiti epidemic--the first 2 years.

Barzilay EJ(1), Schaad N, Magloire R, Mung KS, Boncy J, Dahourou GA, Mintz ED, 
Steenland MW, Vertefeuille JF, Tappero JW.

Author information:
(1)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Rd. NE, MS: A-05, 
Atlanta, GA 30329, USA. ebarzilay@cdc.gov

Comment in
    Pathog Glob Health. 2014 Jan;108(1):1-2. doi: 
10.1179/2047772413Z.000000000168.

BACKGROUND: In October 2010, nearly 10 months after a devastating earthquake, 
Haiti was stricken by epidemic cholera. Within days after detection, the 
Ministry of Public Health and Population established a National Cholera 
Surveillance System (NCSS).
METHODS: The NCSS used a modified World Health Organization case definition for 
cholera that included acute watery diarrhea, with or without vomiting, in 
persons of all ages residing in an area in which at least one case of Vibrio 
cholerae O1 infection had been confirmed by culture.
RESULTS: Within 29 days after the first report, cases of V. cholerae O1 
(serotype Ogawa, biotype El Tor) were confirmed in all 10 administrative 
departments (similar to states or provinces) in Haiti. Through October 20, 2012, 
the public health ministry reported 604,634 cases of infection, 329,697 
hospitalizations, and 7436 deaths from cholera and isolated V. cholerae O1 from 
1675 of 2703 stool specimens tested (62.0%). The cumulative attack rate was 5.1% 
at the end of the first year and 6.1% at the end of the second year. The 
cumulative case fatality rate consistently trended downward, reaching 1.2% at 
the close of year 2, with departmental cumulative rates ranging from 0.6% to 
4.6% (median, 1.4%). Within 3 months after the start of the epidemic, the 
rolling 14-day case fatality rate was 1.0% and remained at or below this level 
with few, brief exceptions. Overall, the cholera epidemic in Haiti accounted for 
57% of all cholera cases and 53% of all cholera deaths reported to the World 
Health Organization in 2010 and 58% of all cholera cases and 37% of all cholera 
deaths in 2011.
CONCLUSIONS: A review of NCSS data shows that during the first 2 years of the 
cholera epidemic in Haiti, the cumulative attack rate was 6.1%, with cases 
reported in all 10 departments. Within 3 months after the first case was 
reported, there was a downward trend in mortality, with a 14-day case fatality 
rate of 1.0% or less in most areas.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1204927
PMID: 23301694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]