---
reference_id: "PMID:31604104"
title: "Hidradenitis suppurativa: Epidemiology, clinical presentation, and pathogenesis."
authors:
- Goldburg SR
- Strober BE
- Payette MJ
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2019.08.090
keywords:
- Academic Medical Centers
- Comorbidity
- Cytokines/metabolism
- "Education, Medical, Continuing"
- Female
- "Hidradenitis Suppurativa/diagnosis, epidemiology, psychology"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Quality of Life
- Risk Assessment
- Severity of Illness Index
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hidradenitis suppurativa: Epidemiology, clinical presentation, and pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Goldburg SR, Strober BE, Payette MJ
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2019.08.090](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2019.08.090)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020 May;82(5):1045-1058. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2019.08.090.
 Epub 2019 Oct 9.

Hidradenitis suppurativa: Epidemiology, clinical presentation, and pathogenesis.

Goldburg SR(1), Strober BE(2), Payette MJ(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, Connecticut.
Electronic address: goldburg@uchc.edu.
(2)Central Connecticut Dermatology Research, Cromwell, Connecticut; Yale
University, New Haven, Connecticut.
(3)University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, Connecticut;
Central Connecticut Dermatology Research, Cromwell, Connecticut; Dermatology
Department, Farmington, Connecticut.

Comment in
    J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020 Nov;83(5):e371. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2020.06.1022.
    J Am Acad Dermatol. 2021 Mar;84(3):e155-e160. doi:
10.1016/j.jaad.2020.09.076.

Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is an inflammatory disorder that is characterized
by chronic deep-seated nodules, abscesses, fistulae, sinus tracts, and scars in
the axilla, inguinal area, submammary folds, and perianal area. This disfiguring
condition is accompanied by pain, embarrassment, and a significantly decreased
quality of life. Although the mechanism of HS has not been entirely elucidated,
lesion formation is believed to center around follicular hyperkeratosis within
the pilosebaceous-apocrine unit. Recent research has provided new insight into
the role of cytokines in the pathogenesis of HS, helping close some existing
knowledge gaps in the development of this condition. The first article in this
continuing medical education series reviews HS epidemiology, clinical
presentation, and classification. We also provide an update on the most recent
understanding of HS pathogenesis, including the central role of inflammatory
cytokines and other contributing factors, such as genetics, hormones, and
pathogenic microorganisms.

Copyright © 2019 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2019.08.090
PMID: 31604104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
