---
reference_id: "PMID:27559310"
title: Peripheral Sensory Neurons Expressing Melanopsin Respond to Light.
authors:
- Matynia A
- Nguyen E
- Sun X
- Blixt FW
- Parikh S
- Kessler J
- Pérez de Sevilla Müller L
- Habib S
- Kim P
- Wang ZZ
- Rodriguez A
- Charles A
- Nusinowitz S
- Edvinsson L
- Barnes S
- Brecha NC
- Gorin MB
journal: Front Neural Circuits
year: '2016'
doi: 10.3389/fncir.2016.00060
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Humans
- Light
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Migraine Disorders/metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Optic Nerve Injuries/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Retinal Ganglion Cells/physiology
- "Rod Opsins/metabolism, physiology"
- "Trigeminal Ganglion/metabolism, physiology"
- Melanopsin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peripheral Sensory Neurons Expressing Melanopsin Respond to Light.
**Authors:** Matynia A, Nguyen E, Sun X, Blixt FW, Parikh S, Kessler J, Pérez de Sevilla Müller L, Habib S, Kim P, Wang ZZ, Rodriguez A, Charles A, Nusinowitz S, Edvinsson L, Barnes S, Brecha NC, Gorin MB
**Journal:** Front Neural Circuits (2016)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fncir.2016.00060](https://doi.org/10.3389/fncir.2016.00060)

## Content

1. Front Neural Circuits. 2016 Aug 10;10:60. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2016.00060. 
eCollection 2016.

Peripheral Sensory Neurons Expressing Melanopsin Respond to Light.

Matynia A(1), Nguyen E(2), Sun X(3), Blixt FW(4), Parikh S(1), Kessler J(2), 
Pérez de Sevilla Müller L(3), Habib S(2), Kim P(2), Wang ZZ(2), Rodriguez A(3), 
Charles A(5), Nusinowitz S(2), Edvinsson L(4), Barnes S(6), Brecha NC(7), Gorin 
MB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Jules Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School 
of Medicine, UCLALos Angeles, CA, USA; Brain Research Institute, UCLALos 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Jules Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School 
of Medicine, UCLA Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurobiology and Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
UCLA Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Division of Experimental Vascular Research, Department of Clinical Sciences, 
Lund University Lund, Sweden.
(5)Brain Research Institute, UCLALos Angeles, CA, USA; Department of Neurology, 
David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLALos Angeles, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Neurobiology and Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
UCLALos Angeles, CA, USA; Departments of Physiology & Biophysics and 
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Dalhousie UniversityHalifax, NS, Canada.
(7)Brain Research Institute, UCLALos Angeles, CA, USA; Department of 
Neurobiology and Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLALos Angeles, CA, 
USA; Veterans Administration Greater Los Angeles Health SystemLos Angeles, CA, 
USA.

The ability of light to cause pain is paradoxical. The retina detects light but 
is devoid of nociceptors while the trigeminal sensory ganglia (TG) contain 
nociceptors but not photoreceptors. Melanopsin-expressing intrinsically 
photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs) are thought to mediate 
light-induced pain but recent evidence raises the possibility of an alternative 
light responsive pathway independent of the retina and optic nerve. Here, we 
show that melanopsin is expressed in both human and mouse TG neurons. In mice, 
they represent 3% of small TG neurons that are preferentially localized in the 
ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve and are likely nociceptive C fibers 
and high-threshold mechanoreceptor Aδ fibers based on a strong size-function 
association. These isolated neurons respond to blue light stimuli with a delayed 
onset and sustained firing, similar to the melanopsin-dependent intrinsic 
photosensitivity observed in ipRGCs. Mice with severe bilateral optic nerve 
crush exhibit no light-induced responses including behavioral light aversion 
until treated with nitroglycerin, an inducer of migraine in people and 
migraine-like symptoms in mice. With nitroglycerin, these same mice with optic 
nerve crush exhibit significant light aversion. Furthermore, this retained light 
aversion remains dependent on melanopsin-expressing neurons. Our results 
demonstrate a novel light-responsive neural function independent of the optic 
nerve that may originate in the peripheral nervous system to provide the first 
direct mechanism for an alternative light detection pathway that influences 
motivated behavior.

DOI: 10.3389/fncir.2016.00060
PMCID: PMC4978714
PMID: 27559310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]