---
reference_id: "PMID:16394638"
title: "[Catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome: CAPS]."
authors:
- Yamazaki M
journal: Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi
year: '2005'
doi: 10.2177/jsci.28.357
keywords:
- "Antiphospholipid Syndrome/diagnosis, therapy"
- Catastrophic Illness
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Immunosorbent Techniques
- Plasmapheresis
- "Purpura, Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic/diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome: CAPS].
**Authors:** Yamazaki M
**Journal:** Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi (2005)
**DOI:** [10.2177/jsci.28.357](https://doi.org/10.2177/jsci.28.357)

## Content

1. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2005 Dec;28(6):357-64. doi: 
10.2177/jsci.28.357.

[Catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome: CAPS].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamazaki M(1).

Author information:
(1)Cellular Transplantation Biology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Division of Hematology.

Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is well known as an autoimmune thrombotic 
syndrome with recurrent thromboses. In APS, thromboses occurs both artery and 
vein, and from large to micro vessels. In contrast, so called catastrophic 
antiphospholipid syndrome, CAPS, develops multiple thromboses at microvessels 
mainly within a few weeks and induces to poor prognosis. CAPS often occurs in 
patients with SLE or primary APS after a change of antithrombotic therapy, 
infection, and operation. Treatments for CAPS have not established although 
plasma exchange is carried out usually as well as intensive anticoagulation and 
immunosuppressive therapy. We treated with immunoadsorption plasmapheresis 
(IAPP) for 5 CAPS patients and they improved their clinical symptoms and 
ameliorated their titers of antiphospholipid antibodies. IAPP could be an useful 
treatment skill for CAPS and we have started prospective study.

DOI: 10.2177/jsci.28.357
PMID: 16394638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]