---
reference_id: "PMID:33751536"
title: "[Clinical features and genetic analysis of a child with late-onset immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-Linked syndrome]."
authors:
- Zhou F
- Wang R
- Yu Z
- Li S
- Li X
journal: Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20200420-00289
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1/congenital, genetics"
- Diarrhea/genetics
- Forkhead Transcription Factors/genetics
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- "Immune System Diseases/congenital, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Polyendocrinopathies, Autoimmune/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Clinical features and genetic analysis of a child with late-onset immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-Linked syndrome].
**Authors:** Zhou F, Wang R, Yu Z, Li S, Li X
**Journal:** Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20200420-00289](https://doi.org/10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20200420-00289)

## Content

1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Mar 10;38(3):255-259. doi: 
10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20200420-00289.

[Clinical features and genetic analysis of a child with late-onset immune 
dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-Linked syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou F(1), Wang R, Yu Z, Li S, Li X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Digestion, Children's Hospital Affiliated to Zhengzhou 
University, Henan Provinicial Children's Hospital, Zhengzhou Children's 
Hospital, Zhengzhou, Henan 450053, China. lixiaoqinys@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To report on the clinical features and result of genetic testing for 
a child featuring immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, 
X-linked (IPEX) syndrome.
METHODS: Clinical records, genetic testing, laboratory investigation and 
treatment of the child were summarized in addition with a comprehensive review 
of the literature.
RESULTS: The 3-year-old boy was administered due to intractable diarrhea, 
recurrent infections, liver dysfunction and failure to thrive, though no 
diabetes or skin disorder was observed. Laboratory testing showed elevated liver 
enzymes and total IgE, decreased albumin and electrolyte imbalance. 
Gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed erosion and granules in the duodenum, and 
edema in the terminal ileum and colon. Biopsies showed villous atrophy in the 
duodenum and terminal ileum. Genetic testing revealed that the patient has 
carried a missense c.1087A>G (p.I363V) variant in the exon 10 of the FOXP3 gene. 
He was treated with enteral and parenteral nutrition, anti infection and 
Sirolimus, and was waiting for hemopoietic stem cell transplantation.
CONCLUSION: Although IPEX syndrome usually occur during infancy, it should not 
be ruled out solely based on the age, and its presentation can be variable. For 
male children with refractory diarrhea, autoimmune disorder and growth 
retardation, the diagnosis should be suspected and confirmed by genetic testing.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20200420-00289
PMID: 33751536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]