---
reference_id: "PMID:38904639"
title: The LCHADD Mouse Model Recapitulates Early-Stage Chorioretinopathy in LCHADD Patients.
authors:
- Babcock SJ
- Curtis AG
- Gaston G
- Elizondo G
- Gillingham MB
- Ryals RC
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.65.6.33
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The LCHADD Mouse Model Recapitulates Early-Stage Chorioretinopathy in LCHADD Patients.
**Authors:** Babcock SJ, Curtis AG, Gaston G, Elizondo G, Gillingham MB, Ryals RC
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.65.6.33](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.65.6.33)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2024 Jun 3;65(6):33. doi: 10.1167/iovs.65.6.33.

The LCHADD Mouse Model Recapitulates Early-Stage Chorioretinopathy in LCHADD 
Patients.

Babcock SJ(1), Curtis AG(2), Gaston G(1), Elizondo G(1), Gillingham MB(1), Ryals 
RC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, Oregon, United States.
(2)Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon, 
United States.

PURPOSE: Recent studies have shown that the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) 
relies on fatty acid oxidation (FAO) for energy, however, its role in overall 
retinal health is unknown. The only FAO disorder that presents with 
chorioretinopathy is long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency 
(LCHADD). Studying the molecular mechanisms can lead to new treatments for 
patients and elucidate the role of FAO in the RPE. This paper characterizes the 
chorioretinopathy progression in a recently reported LCHADD mouse model.
METHODS: Visual assessments, such as optokinetic tracking and fundus imaging, 
were performed in wildtype (WT) and LCHADD mice at 3, 6, 10, and 12 months of 
age. Retinal morphology was analyzed in 12-month retinal cross-sections using 
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), RPE65, CD68, and TUNEL staining, whereas RPE 
structure was assessed using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). 
Acylcarnitine profiles were measured in isolated RPE/sclera samples to determine 
if FAO was blocked. Bulk RNA-sequencing of 12 month old male WT mice and LCHADD 
RPE/sclera samples assessed gene expression changes.
RESULTS: LCHADD RPE/sclera samples had a 5- to 7-fold increase in long-chain 
hydroxyacylcarnitines compared to WT, suggesting an impaired LCHAD step in 
long-chain FAO. LCHADD mice have progressively decreased visual performance and 
increased RPE degeneration starting at 6 months. LCHADD RPE have an altered 
structure and a two-fold increase in macrophages in the subretinal space. 
Finally, LCHADD RPE/sclera have differentially expressed genes compared to WT, 
including downregulation of genes important for RPE function and angiogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, this LCHADD mouse model recapitulates early-stage 
chorioretinopathy seen in patients with LCHADD and is a useful model for 
studying LCHADD chorioretinopathy.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.65.6.33
PMCID: PMC11193142
PMID: 38904639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: S.J. Babcock, None; A.G. Curtis, 
None; G. Gaston, None; G. Elizondo, None; M.B. Gillingham, None; R.C. Ryals, 
None