---
reference_id: "PMID:38045992"
title: "Genetic Patterns of Selected Muscular Dystrophies in the Muscular Dystrophy Surveillance, Tracking, and Research Network."
authors:
- Kang PB
- Jorand-Fletcher M
- Zhang W
- McDermott SW
- Berry R
- Chambers C
- Wong KN
- Mohamed Y
- Thomas S
- Venkatesh YS
- Westfield C
- Whitehead N
- Johnson NE
- "Muscular Dystrophy Surveillance, Tracking, and Research Network (MD STARnet)"
journal: Neurol Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200113
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Patterns of Selected Muscular Dystrophies in the Muscular Dystrophy Surveillance, Tracking, and Research Network.
**Authors:** Kang PB, Jorand-Fletcher M, Zhang W, McDermott SW, Berry R, Chambers C, Wong KN, Mohamed Y, Thomas S, Venkatesh YS, Westfield C, Whitehead N, Johnson NE, Muscular Dystrophy Surveillance, Tracking, and Research Network (MD STARnet)
**Journal:** Neurol Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXG.0000000000200113](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXG.0000000000200113)

## Content

1. Neurol Genet. 2023 Nov 17;9(6):e200113. doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200113. 
eCollection 2023 Dec.

Genetic Patterns of Selected Muscular Dystrophies in the Muscular Dystrophy 
Surveillance, Tracking, and Research Network.

Kang PB(1), Jorand-Fletcher M(1), Zhang W(1), McDermott SW(1), Berry R(1), 
Chambers C(1), Wong KN(1), Mohamed Y(1), Thomas S(1), Venkatesh YS(1), Westfield 
C(1), Whitehead N(1), Johnson NE(1); Muscular Dystrophy Surveillance, Tracking, 
and Research Network (MD STARnet).

Author information:
(1)From the Paul & Sheila Wellstone Muscular Dystrophy Center (P.B.K.), 
Department of Neurology, and Institute for Translational Neuroscience, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis; Department of Pediatrics (M.J.-F., Y.M.), 
University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville; Department of 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics (W.Z.), University of South Carolina, Columbia; 
Department of Environmental, Occupational, and Geospatial Health Sciences 
(S.W.M.), Graduate School of Public Health and Health Policy, City University of 
New York; Division of Population Health Surveillance (R.B., C.W.), Bureau of 
Maternal and Child Health, South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental 
Control, Columbia; Department of Human and Molecular Genetics (C.C.), Virginia 
Commonwealth University, Richmond; Department of Pediatrics (K.N.W.), University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City; New York State Department of Health (S.T.), Albany; 
Department of Neurology (Y.S.V.), University of South Carolina, Columbia; RTI 
International (N.W.), Research Triangle Park, NC; and Department of Neurology 
(N.E.J.), Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: To report the genetic etiologies of Emery-Dreifuss 
muscular dystrophy (EDMD), limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD), congenital 
muscular dystrophy (CMD), and distal muscular dystrophy (DD) in 6 geographically 
defined areas of the United States.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional, population-based study in which we studied 
the genes and variants associated with muscular dystrophy in individuals who 
were diagnosed with and received care for EDMD, LGMD, CMD, and DD from January 
1, 2008, through December 31, 2016, in the 6 areas of the United States covered 
by the Muscular Dystrophy Surveillance, Tracking, and Research Network (MD 
STARnet). Variants of unknown significance (VUSs) from the original genetic test 
reports were reanalyzed for changes in interpretation.
RESULTS: Among 243 individuals with definite or probable muscular dystrophy, 
LGMD was the most common diagnosis (138 cases), followed by CMD (62 cases), DD 
(22 cases), and EDMD (21 cases). There was a higher proportion of male 
individuals compared with female individuals, which persisted after excluding 
X-linked genes (EMD) and autosomal genes reported to have skewed gender ratios 
(ANO5, CAV3, and LMNA). The most common associated genes were FKRP, CAPN3, ANO5, 
and DYSF. Reanalysis yielded more definitive variant interpretations for 60 of 
144 VUSs, with a mean interval between the original clinical genetic test of 
8.11 years for all 144 VUSs and 8.62 years for the 60 reclassified variants. Ten 
individuals were found to have monoallelic pathogenic variants in genes known to 
be primarily recessive.
DISCUSSION: This study is distinct for being an examination of 4 types of 
muscular dystrophies in selected geographic areas of the United States. The 
striking proportion of resolved VUSs demonstrates the value of periodic 
re-examinations of these variants. Such re-examinations will resolve some 
genetic diagnostic ambiguities before initiating repeat testing or more invasive 
diagnostic procedures such as muscle biopsy. The presence of monoallelic 
pathogenic variants in recessive genes in our cohort indicates that some 
individuals with muscular dystrophy continue to face incomplete genetic 
diagnoses; further refinements in genetic knowledge and diagnostic approaches 
will optimize diagnostic information for these individuals.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200113
PMCID: PMC10692796
PMID: 38045992

Conflict of interest statement: P.B. Kang has served on advisory boards for 
Sarepta Therapeutics, NS Pharma, and Teneofour; and has served as a consultant 
for Novartis and Neurogene. M. Jorand-Fletcher reports no disclosures. W. Zhang 
reports no disclosures. S.W. McDermott reports no disclosures. R. Berry reports 
no disclosures. C. Chambers reports no disclosures. K.N. Wong reports no 
disclosures. Y. Mohamed reports no disclosures. S. Thomas reports no 
disclosures. Y.S. Venkatesh reports no disclosures. C. Westfield reports no 
disclosures. N. Whitehead reports no disclosures. N.E. Johnson has received 
grant funding from the NIH (R01 NS104010 and R21 TR003184), CDC (U01 DD001242), 
and the FDA (R01 FD006071). He receives research funds from Dyne, AveXis, Vertex 
Pharmaceuticals, Fulcrum Therapeutics, ML Bio, Sarepta, Triplet Therapeutics, 
Avidity Biosciences, and AMO Pharma. He has provided consultation for AMO 
Pharma, AveXis, Fulcrum Therapeutics, Dyne, Avidity, Vertex, and Entrada. He 
receives licensing fees from the University of Rochester for the CCMDHI and 
CMTHI. Full disclosure form information provided by the authors is available 
with the full text of this article at Neurology.org/NG.