---
reference_id: "PMID:12827539"
title: "Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies: electrophysiological and genetic study of a family with carpal tunnel syndrome as only clinical manifestation."
authors:
- Del Colle R
- Fabrizi GM
- Turazzini M
- Cavallaro T
- Silvestri M
- Rizzuto N
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1007/s100720300072
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Carpal Tunnel Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
- Electrophysiology
- Family Health
- Female
- "Genetics, Medical"
- "Hereditary Sensory and Motor Neuropathy/genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neural Conduction
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies: electrophysiological and genetic study of a family with carpal tunnel syndrome as only clinical manifestation.
**Authors:** Del Colle R, Fabrizi GM, Turazzini M, Cavallaro T, Silvestri M, Rizzuto N
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s100720300072](https://doi.org/10.1007/s100720300072)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2003 Jun;24(2):57-60. doi: 10.1007/s100720300072.

Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies: electrophysiological
and genetic study of a family with carpal tunnel syndrome as only clinical
manifestation.

Del Colle R(1), Fabrizi GM, Turazzini M, Cavallaro T, Silvestri M, Rizzuto N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Legnago Hospital, Via Gianella 1, I-37045 Legnago
(VR), Italy.

Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP) is an autosomal
dominant disease characterized by recurrent sensory or motor manifestations. The
molecular basis of HNPP is a deletion on chromosome 17p11.2. We studied a family
(father, 61 years; mother, 55 years; 6 children of mean age 25.3 years) showing
symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome in 4 members (the parents and 2 sons). No one
of them reported episodes of nerve palsy. In all the patients, except the mother
and the younger son, electrophysiologic evaluation showed a sensorimotor
polyneuropathy with delayed sensorimotor latencies. Genetic analysis was carried
out in the parents and the eldest son. The 17p11.2 deletion was detected in the
father and son, indicating paternal transmission of the disease. Clinical
manifestations of HNPP may be atypical. Sometimes there is no history of acute
nerve palsy, as in this family. For this reason, the frequence of HNPP might be
underestimated. Electrophysiological examination is of great importance for the
diagnosis of HNPP. Genetic analysis is a rapid and reliable diagnostic tool that
can be combined with simplified electrophysiological examination, avoiding the
need for nerve biopsy. In conclusion, the diagnosis of HNPP should be invoked in
early onset entrapment neuropathies.

DOI: 10.1007/s100720300072
PMID: 12827539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
