---
reference_id: "PMID:34193610"
title: Neutrophils initiate and exacerbate Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis.
authors:
- Kinoshita M
- Ogawa Y
- Hama N
- Ujiie I
- Hasegawa A
- Nakajima S
- Nomura T
- Adachi J
- Sato T
- Koizumi S
- Shimada S
- Fujita Y
- Takahashi H
- Mizukawa Y
- Tomonaga T
- Nagao K
- Abe R
- Kawamura T
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aax2398
keywords:
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes
- Humans
- Keratinocytes
- Neutrophils
- Stevens-Johnson Syndrome
- "T-Lymphocytes, Cytotoxic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neutrophils initiate and exacerbate Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis.
**Authors:** Kinoshita M, Ogawa Y, Hama N, Ujiie I, Hasegawa A, Nakajima S, Nomura T, Adachi J, Sato T, Koizumi S, Shimada S, Fujita Y, Takahashi H, Mizukawa Y, Tomonaga T, Nagao K, Abe R, Kawamura T
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.aax2398](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aax2398)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2021 Jun 30;13(600):eaax2398. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.aax2398.

Neutrophils initiate and exacerbate Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal 
necrolysis.

Kinoshita M(1), Ogawa Y(2), Hama N(3), Ujiie I(4), Hasegawa A(3), Nakajima S(5), 
Nomura T(5), Adachi J(6)(7), Sato T(1), Koizumi S(8), Shimada S(1), Fujita Y(4), 
Takahashi H(9), Mizukawa Y(10), Tomonaga T(6)(7), Nagao K(11), Abe R(3), 
Kawamura T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Yamanashi, 
Yamanashi, Japan.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Yamanashi, 
Yamanashi, Japan. yogawa@yamanashi.ac.jp.
(3)Division of Dermatology, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sapporo, Japan.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(6)Laboratory of Proteome Research, National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, 
Health and Nutrition, Osaka, Japan.
(7)Laboratory of Proteomics for Drug Discovery, Center for Drug Design Research, 
National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, Health and Nutrition, Osaka, Japan.
(8)Department of Neuropharmacology, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of 
Medicine, University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi, Japan.
(9)Department of Dermatology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(10)Department of Dermatology, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(11)Cutaneous Leukocyte Biology Section, Dermatology Branch, National Institute 
of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases (NIAMS), National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) are 
life-threatening mucocutaneous adverse drug reactions characterized by massive 
epidermal detachment. Cytotoxic T cells and associated effector molecules are 
known to drive SJS/TEN pathophysiology, but the contribution of innate immune 
responses is not well understood. We describe a mechanism by which neutrophils 
triggered inflammation during early phases of SJS/TEN. Skin-infiltrating CD8+ T 
cells produced lipocalin-2 in a drug-specific manner, which triggered the 
formation of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) in early lesional skin. 
Neutrophils undergoing NETosis released LL-37, an antimicrobial peptide, which 
induced formyl peptide receptor 1 (FPR1) expression by keratinocytes. FPR1 
expression caused keratinocytes to be vulnerable to necroptosis that caused 
further release of LL-37 by necroptotic keratinocytes and induced FPR1 
expression on surrounding keratinocytes, which likely amplified the necroptotic 
response. The NETs-necroptosis axis was not observed in less severe cutaneous 
adverse drug reactions, autoimmune diseases, or neutrophil-associated disorders, 
suggesting that this was a process specific to SJS/TEN. Initiation and 
progression of SJS/TEN keratinocyte necroptosis appear to involve a cascade of 
events mediated by innate and adaptive immune responses, and understanding these 
responses may contribute to the identification of diagnostic markers or 
therapeutic targets for these adverse drug reactions.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aax2398
PMCID: PMC9392155
PMID: 34193610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.