---
reference_id: "PMID:33599186"
title: An unusual ophthalmic presentation of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome.
authors:
- Çelik G
- Batu Oto B
- Kızılay O
- Kılıçarslan O
- Toptan HH
journal: Ophthalmic Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/13816810.2021.1888130
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An unusual ophthalmic presentation of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome.
**Authors:** Çelik G, Batu Oto B, Kızılay O, Kılıçarslan O, Toptan HH
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13816810.2021.1888130](https://doi.org/10.1080/13816810.2021.1888130)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Genet. 2021 Jun;42(3):326-328. doi: 10.1080/13816810.2021.1888130. 
Epub 2021 Feb 18.

An unusual ophthalmic presentation of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome.

Çelik G(1), Batu Oto B(2), Kızılay O(1), Kılıçarslan O(2), Toptan HH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, ROP Screening, Treatment and Training Center, 
Zeynep Kamil Maternity and Children's Disease Training and Research Hospital, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Istanbul University-Cerrahpaşa, Cerrahpaşa 
Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Zeynep Kamil Maternity and Children's Disease 
Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.

Purpose: Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a rare inherited disease caused by 
the deletion in short arm of 4th chromosome. Various ocular manifestations in 
WHS have been described previously. We present an extraordinary clinical case of 
WHS associated with optic nerve head malformation and optic nerve sheath 
enlargement in the same eye.Methods: Case reportResults: A male infant was 
delivered by Caesarean section at 38 weeks with a birth weight of 2040 gr and 
admitted to neonatal intensive care unit due to multi-systemic abnormalities. 
The infant had multiple congenital anomalies; a cleft palate, microcephalia, 
micrognathia, renal pelvicalyceal ectasia, atrial septal defect, transvers arcus 
hypoplasia, patent ductus arteriosus, hypospadias and undescended testicle. 
Fundus examination revealed optic disc coloboma of both eyes. Two weeks later, 
at the second examination, the left optic disc margins were indistinct with 
vessels radiating from the disc margins which resembles morning glory disc 
anomaly (MGDA). The MRI demonstrated corpus callosum agenesis and a T1 
hypointense, T2 hyperintense, 12 × 9 mm optic nerve sheath enlargement in the 
retrobulbar area.Conclusion: The case presented here demonstrates that, the 
optic nerve head malformations and optic nerve sheath enlargement may be due to 
incomplete closure of choroidal fissure and subsequent accumulation of 
cerebrospinal fluid may result in a spectrum of optic nerve head malformations.

DOI: 10.1080/13816810.2021.1888130
PMID: 33599186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]