---
reference_id: "PMID:20400279"
title: Spread of glomerular to tubulointerstitial disease with a focus on proteinuria.
authors:
- Theilig F
journal: Ann Anat
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.aanat.2010.03.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spread of glomerular to tubulointerstitial disease with a focus on proteinuria.
**Authors:** Theilig F
**Journal:** Ann Anat (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.aanat.2010.03.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aanat.2010.03.003)

## Content

1. Ann Anat. 2010 May 20;192(3):125-32. doi: 10.1016/j.aanat.2010.03.003. Epub
2010  Apr 3.

Spread of glomerular to tubulointerstitial disease with a focus on proteinuria.

Theilig F(1).

Author information:
(1)Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Institut für Vegetative Anatomie, 10115 
Berlin, Germany. franziska.theilig@charite.de

Chronic kidney disease is characterized by the decline in renal excretory, 
homeostatic and endocrine functions. In most instances, the primary event is 
glomerular injury. With ongoing progression and glomerular extracapillary 
proliferation, tubulointerstitial damage occurs with consequent nephron loss and 
development of fibrotic lesions, finally resulting in terminal renal failure. 
Renal tubulointerstitial damage is the final common pathway in all forms of 
renal disease leading to CKD. Recent research has focused on how glomerular 
injury spreads to the tubulointerstitium. Presently, four possible mechanisms 
are being discussed: (1) obstruction of the urinary pole; (2) 
proteinuria-induced overload of the proximal tubule; (3) chronic hypoxia and (4) 
inflammation induced by a glomerulotubular feedback loop. Fibrosis is 
hypothesized to account for further deterioration of renal functions. As to the 
role of fibrosis, conflicting results have been published and new data question 
the damaging character of fibrosis.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aanat.2010.03.003
PMID: 20400279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]