---
reference_id: "PMID:38905460"
title: Update on central retinal artery occlusion.
authors:
- Venkatesh R
- Joshi A
- Maltsev D
- Munk M
- Prabhu V
- Bavaskar S
- Mangla R
- Ruamviboonsuk P
- Chhablani J
journal: Indian J Ophthalmol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4103/IJO.IJO_2826_23
keywords:
- Humans
- Retinal Artery Occlusion/diagnosis
- Fluorescein Angiography/methods
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Fundus Oculi
- Vitrectomy/methods
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on central retinal artery occlusion.
**Authors:** Venkatesh R, Joshi A, Maltsev D, Munk M, Prabhu V, Bavaskar S, Mangla R, Ruamviboonsuk P, Chhablani J
**Journal:** Indian J Ophthalmol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4103/IJO.IJO_2826_23](https://doi.org/10.4103/IJO.IJO_2826_23)

## Content

1. Indian J Ophthalmol. 2024 Jul 1;72(7):945-955. doi: 10.4103/IJO.IJO_2826_23. 
Epub 2024 Jun 22.

Update on central retinal artery occlusion.

Venkatesh R(1), Joshi A(1), Maltsev D(2), Munk M(3)(4)(5), Prabhu V(1), Bavaskar 
S(1), Mangla R(1), Ruamviboonsuk P(6)(7), Chhablani J(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vitreo-retinal Services, Narayana Nethralaya, Bengaluru, 
Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Military Medical Academy, St. Petersburg, 
Russia.
(3)Department of Retina, Augenarzt Praxisgemeinschaft Gutblick AG, Pfäffikon, 
Switerland.
(4)Department of Retina, University Hospital Bern, Inselspital, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(5)Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, USA.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, Rangsit University, Lak 
Hok, Thailand.
(7)Center of Excellence for Vitreous and Retinal Disease, Rajavithi Hospital, 
Bangkok, Thailand.
(8)Department of Medical Retina and Vitreoretinal Surgery, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburg, PA 15213, USA.

The medical condition referred to as "central retinal artery occlusion" (CRAO) 
was first documented by Albrecht von Graefe in 1859. Subsequently, CRAO has 
consistently been identified as a serious medical condition that leads to 
substantial visual impairment. Furthermore, it is correlated with vascular 
complications that have the potential to affect crucial organs such as the brain 
and heart. A considerable amount of research has been extensively published on 
the various aspects of this topic, which is marked by notable debates and 
misconceptions, especially regarding its management and outcomes. The primary 
aim of this review article is to analyze the latest developments in the 
understanding of CRAO, which includes its causes, techniques for retinal 
imaging, systemic evaluation, and therapeutic strategies, such as vitrectomy. 
This review article offers readers a comprehensive learning experience to gain 
knowledge on the fundamental principles and recent advancements in CRAO.

Copyright © 2024 Copyright: © 2024 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology.

DOI: 10.4103/IJO.IJO_2826_23
PMCID: PMC11329807
PMID: 38905460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.