---
reference_id: "PMID:26990789"
title: "Health state utilities in non-small cell lung cancer: An international study."
authors:
- Nafees B
- Lloyd AJ
- Dewilde S
- Rajan N
- Lorenzo M
journal: Asia Pac J Clin Oncol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/ajco.12477
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Health state utilities in non-small cell lung cancer: An international study.
**Authors:** Nafees B, Lloyd AJ, Dewilde S, Rajan N, Lorenzo M
**Journal:** Asia Pac J Clin Oncol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ajco.12477](https://doi.org/10.1111/ajco.12477)

## Content

1. Asia Pac J Clin Oncol. 2017 Oct;13(5):e195-e203. doi: 10.1111/ajco.12477. Epub
 2016 Mar 17.

Health state utilities in non-small cell lung cancer: An international study.

Nafees B(1), Lloyd AJ(1), Dewilde S(2), Rajan N(3), Lorenzo M(4).

Author information:
(1)Patient Reported Outcomes, Oxford Outcomes Ltd., Oxford, UK.
(2)SHE, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Oncology - Emerging Markets, Eli Lilly Australia Pty. Ltd., Australia.
(4)Global Health Outcomes - Oncology, Eli Lilly and Company Limited, Surrey, UK.

AIM: Quality of life weights (utilities) are an important input in economic 
evaluation and evidence suggests that there can be important differences between 
countries. This study was designed to capture utilities for metastatic non-small 
cell lung cancer and common grade III/IV toxicities associated with treatment 
from local populations in the United Kingdom, Australia, France, China, Taiwan, 
and Korea. Toxicities included neutropenia, febrile neutropenia, fatigue, 
diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, rash, bleeding, hypertension, and hair loss.
METHODS: Existing health state descriptions of non-small cell lung cancer were 
adapted to represent descriptions of patients on first-line treatment. 
Twenty-three states were translated and assessed in cognitive debrief content 
validation interviews with oncologists in each country. Seventy-five respondents 
per country completed a time trade-off interview to evaluate the states. 
Variation between countries for all states was explored with a Generalized 
Estimating Equations model.
RESULTS: The mean utility for "stable disease and no side effects" (base state) 
varied between 0.84 (United Kingdom) and 0.54 (Taiwan). The largest utility 
decrements were found for febrile neutropenia (0.47) and neutropenia (0.35) 
across all countries. Asian countries regarded bleeds as a severe toxicity 
whereas non-Asian countries did not and valued diarrhea and fatigue as more 
severe. Significant differences in utilities between countries emerged with the 
Taiwanese population in particular rating states as significantly worse than 
other countries.
CONCLUSION: This study improves our understanding of how utilities for the same 
states can vary across countries. The study shows the importance of capturing 
utilities that reflect the preferences of the local population.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ajco.12477
PMID: 26990789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]