---
reference_id: "PMID:36266505"
title: Discovery of 42 genome-wide significant loci associated with dyslexia.
authors:
- Doust C
- Fontanillas P
- Eising E
- Gordon SD
- Wang Z
- Alagöz G
- Molz B
- 23andMe Research Team
- Quantitative Trait Working Group of the GenLang Consortium
- Pourcain BS
- Francks C
- Marioni RE
- Zhao J
- Paracchini S
- Talcott JB
- Monaco AP
- Stein JF
- Gruen JR
- Olson RK
- Willcutt EG
- DeFries JC
- Pennington BF
- Smith SD
- Wright MJ
- Martin NG
- Auton A
- Bates TC
- Fisher SE
- Luciano M
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41588-022-01192-y
keywords:
- Child
- Adult
- Humans
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- "Dyslexia/genetics, psychology"
- Reading
- Language
- Asian People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Discovery of 42 genome-wide significant loci associated with dyslexia.
**Authors:** Doust C, Fontanillas P, Eising E, Gordon SD, Wang Z, Alagöz G, Molz B, 23andMe Research Team, Quantitative Trait Working Group of the GenLang Consortium, Pourcain BS, Francks C, Marioni RE, Zhao J, Paracchini S, Talcott JB, Monaco AP, Stein JF, Gruen JR, Olson RK, Willcutt EG, DeFries JC, Pennington BF, Smith SD, Wright MJ, Martin NG, Auton A, Bates TC, Fisher SE, Luciano M
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41588-022-01192-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-022-01192-y)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2022 Nov;54(11):1621-1629. doi: 10.1038/s41588-022-01192-y. Epub
2022  Oct 20.

Discovery of 42 genome-wide significant loci associated with dyslexia.

Doust C(1), Fontanillas P(2), Eising E(3), Gordon SD(4), Wang Z(5), Alagöz G(3), 
Molz B(3); 23andMe Research Team; Quantitative Trait Working Group of the 
GenLang Consortium; Pourcain BS(3)(6)(7), Francks C(3)(6), Marioni RE(8), Zhao 
J(5), Paracchini S(9), Talcott JB(10), Monaco AP(11), Stein JF(12), Gruen 
JR(13), Olson RK(14)(15), Willcutt EG(14)(15), DeFries JC(14)(15), Pennington 
BF(16), Smith SD(17), Wright MJ(18), Martin NG(4), Auton A, Bates TC(1), Fisher 
SE(3)(6), Luciano M(19).

Collaborators: Aslibekyan S, Auton A, Babalola E, Bell RK, Bielenberg J, Bryc K, 
Bullis E, Coker D, Partida GC, Dhamija D, Das S, Elson SL, Filshtein T, 
Fletez-Brant K, Freyman W, Gandhi PM, Heilbron K, Hicks B, Hinds DA, Jewett EM, 
Jiang Y, Kukar K, Lin KH, Lowe M, McCreight J, McIntyre MH, Micheletti SJ, 
Moreno ME, Mountain JL, Nandakumar P, Noblin ES, O'Connell J, Petrakovitz AA, 
Poznik GD, Schumacher M, Shastri AJ, Shelton JF, Shi J, Shringarpure S, Tran V, 
Tung JY, Wang X, Wang W, Weldon CH, Wilton P, Hernandez A, Wong C, Tchakouté CT, 
Abbondanza F, Allegrini AG, Andlauer TFM, Barr CL, Bernard M, Blokland K, Bonte 
M, Boomsma DI, Bourgeron T, Brandeis D, Carreiras M, Ceroni F, Csépe V, Dale PS, 
de Jong PF, Démonet JF, de Zeeuw EL, Feng Y, Franken MJ, Gerritse M, Gialluisi 
A, Guger SL, Hayiou-Thomas ME, Hernández-Cabrera J, Hottenga JJ, Hulme C, Jansen 
PR, Kere J, Kerr EN, Koomar T, Landerl K, Leonard GT, Liao Z, Lovett MW, 
Lyytinen H, Martinelli A, Maurer U, Michaelson JJ, Mirza-Schreiber N, Moll K, 
Morgan AT, Müller-Myhsok B, Newbury DF, Nöthen MM, Paus T, Pausova Z, Pennell 
CE, Plomin RJ, Price KM, Ramus F, Reilly S, Richer L, Rimfeld K, Schulte-Körne 
G, Shapland CY, Simpson NH, Snowling MJ, Stein JF, Strug LJ, Tiemeier H, Tomblin 
JB, Truong DT, van Bergen E, van der Schroeff MP, Van Donkelaar M, Verhoef E, 
Wang CA, Watkins KE, Whitehouse AJO, Wigg KG, Wilkinson M, Zhu G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(2)23andMe, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA.
(3)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(4)Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, 
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(5)School of Psychology, Shaanxi Normal University and Shaanxi Key Research 
Center of Child Mental and Behavioral Health, Xi'an, China.
(6)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(7)MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(8)Centre for Genomic and Experimental Medicine, Institute of Genetics and 
Cancer, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(9)School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, UK.
(10)Institute of Health and Neurodevelopment, Aston University, Birmingham, UK.
(11)Office of the President, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA.
(12)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, Oxford University, Oxford, 
UK.
(13)Departments of Pediatrics and Genetics, Yale Medical School, New Haven, CT, 
USA.
(14)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado, Boulder, 
CO, USA.
(15)Institute for Behavioral Genetics, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA.
(16)Department of Psychology, University of Denver, Denver, CO, USA.
(17)Department of Neurological Sciences, College of Medicine, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(18)Queensland Brain Institute, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia.
(19)Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. 
michelle.luciano@ed.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2023 Mar;55(3):520. doi: 10.1038/s41588-023-01336-8.

Reading and writing are crucial life skills but roughly one in ten children are 
affected by dyslexia, which can persist into adulthood. Family studies of 
dyslexia suggest heritability up to 70%, yet few convincing genetic markers have 
been found. Here we performed a genome-wide association study of 51,800 adults 
self-reporting a dyslexia diagnosis and 1,087,070 controls and identified 42 
independent genome-wide significant loci: 15 in genes linked to cognitive 
ability/educational attainment, and 27 new and potentially more specific to 
dyslexia. We validated 23 loci (13 new) in independent cohorts of Chinese and 
European ancestry. Genetic etiology of dyslexia was similar between sexes, and 
genetic covariance with many traits was found, including ambidexterity, but not 
neuroanatomical measures of language-related circuitry. Dyslexia polygenic 
scores explained up to 6% of variance in reading traits, and might in future 
contribute to earlier identification and remediation of dyslexia.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41588-022-01192-y
PMCID: PMC9649434
PMID: 36266505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: P.F., A.A. and the 23andMe Research Team are 
employed by and hold stock or stock options in 23andMe, Inc. The remaining 
authors declare no competing interests.