---
reference_id: "PMID:29344322"
title: "Acne Scarring-Pathogenesis, Evaluation, and Treatment Options."
authors:
- Connolly D
- Vu HL
- Mariwalla K
- Saedi N
journal: J Clin Aesthet Dermatol
year: '2017'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acne Scarring-Pathogenesis, Evaluation, and Treatment Options.
**Authors:** Connolly D, Vu HL, Mariwalla K, Saedi N
**Journal:** J Clin Aesthet Dermatol (2017)

## Content

1. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2017 Sep;10(9):12-23. Epub 2017 Sep 1.

Acne Scarring-Pathogenesis, Evaluation, and Treatment Options.

Connolly D(1)(2), Vu HL(1)(2), Mariwalla K(1)(2), Saedi N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Drs. Connolly, Vu, and Saedi are with the Department of Dermatology and 
Cutaneous Biology at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(2)Dr. Mariwalla is with Mariwalla Dermatology in West Islip, New York.

Acne vulgaris is a ubiquitous problem affecting 80 percent of people ages 11 to 
30 years, with many patients experiencing some degree of scarring. This review 
focuses on atrophic scars, the most common type of acne scar. We briefly address 
the cellular sequelae that lead to scar formation and the initial evaluation of 
patients with acne scars. We then discuss an algorithmic approach to the 
treatment of acne scarring based on the classification of scars into 
erythematous and atrophic types. Lastly, we discuss the future treatment of acne 
scars and ongoing clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC5749614
PMID: 29344322

Conflict of interest statement: FUNDING:No funding was provided for this study. 
DISCLOSURES:The authors have no conflicts of interest relating to the content of 
this article.