---
reference_id: "PMID:30314477"
title: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase activity measured by spectrophotometry and associated genetic variants from the Oromiya zone, Ethiopia.
authors:
- Kießling N
- Brintrup J
- Zeynudin A
- Abduselam N
- Götz S
- Mack M
- Pritsch M
- Wieser A
- Kohne E
- Berens-Riha N
journal: Malar J
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2510-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase activity measured by spectrophotometry and associated genetic variants from the Oromiya zone, Ethiopia.
**Authors:** Kießling N, Brintrup J, Zeynudin A, Abduselam N, Götz S, Mack M, Pritsch M, Wieser A, Kohne E, Berens-Riha N
**Journal:** Malar J (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12936-018-2510-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12936-018-2510-3)

## Content

1. Malar J. 2018 Oct 12;17(1):358. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2510-3.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase activity measured by spectrophotometry and 
associated genetic variants from the Oromiya zone, Ethiopia.

Kießling N(1), Brintrup J(2), Zeynudin A(3), Abduselam N(3), Götz S(2), Mack 
M(2), Pritsch M(1)(4), Wieser A(1)(3)(4), Kohne E(2), Berens-Riha N(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine, Medical Center of the 
University of Munich (LMU), Leopoldstrasse 5, 80802, Munich, Germany.
(2)Hemoglobin Laboratory, Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Ulm, 
Eythstrasse 24, 89075, Ulm, Germany.
(3)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, Jimma University, Jimma, Ethiopia.
(4)German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF) at LMU, Munich, Germany.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine, Medical Center of the 
University of Munich (LMU), Leopoldstrasse 5, 80802, Munich, Germany. 
berens@lrz.uni-muenchen.de.
(6)German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF) at LMU, Munich, Germany. 
berens@lrz.uni-muenchen.de.

BACKGROUND: The study aimed to gain first data on the prevalence of G6PD enzyme 
deficiency measured by spectrophotometry and associated genetic variants in 
Jimma and surroundings, Ethiopia. The area is a Plasmodium vivax endemic region, 
but 8-aminoquinolines such as primaquine are not recommended as G6PD testing is 
not available.
METHODS: Healthy volunteers were recruited at Jimma University, Ethiopia. Enzyme 
activity was tested by spectrophotometry at the University of Ulm, Germany. A 
G6PD RDT (Binax NOW® G6PD, Alere, USA) was additionally performed. The G6PD gene 
was analysed for polymorphisms in a sub-population. Tests for 
haemoglobinopathies and the presence of malaria parasites were conducted.
RESULTS: No severe or moderate (cut-off 60%) G6PD deficiency was found in 206 
volunteers. Median male activity was 6.1 U/g Hb. Eleven participants (5.4%) 
showed activities between 70 and 80%. No haemoglobinopathy was detected. None of 
the subjects showed asymptomatic parasitaemia. One G6PD-A+ variant (A376G) and 
one new non-synonymous mutation (G445A) were found.
CONCLUSIONS: As the prevalence of G6PD deficiency seems low in this area, the 
use of 8-aminoquinolines should be encouraged. However, reliable G6PD testing 
methods have to be implemented and safe cut-off levels need to be defined.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2510-3
PMCID: PMC6186078
PMID: 30314477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]