---
reference_id: "PMID:32482293"
title: "Cavitary tuberculosis: the gateway of disease transmission."
authors:
- Urbanowski ME
- Ordonez AA
- Ruiz-Bedoya CA
- Jain SK
- Bishai WR
journal: Lancet Infect Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30148-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cavitary tuberculosis: the gateway of disease transmission.
**Authors:** Urbanowski ME, Ordonez AA, Ruiz-Bedoya CA, Jain SK, Bishai WR
**Journal:** Lancet Infect Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30148-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30148-1)

## Content

1. Lancet Infect Dis. 2020 Jun;20(6):e117-e128. doi:
10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30148-1.  Epub 2020 May 5.

Cavitary tuberculosis: the gateway of disease transmission.

Urbanowski ME(1), Ordonez AA(2), Ruiz-Bedoya CA(2), Jain SK(2), Bishai WR(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Tuberculosis Research, The Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; Center for Infection and Inflammation Imaging 
Research, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; 
Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Center for Tuberculosis Research, The Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; Center for Infection and Inflammation Imaging 
Research, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; 
Department of Pediatrics, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Center for Tuberculosis Research, The Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; Center for Infection and Inflammation Imaging 
Research, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; 
Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. Electronic address: wbishai1@jhmi.edu.

Tuberculosis continues to be a major threat to global health. Cavitation is a 
dangerous consequence of pulmonary tuberculosis associated with poor outcomes, 
treatment relapse, higher transmission rates, and development of drug 
resistance. However, in the antibiotic era, cavities are often identified as the 
most extreme outcome of treatment failure and are one of the least-studied 
aspects of tuberculosis. We review the epidemiology, clinical features, and 
concurrent standards of care for individuals with cavitary tuberculosis. We also 
discuss developments in the understanding of tuberculosis cavities as dynamic 
physical and biochemical structures that interface the host response with a 
unique mycobacterial niche to drive tuberculosis-associated morbidity and 
transmission. Advances in preclinical models and non-invasive imaging can 
provide valuable insights into the drivers of cavitation. These insights will 
guide the development of specific pharmacological interventions to prevent 
cavitation and improve lung function for individuals with tuberculosis.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30148-1
PMCID: PMC7357333
PMID: 32482293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.