---
reference_id: "PMID:34404532"
title: Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia - Not a single disease.
authors:
- Germeshausen M
- Ballmaier M
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Haematol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.beha.2021.101286
keywords:
- Congenital Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Mutation
- "Thrombocytopenia/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia - Not a single disease.
**Authors:** Germeshausen M, Ballmaier M
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Haematol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.beha.2021.101286](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beha.2021.101286)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2021 Jun;34(2):101286. doi: 
10.1016/j.beha.2021.101286. Epub 2021 Jul 14.

Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia - Not a single disease.

Germeshausen M(1), Ballmaier M(2).

Author information:
(1)Central Research Facility Cell Sorting Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany. Electronic address: germeshausen.manuela@mh-hannover.de.
(2)Central Research Facility Cell Sorting Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany. Electronic address: ballmaier.matthias@mh-hannover.de.

Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia (CAMT) is a rare inherited bone 
marrow failure syndrome (IBMFS) that is characterized by severe thrombocytopenia 
at birth due to ineffective megakaryopoiesis and development towards aplastic 
anemia during the first years of life. CAMT is not a single monogenetic 
disorder; rather, many descriptions of CAMT include different entities with 
different etiologies. CAMT in a narrow sense, which is primarily restricted to 
the hematopoietic system, is caused mainly by mutations in the gene for the 
thrombopoietin receptor (MPL), sometimes in the gene for its ligand (THPO). CAMT 
in association with radio-ulnar synostosis, which is not always clinically 
apparent, is mostly caused by mutations in MECOM, rarely in HOXA11. Patients 
affected by other IBMFS - especially Fanconi anemia or dyskeratosis congenita - 
may be misdiagnosed as having CAMT when they lack typical disease features of 
these syndromes or have only mild symptoms. This article reviews scientific and 
clinical aspects of the various disorders associated with the term "CAMT" with a 
main focus on the disease caused by mutations in the MPL gene.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.beha.2021.101286
PMID: 34404532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]