---
reference_id: "PMID:35138872"
title: "Hypertension-Mediated Organ Damage: Prevalence, Correlates, and Prognosis in the Community."
authors:
- Vasan RS
- Song RJ
- Xanthakis V
- Beiser A
- DeCarli C
- Mitchell GF
- Seshadri S
journal: Hypertension
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.121.18502
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertension-Mediated Organ Damage: Prevalence, Correlates, and Prognosis in the Community.
**Authors:** Vasan RS, Song RJ, Xanthakis V, Beiser A, DeCarli C, Mitchell GF, Seshadri S
**Journal:** Hypertension (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.121.18502](https://doi.org/10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.121.18502)

## Content

1. Hypertension. 2022 Mar;79(3):505-515. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.121.18502. 
Epub 2021 Dec 6.

Hypertension-Mediated Organ Damage: Prevalence, Correlates, and Prognosis in the 
Community.

Vasan RS(1)(2)(3), Song RJ(3), Xanthakis V(1)(2)(4), Beiser A(1)(5)(4), DeCarli 
C(6), Mitchell GF(7), Seshadri S(8).

Author information:
(1)Boston University's and National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's 
Framingham Heart Study, Framingham, MA (R.S.V., V.X., A.B.).
(2)Section of Preventive Medicine and Epidemiology, Department of Medicine 
(R.S.V., V.X.), Boston University School of Medicine, MA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology (R.S.V., R.J.S.), Boston University School of 
Public Health, Boston, MA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics (V.X., A.B.), Boston University School of Public 
Health, Boston, MA.
(5)Department of Neurology (A.B.), Boston University School of Medicine, MA.
(6)University of California at Davis (C.D.).
(7)Cardiovascular Engineering, Inc, Norwood, MA (G.F.M.).
(8)Biggs Institute for Alzheimer's Disease, University of Texas Health Sciences 
Center at San Antonio (S.S.).

Comment in
    Hypertension. 2022 Mar;79(3):516-517. doi: 
10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.121.18786.

BACKGROUND: Guidelines emphasize screening people with elevated BP for the 
presence of end-organ damage.
METHODS: We characterized the prevalence, correlates, and prognosis of 
hypertension-mediated organ damage (HMOD) in the community-based Framingham 
Study. 7898 participants (mean age 51.6 years, 54% women) underwent assessment 
for the following HMOD: electrocardiographic and echocardiographic left 
ventricular hypertrophy, abnormal brain imaging findings consistent with 
vascular injury, increased carotid intima-media thickness, elevated 
carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity, reduced kidney function, microalbuminuria, 
and low ankle-brachial index. We characterized HMOD prevalence according to 
blood pressure (BP) categories defined by four international BP guidelines. 
Participants were followed up for incidence of cardiovascular disease.
RESULTS: The prevalence of HMOD varied positively with systolic BP and pulse 
pressure but negatively with diastolic BP; it increased with age, was similar in 
both sexes, and varied across BP guidelines based on their thresholds defining 
hypertension. Among participants with hypertension, elevated carotid-femoral 
pulse wave velocity was the most prevalent HMOD (40%-60%), whereas low 
ankle-brachial index was the least prevalent (<5%). Left ventricular 
hypertrophy, reduced kidney function, microalbuminuria, increased carotid 
intima-media thickness, and abnormal brain imaging findings had an intermediate 
prevalence (20%-40%). HMOD frequently clustered within individuals. On follow-up 
(median, 14.1 years), there were 384 cardiovascular disease events among 5865 
participants with concurrent assessment of left ventricular mass, 
carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity, kidney function, and microalbuminuria. For 
every BP category above optimal (referent group), the presence of HMOD increased 
cardiovascular disease risk compared with its absence.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of HMOD varies across international BP guidelines 
based on their different thresholds for defining hypertension. The presence of 
HMOD confers incremental prognostic information regarding cardiovascular disease 
risk at every BP category.

DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.121.18502
PMCID: PMC8849561
PMID: 35138872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest and Financial Disclosures 
Gary F. Mitchell is the owner of Cardiovascular Engineering, Inc., which designs 
and manufactures devices that measure vascular stiffness. The company uses these 
devices in clinical trials that evaluate the effects of diseases and 
interventions on vascular stiffness. He also reports receiving grants from the 
National Institutes of Health and Novartis and consulting fees from Novartis, 
Bayer, Merck, and Servier. The remaining authors declare no conflicts.