---
reference_id: "PMID:31880634"
title: "Pityriasis Lichenoides: A Large Histopathological Case Series With a Focus on Adnexotropism."
authors:
- Menzinger S
- Frassati-Biaggi A
- Leclerc-Mercier S
- Bodemer C
- Molina TJ
- Fraitag S
journal: Am J Dermatopathol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000001448
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- Female
- Hair Follicle/pathology
- Humans
- Male
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/diagnosis, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pityriasis Lichenoides: A Large Histopathological Case Series With a Focus on Adnexotropism.
**Authors:** Menzinger S, Frassati-Biaggi A, Leclerc-Mercier S, Bodemer C, Molina TJ, Fraitag S
**Journal:** Am J Dermatopathol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1097/DAD.0000000000001448](https://doi.org/10.1097/DAD.0000000000001448)

## Content

1. Am J Dermatopathol. 2020 Jan;42(1):1-10. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000001448.

Pityriasis Lichenoides: A Large Histopathological Case Series With a Focus on
Adnexotropism.

Menzinger S(1)(2)(3), Frassati-Biaggi A(4), Leclerc-Mercier S(5), Bodemer C(6),
Molina TJ(1), Fraitag S(2).

Author information:
(1)Resident, Department of Pathology, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris,
France.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève,
Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Consultant, Department of Pathology, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades,
Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(5)Practicien Hospitalier, Department of Pathology, Hôpital Necker-Enfants
Malades, Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(6)Head of the Department of Dermatology, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades,
Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.

INTRODUCTION: Pityriasis lichenoides (PL) is an infrequent skin disorder. The
clinical manifestations are usually specific enough for a reliable diagnosis,
although the histopathological assessment of a biopsy is sometimes needed to
differentiate between PL and a range of other diseases. The objectives of this
study were to review cases of PL managed in our hospital, confirm the classical
histopathological features of PL, and identify signs that may be of value in the
diagnosis of PL.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: All cases of PL assessed in our pathology department
between January 2007 and December 2017 were retrieved, and all slides were
reviewed. Cases were selected only if a diagnosis of PL was initially suggested
by a dermatologist and then confirmed by the histopathological assessment.
RESULTS: Seventy-one cases met the study criteria. The following features were
almost always present: vacuolar changes or necrotic keratinocytes (100%), both
superficial and deep lymphocytic infiltrates (99%), and the infiltration of
lymphocytes into the adnexal epithelium (97%). The inflammatory cells were
always small- to medium-sized lymphocytes. There were no eosinophilic
infiltrates. Superficial perivascular and/or intraepidermal red blood cells were
observed in 83% of cases.
DISCUSSION: We highlighted the presence of a deep dermal lymphocytic infiltrate,
with a "T-shaped" periadnexal arrangement along the full length of the
follicular and sudoral epithelia. This might be a feature that enables the
differentiation of PL from other diseases. Our findings also prompted a number
of physiopathological hypotheses for PL.
CONCLUSIONS: Our present results confirmed the classical histological aspects of
PL and provided some useful new diagnostic features.

DOI: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000001448
PMID: 31880634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
