---
reference_id: "PMID:36032074"
title: Antiphospholipid antibodies are persistently positive at high titers. Additive value of platelet-bound C4d.
authors:
- Sciascia S
- Bloch R
- O'Malley T
- Kammesheidt A
- Alexander RV
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.949919
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiphospholipid antibodies are persistently positive at high titers. Additive value of platelet-bound C4d.
**Authors:** Sciascia S, Bloch R, O'Malley T, Kammesheidt A, Alexander RV
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2022.949919](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.949919)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2022 Aug 10;13:949919. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.949919. 
eCollection 2022.

Antiphospholipid antibodies are persistently positive at high titers. Additive 
value of platelet-bound C4d.

Sciascia S(1), Bloch R(2), O'Malley T(2), Kammesheidt A(2), Alexander RV(2).

Author information:
(1)University Center of Excellence on Nephrologic, Rheumatologic and Rare 
Diseases (ERK-net, ERN-Reconnect and RITA-ERN Member) with Nephrology and 
Dialysis Unit and Center of Immuno-Rheumatology and Rare Diseases (CMID), 
Coordinating Center of the Interregional Network for Rare Diseases of Piedmont 
and Aosta Valley (North-West Italy), San Giovanni Bosco Hub Hospital, and 
Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences of the University of Turin, 
Turin, Italy.
(2)Exagen Inc., Vista, CA, United States.

BACKGROUND: Classification criteria for antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) require 
that antiphospholipid antibody (aPL) positivity is confirmed after at least 12 
weeks. We tested the hypothesis that aPL at high titers remain positive while 
low titers fluctuate over time. As both platelet-bound C4d (PC4d) and aPL are 
associated with thrombosis in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), we also 
evaluated whether PC4d can aid in APS diagnosis.
METHODS: Data from serum or plasma sent to Exagen's laboratory for routine aPL 
testing were analyzed. Anti-cardiolipin (aCL) and anti-beta2 glycoprotein-1 
antibodies (aB2GP1) were measured by chemiluminescence or ELiA fluorescence 
enzyme immunoassay; anti-phosphatidylserine/prothrombin complex antibodies 
(aPS/PT) by ELISA; PC4d by flow cytometry. Statistical analysis included 
descriptive statistics, logistic regression, and Pearson correlation.
RESULTS: More than 80% of positive samples with aCL and aB2GP1 at high titers - 
but not low titers - were positive at a retest. Non-criteria aPL (aPS/PT) 
followed a similar trend. aCL and aB2GP1 measured with two different 
technologies were highly correlated. PC4d and IgG of the three aPL were at best 
moderately correlated even when only positive aPL samples were analyzed 
(coefficient: 0.1917 to 0.2649).
CONCLUSIONS: High titers aPL are often persistently positive, allowing an 
earlier diagnosis and risk assessment at the time of the initial screening. 
Conversely, a retest may be necessary for low titers. The high correlation 
between two methodologies suggests that these findings are independent of assay 
platform. The low to moderate correlation between PC4d and aPL might suggest a 
possible additive value to evaluate association with thrombosis in autoimmune 
diseases.

Copyright © 2022 Sciascia, Bloch, O’Malley, Kammesheidt and Alexander.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.949919
PMCID: PMC9399821
PMID: 36032074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RB, TO, AK, and RA are current or former 
employees of Exagen Inc. and/or stockholders of Exagen Inc. The remaining author 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.