---
reference_id: "PMID:36052101"
title: "Sleep, Respiration and Nocturnal Paroxysmal Events in Joubert Syndrome: A Case Report."
authors:
- Peraita-Adrados R
journal: Nat Sci Sleep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2147/NSS.S369097
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sleep, Respiration and Nocturnal Paroxysmal Events in Joubert Syndrome: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Peraita-Adrados R
**Journal:** Nat Sci Sleep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2147/NSS.S369097](https://doi.org/10.2147/NSS.S369097)

## Content

1. Nat Sci Sleep. 2022 Aug 26;14:1485-1492. doi: 10.2147/NSS.S369097. eCollection
 2022.

Sleep, Respiration and Nocturnal Paroxysmal Events in Joubert Syndrome: A Case 
Report.

Peraita-Adrados R(1).

Author information:
(1)Sleep and Epilepsy Unit- Clinical Neurophysiology Service, University General 
Hospital and Research Institute Gregorio Marañón, University Complutense of 
Madrid (UCM), Madrid, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Joubert syndrome is a rare disorder, characterized by a complex 
midbrain malformation caused by defects in the structure and/or function of the 
primary cilium.
CASE REPORT: A 15-year-old boy with mild intellectual disability, hypotonia, 
mild ataxia, and abnormal eye movements diagnosed as having Joubert Syndrome 
since childhood, was referred to the Sleep Unit because spells of apnea while 
sleeping. He did not complain of snoring or daytime somnolence. The macro and 
microstructure of sleep and the comorbidities such respiratory abnormalities, 
periodic legs movements (PLM) and paroxysmal motor arousals (PA) and minimal 
motor events (MME) are described for the first time in Joubert syndrome.
RESULTS: EEG was normal. Video-polysomnography revealed a nocturnal disturbed 
sleep and periods of hyperpnea accompanied by body movements and followed by a 
periodic breathing lasting several minutes with no oxygen desaturation. The 
arousals provoked by apneas triggered paroxysmal motor events with dystonic 
movements in the hand and right foot accompanied by a spontaneous Babinski. 
Brain MRI showed the typical "molar tooth sign".
CONCLUSION: Joubert syndrome is a heterogeneous disease. Epileptic seizures have 
been reported in some cases. Video-PSG is mandatory for the identification of 
nocturnal breathing abnormalities and sleep-related motor paroxysmal episodes.

© 2022 Peraita-Adrados.

DOI: 10.2147/NSS.S369097
PMCID: PMC9427012
PMID: 36052101

Conflict of interest statement: The author reports no conflicts of interest in 
this work.