---
reference_id: "PMID:28324176"
title: Bhlha9 regulates apical ectodermal ridge formation during limb development.
authors:
- Kataoka K
- Matsushima T
- Ito Y
- Sato T
- Yokoyama S
- Asahara H
journal: J Bone Miner Metab
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00774-017-0820-0
keywords:
- Animals
- "Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ectoderm/embryology, metabolism"
- Extremities/embryology
- "Fibroblast Growth Factor 8/genetics, metabolism"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Phenotype
- Phosphoproteins/metabolism
- Trans-Activators/metabolism
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Bhlha9 regulates apical ectodermal ridge formation during limb development.
**Authors:** Kataoka K, Matsushima T, Ito Y, Sato T, Yokoyama S, Asahara H
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Metab (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00774-017-0820-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00774-017-0820-0)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Metab. 2018 Jan;36(1):64-72. doi: 10.1007/s00774-017-0820-0. Epub
 2017 Mar 21.

Bhlha9 regulates apical ectodermal ridge formation during limb development.

Kataoka K(1), Matsushima T(1), Ito Y(1), Sato T(1), Yokoyama S(2), Asahara 
H(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems BioMedicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 
1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8510, Japan.
(2)Department of Systems Biomedicine, National Research Institute for Child 
Health and Development, 2-10-1 Okura, Setagaya, Tokyo, 157-0074, Japan.
(3)Department of Systems BioMedicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 
1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8510, Japan. asahara.syst@tmd.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Systems Biomedicine, National Research Institute for Child 
Health and Development, 2-10-1 Okura, Setagaya, Tokyo, 157-0074, Japan. 
asahara.syst@tmd.ac.jp.

Split hand/foot malformation (SHFM) and SHFM combined with long-bone deficiency 
(SHFLD) are congenital dysgeneses of the limb. Although six different 
loci/mutations (SHFM1-SHFM6) have been found from studies on families with SHFM, 
the causes and associated pathogenic mechanisms for a large number of patients 
remain unidentified. On the basis of the identification of a duplicated gene 
region involving BHLHA9 in some affected families, BHLHA9 was identified as a 
novel SHFM/SHFLD-related gene. Although Bhlha9 is predicted to participate in 
limb development as a transcription factor, its precise function is unclear. 
Therefore, to study its physiological function, we generated a Bhlha9-knockout 
mouse and investigated gene expression and the associated phenotype in the limb 
bud. Bhlha9-knockout mice showed syndactyly and poliosis in the limb. Moreover, 
some apical ectodermal ridge (AER) formation related genes, including Trp63, 
exhibited an aberrant expression pattern in the limb bud of Bhlha9-knockout 
mice; TP63 (Trp63) was regulated by Bhlha9 on the basis of in vitro analysis. 
These observations suggest that Bhlha9 regulates AER formation during 
limb/finger development by regulating the expression of some 
AER-formation-related genes and abnormal expression of Bhlha9 leads to SHFM and 
SHFLD via dysregulation of AER formation and associated gene expression.

DOI: 10.1007/s00774-017-0820-0
PMCID: PMC6324935
PMID: 28324176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.

Split hand/foot malformation (SHFM) is a form of limb dysgenesis. Its phenotype is extremely variable between and within families, ranging from ectrodactyly and syndactyly to monodactyly. Six loci/mutations (SHFM1– SHFM6) were found to be associated with human nonsyndromic SHFM [1]. Representatively, mutations in TP63 (Trp63), encoding a homologue of the tumor suppressor p53, were identified as a causative factor for SHFM4 [2, 3]. TP63 (Trp63) RNA is transcribed from two different transcription start sites, yielding both transactivating (TA-p63) and nontransactivating (ΔN-p63) isotypes. The dominant negative isotype ΔN-p63 is specifically expressed in the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) and is thought to function as a transcription factor that is involved in AER maintenance [4]. In fact, the forelimbs of Trp63-knockout mice are severely malformed, lacking the radius and autopod [5, 6]. However, the disease-associated genes and pathogenic mechanisms in a large number of nonsyndromic SHFM cases, including SHFM combined with long-bone deficiency (SHFLD), remain unidentified.

Recent reports have indicated that 17p13.3 duplications should be considered the commonest cause of SHFM/ SHFLD [7–14]. In particular, Klopocki et al. [9] scrutinized the minimal critical region (11.8 kb) by analyzing 17 families with 17p13.3 duplications, and identified BHLHA9 [which encodes basic helix–loop–helix (bHLH) family member A9] as a novel SHFM/SHFLD-related gene.

BHLHA9 encodes a member of the bHLH transcription factor family that is predicted to participate in limb development as a transcription factor. Knockdown of Bhlha9 in zebrafish results in severely truncated pectoral fins [9]. Furthermore, Bhlha9-knockout mice exhibit various degrees of syndactyly [15]. In addition, Malik et al. [16] demonstrated that three missense mutations affecting the highly conserved DNA-binding domain of BHLHA9 are associated with mesoaxial synostotic syndactyly, Malik–Percin type. From these studies, it appears that Bhlha9 is a key molecular player in limb and finger development. However, the precise function of Bhlha9 as a transcription factor is unknown, and its downstream genes have not been identified. To elucidate the physiological function of Bhlha9, we generated knockout mice and investigated their phenotypes and gene expression patterns in the limb bud.

All animal experiments were performed according to protocols approved by the institutional animal care and use committees of the National Institute for Child Health and Development and Tokyo Medical and Dental University. A vector was constructed for replacement of the endogenous Bhlha9 locus with the Venus-Cre and PGK-Neo cassette via homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells (Fig. S1a). Through PCR, 5ʹ and 3ʹ sequences flanking the endogenous Bhlha9 locus were amplified from a C57BL/6 genomic bacterial artificial chromosome clone (BACPAC Resource Center). These homology arms were cloned into a vector harboring both a neomycin resistance cassette for positive selection and a diphtheria toxin A encoding gene for negative selection. The targeting vector was linearized and electroporated into TT2F embryonic stem cells. Recombinant embryonic stem cell clones were isolated after culturing in medium containing G418 antibiotic (Invitrogen) and were screened for proper integration by Southern blotting with use of a 5ʹ probe (Fig. S1b). The resulting chimeric offspring were crossed with C57BL/6 mice, and germline transmission was confirmed by PCR (Fig. S1c). The mouse genotypes were determined by PCR with use of tail DNA as the template and the following primers: T1, 5ʹ-TGAAGCTG TGAGACCAGGACA-3ʹ: T2, 5ʹ-GGCCGTGACACTCCA GGT-3ʹ; and T3, 5ʹ-GTTCTGCTGGTAGTGGTCGG-3ʹ.

In situ hybridization on whole mounts and sections was performed as previously described [17]. Briefly, tissues were embedded in optimal cutting temperature compound (Sakura Finetek) and ash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Specimens were sectioned to 16μm with use of a CM3050 S cryostat (Leica) and hybridized with digoxigenin-labeled antisense RNA probes. Detailed descriptions of the RNA probes are available from the authors on request.

For histological analysis of the interdigit, the forelimbs were harvested from adult mice and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate-buffered saline at 4 °C overnight. Tissues were dehydrated, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned; these sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (Wako). Skeleton specimens from 3-month-old adult Bhlha9-knockout and wild-type littermate control mice were stained with Alcian blue/alizarin red as previously described [18]. The length of the limb skeleton was measured by analysis of an image obtained with an SZX16 stereoscopic microscope (Olympus).

Total RNA was isolated from limb buds and cells with use ISOGEN (Nippon Gene), and was reverse-transcribed with a ReverTraAce kit (Toyobo) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Complementary DNA was used for quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR), and qPCR was performed with use of Thunderbird SYBR mix (Toyobo). β-Actin expression served as the control for messenger RNA expression. Changes in gene expression were quantified by the ΔΔCT method. The primer sequences for qPCR are described in Table S1.

RNA samples were obtained from the whole limb bud of embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5) wild-type and Bhlha9-knockout embryos, as described already. Total RNA (200 ng) was reverse-transcribed and biotinylated with use of a GeneChip 3′ IVT Express kit (Affymetrix). Finally, the complementary RNA was hydrolyzed and hybridized to a GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 array (Affymetrix). The microarray data were summarized with use of the MAS 5.0 method. We applied the following thresholds for data analysis: signal intensity greater than 100, detection call present, and signal intensity upregulated or downregulated more than twofold compared with that of the control. Microarray data are shown in Table S2 and were deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus repository under accession number GSE81223.

To prepare pMIGR-3×FLAG-BHLHA9, complementary DNA encoding full-length human BHLHA9 was artificially constructed (GenScript) and cloned into pMIGR (Addgene). Each 4-kb upstream region of the TA-p63 and ΔN-p63 first protein coding exon was cloned from the A549 genome and subcloned into a promoterless pNL1.1 nanoluciferase vector to be used for luciferase assays. The plasmids were sequenced to verify the absence of mutations.

HeLa cells and PLAT-E cells were cultured in 10% fetal bovine serum–Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium containing 1% penicillin–streptomycin (all from Sigma-Aldrich). PLAT-E cells were transfected with the pMIGR construct (as a control) or the pMIGR-3×FLAG-BHLHA9 construct with use of FugeneHD (Promega). Forty-eight hours later, the media were collected, filtered, and transferred to the HeLa stable cell line in a medium containing puromycin (1μg/ml). Control or 3×FLAG-BHLHA9-expressing HeLa stable cells were cotransfected with each TP63 promoter–nanoluciferase reporter gene construct and the pGL4.13 luciferase construct (for normalization; Promega) with use of Fugene HD (Promega). Cell extracts were prepared 48 h after transfection, and luciferase activity was measured with a Nano-Glo dual-luciferase reporter assay system (Promega).

First, we assessed endogenous Bhlha9 expression in the limb buds of mouse embryos. Previous studies using a LacZ reporter system showed that Bhlha9 is expressed in the ectodermal region of the digit near the AER on embryonic days 10–15 [15]; however, a time-dependent change in endogenous Bhlha9 expression had not been demonstrated. Therefore, we investigated endogenous Bhlha9 expression in the limb bud using in situ hybridization with whole mounts and sections from different stages of embryonic development.

Endogenous Bhlha9 expression in the limb bud was clearly detected on both the dorsal side and the ventral side of the autopod surface, covering the progress zone near the AER, at E10.5 to embryonic day 11.5 (E11.5) (Fig. 1, panels a, b, d, e, g, h). In contrast, Bhlha9 expression in the limb bud was undetectable at embryonic day 12.5 (E12.5) in whole mounts, and was barely visible in tissue sections (Fig. 1, panels c, f, i). We were unable to perform this technique at later developmental stages (data not shown). This observation was confirmed with use of limb bud RNA and qPCR analysis (Fig. 1j). From these results, we estimated that Bhlha9 potentially functions during early embryonic stages (E10.5–E11.5) but not during later developmental stages.

To study the physiological function of Bhlha9, we generated the Bhlha9-knockout mouse and investigated its phenotype. Our Bhlha9-knockout mouse was constructed by replacement of endogenous Bhlha9 with Venus-Cre (Fig. S1a). Unfortunately, Venus-Cre protein expression in Bhlha9-knockout mouse limb bud was not detectable by general biological analyses, although genome mutation was confirmed by Southern blotting and PCR analysis (Fig. S1b, c).

As stated in a previous report, the Bhlha9-knockout mouse showed syndactyly in the forelimb bud (Fig. 2a) [15]. Furthermore, we also found the new phenotype that the Bhlha9-knockout mouse frequently showed poliosis in the hindlimb finger (Fig. 2b). Neither phenotype was observed in heterozygous mice. Next, we used the forelimb to investigate the nature of the syndactyly and the involvement of soft and/or skeletal tissues in it. We performed alizarin red and alcian blue staining of bone and cartilage respectively (Fig. 2c). We found no apparent skeletal abnormalities in the hand plates or arms; hence, the mechanism did not involve defects in skeletal patterning. To clarify the detailed phenotype of the Bhlha9-knockout mice, we investigated their interdigital webbing (Fig. 2d). The fused interdigital webbing in adult Bhlha9-knockout mice (3 months old) exhibited a large number of hematoxylin-positive cells by hematoxylin and eosin staining. This result shows a disruption of cell death in the Bhlha9-knockout mouse interdigital webbing tissue, as stated in previous reports [15].

The Bhlha9-knockout mouse exhibited abnormal limb development and a disruption of cell death in interdigital webbing tissue (Fig. 2) [15]; however, the molecular mechanism of this phenotype remains unknown. Hence, to investigate the physiological function of BHLHA9 as a transcription factor, we performed global gene expression analysis using limb bud RNA. Since Bhlha9 expression was predominant at the E10.5 embryonic stage (Fig. 1), we used E10.5 limb bud RNA for this experiment.

No apparent changes in the expression of major programmed-cell-death-related genes were found in Bhlha9-knockout mouse limb buds by microarray analysis. However, several genes related to limb development, including Trp63, were highly upregulated in the limb bud of Bhlha9-knockout mice (Fig. 3a, Table S2). Differential expression of selected genes was confirmed by qPCR analysis. It was evident that Trp63 and Fgf8, which is a gene downstream of Trp63 and a representative inhibitor of interdigital cell apoptosis, were upregulated in the limb bud of Bhlha9-knockout mice (Fig. 3b). In contrast, the expression of syndactyly-related genes was unaltered. In addition, Trp63 and Fgf8 overexpression in Bhlha9-knockout mouse limb buds was not confirmed at embryonic day 13.5 (E13.5) (Fig. S2). These results indicate that Bhlha9 transiently regulates the expression of Trp63 and its downstream genes during embryonic stages E10.5–E11.5, but not at later developmental stages.

TP63 (Trp63) and Fgf8 are expressed in the AER, and serve as key molecular modulators of limb development [5, 6, 19, 20]. On the basis of gene expression analysis, abnormal expression of these genes was confirmed in E10.5 limb buds of Bhlha9-knockout mice. Thus, we investigated the expression patterns of Trp63 and Fgf8 in E10.5 Bhlha9-knockout mouse limb buds using in situ hybridization with whole mounts and sections.

Trp63 and Fgf8 were clearly detected in the AER of wild-type mouse limb buds (Fig. 4a, b). However, in the AER of Bhlha9-knockout mouse limb buds, the regions that expressed Trp63 and Fgf8 were expanded to the progress zone (Fig. 4c, d). The wild-type mouse AER also had a characteristic convex structure; however, this characteristic shape was not detected in the Bhlha9-knockout mouse AER (Fig. 4b, d).

On the basis of in situ hybridization analysis using whole mounts and sections, we hypothesized that Bhlha9 regulates the expression of Trp63 in the progress zone. We validated this contention by in vitro analysis. TP63 (Trp63) RNA is transcribed from two different transcription start sites, yielding the TA-p63 and ΔN-p63 isotypes. Especially, the dominant-negative isoform (ΔN-p63) is found to be specifically expressed in the AER, and is thought to function as a transcription factor that is involved in AER maintenance [5]. First, we constructed TA-p63 and ΔN-p63 promoter driven luciferase reporter genes to investigate the effect of Bhlha9 on the transcription of these genes (Fig. 5a). We subcloned the 4-kb upstream regions of the TA-p63 and ΔN-p63 first protein coding exons, which include several E-box domains that are recognized by the bHLH transcription factor protein family. We also used the HeLa cell line for in vitro analysis and prepared control and 3×FLAG-BHLHA9-expressing HeLa stable cells using retrovirus systems (Fig. 5b), because these cells can be used to detect the expression of endogenous TP63 (data not shown). Luciferase assays using TA-p63 and ΔN-p63 promoter driven luciferase reporter genes resulted in low luciferase activity in 3×FLAG-BHLHA9-expressing HeLa stable cells as compared with that in control HeLa stable cells (Fig. 5c). Furthermore, endogenous TP63 expression, including TA-p63 and ΔN-p63 expression, was downregulated in 3×FLAG-BHLHA9-expressing HeLa stable cells (Fig. 5d). Both results suggest that Bhlha9 directly sup- presses the expression of TP63 (Trp63), including TA-p63 and ΔN-p63. Our findings suggest that Bhlha9 maintains the AER formation by regulating TP63 (Trp63) expression and its downstream genes including Fgf8, which is known as an inhibitor of interdigital cell apoptosis, in the progress zone. The results suggest that this occurs at an earlier embryonic stage than the interdigital apoptosis stage, and that this function might contribute to finger morphogenesis.

We have reported for the first time that endogenous Bhlha9 was prominently expressed at embryonic stage E10.5 on both the dorsal surface and the ventral surface, covering the progress zone near the AER (Fig. 1). Moreover, abnormalities in limb development, specifically, syndactyly in the forelimb bud and poliosis in the hindlimb finger, were found in Bhlha9-knockout mice (Fig. 2). On the basis of these observations, we hypothesized that BHLHA9 acts as a transcription factor during an early embryonic stage rather than during the interdigital cell apoptosis stage. As such, we determined that two AER-formation-related genes, Trp63 and Fgf8, exhibit transient aberrant expression patterns in Bhlha9-knockout mouse limb buds at E10.5, but not at E13.5 (Figs. 3, S2). It has been reported that the AER formation regresses after E12.5 [21]. Previous reports and our findings indicate that Bhlha9 transiently regulates the expression of Trp63 and its downstream genes in the AER and the progress zone during embryonic stages E10.5–E11.5, but not at later developmental stages.

Limb development results from gradients of signaling molecules in three spatial dimensions: proximodigital, anteroposterior, and dorsoventral [22]. Specifically, for the development of the anteroposterior dimension, the AER contains a specialized cell cluster that expresses TP63 (Trp63) and Fgf8. Failure to form the AER leads to a truncation of limb skeletal structures [23, 24]. The forelimbs of Trp63-knockout mice exhibit the abnormal expression of several genes, including Fgf8, and severe malformations such as a missing radius and autopod [5, 6]. It was also noted that mutations underlying SHFM4 exist in the TP63 gene [3]. Therefore, TP63 (Trp63) is thought to act as an AER maintenance gene. Similarly, Fgf8 is also considered as an essential genes induced by TP63 (Trp63) for AER structure [6, 25]. Cre-mediated inactivation of Fgf8 in the early limb ectoderm resulted in a substantial reduction in limb bud size, a delay in Shh expression, dysregulation of Fgf4 expression, and abnormalities in skeletal elements [26]. Furthermore, fibroblast growth factor (FGF) molecules, including FGF8, which is produced in the AER, suppress bone morphogenetic protein production in the interdigital tissue and act as inhibitors for the interdigital cell apoptosis [27]. Once the AER regresses, FGF production in the AER declines and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) expression in the interdigital tissue is upregulated, leading to interdigital cell apoptosis [28–30]. Consequently, studies on the expression and maintenance of TP63 (Trp63) and Fgf8 are necessary to enhance our understanding of AER function, finger morphogenesis, and pathogenesis of SHFM and SHFLD.

Our investigation has revealed for the first time that disruption of Bhlha9 expression in the progress zone leads to the upregulation and dysregulation of Trp63 and Fgf8 in the AER and the progress zone at E10.5 rather than at the interdigital cell apoptosis stage (Figs. 3, 4). Furthermore, the AER of the wild-type mouse had a characteristic convex structure, which was not clearly detected in Bhlha9-null limb buds. These observations indicate that Bhlha9 expressed in the progress zone mainly contributes to the maintenance of AER formation by regulating Trp63 expression in the AER and the progress zone at E10.5. This notion was corroborated by in vitro analysis, which included luciferase assays and qPCR (Fig. 5). A previous publication indicated that interdigital cell apoptosis was inhibited in Bhlha9-null limb [15]. Interdigital cell apoptosis normally occurs after AER regression [28–30]. Therefore, we speculated that cell death in the AER of Bhlha9-null limb buds is abnormal compared with that in wild-type mouse limb buds. However, no significant difference in AER cell death was found in Bhlha9-knockout mouse limb buds on the basis of Nile blue sulfate staining, which is used to detect apoptotic cells (Fig. S3). On the basis of previous reports and our finding of Trp63 and Fgf8 overexpression in Bhlha9-null limb buds, we suggest that abnormal AER formation and overexpression of Fgf8, which is an interdigital cell apoptosis inhibitor, induced by Trp63 in the Bhlha9-null AER and progress zone inhibits interdigital cell apoptosis, but not AER regression, leading to the syndactyly (Fig. 6). Consequently, our observations suggest that abnormal expression of Bhlha9 leads to SHFM and SHFLD via dysregulation of AER formation and associated gene expression.