---
reference_id: "PMID:30380124"
title: Dietary restrictions for people with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency.
authors:
- La Vieille S
- Lefebvre DE
- Khalid AF
- Decan MR
- Godefroy S
journal: Nutr Rev
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/nutrit/nuy053
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dietary restrictions for people with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency.
**Authors:** La Vieille S, Lefebvre DE, Khalid AF, Decan MR, Godefroy S
**Journal:** Nutr Rev (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nutrit/nuy053](https://doi.org/10.1093/nutrit/nuy053)

## Content

1. Nutr Rev. 2019 Feb 1;77(2):96-106. doi: 10.1093/nutrit/nuy053.

Dietary restrictions for people with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
deficiency.

La Vieille S(1)(2), Lefebvre DE(1), Khalid AF(3), Decan MR(1), Godefroy S(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Bureau of Chemical Safety, Food Directorate, Health Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Food Sciences, Faculty of Agriculture and Food Sciences, 
Université Laval, Québec City, Québec, Canada.
(3)Health Policy PhD Program, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Institute of Nutrition and Functional Foods, Université Laval, Québec City, 
Québec, Canada.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is the most common enzyme 
deficiency in the world and renders those affected susceptible to potentially 
severe oxidative hemolysis. Although the resulting hemolysis is most often 
associated with drug exposure, it has also been reported after consumption of 
certain foods. With the exception of review articles that reiterated the 
historical knowledge that fava beans can provoke severe oxidative hemolysis in 
individuals with G6PD deficiency, very few articles have examined the safety of 
other food ingredients and food additives for people with G6PD deficiency. Some 
articles that associated specific foods with hemolysis appeared to be 
speculative and based on limited information. The objective of this review was 
to examine the association between foods, including food additives, and the 
triggering factors of acute hemolysis. The literature was searched for studies 
and case reports on food consumption and G6PD deficiency. In this review, fava 
beans were found to be the only food for which there is conclusive clinical 
evidence linking the risk of hemolytic anemia to individuals with G6PD 
deficiency. Food additives, at their permitted level of use in North America, 
can be consumed safely by most patients with G6PD deficiency.

DOI: 10.1093/nutrit/nuy053
PMID: 30380124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]