---
reference_id: "PMID:37511127"
title: Deciphering the Signaling Mechanisms of Osteosarcoma Tumorigenesis.
authors:
- Nirala BK
- Yamamichi T
- Yustein JT
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms241411367
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Humans
- Child
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases
- Hedgehog Proteins
- Osteosarcoma/metabolism
- Carcinogenesis/genetics
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic"
- Bone Neoplasms/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deciphering the Signaling Mechanisms of Osteosarcoma Tumorigenesis.
**Authors:** Nirala BK, Yamamichi T, Yustein JT
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms241411367](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241411367)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jul 12;24(14):11367. doi: 10.3390/ijms241411367.

Deciphering the Signaling Mechanisms of Osteosarcoma Tumorigenesis.

Nirala BK(1), Yamamichi T(1), Yustein JT(1).

Author information:
(1)Aflac Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322,
USA.

Osteosarcoma (OS) is the predominant primary bone tumor in the pediatric and
adolescent populations. It has high metastatic potential, with the lungs being
the most common site of metastasis. In contrast to many other sarcomas, OS lacks
conserved translocations or genetic mutations; instead, it has heterogeneous
abnormalities, including somatic DNA copy number alteration, ploidy, chromosomal
amplification, and chromosomal loss and gain. Unfortunately, clinical outcomes
have not significantly improved in over 30 years. Currently, no effective
molecularly targeted therapies are available for this disease. Several genomic
studies showed inactivation in the tumor suppressor genes, including p53, RB,
and ATRX, and hyperactivation of the tumor promoter genes, including MYC and
MDM2, in OS. Alterations in the major signaling pathways, including the
PI3K/AKT/mTOR, JAK/STAT, Wnt/β-catenin, NOTCH, Hedgehog/Gli, TGF-β, RTKs,
RANK/RANKL, and NF-κB signaling pathways, have been identified in OS development
and metastasis. Although OS treatment is currently based on surgical excision
and systematic multiagent therapies, several potential targeted therapies are in
development. This review focuses on the major signaling pathways of OS, and we
propose a biological rationale to consider novel and targeted therapies in the
future.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241411367
PMCID: PMC10379831
PMID: 37511127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
