---
reference_id: "PMID:25405822"
title: "Rheumatoid vasculitis: an update."
authors:
- Makol A
- Matteson EL
- Warrington KJ
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000126
keywords:
- Antirheumatic Agents/therapeutic use
- Diagnostic Imaging/methods
- Global Health
- Humans
- Immunologic Factors/therapeutic use
- Morbidity/trends
- "Rheumatoid Vasculitis/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rheumatoid vasculitis: an update.
**Authors:** Makol A, Matteson EL, Warrington KJ
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0000000000000126](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0000000000000126)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2015 Jan;27(1):63-70. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000126.

Rheumatoid vasculitis: an update.

Makol A(1), Matteson EL, Warrington KJ.

Author information:
(1)aDivision of Rheumatology bDepartment of Health Sciences Research, Mayo 
Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Rheumatoid vasculitis is the most serious extra-articular 
complication of rheumatoid arthritis, with high morbidity and mortality noted in 
multiple prior reports. Recent studies have expanded our understanding of this 
entity in the era of modern immunosuppressive therapy. New clinical predictors 
and possible protective factors have also been identified.
RECENT FINDINGS: This review provides an update on the epidemiology, clinical 
correlates, predictors, therapy and outcomes of rheumatoid vasculitis over the 
past decade. During this time, there has been increasing use of the 
treat-to-target management practices and incorporation of biologic response 
modifiers that have revolutionized rheumatoid arthritis treatment with better 
disease control and overall improved outcomes. The incidence of rheumatoid 
vasculitis has declined significantly in the past several decades, but morbidity 
and mortality continue to remain high, despite aggressive treatment with 
cyclophosphamide or biologic agents. Hydroxychloroquine and low-dose aspirin may 
have a protective role. There is ongoing debate about the role of newer 
biological therapies in prevention, treatment or even as a trigger for 
rheumatoid vasculitis.
SUMMARY: Rheumatoid vasculitis remains a rare yet challenging extra-articular 
manifestation of rheumatoid arthritis with high morbidity and mortality, despite 
aggressive use of disease-modifying therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000126
PMID: 25405822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]