---
reference_id: PMID:38618439
title: "A Narrative Review on Managing Retinopathy of Prematurity: Insights Into Pathogenesis, Screening, and Treatment Strategies."
authors:
- Bishnoi K
- Prasad R
- Upadhyay T
- Mathurkar S
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.56168
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Narrative Review on Managing Retinopathy of Prematurity: Insights Into Pathogenesis, Screening, and Treatment Strategies.
**Authors:** Bishnoi K, Prasad R, Upadhyay T, Mathurkar S
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.56168](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.56168)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Mar 14;16(3):e56168. doi: 10.7759/cureus.56168. eCollection 2024 
Mar.

A Narrative Review on Managing Retinopathy of Prematurity: Insights Into 
Pathogenesis, Screening, and Treatment Strategies.

Bishnoi K(1), Prasad R(2), Upadhyay T(2), Mathurkar S(2).

Author information:
(1)Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe Institute of Higher 
Education and Research, Wardha, IND.
(2)Ophthalmology, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe Institute of 
Higher Education and Research, Wardha, IND.

Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is a rare proliferative ocular condition that 
can happen in premature babies (born preterm <36 weeks) or who weigh <1.5 kg at 
birth (low birth weight babies). ROP is a major cause of childhood blindness. It 
is a premature disease since retina vascularization is completed only by 40 
weeks of life. The survivability for preterm infants has increased owing to 
recent improvements in neonatal care during the past decade. As a result, the 
prevalence of ROP has risen concurrently. The abnormal development of blood 
vessels in the retina is the cause of this illness. It occurs in two phases, 
phases 1 and 2. Most preterm infants weighing <1.5 kg need supplemental oxygen 
for respiratory support at birth. This leads to the initiation of phase 1 
(vasoconstrictive phase). Phase 1 is characterized by loss of maternal-fetal 
connection and hyperoxia due to supplemental oxygen therapy. Oxygen's 
vasoconstrictive and obliterative action is primarily observed in developing 
retinal vessels. The inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factor follows 
from this. Phase 2 (vasoproliferative phase) shows the dilatation and tortuosity 
of the bigger existing vessels together with neovascularization and 
proliferation of new vessels into the vitreous when the baby is shifted from 
respiratory support to room air. Now, the retina gets hypoxic, where the retina 
becomes more metabolically active but is yet minimally vascularized, leading to 
VEGF-induced vasoproliferation, which might result in retinal detachment. 
Patients with ROP face the danger of loss of vision. If correct and quick 
treatment is not provided, they might land into permanent blindness. Yet, ROP 
remains one of the most preventable causes of childhood blindness worldwide. 
Blindness caused by ROP can only be avoided if screening programs are readily 
available, pertinent, and appropriate. The initial stage in the therapy of ROP 
is the screening of premature neonates. Timely screening and management for ROP 
is important to avoid this irreversible loss of vision. The treatment is based 
on the severity of the disease. Management may include pharmacological 
interventions like intravitreal and anti-vascular endothelial growth factor and 
non-pharmacological interventions like laser surgery, vitrectomy, and scleral 
buckling. We conducted a thorough literature search of studies on pathogenesis, 
risk factors, classification, and various treatment options for retinopathy of 
prematurity in infants, using a mixture of pertinent keywords. Only those 
studies published in peer-reviewed journals between 2010 and 2023 and written in 
English were included. Duplicate studies, unavailable in full-text for free, or 
studies unrelated to our subject matter were excluded. After thoroughly 
evaluating the selected studies, the results were synthesized and presented 
narratively. This article sheds light on the pathogenesis of ROP, particularly 
its relation to oxygen use, screening, and potential therapeutic management of 
ROP. Today advances in screening techniques have improved the outcomes for 
infants with ROP. Still, ongoing research is needed to optimize management 
strategies and reduce the burden of this condition.

Copyright © 2024, Bishnoi et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.56168
PMCID: PMC11015904
PMID: 38618439

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.