---
reference_id: "PMID:20043327"
title: "Pancreatic cysts: preoperative diagnosis and clinical management."
authors:
- Pitman MB
- Lewandrowski K
- Shen J
- Sahani D
- Brugge W
- Fernandez-del Castillo C
journal: Cancer Cytopathol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/cncy.20059
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pancreatic cysts: preoperative diagnosis and clinical management.
**Authors:** Pitman MB, Lewandrowski K, Shen J, Sahani D, Brugge W, Fernandez-del Castillo C
**Journal:** Cancer Cytopathol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncy.20059](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncy.20059)

## Content

1. Cancer Cytopathol. 2010 Feb 25;118(1):1-13. doi: 10.1002/cncy.20059.

Pancreatic cysts: preoperative diagnosis and clinical management.

Pitman MB(1), Lewandrowski K, Shen J, Sahani D, Brugge W, Fernandez-del Castillo 
C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02114, USA. mpitman@partners.org

Preoperative diagnosis of pancreatic cysts benefits from integrating the 
clinical, radiological, and cytological features. As patient management 
algorithms evolve to increasingly nonsurgical options, accuracy in 
distinguishing mucinous from nonmucinous and benign from malignant mucinous 
cysts is important. This review focuses on pseudocysts, serous cystadenomas, 
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs), and mucinous cystic neoplasms. 
Patients with pseudocysts almost always present with pancreatitis and are 
usually medically managed. Radiological studies reveal a unilocular cyst mostly 
in the pancreatic tail. Cyst fluid is thin, with high amylase but low 
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels. DNA mutations are absent. Serous 
cystadenomas are benign and do not require resection. Patients are usually 
asymptomatic and have microcystic or macrocystic masses anywhere in the 
pancreas. Cytology is frequently nondiagnostic. CEA and amylase levels are low. 
DNA analysis may reveal loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at 3p if associated with 
Von Hippel-Lindau disease. Neoplastic mucinous cysts are highly variable in 
their presentation. Most are resected. Mucinous cystic neoplasms typically arise 
in the body or tail of the pancreas of middle-aged women and demonstrate a 
septated cyst without dilatation of the main pancreatic duct. Branch duct IPMNs 
are more common in the pancreatic head of elderly men. Main duct dilatation 
correlates with main duct or combined type IPMN. Both types of mucinous cysts 
produce variable amounts of mucin. Cytologically nonmalignant but atypical 
epithelial cells, even when scant, are an indication of a high risk for 
malignancy. High CEA level supports a mucinous cyst, as do KRAS mutation and 
good quality DNA levels. KRAS mutation and multiple LOH support malignancy.

(c) 2009 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncy.20059
PMID: 20043327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]