---
reference_id: "PMID:12928496"
title: Specific sequence changes in multiple transcript system DYT3 are associated with X-linked dystonia parkinsonism.
authors:
- Nolte D
- Niemann S
- Müller U
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1831949100
keywords:
- Adult
- Base Sequence
- "Chromosomes, Human, X"
- DNA/chemistry
- Dystonia/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Male
- Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Parkinsonian Disorders/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Specific sequence changes in multiple transcript system DYT3 are associated with X-linked dystonia parkinsonism.
**Authors:** Nolte D, Niemann S, Müller U
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1831949100](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1831949100)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Sep 2;100(18):10347-52. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1831949100. Epub 2003 Aug 19.

Specific sequence changes in multiple transcript system DYT3 are associated with 
X-linked dystonia parkinsonism.

Nolte D(1), Niemann S, Müller U.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Justus-Liebig-Universität, Schlangenzahl 14, 35392 
Giessen, Germany.

X-linked dystonia parkinsonism (XDP) is an X-linked recessive adult onset 
movement disorder characterized by both dystonia and parkinsonism. We report 
delineation of the disease gene within a 300-kb interval of Xq13.1 by allelic 
association. Sequencing of this region in a patient revealed five 
disease-specific single-nucleotide changes (here referred to as DSC) and a 48-bp 
deletion unique to XDP. One of the DSCs is located within an exon of a not 
previously described multiple transcript system that is composed of at least 16 
exons. There is a minimum of three different transcription start sites that 
encode four different transcripts. Two of these transcripts include distal 
portions of the TAF1 gene (TATA-box binding protein-associated factor 1) and are 
alternatively spliced. Three exons overlap with ING2 (a putative tumor 
suppressor) and with a homologue of CIS4 (cytokine-inducible SH2 protein 4), 
both of which are encoded by the opposite strand. Although all DSCs are located 
within this multiple transcript system, only DSC3 lies within an exon. This exon 
is used by all alternative transcripts making a pathogenic role of DSC3 in XDP 
likely. The multiple transcript system is therefore referred to as DYT3 (disease 
locus in XDP).

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1831949100
PMCID: PMC193564
PMID: 12928496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]