---
reference_id: PMID:20301375
title: Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 3.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Paulson H
- Shakkottai V
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 3.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Paulson H, Shakkottai V

## Content

1. Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 3.

Paulson H(1), Shakkottai V(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
1998 Oct 10 [updated 2020 Jun 4].

Author information:
(1)Professor, Department of Neurology, University of Michigan Medical School, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan
(2)Associate Professor, Departments of Neurology and of Molecular and 
Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3), also known as 
Machado-Joseph disease (MJD), is characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia 
and variable findings including pyramidal signs, a dystonic-rigid extrapyramidal 
syndrome, significant peripheral amyotrophy and generalized areflexia, 
progressive external ophthalmoplegia, action-induced facial and lingual 
fasciculations, and bulging eyes. Neurologic findings tend to evolve as the 
disorder progresses.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SCA3 is established in a proband with 
suggestive findings and a heterozygous abnormal CAG trinucleotide repeat 
expansion in ATXN3 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management is supportive as no 
medication slows the course of disease. The goals of treatment are to maximize 
function and reduce complications. It is recommended that each individual be 
managed by a multidisciplinary team of relevant specialists such as 
neurologists, occupational therapists, physical therapists, physiatrists, 
orthopedists, nutritionists, speech therapists, social workers, and 
psychologists. Various manifestations may respond to pharmacologic agents. 
Regular physical activity is recommended, including combined physical and 
occupational therapy focused on gait and coordination. Canes and walkers help 
prevent falling; motorized scooters, weighted eating utensils, and dressing 
hooks help to maintain independence. Speech therapy and communication devices 
may benefit those with dysarthria, and dietary modification those with 
dysphagia. Other recommendations include home adaptations to prevent falls and 
improve mobility, dietary supplements if caloric intake is reduced, weight 
control to facilitate ambulation and mobility, and caution with general 
anesthesia. Surveillance: Annual assessments (or more frequently as needed) of 
neurologic findings (e.g., dysarthria, dysphagia, bladder dysfunction, 
neuropathic pain, cognitive and psychiatric manifestations), weight and 
nutritional status, and social support.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SCA3 is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Each 
child of an affected individual has a 50% chance of inheriting the ATXN3 CAG 
repeat expansion. Once the CAG repeat expansion has been identified in an 
affected family member, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk and 
preimplantation genetic testing are possible. Note: The prenatal finding of an 
ATXN3 CAG repeat expansion cannot be used to accurately predict onset, severity, 
type of symptoms, or rate of progression of SCA3.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301375