---
reference_id: "PMID:17164511"
title: Use of the recto-sigmoid index to diagnose Hirschsprung's disease.
authors:
- Garcia R
- Arcement C
- Hormaza L
- Haymon ML
- Ward K
- Velasco C
- Correa H
- Congeni JD
- Brown R
- Tyson P
- Udall J
- Schmidt-Sommerfeld E
journal: Clin Pediatr (Phila)
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1177/0009922806289328
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Use of the recto-sigmoid index to diagnose Hirschsprung's disease.
**Authors:** Garcia R, Arcement C, Hormaza L, Haymon ML, Ward K, Velasco C, Correa H, Congeni JD, Brown R, Tyson P, Udall J, Schmidt-Sommerfeld E
**Journal:** Clin Pediatr (Phila) (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0009922806289328](https://doi.org/10.1177/0009922806289328)

## Content

1. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2007 Jan;46(1):59-63. doi: 10.1177/0009922806289328.

Use of the recto-sigmoid index to diagnose Hirschsprung's disease.

Garcia R(1), Arcement C, Hormaza L, Haymon ML, Ward K, Velasco C, Correa H, 
Congeni JD, Brown R, Tyson P, Udall J, Schmidt-Sommerfeld E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology, State University 
Health Sciences Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA.

The recto-sigmoid index on barium enema may aid in the diagnosis of 
Hirschsprung's disease. However, data on its reliability in different age groups 
are sparse. The recto-sigmoid index and transitional zone were evaluated blindly 
in 107 patients with diagnostic rectal suction biopsies. Patients were divided 
into 3 groups: neonates, infants older than 1 month, and children. The 
recto-sigmoid index and transitional zone agreed with the histopathologic 
diagnosis in 79% and 87% of the cases, respectively. Their negative predictive 
values reached clinical significance in infants and children but not in 
neonates. Their positive predictive values were not significant in any age 
group. The recto-sigmoid index identified 4 patients with recto-sigmoid 
Hirschsprung's disease whose diagnosis was missed by evaluating the transitional 
zone alone.

DOI: 10.1177/0009922806289328
PMID: 17164511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]