---
reference_id: "PMID:24194441"
title: Cognitive, sensory, and psychosocial characteristics in patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
authors:
- Brinckman DD
- Keppler-Noreuil KM
- Blumhorst C
- Biesecker LG
- Sapp JC
- Johnston JJ
- Wiggs EA
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36245
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cognitive, sensory, and psychosocial characteristics in patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
**Authors:** Brinckman DD, Keppler-Noreuil KM, Blumhorst C, Biesecker LG, Sapp JC, Johnston JJ, Wiggs EA
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36245](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36245)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Dec;161A(12):2964-71. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36245. Epub 
2013 Nov 5.

Cognitive, sensory, and psychosocial characteristics in patients with 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome.

Brinckman DD(1), Keppler-Noreuil KM, Blumhorst C, Biesecker LG, Sapp JC, 
Johnston JJ, Wiggs EA.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Disease Research Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

Forty-two patients with a clinical diagnosis of Bardet-Biedl syndrome ages 2-61 
years were given a neuropsychological test battery to evaluate cognitive, 
sensory, and behavioral functioning. These tests included the Wechsler scales of 
intelligence, Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test, Boston Naming Test, D-KEFS 
Verbal Fluency Test, D-KEFS Color-Word Interference Test, D-KEFS Sorting Test, 
Wide Range Achievement Test: Math and Reading Subtests, Purdue Pegboard, The 
University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test, Social Communication 
Questionnaire, Social Responsiveness Scale, and Behavior Assessment System for 
Children, Second Edition, Parent Rating Scale. On the age appropriate Wechsler 
scale, the mean Verbal Comprehension was 81 (n = 36), Working Memory was 81 (n = 
36), Perceptual Reasoning was 78 (n = 24) and Full Scale IQ was 75 (n = 26). 
Memory for a word list (Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test) was in the average 
range with a mean of 89 (n = 19). Fine motor speed was slow on the Purdue with 
mean scores 3-4 standard deviations below norms. All subjects were microsmic on 
the University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test. Of these 42 patients, 
only 6 were able to complete all auditory and visual tests; 52% were unable to 
complete the visual tests due to impaired vision. A wide range of behavioral 
issues were endorsed on questionnaires given to parents. Most had social skill 
deficits but no pattern of either externalizing or internalizing problems. We 
identify a characteristic neuro-behavioral profile in our cohort comprised of 
reduced IQ, impaired fine-motor function, and decreased olfaction.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36245
PMCID: PMC4419571
PMID: 24194441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]