---
reference_id: "PMID:40626033"
title: Imaging modalities used in follow-up after coil embolization of splenic artery aneurysm - a systematic review.
authors:
- Lamparski KJ
- Procyk G
- Sajdek M
- Gąsecka A
- Dryjańska-Lamparska A
- Maj E
- Januszewicz M
- Wojtaszek M
journal: Pol J Radiol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.5114/pjr/203730
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imaging modalities used in follow-up after coil embolization of splenic artery aneurysm - a systematic review.
**Authors:** Lamparski KJ, Procyk G, Sajdek M, Gąsecka A, Dryjańska-Lamparska A, Maj E, Januszewicz M, Wojtaszek M
**Journal:** Pol J Radiol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.5114/pjr/203730](https://doi.org/10.5114/pjr/203730)

## Content

1. Pol J Radiol. 2025 May 13;90:e224-e233. doi: 10.5114/pjr/203730. eCollection 
2025.

Imaging modalities used in follow-up after coil embolization of splenic artery 
aneurysm - a systematic review.

Lamparski KJ(1), Procyk G(2)(3), Sajdek M(1), Gąsecka A(2), Dryjańska-Lamparska 
A(1), Maj E(1), Januszewicz M(1), Wojtaszek M(1).

Author information:
(1)2 Department of Clinical Radiology, Medical University of Warsaw, Poland.
(2)1 Chair and Department of Cardiology, Medical University of Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Doctoral School, Medical University of Warsaw, Poland.

PURPOSE: Endovascular procedures have become the method of choice for treating 
splenic artery aneurysms (SSAs). However, there is no consensus regarding the 
intervals and imaging methods for follow-up examinations in patients with true 
SAAs treated with coil embolisation. We aimed to evaluate the utility of digital 
subtraction angiography (DSA), computed tomography angiography (CTA), magnetic 
resonance angiography (MRA), contrast-enhanced ultrasound, and duplex ultrasound 
(DUS) for follow-up screening of patients with SAAs treated with coil 
embolisation.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We conducted a systematic review according to the PRISMA 
2020 Statement. We searched 5 databases: Embase, Medline Ultimate, PubMed, 
Scopus, and Web of Science, each up to 10 April 2024. Eventually, 20 relevant 
original studies were included.
RESULTS: DSA is an invasive procedure that requires ionising radiation and 
should not be performed as a routine check-up. CTA is an appropriate examination 
method in patients immediately after coil embolisation in whom severe 
complications, primarily bleeding, are suspected. Still, it is unsuitable for 
assessing persistent aneurysmal sac perfusion. MRA is a promising noninvasive 
technique that does not require ionising radiation. Several studies have 
demonstrated the superiority of MRA over DSA in detecting small aneurysmal sac 
reperfusion. DUS, while not a standalone method, may supplement MRA in patients 
at low risk of reintervention.
CONCLUSIONS: The evidence regarding follow-up imaging methods after SAAs coil 
embolisation is limited and of low quality. MRA should be preferred over DSA for 
detecting aneurysmal sac reperfusion. Due to artifacts, CTA is suitable for 
emergency cases but not for routine follow-up.

© Pol J Radiol 2025.

DOI: 10.5114/pjr/203730
PMCID: PMC12232415
PMID: 40626033