---
reference_id: "PMID:34937736"
title: Population-Based Epidemiology Study of Paraneoplastic Neurologic Syndromes.
authors:
- Shah S
- Flanagan EP
- Paul P
- Smith CY
- Bryant SC
- Devine MF
- Lennon VA
- McKeon A
- Pittock SJ
- Dubey D
journal: Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000001124
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Disability-Adjusted Life Years
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Minnesota/epidemiology
- "Neoplasms/complications, epidemiology, mortality"
- "Paraneoplastic Syndromes, Nervous System/epidemiology, etiology, mortality"
- Prevalence
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Population-Based Epidemiology Study of Paraneoplastic Neurologic Syndromes.
**Authors:** Shah S, Flanagan EP, Paul P, Smith CY, Bryant SC, Devine MF, Lennon VA, McKeon A, Pittock SJ, Dubey D
**Journal:** Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXI.0000000000001124](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXI.0000000000001124)

## Content

1. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2021 Dec 22;9(2):e1124. doi: 
10.1212/NXI.0000000000001124. Print 2022 Mar.

Population-Based Epidemiology Study of Paraneoplastic Neurologic Syndromes.

Shah S(1), Flanagan EP(1), Paul P(1), Smith CY(1), Bryant SC(1), Devine MF(1), 
Lennon VA(1), McKeon A(1), Pittock SJ(1), Dubey D(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology (S.S., E.P.F., P.P., M.F.D., V.A.L., A.M., 
S.J.P., D.D.), Mayo Clinic; Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology 
(E.P.F., V.A.L., A.M., S.J.P., D.D.), Mayo Clinic College of Medicine; 
Department of Quantitative Health Sciences (C.Y.S., S.C.B.), Mayo Clinic; 
Olmsted Medical Center (M.F.D.); and Department of Immunology (V.A.L.), Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(2)From the Department of Neurology (S.S., E.P.F., P.P., M.F.D., V.A.L., A.M., 
S.J.P., D.D.), Mayo Clinic; Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology 
(E.P.F., V.A.L., A.M., S.J.P., D.D.), Mayo Clinic College of Medicine; 
Department of Quantitative Health Sciences (C.Y.S., S.C.B.), Mayo Clinic; 
Olmsted Medical Center (M.F.D.); and Department of Immunology (V.A.L.), Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN. dubey.divyanshu@mayo.edu.

OBJECTIVES: Population-based epidemiologic data for paraneoplastic neurologic 
syndromes (PNSs) in the United States are lacking. Our objective was to evaluate 
the incidence, prevalence, and associated morbidity of PNS.
METHODS: We performed a population-based epidemiology study in Olmsted County, 
Minnesota, with patients identified between January 1, 1987, and December 31, 
2018, using the medical records linkage system of the Rochester Epidemiology 
Project (REP) who met the definite/probable 2021 PNS criteria and 2004 PNS 
criteria. Patients with dermatomyositis and myasthenia gravis with underlying 
tumors were included. Age- and sex-specific population counts were obtained from 
REP resources for January 1, 2014 (prevalence denominator) and annually for 
1987-2018 (incidence denominator). Morbidity was estimated using 
disability-adjusted life years (DALYs; years lived with disability [YLD] plus 
years of life lost [YLL]).
RESULTS: There were 28 patients with PNS identified (50% female) residing in 
Olmsted County, Minnesota, with median age at diagnosis of 54.5 (IQR 46.5-69.0) 
years. All patients had a cancer diagnosis, and 18 (64%) patients were neural 
autoantibody positive including antineuronal nuclear autoantibody type 1 
(ANNA-1/anti-Hu; n = 1), ANNA-2/anti-Ri (n = 1), muscle-type acetylcholine 
receptor (AChR; n = 6), Purkinje cell cytoplasmic antibody type 1 
(PCA-1/anti-Yo; n = 1), kelch-like protein 11 (KLH11; n = 3), collapsin response 
mediator protein 5 (CRMP-5/anti-CV2; n = 2), 
α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid receptor (n = 1), 
neurofilament light chain (n = 1), leucine zipper 4 (LUZP4; n = 1), and 
unclassified neural antibodies (n = 1). PNS incidence was 0.6/100,000 
person-years and increased over time from 0.4/100,000 person-years (1987-2002) 
to 0.8/100,000 person-years (2003-2018) (p = 0.06). Prevalence was 5.4/100,000 
people. The median follow-up period after PNS diagnosis was 3.1 years (IQR, 
1.1-9.9 years). Total disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) for 28 patients 
with PNS were 472.7 years, based on total years of life lost (YLL) for patients 
dying between 1987 and 2018 (n = 15) of 445.3 years plus years lived with 
disability (YLD) 27.4 years.
DISCUSSION: PNSs are rare neurologic disorders but are associated with severe 
morbidity and mortality. The estimated number of prevalent PNS cases in the 
United States is 17,099, and predicted DALY for all US PNS cases is 292,393 
years. Their apparent increasing rate of detection is attributable to increasing 
physician awareness and availability of serologic testing.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000001124
PMCID: PMC8696552
PMID: 34937736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]