---
reference_id: "PMID:23335809"
title: High cumulative risks of cancer in patients with PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome.
authors:
- Bubien V
- Bonnet F
- Brouste V
- Hoppe S
- Barouk-Simonet E
- David A
- Edery P
- Bottani A
- Layet V
- Caron O
- Gilbert-Dussardier B
- Delnatte C
- Dugast C
- Fricker JP
- Bonneau D
- Sevenet N
- Longy M
- Caux F
- French Cowden Disease Network
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101339
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Breast Neoplasms/etiology, genetics"
- Endometrial Neoplasms/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Germ-Line Mutation
- "Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
- "Melanoma/etiology, genetics"
- Middle Aged
- PTEN Phosphohydrolase/genetics
- Risk Factors
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/etiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High cumulative risks of cancer in patients with PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome.
**Authors:** Bubien V, Bonnet F, Brouste V, Hoppe S, Barouk-Simonet E, David A, Edery P, Bottani A, Layet V, Caron O, Gilbert-Dussardier B, Delnatte C, Dugast C, Fricker JP, Bonneau D, Sevenet N, Longy M, Caux F, French Cowden Disease Network
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101339](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101339)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2013 Apr;50(4):255-63. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101339. Epub 
2013 Jan 18.

High cumulative risks of cancer in patients with PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome.

Bubien V(1), Bonnet F, Brouste V, Hoppe S, Barouk-Simonet E, David A, Edery P, 
Bottani A, Layet V, Caron O, Gilbert-Dussardier B, Delnatte C, Dugast C, Fricker 
JP, Bonneau D, Sevenet N, Longy M, Caux F; French Cowden Disease Network.

Collaborators: Abramowicz M, Bessis D, Bieth E, Bonadona V, Bonnetblanc JM, 
Demange L, Feillet F, Frebourg T, Giraud S, Giurgea I, Heron D, Holder M, 
Journel H, Julia S, Kacem M, Lejeune S, Leprat F, Leroux D, Lok C, Lortholary A, 
Lyonnet S, Margueritte G, Mauillon J, Mazereeuw-Hautier J, Odent S, Penet C, 
Philippe A, Plauchu H, Plessis G, Plouvier E, Richard MA, Saadi A, Saurin JC, 
Tinat J, Vabres P, Van Maldergem L, Vennin P, Weiller PJ.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Genetics Unit, Institut Bergonié, 229, cours de l'Argonne, Bordeaux 
cedex 33076, France.

BACKGROUND: PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome (PHTS) encompasses several clinical 
syndromes with germline mutations in the PTEN tumour suppressor gene, including 
Cowden syndrome which is characterised by an increased risk of breast and 
thyroid cancers. Because PHTS is rare, data regarding cancer risks and 
genotype-phenotype correlations are limited. The objective of this study was to 
better define cancer risks in this syndrome with respect to the type and 
location of PTEN mutations.
METHODS: 154 PHTS individuals with a deleterious germline PTEN mutation were 
recruited from the activity of the Institut Bergonié genetic laboratory. 
Detailed phenotypic information was obtained for 146 of them. Age and sex 
adjusted standardised incidence ratio (SIR) calculations, cumulative cancer risk 
estimations, and genotype-phenotype analyses were performed.
RESULTS: Elevated SIRs were found mainly for female breast cancer (39.1, 95% CI 
24.8 to 58.6), thyroid cancer in women (43.2, 95% CI 19.7 to 82.1) and in men 
(199.5, 95% CI 106.39 to 342.03), melanoma in women (28.3, 95% CI 7.6 to 35.4) 
and in men (39.4, 95% CI 10.6 to 100.9), and endometrial cancer (48.7, 95% CI 
9.8 to 142.3). Cumulative cancer risks at age 70 were 85% (95% CI 70% to 95%) 
for any cancer, 77% (95% CI 59% to 91%) for female breast cancer, and 38% (95% 
CI 25% to 56%) for thyroid cancer. The risk of cancer was two times greater in 
women with PHTS than in men with PHTS (p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows a considerably high cumulative risk of cancer for 
patients with PHTS, mainly in women without clear genotype-phenotype correlation 
for this cancer risk. New recommendations for the management of PHTS patients 
are proposed.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101339
PMID: 23335809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]