---
reference_id: "PMID:38456936"
title: Clinical and genetic architecture of a large cohort with auditory neuropathy.
authors:
- Wang H
- Guan L
- Wu X
- Guan J
- Li J
- Li N
- Wu K
- Gao Y
- Bing D
- Zhang J
- Lan L
- Shi T
- Li D
- Wang W
- Xie L
- Xiong F
- Shi W
- Zhao L
- Wang D
- Yin Y
- Wang Q
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-024-02652-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- "Hearing Loss, Central/genetics"
- Infant
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Mutation
- Retrospective Studies
- Adolescent
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Cohort Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic architecture of a large cohort with auditory neuropathy.
**Authors:** Wang H, Guan L, Wu X, Guan J, Li J, Li N, Wu K, Gao Y, Bing D, Zhang J, Lan L, Shi T, Li D, Wang W, Xie L, Xiong F, Shi W, Zhao L, Wang D, Yin Y, Wang Q
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-024-02652-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-024-02652-7)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2024 Mar;143(3):293-309. doi: 10.1007/s00439-024-02652-7. Epub 2024
 Mar 8.

Clinical and genetic architecture of a large cohort with auditory neuropathy.

Wang H(#)(1)(2), Guan L(#)(3)(4), Wu X(#)(1)(2), Guan J(1)(2), Li J(1)(2), Li 
N(4), Wu K(1)(2), Gao Y(4), Bing D(5), Zhang J(3)(4), Lan L(1)(2), Shi T(1)(2), 
Li D(1)(2), Wang W(1)(2), Xie L(1)(2), Xiong F(1)(2), Shi W(1)(2), Zhao L(4)(6), 
Wang D(1)(2), Yin Y(4), Wang Q(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Senior Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Chinese PLA 
Institute of Otolaryngology, The Sixth Medical Center of Chinese PLA General 
Hospital, Medical School of Chinese PLA, 28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)National Clinical Research Center for Otolaryngologic Diseases, Beijing, 
100853, People's Republic of China.
(3)Hebei Industrial Technology Research Institute of Genomics in Maternal and 
Child Health, Shijiazhuang, 050000, People's Republic of China.
(4)BGI Genomics, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, 518083, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, 
People's Republic of China.
(6)Medical Technology College, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, 050000, 
People's Republic of China.
(7)Senior Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Chinese PLA 
Institute of Otolaryngology, The Sixth Medical Center of Chinese PLA General 
Hospital, Medical School of Chinese PLA, 28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, 
People's Republic of China. wqjavm301@sina.com.
(8)National Clinical Research Center for Otolaryngologic Diseases, Beijing, 
100853, People's Republic of China. wqjavm301@sina.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Auditory neuropathy (AN) is a unique type of language developmental disorder, 
with no precise rate of genetic contribution that has been deciphered in a large 
cohort. In a retrospective cohort of 311 patients with AN, pathogenic and likely 
pathogenic variants of 23 genes were identified in 98 patients (31.5% in 311 
patients), and 14 genes were mutated in two or more patients. Among subgroups of 
patients with AN, the prevalence of pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants 
was 54.4% and 56.2% in trios and families, while 22.9% in the cases with 
proband-only; 45.7% and 25.6% in the infant and non-infant group; and 33.7% and 
0% in the bilateral and unilateral AN cases. Most of the OTOF gene (96.6%, 
28/29) could only be identified in the infant group, while the AIFM1 gene could 
only be identified in the non-infant group; other genes such as ATP1A3 and OPA1 
were identified in both infant and non-infant groups. In conclusion, genes 
distribution of AN, with the most common genes being OTOF and AIFM1, is totally 
different from other sensorineural hearing loss. The subgroups with different 
onset ages showed different genetic spectrums, so did bilateral and unilateral 
groups and sporadic and familial or trio groups.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-024-02652-7
PMCID: PMC11043192
PMID: 38456936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.