---
reference_id: "PMID:19938096"
title: "Ulnar Mammary syndrome and TBX3: expanding the phenotype."
authors:
- Linden H
- Williams R
- King J
- Blair E
- Kini U
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33096
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Mammary Glands, Human/abnormalities"
- Phenotype
- Pregnancy
- Syndrome
- T-Box Domain Proteins/genetics
- Ulna/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ulnar Mammary syndrome and TBX3: expanding the phenotype.
**Authors:** Linden H, Williams R, King J, Blair E, Kini U
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.33096](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.33096)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Dec;149A(12):2809-12. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33096.

Ulnar Mammary syndrome and TBX3: expanding the phenotype.

Linden H(1), Williams R, King J, Blair E, Kini U.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, The Churchill Hospital, Oxford, UK.

We present a patient with features of Ulnar Mammary syndrome (UMS) consisting of 
bilateral ulnar defects, inverted nipples, short stature with associated growth 
hormone deficiency, and cryptorchidism. Our patient also had a hypoplastic 
anterior pituitary and an ectopic posterior pituitary gland, ventricular septal 
defect (VSD), and cardiac conduction defects consistent with 
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome. Although TBX3 is known to be expressed in 
both the developing heart and the pituitary gland, conduction defects and 
anatomical pituitary abnormalities have not been previously described in UMS. 
This may, in part, be due to the fact that these features are not actively 
sought in individuals with UMS. Because these new findings have important 
clinical implications, we suggest that clinicians caring for individuals with 
UMS offer brain imaging, growth hormone testing, and cardiac arrhythmia 
screening. The diagnosis of UMS was confirmed on mutation analysis of TBX3. The 
mother of the propositus was also found to carry the same mutation, although she 
did not show the classical features of UMS. Therefore, our report also supports 
the variable expressivity of UMS within the same family.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33096
PMID: 19938096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]