---
reference_id: "PMID:39087582"
title: "Building Digital Twins for Cardiovascular Health: From Principles to Clinical Impact."
authors:
- Sel K
- Osman D
- Zare F
- Masoumi Shahrbabak S
- Brattain L
- Hahn JO
- Inan OT
- Mukkamala R
- Palmer J
- Paydarfar D
- Pettigrew RI
- Quyyumi AA
- Telfer B
- Jafari R
journal: J Am Heart Assoc
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1161/JAHA.123.031981
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Building Digital Twins for Cardiovascular Health: From Principles to Clinical Impact.
**Authors:** Sel K, Osman D, Zare F, Masoumi Shahrbabak S, Brattain L, Hahn JO, Inan OT, Mukkamala R, Palmer J, Paydarfar D, Pettigrew RI, Quyyumi AA, Telfer B, Jafari R
**Journal:** J Am Heart Assoc (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1161/JAHA.123.031981](https://doi.org/10.1161/JAHA.123.031981)

## Content

1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2024 Oct;13(19):e031981. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.123.031981. Epub 
2024 Aug 1.

Building Digital Twins for Cardiovascular Health: From Principles to Clinical 
Impact.

Sel K(1), Osman D(2), Zare F(2), Masoumi Shahrbabak S(3), Brattain L(4), Hahn 
JO(3), Inan OT(5), Mukkamala R(6), Palmer J(4), Paydarfar D(7), Pettigrew RI(8), 
Quyyumi AA(9), Telfer B(4), Jafari R(1)(2)(4)(8).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Information & Decision Systems (LIDS) Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology Cambridge MA USA.
(2)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Texas A&M University 
College Station TX USA.
(3)Department of Mechanical Engineering University of Maryland College Park MD 
USA.
(4)Lincoln Laboratory Massachusetts Institute of Technology Lexington MA USA.
(5)School of Electrical and Computer Engineering Georgia Institute of Technology 
Atlanta GA USA.
(6)Department of Bioengineering and Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine 
University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh PA USA.
(7)Department of Neurology The University of Texas at Austin Dell Medical School 
Austin TX USA.
(8)School of Engineering Medicine Texas A&M University Houston TX USA.
(9)Emory Clinical Cardiovascular Research Institute, Division of Cardiology, 
Department of Medicine Emory University School of Medicine Atlanta GA USA.

The past several decades have seen rapid advances in diagnosis and treatment of 
cardiovascular diseases and stroke, enabled by technological breakthroughs in 
imaging, genomics, and physiological monitoring, coupled with therapeutic 
interventions. We now face the challenge of how to (1) rapidly process large, 
complex multimodal and multiscale medical measurements; (2) map all available 
data streams to the trajectories of disease states over the patient's lifetime; 
and (3) apply this information for optimal clinical interventions and outcomes. 
Here we review new advances that may address these challenges using digital twin 
technology to fulfill the promise of personalized cardiovascular medical 
practice. Rooted in engineering mechanics and manufacturing, the digital twin is 
a virtual representation engineered to model and simulate its physical 
counterpart. Recent breakthroughs in scientific computation, artificial 
intelligence, and sensor technology have enabled rapid bidirectional 
interactions between the virtual-physical counterparts with measurements of the 
physical twin that inform and improve its virtual twin, which in turn provide 
updated virtual projections of disease trajectories and anticipated clinical 
outcomes. Verification, validation, and uncertainty quantification builds 
confidence and trust by clinicians and patients in the digital twin and 
establishes boundaries for the use of simulations in cardiovascular medicine. 
Mechanistic physiological models form the fundamental building blocks of the 
personalized digital twin that continuously forecast optimal management of 
cardiovascular health using individualized data streams. We present exemplars 
from the existing body of literature pertaining to mechanistic model development 
for cardiovascular dynamics and summarize existing technical challenges and 
opportunities pertaining to the foundation of a digital twin.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.123.031981
PMCID: PMC11681439
PMID: 39087582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]