---
reference_id: "PMID:10700237"
title: Regression of human metastatic renal cell carcinoma after vaccination with tumor cell-dendritic cell hybrids.
authors:
- Kugler A
- Stuhler G
- Walden P
- Zöller G
- Zobywalski A
- Brossart P
- Trefzer U
- Ullrich S
- Müller CA
- Becker V
- Gross AJ
- Hemmerlein B
- Kanz L
- Müller GA
- Ringert RH
journal: Nat Med
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1038/73193
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Regression of human metastatic renal cell carcinoma after vaccination with tumor cell-dendritic cell hybrids.
**Authors:** Kugler A, Stuhler G, Walden P, Zöller G, Zobywalski A, Brossart P, Trefzer U, Ullrich S, Müller CA, Becker V, Gross AJ, Hemmerlein B, Kanz L, Müller GA, Ringert RH
**Journal:** Nat Med (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/73193](https://doi.org/10.1038/73193)

## Content

1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Nat Med. 2000 Mar;6(3):332-6. doi: 10.1038/73193.

Regression of human metastatic renal cell carcinoma after vaccination with tumor 
cell-dendritic cell hybrids.

Kugler A(1), Stuhler G, Walden P, Zöller G, Zobywalski A, Brossart P, Trefzer U, 
Ullrich S, Müller CA, Becker V, Gross AJ, Hemmerlein B, Kanz L, Müller GA, 
Ringert RH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, University of Göttingen, Germany. akugler@gwdg.de

Retraction in
    Nat Med. 2003 Sep;9(9):1221. doi: 10.1038/nm0903-1221a.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2000 Mar;6(3):252-3. doi: 10.1038/73082.
    Nat Med. 2003 Sep;9(9):1093. doi: 10.1038/nm0903-1093.

Reports of spontaneous regressions of metastases and the demonstration of 
tumor-reactive cytotoxic T lymphocytes indicate the importance of the host's 
immune system in controlling the devastating course of metastatic renal cell 
carcinoma. Recent research indicates that immunization with hybrids of tumor and 
antigen presenting cells results in protective immunity and rejection of 
established tumors in various rodent models. Here, we present a hybrid cell 
vaccination study of 17 patients. Using electrofusion techniques, we generated 
hybrids of autologous tumor and allogeneic dendritic cells that presented 
antigens expressed by the tumor in concert with the co-stimulating capabilities 
of dendritic cells. After vaccination, and with a mean follow-up time of 13 
months, four patients completely rejected all metastatic tumor lesions, one 
presented a 'mixed response', and two had a tumor mass reduction of greater 50%. 
We also demonstrate induction of HLA-A2-restricted cytotoxic T cells reactive 
with the Muc1 tumor-associated antigen and recruitment of CD8+ lymphocytes into 
tumor challenge sites. Our data indicate that hybrid cell vaccination is a safe 
and effective therapy for renal cell carcinoma and may provide a broadly 
applicable strategy for other malignancies with unknown antigens.

DOI: 10.1038/73193
PMID: 10700237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]