---
reference_id: "PMID:35142292"
title: "A rare case of 46,XX gonadal dysgenesis, Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome, pituitary and thyroid hypoplasia."
authors:
- Ambachew R
- Gulilat A
- Aberra T
- Terefework Z
- Bedilu W
- Tarekegn G
- Reja A
journal: Endocrinol Diabetes Metab Case Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1530/EDM-21-0103
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A rare case of 46,XX gonadal dysgenesis, Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome, pituitary and thyroid hypoplasia.
**Authors:** Ambachew R, Gulilat A, Aberra T, Terefework Z, Bedilu W, Tarekegn G, Reja A
**Journal:** Endocrinol Diabetes Metab Case Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1530/EDM-21-0103](https://doi.org/10.1530/EDM-21-0103)

## Content

1. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab Case Rep. 2022 Feb 1;2022:21-0103. doi:
10.1530/EDM-21-0103. Online ahead of print.

A rare case of 46,XX gonadal dysgenesis, Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser
syndrome, pituitary and thyroid hypoplasia.

Ambachew R(1), Gulilat A(1), Aberra T(1), Terefework Z(2), Bedilu W(3), Tarekegn
G(1), Reja A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Addis Ababa University, College of Health
Sciences, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(2)MRC-ET Advanced Laboratory, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(3)Department of Radiology, St. Paul's Hospital Millenium Medical College, Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia.

SUMMARY: Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome is characterized by congenital
absence or hypoplasia of the uterus and upper two-thirds of the vagina in both
phenotypically and karyotypically normal females with functional ovaries,
whereas gonadal dysgenesis is a primary ovarian defect in otherwise normal 46,XX
females. An association between these two conditions is extremely rare. We
report a 21-year-old female presented with primary amenorrhea and undeveloped
secondary sexual characteristics. The karyotype was 46,XX and the hormonal
profile revealed hypothyroidism and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Pelvic MRI
showed class I Mullerian duct anomaly with ovarian dysgenesis. Ultrasound showed
bilateral thyroid hypoplasia and brain MRI suggested anterior pituitary
hypoplasia. Levothyroxine and hormone replacement therapy were started.
LEARNING POINTS: The simultaneous presentation of 46,XX gonadal dysgenesis,
Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome, hypothyroidism, and pituitary
hypoplasia is a Possibility. Extensive evaluation should be made when a patient
presents with one or more of these features. The diagnosis imposes a significant
psychological burden on patients and adequate counseling should be provided.
Hormone replacement therapy remains the only therapeutic option for the
development of secondary sexual characteristics and the prevention of
osteoporosis.

DOI: 10.1530/EDM-21-0103
PMCID: PMC8859947
PMID: 35142292
