---
reference_id: "PMID:38667036"
title: A Review of the Impact of Streptococcal Infections and Antimicrobial Resistance on Human Health.
authors:
- Gergova R
- Boyanov V
- Muhtarova A
- Alexandrova A
journal: Antibiotics (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/antibiotics13040360
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Review of the Impact of Streptococcal Infections and Antimicrobial Resistance on Human Health.
**Authors:** Gergova R, Boyanov V, Muhtarova A, Alexandrova A
**Journal:** Antibiotics (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/antibiotics13040360](https://doi.org/10.3390/antibiotics13040360)

## Content

1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2024 Apr 15;13(4):360. doi: 10.3390/antibiotics13040360.

A Review of the Impact of Streptococcal Infections and Antimicrobial Resistance 
on Human Health.

Gergova R(1), Boyanov V(1), Muhtarova A(1), Alexandrova A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Medical Faculty, Medical University of 
Sofia, Zdrave Str. 2, 1431 Sofia, Bulgaria.

Streptococcus pneumoniae, Streptococcus pyogenes (GAS), and Streptococcus 
agalactiae (GBS) are bacteria that can cause a range of infections, some of them 
life-threatening. This review examines the spread of antibiotic resistance and 
its mechanisms against antibiotics for streptococcal infections. Data on 
high-level penicillin-resistant invasive pneumococci have been found in Brazil 
(42.8%) and Japan (77%). The resistance is caused by mutations in genes that 
encode penicillin-binding proteins. Similarly, GAS and GBS strains reported from 
Asia, the USA, and Africa have undergone similar transformations in PBPs. 
Resistance to major alternatives of penicillins, macrolides, and lincosamides 
has become widespread among pneumococci and streptococci, especially in Asia 
(70-95%). The combination of several emm types with erm(B) is associated with 
the development of high-level macrolide resistance in GAS. Major mechanisms are 
ribosomal target modifications encoded by erm genes, ribosomal alterations, and 
active efflux pumps that regulate antibiotic entry due to mefA/E and msrD genes. 
Tetracycline resistance for streptococci in different countries varied from 
22.4% in the USA to 83.7/100% in China, due to tet genes. Combined 
tetracycline/macrolide resistance is usually linked with the insertion of ermB 
into the transposon carrying tetM. New quinolone resistance is increasing by 
between 11.5 and 47.9% in Asia and Europe. The mechanism of quinolone resistance 
is based on mutations in gyrA/B, determinants for DNA gyrase, or parC/E encoding 
topoisomerase IV. The results for antibiotic resistance are alarming, and 
urgently call for increased monitoring of this problem and precautionary 
measures for control to prevent the spread of resistant mutant strains.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics13040360
PMCID: PMC11047474
PMID: 38667036

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.