---
reference_id: "PMID:31077002"
title: CAPS and NLRP3.
authors:
- Booshehri LM
- Hoffman HM
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-019-00638-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CAPS and NLRP3.
**Authors:** Booshehri LM, Hoffman HM
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-019-00638-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-019-00638-z)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2019 Apr;39(3):277-286. doi: 10.1007/s10875-019-00638-z. Epub 
2019 May 10.

CAPS and NLRP3.

Booshehri LM(1), Hoffman HM(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Allergy, Immunology, and Rheumatology, Rady Children's 
Hospital of San Diego, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA.
(2)Division of Pediatric Allergy, Immunology, and Rheumatology, Rady Children's 
Hospital of San Diego, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA. 
hahoffman@ucsd.edu.

Cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome (CAPS) is a rare inherited 
autoinflammatory disorder characterized by systemic, cutaneous, musculoskeletal, 
and central nervous system inflammation. Gain-of-function mutations in NLRP3 in 
CAPS patients lead to activation of the cryopyrin inflammasome, resulting in the 
inappropriate release of inflammatory cytokines including IL-1β and CAPS-related 
inflammatory symptoms. Several mechanisms have been identified that are 
important for the normal regulation of the cryopyrin inflammasome in order to 
prevent uncontrolled inflammation. Investigators have taken advantage of some of 
these pathways to develop and apply novel targeted therapies, which have 
resulted in improved quality of life for patients with this orphan disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-019-00638-z
PMCID: PMC8575304
PMID: 31077002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: Dr. Hoffman has received 
speaking fees from Novartis, consulting fees from Novartis, SOBI, Regeneron, and 
IFM, and research funds from Glaxo Wellcome, Vertex, Burroughs Wellcome, and 
Jecure.