---
reference_id: "PMID:20398390"
title: Epilepsy in patients with Angelman syndrome.
authors:
- Fiumara A
- Pittalà A
- Cocuzza M
- Sorge G
journal: Ital J Pediatr
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1186/1824-7288-36-31
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epilepsy in patients with Angelman syndrome.
**Authors:** Fiumara A, Pittalà A, Cocuzza M, Sorge G
**Journal:** Ital J Pediatr (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1824-7288-36-31](https://doi.org/10.1186/1824-7288-36-31)

## Content

1. Ital J Pediatr. 2010 Apr 16;36:31. doi: 10.1186/1824-7288-36-31.

Epilepsy in patients with Angelman syndrome.

Fiumara A(1), Pittalà A, Cocuzza M, Sorge G.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Neurology, Regional Referral Centre for Inborn Errors Metabolism, 
University of Catania, Italy. agafiu@virgilio.it

Angelman syndrome (AS) is a neuro-behavioural, genetically determined condition, 
characterized by ataxic jerky movements, happy sociable disposition and 
unprovoked bouts of laughter in association with seizures, learning disabilities 
and language impairment. Most of the cases are hardly diagnosed during infancy 
as jerky movements, the cardinal sign, appear later in childhood. AS is caused 
by a variety of genetic mechanisms involving the 15q 11-13 chromosome. About 70% 
of cases are due to a "de novo" interstitial deletion in the long arm region, 
arising on the maternally inherited chromosome. The diagnosis is confirmed by 
methylation test or by mutation analysis of UBE3A gene. The deletion phenotype 
is generally linked to a more severe clinical picture in that 95% of patients 
manifest more severe seizures, severe mental and motor retardation, dysmorphic 
features and microcephaly.The pathogenesis of epilepsy in AS is still not fully 
understood. The presence in the commonly deleted region of a cluster of genes 
coding for 3 subunits of the GABAa receptor complex has lead to the hypothesis 
that GABA neurotransmission is involved. Epilepsy, often severe and hard to 
control, is present in 85% of patients within the first three years of life, 
although less than 25% develop seizures during the first year. It was observed 
that febrile seizures often precede the diagnosis. Most frequent types are 
atypical absences, generalized tonic-clonic, atonic or myoclonic seizures, with 
multiple seizure types occurring in 50% of deleted patients. There is still some 
doubt about the association with West syndrome. The EEG abnormalities are not 
themselves pathognomonic of AS and both background activity and epileptic 
discharges vary even in the same patient with time. Nevertheless, the existence 
of some suggestive patterns should facilitate the early diagnosis allowing the 
correct genetic counselling for the family. Some drugs seems to act better than 
others, Valproate, ethosuximide and clonazepam giving the best results.

DOI: 10.1186/1824-7288-36-31
PMCID: PMC2865483
PMID: 20398390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]