---
reference_id: "PMID:35927237"
title: The role of the immune system in posttraumatic stress disorder.
authors:
- Katrinli S
- Oliveira NCS
- Felger JC
- Michopoulos V
- Smith AK
journal: Transl Psychiatry
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41398-022-02094-7
keywords:
- Anxiety Disorders
- Fear/physiology
- Humans
- Immune System
- Inflammation
- "Stress Disorders, Post-Traumatic/psychology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of the immune system in posttraumatic stress disorder.
**Authors:** Katrinli S, Oliveira NCS, Felger JC, Michopoulos V, Smith AK
**Journal:** Transl Psychiatry (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41398-022-02094-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-022-02094-7)

## Content

1. Transl Psychiatry. 2022 Aug 4;12(1):313. doi: 10.1038/s41398-022-02094-7.

The role of the immune system in posttraumatic stress disorder.

Katrinli S(1), Oliveira NCS(2)(3)(4), Felger JC(5)(6), Michopoulos V(5), Smith 
AK(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. 
seyma.katrinli@emory.edu.
(2)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)National Institute of Woman, Child, and Adolescence Health Fernandes 
Figueira, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(4)Department of Violence and Health Studies Jorge Careli, National School of 
Public Health, Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Emory University, Atlanta, 
GA, USA.
(6)The Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) develops in a subset of individuals upon 
exposure to traumatic stress. In addition to well-defined psychological and 
behavioral symptoms, some individuals with PTSD also exhibit elevated 
concentrations of inflammatory markers, including C-reactive protein, 
interleukin-6, and tumor necrosis factor-α. Moreover, PTSD is often co-morbid 
with immune-related conditions, such as cardiometabolic and autoimmune 
disorders. Numerous factors, including lifetime trauma burden, biological sex, 
genetic background, metabolic conditions, and gut microbiota, may contribute to 
inflammation in PTSD. Importantly, inflammation can influence neural circuits 
and neurotransmitter signaling in regions of the brain relevant to fear, 
anxiety, and emotion regulation. Given the link between PTSD and the immune 
system, current studies are underway to evaluate the efficacy of 
anti-inflammatory treatments in those with PTSD. Understanding the complex 
interactions between PTSD and the immune system is essential for future 
discovery of diagnostic and therapeutic tools.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41398-022-02094-7
PMCID: PMC9352784
PMID: 35927237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.