---
reference_id: "PMID:39243573"
title: "Deciphering the ferroptosis pathways in dorsal root ganglia of Friedreich ataxia models. The role of LKB1/AMPK, KEAP1, and GSK3β in the impairment of the NRF2 response."
authors:
- Sanz-Alcázar A
- Portillo-Carrasquer M
- Delaspre F
- Pazos-Gil M
- Tamarit J
- Ros J
- Cabiscol E
journal: Redox Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2024.103339
keywords:
- Animals
- "NF-E2-Related Factor 2/metabolism, genetics"
- Ferroptosis
- "Friedreich Ataxia/metabolism, genetics, pathology"
- "Kelch-Like ECH-Associated Protein 1/metabolism, genetics"
- Mice
- Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 beta/metabolism
- "Ganglia, Spinal/metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- AMP-Activated Protein Kinases/metabolism
- Frataxin
- "Iron-Binding Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism, genetics"
- Oxidative Stress
- Signal Transduction
- Iron/metabolism
- AMP-Activated Protein Kinase Kinases/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deciphering the ferroptosis pathways in dorsal root ganglia of Friedreich ataxia models. The role of LKB1/AMPK, KEAP1, and GSK3β in the impairment of the NRF2 response.
**Authors:** Sanz-Alcázar A, Portillo-Carrasquer M, Delaspre F, Pazos-Gil M, Tamarit J, Ros J, Cabiscol E
**Journal:** Redox Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.redox.2024.103339](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2024.103339)

## Content

1. Redox Biol. 2024 Oct;76:103339. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2024.103339. Epub 2024
Sep  4.

Deciphering the ferroptosis pathways in dorsal root ganglia of Friedreich ataxia
models. The role of LKB1/AMPK, KEAP1, and GSK3β in the impairment of the NRF2
response.

Sanz-Alcázar A(1), Portillo-Carrasquer M(2), Delaspre F(3), Pazos-Gil M(4),
Tamarit J(5), Ros J(6), Cabiscol E(7).

Author information:
(1)Departament de Ciències Mèdiques Bàsiques, IRBLleida, Universitat de Lleida,
Catalonia, Spain. Electronic address: arabela.sanz@udl.cat.
(2)Departament de Ciències Mèdiques Bàsiques, IRBLleida, Universitat de Lleida,
Catalonia, Spain. Electronic address: marta.portillo@udl.cat.
(3)Departament de Ciències Mèdiques Bàsiques, IRBLleida, Universitat de Lleida,
Catalonia, Spain. Electronic address: fabien.delaspre@udl.cat.
(4)Departament de Ciències Mèdiques Bàsiques, IRBLleida, Universitat de Lleida,
Catalonia, Spain. Electronic address: maria.pazos@udl.cat.
(5)Departament de Ciències Mèdiques Bàsiques, IRBLleida, Universitat de Lleida,
Catalonia, Spain. Electronic address: Jordi.tamarit@udl.cat.
(6)Departament de Ciències Mèdiques Bàsiques, IRBLleida, Universitat de Lleida,
Catalonia, Spain. Electronic address: Joaquim.ros@udl.cat.
(7)Departament de Ciències Mèdiques Bàsiques, IRBLleida, Universitat de Lleida,
Catalonia, Spain. Electronic address: elisa.cabiscol@udl.cat.

Erratum in
    Redox Biol. 2025 May;82:103583. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2025.103583.

Friedreich ataxia (FA) is a rare neurodegenerative disease caused by decreased
levels of the mitochondrial protein frataxin. Frataxin has been related in iron
homeostasis, energy metabolism, and oxidative stress. Ferroptosis has recently
been shown to be involved in FA cellular degeneration; however, its role in
dorsal root ganglion (DRG) sensory neurons, the cells that are affected the most
and the earliest, is mostly unknown. In this study, we used primary cultures of
frataxin-deficient DRG neurons as well as DRG from the FXNI151F mouse model to
study ferroptosis and its regulatory pathways. A lack of frataxin induced
upregulation of transferrin receptor 1 and decreased ferritin and mitochondrial
iron accumulation, a source of oxidative stress. However, there was impaired
activation of NRF2, a key transcription factor involved in the antioxidant
response pathway. Decreased total and nuclear NRF2 explains the downregulation
of both SLC7A11 (a member of the system Xc, which transports cystine required
for glutathione synthesis) and glutathione peroxidase 4, responsible for
increased lipid peroxidation, the main markers of ferroptosis. Such
dysregulation could be due to the increase in KEAP1 and the activation of GSK3β,
which promote cytosolic localization and degradation of NRF2. Moreover, there
was a deficiency in the LKB1/AMPK pathway, which would also impair NRF2
activity. AMPK acts as a positive regulator of NRF2 and it is activated by the
upstream kinase LKB1. The levels of LKB1 were reduced when frataxin decreased,
in agreement with reduced pAMPK (Thr172), the active form of AMPK. SIRT1, a
known activator of LKB1, was also reduced when frataxin decreased. MT-6378, an
AMPK activator, restored NRF2 levels, increased GPX4 levels and reduced lipid
peroxidation. In conclusion, this study demonstrated that frataxin deficiency in
DRG neurons disrupts iron homeostasis and the intricate regulation of molecular
pathways affecting NRF2 activation and the cellular response to oxidative
stress, leading to ferroptosis.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2024.103339
PMCID: PMC11408871
PMID: 39243573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no competing interests.
