---
reference_id: "PMID:8589284"
title: Identification of the alpha 3 chain of type IV collagen as the common autoantigen in antibasement membrane disease and Goodpasture syndrome.
authors:
- Kalluri R
- Wilson CB
- Weber M
- Gunwar S
- Chonko AM
- Neilson EG
- Hudson BG
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.V641178
keywords:
- Animals
- Anti-Glomerular Basement Membrane Disease/immunology
- Antibody Specificity
- Autoantigens/immunology
- Autoimmune Diseases/immunology
- Basement Membrane/immunology
- Cattle
- "Collagen/chemistry, immunology"
- Female
- Humans
- Kidney Diseases/immunology
- Kidney Glomerulus/immunology
- Lung Diseases/immunology
- Male
- Recombinant Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of the alpha 3 chain of type IV collagen as the common autoantigen in antibasement membrane disease and Goodpasture syndrome.
**Authors:** Kalluri R, Wilson CB, Weber M, Gunwar S, Chonko AM, Neilson EG, Hudson BG
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.V641178](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.V641178)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1995 Oct;6(4):1178-85. doi: 10.1681/ASN.V641178.

Identification of the alpha 3 chain of type IV collagen as the common 
autoantigen in antibasement membrane disease and Goodpasture syndrome.

Kalluri R(1), Wilson CB, Weber M, Gunwar S, Chonko AM, Neilson EG, Hudson BG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Kansas 
Medical Center Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Antiglomerular basement membrane (GBM) antibodies can cause glomerulonephritis 
or pulmonary hemorrhage by themselves or Goodpasture syndrome when they occur 
together. It is unknown if variations in antibody reactivity contribute to the 
different patterns of organ involvement seen in this disease. This study 
examines the reactivity of the alpha 1-alpha 6 NC1 domains of Type IV collagen, 
the putative autoantigen, in sera from patients with anti-GBM antibodies after 
various clinical presentations of lung hemorrhage and renal injury. Serum or 
plasma containing anti-GBM antibodies from 35 patients with combined 
glomerulonephritis and pulmonary hemorrhage, 19 with glomerulonephritis alone, 
and 4 with pulmonary hemorrhage alone were compared with samples from 19 normal 
controls and 32 patients with other kidney diseases. Four different immunologic 
assays were performed with bovine alpha 1-alpha 6(IV) and recombinant human type 
alpha 1-alpha 5(IV) collagen NC1 domains. The study found that the anti-GBM 
antibodies from all patients reacted with the alpha 3(IV) NC1 (85% exclusively). 
Additional limited reactivity with the alpha 1(IV) NC1 and alpha 4(IV) NC1 was 
found in 15 and 3%, respectively. This non-alpha 3(IV) NC1 reactivity was most 
frequent in the patients with anti-GBM antibodies and glomerulonephritis alone. 
None of the patients had reactivity to other basement membrane components like 
laminin, fibronectin, heparan sulfate proteoglycan, entactin, or the 7S and 
triple helical fragments of Type IV collagen. The observed alpha-chain NC1 
reactivity was confined to patients with anti-GBM antibodies with no additional 
reactivities detected among a large number of other kidney diseases controls. 
The correlation of alpha 1-alpha 6(IV) NC1 reactivity in a large number of 
patients with anti-GBM antibodies defined by classic assays definitively 
establishes that reactivity to alpha 3(IV) NC1 domains is both sufficient and 
necessary for the expression of autoimmune disease directed to the NC1 domain of 
Type IV collagen. On the basis of the evidence, the classification of 
antibasement membrane disease and Goodpasture syndrome as anti-Type IV collagen 
disease is proposed.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.V641178
PMID: 8589284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]