---
reference_id: "PMID:28496314"
title: "Treatment of lung disease in alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency: a systematic review."
authors:
- Edgar RG
- Patel M
- Bayliss S
- Crossley D
- Sapey E
- Turner AM
journal: Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.2147/COPD.S130440
keywords:
- Chi-Square Distribution
- Disease Progression
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy/adverse effects
- Humans
- "Lung/drug effects, physiopathology, surgery"
- Lung Transplantation/adverse effects
- Observational Studies as Topic
- Pneumonectomy/adverse effects
- "Pulmonary Disease, Chronic Obstructive/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Pulmonary Emphysema/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Recovery of Function
- Treatment Outcome
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of lung disease in alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Edgar RG, Patel M, Bayliss S, Crossley D, Sapey E, Turner AM
**Journal:** Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.2147/COPD.S130440](https://doi.org/10.2147/COPD.S130440)

## Content

1. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 May 2;12:1295-1308. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S130440. eCollection 2017.

Treatment of lung disease in alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency: a systematic
review.

Edgar RG(1)(2), Patel M(3), Bayliss S(4), Crossley D(2)(5), Sapey E(2)(5),
Turner AM(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Therapy Services, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust,
Birmingham, UK.
(2)Institute of Inflammation and Ageing, University of Birmingham, Birmingham,
UK.
(3)Division of Primary Care, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(4)Institute of Applied Health Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham,
UK.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS
Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Heart of England NHS Foundation Trust,
Birmingham, UK.

BACKGROUND: Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a rare genetic condition
predisposing individuals to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The
treatment is generally extrapolated from COPD unrelated to AATD; however, most
COPD trials exclude AATD patients; thus, this study sought to systematically
review AATD-specific literature to assist evidence-based patient management.
METHODS: Standard review methodology was used with meta-analysis and narrative
synthesis (PROSPERO-CRD42015019354). Eligible studies were those of any
treatment used in severe AATD. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) were the
primary focus; however, case series and uncontrolled studies were eligible. All
studies had ≥10 participants receiving treatment or usual care, with baseline
and follow-up data (>3 months). Risk of bias was assessed appropriately
according to study methodology.
RESULTS: In all, 7,296 studies were retrieved from searches; 52 trials with
5,632 participants met the inclusion criteria, of which 26 studies involved
alpha-1 antitrypsin augmentation and 17 concerned surgical treatments (largely
transplantation). Studies were grouped into four management themes: COPD
medical, COPD surgical, AATD specific, and other treatments. Computed tomography
(CT) density, forced expiratory volume in 1 s, diffusing capacity of the lungs
for carbon monoxide, health status, and exacerbation rates were frequently used
as outcomes. Meta-analyses were only possible for RCTs of intravenous
augmentation, which slowed progression of emphysema measured by CT density
change, 0.79 g/L/year versus placebo (P=0.002), and associated with a small
increase in exacerbations 0.29/year (P=0.02). Mortality following lung
transplant was comparable between AATD- and non-AATD-related COPD. Surgical
reduction of lung volume demonstrated inferior outcomes compared with
non-AATD-related emphysema.
CONCLUSION: Intravenous augmentation remains the only disease-specific therapy
in AATD and there is evidence that this slows decline in emphysema determined by
CT density. There is paucity of data around other treatments in AATD. Treatments
for usual COPD may not be as efficacious in AATD, and further studies may be
required for this disease group.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S130440
PMCID: PMC5422329
PMID: 28496314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Mr Edgar reports grants from HEE and
NIHR, during the conduct of the study. This article presents independent
research funded by the NIHR. The views expressed are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the NHS, NIHR, HEE, or the Department of Health. Dr
Patel, Mrs Bayliss, and Dr Crossley have nothing to disclose. Dr Sapey reports
grants from NIHR, during the conduct of the study, and grants from Medical
Research Council, Alpha-1 Foundation, and British Lung Foundation, outside the
submitted work. Dr Turner reports grants from Grifols Biotherapeutics, Alpha-1
Foundation, outside the submitted work, and The Birmingham AATD Registry has
received past funds from CSL Behring for work in AATD, although this was not
held by any of the authors. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in
this work.
