---
reference_id: "PMID:21780190"
title: "Behavioral and molecular genetics of dissociation: the role of the serotonin transporter gene promoter polymorphism (5-HTTLPR)."
authors:
- Pieper S
- Out D
- Bakermans-Kranenburg MJ
- van Ijzendoorn MH
journal: J Trauma Stress
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/jts.20659
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Alleles
- Behavior
- "Dissociative Disorders/genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Biology
- Netherlands
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Serotonin Plasma Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Behavioral and molecular genetics of dissociation: the role of the serotonin transporter gene promoter polymorphism (5-HTTLPR).
**Authors:** Pieper S, Out D, Bakermans-Kranenburg MJ, van Ijzendoorn MH
**Journal:** J Trauma Stress (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jts.20659](https://doi.org/10.1002/jts.20659)

## Content

1. J Trauma Stress. 2011 Aug;24(4):373-80. doi: 10.1002/jts.20659. Epub 2011 Jul 
21.

Behavioral and molecular genetics of dissociation: the role of the serotonin 
transporter gene promoter polymorphism (5-HTTLPR).

Pieper S(1), Out D, Bakermans-Kranenburg MJ, van Ijzendoorn MH.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Child and Family Studies, Leiden University, The Netherlands.

We evaluated the role of the serotonin transporter gene promoter polymorphism 
(5-HTTLPR) in the etiology of dissociation. Adult twin pairs (N = 184 pairs; 
mean age 33.0 years, SD = 10.8) completed measures for dissociation and trauma. 
The DNA samples were genotyped for 5-HTTLPR adjusted for rs25531 alleles. 
Behavioral genetic analyses showed that genetic factors explained 45% of the 
variance in dissociative symptoms, while 55% of the variance was explained by 
unique environment and measurement error. Participants with the SS genotype of 
5-HTTLPR reported more dissociative symptoms compared to participants with the 
other genotypes (p = .02), and they showed more pathological dissociative 
symptoms than the other participants (p = .04) when they reported more 
depressive symptoms and when they had experienced trauma.

Copyright © 2011 International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies.

DOI: 10.1002/jts.20659
PMID: 21780190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]