---
reference_id: "PMID:33192056"
title: "The Distribution of Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Genotypes Between Patients with COPD/Emphysema, Asthma and Bronchiectasis."
authors:
- Veith M
- Tüffers J
- Peychev E
- Klemmer A
- Kotke V
- Janciauskiene S
- Wilhelm S
- Bals R
- Koczulla AR
- Vogelmeier CF
- Greulich T
journal: Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.2147/COPD.S271810
keywords:
- "Asthma/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- "Bronchiectasis/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Genotype
- Germany
- Humans
- "Pulmonary Disease, Chronic Obstructive/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin/genetics
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Distribution of Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Genotypes Between Patients with COPD/Emphysema, Asthma and Bronchiectasis.
**Authors:** Veith M, Tüffers J, Peychev E, Klemmer A, Kotke V, Janciauskiene S, Wilhelm S, Bals R, Koczulla AR, Vogelmeier CF, Greulich T
**Journal:** Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2147/COPD.S271810](https://doi.org/10.2147/COPD.S271810)

## Content

1. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Nov 6;15:2827-2836. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S271810. eCollection 2020.

The Distribution of Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Genotypes Between Patients with 
COPD/Emphysema, Asthma and Bronchiectasis.

Veith M(1), Tüffers J(1), Peychev E(1), Klemmer A(1), Kotke V(1), Janciauskiene 
S(2), Wilhelm S(1), Bals R(3), Koczulla AR(4), Vogelmeier CF(1), Greulich T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University 
Medical Center Giessen and Marburg, Member of the German Center for Lung 
Research, Marburg, Germany.
(2)Clinic for Pneumology, German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Medical 
University Hannover, Hannover, Germany.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine V, Pulmonology, Allergology, Respiratory and 
Intensive Care Medicine, Saarland Hospital, Homburg/Saar, Germany.
(4)Institute for Pulmonary Rehabilitation Research, Schoen Klinik 
Berchtesgadener Land, Teaching Hospital of Philipps-University of Marburg, 
Marburg, Germany.

PURPOSE: Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a rare hereditary condition 
characterized by low circulating levels of alpha-1antitrypsin (AAT). While the 
association between AATD and COPD/emphysema is undisputed, the association 
between AATD and asthma or bronchiectasis is still a matter of debate.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: Our study aimed to investigate the distribution of AAT 
genotypes between patients with COPD/emphysema, asthma and bronchiectasis. To 
back up the diagnostic labels, we described symptoms associated with the 
diagnosis.
METHODS: Between September 2003 and March 2020, 29,465 testing kits (AlphaKit®) 
were analyzed in the AAT laboratory, University of Marburg, Germany. The 
diagnosis of AATD has been made based on the measurements of AAT serum levels, 
followed by genotyping, phenotyping or whole gene sequencing depending on the 
availability and/or the need for more detailed interpretation of the results. 
The respiratory symptoms were recorded as well.
RESULTS: Regarding the distribution of the wild type allele M and the most 
frequent mutations S (E264V) and Z (E342K), no significant differences could be 
found between COPD/emphysema [Pi*MM (58.24%); Pi*SZ (2.49%); Pi*ZZ (9.12%)] and 
bronchiectasis [Pi*MM (59.30%) Pi*SZ (2.81%); Pi*ZZ (7.02%)]. When 
COPD/emphysema and bronchiectasis were recorded in the same patient, the rate of 
Pi* ZZ (14.78%) mutations was even higher. Asthma patients exhibited 
significantly less deficient genotypes [Pi*MM (54.81%); Pi*SZ (2%); Pi*ZZ 
(2.77%)] than two other groups. Associated respiratory symptoms confirmed the 
diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: COPD/emphysema and bronchiectasis, but not asthma patients, exhibit 
higher frequency of AATD genotypes. Our data suggest that AATD testing should be 
offered to patients with COPD/emphysema and bronchiectasis.

© 2020 Veith et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S271810
PMCID: PMC7654539
PMID: 33192056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Martina Veith reports grants from Grifols. Prof. 
Dr. Robert Bals reports grants from BMBF, during the conduct of the study; 
grants from Schwiete Stiftung, Novartis, and Mukoviszidose e.V. and personal 
fees from AstraZeneca and CSL Behring, outside the submitted work. Prof. Dr. 
Claus Franz Vogelmeier reports grants, personal fees from AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Grifols, GlaxoSmithKline, and Novartis; personal fees from 
CSL Behring, Chiesi, Menarini, Nuvaira, MedUpdate, outside the submitted work. 
Dr Timm Greulich reports grants from Grifols, during the conduct of the study; 
personal fees from AstraZeneca, serves as a lecturer and part of the advisory 
board for Berlin Chemie, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, CSL Behring, Grifols, 
GSK, Novartis, received grants from German Centre for Lung Research, outside the 
submitted work. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.