---
reference_id: "PMID:32515487"
title: Complement activation in patients with immune thrombocytopenic purpura according to phases of disease course.
authors:
- Castelli R
- Lambertenghi Delilliers G
- Gidaro A
- Cicardi M
- Bergamaschini L
journal: Clin Exp Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/cei.13475
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complement activation in patients with immune thrombocytopenic purpura according to phases of disease course.
**Authors:** Castelli R, Lambertenghi Delilliers G, Gidaro A, Cicardi M, Bergamaschini L
**Journal:** Clin Exp Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cei.13475](https://doi.org/10.1111/cei.13475)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2020 Sep;201(3):258-265. doi: 10.1111/cei.13475. Epub 2020
Jul  6.

Complement activation in patients with immune thrombocytopenic purpura according 
to phases of disease course.

Castelli R(1), Lambertenghi Delilliers G(2), Gidaro A(1), Cicardi M(1), 
Bergamaschini L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences Luigi Sacco, University of 
Milan, Luigi Sacco Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(2)Fondazione Mattarelli, Milan, Italy.

Immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is an autoimmune thrombocytopenia with 
shortened platelet survival and relative bone marrow failure. The pathogenesis 
involves antibody production, cytokine release, T cell impairment, complement 
activation and clearance of platelets. We measured plasma levels of C3, C4, C1q 
and sC5b-9 in 80 ITP patients in acute phase, 50 ITP patients in complete (CR) 
or partial (PR) remission and 50 age- and sex-matched healthy volunteers. 
Statistical analyses showed that acute ITP patients had higher plasma levels of 
sC5b-9 and C1q than CR or PR patients (median = sC5b-9: 200 versus 98 mg/dl, 
P-value < 0·001) (median C1q = 2·11 versus 1·00 mg/dl, P-value < 0·001). CR and 
PR ITP patients had sC5b-9 and C1q plasma levels comparable to those observed in 
healthy volunteers. There was a significant correlation between sC5b-9 and C1q 
plasma levels (Spearman's rho correlation index on 130 ITP patients equal to 
0·58, P-value < 0·001). We also found that sC5b-9 plasma level is inversely 
correlated with the number of platelets. Furthermore, we divided acute ITP 
patients into subjects with detectable (24 of 80, 30%) or undetectable (56 of 
80, 70%) anti-platelet antibodies; patients with detectable anti-platelet 
antibodies have significantly higher plasma levels of C1q and sC5b-9. This 
research will potentially offer novel therapeutic strategies in light of new 
drugs affecting complement activation for monitoring therapy response.

© 2020 British Society for Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/cei.13475
PMCID: PMC7419927
PMID: 32515487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.