---
reference_id: "PMID:27337455"
title: "Ebola Virus Disease: Therapeutic and Potential Preventative Opportunities."
authors:
- Fisher R
- Borio L
journal: Microbiol Spectr
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1128/microbiolspec.EI10-0014-2016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebola Virus Disease: Therapeutic and Potential Preventative Opportunities.
**Authors:** Fisher R, Borio L
**Journal:** Microbiol Spectr (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1128/microbiolspec.EI10-0014-2016](https://doi.org/10.1128/microbiolspec.EI10-0014-2016)

## Content

1. Microbiol Spectr. 2016 Jun;4(3). doi: 10.1128/microbiolspec.EI10-0014-2016.

Ebola Virus Disease: Therapeutic and Potential Preventative Opportunities.

Fisher R(1), Borio L(2).

Author information:
(1)Food and Drug Administration, Office of Counterterrorism and Emerging 
Threats, Silver Spring, MD 20993.
(2)Food and Drug Administration, Office of the Chief Scientist, Silver Spring, 
MD 20993.

The 2014 Ebola virus disease (EVD) epidemic in West Africa was unprecedented in 
its geographical distribution, scale, and toll on public health infrastructure. 
Standard public health measures were rapidly overwhelmed, and many projections 
on outbreak progression through the region were dire. At the beginning of the 
outbreak there were no treatments or vaccines that had been shown to be safe and 
effective for treating or preventing EVD, limiting health care providers to 
offer supportive care under extremely challenging circumstances and at great 
risk to themselves. Over time, however, drugs and vaccines in the development 
pipeline were prioritized based on all available research data and were moved 
forward for evaluation in clinical trials to demonstrate safety and efficacy. 
The armamentarium against EVD eventually included biologics such as monoclonal 
antibodies, convalescent plasma, and vaccines as well as small molecule 
therapeutics such as small interfering RNAs and nucleoside analogs. This article 
provides a high-level overview of the interventions and prophylactics considered 
for use in the outbreak and discusses the challenges faced when attempting to 
deploy investigational countermeasures in the midst of an evolving epidemic.

DOI: 10.1128/microbiolspec.EI10-0014-2016
PMID: 27337455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]