---
reference_id: "PMID:33578205"
title: Definitions of primary-progressive multiple sclerosis trajectories by rate of clinical disability progression.
authors:
- Achiron A
- Dreyer-Alster S
- Gurevich M
- Menascu S
- Magalashvili D
- Dolev M
- Stern Y
- Ziv-Baran T
journal: Mult Scler Relat Disord
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2021.102814
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Definitions of primary-progressive multiple sclerosis trajectories by rate of clinical disability progression.
**Authors:** Achiron A, Dreyer-Alster S, Gurevich M, Menascu S, Magalashvili D, Dolev M, Stern Y, Ziv-Baran T
**Journal:** Mult Scler Relat Disord (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.msard.2021.102814](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msard.2021.102814)

## Content

1. Mult Scler Relat Disord. 2021 May;50:102814. doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2021.102814.
 Epub 2021 Feb 5.

Definitions of primary-progressive multiple sclerosis trajectories by rate of 
clinical disability progression.

Achiron A(1), Dreyer-Alster S(2), Gurevich M(3), Menascu S(2), Magalashvili 
D(2), Dolev M(2), Stern Y(2), Ziv-Baran T(4).

Author information:
(1)Multiple Sclerosis Center, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel; Sackler 
Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel. Electronic address: 
anat.achiron@sheba.health.gov.il.
(2)Multiple Sclerosis Center, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel.
(3)Multiple Sclerosis Center, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel; Sackler 
Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, School of Public Health, 
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Patients with primary progressive multiple sclerosis (PPMS) vary in 
the rate of disability progression.
OBJECTIVE: To classify clinical disability trajectories by rate of disability 
progression and evaluate predictive variables in PPMS patients.
METHODS: We analyzed the cumulative incidence of progression to disability and 
in accordance defined clinical PPMS disability trajectories. Correlation was 
performed with age, gender and disability at first presentation. Estimated onset 
was calculated and validated by the mathematical slope of disability 
progression.
RESULTS: The cohort included 304 PPMS patients, 146 (48%) were females, the mean 
age at first visit was 41.1 years, and the median follow up was 18.9 years. 
Median time to reach moderate and severe disability was 4.5 years (95%CI 
3.8-5.2) and 12.6 years (95%CI 10.1-14.2), respectively. Extremely fast patients 
(3.3%) progressed to severe disability within 2-years, while very slow patients 
(4.7%) did not progress to moderate disability even 20 years after first 
presentation. Age and gender were not associated with progression. Moderate 
disability at first visit was associated with faster progression to severe 
disability. Mean estimated range of disease onset was between 4.3 to 9.9 years 
prior to first presentation.
CONCLUSIONS: Majority of PPMS patients progressed to moderate disability within 
5-years and to severe disability within 15-years from first presentation. 
Clinical disability progression trajectories can help treatment-related 
decisions.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msard.2021.102814
PMID: 33578205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]