---
reference_id: "PMID:20549748"
title: Deficiency of electroneutral K+-Cl- cotransporter 3 causes a disruption in impulse propagation along peripheral nerves.
authors:
- Sun YT
- Lin TS
- Tzeng SF
- Delpire E
- Shen MR
journal: Glia
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/glia.21028
keywords:
- Acetates/pharmacology
- Action Potentials/genetics
- Animals
- "Axons/metabolism, pathology"
- "Cadherins/genetics, metabolism"
- Electric Stimulation/methods
- In Vitro Techniques
- Indenes/pharmacology
- Kv1.2 Potassium Channel/metabolism
- Locomotion/genetics
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Neural Conduction/drug effects, genetics, physiology"
- "Ranvier's Nodes/metabolism"
- Rats
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- "Reaction Time/drug effects, genetics"
- Schwann Cells/metabolism
- "Sciatic Neuropathy/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Symporters/antagonists & inhibitors, deficiency, metabolism"
- K Cl- Cotransporters
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deficiency of electroneutral K+-Cl- cotransporter 3 causes a disruption in impulse propagation along peripheral nerves.
**Authors:** Sun YT, Lin TS, Tzeng SF, Delpire E, Shen MR
**Journal:** Glia (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/glia.21028](https://doi.org/10.1002/glia.21028)

## Content

1. Glia. 2010 Oct;58(13):1544-52. doi: 10.1002/glia.21028.

Deficiency of electroneutral K+-Cl- cotransporter 3 causes a disruption in
impulse propagation along peripheral nerves.

Sun YT(1), Lin TS, Tzeng SF, Delpire E, Shen MR.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan.

Nerve conduction requires the fine tuning of ionic currents through delicate
interactions between axons and Schwann cells. The K(+)-Cl(-) cotransporter (KCC)
family includes four isoforms (KCC1-4) that play an important role in the
maintenance of cellular osmotic homeostasis via the coupled electroneutral
movement of K(+) and Cl(-) with concurrent water flux. Mutation in SLC12A6 gene
encoding KCC3 results in an autosomal recessive disease, known as agenesis of
the corpus callosum associated with peripheral neuropathy. Nevertheless, the
role of KCC3 in nerve function remains a puzzle. In this study, the microscopic
examination of KCC isoforms expressed in peripheral nerves showed high
expression of KCC2-4 in nodal segments of the axons and in the perinucleus and
microvilli of Schwann cells. The KCC inhibitor [[(dihydroindenyl)oxy]alkanoic
acid] but not the Na(+)-K(+)-2Cl(-)-cotransport inhibitor (bumetanide)
dose-dependently suppressed the amplitude and area of compound muscle action
potential, indicating the involvement of KCC activity in peripheral nerve
conduction. Furthermore, the amplitude and area under the curve were smaller,
and the nerve conduction velocity was slower in nerves from KCC3(-/-) mice than
in nerves from wild-type mice, while the expression pattern of KCC2 and KCC4 was
similar in KCC3 kockout and wild-type strains. KCC3(-/-) mice also manifested a
prominent motor deficit in the beam-walking test. This is the first study to
demonstrate that the K(+)-Cl(-) cotransporter activity of KCC3 contributes to
the propagation of action potentials along peripheral nerves.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/glia.21028
PMID: 20549748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
