---
reference_id: "PMID:31786667"
title: Human Activities Attract Harmful Mosquitoes in a Tropical Urban Landscape.
authors:
- Lee JM
- Wasserman RJ
- Gan JY
- Wilson RF
- Rahman S
- Yek SH
journal: Ecohealth
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s10393-019-01457-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human Activities Attract Harmful Mosquitoes in a Tropical Urban Landscape.
**Authors:** Lee JM, Wasserman RJ, Gan JY, Wilson RF, Rahman S, Yek SH
**Journal:** Ecohealth (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10393-019-01457-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10393-019-01457-9)

## Content

1. Ecohealth. 2020 Mar;17(1):52-63. doi: 10.1007/s10393-019-01457-9. Epub 2019
Nov  30.

Human Activities Attract Harmful Mosquitoes in a Tropical Urban Landscape.

Lee JM(1)(2), Wasserman RJ(1)(3), Gan JY(1), Wilson RF(1), Rahman S(1)(2), Yek 
SH(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Science, Monash University Malaysia, Building 4, Level 8, Room 36 
(4-8-36), Jalan Lagoon Selatan, 47500, Bandar Sunway, Selangor Darul Ehsan, 
Malaysia.
(2)Tropical Medicine and Biology Platform, Monash University Malaysia, Jalan 
Lagoon Selatan, 47500, Bandar Sunway, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Biology and Biotechnology, Botswana International University of 
Science and Technology, Palapye, Botswana.
(4)School of Science, Monash University Malaysia, Building 4, Level 8, Room 36 
(4-8-36), Jalan Lagoon Selatan, 47500, Bandar Sunway, Selangor Darul Ehsan, 
Malaysia. yek.szehuei@monash.edu.

Knowledge of the interrelationship of mosquito communities and land use changes 
is of paramount importance to understand the potential risk of mosquito disease 
transmission. This study examined the effects of land use types in urban, 
peri-urban and natural landscapes on mosquito community structure to test 
whether the urban landscape is implicated in increased prevalence of potentially 
harmful mosquitoes. Three land use types (park, farm, and forest nested in 
urban, peri-urban and natural landscapes, respectively) in Klang Valley, 
Malaysia, were surveyed for mosquito larval habitat, mosquito abundance and 
diversity. We found that the nature of human activities in land use types can 
increase artificial larval habitats, supporting container-breeding vector 
specialists such as Aedes albopictus, a dengue vector. In addition, we observed 
a pattern of lower mosquito richness but higher mosquito abundance, 
characterised by the high prevalence of Ae. albopictus in the urban landscape. 
This was also reflected in the mosquito community structure whereby urban and 
peri-urban landscapes were composed of mainly vector species compared to a more 
diverse mosquito composition in natural landscape. This study suggested that 
good environmental management practices in the tropical urban landscape are of 
key importance for effective mosquito-borne disease management.

DOI: 10.1007/s10393-019-01457-9
PMID: 31786667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]