---
reference_id: "PMID:41280983"
title: "Recurrent Clostridium difficile Infections in a Patient With Ulcerative Colitis: A Case Report."
authors:
- Nadeem O
- Imran MS
- Siddique N
journal: Cureus
year: '2025'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.95130
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent Clostridium difficile Infections in a Patient With Ulcerative Colitis: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Nadeem O, Imran MS, Siddique N
**Journal:** Cureus (2025)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.95130](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.95130)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2025 Oct 22;17(10):e95130. doi: 10.7759/cureus.95130. eCollection 2025
 Oct.

Recurrent Clostridium difficile Infections in a Patient With Ulcerative Colitis: 
A Case Report.

Nadeem O(1), Imran MS(2), Siddique N(1).

Author information:
(1)General Medicine, North Manchester General Hospital, Manchester, GBR.
(2)General Medicine, Manchester Royal Infirmary, Manchester, GBR.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) poses a substantial clinical challenge, 
especially in patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), particularly 
ulcerative colitis (UC). Patients with UC are at greater risk of CDI and tend to 
experience a more severe disease course and higher rates of recurrence than the 
general population. We report a case of an elderly man in his early 90s with a 
long-standing history of UC treated with mesalazine, who had a prior 
hospitalization for hyponatremia and a history of CDI. During his most recent 
four-month hospitalization, he developed three separate episodes of CDI, 
confirmed by stool PCR and toxin assays. Despite treatment with vancomycin, 
metronidazole, and fidaxomicin in succession, he experienced recurrent episodes 
of CDI that ultimately progressed to septic shock and death. This case 
highlights the nature of recurrent CDI in this patient population and the 
complexity and increased morbidity associated with its management in elderly 
patients with UC. It underscores the importance of careful evaluation of 
underlying risk factors, judicious antibiotic use, and consideration of 
alternative treatment modalities, such as faecal microbiota transplantation 
(FMT), for the prevention of recurrent CDI.

Copyright © 2025, Nadeem et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.95130
PMCID: PMC12635890
PMID: 41280983

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Informed consent for treatment 
and open access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this 
study. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure 
form, all authors declare the following: Payment/services info: All authors have 
declared that no financial support was received from any organization for the 
submitted work. Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they 
have no financial relationships at present or within the previous three years 
with any organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other 
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships 
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.