---
reference_id: "PMID:38165044"
title: Immune mechanisms of granuloma formation in sarcoidosis and tuberculosis.
authors:
- Weeratunga P
- Moller DR
- Ho LP
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/JCI175264
keywords:
- Humans
- Sarcoidosis
- Tuberculosis
- Granuloma
- Mycobacterium tuberculosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune mechanisms of granuloma formation in sarcoidosis and tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Weeratunga P, Moller DR, Ho LP
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI175264](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI175264)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2024 Jan 2;134(1):e175264. doi: 10.1172/JCI175264.

Immune mechanisms of granuloma formation in sarcoidosis and tuberculosis.

Weeratunga P(1), Moller DR(2), Ho LP(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Translational Immunology Discovery Unit, Weatherall Institute of 
Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)John Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Sarcoidosis is a complex immune-mediated disease characterized by clusters of 
immune cells called granulomas. Despite major steps in understanding the cause 
of this disease, many questions remain. In this Review, we perform a mechanistic 
interrogation of the immune activities that contribute to granuloma formation in 
sarcoidosis and compare these processes with its closest mimic, tuberculosis, 
highlighting shared and divergent immune activities. We examine how 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is sensed by the immune system; how the granuloma is 
initiated, formed, and perpetuated in tuberculosis compared with sarcoidosis; 
and the role of major innate and adaptive immune cells in shaping these 
processes. Finally, we draw these findings together around several recent 
high-resolution studies of the granuloma in situ that utilized the latest 
advances in single-cell technology combined with spatial methods to analyze 
plausible disease mechanisms. We conclude with an overall view of granuloma 
formation in sarcoidosis.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI175264
PMCID: PMC10760966
PMID: 38165044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: DRM is chairman and chief 
technical officer of Sarcoidosis Diagnostic Testing LLC, which last received 
funding over 5 years ago from the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute Small 
Business Technology Transfer program (R41 HL129728). DRM reports holding patents 
(9,683,999 B2; 9,977,029 B2; 11,041,862 B2, all issued) as well as a patent 
application (17/319,211).