---
reference_id: "PMID:34175791"
title: "Adult-onset Still's disease in focus: Clinical manifestations, diagnosis, treatment, and unmet needs in the era of targeted therapies."
authors:
- Efthimiou P
- Kontzias A
- Hur P
- Rodha K
- Ramakrishna GS
- Nakasato P
journal: Semin Arthritis Rheum
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2021.06.004
keywords:
- Adult
- Antirheumatic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Arthritis, Juvenile/drug therapy"
- Humans
- Macrophage Activation Syndrome/drug therapy
- Retrospective Studies
- "Still's Disease, Adult-Onset/diagnosis, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult-onset Still's disease in focus: Clinical manifestations, diagnosis, treatment, and unmet needs in the era of targeted therapies.
**Authors:** Efthimiou P, Kontzias A, Hur P, Rodha K, Ramakrishna GS, Nakasato P
**Journal:** Semin Arthritis Rheum (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semarthrit.2021.06.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2021.06.004)

## Content

1. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2021 Aug;51(4):858-874. doi: 
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2021.06.004. Epub 2021 Jun 13.

Adult-onset Still's disease in focus: Clinical manifestations, diagnosis, 
treatment, and unmet needs in the era of targeted therapies.

Efthimiou P(1), Kontzias A(2), Hur P(3), Rodha K(4), Ramakrishna GS(4), Nakasato 
P(3).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine and Rheumatology, New York Rheumatology Care and Ross 
University School of Medicine, NY, United States. Electronic address: 
pe53@cornell.edu.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, Stony Brook University 
School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY, United States.
(3)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, United States.
(4)Value and Access, Novartis Healthcare Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad, India.

BACKGROUND: Adult-onset Still's disease (AOSD) is a rare systemic inflammatory 
disorder of unknown etiology, characterized by a clinical triad of high spiking 
fever, arthralgia (± arthritis), and evanescent skin rash. Management of AOSD 
poses several challenges, including difficulty in diagnosis and limited 
therapeutic options. In this review, we examined whether AOSD and systemic 
juvenile idiopathic arthritis (SJIA) represent a continuum of the same disease. 
We also explored the latest available evidence related to prevalence, clinical 
and laboratory manifestations, complications, diagnostic challenges, novel 
biomarkers, and treatment options in the era of biologics and identified the 
unmet needs of patients with AOSD.
METHODS: A comprehensive systematic literature search was performed in the 
Embase and MEDLINE (via PubMed) literature databases. The search was limited to 
human studies published in English from inception up to March 2020. 
Additionally, abstracts presented at various conferences were screened and hand 
searches were performed. Publications were processed according to the Preferred 
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines.
RESULTS: A total of 123 publications were identified through the literature 
search, majority of which were case series and retrospective observational 
studies. AOSD and SJIA are widely considered part of the same disease spectrum 
owing to similarities in their clinical and biological features. The clinical 
presentation of AOSD is highly variable, accompanied by a broad spectrum of 
disease manifestations. Recent evidence suggests that the AOSD disease course 
can be classified into two distinct categories: "systemic" and "articular." 
Furthermore, AOSD patients may experience various life-threatening 
complications, such as macrophage activation syndrome - reported in as high as 
23% of AOSD patients and considered to be the most severe complication 
characterized by a high mortality rate. The ambiguity in presentation and lack 
of serologic markers make the diagnosis of AOSD difficult, often leading to a 
delay in diagnosis. Given these limitations, the Yamaguchi and Fautrel criteria 
are the most widely used diagnostic tools in clinical practice. It has been 
observed that a clinical diagnosis of AOSD is generally reached by exclusion 
while investigating a patient with fever of unknown origin. Recent advances have 
demonstrated a major role of proinflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin 
(IL)-1, IL-6, IL-18, and IL-37, and other biomarkers in the pathogenesis and 
management of AOSD. Owing to the rarity of the disease, there are very limited 
clinical trials evaluating management strategies for AOSD. The current AOSD 
treatment paradigm includes non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and 
glucocorticoids initially, conventional synthetic disease-modifying 
anti-rheumatic drugs in steroid-refractory patients, and biologics in those 
resistant to conventional treatment. Only a few country-specific guidelines for 
the management of AOSD have been published, and a treat-to-target approach, as 
previously recommended for SJIA, is still lacking. Canakinumab is the only 
FDA-approved biologic for the treatment of AOSD.
CONCLUSION: Emerging evidence supports that AOSD and SJIA represent a continuum 
of the same disease entity. Despite advancements in the understanding of AOSD, 
it continues to pose a substantial burden on patients and the healthcare 
systems, and substantial unmet needs exist across key domains such as the 
pathway to diagnosis, use of biomarkers in clinical practice, and standardized 
treatment strategies. Further research and collaboration is crucial for 
optimizing the diagnosis and management of AOSD patients.

Copyright © 2021 Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2021.06.004
PMID: 34175791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Dr. Petros 
Efthimiou has served on the advisory board of Novartis and Kiniksa. Dr. 
Apostolos Kontzias has served on the advisory board of Novartis and Kiniksa. 
Peter Hur and Priscila Nakasato are employees of Novartis Pharmaceuticals 
Corporation. Kavita Rodha and GS Ramakrishna are employees of Novartis 
Healthcare Pvt Ltd.