---
reference_id: "PMID:31156780"
title: "Molecular mechanisms regulating immune responses in thromboangiitis obliterans: A comprehensive review."
authors:
- Shapouri-Moghaddam A
- Saeed Modaghegh MH
- Rahimi HR
- Ehteshamfar SM
- Tavakol Afshari J
journal: Iran J Basic Med Sci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.22038/ijbms.2019.31119.7513
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular mechanisms regulating immune responses in thromboangiitis obliterans: A comprehensive review.
**Authors:** Shapouri-Moghaddam A, Saeed Modaghegh MH, Rahimi HR, Ehteshamfar SM, Tavakol Afshari J
**Journal:** Iran J Basic Med Sci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.22038/ijbms.2019.31119.7513](https://doi.org/10.22038/ijbms.2019.31119.7513)

## Content

1. Iran J Basic Med Sci. 2019 Mar;22(3):215-224. doi: 
10.22038/ijbms.2019.31119.7513.

Molecular mechanisms regulating immune responses in thromboangiitis obliterans: 
A comprehensive review.

Shapouri-Moghaddam A(1), Saeed Modaghegh MH(2), Rahimi HR(3)(4), Ehteshamfar 
SM(1), Tavakol Afshari J(5).

Author information:
(1)Immunology Research Group, Bu-Ali Research Institute, Mashhad University of 
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(2)Vascular and Endovascular Surgery Research Center, Alavi Hospital, Mashhad 
University of Medical Sciences, Iran.
(3)Neurogenic Inflammation Research Center, Mashhad University of Medical 
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(4)Department of Modern Sciences and Technologies, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad 
University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(5)Immunology Research Group, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical 
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.

Thromboangiitis obliterans (TAO) is a thrombotic-occlusive as well as an 
inflammatory peripheral vascular disease with unknown etiology. Recent evidence 
has supported the immunopathogenesis of the disease, however, the factors 
contributing to the altered immune function and vascular tissue inflammation are 
still unclear. This review was intended to collate the more current knowledge on 
the regulatory molecules involved in TAO from an immunoreactive perspective. The 
homeostasis of the immune system as well as a variety of progenitor cell 
populations appear to be affected during TAO and these alterations are 
associated with intrinsic signaling defects that are directing to an improved 
understanding of the crosstalk between angiogenesis and the immune system, as 
well as the potential of new co-targeting strategies applying both immunotherapy 
and angiogenic therapy.

DOI: 10.22038/ijbms.2019.31119.7513
PMCID: PMC6528722
PMID: 31156780