---
reference_id: "PMID:33526677"
title: Retinal bioavailability and functional effects of a synthetic very-long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid in mice.
authors:
- Gorusupudi A
- Rallabandi R
- Li B
- Arunkumar R
- Blount JD
- Rognon GT
- Chang FY
- Wade A
- Lucas S
- Conboy JC
- Rainier JD
- Bernstein PS
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2017739118
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retinal bioavailability and functional effects of a synthetic very-long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid in mice.
**Authors:** Gorusupudi A, Rallabandi R, Li B, Arunkumar R, Blount JD, Rognon GT, Chang FY, Wade A, Lucas S, Conboy JC, Rainier JD, Bernstein PS
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2017739118](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2017739118)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021 Feb 9;118(6):e2017739118. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2017739118.

Retinal bioavailability and functional effects of a synthetic very-long-chain 
polyunsaturated fatty acid in mice.

Gorusupudi A(1), Rallabandi R(2), Li B(1), Arunkumar R(1), Blount JD(1), Rognon 
GT(1), Chang FY(1), Wade A(2), Lucas S(2), Conboy JC(2), Rainier JD(2), 
Bernstein PS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, John A. Moran Eye Center, 
Salt Lake City, UT 84132.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, John A. Moran Eye Center, 
Salt Lake City, UT 84132; paul.bernstein@hsc.utah.edu.

Rare, nondietary very-long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (VLC-PUFAs) are 
uniquely found in the retina and a few other vertebrate tissues. These special 
fatty acids play a clinically significant role in retinal degeneration and 
development, but their physiological and interventional research has been 
hampered because pure VLC-PUFAs are scarce. We hypothesize that if Stargardt-3 
or age-related macular degeneration patients were to consume an adequate amount 
of VLC-PUFAs that could be directly used in the retina, it may be possible to 
bypass the steps of lipid elongation mediated by the retina's ELOVL4 enzyme and 
to delay or prevent degeneration. We report the synthesis of a VLC-PUFA (32:6 
n-3) in sufficient quantity to study its bioavailability and functional benefits 
in the mouse retina. We acutely and chronically gavage fed wild-type mice and 
Elovl4 rod-cone conditional knockout mice this synthetic VLC-PUFA to understand 
its bioavailability and its role in visual function. VLC-PUFA-fed wild-type and 
Elovl4 conditional knockout mice show a significant increase in retinal VLC-PUFA 
levels in comparison to controls. The VLC-PUFA-fed mice also had improvement in 
the animals' visual acuity and electroretinography measurements. Further studies 
with synthetic VLC-PUFAs will continue to expand our understanding of the 
physiological roles of these unique retinal lipids, particularly with respect to 
their potential utility for the treatment and prevention of retinal degenerative 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2017739118
PMCID: PMC8017942
PMID: 33526677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interest statement: A.G., R.R., 
J.D.R., P.S.B., and the University of Utah have filed a provisional patent 
application on the chemical synthesis of VLC-PUFAs and their therapeutic 
effects.