---
reference_id: "PMID:38026703"
title: "Inflammation and emotion regulation: a narrative review of evidence and mechanisms in emotion dysregulation disorders."
authors:
- Petruso F
- Giff AE
- Milano BA
- De Rossi MM
- Saccaro LF
journal: Neuronal Signal
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1042/NS20220077
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inflammation and emotion regulation: a narrative review of evidence and mechanisms in emotion dysregulation disorders.
**Authors:** Petruso F, Giff AE, Milano BA, De Rossi MM, Saccaro LF
**Journal:** Neuronal Signal (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1042/NS20220077](https://doi.org/10.1042/NS20220077)

## Content

1. Neuronal Signal. 2023 Nov 15;7(4):NS20220077. doi: 10.1042/NS20220077.
eCollection 2023 Dec.

Inflammation and emotion regulation: a narrative review of evidence and
mechanisms in emotion dysregulation disorders.

Petruso F(1), Giff AE(2), Milano BA(3)(4), De Rossi MM(3)(4), Saccaro LF(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Politecnico of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Sant'Anna School of Advanced Studies, Pisa, Italy.
(4)University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva,
Switzerland.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Geneva University Hospital, Switzerland.

Emotion dysregulation (ED) describes a difficulty with the modulation of which
emotions are felt, as well as when and how these emotions are experienced or
expressed. It is a focal overarching symptom in many severe and prevalent
neuropsychiatric diseases, including bipolar disorders (BD), attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and borderline personality disorder
(BPD). In all these disorders, ED can manifest through symptoms of depression,
anxiety, or affective lability. Considering the many symptomatic similarities
between BD, ADHD, and BPD, a transdiagnostic approach is a promising lens of
investigation. Mounting evidence supports the role of peripheral inflammatory
markers and stress in the multifactorial aetiology and physiopathology of BD,
ADHD, and BPD. Of note, neural circuits that regulate emotions appear
particularly vulnerable to inflammatory insults and peripheral inflammation,
which can impact the neuroimmune milieu of the central nervous system. Thus far,
few studies have examined the link between ED and inflammation in BD, ADHD, and
BPD. To our knowledge, no specific work has provided a critical comparison of
the results from these disorders. To fill this gap in the literature, we review
the known associations and mechanisms linking ED and inflammation in general,
and clinically, in BD, ADHD, and BD. Our narrative review begins with an
examination of the routes linking ED and inflammation, followed by a discussion
of disorder-specific results accounting for methodological limitations and
relevant confounding factors. Finally, we critically discuss both
correspondences and discrepancies in the results and comment on potential
vulnerability markers and promising therapeutic interventions.

© 2023 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/NS20220077
PMCID: PMC10653990
PMID: 38026703

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing
interests associated with the manuscript.
