---
reference_id: "PMID:33856031"
title: "Snord116 Post-transcriptionally Increases Nhlh2 mRNA Stability: Implications for Human Prader-Willi Syndrome."
authors:
- Kocher MA
- Huang FW
- Le E
- Good DJ
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab103
keywords:
- Animals
- Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Proteins/genetics
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Humans
- "Hypothalamus/metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-myc/genetics
- "RNA Processing, Post-Transcriptional/genetics"
- RNA Stability/genetics
- "RNA, Small Nucleolar/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Snord116 Post-transcriptionally Increases Nhlh2 mRNA Stability: Implications for Human Prader-Willi Syndrome.
**Authors:** Kocher MA, Huang FW, Le E, Good DJ
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddab103](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddab103)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2021 Jun 9;30(12):1101-1110. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab103.

Snord116 Post-transcriptionally Increases Nhlh2 mRNA Stability: Implications for 
Human Prader-Willi Syndrome.

Kocher MA(1), Huang FW(2), Le E(3), Good DJ(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Translational Biology, Medicine and Health Graduate Program, 1 Riverside 
Circle, Virginia Tech, Roanoke, VA 24016.
(2)Biocomplexity Institute & Initiative, University of Virginia, 995 Research 
Park Blvd, Town Center III, 4th Floor, Charlottesville, VA 22911.
(3)Department of Human Nutrition, Foods, and Exercise, 1981 Kraft Drive (0913), 
Integrated Life Sciences Building, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24060.

The smallest genomic region causing Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) deletes the 
non-coding RNA SNORD116 cluster; however, the function of SNORD116 remains a 
mystery. Previous work in the field revealed the tantalizing possibility that 
expression of NHLH2, a gene previously implicated in both obesity and 
hypogonadism, was downregulated in PWS patients and differentiated stem cells. 
In silico RNA: RNA modeling identified several potential interaction domains 
between SNORD116 and NHLH2 mRNA. One of these interaction domains was highly 
conserved in most vertebrate NHLH2 mRNAs examined. A construct containing the 
Nhlh2 mRNA, including its 3'-UTR, linked to a c-myc tag was transfected into a 
hypothalamic neuron cell line in the presence and absence of 
exogenously-expressed Snord116. Nhlh2 mRNA expression was upregulated in the 
presence of Snord116 dependent on the length and type of 3'UTR used on the 
construct. Furthermore, use of actinomycin D to stop new transcription in N29/2 
cells demonstrated that the upregulation occurred through increased stability of 
the Nhlh2 mRNA in the 45 minutes immediately following transcription. In silico 
modeling also revealed that a single nucleotide variant (SNV) in the NHLH2 mRNA 
could reduce the predicted interaction strength of the NHLH2:SNORD116 diad. 
Indeed, use of an Nhlh2 mRNA construct containing this SNV significantly reduces 
the ability of Snord116 to increase Nhlh2 mRNA levels. For the first time, these 
data identify a motif and mechanism for SNORD116-mediated regulation of NHLH2, 
clarifying the mechanism by which deletion of the SNORD116 snoRNAs locus leads 
to PWS phenotypes.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddab103
PMID: 33856031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]