---
reference_id: "PMID:37335715"
title: "Clinical efficacy of selenium supplementation in patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Kong XQ
- Qiu GY
- Yang ZB
- Tan ZX
- Quan XQ
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000033791
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical efficacy of selenium supplementation in patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Kong XQ, Qiu GY, Yang ZB, Tan ZX, Quan XQ
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000033791](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000033791)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2023 May 19;102(20):e33791. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000033791.

Clinical efficacy of selenium supplementation in patients with Hashimoto 
thyroiditis: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Kong XQ(1), Qiu GY(2), Yang ZB(3), Tan ZX(1), Quan XQ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Shenzhen Longhua District Central Hospital, The 
Affiliated Central Hospital of Shenzhen Longhua District, Guangdong Medical 
University, Shenzhen, China.
(2)Department of Stomatology, Renmin Hospital, Hubei University of Medicine, 
Shiyan, China.
(3)Department of Stomatology, Taihe Hospital, Hubei University of Medicine, 
Shiyan, China.

BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests that selenium supplementation could be useful in 
the treatment of Hashimoto thyroiditis (HT), but the available trials are 
heterogeneous. This study investigates clinically relevant effects of selenium 
supplementation in patients with HT.
METHODS: A systematic search was performed in PubMed, Web of Science, EMBASE, 
Scopus, and the Cochrane Library. The latest update was performed on December 3, 
2022. We investigated the changes in thyroid peroxidase antibodies (TPOAb) and 
thyroglobulin antibodies (TgAb) after selenium supplementation. The effect sizes 
were expressed as weighted mean difference (WMD) with 95% confidence intervals 
(CIs).
RESULTS: After screening and full-text assessment, 7 controlled trials 
comprising 342 patients were included in the systematic review. The results 
showed that there was no significant change in TPOAb levels (WMD = -124.28 [95% 
CI: -631.08 to 382.52], P = .631, I2 = 94.5%) after 3 months of treatment. But 
there was a significant decrease in TPOAb levels (WMD = -284.00 [95% CI: -553.41 
to -14.60], P < .05, I2 = 93.9%) and TgAb levels (WMD = -159.86 [95% CI: -293.48 
to -26.24], P < .05, I2 = 85.3%) after 6 months of treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Selenium supplementation reduces serum TPOAb and TgAb levels after 
6 months of treatment in patients with HT, but future studies are warranted to 
evaluate health-related quality or disease progression.

Copyright © 2023 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000033791
PMCID: PMC10194801
PMID: 37335715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.