---
reference_id: "PMID:36781513"
title: "Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: treatment responses and improved overall survival."
authors:
- Pham JT
- Kisiel JB
- Sweetser S
journal: Int J Colorectal Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00384-023-04332-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: treatment responses and improved overall survival.
**Authors:** Pham JT, Kisiel JB, Sweetser S
**Journal:** Int J Colorectal Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00384-023-04332-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00384-023-04332-w)

## Content

1. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2023 Feb 13;38(1):39. doi: 10.1007/s00384-023-04332-w.

Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: treatment responses and improved overall survival.

Pham JT(1), Kisiel JB(1)(2), Sweetser S(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, 
USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, 
USA. sweetser.seth@mayo.edu.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. sweetser.seth@mayo.edu.

BACKGROUND: Cronkhite-Canada syndrome (CCS) is considered a relentlessly 
progressive disease with high mortality rates. Although disease understanding 
and treatment options have greatly improved, the prognosis from these 
advancements has not been well documented. This study aimed to evaluate 
treatment outcomes and overall survival of CCS.
METHODS: Seventeen patients who were diagnosed and treated over a 20-year period 
at Mayo Clinic (Rochester, Minnesota) were included. Data were abstracted, which 
included clinical and endoscopic manifestations, treatment course, and survival 
outcomes.
RESULTS: The median (interquartile range) duration of follow-up was 8.3 
(3.7-15.8) years. All patients received an initial prednisone dose equivalence 
of 30-80 mg daily, and five patients required steroids at the time of the last 
follow-up. Twelve patients trialed thiopurine therapy, and ten patients 
continued with a thiopurine until the last follow-up. Fifteen patients achieved 
clinical complete remission, and eleven patients achieved endoscopic complete 
remission after pharmacotherapy initiation. Seven patients required 
gastrointestinal surgeries during their disease course. The 5-year overall 
survival was 93.3% (95% confidence interval (CI): 81.5-100%), and the 3-year 
relapse-free survival was 82.4% (95% CI: 66.1-100%).
CONCLUSION: The prognosis and overall survival of patients with CCS have 
markedly improved with advancement in disease understanding and therapies. 
Pharmacotherapy, including corticosteroids and immunomodulators, is effective in 
inducing and maintaining remission, and gastrointestinal surgery is commonly 
needed as an adjunct for managing CCS disease complications.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00384-023-04332-w
PMID: 36781513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]