---
reference_id: "PMID:32162201"
title: Bone Disease in Patients with Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes.
authors:
- Basalom S
- Rauch F
journal: Curr Osteoporos Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s11914-020-00568-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone Disease in Patients with Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes.
**Authors:** Basalom S, Rauch F
**Journal:** Curr Osteoporos Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11914-020-00568-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11914-020-00568-5)

## Content

1. Curr Osteoporos Rep. 2020 Apr;18(2):95-102. doi: 10.1007/s11914-020-00568-5.

Bone Disease in Patients with Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes.

Basalom S(1), Rauch F(2).

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children, 1003 Boulevard Decarie, Montreal, Québec, 
Canada.
(2)Shriners Hospital for Children, 1003 Boulevard Decarie, Montreal, Québec, 
Canada. frauch@shriners.mcgill.ca.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To summarize the bone findings, mainly bone mass and fracture 
risk, in Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS).
RECENT FINDINGS: Low bone mineral density and fractures seem to be frequent in 
some of the rare EDS types (kyphoscoliotic, arthrochalasia, spondylodysplastic, 
and classic-like EDS). For the more prevalent hypermobile and classic EDS types, 
some case-control studies found mildly decreased bone mineral density, but it 
was not clear that fracture rates were increased. Nevertheless, abnormalities in 
vertebral shape seem to be common in classical and hypermobile EDS types. In a 
cohort of individuals with EDS followed since birth, no fractures were observed 
during infancy. Bone mineral density varies widely among the different types of 
EDS, and vertebral abnormalities seem to be common in classical and hypermobile 
EDS. It might be justified to perform spine radiographs and bone mineral density 
assessments in newly diagnosed EDS.

DOI: 10.1007/s11914-020-00568-5
PMID: 32162201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]