---
reference_id: "PMID:37547077"
title: "Prevention of Intradialytic Hypotension in Hemodialysis Patients: Current Challenges and Future Prospects."
authors:
- Hamrahian SM
- Vilayet S
- Herberth J
- Fülöp T
journal: Int J Nephrol Renovasc Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2147/IJNRD.S245621
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevention of Intradialytic Hypotension in Hemodialysis Patients: Current Challenges and Future Prospects.
**Authors:** Hamrahian SM, Vilayet S, Herberth J, Fülöp T
**Journal:** Int J Nephrol Renovasc Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2147/IJNRD.S245621](https://doi.org/10.2147/IJNRD.S245621)

## Content

1. Int J Nephrol Renovasc Dis. 2023 Aug 1;16:173-181. doi: 10.2147/IJNRD.S245621.
 eCollection 2023.

Prevention of Intradialytic Hypotension in Hemodialysis Patients: Current
Challenges and Future Prospects.

Hamrahian SM(1), Vilayet S(2), Herberth J(2)(3), Fülöp T(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine - Nephrology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine - Division of Nephrology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.
(3)Medicine Services, Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center, Charleston, SC, USA.

Intradialytic hypotension, defined as rapid decrease in systolic blood pressure
of greater than or equal to 20 mmHg or in mean arterial pressure of greater than
or equal to 10 mmHg that results in end-organ ischemia and requires
countermeasures such as ultrafiltration reduction or saline infusion to increase
blood pressure to improve patient's symptoms, is a known complication of
hemodialysis and is associated with several potential adverse outcomes. Its
pathogenesis is complex and involves both patient-related factors such as age
and comorbidities, as well as factors related to the dialysis prescription
itself. Key factors include the need for volume removal during hemodialysis and
a suboptimal vascular response which compromises the ability to compensate for
acute intravascular volume loss. Inadequate vascular refill, incorrect
assessment or unaccounted changes of target weight, acute illnesses and
medication interference are further potential contributors. Intradialytic
hypotension can lead to compromised tissue perfusion and end-organ damage, both
acutely and over time, resulting in repetitive injuries. To address these
problems, a careful assessment of subjective symptoms, minimizing interdialytic
weight gains, individualizing dialysis prescription and adjusting the dialysis
procedure based on patients' risk factors can mitigate negative outcomes.

© 2023 Hamrahian et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IJNRD.S245621
PMCID: PMC10404053
PMID: 37547077

Conflict of interest statement: Drs. Herberth and Fülöp are current employees of
the United States Veterans Health Administration. However, the opinions and
views expressed in this paper are the Authors’ own and do not represent the
official views or policies of the United States Veteran Health Administrations.
Dr. Salem Vilayet is a current Fellow at the Department of Medicine - Division
of Nephrology, Medical University of South Carolina (Class of 2024). The authors
alone are responsible for the content and writing of the paper. The authors
report no other conflicts of interest in this work.
