---
reference_id: "PMID:32505533"
title: Single-cell transcriptomic architecture and intercellular crosstalk of human intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.
authors:
- Zhang M
- Yang H
- Wan L
- Wang Z
- Wang H
- Ge C
- Liu Y
- Hao Y
- Zhang D
- Shi G
- Gong Y
- Ni Y
- Wang C
- Zhang Y
- Xi J
- Wang S
- Shi L
- Zhang L
- Yue W
- Pei X
- Liu B
- Yan X
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2020.05.039
keywords:
- CD146 Antigen/metabolism
- "CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts/metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Communication
- "Cholangiocarcinoma/immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- Coculture Techniques/methods
- Disease Progression
- Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 Protein/metabolism
- Humans
- Interleukin-6/metabolism
- "Liver Neoplasms/immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- MicroRNAs/metabolism
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic/genetics"
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
- Signal Transduction
- Single-Cell Analysis
- "Stromal Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Up-Regulation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell transcriptomic architecture and intercellular crosstalk of human intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Zhang M, Yang H, Wan L, Wang Z, Wang H, Ge C, Liu Y, Hao Y, Zhang D, Shi G, Gong Y, Ni Y, Wang C, Zhang Y, Xi J, Wang S, Shi L, Zhang L, Yue W, Pei X, Liu B, Yan X
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2020.05.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2020.05.039)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2020 Nov;73(5):1118-1130. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2020.05.039. Epub
2020  Jun 5.

Single-cell transcriptomic architecture and intercellular crosstalk of human 
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.

Zhang M(1), Yang H(2), Wan L(2), Wang Z(3), Wang H(4), Ge C(2), Liu Y(2), Hao 
Y(5), Zhang D(5), Shi G(6), Gong Y(7), Ni Y(8), Wang C(9), Zhang Y(10), Xi 
J(11), Wang S(3), Shi L(3), Zhang L(12), Yue W(13), Pei X(14), Liu B(15), Yan 
X(16).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Science and Bioengineering, Faculty of Environmental and Life 
Sciences, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China; Academy of 
Military Medical Sciences (AMMS), Academy of Military Sciences, Beijing 100071, 
China; State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Fifth Medical Center of 
Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100071, China.
(2)College of Life Science and Bioengineering, Faculty of Environmental and Life 
Sciences, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China; Stem Cell and 
Regenerative Medicine Lab, Institute of Health Service and Transfusion Medicine, 
AMMS, Beijing 100850, China; South China Research Center for Stem Cell & 
Regenerative Medicine, SCIB, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510005, China.
(3)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Fifth Medical Center of Chinese PLA 
General Hospital, Beijing 100039, China.
(4)Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine Lab, Institute of Health Service and 
Transfusion Medicine, AMMS, Beijing 100850, China; South China Research Center 
for Stem Cell & Regenerative Medicine, SCIB, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510005, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of RNA Biology, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substance and Function of Natural 
Medicines, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100050, China.
(7)Academy of Military Medical Sciences (AMMS), Academy of Military Sciences, 
Beijing 100071, China.
(8)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Fifth Medical Center of 
Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100071, China.
(9)Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology, Medical College, Jinan 
University, Guangzhou 510632, China.
(10)Department of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Union 
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan 430022, China.
(11)Academy of Military Medical Sciences (AMMS), Academy of Military Sciences, 
Beijing 100071, China; Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine Lab, Institute of 
Health Service and Transfusion Medicine, AMMS, Beijing 100850, China; South 
China Research Center for Stem Cell & Regenerative Medicine, SCIB, Guangzhou, 
Guangdong 510005, China.
(12)College of Life Science and Bioengineering, Faculty of Environmental and 
Life Sciences, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China.
(13)Academy of Military Medical Sciences (AMMS), Academy of Military Sciences, 
Beijing 100071, China; Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine Lab, Institute of 
Health Service and Transfusion Medicine, AMMS, Beijing 100850, China; South 
China Research Center for Stem Cell & Regenerative Medicine, SCIB, Guangzhou, 
Guangdong 510005, China. Electronic address: yuewen0206@126.com.
(14)Academy of Military Medical Sciences (AMMS), Academy of Military Sciences, 
Beijing 100071, China; Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine Lab, Institute of 
Health Service and Transfusion Medicine, AMMS, Beijing 100850, China; South 
China Research Center for Stem Cell & Regenerative Medicine, SCIB, Guangzhou, 
Guangdong 510005, China. Electronic address: Peixt@nic.bmi.ac.cn.
(15)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Fifth Medical Center of 
Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100071, China. Electronic address: 
bingliu17@yahoo.com.
(16)College of Life Science and Bioengineering, Faculty of Environmental and 
Life Sciences, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China. 
Electronic address: yxlong2000@bjut.edu.cn.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2020 Nov;73(5):1007-1009. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2020.07.017.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) is the second most 
common liver malignancy. ICC typically features remarkable cellular 
heterogeneity and a dense stromal reaction. Therefore, a comprehensive 
understanding of cellular diversity and the interplay between malignant cells 
and niche cells is essential to elucidate the mechanisms driving ICC progression 
and to develop therapeutic approaches.
METHODS: Herein, we performed single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) analysis on 
unselected viable cells from 8 human ICCs and adjacent samples to elucidate the 
comprehensive transcriptomic landscape and intercellular communication network. 
Additionally, we applied a negative selection strategy to enrich fibroblast 
populations in 2 other ICC samples to investigate fibroblast diversity. The 
results of the analyses were validated using multiplex immunofluorescence 
staining, bulk transcriptomic datasets, and functional in vitro and in vivo 
experiments.
RESULTS: We sequenced a total of 56,871 single cells derived from human ICC and 
adjacent tissues and identified diverse tumor, immune, and stromal cells. 
Malignant cells displayed a high degree of inter-tumor heterogeneity. Moreover, 
tumor-infiltrating CD4 regulatory T cells exhibited highly immunosuppressive 
characteristics. We identified 6 distinct fibroblast subsets, of which the 
majority were CD146-positive vascular cancer-associated fibroblasts (vCAFs), 
with highly expressed microvasculature signatures and high levels of interleukin 
(IL)-6. Functional assays indicated that IL-6 secreted by vCAFs induced 
significant epigenetic alterations in ICC cells, particularly upregulating 
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and thereby enhancing malignancy. 
Furthermore, ICC cell-derived exosomal miR-9-5p elicited high expression of IL-6 
in vCAFs to promote tumor progression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our single-cell transcriptomic dataset delineates the inter-tumor 
heterogeneity of human ICCs, underlining the importance of intercellular 
crosstalk between ICC cells and vCAFs, and revealing potential therapeutic 
targets.
LAY SUMMARY: Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma is an aggressive and chemoresistant 
malignancy. Better understanding the complex transcriptional architecture and 
intercellular crosstalk of these tumors will help in the development of more 
effective therapies. Herein, we have identified important interactions between 
cancer cells and cancer-associated fibroblasts in the tumor stroma, which could 
have therapeutic implications.

Copyright © 2020 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2020.05.039
PMID: 32505533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest that pertain to this work. Please refer to the 
accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.