---
reference_id: "PMID:31726290"
title: Clinical findings of autosomal-dominant striatal degeneration and PDE8B mutation screening in parkinsonism and related disorders.
authors:
- Ni J
- Yi X
- Liu Z
- Sun W
- Yuan Y
- Yang J
- Jiang H
- Shen L
- Tang B
- Liu Y
- Wang J
journal: Parkinsonism Relat Disord
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.11.002
keywords:
- "3',5'-Cyclic-AMP Phosphodiesterases/genetics"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Corpus Striatum/pathology
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Diffusion Tensor Imaging
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nerve Degeneration/congenital, genetics, pathology"
- Parkinson Disease/genetics
- Parkinsonian Disorders/genetics
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical findings of autosomal-dominant striatal degeneration and PDE8B mutation screening in parkinsonism and related disorders.
**Authors:** Ni J, Yi X, Liu Z, Sun W, Yuan Y, Yang J, Jiang H, Shen L, Tang B, Liu Y, Wang J
**Journal:** Parkinsonism Relat Disord (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.11.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.11.002)

## Content

1. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2019 Dec;69:94-98. doi:
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.11.002. Epub 2019 Nov 5.

Clinical findings of autosomal-dominant striatal degeneration and PDE8B mutation
screening in parkinsonism and related disorders.

Ni J(1), Yi X(2), Liu Z(1), Sun W(1), Yuan Y(1), Yang J(1), Jiang H(3), Shen
L(3), Tang B(4), Liu Y(1), Wang J(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, PR China.
(2)Department of Radiology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, PR China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, PR China; National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric
Diseases, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 410008,
PR China; Key Laboratory of Hunan Province in Neurodegenerative Disorders,
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 410008, PR China; Center for Medical
Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Central South University, PR China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, PR China; National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric
Diseases, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 410008,
PR China; Key Laboratory of Hunan Province in Neurodegenerative Disorders,
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 410008, PR China; Center for Medical
Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Central South University, PR China;
Departments of Geriatrics, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha,
Hunan, 410008, PR China.
(5)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, PR China; National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric
Diseases, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 410008,
PR China; Key Laboratory of Hunan Province in Neurodegenerative Disorders,
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 410008, PR China; Center for Medical
Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Central South University, PR China.
Electronic address: junling.wang@csu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Autosomal-dominant striatal degeneration (ADSD) is a rare
neurodegenerative movement disorder caused by mutations in the Phosphodiesterase
8B (PDE8B) gene.
OBJECTIVE: To summarize the clinical and imaging features of a Chinese ADSD
family and determine whether mutations in PDE8B are associated with Parkinson's
disease (PD) or Parkinsonism.
METHODS: Clinical, imaging and genetic findings in a Chinese ADSD family are
reported. Rare, potentially pathogenic variants in PDE8B were searched in
whole-exome sequencing datasets from 1714 PD or parkinsonism patients and 1039
controls.
RESULTS: An ADSD diagnosis was confirmed by a nonsense mutation in PDE8B
(p.E102X) in a patient and a presymptomatic carrier. Clinically, the patient
exhibited progressive parkinsonism without tremor and ataxia phenotype.
Neuroimaging showed an inhomogeneous increased signal in the patient's striatum
on T1-weighted images but a decreased signal in the presymptomatic carrier.
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) showed a disturbance in the white matter fiber
distribution, especially between the lentiform nucleus and caudate nucleus,
which was more prominent in the patient than in the presymptomatic carrier.
Within the 1714 patients, three PDE8B missense variants were identified that
were unlikely to be the cause of the parkinsonism phenotype according to the
functional prediction and mutation types reported in ADSD.
CONCLUSIONS: For the first time, we described the typical ataxia phenotype in
ADSD. A loss of white matter fiber integrity was shown on DTI scanning. No
causative PDE8B mutation was discovered in our cohort of PD or Parkinsonism
patients.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.11.002
PMID: 31726290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
