---
reference_id: "PMID:32939873"
title: Functional analysis of Sonic Hedgehog variants associated with holoprosencephaly in humans using a CRISPR/Cas9 zebrafish model.
authors:
- Hong S
- Hu P
- Jang JH
- Carrington B
- Sood R
- Berger SI
- Roessler E
- Muenke M
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/humu.24119
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- CRISPR-Cas Systems/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Family
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Variation
- Guidelines as Topic
- Hedgehog Proteins/genetics
- Holoprosencephaly/genetics
- Humans
- Loss of Function Mutation/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- "Societies, Scientific"
- Zebrafish/genetics
- Zebrafish Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional analysis of Sonic Hedgehog variants associated with holoprosencephaly in humans using a CRISPR/Cas9 zebrafish model.
**Authors:** Hong S, Hu P, Jang JH, Carrington B, Sood R, Berger SI, Roessler E, Muenke M
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.24119](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.24119)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2020 Dec;41(12):2155-2166. doi: 10.1002/humu.24119. Epub 2020 Oct
1.

Functional analysis of Sonic Hedgehog variants associated with holoprosencephaly 
in humans using a CRISPR/Cas9 zebrafish model.

Hong S(1), Hu P(1), Jang JH(1)(2), Carrington B(3), Sood R(3), Berger SI(4), 
Roessler E(1), Muenke M(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)College of Computer, Mathematical, and Natural Sciences, University of 
Maryland, College Park, Maryland, USA.
(3)Zebrafish Core, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(4)Children's National Hospital, Center for Genetic Medicine Research and Rare 
Disease Institute, Washington DC, USA.
(5)American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Genetic variation in the highly conserved Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) gene is one of 
the most common genetic causes for the malformations of the brain and face in 
humans described as the holoprosencephaly clinical spectrum. However, only a 
minor fraction of known SHH variants have been experimentally proven to lead to 
abnormal function. Employing a phenotypic rescue assay with synthetic human 
messenger RNA variant constructs in shha-/- knockout zebrafish, we evaluated 104 
clinically reported in-frame and missense SHH variants. Our data helped us to 
classify them into loss of function variants (31), hypomorphic variants (33), 
and nonpathogenic variants (40). We discuss the strengths and weaknesses of 
currently accepted predictors of variant deleteriousness and the American 
College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines for variant interpretation 
in the context of this functional model; furthermore, we demonstrate the 
robustness of model systems such as zebrafish as a rapid method to resolve 
variants of uncertain significance.

Published 2020. This article is a U.S. Goverment work and is in the public 
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.24119
PMID: 32939873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]