---
reference_id: "PMID:40068358"
title: Diffusion-weighted imaging abnormalities patterns in bacterial meningitis.
authors:
- Hiraga A
- Kojima K
- Kuwabara S
journal: Clin Neurol Neurosurg
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2025.108822
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diffusion-weighted imaging abnormalities patterns in bacterial meningitis.
**Authors:** Hiraga A, Kojima K, Kuwabara S
**Journal:** Clin Neurol Neurosurg (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clineuro.2025.108822](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clineuro.2025.108822)

## Content

1. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2025 Apr;251:108822. doi:
10.1016/j.clineuro.2025.108822.  Epub 2025 Mar 6.

Diffusion-weighted imaging abnormalities patterns in bacterial meningitis.

Hiraga A(1), Kojima K(2), Kuwabara S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Chiba Rosai Hospital, Chiba, Japan. Electronic 
address: hiragaa@yahoo.co.jp.
(2)Department of Neurology, Chiba Rosai Hospital, Chiba, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 
Chiba, Japan.

PURPOSE: Information on abnormal diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) patterns in 
bacterial meningitis (BM) is limited. This study aimed to investigate the 
frequency and patterns of DWI abnormalities in BM in patients with 
culture-positive BM.
METHODS: The medical records of 14 consecutive patients with BM with magnetic 
resonance imaging evaluation, admitted to our hospital over the past 14 years, 
were reviewed. BM was defined by a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) culture positive 
for bacteria, or the combination of CSF pleocytosis and a positive blood 
culture.
RESULTS: Brain DWI abnormalities were identified in 13 (93 %) of the 14 patients 
and classified into six patterns: ischaemic stroke (n = 9), ventriculitis 
(n = 4), sulcal hyperintensity (n = 7), scattered hyperintensities surrounding 
the cerebral hemispheres (n = 6), middle meningeal arterial sign (n = 5), or 
abscess (n = 1). The causes of ischaemic stroke included infective endocarditis 
(n = 4), vasculitis (vasculopathy; n = 2), and unclassified (n = 3).
CONCLUSION: DWI abnormalities in BM were very frequent. Based on the high 
frequency and wide spectrum of DWI abnormalities in BM, we suggest performing 
DWI for all patients with BM.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2025.108822
PMID: 40068358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no competing interests relevant to the content of this manuscript.