---
reference_id: "PMID:32440921"
title: "Pick's disease: clinicopathologic characterization of 21 cases."
authors:
- Choudhury P
- Scharf EL
- Paolini MA 2nd
- Graff-Radford J
- Alden EC
- Machulda MM
- Jones DT
- Fields JA
- Murray ME
- Graff-Radford NR
- Constantopoulos E
- Reichard RR
- Knopman DS
- Duffy JR
- Dickson DW
- Parisi JE
- Josephs KA
- Petersen RC
- Boeve BF
journal: J Neurol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-020-09927-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pick's disease: clinicopathologic characterization of 21 cases.
**Authors:** Choudhury P, Scharf EL, Paolini MA 2nd, Graff-Radford J, Alden EC, Machulda MM, Jones DT, Fields JA, Murray ME, Graff-Radford NR, Constantopoulos E, Reichard RR, Knopman DS, Duffy JR, Dickson DW, Parisi JE, Josephs KA, Petersen RC, Boeve BF
**Journal:** J Neurol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-020-09927-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-020-09927-9)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2020 Sep;267(9):2697-2704. doi: 10.1007/s00415-020-09927-9. Epub
2020  May 21.

Pick's disease: clinicopathologic characterization of 21 cases.

Choudhury P(1), Scharf EL(1), Paolini MA 2nd(2), Graff-Radford J(1), Alden 
EC(3), Machulda MM(3), Jones DT(1), Fields JA(3), Murray ME(4), Graff-Radford 
NR(5), Constantopoulos E(6), Reichard RR(6), Knopman DS(1), Duffy JR(1), Dickson 
DW(4), Parisi JE(1)(6), Josephs KA(1), Petersen RC(1), Boeve BF(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 200 1st St SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, 
USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Medicine, Texas A&M, College Station, 
TX, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology (Neuropathology), Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 200 1st St SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, 
USA. bboeve@mayo.edu.

BACKGROUND: Pick's disease (PiD) is a unique subtype of frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration characterized pathologically by aggregates of 3-Repeat tau. Few 
studies have examined the clinical variability and disease progression in PiD. 
We describe the clinical features, neuropsychological profiles and coexistent 
pathologies in 21 cases of autopsy-confirmed PiD.
METHODS: This study was a retrospective analysis of patients with Pick's disease 
evaluated at Mayo Clinic, Rochester or Jacksonville (1995-2018), and identified 
through an existing database.
RESULTS: Twenty-one cases with sufficient clinical data were identified. 
Behavioral variant FTD (bvFTD; 12/21) was the most common phenotype, followed by 
primary progressive aphasia (PPA; 7/21), corticobasal syndrome (CBS; 1/21) and 
amnestic dementia (1/21). Median age at disease onset was 54 years, with PPA 
cases (median = 52 years) presenting earlier than bvFTD (median = 59). Median 
disease duration (onset-death) overall was 10 years and did not differ 
significantly between bvFTD (median = 9.5 years) and PPA (median = 13). Age at 
death was not significantly different in PPA (median = 66) compared to bvFTD 
(median = 68.5). A third of the cases (n = 7/21) demonstrated pure PiD 
pathology, while the remainder showed co-existent other pathologies including 
Alzheimer's type (n = 6), cerebral amyloid angiopathy (n = 3), combined 
Alzheimer's and amyloid angiopathy (n = 4), and Lewy body disease (n = 1).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows that bvFTD and PPA are the most common clinical 
phenotypes associated with PiD, although rare presentations such as CBS were 
also seen. Coexisting non-Pick's pathology was also present in many cases. Our 
study highlights the clinical and pathologic heterogeneity in PiD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-020-09927-9
PMID: 32440921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]