---
reference_id: "PMID:36044874"
title: "A Discrepancy: Calcium Channel Blockers Are Effective for the Treatment of Hypertensive Left Ventricular Hypertrophy but Not as Effective for Prevention of Heart Failure."
authors:
- Koracevic G
- Perisic Z
- Stanojkovic M
- Stojanovic M
- Zdravkovic M
- Tomasevic M
- Djordjevic D
- Mladenovic K
- Koracevic M
- Trkulja J
journal: Med Princ Pract
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1159/000526792
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Discrepancy: Calcium Channel Blockers Are Effective for the Treatment of Hypertensive Left Ventricular Hypertrophy but Not as Effective for Prevention of Heart Failure.
**Authors:** Koracevic G, Perisic Z, Stanojkovic M, Stojanovic M, Zdravkovic M, Tomasevic M, Djordjevic D, Mladenovic K, Koracevic M, Trkulja J
**Journal:** Med Princ Pract (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000526792](https://doi.org/10.1159/000526792)

## Content

1. Med Princ Pract. 2022;31(5):454-462. doi: 10.1159/000526792. Epub 2022 Aug 31.

A Discrepancy: Calcium Channel Blockers Are Effective for the Treatment of 
Hypertensive Left Ventricular Hypertrophy but Not as Effective for Prevention of 
Heart Failure.

Koracevic G(1)(2), Perisic Z(1)(2), Stanojkovic M(1), Stojanovic M(1)(3), 
Zdravkovic M(1), Tomasevic M(4)(5), Djordjevic D(1)(3), Mladenovic K(6), 
Koracevic M(1), Trkulja J(7).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Nis, Nis, Serbia.
(2)Department for Cardiovascular Diseases, University Clinical Center Nis, Nis, 
Serbia.
(3)Institute for Treatment and Rehabilitation Niska Banja, Nis, Serbia.
(4)Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Kragujevac, Kragujevac, Serbia.
(5)Clinic for Cardiology, Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.
(6)Faculty of Science, Department of Biology and Ecology, University of 
Kragujevac, Kragujevac, Serbia.
(7)Medical Centre "Dom Zdravlja Nis", Nis, Serbia.

Arterial hypertension (HTN) is important due to its high prevalence, morbidity, 
and mortality rates. Calcium channel blockers (CCBs) are the first-line 
antihypertensive drugs. HTN can lead to heart failure (HF) by causing 
hypertensive left ventricular hypertrophy (HTN LVH). CCBs are recommended for 
the treatment of HTN LVH. The aim of this study was to analyze the status of 
CCBs regarding (1) HTN LVH treatment and (2) capability to prevent HTN-induced 
HF in the guidelines. For this narrative review, the following databases were 
searched: Medline, Scopus, Science Direct, Springer, SAGE, Wiley, Oxford 
Journals, Cambridge, and Google Scholar. CCBs are effective antihypertensive 
drugs and a very good therapeutic option for HTN LVH as they can cause reverse 
LVH remodeling. Consequently, we may expect that CCBs would prevent HF. However, 
evidence suggests that CCBs confer less protection from HF than other first-line 
antihypertensive drugs. A negative inotropic action of nondihydropyridine CCBs 
may contribute to suboptimal protection against HF. This discrepancy is 
clinically relevant because CCBs are in one of the two recommended (single pill) 
combinations for the initial treatment of HTN. LVH is a strong risk factor for 
HF in HTN patients. When LVH arises, the risk of HF increases dramatically. CCBs 
are inferior to renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system blockers but still very 
effective in bringing about regression of HTN LVH; consequently, CCBs are 
expected to protect from HF. On the contrary, CCBs protect from HF less 
effectively than other first-line antihypertensive drugs. This discrepancy needs 
to be investigated further to improve clinical practice.

© 2022 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000526792
PMCID: PMC9801368
PMID: 36044874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare. All co-authors have seen and agree with the contents of the manuscript.