---
reference_id: "PMID:7593598"
title: The genetic and functional basis of purine nucleotide feedback-resistant phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase superactivity.
authors:
- Becker MA
- Smith PR
- Taylor W
- Mustafi R
- Switzer RL
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1172/JCI118267
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "Escherichia coli/enzymology, genetics"
- Family
- Feedback
- Female
- Fibroblasts/enzymology
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Point Mutation
- "Purine-Pyrimidine Metabolism, Inborn Errors/enzymology, genetics"
- Purines/metabolism
- Recombinant Proteins/genetics
- Ribose-Phosphate Pyrophosphokinase/genetics
- X Chromosome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The genetic and functional basis of purine nucleotide feedback-resistant phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase superactivity.
**Authors:** Becker MA, Smith PR, Taylor W, Mustafi R, Switzer RL
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI118267](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI118267)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 1995 Nov;96(5):2133-41. doi: 10.1172/JCI118267.

The genetic and functional basis of purine nucleotide feedback-resistant
phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase superactivity.

Becker MA(1), Smith PR, Taylor W, Mustafi R, Switzer RL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

The genetic and functional basis of phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase (PRS)
superactivity associated with purine nucleotide inhibitor-resistance was studied
in six families with this X chromosome-linked purine metabolic and
neurodevelopmental disorder. Cloning and sequencing of PRS1 and PRS2 cDNAs,
derived from fibroblast total RNA of affected male patients by reverse
transcription and PCR amplification, demonstrated that each PRS1 cDNA contained
a distinctive single base substitution predicting a corresponding amino acid
substitution in the PRS1 isoform. Overall, the array of substitutions
encompassed a substantial portion of the translated sequence of PRS1 cDNA.
Plasmid-mediated expression of variant PRS1 cDNAs in Escherichia coli BL21
(DE3/pLysS) yielded recombinant mutant PRS1s, which, in each case, displayed a
pattern and magnitude of purine nucleoside diphosphate inhibitor-resistance
comparable to that found in cells of the respective patient. Kinetic analysis of
recombinant mutant PRS1s showed that widely dispersed point mutations in the X
chromosome-linked PRPS1 gene encoding the PRS1 isoform result in alteration of
the allosteric mechanisms regulating both enzyme inhibition by purine
nucleotides and activation by inorganic phosphate. The functional consequences
of these mutations provide a tenable basis for the enhanced production of
phosphoribosylpyrophosphate, purine nucleotides, and uric acid that are the
biochemical hallmarks of PRS superactivity.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI118267
PMCID: PMC185862
PMID: 7593598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
