---
reference_id: "PMID:24867405"
title: "The role of dural sinus stenosis in idiopathic intracranial hypertension pathogenesis: the self-limiting venous collapse feedback-loop model."
authors:
- De Simone R
- Ranieri A
- Montella S
- Bilo L
- Cautiero F
journal: Panminerva Med
year: '2014'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of dural sinus stenosis in idiopathic intracranial hypertension pathogenesis: the self-limiting venous collapse feedback-loop model.
**Authors:** De Simone R, Ranieri A, Montella S, Bilo L, Cautiero F
**Journal:** Panminerva Med (2014)

## Content

1. Panminerva Med. 2014 Sep;56(3):201-9. Epub 2014 May 25.

The role of dural sinus stenosis in idiopathic intracranial hypertension 
pathogenesis: the self-limiting venous collapse feedback-loop model.

De Simone R(1), Ranieri A, Montella S, Bilo L, Cautiero F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Reproductive Sciences and Odontostomatology 
Headache Centre,"Federico II" University of Naples, Naples, Italy - 
rodesimo@unina.it.

In recent years the efficacy of endovascular venous stenting in idiopathic IIH 
treatment has been consistently reported, strongly suggesting that sinus 
stenosis should be viewed as a causative factor rather than a secondary 
phenomenon. We propose that in subjects carrying one or more collapsible 
segments of large cerebral venous collectors and exposed to a number of 
different promoting factors, sinus venous compression and cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) hypertension may influence each other in a circular way, leading to a new 
relatively stable venous/CSF pressures balance state at higher values. The 
mechanism relay on self-limiting venous collapse (SVC) feedback-loop between the 
CSF pressure, that compresses the sinus, and the consequent venous pressure 
rise, that increases the CSF pressure. The result is the "coupled" increase of 
both pressure values, a phenomenon not expected in presence of sufficiently 
rigid central veins. Once the maximum stretch of venous wall is reached the loop 
stabilize at higher venous/CSF pressure values and become self-sustaining, 
therefore persisting even after the ceasing of the promoting factor. Notably, 
the SVC is reversible provided an adequate perturbation is carried to whichever 
side of the loop such as sinus venous stenting, on one hand, and CSF diversion 
or even a single CSF withdrawal by lumbar puncture (LP), on the other. The SVC 
model predicts that any condition leading to an increase of either, cerebral 
venous pressure or CSF pressure may trigger the feedback loop in predisposed 
individuals. Migraine with and without aura, a disease sharing with IIH a much 
higher prevalence among women of childbearing age, is associated with waves of 
significant brain hyperperfusion. These may lead to the congestion of large 
cerebral venous collectors and could represent a common SVC promoting condition 
in susceptible individuals. The SVC model give reason of the high specificity 
and sensitivity of sinus stenosis as IIH predictor and of the multiplicity of 
the factors that have been found associated with IIH. Moreover it might explain 
why, among the sinus stenosis carriers, young and overweight women are at higher 
risk of developing the disease. Finally, the SVC model fully explain the 
enigmatic longstanding remissions that can be commonly observed after a single 
LP with CSF subtraction in IIH with or without papilledema.

PMID: 24867405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]