---
reference_id: "PMID:10968241"
title: "Osteogenesis imperfecta: profiles of motor development as assessed by a postal questionnaire."
authors:
- Engelbert RH
- Uiterwaal CS
- Gulmans VA
- Pruijs HE
- Helders PJ
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1007/s004310000505
keywords:
- Activities of Daily Living
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Developmental Disabilities/etiology, physiopathology"
- Female
- "Fracture Fixation, Intramedullary"
- Humans
- Male
- Motor Skills
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/classification, complications, surgery"
- Reference Values
- Severity of Illness Index
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Weight-Bearing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenesis imperfecta: profiles of motor development as assessed by a postal questionnaire.
**Authors:** Engelbert RH, Uiterwaal CS, Gulmans VA, Pruijs HE, Helders PJ
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s004310000505](https://doi.org/10.1007/s004310000505)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2000 Aug;159(8):615-20. doi: 10.1007/s004310000505.

Osteogenesis imperfecta: profiles of motor development as assessed by a postal 
questionnaire.

Engelbert RH(1), Uiterwaal CS, Gulmans VA, Pruijs HE, Helders PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Physical Therapy, University Medical Centre, 
Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands. R.Engelbert@wkz.azu.nl

This study was performed to achieve more detailed information regarding the age 
and sequence in the development of motor milestones in the different types of 
osteogenesis imperfecta (OI). The parents of 98 patients with a diagnosis of OI 
were sent a questionnaire regarding the age at which patients achieved motor 
milestones. All patients were attending the outpatient clinic for children with 
OI at the Wilhelmina Children's Hospital. The motor milestones were classified 
into static motor milestones and dynamic motor milestones and all data were 
checked with health care records. The age of development of motor milestones was 
compared to reference values of the healthy population. The severity of the 
disease was classified according to Sillence based on clinical, genetic and 
radiological data. The age of intramedullary rodding of the first nail in the 
lower and upper extremity and the localisation was noted. A total of 76 parents 
responded to the 98 questionnaires (78%). In OI type I, a delay exists in 
achieving motor milestones, comparable to the 95th percentile of the normal 
population. In type III, the development of all motor milestones was 
significantly delayed compared to types I and IV with a discrepancy between 
static and dynamic milestones. In OI type IV, a retardation in motor development 
developed after the milestone 'sitting without support' was achieved. Motor 
development in types I and IV was not influenced by intramedullary rodding of 
the lower extremities, since rodding was rarely performed before the milestone 
'unsupported standing' was achieved. In type III, the influence of 
intramedullary rodding on the age of achieving motor milestones remains 
questionable.
CONCLUSION: The severity of osteogenesis imperfecta has a large influence on the 
age and sequence in the development of motor milestones. No influence of 
intramedullary rodding of the lower extremities on motor development was found 
in osteogenesis imperfecta types I and IV, whereas the influence in type III 
remains questionable.

DOI: 10.1007/s004310000505
PMID: 10968241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]