---
reference_id: "PMID:39053125"
title: In vitro treatment with liposome-encapsulated Mannose-1-phosphate restores N-glycosylation in PMM2-CDG patient-derived fibroblasts.
authors:
- Shirakura T
- Krishnamoorthy L
- Paliwal P
- Hird G
- McCluskie K
- McWilliams P
- He M
- Ismaili MHA
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108531
keywords:
- Humans
- "Fibroblasts/metabolism, drug effects"
- Liposomes
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/drug therapy, genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- Glycosylation/drug effects
- Mannosephosphates/metabolism
- "Phosphotransferases (Phosphomutases)/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Intercellular Adhesion Molecule-1/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In vitro treatment with liposome-encapsulated Mannose-1-phosphate restores N-glycosylation in PMM2-CDG patient-derived fibroblasts.
**Authors:** Shirakura T, Krishnamoorthy L, Paliwal P, Hird G, McCluskie K, McWilliams P, He M, Ismaili MHA
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108531](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108531)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2024 Sep-Oct;143(1-2):108531. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108531.  Epub 2024 Jul 1.

In vitro treatment with liposome-encapsulated Mannose-1-phosphate restores
N-glycosylation in PMM2-CDG patient-derived fibroblasts.

Shirakura T(1), Krishnamoorthy L(1), Paliwal P(1), Hird G(1), McCluskie K(1),
McWilliams P(1), He M(2), Ismaili MHA(3).

Author information:
(1)Glycomine Inc., San Carlos, CA, USA.
(2)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Glycomine Inc., San Carlos, CA, USA. Electronic address:
halaoui@glcyomine.com.

PMM2-CDG is the most common congenital disorder of glycosylation (CDG). Patients
with this disease often carry compound heterozygous mutations of the gene
encoding the phosphomannomutase 2 (PMM2) enzyme. PMM2 converts
mannose-6-phosphate (M6P) to mannose-1-phosphate (M1P), which is a critical
upstream metabolite for proper protein N-glycosylation. Therapeutic options for
PMM2-CDG patients are limited to management of the disease symptoms, as no drug
is currently approved to treat this disease. GLM101 is a M1P-loaded liposomal
formulation being developed as a candidate drug to treat PMM2-CDG. This report
describes the effect of GLM101 treatment on protein N-glycosylation of PMM2-CDG
patient-derived fibroblasts. This treatment normalized intracellular
GDP-mannose, increased the relative glycoprotein mannosylation content and
TNFα-induced ICAM-1 expression. Moreover, glycomics profiling revealed that
GLM101 treatment of PMM2-CDG fibroblasts resulted in normalization of most high
mannose glycans and partial correction of multiple complex and hybrid glycans.
In vivo characterization of GLM101 revealed its favorable pharmacokinetics,
liver-targeted biodistribution, and tolerability profile with achieved systemic
concentrations significantly greater than its effective in vitro potency. Taken
as a whole, the results described in this report support further exploration of
GLM101's safety, tolerability, and efficacy in PMM2-CDG patients.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108531
PMID: 39053125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.
