---
reference_id: "PMID:37864342"
title: Sex differences in cholesterol and triglyceride levels among hospitalized adolescents and young adults with eating disorders.
authors:
- Nagata JM
- Chaphekar AV
- Vargas R
- Nguyen A
- Downey AE
- Patel KP
- Ganson KT
- Stuart E
- Vendlinski S
- Buckelew SM
- Garber AK
journal: Int J Eat Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/eat.24072
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Young Adult
- Risk Factors
- Retrospective Studies
- "Adolescent, Hospitalized"
- Sex Characteristics
- Cholesterol
- Triglycerides
- Malnutrition
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sex differences in cholesterol and triglyceride levels among hospitalized adolescents and young adults with eating disorders.
**Authors:** Nagata JM, Chaphekar AV, Vargas R, Nguyen A, Downey AE, Patel KP, Ganson KT, Stuart E, Vendlinski S, Buckelew SM, Garber AK
**Journal:** Int J Eat Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/eat.24072](https://doi.org/10.1002/eat.24072)

## Content

1. Int J Eat Disord. 2024 Jan;57(1):184-194. doi: 10.1002/eat.24072. Epub 2023
Oct  20.

Sex differences in cholesterol and triglyceride levels among hospitalized
adolescents and young adults with eating disorders.

Nagata JM(1), Chaphekar AV(1), Vargas R(1), Nguyen A(1), Downey AE(1)(2), Patel
KP(1), Ganson KT(3), Stuart E(1), Vendlinski S(1), Buckelew SM(1), Garber AK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco,
California, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of California,
San Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Factor-Inwentash Faculty of Social Work, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To determine sex differences in cholesterol and triglyceride levels
among adolescents and young adults hospitalized for medical complications of
eating disorders.
METHODS: A retrospective electronic medical record review of patients aged
9-25 years admitted to the University of California, San Francisco Eating
Disorders Program for medical stabilization, between 2012 and 2020, was
conducted. Non-fasting total cholesterol and triglycerides were collected;
however, LDL and HDL levels were not available.
RESULTS: Among 83 males and 441 females, mean ± SD age was 15.5 ± 2.8 years,
64.1% had anorexia nervosa, and admission percent median body mass index was
87.3 ± 13.9. The proportion of males and females with high total cholesterol
(13.3% vs. 18.1%, Cramer's V = 0.05, p = .28) and high triglyceride levels (9.6%
vs. 8.1%, Cramer's V = 0.02, p = .63) did not differ. Mean total cholesterol
levels were higher in females compared to males (F 169.6 ± 41.1 mg/dL vs. M
154.5 ± 45.1 mg/dL, Cohen's d = 0.36, p = .003), although a majority were within
the normal range. In adjusted linear regression models, male (compared to
female) sex (B = -14.40, 95% CI -24.54, -4.27) and higher percent median body
mass index (B = -0.33, 95% CI -0.60, -0.06) were associated with lower total
cholesterol levels in adjusted models (R2  = 0.04).
DISCUSSION: Building on prior work showing equally severe complications of
eating disorders in males compared to females, we did not find sex differences
in those presenting with high total cholesterol or triglycerides. Future
research is needed to understand the pathophysiology and role of dyslipidemia in
acute malnutrition, and the impact of nutritional rehabilitation and weight
restoration.
PUBLIC SIGNIFICANCE: We found that the proportion of male and female adolescents
and young adults hospitalized for medical complications of an eating disorder
with high total cholesterol did not significantly differ. Although average total
cholesterol levels were higher in female compared to male patients with eating
disorders, a majority of these levels remained within the normal range. Patients
with more severe malnutrition had a higher risk of elevated total cholesterol
levels. Clinicians should consider monitoring cholesterol levels in young people
hospitalized for restrictive eating disorders.

© 2023 The Authors. International Journal of Eating Disorders published by Wiley
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/eat.24072
PMCID: PMC10842641
PMID: 37864342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors have
no conflicts to disclose.
