---
reference_id: "PMID:32296467"
title: "Nervous system: Embryonal tumors: Neuroblastoma."
authors:
- Pudela C
- Balyasny S
- Applebaum MA
journal: Atlas Genet Cytogenet Oncol Haematol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.4267/2042/70771
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nervous system: Embryonal tumors: Neuroblastoma.
**Authors:** Pudela C, Balyasny S, Applebaum MA
**Journal:** Atlas Genet Cytogenet Oncol Haematol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.4267/2042/70771](https://doi.org/10.4267/2042/70771)

## Content

1. Atlas Genet Cytogenet Oncol Haematol. 2020 Jul;24(7):284-290. doi: 
10.4267/2042/70771.

Nervous system: Embryonal tumors: Neuroblastoma.

Pudela C(1), Balyasny S(1), Applebaum MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

Neuroblastoma is a clinically heterogenous pediatric cancer of the sympathetic 
nervous system that originates from neural crest cells. It is the most common 
extracranial solid tumor in childhood and prognosis ranges from spontaneous 
tumor regression to aggressive disease resistant to multimodal therapy. 
Prognosis depends on patient characteristics and tumor biology that determine 
risk classification. Advancements in therapy reductions are merited for low- and 
intermediate-risk neuroblastoma patients, who generally have excellent outcomes. 
Of the patients with high-risk disease, only 50% achieve long-term survival, and 
therapeutic advancements are needed. Over the past several decades, genomic 
features such as germline mutations, somatic genetic aberrations, chromosome 
copy number, transcriptomics, and epigenetics have proven to contribute to the 
pathogenesis of neuroblastoma. The primary predisposition genes in familial 
neuroblastoma are ALK and PHOX2B. Sporadic neuroblastoma arises with complex 
pathogenesis, but chromosomal abnormalities and single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
have been identified to cooperatively lead to oncogenesis. These advances have 
led to new therapeutic approaches with the potential to improve outcomes for 
children with neuroblastoma.

DOI: 10.4267/2042/70771
PMCID: PMC7158874
PMID: 32296467