---
reference_id: "PMID:22814247"
title: Motor symptoms and schizophrenia.
authors:
- Walther S
- Strik W
journal: Neuropsychobiology
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1159/000339456
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Motor symptoms and schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Walther S, Strik W
**Journal:** Neuropsychobiology (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000339456](https://doi.org/10.1159/000339456)

## Content

1. Neuropsychobiology. 2012;66(2):77-92. doi: 10.1159/000339456. Epub 2012 Jul
17.

Motor symptoms and schizophrenia.

Walther S(1), Strik W.

Author information:
(1)University Hospital of Psychiatry, Bern, Switzerland. walther@puk.unibe.ch

Classical schizophrenia literature reports motor symptoms as characteristic of 
the disorder. After the introduction of neuroleptic drugs, the existence of 
genuine motor disorders was challenged. Renewed interest arose as symptoms were 
found in never-medicated patients. Reports focused on abnormal involuntary 
movements, parkinsonism, neurological soft signs, catatonia, negative symptoms, 
or psychomotor slowing. Since these syndromes refer to different concepts, 
however, the definitions are not congruent and the symptoms overlap. The 
prevalence rates of motor symptoms in schizophrenia are surprisingly high, and 
recent studies indicate a possible pathobiology. In particular, the development 
and maturation of the human motor system appears to be closely linked to the 
emergence of motor symptoms observed in schizophrenia. Post-mortem and 
neuroimaging results demonstrated aberrant structure and function of premotor 
and motor cortices, basal ganglia, thalamus, and the connecting white matter 
tracts. Animal models have focused on aberrant neurotransmission and genetic 
contributions. Findings of localized abnormal oligodendrocyte function and 
myelination point to the special role of the white matter in schizophrenia, and 
recent studies specifically found an association between motor abnormalities and 
white matter structure in schizophrenia. This review of the literature supports 
the idea that motor symptoms are closely related to the neurodevelopmental 
disturbances of schizophrenia and a distinct syndromal dimension with its own 
pathophysiology.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000339456
PMID: 22814247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]