---
reference_id: "PMID:32387641"
title: Whole-genome sequencing and comparative genomic analysis of Shewanella xiamenensis strains carrying bla(OXA-48)-like genes isolated from a water environment in Vietnam.
authors:
- Nguyen NT
- Takemura T
- Pham AHQ
- Tran HT
- Vu KCT
- Tu ND
- Huong LT
- Cuong NT
- Kasuga I
- Hasebe F
- Suzuki M
journal: J Glob Antimicrob Resist
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jgar.2020.04.033
keywords:
- Genomics
- Microbial Sensitivity Tests
- Shewanella
- Vietnam
- Water
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole-genome sequencing and comparative genomic analysis of Shewanella xiamenensis strains carrying bla(OXA-48)-like genes isolated from a water environment in Vietnam.
**Authors:** Nguyen NT, Takemura T, Pham AHQ, Tran HT, Vu KCT, Tu ND, Huong LT, Cuong NT, Kasuga I, Hasebe F, Suzuki M
**Journal:** J Glob Antimicrob Resist (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jgar.2020.04.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jgar.2020.04.033)

## Content

1. J Glob Antimicrob Resist. 2020 Jun;21:272-274. doi:
10.1016/j.jgar.2020.04.033.  Epub 2020 May 6.

Whole-genome sequencing and comparative genomic analysis of Shewanella
xiamenensis strains carrying bla(OXA-48)-like genes isolated from a water
environment in Vietnam.

Nguyen NT(1), Takemura T(1), Pham AHQ(1), Tran HT(1), Vu KCT(1), Tu ND(2), Huong
LT(2), Cuong NT(2), Kasuga I(3), Hasebe F(1), Suzuki M(4).

Author information:
(1)Vietnam Research Station, Center for Infectious Disease Research in Asia and
Africa, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(2)Bacteriology Department, National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology,
Hanoi, Viet Nam.
(3)Department of Urban Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; Vietnam-Japan University, Vietnam National
University, Hanoi, Viet Nam.
(4)AMR Research Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.
Electronic address: suzuki-m@nih.go.jp.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to understand the natural bacterial hosts
of antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs) and their impact on the processes of
evolution, spread and positive selection of acquired ARGs.
METHODS: Environmental carbapenem-resistant Gram-negative bacteria in Vietnam
were screened for based on a One Health approach. Whole-genome sequencing (WGS)
and comparative genomic analysis of the isolates were performed. WGS of three
carbapenem-resistant Shewanella xiamenensis strains (SxND_W2_2018, SxND_W5_2018
and SxND_W9_2018) isolated from canals in Truc Ninh District and Nghia Hung
District, Nam Dinh Province, Vietnam, in 2018 was performed using an Illumina
MiniSeq system. ARGs in the draft genome sequences were detected using
ResFinder, and comparison of genomic regions was performed using BLASTn and
Easyfig.
RESULTS: TheblaOXA-48-like carbapenem-hydrolysing class D β-lactamase genes
blaOXA-48, blaOXA-252 and blaOXA-547 were detected in chromosomal contigs of
SxND_W2_2018, SxND_W5_2018 and SxND_W9_2018, respectively. Comparative analysis
of the surrounding regions of the blaOXA-48-like genes, including both 10 kb
upstream and 10 kb downstream of the genes, showed that the genomic regions were
highly conserved in all three isolates.
CONCLUSION: This study analysed the draft genome sequences of
carbapenem-resistantS. xiamenensis strains isolated from a water environment in
Vietnam. All of the strains carried blaOXA-48-like gene variants in their
chromosomes. This information will contribute to highlight the evolution of
blaOXA-48 family carbapenemase genes in nature and the importance of S.
xiamenensis as a natural reservoir of important ARGs in the environment in
Vietnam.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgar.2020.04.033
PMID: 32387641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
