---
reference_id: "PMID:37832107"
title: "Impact of multi-heavy metal exposure on renal damage indicators in Korea: An analysis using Bayesian Kernel Machine Regression."
authors:
- Choi SH
- Choi KH
- Won JU
- Kim H
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000035001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of multi-heavy metal exposure on renal damage indicators in Korea: An analysis using Bayesian Kernel Machine Regression.
**Authors:** Choi SH, Choi KH, Won JU, Kim H
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000035001](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000035001)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2023 Oct 13;102(41):e35001. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000035001.

Impact of multi-heavy metal exposure on renal damage indicators in Korea: An 
analysis using Bayesian Kernel Machine Regression.

Choi SH(1)(2), Choi KH(3), Won JU(2), Kim H(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Chungbuk National 
University Hospital, Cheongju, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Public Health, Graduate School, Yonsei University, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Preventive Medicine, College of Medicine, Chungbuk National 
University, Cheongju, Republic of Korea.

Exposure to cadmium (Cd), arsenic (As), and mercury (Hg) is associated with 
renal tubular damage. People living near refineries are often exposed to 
multiple heavy metals at high concentrations. This cross-sectional study 
investigated the association between combined urinary Cd, As, and Hg levels and 
renal damage markers in 871 residents living near the Janghang refinery plant 
and in a control area. Urinary Cd, As, Hg, N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase (NAG), 
and β2-microglobulin (β2-MG) levels were measured. The combined effects of Cd, 
As, and Hg on renal tubular damage markers were assessed using linear regression 
and a Bayesian Kernel Machine Regression (BKMR) model. The results of the BKMR 
model were compared using a stratified analysis of the exposure and control 
groups. While the linear regression showed that only Cd concentration was 
significantly associated with urinary NAG levels (β = 0.447, P value < .05), the 
BKMR model showed that Cd and Hg levels were also significantly associated with 
urinary NAG levels. The combined effect of the 3 heavy metals on urinary NAG 
levels was significant and stronger in the exposure group than in the control 
group. However, no relationship was observed between the exposure concentrations 
of the 3 heavy metals and urinary β2-MG levels. The results suggest that the 
BKMR model can be used to assess the health effects of heavy-metal exposure on 
vulnerable residents.

Copyright © 2023 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000035001
PMCID: PMC10578771
PMID: 37832107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.