---
reference_id: "PMID:30074218"
title: "Expression of MMIF, HIF-1α and VEGF in Serum and Endometrial Tissues of Patients with Endometriosis."
authors:
- Zhang F
- Liu XL
- Wang W
- Dong HL
- Xia YF
- Ruan LP
- Liu LP
journal: Curr Med Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s11596-018-1906-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expression of MMIF, HIF-1α and VEGF in Serum and Endometrial Tissues of Patients with Endometriosis.
**Authors:** Zhang F, Liu XL, Wang W, Dong HL, Xia YF, Ruan LP, Liu LP
**Journal:** Curr Med Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11596-018-1906-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11596-018-1906-1)

## Content

1. Curr Med Sci. 2018 Jun;38(3):499-504. doi: 10.1007/s11596-018-1906-1. Epub
2018  Jun 22.

Expression of MMIF, HIF-1α and VEGF in Serum and Endometrial Tissues of Patients 
with Endometriosis.

Zhang F(1), Liu XL(1), Wang W(1), Dong HL(1), Xia YF(1), Ruan LP(1), Liu LP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wuhan 6th Hospital Affiliated to 
Jianghan University, Wuhan, 430000, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wuhan Children's Hospital, Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong University Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430000, 
China. maglip@sina.com.

The aim of this study was to investigate the expression of macrophage migration 
inhibitory factor (MMIF), hypoxia-inducible factor-1 a (HIF-1α) and vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in the serum and endometrial tissues of 
patients with endometriosis (EM) and the clinical significance. Eighty EM 
patients [American Reproductive Association stage I (n=20), stage II (n=22), 
stage III (n=21) and stage IV (n=17)] were enrolled and divided into mild (10-14 
points, n=28), moderate (16-24 points, n=27) and severe (26-30 points, n=25) 
dysmenorrhea groups. The control group included 40 healthy women of childbearing 
age who underwent routine healthcare examinations in the enrolment period. The 
expression of MMIF, HIF-1α and VEGF in the serum and endometrial tissues was 
measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and Western blotting, 
respectively. Meanwhile, the sensitivity and specificity of serum MMIF, HIF-1α, 
and VEGF when separately used as single indexes or jointly used as one index 
were examined as well. The results showed that serum concentrations of MMIF, 
HIF-1α, and VEGF were significantly higher in EM patients than in controls 
(P<0.05). The expression of all three proteins in both serum and endometrial 
tissues increased significantly with the R-AFS stage (P<0.05) and with 
dysmenorrheal severity (P<0.05). The sensitivity and specificity of the combined 
detection of serum MMIF, HIF-1α, and VEGF levels were significantly higher than 
those of single index detection (P<0.05). In conclusion, the expression of MMIF, 
HIF-1α, and VEGF in the serum and endometrial tissues may be used to assess the 
stage of EM and the severity of dysmenorrhea. Combined evaluation of MMIF, 
HIF-1α, and VEGF significantly improves the diagnostic sensitivity and 
specificity.

DOI: 10.1007/s11596-018-1906-1
PMID: 30074218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]