---
reference_id: "PMID:18366307"
title: "Cerebrospinal fluid: identification of diagnostic markers for schizophrenia."
authors:
- Schwarz E
- Bahn S
journal: Expert Rev Mol Diagn
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1586/14737159.8.2.209
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebrospinal fluid: identification of diagnostic markers for schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Schwarz E, Bahn S
**Journal:** Expert Rev Mol Diagn (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1586/14737159.8.2.209](https://doi.org/10.1586/14737159.8.2.209)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2008 Mar;8(2):209-16. doi: 10.1586/14737159.8.2.209.

Cerebrospinal fluid: identification of diagnostic markers for schizophrenia.

Schwarz E(1), Bahn S.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, 
Cambridge CB2 1QT, UK. es404@cam.ac.uk

Schizophrenia is a complex neuropsychiatric disease but, despite extensive 
research efforts over the last 100 years, the etiology of this disorder remains 
elusive. Diagnosis is still based on a subjective, interview-based process, 
which may not align with the biological underpinnings of the symptoms. This 
old-fashioned descriptive approach contributes to the low treatment success and 
impedes early intervention, which is thought to be crucial for successful 
therapy. Therefore, there is an urgent need to discover biochemical analytes 
that facilitate an objective and reliable diagnosis. Disease markers might also 
have utility for tracking treatment success and compliance, as well as the 
discovery of novel drug targets. For schizophrenia and psychiatric disorders at 
large, analyzing cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is an intuitive choice due to its 
close proximity to the brain and its clinical accessibility in the living 
patient. Although numerous studies have aimed to identify potential diagnostic 
markers in the CSF of schizophrenia patients, as yet not one has found its way 
to clinical application. Here, we review molecular alterations of proteins and 
metabolites that have been identified in schizophrenia CSF and discuss their 
potential applicability as diagnostic markers.

DOI: 10.1586/14737159.8.2.209
PMID: 18366307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]