---
reference_id: "PMID:17943789"
title: Directly observed therapy for treating tuberculosis.
authors:
- Volmink J
- Garner P
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD003343.pub3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Directly observed therapy for treating tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Volmink J, Garner P
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD003343.pub3](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD003343.pub3)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Oct 17;(4):CD003343. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD003343.pub3.

Directly observed therapy for treating tuberculosis.

Volmink J(1), Garner P.

Author information:
(1)Stellenbosch University, Faculty of Health Sciences, PO Box 19063, Tygerberg, 
Cape Town, South Africa, 7505. jvolmink@sun.ac.za

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 May 29;(5):CD003343. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD003343.pub4.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006 Apr 19;(2):CD003343. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD003343.pub2.

BACKGROUND: For tuberculosis treatment, policies have been introduced to 
encourage adherence to treatment regimens. One such policy is directly observed 
therapy (DOT), which involves people directly observing patients taking their 
antituberculous drugs.
OBJECTIVES: To compare DOT with self administration of treatment or different 
DOT options for people requiring treatment for clinically active tuberculosis or 
prevention of active disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: In May 2007, we searched the Cochrane Infectious Diseases Group 
Specialized Register, CENTRAL (The Cochrane Library 2007, Issue 2), MEDLINE, 
EMBASE, LILACS, and mRCT. We also checked article reference lists and contacted 
relevant researchers and organizations.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomized and quasi-randomized controlled trials comparing 
a health worker, family member, or community volunteer routinely observing 
people taking antituberculous drugs compared with routine self administration of 
treatment at home. We include people requiring treatment for clinically active 
tuberculosis or medication for preventing active disease.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Both authors independently assessed trial 
methodological quality and extracted data. Data were analysed using relative 
risks (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) and the fixed-effect model when 
there was no statistically significant heterogeneity (chi square P > 0.1). 
Trials of drug users were analysed separately.
MAIN RESULTS: Eleven trials with 5609 participants met the inclusion criteria. 
No statistically significant difference was detected between DOT and self 
administration in terms of cure (RR 1.02, 95% CI 0.86 to 1.21, random-effects 
model; 1603 participants, 4 trials), with similar results for cure plus 
completion of treatment. When stratified by location, DOT provided at home 
compared with DOT provided at clinic suggests a possible small advantage with 
home-based DOT for cure (RR 1.10, 95% CI 1.02 to 1.18; 1365 participants, 3 
trials). There was no significant difference detected in clinical outcomes 
between DOT at a clinic versus by a family member or community health worker (2 
trials), or for DOT provided by a family member versus a community health worker 
(1326 participants, 1 trial). Two small trials of tuberculosis prophylaxis in 
intravenous drugs users found no statistically significant difference between 
DOT and self administration (199 participants, 1 trial) or a choice of location 
for DOT for completion of treatment (108 participants, 1 trial).
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The results of randomized controlled trials conducted in 
low-, middle-, and high-income countries provide no assurance that DOT compared 
with self administration of treatment has any quantitatively important effect on 
cure or treatment completion in people receiving treatment for tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003343.pub3
PMID: 17943789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]