---
reference_id: "PMID:31479590"
title: Encoding Clinical Data with the Human Phenotype Ontology for Computational Differential Diagnostics.
authors:
- Köhler S
- Øien NC
- Buske OJ
- Groza T
- Jacobsen JOB
- McNamara C
- Vasilevsky N
- Carmody LC
- Gourdine JP
- Gargano M
- McMurry JA
- Danis D
- Mungall CJ
- Smedley D
- Haendel M
- Robinson PN
journal: Curr Protoc Hum Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/cphg.92
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Encoding Clinical Data with the Human Phenotype Ontology for Computational Differential Diagnostics.
**Authors:** Köhler S, Øien NC, Buske OJ, Groza T, Jacobsen JOB, McNamara C, Vasilevsky N, Carmody LC, Gourdine JP, Gargano M, McMurry JA, Danis D, Mungall CJ, Smedley D, Haendel M, Robinson PN
**Journal:** Curr Protoc Hum Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cphg.92](https://doi.org/10.1002/cphg.92)

## Content

1. Curr Protoc Hum Genet. 2019 Sep;103(1):e92. doi: 10.1002/cphg.92.

Encoding Clinical Data with the Human Phenotype Ontology for Computational 
Differential Diagnostics.

Köhler S(1)(2)(3), Øien NC(4), Buske OJ(5), Groza T(6), Jacobsen JOB(3)(7), 
McNamara C(6), Vasilevsky N(3)(8), Carmody LC(3)(9), Gourdine JP(3)(8), Gargano 
M(3)(9), McMurry JA(3)(10), Danis D(3)(9), Mungall CJ(3)(11), Smedley D(3)(7), 
Haendel M(3)(8)(10), Robinson PN(3)(9)(12).

Author information:
(1)Charité Centrum für Therapieforschung, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 
and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Einstein Center Digital Future, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Monarch Initiative (monarchinitiative.org).
(4)Freelance Genome Analyst, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Gene42, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Pryzm Health, Perth, Australia.
(7)Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, London, United Kingdom.
(8)Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon.
(9)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, Connecticut.
(10)Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon.
(11)Environmental Genomics and Systems Biology, Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, Berkeley, California.
(12)Institute for Systems Genomics, University of Connecticut, Farmington, 
Connecticut.

The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) is a standardized set of phenotypic terms 
that are organized in a hierarchical fashion. It is a widely used resource for 
capturing human disease phenotypes for computational analysis to support 
differential diagnostics. The HPO is frequently used to create a set of terms 
that accurately describe the observed clinical abnormalities of an individual 
being evaluated for suspected rare genetic disease. This profile is compared 
with computational disease profiles in the HPO database with the aim of 
identifying genetic diseases with comparable phenotypic profiles. The 
computational analysis can be coupled with the analysis of whole-exome or 
whole-genome sequencing data through applications such as Exomiser. This article 
explains how to choose an optimal set of HPO terms for these cases and enter 
them with software, such as PhenoTips and PatientArchive, and demonstrates how 
to use Phenomizer and Exomiser to generate a computational differential 
diagnosis. © 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cphg.92
PMCID: PMC6814016
PMID: 31479590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest. Gene42 Inc. provides 
licensing, support, customization, and integration services for PhenoTips.