---
reference_id: "PMID:27296815"
title: "Alpha-1-antitrypsin (SERPINA1) mutation spectrum: Three novel variants and haplotype characterization of rare deficiency alleles identified in Portugal."
authors:
- Silva D
- Oliveira MJ
- Guimarães M
- Lima R
- Gomes S
- Seixas S
journal: Respir Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.05.002
keywords:
- Alleles
- Base Sequence
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Portugal/epidemiology
- "Pulmonary Emphysema/complications, physiopathology"
- Smoking/genetics
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin/genetics
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-1-antitrypsin (SERPINA1) mutation spectrum: Three novel variants and haplotype characterization of rare deficiency alleles identified in Portugal.
**Authors:** Silva D, Oliveira MJ, Guimarães M, Lima R, Gomes S, Seixas S
**Journal:** Respir Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rmed.2016.05.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmed.2016.05.002)

## Content

1. Respir Med. 2016 Jul;116:8-18. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.05.002. Epub 2016 May
3.

Alpha-1-antitrypsin (SERPINA1) mutation spectrum: Three novel variants and
haplotype characterization of rare deficiency alleles identified in Portugal.

Silva D(1), Oliveira MJ(2), Guimarães M(2), Lima R(2), Gomes S(3), Seixas S(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto
(IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal.
(2)Department of Pulmonology, Centro Hospitalar de Vila Nova de Gaia/Espinho,
Vila Nova de Gaia, Portugal.
(3)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto
(IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal; Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde,
Universidade do Porto (I3S), Porto, Portugal.
(4)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto
(IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal; Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde,
Universidade do Porto (I3S), Porto, Portugal. Electronic address:
sseixas@ipatimup.pt.

BACKGROUND: Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a genetic condition caused
by SERPINA1 mutations, which culminates into lower protease inhibitor activity
in the serum and predisposes affected individuals to emphysema. Clinical
manifestations of AATD are often associated to ZZ (p.Glu342Lys) and SZ
(p.Glu264Val) genotypes and less frequently to rare deficiency or null alleles
in heterozygous and homozygous states.
METHODS: We sequenced SERPINA1 (approximately 8 kb) and genotyped two
microsatellites located upstream and downstream of the gene (195 and 5.6 kb,
respectively) in a cohort of 51 AATD patients found to carry different rare
alleles. A meta-analysis of SERPINA1 mutation spectrum was also performed.
RESULTS: We detected a total of 14 rare alleles including 3 defined by novel
mutations (p.Glu162Gly, p.Arg281Lysfs*17 and p.Met374Leufs*19) and 11
characterized by previously described variants (c.-5+2dupT, p.Arg39Cys,
p.Phe52del, p.Thr68Ile, p.Asp256Val, p.Leu263Pro, p.Glu264Val, p.Leu353Phefs*24,
p.Pro369Ser and p.Pro369Leu) but in several instances differing in their
molecular backgrounds. So far, SERPINA1 has 132 low-frequency variants (<1%),
where AATD mutations are not evenly distributed across the three-dimensional
structure and tend to cluster in functional domains like the gate or the
shutter.
CONCLUSION: The contribution of rare SERPINA1 alleles into AATD should not be
neglected in the diagnosis practice given there is a wide spectrum of variants
originated by mutation and sometimes shuffled between chromosomes by
recombination. Even though many of the rare variants are likely to be recent and
population specific others seems to be as old as the Z allele and dispersed
across European populations.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.05.002
PMID: 27296815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
