---
reference_id: "PMID:11990381"
title: "UGT1A1*28 polymorphism as a determinant of irinotecan disposition and toxicity."
authors:
- Iyer L
- Das S
- Janisch L
- Wen M
- Ramírez J
- Karrison T
- Fleming GF
- Vokes EE
- Schilsky RL
- Ratain MJ
journal: Pharmacogenomics J
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1038/sj.tpj.6500072
keywords:
- Adult
- Alleles
- "Antineoplastic Agents, Phytogenic/pharmacokinetics"
- "Camptothecin/analogs & derivatives, pharmacokinetics, toxicity"
- Female
- Genotype
- Glucuronides/pharmacokinetics
- Glucuronosyltransferase/genetics
- Humans
- Irinotecan
- Male
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# UGT1A1*28 polymorphism as a determinant of irinotecan disposition and toxicity.
**Authors:** Iyer L, Das S, Janisch L, Wen M, Ramírez J, Karrison T, Fleming GF, Vokes EE, Schilsky RL, Ratain MJ
**Journal:** Pharmacogenomics J (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.tpj.6500072](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.tpj.6500072)

## Content

1. Pharmacogenomics J. 2002;2(1):43-7. doi: 10.1038/sj.tpj.6500072.

UGT1A1*28 polymorphism as a determinant of irinotecan disposition and toxicity.

Iyer L(1), Das S, Janisch L, Wen M, Ramírez J, Karrison T, Fleming GF, Vokes EE, 
Schilsky RL, Ratain MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, IL, USA.

The metabolism of irinotecan (CPT-11) involves sequential activation to SN-38 
and detoxification to the pharmacologically inactive SN-38 glucuronide (SN-38G). 
We have previously demonstrated the role of UGT1A1 enzyme in the glucuronidation 
of SN-38 and a significant correlation between in vitro glucuronidation of SN-38 
and UGT1A1 gene promoter polymorphism. This polymorphism (UGT1A1*28) is 
characterized by the presence of an additional TA repeat in the TATA sequence of 
the UGT1A1 promoter, ((TA)7TAA, instead of (TA)6TAA). Here we report the results 
from a prospective clinical pharmacogenetic study to determine the significance 
of UGT1A1*28 polymorphism on irinotecan disposition and toxicity in patients 
with cancer. Twenty patients with solid tumors were treated with a 90 min i.v. 
infusion of irinotecan (300 mg m(-2)) once every 3 weeks. The frequency of 
UGT1A1 genotypes was as follows: 6/6--45%, 6/7--35% and 7/7--20%, with allele 
frequencies of 0.375 and 0.625 for (TA)7TAA and (TA)6TAA, respectively. Patients 
with the (TA)7TAA polymorphism had significantly lower SN-38 glucuronidation 
rates than those with the normal allele (6/6>6/7>7/7, P = 0.001). More severe 
grades of diarrhea and neutropenia were observed only in patients heterozygous 
(grade 4 diarrhea, n = 1) or homozygous (grade 3 diarrhea/grade 4 neutropenia, n 
= 1 and grade 3 neutropenia, n = 1) for the (TA)7TAA sequence. The results 
suggest that screening for UGT1A1*28 polymorphism may identify patients with 
lower SN-38 glucuronidation rates and greater susceptibility to irinotecan 
induced gastrointestinal and bone marrow toxicity.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.tpj.6500072
PMID: 11990381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]