---
reference_id: "PMID:25528808"
title: "[The hand, foot and mouth disease. Clinical premiere in our country]."
authors:
- Brauner E
- Dănilă F
- Rădulescu A
- Turcu T
- Vîntu C
- Hurmuzache T
- Vătavu C
- Damir P
- Colţea A
- Bărăscu L
- Gavriliţă L
- Labă E
- Zavate O
- Cotor F
- Ivan A
journal: Rev Med Chir Soc Med Nat Iasi
year: '1981'
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Enterovirus/isolation & purification"
- "Exanthema/pathology, virology"
- "Fingers/pathology, virology"
- "Foot/pathology, virology"
- "Hand/pathology, virology"
- "Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease/diagnosis, virology"
- Humans
- Male
- Mouth/pathology
- Romania
- "Stomatitis, Aphthous/pathology, virology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [The hand, foot and mouth disease. Clinical premiere in our country].
**Authors:** Brauner E, Dănilă F, Rădulescu A, Turcu T, Vîntu C, Hurmuzache T, Vătavu C, Damir P, Colţea A, Bărăscu L, Gavriliţă L, Labă E, Zavate O, Cotor F, Ivan A
**Journal:** Rev Med Chir Soc Med Nat Iasi (1981)

## Content

1. Rev Med Chir Soc Med Nat Iasi. 1981 Oct-Dec;85(4):629-34.

[The hand, foot and mouth disease. Clinical premiere in our country].

[Article in Romanian]

Brauner E, Dănilă F, Rădulescu A, Turcu T, Vîntu C, Hurmuzache T, Vătavu C, 
Damir P, Colţea A, Bărăscu L, Gavriliţă L, Labă E, Zavate O, Cotor F, Ivan A.

In May 1981 the hand, foot and mouth disease was diagnosed for the first time in 
Ramaia in a 4 year old child. The onset of the disease was characterized by 
moderate fever, coryza and spontaneous endobuccal pains followed at a short 
interval of time by the simultaneous of a papulo-vesicular eruption on hands and 
feet. The eruption was prevalent on the hands and feet fingers as well as on the 
palmar and plantar regions. Isolated aphthous lesions were seen on the 
vestibular mucosa. Morphologically, the intraepidermic site of the lesion with 
an advanced acantholytic process in the vesicular area was noticed. In the 
superficial and deep tissue perivascular infiltrate with mononucleares were 
present.

PMID: 25528808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]