---
reference_id: "PMID:36414630"
title: SMAD6-deficiency in human genetic disorders.
authors:
- Luyckx I
- Verstraeten A
- Goumans MJ
- Loeys B
journal: NPJ Genom Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41525-022-00338-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SMAD6-deficiency in human genetic disorders.
**Authors:** Luyckx I, Verstraeten A, Goumans MJ, Loeys B
**Journal:** NPJ Genom Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41525-022-00338-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41525-022-00338-5)

## Content

1. NPJ Genom Med. 2022 Nov 21;7(1):68. doi: 10.1038/s41525-022-00338-5.

SMAD6-deficiency in human genetic disorders.

Luyckx I(1)(2), Verstraeten A(1), Goumans MJ(3), Loeys B(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
University of Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Centre of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
University of Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.
bart.loeys@uantwerpen.be.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands. bart.loeys@uantwerpen.be.

SMAD6 encodes an intracellular inhibitor of the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)
signalling pathway. Until now, SMAD6-deficiency has been associated with three
distinctive human congenital conditions, i.e., congenital heart diseases,
including left ventricular obstruction and conotruncal defects, craniosynostosis
and radioulnar synostosis. Intriguingly, a similar spectrum of heterozygous
loss-of-function variants has been reported to cause these clinically distinct
disorders without a genotype-phenotype correlation. Even identical nucleotide
changes have been described in patients with either a cardiovascular phenotype,
craniosynostosis or radioulnar synostosis. These findings suggest that the
primary pathogenic variant alone cannot explain the resultant patient phenotype.
In this review, we summarise clinical and (patho)genetic (dis)similarities
between these three SMAD6-related conditions, compare published Madh6 mouse
models, in which the importance and impact of the genetic background with
respect to the observed phenotype is highlighted, and elaborate on the cellular
key mechanisms orchestrated by SMAD6 in the development of these three discrete
inherited disorders. In addition, we discuss future research needed to elucidate
the pathogenetic mechanisms underlying these diseases in order to improve their
molecular diagnosis, advance therapeutic strategies and facilitate counselling
of patients and their families.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41525-022-00338-5
PMCID: PMC9681871
PMID: 36414630

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
