---
reference_id: "PMID:23517654"
title: Association of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) haploinsufficiency with lower adaptive behaviour and reduced cognitive functioning in WAGR/11p13 deletion syndrome.
authors:
- Han JC
- Thurm A
- Golden Williams C
- Joseph LA
- Zein WM
- Brooks BP
- Butman JA
- Brady SM
- Fuhr SR
- Hicks MD
- Huey AE
- Hanish AE
- Danley KM
- Raygada MJ
- Rennert OM
- Martinowich K
- Sharp SJ
- Tsao JW
- Swedo SE
journal: Cortex
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2013.02.009
keywords:
- "Adaptation, Psychological/physiology"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Aniridia/complications, genetics"
- "Autistic Disorder/genetics, psychology"
- Behavior/physiology
- Brain/pathology
- Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor/deficiency
- Child
- "Child Behavior Disorders/etiology, psychology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Deletion
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 11/genetics"
- Cognition/physiology
- "Cognition Disorders/genetics, physiopathology, psychology"
- Cohort Studies
- Corpus Callosum/pathology
- Female
- "Haploinsufficiency/genetics, physiology"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neuropsychological Tests
- Vision Tests
- Visual Acuity
- WAGR Syndrome/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) haploinsufficiency with lower adaptive behaviour and reduced cognitive functioning in WAGR/11p13 deletion syndrome.
**Authors:** Han JC, Thurm A, Golden Williams C, Joseph LA, Zein WM, Brooks BP, Butman JA, Brady SM, Fuhr SR, Hicks MD, Huey AE, Hanish AE, Danley KM, Raygada MJ, Rennert OM, Martinowich K, Sharp SJ, Tsao JW, Swedo SE
**Journal:** Cortex (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cortex.2013.02.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2013.02.009)

## Content

1. Cortex. 2013 Nov-Dec;49(10):2700-10. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2013.02.009. Epub 
2013 Feb 19.

Association of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) haploinsufficiency with 
lower adaptive behaviour and reduced cognitive functioning in WAGR/11p13 
deletion syndrome.

Han JC(1), Thurm A, Golden Williams C, Joseph LA, Zein WM, Brooks BP, Butman JA, 
Brady SM, Fuhr SR, Hicks MD, Huey AE, Hanish AE, Danley KM, Raygada MJ, Rennert 
OM, Martinowich K, Sharp SJ, Tsao JW, Swedo SE.

Author information:
(1)Unit on Metabolism and Neuroendocrinology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA; Section on Growth and Obesity, Program in 
Developmental Endocrinology and Genetics, NICHD, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA. Electronic address: hanjo@mail.nih.gov.

In animal studies, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is an important 
regulator of central nervous system development and synaptic plasticity. WAGR 
(Wilms tumour, Aniridia, Genitourinary anomalies, and mental Retardation) 
syndrome is caused by 11p13 deletions of variable size near the BDNF locus and 
can serve as a model for studying human BDNF haploinsufficiency (+/-). We 
hypothesized that BDNF+/- would be associated with more severe cognitive 
impairment in subjects with WAGR syndrome. Twenty-eight subjects with WAGR 
syndrome (6-28 years), 12 subjects with isolated aniridia due to PAX6 
mutations/microdeletions (7-54 years), and 20 healthy controls (4-32 years) 
received neurocognitive assessments. Deletion boundaries for the subjects in the 
WAGR group were determined by high-resolution oligonucleotide array comparative 
genomic hybridization. Within the WAGR group, BDNF+/- subjects (n = 15), 
compared with BDNF intact (+/+) subjects (n = 13), had lower adaptive behaviour 
(p = .02), reduced cognitive functioning (p = .04), higher levels of reported 
historical (p = .02) and current (p = .02) social impairment, and higher 
percentage meeting cut-off score for autism (p = .047) on Autism Diagnostic 
Interview-Revised. These differences remained nominally significant after 
adjusting for visual acuity. Using diagnostic measures and clinical judgement, 3 
subjects (2 BDNF+/- and 1 BDNF+/+) in the WAGR group (10.7%) were classified 
with autism spectrum disorder. A comparison group of visually impaired subjects 
with isolated aniridia had cognitive functioning comparable to that of healthy 
controls. In summary, among subjects with WAGR syndrome, BDNF+/- subjects had a 
mean Vineland Adaptive Behaviour Compose score that was 14-points lower and a 
mean intelligence quotient (IQ) that was 20-points lower than BDNF+/+ subjects. 
Our findings support the hypothesis that BDNF plays an important role in human 
neurocognitive development.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2013.02.009
PMCID: PMC3762943
PMID: 23517654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]