---
reference_id: "PMID:22285208"
title: "Efficacy of bypassing agents in patients with hemophilia and inhibitors: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Zhou ZY
- Hay JW
journal: Clin Ther
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2012.01.001
keywords:
- Antibodies/blood
- Blood Coagulation Factors/therapeutic use
- Factor IX/immunology
- Factor VIII/immunology
- Factor VIIa/therapeutic use
- "Hemophilia A/drug therapy, immunology"
- Humans
- Recombinant Proteins/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of bypassing agents in patients with hemophilia and inhibitors: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Zhou ZY, Hay JW
**Journal:** Clin Ther (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clinthera.2012.01.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinthera.2012.01.001)

## Content

1. Clin Ther. 2012 Feb;34(2):434-45. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2012.01.001. Epub
2012 Jan 27.

Efficacy of bypassing agents in patients with hemophilia and inhibitors: a
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Zhou ZY(1), Hay JW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical Economics and Policy,
Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and Economics, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California 90089-7273, USA.

BACKGROUND: Activated prothrombin complex concentrate (aPCC) and recombinant
Factor VIIa (rFVIIa) are 2 bypassing agents commonly used for treating acute
bleeds in hemophiliac patients with inhibitors. A wide range of efficacy rates
for aPCC and rFVIIa have been reported in a number of single-armed and
randomized controlled comparative studies.
OBJECTIVE: The aims of this study were to compare the clinical efficacy of aPCC
and rFVIIa using a classic meta-analytic approach and to explore the role of
study characteristics as covariates in a meta-analysis of previously published
clinical studies in hemophiliac patients with antibodies to the missing Factor
VIII or IX.
METHODS: A systematic search was conducted to identify studies on the efficacy
of aPCC and rFVIIa 90 and 270 μg/kg for treating joint bleeds. The efficacy
rates with aPCC and rFVIIa were pooled separately, assuming fixed or random
effects. Subgroup analyses were conducted to pool the efficacy rates for bleeds
evaluated at 8-12, 18-27, and 36-72 hours after the start of the initial
infusion. Meta-regression was used to investigate the association between pooled
efficacy rates and study characteristics.
RESULTS: Although only 2 studies directly compared the efficacy of aPCC and
rFVIIa, data from ~2392 joint bleeding episodes from 19 studies were included.
The pooled efficacy rates were 80.8% with aPCC and 68.4% with rFVIIa (90 μg/kg,
72.0%; 270 μg/kg, 55.7%). The pooled efficacy rates with aPCC at 8-12, 18-27,
and 36-72 hours were 49.2%, 70.2%, and 90.9%, respectively. The corresponding
pooled rates with rFVIIa 90 μg/kg were 66.6%, 70.7%, and 77.7%. No significant
differences were found between the pooled efficacy rates with aPCC and rFVIIa
overall or at any of the time points evaluated. Positive associations were found
between reported efficacy and duration of follow-up and the number of bleeds
evaluated.
CONCLUSIONS: Given the paucity of high-quality studies, the findings from the
present review and meta-analysis suggest no conclusive evidence that aPCC or
rFVIIa is significantly more efficacious than the other in the treatment of
joint bleeding episodes in hemophiliac patients with inhibitors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier HS Journals, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2012.01.001
PMID: 22285208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
