---
reference_id: "PMID:38429489"
title: "Mitochondrial Dysfunction due to Novel COQ8A Variation with Poor Response to CoQ10 Treatment: A Comprehensive Study and Review of Literatures."
authors:
- Wang J
- Lin Y
- Xu Z
- Yan C
- Zhao Y
- Ji K
journal: Cerebellum
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12311-024-01671-4
keywords:
- Humans
- "Ubiquinone/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use, deficiency, genetics"
- Adolescent
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/drug therapy, genetics"
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- Male
- "Ataxia/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Mitochondria/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Muscle Weakness/genetics, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial Dysfunction due to Novel COQ8A Variation with Poor Response to CoQ10 Treatment: A Comprehensive Study and Review of Literatures.
**Authors:** Wang J, Lin Y, Xu Z, Yan C, Zhao Y, Ji K
**Journal:** Cerebellum (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12311-024-01671-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12311-024-01671-4)

## Content

1. Cerebellum. 2024 Oct;23(5):1824-1838. doi: 10.1007/s12311-024-01671-4. Epub
2024  Mar 2.

Mitochondrial Dysfunction due to Novel COQ8A Variation with Poor Response to
CoQ10 Treatment: A Comprehensive Study and Review of Literatures.

Wang J(1), Lin Y(1), Xu Z(1), Yan C(1)(2)(3), Zhao Y(4), Ji K(5).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Diseases and
Department of Neurology, Qilu Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong
University, Jinan, 250012, Shandong, China.
(2)Mitochondrial Medicine Laboratory, Qilu Hospital (Qingdao), Shandong
University, Qingdao, 266035, Shandong, China.
(3)Brain Science Research Institute, Shandong University, Jinan, 250012,
Shandong, China.
(4)Research Institute of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Diseases and
Department of Neurology, Qilu Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong
University, Jinan, 250012, Shandong, China. zyy72@126.com.
(5)Research Institute of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Diseases and
Department of Neurology, Qilu Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong
University, Jinan, 250012, Shandong, China. jikunqian@email.sdu.edu.cn.

COQ8A plays an important role in the biosynthesis of coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10), and
variations in COQ8A gene are associated with primary CoQ10 deficiency-4
(COQ10D4), also known as COQ8A-ataxia. The current understanding of the
association between the specific variant type, the severity of CoQ10 deficiency,
and the degree of oxidative stress in individuals with primary CoQ10
deficiencies remains uncertain. Here we provide a comprehensive analysis of the
clinical and genetic characteristics of an 18-year-old patient with
COQ8A-ataxia, who exhibited novel compound heterozygous variants (c.1904_1906del
and c.637C > T) in the COQ8A gene. These variants reduced the expression levels
of COQ8A and mitochondrial proteins in the patient's muscle and skin fibroblast
samples, contributed to mitochondrial respiration deficiency, increased ROS
production and altered mitochondrial membrane potential. It is worth noting that
the optimal treatment for COQ8A-ataxia remains uncertain. Presently, therapy
consists of CoQ10 supplementation, however, it did not yield significant
improvement in our patient's symptoms. Additionally, we reviewed the response of
CoQ10 supplementation and evolution of patients in previous literatures in
detail. We found that only half of patients could got notable improvement in
ataxia. This research aims to expand the genotype-phenotype spectrum of COQ10D4,
address discrepancies in previous reviews regarding the effectiveness of CoQ10
in these disorders, and help to establish a standardized treatment protocol for
COQ8A-ataxia.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-024-01671-4
PMID: 38429489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
