---
reference_id: "PMID:22660956"
title: Discordant phenotype in monozygotic twins with renal coloboma syndrome and a PAX2 mutation.
authors:
- Iatropoulos P
- Daina E
- Mele C
- Maranta R
- Remuzzi G
- Noris M
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-012-2205-x
keywords:
- Amino Acid Substitution
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Coloboma/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Cysteine
- Disease Progression
- "Diseases in Twins/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Environment
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Mutation
- PAX2 Transcription Factor/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Renal Insufficiency/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Risk Factors
- "Twins, Monozygotic/genetics"
- "Vesico-Ureteral Reflux/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Discordant phenotype in monozygotic twins with renal coloboma syndrome and a PAX2 mutation.
**Authors:** Iatropoulos P, Daina E, Mele C, Maranta R, Remuzzi G, Noris M
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-012-2205-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-012-2205-x)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2012 Oct;27(10):1989-93. doi: 10.1007/s00467-012-2205-x. Epub
 2012 Jun 4.

Discordant phenotype in monozygotic twins with renal coloboma syndrome and a 
PAX2 mutation.

Iatropoulos P(1), Daina E, Mele C, Maranta R, Remuzzi G, Noris M.

Author information:
(1)Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological Research, Clinical Research Center 
for Rare Diseases Aldo e Cele Daccò, Via G.B. Camozzi 3, 24020, Ranica (BG), 
Italy. paraskevas.iatropoulos@marionegri.it

BACKGROUND: Renal coloboma syndrome (RCS) is a highly variable syndrome 
characterized by renal and ocular abnormalities. It is associated in about 50 % 
of cases with mutations of PAX2, a gene encoding a transcription factor required 
during development.
CASE-DIAGNOSIS/TREATMENT: The case study involves two monozygotic twin sisters 
with RCS showing highly discordant phenotypes. Twin 1 was antenatally diagnosed 
with multiple cysts in the right kidney. She had complicated vacuum-assisted 
delivery with acute renal failure. She developed proteinuria at age 4 years, 
followed by a progressive rise in serum creatinine requiring renal replacement 
therapy at age 22. No ocular abnormalities have been detected. Twin 2 
experienced rapidly reversible acute renal failure without renal morphological 
abnormalities at birth. At age 2 years, complete visual acuity loss of the left 
eye secondary to an optic disc coloboma was diagnosed. No significant events 
occurred until the age of 20, when clinical proteinuria was detected. 
Proteinuria remission was obtained by multidrug treatment. In both patients, a 
novel de novo mutation of PAX2 was detected, which leads to the substitution of 
a highly conserved cysteine (p.C52Y).
CONCLUSIONS: The patients described provide an extreme example of clinical 
variability in RCS. The role of environmental, genetic, and epigenetic factors 
is discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-012-2205-x
PMID: 22660956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]