---
reference_id: "PMID:37124514"
title: "Mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome: clinical presentation, diagnosis, staging, and therapeutic management."
authors:
- Miyashiro D
- Sanches JA
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1141108
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome: clinical presentation, diagnosis, staging, and therapeutic management.
**Authors:** Miyashiro D, Sanches JA
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2023.1141108](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2023.1141108)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2023 Apr 14;13:1141108. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1141108.
eCollection  2023.

Mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome: clinical presentation, diagnosis,
staging, and therapeutic management.

Miyashiro D(1), Sanches JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Dermatology, Hospital das Clínicas, University of São
Paulo Medical School, São Paulo, Brazil.

Mycosis fungoides (MF) and Sézary syndrome (SS) are cutaneous T-cell lymphomas.
MF is the most common cutaneous lymphoma, and it is classified into classic
Alibert-Bazin MF, folliculotropic MF, pagetoid reticulosis, and granulomatous
slack skin, each with characteristic clinical presentation, histopathological
findings, and distinct clinical behaviors. SS is an aggressive leukemic variant
of cutaneous lymphoma, and it is characterized by erythroderma, lymphadenopathy,
and peripheral blood involvement by malignant cells. There is a wide range of
dermatological manifestations of MF/SS, and prompt recognition is essential for
early diagnosis. Skin biopsy for histopathology and immunohistochemical analysis
is imperative to confirm the diagnosis of MF/SS. Histopathology may also provide
information that may influence prognosis and treatment. Staging follows the TNMB
system. Besides advanced stage, other factors associated with poorer prognosis
are advanced age, male gender, folliculotropism in histopathology of patients
with infiltrated plaques and tumors in the head and neck region, large cell
transformation, and elevated lactate dehydrogenase. Treatment is divided into
skin-directed therapies (topical treatments, phototherapy, radiotherapy), and
systemic therapies (biological response modifiers, targeted therapies,
chemotherapy). Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation and extracorporeal
photopheresis are other treatment modalities used in selected cases. This review
discusses the main clinical characteristics, the
histopathological/immunohistochemical findings, the staging system, and the
therapeutic management of MF/SS.

Copyright © 2023 Miyashiro and Sanches.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1141108
PMCID: PMC10140754
PMID: 37124514

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
