---
reference_id: "PMID:28467925"
title: Gut Microbiome-Based Metagenomic Signature for Non-invasive Detection of Advanced Fibrosis in Human Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease.
authors:
- Loomba R
- Seguritan V
- Li W
- Long T
- Klitgord N
- Bhatt A
- Dulai PS
- Caussy C
- Bettencourt R
- Highlander SK
- Jones MB
- Sirlin CB
- Schnabl B
- Brinkac L
- Schork N
- Chen CH
- Brenner DA
- Biggs W
- Yooseph S
- Venter JC
- Nelson KE
journal: Cell Metab
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2017.04.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gut Microbiome-Based Metagenomic Signature for Non-invasive Detection of Advanced Fibrosis in Human Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease.
**Authors:** Loomba R, Seguritan V, Li W, Long T, Klitgord N, Bhatt A, Dulai PS, Caussy C, Bettencourt R, Highlander SK, Jones MB, Sirlin CB, Schnabl B, Brinkac L, Schork N, Chen CH, Brenner DA, Biggs W, Yooseph S, Venter JC, Nelson KE
**Journal:** Cell Metab (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cmet.2017.04.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2017.04.001)

## Content

1. Cell Metab. 2017 May 2;25(5):1054-1062.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2017.04.001.

Gut Microbiome-Based Metagenomic Signature for Non-invasive Detection of 
Advanced Fibrosis in Human Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease.

Loomba R(1), Seguritan V(2), Li W(3), Long T(2), Klitgord N(2), Bhatt A(4), 
Dulai PS(5), Caussy C(4), Bettencourt R(4), Highlander SK(6), Jones MB(2), 
Sirlin CB(7), Schnabl B(5), Brinkac L(8), Schork N(6), Chen CH(7), Brenner 
DA(5), Biggs W(2), Yooseph S(3), Venter JC(3), Nelson KE(3).

Author information:
(1)NAFLD Research Center, Department of Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Division of Epidemiology, Department of Family 
and Preventive Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA; Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Electronic address: 
roloomba@ucsd.edu.
(2)Human Longevity, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.
(3)Human Longevity, San Diego, CA 92121, USA; J. Craig Venter Institute, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(4)NAFLD Research Center, Department of Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(5)NAFLD Research Center, Department of Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Division of Gastroenterology, Department of 
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(6)J. Craig Venter Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(7)Liver Imaging Group, Department of Radiology, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(8)J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD 20850, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell Metab. 2019 Sep 3;30(3):607. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2019.08.002.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017 Jul;14(7):388. doi: 
10.1038/nrgastro.2017.67.
    Hepatology. 2017 Dec;66(6):2080-2083. doi: 10.1002/hep.29387.

The presence of advanced fibrosis in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is 
the most important predictor of liver mortality. There are limited data on the 
diagnostic accuracy of gut microbiota-derived signature for predicting the 
presence of advanced fibrosis. In this prospective study, we characterized the 
gut microbiome compositions using whole-genome shotgun sequencing of DNA 
extracted from stool samples. This study included 86 uniquely well-characterized 
patients with biopsy-proven NAFLD, of which 72 had mild/moderate (stage 0-2 
fibrosis) NAFLD, and 14 had advanced fibrosis (stage 3 or 4 fibrosis). We 
identified a set of 40 features (p < 0.006), which included 37 bacterial species 
that were used to construct a Random Forest classifier model to distinguish 
mild/moderate NAFLD from advanced fibrosis. The model had a robust 
diagnostic accuracy (AUC 0.936) for detecting advanced fibrosis. This study 
provides preliminary evidence for a fecal-microbiome-derived metagenomic 
signature to detect advanced fibrosis in NAFLD.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmet.2017.04.001
PMCID: PMC5502730
PMID: 28467925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests: The authors report no 
conflict of interests.