---
reference_id: "PMID:36771238"
title: Treatment of HMG-CoA Lyase Deficiency-Longitudinal Data on Clinical and Nutritional Management of 10 Australian Cases.
authors:
- Thompson S
- Hertzog A
- Selvanathan A
- Batten K
- Lewis K
- Nisbet J
- Mitchell A
- Dalkeith T
- Billmore K
- Moore F
- Tolun AA
- Devanapalli B
- Bratkovic D
- Hilditch C
- Rahman Y
- Tchan M
- Bhattacharya K
journal: Nutrients
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/nu15030531
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of HMG-CoA Lyase Deficiency-Longitudinal Data on Clinical and Nutritional Management of 10 Australian Cases.
**Authors:** Thompson S, Hertzog A, Selvanathan A, Batten K, Lewis K, Nisbet J, Mitchell A, Dalkeith T, Billmore K, Moore F, Tolun AA, Devanapalli B, Bratkovic D, Hilditch C, Rahman Y, Tchan M, Bhattacharya K
**Journal:** Nutrients (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/nu15030531](https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15030531)

## Content

1. Nutrients. 2023 Jan 19;15(3):531. doi: 10.3390/nu15030531.

Treatment of HMG-CoA Lyase Deficiency-Longitudinal Data on Clinical and 
Nutritional Management of 10 Australian Cases.

Thompson S(1)(2), Hertzog A(1)(2), Selvanathan A(1), Batten K(1)(3), Lewis K(1), 
Nisbet J(4), Mitchell A(1), Dalkeith T(1)(2), Billmore K(5), Moore F(6), Tolun 
AA(1)(2), Devanapalli B(1)(2), Bratkovic D(7), Hilditch C(7), Rahman Y(2)(5), 
Tchan M(2)(5), Bhattacharya K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Sydney Children's Hospitals' Network, Westmead, NSW 2145, Australia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health, Westmead Campus, University of Sydney, 
Westmead, NSW 2154, Australia.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of New South Wales, Randwick, NSW 
2031, Australia.
(4)Mater Hospital, Brisbane, QLD 4101, Australia.
(5)Westmead Hospital, Westmead, NSW 2145, Australia.
(6)PathWest Laboratory Medicine, Nedlands, WA 6009, Australia.
(7)Women and Children's Hospital, Adelaide, SA 5006, Australia.

3-Hydroxy-3-Methylglutaryl-CoA Lyase (HMGCL) deficiency can be a very severe 
disorder that typically presents with acute metabolic decompensation with 
features of hypoketotic hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia, and metabolic acidosis. A 
retrospective chart and literature review of Australian patients over their 
lifespan, incorporating acute and long-term dietary management, was performed. 
Data from 10 patients contributed to this study. The index case of this disorder 
was lost to follow-up, but there is 100% survival in the remainder of the cases 
despite several having experienced life-threatening episodes. In the acute 
setting, five of nine patients have used 900 mg/kg/day of sodium D,L 
3-hydroxybutyrate in combination with intravenous dextrose-containing fluids 
(delivering glucose above estimated basal utilization requirements). All 
patients have been on long-term protein restriction, and those diagnosed more 
recently have had additional fat restriction. Most patients take L-carnitine. 
Three children and none of the adults take nocturnal uncooked cornstarch. Of the 
cohort, there were two patients that presented atypically-one with fulminant 
liver failure and the other with isolated developmental delay. Dietary 
management in patients with HMGCL deficiency is well tolerated, and rapid 
institution of acute supportive metabolic treatment is imperative to optimizing 
survival and improve outcomes in this disorder.

DOI: 10.3390/nu15030531
PMCID: PMC9920477
PMID: 36771238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.