---
reference_id: "PMID:20301581"
title: IRF6-Related Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Schutte BC
- Saal HM
- Goudy S
- Leslie EJ
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IRF6-Related Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Schutte BC, Saal HM, Goudy S, Leslie EJ

## Content

1. IRF6-Related Disorders.

Schutte BC(1), Saal HM(2), Goudy S(3), Leslie EJ(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2003 Oct 30 [updated 2021 Mar 4].

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics Department of Pediatrics 
and Human Development Michigan State University East Lansing, Michigan
(2)Division of Human Genetics Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center; 
Department of Pediatrics University of Cincinnati Cincinnati, Ohio
(3)Department of Otolaryngology Vanderbilt University Nashville, Tennessee
(4)Assistant Professor Department of Human Genetics Emory University Atlanta, 
Georgia

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Most commonly, IRF6-related disorders span a spectrum 
from isolated cleft lip and palate and Van der Woude syndrome (VWS) at the mild 
end to popliteal pterygium syndrome (PPS) at the more severe end. In rare 
instances, IRF6 pathogenic variants have also been reported in individuals with 
nonsyndromic orofacial cleft (18/3,811; 0.47%) and in individuals with spina 
bifida (2/192). Individuals with VWS show one or more of the following 
anomalies: Congenital, usually bilateral, paramedian lower-lip fistulae (pits) 
or sometimes small mounds with a sinus tract leading from a mucous gland of the 
lip. Cleft lip (CL). Cleft palate (CP). Note: Cleft lip with or without cleft 
palate (CL±P) is observed about twice as often as CP only. Submucous cleft 
palate (SMCP). The PPS phenotype includes the following: CL±P. Fistulae of the 
lower lip. Webbing of the skin extending from the ischial tuberosities to the 
heels. In males: bifid scrotum and cryptorchidism. In females: hypoplasia of the 
labia majora. Syndactyly of fingers and/or toes. Anomalies of the skin around 
the nails. A characteristic pyramidal fold of skin overlying the nail of the 
hallux (almost pathognomonic). In some nonclassic forms of PPS: filiform 
synechiae connecting the upper and lower jaws (syngnathia) or the upper and 
lower eyelids (ankyloblepharon). Other musculoskeletal anomalies may include 
spina bifida occulta, talipes equinovarus, digital reduction, bifid ribs, and 
short sternum. In VWS, PPS, IRF6-related neural tube defect, and IRF6-related 
orofacial cleft, growth and intelligence are typical.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Diagnosis of an IRF6-related disorder is established in a 
proband with suggestive findings and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in IRF6 
identified by molecular genetic testing. A heterozygous pathogenic variant in 
IRF6 is identified in approximately 72% of individuals with the VWS phenotype, 
approximately 97% of individuals with the PPS phenotype, and fewer than 1% of 
individuals with a neural tube defect or orofacial cleft.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Supportive/symptomatic treatment of VWS 
and PPS may include surgical treatment of lip pits and cleft lip and palate 
pediatric dentistry, orthodontia, speech therapy, feeding therapy, timely 
treatment of otitis media due to eustachian tube dysfunction to prevent 
secondary hearing loss, physical therapy, orthopedic care, and surgical 
treatment for cryptorchidism. Surgical treatment may be needed for those with 
oral and/or eyelid synechiae. IRF6-related neural tube defects are treated in a 
standard manner as per neurosurgeon. IRF6-related orofacial clefts are treated 
in a standard manner. Surveillance: Surveillance for those with cleft lip and/or 
cleft palate includes weekly assessment of nutritional intake and weight gain 
during the first month of life; otolaryngologic evaluation within the first six 
months of life and continued throughout adolescence; audiologic evaluation with 
infant's first visit to cleft clinic, with the frequency of subsequent 
evaluations based on the history of ear disease or hearing loss; speech-language 
pathology evaluation by age six months, twice during the first two years of 
life, at least annually until age six years, at least annually until after 
adenoid involution, and at least every two years until dental and skeletal 
maturity; dental evaluation within six months of the first tooth erupting and no 
later than age 12 months, and routine dental evaluation continued throughout 
life. In individuals with myelomeningocele, assessment of walking and mobility 
and bowel and bladder management with each visit throughout life.
GENETIC COUNSELING: IRF6-related disorders are inherited in an autosomal 
dominant manner. Most individuals diagnosed with an IRF6-related clefting 
disorder (e.g., VWS or PPS) inherited an IRF6 pathogenic variant from a 
heterozygous parent who may or may not have manifestations of the disorder. The 
risk to the sibs of the proband depends on the genetic status of the proband's 
parents: if a parent of the proband is affected and/or has an IRF6 pathogenic 
variant, the risk to the sibs of inheriting the pathogenic variant is 50%. Once 
an IRF6 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, 
prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk and preimplantation genetic 
testing are possible. Prenatal ultrasound examination may detect a cleft lip 
with/without cleft palate in some fetuses later in the second trimester, but it 
is much less likely to detect an isolated cleft palate or lip pits.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301581