---
reference_id: "PMID:38531610"
title: Characterisation of choroid plexus-infiltrating T cells reveals novel therapeutic targets in murine neuropsychiatric lupus.
authors:
- Moore E
- Bharrhan S
- Rao DA
- Macian F
- Putterman C
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1136/ard-2023-224689
keywords:
- Animals
- "Choroid Plexus/immunology, pathology"
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/immunology"
- Mice
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Mice, Inbred MRL lpr"
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Female
- T-Lymphocyte Subsets/immunology
- Gene Expression Profiling/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterisation of choroid plexus-infiltrating T cells reveals novel therapeutic targets in murine neuropsychiatric lupus.
**Authors:** Moore E, Bharrhan S, Rao DA, Macian F, Putterman C
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1136/ard-2023-224689](https://doi.org/10.1136/ard-2023-224689)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2024 Jul 15;83(8):1006-1017. doi: 10.1136/ard-2023-224689.

Characterisation of choroid plexus-infiltrating T cells reveals novel
therapeutic targets in murine neuropsychiatric lupus.

Moore E(1), Bharrhan S(2), Rao DA(3)(4), Macian F(5), Putterman C(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Louisiana State University
Shreveport, Shreveport, Louisiana, USA.
(3)Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York, USA.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA chaim.putterman@einsteinmed.edu.
(7)Azrieli Faculty of Medicine of Bar-Ilan University, Safed, Israel.

OBJECTIVE: Diffuse central nervous system manifestations, referred to as
neuropsychiatric lupus (NPSLE), are observed in 20-40% of lupus patients and
involve complex mechanisms that have not yet been adequately elucidated. In
murine NPSLE models, choroid plexus (ChP)-infiltrating T cells have not been
fully evaluated as drivers of neuropsychiatric disease.
METHOD: Droplet-based single-cell transcriptomic analysis (single-cell RNA
sequencing) and immune T-cell receptor profiling were performed on ChP tissue
from MRL/lpr mice, an NPSLE mouse model, at an 'early' and 'late' disease state,
to investigate the infiltrating immune cells that accumulate with NPSLE disease
progression.
RESULTS: We found 19 unique clusters of stromal and infiltrating cells present
in the ChP of NPSLE mice. Higher resolution of the T-cell clusters uncovered
multiple T-cell subsets, with increased exhaustion and hypoxia expression
profiles. Clonal analysis revealed that the clonal CD8+T cell CDR3 sequence,
ASGDALGGYEQY, matched that of a published T-cell receptor sequence with
specificity for myelin basic protein. Stromal fibroblasts are likely drivers of
T-cell recruitment by upregulating the VCAM signalling pathway. Systemic
blockade of VLA-4, the cognate ligand of VCAM, resulted in significant
resolution of the ChP immune cell infiltration and attenuation of the depressive
phenotype.
CONCLUSION: Our analysis details the dynamic transcriptomic changes associated
with murine NPSLE disease progression, and highlights its potential use in
identifying prospective lupus brain therapeutic targets.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/ard-2023-224689
PMID: 38531610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
