---
reference_id: "PMID:18256395"
title: Neonatal diagnosis and treatment of Menkes disease.
authors:
- Kaler SG
- Holmes CS
- Goldstein DS
- Tang J
- Godwin SC
- Donsante A
- Liew CJ
- Sato S
- Patronas N
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa070613
keywords:
- "3,4-Dihydroxyphenylacetic Acid/blood"
- Adenosine Triphosphatases/genetics
- Biomarkers/blood
- Cation Transport Proteins/genetics
- "Copper/metabolism, therapeutic use"
- Copper-Transporting ATPases
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Dopamine/blood
- "Dopamine beta-Hydroxylase/blood, deficiency"
- Early Diagnosis
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- "Menkes Kinky Hair Syndrome/blood, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Methoxyhydroxyphenylglycol/analogs & derivatives, blood"
- Mutation
- Neonatal Screening
- Norepinephrine/blood
- Pedigree
- Reading Frames
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Survival Analysis
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neonatal diagnosis and treatment of Menkes disease.
**Authors:** Kaler SG, Holmes CS, Goldstein DS, Tang J, Godwin SC, Donsante A, Liew CJ, Sato S, Patronas N
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa070613](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa070613)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2008 Feb 7;358(6):605-14. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa070613.

Neonatal diagnosis and treatment of Menkes disease.

Kaler SG(1), Holmes CS, Goldstein DS, Tang J, Godwin SC, Donsante A, Liew CJ, 
Sato S, Patronas N.

Author information:
(1)Unit on Pediatric Genetics, Program in Molecular Medicine, National Institute 
of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bldg. 10, 
Rm. 5-2571, 10 Center Dr., MSC 1832, Bethesda, MD 20892-1832, 
USA.kalers@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Menkes disease is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder of infancy 
caused by diverse mutations in a copper-transport gene, ATP7A. Early treatment 
with copper injections may prevent death and illness, but presymptomatic 
detection is hindered by the inadequate sensitivity and specificity of 
diagnostic tests. Exploiting the deficiency of a copper enzyme, 
dopamine-beta-hydroxylase, we prospectively evaluated the diagnostic usefulness 
of plasma neurochemical levels, assessed the clinical effect of early detection, 
and investigated the molecular bases for treatment outcomes.
METHODS: Between May 1997 and July 2005, we measured plasma dopamine, 
norepinephrine, dihydroxyphenylacetic acid, and dihydroxyphenylglycol in 81 
infants at risk. In 12 newborns who met the eligibility criteria and began 
copper-replacement therapy within 22 days after birth, we tracked survival and 
neurodevelopment longitudinally for 1.5 to 8 years. We characterized ATP7A 
mutations using yeast complementation, 
reverse-transcriptase-polymerase-chain-reaction analysis, and 
immunohistochemical analysis.
RESULTS: Of 81 infants at risk, 46 had abnormal neurochemical findings 
indicating low dopamine-beta-hydroxylase activity. On the basis of longitudinal 
follow-up, patients were classified as affected or unaffected by Menkes disease, 
and the neurochemical profiles were shown to have high sensitivity and 
specificity for detecting disease. Among 12 newborns with positive screening 
tests who were treated early with copper, survival at a median follow-up of 4.6 
years was 92%, as compared with 13% at a median follow-up of 1.8 years for a 
historical control group of 15 late-diagnosis and late-treatment patients. Two 
of the 12 patients had normal neurodevelopment and brain myelination; 1 of these 
patients had a mutation that complemented a Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
copper-transport mutation, indicating partial ATPase activity, and the other had 
a mutation that allowed some correct ATP7A splicing.
CONCLUSIONS: Neonatal diagnosis of Menkes disease by plasma neurochemical 
measurements and early treatment with copper may improve clinical outcomes. 
Affected newborns who have mutations that do not completely abrogate ATP7A 
function may be especially responsive to early copper treatment. 
(ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00001262.)

Copyright 2008 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa070613
PMCID: PMC3477514
PMID: 18256395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to 
this article was reported.