---
reference_id: "PMID:33551023"
title: "SCID newborn screening: What we've learned."
authors:
- Currier R
- Puck JM
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2020.10.020
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Neonatal Screening/methods
- Severe Combined Immunodeficiency/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SCID newborn screening: What we've learned.
**Authors:** Currier R, Puck JM
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2020.10.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2020.10.020)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2021 Feb;147(2):417-426. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2020.10.020.

SCID newborn screening: What we've learned.

Currier R(1), Puck JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy, Immunology and Blood and Marrow Transplantation, 
Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Francisco School of 
Medicine and UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital San Francisco, San Francisco, 
Calif.
(2)Division of Allergy, Immunology and Blood and Marrow Transplantation, 
Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Francisco School of 
Medicine and UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital San Francisco, San Francisco, 
Calif. Electronic address: Jennifer.Puck@ucsf.edu.

Newborn screening for severe combined immunodeficiency, the most profound form 
of primary immune system defects, has long been recognized as a measure that 
would decrease morbidity and improve outcomes by helping patients avoid 
devastating infections and receive prompt immune-restoring therapy. The T-cell 
receptor excision circle test, developed in 2005, proved to be successful in 
pilot studies starting in the period 2008 to 2010, and by 2019 all states in the 
United States had adopted versions of it in their public health programs. 
Introduction of newborn screening for severe combined immunodeficiency, the 
first immune disorder accepted for population-based screening, has drastically 
changed the presentation of this disorder while providing important lessons for 
public health programs, immunologists, and transplanters.

Copyright © 2020 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2020.10.020
PMCID: PMC7874439
PMID: 33551023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: Dr. Puck is a 
recipient of research grants from the National Institutes of Health and the 
California Institute of Regenerative Medicine. She receives royalties from 
Up-To-Date. Her spouse is an employee and stockholder in Invitae, Inc., a 
genetic diagnostics company. Dr. Currier has no conflicts to disclose.