---
reference_id: "PMID:23019302"
title: BMI-related metabolic composition of the follicular fluid of women undergoing assisted reproductive treatment and the consequences for oocyte and embryo quality.
authors:
- Valckx SD
- De Pauw I
- De Neubourg D
- Inion I
- Berth M
- Fransen E
- Bols PE
- Leroy JL
journal: Hum Reprod
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/humrep/des350
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BMI-related metabolic composition of the follicular fluid of women undergoing assisted reproductive treatment and the consequences for oocyte and embryo quality.
**Authors:** Valckx SD, De Pauw I, De Neubourg D, Inion I, Berth M, Fransen E, Bols PE, Leroy JL
**Journal:** Hum Reprod (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/humrep/des350](https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/des350)

## Content

1. Hum Reprod. 2012 Dec;27(12):3531-9. doi: 10.1093/humrep/des350. Epub 2012 Sep 
27.

BMI-related metabolic composition of the follicular fluid of women undergoing 
assisted reproductive treatment and the consequences for oocyte and embryo 
quality.

Valckx SD(1), De Pauw I, De Neubourg D, Inion I, Berth M, Fransen E, Bols PE, 
Leroy JL.

Author information:
(1)Veterinary Physiology and Biochemistry, Department of Veterinary Sciences, 
University of Antwerp, 2610 Wilrijk, Belgium. sara.valckx@ua.ac.be

STUDY QUESTION: Is the metabolic composition of the follicular fluid of women 
undergoing assisted reproductive treatment (ART) related to serum composition 
and BMI and is it associated with oocyte and embryo quality?
SUMMARY ANSWER: We showed that metabolic alterations in the serum are reflected 
in the follicular fluid and that some of these alterations may affect oocyte 
quality, irrespective of BMI.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Many studies have focused on the effect of metabolic 
disorders, such as obesity and type 2 diabetes, on assisted reproduction 
outcomes. There are, however, only few studies focusing on the importance of the 
correlation between serum and follicular fluid compositions and the composition 
of the follicular fluid as the oocyte's micro-environment, affecting its 
development and subsequent embryo quality.
DESIGN, PARTICIPANTS AND SETTING: In this prospective cohort study, patient 
information, fertility treatment outcome data, follicular fluid and serum were 
obtained from women undergoing ART. Patients were categorized according to their 
BMI (kg/m(2)) as normal (n = 60), overweight (n = 26) or obese (n = 20). Serum 
and follicular fluid samples were analyzed for urea, total protein, albumin, 
cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, triglycerides, non-esterified 
fatty acids, apolipoprotein A1, apolipoprotein B, glucose, lactate, C-reactive 
protein, insulin-like growth factor -1 (IGF-1), IGF-binding protein 3 (only in 
follicular fluid), free carnitine and total carnitine. Metabolite concentrations 
in serum and follicular fluid samples were correlated and were associated with 
BMI and fertility treatment outcome.
MAIN RESULTS: Most serum metabolite differences between patients were reflected 
in the follicular fluid (P < 0.05). Follicular fluid apolipoprotein A1 and 
follicular fluid total protein concentrations negatively affected oocyte quality 
parameters (P < 0.05). However, overall BMI-related associations were poor.
BIAS, CONFOUNDING AND OTHER REASONS FOR CAUTION: In this study, we included 
every patient willing to participate. Within this cohort, women with a BMI 
transcending 35 kg/m(2) were scarce (n = 2), because extremely overweight women 
are mostly advised to lose weight before starting ART. Furthermore, the number 
of patients in each BMI group was different, possibly masking associations 
between the metabolic composition of serum and follicular fluid and oocyte 
quality parameters.
GENERALIZABILITY TO OTHER POPULATIONS: There were significant associations 
indicating that metabolic changes in the serum are reflected in the follicular 
fluid, potentially affecting oocyte quality, irrespective of the patient's BMI. 
For ethical reasons, this study only focused on women already in need of 
artificial reproductive treatment. From a metabolic point of view, we consider 
this cohort as a representative sample of all women of reproductive age.
STUDY FUNDING: This study was funded by the special research fund, university of 
Antwerp (BOF UA). None of the authors has any conflict of interest to declare.

DOI: 10.1093/humrep/des350
PMID: 23019302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]