---
reference_id: "PMID:38103632"
title: The role of genetic and epigenetic GNAS alterations in the development of early-onset obesity.
authors:
- Abbas A
- Hammad AS
- Al-Shafai M
journal: Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.mrrev.2023.108487
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of genetic and epigenetic GNAS alterations in the development of early-onset obesity.
**Authors:** Abbas A, Hammad AS, Al-Shafai M
**Journal:** Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mrrev.2023.108487](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mrrev.2023.108487)

## Content

1. Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res. 2024 Jan-Jun;793:108487. doi: 
10.1016/j.mrrev.2023.108487. Epub 2023 Dec 14.

The role of genetic and epigenetic GNAS alterations in the development of 
early-onset obesity.

Abbas A(1), Hammad AS(2), Al-Shafai M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences, QU Health, 
Qatar University, P.O. Box 2713, Doha, Qatar.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences, QU Health, 
Qatar University, P.O. Box 2713, Doha, Qatar; Biomedical Research Center, Qatar 
University, P.O. Box 2713, Doha, Qatar.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences, QU Health, 
Qatar University, P.O. Box 2713, Doha, Qatar; Biomedical Research Center, Qatar 
University, P.O. Box 2713, Doha, Qatar. Electronic address: malshafai@qu.edu.qa.

BACKGROUND: GNAS (guanine nucleotide-binding protein, alpha stimulating) is an 
imprinted gene that encodes Gsα, the α subunit of the heterotrimeric stimulatory 
G protein. This subunit mediates the signalling of a diverse array of G 
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), including the melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) 
that serves a pivotal role in regulating food intake, energy homoeostasis, and 
body weight. Genetic or epigenetic alterations in GNAS are known to cause 
pseudohypoparathyroidism in its different subtypes and have been recently 
associated with isolated, early-onset, severe obesity. Given the diverse 
biological functions that Gsα serves, multiple molecular mechanisms involving 
various GPCRs, such as MC4R, β2- and β3-adrenoceptors, and 
corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor, have been implicated in the 
pathophysiology of severe, early-onset obesity that results from genetic or 
epigenetic GNAS changes.
SCOPE OF REVIEW: This review examines the structure and function of GNAS and 
provides an overview of the disorders that are caused by defects in this gene 
and may feature early-onset obesity. Moreover, it elucidates the potential 
molecular mechanisms underlying Gsα deficiency-induced early-onset obesity, 
highlighting some of their implications for the diagnosis, management, and 
treatment of this complex condition.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: Gsα deficiency is an underappreciated cause of early-onset, 
severe obesity. Therefore, screening children with unexplained, severe obesity 
for GNAS defects is recommended, to enhance the molecular diagnosis and 
management of this condition.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrrev.2023.108487
PMID: 38103632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.