---
reference_id: "PMID:38972919"
title: Unraveling the pathological biomineralization of monosodium urate crystals in gout patients.
authors:
- Rodriguez-Navarro C
- Elert K
- Ibañez-Velasco A
- Monasterio-Guillot L
- Andres M
- Sivera F
- Pascual E
- Ruiz-Agudo E
journal: Commun Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s42003-024-06534-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unraveling the pathological biomineralization of monosodium urate crystals in gout patients.
**Authors:** Rodriguez-Navarro C, Elert K, Ibañez-Velasco A, Monasterio-Guillot L, Andres M, Sivera F, Pascual E, Ruiz-Agudo E
**Journal:** Commun Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s42003-024-06534-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06534-6)

## Content

1. Commun Biol. 2024 Jul 7;7(1):828. doi: 10.1038/s42003-024-06534-6.

Unraveling the pathological biomineralization of monosodium urate crystals in 
gout patients.

Rodriguez-Navarro C(1), Elert K(2)(3), Ibañez-Velasco A(2), Monasterio-Guillot 
L(2), Andres M(4)(5), Sivera F(4)(6), Pascual E(4)(5), Ruiz-Agudo E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mineralogy and Petrology, University of Granada, Fuentenueva 
s/n, 18002, Granada, Spain. carlosrn@ugr.es.
(2)Department of Mineralogy and Petrology, University of Granada, Fuentenueva 
s/n, 18002, Granada, Spain.
(3)Escuela de Estudios Arabes, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas 
(EEA-CSIC), C. Chapiz 22, 18010, Granada, Spain.
(4)Department of Clinical Medicine, Miguel Hernandez University, CN 332 s/n, 
03550, Alicante, Spain.
(5)Department of Rheumatology, Dr. Balmis General University Hospital, Alicante 
Institute for Health and Biomedical Research, Av. Pintor Baeza s/n, 03010, 
Alicante, Spain.
(6)Department of Rheumatology, Elda General University Hospital, Carretera 
Elda-Sax s/n, 03600, Elda, Spain.

Crystallization of monosodium urate monohydrate (MSU) leads to painful gouty 
arthritis. Despite extensive research it is still unknown how this pathological 
biomineralization occurs, which hampers its prevention. Here we show how 
inflammatory MSU crystals form after a non-inflammatory amorphous precursor 
(AMSU) that nucleates heterogeneously on collagen fibrils from damaged articular 
cartilage of gout patients. This non-classical crystallization route imprints a 
nanogranular structure to biogenic acicular MSU crystals, which have smaller 
unit cell volume, lower microstrain, and higher crystallinity than synthetic 
MSU. These distinctive biosignatures are consistent with the template-promoted 
crystallization of biotic MSU crystals after AMSU at low supersaturation, and 
their slow growth over long periods of time (possibly years) in hyperuricemic 
gout patients. Our results help to better understand gout pathophysiology, 
underline the role of cartilage damage in promoting MSU crystallization, and 
suggest that there is a time-window to treat potential gouty patients before a 
critical amount of MSU has slowly formed as to trigger a gout flare.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-024-06534-6
PMCID: PMC11228021
PMID: 38972919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.