---
reference_id: "PMID:38440129"
title: "Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism Due to Transaldolase Deficiency: Two Cases and Literature Review."
authors:
- Takaleh A
- Abunamous N
- AlShamsi A
- Alhassani N
- Almazrouei R
journal: JCEM Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1210/jcemcr/luae028
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism Due to Transaldolase Deficiency: Two Cases and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Takaleh A, Abunamous N, AlShamsi A, Alhassani N, Almazrouei R
**Journal:** JCEM Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcemcr/luae028](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcemcr/luae028)

## Content

1. JCEM Case Rep. 2024 Mar 4;2(3):luae028. doi: 10.1210/jcemcr/luae028.
eCollection  2024 Mar.

Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism Due to Transaldolase Deficiency: Two Cases and
Literature Review.

Takaleh A(1), Abunamous N(1), AlShamsi A(2), Alhassani N(3)(4), Almazrouei
R(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Tawam Hospital, Al Ain, United Arab
Emirates.
(2)Division of Genetics and Metabolic, Department of Paediatrics, Tawam
Hospital, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(3)Division of Endocrine and Diabetes, Department of Pediatrics, Tawam Hospital.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, College of Medicine and Health Science, United
Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(5)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Tawam Hospital,
Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine and Health Sciences,
United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.

Transaldolase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive inborn error of
carbohydrate metabolism caused by pathogenic/likely pathogenic biallelic
mutations in the TALDO1 gene. This disorder is characterized by multisystem
involvement with variable phenotypes, including intrauterine growth restriction;
dysmorphic features; abnormal skin; hepatosplenomegaly; cytopenia; and cardiac,
renal, and endocrine abnormalities. Herein, we present two Emirati patients with
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism due to transaldolase deficiency and variable
phenotypes of systemic involvement.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/jcemcr/luae028
PMCID: PMC10911397
PMID: 38440129
