---
reference_id: "PMID:29326337"
title: "Acid-Suppressive Drug Use During Pregnancy and the Risk of Childhood Asthma: A Meta-analysis."
authors:
- Lai T
- Wu M
- Liu J
- Luo M
- He L
- Wang X
- Wu B
- Ying S
- Chen Z
- Li W
- Shen H
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2017-0889
keywords:
- Asthma/etiology
- Child
- Female
- Gastroesophageal Reflux/drug therapy
- Histamine H2 Antagonists/adverse effects
- Humans
- Pregnancy
- Pregnancy Complications/drug therapy
- Prenatal Exposure Delayed Effects
- Proton Pump Inhibitors/adverse effects
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acid-Suppressive Drug Use During Pregnancy and the Risk of Childhood Asthma: A Meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Lai T, Wu M, Liu J, Luo M, He L, Wang X, Wu B, Ying S, Chen Z, Li W, Shen H
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2017-0889](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-0889)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2018 Feb;141(2):e20170889. doi: 10.1542/peds.2017-0889. Epub 2018 
Jan 11.

Acid-Suppressive Drug Use During Pregnancy and the Risk of Childhood Asthma: A 
Meta-analysis.

Lai T(1)(2), Wu M(1), Liu J(1)(3), Luo M(1), He L(1), Wang X(1), Wu B(2), Ying 
S(1), Chen Z(1), Li W(1), Shen H(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Second Affiliated 
Hospital, Institute of Respiratory Diseases, School of Medicine, Zhejiang 
University, Zhejiang Sheng, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Institute of 
Respiratory Diseases, The Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical University, 
Guangdong Sheng, China.
(3)Institute of Lung Biology and Disease, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German 
Center for Lung Research, Oberschleißheim, Germany; and.
(4)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Second Affiliated 
Hospital, Institute of Respiratory Diseases, School of Medicine, Zhejiang 
University, Zhejiang Sheng, China; huahaoshen@zju.edu.cn.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases, Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China.

Comment in
    Pediatrics. 2018 Feb;141(2):e20173741. doi: 10.1542/peds.2017-3741.

CONTEXT: The association between acid-suppressive drug exposure during pregnancy 
and childhood asthma has not been well established.
OBJECTIVE: To conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis on this association 
to provide further justification for the current studies.
DATA SOURCES: We searched PubMed, Medline, Embase, the Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews, EBSCO Information Services, Web of Science, and Google 
Scholar from inception until June 2017.
STUDY SELECTION: Observational studies in which researchers assessed 
acid-suppressive drug use during pregnancy and the risk of childhood asthma were 
included.
DATA EXTRACTION: Of 556 screened articles, 8 population-based studies were 
included in the final analyses.
RESULTS: When all the studies were pooled, acid-suppressive drug use in 
pregnancy was associated with an increased risk of asthma in childhood (relative 
risk [RR] = 1.45; 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.35-1.56; I2 = 0%; P < .00001). 
The overall risk of asthma in childhood increased among proton pump inhibitor 
users (RR = 1.34; 95% CI 1.18-1.52; I2 = 46%; P < .00001) and histamine-2 
receptor antagonist users (RR = 1.57; 95% CI 1.46-1.69; I2 = 0%; P < .00001).
LIMITATIONS: None of the researchers in the studies in this meta-analysis 
adjusted for the full panel of known confounders in these associations.
CONCLUSIONS: The evidence suggests that prenatal, maternal, acid-suppressive 
drug use is associated with an increased risk of childhood asthma. This 
information may help clinicians and parents to use caution when deciding whether 
to take acid-suppressing drugs during pregnancy because of the risk of asthma in 
offspring.

Copyright © 2018 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2017-0889
PMID: 29326337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors have 
indicated they have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.