---
reference_id: "PMID:40643496"
title: COP1 Deficiency in BRAF(V600E) Melanomas Confers Resistance to Inhibitors of the MAPK Pathway.
authors:
- Ndoja A
- Rose CM
- Lin E
- Reja R
- Petrovic J
- Kummerfeld S
- Blair A
- Rizos H
- Modrusan Z
- Martin S
- Kirkpatrick DS
- Heidersbach A
- Sun T
- Haley B
- Karayel O
- Newton K
- Dixit VM
journal: Cells
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/cells14130975
keywords:
- Humans
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics, metabolism, antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Melanoma/genetics, drug therapy, pathology, metabolism"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics, drug effects"
- MAP Kinase Signaling System/drug effects
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Transcription Factors/metabolism
- Mutation/genetics
- "Vemurafenib/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COP1 Deficiency in BRAF(V600E) Melanomas Confers Resistance to Inhibitors of the MAPK Pathway.
**Authors:** Ndoja A, Rose CM, Lin E, Reja R, Petrovic J, Kummerfeld S, Blair A, Rizos H, Modrusan Z, Martin S, Kirkpatrick DS, Heidersbach A, Sun T, Haley B, Karayel O, Newton K, Dixit VM
**Journal:** Cells (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells14130975](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells14130975)

## Content

1. Cells. 2025 Jun 25;14(13):975. doi: 10.3390/cells14130975.

COP1 Deficiency in BRAF(V600E) Melanomas Confers Resistance to Inhibitors of the
MAPK Pathway.

Ndoja A(1)(2), Rose CM(3), Lin E(4), Reja R(5), Petrovic J(3), Kummerfeld S(5),
Blair A(5), Rizos H(6)(7), Modrusan Z(3), Martin S(4), Kirkpatrick DS(3),
Heidersbach A(8), Sun T(8), Haley B(8), Karayel O(1), Newton K(1), Dixit VM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
(3)Department of Proteomics and Genomics Technologies, Genentech, South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Oncology, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA 94080,
USA.
(5)Department of Computational Sciences, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA.
(6)Melanoma Institute Australia, Wollstonecraft, NSW 2065, Australia.
(7)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Health and Human
Sciences, Macquarie University, Macquarie Park, NSW 2109, Australia.
(8)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA 94080,
USA.

Aberrant activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade
promotes oncogenic transcriptomes. Despite efforts to inhibit oncogenic kinases,
such as BRAFV600E, tumor responses in patients can be heterogeneous and limited
by drug resistance mechanisms. Here, we describe patient tumors that acquired
COP1 or DET1 mutations after treatment with the BRAFV600E inhibitor vemurafenib.
COP1 and DET1 constitute the substrate adaptor of the E3 ubiquitin ligase
CRL4COP1/DET1, which targets transcription factors, including ETV1, ETV4, and
ETV5, for proteasomal degradation. MAPK-MEK-ERK signaling prevents CRL4COP1/DET1
from ubiquitinating ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5, but the mechanistic details are still
being elucidated. We found that patient mutations in COP1 or DET1 inactivated
CRL4COP1/DET1 in melanoma cells, stabilized ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5, and conferred
resistance to inhibitors of the MAPK pathway. ETV5, in particular, enhanced cell
survival and was found to promote the expression of the pro-survival gene
BCL2A1. Indeed, the deletion of pro-survival BCL2A1 re-sensitized COP1 mutant
cells to vemurafenib treatment. These observations indicate that the
post-translational regulation of ETV5 by CRL4COP1/DET1 modulates transcriptional
outputs in ERK-dependent cancers, and its inactivation contributes to
therapeutic resistance.

DOI: 10.3390/cells14130975
PMCID: PMC12249101
PMID: 40643496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.N., C.M.R., E.L., R.R., J.P., S.K., A.B.,
Z.M., S.M., D.S.K., A.H., T.S., B.H., O.K., K.N. and V.M.D. are current or
former employees of Genentech. Genentech employees listed above may own Roche
stock. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as
potential conflicts of interest.
