---
reference_id: "PMID:28335843"
title: Anomalous Aortic Origin of a Coronary Artery From the Inappropriate Sinus of Valsalva.
authors:
- Cheezum MK
- Liberthson RR
- Shah NR
- Villines TC
- "O'Gara PT"
- Landzberg MJ
- Blankstein R
journal: J Am Coll Cardiol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2017.01.031
keywords:
- Cardiac Imaging Techniques
- "Coronary Vessel Anomalies/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, therapy"
- Humans
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anomalous Aortic Origin of a Coronary Artery From the Inappropriate Sinus of Valsalva.
**Authors:** Cheezum MK, Liberthson RR, Shah NR, Villines TC, O'Gara PT, Landzberg MJ, Blankstein R
**Journal:** J Am Coll Cardiol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacc.2017.01.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2017.01.031)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017 Mar 28;69(12):1592-1608. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2017.01.031.

Anomalous Aortic Origin of a Coronary Artery From the Inappropriate Sinus 
of Valsalva.

Cheezum MK(1), Liberthson RR(2), Shah NR(3), Villines TC(4), O'Gara PT(5), 
Landzberg MJ(6), Blankstein R(5).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine and Radiology, Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of 
Medicine, Cardiology Service, Fort Belvoir Community Hospital, Ft. Belvoir, 
Virginia. Electronic address: mcheezum@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Lifespan Cardiovascular Institute, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, 
Department of Medicine, Brown University Alpert School of Medicine, Providence, 
Rhode Island.
(4)Department of Medicine, Cardiology Service, Walter Reed National Military 
Medical Center, Bethesda Maryland.
(5)Departments of Medicine and Radiology, Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

Anomalous aortic origin of a coronary artery (AAOCA) from the inappropriate 
sinus of Valsalva is increasingly recognized by cardiac imaging. Although most 
AAOCA subtypes are benign, autopsy studies report an associated risk of sudden 
death with interarterial anomalous left coronary artery (ALCA) and anomalous 
right coronary artery (ARCA). Despite efforts to identify high-risk ALCA and 
ARCA patients who may benefit from surgical repair, debate remains regarding 
their classification, prevalence, risk stratification, and management. We 
comprehensively reviewed 77 studies reporting the prevalence of AAOCA among >1 
million patients, and 20 studies examining outcomes of interarterial ALCA/ARCA 
patients. Observational data suggests that interarterial ALCA is rare (weighted 
prevalence = 0.03%; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.01% to 0.04%) compared with 
interarterial ARCA (weighted prevalence = 0.23%; 95% CI: 0.17% to 0.31%). 
Recognizing the challenges in managing these patients, we review cardiac tests 
used to examine AAOCA and knowledge gaps in management.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2017.01.031
PMID: 28335843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]