---
reference_id: "PMID:21850989"
title: "Mantle cell lymphoma: recent insights into pathogenesis, clinical variability, and new diagnostic markers."
authors:
- Sander B
journal: Semin Diagn Pathol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1053/j.semdp.2011.02.010
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, Mantle-Cell/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mantle cell lymphoma: recent insights into pathogenesis, clinical variability, and new diagnostic markers.
**Authors:** Sander B
**Journal:** Semin Diagn Pathol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.semdp.2011.02.010](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.semdp.2011.02.010)

## Content

1. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2011 Aug;28(3):245-55. doi: 10.1053/j.semdp.2011.02.010.

Mantle cell lymphoma: recent insights into pathogenesis, clinical variability, 
and new diagnostic markers.

Sander B(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. birgitta.sander@ki.se

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL; previously called centrocytic lymphoma or lymphocytic 
lymphoma of intermediate differentiation) is a distinct subtype of B-cell 
lymphoma, accounting for approximately 3%-10% of all lymphoma diagnoses. The 
name refers to the growth pattern in early disease presentation resembling the 
normal mantle zone that surrounds the germinal center of the B-cell follicle. 
The hallmark of MCL is the t(11;14)(q13;q32), resulting in aberrant expression 
of the CCND1 gene and expression of cyclin D1 in the tumor cells. Expression and 
genomic profiling of MCL have provided new insight into the pathogenesis and 
will be summarized in this review. Pitfalls in the differential diagnosis versus 
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia, B-cell prolymphocytic leukemia, cyclin 
D1-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, hairy cell leukemia, and plasma cell 
tumors will be discussed, including the usefulness new diagnostic markers SOX11 
and CD200. In situ MCL, MCL with an indolent clinical course, and cyclin 
D1-negative MCL are other topics of this review.

DOI: 10.1053/j.semdp.2011.02.010
PMID: 21850989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]