---
reference_id: "PMID:32916160"
title: Dysregulation of non-coding RNAs in autoimmune thyroid disease.
authors:
- Taheri M
- Eghtedarian R
- Dinger ME
- Ghafouri-Fard S
journal: Exp Mol Pathol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2020.104527
keywords:
- "Autoimmune Diseases/genetics, immunology, pathology"
- CTLA-4 Antigen/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- MicroRNAs/genetics
- "RNA, Long Noncoding/genetics, immunology"
- Th1 Cells/immunology
- Th17 Cells/immunology
- Th2 Cells/immunology
- "Thyroid Diseases/genetics, immunology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dysregulation of non-coding RNAs in autoimmune thyroid disease.
**Authors:** Taheri M, Eghtedarian R, Dinger ME, Ghafouri-Fard S
**Journal:** Exp Mol Pathol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexmp.2020.104527](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexmp.2020.104527)

## Content

1. Exp Mol Pathol. 2020 Dec;117:104527. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2020.104527. Epub
2020  Sep 8.

Dysregulation of non-coding RNAs in autoimmune thyroid disease.

Taheri M(1), Eghtedarian R(2), Dinger ME(3), Ghafouri-Fard S(4).

Author information:
(1)Urogenital Stem Cell Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Medical genetics, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South 
Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia. Electronic address: m.dinger@unsw.edu.au.
(4)Department of Medical genetics, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: s.ghafourifard@sbmu.ac.ir.

Autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD) is a complex disorder with both genetic and 
environmental risk factors. A number of genetic factors such as HLA and CTLA-4 
loci have been associated with risk of this disorder. In addition to these 
factors, recent studies have shown contribution of non-coding RNAs in the 
pathogenesis of this condition. Several microRNAs (miRNAs) and a number of long 
noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) such as IFNG-AS1, Heg, NR_038461, NR_038462, T204821 
and NR_104125 have been dysregulated in peripheral blood of patients with AITD. 
These transcripts are mostly enriched in pathways that modulate humoral and 
cellular immune responses such as those associated with antigen presentation and 
differentiation of Th1, Th2 and Th17 cells. Functional studies verified the role 
of a number of lncRNAs and miRNAs in regulation of critical immune-related 
pathways in AITD. Thus, they participate in the pathophysiology of AITD. In the 
current review, we summarize the results of studies that assessed participation 
of non-coding RNAs in the pathophysiology of AITD.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2020.104527
PMID: 32916160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]