---
reference_id: "PMID:37230380"
title: Disruption of BMP4 signaling is associated with laryngeal birth defects in a mouse model.
authors:
- Bottasso-Arias N
- Burra K
- Sinner D
- Riede T
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2023.04.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disruption of BMP4 signaling is associated with laryngeal birth defects in a mouse model.
**Authors:** Bottasso-Arias N, Burra K, Sinner D, Riede T
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2023.04.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2023.04.007)

## Content

1. Dev Biol. 2023 Aug;500:10-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2023.04.007. Epub 2023 May 
23.

Disruption of BMP4 signaling is associated with laryngeal birth defects in a 
mouse model.

Bottasso-Arias N(1), Burra K(1), Sinner D(2), Riede T(3).

Author information:
(1)Neonatology and Pulmonary Biology, Perinatal Institute Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(2)Neonatology and Pulmonary Biology, Perinatal Institute Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA; College of Medicine, University of 
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA. Electronic address: Debora.sinner@cchmc.org.
(3)Department of Physiology, Midwestern University, Glendale, AZ, USA. 
Electronic address: triede@midwestern.edu.

Laryngeal birth defects are considered rare, but they can be life-threatening 
conditions. The BMP4 gene plays an important role in organ development and 
tissue remodeling throughout life. Here we examined its role in laryngeal 
development complementing similar efforts for the lung, pharynx, and cranial 
base. Our goal was to determine how different imaging techniques contribute to a 
better understanding of the embryonic anatomy of the normal and diseased larynx 
in small specimens. Contrast-enhanced micro CT images of embryonic larynx tissue 
from a mouse model with Bmp4 deletion informed by histology and whole-mount 
immunofluorescence were used to reconstruct the laryngeal cartilaginous 
framework in three dimensions. Laryngeal defects included laryngeal cleft, 
laryngeal asymmetry, ankylosis and atresia. Results implicate BMP4 in laryngeal 
development and show that the 3D reconstruction of laryngeal elements provides a 
powerful approach to visualize laryngeal defects and thereby overcoming 
shortcomings of 2D histological sectioning and whole mount immunofluorescence.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2023.04.007
PMCID: PMC10330877
PMID: 37230380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]