---
reference_id: "PMID:30689738"
title: Gene therapy improves motor and mental function of aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency.
authors:
- Kojima K
- Nakajima T
- Taga N
- Miyauchi A
- Kato M
- Matsumoto A
- Ikeda T
- Nakamura K
- Kubota T
- Mizukami H
- Ono S
- Onuki Y
- Sato T
- Osaka H
- Muramatsu SI
- Yamagata T
journal: Brain
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awy331
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnostic imaging, genetics, therapy"
- "Aromatic-L-Amino-Acid Decarboxylases/deficiency, genetics"
- Brain/diagnostic imaging
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- Humans
- Male
- Mental Processes/physiology
- Motor Skills/physiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene therapy improves motor and mental function of aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency.
**Authors:** Kojima K, Nakajima T, Taga N, Miyauchi A, Kato M, Matsumoto A, Ikeda T, Nakamura K, Kubota T, Mizukami H, Ono S, Onuki Y, Sato T, Osaka H, Muramatsu SI, Yamagata T
**Journal:** Brain (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awy331](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awy331)

## Content

1. Brain. 2019 Feb 1;142(2):322-333. doi: 10.1093/brain/awy331.

Gene therapy improves motor and mental function of aromatic l-amino acid
decarboxylase deficiency.

Kojima K(1), Nakajima T(2), Taga N(3), Miyauchi A(1), Kato M(4)(5), Matsumoto
A(1), Ikeda T(1), Nakamura K(5), Kubota T(6), Mizukami H(7), Ono S(8), Onuki
Y(2), Sato T(9), Osaka H(1), Muramatsu SI(7)(8)(10), Yamagata T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi,
Japan.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi,
Japan.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Division of
Anesthesiology, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Showa University, Shinagawa, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University Faculty of Medicine, Yamagata,
Yamagata, Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Anjo Kosei Hospital, Anjo, Aichi, Japan.
(7)Division of Genetic Therapeutics, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke,
Tochigi, Japan.
(8)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical University,
Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan.
(9)Utsunomiya Central Clinic, Utsunomiya, Tochigi, Japan.
(10)Center for Gene and Cell Therapy, The Institute of Medical Science, The
University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

In patients with aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) deficiency, a
decrease in catecholamines and serotonin levels in the brain leads to
developmental delay and movement disorders. The beneficial effects of gene
therapy in patients from 1 to 8 years of age with homogeneous severity of
disease have been reported from Taiwan. We conducted an open-label phase 1/2
study of population including adolescent patients with different degrees of
severity. Six patients were enrolled: four males (ages 4, 10, 15 and 19 years)
and one female (age 12 years) with a severe phenotype who were not capable of
voluntary movement or speech, and one female (age 5 years) with a moderate
phenotype who could walk with support. The patients received a total of 2 × 1011
vector genomes of adeno-associated virus vector harbouring DDC via bilateral
intraputaminal infusions. At up to 2 years after gene therapy, the motor
function was remarkably improved in all patients. Three patients with the severe
phenotype were able to stand with support, and one patient could walk with a
walker, while the patient with the moderate phenotype could run and ride a
bicycle. This moderate-phenotype patient also showed improvement in her mental
function, being able to converse fluently and perform simple arithmetic.
Dystonia disappeared and oculogyric crisis was markedly decreased in all
patients. The patients exhibited transient choreic dyskinesia for a couple of
months, but no adverse events caused by vector were observed. PET with
6-[18F]fluoro-l-m-tyrosine, a specific tracer for AADC, showed a persistently
increased uptake in the broad areas of the putamen. In our study, older patients
(>8 years of age) also showed improvement, although treatment was more effective
in younger patients. The genetic background of our patients was heterogeneous,
and some patients suspected of having remnant enzyme activity showed better
improvement than the Taiwanese patients. In addition to the alleviation of motor
symptoms, the cognitive and verbal functions were improved in a patient with the
moderate phenotype. The restoration of dopamine synthesis in the putamen via
gene transfer provides transformative medical benefit across all patient ages,
genotypes, and disease severities included in this study, with the most
pronounced improvements noted in moderate
patients.10.1093/brain/awy331_video1awy331media15991361892001.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awy331
PMCID: PMC6377184
PMID: 30689738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
