---
reference_id: "PMID:26453805"
title: Hepatic dysfunction in peroxisomal disorders.
authors:
- Baes M
- Van Veldhoven PP
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.09.035
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatic dysfunction in peroxisomal disorders.
**Authors:** Baes M, Van Veldhoven PP
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.09.035](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.09.035)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 May;1863(5):956-70. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.09.035. Epub 2015 Oct 9.

Hepatic dysfunction in peroxisomal disorders.

Baes M(1), Van Veldhoven PP(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Cell Metabolism, Department of Pharmaceutical and 
Pharmacological Sciences, KU Leuven, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: 
myriam.baes@pharm.kuleuven.be.
(2)Laboratory for Lipid Biochemistry and Protein Interactions, Department of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium. Electronic 
address: paul.vanveldhoven@med.kuleuven.be.

The peroxisomal compartment in hepatocytes hosts several essential metabolic 
conversions. These are defective in peroxisomal disorders that are either caused 
by failure to import the enzymes in the organelle or by mutations in the enzymes 
or in transporters needed to transfer the substrates across the peroxisomal 
membrane. Hepatic pathology is one of the cardinal features in disorders of 
peroxisome biogenesis and peroxisomal β-oxidation although it only rarely 
determines the clinical fate. In mouse models of these diseases liver 
pathologies also occur, although these are not always concordant with the human 
phenotype which might be due to differences in diet, expression of enzymes and 
backup mechanisms. Besides the morphological changes, we overview the impact of 
peroxisome malfunction on other cellular compartments including mitochondria and 
the ER. We further focus on the metabolic pathways that are affected such as 
bile acid formation, and dicarboxylic acid and branched chain fatty acid 
degradation. It appears that the association between deregulated metabolites and 
pathological events remains unclear.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.09.035
PMID: 26453805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]