---
reference_id: "PMID:36929420"
title: "The Risk of Cholesteatoma in Individuals With First-degree Relatives Surgically Treated for the Disease."
journal: JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: "2023"
doi: 10.1001/jamaoto.2023.0048
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Risk of Cholesteatoma in Individuals With First-degree Relatives Surgically Treated for the Disease.

## Content

Importance: Cholesteatoma in the middle ear is not regarded as a hereditary
disease, but case reports of familial clustering exist in the literature, as
well as observed familial cases in the clinical work. However, the knowledge
regarding cholesteatoma as a hereditary disease is lacking in the literature.

Objective: To assess the risk of cholesteatoma in individuals with a first-degree
relative surgically treated for the same disease.

Design, setting, and participants: In this nested case-control study in the
Swedish population between 1987 and 2018 of first-time cholesteatoma surgery
identified from the Swedish National Patient Register, 2 controls per case were
randomly selected from the population register through incidence density
sampling, and all first-degree relatives for cases and controls were identified.
Data were received in April 2022, and analyses were conducted between April and
September 2022.

Exposure: Cholesteatoma surgery in a first-degree relative.

Main outcomes and measures: The main outcome was first-time cholesteatoma
surgery. The association between having a first-degree relative with
cholesteatoma and the risk of cholesteatoma surgery in the index persons was
estimated by odds ratios (ORs) and 95% CIs through conditional logistic
regression analysis.

Results: Between 1987 and 2018, 10 618 individuals with a first-time
cholesteatoma surgery were identified in the Swedish National Patient Register.
The risk of having a cholesteatoma surgery was almost 4 times higher in
individuals having a first-degree relative surgically treated for the disease
(OR, 3.9; 95% CI, 3.1-4.8), but few cases were exposed overall.

Conclusions and relevance: In this Swedish case-control study using nationwide
register data with high coverage and completeness, the findings suggest that the
risk of cholesteatoma in the middle ear is strongly associated with a family
history of the condition. Family history was nevertheless quite rare and can
therefore only explain a limited number of all cases; these families could be an
important source for information regarding the genetic background for
cholesteatoma disease.
