---
reference_id: "PMID:22190039"
title: Topoisomerase inhibitors unsilence the dormant allele of Ube3a in neurons.
authors:
- Huang HS
- Allen JA
- Mabb AM
- King IF
- Miriyala J
- Taylor-Blake B
- Sciaky N
- Dutton JW Jr
- Lee HM
- Chen X
- Jin J
- Bridges AS
- Zylka MJ
- Roth BL
- Philpot BD
journal: Nature
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/nature10726
keywords:
- Alleles
- "Angelman Syndrome/drug therapy, genetics"
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Cerebral Cortex/cytology, drug effects, metabolism"
- "Drug Evaluation, Preclinical"
- Fathers
- Female
- Gene Silencing/drug effects
- "Genomic Imprinting/drug effects, genetics"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Mothers
- "Neurons/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Small Molecule Libraries/administration & dosage, chemistry, pharmacology"
- "Topoisomerase Inhibitors/administration & dosage, analysis, pharmacokinetics, pharmacology"
- "Topotecan/administration & dosage, pharmacokinetics, pharmacology"
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Topoisomerase inhibitors unsilence the dormant allele of Ube3a in neurons.
**Authors:** Huang HS, Allen JA, Mabb AM, King IF, Miriyala J, Taylor-Blake B, Sciaky N, Dutton JW Jr, Lee HM, Chen X, Jin J, Bridges AS, Zylka MJ, Roth BL, Philpot BD
**Journal:** Nature (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature10726](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10726)

## Content

1. Nature. 2011 Dec 21;481(7380):185-9. doi: 10.1038/nature10726.

Topoisomerase inhibitors unsilence the dormant allele of Ube3a in neurons.

Huang HS(1), Allen JA, Mabb AM, King IF, Miriyala J, Taylor-Blake B, Sciaky N,
Dutton JW Jr, Lee HM, Chen X, Jin J, Bridges AS, Zylka MJ, Roth BL, Philpot BD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology, University of North Carolina
School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2011 Dec 21;481(7380):150-2. doi: 10.1038/nature10784.
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2012 Jan 24;8(2):62. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2012.2.

Angelman syndrome is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder caused by deletion or
mutation of the maternal allele of the ubiquitin protein ligase E3A (UBE3A). In
neurons, the paternal allele of UBE3A is intact but epigenetically silenced,
raising the possibility that Angelman syndrome could be treated by activating
this silenced allele to restore functional UBE3A protein. Using an unbiased,
high-content screen in primary cortical neurons from mice, we identify twelve
topoisomerase I inhibitors and four topoisomerase II inhibitors that unsilence
the paternal Ube3a allele. These drugs included topotecan, irinotecan, etoposide
and dexrazoxane (ICRF-187). At nanomolar concentrations, topotecan upregulated
catalytically active UBE3A in neurons from maternal Ube3a-null mice. Topotecan
concomitantly downregulated expression of the Ube3a antisense transcript that
overlaps the paternal copy of Ube3a. These results indicate that topotecan
unsilences Ube3a in cis by reducing transcription of an imprinted antisense RNA.
When administered in vivo, topotecan unsilenced the paternal Ube3a allele in
several regions of the nervous system, including neurons in the hippocampus,
neocortex, striatum, cerebellum and spinal cord. Paternal expression of Ube3a
remained elevated in a subset of spinal cord neurons for at least 12  weeks
after cessation of topotecan treatment, indicating that transient topoisomerase
inhibition can have enduring effects on gene expression. Although potential
off-target effects remain to be investigated, our findings suggest a therapeutic
strategy for reactivating the functional but dormant allele of Ube3a in patients
with Angelman syndrome.

DOI: 10.1038/nature10726
PMCID: PMC3257422
PMID: 22190039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
