---
reference_id: "PMID:29391887"
title: Targeted sequencing of cancer-associated genes in hepatocellular carcinoma using next-generation sequencing.
authors:
- Morishita A
- Iwama H
- Fujihara S
- Watanabe M
- Fujita K
- Tadokoro T
- Ohura K
- Chiyo T
- Sakamoto T
- Mimura S
- Nomura T
- Tani J
- Yoneyama H
- Okano K
- Suzuki Y
- Himoto T
- Masaki T
journal: Oncol Lett
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3892/ol.2017.7334
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted sequencing of cancer-associated genes in hepatocellular carcinoma using next-generation sequencing.
**Authors:** Morishita A, Iwama H, Fujihara S, Watanabe M, Fujita K, Tadokoro T, Ohura K, Chiyo T, Sakamoto T, Mimura S, Nomura T, Tani J, Yoneyama H, Okano K, Suzuki Y, Himoto T, Masaki T
**Journal:** Oncol Lett (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3892/ol.2017.7334](https://doi.org/10.3892/ol.2017.7334)

## Content

1. Oncol Lett. 2018 Jan;15(1):528-532. doi: 10.3892/ol.2017.7334. Epub 2017 Nov
2.

Targeted sequencing of cancer-associated genes in hepatocellular carcinoma using 
next-generation sequencing.

Morishita A(1), Iwama H(2), Fujihara S(1), Watanabe M(1), Fujita K(1), Tadokoro 
T(1), Ohura K(1), Chiyo T(1), Sakamoto T(1), Mimura S(1), Nomura T(1), Tani 
J(1), Yoneyama H(1), Okano K(3), Suzuki Y(3), Himoto T(4), Masaki T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Neurology, Kagawa University School of 
Medicine, Miki, Kagawa 761-0793, Japan.
(2)Life Science Research Center, Kagawa University School of Medicine, Miki, 
Kagawa 761-0793, Japan.
(3)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Kagawa University School of 
Medicine, Miki, Kagawa 761-0793, Japan.
(4)Department of Medical Technology, Kagawa Prefectural University of Health 
Sciences, Takamatsu, Kagawa 761-0123, Japan.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading cause of cancer mortality 
worldwide. Although the clinical success rate for the treatment of early-stage 
HCC has improved, the prognosis of advanced HCC remains poor owing to the high 
recurrence rate and the refractory nature of HCC for various anticancer drugs. A 
better understanding of the pathogenesis of HCC is therefore critically needed 
in order to treat HCC, including its genetic alterations. Next-generation 
sequencing (NGS) has provided an unbiased platform to systematically identify 
gene mutations and reveal the pathogenesis of various cancers. In the present 
study, a total of 118 samples (59 liver tissues including cancer and adjacent 
normal tissues) were sequenced using the AmpliSeq Hotspot Cancer Panel (version 
2). The most common somatic mutations identified were tumor protein 53 (TP53; 
35.6%) and β-catenin 1 (CTNNB1; 30.5%), and the most frequent variants of those 
genes were missense variants. In addition, somatic mutations including those in 
genes encoding colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (5.1%), epidermal growth 
factor receptor (6.8%), RET proto-oncogene (3.4%), Erb-B2 receptor tyrosine 
kinase 4 (ERBB4; 1.7%) and serine/threonine kinase 11 (STK11, also known as 
liver kinase B1; 6.8%) were also identified at a low frequency in patients with 
HCC. A frameshift variant in STK11, a splice acceptor variant in TP53, a splice 
region variant in ERBB4 and a stop-gained variant in TP53 were also specifically 
determined. The most abundant alteration was a C:G>T:A transition (50%) and 
other transversions, i.e., C:G>G:C (19.6%), T:A>C:G (19.6%), C:G>A:T (12.5%), 
T:A>G:C (12.5%) and T:A>A:T (5.4%). This spectrum pattern differs from that in 
other solid tumors. TP53 mutations in the tumors at advanced stages were 
significantly more frequent compared with those in early-stage tumors. 
Additionally, age (<70 vs. ≥70 years) was significantly associated with CTNNB1 
mutations. Using NGS, a number of novel gene mutations were identified in HCC, 
including established mutations and disproved mutations. The results of the 
present study offer new insight and improved understanding of the etiology and 
the development of HCC.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2017.7334
PMCID: PMC5769409
PMID: 29391887