---
reference_id: "PMID:40015599"
title: "Early onset basal cell carcinoma: Consider Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome."
authors:
- Cragg A
- Hunt D
- Cooper H
- Schirwani S
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2025.105004
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hypotrichosis/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- Male
- Female
- Pedigree
- Adult
- "Chromosomes, Human, X/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early onset basal cell carcinoma: Consider Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome.
**Authors:** Cragg A, Hunt D, Cooper H, Schirwani S
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2025.105004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2025.105004)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2025 Jun;75:105004. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2025.105004. Epub
2025  Feb 25.

Early onset basal cell carcinoma: Consider Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome.

Cragg A(1), Hunt D(2), Cooper H(3), Schirwani S(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(2)Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Princess Anne Hospital, Coxford Road,
Southampton, Hampshire, UK.
(3)Dermatology Department, Queen Alexandra Hospital, Portsmouth, Hampshire, UK.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK; Wessex
Clinical Genetics Service, Princess Anne Hospital, Coxford Road, Southampton,
Hampshire, UK; Dermatology Department, University Hospital Southampton NHS
Foundation Trust, Tremona Road, Southampton, Hampshire, UK. Electronic address:
Schaida.schirwani@uhs.nhs.uk.

Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome is a rare genetic condition characterised by basal
cell carcinomas, follicular atrophoderma and hypotrichosis. Until recently, the
molecular basis of the condition was largely unknown. A recent study has
identified a section of duplicated DNA on the X chromosome of those with the
condition which appears to be the underlying cause of the syndrome. This case
study looks at a family with five affected members over three generations. They
had been diagnosed with the syndrome in early life and had previously undergone
genetic testing with no cause being found. The index patient within this family
has now been identified as having the same duplication as those tested in the
initial study.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2025.105004
PMID: 40015599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
