---
reference_id: "PMID:14765731"
title: "Antinuclear antibodies can be detected in dog sera reactive to Bartonella vinsonii subsp. berkhoffii, Ehrlichia canis, or Leishmania infantum antigens."
authors:
- Smith BE
- Tompkins MB
- Breitschwerdt EB
journal: J Vet Intern Med
year: '2004'
doi: "10.1892/0891-6640(2004)18<47:aacbdi>2.0.co;2"
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Antinuclear/immunology"
- "Antigens, Bacterial/immunology"
- Bartonella/immunology
- "Bartonella Infections/immunology, veterinary"
- "Dog Diseases/blood, epidemiology, immunology"
- Dogs
- Ehrlichia canis/immunology
- "Ehrlichiosis/immunology, veterinary"
- "Fluorescent Antibody Technique, Indirect/veterinary"
- Gram-Negative Bacteria/immunology
- "Gram-Negative Bacterial Infections/immunology, veterinary"
- North Carolina/epidemiology
- Prospective Studies
- Records/veterinary
- Retrospective Studies
- "Rickettsia Infections/immunology, veterinary"
- Rickettsia rickettsii/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antinuclear antibodies can be detected in dog sera reactive to Bartonella vinsonii subsp. berkhoffii, Ehrlichia canis, or Leishmania infantum antigens.
**Authors:** Smith BE, Tompkins MB, Breitschwerdt EB
**Journal:** J Vet Intern Med (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1892/0891-6640(2004)18<47:aacbdi>2.0.co;2](https://doi.org/10.1892/0891-6640(2004)18<47:aacbdi>2.0.co;2)

## Content

1. J Vet Intern Med. 2004 Jan-Feb;18(1):47-51. doi:
10.1892/0891-6640(2004)18<47:aacbdi>2.0.co;2.

Antinuclear antibodies can be detected in dog sera reactive to Bartonella
vinsonii subsp. berkhoffii, Ehrlichia canis, or Leishmania infantum antigens.

Smith BE(1), Tompkins MB, Breitschwerdt EB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27606, USA.

The presence of antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) is used to support a clinical
diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in dogs. However, clinicians
must interpret the detection of ANAs with caution, particularly in light of
increasing evidence that dogs with known bacterial and protozoal infections can
have high ANA titers. Retrospectively, medical records were reviewed for all
dogs that were concurrently tested for antinuclear antigens and Bartonella
vinsonii (berkhoffii), Ehrlichia canis, or Rickettsia rickettsii antigens
between 1990 and 2000. When analyzed on the basis of reactivity to a specific
infectious agent, 75% of the B vinsonii (berkhoffii) seroreactors, 16.7% of the
E canis seroreactors, and 0% of the R rickettsii seroreactors had concurrent
ANAs. Subsequent prospective testing did not detect ANAs in convalescent sera
from dogs experimentally infected with B vinsonii (berkhoffii), E canis, or R
rickettsii. However, 10-20% B vinsonii (berkhoffii), E canis, or Leishmania
infantum reactive sera from naturally infected dogs contained ANAs. In addition,
45% of sera from dogs that are reactive to multiple vectorborne organisms were
more likely to contain ANAs when compared to sera from dogs reactive to only 1
test antigen. When interpreting the relevance of seroreactivity to nuclear
antigens, clinicians should recognize that dogs with seroreactivity to B
vinsonii (berkhoffii), E canis, or L infantum antigens (especially those with
seroreactivity to more than one of these pathogens) may produce ANAs.

DOI: 10.1892/0891-6640(2004)18<47:aacbdi>2.0.co;2
PMID: 14765731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
