---
reference_id: "PMID:28003083"
title: "Gitelman syndrome: consensus and guidance from a Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Controversies Conference."
authors:
- Blanchard A
- Bockenhauer D
- Bolignano D
- Calò LA
- Cosyns E
- Devuyst O
- Ellison DH
- Karet Frankl FE
- Knoers NV
- Konrad M
- Lin SH
- Vargas-Poussou R
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2016.09.046
keywords:
- Angiotensin Receptor Antagonists/therapeutic use
- Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal/therapeutic use"
- "Bartter Syndrome/blood, diagnosis, genetics, urine"
- Calcium/urine
- Chloride Channels/genetics
- "Chondrocalcinosis/etiology, prevention & control"
- Consensus Statements as Topic
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Dietary Supplements
- Genetic Testing
- "Gitelman Syndrome/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Humans
- "Hypokalemia/blood, genetics"
- "Magnesium/administration & dosage, blood, therapeutic use"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Potassium/administration & dosage, blood, therapeutic use"
- Quality of Life
- Rare Diseases/genetics
- "Sodium Chloride, Dietary/therapeutic use"
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 3/genetics"
- Ultrasonography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gitelman syndrome: consensus and guidance from a Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Controversies Conference.
**Authors:** Blanchard A, Bockenhauer D, Bolignano D, Calò LA, Cosyns E, Devuyst O, Ellison DH, Karet Frankl FE, Knoers NV, Konrad M, Lin SH, Vargas-Poussou R
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.kint.2016.09.046](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2016.09.046)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2017 Jan;91(1):24-33. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2016.09.046.

Gitelman syndrome: consensus and guidance from a Kidney Disease: Improving
Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Controversies Conference.

Blanchard A(1), Bockenhauer D(2), Bolignano D(3), Calò LA(4), Cosyns E(5),
Devuyst O(6), Ellison DH(7), Karet Frankl FE(8), Knoers NV(9), Konrad M(10), Lin
SH(11), Vargas-Poussou R(12).

Author information:
(1)Faculté de Médecine, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris,
France; Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de
Paris, Centre d'Investigation Clinique, Paris, France; Centre d'Investigation
Clinique 1418, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Paris,
France; UMR 970, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Paris, France.
(2)Centre for Nephrology, University College London, London, UK; Great Ormond
Street Hospital for Children National Health Service Foundation Trust, London,
UK.
(3)Institute of Clinical Physiology, National Research Council, Reggio,
Calabria, Italy.
(4)Department of Medicine, Nephrology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(5)Wanze, Belgium.
(6)Institute of Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
Electronic address: olivier.devuyst@uzh.ch.
(7)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Oregon Health and Science
University, Veterans Affairs Portland Health Care System, Portland, Oregon, USA.
(8)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge and Cambridge
University Hospitals National Health Service Trust, Cambridge, UK; Division of
Renal Medicine, University of Cambridge and Cambridge University Hospitals
National Health Service Trust, Cambridge, UK.
(9)Department of Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical
Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
v.v.a.knoers@umcutrecht.nl.
(10)Department of General Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital, Münster,
Germany.
(11)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Tri-Service General
Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of
Medical Science, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(12)Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris,
Centre d'Investigation Clinique, Paris, France; Centre de Référence des Maladies
Rénales Héréditaires de l'Enfant et de l'Adulte, Paris, France.

Gitelman syndrome (GS) is a rare, salt-losing tubulopathy characterized by
hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis with hypomagnesemia and hypocalciuria. The
disease is recessively inherited, caused by inactivating mutations in the
SLC12A3 gene that encodes the thiazide-sensitive sodium-chloride cotransporter
(NCC). GS is usually detected during adolescence or adulthood, either
fortuitously or in association with mild or nonspecific symptoms or both. The
disease is characterized by high phenotypic variability and a significant
reduction in the quality of life, and it may be associated with severe
manifestations. GS is usually managed by a liberal salt intake together with
oral magnesium and potassium supplements. A general problem in rare diseases is
the lack of high quality evidence to inform diagnosis, prognosis, and
management. We report here on the current state of knowledge related to the
diagnostic evaluation, follow-up, management, and treatment of GS; identify
knowledge gaps; and propose a research agenda to substantiate a number of issues
related to GS. This expert consensus statement aims to establish an initial
framework to enable clinical auditing and thus improve quality control of care.

Copyright © 2016 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2016.09.046
PMID: 28003083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
