---
reference_id: "PMID:27858745"
title: Functional Characterization of a Central Core Disease RyR1 Mutation (p.Y4864H) Associated with Quantitative Defect in RyR1 Protein.
authors:
- Cacheux M
- Blum A
- Sébastien M
- Wozny AS
- Brocard J
- Mamchaoui K
- Mouly V
- Roux-Buisson N
- Rendu J
- Monnier N
- Krivosic R
- Allen P
- Lacour A
- Lunardi J
- Fauré J
- Marty I
journal: J Neuromuscul Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.3233/JND-150073
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional Characterization of a Central Core Disease RyR1 Mutation (p.Y4864H) Associated with Quantitative Defect in RyR1 Protein.
**Authors:** Cacheux M, Blum A, Sébastien M, Wozny AS, Brocard J, Mamchaoui K, Mouly V, Roux-Buisson N, Rendu J, Monnier N, Krivosic R, Allen P, Lacour A, Lunardi J, Fauré J, Marty I
**Journal:** J Neuromuscul Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JND-150073](https://doi.org/10.3233/JND-150073)

## Content

1. J Neuromuscul Dis. 2015 Nov 20;2(4):421-432. doi: 10.3233/JND-150073.

Functional Characterization of a Central Core Disease RyR1 Mutation (p.Y4864H)
Associated with Quantitative Defect in RyR1 Protein.

Cacheux M(1)(2), Blum A(1)(2), Sébastien M(1)(2), Wozny AS(1)(2)(3), Brocard
J(1)(2), Mamchaoui K(4), Mouly V(4), Roux-Buisson N(1)(2)(3), Rendu J(1)(2)(3),
Monnier N(1)(2)(3), Krivosic R(5), Allen P(6), Lacour A(7), Lunardi J(1)(2)(3),
Fauré J(1)(2)(3), Marty I(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)INSERM U836, Grenoble Institut des Neurosciences, Equipe Muscle et
Pathologies, Grenoble, France.
(2)Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France.
(3)Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire de Grenoble, Hôpital Michallon,
Biochimie Génétique et Moléculaire, Grenoble, France.
(4)UMRS974 Inserm, UMR7215 CNRS, Institut de Myologie, GH PitiéSalpétrière, 47
bd de l'hôpital, Paris, France.
(5)Département Anesthésie-Réanimation, Hôpital Roger Salengro, CHRU de Lille,
Lille, France.
(6)Department of Molecular Biosciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of California at Davis, Davis CA, USA.
(7)Service de Neurologie, Hôpital Roger Salengro, CHRU de Lille, Lille, France.

BACKGROUND: Central Core Disease (CCD) is a congenital myopathy often resulting
from a mutation in RYR1 gene. Mutations in RyR1 can increase or decrease channel
activity, or induce a reduction in the amount of protein. The consequences of a
single mutation are sometimes multiple and the analysis of the functional
effects is complex.
OBJECTIVE: The consequences of the p.Y4864H mutation identified in a CCD patient
have been studied regarding both RyR1 function and amount.
METHODS: The amount of RyR1 in human and mouse muscles was evaluated using
qRT-PCR and quantitative Western blot, and calcium release was studied using
calcium imaging on primary cultures. The results were compared between human and
mouse.
RESULTS: The p.Y4864H mutation induced an alteration of calcium release, and in
addition was associated to a reduction in the amount of RyR1 in the patient's
muscle. This suggests two possible pathophysiological mechanisms: the alteration
of calcium release could result from a modification of the channel properties of
RyR1 or from a RyR1 reduction. In order to discriminate between the two
hypotheses, we used the heterozygous RyR1 knockout (RyR1+/-) mouse model showing
a comparable RyR1 protein reduction. No reduction in calcium release was
observed in primary muscle culture from these mice, and no muscle weakness was
measured.
CONCLUSIONS: Because the reduction in the amount of RyR1 protein has no
functional consequences in the murine model, the muscle weakness observed in the
patient is most likely the result of a modification of the calcium channel
function of RyR1 due to the p.Y4864H mutation.

DOI: 10.3233/JND-150073
PMCID: PMC5240544
PMID: 27858745
