---
reference_id: PMID:23028967
title: Bacterial neuraminidase rescues influenza virus replication from inhibition by a neuraminidase inhibitor.
authors:
- Nishikawa T
- Shimizu K
- Tanaka T
- Kuroda K
- Takayama T
- Yamamoto T
- Hanada N
- Hamada Y
journal: PLoS One
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045371
keywords:
- Animals
- Antiviral Agents/pharmacology
- Bacterial Proteins/pharmacology
- Cell Line
- Dogs
- Enzyme Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Neuraminidase/antagonists & inhibitors, pharmacology"
- Orthomyxoviridae/drug effects
- Streptococcus pneumoniae/enzymology
- "Viral Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Virus Replication/drug effects
- Zanamivir/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bacterial neuraminidase rescues influenza virus replication from inhibition by a neuraminidase inhibitor.
**Authors:** Nishikawa T, Shimizu K, Tanaka T, Kuroda K, Takayama T, Yamamoto T, Hanada N, Hamada Y
**Journal:** PLoS One (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0045371](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0045371)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45371. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045371. Epub 2012 Sep
18.

Bacterial neuraminidase rescues influenza virus replication from inhibition by a 
neuraminidase inhibitor.

Nishikawa T(1), Shimizu K, Tanaka T, Kuroda K, Takayama T, Yamamoto T, Hanada N, 
Hamada Y.

Author information:
(1)SRBD Project, Nihon University School of Medicine, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Influenza virus neuraminidase (NA) cleaves terminal sialic acid residues on 
oligosaccharide chains that are receptors for virus binding, thus playing an 
important role in the release of virions from infected cells to promote the 
spread of cell-to-cell infection. In addition, NA plays a role at the initial 
stage of viral infection in the respiratory tract by degrading hemagglutination 
inhibitors in body fluid which competitively inhibit receptor binding of the 
virus. Current first line anti-influenza drugs are viral NA-specific inhibitors, 
which do not inhibit bacterial neuraminidases. Since neuraminidase producing 
bacteria have been isolated from oral and upper respiratory commensal bacterial 
flora, we posited that bacterial neuraminidases could decrease the antiviral 
effectiveness of NA inhibitor drugs in respiratory organs when viral NA is 
inhibited. Using in vitro models of infection, we aimed to clarify the effects 
of bacterial neuraminidases on influenza virus infection in the presence of the 
NA inhibitor drug zanamivir. We found that zanamivir reduced progeny virus yield 
to less than 2% of that in its absence, however the yield was restored almost 
entirely by the exogenous addition of bacterial neuraminidase from Streptococcus 
pneumoniae. Furthermore, cell-to-cell infection was severely inhibited by 
zanamivir but restored by the addition of bacterial neuraminidase. Next we 
examined the effects of bacterial neuraminidase on hemagglutination inhibition 
and infectivity neutralization activities of human saliva in the presence of 
zanamivir. We found that the drug enhanced both inhibitory activities of saliva, 
while the addition of bacterial neuraminidase diminished this enhancement. 
Altogether, our results showed that bacterial neuraminidases functioned as the 
predominant NA when viral NA was inhibited to promote the spread of infection 
and to inactivate the neutralization activity of saliva. We propose that 
neuraminidase from bacterial flora in patients may reduce the efficacy of NA 
inhibitor drugs during influenza virus infection. (295 words).

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045371
PMCID: PMC3445474
PMID: 23028967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.