---
reference_id: "PMID:34626608"
title: "Creatine kinase test diagnostic accuracy in neonatal screening for Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy: A systematic review."
authors:
- de Freitas Nakata KC
- da Silva Pereira PP
- Salgado Riveros B
journal: Clin Biochem
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2021.09.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Creatine kinase test diagnostic accuracy in neonatal screening for Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy: A systematic review.
**Authors:** de Freitas Nakata KC, da Silva Pereira PP, Salgado Riveros B
**Journal:** Clin Biochem (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2021.09.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2021.09.010)

## Content

1. Clin Biochem. 2021 Dec;98:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2021.09.010. Epub
2021  Oct 6.

Creatine kinase test diagnostic accuracy in neonatal screening for Duchenne 
Muscular Dystrophy: A systematic review.

de Freitas Nakata KC(1), da Silva Pereira PP(2), Salgado Riveros B(3).

Author information:
(1)Núcleo de Avaliação de Tecnologias em Saúde - SES/MT, Brazil. Electronic 
address: kellinakata@hotmail.com.
(2)Laboratório de pesquisa sobre Cuidados em Saúde/LAPECS Universidade Federal 
de Rondônia, Brazil.
(3)Universidade Federal do Paraná, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: to evaluate the accuracy of the creatine kinase test in neonatal 
screening for Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy.
METHODS: Investigations were carried out in six databases, gray literature and 
manual search. All studies and data extraction eligibility processes were 
carried out in paired mode. The methodological stringency of the studies was 
assessed using the modified QUADAS 2 tool. The performance measures of the test 
were calculated using the Meta-DiSc software, version 1.4.
RESULTS: 11 studies were included, with a total sample of 1,416,123 newborns. 
The positive likelihood ratio was more than 10 in these studies. On the other 
hand, the negative likelihood ratio was up to 0.2 in 9/10 studies; however, when 
considering the upper limit of the confidence interval, only 4/10 studies showed 
a negative likelihood ratio less than 0.2 and in 6/11 it was greater than 0.5. 
Specificity was close to 1 in studies. The sensitivity was equal to or greater 
than 0.81 in 10/11 studies; however, when considering the reliability's minimum 
interval limit, only 6/10 studies showed sensitivity equal to or greater than 
0.7. Ten studies were summarized on a ROC curve indicating good performance 
(Area under the curve = 0.9980 and Q index = 0.9846).
CONCLUSIONS: the creatine kinase test showed good accuracy in screening for 
cases of Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy and may be a useful alternative in the 
early diagnosis of the disease followed by confirmatory genetic testing.

Copyright © 2021 The Canadian Society of Clinical Chemists. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2021.09.010
PMID: 34626608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]