---
reference_id: "PMID:20494109"
title: "Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis: an inborn error in bile acid synthesis with defined mutations but still a challenge."
authors:
- Björkhem I
- Hansson M
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.02.140
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bile Acids and Salts/biosynthesis, genetics, pharmacology"
- Cholestanetriol 26-Monooxygenase/genetics
- Cholestanol/metabolism
- Cholestenones/metabolism
- Cholesterol 7-alpha-Hydroxylase/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Xanthomatosis, Cerebrotendinous/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis: an inborn error in bile acid synthesis with defined mutations but still a challenge.
**Authors:** Björkhem I, Hansson M
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.02.140](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.02.140)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 May 21;396(1):46-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.02.140.

Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis: an inborn error in bile acid synthesis with
defined mutations but still a challenge.

Björkhem I(1), Hansson M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Clinical Chemistry, Karolinska
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, S-14186 Huddinge, Sweden.
ingemar.bjorkhem@karolinska.se

Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis [CTX] is a rare disease characterized by the
accumulation of cholesterol and cholestanol in brain and tendons caused by a
mutation in the sterol 27-hydroxylase gene [CYP27A1] involved in bile acid
synthesis. Disruption of this gene in mice does not give rise to xanthomas. The
gene defect leads to reduced bile acid synthesis with a compensatory increase in
the activity of the rate-limiting enzyme in bile acid synthesis, cholesterol
7alpha-hydroxylase. This leads to a marked accumulation of 7alpha-hydroxylated
bile acid precursors, in particular 7alpha-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one. The latter
oxysterol passes the blood-brain barrier and is an efficient precursor to
cholestanol. The activity of cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase is normalized by
treatment with bile acids. Such treatment reduces the xanthomas in CTX patients
in parallel with decreased cholestanol levels. The relationship between the
accumulation of cholestanol and the development of cholesterol-rich xanthomas
has however not been clarified and a suitable animal model is still lacking.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.02.140
PMID: 20494109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
