---
reference_id: "PMID:11385577"
title: A frameshift mutation in NOD2 associated with susceptibility to Crohn's disease.
authors:
- Ogura Y
- Bonen DK
- Inohara N
- Nicolae DL
- Chen FF
- Ramos R
- Britton H
- Moran T
- Karaliuskas R
- Duerr RH
- Achkar JP
- Brant SR
- Bayless TM
- Kirschner BS
- Hanauer SB
- Nuñez G
- Cho JH
journal: Nature
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/35079114
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A frameshift mutation in NOD2 associated with susceptibility to Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Ogura Y, Bonen DK, Inohara N, Nicolae DL, Chen FF, Ramos R, Britton H, Moran T, Karaliuskas R, Duerr RH, Achkar JP, Brant SR, Bayless TM, Kirschner BS, Hanauer SB, Nuñez G, Cho JH
**Journal:** Nature (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/35079114](https://doi.org/10.1038/35079114)

## Content

1. Nature. 2001 May 31;411(6837):603-6. doi: 10.1038/35079114.

A frameshift mutation in NOD2 associated with susceptibility to Crohn's disease.

Ogura Y(1), Bonen DK, Inohara N, Nicolae DL, Chen FF, Ramos R, Britton H, Moran 
T, Karaliuskas R, Duerr RH, Achkar JP, Brant SR, Bayless TM, Kirschner BS, 
Hanauer SB, Nuñez G, Cho JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of 
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2001 May 31;411(6837):537, 539. doi: 10.1038/35079223.

Crohn's disease is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the gastrointestinal 
tract, which is thought to result from the effect of environmental factors in a 
genetically predisposed host. A gene location in the pericentromeric region of 
chromosome 16, IBD1, that contributes to susceptibility to Crohn's disease has 
been established through multiple linkage studies, but the specific gene(s) has 
not been identified. NOD2, a gene that encodes a protein with homology to plant 
disease resistance gene products is located in the peak region of linkage on 
chromosome 16 (ref. 7). Here we show, by using the transmission disequilibium 
test and case-control analysis, that a frameshift mutation caused by a cytosine 
insertion, 3020insC, which is expected to encode a truncated NOD2 protein, is 
associated with Crohn's disease. Wild-type NOD2 activates nuclear factor 
NF-kappaB, making it responsive to bacterial lipopolysaccharides; however, this 
induction was deficient in mutant NOD2. These results implicate NOD2 in 
susceptibility to Crohn's disease, and suggest a link between an innate immune 
response to bacterial components and development of disease.

DOI: 10.1038/35079114
PMID: 11385577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]