---
reference_id: "PMID:29125261"
title: Hepatitis B and liver transplantation.
authors:
- Ferrarese A
- Zanetto A
- Russo FP
journal: Minerva Gastroenterol Dietol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.23736/S1121-421X.17.02453-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B and liver transplantation.
**Authors:** Ferrarese A, Zanetto A, Russo FP
**Journal:** Minerva Gastroenterol Dietol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.23736/S1121-421X.17.02453-9](https://doi.org/10.23736/S1121-421X.17.02453-9)

## Content

1. Minerva Gastroenterol Dietol. 2018 Jun;64(2):147-157. doi: 
10.23736/S1121-421X.17.02453-9. Epub 2017 Nov 10.

Hepatitis B and liver transplantation.

Ferrarese A(1), Zanetto A(1), Russo FP(2).

Author information:
(1)Multivisceral Transplant Unit, Gastroenterology, Department of Surgery, 
Oncology and Gastroenterology, Padua University Hospital, Padua, Italy.
(2)Multivisceral Transplant Unit, Gastroenterology, Department of Surgery, 
Oncology and Gastroenterology, Padua University Hospital, Padua, Italy - 
francescopaolo.russo@unipd.it.

Liver transplantation (LT) is the only effective treatment for hepatitis B-virus 
(HBV) related end stage liver disease, even if the outcome of these patients, 
has significantly improved after introduction of effective and well tolerated 
nucleoside/nucleotide analogues (NUC). Pre-transplant therapy has been initially 
based on lamivudine, but entecavir and tenofovir represent the currently 
recommended first-line therapeutic option in patients with HBV decompensated 
cirrhosis. After LT, the development of hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG) in the 
early 1990's dramatically changes the prognosis of these patients by reducing 
the incidence of HBV recurrence and increasing survival rate. Combination of 
HBIG and NUC is now considered as the standard of care for prophylaxis against 
HBV recurrence, however personalized therapeutic algorithms based on pre- and 
post-transplant viral and host factors have been proposed. Finally, liver grafts 
from hepatitis B core antibody-positive donors and from hepatitis B 
antigen-positive donors can be safely used in selected patients.

DOI: 10.23736/S1121-421X.17.02453-9
PMID: 29125261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]