---
reference_id: PMID:37820296
title: "Adolescent and Young Adult Germ Cell Tumors: Epidemiology, Genomics, Treatment, and Survivorship."
authors:
- Travis LB
- Feldman DR
- Fung C
- Poynter JN
- Lockley M
- Frazier AL
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.23.01099
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adolescent and Young Adult Germ Cell Tumors: Epidemiology, Genomics, Treatment, and Survivorship.
**Authors:** Travis LB, Feldman DR, Fung C, Poynter JN, Lockley M, Frazier AL
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.23.01099](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.23.01099)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2024 Feb 20;42(6):696-706. doi: 10.1200/JCO.23.01099. Epub 2023 
Oct 11.

Adolescent and Young Adult Germ Cell Tumors: Epidemiology, Genomics, Treatment, 
and Survivorship.

Travis LB(1), Feldman DR(2), Fung C(3), Poynter JN(4), Lockley M(5), Frazier 
AL(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN.
(2)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.
(3)J.P. Wilmot Cancer Institute, University of Rochester Medical Center, 
Rochester, NY.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
(5)Centre for Cancer Genomics and Computational Biology, Barts Cancer Institute, 
Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Dana Farber-Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Boston, MA.

Innovations in the care of adolescent and young adult (AYA) germ cell tumors 
(GCTs) are needed for one of the most common AYA cancers for which treatment has 
not significantly changed for several decades. Testicular GCTs (TGCTs) are the 
most common cancers in 15- to 39-year-old men, and ovarian GCTs (OvGCTs) are the 
leading gynecologic malignancies in women younger than 25 years. Excellent 
outcomes, even in widely metastatic disease using cisplatin-based chemotherapy, 
can be achieved since Einhorn and Donohue's landmark 1977 study in TGCT. 
However, as the severity of accompanying late effects (ototoxicity, 
neurotoxicity, cardiovascular disease, second malignant neoplasms, 
nephrotoxicity, and others) has emerged, efforts to deintensity treatment and 
find alternatives to cisplatin have taken on new urgency. Current innovations 
include the collaborative design of clinical trials that accrue GCTs across all 
ages and both sexes, including adolescents (previously on pediatric trials), and 
OvGCT (previously on gynecologic-only trials). Joint trials accrue larger sample 
sizes at a faster rate and therefore evaluate new approaches more rapidly. These 
joint trials also allow for biospecimen collection to further probe GCT etiology 
and underlying mechanisms of tumor growth, thus providing new therapeutic 
options. This AYA approach has been fostered by The Malignant Germ Cell 
International Consortium, which includes over 115 GCT disease experts from 
pediatric, gynecologic, and genitourinary oncologies in 16 countries. Trials in 
development incorporate, to our knowledge, for the first time, molecular risk 
stratification and precision oncology approaches on the basis of specific GCT 
biology. This collaborative AYA approach pioneering successfully in GCT could 
serve as a model for impactful research for other AYA cancer types.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.23.01099
PMCID: PMC11934052
PMID: 37820296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: Travis: None Fung: on 
ASCO website Lockley: None Feldman: on ASCO website Poynter: None Frazier: on 
ASCO website (consultant for Decibel Therapeutics)