---
reference_id: "PMID:25979340"
title: Lysyl Oxidase Activity Is Required for Ordered Collagen Fibrillogenesis by Tendon Cells.
authors:
- Herchenhan A
- Uhlenbrock F
- Eliasson P
- Weis M
- Eyre D
- Kadler KE
- Magnusson SP
- Kjaer M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.641670
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome/enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- "Fibrillar Collagens/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- "Protein-Lysine 6-Oxidase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Tendons/enzymology, metabolism"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lysyl Oxidase Activity Is Required for Ordered Collagen Fibrillogenesis by Tendon Cells.
**Authors:** Herchenhan A, Uhlenbrock F, Eliasson P, Weis M, Eyre D, Kadler KE, Magnusson SP, Kjaer M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M115.641670](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M115.641670)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jun 26;290(26):16440-50. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.641670. Epub 
2015 May 15.

Lysyl Oxidase Activity Is Required for Ordered Collagen Fibrillogenesis by 
Tendon Cells.

Herchenhan A(1), Uhlenbrock F(2), Eliasson P(3), Weis M(4), Eyre D(4), Kadler 
KE(5), Magnusson SP(3), Kjaer M(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Institute of Sports Medicine Copenhagen and Center for Healthy 
Ageing, University of Copenhagen, DK-2400 Copenhagen, Denmark, 
andreas.herchenhan@gmail.com.
(2)Section for Experimental Animal Models, Laboratory of Immunology, Faculty of 
Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, DK-1870 Frederiksberg, 
Denmark.
(3)From the Institute of Sports Medicine Copenhagen and Center for Healthy 
Ageing, University of Copenhagen, DK-2400 Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington 98195-6500, and.
(5)Wellcome Trust Center for Cell-Matrix Research, Faculty of Life Sciences, 
University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, United Kingdom.

Lysyl oxidases (LOXs) are a family of copper-dependent oxido-deaminases that can 
modify the side chain of lysyl residues in collagen and elastin, thereby leading 
to the spontaneous formation of non-reducible aldehyde-derived interpolypeptide 
chain cross-links. The consequences of LOX inhibition in producing lathyrism are 
well documented, but the consequences on collagen fibril formation are less 
clear. Here we used β-aminoproprionitrile (BAPN) to inhibit LOX in tendon-like 
constructs (prepared from human tenocytes), which are an experimental model of 
cell-mediated collagen fibril formation. The improvement in structure and 
strength seen with time in control constructs was absent in constructs treated 
with BAPN. As expected, BAPN inhibited the formation of aldimine-derived 
cross-links in collagen, and the constructs were mechanically weak. However, an 
unexpected finding was that BAPN treatment led to structurally abnormal collagen 
fibrils with irregular profiles and widely dispersed diameters. Of special 
interest, the abnormal fibril profiles resembled those seen in some 
Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome phenotypes. Importantly, the total collagen content 
developed normally, and there was no difference in COL1A1 gene expression. 
Collagen type V, decorin, fibromodulin, and tenascin-X proteins were unaffected 
by the cross-link inhibition, suggesting that LOX regulates fibrillogenesis 
independently of these molecules. Collectively, the data show the importance of 
LOX for the mechanical development of early collagenous tissues and that LOX is 
essential for correct collagen fibril shape formation.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.641670
PMCID: PMC4481240
PMID: 25979340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]