---
reference_id: "PMID:38494297"
title: Epidemiology of paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes.
authors:
- Kadish R
- Clardy SL
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-823912-4.00011-6
keywords:
- Humans
- "Paraneoplastic Syndromes, Nervous System/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Neoplasms/epidemiology, complications"
- "Nervous System Diseases/etiology, complications"
- Immunotherapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes.
**Authors:** Kadish R, Clardy SL
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-12-823912-4.00011-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-823912-4.00011-6)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2024;200:57-77. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-823912-4.00011-6.

Epidemiology of paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes.

Kadish R(1), Clardy SL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United 
States.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United 
States; George E. Wahlen Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Salt 
Lake City, UT, United States. Electronic address: stacey.clardy@hsc.utah.edu.

Paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes (PNS), initially depicted as seemingly 
cryptic remote manifestations of malignancy, were first described clinically in 
the early 20th century, with pathophysiologic correlates becoming better 
elucidated in the latter half of the century. There remain many questions not 
only about the pathophysiology but also regarding the epidemiology of these 
conditions. The continuous discovery of novel autoantigens and related 
neurologic disease has broadened the association in classical PNS to include 
conditions such as paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration. It has also brought 
into focus several other neurologic syndromes with a putative neoplastic 
association. These conditions are overall rare, making it difficult to capture 
large numbers of patients to study, and raising the question of whether 
incidence is increasing over time or improved identification is driving the 
increased numbers of cases. With the rise and increasing use of immunotherapy 
for cancer treatment, the incidence of these conditions is additionally expected 
to rise and may present with various clinical symptoms. As we enter an era of 
clinical trial intervention in these conditions, much work is needed to capture 
more granular data on population groups defined by socioeconomic characteristics 
such as age, ethnicity, economic resources, and gender to optimize care and 
clinical trial planning.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text 
and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-823912-4.00011-6
PMID: 38494297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]