---
reference_id: "PMID:38252288"
title: "Hypotension during intensive care stay and mortality and morbidity: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Schuurmans J
- van Rossem BTB
- Rellum SR
- Tol JTM
- Kurucz VC
- van Mourik N
- van der Ven WH
- Veelo DP
- Schenk J
- Vlaar APJ
journal: Intensive Care Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00134-023-07304-4
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hypotension/mortality, epidemiology"
- "Intensive Care Units/statistics & numerical data"
- Hospital Mortality
- "Acute Kidney Injury/mortality, epidemiology"
- "Critical Care/statistics & numerical data, methods"
- "Length of Stay/statistics & numerical data"
- Morbidity/trends
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypotension during intensive care stay and mortality and morbidity: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Schuurmans J, van Rossem BTB, Rellum SR, Tol JTM, Kurucz VC, van Mourik N, van der Ven WH, Veelo DP, Schenk J, Vlaar APJ
**Journal:** Intensive Care Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00134-023-07304-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00134-023-07304-4)

## Content

1. Intensive Care Med. 2024 Apr;50(4):516-525. doi: 10.1007/s00134-023-07304-4. 
Epub 2024 Jan 22.

Hypotension during intensive care stay and mortality and morbidity: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis.

Schuurmans J(1)(2), van Rossem BTB(1), Rellum SR(1)(2), Tol JTM(1), Kurucz 
VC(1), van Mourik N(2), van der Ven WH(1), Veelo DP(3), Schenk J(#)(1)(2)(4), 
Vlaar APJ(#)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Amsterdam UMC location University of Amsterdam, Anesthesiology, Meibergdreef 
9, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Amsterdam UMC location University of Amsterdam, Intensive Care, Meibergdreef 
9, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Amsterdam UMC location University of Amsterdam, Anesthesiology, Meibergdreef 
9, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. d.p.veelo@amsterdamumc.nl.
(4)Amsterdam UMC location University of Amsterdam, Epidemiology and Data 
Science, Amsterdam Public Health, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Amsterdam UMC location University of Amsterdam, Laboratory of Experimental 
Intensive Care and Anesthesiology, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: The aim of this study is to provide a summary of the existing 
literature on the association between hypotension during intensive care unit 
(ICU) stay and mortality and morbidity, and to assess whether there is an 
exposure-severity relationship between hypotension exposure and patient 
outcomes.
METHODS: CENTRAL, Embase, and PubMed were searched up to October 2022 for 
articles that reported an association between hypotension during ICU stay and at 
least one of the 11 predefined outcomes. Two independent reviewers extracted the 
data and assessed the risk of bias. Results were gathered in a summary table and 
studies designed to investigate the hypotension-outcome relationship were 
included in the meta-analyses.
RESULTS: A total of 122 studies (176,329 patients) were included, with the 
number of studies varying per outcome between 0 and 82. The majority of articles 
reported associations in favor of 'no hypotension' for the outcomes mortality 
and acute kidney injury (AKI), and the strength of the association was related 
to the severity of hypotension in the majority of studies. Using meta-analysis, 
a significant association was found between hypotension and mortality (odds 
ratio: 1.45; 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.12-1.88; based on 13 studies and 
34,829 patients), but not for AKI.
CONCLUSION: Exposure to hypotension during ICU stay was associated with 
increased mortality and AKI in the majority of included studies, and 
associations for both outcomes increased with increasing hypotension severity. 
The meta-analysis reinforced the descriptive findings regarding mortality but 
did not yield similar support for AKI.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00134-023-07304-4
PMCID: PMC11018652
PMID: 38252288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JS, DPV and APJV report receipt of consulting 
fees from Edwards Lifesciences paid to the institution. DPV additionally reports 
receipt of research grants from Philips and Edwards Lifesciences and APJV 
reports receipt of unrestricted research grants from Edwards Lifesciences.