---
reference_id: "PMID:26364555"
title: "Bohring-Opitz syndrome (BOS) with a new ASXL1 pathogenic variant: Review of the most prevalent molecular and phenotypic features of the syndrome."
authors:
- Dangiolo SB
- Wilson A
- Jobanputra V
- Anyane-Yeboa K
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37342
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Craniosynostoses/genetics, pathology"
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation/genetics
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- Prognosis
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bohring-Opitz syndrome (BOS) with a new ASXL1 pathogenic variant: Review of the most prevalent molecular and phenotypic features of the syndrome.
**Authors:** Dangiolo SB, Wilson A, Jobanputra V, Anyane-Yeboa K
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.37342](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.37342)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Dec;167A(12):3161-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37342. Epub
2015  Sep 14.

Bohring-Opitz syndrome (BOS) with a new ASXL1 pathogenic variant: Review of the 
most prevalent molecular and phenotypic features of the syndrome.

Dangiolo SB(1), Wilson A(1), Jobanputra V(2), Anyane-Yeboa K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York.
(2)Department of Pathology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York.

Bohring-Opitz syndrome (BOS) was first described by Bohring et al. [1999]. The 
authors reported four cases which had several features in common, including a 
prominent metopic suture, hypertelorism, exophthalmos, cleft lip and palate, 
limb anomalies, as well as difficulty feeding with severe developmental delays. 
In almost 50% of cases that meet the clinical criteria for BOS, de novo 
frameshift and nonsense mutations in the ASXL1 gene have been detected, 
suggesting that loss of function of this gene is a major cause. We report on the 
clinical characterization of one young female patient who was evaluated because 
of severe developmental delays, failure to thrive, and multiple minor anomalies 
and was clinically diagnosed with BOS. Whole exome sequencing analysis detected 
one novel disruptive frameshift mutation in the ASXL1 gene and we were also able 
to confirm the presence of two CFTR mutations associated with her chronic 
pancreatitis with acute severe breakthrough attacks requiring multiple ICU 
admissions. This latter complication of pancreatitis further contributed to the 
complexity of the clinical presentation and represents an independent genetic 
finding. Our case report emphasizes the importance of highly specific phenotypic 
characterization of patients with complex phenotypes before proceeding with 
molecular studies. That approach will lead to more accurate molecular data 
interpretation and better clinical genetic diagnosis, particularly for those 
patients with rare, difficult-to-diagnose disorders.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37342
PMID: 26364555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]