---
reference_id: "PMID:14717922"
title: The classification of glomerulonephritis in systemic lupus erythematosus revisited.
authors:
- Weening JJ
- D'Agati VD
- Schwartz MM
- Seshan SV
- Alpers CE
- Appel GB
- Balow JE
- Bruijn JA
- Cook T
- Ferrario F
- Fogo AB
- Ginzler EM
- Hebert L
- Hill G
- Hill P
- Jennette JC
- Kong NC
- Lesavre P
- Lockshin M
- Looi LM
- Makino H
- Moura LA
- Nagata M
- International Society of Nephrology Working Group on the Classification of Lupus Nephritis
- Renal Pathology Society Working Group on the Classification of Lupus Nephritis
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1111/j.1523-1755.2004.00443.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The classification of glomerulonephritis in systemic lupus erythematosus revisited.
**Authors:** Weening JJ, D'Agati VD, Schwartz MM, Seshan SV, Alpers CE, Appel GB, Balow JE, Bruijn JA, Cook T, Ferrario F, Fogo AB, Ginzler EM, Hebert L, Hill G, Hill P, Jennette JC, Kong NC, Lesavre P, Lockshin M, Looi LM, Makino H, Moura LA, Nagata M, International Society of Nephrology Working Group on the Classification of Lupus Nephritis, Renal Pathology Society Working Group on the Classification of Lupus Nephritis
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1523-1755.2004.00443.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1523-1755.2004.00443.x)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2004 Feb;65(2):521-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1523-1755.2004.00443.x.

The classification of glomerulonephritis in systemic lupus erythematosus 
revisited.

Weening JJ(1), D'Agati VD, Schwartz MM, Seshan SV, Alpers CE, Appel GB, Balow 
JE, Bruijn JA, Cook T, Ferrario F, Fogo AB, Ginzler EM, Hebert L, Hill G, Hill 
P, Jennette JC, Kong NC, Lesavre P, Lockshin M, Looi LM, Makino H, Moura LA, 
Nagata M; International Society of Nephrology Working Group on the 
Classification of Lupus Nephritis; Renal Pathology Society Working Group on the 
Classification of Lupus Nephritis.

Author information:
(1)Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
j.j.weening@amc.uva.nl

Erratum in
    Kidney Int. 2004 Mar;65(3):1132.

The currently used classification reflects our understanding of the pathogenesis 
of the various forms of lupus nephritis, but clinicopathologic studies have 
revealed the need for improved categorization and terminology. Based on the 1982 
classification published under the auspices of the World Health Organization 
(WHO) and subsequent clinicopathologic data, we propose that class I and II be 
used for purely mesangial involvement (I, mesangial immune deposits without 
mesangial hypercellularity; II, mesangial immune deposits with mesangial 
hypercellularity); class III for focal glomerulonephritis (involving <50% of 
total number of glomeruli) with subdivisions for active and sclerotic lesions; 
class IV for diffuse glomerulonephritis (involving > or =50% of total number of 
glomeruli) either with segmental (class IV-S) or global (class IV-G) 
involvement, and also with subdivisions for active and sclerotic lesions; class 
V for membranous lupus nephritis; and class VI for advanced sclerosing lesions. 
Combinations of membranous and proliferative glomerulonephritis (i.e., class III 
and V or class IV and V) should be reported individually in the diagnostic line. 
The diagnosis should also include entries for any concomitant vascular or 
tubulointerstitial lesions. One of the main advantages of the current revised 
classification is that it provides a clear and unequivocal description of the 
various lesions and classes of lupus nephritis, allowing a better 
standardization and lending a basis for further clinicopathologic studies. We 
hope that this revision, which evolved under the auspices of the International 
Society of Nephrology and the Renal Pathology Society, will contribute to 
further advancement of the WHO classification.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1523-1755.2004.00443.x
PMID: 14717922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]