---
reference_id: "PMID:37108526"
title: Evidence of Spaceflight-Induced Adverse Effects on Photoreceptors and Retinal Function in the Mouse Eye.
authors:
- Mao X
- Stanbouly S
- Holley J
- Pecaut M
- Crapo J
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24087362
keywords:
- Male
- Mice
- Animals
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Retina/physiology
- Space Flight
- Intraocular Pressure
- Photoreceptor Cells
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence of Spaceflight-Induced Adverse Effects on Photoreceptors and Retinal Function in the Mouse Eye.
**Authors:** Mao X, Stanbouly S, Holley J, Pecaut M, Crapo J
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24087362](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24087362)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Apr 17;24(8):7362. doi: 10.3390/ijms24087362.

Evidence of Spaceflight-Induced Adverse Effects on Photoreceptors and Retinal 
Function in the Mouse Eye.

Mao X(1), Stanbouly S(1), Holley J(1), Pecaut M(1), Crapo J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, Division of Biomedical Engineering Sciences 
(BMES), Loma Linda University Health, Loma Linda, CA 92350, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care & Sleep 
Medicine, National Jewish Health, University of Colorado Denver, Denver, CO 
80204, USA.

The goal of the present study was to characterize acute oxidative damage in 
ocular structure and retinal function after exposure to spaceflight, and to 
evaluate the efficacy of an antioxidant in reducing spaceflight-induced changes 
in the retina. Ten-week-old adult C57BL/6 male mice were flown aboard the ISS on 
Space-X 24 over 35 days, and returned to Earth alive. The mice received a weekly 
injection of a superoxide dismutase mimic, MnTnBuOE-2-PyP 5+ (BuOE), before 
launch and during their stay onboard the ISS. Ground control mice were 
maintained on Earth under identical environmental conditions. Before the launch, 
intraocular pressure (IOP) was measured using a handheld tonometer and retinal 
function was evaluated using electroretinogram (ERG). ERG signals were recorded 
when the mouse eye was under dark-adapted conditions in response to ultraviolet 
monochromatic light flashes. Within 20 h after splashdown, IOP and ERG 
assessments were repeated before euthanasia. There were significant increases in 
body weight for habitat control groups post-flight compared to pre-flight 
measurements. However, the body weights were similar among flight groups before 
launch and after splashdown. The IOP measurements were similar between pre- and 
post-flight groups with no significant differences between BuOE-treated and 
saline controls. Immunofluorescence evaluation showed increases in retinal 
oxidative stress and apoptotic cell death after spaceflight. BuOE treatment 
significantly decreased the level of the oxidative stress biomarker. ERG data 
showed that the average amplitudes of the a- and b-wave were significantly 
decreased (39% and 32% by spaceflight, respectively) compared to that of habitat 
ground controls. These data indicate that spaceflight conditions induce 
oxidative stress in the retina, which may lead to photoreceptor cell damage and 
retinal function impairment.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24087362
PMCID: PMC10138634
PMID: 37108526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.