---
reference_id: "PMID:41126693"
title: Immunological phenotype and skin modeling of Netherton syndrome.
authors:
- Süßmuth K
- Traupe H
- Wittkowski H
- Fischer J
- Oji V
- Bodes J
journal: J Dtsch Dermatol Ges
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/ddg.15928
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunological phenotype and skin modeling of Netherton syndrome.
**Authors:** Süßmuth K, Traupe H, Wittkowski H, Fischer J, Oji V, Bodes J
**Journal:** J Dtsch Dermatol Ges (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ddg.15928](https://doi.org/10.1111/ddg.15928)

## Content

1. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2025 Dec;23(12):1528-1532. doi: 10.1111/ddg.15928. Epub 
2025 Oct 23.

Immunological phenotype and skin modeling of Netherton syndrome.

Süßmuth K(1), Traupe H(2), Wittkowski H(3), Fischer J(4), Oji V(2)(5), Bodes 
J(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Helios Klinikum Berlin-Buch, 
Campus of Medical School Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology and Immunology, University Children's 
Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.
(4)Institute of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Medical Center - University 
of Freiburg, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(5)Hautarztpraxis am Buddenturm, Münster, Germany.
(6)Institute of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmaceutics, University of 
Münster, Münster, Germany.

Netherton syndrome (NTS) is a syndromic ichthyosis characterized by scaling, 
erythroderma, and proneness towards allergies and infections. It is caused by 
mutations in the SPINK5 gene, encoding the lympho-epithelial Kazal-type 5 
related inhibitor (LEKTI), which regulates the activity of kallikreins in the 
skin. Treatment options are limited, insufficient, time-consuming and a 
financial burden for the patients. In the last years, genotype-phenotype 
correlations in NTS and immunological phenotypes have been delineated. 
Psoriasiform patterns have been described. Moreover, the literature reports on 
biological therapies as novel therapeutic options in NTS. Previously, 
recombinant human LEKTI domain 8+9 (rhLEKTI 8+9) was identified as a potent 
kallikrein inhibitor, implying that these subunits are suitable for a topical 
protein substitution therapy. We aimed to characterize NTS in more detail to 
discuss further personalized therapeutic options by phenotyping a large cohort 
of NTS patients and performing serum analyses. Moreover, we worked on 
preliminary steps for a protein replacement therapy by investigating recombinant 
expressed rhLEKTI8+9 and establishing 3D epidermal equivalents for therapeutic 
evaluation.

© 2025 Deutsche Dermatologische Gesellschaft (DDG).

DOI: 10.1111/ddg.15928
PMID: 41126693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]