---
reference_id: "PMID:35197626"
title: TDP-43 represses cryptic exon inclusion in the FTD-ALS gene UNC13A.
authors:
- Ma XR
- Prudencio M
- Koike Y
- Vatsavayai SC
- Kim G
- Harbinski F
- Briner A
- Rodriguez CM
- Guo C
- Akiyama T
- Schmidt HB
- Cummings BB
- Wyatt DW
- Kurylo K
- Miller G
- Mekhoubad S
- Sallee N
- Mekonnen G
- Ganser L
- Rubien JD
- Jansen-West K
- Cook CN
- Pickles S
- Oskarsson B
- Graff-Radford NR
- Boeve BF
- Knopman DS
- Petersen RC
- Dickson DW
- Shorter J
- Myong S
- Green EM
- Seeley WW
- Petrucelli L
- Gitler AD
journal: Nature
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-04424-7
keywords:
- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/metabolism
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Exons/genetics
- Frontotemporal Dementia/metabolism
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- Motor Neurons/pathology
- Nerve Tissue Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TDP-43 represses cryptic exon inclusion in the FTD-ALS gene UNC13A.
**Authors:** Ma XR, Prudencio M, Koike Y, Vatsavayai SC, Kim G, Harbinski F, Briner A, Rodriguez CM, Guo C, Akiyama T, Schmidt HB, Cummings BB, Wyatt DW, Kurylo K, Miller G, Mekhoubad S, Sallee N, Mekonnen G, Ganser L, Rubien JD, Jansen-West K, Cook CN, Pickles S, Oskarsson B, Graff-Radford NR, Boeve BF, Knopman DS, Petersen RC, Dickson DW, Shorter J, Myong S, Green EM, Seeley WW, Petrucelli L, Gitler AD
**Journal:** Nature (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-022-04424-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04424-7)

## Content

1. Nature. 2022 Mar;603(7899):124-130. doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-04424-7. Epub 2022
 Feb 23.

TDP-43 represses cryptic exon inclusion in the FTD-ALS gene UNC13A.

Ma XR(#)(1), Prudencio M(#)(2)(3), Koike Y(#)(2)(3), Vatsavayai SC(4)(5), Kim
G(1)(6), Harbinski F(7), Briner A(1)(8), Rodriguez CM(1), Guo C(1), Akiyama
T(1), Schmidt HB(9), Cummings BB(7), Wyatt DW(7), Kurylo K(7), Miller G(7),
Mekhoubad S(7), Sallee N(7), Mekonnen G(10)(11), Ganser L(12), Rubien JD(13),
Jansen-West K(2), Cook CN(2)(3), Pickles S(2)(3), Oskarsson B(14), Graff-Radford
NR(14), Boeve BF(15), Knopman DS(15), Petersen RC(15), Dickson DW(2)(3), Shorter
J(13), Myong S(10)(11)(12), Green EM(7), Seeley WW(4)(5), Petrucelli L(16)(17),
Gitler AD(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA,
USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(3)Neuroscience Graduate Program, Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(6)Neurosciences Interdepartmental Program, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(7)Maze Therapeutics, South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(8)Clem Jones Centre for Ageing Dementia Research (CJCADR), Queensland Brain
Institute (QBI), The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(9)Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA, USA.
(10)Program in Cell, Molecular, Developmental Biology, and Biophysics, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(11)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(12)Department of Biophysics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(13)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(14)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(15)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(16)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
petrucelli.leonard@mayo.edu.
(17)Neuroscience Graduate Program, Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Jacksonville, FL, USA. petrucelli.leonard@mayo.edu.
(18)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA, USA. agitler@stanford.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Nature. 2022 Mar;603(7899):33-34. doi: 10.1038/d41586-022-00383-1.
    Med. 2022 Apr 8;3(4):226-227. doi: 10.1016/j.medj.2022.03.008.
    Trends Genet. 2022 Sep;38(9):889-891. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2022.06.004.

A hallmark pathological feature of the neurodegenerative diseases amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is the depletion of
RNA-binding protein TDP-43 from the nucleus of neurons in the brain and spinal
cord1. A major function of TDP-43 is as a repressor of cryptic exon inclusion
during RNA splicing2-4. Single nucleotide polymorphisms in UNC13A are among the
strongest hits associated with FTD and ALS in human genome-wide association
studies5,6, but how those variants increase risk for disease is unknown. Here we
show that TDP-43 represses a cryptic exon-splicing event in UNC13A. Loss of
TDP-43 from the nucleus in human brain, neuronal cell lines and motor neurons
derived from induced pluripotent stem cells resulted in the inclusion of a
cryptic exon in UNC13A mRNA and reduced UNC13A protein expression. The top
variants associated with FTD or ALS risk in humans are located in the intron
harbouring the cryptic exon, and we show that they increase UNC13A cryptic exon
splicing in the face of TDP-43 dysfunction. Together, our data provide a direct
functional link between one of the strongest genetic risk factors for FTD and
ALS (UNC13A genetic variants), and loss of TDP-43 function.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-022-04424-7
PMCID: PMC8891019
PMID: 35197626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.D.G. is a scientific founder of Maze
Therapeutics. X.R.M. served as a consultant for Maze Therapeutics. M.P. and L.P.
serve as consultants for Target ALS. F.H., B.B.C., D.W.W., K.K., G. Miller,
S. Mekhoubad, N.S. and E.G. are employees of Maze Therapeutics, which has filed
a patent (63/171,522) on methods to modulate splicing of UNC13A.
