---
reference_id: "PMID:21868677"
title: MED23 mutation links intellectual disability to dysregulation of immediate early gene expression.
authors:
- Hashimoto S
- Boissel S
- Zarhrate M
- Rio M
- Munnich A
- Egly JM
- Colleaux L
journal: Science
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1126/science.1206638
keywords:
- Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Leucine Zipper Transcription Factors/metabolism
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chromatin Immunoprecipitation
- Early Growth Response Protein 1/genetics
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Genes, Immediate-Early"
- "Genes, fos"
- "Genes, jun"
- Histones/metabolism
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- Mediator Complex/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Transcription Factor 4
- Transcription Factors/metabolism
- Transcriptional Activation
- ets-Domain Protein Elk-1/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MED23 mutation links intellectual disability to dysregulation of immediate early gene expression.
**Authors:** Hashimoto S, Boissel S, Zarhrate M, Rio M, Munnich A, Egly JM, Colleaux L
**Journal:** Science (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1206638](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1206638)

## Content

1. Science. 2011 Aug 26;333(6046):1161-3. doi: 10.1126/science.1206638.

MED23 mutation links intellectual disability to dysregulation of immediate early 
gene expression.

Hashimoto S(1), Boissel S, Zarhrate M, Rio M, Munnich A, Egly JM, Colleaux L.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 
CNRS/INSERM/Université de Strasbourg, BP 163, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, C. U. 
Strasbourg, France.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2012 May;81(5):430. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01821.x.

MED23 is a subunit of the Mediator complex, a key regulator of protein-coding 
gene expression. Here, we report a missense mutation (p. R617Q) in MED23 that 
cosegregates with nonsyndromic autosomal recessive intellectual disability. This 
mutation specifically impaired the response of JUN and FOS immediate early genes 
(IEGs) to serum mitogens by altering the interaction between enhancer-bound 
transcription factors (TCF4 and ELK1, respectively) and Mediator. 
Transcriptional dysregulation of these genes was also observed in cells derived 
from patients presenting with other neurological disorders linked to mutations 
in other Mediator subunits or proteins interacting with MED. These findings 
highlight the crucial role of Mediator in brain development and functioning and 
suggest that altered IEG expression might be a common molecular hallmark of 
cognitive deficit.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1206638
PMID: 21868677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]