---
reference_id: "PMID:21123741"
title: Resistance to somatostatin analogs in acromegaly.
authors:
- Colao A
- Auriemma RS
- Lombardi G
- Pivonello R
journal: Endocr Rev
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1210/er.2010-0002
keywords:
- "Acromegaly/drug therapy, etiology"
- "Adenoma/complications, surgery"
- Drug Resistance
- Humans
- Octreotide/therapeutic use
- "Peptides, Cyclic/therapeutic use"
- "Pituitary Neoplasms/complications, surgery"
- "Somatostatin/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Resistance to somatostatin analogs in acromegaly.
**Authors:** Colao A, Auriemma RS, Lombardi G, Pivonello R
**Journal:** Endocr Rev (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1210/er.2010-0002](https://doi.org/10.1210/er.2010-0002)

## Content

1. Endocr Rev. 2011 Apr;32(2):247-71. doi: 10.1210/er.2010-0002. Epub 2010 Dec 1.

Resistance to somatostatin analogs in acromegaly.

Colao A(1), Auriemma RS, Lombardi G, Pivonello R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Endocrinology and Oncology, University
“Federico II,” Naples, Italy. colao@unina.it

Somatostatin analogs (SA) are widely used in acromegaly, either as first-line or
adjuvant treatment after surgery. First-line treatment with these drugs is
generally used in the patients with macroadenomas or in those with clinical
conditions so severe as to prevent unsafe reactions during anesthesia.
Generally, the response to SA takes into account both control of GH and IGF-I
excess, with consequent improvement of clinical symptoms directly related to GH
and IGF-I excess, and tumor shrinkage. This latter effect is more prominent in
the patients treated first-line and bearing large macroadenomas, but it is also
observed in patients with microadenomas, even with little clinical implication.
Predictors of response are patients' gender, age, initial GH and IGF-I levels,
and tumor mass, as well as adequate expression of somatostatin receptor types 2
and 5, those with the highest affinity for octreotide and lanreotide. Only
sporadic cases of somatostatin receptor gene mutation or impaired signaling
pathways have been described in GH-secreting tumors so far. The response to SA
also depends on treatment duration and dosage of the drug used, so that a
definition of resistance based on short-term treatments using low doses of
long-acting SA is limited. Current data suggest that response to these drugs is
better analyzed taking together biochemical and tumoral effects because only the
absence of both responses might be considered as a poor response or resistance.
This latter evidence seems to occur in 25% of treated patients after 12 months
of currently available long-acting SA.

DOI: 10.1210/er.2010-0002
PMID: 21123741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
