---
reference_id: "PMID:31401977"
title: "Ainhum, a rare mutilating dermatological disease in a female Cameroonian: a case report."
authors:
- Tchouakam DN
- Tochie JN
- Guifo ML
- Choukem SP
journal: BMC Dermatol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12895-019-0092-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ainhum, a rare mutilating dermatological disease in a female Cameroonian: a case report.
**Authors:** Tchouakam DN, Tochie JN, Guifo ML, Choukem SP
**Journal:** BMC Dermatol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12895-019-0092-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12895-019-0092-6)

## Content

1. BMC Dermatol. 2019 Aug 12;19(1):12. doi: 10.1186/s12895-019-0092-6.

Ainhum, a rare mutilating dermatological disease in a female Cameroonian: a case 
report.

Tchouakam DN(1)(2), Tochie JN(3)(4), Guifo ML(5)(6), Choukem SP(1)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Health and Human Development (2HD) Research Network, Douala, Cameroon.
(2)Bogo District Hospital, Bogo, Cameroon.
(3)Health and Human Development (2HD) Research Network, Douala, Cameroon. 
joeltochie@gmail.com.
(4)Departement of Surgery and Specialties, Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical 
Sciences, University of Yaoundé 1, Yaoundé, Cameroon. joeltochie@gmail.com.
(5)Departement of Surgery and Specialties, Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical 
Sciences, University of Yaoundé 1, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(6)Department of Surgery, University Hospital Center, Yaounde, Cameroon.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Douala General Hospital, Douala, Cameroon.
(8)Faculty of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Dschang, 
Dschang, Cameroon.

BACKGROUND: Ainhum is an idiopathic dermatological disease characterized by a 
progressive constricting ring usually on the fifth toe, which may lead to 
spontaneous auto-amputation of the affected toe. Timely diagnosis and treatment 
are the key elements to avert amputations with resultant mutilating deformities, 
permanent handicaps and psychological sequelae. Though common in African 
descents, this pathology has not been described in the Cameroonian literature. 
Herein, we report the case of an adult Cameroonian woman presenting with ainhum.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 54-year old Cameroonian was admitted to our primary 
healthcare centre with a 6-month history of a painful constriction band 
developing at the base of her right fifth toe. Her past history was uneventful. 
Based on the absence of trauma and spontaneous onset of the condition, the 
diagnosis of ainhum was most suggestive. She was managed surgically by excision 
of the band, disarticulated at right fifth metatarsophalangeal joint and skin 
closure. Her post-operative course after 1 year was uneventful.
CONCLUSION: Here we presented a case of ainhum, a rare dermatological disease 
with few reports. In view of the serious complications of ainhum such as 
mutilating deformities with permanent physical disabilities and psychological 
trauma, we draw clinicians' attention, especially wound care specialists to this 
rare but potentially handicapping disease, for timely diagnosis and management.

DOI: 10.1186/s12895-019-0092-6
PMCID: PMC6689862
PMID: 31401977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.