---
reference_id: "PMID:28526246"
title: Impaired mitophagy facilitates mitochondrial damage in Danon disease.
authors:
- Hashem SI
- Murphy AN
- Divakaruni AS
- Klos ML
- Nelson BC
- Gault EC
- Rowland TJ
- Perry CN
- Gu Y
- Dalton ND
- Bradford WH
- Devaney EJ
- Peterson KL
- Jones KL
- Taylor MRG
- Chen J
- Chi NC
- Adler ED
journal: J Mol Cell Cardiol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2017.05.007
keywords:
- Animals
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type IIb/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Hemodynamics
- Humans
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- "Lysosomal-Associated Membrane Protein 2/genetics, metabolism"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mitochondria, Heart/genetics, metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Mitophagy/genetics
- "Models, Biological"
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impaired mitophagy facilitates mitochondrial damage in Danon disease.
**Authors:** Hashem SI, Murphy AN, Divakaruni AS, Klos ML, Nelson BC, Gault EC, Rowland TJ, Perry CN, Gu Y, Dalton ND, Bradford WH, Devaney EJ, Peterson KL, Jones KL, Taylor MRG, Chen J, Chi NC, Adler ED
**Journal:** J Mol Cell Cardiol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yjmcc.2017.05.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yjmcc.2017.05.007)

## Content

1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2017 Jul;108:86-94. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2017.05.007. Epub
 2017 May 16.

Impaired mitophagy facilitates mitochondrial damage in Danon disease.

Hashem SI(1), Murphy AN(2), Divakaruni AS(2), Klos ML(3), Nelson BC(1), Gault 
EC(1), Rowland TJ(4), Perry CN(1), Gu Y(1), Dalton ND(1), Bradford WH(1), 
Devaney EJ(3), Peterson KL(1), Jones KL(5), Taylor MRG(4), Chen J(1), Chi NC(6), 
Adler ED(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of California San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(4)Cardiovascular Institute, Adult Medical Genetics Program, University of 
Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Hematology, Oncology, and Bone Marrow 
Transplant, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of California San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA; Institute for Genomic Medicine, University of 
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of California San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. Electronic address: eradler@ucsd.edu.

RATIONALE: Lysosomal associated membrane protein type-2 (LAMP-2) is a highly 
conserved, ubiquitous protein that is critical for autophagic flux. Loss of 
function mutations in the LAMP-2 gene cause Danon disease, a rare X-linked 
disorder characterized by developmental delay, skeletal muscle weakness, and 
severe cardiomyopathy. We previously found that human induced pluripotent stem 
cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) from Danon patients exhibited 
significant mitochondrial oxidative stress and apoptosis. Understanding how loss 
of LAMP-2 expression leads to cardiomyocyte dysfunction and heart failure has 
important implications for the treatment of Danon disease as well as a variety 
of other cardiac disorders associated with impaired autophagy.
OBJECTIVE: Elucidate the pathophysiology of cardiac dysfunction in Danon 
disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We created hiPSCs from two patients with Danon disease and 
differentiated those cells into hiPSC-CMs using well-established protocols. 
Danon hiPSC-CMs demonstrated an accumulation of damaged mitochondria, disrupted 
mitophagic flux, depressed mitochondrial respiratory capacity, and abnormal gene 
expression of key mitochondrial pathways. Restoring the expression of LAMP-2B, 
the most abundant LAMP-2 isoform in the heart, rescued mitophagic flux as well 
as mitochondrial health and bioenergetics. To confirm our findings in vivo, we 
evaluated Lamp-2 knockout (KO) mice. Impaired autophagic flux was noted in the 
Lamp-2 KO mice compared to WT reporter mice, as well as an increased number of 
abnormal mitochondria, evidence of incomplete mitophagy, and impaired 
mitochondrial respiration. Physiologically, Lamp-2 KO mice demonstrated early 
features of contractile dysfunction without overt heart failure, indicating that 
the metabolic abnormalities associated with Danon disease precede the 
development of end-stage disease and are not merely part of the secondary 
changes associated with heart failure.
CONCLUSIONS: Incomplete mitophagic flux and mitochondrial dysfunction are noted 
in both in vitro and in vivo models of Danon disease, and proceed overt cardiac 
contractile dysfunction. This suggests that impaired mitochondrial clearance may 
be central to the pathogenesis of disease and a potential target for therapeutic 
intervention.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2017.05.007
PMID: 28526246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]