---
reference_id: "PMID:24015598"
title: BNP molecular forms and processing by the cardiac serine protease corin.
authors:
- Ichiki T
- Huntley BK
- Burnett JC Jr
journal: Adv Clin Chem
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/b978-0-12-407680-8.00001-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BNP molecular forms and processing by the cardiac serine protease corin.
**Authors:** Ichiki T, Huntley BK, Burnett JC Jr
**Journal:** Adv Clin Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/b978-0-12-407680-8.00001-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-407680-8.00001-4)

## Content

1. Adv Clin Chem. 2013;61:1-31. doi: 10.1016/b978-0-12-407680-8.00001-4.

BNP molecular forms and processing by the cardiac serine protease corin.

Ichiki T(1), Huntley BK, Burnett JC Jr.

Author information:
(1)Cardiorenal Research Laboratory, Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA. ichiki.tomoko@mayo.edu

The cardiac hormone, B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP), is one of human 
natriuretic peptides which possesses cardiorenal protective actions and is used 
as a therapeutic and a biomarker for heart failure (HF). Its prohormone, 
proBNP1_108, is processed by the proNPs convertases, corin or furin, to inactive 
NT-proBNP1_76 and active BNP1-32. Paradoxically, circulating NT-proBNP and BNP 
are elevated in HF leading to the use of BNP as a sensitive and predictive 
marker of HF. This paradox may be explained by the "nonspecific" nature of 
conventional assays and/or a relative deficiency state of "active BNP" as 
characterized by an increase in inactive proBNP_108 and a decrease in active 
BNP1-32. Therefore, understanding the regulation of proBNP1_108 processing and 
the role of the convertase corin may be important in understanding the 
physiology of HF. Corin is expressed in heart and kidney and may play an 
important role in regulating blood pressure and remodeling of the heart. The 
processing of proBNP1_108 by corin may be controlled by O-linked glycosylation 
of proBNP1-108. A potential impairment of proBNP1lo8 processing in HF may be 
linked to dysregulation of the convertase corin, which may offer therapeutic 
opportunities to control proBNPlo0s processing and its activation in HF.

DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-12-407680-8.00001-4
PMCID: PMC4522930
PMID: 24015598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]