---
reference_id: "PMID:36081403"
title: "Histological patterns, subtypes and aspects of prostate cancer: different aspects, different outcomes."
authors:
- Wasinger G
- Oszwald A
- Shariat SF
- Compérat E
journal: Curr Opin Urol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/MOU.0000000000001038
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Histological patterns, subtypes and aspects of prostate cancer: different aspects, different outcomes.
**Authors:** Wasinger G, Oszwald A, Shariat SF, Compérat E
**Journal:** Curr Opin Urol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOU.0000000000001038](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOU.0000000000001038)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Urol. 2022 Nov 1;32(6):643-648. doi: 10.1097/MOU.0000000000001038. 
Epub 2022 Sep 8.

Histological patterns, subtypes and aspects of prostate cancer: different 
aspects, different outcomes.

Wasinger G(1), Oszwald A(1), Shariat SF(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7), Compérat E(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, General Hospital of Vienna.
(2)Department of Urology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Medical University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Department of Urology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York.
(4)Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(5)Hourani Center for Applied Scientific Research, Al-Ahliyya Amman University, 
Amman, Jordan.
(6)Department of Urology, Second Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
(7)Karl Landsteiner Society, Vienna, Austria.
(8)Department of Pathology, Sorbonne University, Assistance Publique-Hôpital de 
Paris, Hopital Tenon, Paris, France.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The most common prostatic cancers (PCa) are acinary 
adenocarcinomas. Histological subtypes have been variably defined. The purpose 
of this review is to discuss unusual histological patterns and subtypes of 
acinar adenocarcinoma, as well as other types of PCa and their prognostic and 
therapeutic relevance.
RECENT FINDINGS: The new term 'subtype' for morphologically defined tumor 
entities replaced the term 'variant' in the new 2022 classification of the WHO 
to allow for clear terminological distinction from genetic variants. The 2022 
WHO classification mentions prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN)-like 
carcinoma, signet-cell-like adenocarcinoma, sarcomatoid carcinoma and 
pleomorphic-giant-cell adenocarcinoma of the prostate as true subtypes of 
acinary PCa. Other forms of acinary PCa are termed unusual histological patterns 
and include atrophic, foamy-cell, microcystic, pseudohyperplastic and mucinous 
patterns. Nonacinar forms of prostate cancer include other glandular PCa, the 
ductal adenocarcinoma and the treatment-associated neuroendocrine carcinoma, and 
nonglandular PCa, the adenosquamous carcinoma, the squamous cell carcinoma and 
the adenoid cystic (basal cell) carcinoma of the prostate.
SUMMARY: True subtypes of acinary PCa and other forms of glandular and 
nonglandular PCa show relevant differences in prognosis and treatment approach 
compared with classic acinary PCa. The relevance of unusual histological 
patterns mainly lies in their deceptive benign appearance and the need for 
pathologists to know about these entities for accurate and timely diagnosis.

Copyright © 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MOU.0000000000001038
PMID: 36081403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]