---
reference_id: "PMID:40081835"
title: "The loss of the urea cycle and ornithine metabolism in different insect orders: An omics approach."
authors:
- Martins JCS
- Assunção Romão HA
- Canettieri CK
- Cercilian AC
- Oliveira PRO
- Ferreira C
- Terra WR
- de Oliveira Dias R
journal: Insect Mol Biol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/imb.12989
keywords:
- Animals
- Ornithine/metabolism
- "Insecta/metabolism, genetics"
- Urea/metabolism
- "Arginine/metabolism, biosynthesis"
- "Nitric Oxide Synthase/genetics, metabolism"
- Ornithine Carbamoyltransferase/genetics
- "Arginase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Genome, Insect"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The loss of the urea cycle and ornithine metabolism in different insect orders: An omics approach.
**Authors:** Martins JCS, Assunção Romão HA, Canettieri CK, Cercilian AC, Oliveira PRO, Ferreira C, Terra WR, de Oliveira Dias R
**Journal:** Insect Mol Biol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/imb.12989](https://doi.org/10.1111/imb.12989)

## Content

1. Insect Mol Biol. 2025 Oct;34(5):632-644. doi: 10.1111/imb.12989. Epub 2025 Mar
 13.

The loss of the urea cycle and ornithine metabolism in different insect orders:
An omics approach.

Martins JCS(1), Assunção Romão HA(1), Canettieri CK(2), Cercilian AC(1),
Oliveira PRO(1), Ferreira C(3), Terra WR(3), de Oliveira Dias R(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Genética & Biodiversidade, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Federal de Goiás, Goiânia, Goiás, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Gene Expression and Evolution in Arthropods, Institute of
Biosciences, University of Sao Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Laboratório de Bioquímica de Insetos, Instituto de Química, Universidade de
São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Previous studies suggest that some insects require dietary arginine because they
cannot synthesize this amino acid through the urea cycle. To determine whether
this finding applies to all insects and what its metabolic implications are, we
analysed the conservation of 20 genes involved in arginine biosynthesis and
metabolism in the genomes of 150 species from 11 taxonomic orders. Our results
showed that no insect can synthesize arginine via the urea cycle, as ornithine
carbamoyltransferase is absent from all genomes analysed. While we found losses
in other genes encoding urea cycle enzymes, nitric oxide synthase (NOS) was
conserved across orders. However, the citrulline produced by NOS cannot be
converted back to arginine in several insects due to the loss of
argininosuccinate synthase and argininosuccinate lyase genes. Despite the
inability to synthesize arginine, all insects (except some Hemiptera) can
degrade it to ornithine and urea, as the arginase (ARG) gene is conserved across
the orders analysed. For some Hemiptera that have lost ARG, we investigated how
these insects produce or metabolize ornithine. Our results show that the genes
for converting ornithine to glutamate, proline and putrescine are conserved
across orders. However, while all insects have enzymes to synthesize putrescine
and spermidine, some lack the ability to produce spermine due to the absence of
the spermine synthase gene. Taken together, our results show that the loss of
the urea cycle has led to significant changes in the pathways by which insects
metabolize and recover arginine, which is particularly important for the
diversification of hemipterans.

© 2025 The Author(s). Insect Molecular Biology published by John Wiley & Sons
Ltd on behalf of Royal Entomological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/imb.12989
PMCID: PMC12419136
PMID: 40081835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
