---
reference_id: "PMID:37227579"
title: Emerging Signaling Regulation of Sinoatrial Node Dysfunction.
authors:
- Zheng M
- Erhardt S
- Cao Y
- Wang J
journal: Curr Cardiol Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s11886-023-01885-8
keywords:
- Humans
- "Sinoatrial Node/metabolism, pathology"
- "Sick Sinus Syndrome/metabolism, pathology"
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac"
- Heart Rate/physiology
- Ion Channels
- Heart Failure
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emerging Signaling Regulation of Sinoatrial Node Dysfunction.
**Authors:** Zheng M, Erhardt S, Cao Y, Wang J
**Journal:** Curr Cardiol Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11886-023-01885-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11886-023-01885-8)

## Content

1. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2023 Jul;25(7):621-630. doi: 10.1007/s11886-023-01885-8.
Epub  2023 May 25.

Emerging Signaling Regulation of Sinoatrial Node Dysfunction.

Zheng M(1), Erhardt S(1)(2), Cao Y(1), Wang J(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, McGovern Medical School, The University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(2)MD Anderson Cancer Center UTHealth Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 
The University of Texas, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, McGovern Medical School, The University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. jun.wang@uth.tmc.edu.
(4)MD Anderson Cancer Center UTHealth Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 
The University of Texas, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. jun.wang@uth.tmc.edu.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The sinoatrial node (SAN), the natural pacemaker of the 
heart, is responsible for generating electrical impulses and initiating each 
heartbeat. Sinoatrial node dysfunction (SND) causes various arrhythmias such as 
sinus arrest, SAN block, and tachycardia/bradycardia syndrome. Unraveling the 
underlying mechanisms of SND is of paramount importance in the pursuit of 
developing effective therapeutic strategies for patients with SND. This review 
provides a concise summary of the most recent progress in the signaling 
regulation of SND.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent studies indicate that SND can be caused by abnormal 
intercellular and intracellular signaling, various forms of heart failure (HF), 
and diabetes. These discoveries provide novel insights into the 
underlying mechanisms SND, advancing our understanding of its pathogenesis. SND 
can cause severe cardiac arrhythmias associated with syncope and an increased 
risk of sudden death. In addition to ion channels, the SAN is susceptible to the 
influence of various signalings including Hippo, AMP-activated protein kinase 
(AMPK), mechanical force, and natriuretic peptide receptors. New cellular and 
molecular mechanisms related to SND are also deciphered in systemic diseases 
such as HF and diabetes. Progress in these studies contributes to the 
development of potential therapeutics for SND.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11886-023-01885-8
PMCID: PMC11418806
PMID: 37227579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.