---
reference_id: "PMID:34809918"
title: Left Heart Disease-Related Pulmonary Hypertension.
authors:
- Alamri AK
- Ma CL
- Ryan JJ
journal: Cardiol Clin
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccl.2021.08.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Left Heart Disease-Related Pulmonary Hypertension.
**Authors:** Alamri AK, Ma CL, Ryan JJ
**Journal:** Cardiol Clin (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccl.2021.08.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccl.2021.08.007)

## Content

1. Cardiol Clin. 2022 Feb;40(1):69-76. doi: 10.1016/j.ccl.2021.08.007.

Left Heart Disease-Related Pulmonary Hypertension.

Alamri AK(1), Ma CL(2), Ryan JJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Utah, University of Utah School of 
Medicine, 30 North 1900 East, Room 4C116, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Utah, University of Utah School of Medicine, 30 North 1900 East, Room 4A100, 
Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.
(3)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Utah, University of Utah School of Medicine, 30 North 1900 East, Room 4A100, 
Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. Electronic address: john.ryan@hsc.utah.edu.

Pulmonary hypertension (PH) due to left heart disease (LHD; group 2 PH) is a 
common complication of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction and heart 
failure with preserved ejection fraction and is often related to disease 
severity and duration of these diseases. PH due to LHD is associated with 
negative impact on outcomes in addition to worse symptoms and exercise capacity. 
Risk factors for group 2 PH are older age, hypertension, atrial fibrillation, 
and features of metabolic syndrome. The main mechanisms for group 2 PH are 
believed to be vascular remodeling secondary to sustained elevated intravascular 
pressure.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccl.2021.08.007
PMID: 34809918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors have nothing to disclose.