---
reference_id: "PMID:8220422"
title: A mutation in the human ryanodine receptor gene associated with central core disease.
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Chen HS
- Khanna VK
- De Leon S
- Phillips MS
- Schappert K
- Britt BA
- Browell AK
- MacLennan DH
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1038/ng0993-46
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mutation in the human ryanodine receptor gene associated with central core disease.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Chen HS, Khanna VK, De Leon S, Phillips MS, Schappert K, Britt BA, Browell AK, MacLennan DH
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0993-46](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0993-46)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1993 Sep;5(1):46-50. doi: 10.1038/ng0993-46.

A mutation in the human ryanodine receptor gene associated with central core 
disease.

Zhang Y(1), Chen HS, Khanna VK, De Leon S, Phillips MS, Schappert K, Britt BA, 
Browell AK, MacLennan DH.

Author information:
(1)Banting and Best Department of Medical Research, University of Toronto, 
Charles H. Best Institute, Ontario, Canada.

Central core disease (CCD) is a morphologically distinct, autosomal dominant 
myopathy with variable clinical features. A close association with malignant 
hyperthermia (MH) has been identified. Since MH and CCD genes have been linked 
to the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene, cDNA sequence analysis 
was used to search for a causal RYR1 mutation in a CCD individual. The only 
amino acid substitution found was an Arg2434His mutation, resulting from the 
substitution of A for G7301. This mutation was linked to CCD with a lod score of 
4.8 at a recombinant fraction of 0.0 in 16 informative meioses in a 130 member 
family, suggesting a causal relationship to CCD.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0993-46
PMID: 8220422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]