---
reference_id: "PMID:28754595"
title: "Mapping the Consequences of Impaired Synaptic Plasticity in Schizophrenia through Development: An Integrative Model for Diverse Clinical Features."
authors:
- Forsyth JK
- Lewis DA
journal: Trends Cogn Sci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2017.06.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mapping the Consequences of Impaired Synaptic Plasticity in Schizophrenia through Development: An Integrative Model for Diverse Clinical Features.
**Authors:** Forsyth JK, Lewis DA
**Journal:** Trends Cogn Sci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tics.2017.06.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2017.06.006)

## Content

1. Trends Cogn Sci. 2017 Oct;21(10):760-778. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2017.06.006.
Epub  2017 Jul 25.

Mapping the Consequences of Impaired Synaptic Plasticity in Schizophrenia 
through Development: An Integrative Model for Diverse Clinical Features.

Forsyth JK(1), Lewis DA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California at Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA; Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, 
University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic 
address: JForsyth@mednet.ucla.edu.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Schizophrenia is associated with alterations in sensory, motor, and cognitive 
functions that emerge before psychosis onset; identifying pathogenic processes 
that can account for this multi-faceted phenotype remains a challenge. 
Accumulating evidence suggests that synaptic plasticity is impaired in 
schizophrenia. Given the role of synaptic plasticity in learning, memory, and 
neural circuit maturation, impaired plasticity may underlie many features of the 
schizophrenia syndrome. Here, we summarize the neurobiology of synaptic 
plasticity, review evidence that plasticity is impaired in schizophrenia, and 
explore a framework in which impaired synaptic plasticity interacts with brain 
maturation to yield the emergence of sensory, motor, cognitive, and psychotic 
features at different times during development in schizophrenia. Key gaps in the 
literature and future directions for testing this framework are discussed.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tics.2017.06.006
PMCID: PMC5610626
PMID: 28754595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]