---
reference_id: "PMID:28855057"
title: Cystic Fibrosis.
authors:
- Naehrig S
- Chao CM
- Naehrlich L
journal: Dtsch Arztebl Int
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3238/arztebl.2017.0564
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cystic Fibrosis.
**Authors:** Naehrig S, Chao CM, Naehrlich L
**Journal:** Dtsch Arztebl Int (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3238/arztebl.2017.0564](https://doi.org/10.3238/arztebl.2017.0564)

## Content

1. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2017 Aug 21;114(33-34):564-574. doi: 
10.3238/arztebl.2017.0564.

Cystic Fibrosis.

Naehrig S(1), Chao CM, Naehrlich L.

Author information:
(1)*Joint and equal first authors; Medizinische Klinik V (Pneumology), LMU 
University of Munich, Pneumology, Medizinische Klinik Innenstadt, University of 
Munich; Department of Pediatrics, Justus-Liebig-University Gießen.

BACKGROUND: Universal screening of newborn babies for cystic fibrosis was 
launched in Germany on 1 September 2016. Here we present up-to-date information 
on the diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of this disease.
METHODS: This article is based on relevant publications retrieved by a selective 
search in PubMed, along with guidelines from Germany and abroad and systematic 
reviews.
RESULTS: Cystic fibrosis is caused by a gene mutation leading to dysfunction of 
the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein. It 
affects multiple organ systems-the lungs, pancreas, upper airways, liver, 
intestine, and reproductive organs-to varying degrees. Its incidence among 
newborn babies in Germany is between 1 in 3300 and 1 in 4800. Its diagnosis 
requires both clinical evidence (positive newborn screening, sibling[s] with 
cystic fibrosis, clinical signs) and the demonstration of CFTR dysfunction by an 
elevated chloride concentration in sweat, and/or two disease-causing mutations, 
and/or abnormal electrophysiological findings (nasal potential difference 
measurement, intestinal short-circuit current measurement). Patients should be 
cared for by specialized cystic fibrosis centers in close cooperation with their 
primary care physicians. The median life span of patients with this disease has 
risen steadily to the current value of 40 years. Aside from symptomatic 
treatment, the first mutation- specific treatments have recently become 
available.
CONCLUSION: Early diagnosis and optimized treatment prolong the lives of persons 
with cystic fibrosis and improve their quality of life. Causally directed 
treatment for all patients and their effects on the course of disease are now 
central issues for further research.

DOI: 10.3238/arztebl.2017.0564
PMCID: PMC5596161
PMID: 28855057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]