---
reference_id: "PMID:35054981"
title: The Role of GRP and MGP in the Development of Non-Hemorrhagic VKCFD1 Phenotypes.
authors:
- Ghosh S
- Oldenburg J
- Czogalla-Nitsche KJ
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms23020798
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- Biomarkers
- Blood Coagulation
- "Blood Coagulation Disorders, Inherited/diagnosis, etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Calcification, Physiologic/genetics"
- Calcium-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Carrier Proteins/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins/metabolism
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- Humans
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Protein Binding
- Matrix Gla Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of GRP and MGP in the Development of Non-Hemorrhagic VKCFD1 Phenotypes.
**Authors:** Ghosh S, Oldenburg J, Czogalla-Nitsche KJ
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms23020798](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23020798)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jan 12;23(2):798. doi: 10.3390/ijms23020798.

The Role of GRP and MGP in the Development of Non-Hemorrhagic VKCFD1 Phenotypes.

Ghosh S(1), Oldenburg J(1)(2), Czogalla-Nitsche KJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Experimental Haematology and Transfusion Medicine, Venusberg 
Campus 1, University Clinic Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(2)Center for Rare Diseases Bonn, Venusberg Campus 1, University Clinic Bonn, 
53127 Bonn, Germany.

Vitamin K dependent coagulation factor deficiency type 1 (VKCFD1) is a rare 
hereditary bleeding disorder caused by mutations in γ-Glutamyl carboxylase 
(GGCX) gene. The GGCX enzyme catalyzes the γ-carboxylation of 15 different 
vitamin K dependent (VKD) proteins, which have function in blood coagulation, 
calcification, and cell signaling. Therefore, in addition to bleedings, some 
VKCFD1 patients develop diverse non-hemorrhagic phenotypes such as skin 
hyper-laxity, skeletal dysmorphologies, and/or cardiac defects. Recent studies 
showed that GGCX mutations differentially effect γ-carboxylation of VKD 
proteins, where clotting factors are sufficiently γ-carboxylated, but not 
certain non-hemostatic VKD proteins. This could be one reason for the 
development of diverse phenotypes. The major manifestation of non-hemorrhagic 
phenotypes in VKCFD1 patients are mineralization defects. Therefore, the 
mechanism of regulation of calcification by specific VKD proteins as matrix Gla 
protein (MGP) and Gla-rich protein (GRP) in physiological and pathological 
conditions is of high interest. This will also help to understand the 
patho-mechanism of VKCFD1 phenotypes and to deduce new treatment strategies. In 
the present review article, we have summarized the recent findings on the 
function of GRP and MGP and how these proteins influence the development of 
non-hemorrhagic phenotypes in VKCFD1 patients.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23020798
PMCID: PMC8775833
PMID: 35054981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.