---
reference_id: "PMID:37140876"
title: "Ophthalmic Aspects of Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis: A Narrative Review."
authors:
- Tóth G
- Lukács A
- Schirra F
- Sándor GL
- Killik P
- Maneschg OA
- Nagy ZZ
- Szentmáry N
journal: Ophthalmol Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s40123-023-00725-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ophthalmic Aspects of Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis: A Narrative Review.
**Authors:** Tóth G, Lukács A, Schirra F, Sándor GL, Killik P, Maneschg OA, Nagy ZZ, Szentmáry N
**Journal:** Ophthalmol Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40123-023-00725-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40123-023-00725-w)

## Content

1. Ophthalmol Ther. 2023 Aug;12(4):1795-1811. doi: 10.1007/s40123-023-00725-w.
Epub  2023 May 4.

Ophthalmic Aspects of Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis: A 
Narrative Review.

Tóth G(1)(2), Lukács A(3), Schirra F(4), Sándor GL(5), Killik P(5), Maneschg 
OA(5), Nagy ZZ(5), Szentmáry N(6)(5).

Author information:
(1)Dr. Rolf M. Schwiete Center for Limbal Stem Cell and Congenital Aniridia 
Research, Saarland University, Kirrberger Str. 100, 66424, Homburg/Saar, 
Germany. gabortothgabor@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Semmelweis University, Mária Utca 39, 1085, 
Budapest, Hungary. gabortothgabor@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Dermatooncology, Semmelweis 
University, Mária Utca 41, 1085, Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Argos Augenzentrum, Faktoreistraße 4, 66111, Saarbrücken, Germany.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Semmelweis University, Mária Utca 39, 1085, 
Budapest, Hungary.
(6)Dr. Rolf M. Schwiete Center for Limbal Stem Cell and Congenital Aniridia 
Research, Saarland University, Kirrberger Str. 100, 66424, Homburg/Saar, 
Germany.

The aim of our review article was to summarize the current literature on 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and its severe form, toxic epidermal necrolysis 
(TEN). SJS/TEN is a serious, rare multi-system, immune-mediated, mucocutaneous 
disease with a significant mortality rate that can lead to severe ocular surface 
sequelae and even to bilateral blindness. Restoration of the ocular surface in 
acute and chronic SJS/TEN is challenging. There are only limited local or 
systemic treatment options for SJS/TEN. Early diagnosis, timely amniotic 
membrane transplantation and aggressive topical management in acute SJS/TEN are 
necessary to prevent long-term, chronic ocular complications. Although the 
primary aim of acute care is to save the life of the patient, ophthalmologists 
should regularly examine patients already in the acute phase, which should also 
be followed by systematic ophthalmic examination in the chronic phase. Herein, 
we summarize actual knowledge on the epidemiology, aetiology, pathology, 
clinical appearance and treatment of SJS/TEN.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40123-023-00725-w
PMCID: PMC10157599
PMID: 37140876

Conflict of interest statement: The work of Dr. Tóth at the Dr. Rolf M. Schwiete 
Center has been supported by the Eötvös Scholarship and the work of Dr. 
Szentmáry at the Dr. Rolf M. Schwiete Center has been supported by the Dr. Rolf 
M. Schwiete Foundation. Andrea Lukács, Frank Schirra, Gábor László Sándor, Petra 
Killik, Otto Alexander Maneschg and Zoltán Zsolt Nagy declare that they have no 
competing interests.