---
reference_id: "PMID:35687593"
title: "Whole genome sequences of Treponema pallidum subsp. endemicum isolated from Cuban patients: The non-clonal character of isolates suggests a persistent human infection rather than a single outbreak."
authors:
- Vrbová E
- Noda AA
- Grillová L
- Rodríguez I
- Forsyth A
- Oppelt J
- Šmajs D
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009900
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole genome sequences of Treponema pallidum subsp. endemicum isolated from Cuban patients: The non-clonal character of isolates suggests a persistent human infection rather than a single outbreak.
**Authors:** Vrbová E, Noda AA, Grillová L, Rodríguez I, Forsyth A, Oppelt J, Šmajs D
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0009900](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0009900)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2022 Jun 10;16(6):e0009900. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009900. eCollection 2022 Jun.

Whole genome sequences of Treponema pallidum subsp. endemicum isolated from 
Cuban patients: The non-clonal character of isolates suggests a persistent human 
infection rather than a single outbreak.

Vrbová E(1), Noda AA(2), Grillová L(1), Rodríguez I(2), Forsyth A(3)(4), Oppelt 
J(5), Šmajs D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech 
Republic.
(2)Department of Mycology-Bacteriology, Institute of Tropical Medicine "Pedro 
Kourí", Havana, Cuba.
(3)GeneticPrime Dx, Inc., La Jolla, California, United States of America.
(4)San Diego State University, San Diego, California, United States of America.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Bejel (endemic syphilis) is a neglected non-venereal disease caused by Treponema 
pallidum subsp. endemicum (TEN). Although it is mostly present in hot, dry 
climates, a few cases have been found outside of these areas. The aim of this 
work was the sequencing and analysis of TEN isolates obtained from "syphilis 
patients" in Cuba, which is not considered an endemic area for bejel. Genomes 
were obtained by pool segment genome sequencing or direct sequencing methods, 
and the bioinformatics analysis was performed according to an established 
pipeline. We obtained four genomes with 100%, 81.7%, 52.6%, and 21.1% breadth of 
coverage, respectively. The sequenced genomes revealed a non-clonal character, 
with nucleotide variability ranging between 0.2-10.3 nucleotide substitutions 
per 100 kbp among the TEN isolates. Nucleotide changes affected 27 genes, and 
the analysis of the completely sequenced genome also showed a recombination 
event between tprC and tprI, in TP0488 as well as in the intergenic region 
between TP0127-TP0129. Despite limitations in the quality of samples affecting 
breadth of sequencing coverage, the determined non-clonal character of the 
isolates suggests a persistent infection in the Cuban population rather than a 
single outbreak caused by imported case.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009900
PMCID: PMC9223347
PMID: 35687593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.