---
reference_id: "PMID:36048559"
title: p53 Inhibits Bmi-1-driven Self-Renewal and Defines Salivary Gland Cancer Stemness.
authors:
- Rodriguez-Ramirez C
- Zhang Z
- Warner KA
- Herzog AE
- Mantesso A
- Zhang Z
- Yoon E
- Wang S
- Wicha MS
- Nör JE
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-1357
keywords:
- Humans
- Mice
- Animals
- "Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/pathology"
- Salivary Gland Neoplasms/pathology
- Neoplastic Stem Cells/metabolism
- "Carcinoma, Mucoepidermoid/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# p53 Inhibits Bmi-1-driven Self-Renewal and Defines Salivary Gland Cancer Stemness.
**Authors:** Rodriguez-Ramirez C, Zhang Z, Warner KA, Herzog AE, Mantesso A, Zhang Z, Yoon E, Wang S, Wicha MS, Nör JE
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-1357](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-1357)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2022 Nov 1;28(21):4757-4770. doi: 
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-1357.

p53 Inhibits Bmi-1-driven Self-Renewal and Defines Salivary Gland Cancer 
Stemness.

Rodriguez-Ramirez C(1), Zhang Z(1), Warner KA(1), Herzog AE(1), Mantesso A(1), 
Zhang Z(2), Yoon E(2), Wang S(3)(4)(5), Wicha MS(4)(5), Nör JE(1)(2)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Restorative Sciences, University of Michigan School of 
Dentistry, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Michigan College of 
Engineering, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan School of Medicine, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(5)Rogel Cancer Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan.

PURPOSE: Mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC) is a poorly understood salivary gland 
malignancy with limited therapeutic options. Cancer stem cells (CSC) are 
considered drivers of cancer progression by mediating tumor recurrence and 
metastasis. We have shown that clinically relevant small molecule inhibitors of 
MDM2-p53 interaction activate p53 signaling and reduce the fraction of CSC in 
MEC. Here we examined the functional role of p53 in the plasticity and 
self-renewal of MEC CSC.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Using gene silencing and therapeutic activation of p53, we 
analyzed the cell-cycle profiles and apoptosis levels of CSCs in MEC cell lines 
(UM-HMC-1, -3A, -3B) via flow cytometry and looked at the effects on 
survival/self-renewal of the CSCs through sphere assays. We evaluated the effect 
of p53 on tumor development (N = 51) and disease recurrence (N = 17) using in 
vivo subcutaneous and orthotopic murine models of MEC. Recurrence was followed 
for 250 days after tumor resection.
RESULTS: Although p53 activation does not induce MEC CSC apoptosis, it reduces 
stemness properties such as self-renewal by regulating Bmi-1 expression and 
driving CSC towards differentiation. In contrast, downregulation of p53 causes 
expansion of the CSC population while promoting tumor growth. Remarkably, 
therapeutic activation of p53 prevented CSC-mediated tumor recurrence in 
preclinical trials.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these results demonstrate that p53 defines the 
stemness of MEC and suggest that therapeutic activation of p53 might have 
clinical utility in patients with salivary gland MEC.

©2022 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-1357
PMCID: PMC9633396
PMID: 36048559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The remaining authors 
declare no potential conflicts of interest.