---
reference_id: "PMID:37651614"
title: Epidemiology and survival of adult-type diffuse glioma in Belgium during the molecular era.
authors:
- Pinson H
- Silversmit G
- Vanhauwaert D
- Vanschoenbeek K
- Okito JK
- De Vleeschouwer S
- Boterberg T
- De Gendt C
journal: Neuro Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noad158
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Belgium/epidemiology
- "Brain Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- Prospective Studies
- "Glioma/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Astrocytoma
- Mutation
- Isocitrate Dehydrogenase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology and survival of adult-type diffuse glioma in Belgium during the molecular era.
**Authors:** Pinson H, Silversmit G, Vanhauwaert D, Vanschoenbeek K, Okito JK, De Vleeschouwer S, Boterberg T, De Gendt C
**Journal:** Neuro Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/neuonc/noad158](https://doi.org/10.1093/neuonc/noad158)

## Content

1. Neuro Oncol. 2024 Jan 5;26(1):191-202. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noad158.

Epidemiology and survival of adult-type diffuse glioma in Belgium during the 
molecular era.

Pinson H(1), Silversmit G(2), Vanhauwaert D(3), Vanschoenbeek K(2), Okito JK(1), 
De Vleeschouwer S(4)(5), Boterberg T(6), De Gendt C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Belgian Cancer Registry, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, AZ Delta, Roeselare, Belgium.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Laboratory for experimental neurosurgery and neuroanatomy, Department of 
Neurosciences, Leuven Brain Institute (LBI), KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Survival data of diffuse adult-type glioma is mostly based on 
prospective clinical trials or small retrospective cohort studies. Real-world 
data with large patient cohorts is currently lacking.
METHODS: Using the nationwide, population-based Belgian Cancer Registry, all 
known histological reports of patients diagnosed with an adult-type diffuse 
glioma in Belgium between 2017 and 2019 were reviewed. The ICD-O-3 morphology 
codes were matched with the histological diagnosis. The gathered data were 
transformed into the 2021 World Health Organization classification of CNS tumors 
using the IDH- and 1p/19q-mutation status.
RESULTS: Between 2017 and 2019, 2233 diffuse adult-type gliomas were diagnosed 
in Belgium. Full molecular status was available in 67.1% of identified cases. 
The age-standardized incidence rate of diffuse adult-type glioma in Belgium was 
estimated at 8.55 per 100 000 person-years and 6.72 per 100 000 person-years for 
grade 4 lesions. Median overall survival time in IDH-wild-type glioblastoma was 
9.3 months, significantly shorter compared to grade 4 IDH-mutant astrocytoma 
(median survival time: 25.9 months). The 3-year survival probability was 86.0% 
and 75.7% for grades 2 and 3 IDH-mutated astrocytoma. IDH-wild-type astrocytoma 
has a worse prognosis with a 3-year survival probability of 31.6% for grade 2 
and 5.7% for grade 3 lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: This registry-based study presents a large cohort of adult-type 
diffuse glioma with known molecular status and uses real-world survival data. It 
adds to the current literature which is mainly based on historical landmark 
trials and smaller retrospective cohort studies.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/neuonc/noad158
PMCID: PMC10768998
PMID: 37651614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest to be 
declared by any of the authors.