---
reference_id: PMID:21694887
title: Anidulafungin and its role in candida infections.
authors:
- Cappelletty DM
- Jung R
journal: Infect Drug Resist
year: '2009'
doi: 10.2147/idr.s4796
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anidulafungin and its role in candida infections.
**Authors:** Cappelletty DM, Jung R
**Journal:** Infect Drug Resist (2009)
**DOI:** [10.2147/idr.s4796](https://doi.org/10.2147/idr.s4796)

## Content

1. Infect Drug Resist. 2009;2:51-60. doi: 10.2147/idr.s4796. Epub 2009 Jun 30.

Anidulafungin and its role in candida infections.

Cappelletty DM(1), Jung R.

Author information:
(1)The University of Toledo, College of Pharmacy, Toledo, OH, USA.

Candida infections continue to play a significant role not only in critically 
ill and immunocompromised patients but also in non-compromised patients. The 
incidence of systemic fungal infections in the United States has been on the 
rise for the past 30 years. Anidulafungin and all echinocandins inhibit glucan 
synthase thus inhibiting the formation of 1,3-β-D-glucan which is an essential 
component of the fungal cell wall. The decrease in 1,3-β-D-glucan results in the 
osmotic lysis of the cell, resulting in fungicidal activity against candida. 
Anidulafungin is active against most species of candida and resistance to it is 
very rare. Two potential mechanisms conferring reduced susceptibility to the 
echinocandins are efflux and target alteration. The efflux pump associated with 
fluconazole resistance in Candida albicans can confer higher minimum inhibitory 
concentrations to caspofungin. The second mechanism of resistance is via 
mutations in the genes which code for 1,3 β-D-glucan synthase, specifically 
FKS1. Because of its spectrum of activity, fungicidal nature, and tolerability 
it is an attractive first-line therapeutic choice for treating candidemia in 
both non-neutropenic and neutropenic patients. Because it is available only 
parenterally its role in treating mucocutaneous candidiasis is primarily in 
patients unable to take oral therapy.

DOI: 10.2147/idr.s4796
PMCID: PMC3108729
PMID: 21694887