---
reference_id: "PMID:10677536"
title: "Chemical chaperones mediate increased secretion of mutant alpha 1-antitrypsin (alpha 1-AT) Z: A potential pharmacological strategy for prevention of liver injury and emphysema in alpha 1-AT deficiency."
authors:
- Burrows JA
- Willis LK
- Perlmutter DH
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.97.4.1796
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- Animals
- Cell Line
- Emphysema/drug therapy
- Glycerol/pharmacology
- Humans
- "Liver/metabolism, pathology"
- Lung/pathology
- Methylamines/pharmacology
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation
- "Phenylbutyrates/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Protein Folding
- Temperature
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin/genetics, metabolism"
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chemical chaperones mediate increased secretion of mutant alpha 1-antitrypsin (alpha 1-AT) Z: A potential pharmacological strategy for prevention of liver injury and emphysema in alpha 1-AT deficiency.
**Authors:** Burrows JA, Willis LK, Perlmutter DH
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.97.4.1796](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.97.4.1796)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Feb 15;97(4):1796-801. doi:
10.1073/pnas.97.4.1796.

Chemical chaperones mediate increased secretion of mutant alpha 1-antitrypsin
(alpha 1-AT) Z: A potential pharmacological strategy for prevention of liver
injury and emphysema in alpha 1-AT deficiency.

Burrows JA(1), Willis LK, Perlmutter DH.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, Division
of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO 63110,
USA.

In alpha1-AT deficiency, a misfolded but functionally active mutant alpha1-ATZ
(alpha1-ATZ) molecule is retained in the endoplasmic reticulum of liver cells
rather than secreted into the blood and body fluids. Emphysema is thought to be
caused by the lack of circulating alpha1-AT to inhibit neutrophil elastase in
the lung. Liver injury is thought to be caused by the hepatotoxic effects of the
retained alpha1-ATZ. In this study, we show that several "chemical chaperones,"
which have been shown to reverse the cellular mislocalization or misfolding of
other mutant plasma membrane, nuclear, and cytoplasmic proteins, mediate
increased secretion of alpha1-ATZ. In particular, 4-phenylbutyric acid (PBA)
mediated a marked increase in secretion of functionally active alpha1-ATZ in a
model cell culture system. Moreover, oral administration of PBA was well
tolerated by PiZ mice (transgenic for the human alpha1-ATZ gene) and
consistently mediated an increase in blood levels of human alpha1-AT reaching
20-50% of the levels present in PiM mice and normal humans. Because clinical
studies have suggested that only partial correction is needed for prevention of
both liver and lung injury in alpha1-AT deficiency and PBA has been used safely
in humans, it constitutes an excellent candidate for chemoprophylaxis of target
organ injury in alpha1-AT deficiency.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.97.4.1796
PMCID: PMC26515
PMID: 10677536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
