---
reference_id: "PMID:38665615"
title: Decoding the Genetics of Recurrent Molar Pregnancy.
authors:
- Mehta S
- Mahay SB
- Satapathy A
- Arora K
journal: J Hum Reprod Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4103/jhrs.jhrs_121_23
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Decoding the Genetics of Recurrent Molar Pregnancy.
**Authors:** Mehta S, Mahay SB, Satapathy A, Arora K
**Journal:** J Hum Reprod Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4103/jhrs.jhrs_121_23](https://doi.org/10.4103/jhrs.jhrs_121_23)

## Content

1. J Hum Reprod Sci. 2024 Jan-Mar;17(1):61-64. doi: 10.4103/jhrs.jhrs_121_23.
Epub  2024 Mar 28.

Decoding the Genetics of Recurrent Molar Pregnancy.

Mehta S(1), Mahay SB(2), Satapathy A(2), Arora K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Babu Jagjivan Ram Memorial Hospital, 
Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Medical Genetics and Genomics, 
Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Artemis Hospital, Gurgaon, Haryana, 
India.

Hydatidiform mole is a condition characterised by abnormal trophoblastic 
hyperplasia and failure of embryonic tissue development. The risk of recurrence 
is seen to be associated with biallelic maternal mutations in NLRP7, KHDC3 L and 
PAD16 genes. Women with such mutations have a major risk of reproductive failure 
and normal pregnancy is seen in only 1.8%. We report the case of a 31-year-old 
woman with previous three molar pregnancies who on genetic testing was found to 
be compound heterozygous for pathogenic variants in the NLRP7 gene (c.2738A>G 
and c.2078G>C). Accordingly, the woman was counselled regarding assisted 
reproduction with oocyte donation for a normal pregnancy outcome. At present, 
the patient has an ongoing 5-month pregnancy through oocyte donation.

Copyright: © 2024 Journal of Human Reproductive Sciences.

DOI: 10.4103/jhrs.jhrs_121_23
PMCID: PMC11041314
PMID: 38665615

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.