---
reference_id: "PMID:36852847"
title: "Reduced homovanillic acid, SDF-1α and SCGF-β levels in cerebrospinal fluid are related to depressive states in systemic lupus erythematosus."
authors:
- Fujita Y
- Iwata S
- Hidese S
- Ishiwata S
- Ide S
- Tanaka H
- Sonomoto K
- Miyazaki Y
- Nakayamada S
- Ikenouchi A
- Hattori K
- Kunugi H
- Yoshimura R
- Tanaka Y
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kead091
keywords:
- Humans
- Chemokine CXCL12
- Homovanillic Acid
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/diagnosis"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/complications"
- Biomarkers
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduced homovanillic acid, SDF-1α and SCGF-β levels in cerebrospinal fluid are related to depressive states in systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Fujita Y, Iwata S, Hidese S, Ishiwata S, Ide S, Tanaka H, Sonomoto K, Miyazaki Y, Nakayamada S, Ikenouchi A, Hattori K, Kunugi H, Yoshimura R, Tanaka Y
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/kead091](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/kead091)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2023 Oct 3;62(10):3490-3500. doi:
10.1093/rheumatology/kead091.

Reduced homovanillic acid, SDF-1α and SCGF-β levels in cerebrospinal fluid are
related to depressive states in systemic lupus erythematosus.

Fujita Y(1), Iwata S(1)(2), Hidese S(3)(4), Ishiwata S(3), Ide S(5), Tanaka
H(1), Sonomoto K(6), Miyazaki Y(1), Nakayamada S(1), Ikenouchi A(7)(8), Hattori
K(4)(9), Kunugi H(3)(4), Yoshimura R(7), Tanaka Y(1).

Author information:
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, University of Occupational and
Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Wakayama Medical
University, Wakayama, Japan.
(3)Department of Mental Disorder Research, National Institute of Neuroscience,
National Centre of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Radiology, University of Occupational and Environmental Health,
Fukuoka, Japan.
(6)Department of Clinical Nursing, School of Health Sciences, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Fukuoka, Japan.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, University of Occupational and Environmental
Health, Fukuoka, Japan.
(8)Medical Center for Dementia, Hospital of the University of Occupational and
Environmental Health, Fukuoka, Japan.
(9)Department of Bioresources, Medical Genome Center, National Centre of
Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to seek a new method of evaluation and surrogate
markers for diffuse neuropsychiatric SLE (NPSLE).
METHODS: We enrolled 44 patients with SLE between 2017 and 2020 who fulfilled at
least one of three specific inclusion criteria: high disease activity, abnormal
findings (cerebrospinal fluid [CSF] examination, brain MRI, or
electroencephalography), or history of neuropsychiatric illness. Psychiatric
symptom rating scales (PSYRATS) were evaluated retrospectively. The primary end
point was the PSYRATS positivity rate in SLE patients who had not been diagnosed
with diffuse NPSLE.
RESULTS: Based on the 1999 ACR classifications, 7 out of the 44 patients
evaluated using PSYRATS had been diagnosed with diffuse NPSLE. PSYRATS
positivity was seen in 13 out of 37 SLE patients (35.1%) who had not been
diagnosed with diffuse NPSLE, and all these patients were positive for
Montgomery-Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS), an indicator of depression
state in PSYRATS. Additionally, in the 20 SLE patients exhibiting depression
symptoms who were MADRS-positive, CSF concentrations of the neuroinflammatory
markers homovanillic acid (HVA; P = 0.0400), stromal cell-derived factor-1α
(SDF-1α; P = 0.0431) and stem cell growth factor-β (SCGF-1β; P = 0.0061) were
significantly reduced compared with the 24 MADRS-negative SLE patients, and the
levels of HVA, SDF-1α and SCGF-1β correlated with one another (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Many patients with active SLE have subclinical depression, and MADRS
evaluation of neuropsychiatric symptoms is useful for detecting them.
Additionally, the decrease in CSF levels of HVA, SDF-1 α and SCGF-1β reflects
the same pathology, and these may serve as surrogate markers.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
British Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/kead091
PMID: 36852847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
