---
reference_id: "PMID:9553082"
title: Alkyl-dihydroxyacetonephosphate synthase. Fate in peroxisome biogenesis disorders and identification of the point mutation underlying a single enzyme deficiency.
authors:
- de Vet EC
- Ijlst L
- Oostheim W
- Wanders RJ
- van den Bosch H
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.17.10296
keywords:
- "Alkyl and Aryl Transferases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2"
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- "DNA, Complementary"
- Guinea Pigs
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- "Peroxisomal Disorders/enzymology, genetics"
- Point Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alkyl-dihydroxyacetonephosphate synthase. Fate in peroxisome biogenesis disorders and identification of the point mutation underlying a single enzyme deficiency.
**Authors:** de Vet EC, Ijlst L, Oostheim W, Wanders RJ, van den Bosch H
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.17.10296](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.17.10296)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 24;273(17):10296-301. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.17.10296.

Alkyl-dihydroxyacetonephosphate synthase. Fate in peroxisome biogenesis 
disorders and identification of the point mutation underlying a single enzyme 
deficiency.

de Vet EC(1), Ijlst L, Oostheim W, Wanders RJ, van den Bosch H.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Biomembranes and Lipid Enzymology, Institute for Biomembranes, 
Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Peroxisomes play an indispensible role in ether lipid biosynthesis as evidenced 
by the deficiency of ether phospholipids in fibroblasts and tissues from 
patients suffering from a number of peroxisomal disorders. 
Alkyl-dihydroxyacetonephosphate synthase, a peroxisomal enzyme playing a key 
role in the biosynthesis of ether phospholipids, contains the peroxisomal 
targeting signal type 2 in a N-terminal cleavable presequence. Using a 
polyclonal antiserum raised against alkyl-dihydroxyacetonephosphate synthase, 
levels of this enzyme were examined in fibroblast cell lines from patients 
affected by peroxisomal disorders. Strongly reduced levels were found in 
fibroblasts of Zellweger syndrome and rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata 
patients, indicating that the enzyme is not stable in the cytoplasm as a result 
of defective import into peroxisomes. In a neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy patient 
with an isolated import deficiency of proteins carrying the peroxisomal 
targeting signal type 1, the precursor form of alkyl-dihydroxyacetonephosphate 
synthase was detected at a level comparable to that of the mature form in 
control fibroblasts, in line with an intraperoxisomal localization. A patient 
with an isolated deficiency in alkyl-dihydroxyacetonephosphate (DHAP) synthase 
activity had normal levels of this protein. Analysis at the cDNA level revealed 
a missense mutation leading to a R419H substitution in the enzyme of this 
patient. Expression of a recombinant protein carrying this mutation in 
Escherichia coli yielded an inactive enzyme, whereas a comparable control 
recombinant enzyme was active, providing further proof that this substitution is 
responsible for the inactivity of the enzyme and the phenotype. In line with 
this result is the observation that wild-type alkyl-DHAP synthase activity can 
be inactivated by the arginine-modifying agent phenylglyoxal. The enzyme is 
efficiently protected against this inactivation when the substrate 
palmitoyl-DHAP is present at a saturating concentration. The gene encoding human 
alkyl-dihydroxyacetonephosphate synthase was mapped on chromosome 2q31.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.17.10296
PMID: 9553082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]