---
reference_id: "PMID:17397529"
title: Inborn errors in the metabolism of glutathione.
authors:
- Ristoff E
- Larsson A
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-16
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Animals
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Dipeptidases/deficiency
- Genetic Testing/methods
- Glutathione/metabolism
- Glutathione Synthase/deficiency
- Humans
- Prognosis
- Pyroglutamate Hydrolase/deficiency
- gamma-Glutamyltransferase/deficiency
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inborn errors in the metabolism of glutathione.
**Authors:** Ristoff E, Larsson A
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-2-16](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-2-16)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2007 Mar 30;2:16. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-16.

Inborn errors in the metabolism of glutathione.

Ristoff E(1), Larsson A.

Author information:
(1)Karolinska Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Karolinska University
Hospital Huddinge, SE-141 86 Stockholm, Sweden. ellinor.ristoff@ki.se

Glutathione is a tripeptide composed of glutamate, cysteine and glycine.
Glutathione is present in millimolar concentrations in most mammalian cells and
it is involved in several fundamental biological functions, including free
radical scavenging, detoxification of xenobiotics and carcinogens, redox
reactions, biosynthesis of DNA, proteins and leukotrienes, as well as
neurotransmission/neuromodulation. Glutathione is metabolised via the
gamma-glutamyl cycle, which is catalyzed by six enzymes. In man, hereditary
deficiencies have been found in five of the six enzymes. Glutathione synthetase
deficiency is the most frequently recognized disorder and, in its severe form,
it is associated with hemolytic anemia, metabolic acidosis, 5-oxoprolinuria,
central nervous system (CNS) damage and recurrent bacterial infections.
Gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase deficiency is also associated with hemolytic
anemia, and some patients with this disorder show defects of neuromuscular
function and generalized aminoaciduria. Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase deficiency
has been found in patients with CNS involvement and glutathionuria.
5-Oxoprolinase deficiency is associated with 5-oxoprolinuria but without a clear
association with other symptoms. Dipeptidase deficiency has been described in
one patient. All disorders are very rare and inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. Most of the mutations are leaky so that many patients have residual
enzyme activity. Diagnosis is made by measuring the concentration of different
metabolites in the gamma-glutamyl cycle, enzyme activity and in glutathione
synthetase and gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase deficiency, also by mutation
analysis. Prenatal diagnosis has been preformed in glutathione synthetase
deficiency. The prognosis is difficult to predict, as few patients are known,
but seems to vary significantly between different patients. The aims of the
treatment of glutathione synthesis defects are to avoid hemolytic crises and to
increase the defense against reactive oxygen species. No treatment has been
recommended for gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, 5-oxoprolinase and dipeptidase
deficiency.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-16
PMCID: PMC1852094
PMID: 17397529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
