---
reference_id: "PMID:35075293"
title: Antisense oligonucleotide silencing of FUS expression as a therapeutic approach in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
authors:
- Korben VA
- Lyashchenko AK
- Blanco-Redondo B
- Jafar-Nejad P
- Shneider NA
journal: Nat Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-021-01615-z
keywords:
- "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/genetics, therapy"
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene Silencing/drug effects
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/pharmacology"
- RNA-Binding Protein FUS/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antisense oligonucleotide silencing of FUS expression as a therapeutic approach in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
**Authors:** Korben VA, Lyashchenko AK, Blanco-Redondo B, Jafar-Nejad P, Shneider NA
**Journal:** Nat Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-021-01615-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-021-01615-z)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2022 Jan;28(1):104-116. doi: 10.1038/s41591-021-01615-z. Epub 2022
Jan  24.

Antisense oligonucleotide silencing of FUS expression as a therapeutic approach 
in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Korben VA(#)(1)(2), Lyashchenko AK(#)(1)(2), Blanco-Redondo B(#)(1)(3), 
Jafar-Nejad P(4), Shneider NA(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Center for Motor Neuron Biology and Disease, 
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY, 
USA.
(3)Rudolf-Schönheimer Institute for Biochemistry, Leipzig University, Leipzig, 
Germany.
(4)Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Center for Motor Neuron Biology and Disease, 
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. ns327@columbia.edu.
(6)Department of Neurology, Eleanor and Lou Gehrig ALS Center, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA. ns327@columbia.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2022 Jan;28(1):25-27. doi: 10.1038/s41591-021-01629-7.
    Trends Mol Med. 2022 Apr;28(4):253-254. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2022.02.006.

Fused in sarcoma (FUS) is an RNA-binding protein that is genetically and 
pathologically associated with rare and aggressive forms of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). To explore the mechanisms by 
which mutant FUS causes neurodegeneration in ALS-FTD, we generated a series of 
FUS knock-in mouse lines that express the equivalent of ALS-associated mutant 
FUSP525L and FUSΔEX14 protein. In FUS mutant mice, we show progressive, 
age-dependent motor neuron loss as a consequence of a dose-dependent gain of 
toxic function, associated with the insolubility of FUS and related RNA-binding 
proteins. In this disease-relevant mouse model of ALS-FUS, we show that ION363, 
a non-allele-specific FUS antisense oligonucleotide, efficiently silences Fus 
and reduces postnatal levels of FUS protein in the brain and spinal cord, 
delaying motor neuron degeneration. In a patient with ALS with a FUSP525L 
mutation, we provide preliminary evidence that repeated intrathecal infusions of 
ION363 lower wild-type and mutant FUS levels in the central nervous system, 
resulting in a marked reduction in the burden of FUS aggregates that are a 
pathological hallmark of disease. In mouse genetic and human clinical studies, 
we provide evidence in support of FUS silencing as a therapeutic strategy in 
FUS-dependent ALS and FTD.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-021-01615-z
PMCID: PMC8799464
PMID: 35075293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: P.J.-N. is employed by Ionis Pharmaceuticals, a 
for-profit company that develops ASO therapies. The other authors declare no 
competing interests.