---
reference_id: "PMID:28359321"
title: The origin of Rosenthal fibers and their contributions to astrocyte pathology in Alexander disease.
authors:
- Sosunov AA
- McKhann GM 2nd
- Goldman JE
journal: Acta Neuropathol Commun
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s40478-017-0425-9
keywords:
- "Aging/metabolism, pathology"
- "Alexander Disease/metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- "Astrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Cerebral Cortex/metabolism, pathology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cytoplasm/metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- Fluorescent Dyes
- "Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Indoles
- Infant
- Male
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Microscopy, Electron, Transmission"
- Mitosis/physiology
- Point Mutation
- "Protein Aggregation, Pathological/metabolism, pathology"
- alpha-Crystallin B Chain/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The origin of Rosenthal fibers and their contributions to astrocyte pathology in Alexander disease.
**Authors:** Sosunov AA, McKhann GM 2nd, Goldman JE
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol Commun (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40478-017-0425-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-017-0425-9)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2017 Mar 31;5(1):27. doi: 10.1186/s40478-017-0425-9.

The origin of Rosenthal fibers and their contributions to astrocyte pathology in 
Alexander disease.

Sosunov AA(1), McKhann GM 2nd(1), Goldman JE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Columbia University, New York, NY, 10032, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY, 
10032, USA. jeg5@cumc.columbia.edu.

Rosenthal fibers (RFs) are cytoplasmic, proteinaceous aggregates. They are the 
pathognomonic feature of the astrocyte pathology in Alexander Disease (AxD), a 
neurodegenerative disorder caused by heterozygous mutations in the GFAP gene, 
encoding glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). Although RFs have been known 
for many years their origin and significance remain elusive issues. We have used 
mouse models of AxD based on the overexpression of human GFAP (transgenic, TG) 
and a point mutation in mouse GFAP (knock-in, KI) to examine the formation of 
RFs and to find astrocyte changes that correlate with the appearance of RFs. We 
found RFs of various sizes and shapes. The smallest ones appear as granular 
depositions on intermediate filaments. These contain GFAP and the small heat 
shock protein, alphaB-crystallin. Their aggregation appears to give rise to 
large RFs. The appearance of new RFs and the growth of previously formed RFs 
occur over time. We determined that DAPI is a reliable marker of RFs and in 
parallel with Fluoro-Jade B (FJB) staining defined a high variability in the 
appearance of RFs, even in neighboring astrocytes. Although many astrocytes in 
AxD with increased levels of GFAP and with or without RFs change their 
phenotype, only some cells with large numbers of RFs show a profound 
reconstruction of cellular processes, with a loss of fine distal processes and 
the appearance of large, lobulated nuclei, likely due to arrested mitosis. We 
conclude that 1) RFs appear to originate as small, osmiophilic masses containing 
both GFAP and alphaB-crystallin deposited on bundles of intermediate filaments. 
2) RFs continue to form within AxD astrocytes over time. 3) DAPI is a reliable 
marker for RFs and can be used with immunolabeling. 4) RFs appear to interfere 
with the successful completion of astrocyte mitosis and cell division.

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-017-0425-9
PMCID: PMC5374671
PMID: 28359321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]