---
reference_id: "PMID:31005270"
title: Regulated necrosis in kidney ischemia-reperfusion injury.
authors:
- Pefanis A
- Ierino FL
- Murphy JM
- Cowan PJ
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2019.02.009
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/etiology, pathology, prevention & control"
- Animals
- "Apoptosis/drug effects, genetics"
- "Clinical Trials, Phase II as Topic"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Epithelial Cells/pathology
- "Ferroptosis/drug effects, genetics"
- Humans
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/surgery"
- Kidney Transplantation/adverse effects
- "Kidney Tubules/cytology, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Microvessels/drug effects, pathology"
- "Necroptosis/drug effects, genetics"
- "Necrosis/etiology, pathology"
- "Oxazepines/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Protein Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Receptor-Interacting Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Regional Blood Flow/drug effects, genetics"
- "Reperfusion Injury/drug therapy, etiology, pathology"
- "Signal Transduction/drug effects, genetics"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Triazoles/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Regulated necrosis in kidney ischemia-reperfusion injury.
**Authors:** Pefanis A, Ierino FL, Murphy JM, Cowan PJ
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.kint.2019.02.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2019.02.009)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2019 Aug;96(2):291-301. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2019.02.009. Epub 2019
 Mar 7.

Regulated necrosis in kidney ischemia-reperfusion injury.

Pefanis A(1), Ierino FL(2), Murphy JM(3), Cowan PJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Immunology Research Centre, St. Vincent's Hospital Melbourne, Fitzroy, 
Australia; Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia; 
Department of Nephrology, St. Vincent's Hospital Melbourne, Fitzroy, Australia.
(3)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, 
Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, Australia.
(4)Immunology Research Centre, St. Vincent's Hospital Melbourne, Fitzroy, 
Australia; Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Australia. Electronic address: peter.cowan@svha.org.au.

Ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI) is the outcome of an inflammatory process that 
is triggered when an organ undergoes a transient reduction or cessation of blood 
flow, followed by re-establishment of perfusion. In the clinical setting, IRI 
contributes to significant acute kidney injury, patient morbidity and mortality, 
and adverse outcomes in transplantation. Tubular cell death by necrosis and 
apoptosis is a central feature of renal IRI. Recent research has challenged 
traditional views of cell death by identifying new pathways in which cells die 
in a regulated manner but with the morphologic features of necrosis. This 
regulated necrosis (RN) takes several forms, with necroptosis and ferroptosis 
being the best described. The precise mechanisms and relationships between the 
RN pathways in renal IRI are currently the subject of active research. The 
common endpoint of RN is cell membrane rupture, resulting in the release of 
cytosolic components with subsequent inflammation and activation of the immune 
system. We review the evidence and mechanisms of RN in the kidney following 
renal IRI, and discuss the use of small molecule inhibitors and genetically 
modified mice to better understand this process and guide potentially novel 
therapeutic interventions.

Copyright © 2019 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2019.02.009
PMID: 31005270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]