---
reference_id: "PMID:34397866"
title: "Comparison of chest computed tomography features between pulmonary tuberculosis patients with culture-positive and culture-negative sputum for non-mycobacteria: A retrospective observational study."
authors:
- Kan T
- Komiya K
- Yamasue M
- Itai M
- Tanaka A
- Takeno Y
- Takikawa S
- Hiramatsu K
- Kadota JI
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000026897
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of chest computed tomography features between pulmonary tuberculosis patients with culture-positive and culture-negative sputum for non-mycobacteria: A retrospective observational study.
**Authors:** Kan T, Komiya K, Yamasue M, Itai M, Tanaka A, Takeno Y, Takikawa S, Hiramatsu K, Kadota JI
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000026897](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000026897)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Aug 6;100(31):e26897. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000026897.

Comparison of chest computed tomography features between pulmonary tuberculosis 
patients with culture-positive and culture-negative sputum for non-mycobacteria: 
A retrospective observational study.

Kan T(1), Komiya K(1)(2), Yamasue M(1)(2), Itai M(2), Tanaka A(1), Takeno 
Y(1)(2), Takikawa S(2), Hiramatsu K(1), Kadota JI(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Oita University 
Faculty of Medicine, 1-1 Idaigaoka, Hasama-machi, Yufu, Oita, Japan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, National Hospital Organization Nishi-Beppu 
Hospital, 4548 Tsurumi, Beppu, Oita, Japan.

Although complication with non-mycobacterial pneumonia among patients with 
pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) may lead to poor prognosis, discrimination between 
TB complicated with and without non-mycobacterial pneumonia using radiological 
imaging has not been fully elucidated. We aimed to clarify the differences in 
chest computed tomography (CT) features between pulmonary TB patients with 
culture-positive and culture-negative sputum for non-mycobacteria.We 
retrospectively included consecutive patients admitted to our hospital from 
January 2013 to December 2015 for bacteriologically-confirmed pulmonary TB, who 
were tested by sputum culture for non-mycobacteria, and who underwent chest CT 
within 2 weeks before or after admission. Chest CT features were compared 
between pulmonary TB patients who had positive non-mycobacterial cultures and in 
those who had not.Of 202 patients with pulmonary TB, 186 (92%) were tested by 
sputum culture for non-mycobacteria and underwent chest CT. Among these, 
non-mycobacteria were isolated in 118 patients (63%), while 68 patients (37%) 
had negative cultures. Patients with a positive culture for non-mycobacteria 
were significantly older and had lower levels of physical activity and albumin, 
higher levels of C-reactive protein, and a greater number of respiratory 
failures. By CT, emphysematous lesions, ground-glass opacities, airspace 
consolidation, air-bronchogram, interlobular septal thickening, bronchiectasis, 
pleural effusion, pleural thickening, and lymph node enlargement were more 
frequently in patients with a positive culture for non-mycobacteria. These chest 
CT features could be helpful for detecting complication with non-mycobacterial 
pneumonia in patients with pulmonary TB.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000026897
PMCID: PMC8341271
PMID: 34397866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding and conflicts of 
interests to disclose.