---
reference_id: "PMID:17675240"
title: Retinal detachment and prophylaxis in type 1 Stickler syndrome.
authors:
- Ang A
- Poulson AV
- Goodburn SF
- Richards AJ
- Scott JD
- Snead MP
journal: Ophthalmology
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2007.03.059
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retinal detachment and prophylaxis in type 1 Stickler syndrome.
**Authors:** Ang A, Poulson AV, Goodburn SF, Richards AJ, Scott JD, Snead MP
**Journal:** Ophthalmology (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ophtha.2007.03.059](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2007.03.059)

## Content

1. Ophthalmology. 2008 Jan;115(1):164-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2007.03.059. Epub 
2007 Aug 2.

Retinal detachment and prophylaxis in type 1 Stickler syndrome.

Ang A(1), Poulson AV, Goodburn SF, Richards AJ, Scott JD, Snead MP.

Author information:
(1)Vitreoretinal Service, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Ophthalmology. 2008 Sep;115(9):1636-7; author reply 1637-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.ophtha.2008.04.018.

PURPOSE: To report the prevalence of retinal detachment (RD) and results of 
prophylaxis against detachment from a giant retinal tear in a large cohort of 
patients with type 1 Stickler syndrome.
DESIGN: Retrospective study.
PARTICIPANTS: Two hundred four type 1 Stickler syndrome patients.
METHOD: Pedigrees and individuals with type 1 Stickler syndrome were identified 
from the vitreous research clinic and divided into 3 groups. Group 1 consisted 
of patients who received no prophylaxis (control group). Group 2 consisted of 
patients who had bilateral 360 degrees prophylactic cryotherapy (study group). 
Group 3 consisted of patients referred with unilateral RD for surgical repair 
and who underwent prophylaxis in the fellow eye (mixed group).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Retinal status after prophylaxis, with failure of 
prophylaxis being defined as the development of RD or retinal tears needing 
further retinopexy.
RESULTS: Of 111 patients who had no prophylactic retinopexy (group 1; mean age, 
49 years), 73% (81/111) suffered RD and 48% (53/111) were bilateral. Of 62 
patients who had bilateral prophylactic cryotherapy (group 2; mean age, 21 
years), 8% (5/62) suffered failure of prophylaxis. There were no cases of 
bilateral detachments. The mean follow-up period was 11.5 years. In 31 patients 
who had unilateral prophylactic cryotherapy to the fellow eye (group 3; mean 
age, 36 years), failure occurred in 10% (3/31) of cases with a mean follow-up of 
15.5 years. The prevalence of failure of prophylaxis in treated patients was 
significantly less than prevalence of RD in untreated patients (chi2(1) = 119.2, 
P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Prophylactic cryotherapy substantially reduces the risk of RD in 
type 1 Stickler syndrome and, in this series, eliminated the risk of bilateral 
detachments.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2007.03.059
PMID: 17675240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]