---
reference_id: "PMID:7698750"
title: Isolation and expression of a cDNA encoding the precursor for a novel member (ACADSB) of the acyl-CoA dehydrogenase gene family.
authors:
- Rozen R
- Vockley J
- Zhou L
- Milos R
- Willard J
- Fu K
- Vicanek C
- Low-Nang L
- Torban E
- Fournier B
journal: Genomics
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1006/geno.1994.1617
keywords:
- Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase
- "Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenases/genetics, metabolism"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Cell Line
- DNA Primers
- "DNA, Complementary"
- "Enzyme Precursors/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Substrate Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isolation and expression of a cDNA encoding the precursor for a novel member (ACADSB) of the acyl-CoA dehydrogenase gene family.
**Authors:** Rozen R, Vockley J, Zhou L, Milos R, Willard J, Fu K, Vicanek C, Low-Nang L, Torban E, Fournier B
**Journal:** Genomics (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.1994.1617](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1994.1617)

## Content

1. Genomics. 1994 Nov 15;24(2):280-7. doi: 10.1006/geno.1994.1617.

Isolation and expression of a cDNA encoding the precursor for a novel member
(ACADSB) of the acyl-CoA dehydrogenase gene family.

Rozen R(1), Vockley J, Zhou L, Milos R, Willard J, Fu K, Vicanek C, Low-Nang L,
Torban E, Fournier B.

Author information:
(1)McGill University-Montreal Children's Hospital Research Institute, Quebec,
Canada.

The acyl-CoA dehydrogenases (ACDs) are a family of mitochondrial enzymes that
oxidize straight chain or branched chain acyl-CoAs in the metabolism of fatty
acids or branched chain amino acids. Deficiencies in members of this gene family
are important causes of human disease. A cDNA encoding the human precursor for a
novel member (gene symbol ACADSB) of the ACD gene family has been isolated and
characterized. The open reading frame of 1.3 kb encodes a precursor protein of
431 amino acids, which is processed in vitro to yield a mature protein of 399
amino acids. The cDNA has significant sequence similarity to other members of
the acyl-CoA dehydrogenase family, with the greatest homology (38%) to the short
chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase. The cDNA was expressed in eukaryotic (COS) and
prokaryotic (Escherichia coli) cells, producing a protein of the expected size,
with activity toward the short branched chain acyl-CoA derivatives
((S)-2-methylbutyryl-CoA, isobutyryl-CoA, and 2-methylhexanoyl-CoA), as well as
toward the short straight chain acyl-CoAs (butyryl-CoA and hexanoyl-CoA).

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1994.1617
PMID: 7698750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
