---
reference_id: "PMID:11773966"
title: A mouse model of Waardenburg syndrome type 4 with a new spontaneous mutation of the endothelin-B receptor gene.
authors:
- Matsushima Y
- Shinkai Y
- Kobayashi Y
- Sakamoto M
- Kunieda T
- Tachibana M
journal: Mamm Genome
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1007/s00335-001-3038-2
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cochlea/abnormalities, pathology"
- "DNA, Complementary/analysis"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Deafness/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Hirschsprung Disease/genetics, pathology"
- Megacolon/pathology
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Inbred Strains"
- Microphthalmia-Associated Transcription Factor
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Receptor, Endothelin B"
- "Receptors, Endothelin/genetics"
- Transcription Factors
- "Waardenburg Syndrome/classification, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mouse model of Waardenburg syndrome type 4 with a new spontaneous mutation of the endothelin-B receptor gene.
**Authors:** Matsushima Y, Shinkai Y, Kobayashi Y, Sakamoto M, Kunieda T, Tachibana M
**Journal:** Mamm Genome (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00335-001-3038-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00335-001-3038-2)

## Content

1. Mamm Genome. 2002 Jan;13(1):30-5. doi: 10.1007/s00335-001-3038-2.

A mouse model of Waardenburg syndrome type 4 with a new spontaneous mutation of
the endothelin-B receptor gene.

Matsushima Y(1), Shinkai Y, Kobayashi Y, Sakamoto M, Kunieda T, Tachibana M.

Author information:
(1)Saitama Cancer Center, Research Institute 818 Komuro, Ina, Saitama 362-0806,
Japan.

Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is a hereditary auditory-pigmentary syndrome with
hearing impairment and pigmentation anomaly of the skin and iris. In addition to
these major symptoms, WS type 4 is associated with Hirschsprung disease. To
date, three genes responsible for WS4 have been cloned: genes for a
transcription factor SOX10, endothelin 3 (EDN3), and endothelin B receptor
(EDNRB). We here describe a novel mutant mouse with a mutation of the Ednrb
gene, and propose the mouse as an animal model of WS4. These mutants are with
mixed genetic background of BALB/c and MSM (an inbred strain of Japanese wild
mice) and have extensive white spotting. They died between 2 and 7 weeks after
birth owing to megacolon: their colon distal to the megacolon lacked Auerbach's
plexus cells. Interestingly, these mutants did not respond to sound, and the
stria vascularis of their cochlea lacked intermediate cells, i.e., neural
crest-derived melanocytes. Since these symptoms resembled those of human WS4 and
were transmitted in autosomal recessive hereditary manner, the mutants were
named WS4 mice. Breeding analysis revealed that WS4 mice are allelic with
piebald-lethal and JF1 mice, which are also mutated in the Ednrb gene. Mutation
analysis revealed that their Ednrb lacked 318 nucleotides encoding Ednrb
transmembrane domains owing to deletion of exons 2 and 3. Interaction between
endothelin 3 and its receptor is required for normal differentiation and
development of melanocytes and Auerbach's plexus cells. We concluded that a
missing interaction here led to a lack of these cells, which caused pigmentation
anomaly, deafness, and megacolon in WS4 mice.

DOI: 10.1007/s00335-001-3038-2
PMID: 11773966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
