---
reference_id: "PMID:28626839"
title: "Auditory-Tactile integration: Effects of Phase of Sinusoidal Stimulation at 50 and 250 Hz."
authors:
- Ranjbar P
- Wilson EC
- Reed CM
- Braida LD
journal: Int J Eng Technol Sci Innov
year: '2016'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Auditory-Tactile integration: Effects of Phase of Sinusoidal Stimulation at 50 and 250 Hz.
**Authors:** Ranjbar P, Wilson EC, Reed CM, Braida LD
**Journal:** Int J Eng Technol Sci Innov (2016)

## Content

1. Int J Eng Technol Sci Innov. 2016 Apr;1(2):209-229.

Auditory-Tactile integration: Effects of Phase of Sinusoidal Stimulation at 50 
and 250 Hz.

Ranjbar P(1), Wilson EC(2), Reed CM(2), Braida LD(2).

Author information:
(1)Audiological Research Centre, University Hospital at Örebro, Sweden.
(2)Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA.

The perceptual integration of 50- and 250-Hz, 500-ms vibrotactile and auditory 
tones was studied in detection experiments as a function of the relative phase 
(0°, 72°, 144°, 216°, and 288°) of the tone pulses. Vibrotactile stimuli were 
delivered through a single-channel vibrator to the left middle fingertip and 
auditory stimuli were presented diotically through headphones in a background of 
50 dB SPL broadband noise. The observers were four adults with normal hearing. 
The vibrotactile and auditory stimulus levels used each yielded 63-77%-Correct 
unimodal detection performance in a two-interval two-alternative forced-choice 
task. Scores for the auditory-alone and tactile-alone conditions averaged 
roughly 70%-Correct. Mean scores for the auditory plus tactile conditions 
averaged across different phases were 77.1%-Correct at 50 Hz and 79.6%-Correct 
at 250 Hz. At 50 Hz, no differences in performance were observed as a function 
of the relative phase at which the combined auditory and tactile signals were 
presented. At 250 Hz, significantly higher scores were observed for one phase 
combination (72°) compared to two of the other four relative phases. Performance 
on the auditory plus tactile conditions resulted in significant integrative 
effects and was generally more consistent with a "Pythagorean Sum" model than 
with either an "Algebraic Sum" or an "Optimum Single Cannel" model of perceptual 
integration.

PMCID: PMC5472392
PMID: 28626839