---
reference_id: "PMID:40692014"
title: Hepatic Ketogenesis Regulates Lipid Homeostasis via ACSL1-mediated Fatty Acid Partitioning.
authors:
- Mooli RGR
- Han Y
- Fiorenza EJ
- Balakrishnan K
- Kanshana JS
- Kumar S
- Bello FM
- Nallanagulagari AR
- Karra S
- Tao J
- Delgado ER
- Teng L
- Kohan AB
- Singhi AD
- Jurczak M
- Ramakrishnan SK
journal: Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2025.101593
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Fatty Acids/metabolism
- Ketone Bodies/metabolism
- Lipid Metabolism
- "Liver/metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- Homeostasis
- Hepatocytes/metabolism
- "Coenzyme A Ligases/metabolism, genetics"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Fasting/metabolism
- Male
- "Fatty Liver/metabolism, pathology, etiology"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- "Diet, High-Fat/adverse effects"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Esterification
- Acetate-CoA Ligase/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Synthase
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatic Ketogenesis Regulates Lipid Homeostasis via ACSL1-mediated Fatty Acid Partitioning.
**Authors:** Mooli RGR, Han Y, Fiorenza EJ, Balakrishnan K, Kanshana JS, Kumar S, Bello FM, Nallanagulagari AR, Karra S, Tao J, Delgado ER, Teng L, Kohan AB, Singhi AD, Jurczak M, Ramakrishnan SK
**Journal:** Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcmgh.2025.101593](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmgh.2025.101593)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2025;19(11):101593. doi:
10.1016/j.jcmgh.2025.101593. Epub 2025 Jul 19.

Hepatic Ketogenesis Regulates Lipid Homeostasis via ACSL1-mediated Fatty Acid
Partitioning.

Mooli RGR(1), Han Y(1), Fiorenza EJ(1), Balakrishnan K(1), Kanshana JS(1), Kumar
S(1), Bello FM(1), Nallanagulagari AR(1), Karra S(1), Tao J(2), Delgado ER(2),
Teng L(1), Kohan AB(1), Singhi AD(2), Jurczak M(1), Ramakrishnan SK(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, University
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(2)Division of Experimental Pathology, Department of Pathology, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(3)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, University
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Electronic address: ramaks@pitt.edu.

Update of
    Res Sq. 2023 Jul 18:rs.3.rs-3147009. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-3147009/v1.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Liver-derived ketone bodies play an essential role in energy
homeostasis during fasting by supplying fuel to the brain and peripheral
tissues. Ketogenesis also helps to remove excess acetyl-CoA generated from fatty
acid oxidation, thereby protecting against diet-induced hepatic steatosis.
Despite this, the role of ketogenesis in fasting-associated hepatocellular lipid
metabolism has not been thoroughly investigated.
METHODS: We used mice with liver-specific knockout of HMGCS2 mice to determine
how ACSL1-mediated esterification contributes to fasting-induced steatosis and
performed biochemical assays, gene expression profiling, Western blotting, and
histologic analyses. We further investigated the association between HMGCS2
expression, lipid re-esterification, and steatosis using human primary
hepatocytes and liver samples from patients with metabolic
dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis.
RESULTS: We show that ketogenic insufficiency, achieved through disrupting
hepatic HMGCS2, worsens liver steatosis in both fasted chow-fed and high-fat-fed
mice. Our findings indicate that hepatic steatosis arises from increased fatty
acid partitioning to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) for re-esterification, a
process mediated by acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member 1 (ACSL1).
Mechanistically, the accumulation of acetyl-CoA because of impaired hepatic
ketogenesis drives the elevated translocation of ACSL1 to the ER. Furthermore,
our study reveals heightened ER-localized ACSL1 and lipid re-esterification in
human metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis cases exhibiting impaired
hepatic ketogenesis. We also demonstrate that L-carnitine, which buffers excess
acetyl-CoA, reduces ER-associated ACSL1 and alleviates hepatic steatosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Hepatic ketogenesis plays a crucial role in maintaining
intracellular acetyl-CoA balance, regulating lipid partitioning, and preventing
the development of fasting-induced hepatic steatosis.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2025.101593
PMCID: PMC12482313
PMID: 40692014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
