---
reference_id: "PMID:39806098"
title: Glycogen synthase GYS1 overactivation contributes to glycogen insolubility and malto-oligoglucan-associated neurodegenerative disease.
authors:
- Nitschke S
- Montalbano AP
- Whiting ME
- Smith BH
- Mukherjee-Roy N
- Marchioni CR
- Sullivan MA
- Zhao X
- Wang P
- Mount H
- Verma M
- Minassian BA
- Nitschke F
journal: EMBO J
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s44318-024-00339-3
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- "Glycogen Synthase/metabolism, genetics"
- Glycogen/metabolism
- "Lafora Disease/metabolism, genetics, pathology"
- Glucans/metabolism
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases, Non-Receptor/genetics, metabolism"
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- Dual-Specificity Phosphatases/genetics
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/metabolism, genetics, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Glycogen Storage Disease
- Nervous System Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glycogen synthase GYS1 overactivation contributes to glycogen insolubility and malto-oligoglucan-associated neurodegenerative disease.
**Authors:** Nitschke S, Montalbano AP, Whiting ME, Smith BH, Mukherjee-Roy N, Marchioni CR, Sullivan MA, Zhao X, Wang P, Mount H, Verma M, Minassian BA, Nitschke F
**Journal:** EMBO J (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s44318-024-00339-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s44318-024-00339-3)

## Content

1. EMBO J. 2025 Mar;44(5):1379-1413. doi: 10.1038/s44318-024-00339-3. Epub 2025
Jan  13.

Glycogen synthase GYS1 overactivation contributes to glycogen insolubility and 
malto-oligoglucan-associated neurodegenerative disease.

Nitschke S(1), Montalbano AP(1), Whiting ME(1), Smith BH(1)(2), Mukherjee-Roy 
N(1), Marchioni CR(1)(3), Sullivan MA(4)(5), Zhao X(6), Wang P(6), Mount H(7), 
Verma M(1), Minassian BA(8)(9), Nitschke F(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 75390, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, 75390, USA.
(3)Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Department, University of Colorado School 
of Medicine, Aurora, CO, 80045, USA.
(4)Glycation and Diabetes Complications, Mater Research Institute - The 
University of Queensland, Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD, 4102, 
Australia.
(5)School of Health, University of the Sunshine Coast, Sippy Downs, QLD, 4556, 
Australia.
(6)Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children 
Research Institute, Toronto, ON, M5G 0A4, Canada.
(7)Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, Departments of 
Psychiatry and Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, M5T 0S8, Canada.
(8)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 75390, USA. 
berge.minassian@utsouthwestern.edu.
(9)O'Donnell Brain Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, 75390, USA. berge.minassian@utsouthwestern.edu.
(10)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 75390, USA. 
felix.nitschke@utsouthwestern.edu.
(11)O'Donnell Brain Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, 75390, USA. felix.nitschke@utsouthwestern.edu.
(12)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, 75390, USA. felix.nitschke@utsouthwestern.edu.

Polyglucosans are glycogen molecules with overlong chains, which are 
hyperphosphorylated in the neurodegenerative Lafora disease (LD). Brain 
polyglucosan bodies (PBs) cause fatal neurodegenerative diseases including 
Lafora disease and adult polyglucosan body disease (ABPD), for which treatments, 
biomarkers, and good understanding of their pathogenesis are currently missing. 
Mutations in the genes for the phosphatase laforin or the E3 ubiquitin ligase 
malin can cause LD. By depleting PTG, an activator of the glycogen 
chain-elongating enzyme glycogen synthase (GYS1), in laforin- and 
malin-deficient LD mice, we show that abnormal glycogen chain lengths and not 
hyperphosphorylation underlie polyglucosan formation, and that polyglucosan 
bodies induce neuroinflammation. We provide evidence indicating that a small 
pool of overactive GYS1 contributes to glycogen insolubility in LD and APBD. In 
contrast to previous findings, metabolomics experiments using in situ-fixed 
brains reveal only modest metabolic changes in laforin-deficient mice. These 
changes are not replicated in malin-deficient or APBD mice, and are not 
normalized in rescued LD mice. Finally, we identify a pool of metabolically 
volatile malto-oligoglucans as a polyglucosan body- and 
neuroinflammation-associated brain energy source, and promising candidate 
biomarkers for LD and APBD, including malto-oligoglucans and the 
neurodegeneration marker CHI3L1/YKL40.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s44318-024-00339-3
PMCID: PMC11876434
PMID: 39806098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure and competing interests statement. 
The authors declare no competing interests.