---
reference_id: "PMID:17259973"
title: Dll4 signalling through Notch1 regulates formation of tip cells during angiogenesis.
authors:
- Hellström M
- Phng LK
- Hofmann JJ
- Wallgard E
- Coultas L
- Lindblom P
- Alva J
- Nilsson AK
- Karlsson L
- Gaiano N
- Yoon K
- Rossant J
- Iruela-Arispe ML
- Kalén M
- Gerhardt H
- Betsholtz C
journal: Nature
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/nature05571
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dll4 signalling through Notch1 regulates formation of tip cells during angiogenesis.
**Authors:** Hellström M, Phng LK, Hofmann JJ, Wallgard E, Coultas L, Lindblom P, Alva J, Nilsson AK, Karlsson L, Gaiano N, Yoon K, Rossant J, Iruela-Arispe ML, Kalén M, Gerhardt H, Betsholtz C
**Journal:** Nature (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature05571](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05571)

## Content

1. Nature. 2007 Feb 15;445(7129):776-80. doi: 10.1038/nature05571. Epub 2007 Jan 
28.

Dll4 signalling through Notch1 regulates formation of tip cells during 
angiogenesis.

Hellström M(1), Phng LK, Hofmann JJ, Wallgard E, Coultas L, Lindblom P, Alva J, 
Nilsson AK, Karlsson L, Gaiano N, Yoon K, Rossant J, Iruela-Arispe ML, Kalén M, 
Gerhardt H, Betsholtz C.

Author information:
(1)AngioGenetics Sweden AB, Scheeles väg 2, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden. 
mats.hellstrom@ki.se

Comment in
    Nature. 2007 Feb 15;445(7129):722-3. doi: 10.1038/445722a.

In sprouting angiogenesis, specialized endothelial tip cells lead the outgrowth 
of blood-vessel sprouts towards gradients of vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF)-A. VEGF-A is also essential for the induction of endothelial tip cells, 
but it is not known how single tip cells are selected to lead each vessel 
sprout, and how tip-cell numbers are determined. Here we present evidence that 
delta-like 4 (Dll4)-Notch1 signalling regulates the formation of appropriate 
numbers of tip cells to control vessel sprouting and branching in the mouse 
retina. We show that inhibition of Notch signalling using gamma-secretase 
inhibitors, genetic inactivation of one allele of the endothelial Notch ligand 
Dll4, or endothelial-specific genetic deletion of Notch1, all promote increased 
numbers of tip cells. Conversely, activation of Notch by a soluble jagged1 
peptide leads to fewer tip cells and vessel branches. Dll4 and reporters of 
Notch signalling are distributed in a mosaic pattern among endothelial cells of 
actively sprouting retinal vessels. At this location, Notch1-deleted endothelial 
cells preferentially assume tip-cell characteristics. Together, our results 
suggest that Dll4-Notch1 signalling between the endothelial cells within the 
angiogenic sprout serves to restrict tip-cell formation in response to VEGF, 
thereby establishing the adequate ratio between tip and stalk cells required for 
correct sprouting and branching patterns. This model offers an explanation for 
the dose-dependency and haploinsufficiency of the Dll4 gene, and indicates that 
modulators of Dll4 or Notch signalling, such as gamma-secretase inhibitors 
developed for Alzheimer's disease, might find usage as pharmacological 
regulators of angiogenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/nature05571
PMID: 17259973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]