---
reference_id: "PMID:33484700"
title: "Treatment Practices and Outcomes in Continuous Spike and Wave during Slow Wave Sleep: A Multicenter Collaboration."
authors:
- Baumer FM
- McNamara NA
- Fine AL
- Pestana-Knight E
- Shellhaas RA
- He Z
- Arndt DH
- Gaillard WD
- Kelley SA
- Nagan M
- Ostendorf AP
- Singhal NS
- Speltz L
- Chapman KE
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2021.01.032
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Anticonvulsants/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Benzodiazepines/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Drug Administration Schedule
- Electroencephalography
- "Epileptic Syndromes/diagnosis, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- "Practice Patterns, Physicians'/statistics & numerical data"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sleep, Slow-Wave/drug effects"
- "Steroids/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Treatment Outcome
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment Practices and Outcomes in Continuous Spike and Wave during Slow Wave Sleep: A Multicenter Collaboration.
**Authors:** Baumer FM, McNamara NA, Fine AL, Pestana-Knight E, Shellhaas RA, He Z, Arndt DH, Gaillard WD, Kelley SA, Nagan M, Ostendorf AP, Singhal NS, Speltz L, Chapman KE
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpeds.2021.01.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2021.01.032)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2021 May;232:220-228.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2021.01.032. Epub
2021  Jan 20.

Treatment Practices and Outcomes in Continuous Spike and Wave during Slow Wave 
Sleep: A Multicenter Collaboration.

Baumer FM(1), McNamara NA(2), Fine AL(3), Pestana-Knight E(4), Shellhaas RA(2), 
He Z(5), Arndt DH(6), Gaillard WD(7), Kelley SA(8), Nagan M(9), Ostendorf 
AP(10), Singhal NS(11), Speltz L(12), Chapman KE(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, 
CA. Electronic address: fbaumer@stanford.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Michigan Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI.
(3)Department of Neurology, Divisions of Epilepsy & Child Neurology, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(4)Epilepsy Center, Cleveland Clinic Neurological Institute, Cleveland Clinic 
Lerner College of Medicine, Cleveland, OH.
(5)Department of Neurology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, 
CA.
(6)Beaumont Children's, Oakland University William Beaumont School of Medicine, 
Royal Oak, MI.
(7)Center for Neuroscience, Children's National Hospital, George Washington 
University, Washington, DC.
(8)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.
(9)Department of Pediatrics & Neurology, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH.
(11)UCSF Weill Institute for Neurosciences, UCSF School of Medicine, San 
Francisco, CA.
(12)Department of Neurology, University of Minnesota School of Medicine, 
Minneapolis, MN.

OBJECTIVES: To determine how continuous spike and wave during slow wave sleep 
(CSWS) is currently managed and to compare the effectiveness of current 
treatment strategies using a database from 11 pediatric epilepsy centers in the 
US.
STUDY DESIGN: This retrospective study gathered information on baseline clinical 
characteristics, CSWS etiology, and treatment(s) in consecutive patients seen 
between 2014 and 2016 at 11 epilepsy referral centers. Treatments were 
categorized as benzodiazepines, steroids, other antiseizure medications (ASMs), 
or other therapies. Two measures of treatment response (clinical improvement as 
noted by the treating physician; and electroencephalography improvement) were 
compared across therapies, controlling for baseline variables.
RESULTS: Eighty-one children underwent 153 treatment trials during the study 
period (68 trials of benzodiazepines, 25 of steroids, 45 of ASMs, 14 of other 
therapies). Children most frequently received benzodiazepines (62%) or ASMs 
(27%) as first line therapy. Treatment choice did not differ based on baseline 
clinical variables, nor did these variables correlate with outcome. After 
adjusting for baseline variables, children had a greater odds of clinical 
improvement with benzodiazepines (OR 3.32, 95%CI 1.57-7.04, P = .002) or 
steroids (OR 4.04, 95%CI 1.41-11.59, P = .01) than with ASMs and a greater odds 
of electroencephalography improvement after steroids (OR 3.36, 95% CI 
1.09-10.33, P = .03) than after ASMs.
CONCLUSIONS: Benzodiazepines and ASMs are the most frequent initial therapy 
prescribed for CSWS in the US. Our data suggests that ASMs are inferior to 
benzodiazepines and steroids and support earlier use of these therapies. 
Multicenter prospective studies that rigorously assess treatment protocols and 
outcomes are needed.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2021.01.032
PMCID: PMC8934740
PMID: 33484700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None. A segment of the 
results in this article was previously presented in poster format at the 
American Epilepsy Society National Meeting.