---
reference_id: "PMID:12650805"
title: Overexpression of cyclooxygenase 2 in hamartomatous polyps of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.
authors:
- McGarrity TJ
- Peiffer LP
- Amos CI
- Frazier ML
- Ward MG
- Howett MK
journal: Am J Gastroenterol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1111/j.1572-0241.2003.07328.x
keywords:
- "Blotting, Western"
- Cyclooxygenase 1
- Cyclooxygenase 2
- ErbB Receptors/metabolism
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic"
- Hamartoma/enzymology
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Intestinal Polyps/enzymology
- "Isoenzymes/analysis, genetics"
- Membrane Proteins
- "Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome/enzymology, metabolism"
- "Prostaglandin-Endoperoxide Synthases/analysis, genetics"
- "RNA, Messenger/analysis"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Up-Regulation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Overexpression of cyclooxygenase 2 in hamartomatous polyps of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.
**Authors:** McGarrity TJ, Peiffer LP, Amos CI, Frazier ML, Ward MG, Howett MK
**Journal:** Am J Gastroenterol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1572-0241.2003.07328.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1572-0241.2003.07328.x)

## Content

1. Am J Gastroenterol. 2003 Mar;98(3):671-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1572-0241.2003.07328.x.

Overexpression of cyclooxygenase 2 in hamartomatous polyps of Peutz-Jeghers
syndrome.

McGarrity TJ(1), Peiffer LP, Amos CI, Frazier ML, Ward MG, Howett MK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, The Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, The
Pennsylvania State University, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033-0850, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is an autosomal-dominant hamartomatous
polyposis syndrome. Affected individuals are at risk for intestinal and
extraintestinal malignancies. Prostaglandins and polyamines are small molecules
believed to be important in tumor formation and growth. Cyclooxygenase (COX) and
ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) are key enzymes in the prostaglandin and polyamine
biosynthetic pathways, respectively. The aim of this study was to measure and
compare COX-1 and COX-2 expression in normal and hamartomatous tissue of PJS
patients.
METHODS: We measured COX-1 and COX-2 protein expression in normal and
hamartomatous GI tissues from affected PJS individuals and compared it with that
in normal controls. COX-2 RNA in these tissues was also measured and compared by
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In addition, COX-2
expression was detected in tissue slides by immunostaining. ODC activity was
measured between normal and hamartomatous tissues of PJS compared with control
tissues.
RESULTS: COX-1 expression was similar in normal and control GI tissues. In
contrast, COX-2 overexpression was noted in hamartomatous polyp tissue from PJS
patients compared with normal control and PJS tissue. COX-2 expression by
reverse transcription PCR was 10-fold greater in a hamartoma compared with other
tissues. COX-2 expression was noted in the epithelial cells of hamartomatous
polyps, and also coursing throughout the stromal tissue of the lamina propria,
including muscle cells. ODC activity was similar in the tissues studied.
CONCLUSIONS: Selective COX-2 overexpression was noted in hamartomatous polyp
tissue from PJS individuals. The results of the study provide an avenue for
possible effective chemoprevention of polyp formation and growth in PJS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1572-0241.2003.07328.x
PMID: 12650805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
