---
reference_id: "PMID:36430334"
title: Aberrant Cortical Layer Development of Brain Organoids Derived from Noonan Syndrome-iPSCs.
authors:
- Kim B
- Koh Y
- Do H
- Ju Y
- Choi JB
- Cho G
- Yoo HW
- Lee BH
- Han J
- Park JE
- Han YM
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms232213861
keywords:
- Humans
- Organoids
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
- Noonan Syndrome/genetics
- Brain
- Neurons
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aberrant Cortical Layer Development of Brain Organoids Derived from Noonan Syndrome-iPSCs.
**Authors:** Kim B, Koh Y, Do H, Ju Y, Choi JB, Cho G, Yoo HW, Lee BH, Han J, Park JE, Han YM
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms232213861](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms232213861)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Nov 10;23(22):13861. doi: 10.3390/ijms232213861.

Aberrant Cortical Layer Development of Brain Organoids Derived from Noonan
Syndrome-iPSCs.

Kim B(1), Koh Y(2), Do H(2), Ju Y(1)(3), Choi JB(1), Cho G(1), Yoo HW(4), Lee
BH(4), Han J(2), Park JE(2), Han YM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 34141, Korea.
(2)Graduate School of Medical Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute
of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 34141, Korea.
(3)SoVarGen, Co., Ltd., Daejeon 34051, Korea.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital, University
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul 05505, Korea.

Noonan syndrome (NS) is a genetic disorder mainly caused by gain-of-function
mutations in Src homology region 2-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase 2
(SHP2). Although diverse neurological manifestations are commonly diagnosed in
NS patients, the mechanisms as to how SHP2 mutations induce the
neurodevelopmental defects associated with NS remain elusive. Here, we report
that cortical organoids (NS-COs) derived from NS-induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs) exhibit developmental abnormalities, especially in excitatory neurons
(ENs). Although NS-COs develop normally in their appearance, single-cell
transcriptomic analysis revealed an increase in the EN population and
overexpression of cortical layer markers in NS-COs. Surprisingly, the EN
subpopulation co-expressing the upper layer marker SATB2 and the deep layer
maker CTIP2 was enriched in NS-COs during cortical development. In parallel with
the developmental disruptions, NS-COs also exhibited reduced synaptic
connectivity. Collectively, our findings suggest that perturbed cortical layer
identity and impeded neuronal connectivity contribute to the neurological
manifestations of NS.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232213861
PMCID: PMC9699065
PMID: 36430334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
