---
reference_id: "PMID:9157474"
title: "[Radiologic diagnosis of primary extranodal lymphoma manifestations]."
authors:
- Malms J
- Engelbrecht V
- Zahner J
- Mödder U
journal: Radiologe
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1007/s001170050174
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Radiologic diagnosis of primary extranodal lymphoma manifestations].
**Authors:** Malms J, Engelbrecht V, Zahner J, Mödder U
**Journal:** Radiologe (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s001170050174](https://doi.org/10.1007/s001170050174)

## Content

1. Radiologe. 1997 Jan;37(1):27-34. doi: 10.1007/s001170050174.

[Radiologic diagnosis of primary extranodal lymphoma manifestations].

[Article in German]

Malms J(1), Engelbrecht V, Zahner J, Mödder U.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Diagnostische Radiologie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf.

Primary extranodal lymphoma manifestation in the narrow sense is the term used 
to define the primary organ manifestation of a malignant lymphoma, excluding the 
thymus, spleen, Waldeyer's tonsillar ring, the appendix and Peyer's patches. 
However, in the clinical routine the term is also used for the secondary organ 
manifestation of underlying lymphoproliferative disease. Primary extranodal 
lymphomas are mainly non-Hodgkin lymphomas; there is primary extranodal 
manifestation of Hodgkin's disease in only about 1% of the cases. Among the 
extranodal NHL, the highly malignant forms predominate. A major exception is 
MALT lymphomas, which mainly show low slow growth. In the past, they were 
considered to be pseudolymphomas because of their slow and localized tumor 
growth. They were included as an entity of their own for the first time in the 
Revised European American Lymphoma (REAL) classification of 1994. The incidence 
data vary between < 10% and 25% for primary extranodal manifestation. The major 
reason for this is the difference in extranodal regions because of 
classification. Secondary organ involvement of an NHL occurs in up to 40% of the 
cases in the long-term course of the disease in primary nodal lymphomas. 
Secondary organ involvement is frequently diagnosed in AIDS patients who develop 
an AIDS-related lymphoma (85% of cases). The following contribution reports on 
the radiological imaging of extranodal lymphoma manifestation in the 
thoracoabdominal region.

DOI: 10.1007/s001170050174
PMID: 9157474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]