---
reference_id: "PMID:23365103"
title: "SGCE mutations cause psychiatric disorders: clinical and genetic characterization."
authors:
- Peall KJ
- Smith DJ
- Kurian MA
- Wardle M
- Waite AJ
- Hedderly T
- Lin JP
- Smith M
- Whone A
- Pall H
- White C
- Lux A
- Jardine P
- Bajaj N
- Lynch B
- Kirov G
- "O'Riordan S"
- Samuel M
- Lynch T
- King MD
- Chinnery PF
- Warner TT
- Blake DJ
- Owen MJ
- Morris HR
journal: Brain
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/brain/aws308
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Alcoholism/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Anxiety Disorders/diagnosis, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Dystonic Disorders/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Myoclonus/genetics
- "Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder/diagnosis, genetics"
- Phenotype
- Quality of Life
- Sarcoglycans/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SGCE mutations cause psychiatric disorders: clinical and genetic characterization.
**Authors:** Peall KJ, Smith DJ, Kurian MA, Wardle M, Waite AJ, Hedderly T, Lin JP, Smith M, Whone A, Pall H, White C, Lux A, Jardine P, Bajaj N, Lynch B, Kirov G, O'Riordan S, Samuel M, Lynch T, King MD, Chinnery PF, Warner TT, Blake DJ, Owen MJ, Morris HR
**Journal:** Brain (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/aws308](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/aws308)

## Content

1. Brain. 2013 Jan;136(Pt 1):294-303. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws308.

SGCE mutations cause psychiatric disorders: clinical and genetic
characterization.

Peall KJ(1), Smith DJ, Kurian MA, Wardle M, Waite AJ, Hedderly T, Lin JP, Smith
M, Whone A, Pall H, White C, Lux A, Jardine P, Bajaj N, Lynch B, Kirov G,
O'Riordan S, Samuel M, Lynch T, King MD, Chinnery PF, Warner TT, Blake DJ, Owen
MJ, Morris HR.

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Institute of
Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, Henry Wellcome Building,
Heath Park, Cardiff, UK. kathrynpeall@yahoo.co.uk

Myoclonus dystonia syndrome is a childhood onset hyperkinetic movement disorder
characterized by predominant alcohol responsive upper body myoclonus and
dystonia. A proportion of cases are due to mutations in the maternally imprinted
SGCE gene. Previous studies have suggested that patients with SGCE mutations may
have an increased rate of psychiatric disorders. We established a cohort of
patients with myoclonus dystonia syndrome and SGCE mutations to determine the
extent to which psychiatric disorders form part of the disease phenotype. In
all, 89 patients with clinically suspected myoclonus dystonia syndrome were
recruited from the UK and Ireland. SGCE was analysed using direct sequencing and
for copy number variants. In those patients where no mutation was found TOR1A
(GAG deletion), GCH1, THAP1 and NKX2-1 were also sequenced. SGCE mutation
positive cases were systematically assessed using standardized psychiatric
interviews and questionnaires and compared with a disability-matched control
group of patients with alcohol responsive tremor. Nineteen (21%) probands had a
SGCE mutation, five of which were novel. Recruitment of family members increased
the affected SGCE mutation positive group to 27 of whom 21 (77%) had psychiatric
symptoms. Obsessive-compulsive disorder was eight times more likely (P < 0.001)
in mutation positive cases, compulsivity being the predominant feature (P <
0.001). Generalized anxiety disorder (P = 0.003) and alcohol dependence (P =
0.02) were five times more likely in mutation positive cases than tremor
controls. SGCE mutations are associated with a specific psychiatric phenotype
consisting of compulsivity, anxiety and alcoholism in addition to the
characteristic motor phenotype. SGCE mutations are likely to have a pleiotropic
effect in causing both motor and specific psychiatric symptoms.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/aws308
PMCID: PMC4052887
PMID: 23365103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
