---
reference_id: "PMID:37059571"
title: Incidence and prevalence of multiple sclerosis in China and other Asian countries.
authors:
- Zhang GX
- Carrillo-Vico A
- Zhang WT
- Gao SS
- Izquierdo Ayuso G
journal: Neurologia (Engl Ed)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.nrleng.2020.07.022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence and prevalence of multiple sclerosis in China and other Asian countries.
**Authors:** Zhang GX, Carrillo-Vico A, Zhang WT, Gao SS, Izquierdo Ayuso G
**Journal:** Neurologia (Engl Ed) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nrleng.2020.07.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nrleng.2020.07.022)

## Content

1. Neurologia (Engl Ed). 2023 Apr;38(3):159-172. doi:
10.1016/j.nrleng.2020.07.022.

Incidence and prevalence of multiple sclerosis in China and other Asian 
countries.

Zhang GX(1), Carrillo-Vico A(2), Zhang WT(3), Gao SS(3), Izquierdo Ayuso G(4).

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Esclerosis Múltiple. Servicio de Neurología. Hospital Vithas-Nisa, 
Sevilla, España; Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla, IBiS (Universidad de 
Sevilla, HUVR, Junta de Andalucía, CSIC) y Departamento de Bioquímica Médica y 
Biología Molecular e Inmunología, Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, España.
(2)Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla, IBiS (Universidad de Sevilla, HUVR, 
Junta de Andalucía, CSIC) y Departamento de Bioquímica Médica y Biología 
Molecular e Inmunología, Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, España.
(3)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, España.
(4)Unidad de Esclerosis Múltiple. Servicio de Neurología. Hospital Vithas-Nisa, 
Sevilla, España. Electronic address: g.i.ayuso@gmail.com.

The prevalence of multiple sclerosis (MS) in Asian countries is thought to be 
lower than in Western countries, with Asian populations presenting 80% less risk 
of MS than white populations. Incidence and prevalence rates in Asian countries 
are therefore not well defined and their association with rates in neighboring 
countries, as well as with ethnic, environmental, and socioeconomic factors, are 
not well understood. We performed a comprehensive literature review of 
epidemiological data from China and neighbouring countries to study the 
frequency of the disease, focusing on prevalence, and the progression over time 
and the influence of sex-related, environmental, dietary, and sociocultural 
factors. Prevalence rates in China range between 0.88 cases/100,000 population 
in 1986 and 5.2 cases/100,000 population in 2013, with a non-significant upwards 
trend (p = .08). The increase observed in Japan, where figures ranged between 
8.1 and 18.6 cases/100,000 population was highly significant (p < .001). 
Prevalence rates in countries with predominantly white populations are 
considerably higher and have increased over time, reaching 115 cases/100,000 
population in 2015 (r2 = 0.79, p < .0001). In conclusion, the prevalence of MS 
in China appears to have risen in recent years, although Asian populations 
(including Chinese and Japanese populations, among others) appear to present 
less risk than other populations. Within Asia, geographical latitude appears not 
to be a determining factor for developing MS.

Copyright © 2020 Sociedad Española de Neurología. Published by Elsevier España, 
S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nrleng.2020.07.022
PMID: 37059571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]