---
reference_id: "PMID:17088259"
title: "Tumor prone phenotype of mice deficient in a novel apoptosis-inducing gene, drs."
authors:
- Tambe Y
- Yoshioka-Yamashita A
- Mukaisho K
- Haraguchi S
- Chano T
- Isono T
- Kawai T
- Suzuki Y
- Kushima R
- Hattori T
- Goto M
- Yamada S
- Kiso M
- Saga Y
- Inoue H
journal: Carcinogenesis
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgl211
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tumor prone phenotype of mice deficient in a novel apoptosis-inducing gene, drs.
**Authors:** Tambe Y, Yoshioka-Yamashita A, Mukaisho K, Haraguchi S, Chano T, Isono T, Kawai T, Suzuki Y, Kushima R, Hattori T, Goto M, Yamada S, Kiso M, Saga Y, Inoue H
**Journal:** Carcinogenesis (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/carcin/bgl211](https://doi.org/10.1093/carcin/bgl211)

## Content

1. Carcinogenesis. 2007 Apr;28(4):777-84. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgl211. Epub 2006
Nov  4.

Tumor prone phenotype of mice deficient in a novel apoptosis-inducing gene, drs.

Tambe Y(1), Yoshioka-Yamashita A, Mukaisho K, Haraguchi S, Chano T, Isono T, 
Kawai T, Suzuki Y, Kushima R, Hattori T, Goto M, Yamada S, Kiso M, Saga Y, Inoue 
H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Shiga University of Medical Science, 
Setatsukinowa-cho, Otsu, Shiga 520-2192, Japan.

The drs gene was originally isolated as a suppressor of v-src transformation. 
Expression of drs mRNA is markedly downregulated in a variety of human cancer 
cell lines and tissues, suggesting the potential role of this gene as a tumor 
suppressor. Previously, we found that Drs protein associates with 
ASY/Nogo-B/RTN-x(S), an apoptosis-inducing protein in the endoplasmic reticulum, 
and sequentially activates caspases to induce apoptosis in human cancer cells 
without involvement of the mitochondria. In this study, we investigated the 
tumor suppressor function of drs and the correlation between Drs-mediated 
apoptosis and tumor suppression by generating a gene-knockout (KO) mouse. 
Between 7 and 12 months after birth, malignant tumors including lymphomas, lung 
adenocarcinomas and hepatomas were generated in about 30% of the drs KO mice, 
whereas no tumors were found in any of the wild-type mice during the same period 
of time. drs KO embryonic fibroblasts also showed enhanced sensitivity to 
transformation by v-src oncogene. Reintroduction of drs into a tumor cell line 
derived from the tumor of a drs KO mouse led to the suppression of tumor 
formation in nude mice, which was accompanied by enhanced apoptosis and the 
activation of caspase-9 and -3. Furthermore, introduction of drs into this cell 
line enhanced sensitivity to apoptosis mediated by caspase-3, -9 and -12 under 
low serum culture conditions. The present results thus indicate that drs 
contributes to the suppression of malignant tumor formation, and this 
suppression is closely correlated with drs-mediated apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgl211
PMID: 17088259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]