---
reference_id: "PMID:8004091"
title: Instability of simple sequence repeats in a mammalian cell line.
authors:
- Farber RA
- Petes TD
- Dominska M
- Hudgens SS
- Liskay RM
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/3.2.253
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Instability of simple sequence repeats in a mammalian cell line.
**Authors:** Farber RA, Petes TD, Dominska M, Hudgens SS, Liskay RM
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/3.2.253](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/3.2.253)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1994 Feb;3(2):253-6. doi: 10.1093/hmg/3.2.253.

Instability of simple sequence repeats in a mammalian cell line.

Farber RA(1), Petes TD, Dominska M, Hudgens SS, Liskay RM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 27599.

Short tandem repeat sequences in the mammalian genome are considered to be 
unstable, since many of them are polymorphic in length; however, the extent of 
this instability has been difficult to quantitate. We have directly determined 
the rate of mutation of a simple sequence repeat in a mammalian cell line. A 
plasmid containing a dinucleotide repeat [poly(CA/GT)] that disrupts the reading 
frame of a downstream gene was integrated into the genome of a mouse cell line, 
and spontaneous revertants were selected. Reversion rates were more than 100 
times higher in cells carrying the repeated sequence than in control cells that 
carried the same fusion gene with a 4-bp out-of-frame deletion. Revertant clones 
derived from the lines carrying the dinucleotide repeat had insertions or 
deletions of one or more repeat units.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/3.2.253
PMID: 8004091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]