---
reference_id: "PMID:10951458"
title: Cholesterol supplementation with egg yolk increases plasma cholesterol and decreases plasma 7-dehydrocholesterol in Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome.
authors:
- Linck LM
- Lin DS
- Flavell D
- Connor WE
- Steiner RD
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '2000'
doi: "10.1002/1096-8628(20000828)93:5<360::aid-ajmg4>3.0.co;2-p"
keywords:
- Cholesterol/blood
- "Cholesterol, Dietary/administration & dosage, metabolism"
- Dehydrocholesterols/blood
- Egg Yolk/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome/blood, metabolism, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholesterol supplementation with egg yolk increases plasma cholesterol and decreases plasma 7-dehydrocholesterol in Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome.
**Authors:** Linck LM, Lin DS, Flavell D, Connor WE, Steiner RD
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1096-8628(20000828)93:5<360::aid-ajmg4>3.0.co;2-p](https://doi.org/10.1002/1096-8628(20000828)93:5<360::aid-ajmg4>3.0.co;2-p)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 2000 Aug 28;93(5):360-5. doi:
10.1002/1096-8628(20000828)93:5<360::aid-ajmg4>3.0.co;2-p.

Cholesterol supplementation with egg yolk increases plasma cholesterol and
decreases plasma 7-dehydrocholesterol in Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome.

Linck LM(1), Lin DS, Flavell D, Connor WE, Steiner RD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics,
Child Development and Rehabilitation Center, Doernbecher Children's Hospital,
Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, Oregon, USA.

Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS), an autosomal recessive condition comprising
multiple malformations, mental retardation, and growth failure, results from
reduced activity of the final enzyme in cholesterol biosynthesis,
7-dehydrocholesterol Delta(7)-reductase (DHCR7). Reduced plasma and tissue
cholesterol concentrations and accumulation of cholesterol precursors including
7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC) are characteristic biochemical abnormalities. While
it is still unclear what role these potentially toxic precursors have in the
pathogenesis of this disorder, the accumulation of 7-DHC in the brain has been
associated with impaired learning in rats and oxidized 7-DHC has been shown to
induce growth retardation in cultured rat embryos. We hypothesized that
supplemental dietary cholesterol would increase plasma cholesterol levels and
suppress synthesis of 7-DHC and other abnormal sterols in individuals with SLOS.
After baseline sterol levels were obtained, patients were provided supplemental
cholesterol as egg yolk. Plasma sterols were analyzed by capillary-column gas
chromatography over time in four children with SLOS. When evaluated at 4-8 weeks
after the initiation of cholesterol supplementation, there was a marked increase
in mean plasma cholesterol, from 53 mg/dl to 82 mg/dl. While the percent of
total sterols as 7-DHC decreased from 15% to 10%, there was no change in total
plasma 7-DHC levels. However, when evaluated 35-90 weeks after the institution
of cholesterol supplementation, mean plasma 7-DHC decreased, from 11.3 mg/dl to
3.5 mg/dl (-67%, P < 0.05), along with an increase in mean plasma cholesterol
from 53 mg/dl to 114 mg/dl (+116%, P < 0.05). These results support the
hypothesis that over time dietary cholesterol supplementation from egg yolk
increases the plasma cholesterol levels and decreases levels of 7-DHC which may
be toxic. These data have important therapeutic implications in the management
of SLOS.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/1096-8628(20000828)93:5<360::aid-ajmg4>3.0.co;2-p
PMID: 10951458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
