---
reference_id: "PMID:31846611"
title: Factor VIII replacement is still the standard of care in haemophilia A.
authors:
- Aledort L
- Mannucci PM
- Schramm W
- Tarantino M
journal: Blood Transfus
year: '2019'
doi: 10.2450/2019.0211-19
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Bispecific/therapeutic use"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use"
- Factor VIII/therapeutic use
- "Hemarthrosis/blood, prevention & control"
- "Hemophilia A/blood, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Hemorrhage/blood, prevention & control"
- Hemostasis
- Humans
- Quality of Life
- Standard of Care
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Factor VIII replacement is still the standard of care in haemophilia A.
**Authors:** Aledort L, Mannucci PM, Schramm W, Tarantino M
**Journal:** Blood Transfus (2019)
**DOI:** [10.2450/2019.0211-19](https://doi.org/10.2450/2019.0211-19)

## Content

1. Blood Transfus. 2019 Nov;17(6):479-486. doi: 10.2450/2019.0211-19. Epub 2019
Dec  11.

Factor VIII replacement is still the standard of care in haemophilia A.

Aledort L(1), Mannucci PM(2), Schramm W(3), Tarantino M(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Icahn School of Medicine, Mount Sinai, New
York, NY, United States of America.
(2)Scientific Direction, IRCCS Foundation Ca' Granda Maggiore Policlinico
Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Transfusion Medicine and Haemostasis, University Hospital of
Munich, Munich, Germany.
(4)University of Illinois College of Medicine, and the Bleeding and Clotting
Disorders Institute, Peoria, IL, United States of America.

Comment in
    Blood Transfus. 2019 Nov;17(6):401-402. doi: 10.2450/2019.0259-19.

Prophylactic factor VIII (FVIII) has dramatically improved haemophilia A
treatment, preventing joint bleeding and halting the deterioration of joint
status. FVIII products with an extended plasma half-life further improve
patients' quality of life and increase therapeutic adherence. New licensed
classes of non-replacement products include prophylactic emicizumab, which is
administered subcutaneously up to every 4 weeks. However, this drug is not
suitable for acute bleeding episodes or management of major surgery, and
long-term data on the impact of emicizumab on joint health, FVIII inhibitor
development and thrombotic risk are awaited. Prophylaxis with FVIII replacement
remains the standard of care in haemophilia A, with the aim of achieving a level
of haemostasis control that allows patients to meet their lifestyle goals.

DOI: 10.2450/2019.0211-19
PMCID: PMC6917528
PMID: 31846611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures of conflicts of interest LA has
participated in a Data Safety Monitoring Board for Octapharma and Takeda. He has
also received honoraria from Bayer, Kedrion, and Takeda, and has acted as Chair
for a scientific advisory committee for Kedrion. PMM sits on the scientific
board for the Bayer Awards. He has also received honoraria for lectures at
educational symposia from Bayer, Kedrion and Novo Nordisk. WS has participated
in a Data Safety Monitoring Board for Biotest and received honoraria for
lectures from Biotest, Novo Nordisk, Roche, Takeda and Bio&Bio. MT has been an
advisor for Amgen, Genentech, Kedrion, Novo Nordisk, Octapharma and Takeda. He
has received fees for lectures at symposia for Takeda. Research with Novo
Nordisk and Takeda.
