---
reference_id: "PMID:35751534"
title: Malassezia virulence factors and their role in dermatological disorders.
authors:
- Kurniadi I
- Hendra Wijaya W
- Timotius KH
journal: Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Pannonica Adriat
year: '2022'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malassezia virulence factors and their role in dermatological disorders.
**Authors:** Kurniadi I, Hendra Wijaya W, Timotius KH
**Journal:** Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Pannonica Adriat (2022)

## Content

1. Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Pannonica Adriat. 2022 Jun;31(2):65-70.

Malassezia virulence factors and their role in dermatological disorders.

Kurniadi I(1), Hendra Wijaya W(1), Timotius KH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Christian University of Krida Wacana (UKRIDA), Jakarta, Indonesia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Christian University of Krida Wacana (UKRIDA), Jakarta, Indonesia.

Malassezia is a commensal fungus that constitutes normal skin microbiota. 
However, in certain conditions and individuals, it may transform into a 
pathogenic yeast with multiple associated dermatological disorders and various 
clinical manifestations. This phenomenon is influenced by a unique host-agent 
interaction that triggers the production of several virulence factors, such as 
indoles, reactive oxygen species, azelaic acid, hyphae formation, and biofilm 
formation. This review article discusses Malassezia virulence factors that 
contribute to the transformation of Malassezia from commensal to pathogenic as 
well as their role in dermatological disorders, including pityriasis versicolor, 
seborrheic dermatitis, Malassezia folliculitis, atopic dermatitis, and 
psoriasis.

PMID: 35751534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]