---
reference_id: "PMID:30498034"
title: "Genetic determinants and an epistasis of LILRA3 and HLA-B*52 in Takayasu arteritis."
authors:
- Terao C
- Yoshifuji H
- Matsumura T
- Naruse TK
- Ishii T
- Nakaoka Y
- Kirino Y
- Matsuo K
- Origuchi T
- Shimizu M
- Maejima Y
- Amiya E
- Tamura N
- Kawaguchi T
- Takahashi M
- Setoh K
- Ohmura K
- Watanabe R
- Horita T
- Atsumi T
- Matsukura M
- Miyata T
- Kochi Y
- Suda T
- Tanemoto K
- Meguro A
- Okada Y
- Ogimoto A
- Yamamoto M
- Takahashi H
- Nakayamada S
- Saito K
- Kuwana M
- Mizuki N
- Tabara Y
- Ueda A
- Komuro I
- Kimura A
- Isobe M
- Mimori T
- Matsuda F
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1808850115
keywords:
- Case-Control Studies
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Epistasis, Genetic"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Genotype
- HLA-B52 Antigen/genetics
- Humans
- "Killer Cells, Natural/metabolism, pathology"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Receptors, Immunologic/genetics"
- "Takayasu Arteritis/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic determinants and an epistasis of LILRA3 and HLA-B*52 in Takayasu arteritis.
**Authors:** Terao C, Yoshifuji H, Matsumura T, Naruse TK, Ishii T, Nakaoka Y, Kirino Y, Matsuo K, Origuchi T, Shimizu M, Maejima Y, Amiya E, Tamura N, Kawaguchi T, Takahashi M, Setoh K, Ohmura K, Watanabe R, Horita T, Atsumi T, Matsukura M, Miyata T, Kochi Y, Suda T, Tanemoto K, Meguro A, Okada Y, Ogimoto A, Yamamoto M, Takahashi H, Nakayamada S, Saito K, Kuwana M, Mizuki N, Tabara Y, Ueda A, Komuro I, Kimura A, Isobe M, Mimori T, Matsuda F
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1808850115](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1808850115)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Dec 18;115(51):13045-13050. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1808850115. Epub 2018 Nov 29.

Genetic determinants and an epistasis of LILRA3 and HLA-B*52 in Takayasu
arteritis.

Terao C(1)(2)(3), Yoshifuji H(4), Matsumura T(5)(6), Naruse TK(7), Ishii T(8),
Nakaoka Y(9)(10), Kirino Y(11), Matsuo K(12), Origuchi T(13), Shimizu M(14),
Maejima Y(15), Amiya E(5), Tamura N(15), Kawaguchi T(14), Takahashi M(14), Setoh
K(14), Ohmura K(4), Watanabe R(8), Horita T(16), Atsumi T(16), Matsukura M(17),
Miyata T(17), Kochi Y(18), Suda T(6), Tanemoto K(19), Meguro A(20), Okada
Y(2)(21)(22), Ogimoto A(23), Yamamoto M(24), Takahashi H(24), Nakayamada S(25),
Saito K(25), Kuwana M(26), Mizuki N(20), Tabara Y(14), Ueda A(11), Komuro I(5),
Kimura A(7), Isobe M(15)(27), Mimori T(4), Matsuda F(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; a0001101@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(2)Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.
(3)Clinical Research Center, Shizuoka General Hospital, Shizuoka 420-0881,
Japan.
(4)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
(5)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.
(6)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 117599.
(7)Department of Molecular Pathogenesis, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.
(8)Department of Hematology and Rheumatology, Tohoku University School of
Medicine, Sendai 980-8574, Japan.
(9)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Suita 565-0871, Japan.
(10)Department of Vascular Physiology, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular
Center Research Institute, Suita 565-0873, Japan.
(11)Department of Stem Cell and Immune Regulation, Yokohama City University
Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan.
(12)Division of Molecular and Clinical Epidemiology, Aichi Cancer Center
Research Institute, Nagoya 464-8681, Japan.
(13)Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki
852-8501, Japan.
(14)Center for Genomic Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
(15)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.
(16)Division of Rheumatology, Endocrinology and Nephrology, Hokkaido University
Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8648, Japan.
(17)Department of Surgical Oncology and Vascular Surgery, Graduate School of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.
(18)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.
(19)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Kawasaki Medical School, Kurashiki
701-0192, Japan.
(20)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Yokohama City University
Graduate School of Medicine, Yokoham 236-0004, Japan.
(21)Laboratory of Statistical Immunology, Immunology Frontier Research Center,
Osaka University, Suita 565-0871, Japan.
(22)Department of Statistical Genetics, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Suita 565-0871, Japan.
(23)Department of Cardiology, Pulmonology, Hypertension & Nephrology, Ehime
University Graduate School of Medicine, Ehime 791-0295, Japan.
(24)Department of Rheumatology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
Sapporo Medical University, Sapporo 060-8556, Japan.
(25)First Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational & Environmental Health, Kitakyushu 807-8556, Japan.
(26)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Nippon Medical School Graduate
School of Medicine, Tokyo 113-8603, Japan.
(27)Sakakibara Heart Institute, Tokyo 183-0003, Japan.

Takayasu arteritis (TAK) is a systemic vasculitis with severe complications that
affects the aorta and its large branches. HLA-B*52 is an established
susceptibility locus to TAK. To date, there are still only a limited number of
reports concerning non-HLA susceptibility loci to TAK. We conducted a
genome-wide association study (GWAS) and a follow-up study in a total of 633 TAK
cases and 5,928 controls. A total of 510,879 SNPs were genotyped, and 5,875,450
SNPs were imputed together with HLA-B*52. Functional annotation of significant
loci, enhancer enrichment, and pathway analyses were conducted. We identified
four unreported significant loci, namely rs2322599, rs103294, rs17133698, and
rs1713450, in PTK2B, LILRA3/LILRB2, DUSP22, and KLHL33, respectively. Two
additional significant loci unreported in non-European GWAS were identified,
namely HSPA6/FCGR3A and chr21q.22. We found that a single variant associated
with the expression of MICB, a ligand for natural killer (NK) cell receptor,
could explain the entire association with the HLA-B region. Rs2322599 is
strongly associated with the expression of PTK2B Rs103294 risk allele in
LILRA3/LILRB2 is known to be a tagging SNP for the deletion of LILRA3, a soluble
receptor of HLA class I molecules. We found a significant epistasis effect
between HLA-B*52 and rs103294 (P = 1.2 × 10-3). Enhancer enrichment analysis and
pathway analysis suggested the involvement of NK cells (P = 8.8 × 10-5, enhancer
enrichment). In conclusion, four unreported TAK susceptibility loci and an
epistasis effect between LILRA3 and HLA-B*52 were identified. HLA and non-HLA
regions suggested a critical role for NK cells in TAK.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1808850115
PMCID: PMC6304955
PMID: 30498034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: Editor Tasuku
Honjo and several authors are affiliated with Kyoto University but do not have
any active collaborations.
