---
reference_id: "PMID:14722080"
title: "Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor localization and stability in neonatal cardiomyocytes requires interaction with ankyrin-B."
authors:
- Mohler PJ
- Davis JQ
- Davis LH
- Hoffman JA
- Michaely P
- Bennett V
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M313979200
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- Ankyrins/metabolism
- Brain/embryology
- Calcium Channels/biosynthesis
- Cattle
- Cell Line
- Cell Membrane/metabolism
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- Green Fluorescent Proteins
- Humans
- "Inositol 1,4,5-Trisphosphate Receptors"
- Kinetics
- Luminescent Proteins/metabolism
- Mice
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutagenesis
- Mutation
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/cytology"
- Phenotype
- Precipitin Tests
- Protein Binding
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/biosynthesis"
- Recombinant Proteins/chemistry
- Time Factors
- Tissue Distribution
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor localization and stability in neonatal cardiomyocytes requires interaction with ankyrin-B.
**Authors:** Mohler PJ, Davis JQ, Davis LH, Hoffman JA, Michaely P, Bennett V
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M313979200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M313979200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 26;279(13):12980-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M313979200. Epub
2004  Jan 13.

Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor localization and stability in neonatal
cardiomyocytes requires interaction with ankyrin-B.

Mohler PJ(1), Davis JQ, Davis LH, Hoffman JA, Michaely P, Bennett V.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cell Biology, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA. p.mohler@cellbio.duke.edu

The molecular mechanisms required for inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor
(InsP(3)R) targeting to specialized endoplasmic reticulum membrane domains are
unknown. We report here a direct, high affinity interaction between InsP(3)R and
ankyrin-B and demonstrate that this association is critical for InsP(3)R
post-translational stability and localization in cultures of neonatal
cardiomyocytes. Recombinant ankyrin-B membrane-binding domain directly interacts
with purified cerebellar InsP(3)R (K(d) = 2 nm). 220-kDa ankyrin-B
co-immunoprecipitates with InsP(3)R in tissue extracts from brain, heart, and
lung. Alanine-scanning mutagenesis of the ankyrin-B ANK (ankyrin repeat) repeat
beta-hairpin loop tips revealed that consecutive ANK repeat beta-hairpin loop
tips (repeats 22-24) are required for InsP(3)R interaction, thus providing the
first detailed evidence of how ankyrin polypeptides associate with membrane
proteins. Pulse-chase biosynthesis experiments demonstrate that reduction or
loss of ankyrin-B in ankyrin-B (+/-) or ankyrin-B (-/-) neonatal cardiomyocytes
leads to approximately 3-fold reduction in half-life of newly synthesized
InsP(3)R. Furthermore, interactions with ankyrin-B are required for InsP(3)R
stability as abnormal InsP(3)R phenotypes, including mis-localization, and
reduced half-life in ankyrin-B (+/-) cardiomyocytes can be rescued by green
fluorescent protein (GFP)-220-kDa ankyrin-B but not by GFP-220-kDa ankyrin-B
mutants, which do not associate with InsP(3)R. These new results provide the
first physiological evidence of a molecular partner required for early
post-translational stability of InsP(3)R.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M313979200
PMID: 14722080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
