---
reference_id: "PMID:35320431"
title: "Mutations in RNU7-1 Weaken Secondary RNA Structure, Induce MCP-1 and CXCL10 in CSF, and Result in Aicardi-Goutières Syndrome with Severe End-Organ Involvement."
authors:
- Naesens L
- Nemegeer J
- Roelens F
- Vallaeys L
- Meuwissen M
- Janssens K
- Verloo P
- Ogunjimi B
- Hemelsoet D
- Program for Undiagnosed Rare Diseases (UD-PrOZA)
- Hoste L
- Roels L
- De Bruyne M
- De Baere E
- Van Dorpe J
- Dendooven A
- Sieben A
- Rice GI
- Kerre T
- Beyaert R
- Uggenti C
- Crow YJ
- Tavernier SJ
- Maelfait J
- Haerynck F
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-022-01209-5
keywords:
- "Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/diagnosis, genetics"
- Chemokine CXCL10/genetics
- Histones
- Humans
- Interferons
- Mutation
- "Nervous System Malformations/diagnosis, genetics"
- RNA
- "RNA Precursors/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "RNA, Small Nuclear/genetics"
- RNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in RNU7-1 Weaken Secondary RNA Structure, Induce MCP-1 and CXCL10 in CSF, and Result in Aicardi-Goutières Syndrome with Severe End-Organ Involvement.
**Authors:** Naesens L, Nemegeer J, Roelens F, Vallaeys L, Meuwissen M, Janssens K, Verloo P, Ogunjimi B, Hemelsoet D, Program for Undiagnosed Rare Diseases (UD-PrOZA), Hoste L, Roels L, De Bruyne M, De Baere E, Van Dorpe J, Dendooven A, Sieben A, Rice GI, Kerre T, Beyaert R, Uggenti C, Crow YJ, Tavernier SJ, Maelfait J, Haerynck F
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-022-01209-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-022-01209-5)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2022 Jul;42(5):962-974. doi: 10.1007/s10875-022-01209-5. Epub
2022 Mar 23.

Mutations in RNU7-1 Weaken Secondary RNA Structure, Induce MCP-1 and CXCL10 in
CSF, and Result in Aicardi-Goutières Syndrome with Severe End-Organ Involvement.

Naesens L(1)(2), Nemegeer J(3)(4), Roelens F(5), Vallaeys L(6), Meuwissen
M(7)(8), Janssens K(7)(8), Verloo P(9), Ogunjimi B(10)(11), Hemelsoet D(12);
Program for Undiagnosed Rare Diseases (UD-PrOZA); Hoste L(1)(2), Roels L(1)(2),
De Bruyne M(13)(14), De Baere E(13)(14), Van Dorpe J(15), Dendooven A(15)(16),
Sieben A(12)(16), Rice GI(17), Kerre T(18), Beyaert R(4)(19), Uggenti C(20),
Crow YJ(20)(21), Tavernier SJ(2)(4)(13)(19), Maelfait J(3)(4), Haerynck
F(22)(23)(24).

Collaborators: Callens S, Dermaut B, Terryn W, Schuermans N, Poppe B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Ghent University, 9000,
Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Primary Immunodeficiency Research Lab, Jeffrey Modell Diagnosis and Research
Center, Ghent University Hospital, 9000, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)VIB-UGent Center for Inflammation Research, 9052, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, 9052, Ghent,
Belgium.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Algemeen Ziekenhuis Delta, 8800, Roeselare,
Belgium.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Algemeen Ziekenhuis Groeninge, 8500, Kortrijk,
Belgium.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, 2000, Antwerp,
Belgium.
(8)Department of Medical Genetics, Antwerp University Hospital, 2650, Antwerp,
Belgium.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology, University
Hospital Ghent, 9000, Ghent, Belgium.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Antwerp University Hospital, 2650, Edegem,
Belgium.
(11)Centre for Health Economics Research & Modeling Infectious Diseases
(CHERMID), Vaccine & Infectious Disease Institute (VAXINFECTIO), University of
Antwerp, 2610, Antwerp, Belgium.
(12)Department of Neurology, Ghent University Hospital, 9000, Ghent, Belgium.
(13)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, 9000, Ghent,
Belgium.
(14)Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, 9000, Ghent, Belgium.
(15)Department of Pathology, Ghent University Hospital, 9000, Ghent, Belgium.
(16)Department of Pathology, Antwerp University Hospital, 9000, Ghent, Belgium.
(17)Division of Evolution, Infection and Genomics, School of Biological
Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK.
(18)Department of Hematology, Jeffrey Modell Diagnosis and Research Center,
Ghent University Hospital, 9000, Ghent, Belgium.
(19)VIB-UGent Center for Inflammation Research, Laboratory of Molecular Signal
Transduction in Inflammation, VIB, 9052, Ghent, Belgium.
(20)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Cancer, The University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(21)Laboratory of Neurogenetics and Neuroinflammation, University of Paris,
Imagine Institute, Paris, France.
(22)Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Ghent University, 9000,
Ghent, Belgium. filomeen.haerynck@uzgent.be.
(23)Primary Immunodeficiency Research Lab, Jeffrey Modell Diagnosis and Research
Center, Ghent University Hospital, 9000, Ghent, Belgium.
filomeen.haerynck@uzgent.be.
(24)Department of Pediatric Pulmonology, Infectious Diseases and Immunology,
Ghent University Hospital, Corneel Heymanslaan 10, Ghent, Belgium.
filomeen.haerynck@uzgent.be.

BACKGROUND: Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS) is a type I interferonopathy
usually characterized by early-onset neurologic regression. Biallelic mutations
in LSM11 and RNU7-1, components of the U7 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein
(snRNP) complex, have been identified in a limited number of genetically
unexplained AGS cases. Impairment of U7 snRNP function results in misprocessing
of replication-dependent histone (RDH) pre-mRNA and disturbance of histone
occupancy of nuclear DNA, ultimately driving cGAS-dependent type I interferon
(IFN-I) release.
OBJECTIVE: We performed a clinical, genetic, and immunological workup of 3
unrelated patients with uncharacterized AGS.
METHODS: Whole exome sequencing (WES) and targeted Sanger sequencing of RNU7-1
were performed. Primary fibroblasts were used for mechanistic studies. IFN-I
signature and STAT1/2 phosphorylation were assessed in peripheral blood.
Cytokines were profiled on serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Histopathology
was examined on brain and kidney tissue.
RESULTS: Sequencing revealed compound heterozygous RNU7-1 mutations, resulting
in impaired RDH pre-mRNA processing. The 3' stem-loop mutations reduced
stability of the secondary U7 snRNA structure. A discrete IFN-I signature in
peripheral blood was paralleled by MCP-1 (CCL2) and CXCL10 upregulation in CSF.
Histopathological analysis of the kidney showed thrombotic microangiopathy. We
observed dysregulated STAT phosphorylation upon cytokine stimulation. Clinical
overview of all reported patients with RNU7-1-related disease revealed high
mortality and high incidence of organ involvement compared to other AGS
genotypes.
CONCLUSIONS: Targeted RNU7-1 sequencing is recommended in genetically
unexplained AGS cases. CSF cytokine profiling represents an additional
diagnostic tool to identify aberrant IFN-I signaling. Clinical follow-up of
RNU7-1-mutated patients should include screening for severe end-organ
involvement including liver disease and nephropathy.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-022-01209-5
PMCID: PMC9402729
PMID: 35320431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests. The
authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of the paper.
