---
reference_id: "PMID:35753087"
title: Efficacy and safety of ripretinib in patients with KIT-altered metastatic melanoma.
authors:
- Janku F
- Bauer S
- Shoumariyeh K
- Jones RL
- Spreafico A
- Jennings J
- Psoinos C
- Meade J
- Ruiz-Soto R
- Chi P
journal: ESMO Open
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100520
keywords:
- Adult
- Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors
- Humans
- Melanoma/drug therapy
- Naphthyridines/adverse effects
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors
- "Urea/adverse effects, analogs & derivatives"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of ripretinib in patients with KIT-altered metastatic melanoma.
**Authors:** Janku F, Bauer S, Shoumariyeh K, Jones RL, Spreafico A, Jennings J, Psoinos C, Meade J, Ruiz-Soto R, Chi P
**Journal:** ESMO Open (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100520](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100520)

## Content

1. ESMO Open. 2022 Aug;7(4):100520. doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100520. Epub 2022 
Jun 23.

Efficacy and safety of ripretinib in patients with KIT-altered metastatic 
melanoma.

Janku F(1), Bauer S(2), Shoumariyeh K(3), Jones RL(4), Spreafico A(5), Jennings 
J(6), Psoinos C(6), Meade J(6), Ruiz-Soto R(6), Chi P(7).

Author information:
(1)Investigational Cancer Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, USA. Electronic address: fjanku@me.com.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Sarcoma Center/West German Cancer Center, 
University Hospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany; German 
Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Partner Site University Hospital Essen, Essen, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Medicine I, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; German Cancer Consortium 
(DKTK), Partner Site Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Medical Oncology, Royal Marsden Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(5)Division of Medical Oncology and Hematology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, 
University Health Network, and Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada.
(6)Deciphera Pharmaceuticals, LLC, Waltham, USA.
(7)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program/Department of Medicine, Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, USA.

BACKGROUND: Ripretinib, a broad-spectrum KIT and platelet-derived growth factor 
receptor A switch-control tyrosine kinase inhibitor, is approved for the 
treatment of adult patients with advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumor as ≥ 
fourth-line therapy. We present the efficacy and safety of ripretinib in 
patients with KIT-altered metastatic melanoma enrolled in the expansion phase of 
the ripretinib phase I study.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with KIT-altered metastatic melanoma were 
enrolled and treated with ripretinib at the recommended phase II dose of 150 mg 
once daily in 28-day cycles. Investigator-assessed responses according to 
Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors version 1.1 were carried out on day 
1 of cycles 3, 5, 7, every three cycles thereafter, and at a final study visit.
RESULTS: A total of 26 patients with KIT-altered metastatic melanoma (25 with 
KIT mutations, 1 with KIT-amplification) were enrolled. Patients had received 
prior immunotherapy (n = 23, 88%) and KIT inhibitor therapy (n = 9, 35%). 
Confirmed objective response rate (ORR) was 23% [95% confidence interval (CI) 
9%-44%; one complete and five partial responses] with a median duration of 
response of 9.1 months (range, 6.9-31.3 months). Median progression-free 
survival (mPFS) was 7.3 months (95% CI 1.9-13.6 months). Patients without prior 
KIT inhibitor therapy had a higher ORR and longer mPFS (n = 17, ORR 29%, mPFS 
10.2 months) than those who had received prior KIT inhibitor treatment (n = 9, 
ORR 11%, mPFS 2.9 months). The most common treatment-related treatment-emergent 
adverse events (TEAEs) of any grade in ≥15% of patients were increased lipase, 
alopecia, actinic keratosis, myalgia, arthralgia, decreased appetite, fatigue, 
hyperkeratosis, nausea, and palmar-plantar erythrodysesthesia syndrome. There 
were no grade ≥4 treatment-related TEAEs.
CONCLUSIONS: In this phase I study, ripretinib demonstrated encouraging efficacy 
and a well-tolerated safety profile in patients with KIT-altered metastatic 
melanoma, suggesting ripretinib may have a clinically meaningful role in 
treating these patients.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100520
PMCID: PMC9434165
PMID: 35753087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Role of the funder This study was designed by 
Deciphera Pharmaceuticals, LLC, with input from the investigators. Deciphera 
Pharmaceuticals, LLC, analyzed the data collected by the investigators and 
interpreted jointly with all the authors. The authors had access to the data to 
verify the completeness and accuracy of the data reported and for the adherence 
of the study to the protocol. The corresponding author had full access to all 
data in this study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for 
publication. Disclosure FJ received research support from Astex, Novartis, 
BioMed Valley Discoveries, Fore Bio, Deciphera, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Asana, 
Ideaya Biosciences, Sanofi, Merck, F-star, JSI Innopharm, Bioxcel, Lilly, 
Bicara, PureTech Health, FujiFilm Pharmaceuticals, Sotio, Synlogic, NextCure, 
and Hutchinson Medipharma; has been on the Scientific Advisory Boards of Ideaya 
Biosciences, Synlogic, Sotio, Puretech Health, Deciphera, Crown Bioscience, 
Asana, Fore Bio, Novartis, Bicara, and PegaOne; has served as a paid consultant 
for Mersana Therapeutics, Flame Bio, Cardiff Oncology, MedinCell, and Immunomet; 
has ownership interests in Cardiff Oncology and Monte Rosa Therapeutics; and 
holds a leadership position at Monte Rosa Therapeutics. SB received honoraria 
from Bayer, Lilly, Novartis, Pfizer, and Pharmamar; acts in an 
advisory/consultancy role for Blueprint Medicines, ADC Therapeutics, Lilly, 
Novartis, Daiichi Sankyo, Plexxikon, Nanobiotix, Deciphera Pharmaceuticals, 
Exelixis, Janssen-Cilag, Pharmamar, Bayer, and Roche; receives research support 
from Novartis (self and institution), Incyte (institution), and Blueprint 
Medicines (institution); and serves as a member of the External Advisory Board 
of the Federal Ministry of Health for “off-label use in oncology.” KS received 
honoraria from and acts in an advisory/consultancy role for Novartis and 
Blueprint Medicines; and received travel/accommodation/expense reimbursement 
from AbbVie and Novartis. RLJ received honoraria from and acts in an 
advisory/consultancy role for Adaptimmune, Athenex, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Blueprint Medicines, Clinigen, Eisai, Epizyme, Daichii Sankyo, Deciphera 
Pharmaceuticals, Immunedesign, Lilly, Merck, Pharmamar, Springworks, Tracon, and 
Upto Date; received research support (institution) from MSD; and has a patent 
pending for Biomarker. AS acts in an advisory/consultancy role for Merck, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Oncorus, and Janssen; and received research support 
(institution) from Novartis, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Symphogen 
AstraZeneca/Medimmune, Merck, Bayer, Surface Oncology, Northern Biologics, 
Janssen Oncology/Johnson & Johnson, Roche, Regeneron, Alkermes, Array 
Biopharma/Pfizer, GSK, and Treadwell. JJ is a former employee of Deciphera 
Pharmaceuticals. CP is employed by Deciphera Pharmaceuticals; and holds stock 
options in AbbVie, CVS, Johnson & Johnson, Pfizer, and Viatris. JM is employed 
by and holds stock options in Deciphera Pharmaceuticals. RRS is employed by and 
holds stock options in Deciphera Pharmaceuticals. PC acts in an 
advisory/consultancy role for Deciphera Pharmaceuticals, Exelixis, ZaiLab, 
Novartis, and NewBay; and received research funding (institution) from Deciphera 
Pharmaceuticals and Pfizer/Array; spouse owns stock options in Oric Pharma. Data 
sharing Qualified scientific and medical researchers can make requests for 
individual participant data that underlie the results reported in this article, 
after de-identification, at info@deciphera.com. Proposals for data will be 
evaluated and approved by Deciphera at its sole discretion. All approved 
researchers must sign a data access agreement before accessing the data. Data 
will be available as soon as possible but no later than 1 year of the acceptance 
of the article for publication, and for 3 years after article publication. 
Deciphera will not share data from identified participants or a data dictionary.