---
reference_id: "PMID:38066625"
title: "SMAD4 variants and its genotype-phenotype correlations to juvenile polyposis syndrome"
journal: Hered Cancer Clin Pract
year: "2023"
doi: 10.1186/s13053-023-00267-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SMAD4 variants and its genotype-phenotype correlations to juvenile polyposis syndrome

**Journal:** Hered Cancer Clin Pract (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13053-023-00267-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13053-023-00267-z)

## Content

Background: Juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS), a rare autosomal dominant syndrome, affects one per 100 000 births, increasing lifetime cancer risk by 9 - 50%. Around 40-60% of JPS cases are caused by disease-causing variants (DCV) in SMAD4 or BMPR1A genes, of which SMAD4 accounts for 20-30%.

Objectives: To characterise genotype-phenotype correlations between sites and types of variants within SMAD4 to JPS phenotypes, to inform diagnosis, screening, and management of JPS.

Search methods: Online search databases utilised included Ovid MEDLINE, Embase Classic + Embase and PubMed, using search terms classified by MeSH on Demand. Adjacency operators, word truncation and Boolean operators were employed. 110 articles were included in the review, collating 291 variants from the literature.

Results: In SMAD4 + JPS patients, most variants are located around SMAD4's MH2 domain (3' end). Extracolonic involvement, massive gastric polyposis and a more aggressive phenotype have been associated with SMAD4 + JPS, predisposing to gastric cancer. This has contributed to an overall higher incidence of GI cancers compared to other genes causing JPS, with DCVs mostly all within the MH2 domain.

Genetically related allelic disorders of SMAD4 also have variants in this region, including hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) alongside SMAD4 + JPS, and Myhre syndrome, independent of JPS. Similarly, with DCVs in the MH2 domain, Ménétrier's disease, hypertrophic osteoarthropathy and juvenile idiopathic arthritis have been seen in this population, whereas cardiac pathologies have occurred both alongside and independently of SMAD4 + JPS with DCVs in the MH1 domain.

Conclusion: Truncating and missense variants around the MH2 region of SMAD4 are most prevalent and pathogenic, thus should undergo careful surveillance. Given association with extracolonic polyposis and higher GI cancer risk, endoscopic screening should occur more frequently and at an earlier age in SMAD4 + JPS patients than in patients with other causative genes, with consideration of Ménétrier's disease on upper GI endoscopy.
