---
reference_id: "PMID:28747911"
title: F1 Domain of the Leishmania (Leishmania) donovani Nucleoside Hydrolase Promotes a Th1 Response in Leishmania (Leishmania) infantum Cured Patients and in Asymptomatic Individuals Living in an Endemic Area of Leishmaniasis.
authors:
- Carrillo E
- Fernandez L
- Ibarra-Meneses AV
- Santos MLB
- Nico D
- de Luca PM
- Correa CB
- de Almeida RP
- Moreno J
- Palatnik-de-Sousa CB
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00750
content_type: abstract_only
---

# F1 Domain of the Leishmania (Leishmania) donovani Nucleoside Hydrolase Promotes a Th1 Response in Leishmania (Leishmania) infantum Cured Patients and in Asymptomatic Individuals Living in an Endemic Area of Leishmaniasis.
**Authors:** Carrillo E, Fernandez L, Ibarra-Meneses AV, Santos MLB, Nico D, de Luca PM, Correa CB, de Almeida RP, Moreno J, Palatnik-de-Sousa CB
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2017.00750](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2017.00750)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2017 Jul 12;8:750. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00750. eCollection 
2017.

F1 Domain of the Leishmania (Leishmania) donovani Nucleoside Hydrolase Promotes 
a Th1 Response in Leishmania (Leishmania) infantum Cured Patients and in 
Asymptomatic Individuals Living in an Endemic Area of Leishmaniasis.

Carrillo E(1), Fernandez L(1), Ibarra-Meneses AV(1), Santos MLB(2), Nico D(3), 
de Luca PM(4), Correa CB(5), de Almeida RP(2)(6), Moreno J(1), Palatnik-de-Sousa 
CB(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)WHO Collaborating Centre for Leishmaniasis, Centro Nacional de Microbiologia, 
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Medicina, Hospital Universitário, Universidade Federal de 
Sergipe, Aracaju, Brazil.
(3)Instituto de Microbiologia Paulo de Góes, Universidade Federal do Rio de 
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Laboratório de Imunoparasitologia, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
(5)Departamento de Morfologia, Universidade Federal de Sergipe, Aracaju, Brazil.
(6)Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia de Investigação em Imunologia, São 
Paulo, Brazil.

The Leishmania (Leishmania) donovani nucleoside hydrolase NH36 is the main 
antigen of the Leishmune® vaccine and one of the promising candidates for 
vaccination against visceral leishmaniasis. The antigenicity of the N-terminal 
(F1), the central (F2), or the C-terminal recombinant domain (F3) of NH36 was 
evaluated using peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from individuals 
infected with L. (L.) infantum from an endemic area of visceral leishmaniasis of 
Spain. Both NH36 and F1 domains significantly increased the PBMC proliferation 
stimulation index of cured patients and infected asymptomatic individuals 
compared to healthy controls. Moreover, F1 induced a 19% higher proliferative 
response than NH36 in asymptomatic exposed subjects. In addition, in patients 
cured from visceral leishmaniasis, proliferation in response to NH36 and F1 was 
accompanied by a significant increase of IFN-γ and TNF-α secretion, which was 
42-43% higher, in response to F1 than to NH36. The interleukin 17 (IL-17) 
secretion was stronger in asymptomatic subjects, in response to F1, as well as 
in cured cutaneous leishmaniasis after NH36 stimulation. While no IL-10 
secretion was determined by F1, a granzyme B increase was detected in 
supernatants from cured patients after stimulation with either NH36 or F1. These 
data demonstrate that F1 is the domain of NH36 that induces a recall cellular 
response in individuals with acquired resistance to the infection by L. (L.) 
infantum. In addition, F1 and NH36 discriminated the IgG3 humoral response in 
patients with active visceral leishmaniasis due to L. (L.) donovani (Ethiopia) 
and L. (L.) infantum (Spain) from that of endemic and non-endemic area controls. 
NH36 showed higher reactivity with sera from L. (L.) donovani-infected 
individuals, indicating species specificity. We conclude that the F1 domain, 
previously characterized as an inducer of the Th1 and Th17 responses in 
cured/exposed patients infected with L. (L.) infantum chagasi, may also be 
involved in the generation of a protective response against L. (L.) infantum and 
represents a potential vaccine candidate for the control of human leishmaniasis 
alone, or in combination with other HLA epitopes/antigens.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00750
PMCID: PMC5506215
PMID: 28747911