---
reference_id: "PMID:32929646"
title: "Amyloid, tau and risk of Alzheimer's disease: a Mendelian randomization study."
authors:
- Yeung CHC
- Lau KWD
- Au Yeung SL
- Schooling CM
journal: Eur J Epidemiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10654-020-00683-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amyloid, tau and risk of Alzheimer's disease: a Mendelian randomization study.
**Authors:** Yeung CHC, Lau KWD, Au Yeung SL, Schooling CM
**Journal:** Eur J Epidemiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10654-020-00683-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10654-020-00683-8)

## Content

1. Eur J Epidemiol. 2021 Jan;36(1):81-88. doi: 10.1007/s10654-020-00683-8. Epub 
2020 Sep 14.

Amyloid, tau and risk of Alzheimer's disease: a Mendelian randomization study.

Yeung CHC(1), Lau KWD(1), Au Yeung SL(1), Schooling CM(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of 
Hong Kong, 7 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(2)School of Public Health, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of 
Hong Kong, 7 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China. cms1@hku.hk.
(3)Graduate School of Public Health and Health Policy, City University of New 
York, New York, USA. cms1@hku.hk.

This study was carried out to assess the effect of amyloid and tau on 
Alzheimer's disease using two-sample Mendelian randomization design. Genetic 
associations with plasma amyloid species (amyloid precursor protein, 
amyloid-like protein 2, serum amyloid P-component, amyloid beta peptide), 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) amyloid beta, total tau, and phosphorylated tau181 
were extracted from the largest genome-wide association study (GWAS) available. 
Genetic associations with Alzheimer's disease were obtained from a GWAS of 
proxy-cases based on family history of Alzheimer's disease with 314,278 
participants from the UK Biobank and a GWAS with clinically diagnosed 
Alzheimer's disease from the International Genomics of Alzheimer's Project 
(IGAP) with 21,982 cases and 41,944 controls. Estimates were obtained using 
inverse variance weighting with sensitivity analyses including MR-Egger, 
weighted median and MR-PRESSO. Presence of bias due to selective survival and 
competing risk was also considered. Plasma amyloid species, CSF total tau and 
phosphorylated tau181 were not associated with Alzheimer's disease. For CSF 
Aβ42, no association was found using the proxy-cases but an inverse association 
was found after removing outliers with MR-PRESSO using IGAP. Higher genetically 
predicted (p < 1 × 10-5) plasma amyloid species, CSF total tau and 
phosphorylated tau181 (based on sample sizes ~ 3300) were not associated with 
Alzheimer's disease using family history or clinically diagnosed cases while 
effects of CSF Aβ42 were inconsistent between the family history and IGAP GWAS.

DOI: 10.1007/s10654-020-00683-8
PMID: 32929646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]