---
reference_id: "PMID:20301338"
title: Arginase Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Sun A
- Crombez EA
- Wong D
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arginase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Sun A, Crombez EA, Wong D

## Content

1. Arginase Deficiency.

Sun A(1), Crombez EA(2), Wong D(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2004 Oct 21 [updated 2020 May 28].

Author information:
(1)Seattle Children's Hospital;, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
(2)Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical Inc, Novato, California
(3)University of California Los Angeles Medical Center, Los Angeles, California

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Arginase deficiency in untreated individuals is
characterized by episodic hyperammonemia of variable degree that is infrequently
severe enough to be life threatening or to cause death. Most commonly, birth and
early childhood are normal. Untreated individuals have slowing of linear growth
at age one to three years, followed by development of spasticity, plateauing of
cognitive development, and subsequent loss of developmental milestones. If
untreated, arginase deficiency usually progresses to severe spasticity, loss of
ambulation, complete loss of bowel and bladder control, and severe intellectual
disability. Seizures are common and are usually controlled easily. Individuals
treated from birth, either as a result of newborn screening or having an
affected older sib, appear to have minimal symptoms.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of arginase deficiency is established in a
proband with suggestive clinical and/or biochemical findings and confirmed by
identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in ARG1 or, in limited
instances, by failure to detect arginase enzyme activity (usually <1% of normal)
in red blood cell extracts.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management should closely mirror that
for urea cycle disorders, except that individuals with arginase deficiency are
not as likely to have episodes of hyperammonemia; if present, such episodes
respond to conservative management (e.g., intravenous fluid administration).
Treatment should involve a team coordinated by a metabolic specialist. Routine
outpatient management includes restriction of dietary protein and consideration
of oral nitrogen-scavenging drugs (in those who have chronic or recurrent
hyperammonemia). Treatment of an acutely ill (comatose and encephalopathic)
individual requires: rapid reduction of plasma ammonia concentration; use of
pharmacologic agents (sodium benzoate and/or sodium
phenylbutyrate/phenylacetate) to promote excretion of excess nitrogen through
alternative pathways; and introduction of calories supplied by carbohydrates and
fat to reduce catabolism and the amount of excess nitrogen in the diet while
avoiding overhydration and resulting cerebral edema. Standard treatment for
seizures, spasticity, developmental delay / intellectual disability, and joint
contractures. In those with persistent hepatic synthetic function abnormalities,
fresh-frozen plasma should be considered prior to surgical procedures. In the
rare instance of progression to hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis, liver
transplantation can be considered. Prevention of primary manifestations:
Maintenance of plasma arginine concentration as near normal as possible through
restriction of dietary protein and use of oral nitrogen-scavenging drugs as
necessary to treat hyperammonemia. Liver transplantation eliminates
hyperargininemia and presumably the risk for hyperammonemia but is rarely
necessary in arginase deficiency. Surveillance: Regular follow up at intervals
determined by age and degree of metabolic stability. Assessment of metabolic
control (plasma ammonia, amino acid profile, and nutritional labs) at least
monthly for the first year of life and as determined by a metabolic specialist
after the first year of life; guanidinoacetate and liver function tests every
six to 12 months; monitoring of growth and developmental progress at each visit.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Valproic acid (exacerbates hyperammonemia).
Evaluation of relatives at risk: Plasma quantitative amino acid analysis,
molecular genetic testing (if the family-specific pathogenic variants are
known), or enzymatic testing in all sibs (especially younger ones) of a proband
to allow early diagnosis and treatment of those found to be affected. Pregnancy
management: In general, affected pregnant women should continue dietary protein
restriction and ammonia-scavenging medications (after an appropriate
benefit/risk calculation) based on their clinical course before pregnancy.
Other: Immunizations on the usual schedule; appropriate use of antipyretics as
indicated (ibuprofen preferred over acetaminophen).
GENETIC COUNSELING: Arginase deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. At conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of
being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance
of being unaffected and not a carrier. Heterozygotes (carriers) are
asymptomatic. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal testing for
pregnancies at increased risk are possible if the ARG1 pathogenic variants in
the family are known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301338
