---
reference_id: "PMID:28540603"
title: Positioning novel biologicals in CKD-mineral and bone disorders.
authors:
- Tartaglione L
- Pasquali M
- Rotondi S
- Muci ML
- Covic A
- Mazzaferro S
journal: J Nephrol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s40620-017-0410-1
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/therapeutic use"
- Biological Products/therapeutic use
- Bone Density Conservation Agents/therapeutic use
- Bone and Bones/physiopathology
- "Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral and Bone Disorder/drug therapy, etiology"
- Denosumab/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Osteoporosis/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Parathyroid Hormone/therapeutic use
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/complications, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Positioning novel biologicals in CKD-mineral and bone disorders.
**Authors:** Tartaglione L, Pasquali M, Rotondi S, Muci ML, Covic A, Mazzaferro S
**Journal:** J Nephrol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40620-017-0410-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40620-017-0410-1)

## Content

1. J Nephrol. 2017 Oct;30(5):689-699. doi: 10.1007/s40620-017-0410-1. Epub 2017
May  24.

Positioning novel biologicals in CKD-mineral and bone disorders.

Tartaglione L(1), Pasquali M(2), Rotondi S(1), Muci ML(1), Covic A(3), 
Mazzaferro S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular, Respiratory, Nephrologic, Anesthetic and 
Geriatric Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Nephrology and Dialysis, University Hospital Company, 
Policlinico Umberto I, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Gr. T. Popa University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Iasi, Romania.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular, Respiratory, Nephrologic, Anesthetic and 
Geriatric Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy. 
sandro.mazzaferro@uniroma1.it.

Renal osteodystrophy (ROD), the histologic bone lesions of chronic kidney 
disease (CKD), is now included in a wider syndrome with laboratory abnormalities 
of mineral metabolism and extra-skeletal calcifications or CKD-mineral and bone 
disorders (CKD-MBD), to highlight the increased burden of mortality. Aging 
people, frequently identified as early CKD, could suffer from either the 
classical age-related osteoporosis (OP) or ROD. Distinguishing between these two 
bone diseases may not be easy without bone biopsy. In any case, besides 
classical therapies for ROD, nephrologists are now challenged by the possibility 
of using new drugs developed for OP. Importantly, while therapies for ROD mostly 
aim at controlling parathyroid secretion with bone effects regarded as indirect, 
new drugs for OP directly modulate bone cells activity. Thus, their action could 
be useful in specific types of ROD. Parathyroid hormone therapy, which is 
anabolic in OP, could be useful in renal patients with low turnover bone 
disease. Denosumab, the monoclonal antibody against receptor activator of NF-κB 
ligand (RANK-L) that inhibits osteoclast activity and proliferation, could be 
beneficial in cases with high turnover bone. Use of romosozumab, the monoclonal 
antibody against sclerostin, which both stimulates osteoblasts and inhibits 
osteoclasts, could allow both anabolic and anti-resorptive effects. However, we 
should not forget the systemic role now attributed to CKD-MBD. In fact, 
therapies targeting bone cells activity could also result in unpredicted 
extra-bone effects and affect cardiovascular outcomes. In conclusion, the new 
biologicals established for OP could be useful in renal patients with either OP 
or ROD. In addition, their potential non-bone effects warrant investigation.

DOI: 10.1007/s40620-017-0410-1
PMID: 28540603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]