---
reference_id: "PMID:14722303"
title: Systemic immune deficiency necessary for cytomegalovirus invasion of the mature brain.
authors:
- Reuter JD
- Gomez DL
- Wilson JH
- Van Den Pol AN
journal: J Virol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1128/jvi.78.3.1473-1487.2004
keywords:
- Animals
- Blood-Brain Barrier
- "Brain/cytology, virology"
- Encephalitis/virology
- Female
- "Genes, Reporter"
- Green Fluorescent Proteins
- Herpesviridae Infections/virology
- Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/complications
- "Leukocytes, Mononuclear/virology"
- "Luminescent Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Nude"
- "Mice, SCID"
- Monocytes/virology
- "Muromegalovirus/genetics, pathogenicity"
- "Recombinant Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Risk Factors
- Viremia/virology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic immune deficiency necessary for cytomegalovirus invasion of the mature brain.
**Authors:** Reuter JD, Gomez DL, Wilson JH, Van Den Pol AN
**Journal:** J Virol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jvi.78.3.1473-1487.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.78.3.1473-1487.2004)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2004 Feb;78(3):1473-87. doi: 10.1128/jvi.78.3.1473-1487.2004.

Systemic immune deficiency necessary for cytomegalovirus invasion of the mature 
brain.

Reuter JD(1), Gomez DL, Wilson JH, Van Den Pol AN.

Author information:
(1)Section of Comparative Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA. jon.reuter@yale.edu

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a significant opportunistic pathogen associated with 
AIDS and immunosuppressive therapy. Infection of the mature central nervous 
system (CNS) can cause significant pathology with associated neurological 
deficits, mental disorders, and cognitive impairment and may have potentially 
fatal consequences. Using genetically immunocompromised mice, we studied 
mechanisms of CMV invasion into, and behavior within, the CNS. Adult 
immunodeficient (nude and SCID) and control mice were peripherally infected with 
recombinant mouse CMV expressing a green fluorescent protein reporter gene. 
Control mice actively eliminated acute peripheral infection and were resistant 
to invasion of CMV into the brain. In contrast, virus infected brains of 
immunodeficient mice but only after a minimum of 21 days postinoculation. After 
inoculation, CMV was found in circulating leukocytes (MAC-3/CD45(+)) and in 
leukocytes within the brain, suggesting these cells as a possible source of CMV 
entry into the CNS. CNS infection was observed in many different cell types, 
including neurons, glial cells, meninges, ependymal cells, and cells of cerebral 
vessels. Infection foci progressively expanded locally to adjacent cells, 
resulting in meningitis, choroiditis, encephalitis, vasculitis, and necrosis; 
clear indication of axonal transport of CMV was not found. Regional distribution 
of CMV was unique in each brain, consisting of randomly distributed, unilateral 
foci. Testing whether CMV gained access to brain through nonspecific vascular 
disruption, vascular injections of a tracer molecule revealed no obvious 
disruption of the blood brain barrier in mice with CMV in the brain. Results 
indicate the importance of host adaptive immunity (particularly T cells) in 
controlling entry and dissemination of CMV into the brain and are consistent 
with the view that virus may be carried into the brain by circulating 
mononuclear cells that traffic through the blood brain barrier.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.78.3.1473-1487.2004
PMCID: PMC321365
PMID: 14722303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]