---
reference_id: "PMID:33184735"
title: Distorted frequency of dendritic cells and their associated stimulatory and inhibitory markers augment the pathogenesis of pemphigus vulgaris.
authors:
- Das D
- Singh A
- Antil PS
- Sharma D
- Arava S
- Khandpur S
- Sharma A
journal: Immunol Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s12026-020-09166-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distorted frequency of dendritic cells and their associated stimulatory and inhibitory markers augment the pathogenesis of pemphigus vulgaris.
**Authors:** Das D, Singh A, Antil PS, Sharma D, Arava S, Khandpur S, Sharma A
**Journal:** Immunol Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12026-020-09166-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12026-020-09166-0)

## Content

1. Immunol Res. 2020 Dec;68(6):353-362. doi: 10.1007/s12026-020-09166-0. Epub
2020  Nov 12.

Distorted frequency of dendritic cells and their associated stimulatory and 
inhibitory markers augment the pathogenesis of pemphigus vulgaris.

Das D(1), Singh A(1), Antil PS(1), Sharma D(1), Arava S(2), Khandpur S(3), 
Sharma A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.
(3)Department of Dermatology & Venereology, All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India. dralpanasharma@gmail.com.

The objective of this study was to investigate the frequency and functionality 
of DCs and its associated stimulatory and inhibitory markers in the pathogenesis 
of PV Active PV patients (n = 30) having both skin and oral lesions, and 30 
healthy controls were recruited in the study. The frequency of DCs was 
determined by flow cytometry followed by the primary culture by using 
recombinant IL-4 (250 IU/ml) and GM-CSF (600 IU/ml). The culture supernatant was 
used for ELISA. RNA was isolated from sorted DCs and used for the mRNA 
expression of DC-associated stimulatory (CD40 and CD80) and inhibitory (PSGL1 
and ILT3) markers. Tissue localization of Langerhans cells was done by 
immunohistochemistry. In this study, altered frequency of myeloid DC (mDC) and 
plasmacytoid DC (pDC) was seen in the circulation of PV patients. The primary 
culture of patient-derived DCs showed anomalous cytokine profiling. In the 
culture supernatant of DCs, elevated levels of TNF-ɑ and IL-12 were detected in 
PV patients. Meanwhile, reverse trend was found in the case of IFN-ɑ and IL-10 
cytokine levels. Similarly, a discrepancy in the expression of DC-associated 
stimulatory (CD40 and CD80) and inhibitory (PSGL1 and ILT3) markers suggested 
their possible involvement in the immunopathogenesis of PV. An elevated number 
of tissue localizing Langerhans cells was also observed in the perilesional 
skin. This study indicates the distorted frequency and functionality of DCs in 
the immunopathogenesis of PV. Targeting these functional markers in the future 
may generate novel therapeutic options for better management of PV.

DOI: 10.1007/s12026-020-09166-0
PMID: 33184735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]