---
reference_id: PMID:39858456
title: "HBV cccDNA: The Molecular Reservoir of Hepatitis B Persistence and Challenges to Achieve Viral Eradication."
authors:
- Boonstra A
- Sari G
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/biom15010062
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hepatitis B virus/genetics, physiology, drug effects"
- "DNA, Circular/genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA, Viral/genetics, metabolism"
- Virus Replication/drug effects
- "Hepatitis B, Chronic/virology, drug therapy"
- "Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- "Hepatitis B/virology, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HBV cccDNA: The Molecular Reservoir of Hepatitis B Persistence and Challenges to Achieve Viral Eradication.
**Authors:** Boonstra A, Sari G
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom15010062](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom15010062)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2025 Jan 4;15(1):62. doi: 10.3390/biom15010062.

HBV cccDNA: The Molecular Reservoir of Hepatitis B Persistence and Challenges to 
Achieve Viral Eradication.

Boonstra A(1), Sari G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus Medical Center, 
Wytemaweg 80, 3015CN Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a major global health issue, with an estimated 254 
million people living with chronic HBV infection worldwide as of 2022. Chronic 
HBV infection is the leading cause of cirrhosis and liver cancer. Current 
treatment with nucleos(t)ide analogs is effective in the suppression of viral 
activity but generally requires lifelong treatment. They fail to eradicate the 
HBV viral reservoir, called covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA), which 
replicates in the nucleus of liver cells. The cccDNA serves as the sole template 
for viral replication, as it generates the pregenomic RNA (pgRNA) necessary for 
producing new viral genomes. This stable form of viral DNA can reactivate the 
virus when treatment is stopped. HBV cccDNA is therefore one of the main 
challenges in curing chronic HBV infections. By targeting steps such as cccDNA 
formation, capsid assembly, or particle secretion, researchers continue to seek 
ways to interfere with HBV replication and to reduce its persistence, ultimately 
to eradicate HBV as a global health problem. This review provides an overview of 
what is currently known about cccDNA formation and biogenesis and the ongoing 
efforts to target and eradicate it to cure chronic HBV infections.

DOI: 10.3390/biom15010062
PMCID: PMC11763949
PMID: 39858456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.