---
reference_id: "PMID:28516867"
title: The link between Proteus mirabilis, environmental factors and autoantibodies in rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Rashid T
- Ebringer A
- Wilson C
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2017'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The link between Proteus mirabilis, environmental factors and autoantibodies in rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Rashid T, Ebringer A, Wilson C
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2017)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2017 Sep-Oct;35(5):865-871. Epub 2017 May 8.

The link between Proteus mirabilis, environmental factors and autoantibodies in 
rheumatoid arthritis.

Rashid T(1), Ebringer A(2), Wilson C(3).

Author information:
(1)Analytical Sciences Group, Kings College London, UK.
(2)Analytical Sciences Group, Kings College London, UK. alan.ebringer@kcl.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Pathology, King Edward VII Memorial Hospital, Hamilton, 
Bermuda.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a relatively common and potentially disabling 
immune-mediated inflammatory systemic disease, predominantly affecting women and 
characterised by multiple small joint arthritis. Extensive data supports the 
roles of genetic, environmental and microbial factors in the triggering and 
development of this disease. Proteus mirabilis is considered as the main 
microbial culprit in the causation of RA. The evidence for the role of these 
microbes in RA and their links with commonly associated autoantibodies such as 
rheumatoid factors and anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies have been 
elucidated together with their relations with some of the non-microbial 
environmental factors which have been implicated in the aetiopathogenesis of RA. 
The most likely mechanism in the development of RA is "molecular mimicry" where 
Proteus antigens were found to share homologous sequences, which cross-react 
with certain self-antigens present in synovial tissues. This could raise 
possibilities for implementing a new therapeutic strategy in the treatment of 
RA.

PMID: 28516867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]