---
reference_id: "PMID:20301347"
title: Congenital Myasthenic Syndromes Overview.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Abicht A
- Müller JS
- Lochmüller H
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital Myasthenic Syndromes Overview.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Abicht A, Müller JS, Lochmüller H

## Content

1. Congenital Myasthenic Syndromes Overview.

Abicht A(1), Müller JS(2), Lochmüller H(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2003 May 9 [updated 2021 Dec 23].

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Center (MGZ);, Department of Neurology, Friedrich-Baur 
Institute, Munich, Germany
(2)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom
(3)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute;, Division of 
Neurology, Department of Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital;, Brain and Mind Research 
Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada

The purpose of this overview is to: 1.. Briefly describe the clinical 
characteristics of CMS; 2.. Review the subtypes and genetic causes of CMS; 3.. 
Review the differential diagnosis of CMS; 4.. Provide an evaluation strategy to 
identify the genetic cause of CMS in a proband; 5.. Review management of CMS 
following diagnosis: evaluations, treatment (based on genetic cause when 
possible) and surveillance; 6.. Inform genetic counseling of family members of a 
proband with CMS.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301347