---
reference_id: "PMID:38116000"
title: "Mulibrey nanism and immunological complications: a comprehensive case report and literature review."
authors:
- Gazzin A
- Pala F
- Bosticardo M
- Niemela J
- Stoddard J
- Biasin E
- Quarello P
- Carli D
- Ferroni F
- Delmonte OM
- Montin D
- Rosenzweig SD
- Licciardi F
- Notarangelo LD
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1303251
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Agammaglobulinemia/complications
- "Heart Failure/etiology, therapy"
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
- Kidney Neoplasms/genetics
- Lymphopenia/complications
- Mulibrey Nanism/genetics
- Mutation
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Tripartite Motif Proteins/genetics
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
- Wilms Tumor/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mulibrey nanism and immunological complications: a comprehensive case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Gazzin A, Pala F, Bosticardo M, Niemela J, Stoddard J, Biasin E, Quarello P, Carli D, Ferroni F, Delmonte OM, Montin D, Rosenzweig SD, Licciardi F, Notarangelo LD
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1303251](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1303251)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Dec 5;14:1303251. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1303251. 
eCollection 2023.

Mulibrey nanism and immunological complications: a comprehensive case report and 
literature review.

Gazzin A(1)(2), Pala F(1), Bosticardo M(1), Niemela J(3), Stoddard J(3), Biasin 
E(4), Quarello P(4), Carli D(5)(6), Ferroni F(7), Delmonte OM(1), Montin D(8), 
Rosenzweig SD(3), Licciardi F(9), Notarangelo LD(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and Microbiology, Immune Deficiency 
Genetics Section, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(2)Postgraduate School of Pediatrics, University of Torino, Turin, Italy.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Institutes of Health Clinical 
Center, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(4)Pediatric Onco-Hematology, Stem Cell Transplantation and Cellular Therapy 
Division, Regina Margherita Children's Hospital, Turin, Italy.
(5)Immunogenetics and Transplant Biology Unit, Città della Salute e della 
Scienza University Hospital, Turin, Italy.
(6)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy.
(7)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, City of Health and Science University 
Hospital, Turin, Italy.
(8)Department of Public Health and Pediatrics, University of Turin, Pediatria 
Specialistica U, "Regina Margherita" Children Hospital, Turin, Italy.
(9)Department of Public Health and Pediatric Sciences, University of Torino, 
Torino, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Mulibrey nanism (MUL) is a rare disorder caused by TRIM37 gene 
variants characterized by growth failure, dysmorphic features, congestive heart 
failure (CHF), and an increased risk of Wilms' tumor. Although immune system 
impairment has been documented in MUL, the underlying mechanisms remain poorly 
understood.
METHODS: We present a case of MUL with progressive lymphopenia and review 
similar cases from the literature.
RESULTS: Our patient presented with prenatal onset growth restriction, 
characteristic dysmorphic features, and Wilms' tumor. She developed progressive 
lymphopenia starting at 10 years of age, leading to the initiation of 
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) replacement therapy and infection prophylaxis. 
Genetic analysis detected a likely pathogenic variant on the maternal allele and 
copy number loss on the paternal allele in TRIM37. Subsequently a cardiac 
magnetic resonance imaging was conducted revealing signs of pericardial 
constriction raising concerns for intestinal lymphatic losses. The cessation of 
IVIG therapy did not coincide with any increase in the rate of infections. The 
patient exhibited a distinct immunological profile, characterized by 
hypogammaglobulinemia, impaired antibody responses, and skewed T-cell subsets 
with an altered CD4+/CD8+ ratio, consistent with previous reports. Normal 
thymocyte development assessed by artificial thymic organoid platform ruled out 
an early hematopoietic intrinsic defect of T-cell development.
DISCUSSION: The immunological profile of MUL patients reported so far shares 
similarities with that described in protein-losing enteropathy secondary to CHF 
in Fontan circulation and primary intestinal lymphangiectasia. These 
similarities include hypogammaglobulinemia, significant T-cell deficiency with 
decreased CD4+ and CD8+ counts, altered CD4+/CD8+ ratios, and significantly 
modified CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell phenotypes toward effector and terminal 
differentiated T cells, accompanied by a loss of naïve CD45RA+ T lymphocytes. In 
MUL, CHF is a cardinal feature, occurring in a significant proportion of 
patients and influencing prognosis. Signs of CHF or constrictive pericarditis 
have been evident in the case reported here and in all cases of MUL with 
documented immune dysfunction reported so far. These observations raise 
intriguing connections between these conditions. However, further investigation 
is warranted to in-depth define the immunological defect, providing valuable 
insights into the pathophysiology and treatment strategies for this condition.

Copyright © 2023 Gazzin, Pala, Bosticardo, Niemela, Stoddard, Biasin, Quarello, 
Carli, Ferroni, Delmonte, Montin, Rosenzweig, Licciardi and Notarangelo.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1303251
PMCID: PMC10728670
PMID: 38116000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.