---
reference_id: "PMID:18671700"
title: "Diagnosing and treating Diamond Blackfan anaemia: results of an international clinical consensus conference."
authors:
- Vlachos A
- Ball S
- Dahl N
- Alter BP
- Sheth S
- Ramenghi U
- Meerpohl J
- Karlsson S
- Liu JM
- Leblanc T
- Paley C
- Kang EM
- Leder EJ
- Atsidaftos E
- Shimamura A
- Bessler M
- Glader B
- Lipton JM
- Participants of Sixth Annual Daniella Maria Arturi International Consensus Conference
journal: Br J Haematol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07269.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosing and treating Diamond Blackfan anaemia: results of an international clinical consensus conference.
**Authors:** Vlachos A, Ball S, Dahl N, Alter BP, Sheth S, Ramenghi U, Meerpohl J, Karlsson S, Liu JM, Leblanc T, Paley C, Kang EM, Leder EJ, Atsidaftos E, Shimamura A, Bessler M, Glader B, Lipton JM, Participants of Sixth Annual Daniella Maria Arturi International Consensus Conference
**Journal:** Br J Haematol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07269.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07269.x)

## Content

1. Br J Haematol. 2008 Sep;142(6):859-76. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07269.x. 
Epub 2008 Jul 30.

Diagnosing and treating Diamond Blackfan anaemia: results of an international 
clinical consensus conference.

Vlachos A(1), Ball S, Dahl N, Alter BP, Sheth S, Ramenghi U, Meerpohl J, 
Karlsson S, Liu JM, Leblanc T, Paley C, Kang EM, Leder EJ, Atsidaftos E, 
Shimamura A, Bessler M, Glader B, Lipton JM; Participants of Sixth Annual 
Daniella Maria Arturi International Consensus Conference.

Collaborators: Alter BP, Atsidaftos E, Ball S, Bessler M, Dahl N, Dianzani I, 
Dror Y, Ellis S, Gazda H, Glader B, Gripp K, Kang EM, Karlsson S, Leblanc T, 
Lipton JM, Liu JM, Loreni F, Meerpohl J, Paley C, Peterson C, Qasba P, Ramenghi 
U, Sheth S, Shimamura A, Sieff C, Vlachos A, Wang W.

Author information:
(1)The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY, USA. 
avlachos@lij.edu

Comment in
    Br J Haematol. 2009 May;145(3):428-30. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2141.2009.07590.x.

Diamond Blackfan anaemia (DBA) is a rare, genetically and clinically 
heterogeneous, inherited red cell aplasia. Classical DBA affects about seven per 
million live births and presents during the first year of life. However, as 
mutated genes have been discovered in DBA, non-classical cases with less 
distinct phenotypes are being described in adults as well as children. In caring 
for these patients it is often difficult to have a clear understanding of the 
treatment options and their outcomes because of the lack of complete information 
on the natural history of the disease. The purpose of this document is to review 
the criteria for diagnosis, evaluate the available treatment options, including 
corticosteroid and transfusion therapies and stem cell transplantation, and 
propose a plan for optimizing patient care. Congenital anomalies, mode of 
inheritance, cancer predisposition, and pregnancy in DBA are also reviewed. 
Evidence-based conclusions will be made when possible; however, as in many rare 
diseases, the data are often anecdotal and the recommendations are based upon 
the best judgment of experienced clinicians. The recommendations regarding the 
diagnosis and management described in this report are the result of 
deliberations and discussions at an international consensus conference.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07269.x
PMCID: PMC2654478
PMID: 18671700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]