---
reference_id: "PMID:24823368"
title: Impairment of visual function and retinal ER stress activation in Wfs1-deficient mice.
authors:
- Bonnet Wersinger D
- Benkafadar N
- Jagodzinska J
- Hamel C
- Tanizawa Y
- Lenaers G
- Delettre C
journal: PLoS One
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097222
keywords:
- Age Factors
- Animals
- "Blotting, Western"
- "Contrast Sensitivity/genetics, physiology"
- DNA Primers/genetics
- Electroretinography
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Chaperone BiP
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress/physiology
- Endoribonucleases/metabolism
- "Evoked Potentials, Visual/physiology"
- Heat-Shock Proteins/metabolism
- Immunohistochemistry
- Membrane Proteins/deficiency
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Microscopy, Electron, Transmission"
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Protein Disulfide-Isomerases/metabolism
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism
- "Retina/metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Retinal Ganglion Cells/metabolism, physiology"
- Unfolded Protein Response/physiology
- "Visual Acuity/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impairment of visual function and retinal ER stress activation in Wfs1-deficient mice.
**Authors:** Bonnet Wersinger D, Benkafadar N, Jagodzinska J, Hamel C, Tanizawa Y, Lenaers G, Delettre C
**Journal:** PLoS One (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0097222](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0097222)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2014 May 13;9(5):e97222. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097222.
eCollection 2014.

Impairment of visual function and retinal ER stress activation in Wfs1-deficient
mice.

Bonnet Wersinger D(1), Benkafadar N(1), Jagodzinska J(1), Hamel C(2), Tanizawa
Y(3), Lenaers G(1), Delettre C(1).

Author information:
(1)INSERM U1051, Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, France and
Université de Montpellier I et II, Montpellier, France.
(2)INSERM U1051, Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, France and
Université de Montpellier I et II, Montpellier, France; Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire, Genetics of Sensory Diseases, Montpellier, France.
(3)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, Hematological Sciences and
Therapeutics, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine, Yamaguchi,
Japan.

Wolfram syndrome is an early onset genetic disease (1/180,000) featuring
diabetes mellitus and optic neuropathy, associated to mutations in the WFS1
gene. Wfs1-/- mouse model shows pancreatic beta cell atrophy, but its visual
performance has not been investigated, prompting us to study its visual function
and histopathology of the retina and optic nerve. Electroretinogram and visual
evoked potentials (VEPs) were performed in Wfs1-/- and Wfs1+/+ mice at 3, 6, 9
and 12 months of age. Fundi were pictured with Micron III apparatus. Retinal
ganglion cell (RGC) abundance was determined from Brn3a immunolabeling of
retinal sections. RGC axonal loss was quantified by electron microscopy in
transversal optic nerve sections. Endoplasmic reticulum stress was assessed
using immunoglobulin binding protein (BiP), protein disulfide isomerase (PDI)
and inositol-requiring enzyme 1 alpha (Ire1α) markers. Electroretinograms
amplitudes were slightly reduced and latencies increased with time in Wfs1-/-
mice. Similarly, VEPs showed decreased N+P amplitudes and increased N-wave
latency. Analysis of unfolded protein response signaling revealed an activation
of endoplasmic reticulum stress in Wfs1-/- mutant mouse retinas. Altogether,
progressive VEPs alterations with minimal neuronal cell loss suggest functional
alteration of the action potential in the Wfs1-/- optic pathways.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097222
PMCID: PMC4019519
PMID: 24823368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
