---
reference_id: "PMID:37450245"
title: "Understanding the Ultra-Rare Disease Autosomal Dominant Leukodystrophy: an Updated Review on Morpho-Functional Alterations Found in Experimental Models."
authors:
- Neri I
- Ramazzotti G
- Mongiorgi S
- Rusciano I
- Bugiani M
- Conti L
- Cousin M
- Giorgio E
- Padiath QS
- Vaula G
- Cortelli P
- Manzoli L
- Ratti S
journal: Mol Neurobiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s12035-023-03461-1
keywords:
- Humans
- Rare Diseases
- Demyelinating Diseases/metabolism
- Brain/metabolism
- Lysosomal Storage Diseases
- Neurodegenerative Diseases
- "Models, Theoretical"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding the Ultra-Rare Disease Autosomal Dominant Leukodystrophy: an Updated Review on Morpho-Functional Alterations Found in Experimental Models.
**Authors:** Neri I, Ramazzotti G, Mongiorgi S, Rusciano I, Bugiani M, Conti L, Cousin M, Giorgio E, Padiath QS, Vaula G, Cortelli P, Manzoli L, Ratti S
**Journal:** Mol Neurobiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12035-023-03461-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-023-03461-1)

## Content

1. Mol Neurobiol. 2023 Nov;60(11):6362-6372. doi: 10.1007/s12035-023-03461-1.
Epub  2023 Jul 14.

Understanding the Ultra-Rare Disease Autosomal Dominant Leukodystrophy: an 
Updated Review on Morpho-Functional Alterations Found in Experimental Models.

Neri I(1), Ramazzotti G(1), Mongiorgi S(1), Rusciano I(1), Bugiani M(2), Conti 
L(3), Cousin M(4), Giorgio E(5)(6), Padiath QS(7), Vaula G(8), Cortelli 
P(9)(10), Manzoli L(1), Ratti S(11).

Author information:
(1)Cellular Signalling Laboratory, Anatomy Centre, Department of Biomedical and 
Neuromotor Sciences (DIBINEM), University of Bologna, 40126, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Pathology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Vrije 
Universiteit and Amsterdam Neuroscience, 1105, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Cellular, Computational, and Integrative Biology (CIBIO), 
Università Degli Studi Di Trento, 38123, Povo-Trento, Italy.
(4)Center for Individualized Medicine and Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, 27100, Pavia, Italy.
(6)Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, 27100, Pavia, Italy.
(7)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Public Health, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15261, USA.
(8)Department of Neuroscience, Azienda Ospedaliera-Universitaria Città della 
Salute e della Scienza, 10126, Turin, Italy.
(9)IRCCS, Istituto Di Scienze Neurologiche Di Bologna, 40139, Bologna, Italy.
(10)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences (DIBINEM), University of 
Bologna, 40126 , Bologna, Italy.
(11)Cellular Signalling Laboratory, Anatomy Centre, Department of Biomedical and 
Neuromotor Sciences (DIBINEM), University of Bologna, 40126, Bologna, Italy. 
stefano.ratti@unibo.it.

Autosomal dominant leukodystrophy (ADLD) is an ultra-rare, slowly progressive, 
and fatal neurodegenerative disorder associated with the loss of white matter in 
the central nervous system (CNS). Several years after its first clinical 
description, ADLD was found to be caused by coding and non-coding variants in 
the LMNB1 gene that cause its overexpression in at least the brain of patients. 
LMNB1 encodes for Lamin B1, a protein of the nuclear lamina. Lamin B1 regulates 
many cellular processes such as DNA replication, chromatin organization, and 
senescence. However, its functions have not been fully characterized yet. 
Nevertheless, Lamin B1 together with the other lamins that constitute the 
nuclear lamina has firstly the key role of maintaining the nuclear structure. 
Being the nucleus a dynamic system subject to both biochemical and mechanical 
regulation, it is conceivable that changes to its structural homeostasis might 
translate into functional alterations. Under this light, this review aims at 
describing the pieces of evidence that to date have been obtained regarding the 
effects of LMNB1 overexpression on cellular morphology and functionality. 
Moreover, we suggest that further investigation on ADLD morpho-functional 
consequences is essential to better understand this complex disease and, 
possibly, other neurological disorders affecting CNS myelination.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-023-03461-1
PMCID: PMC10533580
PMID: 37450245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.