---
reference_id: "PMID:21308989"
title: "Hypermethioninemias of genetic and non-genetic origin: A review."
authors:
- Mudd SH
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.30293
keywords:
- "Adenosylhomocysteinase/deficiency, genetics"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Calcium-Binding Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- "Cystathionine beta-Synthase/deficiency, genetics"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- "Glycine N-Methyltransferase/deficiency, genetics"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Liver Diseases/blood, complications, metabolism"
- Methionine/blood
- "Methionine Adenosyltransferase/deficiency, genetics"
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Neonatal Screening
- "Organic Anion Transporters/deficiency, genetics"
- "Tyrosinemias/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "cis-trans-Isomerases/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypermethioninemias of genetic and non-genetic origin: A review.
**Authors:** Mudd SH
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.30293](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.30293)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2011 Feb 15;157C(1):3-32. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.30293. Epub 2011 Feb 9.

Hypermethioninemias of genetic and non-genetic origin: A review.

Mudd SH(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Mental Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA. muddh@mail.nih.gov

This review covers briefly the major conditions, genetic and non-genetic, 
sometimes leading to abnormally elevated methionine, with emphasis on recent 
developments. A major aim is to assist in the differential diagnosis of 
hypermethioninemia. The genetic conditions are: (1) Homocystinuria due to 
cystathionine β-synthase (CBS) deficiency. At least 150 different mutations in 
the CBS gene have been identified since this deficiency was established in 1964. 
Hypermethioninemia is due chiefly to remethylation of the accumulated 
homocysteine. (2) Deficient activity of methionine adenosyltransferases I and 
III (MAT I/III), the isoenzymes the catalytic subunit of which are encoded by 
MAT1A. Methionine accumulates because its conversion to S-adenosylmethionine 
(AdoMet) is impaired. (3) Glycine N-methyltrasferase (GNMT) deficiency. 
Disruption of a quantitatively major pathway for AdoMet disposal leads to AdoMet 
accumulation with secondary down-regulation of methionine flux into AdoMet. (4) 
S-adenosylhomocysteine (AdoHcy) hydrolase (AHCY) deficiency. Not being 
catabolized normally, AdoHcy accumulates and inhibits many AdoMet-dependent 
methyltransferases, producing accumulation of AdoMet and, thereby, 
hypermethioninemia. (5) Citrin deficiency, found chiefly in Asian countries. 
Lack of this mitochondrial aspartate-glutamate transporter may produce (usually 
transient) hypermethioninemia, the immediate cause of which remains uncertain. 
(6) Fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH) deficiency (tyrosinemia type I) may lead 
to hypermethioninemia secondary either to liver damage and/or to accumulation of 
fumarylacetoacetate, an inhibitor of the high K(m) MAT. Additional possible 
genetic causes of hypermethioninemia accompanied by elevations of plasma AdoMet 
include mitochondrial disorders (the specificity and frequency of which remain 
to be elucidated). Non-genetic conditions include: (a) Liver disease, which may 
cause hypermethioninemia, mild, or severe. (b) Low-birth-weight and/or 
prematurity which may cause transient hypermethioninemia. (c) Ingestion of 
relatively large amounts of methionine which, even in full-term, 
normal-birth-weight babies may cause hypermethioninemia.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.30293
PMID: 21308989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]