---
reference_id: "PMID:39020288"
title: Weaning failure due to isolated residual diaphragmatic paralysis after cervical spinal cord ischemia following aortic surgery- a case report.
authors:
- Overbeek R
- Behrens A
- Zopfs D
- Mylonas S
- Dorweiler B
- Dusse F
- Böttiger BW
- Stoll SE
journal: BMC Anesthesiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12871-024-02626-2
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Aged
- Spinal Cord Ischemia/etiology
- "Respiratory Paralysis/etiology, surgery"
- Postoperative Complications/etiology
- "Subclavian Artery/surgery, diagnostic imaging, abnormalities"
- Ventilator Weaning
- Cervical Vertebrae/surgery
- "Aorta, Thoracic/surgery"
- Cardiovascular Abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Weaning failure due to isolated residual diaphragmatic paralysis after cervical spinal cord ischemia following aortic surgery- a case report.
**Authors:** Overbeek R, Behrens A, Zopfs D, Mylonas S, Dorweiler B, Dusse F, Böttiger BW, Stoll SE
**Journal:** BMC Anesthesiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12871-024-02626-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12871-024-02626-2)

## Content

1. BMC Anesthesiol. 2024 Jul 17;24(1):241. doi: 10.1186/s12871-024-02626-2.

Weaning failure due to isolated residual diaphragmatic paralysis after cervical
spinal cord ischemia following aortic surgery- a case report.

Overbeek R(1), Behrens A(2), Zopfs D(3), Mylonas S(2), Dorweiler B(2), Dusse
F(4), Böttiger BW(4), Stoll SE(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of Medicine
and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, 50937, Cologne, Germany.
Remco.overbeek@uk-koeln.de.
(2)Department of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Faculty of Medicine and
University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, 50937, Cologne, Germany.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Department of Diagnostic
and Interventional Radiology, University Cologne, 50937, Cologne, Germany.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of Medicine
and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, 50937, Cologne, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Bilateral diaphragmatic dysfunction can lead to dyspnea and
recurrent respiratory failure. In rare cases, it may result from high cervical
spinal cord ischemia (SCI) due to anterior spinal artery syndrome (ASAS). We
present a case of a patient experiencing persistent isolated diaphragmatic
paralysis after SCI at level C3/C4 following thoracic endovascular aortic repair
(TEVAR) for Kommerell's diverticulum. This is, to our knowledge, the first
documented instance of a patient fully recovering from tetraplegia due to SCI
while still exhibiting ongoing bilateral diaphragmatic paralysis.
CASE PRESENTATION: The patient, a 67-year-old male, presented to the Vascular
Surgery Department for surgical treatment of symptomatic Kommerell's
diverticulum in an aberrant right subclavian artery. After successful surgery in
two stages, the patient presented with respiratory insufficiency and flaccid
tetraparesis consistent with anterior spinal artery syndrome with maintained
sensibility of all extremities. A computerized tomography scan (CT) revealed a
high-grade origin stenosis of the left vertebral artery, which was treated by
angioplasty and balloon-expandable stenting. Consecutively, the tetraparesis
immediately resolved, but weaning remained unsuccessful requiring tracheostomy.
Abdominal ultrasound revealed a residual bilateral diaphragmatic paralysis. A
repeated magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 14 days after vertebral artery
angioplasty confirmed SCI at level C3/C4. The patient was transferred to a
pulmonary clinic with weaning center for further recovery.
CONCLUSIONS: This novel case highlights the need to consider diaphragmatic
paralysis due to SCI as a cause of respiratory failure in patients following
aortic surgery. Diaphragmatic paralysis may remain as an isolated residual in
these patients.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12871-024-02626-2
PMCID: PMC11253376
PMID: 39020288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.