---
reference_id: "PMID:15609264"
title: Intraocular inflammation in autoimmune diseases.
authors:
- Pras E
- Neumann R
- Zandman-Goddard G
- Levy Y
- Assia EI
- Shoenfeld Y
- Langevitz P
journal: Semin Arthritis Rheum
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2004.05.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intraocular inflammation in autoimmune diseases.
**Authors:** Pras E, Neumann R, Zandman-Goddard G, Levy Y, Assia EI, Shoenfeld Y, Langevitz P
**Journal:** Semin Arthritis Rheum (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semarthrit.2004.05.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2004.05.002)

## Content

1. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2004 Dec;34(3):602-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2004.05.002.

Intraocular inflammation in autoimmune diseases.

Pras E(1), Neumann R, Zandman-Goddard G, Levy Y, Assia EI, Shoenfeld Y, 
Langevitz P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Sapir Medical Center, Israel.

BACKGROUND: The uveal tract represents the vascular organ of the eye. In 
addition to providing most of the blood supply to the intraocular structures, it 
acts as a conduit for immune cells, particularly lymphocytes, to enter the eye. 
Consequently, the uveal tract is represented in many intraocular inflammatory 
processes. Uveitis is probably a misnomer unless antigens within the uvea are 
the direct targets of the inflammatory process. A better term of the condition 
is "intraocular inflammation" (IOI).
OBJECTIVES: To review the presence of IOI in autoimmune diseases, the 
immunopathogenic mechanisms leading to disease, and treatment.
METHODS: We reviewed the English medical literature by using MEDLINE (1984-2003) 
employing the terms "uveitis," "intraocular inflammation," and "autoimmune 
diseases."
RESULTS: An underlying autoimmune disease was identified in up to 40% of 
patients with IOI, and included spondyloarthropathies, Behcets disease, 
sarcoidosis, juvenile chronic arthritis, Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome (an 
inflammatory syndrome including uveitis with dermatologic and neurologic 
manifestations), immune recovery syndrome, and uveitis with tubulointerstitial 
disease. The immunopathogenesis of IOI involves enhanced T-cell response. 
Recently, guidelines for the use of immunosuppressive drugs for inflammatory eye 
disease were established and include: corticosteroids, azathioprine, 
methotrexate, mycophenolate mofetil, cyclosporine, tacrolimus, cyclophosphamide, 
and chlorambucil. New therapies with limited experience include the tumor 
necrosis factor alpha inhibitors, interferon alfa, monoclonal antibodies against 
lymphocyte surface antigens, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), and the 
intraocular delivery of immunosuppressive agents.
CONCLUSION: An underlying autoimmune disease was identified in up to 40% of 
patients with IOI. Immunosuppressive drugs, biologic agents, and IVIG are 
employed for the treatment of IOI in autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2004.05.002
PMID: 15609264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]