---
reference_id: "PMID:31851307"
title: Biallelic loss-of-function mutations in JAM2 cause primary familial brain calcification.
authors:
- Cen Z
- Chen Y
- Chen S
- Wang H
- Yang D
- Zhang H
- Wu H
- Wang L
- Tang S
- Ye J
- Shen J
- Wang H
- Fu F
- Chen X
- Xie F
- Liu P
- Xu X
- Cao J
- Cai P
- Pan Q
- Li J
- Yang W
- Shan PF
- Li Y
- Liu JY
- Zhang B
- Luo W
journal: Brain
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awz392
keywords:
- Adult
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- "Brain Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- Calcinosis/genetics
- "Cell Adhesion Molecules/genetics, metabolism"
- Endothelial Cells/metabolism
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nervous System Malformations/genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Receptor, Platelet-Derived Growth Factor beta/genetics, metabolism"
- Xenotropic and Polytropic Retrovirus Receptor
- Junctional Adhesion Molecule B
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic loss-of-function mutations in JAM2 cause primary familial brain calcification.
**Authors:** Cen Z, Chen Y, Chen S, Wang H, Yang D, Zhang H, Wu H, Wang L, Tang S, Ye J, Shen J, Wang H, Fu F, Chen X, Xie F, Liu P, Xu X, Cao J, Cai P, Pan Q, Li J, Yang W, Shan PF, Li Y, Liu JY, Zhang B, Luo W
**Journal:** Brain (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awz392](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awz392)

## Content

1. Brain. 2020 Feb 1;143(2):491-502. doi: 10.1093/brain/awz392.

Biallelic loss-of-function mutations in JAM2 cause primary familial brain 
calcification.

Cen Z(1)(2), Chen Y(1)(2), Chen S(1)(2), Wang H(3), Yang D(1)(2), Zhang H(4), Wu 
H(5), Wang L(1), Tang S(6), Ye J(6), Shen J(7), Wang H(1), Fu F(8), Chen X(1), 
Xie F(9), Liu P(1), Xu X(10), Cao J(10), Cai P(11), Pan Q(1)(12), Li J(13), Yang 
W(14), Shan PF(15), Li Y(6), Liu JY(10), Zhang B(1), Luo W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Cancer Institute, Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Intervention, China 
National Ministry of Education, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical 
University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Ningbo Fourth Hospital, Ningbo, Zhejiang, China.
(5)Department of Neurology, Lishui People's Hospital, Lishui, Zhejiang, China.
(6)Children's Hospital and Department of Biophysics, NHC and CAMS Key Laboratory 
of Medical Neurobiology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China.
(7)Department of Cardiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(8)Department of Neurology, Zhuji People's Hospital of Zhejiang Province, 
Shaoxing, Zhejiang, China.
(9)Department of Neurology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(10)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry of Education, College 
of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan, China.
(11)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical University, 
Zunyi, Guizhou, China.
(12)Department of Neurology, Wuyi First People's Hospital, Jinhua, Zhejiang, 
China.
(13)Department of Neurology, Guiyang Second People's Hospital, Guiyang, Guizhou, 
China.
(14)Department of Biophysics, Institute of Neuroscience, NHC and CAMS Key 
Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(15)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, The Second Affiliated Hospital, 
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

Primary familial brain calcification is a monogenic disease characterized by 
bilateral calcifications in the basal ganglia and other brain regions, and 
commonly presents motor, psychiatric, and cognitive symptoms. Currently, four 
autosomal dominant (SLC20A2, PDGFRB, PDGFB, XPR1) and one autosomal recessive 
(MYORG) causative genes have been identified. Compared with patients with 
autosomal dominant primary familial brain calcification, patients with the 
recessive form of the disease present with more severe clinical and imaging 
phenotypes, and deserve more clinical and research attention. Biallelic 
mutations in MYORG cannot explain all autosomal recessive primary familial brain 
calcification cases, indicating the existence of novel autosomal recessive 
genes. Using homozygosity mapping and whole genome sequencing, we detected a 
homozygous frameshift mutation (c.140delT, p.L48*) in the JAM2 gene in a 
consanguineous family with two affected siblings diagnosed with primary familial 
brain calcification. Further genetic screening in a cohort of 398 probands 
detected a homozygous start codon mutation (c.1A>G, p.M1?) and compound 
heterozygous mutations [c.504G>C, p.W168C and c.(67+1_68-1)_(394+1_395-1), 
p.Y23_V131delinsL], respectively, in two unrelated families. The clinical 
phenotypes of the four patients included parkinsonism (3/4), dysarthria (3/4), 
seizures (1/4), and probable asymptomatic (1/4), with diverse onset ages. All 
patients presented with severe calcifications in the cortex in addition to 
extensive calcifications in multiple brain areas (lenticular nuclei, caudate 
nuclei, thalamus, cerebellar hemispheres, ± brainstem; total calcification 
scores: 43-77). JAM2 encodes junctional adhesion molecule 2, which is highly 
expressed in neurovascular unit-related cell types (endothelial cells and 
astrocytes) and is predominantly localized on the plasma membrane. It may be 
important in cell-cell adhesion and maintaining homeostasis in the CNS. In 
Chinese hamster ovary cells, truncated His-tagged JAM2 proteins were detected by 
western blot following transfection of p.Y23_V131delinsL mutant plasmid, while 
no protein was detected following transfection of p.L48* or p.1M? mutant 
plasmids. In immunofluorescence experiments, the p.W168C mutant JAM2 protein 
failed to translocate to the plasma membrane. We speculated that mutant JAM2 
protein resulted in impaired cell-cell adhesion functions and reduced integrity 
of the neurovascular unit. This is similar to the mechanisms of other causative 
genes for primary familial brain calcification or brain calcification syndromes 
(e.g. PDGFRB, PDGFB, MYORG, JAM3, and OCLN), all of which are highly expressed 
and functionally important in the neurovascular unit. Our study identifies a 
novel causative gene for primary familial brain calcification, whose vital 
function and high expression in the neurovascular unit further supports 
impairment of the neurovascular unit as the root of primary familial brain 
calcification pathogenesis.

© The Author(s) (2019). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awz392
PMID: 31851307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]