---
reference_id: "PMID:34593148"
title: Interpretation of HBV Serologies.
authors:
- Zamor PJ
- Lane AM
journal: Clin Liver Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2021.06.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interpretation of HBV Serologies.
**Authors:** Zamor PJ, Lane AM
**Journal:** Clin Liver Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cld.2021.06.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cld.2021.06.012)

## Content

1. Clin Liver Dis. 2021 Nov;25(4):689-709. doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2021.06.012. Epub 
2021 Sep 11.

Interpretation of HBV Serologies.

Zamor PJ(1), Lane AM(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hepatology, Carolinas Medical Center-Atrium Healthcare, 1025 
Morehead Medical Drive, Charlotte, NC 28204, USA. Electronic address: 
Philippe.Zamor@atriumhealth.org.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, 
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA; Department of 
Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Rocky Mountain Regional 
VA Medical Center, Aurora, CO, USA; Department of Gastroenterology and 
Hepatology, Rocky Mountain Regional VAMC, 1700 N. Wheeling Street, Aurora, 
D3-111E, CO 80045, USA.

Hepatitis B was discovered by researchers who were investigating jaundice 
associated with blood transfusions as well as parenterally administered 
medications. Through trial and error, the HBV was identified. There are specific 
tests that detect HBV infection, whether it is a previous exposure or active 
infection. The various HBV serologies are reviewed in this work as well. 
Hepatitis B surface antigen has emerged as a tool in defining treatment endpoint 
and its significance is reviewed. HBV genotypes are distributed uniquely 
throughout the world, in particular, genotype C is associated with higher rates 
of hepatocellular carcinoma. Various HBV genotypes and their impact on the 
clinical course are discussed. The relationship of HBV serologies and HBV DNA to 
disease progression is outlined. There are specific recommendations on 
monitoring those infected with HBV and this is reviewed here. HBV mutations have 
an impact on the disease course and those of significance are also discussed.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cld.2021.06.012
PMID: 34593148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]