---
reference_id: "PMID:24767728"
title: "Cutis laxa, fat pads and retinopathy due to ALDH18A1 mutation and review of the literature."
authors:
- Wolthuis DF
- van Asbeck E
- Mohamed M
- Gardeitchik T
- Lim-Melia ER
- Wevers RA
- Morava E
journal: Eur J Paediatr Neurol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2014.01.003
keywords:
- Adipose Tissue/pathology
- Aldehyde Dehydrogenase/genetics
- Aldehyde Dehydrogenase 1 Family
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cutis Laxa/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Retinal Dehydrogenase
- "Retinal Diseases/complications, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutis laxa, fat pads and retinopathy due to ALDH18A1 mutation and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Wolthuis DF, van Asbeck E, Mohamed M, Gardeitchik T, Lim-Melia ER, Wevers RA, Morava E
**Journal:** Eur J Paediatr Neurol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejpn.2014.01.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpn.2014.01.003)

## Content

1. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2014 Jul;18(4):511-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2014.01.003.
Epub 2014 Feb 28.

Cutis laxa, fat pads and retinopathy due to ALDH18A1 mutation and review of the
literature.

Wolthuis DF(1), van Asbeck E(1), Mohamed M(1), Gardeitchik T(1), Lim-Melia
ER(2), Wevers RA(3), Morava E(4).

Author information:
(1)Hayward Genetics Center, Tulane University Medical School, 1430 Tulane Ave,
New Orleans, LA 70112, USA; Laboratory of Genetic, Metabolic and Endocrine
Diseases, Radboud University Medical Centre Nijmegen, The Netherlands;
Department of Pediatrics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.
(2)Regional Medical Genetics Center, N.Y. Medical College, Valhalla, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Genetic, Metabolic and Endocrine Diseases, Radboud University
Medical Centre Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(4)Hayward Genetics Center, Tulane University Medical School, 1430 Tulane Ave,
New Orleans, LA 70112, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Radboud University Medical
Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: emoravakozicz@tulane.edu.

Autosomal recessive cutis laxa (ARCL) is a connective tissue disorder
characterized by wrinkled, inelastic skin, frequently associated with a
neurologic involvement and multisystem disease. Next generation sequencing was
performed in genetically unsolved patients with progeroid features, neurological
and eye involvement to assess the underlying etiology. We describe an 6 month
old child, diagnosed with a novel, homozygous nonsense mutation c.2339T>C in
exon 18 of the ALDH18A1 gene, and reviewed all reported P5CS patients. So far 10
patients were described with mutations in ALDH18A1. Features of our patient that
have been described in literature included cutis laxa on hands and feet, visible
veins on thorax and abdomen, joint laxity, failure to thrive, short stature,
microcephaly, and severe developmental and speech delay. Furthermore, abnormal
fat distribution, retinal abnormalities, undescended testis, and retinitis
pigmentosa have never been described in ALDH18A1. Some features described as
unique in ALDH18A1 have been observed in PYCR1 patients, thus suggesting that
the phenotypic overlap is higher than previously shown. In conclusion, the
clinical phenotype caused by ALDH18A1 mutations is diverse, with variable degree
of progeria in children, but always in association with neurologic disease. We
suggest genetic testing for possible ALDH18A1 mutations in all patients with
progeroid features, like wrinkled or parchment-like skin, abnormal growth,
especially with central nervous system involvement and microcephaly.

Copyright © 2014 European Paediatric Neurology Society. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2014.01.003
PMID: 24767728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
