---
reference_id: "PMID:25267545"
title: "Malassezia yeasts activate the NLRP3 inflammasome in antigen-presenting cells via Syk-kinase signalling"
authors:
- Kistowska M
- Fenini G
- Jankovic D
- Feldmeyer L
- Kerl K
- Bosshard P
- Contassot E
- French LE
journal: Exp Dermatol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1111/exd.12552
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malassezia yeasts activate the NLRP3 inflammasome in antigen-presenting cells via Syk-kinase signalling
**Authors:** Kistowska M, Fenini G, Jankovic D, Feldmeyer L, Kerl K, Bosshard P, Contassot E, French LE
**Journal:** Exp Dermatol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/exd.12552](https://doi.org/10.1111/exd.12552)

## Content

1. Exp Dermatol. 2014 Dec;23(12):884-9. doi: 10.1111/exd.12552.

Malassezia yeasts activate the NLRP3 inflammasome in antigen-presenting cells
via Syk-kinase signalling.

Kistowska M, Fenini G, Jankovic D, Feldmeyer L, Kerl K, Bosshard P, Contassot
E, French LE.

Although being a normal part of the skin flora, yeasts of the genus Malassezia
are associated with several common dermatologic conditions including pityriasis
versicolour, seborrhoeic dermatitis (SD), folliculitis, atopic
eczema/dermatitis (AE/AD) and dandruff. While Malassezia spp. are aetiological
agents of pityriasis versicolour, a causal role of Malassezia spp. in AE/AD and
SD remains to be established. Previous reports have shown that fungi such as
Candida albicans and Aspergillus fumigatus are able to efficiently activate the
NLRP3 inflammasome leading to robust secretion of the pro-inflammatory cytokine
IL-1β. To date, innate immune responses to Malassezia spp. are not well
characterized. Here, we show that different Malassezia species could induce
NLRP3 inflammasome activation and subsequent IL-1β secretion in human
antigen-presenting cells. In contrast, keratinocytes were not able to secrete
IL-1β when exposed to Malassezia spp. Moreover, we demonstrate that IL-1β
secretion in antigen-presenting cells was dependent on Syk-kinase signalling.
Our results identify Malassezia spp. as potential strong inducers of
pro-inflammatory responses when taken up by antigen-presenting cells and
identify C-type lectin receptors and the NLRP3 inflammasome as crucial actors
in this process.

PMID: 25267545
