---
reference_id: "PMID:18273731"
title: Primary myopathies and the heart.
authors:
- Finsterer J
- Stöllberger C
journal: Scand Cardiovasc J
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1080/14017430701854953
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary myopathies and the heart.
**Authors:** Finsterer J, Stöllberger C
**Journal:** Scand Cardiovasc J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14017430701854953](https://doi.org/10.1080/14017430701854953)

## Content

1. Scand Cardiovasc J. 2008 Feb;42(1):9-24. doi: 10.1080/14017430701854953.

Primary myopathies and the heart.

Finsterer J(1), Stöllberger C.

Author information:
(1)Krankenanstalt Rudolfstiftung, Vienna, Austria. fifigs1@yahoo.de

Myopathies are frequently not confined to the skeletal muscles but also involve 
other organs or tissues. One of the most frequently affected organ in addition 
to the skeletal muscle is the heart (cardiac involvement, CI). CI manifests as 
impulse generation or conduction defects, focal or diffuse myocardial 
thickening, dilation of the cardiac cavities, relaxation abnormality, 
hypertrophic, dilated, restrictive cardiomyopathy, apical form of hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy, noncompaction, Takotsubo phenomenon, secondary valve 
insufficiency, intra-cardiac thrombus formation, or heart failure with systolic 
or diastolic dysfunction. CI occurs in dystrophinopathies, Emery-Dreifuss 
muscular dystrophy, facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, limb girdle muscular 
dystrophies, laminopathies, congenital muscular dystrophies, myotonic 
dystrophies, congenital myopathies, metabolic myopathies, desminopathies, 
myofibrillar myopathy, Barth syndrome, McLeod syndrome, Senger's syndrome, and 
Bethlem myopathy. Patients with myopathy should be cardiologically investigated 
as soon as their neurological diagnosis is established, since supportive cardiac 
therapy is available, which markedly influences prognosis and outcome of CI in 
these patients.

DOI: 10.1080/14017430701854953
PMID: 18273731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]