---
reference_id: "PMID:23065309"
title: Long-chain 3-hydroxy fatty acids accumulating in long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase and mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiencies uncouple oxidative phosphorylation in heart mitochondria.
authors:
- Tonin AM
- Amaral AU
- Busanello EN
- Grings M
- Castilho RF
- Wajner M
journal: J Bioenerg Biomembr
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s10863-012-9481-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-chain 3-hydroxy fatty acids accumulating in long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase and mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiencies uncouple oxidative phosphorylation in heart mitochondria.
**Authors:** Tonin AM, Amaral AU, Busanello EN, Grings M, Castilho RF, Wajner M
**Journal:** J Bioenerg Biomembr (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10863-012-9481-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10863-012-9481-9)

## Content

1. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2013 Feb;45(1-2):47-57. doi: 10.1007/s10863-012-9481-9. 
Epub 2012 Oct 13.

Long-chain 3-hydroxy fatty acids accumulating in long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase and mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiencies uncouple 
oxidative phosphorylation in heart mitochondria.

Tonin AM(1), Amaral AU, Busanello EN, Grings M, Castilho RF, Wajner M.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Ciências Básicas da Saúde, 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Rua Ramiro Barcelos, 2600-Anexo, CEP 
90035-003 Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

Cardiomyopathy is a common clinical feature of some inherited disorders of 
mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation including mitochondrial trifunctional 
protein (MTP) and isolated long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) 
deficiencies. Since individuals affected by these disorders present tissue 
accumulation of various fatty acids, including long-chain 3-hydroxy fatty acids, 
in the present study we investigated the effect of 3-hydroxydecanoic (3 HDCA), 
3-hydroxydodecanoic (3 HDDA), 3-hydroxytetradecanoic (3 HTA) and 
3-hydroxypalmitic (3 HPA) acids on mitochondrial oxidative metabolism, estimated 
by oximetry, NAD(P)H content, hydrogen peroxide production, membrane potential 
(ΔΨ) and swelling in rat heart mitochondrial preparations. We observed that 3 
HTA and 3 HPA increased resting respiration and diminished the respiratory 
control and ADP/O ratios using glutamate/malate or succinate as substrates. 
Furthermore, 3 HDDA, 3 HTA and 3 HPA decreased ΔΨ, the matrix NAD(P)H pool and 
hydrogen peroxide production. These data indicate that these fatty acids behave 
as uncouplers of oxidative phosphorylation. We also verified that 3 HTA-induced 
uncoupling-effect was not mediated by the adenine nucleotide translocator and 
that this fatty acid induced the mitochondrial permeability transition pore 
opening in calcium-loaded organelles since cyclosporin A prevented the reduction 
of mitochondrial ΔΨ and swelling provoked by 3 HTA. The present data indicate 
that major 3-hydroxylated fatty acids accumulating in MTP and LCHAD deficiencies 
behave as strong uncouplers of oxidative phosphorylation potentially impairing 
heart energy homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1007/s10863-012-9481-9
PMID: 23065309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]