---
reference_id: "PMID:14654350"
title: Thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor and its role in Graves' disease.
authors:
- Chistiakov DA
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2003.09.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor and its role in Graves' disease.
**Authors:** Chistiakov DA
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2003.09.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2003.09.001)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2003 Dec;80(4):377-88. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2003.09.001.

Thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor and its role in Graves' disease.

Chistiakov DA(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Aquatic Ecology, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, B-3000, 
Leuven, Belgium. dimitry.chistiakov@bio.kuleuven.ac.be

The thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH, or thyrotropin) receptor (TSHR) mediates 
the activating action of TSH to the thyroid gland, resulting in the growth and 
proliferation of thyrocytes and thyroid hormone production. In Graves' disease, 
thyroid-stimulating autoantibodies can mimic TSH action and stimulate thyroid 
cells. This leads to hyperthyroidism and abnormal overproduction of thyroid 
hormone. TSHR-antibodies-binding epitopes on the receptor molecule are well 
studied. Mechanism of TSHR-autoantibodies production is more or less clear but a 
susceptibility gene, which is linked to their production, is still unknown. 
Genetic studies show no linkage between the TSHR gene and Graves' disease. Among 
three common polymorphisms in the TSHR gene, only the D727E germline 
polymorphism in the cytoplasmic tail of the receptor showed an association with 
the disease, and this association is weak. The absence of a strong genetic 
effect of the TSHR polymorphisms in such a common and complex disorder as 
Graves' disease may be explained by a high degree of evolutionary conservation 
in TSHR. This can be shown by naturally existing germline and somatic mutations 
in the TSHR gene that cause various types of nonautoimmune and hereditary 
thyroid disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2003.09.001
PMID: 14654350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]