---
reference_id: PMID:18406185
title: "Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome: functional characterization of pathogenic mutations and polymorphisms in the arylsulfatase B gene."
authors:
- Garrido E
- Cormand B
- Hopwood JJ
- Chabás A
- Grinberg D
- Vilageliu L
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.02.012
keywords:
- Animals
- COS Cells
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- "Codon, Nonsense/genetics, physiology"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Enzyme Activation/genetics
- Humans
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mucopolysaccharidosis VI/genetics
- Mutation/physiology
- "N-Acetylgalactosamine-4-Sulfatase/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/physiology"
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- RNA Stability/genetics
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome: functional characterization of pathogenic mutations and polymorphisms in the arylsulfatase B gene.
**Authors:** Garrido E, Cormand B, Hopwood JJ, Chabás A, Grinberg D, Vilageliu L
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.02.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.02.012)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2008 Jul;94(3):305-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.02.012. Epub
 2008 Apr 10.

Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome: functional characterization of pathogenic mutations and 
polymorphisms in the arylsulfatase B gene.

Garrido E(1), Cormand B, Hopwood JJ, Chabás A, Grinberg D, Vilageliu L.

Author information:
(1)Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.

Mucopolysaccharidosis VI (MPS VI; Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome) is an autosomal 
recessive lysosomal disorder caused by deficiency of 
N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase (ARSB), which is required for the degradation 
of dermatan sulfate. We recently reported mutational screening of 12 Spanish and 
4 Argentinian MPS VI patients. In the present study, seven missense mutations 
(c.245T>G [p.L82R], c.413A>G [p.Y138C], c.719C>T [p.S240F], c.922G>A [p.G308R], 
c.937C>G [p.P313A], c.1340G>T [p.C447F] and c.1415T>C [p.L472P]) were 
transiently expressed in COS-7 cells and 4-sulfatase activity was measured in 
cell extracts. All mutations resulted in less than 6% of wild-type enzyme 
activity, in most cases undetectable. Mutations were expressed in their original 
haplotype context with respect to two non-synonymous polymorphisms present in 
the ARSB protein, p.V358M and p.S384N. The three less frequent haplotype 
combinations yielded an ARSB activity of 16%, 57% and 70%, when compared to the 
most frequent haplotype (p.358V and p.384S). Western blot analyses showed that 
the expressed mutations significantly reduced the amount of mature protein. 
Sub-cellular localization studies of mutant ARSB proteins in fibroblasts of MPS 
VI patients were performed. RNA analysis confirmed that nonsense-mediated RNA 
decay had taken place for all mutant alleles (c.1143-1G>C, c.1143-8T>G, p.W322X, 
c.427delG and c.1142+2T>A) which were candidates for causing RNA degradation by 
this mechanism. In summary, all the ARSB mutations studied had a significant 
effect on enzyme activity, protein processing and/or mRNA stability.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.02.012
PMID: 18406185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]