---
reference_id: "PMID:16567567"
title: Plakophilin-2 mutations are the major determinant of familial arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- van Tintelen JP
- Entius MM
- Bhuiyan ZA
- Jongbloed R
- Wiesfeld AC
- Wilde AA
- van der Smagt J
- Boven LG
- Mannens MM
- van Langen IM
- Hofstra RM
- Otterspoor LC
- Doevendans PA
- Rodriguez LM
- van Gelder IC
- Hauer RN
journal: Circulation
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.609719
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Dysplasia/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Haplotypes
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Plakophilins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Plakophilin-2 mutations are the major determinant of familial arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** van Tintelen JP, Entius MM, Bhuiyan ZA, Jongbloed R, Wiesfeld AC, Wilde AA, van der Smagt J, Boven LG, Mannens MM, van Langen IM, Hofstra RM, Otterspoor LC, Doevendans PA, Rodriguez LM, van Gelder IC, Hauer RN
**Journal:** Circulation (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.609719](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.609719)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2006 Apr 4;113(13):1650-8. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.609719.  Epub 2006 Mar 27.

Plakophilin-2 mutations are the major determinant of familial arrhythmogenic 
right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy.

van Tintelen JP(1), Entius MM, Bhuiyan ZA, Jongbloed R, Wiesfeld AC, Wilde AA, 
van der Smagt J, Boven LG, Mannens MM, van Langen IM, Hofstra RM, Otterspoor LC, 
Doevendans PA, Rodriguez LM, van Gelder IC, Hauer RN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, 
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. 
p.van.tintelen@medgen.umcg.nl

Comment in
    Circulation. 2006 Apr 4;113(13):1634-7. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.616490.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the plakophilin-2 gene (PKP2) have been found in 
patients with arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy (ARVC). 
Hence, genetic screening can potentially be a valuable tool in the diagnostic 
workup of patients with ARVC.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To establish the prevalence and character of PKP2 mutations 
and to study potential differences in the associated phenotype, we evaluated 96 
index patients, including 56 who fulfilled the published task force criteria. In 
addition, 114 family members from 34 of these 56 ARVC index patients were 
phenotyped. In 24 of these 56 ARVC patients (43%), 14 different (11 novel) PKP2 
mutations were identified. Four different mutations were found more than once; 
haplotype analyses revealed identical haplotypes in the different mutation 
carriers, suggesting founder mutations. No specific genotype-phenotype 
correlations could be identified, except that negative T waves in V(2) and V(3) 
occurred more often in PKP2 mutation carriers (P<0.05). Of the 34 index patients 
whose family members were phenotyped, 23 familial cases were identified. PKP2 
mutations were identified in 16 of these 23 ARVC index patients (70%) with 
familial ARVC. On the other hand, no PKP2 mutations at all were found in 11 
probands without additional affected family members (P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: PKP2 mutations can be identified in nearly half of the Dutch 
patients fulfilling the ARVC criteria. In familial ARVC, even the vast majority 
(70%) is caused by PKP2 mutations. However, nonfamilial ARVC is not related to 
PKP2. The high yield of mutational analysis in familial ARVC is unique in 
inherited cardiomyopathies.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.609719
PMID: 16567567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]