---
reference_id: "PMID:27847013"
title: Fluorescein diacetate vital staining for detecting viability of acid-fast bacilli in patients on antituberculosis treatment.
authors:
- Kanade S
- Nataraj G
- Ubale M
- Mehta P
journal: Int J Mycobacteriol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijmyco.2016.06.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fluorescein diacetate vital staining for detecting viability of acid-fast bacilli in patients on antituberculosis treatment.
**Authors:** Kanade S, Nataraj G, Ubale M, Mehta P
**Journal:** Int J Mycobacteriol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijmyco.2016.06.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmyco.2016.06.003)

## Content

1. Int J Mycobacteriol. 2016 Sep;5(3):294-298. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmyco.2016.06.003.
 Epub 2016 Jun 23.

Fluorescein diacetate vital staining for detecting viability of acid-fast 
bacilli in patients on antituberculosis treatment.

Kanade S(1), Nataraj G(2), Ubale M(3), Mehta P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Seth GS Medical College and KEM Hospital, Mumbai, 
India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Seth GS Medical College and KEM Hospital, Mumbai, 
India. Electronic address: gitanataraj@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Seth GS Medical College and KEM Hospital, Mumbai, 
India; Department of Microbiology, Rajiv Gandhi Medical College, Thane, India.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the performance of FDA vital staining method in 
detecting viability of acid fast bacilli in comparison with culture and also its 
correlation with conventional drug susceptibility testing results for isoniazid 
and rifampicin.
DESIGN: The study was conducted from Jan 2014 to June 2015. Sputum samples of 
patients taking either Cat I or Cat II anti-TB treatment were tested by Ziehl 
Neelsen and FDA staining, culture and susceptibility to rifampicin and isoniazid 
at the end of intensive phase.
RESULTS: Of the 100 ZN positive specimens, 74 were FDA positive of which 70 were 
reported positive by both the readers. All specimens having higher grades (2+ 
and 3+) by ZN were positive by FDA staining. 87.88% of 1+ and 45% of scanty 
smears were positive by FDA staining. MTB was isolated in 75 specimens of which 
72 were positive by FDA. Two culture negative specimens were FDA positive. FDA 
staining had sensitivity and specificity of 96% and 92% respectively. 70.66% of 
the total culture isolates were MDRTB strains. 2.66% strains demonstrated 
monoresistance to each of INH and rifampicin.
CONCLUSION: FDA microscopy can be used as a simple and rapid TB treatment 
monitoring tool in resource limited settings to identify those patients 
requiring immediate culture and DST test.

Copyright © 2016 Asian-African Society for Mycobacteriology. Published by 
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmyco.2016.06.003
PMID: 27847013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]