---
reference_id: "PMID:23893277"
title: Addison's disease and its associations.
authors:
- Puttanna A
- Cunningham AR
- Dainty P
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2013-010473
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Addison's disease and its associations.
**Authors:** Puttanna A, Cunningham AR, Dainty P
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2013-010473](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2013-010473)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2013 Jul 26;2013:bcr2013010473. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2013-010473.

Addison's disease and its associations.

Puttanna A(1), Cunningham AR, Dainty P.

Author information:
(1)Russells Hall Hospital, Dudley, UK. amarputtanna@doctors.org.uk

Addison's disease is a relatively rare endocrine condition resulting from 
adrenal insufficiency due to various causes. Weight loss is a common feature; 
however, patients may be seen by a variety of specialists, even requiring acute 
admission before the diagnosis is made. Addison's disease is commonly associated 
with other autoimmune diseases. In some cases such as autoimmune polyendocrine 
syndromes (APS) types 1 and 2, these associations are more commonly found. We 
present a case of one such patient who presented to the acute medical team 
having been referred to the gastrointestinal services in the previous year for 
persistent vomiting and weight loss. On review of history, the cause of vomiting 
and weight loss was questioned and combined with subsequent biochemical testing 
a diagnosis of Addison's disease was made. The patient was also noted to have 
other associated endocrine and autoimmune conditions.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2013-010473
PMCID: PMC3736622
PMID: 23893277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]