---
reference_id: "PMID:39594813"
title: "Liposarcoma: A Journey into a Rare Tumor's Epidemiology, Diagnosis, Pathophysiology, and Limitations of Current Therapies."
authors:
- Jonczak E
- Grossman J
- Alessandrino F
- Seldon Taswell C
- Velez-Torres JM
- Trent J
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cancers16223858
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liposarcoma: A Journey into a Rare Tumor's Epidemiology, Diagnosis, Pathophysiology, and Limitations of Current Therapies.
**Authors:** Jonczak E, Grossman J, Alessandrino F, Seldon Taswell C, Velez-Torres JM, Trent J
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers16223858](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16223858)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2024 Nov 18;16(22):3858. doi: 10.3390/cancers16223858.

Liposarcoma: A Journey into a Rare Tumor's Epidemiology, Diagnosis, 
Pathophysiology, and Limitations of Current Therapies.

Jonczak E(1)(2), Grossman J(2)(3), Alessandrino F(4), Seldon Taswell C(5), 
Velez-Torres JM(6), Trent J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, University of 
Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(2)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami Miller School of 
Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology, University of Miami 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, Division of Abdominal Imaging, University of Miami 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Miami Miller School of 
Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology & Internal Medicine, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Sarcomas are a heterogeneous group of neoplasms that develop from bone and soft 
tissue. Approximately 80% of sarcomas affect soft tissue, with liposarcoma being 
one of the most common types, accounting for approximately 13-20% of all 
soft-tissue sarcomas. Per the World Health Organization, liposarcoma can be 
broadly classified into four different subtypes based on histologic examination: 
well-differentiated liposarcoma (WDLS)/atypical lipomatous tumors (ALT), 
dedifferentiated liposarcoma (DDLS), myxoid liposarcoma (MLS), and pleomorphic 
liposarcoma (PLS). WDLS/ALT is the most common liposarcoma subtype, accounting 
for approximately 31-33% of liposarcomas; DDLS accounts for 20%; MLS accounts 
for 19%; and PLS, the least common subtype, represents 7-8% of liposarcomas. 
Sarcoma diagnosis is challenging because of its rarity, intrinsic complexity, 
and diagnostic technological complexity. Sarcomas are misdiagnosed in 
approximately 30% of cases, leading to delays in diagnosis and access to 
appropriate therapy and clinical trials. Furthermore, treatment options are 
limited for those diagnosed with liposarcoma. This review discusses the 
epidemiology, pathology, and treatment options currently available for 
liposarcoma.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers16223858
PMCID: PMC11592651
PMID: 39594813

Conflict of interest statement: The sponsor had no role in the writing of this 
report and in the decision to submit the article for publication. Emily Jonczak, 
Julie Grossman, Crystal Seldon Taswell, Jaylou M. Velez-Torres declare no 
conflicts of interest. Francesco Alessandrino: Ascelia Pharma-Sub investigator. 
Jonathan Trent: AADI Pharmaceutical–Clinical Trial Consultant; Blueprint 
Medicines–Clinical Trial Consultant; C4 Therapeutics–Clinical Trial Consultant; 
Daiichi Sankyo–Clinical Trial Consultant; Deciphera Pharmaceuticals–Clinical 
Trial Consultant; Epizyme–Clinical Trial Consultant; Foghorn 
Therapeutics–Clinical Trial Consultant.