---
reference_id: "PMID:24746205"
title: "The expression of FOXL2 in pancreatic, hepatobiliary, and renal tumors with ovarian-type stroma."
authors:
- Westerhoff M
- Tretiakova M
- Hart J
- Gwin K
- Liu X
- Zhou M
- Yeh MM
- Antic T
journal: Hum Pathol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.12.015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The expression of FOXL2 in pancreatic, hepatobiliary, and renal tumors with ovarian-type stroma.
**Authors:** Westerhoff M, Tretiakova M, Hart J, Gwin K, Liu X, Zhou M, Yeh MM, Antic T
**Journal:** Hum Pathol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.humpath.2013.12.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humpath.2013.12.015)

## Content

1. Hum Pathol. 2014 May;45(5):1010-4. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.12.015. Epub
2014  Jan 17.

The expression of FOXL2 in pancreatic, hepatobiliary, and renal tumors with 
ovarian-type stroma.

Westerhoff M(1), Tretiakova M(2), Hart J(3), Gwin K(3), Liu X(4), Zhou M(5), Yeh 
MM(2), Antic T(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Washington Medical Center, Seattle, WA 98195. Electronic 
address: mwest2@uw.edu.
(2)University of Washington Medical Center, Seattle, WA 98195.
(3)University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60637.
(4)Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 809835.
(5)New York University, New York, NY 10012.

FOXL2, a gene encoding a member of the fork-head-winged-helix family of 
transcription factors, is one of the earliest expressed genes during female 
gonadal development. It is expressed in normal ovarian stroma and ovarian 
neoplasms with granulosa cell lineage. Nonovarian tumors such as pancreatic 
mucinous cystic neoplasms (PMCs), hepatobiliary cystadenomas (HBCs), and mixed 
epithelial and stromal tumor of the kidney (MEST) have ovarian-type stroma. 
Immunohistochemical staining with FOXL2, estrogen receptor, and progesterone 
receptor was performed on 21 PMCs, 13 HBCs, and 10 MESTs and assessed for 
nuclear immunohistochemical positivity in the tumor stroma. All cases of PMC and 
HBC demonstrated nuclear reactivity for FOXL2 in the subepithelial stromal 
cells. Ninety percent of MEST demonstrated nuclear FOXL2 positivity. Estrogen 
receptor nuclear positivity was demonstrated in 57% of PMC, 77% of HBC, and 80% 
of MEST. Progesterone receptor nuclear positivity was present in 67% of PMC, 
100% of HBC, and 90% of MEST. Clinical information was available for 37 
patients. Seventy-eight percent of the patients had a history of obesity, heavy 
alcohol use, or hormone-related therapy. The 2 male patients had histories 
significant for morbid obesity and chronic alcoholism. FOXL2 is expressed from 
the early stages of ovarian development and has been shown to be mandatory for 
normal ovarian function. We have shown that it is also expressed in the aberrant 
ovarian-type stroma characteristic of PMC, HBC, and MEST. Most of such patients, 
including the rare male patients, have risk factors for hormonal abnormalities 
such as obesity and hormonal replacement therapy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.12.015
PMID: 24746205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]