---
reference_id: "PMID:20301325"
title: Nonsyndromic Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Riazi S
- Biesecker LG
- Rosenberg H
- Dirksen RT
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nonsyndromic Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Riazi S, Biesecker LG, Rosenberg H, Dirksen RT

## Content

1. Nonsyndromic Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility.

Riazi S(1), Biesecker LG(2), Rosenberg H(3), Dirksen RT(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2003 Dec 19 [updated 2025 Aug 7].

Author information:
(1)Professor, Department of Anesthesia, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario
(2)Center for Precision Health Research, National Human Genome Research
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(3)President Emeritus of MHAUS and Courtesy Clinical Professor of
Anesthesiology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida
(4)Professor, Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, New York

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility (MHS) is a
pharmacogenetic disorder of skeletal muscle calcium regulation associated with
uncontrolled skeletal muscle hypermetabolism. Manifestations of malignant
hyperthermia (MH) are precipitated by volatile anesthetics (i.e., halothane,
isoflurane, sevoflurane, desflurane, enflurane), either alone or in conjunction
with a depolarizing muscle relaxant (specifically, succinylcholine). The
triggering substances cause uncontrolled release of calcium from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum and may promote entry of extracellular calcium into the
myoplasm, causing contracture of skeletal muscles, glycogenolysis, and increased
cellular metabolism, resulting in production of heat and excess lactate.
Affected individuals experience acidosis, hypercapnia, tachycardia,
hyperthermia, muscle rigidity, compartment syndrome, rhabdomyolysis with
subsequent increase in serum creatine kinase (CK) concentration, hyperkalemia
with a risk for cardiac arrhythmia or even cardiac arrest, and myoglobinuria
with a risk for kidney failure. In nearly all individuals, the first
manifestations of MH (hypercapnia, tachycardia, and tachypnea) occur in the
operating room; however, MH may also occur in the early postoperative period.
There is mounting evidence that some individuals with MHS will also develop MH
with exercise and/or on exposure to hot environments. Without proper and prompt
treatment with dantrolene sodium, mortality can be over 80%.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of MHS is established with in vitro muscle
contracture testing by measuring the contracture responses of biopsied muscle
samples to halothane and graded concentrations of caffeine. The diagnosis of MHS
can also be established by identification of a pathogenic variant in RYR1 (in
60%-70% of individuals with MHS), CACNA1S (~1%), or STAC3 (<1%) by molecular
genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: Administration of intravenous dantrolene sodium
(initial dose of 2.5 mg/kg) as early as possible during an MH episode. Treatment
of manifestations: Early diagnosis of an MH episode is essential. Successful
treatment of an acute episode of MH, in addition to administration of
intravenous dantrolene sodium, includes: discontinuation of potent inhalation
agents and succinylcholine; increase in minute ventilation to lower end-tidal
CO2; communication with Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the US (MHAUS)
helpline; cooling measures if body temperature is >38.5 °C; treatment of cardiac
arrhythmias if needed (do not use calcium channel blockers); monitoring blood
gases, serum concentrations of electrolytes and CK, blood and urine for
myoglobin, and coagulation profile; treatment of metabolic abnormalities.
Prevention of primary manifestations: Individuals undergoing general anesthesia
that exceeds 30 minutes in duration should have their temperature monitored
using an electronic temperature probe. Individuals with MHS should carry proper
identification (e.g., MedicAlert® bracelet) as to their susceptibility.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Avoid potent inhalation anesthetics and
succinylcholine. Calcium channel blockers should not be given together with
dantrolene because life-threatening hyperkalemia may result. Serotonin
antagonist (5-HT3 antagonist) antiemetics should be used cautiously. Individuals
with MHS should avoid extremes of heat but not restrict athletic activity unless
there is a history of overt rhabdomyolysis and/or heat stroke. Strenuous
activities at high ambient temperatures should be avoided or performed with
caution. In individuals with MHS undergoing cardiac bypass surgery, aggressive
rewarming should be avoided, as it may be associated with development of
clinical signs of MH. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to
clarify the status of at-risk relatives of an individual diagnosed with MHS to
identify those who also have an increased susceptibility to MH and thus would
benefit from avoiding anesthetic agents that increase the risk for an MH
episode. Evaluations include: multigene panel testing (if the MHS-related
causative variant in the family is known) and muscle biopsy and contracture
testing (if the MHS-causative pathogenic variant in the family is not known or
if an at-risk relative is found to be negative for the familial pathogenic
variant on targeted testing but has not undergone multigene panel testing).
Pregnancy management: If a pregnant woman with MHS requires a non-emergent
surgery, a non-triggering anesthetic (local, nerve block, epidural, spinal
anesthesia, or a total intravenous general anesthetic) should be administered.
Continuous epidural analgesia is highly recommended for labor and delivery. If a
cesarean delivery is indicated in a woman who does not have an epidural catheter
in place, neuraxial (spinal, epidural, or combined spinal-epidural) anesthesia
is recommended (if not otherwise contraindicated). If a general anesthetic is
indicated, a total intravenous anesthetic technique should be administered, with
an anesthesia machine that has been prepared for an individual with MHS.
GENETIC COUNSELING: MHS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Most
individuals diagnosed with MHS have a parent with MHS, although the parent may
not have experienced an episode of MH. Each child of an individual with MHS has
a 50% chance of being MH susceptible. If an MHS-causative pathogenic variant has
been identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation
genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301325
