---
reference_id: "PMID:40184730"
title: Associations of clinicopathologic features and mutation status with lateral lymph node metastasis as a predictor of disease-free survival in papillary thyroid carcinoma.
authors:
- Nguyen VPT
- Kurohama H
- Akazawa Y
- Nguyen TNA
- Matsuda K
- Matsuoka Y
- Mussazhanova Z
- Yokota K
- Satoh S
- Shindo H
- Nguyen TN
- Sailaubekova Y
- Kerimbayeva A
- Nakashima M
journal: Pathol Res Pract
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2025.155951
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- "Lymphatic Metastasis/pathology, genetics"
- "Thyroid Cancer, Papillary/genetics, pathology, mortality"
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/pathology, genetics, mortality"
- Adult
- Mutation
- Retrospective Studies
- Telomerase/genetics
- Disease-Free Survival
- Aged
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Prognosis
- Young Adult
- Lymph Nodes/pathology
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Associations of clinicopathologic features and mutation status with lateral lymph node metastasis as a predictor of disease-free survival in papillary thyroid carcinoma.
**Authors:** Nguyen VPT, Kurohama H, Akazawa Y, Nguyen TNA, Matsuda K, Matsuoka Y, Mussazhanova Z, Yokota K, Satoh S, Shindo H, Nguyen TN, Sailaubekova Y, Kerimbayeva A, Nakashima M
**Journal:** Pathol Res Pract (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.prp.2025.155951](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prp.2025.155951)

## Content

1. Pathol Res Pract. 2025 May;269:155951. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2025.155951. Epub
2025  Apr 1.

Associations of clinicopathologic features and mutation status with lateral
lymph node metastasis as a predictor of disease-free survival in papillary
thyroid carcinoma.

Nguyen VPT(1), Kurohama H(1), Akazawa Y(2), Nguyen TNA(1), Matsuda K(1),
Matsuoka Y(1), Mussazhanova Z(1), Yokota K(3), Satoh S(4), Shindo H(4), Nguyen
TN(1), Sailaubekova Y(1), Kerimbayeva A(1), Nakashima M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Tumor and Diagnostic Pathology, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute,
Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki 852-8523,
Japan.
(2)Department of Histology and Cell Biology, Nagasaki University Graduate School
of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.
(3)Biostatistics Section, Division of Scientific Data Registry, Atomic Bomb
Disease Institute, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.
(4)Yamashita Thyroid Hospital, Fukuoka 812-0034, Japan.
(5)Department of Tumor and Diagnostic Pathology, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute,
Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki 852-8523,
Japan. Electronic address: moemoe@nagasaki-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Lateral lymph node metastasis (LLNM) is a significant risk factor
for poor prognosis in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). Data on the association
between LLNM and genetic alterations in PTC remains limited. This study
investigated clinicopathological and molecular predictive factors for LLNM in
patients with PTC.
METHODS: We conducted a single-center retrospective analysis of 603 patients who
underwent thyroid surgery between January 2018 and December 2023.
Clinicopathological features and genetic mutations, including BRAFV600E and
telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) promoter mutations, were assessed to
identify predictors of LLNM. The impact of these features on disease-free
survival (DFS) was analyzed using multivariable Cox regression.
RESULTS: LLNM was found in 154 (25.5 %) patients. Independent predictors of LLNM
included age < 55 years (odds ratio [OR] = 2.491, 95 % confidence interval [CI]:
1.411-4.398), multifocality (OR = 2.056, 95 % CI: 1.254-3.370), lymphatic
invasion (OR = 1.811, 95 % CI: 1.094-2.997), gross extrathyroidal extension
(ETE) (OR = 2.611, 95 % CI: 1.333-5.115), central lymph node metastasis (CLNM)
without extranodal extension (ENE) (OR = 12.060, 95 % CI: 4.205-34.595) or with
ENE (OR = 68.060, 95 % CI: 23.224-199.453), and TERT promoter mutation (OR =
2.272, 95 % CI: 1.078-4.786). CLNM with ENE, LLNM with ENE and TERT promoter
mutation were significantly correlated with shorter DFS.
CONCLUSIONS: LLNM is not rare in PTC and represents an adverse prognostic factor
significantly associated with age, gross ETE, multifocality, lymphatic invasion,
CLNM, and TERT promoter mutation.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prp.2025.155951
PMID: 40184730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest There is no
conflict of interest.
