---
reference_id: "PMID:36504143"
title: Functional and structural markers of peripheral microvascular autonomic neuropathy.
authors:
- Rasmussen TK
- Karlsson P
- Finnerup NB
- Jensen TS
- Nyengaard JR
- Terkelsen AJ
journal: Muscle Nerve
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/mus.27770
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional and structural markers of peripheral microvascular autonomic neuropathy.
**Authors:** Rasmussen TK, Karlsson P, Finnerup NB, Jensen TS, Nyengaard JR, Terkelsen AJ
**Journal:** Muscle Nerve (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mus.27770](https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.27770)

## Content

1. Muscle Nerve. 2023 Feb;67(2):146-153. doi: 10.1002/mus.27770. Epub 2022 Dec
26.

Functional and structural markers of peripheral microvascular autonomic 
neuropathy.

Rasmussen TK(1), Karlsson P(1)(2), Finnerup NB(1)(3), Jensen TS(1), Nyengaard 
JR(2)(4), Terkelsen AJ(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Danish Pain Research Center, Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus 
University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(2)Core Center for Molecular Morphology, Section for Stereology and Microscopy, 
Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)Department of Neurology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(4)Department of Pathology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

INTRODUCTION/AIMS: Autonomic dysfunction is a common complication of small-fiber 
neuropathy (SFN). In this study we aimed to assess the applicability of 
autonomic microvascular indices as a potential marker for SFN assessment.
METHODS: Fifteen patients with confirmed SFN (idiopathic neuropathy [n = 10], 
chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy [n = 2], impaired glucose tolerance 
[n = 1], hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis (hATTR) [n = 1], pulmonary 
sarcoidosis [n = 1]) and 15 matched control subjects underwent assessment of 
vascular skin responses assessed through laser Doppler flowmetry and evaluation 
of microvascular vessel and nerve density in skin biopsies. All participants 
underwent peripheral autonomic evaluation by quantitative sudomotor axon reflex 
testing (QSART).
RESULTS: We found no significant differences in vascular skin responses, or in 
any microvascular skin biopsy markers, when comparing SFN with control subjects. 
We found no correlation between vascular skin responses and skin biopsy indices. 
We saw no significant difference in any microvascular indices when comparing 
subjects with and without impaired sudomotor function.
DISCUSSION: Our findings suggest markers of peripheral microvascular innervation 
and function are not associated with the diagnosis of SFN. Furthermore, we saw 
no association between microvascular markers and sudomotor function, suggesting 
that these are independent and unrelated components of the autonomic nervous 
system.

© 2022 The Authors. Muscle & Nerve published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.27770
PMCID: PMC10108116
PMID: 36504143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors has any conflict of interest 
to disclose.