---
reference_id: "PMID:19394342"
title: Cardiac ankyrins in health and disease.
authors:
- Hashemi SM
- Hund TJ
- Mohler PJ
journal: J Mol Cell Cardiol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2009.04.010
keywords:
- "Ankyrins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Brugada Syndrome/metabolism
- Disease
- Health
- Humans
- "Myocardium/enzymology, metabolism"
- Sinoatrial Node/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac ankyrins in health and disease.
**Authors:** Hashemi SM, Hund TJ, Mohler PJ
**Journal:** J Mol Cell Cardiol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yjmcc.2009.04.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yjmcc.2009.04.010)

## Content

1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2009 Aug;47(2):203-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2009.04.010.
Epub  2009 Apr 24.

Cardiac ankyrins in health and disease.

Hashemi SM(1), Hund TJ, Mohler PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa Carver College of
Medicine, Iowa City, IA, USA.

Ankyrins are critical components of ion channel and transporter signaling
complexes in the cardiovascular system. Over the past 5 years, ankyrin
dysfunction has been linked with abnormal ion channel and transporter membrane
organization and fatal human arrhythmias. Loss-of-function variants in the
ankyrin-B gene (ANK2) cause "ankyrin-B syndrome" (previously called type 4 long
QT syndrome), manifested by a complex cardiac phenotype including ventricular
arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. More recently, dysfunction in the
ankyrin-B-based targeting pathway has been linked with a highly penetrant and
severe form of human sinus node disease. Ankyrin-G (a second ankyrin gene
product) is required for normal expression, membrane localization, and
biophysical function of the primary cardiac voltage-gated sodium channel,
Na(v)1.5. Loss of the ankyrin-G/Na(v)1.5 interaction is associated with human
cardiac arrhythmia (Brugada syndrome). Finally, in the past year ankyrin
dysfunction has been associated with more common arrhythmia and cardiovascular
disease phenotypes. Specifically, large animal studies reveal striking
remodeling of ankyrin-B and associated proteins following myocardial infarction.
Additionally, the ANK2 locus has been linked with QT(c) interval variability in
the general human population. Together, these findings identify a host of
unanticipated and exciting roles for ankyrin polypeptides in cardiac function.
More broadly, these findings illustrate the importance of local membrane
organization for normal cardiac physiology.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2009.04.010
PMCID: PMC2745072
PMID: 19394342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
