---
reference_id: "PMID:15126690"
title: "Familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy: protein aggregation in the peripheral nervous system."
authors:
- João Saraiva M
- Mendes Sousa M
- Cardoso I
- Fernandes R
journal: J Mol Neurosci
year: '2004'
doi: "10.1385/jmn:23:1-2:035"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy: protein aggregation in the peripheral nervous system.
**Authors:** João Saraiva M, Mendes Sousa M, Cardoso I, Fernandes R
**Journal:** J Mol Neurosci (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1385/jmn:23:1-2:035](https://doi.org/10.1385/jmn:23:1-2:035)

## Content

1. J Mol Neurosci. 2004;23(1-2):35-40. doi: 10.1385/jmn:23:1-2:035.

Familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy: protein aggregation in the peripheral 
nervous system.

João Saraiva M(1), Mendes Sousa M, Cardoso I, Fernandes R.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neurobiology, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, University 
of Porto, Portugal. mjsaraiv@ibmc.up.pt

The molecular pathology underlying transthyretin (TTR)-related amyloidosis is 
largely unknown. It is possible that a common factor in the amyloidogenesis 
process exists among the different forms; this common factor can involve changes 
produced by mutations in the three-dimensional structure of TTR, rendering it 
prone to deposition as amyloid. This amyloidogenic potential, together with 
other yet unidentified factors, contribute to amyloid deposition. The factors 
that trigger fibril formation and/or neurodegeneration in TTR-related 
amyloidosis present central questions for which there are still no available 
clues. We recently showed in vitro that TTR fibrils trigger NF-kappaB 
activation, and subsequent studies identified some inflammatory and apoptotic 
pathways opening perspectives to understand the neurodegeneration process in 
familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy (FAP). It is current opinion that the 
modified TTR represents an amyloidogenic intermediate, which integrates the 
fibril structure; analyses of FAP fibrils have proved that TTR in the fibrils 
maintains a beta-conformation and have suggested that the TTR monomer is the 
building block in fibrils. This concept has been questioned recently by 
investigators, and only future studies on native and synthetic TTR fibrils using 
high-resolution structural techniques will further elucidate fibril structure 
and the aggregation pathway. Modulators responsible for phenotypic diversity can 
be addressed by mice transgenic for different human TTR mutations. Different 
lines are now available; incomplete penetrance and environmental influence on 
the deposition of mutant TTR has been observed. Therefore, these animals 
constitute important tools to address modulators of phenotypic expression and 
pathophysiological consequences of amyloid deposition at cellular/molecular 
levels. They are pivotal for testing potential drugs for TTR amyloidosis as 
well.

DOI: 10.1385/jmn:23:1-2:035
PMID: 15126690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]