---
reference_id: "PMID:10734523"
title: Diagnosis of tuberculosis in sputum negative patients in Dar es Salaam.
authors:
- Aris EA
- Bakari M
- Chonde TM
- Kitinya J
- Swai AB
journal: East Afr Med J
year: '1999'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis of tuberculosis in sputum negative patients in Dar es Salaam.
**Authors:** Aris EA, Bakari M, Chonde TM, Kitinya J, Swai AB
**Journal:** East Afr Med J (1999)

## Content

1. East Afr Med J. 1999 Nov;76(11):630-4.

Diagnosis of tuberculosis in sputum negative patients in Dar es Salaam.

Aris EA(1), Bakari M, Chonde TM, Kitinya J, Swai AB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Muhimbili University College of Health 
Sciences, University of Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.

OBJECTIVE: To determine diagnostic criteria for tuberculosis among sputum smear 
acid fast bacilli negative patients with chronic cough, based on symptoms, signs 
and simple laboratory tests.
DESIGN: A two-month prospective follow up study.
SETTING: Muhimbili Medical Centre, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
SUBJECTS: One hundred and seventy- eight consecutive patients admitted between 
1st November, 1994 and 31st March, 1995 with chronic productive cough.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Sputum smear acid fast bacilli (AAFB) negative with TB, 
discriminating ability of clinical and laboratory parameters.
RESULTS: Forty three (24.2%) were sputum smear positive for acid fast bacilli 
(AAFB). In 90 (50.6%) patients, AAFB could be isolated in specimen other than 
sputum and in 45 (25.3%) no AAFB could be isolated. In a univariate analysis of 
all symptoms, signs and laboratory test results, cough of four or more weeks, 
haemoptysis, oral candidiasis, chest consolidation, pleural effusion, mid zone 
and upper zone chest x-ray opacities were significantly different between sputum 
AAFB negative TB and non TB patients. Discriminant analysis revealed six highly 
significant variables: Mantoux reaction, pleural effusion, Kaposi's lesion, 
cervical lymphadenopathy, matted lymph node, mid zone and upper zone CXR 
infiltrates. From these variables an equation was derived to calculate the 
probability that a sputum smear negative patient had tuberculosis. Then a 
scoring system was developed that classified correctly 84% of cases of sputum 
AAFB negative patients into tuberculosis or non tuberculosis.
CONCLUSION: In sputum smear AAFB negative patient clinically suspected to have 
tuberculosis, Mantoux reaction, cervical lymphadenopathy, matted lymph nodes, 
absence of mid lower zone infiltration on CXR and presence of pleural effusion 
could be used for presumptive diagnosis, but they would not make a therapeutic 
trial unnecessary.

PMID: 10734523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]