---
reference_id: PMID:21674803
title: Protein acetylation in prokaryotes.
authors:
- Jones JD
- "O'Connor CD"
journal: Proteomics
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/pmic.201000812
keywords:
- Acetylation
- Acetyltransferases/metabolism
- "Archaea/enzymology, metabolism"
- Archaeal Proteins/metabolism
- "Bacteria/enzymology, metabolism"
- Bacterial Proteins/metabolism
- Lysine/metabolism
- Metabolic Networks and Pathways
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein acetylation in prokaryotes.
**Authors:** Jones JD, O'Connor CD
**Journal:** Proteomics (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pmic.201000812](https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201000812)

## Content

1. Proteomics. 2011 Aug;11(15):3012-22. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201000812. Epub 2011
Jun  14.

Protein acetylation in prokaryotes.

Jones JD(1), O'Connor CD.

Author information:
(1)Christ's College, University of Cambridge, Cambridge UK.

Protein acetylation plays a critical regulatory role in eukaryotes but until 
recently its significance and function in bacteria and the archaea were obscure. 
It is now clear, however, that prokaryotes have the capacity to acetylate both 
the α-amino groups of N-terminal residues and the ε-amino groups of lysine side 
chains. In this review, we bring together information indicating that such 
acetylation is widespread and that it is likely to regulate fundamental cellular 
processes. We particularly focus on lysine acetylation, which recent studies 
show can occur in proteins involved in transcription, translation, pathways 
associated with central metabolism and stress responses. Intriguingly, specific 
acetylated lysine residues map to critical regions in the three-dimensional 
structures of key proteins, e.g. to active sites or to surfaces that dock with 
other major cellular components. Like phosphorylation, acetylation appears to be 
an ancient reversible modification that can be present at multiple sites in 
proteins, thereby potentially producing epigenetic combinatorial complexity. It 
may be particularly important in regulating central metabolism in prokaryotes 
due to the requirement for acetyl-CoA and NAD(+) for protein acetyltransferases 
and Sir2-type deacetylases, respectively.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201000812
PMID: 21674803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]