---
reference_id: "PMID:40004838"
title: "Comorbidities, Endocrine Medications, and Mortality in Prader-Willi Syndrome-A Swedish Register Study."
authors:
- Giesecke J
- Oskarsson A
- Petersson M
- Nordenvall AS
- Tettamanti G
- Nordgren A
- Höybye C
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/jcm14041307
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comorbidities, Endocrine Medications, and Mortality in Prader-Willi Syndrome-A Swedish Register Study.
**Authors:** Giesecke J, Oskarsson A, Petersson M, Nordenvall AS, Tettamanti G, Nordgren A, Höybye C
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm14041307](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm14041307)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2025 Feb 16;14(4):1307. doi: 10.3390/jcm14041307.

Comorbidities, Endocrine Medications, and Mortality in Prader-Willi Syndrome-A 
Swedish Register Study.

Giesecke J(1)(2), Oskarsson A(1)(3), Petersson M(1)(2), Nordenvall AS(1)(4), 
Tettamanti G(1)(5), Nordgren A(1)(6)(7)(8), Höybye C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institute, 171 77 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Karolinska University Hospital, 171 76 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, St Göran's Hospital, 112 19 Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Radiology, Karolinska University Hospital, 171 76 Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(5)Unit of Epidemiology, Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska 
Institute, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics and Genomics, Karolinska University Hospital, 
171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, University of 
Gothenburg, 405 30 Göteborg, Sweden.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics and Genomics, Sahlgrenska University 
Hospital, 413 45 Göteborg, Sweden.

Background: Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a rare, genetic, multi-systemic 
disorder. Its main characteristics are muscular hypotonia, behavioral problems, 
intellectual disability, endocrine deficiencies, hyperphagia, and a high risk of 
morbid obesity and related comorbidities. This study aimed to investigate the 
rate of comorbidity, prescription of endocrine medications, and mortality in 
individuals with PWS compared to the general population. Methods: The 
association between PWS and outcomes were investigated in a matched cohort study 
of individuals born in the period of 1930-2018 with data from Swedish national 
health and welfare registers. Each individual was matched with 50 non-PWS 
comparisons. The associations between PWS, outcomes and prescribed endocrine 
medications were estimated through Cox proportional hazard models, presented as 
Hazard Ratios (HR) with 95% Confidence Intervals (CIs). Results: Among 360 
individuals (53% men) with PWS, 16% had diabetes mellitus, 6% heart failure, 4% 
vein thrombosis, 2% atrial fibrillation, 2% coronary heart disease, and 1% 
pulmonary embolism. Individuals with PWS had an increased rate of heart failure 
(HR: 23.85; 95% CI: 14.09-40.38), diabetes mellitus (HR: 17.49; 95% CI: 
12.87-23.74), vein thrombosis (HR: 10.44; 95% CI: 5.69-19.13), pulmonary 
embolism (HR: 5.77; 95% CI: 2.27-14.67), atrial fibrillation (HR: 5.19; 95% CI: 
2.48-10.86), and coronary heart disease (HR: 3.46; 95% CI: 1.50-7.97) compared 
to non-PWS individuals. Somatotropin was prescribed in 63%, antidiabetics in 
18%, and thyroid hormones in 16% of the PWS individuals (<1%, 2%, and 3%, 
respectively, in non-PWS individuals). The rate of mortality was fifteen times 
higher in PWS than in non-PWS, with a mean age at death of 42 years. 
Conclusions: The rates of diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular comorbidities 
were higher in individuals with PWS. As expected, the prescription of 
somatotropin was high, but the endocrine prescription pattern also reflected the 
high prevalence of diabetes mellitus and thyroid illness. Although the mean age 
at death was older than previously reported, a higher awareness and intensified 
efforts to avoid obesity, as well as the prevention and early treatment of 
cardiovascular and endocrine comorbidity, are crucial aims in the care of people 
with PWS.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm14041307
PMCID: PMC11856969
PMID: 40004838

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.