---
reference_id: "PMID:24786371"
title: "Childhood melanoma: an increasingly important health problem in the USA."
authors:
- Slade AD
- Austin MT
journal: Curr Opin Pediatr
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000000082
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Childhood melanoma: an increasingly important health problem in the USA.
**Authors:** Slade AD, Austin MT
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pediatr (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOP.0000000000000082](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOP.0000000000000082)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2014 Jun;26(3):356-61. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000000082.

Childhood melanoma: an increasingly important health problem in the USA.

Slade AD(1), Austin MT.

Author information:
(1)aDepartment of Pediatric Surgery, The University of Texas Medical School at 
Houston bDepartment of Pediatrics, Children's Cancer Hospital, The University of 
Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center cDepartment of Surgical Oncology, The 
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To inform pediatricians of the challenges of detection of 
melanoma in children and adolescents as well as to instruct on proper biopsy 
technique of suspicious lesions.
RECENT FINDINGS: The incidence of melanoma in children and adolescents is on the 
rise with an average increase of 2% per year. Rates of change are higher in 
adolescent girls and locations with low UV-B exposure. Standard Amelanotic, 
Bleeding, Bump, Color uniformity, De novo, any Diameter (ABCD) detection 
criteria fail to detect most childhood melanomas. Tumor thickness and sentinel 
lymph node status are the most important prognostic factors. Artificial tanning 
use is prevalent among adolescent girls and likely contributes to the growing 
incidence of melanoma in this group.
SUMMARY: Childhood melanoma is often amelanotic and may also appear as raised or 
ulcerated lesions commonly mistaken for warts or other benign skin conditions. 
Excision and full-thickness punch biopsies are indicated for suspicious lesions, 
whereas shaves and small punch biopsies are to be avoided. Pediatric patients 
more frequently have positive sentinel lymph nodes and increased tumor 
thickness, yet similar survival compared with adults.

DOI: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000000082
PMID: 24786371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]