---
reference_id: "PMID:17968944"
title: "NOD2 gene-associated pediatric granulomatous arthritis: clinical diversity, novel and recurrent mutations, and evidence of clinical improvement with interleukin-1 blockade in a Spanish cohort."
authors:
- Aróstegui JI
- Arnal C
- Merino R
- Modesto C
- Antonia Carballo M
- Moreno P
- García-Consuegra J
- Naranjo A
- Ramos E
- de Paz P
- Rius J
- Plaza S
- Yagüe J
journal: Arthritis Rheum
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/art.22966
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Antirheumatic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Arthritis/drug therapy, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- "Granuloma/drug therapy, genetics"
- Humans
- Interleukin 1 Receptor Antagonist Protein/therapeutic use
- "Interleukin-1/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Nod2 Signaling Adaptor Protein/genetics
- Pedigree
- Recurrence
- Spain
- Syndrome
- "Uveitis/drug therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NOD2 gene-associated pediatric granulomatous arthritis: clinical diversity, novel and recurrent mutations, and evidence of clinical improvement with interleukin-1 blockade in a Spanish cohort.
**Authors:** Aróstegui JI, Arnal C, Merino R, Modesto C, Antonia Carballo M, Moreno P, García-Consuegra J, Naranjo A, Ramos E, de Paz P, Rius J, Plaza S, Yagüe J
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheum (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.22966](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.22966)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheum. 2007 Nov;56(11):3805-13. doi: 10.1002/art.22966.

NOD2 gene-associated pediatric granulomatous arthritis: clinical diversity, 
novel and recurrent mutations, and evidence of clinical improvement with 
interleukin-1 blockade in a Spanish cohort.

Aróstegui JI(1), Arnal C, Merino R, Modesto C, Antonia Carballo M, Moreno P, 
García-Consuegra J, Naranjo A, Ramos E, de Paz P, Rius J, Plaza S, Yagüe J.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Inmunología, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain. 
jiaroste@clinic.ub.es

OBJECTIVE: Blau syndrome and early-onset sarcoidosis are NOD2 gene-associated 
chronic autoinflammatory diseases characterized by skin rash, arthritis, and/or 
eye involvement, with noncaseating granulomata as their pathologic hallmark. 
This study was undertaken to describe the expanded clinical phenotype, treatment 
outcomes, and NOD2 gene mutation analysis in a Spanish cohort with pediatric 
granulomatous arthritis, a chronic disease resembling Blau syndrome/early-onset 
sarcoidosis.
METHODS: Clinical, laboratory, and treatment data on the 12 patients in the 
cohort were obtained through direct interviews. NOD2 gene analysis was performed 
in a central laboratory, by bidirectional sequencing. Cytokine levels were 
measured using the human Flex-Set cytokine bead array.
RESULTS: The classic Blau syndrome/early-onset sarcoidosis triad of skin rash, 
arthritis, and recurrent uveitis was identified in 5 patients (41.7%), whereas 7 
patients (58.3%) presented with fewer than 3 of the classic features. Novel 
atypical manifestations such as persistent fever and myocardiopathy were also 
observed. NOD2 analysis revealed 1 heterozygous mutation in each patient, and 
familial studies confirmed its full penetrance. Of the 12 cases, 58.3% were 
sporadic, due to de novo mutations. Four different missense mutations on exon 4 
were detected. Two of them (R334W and R334Q) were recurrent mutations and were 
found in 77.8% of the Spanish families, whereas the other 2 (C495Y and R587C) 
were novel. In the patient who received anakinra treatment, all clinical 
inflammatory symptoms improved and plasma cytokine levels normalized.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that the expanding clinical heterogeneity of 
the disease (that is, the presentation of incomplete forms of the classic triad 
and atypical manifestations) and the high prevalence of sporadic cases should 
alert clinicians to the possible genetic basis of the condition and support the 
inclusion of DNA analysis as a diagnostic test. The positive response to 
anakinra observed in 1 patient suggests a new potential therapeutic approach 
that merits further investigation, and suggests that the pathogenesis of 
pediatric granulomatous arthritis may involve interleukin-1-mediated events.

DOI: 10.1002/art.22966
PMID: 17968944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]