---
reference_id: "PMID:3042913"
title: A combined regimen of subcutaneous lisuride and oral Madopar HBS in Parkinson's disease.
authors:
- Chouza C
- Caamaño JL
- de Medina O
- Aljanati R
- Scaramelli A
- Romero S
journal: J Neural Transm Suppl
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-8954-2_7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A combined regimen of subcutaneous lisuride and oral Madopar HBS in Parkinson's disease.
**Authors:** Chouza C, Caamaño JL, de Medina O, Aljanati R, Scaramelli A, Romero S
**Journal:** J Neural Transm Suppl (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-7091-8954-2_7](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-7091-8954-2_7)

## Content

1. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1988;27:61-70. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-8954-2_7.

A combined regimen of subcutaneous lisuride and oral Madopar HBS in Parkinson's 
disease.

Chouza C(1), Caamaño JL, de Medina O, Aljanati R, Scaramelli A, Romero S.

Author information:
(1)Section of Extrapyramidal Diseases, Institute of Neurology, Montevideo, 
Uruguay.

At the first stage of a pilot study involving 14 parkinsonians with motor 
fluctuations, treatment with standard Madopar was substituted by a 
sustained-release form, Madopar HBS, which attenuated fluctuations in patients 
with end-of-dose impairment, but achieved only moderate improvement in patients 
with on-off phenomena. In a second phase of the trial, 4 parkinsonians 
exhibiting the most severe fluctuations of mobility and the poorest response to 
Madopar HBS (Hydrodynamically Balanced System) were selected for treatment with 
a combined regimen utilizing subcutaneous lisuride infusions as the additional 
component. The sequence of the trial was as follows: 1. standard Madopar, 2. 
Madopar HBS, 3. standard Madopar combined with lisuride infusions and 4. Madopar 
HBS combined with lisuride infusions. Steady improvement was observed along the 
lines of this schedule, but the best results were obtained when Madopar HBS was 
combined with lisuride infusions. Subsequently motor fluctuations were less 
marked or disappeared, early-morning Parkinson symptoms decreased and dystonia 
was not recorded any longer. Even better results could be accomplished in an 
extended trial attempting to establish the best dosage ratio of the combination, 
possibly admitting increased dosage. The tolerance of the combined regimen was 
excellent, except in one patient who transiently exhibited delusions and 
postural hypotension. The combination of sustained-release Madopar and 
continuous infusions of the dopaminergic agonist lisuride seems to prove a more 
physiological and effective regimen for the treatment of severe motor 
fluctuations.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-8954-2_7
PMID: 3042913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]