---
reference_id: "PMID:38778082"
title: "Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of NOTCH1 variants: clinical manifestations in families with congenital heart disease."
authors:
- Stanley KJ
- Kalbfleisch KJ
- Moran OM
- Chaturvedi RR
- Roifman M
- Chen X
- Manshaei R
- Martin N
- McDermott S
- McNiven V
- Myles-Reid D
- Nield LE
- Reuter MS
- Schwartz MLB
- Shannon P
- Silver R
- Somerville C
- Teitelbaum R
- Zahavich L
- Bassett AS
- Kim RH
- Mital S
- Chitayat D
- Jobling RK
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-024-01629-4
keywords:
- Humans
- "Receptor, Notch1/genetics"
- Male
- Female
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- Adult
- Adolescent
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- Phenotype
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Pedigree
- Mutation
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics, pathology, diagnosis"
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics, pathology, diagnosis"
- Scalp Dermatoses/congenital
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of NOTCH1 variants: clinical manifestations in families with congenital heart disease.
**Authors:** Stanley KJ, Kalbfleisch KJ, Moran OM, Chaturvedi RR, Roifman M, Chen X, Manshaei R, Martin N, McDermott S, McNiven V, Myles-Reid D, Nield LE, Reuter MS, Schwartz MLB, Shannon P, Silver R, Somerville C, Teitelbaum R, Zahavich L, Bassett AS, Kim RH, Mital S, Chitayat D, Jobling RK
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-024-01629-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-024-01629-4)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2024 Jul;32(7):795-803. doi: 10.1038/s41431-024-01629-4. Epub
 2024 May 22.

Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of NOTCH1 variants: clinical manifestations in 
families with congenital heart disease.

Stanley KJ(1), Kalbfleisch KJ(1)(2), Moran OM(1)(2), Chaturvedi RR(1)(3), 
Roifman M(2)(4), Chen X(1), Manshaei R(1), Martin N(4), McDermott S(4), McNiven 
V(5), Myles-Reid D(4), Nield LE(3), Reuter MS(6)(7), Schwartz MLB(1)(2), Shannon 
P(8), Silver R(4), Somerville C(1), Teitelbaum R(4), Zahavich L(2)(3), Bassett 
AS(7)(9)(10)(11), Kim RH(1)(2)(12), Mital S(3)(13), Chitayat D(2)(4), Jobling 
RK(14)(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)Ted Rogers Centre for Heart Research Cardiac Genome Clinic, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Division of Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics Program, Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, McMaster Children's Hospital, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(6)The Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(7)Genetics and Genome Biology Program, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
ON, Canada.
(8)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(9)The Dalglish Family 22q Clinic, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(10)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(11)Clinical Genetics Research Program and Campbell Family Mental Health 
Research Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(12)Fred A. Litwin Family Centre in Genetic Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(13)Ted Rogers Centre for Heart Research, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(14)Ted Rogers Centre for Heart Research Cardiac Genome Clinic, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. rebekah.jobling@sickkids.ca.
(15)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. rebekah.jobling@sickkids.ca.
(16)Genome Diagnostics, Department of Pediatric Laboratory Medicine, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. rebekah.jobling@sickkids.ca.

Pathogenic variants in NOTCH1 are associated with non-syndromic congenital heart 
disease (CHD) and Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS). The clinical presentation of 
individuals with damaging NOTCH1 variants is characterized by variable 
expressivity and incomplete penetrance; however, data on systematic phenotypic 
characterization are limited. We report the genotype and phenotype of a cohort 
of 33 individuals (20 females, 13 males; median age 23.4 years, range 2.5-68.3 
years) from 11 families with causative NOTCH1 variants (9 inherited, 2 de novo; 
9 novel), ascertained from a proband with CHD. We describe the cardiac and 
extracardiac anomalies identified in these 33 individuals, only four of whom met 
criteria for AOS. The most common CHD identified was tetralogy of Fallot, though 
various left- and right-sided lesions and septal defects were also present. 
Extracardiac anomalies identified include cutis aplasia (5/33), cutaneous 
vascular anomalies (7/33), vascular anomalies of the central nervous system 
(2/10), Poland anomaly (1/33), pulmonary hypertension (2/33), and structural 
brain anomalies (3/14). Identification of these findings in a cardiac proband 
cohort supports NOTCH1-associated CHD and NOTCH1-associated AOS lying on a 
phenotypic continuum. Our findings also support (1) Broad indications for NOTCH1 
molecular testing (any familial CHD, simplex tetralogy of Fallot or hypoplastic 
left heart); (2) Cascade testing in all at-risk relatives; and (3) A thorough 
physical exam, in addition to cardiac, brain (structural and vascular), 
abdominal, and ophthalmologic imaging, in all gene-positive individuals. This 
information is important for guiding the medical management of these 
individuals, particularly given the high prevalence of NOTCH1 variants in the 
CHD population.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-024-01629-4
PMCID: PMC11219983
PMID: 38778082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest. Dr. 
Mital serves on the Advisory Board of Bristol Myers Squibb and Tenaya 
Therapeutics.