---
reference_id: "PMID:36305432"
title: Phenotypic and genotypic characteristics of children with Bartter syndrome.
authors:
- Güven S
- Gökçe İ
- Alavanda C
- Çiçek N
- Demirci EB
- Sak M
- Pul S
- Türkkan ÖN
- Yıldız N
- Ata P
- Alpay H
journal: Turk J Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2021.4697
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Pregnancy
- "Bartter Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Chloride Channels/genetics
- Genotype
- Mutation
- Nephrocalcinosis
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic and genotypic characteristics of children with Bartter syndrome.
**Authors:** Güven S, Gökçe İ, Alavanda C, Çiçek N, Demirci EB, Sak M, Pul S, Türkkan ÖN, Yıldız N, Ata P, Alpay H
**Journal:** Turk J Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.24953/turkjped.2021.4697](https://doi.org/10.24953/turkjped.2021.4697)

## Content

1. Turk J Pediatr. 2022;64(5):825-838. doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2021.4697.

Phenotypic and genotypic characteristics of children with Bartter syndrome.

Güven S(1), Gökçe İ(1), Alavanda C(2), Çiçek N(1), Demirci EB(1), Sak M(1), Pul 
S(1), Türkkan ÖN(1), Yıldız N(1), Ata P(2), Alpay H(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Marmara 
University Faculty of Medicine, İstanbul, Türkiye.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Marmara University Faculty of Medicine, 
İstanbul, Türkiye.

INTRODUCTION: Bartter syndrome (BS) is a group of autosomal-recessive tubular 
disorders and it is classified into five genetic subtypes. BS can also be 
classified by phenotype (antenatal, classic). Patients with mutations in the 
same gene can present different phenotypes. In the present study, target gene 
sequencing was performed to evaluate the genotype-phenotype relationship.
METHODS: Biochemical, clinical and renal ultrasonography results were collected 
at presentation and the last clinic visit. Genetic analyses were performed. The 
findings of patients with classical BS (cBS) and antenatal BS (aBS) at 
presentation and the last visit were compared.
RESULTS: Our study included 21 patients (12 female, 57.1%) from 20 families with 
BS. The median age at diagnosis was 8 months and the median follow-up period was 
39 months. The most frequent complaint was growth failure. We have found 18 
different types of mutations in four genes, including nine in the CLCNKB gene, 
seven in the SLCA12A1 gene, one in the KCNJ1 gene and one in the BSND gene. In 
ten patients, nine different types of CLCNKB gene mutations were detected, five 
of them were novel. Seven different mutations in the SLC12A1 gene were detected 
in eight patients, five of them were novel. Compared to patients with aBS and 
cBS, prematurity was significantly higher in the group with aBS. 
Nephrocalcinosis was present in only one patient with cBS, all the ten 
hypercalciuric patients with aBS had nephrocalcinosis at the time of diagnosis 
and the last visit. The mean height standard deviation score (SDS) of patients 
with aBS were significantly lower than the cBS group at the time of 
presentation. The mean weight SDS at the time of presentation was worse in 
patients with aBS than in patients with cBS. The mean plasma potassium and 
chloride concentrations were significantly lower in the patients with cBS at the 
time of diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: This investigation revealed the mutation characteristics and 
phenotype-genotype relationship of our patients and provided valuable data for 
genetic counseling.

DOI: 10.24953/turkjped.2021.4697
PMID: 36305432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]