---
reference_id: "PMID:37807786"
title: "SELENON-Related Myopathy Across the Life Span, a Cross-Sectional Study for Preparing Trial Readiness."
authors:
- Bouman K
- Groothuis JT
- Doorduin J
- van Alfen N
- Udink Ten Cate FEA
- van den Heuvel FMA
- Nijveldt R
- Kamsteeg EJ
- Dittrich ATM
- Draaisma JMT
- Janssen MCH
- van Engelen BGM
- Erasmus CE
- Voermans NC
journal: J Neuromuscul Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3233/JND-221673
keywords:
- Male
- Muscular Diseases
- Muscular Dystrophies
- Mallory Bodies/pathology
- Female
- Longevity
- Humans
- Fatigue
- Muscle Weakness
- Retrospective Studies
- Quality of Life
- Scoliosis
- Cross-Sectional Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SELENON-Related Myopathy Across the Life Span, a Cross-Sectional Study for Preparing Trial Readiness.
**Authors:** Bouman K, Groothuis JT, Doorduin J, van Alfen N, Udink Ten Cate FEA, van den Heuvel FMA, Nijveldt R, Kamsteeg EJ, Dittrich ATM, Draaisma JMT, Janssen MCH, van Engelen BGM, Erasmus CE, Voermans NC
**Journal:** J Neuromuscul Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JND-221673](https://doi.org/10.3233/JND-221673)

## Content

1. J Neuromuscul Dis. 2023;10(6):1055-1074. doi: 10.3233/JND-221673.

SELENON-Related Myopathy Across the Life Span, a Cross-Sectional Study for 
Preparing Trial Readiness.

Bouman K(1)(2), Groothuis JT(3), Doorduin J(1), van Alfen N(1), Udink Ten Cate 
FEA(4), van den Heuvel FMA(5), Nijveldt R(5), Kamsteeg EJ(6), Dittrich ATM(7), 
Draaisma JMT(7), Janssen MCH(8), van Engelen BGM(1), Erasmus CE(2), Voermans 
NC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Amalia Children's Hospital, Radboud university medical center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pediatric cardiology, Amalia Children's Hospital, Radboud 
university medical center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Amalia 
Children's Hospital, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: SELENON(SEPN1)-related myopathy (SELENON-RM) is a rare congenital 
neuromuscular disease characterized by proximal and axial muscle weakness, 
spinal rigidity, scoliosis and respiratory impairment. No curative treatment 
options exist, but promising preclinical studies are ongoing. Currently, natural 
history data are lacking, while selection of appropriate clinical and functional 
outcome measures is needed to reach trial readiness.
OBJECTIVE: We aim to identify all Dutch and Dutch-speaking Belgian SELENON-RM 
patients, deep clinical phenotyping, trial readiness and optimization of 
clinical care.
METHODS: This cross-sectional, single-center, observational study comprised 
neurological examination, functional measurements including Motor Function 
Measurement 20/32 (MFM-20/32) and accelerometry, questionnaires, muscle 
ultrasound, respiratory function tests, electro- and echocardiography, and 
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry.
RESULTS: Eleven patients with genetically confirmed SELENON-RM were included 
(20±13 (3-42) years, 73% male). Axial and proximal muscle weakness were most 
pronounced. The mean MFM-20/32 score was 71.2±15.1%, with domain 1 (standing and 
transfers) being most severely affected. Accelerometry showed a strong 
correlation with MFM-20/32. Questionnaires revealed impaired quality of life, 
pain and problematic fatigue. Muscle ultrasound showed symmetrically increased 
echogenicity in all muscles. Respiratory function, and particularly diaphragm 
function, was impaired in all patients, irrespective of the age. Cardiac 
assessment showed normal left ventricular systolic function in all patients but 
abnormal left ventricular global longitudinal strain in 43% of patients and QRS 
fragmentation in 80%. Further, 80% of patients showed decreased bone mineral 
density on dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry scan and 55% of patients 
retrospectively experienced fragility long bone fractures.
CONCLUSIONS: We recommend cardiorespiratory follow-up as a part of routine 
clinical care in all patients. Furthermore, we advise vitamin D supplementation 
and optimization of calcium intake to improve bone quality. We recommend 
management interventions to reduce pain and fatigue. For future clinical trials, 
we propose MFM-20/32, accelerometry and muscle ultrasound to capture disease 
severity and possibly disease progression.

DOI: 10.3233/JND-221673
PMCID: PMC10657684
PMID: 37807786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. The authors have no conflict of interest to report.