---
reference_id: "PMID:28122681"
title: Phenotypic and genotypic spectrum of congenital disorders of glycosylation type I and type II.
authors:
- Al Teneiji A
- Bruun TU
- Sidky S
- Cordeiro D
- Cohn RD
- Mendoza-Londono R
- Moharir M
- Raiman J
- Siriwardena K
- Kyriakopoulou L
- Mercimek-Mahmutoglu S
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.12.014
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/classification, diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Exome
- Female
- Gene Regulatory Networks
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing/methods
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Phenotype
- Protein Isoforms/metabolism
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA/methods"
- Transferrin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic and genotypic spectrum of congenital disorders of glycosylation type I and type II.
**Authors:** Al Teneiji A, Bruun TU, Sidky S, Cordeiro D, Cohn RD, Mendoza-Londono R, Moharir M, Raiman J, Siriwardena K, Kyriakopoulou L, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu S
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.12.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.12.014)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2017 Mar;120(3):235-242. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.12.014.
Epub  2017 Jan 3.

Phenotypic and genotypic spectrum of congenital disorders of glycosylation type 
I and type II.

Al Teneiji A(1), Bruun TU(2), Sidky S(1), Cordeiro D(1), Cohn RD(3), 
Mendoza-Londono R(3), Moharir M(4), Raiman J(5), Siriwardena K(6), Kyriakopoulou 
L(7), Mercimek-Mahmutoglu S(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Paediatrics, 
University of Toronto, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Paediatrics, 
University of Toronto, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 
Genetics and Genome Biology Program, Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Paediatrics, 
University of Toronto, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 
Genetics and Genome Biology Program, Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Division of Neurology, Department of Paediatrics, University of Toronto, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Birmingham's Children Hospital, Birmingham, England.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(7)Division of Genome Diagnostics, Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, 
University of Toronto, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Paediatrics, 
University of Toronto, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 
Genetics and Genome Biology Program, Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Institute of Medical Sciences, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: 
saadet.mahmutoglu@sickkids.ca.

BACKGROUND: Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) are inborn defects of 
glycan metabolism. They are multisystem disorders. Analysis of transferrin 
isoforms is applied as a screening test for CDG type I (CDG-I) and type II 
(CDG-II). We performed a retrospective cohort study to determine spectrum of 
phenotype and genotype and prevalence of the different subtypes of CDG-I and 
CDG-II.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: All patients with CDG-I and CDG-II evaluated in our 
institution's Metabolic Genetics Clinics were included. Electronic and paper 
patient charts were reviewed. We set-up a high performance liquid chromatography 
transferrin isoelectric focusing (TIEF) method to measure transferrin isoforms 
in our Institution. We reviewed the literature for the rare CDG-I and CDG-II 
subtypes seen in our Institution.
RESULTS: Fifteen patients were included: 9 with PMM2-CDG and 6 with non-PMM2-CDG 
(one ALG3-CDG, one ALG9-CDG, two ALG11-CDG, one MPDU1-CDG and one ATP6V0A2-CDG). 
All patients with PMM2-CDG and 5 patients with non-PMM2-CDG showed abnormal TIEF 
suggestive of CDG-I or CDG-II pattern. In all patients, molecular diagnosis was 
confirmed either by single gene testing, targeted next generation sequencing for 
CDG genes, or by whole exome sequencing.
CONCLUSION: We report 15 new patients with CDG-I and CDG-II. Whole exome 
sequencing will likely identify more patients with normal TIEF and expand the 
phenotypic spectrum of CDG-I and CDG-II.

Crown Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.12.014
PMID: 28122681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]