---
reference_id: "PMID:15367740"
title: "Acidosis in a patient with cholera: a need to redefine concepts."
authors:
- Zalunardo N
- Lemaire M
- Davids MR
- Halperin ML
journal: QJM
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hch110
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acidosis in a patient with cholera: a need to redefine concepts.
**Authors:** Zalunardo N, Lemaire M, Davids MR, Halperin ML
**Journal:** QJM (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1093/qjmed/hch110](https://doi.org/10.1093/qjmed/hch110)

## Content

1. QJM. 2004 Oct;97(10):681-96. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hch110.

Acidosis in a patient with cholera: a need to redefine concepts.

Zalunardo N(1), Lemaire M, Davids MR, Halperin ML.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Comment in
    QJM. 2005 Mar;98(3):234-5; author reply 235-6. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hci032.

A patient presented with cholera and a severe degree of ECF volume contraction. 
Despite large losses of bicarbonate (HCO3-)-containing diarrhoeal fluid, 
laboratory acid-base values were remarkably close to normal. A detailed analysis 
emphasizing principles of physiology and a quantitative approach provided new 
insights and eventually better definitions of metabolic and respiratory 
acidosis. A shift in focus from HCO3- concentration to HCO3- content in the 
extracellular fluid (ECF) compartment revealed the presence of metabolic 
acidosis. Central to this analysis was an emphasis on the haematocrit to enable 
a more accurate estimate of the degree of ECF volume contraction. The latter 
also revealed 'contraction' metabolic alkalosis, which masked the underlying 
metabolic acidosis. The presence of a respiratory acidosis of the tissue type 
was evident from the raised venous PCO2, which was not surprising once the 
magnitude of the ECF contraction had been appreciated. 'Bad buffering', as 
defined by Professor McCance, was the immediate danger and prompted swift action 
to restore an effective circulation. The haematocrit and the venous PCO2 also 
contribute valuable information to monitor the response to therapy. 
Nevertheless, there were still dangers to be discovered when an in-depth 
analysis suggested that the administration of isotonic saline would introduce an 
unanticipated danger for the patient.

DOI: 10.1093/qjmed/hch110
PMID: 15367740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]