---
reference_id: "PMID:17021169"
title: "Intraneuronal beta-amyloid aggregates, neurodegeneration, and neuron loss in transgenic mice with five familial Alzheimer's disease mutations: potential factors in amyloid plaque formation."
authors:
- Oakley H
- Cole SL
- Logan S
- Maus E
- Shao P
- Craft J
- Guillozet-Bongaarts A
- Ohno M
- Disterhoft J
- Van Eldik L
- Berry R
- Vassar R
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1202-06.2006
keywords:
- "Alzheimer Disease/genetics, pathology"
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/genetics
- Animals
- Cell Count
- "Memory Disorders/genetics, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation
- "Nerve Degeneration/genetics, pathology"
- "Neurofibrillary Tangles/genetics, pathology"
- Neurons/pathology
- "Plaque, Amyloid/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intraneuronal beta-amyloid aggregates, neurodegeneration, and neuron loss in transgenic mice with five familial Alzheimer's disease mutations: potential factors in amyloid plaque formation.
**Authors:** Oakley H, Cole SL, Logan S, Maus E, Shao P, Craft J, Guillozet-Bongaarts A, Ohno M, Disterhoft J, Van Eldik L, Berry R, Vassar R
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1202-06.2006](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1202-06.2006)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2006 Oct 4;26(40):10129-40. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1202-06.2006.

Intraneuronal beta-amyloid aggregates, neurodegeneration, and neuron loss in 
transgenic mice with five familial Alzheimer's disease mutations: potential 
factors in amyloid plaque formation.

Oakley H(1), Cole SL, Logan S, Maus E, Shao P, Craft J, Guillozet-Bongaarts A, 
Ohno M, Disterhoft J, Van Eldik L, Berry R, Vassar R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, The Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Mutations in the genes for amyloid precursor protein (APP) and presenilins (PS1, 
PS2) increase production of beta-amyloid 42 (Abeta42) and cause familial 
Alzheimer's disease (FAD). Transgenic mice that express FAD mutant APP and PS1 
overproduce Abeta42 and exhibit amyloid plaque pathology similar to that found 
in AD, but most transgenic models develop plaques slowly. To accelerate plaque 
development and investigate the effects of very high cerebral Abeta42 levels, we 
generated APP/PS1 double transgenic mice that coexpress five FAD mutations 
(5XFAD mice) and additively increase Abeta42 production. 5XFAD mice generate 
Abeta42 almost exclusively and rapidly accumulate massive cerebral Abeta42 
levels. Amyloid deposition (and gliosis) begins at 2 months and reaches a very 
large burden, especially in subiculum and deep cortical layers. Intraneuronal 
Abeta42 accumulates in 5XFAD brain starting at 1.5 months of age (before plaques 
form), is aggregated (as determined by thioflavin S staining), and occurs within 
neuron soma and neurites. Some amyloid deposits originate within morphologically 
abnormal neuron soma that contain intraneuronal Abeta. Synaptic markers 
synaptophysin, syntaxin, and postsynaptic density-95 decrease with age in 5XFAD 
brain, and large pyramidal neurons in cortical layer 5 and subiculum are lost. 
In addition, levels of the activation subunit of cyclin-dependent kinase 5, p25, 
are elevated significantly at 9 months in 5XFAD brain, although an upward trend 
is observed by 3 months of age, before significant neurodegeneration or neuron 
loss. Finally, 5XFAD mice have impaired memory in the Y-maze. Thus, 5XFAD mice 
rapidly recapitulate major features of AD amyloid pathology and may be useful 
models of intraneuronal Abeta42-induced neurodegeneration and amyloid plaque 
formation.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1202-06.2006
PMCID: PMC6674618
PMID: 17021169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]