---
reference_id: "PMID:22186724"
title: "Palatogenesis: morphogenetic and molecular mechanisms of secondary palate development."
authors:
- Bush JO
- Jiang R
journal: Development
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1242/dev.067082
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cleft Palate/genetics, physiopathology"
- Mammals
- "Models, Biological"
- "Morphogenesis/genetics, physiology"
- Palate/embryology
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Palatogenesis: morphogenetic and molecular mechanisms of secondary palate development.
**Authors:** Bush JO, Jiang R
**Journal:** Development (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.067082](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.067082)

## Content

1. Development. 2012 Jan;139(2):231-43. doi: 10.1242/dev.067082.

Palatogenesis: morphogenetic and molecular mechanisms of secondary palate 
development.

Bush JO(1), Jiang R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Tissue Biology and Program in Craniofacial and 
Mesenchymal Biology, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA 94143, USA. Jeffrey.Bush@ucsf.edu

Erratum in
    Development. 2012 Feb;139(4):828.

Mammalian palatogenesis is a highly regulated morphogenetic process during which 
the embryonic primary and secondary palatal shelves develop as outgrowths from 
the medial nasal and maxillary prominences, respectively, remodel and fuse to 
form the intact roof of the oral cavity. The complexity of control of 
palatogenesis is reflected by the common occurrence of cleft palate in humans. 
Although the embryology of the palate has long been studied, the past decade has 
brought substantial new knowledge of the genetic control of secondary palate 
development. Here, we review major advances in the understanding of the 
morphogenetic and molecular mechanisms controlling palatal shelf growth, 
elevation, adhesion and fusion, and palatal bone formation.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.067082
PMCID: PMC3243091
PMID: 22186724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]