---
reference_id: "PMID:31768671"
title: Molecular subgrouping of primary pineal parenchymal tumors reveals distinct subtypes correlated with clinical parameters and genetic alterations.
authors:
- Pfaff E
- Aichmüller C
- Sill M
- Stichel D
- Snuderl M
- Karajannis MA
- Schuhmann MU
- Schittenhelm J
- Hasselblatt M
- Thomas C
- Korshunov A
- Rhizova M
- Wittmann A
- Kaufhold A
- Iskar M
- Ketteler P
- Lohmann D
- Orr BA
- Ellison DW
- von Hoff K
- Mynarek M
- Rutkowski S
- Sahm F
- von Deimling A
- Lichter P
- Kool M
- Zapatka M
- Pfister SM
- Jones DTW
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-019-02101-0
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Brain Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- DNA Methylation
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- MicroRNAs
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- Pineal Gland
- "Pinealoma/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Molecular subgrouping of primary pineal parenchymal tumors reveals distinct subtypes correlated with clinical parameters and genetic alterations.
**Authors:** Pfaff E, Aichmüller C, Sill M, Stichel D, Snuderl M, Karajannis MA, Schuhmann MU, Schittenhelm J, Hasselblatt M, Thomas C, Korshunov A, Rhizova M, Wittmann A, Kaufhold A, Iskar M, Ketteler P, Lohmann D, Orr BA, Ellison DW, von Hoff K, Mynarek M, Rutkowski S, Sahm F, von Deimling A, Lichter P, Kool M, Zapatka M, Pfister SM, Jones DTW
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-019-02101-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-019-02101-0)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2020 Feb;139(2):243-257. doi: 10.1007/s00401-019-02101-0.
Epub  2019 Nov 25.

Molecular subgrouping of primary pineal parenchymal tumors reveals distinct
subtypes correlated with clinical parameters and genetic alterations.

Pfaff E(1)(2)(3), Aichmüller C(4), Sill M(1)(5), Stichel D(6)(7), Snuderl
M(8)(9)(10), Karajannis MA(11), Schuhmann MU(12), Schittenhelm J(13),
Hasselblatt M(14), Thomas C(14), Korshunov A(6)(7), Rhizova M(15), Wittmann
A(1)(2), Kaufhold A(1)(5), Iskar M(4), Ketteler P(16), Lohmann D(17), Orr
BA(18), Ellison DW(18)(19), von Hoff K(20)(21), Mynarek M(21), Rutkowski S(21),
Sahm F(1)(6)(7), von Deimling A(6)(7), Lichter P(4)(22), Kool M(1)(5), Zapatka
M(4), Pfister SM(1)(3)(5), Jones DTW(23)(24).

Author information:
(1)Hopp Children's Cancer Center Heidelberg (KiTZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Pediatric Glioma Research Group (B360), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Hopp Children's Cancer Center Heidelberg (KiTZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, Heidelberg
University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Division of Molecular Genetics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany.
(6)Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuropathology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research (DKTK), Heidelberg,
Germany.
(8)Division of Neuropathology, NYU Langone Health, New York, USA.
(9)Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer Center, NYU Langone Health, New York, USA.
(10)Division of Molecular Pathology and Diagnostics, NYU Langone Health, New
York, USA.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
USA.
(12)Division of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Department of Neurosurgery, Eberhard
Karl's University Hospital of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(13)Institute of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology and Neuropathology,
University of Tübingen, Comprehensive Cancer Center Tübingen-Stuttgart,
Tübingen, Germany.
(14)Institute of Neuropathology, University Hospital Münster, Munster, Germany.
(15)Department of Neuropathology, Burdenko Neurosurgical Institute, Moscow,
Russia.
(16)Pediatrics III, Pediatric Oncology and Hematology, University Hospital
Essen, Essen, Germany.
(17)Eye Cancer Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Essen,
Essen, Germany.
(18)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
USA.
(19)Department of Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, USA.
(20)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(21)Department of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, University Medical Centre
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(22)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany.
(23)Hopp Children's Cancer Center Heidelberg (KiTZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
david.jones@kitz-heidelberg.de.
(24)Pediatric Glioma Research Group (B360), German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Hopp Children's Cancer Center Heidelberg (KiTZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
david.jones@kitz-heidelberg.de.

Tumors of the pineal region comprise several different entities with distinct
clinical and histopathological features. Whereas some entities predominantly
affect adults, pineoblastoma (PB) constitutes a highly aggressive malignancy of
childhood with a poor outcome. PBs mainly arise sporadically, but may also occur
in the context of cancer predisposition syndromes including DICER1 and RB1
germline mutation. With this study, we investigate clinico-pathological
subgroups of pineal tumors and further characterize their biological features.
We performed genome-wide DNA methylation analysis in 195 tumors of the pineal
region and 20 normal pineal gland controls. Copy-number profiles were obtained
from DNA methylation data; gene panel sequencing was added for 93 tumors and
analysis was further complemented by miRNA sequencing for 22 tumor samples.
Unsupervised clustering based on DNA methylation profiling separated known
subgroups, like pineocytoma, pineal parenchymal tumor of intermediate
differentiation, papillary tumor of the pineal region and PB, and further
distinct subtypes within these groups, including three subtypes within the core
PB subgroup. The novel molecular subgroup Pin-RB includes cases of trilateral
retinoblastoma as well as sporadic pineal tumors with RB1 alterations, and
displays similarities with retinoblastoma. Distinct clinical associations
discriminate the second novel molecular subgroup PB-MYC from other PB cases.
Alterations within the miRNA processing pathway (affecting DROSHA, DGCR8 or
DICER1) are found in about two thirds of cases in the three core PB subtypes.
Methylation profiling revealed biologically distinct groups of pineal tumors
with specific clinical and molecular features. Our findings provide a foundation
for further clinical as well as molecular and functional characterization of PB
and other pineal tumors, including the role of miRNA processing defects in
oncogenesis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-019-02101-0
PMCID: PMC7275775
PMID: 31768671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Tumors arising in the pineal region are rare, accounting for 0.8-3.2% of primary brain and CNS tumors in children and adolescents [22, 35]. Tumors presumably originating from pineal cells comprise pineocytoma (Pin-Cyt), pineal parenchymal tumors of intermediate differentiation (PPTID), papillary tumors of the pineal region (PTPR) and pineoblastoma (PB) [30]. Further tumor entities occurring in the pineal region include germinomas, gliomas, and metastases.

Pin-Cyt is a low grade tumor (WHO grade I), accounting for approximately 20% of primary pineal tumors and typically occurring in adults in their forties. After total surgical resection, prognosis is favorable [30, 39].

PPTID has clinical and morphological features intermediate between Pin-Cyt and PB and corresponds to WHO grade II-III with definitive grading criteria still pending. Therefore, diagnosis can be challenging [30].

PTPR is a very rare neuroepithelial tumor affecting children and adults (mean age at diagnosis 35 years) and often recurs locally [30]. By DNA methylation based clustering, two distinct subtypes within PTPR are distinguished. Although no significant difference with regards to clinical and histopathological features or molecular alterations have been identified to date, there is a trend to a longer survival for one of the subtypes [19]. Typical alterations found in PTPR are loss of chromosomes 3, 10 and 22q, gain of chromosomes 8 and 12 as well as PTEN alterations [16].

PB mainly occurs in children and young adults and accounts for approximately 5% of childhood brain tumors. It is an embryonal tumor graded as WHO grade IV which frequently disseminates in cranio-spinal axis [15, 30]. Formerly, PB were frequently termed pineal ‘primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the central nervous system’ (CNS-PNET) [27] – however, more recent studies could show that ‘PNET’ in the pineal gland and elsewhere in the CNS are classified into distinct molecular entities [31, 44].

Despite multimodal treatment regimens with postsurgical polychemotherapy and cranio-spinal irradiation [13, 32], the median overall survival is relatively short (with 10-year overall survival rates of 48.6% in a series of 31 cases [10]), especially for children less than 4-5 years of age at diagnosis [32, 36].

Data on the comprehensive molecular characterization of PB and correlation with the clinical course of the patients is rare to date. Previous reports on copy-number analysis in PB include only small sample numbers with a maximum often samples [3, 23, 27, 31, 45]. To our knowledge, we present here on of the first studies on DNA methylation analysis in PB as well as one of the largest cohorts of this tumor type.

PB can be linked to genetic predisposition when arising in a rare condition called ‘trilateral retinoblastoma syndrome’ (TLRB) with an underlying RB1 germline mutation and co-occurring uni- or bilateral retinoblastoma [6, 7, 48]. Further, PB is one of the various tumor types that can occur in the context of patients with DICER1 Syndrome harboring a DICER1 germline mutation [40, 41]. Somatic DICER1 mutations and homozygous deletions of DROSHA have also been described in PB [8, 43], suggesting a possible role for miRNA processing defects in PB tumorigenesis.

MicroRNAs (miRNA) are small, non-coding RNA molecules which exert a regulatory effect on their mRNA targets. The complex formed by the nuclear ribonuclease DROSHA and the microprocessor complex subunit DGCR8 further processes primary precursor miRNA into hairpin precursor-miRNA, which is then cleaved by DICER1 in order to obtain mature miRNA [42].

Herein, we describe the molecular classification of 195 pineal tumors based on DNA methylation patterns into known subgroups. Moreover, we present the delineation of novel molecular subgroups as well as subtypes associated with distinct clinical characteristics and molecular alterations. Importantly, we find defects in the miRNA processing pathway in at least 40% of PBs.

Tumor samples were obtained from international collaboration partners as either fresh frozen or formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples. The majority of tumor samples were histologically diagnosed as pineal tumors, however no central histopathological review was performed.

Two PB samples were first and second relapse, respectively. For all other samples no explicit information was available. Therefore, it can only be assumed that these samples are primary disease and therefore treatment-naïve. Normal pineal gland samples were partly primarily diagnosed as Pin-Cyt (5/20) or PPTID (1/20). The remaining samples were collected post-mortem.

Clinical data and tumor material were obtained according to local ethical and institutional review board approval and collected at the German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany). Informed consent for molecular profiling was obtained from all patients and/or their legal representatives. A proportion of cases were previously published in Capper et al [4] or Hwang et al [21], but the majority of cases were collected within the scope of collaborative research efforts, international molecular diagnostic studies or routine histopathological and molecular diagnostic assessment.

Genome-wide DNA methylation profiles were obtained using Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 (450k) array and Illumina Infinium MethylationEPIC (EPIC) array, according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Illumina, San Diego, USA). Data were generated at the Genomics and Proteomics Core Facility of the DKFZ (Heidelberg, Germany) and St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital (Memphis, USA). On-chip quality metrics of all samples were carefully controlled. The conumee Bioconductor package version 1.12.0 was used for copy-number variation (CNV) analysis from 450k and EPIC methylation array data. All computational analyses were performed in R version 3.4.4 (R Development Core Team, 2019). The minfi Bioconductor package version 1.24.0 was applied for determination of raw signal intensities obtained from IDAT-files. Selecting the intersection of probes present on both arrays (combineArrays function, minfi) was used for merging Illumina EPIC and 450k samples to a combined data set. Individual normalization was performed for each sample using a background correction (shifting of the 5th percentile of negative control probe intensities to 0) and a dye-bias correction (scaling of the mean of normalization control probe intensities to 10,000) for both color channels. Subsequently, a correction for the type of material tissue (FFPE/frozen) and array (450k/EPIC) was applied by fitting univariate, linear models to the log2-transformed intensity values (removeBatchEffect function, limma package version 3.34.5). Correction was performed individually for methylated and unmethylated signals. Beta-values were calculated from the retransformed intensities using an offset of 100 (as recommended by Illumina). The following filtering criteria were applied before further analyses were performed: Removal of probes targeting the X and Y chromosomes (n = 11,551), removal of probes containing a single-nucleotide polymorphism (dbSNP132 Common) within five base pairs of and including the targeted CpG-site (n = 7998), probes not mapping uniquely to the human reference genome (hg19) allowing for one mismatch (n = 3965), and 450k array probes not included on the EPIC array. In total, 428,230 probes were kept for downstream analysis. To perform unsupervised dimension reduction, the remaining probes were used to calculate the 1-variance weighted Pearson correlation between the samples. Fort-SNE analysis (t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding; Rtsne package version 0.13) the resulting distance matrix was used as input. The following non-default parameters were applied: theta = 0, pca = F, max_iter = 2500 perplexity = 20. For unsupervised hierarchical clustering, the 10.000 probes with highest standard deviation were selected to calculate the Euclidean distance between samples, followed by applying Wards linkage method for sample clustering. In the heatmap, reordering of representation probes by complete linkage hierarchical clustering of the Euclidean distance between probes was conducted. Copy-number profiles of each case were visually inspected for evaluation of focal amplifications and deletions and chromosomal gains and losses. Candidate genes and their 3’ and 5’ intergenic neighborhood were further investigated using the Integrative Genomic Viewer (IGV) for the presence of breakpoints, as an indication for potential gene fusions.

A updated version of a previously described customized enrichment/hybrid-capture-based next-generation sequencing (NGS) gene panel including a selection of genes recurrently altered in brain tumors was applied [38] in a total of 93 samples (28x PB-Group 1A (PB-Grp1A) , 4x PB-Group 1B (PB-Grp1B), 7x PB-Group 2 (PB-Grp2), 6x PB-MYC (pineoblastoma with MYC alterations), 8x Pin-RB (pineal tumors with RB1 alterations), 9x Pin-Cyt, 9x PPTID-A, 7x PPTID-B, 3x PTPR-A, 12x PTPR-B). Furthermore, low-coverage whole genome and whole exome sequencing according to the INFORM pipeline were performed for two samples as described elsewhere [47]. The following filtering settings were applied for gene panel sequencing data, since no germline material was available for analysis: only exonic, nonsynonymous single nucleotide variants (SNV) with a frequency of ≤0.01 in the 1000 genomes database (http://www.internationalgenome.org/) were considered. Furthermore, SNVs were excluded when 1) the respective SNV was listed in the dbSNP database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/SNP/) but not in the COSMIC database (https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic), 2) when ≥10% of SNV counts in one gene were exactly the same specific nucleotide substitution found within different subtypes, and 3) when the specific SNV was listed as a benign variant in the ClinVar database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar/).

The small RNA composition of a total of 22 samples (9x PB-Grp1A, 1x PB-Grp1B, 1x PB-Grp2, 3x PB-MYC, 5x PPTID-A, 3x PPTID-B) was obtained by sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq2000 applying Illumina’s NEBNext Small RNA protocol using 50bp single-end reads. For miRNA clustering gene counts based on uniquely mapped reads have been normalized using the ‘rlog’ function from the R-package (https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8). Based on standard deviation, the most variable 15% miRNA have been chosen for clustering. In order to measure individual miRNA expression as deviation from the cohort mean expression, a z-transformation has been applied. For clustering, spearman correlation has been used to measure similarity and agglomeration was done according to ward.D.

Reads were aligned to a masked version of the human genome version 19 (hg19/GRCh37). Only regions harboring smallRNA and long non-coding RNA were accessible for alignment. Genetic locations were annotated using GENCODE gene annotation (version 28, liftover37) [12]. miRNA annotations were replaced with annotations provided by MiRBase (version 20) [25]. Sequencing reads were aligned using STAR version 2.5.2 with a parameter setting suggested by ENCODE [5]. Additionally, reads were aligned to a miRNA genome provided by MiRBase using BOWTIE2, version 2.3.4.3, using the parameter configuration --phred33, -D 20, -R 3, -N 0, -L 8, -i S,1,0.50.

Statistical analysis was conducted using R, version 3.4.4.

Samples for the current cohort were selected based on DNA methylation profiling applying a previously proposed classification algorithm [4] and including samples with the highest score for one of the pineal subgroups. 149/195 (76.4%) pineal tumor samples reached a DNA methylation score of at least 0.9 for one of the pineal subgroups according to the classification algorithm, whereas the score for one of the pineal subgroups was 0.22 – 0.89 for 28/195 (14.3%) cases. 13 samples were assigned to the methylation class “medulloblastoma, subclass group 3” with scores of 0.25 – 0.99. These tumors were primarily diagnosed as PB or PNET and therefore included in this study. Two cases with the highest score for the methylation class “retinoblastoma” (score 0.61 and 0.99, respectively) were primarily diagnosed as PNET and PB and fall into the subgroups PB_MYC and Pin_RB in this study, respectively. Three Pin-Cyt samples had a score of 0.19 – 0.41 for the methylation class “plexus tumor, subclass paediatric B” and one PTPR-B sample had a score of 0.24 for the methylation class “control tissue, reactive tumor microenvironment”.

Unsupervised clustering based on DNA methylation patterns of 195 tumor samples as well as 20 normal tissue samples from the pineal region (Norm-Pin, median age of 44 years, range 12-81, not age-matched) revealed distinct entities – Pin-Cyt, PPTID, PTPR and PB (Figure 1). Distinct subtypes within the respective subgroups (like PB-Grp1A, PB-Grp1B and PB-Grp2 within the PB subgroup as well as two different subtypes within the PPTID and PTPR groups (subtypes A and B, respectively)) as well as two novel molecular subgroups within the PB group (named Pin-RB (pineal tumors with RB1 alteration) and PB-MYC (PB with MYC activation)) could be distinguished since they formed distinct clusters based on t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (Figure 1a). Separation of the defined subtypes could be reproduced by hierarchical clustering using 10,000 probes filtered based on standard deviation (Figure 1b). Gross subgroup affiliation was stable applying variable probe numbers. Information on demographics and clinical follow-up for all subgroups and subtypes are given in Table 1 and illustrated in Figure 2.

PPTID (n=27) as a distinct molecular subgroup can be separated into two further subtypes based on methylation profiling. Tumors of both subtypes showed relatively flat copy number profiles with broad gains or losses in some cases (illustrated in Figure 3). Recent reports describe KBTBD4 small in-frame insertions as recurrent and characteristic alterations in PPTID as well as Group 3 and Group 4 medulloblastoma (MB-G3, MB-G4) [26, 33]. In line with these findings, we identified small insertions in KBTBD4, the Kelch repeat- and BTB domain-containing protein 4, in all PPTID cases with gene panel sequencing data available (9x PPTID-A and 7x PPTID-B). 11 cases harbored the specified in-frame insertion p.R313delinsPRR described in MB and PPTID [26, 33] whereas five cases showed an insertion of 9 instead of 6 bases in the same genomic region at codons 313-314 within a Kelch repeat domain.

For the PTPR group (n=46) we could discriminate two separate subtypes (Figure 1a, b), as previously described by Heim et al. [19]. The most frequently occurring alteration was loss of chromosome 10 in 83% of cases (10/12) of the PTPR-A subtype and 97% of cases (33/34) of the PTPR-B subtype (Figure 3a). In the PTPR-B subtype, two cases (2/12 with gene panel sequencing data available) harbored a small insertion/deletion (InDel) resulting in a frameshift in PTEN and one further PTPR-B case showed a homozygous deletion of the PTEN gene locus. No PTEN alterations were observed in tumors of the PTPR-A subtype. Chromosome 10 loss and PTEN alterations were previously described in PTPR [19].

A distinct molecular subgroup designated Pin-RB (n=16) emerged from the clustering (Figure 1). Tumor samples known to have arisen in the context of ‘trilateral retinoblastoma’ (TLRB) fell into this subgroup, but did not form a distinct subcluster separate from the other Pin-RB samples without this specific information (Figure 1c).

Patients of the Pin-RB subgroup were on average significantly younger compared to the other PB subtypes (Figure 2a). Gender distribution and primary diagnosis are illustrated in Figure 2b+c.

RB1 alterations (SNVs, InDels) were found in 9/10 cases with sequencing data available or known mutation status, with the RB1 mutation being confirmed as somatic in at least one case (no germline data available for the remaining cases). Variant allele frequencies ranged from 47-100%. Two cases harbored a homozygous focal RB1 deletion. Altogether, 11/16 cases showed an RB1 alteration (SNV, InDel or gene deletion) predicted to lead to a loss of function (with sequencing data missing for 6 cases).

Information on RB1 germline status was known for three of the TLRB cases, with a constitutional heterozygous RB1 germline alteration accompanied by loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH) in the tumor in each case. One further TLRB case harbored an RB1 stopgain mutation without germline data available.

As another highly recurrent alteration, loss of chromosome 16q was identified in 11/16 (69%) cases in the Pin-RB group with concomitant chromosome 16p loss being less frequently observed (8/16, 50%). Furthermore, 9/16 (56%) cases displayed a gain of chromosome arm 1q (Figure 3a, b). Besides RB1 alterations, these chromosomal changes are recurrent findings in retinoblastoma - with chromosome 1q gain described in 57% and loss of chromosome 16 found in 11-23% [17, 18, 28].

The similarity of Pin-RB and retinoblastoma regarding DNA methylation patterns was further illustrated when a cohort of 18 retinoblastoma cases were included in the clustering for comparison. Pin-RB samples and typical ocular retinoblastoma fall into the same cluster (Figure 1c+d), likely indicating commonalities in their cellular origin and pointing again to the intriguing evolutionary resemblance of the pineal gland and the retina.

As for the Pin-RB cases, patients of the second newly emerging molecular subgroup named PB-MYC - due to evidence of MYC activation - were on average significantly younger at diagnosis compared to the three core PB subtypes PB-Grp1A, PB-Grp1B and PB-Grp2 (Figure 2a). Recurrent copy number alterations included complete loss of chromosome 8p and loss of chromosome 10q, each in 5/17 cases (29%) (Figure 3). Notably, MYC amplification was identified in two cases and a broader chromosomal gain including the MYC gene locus in three further cases, summing up to MYC alterations being found in 5/17 PB-MYC cases (29%). MB-G3, another primitive embryonal tumor, is also known to be MYC-driven [34]. Based on DNA methylation patterns, the cluster of PB-MYC tumors delineates close to but still separated from the MB-G3 cluster (n=18) (Figure 1c+d). In contrast to the three other PB subtypes (see below), no alterations in the miRNA processing pathway were identified in PB-MYC tumors, with gene panel data being available for 6/17 cases. Furthermore, no alterations in KBTBD4 were observed in any of the PB-MYC cases, as might have been suspected by the findings of Northcott et al. [33] with KBTBD4 alterations as characteristic for MB-G3 and MB-G4. Based on the data presented here, the distinction of the molecular subgroup PB-MYC seems to be obvious. However, due to small sample numbers independent replication is necessary.

When focusing further on the remaining PB cluster, three different subtypes can be distinguished (named PB-Grp1A, PB-Grp1B, PB-Grp2) (Figure 1a+b) with PB-Grp1A and −1B falling close together. Patients’ age, gender distribution and primary diagnosis are illustrated in Figure 2a–c.

Within PB-Grp1A (n=54) recurrent homozygous focal deletion of the DROSHA or DGCR8 gene loci were identified in 11/54 (20%) and 4/54 (7%) cases, respectively (example depicted in Figure 4a+b), whereas none of the PB-Grp1B (n=10) tumors showed a deletion of one of these genes.

Sequencing analysis (available for 29 PB-Grp1A and 4 PB-Grp1B cases) revealed DROSHA mutations in 3/29 (10%) PB-Grp1A cases. DICER1 mutations were detected in 6/29 (21%) PB-Grp1A cases and 3/4 (75%) PB-Grp1B cases (three cases harbored two DICER1 alterations) (Figure 4d). Eight of the detected DICER1 mutations were not previously listed in common databases. Four DICER1 alterations were described before as being pathogenic in a germline context (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar; SCV000267168.1; SCV000581544.3; SCV000581563.3; accession date 03/25/2019). Four of the detected DICER1 mutations are located within the Ribonuclease IIIA domain (Figure 4e) [20]. All other DICER1 alterations are outside functional domains – as previously described in PB, but in contrast to other tumor entities where somatic DICER1 mutations typically cluster within the Ribonuclease IIIA domain [8, 11]. Variant allele frequencies for DICER1 as well as DROSHA mutations varied from 30-99%. Two cases in our series were known to harbor a DICER1 germline mutation. For all other cases, discrimination between somatic or germline mutation status could not be made due to lack of available germline material. One case harboring a DICER1 stopgain mutation showed a further pathogenic NRAS hotspot mutation as well as focal high-level CDK6 and MYC amplification.

PB-Grp1B tumors harbored several whole-chromosome gains and losses (Figure 3), with chromosome 8 gain and chromosome 16 loss as the more frequent ones. Gain of chromosome 14q (being observed in 50% of cases, 5/10) was more specific but not exclusive for this subtype.

For the second specific subtype of PB, PB-Grp2 (n=10), loss of chromosome 14q was the most frequent alteration, being found in 7/10 cases (70%) (Figure 3). Furthermore, two cases of this subtype showed homozygous focal deletion of the DROSHA gene locus. Sequencing analysis revealed frameshift InDels in the DICER1 gene in two further cases, summing up to alterations in the miRNA processing pathway in 4/7 cases with both sequencing and copy number data available (Figure 4).

Taken together, alterations in genes of the miRNA processing pathway (namely DROSHA, DGCR8 and DICER1 as illustrated in Figure 4c) were found in 31/74 (41.9%) cases in the core PB subtypes combined (PB-Grp1A, PB-Grp1B, PB-Grp2), with all alterations being mutually exclusive (Figure 4d). For cases with both copy number plots and sequencing data available, 23/40 cases (57.5%) harbored an alteration in the miRNA processing pathway.

Results of the next-generation sequencing (NGS) gene panel revealed described alterations in the DICER1, DROSHA, DGCR8 as well as RB1 genes. Furthermore, a NRAS hot spot mutation and a pathogenic ATM mutation were detected each in one PB-Grp1A case. No recurrent alterations which were considered to play a relevant role in the pathogenesis of these tumors were identified. A list of genes included in the gene panel is given as Supplement table 1 (online resource).

Due to the observed alterations in the miRNA processing pathway in PBs, we performed miRNA sequencing in a cohort of 22 pineal samples (9x PB-Grp1A, 1x PB-Grp1B, 1x PB-Grp2, 3x PB-MYC, 5x PPTID-A, 3x PPTID-B) as well as 3 normal brain and 6 MB-G4 samples as controls (Figure 4f+g).

Unsupervised clustering based on the top 15% most variable miRNAs by standard deviation revealed separate clusters for PB subtypes (PB-Grp1A, PB-Grp1B, PB-Grp2 taken together as PB-combined), PB-MYC samples and PPTID (Figure 4f). Since subtypes PB-Grp1A, PB-Grp1B and PB-Grp2 form one branch directly from the root of the dendogram based on the hierarchical clustering (Figure 1b), it seems plausible to combine these subtypes for miRNA analyses. Furthermore, sample numbers were too small to segregate PB-Grp1A, PB-Grp1B and PB-Grp2 subtypes. The proportion of uniquely mapped reads aligning to specific miRNA regions in the genome was significantly lower for the PB subtypes compared to PPTID (but not compared to MB), indicating on average less processed miRNA in the PB subtypes (Wilcoxon Test, FDR < 0.01). PB subtypes showed a lower fraction of miRNA (based on reads aligned to miRNA regions) within the small RNA composition compared to normal brain and PB-MYC, although no statistical test was conducted due to insufficient sample size of the respective subtypes (Figure 4g). Differences within and between subtypes might be due to quantitative changes of small RNA classes other than miRNA. Further functional investigation will be required to fully elucidate the exact cause for miRNA changes in these tumors.

Comparison of 3’/5’ miRNA expression across samples, irrespective of the subtype, showed an on average slightly higher expression of 5’ miRNA (Supplementary figure 1a, online resource). Two PB cases – one carrying a DICER1 germline mutation - displayed a significant difference in their 3’/5’ miRNA expression ratio (paired Wilcoxon Test, p < 0.01) with lower expression of 3’ miRNA.

The fraction of completely processed miRNA in relation to all miRNA was significantly lower for the PB subtypes in comparison to MBs, but not in comparison to PPTIDs (Wilcoxon Test, fdr <= 0.01) (Supplementary figure 1b, online resource). Supplementary figure 1c (online resource) shows the detailed small RNA composition. Due to small numbers of samples with suitable material for analysis, not covering all described alterations in the miRNA processing pathway, a genotype-phenotype correlation was not possible.

Clinical follow up data was available for 59 tumor patients (see Table 1). Based on Kaplan-Meier analysis, differences in progression-free survival (PFS) as well as overall survival (OS) can be observed (Figure 2d+e). PPTID and PTPR appear to show a more favorable OS compared with PB, Pin-RB and PB-MYC, despite showing similar relapse rates. Survival curves for both PFS and OS suggest the poorest prognosis in the PB-MYC molecular subgroup. However, patient numbers are currently too small to draw final conclusions or statistically validate the observed trends.

Multiple different tumor entities can arise in the pineal gland, with PB (the most aggressive variant) mainly occurring in the pediatric age group. Prognosis for PB is quite poor despite multimodal therapy, and little is known about underlying genetic alterations or molecular subgroups.

With our study presented here, we confirm the discrimination of several histologically defined subgroups of pineal tumors and further delineate distinct subtypes based on DNA methylation analysis. Focusing in more detail on PB, this study is one of the first reports presenting a classification of distinct PB subtypes and newly described molecular subgroups arising in the pineal gland.

With PB occurring on the basis of RB1 germline alterations in the context of ‘trilateral retinoblastoma’ syndrome, a relation of PB and RB was previously known. Accordingly, we identified a distinct molecular subgroup Pin-RB with either somatic or germline RB1 alterations that share remarkable similarities with the RB methylation profile. These tumors occur at a notably younger age than the core PB subtypes PB-Grp1A, PB-Grp1B and PB-Grp2 (similar to the mean age at diagnosis for RB [9]), and frequently show common features of RB like loss of chromosome 16 and gain of chromosome 1q [2, 17, 18, 28, 29].

Similarly, further clinical characterization is necessary for the newly described molecular subgroup PB-MYC. MYC gain as well as chromosome 8p and 10q loss as recurrently observed in PB-MYC tumors are known alterations in MB-G3 [34]. Even though the distinct PB subgroup PB-MYC shares molecular features with MB as another embryonal brain tumor, these entities still have to be distinguished based on their location, further clinical, histopathological and molecular features. PB-MYC show unique characteristics in contrast to the three PB subtypes, including younger age at diagnosis, similarities to MB-G3 based on DNA methylation analysis and copy number profiles, absence of alterations in the miRNA processing pathway, as well as poor outcome. Our data with the combination of a high proportion of infants and shorter overall survival in the PB-MYC subgroup can lead to the hypothesis that the underlying biology of this molecular subgroup might explain the observation of young age as a negative prognostic factor in PB [32, 36].

Alterations in the miRNA processing pathway are described in different pediatric tumor entities, like pleuropulmonary blastoma, but also Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor of the ovary, embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma, primary intracranial sarcoma and PB in the context of underlying DICER1 germline mutations [8, 24, 40, 41]. Furthermore, mutations in DROSHA, DGCR8 and DICER1 are found in Wilms tumor [14, 46]. MiRNAs as a class of non-coding RNAs are considered to be involved in the development of cancer, e.g. through dysregulation of tumor-suppressive miRNAs or activation of miRNAs with oncogenic function [37]. DICER1 alterations affect the processing of pre-miRNA hairpins, for example with missense mutations located in the Ribonuclease IIIB domain leading to depletion of mature 5’miRNA [1, 11]. Interestingly, the DICER1 mutated cases in our cohort did not show a depletion of 5’ miRNA, most likely due to the detected mutations not affecting the Ribonuclease IIIB domain. The specific impact of distinct alterations in the different genes of the miRNA processing pathway in PB needs to be investigated in a larger cohort facilitating miRNA- as well as total RNA sequencing.

Taking the poor outcome of pediatric patients with tumors of the pineal region and the limited biological knowledge on this heterogeneous group of tumors, further clinical as well as molecular characterization is essential. Our results on distinct features of the subgroups could form a basis for further studies on clinical stratification, treatment optimization as well as more targeted treatment approaches.

In conclusion, with the current study we present a molecular subgrouping (summarized in Figure 5) of tumors of the pineal region correlating with distinct clinical features and genetic alterations. In particular, three core subtypes of PB are described in which alterations in the miRNA processing pathway are the predominant characteristic. Furthermore, we shed light on the similarity of Pin-RB with retinoblastoma, hinting at common developmental origins, and introduce a new MB-like molecular subgroup (PB-MYC) associated with a poor prognosis. Further functional characterization of miRNA processing alterations, histopathological reviews as well as clinical follow-up studies are now required in order to build upon the foundation presented here.
