---
reference_id: "PMID:39870490"
title: Comparative impact of tertiary lymphoid structures and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in cholangiocarcinoma.
authors:
- Chung SY
- Yeh YC
- Huang CJ
- Chiang NJ
- Hsu DS
- Chan MH
- Lu ML
- Hsu TS
- Hung YP
- Yeh CN
- Hsiao M
- Chang YC
- Wang YC
- Chen MH
journal: J Immunother Cancer
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1136/jitc-2024-010173
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lymphocytes, Tumor-Infiltrating/immunology, metabolism"
- "Cholangiocarcinoma/drug therapy, immunology, pathology"
- "Tertiary Lymphoid Structures/immunology, pathology"
- Male
- Female
- "Bile Duct Neoplasms/drug therapy, immunology, pathology"
- Tumor Microenvironment/immunology
- Middle Aged
- Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative impact of tertiary lymphoid structures and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in cholangiocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Chung SY, Yeh YC, Huang CJ, Chiang NJ, Hsu DS, Chan MH, Lu ML, Hsu TS, Hung YP, Yeh CN, Hsiao M, Chang YC, Wang YC, Chen MH
**Journal:** J Immunother Cancer (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jitc-2024-010173](https://doi.org/10.1136/jitc-2024-010173)

## Content

1. J Immunother Cancer. 2025 Jan 27;13(1):e010173. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2024-010173.

Comparative impact of tertiary lymphoid structures and tumor-infiltrating 
lymphocytes in cholangiocarcinoma.

Chung SY(#)(1), Yeh YC(#)(2)(3)(4), Huang CJ(#)(2), Chiang NJ(1)(4)(5), Hsu 
DS(6), Chan MH(7), Lu ML(1), Hsu TS(8), Hung YP(1), Yeh CN(9), Hsiao M(10), 
Chang YC(#)(7), Wang YC(#)(2), Chen MH(#)(11)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Biomedical Informatics, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Taipei Veterans General 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes, 
Tainan, Taiwan.
(6)Asclepiumm Taiwan Co., Ltd, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Radiological Sciences, National 
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, College of Life Sciences and 
Medicine, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(9)General Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(10)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(11)Department of Oncology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan 
mhchen9@vghtpe.gov.tw.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Cholangiocarcinoma is a challenging malignancy with limited 
responses to conventional therapies, particularly immune checkpoint inhibitor 
therapy. Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and tertiary lymphoid structures 
(TLSs) are key components of the tumor microenvironment (TME) and have been 
implicated in the immune response to cancer. However, the role and difference of 
TLSs and TILs in patients with cholangiocarcinoma remains unclear. This study 
elucidates their contributions to the TME.
METHODS: We examined 16 tumor samples from a single-arm, phase II trial of 
nivolumab plus modified gemcitabine and S-1 and various datasets. 
Immunohistochemistry and RNA sequencing were employed to assess TLSs and TILs 
presence and activity. Differential gene expression and signature of immune cell 
composition were examined by GeoMx Digital Spatial Profiler and Cancer 
Transcriptome Altas analysis.
RESULTS: TLS-positive (N=7) patients demonstrated significantly better 
immunotherapy outcomes compared with TLS-negative (N=9) patients, including 
higher objective response rates (71% vs 0%) and disease control rates (100% vs 
67%). The presence of TLSs correlated with improved progression-free and overall 
survival (p=0.03). TLSs were associated with "inflamed" tumors characterized by 
substantial immune infiltration, particularly involving T and B cells. Gene 
expression analyses identified significant upregulation of B cell-related genes 
in TLSs. Additionally, TLSs exhibited higher properties of memory B cells and 
myeloid dendritic cells but lower levels of innate immune cells compared with 
TILs. T cells within TLSs showed elevated expression of 
precursor-exhausted-related genes and lower cytotoxicity signature. Furthermore, 
TILs in TLS-positive tumors had higher levels of exhaustion signatures compared 
with TILs in TLS-negative tumors. Clinical data corroborated these findings, 
with higher PD-L1 and LAG-3 expression in TLS-positive tumors.
CONCLUSION: Our findings revealed that TILs in TLS-positive tumors have more 
exhausted T cell signature and PD-1 and LAG-3 protein expression in CCA which 
support our clinical finding. TLSs can predict favorable immunotherapy responses 
in patients with cholangiocarcinoma, highlighting their potential as a biomarker 
and therapeutic target to enhance treatment efficacy.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2025. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/jitc-2024-010173
PMCID: PMC11772930
PMID: 39870490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: No, there are no competing 
interests.