---
reference_id: "PMID:30824184"
title: "Identification of a point mutation PML(S214L)-RARα that alters PML body organization, dynamics and SUMOylation."
authors:
- Zhao S
- Shi P
- Zhong Q
- Shao S
- Huang Y
- Sun Y
- Wu C
- Zhu HH
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.02.101
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Arsenic Trioxide/therapeutic use
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm"
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/analysis, genetics"
- Point Mutation
- Sumoylation/drug effects
- Tretinoin/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a point mutation PML(S214L)-RARα that alters PML body organization, dynamics and SUMOylation.
**Authors:** Zhao S, Shi P, Zhong Q, Shao S, Huang Y, Sun Y, Wu C, Zhu HH
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.02.101](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.02.101)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2019 Apr 9;511(3):518-523. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.02.101. Epub 2019 Feb 26.

Identification of a point mutation PML(S214L)-RARα that alters PML body
organization, dynamics and SUMOylation.

Zhao S(1), Shi P(1), Zhong Q(1), Shao S(2), Huang Y(1), Sun Y(3), Wu C(4), Zhu
HH(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Systems Biomedicine, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing, 100191, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Biodynamic Optical Imaging Center
(BIOPIC), School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Biodynamic Optical Imaging Center
(BIOPIC), School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China.
Electronic address: sun_yujie@pku.edu.cn.
(4)Institute of Systems Biomedicine, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing, 100191, China. Electronic address:
congyingwu@hsc.pku.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Hematology& Institute of Hematology, The First Affiliated
Hospital, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310003, China; Institute of Hematology,
China Three Gorges University, Yichang, 443002, China. Electronic address:
zhuhhdoc@163.com.

Genetic mutations on PML-RARα in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) are reported
to associate with arsenic trioxide (ATO) or all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA)
resistance. Here we performed a retrospective analysis of APL patients and
identified that the patient with S214L mutation on the PML moiety of PML-RARα
showed resistance to both ATO and ATRA. Super-resolution microcopy was used to
examine the structural response of PML bodies in wild-type or the S214L mutant
cells upon drug treatment. Different protein density and fluidity were
identified with the S214L mutant PML bodies by single particle quantification
and FRAP analysis. We discovered that altered SUMOylation and ubiquitination
might contribute to the drug resistance. Taken together, we have revealed that
the S214L mutation on PML-RARα disrupted the organization of PML body and
dynamics changes, perturbing structural responses to ATRA and subsequent
oncoprotein degradation. Our findings shed new light on the structural
alterations of PML bodies and mechanisms of APL drug resistance.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.02.101
PMID: 30824184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
