---
reference_id: "PMID:24814846"
title: DEPDC5 mutations in families presenting as autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy.
authors:
- Picard F
- Makrythanasis P
- Navarro V
- Ishida S
- de Bellescize J
- Ville D
- Weckhuysen S
- Fosselle E
- Suls A
- De Jonghe P
- Vasselon Raina M
- Lesca G
- Depienne C
- An-Gourfinkel I
- Vlaicu M
- Baulac M
- Mundwiller E
- Couarch P
- Combi R
- Ferini-Strambi L
- Gambardella A
- Antonarakis SE
- Leguern E
- Steinlein O
- Baulac S
journal: Neurology
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000488
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 22/genetics"
- Drug Resistance/genetics
- "Epilepsy, Frontal Lobe/genetics"
- Europe
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- GTPase-Activating Proteins
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DEPDC5 mutations in families presenting as autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy.
**Authors:** Picard F, Makrythanasis P, Navarro V, Ishida S, de Bellescize J, Ville D, Weckhuysen S, Fosselle E, Suls A, De Jonghe P, Vasselon Raina M, Lesca G, Depienne C, An-Gourfinkel I, Vlaicu M, Baulac M, Mundwiller E, Couarch P, Combi R, Ferini-Strambi L, Gambardella A, Antonarakis SE, Leguern E, Steinlein O, Baulac S
**Journal:** Neurology (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000000488](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000000488)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2014 Jun 10;82(23):2101-6. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000488. Epub
2014 May 9.

DEPDC5 mutations in families presenting as autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal
lobe epilepsy.

Picard F(1), Makrythanasis P(1), Navarro V(1), Ishida S(1), de Bellescize J(1),
Ville D(1), Weckhuysen S(1), Fosselle E(1), Suls A(1), De Jonghe P(1), Vasselon
Raina M(1), Lesca G(1), Depienne C(1), An-Gourfinkel I(1), Vlaicu M(1), Baulac
M(1), Mundwiller E(1), Couarch P(1), Combi R(1), Ferini-Strambi L(1),
Gambardella A(1), Antonarakis SE(1), Leguern E(1), Steinlein O(1), Baulac S(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology (F.P.), and Service of Genetic Medicine
(S.E.A.), University Hospitals of Geneva; Department of Genetic Medicine and
Development (P.M.), and iGE3, Institute of Genetics and Genomics of Geneva
(S.E.A.), University of Geneva, Switzerland; Institut national de la santé et de
la recherche médicale (INSERM) (V.N., S.I., C.D., I.A.-G., M.V., M.B., E.L.,
S.B.), U1127, ICM, Paris, F-75013 Paris; Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris
06, UMR S 1127, F-75013 Paris (V.N., S.I., C.D., I.A.-G., M.V., M.B., E.L.,
S.B.), Paris; CNRS (V.N., S.I., C.D., I.A.-G., M.V., M.B., E.L., S.B.), UMR7225,
Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris; Epilepsy Unit (V.N., I.A.-G., M.V.,
M.B.), ICM, Paris, F-75013 Paris, France (V.N., S.I., C.D., I.A.-G., M.V., M.B.,
E.L., S.B.), and Département de Génétique et de Cytogénétique (C.D., E.L.),
AP-HP Groupe hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris; Epilepsy, Sleep and Pediatric
Neurophysiology (J.d.B.), University Hospitals of Lyon; Hospices Civils de Lyon
(D.V.), HFME, centre de référence déficiences intellectuelles de causes rares et
sclérose tubéreuse de Bourneville, Bron, France; Neurogenetics Group (S.W.,
A.S., P.D.J.), Department of Molecular Genetics, VIB, Antwerp; Laboratory of
Neurogenetics (S.W., A.S., P.D.J.), Institute Born-Bunge, University of Antwerp,
Belgium; Epilepsy Centre Kempenhaeghe (S.W.), Oosterhout, the Netherlands;
Algemeen Stedelijk Ziekenhuis (E.F.), Aalst; Division of Neurology (P.D.J.),
Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp University, Belgium; Centre hospitalier
général de Valence (M.V.R.); Department of Medical Genetics (G.L.), Hospices
Civils de Lyon; Claude Bernard Lyon I University (G.L.); CRNL (G.L.), CNRS UMR
5292, INSERM U1028, Lyon; Centre de référence épilepsies rares et Sclérose
tubéreuse de Bourneville (I.A.-G., M.B.); Genotyping and Sequencing Platform,
ICM (E.M.), and DNA and Cell Bank (P.C.), Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris,
France; Department of Surge

OBJECTIVE: To study the prevalence of DEPDC5 mutations in a series of 30 small
European families with a phenotype compatible with autosomal dominant nocturnal
frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE).
METHODS: Thirty unrelated families referred with ADNFLE were recruited in
France, Italy, Germany, Belgium, and Norway. Whole-exome sequencing was
performed in 10 probands and direct sequencing of the DEPDC5 coding sequence in
20 probands. Testing for nonsense-mediated messenger RNA decay (NMD) was
performed in lymphoblastic cells.
RESULTS: Exome sequencing revealed a splice acceptor mutation (c.2355-2A>G) in
DEPDC5 in the proband of a German family. In addition, 3 nonsense DEPDC5
mutations (p.Arg487*, p.Arg1087*, and p.Trp1369*) were detected in the probands
of 2 French and one Belgian family. The nonsense mutations p.Arg487* and
p.Arg1087* were targeted by NMD, leading to the degradation of the mutated
transcripts. At the clinical level, 78% of the patients with DEPDC5 mutations
were drug resistant.
CONCLUSIONS: DEPDC5 loss-of-function mutations were found in 13% of the families
with a presentation of ADNFLE. The rate of drug resistance was high in patients
with DEPDC5 mutations. Small ADNFLE pedigrees with DEPDC5 mutations might
actually represent a part of the broader familial focal epilepsy with variable
foci phenotype.

© 2014 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000488
PMID: 24814846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
