---
reference_id: "PMID:15737014"
title: Acquired resistance of lung adenocarcinomas to gefitinib or erlotinib is associated with a second mutation in the EGFR kinase domain.
authors:
- Pao W
- Miller VA
- Politi KA
- Riely GJ
- Somwar R
- Zakowski MF
- Kris MG
- Varmus H
journal: PLoS Med
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020073
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/drug therapy, genetics"
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Disease Progression
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Erlotinib Hydrochloride
- Exons
- Female
- Gefitinib
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Middle Aged
- Point Mutation
- Quinazolines/pharmacology
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acquired resistance of lung adenocarcinomas to gefitinib or erlotinib is associated with a second mutation in the EGFR kinase domain.
**Authors:** Pao W, Miller VA, Politi KA, Riely GJ, Somwar R, Zakowski MF, Kris MG, Varmus H
**Journal:** PLoS Med (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pmed.0020073](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0020073)

## Content

1. PLoS Med. 2005 Mar;2(3):e73. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020073. Epub 2005 Feb
22.

Acquired resistance of lung adenocarcinomas to gefitinib or erlotinib is
associated with a second mutation in the EGFR kinase domain.

Pao W(1), Miller VA, Politi KA, Riely GJ, Somwar R, Zakowski MF, Kris MG, Varmus
H.

Author information:
(1)Program in Cancer Biology and Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York, USA. paow@mskcc.org <paow@mskcc.org>

Comment in
    PLoS Med. 2005 Mar;2(3):e75. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020075.
    PLoS Med. 2005 Sep;2(9):e269. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020269.

BACKGROUND: Lung adenocarcinomas from patients who respond to the tyrosine
kinase inhibitors gefitinib (Iressa) or erlotinib (Tarceva) usually harbor
somatic gain-of-function mutations in exons encoding the kinase domain of the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Despite initial responses, patients
eventually progress by unknown mechanisms of "acquired" resistance.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We show that in two of five patients with acquired
resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib, progressing tumors contain, in addition to
a primary drug-sensitive mutation in EGFR, a secondary mutation in exon 20,
which leads to substitution of methionine for threonine at position 790 (T790M)
in the kinase domain. Tumor cells from a sixth patient with a drug-sensitive
EGFR mutation whose tumor progressed on adjuvant gefitinib after complete
resection also contained the T790M mutation. This mutation was not detected in
untreated tumor samples. Moreover, no tumors with acquired resistance had KRAS
mutations, which have been associated with primary resistance to these drugs.
Biochemical analyses of transfected cells and growth inhibition studies with
lung cancer cell lines demonstrate that the T790M mutation confers resistance to
EGFR mutants usually sensitive to either gefitinib or erlotinib. Interestingly,
a mutation analogous to T790M has been observed in other kinases with acquired
resistance to another kinase inhibitor, imatinib (Gleevec).
CONCLUSION: In patients with tumors bearing gefitinib- or erlotinib-sensitive
EGFR mutations, resistant subclones containing an additional EGFR mutation
emerge in the presence of drug. This observation should help guide the search
for more effective therapy against a specific subset of lung cancers.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020073
PMCID: PMC549606
PMID: 15737014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: See Acknowledgments.
