---
reference_id: "PMID:34556300"
title: Executive summary of the KDIGO 2021 Guideline for the Management of Glomerular Diseases.
authors:
- Rovin BH
- Adler SG
- Barratt J
- Bridoux F
- Burdge KA
- Chan TM
- Cook HT
- Fervenza FC
- Gibson KL
- Glassock RJ
- Jayne DRW
- Jha V
- Liew A
- Liu ZH
- Mejía-Vilet JM
- Nester CM
- Radhakrishnan J
- Rave EM
- Reich HN
- Ronco P
- Sanders JF
- Sethi S
- Suzuki Y
- Tang SCW
- Tesar V
- Vivarelli M
- Wetzels JFM
- Lytvyn L
- Craig JC
- Tunnicliffe DJ
- Howell M
- Tonelli MA
- Cheung M
- Earley A
- Floege J
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2021.05.015
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- "Glomerulonephritis/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Glomerulonephritis, IGA/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Glomerulonephritis, Membranous/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Humans
- Kidney
- "Nephrosis, Lipoid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Executive summary of the KDIGO 2021 Guideline for the Management of Glomerular Diseases.
**Authors:** Rovin BH, Adler SG, Barratt J, Bridoux F, Burdge KA, Chan TM, Cook HT, Fervenza FC, Gibson KL, Glassock RJ, Jayne DRW, Jha V, Liew A, Liu ZH, Mejía-Vilet JM, Nester CM, Radhakrishnan J, Rave EM, Reich HN, Ronco P, Sanders JF, Sethi S, Suzuki Y, Tang SCW, Tesar V, Vivarelli M, Wetzels JFM, Lytvyn L, Craig JC, Tunnicliffe DJ, Howell M, Tonelli MA, Cheung M, Earley A, Floege J
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.kint.2021.05.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2021.05.015)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2021 Oct;100(4):753-779. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2021.05.015.

Executive summary of the KDIGO 2021 Guideline for the Management of Glomerular 
Diseases.

Rovin BH(1), Adler SG(2), Barratt J(3), Bridoux F(4), Burdge KA(5), Chan TM(6), 
Cook HT(7), Fervenza FC(8), Gibson KL(9), Glassock RJ(10), Jayne DRW(11), Jha 
V(12), Liew A(13), Liu ZH(14), Mejía-Vilet JM(15), Nester CM(16), Radhakrishnan 
J(17), Rave EM(18), Reich HN(19), Ronco P(20), Sanders JF(21), Sethi S(22), 
Suzuki Y(23), Tang SCW(6), Tesar V(24), Vivarelli M(25), Wetzels JFM(26), Lytvyn 
L(27), Craig JC(28), Tunnicliffe DJ(29), Howell M(29), Tonelli MA(30), Cheung 
M(31), Earley A(31), Floege J(32).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University College of 
Medicine, Columbus, Ohio, USA. Electronic address: brad.rovin@osumc.edu.
(2)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Los Angeles Biomedical Research 
Institute, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, 
UK.
(4)Department of Nephrology and Renal Transplantation, CIC INSERM 1402, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire, University Hospital Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
(5)Division of Nephrology, Mass General Brigham-Salem Hospital, Salem, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong, China.
(7)Renal and Transplant Centre, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(8)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, 
USA.
(9)University of North Carolina Kidney Center at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina, USA.
(10)Department of Medicine, Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(11)Division of Experimental Medicine & Immunotherapeutics, School of Clinical 
Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(12)The George Institute for Global Health, New Delhi, India; School of Public 
Health, Imperial College London, London, UK; Prasanna School of Public Health, 
Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India.
(13)The Kidney and Transplant Practice, Mount Elizabeth Novena Hospital, 
Singapore.
(14)Nanjing University School of Medicine, Nanjing, China.
(15)Department of Nephrology and Mineral Metabolism, Instituto Nacional de 
Ciencias Medicas y Nutricion, Salvador Zubiran, Mexico City, Mexico.
(16)Molecular Otolaryngology & Renal Research Laboratories, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(17)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical 
Center, New York, New York, USA.
(18)Ohio Kidney Associates, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(19)Divsion of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(20)Sorbonne University, and Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche 
Médicale, Unité Mixte de Recherche S1155, Paris, France; Le Mans Hospital, Le 
Mans, France.
(21)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(22)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA.
(23)Department of Nephrology, Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan.
(24)Department of Nephrology, 1st Faculty of Medicine and General University 
Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(25)Department of Pediatric Subspecialties, Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, 
Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy.
(26)Department of Nephrology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(27)MAGIC Evidence Ecosystem Foundation, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada; Department 
of Health Research Methods, Evidence, and Impact, McMaster University, Hamilton, 
Ontario, Canada.
(28)College of Medicine and Public Health, Flinders University, Adelaide, 
Australia; Cochrane Kidney and Transplant, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(29)Cochrane Kidney and Transplant, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; Sydney 
School of Public Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(30)Department of Medicine, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(31)KDIGO, Brussels, Belgium.
(32)Division of Nephrology, University Hospital, Rheinisch-Westfälische 
Technische Hochschule (RWTH) Aachen, Aachen, Germany. Electronic address: 
jfloege@ukaachen.de.

The Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Clinical Practice 
Guideline for the Management of Glomerular Diseases is an update to the KDIGO 
2012 guideline. The aim is to assist clinicians caring for individuals with 
glomerulonephritis (GN), both adults and children. The scope includes various 
glomerular diseases, including IgA nephropathy and IgA vasculitis, membranous 
nephropathy, nephrotic syndrome, minimal change disease (MCD), focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), infection-related GN, antineutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibody (ANCA) vasculitis, lupus nephritis, and anti-glomerular basement 
membrane antibody GN. In addition, this guideline will be the first to address 
the subtype of complement-mediated diseases. Each chapter follows the same 
format providing guidance related to diagnosis, prognosis, treatment, and 
special situations. The goal of the guideline is to generate a useful resource 
for clinicians and patients by providing actionable recommendations based on 
evidence syntheses, with useful infographics incorporating views from experts in 
the field. Another aim is to propose research recommendations for areas where 
there are gaps in knowledge. The guideline targets a broad global audience of 
clinicians treating GN while being mindful of implications for policy and cost. 
Development of this guideline update followed an explicit process whereby 
treatment approaches and guideline recommendations are based on systematic 
reviews of relevant studies, and appraisal of the quality of the evidence and 
the strength of recommendations followed the "Grading of Recommendations 
Assessment, Development and Evaluation" (GRADE) approach. Limitations of the 
evidence are discussed, with areas of future research also presented.

Copyright © 2021 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2021.05.015
PMID: 34556300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]