---
reference_id: "PMID:38844297"
title: Pathophysiology of Cardiac Amyloidosis.
authors:
- Morfino P
- Aimo A
- Franzini M
- Vergaro G
- Castiglione V
- Panichella G
- Limongelli G
- Emdin M
journal: Heart Fail Clin
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.hfc.2024.02.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of Cardiac Amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Morfino P, Aimo A, Franzini M, Vergaro G, Castiglione V, Panichella G, Limongelli G, Emdin M
**Journal:** Heart Fail Clin (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hfc.2024.02.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hfc.2024.02.002)

## Content

1. Heart Fail Clin. 2024 Jul;20(3):261-270. doi: 10.1016/j.hfc.2024.02.002. Epub 
2024 Apr 8.

Pathophysiology of Cardiac Amyloidosis.

Morfino P(1), Aimo A(2), Franzini M(3), Vergaro G(2), Castiglione V(2), 
Panichella G(4), Limongelli G(5), Emdin M(6).

Author information:
(1)Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, Italy.
(2)Fondazione Toscana Gabriele Monasterio, via G. Moruzzi 1, 56124, Pisa, Italy; 
Health Science Interdisciplinary Center, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Translational Research and of New Surgical and Medical 
Technologies, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Careggi University 
Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(5)Inherited and Rare Cardiovascular Disease Unit, Department of Translational 
Medical Sciences, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy.
(6)Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, Italy; Fondazione Toscana Gabriele 
Monasterio, via G. Moruzzi 1, 56124, Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: 
m.emdin@santannapisa.it.

Amyloidosis refers to a heterogeneous group of disorders sharing common 
pathophysiological mechanisms characterized by the extracellular accumulation of 
fibrillar deposits consisting of the aggregation of misfolded proteins. Cardiac 
amyloidosis (CA), usually caused by deposition of misfolded transthyretin or 
immunoglobulin light chains, is an increasingly recognized cause of heart 
failure burdened by a poor prognosis. CA manifests with a restrictive 
cardiomyopathy which progressively leads to biventricular thickening, diastolic 
and then systolic dysfunction, arrhythmias, and valvular disease. The 
pathophysiology of CA is multifactorial and includes increased oxidative stress, 
mitochondrial damage, apoptosis, impaired metabolism, and modifications of 
intracellular calcium balance.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hfc.2024.02.002
PMID: 38844297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors have nothing to disclose.