---
reference_id: "PMID:37140960"
title: "Viral persistence, reactivation, and mechanisms of long COVID."
authors:
- Chen B
- Julg B
- Mohandas S
- Bradfute SB
- RECOVER Mechanistic Pathways Task Force
journal: Elife
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.86015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Viral persistence, reactivation, and mechanisms of long COVID.
**Authors:** Chen B, Julg B, Mohandas S, Bradfute SB, RECOVER Mechanistic Pathways Task Force
**Journal:** Elife (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.86015](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86015)

## Content

1. Elife. 2023 May 4;12:e86015. doi: 10.7554/eLife.86015.

Viral persistence, reactivation, and mechanisms of long COVID.

Chen B(1), Julg B(2), Mohandas S(3), Bradfute SB(4); RECOVER Mechanistic 
Pathways Task Force.

Collaborators: Sherif ZA(5), Gomez CR(6), Connors TJ(7), Henrich TJ(8), Reeves 
WB(9), Coombs K(10), Kim C(10), Jagannathan P(11), Bime C(12), Quinlan EB(13), 
Portman MA(14), Gennaro ML(15), Rehman J(16).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, United States.
(2)Infectious Diseases Division, Massachusetts General Hospital, Ragon Institute 
of Mass General, MIT and Harvard, Boston, United States.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Children's 
Hospital Los Angeles, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, United States.
(4)Center for Global Health, Department of Internal Medicine, University of New 
Mexico Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, United States.
(5)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Howard University College of 
Medicine, Washington, United States.
(6)Division of Lung Diseases, National Institutes of Health (NIH), National 
Heart Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI), Bethesda, United States.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Critical Care, Columbia University 
Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons and New York - Presbyterian Morgan 
Stanley Children's Hospital, New York, United States.
(8)Division of Experimental Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, United States.
(9)Department of Medicine, Joe R. and Teresa Lozano Long School of Medicine, 
University of Texas, San Antonio, United States.
(10)NIH RECOVER Research Initiative: Patient representative, Bronx, United 
States.
(11)Division of Infectious Diseases and Geographic Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, United States.
(12)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care & Sleep Medicine, Department 
of Medicine, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Tucson, United States.
(13)National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, United States.
(14)Seattle Children's Hospital, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, United States.
(15)Public Health Research Institute and Department of Medicine, Rutgers New 
Jersey Medical School, Newark, United States.
(16)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois, 
College of Medicine, Chicago, United States.

The COVID-19 global pandemic caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection has infected hundreds of millions of 
individuals. Following COVID-19 infection, a subset can develop a wide range of 
chronic symptoms affecting diverse organ systems referred to as post-acute 
sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC), also known as long COVID. A National 
Institutes of Health-sponsored initiative, RECOVER: Researching COVID to Enhance 
Recovery, has sought to understand the basis of long COVID in a large cohort. 
Given the range of symptoms that occur in long COVID, the mechanisms that may 
underlie these diverse symptoms may also be diverse. In this review, we focus on 
the emerging literature supporting the role(s) that viral persistence or 
reactivation of viruses may play in PASC. Persistence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA or 
antigens is reported in some organs, yet the mechanism by which they do so and 
how they may be associated with pathogenic immune responses is unclear. 
Understanding the mechanisms of persistence of RNA, antigen or other reactivated 
viruses and how they may relate to specific inflammatory responses that drive 
symptoms of PASC may provide a rationale for treatment.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.86015
PMCID: PMC10159620
PMID: 37140960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: BC, BJ, SM, SB No competing interests declared