---
reference_id: "PMID:38890701"
title: "Identification of miRNA expression profile in middle ear cholesteatoma using small RNA-sequencing."
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: "2024"
doi: 10.1186/s12920-024-01932-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of miRNA expression profile in middle ear cholesteatoma using small RNA-sequencing.

## Content

Background: The present study aims to identify the differential miRNA expression
profile in middle ear cholesteatoma and explore their potential roles in its
pathogenesis.

Methods: Cholesteatoma and matched normal retroauricular skin tissue samples were
collected from patients diagnosed with acquired middle ear cholesteatoma. The
miRNA expression profiling was performed using small RNA sequencing, which
further validated by quantitative real-time PCR. Target genes of differentially
expressed miRNAs in cholesteatoma were predicted. The interaction network of 5
most significantly differentially expressed miRNAs was visualized using
Cytoscape. Further Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genome
pathway enrichment analyses were processed to investigate the biological
functions of miRNAs in cholesteatoma.

Results: The miRNA expression profile revealed 121 significantly differentially
expressed miRNAs in cholesteatoma compared to normal skin tissues, with 56
upregulated and 65 downregulated. GO and KEGG pathway enrichment analyses
suggested their significant roles in the pathogenesis of cholesteatoma. The
interaction network of the the 2 most upregulated (hsa-miR-21-5p and
hsa-miR-142-5p) and 3 most downregulated (hsa-miR-508-3p, hsa-miR-509-3p and
hsa-miR-211-5p) miRNAs identified TGFBR2, MBNL1, and NFAT5 as potential key
target genes in middle ear cholesteatoma.

Conclusions: This study provides a comprehensive miRNA expression profile in
middle ear cholesteatoma, which may aid in identifying therapeutic targets for
its management.
