---
reference_id: "PMID:19285295"
title: Haplotype-sharing analysis implicates chromosome 7q36 harboring DPP6 in familial idiopathic ventricular fibrillation.
authors:
- Alders M
- Koopmann TT
- Christiaans I
- Postema PG
- Beekman L
- Tanck MW
- Zeppenfeld K
- Loh P
- Koch KT
- Demolombe S
- Mannens MM
- Bezzina CR
- Wilde AA
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.02.009
keywords:
- Adult
- Case-Control Studies
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 7/genetics"
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/etiology"
- Dipeptidyl-Peptidases and Tripeptidyl-Peptidases
- Electrocardiography
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Myocardium/metabolism
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- Peptide Hydrolases/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Potassium Channels/genetics
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- Risk Factors
- "Ventricular Fibrillation/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Haplotype-sharing analysis implicates chromosome 7q36 harboring DPP6 in familial idiopathic ventricular fibrillation.
**Authors:** Alders M, Koopmann TT, Christiaans I, Postema PG, Beekman L, Tanck MW, Zeppenfeld K, Loh P, Koch KT, Demolombe S, Mannens MM, Bezzina CR, Wilde AA
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.02.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.02.009)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Apr;84(4):468-76. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.02.009. Epub 
2009 Mar 12.

Haplotype-sharing analysis implicates chromosome 7q36 harboring DPP6 in familial 
idiopathic ventricular fibrillation.

Alders M(1), Koopmann TT, Christiaans I, Postema PG, Beekman L, Tanck MW, 
Zeppenfeld K, Loh P, Koch KT, Demolombe S, Mannens MM, Bezzina CR, Wilde AA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.

Idiopathic Ventricular Fibrillation (IVF) is defined as spontaneous VF without 
any known structural or electrical heart disease. A family history is present in 
up to 20% of probands with the disorder, suggesting that at least a subset of 
IVF is hereditary. A genome-wide haplotype-sharing analysis was performed for 
identification of the responsible gene in three distantly related families in 
which multiple individuals died suddenly or were successfully resuscitated at 
young age. We identified a haplotype, on chromosome 7q36, that was conserved in 
these three families and was also shared by 7 of 42 independent IVF patients. 
The shared chromosomal segment harbors part of the DPP6 gene, which encodes a 
putative component of the transient outward current in the heart. We 
demonstrated a 20-fold increase in DPP6 mRNA levels in the myocardium of 
carriers as compared to controls. Clinical evaluation of 84 risk-haplotype 
carriers and 71 noncarriers revealed no ECG or structural parameters indicative 
of cardiac disease. Penetrance of IVF was high; 50% of risk-haplotype carriers 
experienced (aborted) sudden cardiac death before the age of 58 years. We 
propose DPP6 as a gene for IVF and increased DPP6 expression as the likely 
pathogenetic mechanism.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.02.009
PMCID: PMC2667995
PMID: 19285295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]