---
reference_id: "PMID:36926950"
title: Duodenal stenosis surgical treatment in Crohn's disease.
authors:
- Chóliz Ezquerro J
- Aparicio López D
- García López S
- Hörndler Argárate C
- Serradilla Martín M
journal: Rev Esp Enferm Dig
year: '2023'
doi: 10.17235/reed.2023.9521/2023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Duodenal stenosis surgical treatment in Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Chóliz Ezquerro J, Aparicio López D, García López S, Hörndler Argárate C, Serradilla Martín M
**Journal:** Rev Esp Enferm Dig (2023)
**DOI:** [10.17235/reed.2023.9521/2023](https://doi.org/10.17235/reed.2023.9521/2023)

## Content

1. Rev Esp Enferm Dig. 2023 Dec;115(12):733-734. doi:
10.17235/reed.2023.9521/2023.

Duodenal stenosis surgical treatment in Crohn's disease.

Chóliz Ezquerro J(1), Aparicio López D(2), García López S(3), Hörndler Argárate 
C(4), Serradilla Martín M(5).

Author information:
(1)Cirugía General, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Spain.
(2)Cirugía General , Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, España.
(3)Aparato Digestivo, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet.
(4)Anatomía Patológica, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet.
(5)Cirugía General, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet.

We present the case of a 34-year-old man with daily vomiting and 20% weight loss 
in a year. A gastroduodenoscopy was performed, noticing 2nd and 3rd duodenal 
portion dilatation and inflammatory involvement of the 3rd and 4th portion, 
causing luminal stenosis. These findings are the same than in the magnetic 
resonance . The biopsy proves the histological diagnosis of Crohn's disease. At 
the beginning the patient was treated with Prednisone, Adalimumab and 
Ustekinumab. After 9 months, surgery was decided because the disease was 
refractory to treatment and there was corticosteroid dependence. A partial 
resection of 3rd and 4th portion of the duodenum and the first loop of jejunum 
was performed, with duodenojejunal anastomosis. The patient presents good 
postoperative evolution and after 1 year he remained asymptomatic under 
treatment with Ustekinumab.

DOI: 10.17235/reed.2023.9521/2023
PMID: 36926950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]