---
reference_id: "PMID:19096983"
title: "Prevalence of cystinuria among elementary schoolchildren in Eskisehir, Turkey."
authors:
- Aydogdu SD
- Kirel B
- Coskun T
- Kose S
journal: Scand J Urol Nephrol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1080/00365590802625060
keywords:
- Child
- "Cystinuria/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Prevalence
- Turkey/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of cystinuria among elementary schoolchildren in Eskisehir, Turkey.
**Authors:** Aydogdu SD, Kirel B, Coskun T, Kose S
**Journal:** Scand J Urol Nephrol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00365590802625060](https://doi.org/10.1080/00365590802625060)

## Content

1. Scand J Urol Nephrol. 2009;43(2):138-41. doi: 10.1080/00365590802625060.

Prevalence of cystinuria among elementary schoolchildren in Eskisehir, Turkey.

Aydogdu SD(1), Kirel B, Coskun T, Kose S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Eskisehir Osmangazi
University, Eskisehir, Turkey. saydogdu@ogu.edu.tr

OBJECTIVE: Cystinuria is an inherited transport disorder due to defects in
intestinal and renal transport of cystine and dibasic amino acids. Early
diagnosis is required for some general and specific treatments because
cystinuric patients have an increased risk of recurrent urinary stone formation.
The prevalence of cystinuria varies widely in different countries. The aim of
this study is to determine the prevalence of cystinuria among schoolchildren in
Eskisehir, a central Anatolian city in Turkey.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The sodium cyanide-nitroprusside spot test was applied to
the first morning urine samples from 8260 schoolchildren (4087 female, 4173
male, aged between 6 and 12 years). Urine and blood amino acids were determined
with paper chromatography and special cystine-homocystine chromatography were
performed if a child had a positive spot-test result. Urinary cystine levels of
two children were measured quantitatively.
RESULTS: Spot-test results were positive in four students. Increased levels of
cystine and dibasic amino acids in the urine were determined with paper
chromatography and cystine spots were also detected with special
cystine-homocystine chromatography for these four students. Urinary cystine
levels were elevated in two children whose urine could be studied. The
prevalence of cystinuria in this study was 1:2065. There was no history or
symptoms related to urolithiasis in these students.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of cystinuria in this study is higher than many other
countries. Patients in Turkey with urinary stones or with symptoms related to
urolithiasis must also be investigated for cystinuria.

DOI: 10.1080/00365590802625060
PMID: 19096983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
