---
reference_id: "PMID:34456134"
title: Natural history of Tay-Sachs disease in sheep.
authors:
- Story B
- Taghian T
- Gallagher J
- Koehler J
- Taylor A
- Randle A
- Nielsen K
- Gross A
- Maguire A
- Carl S
- Johnson S
- Fernau D
- Diffie E
- Cuddon P
- Corado C
- Chandra S
- Sena-Esteves M
- Kolodny E
- Jiang X
- Martin D
- Gray-Edwards H
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.08.009
keywords:
- Animals
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Sheep
- "Tay-Sachs Disease/genetics, physiopathology, veterinary"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of Tay-Sachs disease in sheep.
**Authors:** Story B, Taghian T, Gallagher J, Koehler J, Taylor A, Randle A, Nielsen K, Gross A, Maguire A, Carl S, Johnson S, Fernau D, Diffie E, Cuddon P, Corado C, Chandra S, Sena-Esteves M, Kolodny E, Jiang X, Martin D, Gray-Edwards H
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.08.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.08.009)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2021 Sep-Oct;134(1-2):164-174. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.08.009. Epub 2021 Aug 21.

Natural history of Tay-Sachs disease in sheep.

Story B(1), Taghian T(2), Gallagher J(3), Koehler J(4), Taylor A(5), Randle
A(1), Nielsen K(1), Gross A(1), Maguire A(6), Carl S(1), Johnson S(1), Fernau
D(3), Diffie E(1), Cuddon P(7), Corado C(8), Chandra S(8), Sena-Esteves M(9),
Kolodny E(10), Jiang X(11), Martin D(12), Gray-Edwards H(13).

Author information:
(1)Scott-Ritchey Research Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn
University, Auburn, AL, United States of America.
(2)Horae Gene Therapy Center, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA, United States of America; Department of Radiology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States of America.
(3)Horae Gene Therapy Center, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA, United States of America.
(4)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn
University, Auburn, AL, United States of America.
(5)Auburn University, Department of Clinical Sciences Auburn University, Auburn,
AL, United States of America.
(6)Scott-Ritchey Research Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn
University, Auburn, AL, United States of America; Department of Anatomy,
Physiology, and Pharmacology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University,
Auburn, AL, United States of America.
(7)Neurology Locum, Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Auburn University, AL.
(8)BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Novato, CA, United States of America.
(9)Horae Gene Therapy Center, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA, United States of America; Department of Neurology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States of America.
(10)Bernard A. Marden Professor of Neurology and Chairman of the Department of
Neurology, New York University, School of Medicine, NY, NY, United States of
America; Head of the Division of Neurogenetics, New York University, School of
Medicine, NY, NY, United States of America.
(11)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MI, United States of America.
(12)Department of Anatomy, Physiology, and Pharmacology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, United States of America; Neurology
Locum, Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn
University, AL.
(13)Scott-Ritchey Research Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn
University, Auburn, AL, United States of America; Horae Gene Therapy Center,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States of
America; Department of Anatomy, Physiology, and Pharmacology, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, United States of America;
Department of Radiology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
MA, United States of America. Electronic address:
Heather.GrayEdwards@umassmed.edu.

Tay-Sachs disease (TSD) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease caused by a
deficiency of the enzyme β-N-acetylhexosaminidase A (HexA). TSD naturally occurs
in Jacob sheep is the only experimental model of TSD. TSD in sheep recapitulates
neurologic features similar to juvenile onset and late onset TSD patients. Due
to the paucity of human literature on pathology of TSD, a better natural history
in the sheep TSD brain, which is on the same order of magnitude as a child's, is
necessary for evaluating therapy and characterizing the pathological events that
occur. To provide clinicians and researchers with a clearer understanding of
longitudinal pathology in patients, we compare spectrum of clinical signs and
brain pathology in mildly symptomatic (3-months), moderately symptomatic
(6-months), or severely affected TSD sheep (humane endpoint at ~9-months of
age). Increased GM2 ganglioside in the CSF of TSD sheep and a TSD specific
biomarker on MRS (taurine) correlate with disease severity. Microglial
activation and reactive astrocytes were observed globally on histopathology in
TSD sheep with a widespread reduction in oligodendrocyte density. Myelination is
reduced primarily in the forebrain illustrated by loss of white matter on MRI.
GM2 and GM3 ganglioside were increased and distributed differently in various
tissues. The study of TSD in the sheep model provides a natural history to shed
light on the pathophysiology of TSD, which is of utmost importance due to novel
therapeutics being assessed in human patients.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.08.009
PMCID: PMC8811770
PMID: 34456134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None.
