---
reference_id: "PMID:30963787"
title: A Quantitative Chloride Channel Conductance Assay for Efficacy Testing of AAV.BEST1.
authors:
- Wood SR
- McClements ME
- Martinez-Fernandez de la Camara C
- Patrício MI
- Uggenti C
- Sekaran S
- Barnard AR
- Manson FD
- MacLaren RE
journal: Hum Gene Ther Methods
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1089/hgtb.2018.267
keywords:
- "Bestrophins/genetics, physiology"
- Dependovirus
- Genetic Vectors
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Parvovirinae/genetics
- "Transduction, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Quantitative Chloride Channel Conductance Assay for Efficacy Testing of AAV.BEST1.
**Authors:** Wood SR, McClements ME, Martinez-Fernandez de la Camara C, Patrício MI, Uggenti C, Sekaran S, Barnard AR, Manson FD, MacLaren RE
**Journal:** Hum Gene Ther Methods (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1089/hgtb.2018.267](https://doi.org/10.1089/hgtb.2018.267)

## Content

1. Hum Gene Ther Methods. 2019 Apr;30(2):44-52. doi: 10.1089/hgtb.2018.267.

A Quantitative Chloride Channel Conductance Assay for Efficacy Testing of
AAV.BEST1.

Wood SR(1), McClements ME(1), Martinez-Fernandez de la Camara C(1), Patrício
MI(1), Uggenti C(2), Sekaran S(1), Barnard AR(1), Manson FD(2), MacLaren
RE(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)1 Nuffield Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Department of Clinical Neurosciences,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)2 Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, The University of Manchester,
Manchester, United Kingdom.
(3)3 National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Oxford Biomedical Research
Centre (BRC), Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)4 Oxford Eye Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Oxford, United Kingdom.

Mutations in the human BEST1 gene are responsible for a number of distinct
retinal disorders known as bestrophinopathies, for which there are no current
treatments. The protein product, bestrophin-1, is expressed in the retinal
pigment epithelium (RPE) where it localizes to the basolateral membrane and acts
as a Ca2+-activated chloride channel. Recent studies have shown successful
BEST1-mediated gene transfer to the RPE, indicating human clinical trials of
BEST1 gene therapy may be on the horizon. A critical aspect of such trials is
the ability to assess the efficacy of vector prior to patient administration.
Here, an assay is presented that enables the quantitative assessment of
AAV-mediated BEST1 chloride conductance as a measure of vector efficacy.
Expression of BEST1 following transduction of HEK293 cells with AAV.BEST1
vectors was confirmed by liquid chromatography, Western blot, and
immunocytochemistry. Whole-cell patch-clamp showed increased chloride
conductance in BEST1-transduced cells compared to sham-transduced and
untransduced controls. Exogenous chloride current correlated to BEST1 expression
level, with an enhanced AAV.BEST1.WPRE vector providing higher expression levels
of BEST1 and increases in chloride conductance. This study presents in vitro
electrophysical quantification of bestrophin-1 following AAV-mediated gene
transfer, providing vital functional data on an AAV gene therapy product that
will support a future application for regulatory approval.

DOI: 10.1089/hgtb.2018.267
PMID: 30963787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
