---
reference_id: "PMID:39824182"
title: "Long somatic DNA-repeat expansion drives neurodegeneration in Huntington's disease."
authors:
- Handsaker RE
- Kashin S
- Reed NM
- Tan S
- Lee WS
- McDonald TM
- Morris K
- Kamitaki N
- Mullally CD
- Morakabati NR
- Goldman M
- Lind G
- Kohli R
- Lawton E
- Hogan M
- Ichihara K
- Berretta S
- McCarroll SA
journal: Cell
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.11.038
keywords:
- "Huntington Disease/genetics, pathology"
- "Huntingtin Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Mice
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
- "Corpus Striatum/metabolism, pathology"
- DNA Repeat Expansion
- Male
- Single-Cell Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long somatic DNA-repeat expansion drives neurodegeneration in Huntington's disease.
**Authors:** Handsaker RE, Kashin S, Reed NM, Tan S, Lee WS, McDonald TM, Morris K, Kamitaki N, Mullally CD, Morakabati NR, Goldman M, Lind G, Kohli R, Lawton E, Hogan M, Ichihara K, Berretta S, McCarroll SA
**Journal:** Cell (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2024.11.038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2024.11.038)

## Content

1. Cell. 2025 Feb 6;188(3):623-639.e19. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.11.038. Epub
2025  Jan 16.

Long somatic DNA-repeat expansion drives neurodegeneration in Huntington's
disease.

Handsaker RE(1), Kashin S(2), Reed NM(3), Tan S(3), Lee WS(3), McDonald TM(3),
Morris K(4), Kamitaki N(3), Mullally CD(3), Morakabati NR(4), Goldman M(3), Lind
G(3), Kohli R(3), Lawton E(4), Hogan M(3), Ichihara K(3), Berretta S(5),
McCarroll SA(6).

Author information:
(1)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
handsake@broadinstitute.org.
(2)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
skashin@broadinstitute.org.
(3)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(4)McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA 02478, USA.
(5)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; McLean
Hospital, Belmont, MA 02478, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Program in Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02215, USA. Electronic address: sberretta@mclean.harvard.edu.
(6)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Program in
Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA. Electronic address:
smccarro@broadinstitute.org.

In Huntington's disease (HD), striatal projection neurons (SPNs) degenerate
during midlife; the core biological question involves how the disease-causing
DNA repeat (CAG)n in the huntingtin (HTT) gene leads to neurodegeneration after
decades of biological latency. We developed a single-cell method for measuring
this repeat's length alongside genome-wide RNA expression. We found that the HTT
CAG repeat expands somatically from 40-45 to 100-500+ CAGs in SPNs. Somatic
expansion from 40 to 150 CAGs had no apparent cell-autonomous effect, but SPNs
with 150-500+ CAGs lost positive and then negative features of neuronal
identity, de-repressed senescence/apoptosis genes, and were lost. Our results
suggest that somatic repeat expansion beyond 150 CAGs causes SPNs to degenerate
quickly and asynchronously. We conclude that in HD, at any one time, most
neurons have an innocuous but unstable HTT gene and that HD pathogenesis is a
DNA process for almost all of a neuron's life.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.11.038
PMCID: PMC11822645
PMID: 39824182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests Patent applications
filed by the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard related to this work include
subsets of the authors as inventors. S.A.M. has received compensation for
scientific advice to Roche, Pfizer, Biogen, Vertex, and LoQus23 Therapeutics.
