---
reference_id: "PMID:28393498"
title: Impact of Obesity and Adiposity on Inflammatory Markers in Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis.
authors:
- George MD
- Giles JT
- Katz PP
- England BR
- Mikuls TR
- Michaud K
- Ogdie-Beatty AR
- Ibrahim S
- Cannon GW
- Caplan L
- Sauer BC
- Baker JF
journal: Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/acr.23229
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of Obesity and Adiposity on Inflammatory Markers in Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis.
**Authors:** George MD, Giles JT, Katz PP, England BR, Mikuls TR, Michaud K, Ogdie-Beatty AR, Ibrahim S, Cannon GW, Caplan L, Sauer BC, Baker JF
**Journal:** Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/acr.23229](https://doi.org/10.1002/acr.23229)

## Content

1. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2017 Dec;69(12):1789-1798. doi:
10.1002/acr.23229.  Epub 2017 Nov 6.

Impact of Obesity and Adiposity on Inflammatory Markers in Patients With 
Rheumatoid Arthritis.

George MD(1), Giles JT(2), Katz PP(3), England BR(4), Mikuls TR(4), Michaud 
K(4), Ogdie-Beatty AR(5), Ibrahim S(6), Cannon GW(7), Caplan L(8), Sauer BC(9), 
Baker JF(6).

Author information:
(1)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
(2)Columbia University, New York, New York.
(3)University of California, San Francisco.
(4)University of Nebraska, Omaha.
(5)University of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(6)Philadelphia VA Medical Center and University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
(7)Salt Lake City VA Medical Center and University of Utah, Salt Lake City.
(8)Denver VA Medical Center and University of Colorado School of Medicine, 
Denver.
(9)University of Utah, Salt Lake City.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2017 Jun;13(6):323. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2017.62.

OBJECTIVE: The C-reactive protein (CRP) level and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
(ESR) are important disease activity biomarkers in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). 
This study aimed to determine to what extent obesity biases these biomarkers.
METHODS: Body mass index (BMI) associations with CRP level and ESR were assessed 
in 2 RA cohorts: the cross-sectional Body Composition (BC) cohort (n = 451), 
including whole-body dual x-ray absorptiometry measures of fat mass index; and 
the longitudinal Veterans Affairs Rheumatoid Arthritis (VARA) registry (n = 
1,652), using multivariable models stratified by sex. For comparison, 
associations were evaluated in the general population using the National Health 
and Nutrition Examination Survey.
RESULTS: Among women with RA and in the general population, greater BMI was 
associated with greater CRP levels, especially among women with severe obesity 
(P < 0.001 for BMI ≥35 kg/m2 versus 20-25 kg/m2 ). This association remained 
after adjustment for joint counts and patient global health scores (P < 0.001 in 
BC and P < 0.01 in VARA), but was attenuated after adjustment for fat mass index 
(P = 0.17). Positive associations between BMI and ESR in women were more modest. 
In men with RA, lower BMI was associated with higher CRP levels and ESR, 
contrasting with positive associations among men in the general population.
CONCLUSION: Obesity is associated with higher CRP levels and ESR in women with 
RA. This association is related to fat mass and not RA disease activity. Low BMI 
is associated with higher CRP levels in men with RA; this unexpected finding 
remains incompletely explained but likely is not a direct effect of adiposity.

© 2017, American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/acr.23229
PMCID: PMC5634905
PMID: 28393498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]