---
reference_id: "PMID:15899774"
title: "Morphologic, cytogenetic, and molecular abnormalities in therapy-related acute promyelocytic leukemia."
authors:
- Yin CC
- Glassman AB
- Lin P
- Valbuena JR
- Jones D
- Luthra R
- Medeiros LJ
journal: Am J Clin Pathol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1309/TJFF-K819-RPCL-FKJ0
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Bone Marrow/pathology
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Female
- Flow Cytometry
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Humans
- Immunophenotyping
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms, Second Primary/genetics, pathology"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Tretinoin/therapeutic use
- fms-Like Tyrosine Kinase 3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Morphologic, cytogenetic, and molecular abnormalities in therapy-related acute promyelocytic leukemia.
**Authors:** Yin CC, Glassman AB, Lin P, Valbuena JR, Jones D, Luthra R, Medeiros LJ
**Journal:** Am J Clin Pathol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1309/TJFF-K819-RPCL-FKJ0](https://doi.org/10.1309/TJFF-K819-RPCL-FKJ0)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Pathol. 2005 Jun;123(6):840-8. doi: 10.1309/TJFF-K819-RPCL-FKJ0.

Morphologic, cytogenetic, and molecular abnormalities in therapy-related acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Yin CC(1), Glassman AB, Lin P, Valbuena JR, Jones D, Luthra R, Medeiros LJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, USA.

We describe 17 cases of therapy-related acute promyelocytic leukemia (tAPL).
Treatment for the initial neoplasms (mostly carcinomas and non-Hodgkin
lymphomas) included radiation and chemotherapy in 11 patients, radiation in 3,
and chemotherapy in 3. The interval between the initial neoplasm and tAPL ranged
from 17 to 166 months (median, 40 months). Morphologically, all 13 cases with
available bone marrow aspirate smears showed tAPL. Dyserythropoiesis or
dysmegakaryopoiesis was identified in 11 cases. In 2 cases, too few
nonneoplastic cells and, in all cases, too few maturing granulocytes were
present to assess for dysplasia. Conventional cytogenetics or fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH) showed the t(15;17)(q22;q21) in all cases; 6 as a sole
abnormality, 9 with additional abnormalities, and 2 assessed only by FISH.
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) studies showed PML/RARa in
13 cases (8 short form, 5 long form). Mutations of the flt3 gene were detected
by PCR in 5 (42%) of 12 cases. We conclude that dysplastic features, secondary
cytogenetic abnormalities, and flt3 mutations are common in tAPL.

DOI: 10.1309/TJFF-K819-RPCL-FKJ0
PMID: 15899774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
