---
reference_id: "PMID:34628681"
title: "Gene Therapy for Polyglutamine Spinocerebellar Ataxias: Advances, Challenges, and Perspectives."
authors:
- Vázquez-Mojena Y
- León-Arcia K
- González-Zaldivar Y
- Rodríguez-Labrada R
- Velázquez-Pérez L
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/mds.28819
keywords:
- Animals
- Genetic Therapy
- "Peptides/genetics, therapeutic use"
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene Therapy for Polyglutamine Spinocerebellar Ataxias: Advances, Challenges, and Perspectives.
**Authors:** Vázquez-Mojena Y, León-Arcia K, González-Zaldivar Y, Rodríguez-Labrada R, Velázquez-Pérez L
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.28819](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.28819)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2021 Dec;36(12):2731-2744. doi: 10.1002/mds.28819. Epub 2021 Oct
10.

Gene Therapy for Polyglutamine Spinocerebellar Ataxias: Advances, Challenges,
and Perspectives.

Vázquez-Mojena Y(1), León-Arcia K(1), González-Zaldivar Y(2), Rodríguez-Labrada
R(1), Velázquez-Pérez L(3).

Author information:
(1)Cuban Center for Neuroscience, Havana, Cuba.
(2)Centre for the Research and Rehabilitation of Hereditary Ataxias, Holguin,
Cuba.
(3)Cuban Academy of Sciences, Havana, Cuba.

Polyglutamine spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) comprise a heterogeneous group of
six autosomal dominant ataxias caused by cytosine-adenine-guanine repeat
expansions in the coding region of single genes. Currently, there is no curative
or disease-slowing treatment for these disorders, but their monogenic
inheritance has informed rationales for development of gene therapy strategies.
In fact, RNA interference strategies have shown promising findings in cellular
and/or animal models of SCA1, SCA3, SCA6, and SCA7. In addition, antisense
oligonucleotide therapy has provided encouraging proofs of concept in models of
SCA1, SCA2, SCA3, and SCA7, but they have not yet progressed to clinical trials.
On the contrary, the gene editing strategies, such as the clustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR/Cas9), have been introduced to a
limited extent in these disorders. In this article, we review the available
literature about gene therapy in polyglutamine SCAs and discuss the main
technological and ethical challenges toward the prospect of their use in future
clinical trials. Although antisense oligonucleotide therapies are further along
the path to clinical phases, the recent failure of three clinical trials in
Huntington's disease may delay their utilization for polyglutamine SCAs, but
they offer lessons that could optimize the likelihood of success in potential
future clinical studies. © 2021 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder
Society.

© 2021 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.28819
PMID: 34628681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
