---
reference_id: "PMID:3099065"
title: "3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme a lyase deficiency: a review."
authors:
- Wysocki SJ
- Hähnel R
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '1986'
doi: 10.1007/BF01799652
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme a lyase deficiency: a review.
**Authors:** Wysocki SJ, Hähnel R
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (1986)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF01799652](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01799652)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 1986;9(3):225-33. doi: 10.1007/BF01799652.

3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme a lyase deficiency: a review.

Wysocki SJ, Hähnel R.

Children with 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase deficiency (HMG-CoA-LD; 
McKusick 24645), have inherited two areas of metabolic weakness. Firstly, they 
are unable to metabolize fully the carbon skeleton of leucine, and secondly, 
they cannot make ketone bodies in response to prolonged fasting. In the first 
year of life infants with HMG-CoA-LD run a high risk of developing severe 
hypoglycaemia which can lead to death if prompt intervention does not occur. The 
metabolic crisis develops when the infant is first introduced to dietary protein 
soon after birth, or later, when a reduced intake of glucose, often during a 
viral infection, results in a drain on the infant's circulating glucose levels. 
However, where diets are adequately adjusted to limit protein and fat intake, 
the metabolic handicaps of individuals with HMG-CoA-LD are not exposed and they 
are virtually symptomless. As children with HMG-CoA-LD grow older the incidence 
of hypoglycaemic attacks diminishes and they usually develop normally. This 
article reviews literature on cases of HMG-CoA-LD and interprets data on altered 
metabolism in these children.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01799652
PMID: 3099065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]