---
reference_id: "PMID:27549763"
title: Disease modifying therapies for relapsing multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Wingerchuk DM
- Weinshenker BG
journal: BMJ
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1136/bmj.i3518
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease modifying therapies for relapsing multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Wingerchuk DM, Weinshenker BG
**Journal:** BMJ (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmj.i3518](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.i3518)

## Content

1. BMJ. 2016 Aug 22;354:i3518. doi: 10.1136/bmj.i3518.

Disease modifying therapies for relapsing multiple sclerosis.

Wingerchuk DM(1), Weinshenker BG(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 13400 E Shea Blvd, Scottsdale, AZ, 
85259, USA wingerchuk.dean@mayo.edu.
(2)Mayo Clinic, 200 1st Street SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a common, disabling, putatively autoimmune 
neurological disease with worldwide distribution. It typically begins as a 
relapsing disorder that later evolves to a secondary progressive phase. 
Inflammatory and neurodegenerative mechanisms seem to operate in both phases, 
but their relative contributions and interactions are incompletely understood. 
Disease modifying therapies (DMTs) approved for relapsing multiple sclerosis 
interfere with a variety of immunological mechanisms to reduce rates of relapse, 
accumulation of disease burden measured by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and 
decline in neurological function over the two to three year duration of typical 
randomized controlled trials. Benefits of longer duration of therapy on 
disability are less clear, as data beyond three years are largely limited to 
observational studies. However, current DMTs do not slow accrual of disability 
once progressive multiple sclerosis is established. This review summarizes the 
evidence about the use of approved DMTs and examines how to individualize 
treatment despite the absence of validated biomarkers to guide drug selection. 
Methods such as stratifying patients on the basis of estimated risk for future 
disability, weighing patient specific factors and preferences, and using 
objective outcomes to adjudicate treatment success are discussed. Emerging drug 
therapies and strategies are also reviewed.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.i3518
PMID: 27549763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]