---
reference_id: "PMID:35236361"
title: "Arginase 1 Deficiency: using genetic databases as a tool to establish global prevalence."
authors:
- Catsburg C
- Anderson S
- Upadhyaya N
- Bechter M
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02226-8
keywords:
- Alleles
- Arginase/genetics
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Gene Frequency
- Humans
- "Hyperargininemia/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arginase 1 Deficiency: using genetic databases as a tool to establish global prevalence.
**Authors:** Catsburg C, Anderson S, Upadhyaya N, Bechter M
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-022-02226-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-022-02226-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2022 Mar 2;17(1):94. doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02226-8.

Arginase 1 Deficiency: using genetic databases as a tool to establish global
prevalence.

Catsburg C(1), Anderson S(1), Upadhyaya N(2), Bechter M(3).

Author information:
(1)BluePrint Orphan, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Aeglea BioTherapeutics, Inc., Austin, TX, USA.
(3)Aeglea BioTherapeutics, Inc., Austin, TX, USA. MBechter@aegleabio.com.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVE: Arginase 1 Deficiency (ARG1-D) is a rare inherited
metabolic disease with progressive, devastating neurological manifestations with
early mortality and high unmet need. Information on prevalence is scarce and
highly variable due to limited newborn screening (NBS) availability, variability
of arginine levels in the first days of life, and high rates of misdiagnosis. US
birth prevalence was recently estimated via indirect methods at 1.1 cases per
million live births. Due to the autosomal recessive nature of ARG1-D we
hypothesize that the global prevalence may be more accurately estimated using
genetic population databases.
METHODS: MEDLINE and EMBASE were systematically searched for previously reported
disease variants. Disease variants in ARG1-D were annotated wherever possible
with allele frequencies from gnomAD. Ethnicity-specific prevalence was
calculated using the Hardy-Weinberg equation and applied to generate
country-specific carrier frequencies for 38 countries. Finally, documented
consanguinity rates were applied to establish a birth prevalence for each
country.
RESULTS: 133 of 228 (58%) known causative alleles were annotated with
ethnic-specific frequencies. Global birth prevalence for ARG1-D was estimated at
2.8 cases per million live births (country-specific estimates ranged from 0.92
to 17.5) and population prevalence to be 1.4 cases per million people
(approximately 1/726,000 people). Birth prevalence estimates were dependent on
population demographics and consanguinity rate.
CONCLUSION: Birth prevalence of ARG1-D based on genetic database analysis was
estimated to be more frequent than previous NBS studies have indicated. There
was a higher degree of confidence in North American and European countries due
to availability of genetic databases and mutational analysis versus other
regions. These findings suggest the need for greater disease education around
signs and manifestations of ARG1-D, as well as more widespread testing and
standardization of screening for this severe disease in order to appropriately
identify patients prior to disease progression.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-022-02226-8
PMCID: PMC8889696
PMID: 35236361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CC and SA performed as consultants and received
funding from Aeglea BioTherapeutics, Inc. MB and NU are employees of Aeglea
BioTherapeutics, Inc.
