---
reference_id: "PMID:31015102"
title: "Abnormal visual sensitivity in eyelid myoclonia with absences: Evidence from electrocortical connectivity and non-linear quantitative analysis of EEG signal."
authors:
- Giuliano L
- Mostile G
- Fatuzzo D
- Mainieri G
- Nicoletti A
- Sofia V
- Zappia M
journal: Seizure
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.seizure.2019.04.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal visual sensitivity in eyelid myoclonia with absences: Evidence from electrocortical connectivity and non-linear quantitative analysis of EEG signal.
**Authors:** Giuliano L, Mostile G, Fatuzzo D, Mainieri G, Nicoletti A, Sofia V, Zappia M
**Journal:** Seizure (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.seizure.2019.04.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seizure.2019.04.007)

## Content

1. Seizure. 2019 Jul;69:118-124. doi: 10.1016/j.seizure.2019.04.007. Epub 2019
Apr  10.

Abnormal visual sensitivity in eyelid myoclonia with absences: Evidence from 
electrocortical connectivity and non-linear quantitative analysis of EEG signal.

Giuliano L(1), Mostile G(1), Fatuzzo D(1), Mainieri G(1), Nicoletti A(1), Sofia 
V(1), Zappia M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department "G.F. Ingrassia", Section of Neurosciences, University of Catania, 
Via S. Sofia 78, 95123 Catania, Italy.
(2)Department "G.F. Ingrassia", Section of Neurosciences, University of Catania, 
Via S. Sofia 78, 95123 Catania, Italy. Electronic address: m.zappia@unict.it.

PURPOSE: Eyelid myoclonia with absences (EMA) is an epileptic syndrome 
characterized by eyelid myoclonia with or without absences, eyes closure-induced 
EEG paroxysms and photosensitivity. Pathophysiological mechanisms of visual 
sensitivity in EMA are not-fully understood. The objective of the present study 
was to analyze the electrophysiological dynamics implicated in the visual 
sensitivity in patients with EMA.
METHODS: We analyzed data of 10 subjects with diagnosis of EMA and of 10 healthy 
control subjects. For both patients and controls, 4-seconds artifacts-free 
electroencephalographic signal epochs recorded were analyzed, during resting 
state, eyes-opened and eyes-closed tasks. Resting state networks in EEG have 
been computed using independent components analysis (ICA) LORETA. Moreover, the 
power law exponent β was obtained for each coordinate as minus the slope of the 
power spectrum versus frequency in a Log-Log scale.
RESULTS: Using LORETA ICA, patients during resting state showed significant 
differences as compared to controls with a reduction of the physiological alpha 
activity over the occipital lobe and of the physiological beta activity over the 
frontal lobe. Immediately after eye closure, a significant increase of beta 
activity over the frontal lobe was found in the group of patients compared to 
controls. Power law exponent β analysis showed a significant increase of β over 
the frontal regions in patients as compared to controls during resting-state and 
an increase of β over the parieto-occipital regions after eye closure.
CONCLUSION: Abnormal occipital and frontal cortex activities seem to be related 
with the visual sensitivity and eyelid myoclonia observed in patients with EMA.

Copyright © 2019 British Epilepsy Association. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.seizure.2019.04.007
PMID: 31015102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]