---
reference_id: "PMID:19089441"
title: Analysis of the vitreous membrane in a case of type 1 Stickler syndrome.
authors:
- Yokoi T
- Koide R
- Matsuoka K
- Nakagawa A
- Azuma N
journal: Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s00417-008-1016-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of the vitreous membrane in a case of type 1 Stickler syndrome.
**Authors:** Yokoi T, Koide R, Matsuoka K, Nakagawa A, Azuma N
**Journal:** Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00417-008-1016-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00417-008-1016-z)

## Content

1. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2009 May;247(5):715-8. doi: 
10.1007/s00417-008-1016-z. Epub 2008 Dec 17.

Analysis of the vitreous membrane in a case of type 1 Stickler syndrome.

Yokoi T(1), Koide R, Matsuoka K, Nakagawa A, Azuma N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, National Center for Child Health and 
Development, Syowa University East Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Stickler syndrome causes ocular abnormalities, including retinal 
detachment and vitreoretinal degeneration, and systemic anomalies such as 
arthritis and deafness. Although retinal detachment is characteristic of this 
syndrome, the pathogenesis is unknown.
CASE REPORT: A 10-year-old boy reported decreased vision and presented 5 days 
after visual loss.
RESULTS: Ophthalmoscopy showed a retinal detachment with a giant tear in the 
right eye, and a nonpigmented epithelial detachment with pars plicata breaks in 
the left eye. Bilateral findings included an empty vitreous and a vitreous 
membrane at the equator. The systemic abnormalities included short stature and 
joint hypermobility. The diagnosis was type 1 Stickler syndrome, and the eyes 
were treated surgically. Immunohistochemistry showed that the vitreous membrane 
resected intraoperatively was comprised primarily of Müller cells. Electron 
microscopy showed dense collagen fibers around the cells in the membrane that 
were identical to the vitreous collagen inserted into the basement membrane of 
the cells, which was similar to the ultrastructure of the vitreous base.
CONCLUSION: Müller cells might be primary components of the vitreous membrane in 
type 1 Stickler syndrome. The vitreoretinal interface, which resembled the 
ectopic vitreous base, in the vitreous membrane may be related to the 
pathogenesis of the retinal detachment.

DOI: 10.1007/s00417-008-1016-z
PMID: 19089441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]