---
reference_id: "PMID:18362356"
title: Cyclosporin A corrects mitochondrial dysfunction and muscle apoptosis in patients with collagen VI myopathies.
authors:
- Merlini L
- Angelin A
- Tiepolo T
- Braghetta P
- Sabatelli P
- Zamparelli A
- Ferlini A
- Maraldi NM
- Bonaldo P
- Bernardi P
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0800962105
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- Biopsy
- Child
- "Collagen Type VI/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Cyclosporine/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Middle Aged
- "Mitochondria/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Muscular Diseases/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cyclosporin A corrects mitochondrial dysfunction and muscle apoptosis in patients with collagen VI myopathies.
**Authors:** Merlini L, Angelin A, Tiepolo T, Braghetta P, Sabatelli P, Zamparelli A, Ferlini A, Maraldi NM, Bonaldo P, Bernardi P
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0800962105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0800962105)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Apr 1;105(13):5225-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0800962105. Epub 2008 Mar 24.

Cyclosporin A corrects mitochondrial dysfunction and muscle apoptosis in
patients with collagen VI myopathies.

Merlini L(1), Angelin A, Tiepolo T, Braghetta P, Sabatelli P, Zamparelli A,
Ferlini A, Maraldi NM, Bonaldo P, Bernardi P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Diagnostic Medicine, Section of Medical
Genetics, University of Ferrara, I-44100 Ferrara, Italy.

Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy and Bethlem myopathy are skeletal muscle
diseases that are due to mutations in the genes encoding collagen VI, an
extracellular matrix protein forming a microfibrillar network that is
particularly prominent in the endomysium of skeletal muscle. Myoblasts from
patients affected by Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy display functional
and ultrastructural mitochondrial alterations and increased apoptosis due to
inappropriate opening of the permeability transition pore, a mitochondrial inner
membrane channel. These alterations could be normalized by treatment with
cyclosporin A, a widely used immunosuppressant that desensitizes the
permeability transition pore independently of calcineurin inhibition. Here, we
report the results of an open pilot trial with cyclosporin A in five patients
with collagen VI myopathies. Before treatment, all patients displayed
mitochondrial dysfunction and increased frequency of apoptosis, as determined in
muscle biopsies. Both of these pathologic signs were largely normalized after 1
month of oral cyclosporin A administration, which also increased muscle
regeneration. These findings demonstrate that collagen VI myopathies can be
effectively treated with drugs acting on the pathogenic mechanism downstream of
the genetic lesion, and they represent an important proof of principle for the
potential therapy of genetic diseases.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0800962105
PMCID: PMC2278179
PMID: 18362356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
