---
reference_id: "PMID:41039983"
title: Cytokine and IRF5 Gene Polymorphisms Associated With Susceptibility and Organ Damage in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.
authors:
- Allam I
- Hassinet Y
- Zeghichi C
- Berkani LM
- Belaid B
- Oulakrouz S
- Saidani M
- Ayoub S
- Djidjik R
journal: Int J Immunogenet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/iji.70016
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/genetics, pathology"
- Interferon Regulatory Factors/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Female
- Adult
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Case-Control Studies
- Alleles
- Genotype
- Cytokines/genetics
- Gene Frequency
- Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/genetics
- Interleukin-8/genetics
- Genetic Association Studies
- Interleukin-1/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytokine and IRF5 Gene Polymorphisms Associated With Susceptibility and Organ Damage in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.
**Authors:** Allam I, Hassinet Y, Zeghichi C, Berkani LM, Belaid B, Oulakrouz S, Saidani M, Ayoub S, Djidjik R
**Journal:** Int J Immunogenet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/iji.70016](https://doi.org/10.1111/iji.70016)

## Content

1. Int J Immunogenet. 2025 Dec;52(6):379-387. doi: 10.1111/iji.70016. Epub 2025
Oct  3.

Cytokine and IRF5 Gene Polymorphisms Associated With Susceptibility and Organ
Damage in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.

Allam I(1)(2), Hassinet Y(1)(2), Zeghichi C(1)(2), Berkani LM(1)(2), Belaid
B(1)(2), Oulakrouz S(3)(4), Saidani M(3)(4), Ayoub S(4)(5), Djidjik R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Immunology, Beni Messous University Hospital Center,
Algiers, Algeria.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy, the University of Health Sciences, Algiers, Algeria.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Beni Messous University Hospital Center, Algiers,
Algeria.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, the University of Health Sciences, Algiers, Algeria.
(5)Department of Internal medicine, Beni Messous University Hospital Center,
Algiers, Algeria.

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a multifactorial autoimmune
disease resulting from the complex interplay between genetic, environmental, and
immunological factors. Genetic polymorphisms in cytokine and transcription
factor genes have been proposed as key contributors to disease susceptibility
and clinical heterogeneity.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association between selected single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in TNF-α, IL-1, IL-8, and IRF5 genes and the risk of SLE,
as well as their correlation with specific organ system involvement.
METHODS: We conducted a case-control study including 156 SLE patients and 104
healthy controls from the Algerian population. Seven SNPs were genotyped using
TaqMan assays: IL-1 (-31 C/T and -511 C/T), TNF-α (-308 G/A and -238 G/A), IL-8
(-251 A/T), and IRF5 (-13176 A/C and -3835 G/T). Genotype and allele frequencies
were compared between groups and correlated with clinical phenotypes.
RESULTS: The immunogenetic study revealed a significant association between G
allele of the -3835 G/T polymorphism of the IRF5 gene and the risk of genetic
susceptibility to the lupus (p = 0.012). Stratification according to clinical
manifestations has showed that the G allele of the -31 C/T polymorphism of the
IL-1 gene is associated with joint damage (p = 0.024) and the A allele of -511
C/T polymorphism predisposes to hematological damage (p = 0.041) in lupus
patients. Also, the A allele of the TNFα -238 G/A polymorphism was associated
with neuropsychiatric impairment (p = 0.036) and the A allele of -251A/T SNP of
the IL-8 gene to the joint damage (p = 0.04).
CONCLUSION: Our findings support a role for IRF5 and cytokine gene polymorphisms
in the genetic predisposition to SLE and its clinical manifestations. These
polymorphisms may serve as potential biomarkers for disease risk stratification
and personalized patient management, particularly in underrepresented
populations such as North Africans.

© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/iji.70016
PMID: 41039983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
