---
reference_id: PMID:38383825
title: "Bardet-Biedl syndrome: A clinical overview focusing on diagnosis, outcomes and best-practice management."
authors:
- Shoemaker A
journal: Diabetes Obes Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/dom.15494
keywords:
- Humans
- "Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Obesity/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- "Obesity, Morbid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bardet-Biedl syndrome: A clinical overview focusing on diagnosis, outcomes and best-practice management.
**Authors:** Shoemaker A
**Journal:** Diabetes Obes Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dom.15494](https://doi.org/10.1111/dom.15494)

## Content

1. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2024 Apr;26 Suppl 2:25-33. doi: 10.1111/dom.15494. Epub 
2024 Feb 21.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome: A clinical overview focusing on diagnosis, outcomes and 
best-practice management.

Shoemaker A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a genetic disorder characterized by early-onset 
obesity, polydactyly, genital and kidney anomalies, developmental delay and 
vision loss due to rod-cone dystrophy. BBS is an autosomal recessive disorder 
with >20 implicated genes. The genotype-phenotype relationship in BBS is not 
clear, and there may be additional modifying factors. The underlying mechanism 
is dysfunction of primary cilia. In BBS, receptor trafficking in and out of the 
cilia is compromised, affecting multiple organ systems. Along with early-onset 
obesity, hyperphagia is a prominent symptom and contributes significantly to 
clinical morbidity and caregiver burden. While there is no cure for BBS, 
setmelanotide is a new pharmacotherapy approved for treatment of obesity in BBS. 
The differential diagnosis for BBS includes other ciliopathies, such as Alstrom 
syndrome, and other genetic obesity syndromes, such as Prader-Willi syndrome. 
Careful clinical history and genetic testing can help determine the diagnosis 
and a multidisciplinary team is necessary to guide clinical management.

© 2024 The Authors. Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/dom.15494
PMID: 38383825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]