---
reference_id: "PMID:10579720"
title: Ankyrin-B is required for intracellular sorting of structurally diverse Ca2+ homeostasis proteins.
authors:
- Tuvia S
- Buhusi M
- Davis L
- Reedy M
- Bennett V
journal: J Cell Biol
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1083/jcb.147.5.995
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- "Ankyrins/genetics, metabolism"
- Calcium/metabolism
- Calcium Channels/metabolism
- Calcium Signaling/physiology
- Homeostasis/physiology
- "Inositol 1,4,5-Trisphosphate Receptors"
- Mice
- "Mice, Congenic"
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/cytology, metabolism"
- "Myocardium/chemistry, cytology, metabolism"
- Rats
- "Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/metabolism"
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/metabolism
- Sarcoplasmic Reticulum/enzymology
- "Thymus Gland/cytology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ankyrin-B is required for intracellular sorting of structurally diverse Ca2+ homeostasis proteins.
**Authors:** Tuvia S, Buhusi M, Davis L, Reedy M, Bennett V
**Journal:** J Cell Biol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1083/jcb.147.5.995](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.147.5.995)

## Content

1. J Cell Biol. 1999 Nov 29;147(5):995-1008. doi: 10.1083/jcb.147.5.995.

Ankyrin-B is required for intracellular sorting of structurally diverse Ca2+
homeostasis proteins.

Tuvia S(1), Buhusi M, Davis L, Reedy M, Bennett V.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Departments of Cell Biology and
Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

This report describes a congenital myopathy and major loss of thymic lymphocytes
in ankyrin-B (-/-) mice as well as dramatic alterations in intracellular
localization of key components of the Ca(2+) homeostasis machinery in ankyrin-B
(-/-) striated muscle and thymus. The sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) and
SR/T-tubule junctions are apparently preserved in a normal distribution in
ankyrin-B (-/-) skeletal muscle based on electron microscopy and the presence of
a normal pattern of triadin and dihydropyridine receptor. Therefore, the
abnormal localization of SR/ER Ca ATPase (SERCA) and ryanodine receptors
represents a defect in intracellular sorting of these proteins in skeletal
muscle. Extrapolation of these observations suggests defective targeting as the
basis for abnormal localization of ryanodine receptors, IP3 receptors and SERCA
in heart, and of IP3 receptors in the thymus of ankyrin-B (-/-) mice.
Mis-sorting of SERCA 2 and ryanodine receptor 2 in ankyrin-B (-/-)
cardiomyocytes is rescued by expression of 220-kD ankyrin-B, demonstrating that
lack of the 220-kD ankyrin-B polypeptide is the primary defect in these cells.
Ankyrin-B is associated with intracellular vesicles, but is not colocalized with
the bulk of SERCA 1 or ryanodine receptor type 1 in skeletal muscle. These data
provide the first evidence of a physiological requirement for ankyrin-B in
intracellular targeting of the calcium homeostasis machinery of striated muscle
and immune system, and moreover, support a catalytic role that does not involve
permanent stoichiometric complexes between ankyrin-B and targeted proteins.
Ankyrin-B is a member of a family of adapter proteins implicated in restriction
of diverse proteins to specialized plasma membrane domains. Similar mechanisms
involving ankyrins may be essential for segregation of functionally defined
proteins within specialized regions of the plasma membrane and within the Ca(2+)
homeostasis compartment of the ER.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.147.5.995
PMCID: PMC2169334
PMID: 10579720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
