---
reference_id: "PMID:8543151"
title: A proline-rich TGF-beta-responsive transcriptional activator interacts with histone H3.
authors:
- Alevizopoulos A
- Dusserre Y
- Tsai-Pflugfelder M
- von der Weid T
- Wahli W
- Mermod N
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1101/gad.9.24.3051
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A proline-rich TGF-beta-responsive transcriptional activator interacts with histone H3.
**Authors:** Alevizopoulos A, Dusserre Y, Tsai-Pflugfelder M, von der Weid T, Wahli W, Mermod N
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.9.24.3051](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.9.24.3051)

## Content

1. Genes Dev. 1995 Dec 15;9(24):3051-66. doi: 10.1101/gad.9.24.3051.

A proline-rich TGF-beta-responsive transcriptional activator interacts with 
histone H3.

Alevizopoulos A(1), Dusserre Y, Tsai-Pflugfelder M, von der Weid T, Wahli W, 
Mermod N.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Animal Biology, University of Lausanne, Switzerland.

The molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation of gene expression by 
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) have been analyzed. We show that 
TGF-beta specifically induces the activity of the proline-rich trans-activation 
domain of CTF-1, a member of the CTF/NF-I family of transcription factors. A 
TGF-beta-responsive domain (TRD) in the proline-rich transcriptional activation 
sequence of CTF-1 was shown to mediate TGF-beta induction in NIH-3T3 cells. 
Mutagenesis studies indicated that this domain is not the primary target of 
regulatory phosphorylations, suggesting that the growth factor may regulate a 
CTF-1-interacting protein. A two-hybrid screening assay identified a nucleosome 
component, histone H3, as a specific CTF-1-interacting protein in yeast. 
Furthermore, the CTF-1 trans-activation domain was shown to interact with 
histone H3 in both transiently and stably transfected mammalian cells. This 
interaction requires the TRD, and it appears to be upregulated by TGF-beta in 
vivo. Moreover, point mutations in the TRD that inhibit TGF-beta induction also 
reduce interaction with histone H3. In vitro, the trans-activation domain of 
CTF-1 specifically contacts histone H3 and oligomers of histones H3 and H4, and 
full-length CTF-1 was shown to alter the interaction of reconstituted 
nucleosomal cores with DNA. Thus, the growth factor-regulated trans-activation 
domain of CTF-1 can interact with chromatin components through histone H3. These 
findings suggest that such interactions may regulate chromatin dynamics in 
response to growth factor signaling.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.9.24.3051
PMID: 8543151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]