---
reference_id: "PMID:36420742"
title: DNA Methylation in Autoimmune Thyroid Disease.
authors:
- Lafontaine N
- Wilson SG
- Walsh JP
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgac664
keywords:
- Humans
- Hashimoto Disease/genetics
- DNA Methylation
- Autoimmune Diseases/genetics
- Graves Disease
- Iodine
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 22/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DNA Methylation in Autoimmune Thyroid Disease.
**Authors:** Lafontaine N, Wilson SG, Walsh JP
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgac664](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgac664)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2023 Feb 15;108(3):604-613. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgac664.

DNA Methylation in Autoimmune Thyroid Disease.

Lafontaine N(1)(2), Wilson SG(1)(3), Walsh JP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology & Diabetes, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, 
Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia.
(2)Medical School, University of Western Australia, Crawley, Western Australia 
6009, Australia.
(3)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Western Australia, Crawley, 
Western Australia 6009, Australia.

Graves disease and Hashimoto disease form part of the spectrum of autoimmune 
thyroid disease (AITD), to which genetic and environmental factors are 
recognized contributors. Epigenetics provides a potential link between 
environmental influences, gene expression, and thyroid autoimmunity. DNA 
methylation (DNAm) is the best studied epigenetic process, and global 
hypomethylation of leukocyte DNA is reported in several autoimmune disorders. 
This review summarizes the current understanding of DNAm in AITD. Targeted DNAm 
studies of blood samples from AITD patients have reported differential DNAm in 
the promoter regions of several genes implicated in AITD, including TNF, IFNG, 
IL2RA, IL6, ICAM1, and PTPN22. In many cases, however, the findings await 
replication and are unsupported by functional studies to support causal roles in 
AITD pathogenesis. Furthermore, thyroid hormones affect DNAm, and in many 
studies confounding by reverse causation has not been considered. Recent studies 
have shown that DNAm patterns in candidate genes including ITGA6, PRKAA2, and 
DAPK1 differ between AITD patients from regions with different iodine status, 
providing a potential mechanism for associations between iodine and AITD. 
Research focus in the field is moving from candidate gene studies to an 
epigenome-wide approach. Genome-wide methylation studies of AITD patients have 
demonstrated multiple differentially methylated positions, including some in 
immunoregulatory genes such as NOTCH1, HLA-DRB1, TNF, and ICAM1. Large, 
epigenome-wide studies are required to elucidate the pathophysiological role of 
DNAm in AITD, with the potential to provide novel diagnostic and prognostic 
biomarkers as well as therapeutic targets.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgac664
PMID: 36420742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]