---
reference_id: "PMID:30173896"
title: "[Drug-induced vasculitis]."
authors:
- Fathallah N
- Ouni B
- Mokni S
- Baccouche K
- Atig A
- Ghariani N
- Azzabi A
- Denguezli M
- Slim R
- Ben Salem C
journal: Therapie
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.therap.2018.07.005
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Drug-Related Side Effects and Adverse Reactions/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pharmacovigilance
- Retrospective Studies
- Tunisia
- "Vasculitis/chemically induced, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Vasculitis, Leukocytoclastic, Cutaneous/chemically induced, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Drug-induced vasculitis].
**Authors:** Fathallah N, Ouni B, Mokni S, Baccouche K, Atig A, Ghariani N, Azzabi A, Denguezli M, Slim R, Ben Salem C
**Journal:** Therapie (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.therap.2018.07.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.therap.2018.07.005)

## Content

1. Therapie. 2019 Jun;74(3):347-354. doi: 10.1016/j.therap.2018.07.005. Epub 2018
 Jul 24.

[Drug-induced vasculitis].

[Article in French]

Fathallah N(1), Ouni B(2), Mokni S(3), Baccouche K(4), Atig A(5), Ghariani N(3),
Azzabi A(6), Denguezli M(3), Slim R(2), Ben Salem C(2).

Author information:
(1)Département de pharmacologie, faculté de médecine de Sousse, université de
Sousse, avenue Md Karoui, 4002 Sousse, Tunisie. Electronic address:
neilafathallah@gmail.com.
(2)Département de pharmacologie, faculté de médecine de Sousse, université de
Sousse, avenue Md Karoui, 4002 Sousse, Tunisie.
(3)Département de dermatologie, CHU Farhat Hached, 4002 Sousse, Tunisie.
(4)Département de rhumatologie, CHU Farhat Hached, 4002 Sousse, Tunisie.
(5)Département de médecine Interne, CHU Farhat Hached, 4002 Sousse, Tunisie.
(6)Département de néphrologie, CHU Sahloul, 4002 Sousse, Tunisie.

INTRODUCTION: Drug-induced vasculitis is reported in almost 10-20 % of
vasculitis. Several drugs may be incriminated in their occurrence. Our study
aimed to study the epidemiological, clinical, histopathological and evolutionary
characteristics of drug-indced vasculitis from a series of cases and to specify
the different drugs involved.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective study during the period from January 2006
to December 2015 from the cases notified to the regional pharmacovigilance
center of Sousse, Tunisia. The diagnosis was established according to the
criteria proposed by the group of the American college of rheumatology (ACR).
RESULTS: Our study included thirteen cases of drug-induced vasculitis over a
ten-year period, with an mean incidence of 1.3 new cases per year. Mean age of
patients was 40.84 years. The mean delay from the treatment onset was 14.46 days
with extremes ranging from 5 days to six weeks. Most patients had pure skin
involvement. Association with other extracutaneous complaints was present in
five cases. Cutaneous biopsy was performed in all patients showing a
pathological pattern of leukocytoclastic vasculitis, associated with fibrinoid
necrosis, extravasation of red blood cells and allergic capillaritis. The
outcome was favorable for all patients. The offending drugs in our series were
amoxicillin, pristinamycin, rifampicin, fluconazole, metformin, glimepiride,
phenobarbital, gabapentin, fenofibrate, ibuprofen, allopurinol, rituximab and
tinzaparin.
CONCLUSION: Anamnestic, clinical, biological and histopathological findings
allow the early recognition of drug-induced vasculitis. Adequate treatment
prevents systemic spreading and a worse prognosis.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.therap.2018.07.005
PMID: 30173896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
