---
reference_id: "PMID:39189034"
title: "Clinical Characteristics and Mortality Risks Among Patients With Culture-Proven Coccidioidomycosis Who Are Critically Ill: A Multicenter Study in an Endemic Region."
authors:
- Lim J
- Scott AM
- Wig R
- Tan RV
- Harnois ER
- Zangeneh TT
- Al-Obaidi MM
journal: Open Forum Infect Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofae454
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Characteristics and Mortality Risks Among Patients With Culture-Proven Coccidioidomycosis Who Are Critically Ill: A Multicenter Study in an Endemic Region.
**Authors:** Lim J, Scott AM, Wig R, Tan RV, Harnois ER, Zangeneh TT, Al-Obaidi MM
**Journal:** Open Forum Infect Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ofid/ofae454](https://doi.org/10.1093/ofid/ofae454)

## Content

1. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2024 Aug 7;11(8):ofae454. doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofae454. 
eCollection 2024 Aug.

Clinical Characteristics and Mortality Risks Among Patients With Culture-Proven 
Coccidioidomycosis Who Are Critically Ill: A Multicenter Study in an Endemic 
Region.

Lim J(1)(2), Scott AM(1), Wig R(1), Tan RV(1), Harnois ER(1), Zangeneh 
TT(1)(2)(3), Al-Obaidi MM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Arizona College of Medicine, 
Tucson, Arizona, USA.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Arizona College of Medicine, 
Tucson, Arizona, USA.
(3)Valley Fever Center for Excellence, University of Arizona College of 
Medicine, Tucson, Arizona, USA.

BACKGROUND: Coccidioidomycosis is an endemic mycosis in the southwestern United 
States. While most infections are mild, severe cases can be devastating. We 
aimed to describe the clinical characteristics and mortality risks of patients 
in the intensive care unit (ICU) with culture-proven coccidioidomycosis.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective chart review of patients in the ICU with 
positive Coccidioides spp culture in a large health care system in Arizona 
between 1 October 2017 and 1 July 2022. All data were entered into REDCap.
RESULTS: An overall 145 patients were identified and included. The median age 
was 51 years, with the majority male (69%) and non-Hispanic White (39%). Most 
patients (n = 104, 72%) had pulmonary coccidioidomycosis, and 41 had 
extrapulmonary disease (17 meningitis, 13 fungemia, 10 musculoskeletal disease, 
and 4 pericardial or aortic involvement). Seventy patients (48%) died during 
hospitalization, and most (91%) received antifungal therapy during 
hospitalization. In the multivariate logistic regression model, age ≥60 years 
(odds ratio [OR], 7.0; 95% CI, 2.6-18.8), cirrhosis (OR, 13.1; 95% CI, 
1.6-108.8), and mechanical ventilation or vasopressor support (OR, 15.4; 95% CI, 
3.9-59.6) were independently associated with increased all-cause mortality, but 
pre-ICU antifungal use had a statistically insignificant mortality risk 
association (OR, 0.5; 95% CI, .2-1.2).
CONCLUSIONS: In our study of patients in the ICU with coccidioidomycosis and 
multiple comorbidities, the mortality rate was high. Older age, cirrhosis, and 
mechanical ventilation or vasopressor support were significantly associated with 
high mortality. Future studies are recommended to evaluate those risk factors 
and the efficacy of rapid diagnosis and early therapy in patients at high risk.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
Infectious Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofae454
PMCID: PMC11346353
PMID: 39189034