---
reference_id: "PMID:36797465"
title: "Identification of a DNA methylation signature for Renpenning syndrome (RENS1), a spliceopathy."
authors:
- Haghshenas S
- Foroutan A
- Bhai P
- Levy MA
- Relator R
- Kerkhof J
- McConkey H
- Skinner CD
- Caylor RC
- Tedder ML
- Stevenson RE
- Sadikovic B
- Schwartz CE
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-023-01313-z
keywords:
- Humans
- DNA Methylation
- "X-Linked Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics"
- Cerebral Palsy/genetics
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a DNA methylation signature for Renpenning syndrome (RENS1), a spliceopathy.
**Authors:** Haghshenas S, Foroutan A, Bhai P, Levy MA, Relator R, Kerkhof J, McConkey H, Skinner CD, Caylor RC, Tedder ML, Stevenson RE, Sadikovic B, Schwartz CE
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-023-01313-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-023-01313-z)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2023 Aug;31(8):879-886. doi: 10.1038/s41431-023-01313-z. Epub
 2023 Feb 16.

Identification of a DNA methylation signature for Renpenning syndrome (RENS1), a 
spliceopathy.

Haghshenas S(1)(2), Foroutan A(1), Bhai P(2), Levy MA(2), Relator R(2), Kerkhof 
J(2), McConkey H(1)(2), Skinner CD(3), Caylor RC(3), Tedder ML(3), Stevenson 
RE(3), Sadikovic B(4)(5), Schwartz CE(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Western University, London, 
ON, N6A 3K7, Canada.
(2)Verspeeten Clinical Genome Centre, London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON, 
N6A 5W9, Canada.
(3)Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, 29646, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Western University, London, 
ON, N6A 3K7, Canada. bekim.sadikovic@lhsc.on.ca.
(5)Verspeeten Clinical Genome Centre, London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON, 
N6A 5W9, Canada. bekim.sadikovic@lhsc.on.ca.
(6)Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, 29646, USA. 
charles.schwartz224@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Pediatrics and Human Development, College of Human Medicine, 
Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, 49503, USA. 
charles.schwartz224@gmail.com.

The challenges and ambiguities in providing an accurate diagnosis for patients 
with neurodevelopmental disorders have led researchers to apply epigenetics as a 
technique to validate the diagnosis provided based on the clinical examination 
and genetic testing results. Genome-wide DNA methylation analysis has recently 
been adapted for clinical testing of patients with genetic neurodevelopmental 
disorders. In this paper, preliminary data demonstrating a DNA methylation 
signature for Renpenning syndrome (RENS1 - OMIM 309500), which is an X-linked 
recessive neurodevelopmental disorder caused by variants in 
polyglutamine-binding protein 1 (PQBP1) is reported. The identified episignature 
was then utilized to construct a highly sensitive and specific binary 
classification model. Besides providing evidence for the existence of a DNA 
methylation episignature for Renpenning syndrome, this study increases the 
knowledge of the molecular mechanisms related to the disease. Moreover, the 
availability of more subjects in future may facilitate the establishment of an 
episignature that can be utilized for diagnosis in a clinical setting and for 
reclassification of variants of unknown clinical significance.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to European Society of Human 
Genetics.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-023-01313-z
PMCID: PMC10400603
PMID: 36797465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential competing interest. CES was previously affiliated 
with GGC, which provides commercial diagnostic services using EpiSign. This 
study however, was initiated after his retirement from GGC in collaboration with 
BS. Some of the genome-wide data was generated at GGC on a research basis at the 
request of CES. Thus, it is not linked to the commercial diagnostic services at 
GGC.