---
reference_id: "PMID:16462678"
title: "[Allergy-related hypereosinophilia]."
authors:
- Garcia G
journal: Presse Med
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/s0755-4982(06)74536-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Allergy-related hypereosinophilia].
**Authors:** Garcia G
**Journal:** Presse Med (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0755-4982(06)74536-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0755-4982(06)74536-5)

## Content

1. Presse Med. 2006 Jan;35(1 Pt 2):135-43. doi: 10.1016/s0755-4982(06)74536-5.

[Allergy-related hypereosinophilia].

[Article in French]

Garcia G(1).

Author information:
(1)Service des explorations fonctionnelles respiratoires, Hôpital Antoine 
Béclère, Clamart. gilles.garcia@abc.aphp.fr

Hypereosinophilia in the blood and tissues is one of the main characteristics of 
the pathophysiology of allergic disease. CD4+ T cells polarized to a Th2 
phenotype mediate inflammatory disorders; cytokines produced by Th2, including 
IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13, drive the cardinal features of the disease. Recent human 
experiments indicate that eosinophils may control the bronchial remodeling that 
occurs in asthma. Eosinophils are a rich source of fibrogenic factors, 
particularly TGF-ss. Atopy is defined by abnormal IgE production in response to 
an allergen (an antigen that is then designated an allergen). Allergy combines 
pre-existent sensitization (atopy) with various symptoms - cutaneous, ENT, 
respiratory, or digestive. Atopy is diagnosed primarily by cutaneous skin-prick 
tests and the new multi-allergen blood test. A diagnosis of allergy requires the 
presence of symptoms and justifies workups for asthma, rhinitis, food allergies, 
or atopic dermatitis.

DOI: 10.1016/s0755-4982(06)74536-5
PMID: 16462678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]