---
reference_id: "PMID:27621760"
title: "Epithelial plasticity in urothelial carcinoma: Current advancements and future challenges."
authors:
- Garg M
journal: World J Stem Cells
year: '2016'
doi: 10.4252/wjsc.v8.i8.260
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epithelial plasticity in urothelial carcinoma: Current advancements and future challenges.
**Authors:** Garg M
**Journal:** World J Stem Cells (2016)
**DOI:** [10.4252/wjsc.v8.i8.260](https://doi.org/10.4252/wjsc.v8.i8.260)

## Content

1. World J Stem Cells. 2016 Aug 26;8(8):260-7. doi: 10.4252/wjsc.v8.i8.260.

Epithelial plasticity in urothelial carcinoma: Current advancements and future
challenges.

Garg M(1).

Author information:
(1)Minal Garg, Department of Biochemistry, University of Lucknow, Lucknow
226007, India.

Urothelial carcinoma (UC) of the bladder is characterized by high recurrence
rate where a subset of these cells undergoes transition to deadly muscle
invasive disease and later metastasizes. Urothelial cancer stem cells (UroCSCs),
a tumor subpopulation derived from transformation of urothelial stem cells, are
responsible for heterogeneous tumor formation and resistance to systemic
treatment in UC of the bladder. Although the precise reason for pathophysiologic
spread of tumor is not clear, transcriptome analysis of microdissected cancer
cells expressing multiple progenitor/stem cell markers validates the
upregulation of genes that derive epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.
Experimental studies on human bladder cancer xenografts describe the mechanistic
functions and regulation of epithelial plasticity for its cancer-restraining
effects. It has been further examined to be associated with the recruitment of a
pool of UroCSCs into cell division in response to damages induced by adjuvant
therapies. This paper also discusses the various probable therapeutic approaches
to attenuate the progressive manifestation of chemoresistance by
co-administration of inhibitors of epithelial plasticity and chemotherapeutic
drugs by abrogating the early tumor repopulation as well as killing
differentiated cancer cells.

DOI: 10.4252/wjsc.v8.i8.260
PMCID: PMC4999653
PMID: 27621760
