---
reference_id: "PMID:36834443"
title: WebGIS-Based Real-Time Surveillance and Response System for Vector-Borne Infectious Diseases.
authors:
- Javaid M
- Sarfraz MS
- Aftab MU
- Zaman QU
- Rauf HT
- Alnowibet KA
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph20043740
content_type: abstract_only
---

# WebGIS-Based Real-Time Surveillance and Response System for Vector-Borne Infectious Diseases.
**Authors:** Javaid M, Sarfraz MS, Aftab MU, Zaman QU, Rauf HT, Alnowibet KA
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph20043740](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph20043740)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2023 Feb 20;20(4):3740. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph20043740.

WebGIS-Based Real-Time Surveillance and Response System for Vector-Borne 
Infectious Diseases.

Javaid M(1), Sarfraz MS(1), Aftab MU(1), Zaman QU(1), Rauf HT(2), Alnowibet 
KA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, National University of Computer and Emerging 
Sciences, Islamabad, Chiniot-Faisalabad Campus, Chiniot 35400, Pakistan.
(2)Independent Researcher, Bradford BD8 0HS, UK.
(3)Statistics and Operations Research Department, College of Science, King Saud 
University, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia.

Erratum in
    Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2025 Mar 26;22(4):499. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph22040499.

The diseases transmitted through vectors such as mosquitoes are named 
vector-borne diseases (VBDs), such as malaria, dengue, and leishmaniasis. 
Malaria spreads by a vector named Anopheles mosquitos. Dengue is transmitted 
through the bite of the female vector Aedes aegypti or Aedes albopictus 
mosquito. The female Phlebotomine sandfly is the vector that transmits 
leishmaniasis. The best way to control VBDs is to identify breeding sites for 
their vectors. This can be efficiently accomplished by the Geographical 
Information System (GIS). The objective was to find the relation between 
climatic factors (temperature, humidity, and precipitation) to identify breeding 
sites for these vectors. Our data contained imbalance classes, so data 
oversampling of different sizes was created. The machine learning models used 
were Light Gradient Boosting Machine, Random Forest, Decision Tree, Support 
Vector Machine, and Multi-Layer Perceptron for model training. Their results 
were compared and analyzed to select the best model for disease prediction in 
Punjab, Pakistan. Random Forest was the selected model with 93.97% accuracy. 
Accuracy was measured using an F score, precision, or recall. Temperature, 
precipitation, and specific humidity significantly affect the spread of dengue, 
malaria, and leishmaniasis. A user-friendly web-based GIS platform was also 
developed for concerned citizens and policymakers.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph20043740
PMCID: PMC9965707
PMID: 36834443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.