---
reference_id: "PMID:15771266"
title: "Laser printing of single cells: statistical analysis, cell viability, and stress."
authors:
- Barron JA
- Krizman DB
- Ringeisen BR
journal: Ann Biomed Eng
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1007/s10439-005-8971-x
keywords:
- Cell Count/methods
- "Cell Culture Techniques/instrumentation, methods"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Proliferation
- "Cell Separation/instrumentation, methods"
- Cell Survival/physiology
- Computer Peripherals
- Heat-Shock Proteins/metabolism
- Heat-Shock Response
- Humans
- "Models, Biological"
- "Models, Statistical"
- "Osteosarcoma/metabolism, pathology"
- Oxidative Stress/physiology
- "Printing/instrumentation, methods"
- "Tissue Engineering/instrumentation, methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laser printing of single cells: statistical analysis, cell viability, and stress.
**Authors:** Barron JA, Krizman DB, Ringeisen BR
**Journal:** Ann Biomed Eng (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10439-005-8971-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10439-005-8971-x)

## Content

1. Ann Biomed Eng. 2005 Feb;33(2):121-30. doi: 10.1007/s10439-005-8971-x.

Laser printing of single cells: statistical analysis, cell viability, and
stress.

Barron JA(1), Krizman DB, Ringeisen BR.

Author information:
(1)Chemical Dynamics and Diagnostics Branch, Chemistry Division, Naval Research
Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375, USA.

Methods to print patterns of mammalian cells to various substrates with high
resolution offer unique possibilities to contribute to a wide range of fields
including tissue engineering, cell separation, and functional genomics. This
manuscript details experiments demonstrating that BioLP Biological Laser
Printing, can be used to rapidly and accurately print patterns of single cells
in a noncontact manner. Human osteosarcoma cells were deposited into a
biopolymer matrix, and after 6 days of incubation, the printed cells are shown
to be 100% viable. Printing low numbers of cells per spot by BioLP is shown to
follow a Poisson distribution, indicating that the reproducibility for the
number of cells per spot is therefore determined not by the variance in printed
volume per drop but by random sampling statistics. Potential cell damage during
the laser printing process is also investigated via immunocytochemical studies
that demonstrate minimal expression of heat shock proteins by printed cells.
Overall, we find that BioLP is able to print patterns of osteosarcoma cells with
high viability, little to no heat or shear damage to the cells, and at the
ultimate single cell resolution.

DOI: 10.1007/s10439-005-8971-x
PMID: 15771266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
