---
reference_id: "PMID:36587182"
title: Chromatin remodeler CHD7 targets active enhancer region to regulate cell type-specific gene expression in human neural crest cells.
authors:
- Sanosaka T
- Okuno H
- Mizota N
- Andoh-Noda T
- Sato M
- Tomooka R
- Banno S
- Kohyama J
- Okano H
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-27293-6
keywords:
- Humans
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- CHARGE Syndrome/genetics
- Neural Crest/metabolism
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- "Chromatin/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Expression
- "DNA Helicases/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chromatin remodeler CHD7 targets active enhancer region to regulate cell type-specific gene expression in human neural crest cells.
**Authors:** Sanosaka T, Okuno H, Mizota N, Andoh-Noda T, Sato M, Tomooka R, Banno S, Kohyama J, Okano H
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-022-27293-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-27293-6)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2022 Dec 31;12(1):22648. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-27293-6.

Chromatin remodeler CHD7 targets active enhancer region to regulate cell 
type-specific gene expression in human neural crest cells.

Sanosaka T(1), Okuno H(1), Mizota N(1), Andoh-Noda T(1), Sato M(1), Tomooka 
R(1), Banno S(1), Kohyama J(2), Okano H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan.
(2)Department of Physiology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan. jkohyama@a7.keio.jp.
(3)Department of Physiology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan. hidokano@keio.jp.

A mutation in the chromatin remodeler chromodomain helicase DNA-binding 7 (CHD7) 
gene causes the multiple congenital anomaly CHARGE syndrome. The craniofacial 
anomalies observed in CHARGE syndrome are caused by dysfunctions of neural crest 
cells (NCCs), which originate from the neural tube. However, the mechanism by 
which CHD7 regulates the function of human NCCs (hNCCs) remains unclear. We 
aimed to characterize the cis-regulatory elements governed by CHD7 in hNCCs by 
analyzing genome-wide ChIP-Seq data and identifying hNCC-specific CHD7-binding 
profiles. We compared CHD7-binding regions among cell types, including human 
induced pluripotent stem cells and human neuroepithelial cells, to determine the 
comprehensive properties of CHD7-binding in hNCCs. Importantly, analysis of the 
hNCC-specific CHD7-bound region revealed transcription factor AP-2α as a 
potential co-factor facilitating the cell type-specific transcriptional program 
in hNCCs. CHD7 was strongly associated with active enhancer regions, permitting 
the expression of hNCC-specific genes to sustain the function of hNCCs. Our 
findings reveal the regulatory mechanisms of CHD7 in hNCCs, thus providing 
additional information regarding the transcriptional programs in hNCCs.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-27293-6
PMCID: PMC9805427
PMID: 36587182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: H.O. is a compensated scientific consultant of 
San Bio, Co., Ltd., and K Pharma Inc. The other authors declare no potential 
conflicts of interest.