---
reference_id: "PMID:28336416"
title: Repression of the DCL2 and DCL4 genes in Nicotiana benthamiana plants for the transient expression of recombinant proteins.
authors:
- Matsuo K
- Matsumura T
journal: J Biosci Bioeng
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2017.02.019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Repression of the DCL2 and DCL4 genes in Nicotiana benthamiana plants for the transient expression of recombinant proteins.
**Authors:** Matsuo K, Matsumura T
**Journal:** J Biosci Bioeng (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbiosc.2017.02.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiosc.2017.02.019)

## Content

1. J Biosci Bioeng. 2017 Aug;124(2):215-220. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2017.02.019. 
Epub 2017 Mar 21.

Repression of the DCL2 and DCL4 genes in Nicotiana benthamiana plants for the 
transient expression of recombinant proteins.

Matsuo K(1), Matsumura T(2).

Author information:
(1)Bioproduction Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial 
Science and Technology (AIST), 2-17-2-1 Tsukisamu-Higashi, Toyohira-ku, Sapporo 
062-8517, Japan. Electronic address: matsuo-kouki@aist.go.jp.
(2)Bioproduction Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial 
Science and Technology (AIST), 2-17-2-1 Tsukisamu-Higashi, Toyohira-ku, Sapporo 
062-8517, Japan.

The production of recombinant proteins in plants has many advantages, including 
safety and reduced costs. However, this technology still faces several issues, 
including low levels of production. The repression of RNA silencing seems to be 
particularly important for improving recombinant protein production because RNA 
silencing effectively degrades transgene-derived mRNAs in plant cells. 
Therefore, to overcome this, we used RNA interference technology to develop 
DCL2- and DCL4-repressed transgenic Nicotiana benthamiana plants (ΔD2, ΔD4, and 
ΔD2ΔD4 plants), which had much lower levels of NbDCL2 and/or NbDCL4 mRNAs than 
wild-type plants. A transient gene expression assay showed that the ΔD2ΔD4 
plants accumulated larger amounts of green fluorescent protein (GFP) and human 
acidic fibroblast growth factor (aFGF) than ΔD2, ΔD4, and wild-type plants. 
Furthermore, the levels of GFP and aFGF mRNAs were also higher in ΔD2ΔD4 plants 
than in ΔD2, ΔD4, and wild-type plants. These findings demonstrate that ΔD2ΔD4 
plants express larger amounts of recombinant proteins than wild-type plants, and 
so would be useful for recombinant protein production.

Copyright © 2017 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2017.02.019
PMID: 28336416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]