---
reference_id: "PMID:37415760"
title: "Clinical characteristics of malaria in COVID-19: A systematic review of case reports."
authors:
- Rayella C
- Devanandan P
- Rasuri K
- Yerravelly SS
- Andem S
- Puvvada RC
journal: Trop Parasitol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4103/tp.tp_26_22
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical characteristics of malaria in COVID-19: A systematic review of case reports.
**Authors:** Rayella C, Devanandan P, Rasuri K, Yerravelly SS, Andem S, Puvvada RC
**Journal:** Trop Parasitol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4103/tp.tp_26_22](https://doi.org/10.4103/tp.tp_26_22)

## Content

1. Trop Parasitol. 2023 Jan-Jun;13(1):22-27. doi: 10.4103/tp.tp_26_22. Epub 2023 
May 19.

Clinical characteristics of malaria in COVID-19: A systematic review of case 
reports.

Rayella C(1), Devanandan P(1), Rasuri K(1), Yerravelly SS(1), Andem S(1), 
Puvvada RC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, St. Peter's Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Hanamkonda, Telangana, India.

AIMS: Severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 is a viral infection that 
was first discovered in Wuhan, Hubei province, China, in December 2019. Effects 
of COVID-19 infection could drastically influence other concomitant diseases 
like Malaria. Malaria and COVID-19 may mimic each other and share look-alike 
symptoms. The aim of this systematic review was to analyze the clinical and 
biochemical characteristics of malaria and COVID-19 synergism that was based on 
the published case reports.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: An extensive literature search was carried out between May 
2020 and February 2022 in PubMed, Google Scholar, and EMBASE. Our study was 
devised according to Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and 
Meta-Analyses statement.
RESULTS: We have evaluated 16 case reports and one case series of coinfection of 
malaria with COVID-19. It has been observed that all the patients showed 
lymphopenia, fever, headache (52%), vomiting (47%), cough (38%), chills (38%), 
body ache (38%), myalgia (28%), and sweating (14%). Despite unprecedented times, 
whenever there is a suspicion, we recommend that medical practitioners should be 
alert to presenting plethora features of COVID-19 and confirm with polymerase 
chain reaction test.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that screening for COVID-19 should also be performed to 
mitigate missed diagnoses due to the long incubation period of novel 
coronavirus. Especially in vulnerable population, we should suspect other 
concurrent diseases and diagnoses in patients presenting with the symptoms of 
COVID-19 infection.

Copyright: © 2023 Tropical Parasitology.

DOI: 10.4103/tp.tp_26_22
PMCID: PMC10321589
PMID: 37415760

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.