---
reference_id: "PMID:38510107"
title: Microglia-neuron interactions in schizophrenia.
authors:
- Hartmann SM
- Heider J
- Wüst R
- Fallgatter AJ
- Volkmer H
journal: Front Cell Neurosci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fncel.2024.1345349
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microglia-neuron interactions in schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Hartmann SM, Heider J, Wüst R, Fallgatter AJ, Volkmer H
**Journal:** Front Cell Neurosci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fncel.2024.1345349](https://doi.org/10.3389/fncel.2024.1345349)

## Content

1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2024 Mar 6;18:1345349. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2024.1345349.
eCollection 2024.

Microglia-neuron interactions in schizophrenia.

Hartmann SM(#)(1), Heider J(#)(1), Wüst R(#)(2), Fallgatter AJ(2), Volkmer H(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Pharma and Biotech, NMI Natural and
Medical Sciences Institute at the University of Tübingen, Reutlingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Tübingen Center for Mental Health (TüCMH),
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

Multiple lines of evidence implicate increased neuroinflammation mediated by
glial cells to play a key role in neurodevelopmental disorders such as
schizophrenia. Microglia, which are the primary innate immune cells of the
brain, are crucial for the refinement of the synaptic circuitry during early
brain development by synaptic pruning and the regulation of synaptic plasticity
during adulthood. Schizophrenia risk factors as genetics or environmental
influences may further be linked to increased activation of microglia, an
increase of pro-inflammatory cytokine levels and activation of the inflammasome
resulting in an overall elevated neuroinflammatory state in patients. Synaptic
loss, one of the central pathological hallmarks of schizophrenia, is believed to
be due to excess removal of synapses by activated microglia, primarily affecting
glutamatergic neurons. Therefore, it is crucial to investigate microglia-neuron
interactions, which has been done by multiple studies focusing on post-mortem
brain tissues, brain imaging, animal models and patient iPSC-derived 2D culture
systems. In this review, we summarize the major findings in patients and in vivo
and in vitro models in the context of neuron-microglia interactions in
schizophrenia and secondly discuss the potential of anti-inflammatory treatments
for the alleviation of positive, negative, and cognitive symptoms.

Copyright © 2024 Hartmann, Heider, Wüst, Fallgatter and Volkmer.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2024.1345349
PMCID: PMC10950997
PMID: 38510107

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
