---
reference_id: "PMID:37778777"
title: Maternal-to-Child Transmission of Hepatitis B Virus and Hepatitis Delta Virus.
authors:
- Aliasi-Sinai L
- Worthington T
- Lange M
- Kushner T
journal: Clin Liver Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2023.05.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Maternal-to-Child Transmission of Hepatitis B Virus and Hepatitis Delta Virus.
**Authors:** Aliasi-Sinai L, Worthington T, Lange M, Kushner T
**Journal:** Clin Liver Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cld.2023.05.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cld.2023.05.007)

## Content

1. Clin Liver Dis. 2023 Nov;27(4):917-935. doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2023.05.007. Epub 
2023 Jul 7.

Maternal-to-Child Transmission of Hepatitis B Virus and Hepatitis Delta Virus.

Aliasi-Sinai L(1), Worthington T(2), Lange M(3), Kushner T(4).

Author information:
(1)Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Division of Liver Diseases, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, USA.
(3)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, USA.
(4)Division of Liver Diseases, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, USA. Electronic address: tatyana.kushner@mssm.edu.

Maternal-to-child transmission of hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis delta 
virus (HDV) can lead to the risk of progressive liver disease in infants, but 
fortunately effective interventions exist to decrease transmission. Counseling 
on the risk of maternal-to-child transmission, care pathways to decrease 
transmission, and the implications of HBV and HDV on pregnancy outcomes are the 
key components of caring for pregnant people living with HBV and HDV.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cld.2023.05.007
PMID: 37778777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]