---
reference_id: "PMID:32877710"
title: ERK activation precedes Purkinje cell loss in mice with Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17.
authors:
- Lin CW
- Fan CH
- Chang YC
- Hsieh-Li HM
journal: Neurosci Lett
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2020.135337
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcineurin/metabolism
- Cell Death/physiology
- "Cerebellum/metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Gliosis/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- MAP Kinase Signaling System/physiology
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Motor Skills/physiology
- Phenotype
- Phosphorylation
- "Purkinje Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- TATA-Box Binding Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ERK activation precedes Purkinje cell loss in mice with Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17.
**Authors:** Lin CW, Fan CH, Chang YC, Hsieh-Li HM
**Journal:** Neurosci Lett (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neulet.2020.135337](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2020.135337)

## Content

1. Neurosci Lett. 2020 Nov 1;738:135337. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2020.135337. Epub 
2020 Aug 30.

ERK activation precedes Purkinje cell loss in mice with Spinocerebellar ataxia 
type 17.

Lin CW(1), Fan CH(1), Chang YC(2), Hsieh-Li HM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, National Taiwan Normal University, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Taiwan Adventist Hospital, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Life Science, National Taiwan Normal University, Taiwan. 
Electronic address: hmhsieh@ntnu.edu.tw.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17) is an autosomal dominant 
neurodegenerative disease caused by CAG expansion in the gene encoding the 
TATA-binding protein (TBP). The neurological features of SCA17 are Purkinje cell 
loss and gliosis. We have generated SCA17 transgenic mice which recapitulate the 
patients' phenotypes and are suitable for the study of the SCA17 pathomechanism. 
Our previous study identified the activation of mitogen-activated protein 
kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MAPK/ERK) occurred in the SCA17 
cerebella, this study aims to study the role of ERK activation in SCA17. The 
levels of pERK, calbindin, and gliosis markers on the mouse cerebellum at 4-8 
weeks old were analyzed to elucidate the correlation among behavioral 
performance, ERK activation and Purkinje cell degeneration. The motor 
incoordination was initiated in SCA17 mice at 6 weeks old. We found that the 
presence of TBP nuclear aggregation and microglia activation were observed at 4 
weeks old. Gliosis of astrocytes and Bergmann glia, pERK, Bax/Bcl2 ratio, and 
caspase-3 were significantly increased in the 6-week-old SCA17 mouse cerebellum. 
In addition to the polyglutamine-protein aggregation in Purkinje cells caused 
apoptosis cell-autonomously, a significant body of evidence have shown that ERK 
pathways involves in neuronal apoptosis. Our study showed that the activation of 
ERK in the astrocytes and Bergmann glia was identified as preceding motor 
deficits, which suggest the elevated gliosis by ERK activation may contribute to 
neuronal apoptosis in SCA17 mice.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2020.135337
PMID: 32877710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]