---
reference_id: "PMID:6954526"
title: "Type I osteogenesis imperfecta: a nonfunctional allele for pro alpha 1 (I) chains of type I procollagen."
authors:
- Barsh GS
- David KE
- Byers PH
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1982'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.79.12.3838
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type I osteogenesis imperfecta: a nonfunctional allele for pro alpha 1 (I) chains of type I procollagen.
**Authors:** Barsh GS, David KE, Byers PH
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1982)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.79.12.3838](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.79.12.3838)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1982 Jun;79(12):3838-42. doi:
10.1073/pnas.79.12.3838.

Type I osteogenesis imperfecta: a nonfunctional allele for pro alpha 1 (I) 
chains of type I procollagen.

Barsh GS, David KE, Byers PH.

Type I osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a dominantly inherited disease 
characterized clinically by bone fractures during childhood, blue sclerae, and 
frequent hearing loss accompanied by a decreased content of type I collagen in 
bone and skin. Cultured skin fibroblasts from three individuals affected with 
the disease produce half-normal levels of type I procollagen, a disulfide-bonded 
trimer that contains two pro alpha 1(I) chains and one pro alpha 2(I) chain. In 
normal cells, pro alpha 1(I) and pro alpha 2(I) are synthesized in a 2:1 ratio 
and only assembled molecules are secreted. In contrast, the OI cells contain 
equimolar amounts of pro alpha 1(I) and pro alpha 2(I), which suggests that 
trimer assembly and secretion are limited by the level of pro alpha 1(I) 
synthesis. The "extra" pro alpha 2(I) in the OI cells is in a 
nondisulfide-bonded configuration and is not secreted but apparently contributes 
to an increased level of intracellular degradation. Thus, decreased production 
of type I procollagen in these patients is the result of decreased synthesis of 
pro alpha 1(I). These results suggest that the stoichiometry of pro alpha chains 
in type I procollagen is determined by the conformation of the chains rather 
than the ratio in which they are synthesized, that molecules containing more 
than a single pro alpha 2(I) chain are not assembled, and that the production of 
this heteropolymeric molecule may be effectively regulated by controlling the 
synthesis of only one of the subunits.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.79.12.3838
PMCID: PMC346523
PMID: 6954526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]