---
reference_id: "PMID:37762220"
title: Conditional Deletion of Foxg1 Delayed Myelination during Early Postnatal Brain Development.
authors:
- Cao G
- Sun C
- Shen H
- Qu D
- Shen C
- Lu H
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms241813921
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Brain
- Rett Syndrome
- Action Potentials
- Cell Cycle
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Forkhead Transcription Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Conditional Deletion of Foxg1 Delayed Myelination during Early Postnatal Brain Development.
**Authors:** Cao G, Sun C, Shen H, Qu D, Shen C, Lu H
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms241813921](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241813921)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Sep 10;24(18):13921. doi: 10.3390/ijms241813921.

Conditional Deletion of Foxg1 Delayed Myelination during Early Postnatal Brain
Development.

Cao G(1), Sun C(2), Shen H(1), Qu D(1), Shen C(3), Lu H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, School of Medicine, Southeast University,
Nanjing 210009, China.
(2)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Southeast University, Nanjing
210009, China.
(3)Department of Pathophysiology, School of Medicine, Southeast University,
Nanjing 210009, China.

FOXG1 (forkhead box G1) syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by
variants in the Foxg1 gene that affect brain structure and function. Individuals
affected by FOXG1 syndrome frequently exhibit delayed myelination in
neuroimaging studies, which may impair the rapid conduction of nerve impulses.
To date, the specific effects of FOXG1 on oligodendrocyte lineage progression
and myelination during early postnatal development remain unclear. Here, we
investigated the effects of Foxg1 deficiency on myelin development in the mouse
brain by conditional deletion of Foxg1 in neural progenitors using
NestinCreER;Foxg1fl/fl mice and tamoxifen induction at postnatal day 0 (P0). We
found that Foxg1 deficiency resulted in a transient delay in myelination,
evidenced by decreased myelin formation within the first two weeks after birth,
but ultimately recovered to the control levels by P30. We also found that Foxg1
deletion prevented the timely attenuation of platelet-derived growth factor
receptor alpha (PDGFRα) signaling and reduced the cell cycle exit of
oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs), leading to their excessive proliferation
and delayed maturation. Additionally, Foxg1 deletion increased the expression of
Hes5, a myelin formation inhibitor, as well as Olig2 and Sox10, two promoters of
OPC differentiation. Our results reveal the important role of Foxg1 in myelin
development and provide new clues for further exploring the pathological
mechanisms of FOXG1 syndrome.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241813921
PMCID: PMC10530892
PMID: 37762220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
