---
reference_id: "PMID:38427495"
title: Mono- and Biallelic Inactivation of Huntingtin Gene in Patient-Specific Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Reveal HTT Roles in Striatal Development and Neuronal Functions.
authors:
- Louessard M
- Cailleret M
- Jarrige M
- Bigarreau J
- Lenoir S
- Dufour N
- Rey M
- Saudou F
- Deglon N
- Perrier AL
journal: J Huntingtons Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3233/JHD-231509
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- Huntington Disease/metabolism
- Neurons/metabolism
- Corpus Striatum/metabolism
- Alleles
- "Huntingtin Protein/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mono- and Biallelic Inactivation of Huntingtin Gene in Patient-Specific Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Reveal HTT Roles in Striatal Development and Neuronal Functions.
**Authors:** Louessard M, Cailleret M, Jarrige M, Bigarreau J, Lenoir S, Dufour N, Rey M, Saudou F, Deglon N, Perrier AL
**Journal:** J Huntingtons Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JHD-231509](https://doi.org/10.3233/JHD-231509)

## Content

1. J Huntingtons Dis. 2024;13(1):41-53. doi: 10.3233/JHD-231509.

Mono- and Biallelic Inactivation of Huntingtin Gene in Patient-Specific Induced 
Pluripotent Stem Cells Reveal HTT Roles in Striatal Development and Neuronal 
Functions.

Louessard M(1)(2)(3), Cailleret M(3), Jarrige M(4), Bigarreau J(3), Lenoir S(5), 
Dufour N(1)(2), Rey M(6), Saudou F(5), Deglon N(6), Perrier AL(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, Molecular Imaging Research Center, 
Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.
(2)Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Laboratoire des Maladies 
Neurodégénératives: Mécanismes, Thérapies, Imagerie, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.
(3)Université Paris-Saclay, Inserm, Univ Evry, Institut des Cellules Souches 
pour le Traitement et l'étude des Maladies Monogéniques, Corbeil-Essonne, 
France.
(4)CECS/AFM, Institut des Cellules Souches pour le Traitement et l'étude des 
Maladies Monogéniques, Corbeil-Essonne, France.
(5)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inserm, U1216, CHU Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble Institut 
Neuroscience, GIN, Grenoble, France.
(6)Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV) and University of Lausanne (UNIL), 
Department of Clinical Neurosciences (DNC), and Neuroscience Research Center 
(CRN), Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Neurotherapies, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the Huntingtin (HTT) gene cause Huntington's disease 
(HD), a neurodegenerative disorder. As a scaffold protein, HTT is involved in 
numerous cellular functions, but its normal and pathogenic functions during 
human forebrain development are poorly understood.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the developmental component of HD, with a specific 
emphasis on understanding the functions of wild-type and mutant HTT alleles 
during forebrain neuron development in individuals carrying HD mutations.
METHODS: We used CRISPR/Cas9 gene-editing technology to disrupt the ATG region 
of the HTT gene via non-homologous end joining to produce mono- or biallelic HTT 
knock-out human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) clones.
RESULTS: We showed that the loss of wild-type, mutant, or both HTT isoforms does 
not affect the pluripotency of iPSCs or their transition into neural cells. 
However, we observed that HTT loss causes division impairments in forebrain 
neuro-epithelial cells and alters maturation of striatal projection neurons 
(SPNs) particularly in the acquisition of DARPP32 expression, a key functional 
marker of SPNs. Finally, young post-mitotic neurons derived from HTT-/- human 
iPSCs display cellular dysfunctions observed in adult HD neurons.
CONCLUSIONS: We described a novel collection of isogenic clones with mono- and 
biallelic HTT inactivation that complement existing HD-hiPSC isogenic series to 
explore HTT functions and test therapeutic strategies in particular HTT-lowering 
drugs. Characterizing neural and neuronal derivatives from human iPSCs of this 
collection, we show evidence that HTT loss or mutation has impacts on 
neuro-epithelial and striatal neurons maturation, and on basal DNA damage and 
BDNF axonal transport in post-mitotic neurons.

DOI: 10.3233/JHD-231509
PMCID: PMC11091579
PMID: 38427495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Frédéric Saudou is an Editorial Board member of 
this journal but was not involved in the peer-review process nor had access to 
any information regarding its peer review.