---
reference_id: PMID:35938771
title: Mast cell activation syndrome and the link with long COVID.
authors:
- Arun S
- Storan A
- Myers B
journal: Br J Hosp Med (Lond)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.12968/hmed.2022.0123
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mast cell activation syndrome and the link with long COVID.
**Authors:** Arun S, Storan A, Myers B
**Journal:** Br J Hosp Med (Lond) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.12968/hmed.2022.0123](https://doi.org/10.12968/hmed.2022.0123)

## Content

1. Br J Hosp Med (Lond). 2022 Jul 2;83(7):1-10. doi: 10.12968/hmed.2022.0123.
Epub  2022 Jul 26.

Mast cell activation syndrome and the link with long COVID.

Arun S(1)(2), Storan A(2)(3), Myers B(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biosciences, University College London, London, UK.
(2)Mast Cell Action, Leamington Spa, UK.
(3)Department of Science, Engineering, and Environment, The University of 
Salford, Salford, UK.
(4)Haematology Department, University Hospitals of Leicester, Leicester, UK.

Mast cells are innate immune cells found in connective tissues throughout the 
body, most prevalent at tissue-environment interfaces. They possess multiple 
cell-surface receptors which react to various stimuli and, after activation, 
release many mediators including histamine, heparin, cytokines, prostaglandins, 
leukotrienes and proteases. In mast cell activation syndrome, excessive amounts 
of inflammatory mediators are released in response to triggers such as foods, 
fragrances, stress, exercise, medications or temperature changes. Diagnostic 
markers may be difficult to assess because of their rapid degradation; these 
include urinary N-methyl histamine, urinary prostaglandins D2, DM and F2α and 
serum tryptase (which is stable) in the UK. Self-management techniques, 
medications and avoiding triggers may improve quality of life. Treatments 
include mast cell mediator blockers, mast cell stabilisers and anti-inflammatory 
agents. 'Long COVID' describes post-COVID-19 syndrome when symptoms persist for 
more than 12 weeks after initial infection with no alternative diagnosis. Both 
mast cell activation syndrome and long COVID cause multiple symptoms. It is 
theorised that COVID-19 infection could lead to exaggeration of existing 
undiagnosed mast cell activation syndrome, or could activate normal mast cells 
owing to the persistence of viral particles. Other similarities include the 
relapse-remission cycle and improvements with similar treatments. Importantly, 
however, aside from mast cell disorders, long COVID could potentially be 
attributed to several other conditions.

DOI: 10.12968/hmed.2022.0123
PMID: 35938771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]