---
reference_id: PMID:38445857
title: "Evolutionary trends in antifungal resistance: a meta-analysis."
authors:
- Niu X
- Al-Hatmi AMS
- Vitale RG
- Lackner M
- Ahmed SA
- Verweij PE
- Kang Y
- de Hoog S
journal: Microbiol Spectr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1128/spectrum.02127-23
keywords:
- Humans
- Antifungal Agents/pharmacology
- Phylogeny
- Microbial Sensitivity Tests
- Fluconazole
- Voriconazole
- Azoles/pharmacology
- "Drug Resistance, Fungal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evolutionary trends in antifungal resistance: a meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Niu X, Al-Hatmi AMS, Vitale RG, Lackner M, Ahmed SA, Verweij PE, Kang Y, de Hoog S
**Journal:** Microbiol Spectr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1128/spectrum.02127-23](https://doi.org/10.1128/spectrum.02127-23)

## Content

1. Microbiol Spectr. 2024 Apr 2;12(4):e0212723. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.02127-23. 
Epub 2024 Mar 6.

Evolutionary trends in antifungal resistance: a meta-analysis.

Niu X(1)(2), Al-Hatmi AMS(2)(3), Vitale RG(4)(5), Lackner M(6), Ahmed SA(2), 
Verweij PE(2), Kang Y(1), de Hoog S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Environmental Pollution Monitoring and Disease Control, 
Ministry of Education of Guizhou & Key Laboratory of Microbiology and 
Parasitology of Education Department of Guizhou, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, China.
(2)Center of Expertise in Mycology of Radboud University Medical Center/Canisius 
Wilhelmina Hospital, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Natural & Medical Science Research Center, University of Nizwa, Nizwa, Oman.
(4)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Tecnológicas (CONICET), 
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(5)Unidad de Parasitología, Sector Micología, Hospital J.M. Ramos Mejía, Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(6)Institute of Hygiene and Medical Microbiology, Medical University of 
Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.

The present paper includes a meta-analysis of literature data on 318 species of 
fungi belonging to 34 orders in their response to 8 antifungal agents 
(amphotericin B, caspofungin, fluconazole, itraconazole, ketoconazole, 
posaconazole, terbinafine, and voriconazole). Main trends of MIC results at the 
ordinal level were visualized. European Committee on Antimicrobial 
Susceptibility Testing and Clinical & Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) 
clinical breakpoints were used as the staff gauge to evaluate MIC values ranging 
from resistance to susceptibility, which were subsequently compared with a 
phylogenetic tree of the fungal kingdom. Several orders (Hypocreales, 
Microascales, and Mucorales) invariably showed resistance. Also the 
basidiomycetous orders Agaricales, Polyporales, Sporidiales, Tremellales, and 
Trichosporonales showed relatively high degrees of azole multi-resistance, while 
elsewhere in the fungal kingdom, including orders with numerous pathogenic and 
opportunistic species, that is, Onygenales, Chaetothyiales, Sordariales, and 
Malasseziales, in general were susceptible to azoles. In most cases, resistance 
vs susceptibility was consistently associated with phylogenetic distance, 
members of the same order showing similar behavior.
IMPORTANCE: A kingdom-wide the largest set of published wild-type antifungal 
data comparison were analyzed. Trends in resistance in taxonomic groups 
(monophyletic clades) can be compared with the phylogeny of the fungal kingdom, 
eventual relationships between fungus-drug interaction and evolution can be 
described.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.02127-23
PMCID: PMC10986544
PMID: 38445857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.