---
reference_id: "PMID:29222629"
title: "Postinflammatory Hyperpigmentation: Epidemiology, Clinical Presentation, Pathogenesis and Treatment."
authors:
- Kaufman BP
- Aman T
- Alexis AF
journal: Am J Clin Dermatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s40257-017-0333-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Postinflammatory Hyperpigmentation: Epidemiology, Clinical Presentation, Pathogenesis and Treatment.
**Authors:** Kaufman BP, Aman T, Alexis AF
**Journal:** Am J Clin Dermatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40257-017-0333-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40257-017-0333-6)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2018 Aug;19(4):489-503. doi: 10.1007/s40257-017-0333-6.

Postinflammatory Hyperpigmentation: Epidemiology, Clinical Presentation, 
Pathogenesis and Treatment.

Kaufman BP(1), Aman T(2), Alexis AF(3).

Author information:
(1)Mount Sinai St. Luke's and West, 1090 Amsterdam Avenue, Suite 11B, New York, 
NY, 10025, USA. bridgetkaufmanmd@gmail.com.
(2)New York Medical College, 40 Sunshine Cottage Road, Valhalla, NY, 10595, USA.
(3)Mount Sinai St. Luke's and West, 1090 Amsterdam Avenue, Suite 11B, New York, 
NY, 10025, USA.

Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation (PIH) is a reactive hypermelanosis that 
develops following cutaneous inflammation. Common causes of PIH include 
intrinsic skin conditions (e.g., acne and eczema) as well as external insults to 
the skin, such as burn injuries and dermatologic procedures. PIH more commonly 
occurs in individuals with darker skin, for whom it is often a source of 
significant psychological distress. Several therapeutic modalities are available 
for the treatment of PIH, including topical agents, chemical peels, and 
energy-based devices. We review the epidemiology, clinical presentation, 
pathogenesis, and treatment of PIH.

DOI: 10.1007/s40257-017-0333-6
PMID: 29222629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]