---
reference_id: "PMID:38441351"
title: "Effective management of recurrent Doege-Potter syndrome with somatostatin-analogues: A case report."
authors:
- Schöler F
- Storz MA
- Khavaran A
- Hümmler N
- Russe MF
- Wielenberg CF
- Laubner K
- Seufert J
journal: Cancer Rep (Hoboken)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/cnr2.1992
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Kidney Diseases/congenital
- Somatostatin
- Neoplasms
- Hypoglycemia/etiology
- Congenital Abnormalities
- Kidney/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effective management of recurrent Doege-Potter syndrome with somatostatin-analogues: A case report.
**Authors:** Schöler F, Storz MA, Khavaran A, Hümmler N, Russe MF, Wielenberg CF, Laubner K, Seufert J
**Journal:** Cancer Rep (Hoboken) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cnr2.1992](https://doi.org/10.1002/cnr2.1992)

## Content

1. Cancer Rep (Hoboken). 2024 Mar;7(3):e1992. doi: 10.1002/cnr2.1992.

Effective management of recurrent Doege-Potter syndrome with 
somatostatin-analogues: A case report.

Schöler F(1), Storz MA(1)(2), Khavaran A(1), Hümmler N(3), Russe MF(4), 
Wielenberg CF(5), Laubner K(1), Seufert J(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetology, Department of Internal Medicine 
II, University Hospital of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine II, Center for Complementary Medicine, 
University Hospital of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Medical Center, University Hospital of 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Radiology, Clinic for Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, 
University Hospital of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Nuclear Medicine, University Hospital of Freiburg, Faculty of 
Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Doege-Potter syndrome is defined as paraneoplastic hypoinsulinemic 
hypoglycemia associated with a benign or malignant solitary fibrous tumor 
frequently located in pleural, but also extrapleural sites. Hypoglycemia can be 
attributed to paraneoplastic secretion of "Big-IGF-II," a precursor of 
Insulin-like growth factor-II. This prohormone aberrantly binds to and activates 
insulin receptors, with consecutive initiation of common insulin actions such as 
inhibition of gluconeogenesis, activation of glycolysis and stimulation of 
cellular glucose uptake culminating in recurrent tumor-induced hypoglycemic 
episodes. Complete tumor resection or debulking surgery is considered the most 
promising treatment for DPS.
CASE: Here, we report a rare case of a recurrent Doege-Poter Syndrome with 
atypical gelatinous tumor lesions of the lung, pleura and pericardial fat tissue 
in an 87-year-old woman. Although previously described as ineffective, we 
propose that adjuvant treatment with Octreotide in conjunction with intravenous 
glucose helped to maintain tolerable blood glucose levels before tumor 
resection. The somatostatin-analogue Lanreotide was successfully used after 
tumor debulking surgery (R2-resection) to maintain adequate blood glucose 
control.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that somatostatin-analogues bear the potential of being 
effective in conjunction with limited surgical approaches for the treatment of 
hypoglycemia in recurrent or non-totally resectable SFT entities underlying DPS.

© 2024 The Authors. Cancer Reports published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/cnr2.1992
PMCID: PMC10913086
PMID: 38441351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have stated explicitly that there 
are no conflicts of interest in connection with this article.