---
reference_id: "PMID:20301312"
title: Loeys-Dietz Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Loeys BL
- Dietz HC
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loeys-Dietz Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Loeys BL, Dietz HC

## Content

1. Loeys-Dietz Syndrome.

Loeys BL(1), Dietz HC(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2008 Feb 28 [updated 2024 Sep 12].

Author information:
(1)Center of Medical Genetics, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium
(2)Victor A McKusick Professor of Medicine and Genetics, Department of Genetic 
Medicine, Departments of Pediatrics, Medicine, and Molecular Biology and 
Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is characterized by 
vascular findings (cerebral, thoracic, and abdominal arterial aneurysms and/or 
dissections), skeletal manifestations (pectus excavatum or pectus carinatum, 
scoliosis, joint laxity, arachnodactyly, talipes equinovarus, and cervical spine 
malformation and/or instability), craniofacial features (hypertelorism, 
strabismus, bifid uvula / cleft palate, and craniosynostosis that can involve 
any sutures), and cutaneous findings (velvety and translucent skin, easy 
bruising, and dystrophic scars). Individuals with LDS are predisposed to 
widespread and aggressive arterial aneurysms and pregnancy-related complications 
including uterine rupture and death. Individuals with LDS can show a strong 
predisposition for allergic/inflammatory disease including asthma, eczema, and 
reactions to food or environmental allergens. There is also an increased 
incidence of gastrointestinal inflammation including eosinophilic esophagitis 
and gastritis or inflammatory bowel disease. Wide variation in the distribution 
and severity of clinical features can be seen in individuals with LDS, even 
among affected individuals within a family who have the same pathogenic variant.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of LDS is established in (1) a proband with 
characteristic clinical findings or (2) by the identification of a heterozygous 
pathogenic variant in SMAD2, SMAD3, TGFB2, TGFB3, TGFBR1, or TGFBR2 or biallelic 
pathogenic variants in IPO8 in a proband with aortic root enlargement, type A 
dissection, other characteristic clinical features of LDS, or a family history 
of an established diagnosis of LDS.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Important considerations when managing 
cardiovascular features of LDS include the following: aortic dissection can 
occur at smaller aortic diameters and at younger ages than observed in Marfan 
syndrome; vascular disease is not limited to the aortic root; angiotensin 
receptor blockers, beta-adrenergic receptor blockers, or other medications are 
used to reduce hemodynamic stress; and aneurysms are amenable to early and 
aggressive surgical intervention. Consider subacute bacterial endocarditis 
prophylaxis in those undergoing dental work or other procedures expected to 
contaminate the bloodstream with bacteria. Management of orthopedic 
manifestations per orthopedist. Surgical fixation of cervical spine instability 
may be necessary to prevent spinal cord damage. Management by a craniofacial 
team is preferred for treatment of cleft palate and craniosynostosis. Hernias 
tend to recur after surgical intervention; a supporting mesh can be used during 
surgical repair to minimize recurrence risk. Standard treatment for allergic 
complications with consideration of referral to an allergy/immunology specialist 
in those with severe disease. Careful and aggressive refraction and visual 
correction is mandatory in young children at risk for amblyopia. Optimal 
management of pneumothorax to prevent recurrence may require chemical or 
surgical pleurodesis or surgical removal of pulmonary blebs. Counseling 
regarding risk and clinical manifestations of organ rupture. Surveillance: 
Echocardiography to monitor the status of the aortic root and ascending aorta 
(at least annually) and magnetic resonance angiography or computerized 
tomography angiography to assess the entire arterial tree (at least every other 
year); more frequent imaging may be indicated based on genotype, family history, 
absolute vessel size or growth rate, or vascular pathology. Assess for skeletal 
deformity, joint manifestations, pes planus, hernia, and allergic and 
inflammatory manifestations at each visit or as needed. Individuals with 
cervical spine instability and severe or progressive scoliosis should be 
followed by an orthopedist. Eye examination per ophthalmologist. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Contact sports, competitive sports, and isometric 
exercise; agents that stimulate the cardiovascular system including routine use 
of decongestants or triptan medications for the management of migraine headache; 
activities that cause joint injury or pain; for individuals at risk for 
recurrent pneumothorax, breathing against a resistance (e.g., playing a brass 
instrument) or positive pressure ventilation (e.g., scuba diving). Evaluation of 
relatives at risk: Clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives of any age 
either by molecular genetic testing (if the LDS-related pathogenic variant[s] in 
the family are known) or by clinical examination including echocardiography and 
extensive vascular imaging if findings suggest LDS or if findings were subtle in 
the index case (if the pathogenic variant[s] in the family are not known) so 
that affected individuals can undergo regular cardiovascular screening to detect 
aortic aneurysms and initiate appropriate medical or surgical intervention. 
Pregnancy management: Pregnancy and the postpartum period can be dangerous for 
women with LDS because of increased risk of aortic dissection/rupture and 
uterine rupture. Increased frequency of aortic imaging is recommended, both 
during pregnancy and in the weeks following delivery.
GENETIC COUNSELING: LDS caused by a pathogenic variant in SMAD2, SMAD3, TGFB2, 
TGFB3, TGFBR1, or TGFBR2 is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. 
IPO8-related LDS is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Autosomal 
dominant inheritance: Approximately 75% of probands diagnosed with LDS have the 
disorder as the result of a de novo pathogenic variant; approximately 25% of 
individuals diagnosed with LDS have an affected parent. Each child of an 
individual with LDS has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant and 
the disorder. Autosomal recessive inheritance: The parents of a child with 
IPO8-related LDS are presumed to be heterozygous for an IPO8 pathogenic variant. 
If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an IPO8 pathogenic variant, 
each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of 
being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives 
requires prior identification of the IPO8 pathogenic variants in the family. If 
the LDS-related pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected family 
member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301312