---
reference_id: "PMID:32702756"
title: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency.
authors:
- Luzzatto L
- Ally M
- Notaro R
journal: Blood
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2019000944
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency.
**Authors:** Luzzatto L, Ally M, Notaro R
**Journal:** Blood (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2019000944](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2019000944)

## Content

1. Blood. 2020 Sep 10;136(11):1225-1240. doi: 10.1182/blood.2019000944.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency.

Luzzatto L(1)(2), Ally M(1), Notaro R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology and Blood Transfusion, Muhimbili University of 
Health and Allied Sciences, Dar es Salaam, United Republic of Tanzania.
(2)Department of Hematology, University of Florence, Florence, Italy; and.
(3)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics and Gene Transfer, Core Research Laboratory, 
Institute for Cancer Research, Prevention and Clinical Network (ISPRO), 
Florence, Italy.

Comment on
    Blood. 2020 Sep 10;136(11):1351-1358. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020006890.
    Blood. 2020 Sep 10;136(11):1359-1367. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020007003.

Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is 1 of the commonest human 
enzymopathies, caused by inherited mutations of the X-linked gene G6PD. G6PD 
deficiency makes red cells highly vulnerable to oxidative damage, and therefore 
susceptible to hemolysis. Over 200 G6PD mutations are known: approximately 
one-half are polymorphic and therefore common in various populations. Some 500 
million persons with any of these mutations are mostly asymptomatic throughout 
their lifetime; however, any of them may develop acute and sometimes very severe 
hemolytic anemia when triggered by ingestion of fava beans, by any of a number 
of drugs (for example, primaquine, rasburicase), or, more rarely, by infection. 
Approximately one-half of the G6PD mutations are instead sporadic: rare patients 
with these mutations present with chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia. 
Almost all G6PD mutations are missense mutations, causing amino acid 
replacements that entail deficiency of G6PD enzyme activity: they compromise the 
stability of the protein, the catalytic activity is decreased, or a combination 
of both mechanisms occurs. Thus, genotype-phenotype correlations have been 
reasonably well clarified in many cases. G6PD deficiency correlates remarkably, 
in its geographic distribution, with past/present malaria endemicity: indeed, it 
is a unique example of an X-linked human polymorphism balanced through 
protection of heterozygotes from malaria mortality. Acute hemolytic anemia can 
be managed effectively provided it is promptly diagnosed. Reliable diagnostic 
procedures are available, with point-of-care tests becoming increasingly 
important where primaquine and its recently introduced analog tafenoquine are 
required for the elimination of malaria.

© 2020 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2019000944
PMID: 32702756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]