---
reference_id: "PMID:19846582"
title: Clinical features of spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy.
authors:
- Rhodes LE
- Freeman BK
- Auh S
- Kokkinis AD
- La Pean A
- Chen C
- Lehky TJ
- Shrader JA
- Levy EW
- Harris-Love M
- Di Prospero NA
- Fischbeck KH
journal: Brain
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awp258
keywords:
- Action Potentials/physiology
- Activities of Daily Living
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- Androgens/therapeutic use
- "Bulbo-Spinal Atrophy, X-Linked/diagnosis, pathology, physiopathology"
- Electrodiagnosis
- Electromyography/methods
- "Erectile Dysfunction/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology"
- Exercise Tolerance/physiology
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Muscle Strength/physiology
- "Muscle Weakness/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology, physiopathology"
- Neural Conduction/physiology
- Peripheral Nerves/physiopathology
- Quality of Life
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- "Testosterone/analysis, blood"
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features of spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy.
**Authors:** Rhodes LE, Freeman BK, Auh S, Kokkinis AD, La Pean A, Chen C, Lehky TJ, Shrader JA, Levy EW, Harris-Love M, Di Prospero NA, Fischbeck KH
**Journal:** Brain (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awp258](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awp258)

## Content

1. Brain. 2009 Dec;132(Pt 12):3242-51. doi: 10.1093/brain/awp258.

Clinical features of spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy.

Rhodes LE(1), Freeman BK, Auh S, Kokkinis AD, La Pean A, Chen C, Lehky TJ, 
Shrader JA, Levy EW, Harris-Love M, Di Prospero NA, Fischbeck KH.

Author information:
(1)Neurogenetics Branch, NINDS, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy is an X-linked motor neuron disease caused by 
a CAG repeat expansion in the androgen receptor gene. To characterize the 
natural history and define outcome measures for clinical trials, we assessed the 
clinical history, laboratory findings and muscle strength and function in 57 
patients with genetically confirmed disease. We also administered 
self-assessment questionnaires for activities of daily living, quality of life 
and erectile function. We found an average delay of over 5 years from onset of 
weakness to diagnosis. Muscle strength and function correlated directly with 
serum testosterone levels and inversely with CAG repeat length, age and duration 
of weakness. Motor unit number estimation was decreased by about half compared 
to healthy controls. Sensory nerve action potentials were reduced in nearly all 
subjects. Quantitative muscle assessment and timed 2 min walk may be useful as 
meaningful indicators of disease status. The direct correlation of testosterone 
levels with muscle strength indicates that androgens may have a positive effect 
on muscle function in spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy patients, in addition 
to the toxic effects described in animal models.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awp258
PMCID: PMC2792370
PMID: 19846582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]