---
reference_id: "PMID:39650963"
title: "Lysosomal Acid Lipase Deficiency: A Report of Two Cases and a Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Nedelcu C
- Dijmarescu I
- Patrascoiu M
- Oprescu I
- Pacurar D
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.73299
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lysosomal Acid Lipase Deficiency: A Report of Two Cases and a Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Nedelcu C, Dijmarescu I, Patrascoiu M, Oprescu I, Pacurar D
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.73299](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.73299)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Nov 8;16(11):e73299. doi: 10.7759/cureus.73299. eCollection 2024 
Nov.

Lysosomal Acid Lipase Deficiency: A Report of Two Cases and a Review of the 
Literature.

Nedelcu C(1), Dijmarescu I(2)(1), Patrascoiu M(1), Oprescu I(1), Pacurar 
D(2)(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatrics, "Grigore Alexandrescu" Emergency Children's Hospital, Bucharest, 
ROU.
(2)Pediatrics, "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, 
ROU.

Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency (LAL-D) is an autosomal recessive genetic 
disease arising from mutations in the lipase A, lysosomal acid type (LIPA) gene, 
characterised by the formation of cholesterol esters and triglyceride storages, 
primarily in the liver and spleen. By analysing the level of lysosomal acid 
lipase (LAL), two forms were described in the literature: Wolman disease and 
cholesteryl-ester storage disease (CESD). Wolman disease usually manifests with 
rapidly progressive symptoms within the first year of life, while CESD is a 
latent condition, with significant features appearing later in life. LAL-D 
usually presents with a non-specific tableau, thus having the possibility of 
being incorrectly labelled. LAL activity can be demonstrated by LAL dried blood 
spot (DBS) testing. Since 2015, sebelipase alfa has been authorised for the 
treatment of LAL-D in the European Union, changing the course of this disease. 
This article aims to present two clinical cases of CESD and review the current 
literature on LAL-D. We presented two cases of CESD who were evaluated in our 
department for chronically elevated transaminases, one with and one without 
dyslipidaemia. For both patients, other causes of chronic hepatitis were 
excluded (viral infections, autoimmune diseases, and metabolic diseases), and 
LAL DBS testing was positive, establishing the diagnosis of CESD. One of them 
also underwent genetic testing, and a homozygous mutation of the LIPA gene was 
identified. LAL-D is a difficult diagnosis to establish, considering the 
scarcity of knowledge. In addition, neither the LAL DBS test nor LIPA gene 
sequencing investigations are largely available. Thus, most asymptomatic or 
minimally symptomatic patients might remain undiagnosed, and multiple 
complications without clear aetiology might arise, making this disease even 
harder to diagnose and manage. Nevertheless, even though the introduction of 
enzyme replacement therapy has improved outcomes for many patients, there still 
remains a need for increased awareness and understanding of this rare condition 
among health professionals.

Copyright © 2024, Nedelcu et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.73299
PMCID: PMC11625490
PMID: 39650963

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent for treatment and open 
access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this study. 
Ethical Committee of “Grigore Alexandrescu” Emergency Children’s Hospital issued 
approval 33/26.09.2024. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the ICMJE 
uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: Payment/services 
info: All authors have declared that no financial support was received from any 
organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: All authors have 
declared that they have no financial relationships at present or within the 
previous three years with any organizations that might have an interest in the 
submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared that there are no 
other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the 
submitted work.