---
reference_id: "PMID:15356178"
title: Regulation of synaptic inputs to paraventricular-spinal output neurons by alpha2 adrenergic receptors.
authors:
- Li DP
- Atnip LM
- Chen SR
- Pan HL
journal: J Neurophysiol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1152/jn.00564.2004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Regulation of synaptic inputs to paraventricular-spinal output neurons by alpha2 adrenergic receptors.
**Authors:** Li DP, Atnip LM, Chen SR, Pan HL
**Journal:** J Neurophysiol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1152/jn.00564.2004](https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00564.2004)

## Content

1. J Neurophysiol. 2005 Jan;93(1):393-402. doi: 10.1152/jn.00564.2004. Epub 2004 
Sep 8.

Regulation of synaptic inputs to paraventricular-spinal output neurons by alpha2 
adrenergic receptors.

Li DP(1), Atnip LM, Chen SR, Pan HL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, H187, Pennsylvania State University College of 
Medicine, 500 University Dr., Hershey, PA 17033-0850, USA. hpan@psu.edu

Neurons in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) that project to the brain stem and 
spinal cord are important for autonomic regulation. The excitability of 
preautonomic PVN neurons is controlled by the noradrenergic input from the brain 
stem. In this study, we determined the role of alpha(2) adrenergic receptors in 
the regulation of excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs to spinally 
projecting PVN neurons. Excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs 
and IPSCs) were recorded using whole cell voltage-clamp techniques on PVN 
neurons labeled by a retrograde fluorescence tracer injected into the thoracic 
spinal cord of rats. Bath application of 5-20 muM clonidine, an alpha(2) 
receptor agonist, significantly reduced the amplitude of evoked GABAergic IPSCs 
in a dose-dependent manner. Also, 10 microM clonidine significantly decreased 
the frequency (from 2.68 +/- 0.41 to 1.22 +/- 0.40 Hz) but not the amplitude of 
miniature IPSCs (mIPSCs), and this effect was blocked by the alpha(2) receptor 
antagonist yohimbine. Furthermore, clonidine increased the paired-pulse ratio of 
evoked IPSCs from 1.25 +/- 0.05 to 1.61 +/- 0.08 (P < 0.05). On the other hand, 
clonidine had little effect on evoked glutamatergic EPSCs, mEPSCs, and the 
paired-pulse ratio of evoked EPSCs in most labeled cells examined. Additionally, 
immunofluorescence labeling revealed that the alpha(2A) receptor and GABA 
immunoreactivities were co-localized in close apposition to labeled PVN neurons. 
Collectively, these data suggest that stimulation of alpha(2) adrenergic 
receptors primarily attenuates GABAergic inputs to PVN output neurons to the 
spinal cord. The presynaptic alpha(2) receptors function as heteroreceptors to 
modulate synaptic GABA release and contribute to the hypothalamic regulation of 
sympathetic outflow.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00564.2004
PMID: 15356178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]