---
reference_id: PMID:19451251
title: CspA-mediated binding of human factor H inhibits complement deposition and confers serum resistance in Borrelia burgdorferi.
authors:
- Kenedy MR
- Vuppala SR
- Siegel C
- Kraiczy P
- Akins DR
journal: Infect Immun
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1128/IAI.00318-09
keywords:
- "Bacterial Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Blood Bactericidal Activity/immunology
- Blood Physiological Phenomena/immunology
- "Borrelia burgdorferi/immunology, pathogenicity"
- Complement Factor H/metabolism
- "Complement System Proteins/immunology, metabolism"
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- Humans
- Microbial Viability
- Protein Binding
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CspA-mediated binding of human factor H inhibits complement deposition and confers serum resistance in Borrelia burgdorferi.
**Authors:** Kenedy MR, Vuppala SR, Siegel C, Kraiczy P, Akins DR
**Journal:** Infect Immun (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1128/IAI.00318-09](https://doi.org/10.1128/IAI.00318-09)

## Content

1. Infect Immun. 2009 Jul;77(7):2773-82. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00318-09. Epub 2009 May
 18.

CspA-mediated binding of human factor H inhibits complement deposition and 
confers serum resistance in Borrelia burgdorferi.

Kenedy MR(1), Vuppala SR, Siegel C, Kraiczy P, Akins DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Oklahoma Health 
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA.

Borrelia burgdorferi has developed efficient mechanisms for evading the innate 
immune response during mammalian infection and has been shown to be resistant to 
the complement-mediated bactericidal activity of human serum. It is well 
recognized that B. burgdorferi expresses multiple lipoproteins on its surface 
that bind the human complement inhibitors factor H and factor H-like protein 1 
(FH/FHL-1). The binding of FH/FHL-1 on the surface of B. burgdorferi is thought 
to enhance its ability to evade serum-mediated killing during the acute phase of 
infection. One of the key B. burgdorferi FH/FHL-1 binding proteins identified 
thus far was designated CspA. While it is known that CspA binds FH/FHL-1, it is 
unclear how the interaction between CspA and FH/FHL-1 specifically enhances 
serum resistance. To better understand how CspA mediates serum resistance in B. 
burgdorferi, we inactivated cspA in a virulent strain of B. burgdorferi. An 
affinity ligand blot immunoassay and indirect immunofluorescence revealed that 
the CspA mutant does not efficiently bind human FH to its surface. Consistent 
with the lack of FH binding, the CspA mutant was also highly sensitive to 
killing by human serum. Additionally, the deposition of complement components 
C3, C6, and C5b-9 was enhanced on the surface of the CspA mutant compared to 
that of the wild-type strain. The combined data lead us to conclude that the 
CspA-mediated binding of human FH confers serum resistance by directly 
inhibiting complement deposition on the surface of B. burgdorferi.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00318-09
PMCID: PMC2708555
PMID: 19451251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]