---
reference_id: "PMID:26590883"
title: Novel FANCI mutations in Fanconi anemia with VACTERL association.
authors:
- Savage SA
- Ballew BJ
- Giri N
- NCI DCEG Cancer Genomics Research Laboratory
- Chandrasekharappa SC
- Ameziane N
- de Winter J
- Alter BP
- NCI DCEG Cancer Sequencing Working Group
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37461
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel FANCI mutations in Fanconi anemia with VACTERL association.
**Authors:** Savage SA, Ballew BJ, Giri N, NCI DCEG Cancer Genomics Research Laboratory, Chandrasekharappa SC, Ameziane N, de Winter J, Alter BP, NCI DCEG Cancer Sequencing Working Group
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.37461](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.37461)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Feb;170A(2):386-391. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37461. Epub
2015  Nov 21.

Novel FANCI mutations in Fanconi anemia with VACTERL association.

Savage SA(1), Ballew BJ(1), Giri N(1); NCI DCEG Cancer Genomics Research 
Laboratory(2); Chandrasekharappa SC(3), Ameziane N(4), de Winter J(4), Alter 
BP(1); NCI DCEG Cancer Sequencing Working Group(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, 
Rockville, Maryland.
(2)Cancer Genomics Research Laboratory, Leidos Biomedical Research, 
NCI-Frederick, Rockville, Maryland.
(3)Cancer Genetics and Comparative Genomics Branch, National Human Genome 
Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Vrije Universiteit Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is an inherited bone marrow failure syndrome caused by 
mutations in DNA repair genes; some of these patients may have features of the 
VACTERL association. Autosomal recessive mutations in FANCI are a rare cause of 
FA. We identified FANCI mutations by next generation sequencing in three 
patients in our FA cohort among several whose mutated gene was unknown. Four of 
the six mutations are novel and all mutations are likely deleterious to protein 
function. There are now 16 reported cases of FA due to FANCI of whom 7 have at 
least 3 features of the VACTERL association (44%). This suggests that the 
VACTERL association in patients with FA may be seen in patients with FANCI 
mutations more often than previously recognized.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37461
PMCID: PMC7158112
PMID: 26590883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]