---
reference_id: "PMID:21327736"
title: Recent advances in the genetics of hereditary axonal sensory-motor neuropathies type 2.
authors:
- Ajroud-Driss S
- Deng HX
- Siddique T
journal: Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s11910-011-0185-z
keywords:
- Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics
- Genetic Linkage
- Hereditary Sensory and Autonomic Neuropathies/genetics
- Humans
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent advances in the genetics of hereditary axonal sensory-motor neuropathies type 2.
**Authors:** Ajroud-Driss S, Deng HX, Siddique T
**Journal:** Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11910-011-0185-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11910-011-0185-z)

## Content

1. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2011 Jun;11(3):262-73. doi:
10.1007/s11910-011-0185-z.

Recent advances in the genetics of hereditary axonal sensory-motor neuropathies
type 2.

Ajroud-Driss S(1), Deng HX, Siddique T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuromuscular Medicine, Davee Department of Neurology and
Clinical Neurosciences, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Tarry Building, Room 13-715, 303 East Chicago Avenue, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
s-ajroud@md.northwestern.edu

Hereditary axonal motor and sensory neuropathies or Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
type 2 (CMT2) are characterized clinically by distal muscle weakness and
atrophy, sensory loss, and foot deformities. Conduction velocities are usually
in the normal range or mildly slowed. The majority of CMT2 are
autosomal-dominant but autosomal-recessive forms have been described. The number
of genes associated with CMT2 have significantly increased in the past decade,
with the gene causing CMT2C/SPSMA being the last one discovered. More than 10
genes are now associated with different subtypes of CMT2, which are classified
from CMT2A to CMT2N. These genes have distinct functions, but some appear to be
involved in common biological pathways, therefore, providing important clues for
understanding the pathogenic mechanism of these heterogeneous disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-011-0185-z
PMID: 21327736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
