---
reference_id: "PMID:31761667"
title: "Autophagy lysosomal pathway dysfunction in Parkinson's disease; evidence from human genetics."
authors:
- Senkevich K
- Gan-Or Z
journal: Parkinsonism Relat Disord
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.11.015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autophagy lysosomal pathway dysfunction in Parkinson's disease; evidence from human genetics.
**Authors:** Senkevich K, Gan-Or Z
**Journal:** Parkinsonism Relat Disord (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.11.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.11.015)

## Content

1. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2020 Apr;73:60-71. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.11.015. Epub 2019 Nov 17.

Autophagy lysosomal pathway dysfunction in Parkinson's disease; evidence from 
human genetics.

Senkevich K(1), Gan-Or Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montréal, QC, H3A 1A1, 
Canada; First Pavlov State Medical University of St. Petersburg, St. Petersburg, 
Russia; Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute Named By B.P. Konstantinov of 
National Research Centre «Kurchatov Institute», Gatchina, Russia; Department of 
Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, QC, H3A 1A1, Canada.
(2)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montréal, QC, 
H3A 1A1, Canada; Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montréal, 
QC, H3A 1A1, Canada; Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, 
QC, H3A 1A1, Canada. Electronic address: ziv.gan-or@mcgill.ca.

In recent years, multiple lines of evidence from human genetic and molecular 
studies have highlighted the importance of the autophagy lysosomal pathway (ALP) 
in Parkinson's disease (PD). Genes such as GBA and LRRK2, which harbor some of 
the most common mutations associated with PD, have essential roles in the ALP. 
α-synuclein, encoded by the SNCA gene, is degraded mainly by the ALP, and 
mutations/multiplications in SNCA may lead to impairment of chaperone mediated 
autophagy or other ALP functions. Numerous other PD-related genes, such as PRKN, 
PINK1, TMEM175, SMPD1, CTSD, CTSB and many more, have also been reported to have 
important roles in the ALP. Understanding the relationship between ALP 
impairment and PD pathogenesis may be crucial for uncovering the mechanisms 
underlying PD, and for the development of long-awaited neuroprotective 
therapies. In this review, we will discuss the data linking the ALP to PD 
(other, atypical forms of Parkinsonism, will not be discussed in this review). 
We will focus on evidence from studies on specific genes and proteins, their 
roles in the ALP, and the potential mechanisms underlying the involvement of 
these genes in PD.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.11.015
PMID: 31761667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Ziv Gan-Or has 
been consulting for Lysosomal Therapeutics Inc., Idorsia, Prevail Therapeutics, 
Denali, Inception Sciences (Ventus) and Deerfield. None of these companies were 
involved in any parts of preparing, drafting and publishing this review.