---
reference_id: "PMID:36290302"
title: WDR73 Depletion Destabilizes PIP4K2C Activity and Impairs Focal Adhesion Formation in Galloway-Mowat Syndrome.
authors:
- Li H
- Liu F
- Kuang H
- Teng H
- Chen S
- Zeng S
- Zhou Q
- Li Z
- Liang D
- Li Z
- Wu L
journal: Biology (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/biology11101397
content_type: abstract_only
---

# WDR73 Depletion Destabilizes PIP4K2C Activity and Impairs Focal Adhesion Formation in Galloway-Mowat Syndrome.
**Authors:** Li H, Liu F, Kuang H, Teng H, Chen S, Zeng S, Zhou Q, Li Z, Liang D, Li Z, Wu L
**Journal:** Biology (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biology11101397](https://doi.org/10.3390/biology11101397)

## Content

1. Biology (Basel). 2022 Sep 25;11(10):1397. doi: 10.3390/biology11101397.

WDR73 Depletion Destabilizes PIP4K2C Activity and Impairs Focal Adhesion
Formation in Galloway-Mowat Syndrome.

Li H(1), Liu F(1), Kuang H(1), Teng H(1), Chen S(1), Zeng S(1), Zhou Q(1), Li
Z(1), Liang D(1), Li Z(1), Wu L(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics & Hunan
Key Laboratory of Animal Models for Human Disease, School of Life Sciences,
Central South University, Changsha 410000, China.

(1) Background: Galloway-Mowat syndrome (GAMOS) is a rare genetic disease,
classically characterized by a combination of various neurological symptoms and
nephrotic syndrome. WDR73 is the pathogenic gene responsible for GAMOS1.
However, the pathological and molecular mechanisms of GAMOS1, especially
nephrotic syndrome caused by WDR73 deficiency, remain unknown. (2) Methods and
Results: In this study, we first observed remarkable cellular morphological
changes including impaired cell adhesion, decreased pseudopodia, and G2/M phase
arrest in WDR73 knockout (KO) HEK 293 cells. The differentially expressed genes
in WDR73 KO cells were enriched in the focal adhesion (FA) pathway.
Additionally, PIP4K2C, a phospholipid kinase also involved in the FA pathway,
was subsequently validated to interact with WDR73 via protein microarray and GST
pulldown. WDR73 regulates PIP4K2C protein stability through the
autophagy-lysosomal pathway. The stability of PIP4K2C was significantly
disrupted by WDR73 KO, leading to a remarkable reduction in PIP2 and thus
weakening the FA formation. In addition, we found that podocyte-specific
conditional knockout (Wdr73 CKO) mice showed high levels of albuminuria and
podocyte foot process injury in the ADR-induced model. FA formation was impaired
in primary podocytes derived from Wdr73 CKO mice. (3) Conclusions: Since FA has
been well known for its critical roles in maintaining podocyte structures and
function, our study indicated that nephrotic syndrome in GAMOS1 is associated
with disruption of FA caused by WDR73 deficiency.

DOI: 10.3390/biology11101397
PMCID: PMC9598763
PMID: 36290302

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to
publish the results.
