---
reference_id: "PMID:37144533"
title: Cleaning up alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency related liver disease.
authors:
- Rademacher L
- Fromme M
- Strnad P
journal: Curr Opin Gastroenterol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/MOG.0000000000000919
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cleaning up alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency related liver disease.
**Authors:** Rademacher L, Fromme M, Strnad P
**Journal:** Curr Opin Gastroenterol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOG.0000000000000919](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOG.0000000000000919)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2023 May 1;39(3):163-168. doi: 
10.1097/MOG.0000000000000919. Epub 2023 Mar 1.

Cleaning up alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency related liver disease.

Rademacher L(1), Fromme M, Strnad P.

Author information:
(1)Medical Clinic III, Gastroenterology, Metabolic Diseases and Intensive Care, 
University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Healthcare Provider of the European Reference 
Network on Rare Liver Disorders (ERN RARE LIVER), Aachen, Germany.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is one of the most 
common genetic disorders arising due to mutations in alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) 
gene affecting primarily the lung and the liver. This review summarizes the 
pathophysiology and clinical manifestation of different AATD genotypes and 
discusses the recent therapeutic developments. The focus is on the severe, rare 
homozygous Pi∗ZZ and the common heterozygous Pi∗MZ genotype.
RECENT FINDINGS: Pi∗ZZ individuals harbor an up to 20 times higher risk of liver 
fibrosis and cirrhosis than noncarriers and liver transplantation is currently 
the only available therapeutic option. AATD constitutes a proteotoxic disorder 
arising from hepatic AAT accumulation and the currently most promising data come 
from a phase 2, open-label trial of fazirsiran, a hepatocyte-targeted siRNA. 
Pi∗MZ subjects display an increased risk of advanced liver disease and at the 
latter stage, a faster deterioration than individuals without AAT mutation.
SUMMARY: Although the fazirsiran data offer a glimpse of hope to AATD patients, 
a consensus on appropriate study endpoint, a careful patient selection as well 
as monitoring of long-term safety will be essential for an approval.

Copyright © 2023 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MOG.0000000000000919
PMID: 37144533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]