---
reference_id: "PMID:35555885"
title: Differential Diagnosis of Thick Myocardium according to Histologic Features Revealed by Multiparametric Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging.
authors:
- Cha MJ
- Kim C
- Park CH
- Hong YJ
- Shin JM
- Kim TH
- Cha YJ
- Park CH
journal: Korean J Radiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3348/kjr.2021.0815
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differential Diagnosis of Thick Myocardium according to Histologic Features Revealed by Multiparametric Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging.
**Authors:** Cha MJ, Kim C, Park CH, Hong YJ, Shin JM, Kim TH, Cha YJ, Park CH
**Journal:** Korean J Radiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3348/kjr.2021.0815](https://doi.org/10.3348/kjr.2021.0815)

## Content

1. Korean J Radiol. 2022 Jun;23(6):581-597. doi: 10.3348/kjr.2021.0815. Epub 2022
 May 9.

Differential Diagnosis of Thick Myocardium according to Histologic Features 
Revealed by Multiparametric Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging.

Cha MJ(1), Kim C(2), Park CH(3), Hong YJ(4), Shin JM(5), Kim TH(5), Cha YJ(6), 
Park CH(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Chung-Ang University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Radiology, Korea University Ansan Hospital, Ansan, Korea.
(3)Department of Radiology, Soonchunhyang University Cheonan Hospital, Cheonan, 
Korea.
(4)Department of Radiology and Research Institute of Radiological Science, 
Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Department of Radiology and Research Institute of Radiological Science, 
Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Department of Pathology, Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. yooncha@yuhs.ac.
(7)Department of Radiology and Research Institute of Radiological Science, 
Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. 
park_chulhwan@yuhs.ac.

Erratum in
    Korean J Radiol. 2022 Sep;23(9):935. doi: 10.3348/kjr.2022.0568.

Comment in
    Korean J Radiol. 2025 Apr;26(4):394-396. doi: 10.3348/kjr.2024.1316.

Left ventricular (LV) wall thickening, or LV hypertrophy (LVH), is common and 
occurs in diverse conditions including hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 
hypertensive heart disease, aortic valve stenosis, lysosomal storage disorders, 
cardiac amyloidosis, mitochondrial cardiomyopathy, sarcoidosis and athlete's 
heart. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging provides various tissue 
contrasts and characteristics that reflect histological changes in the 
myocardium, such as cellular hypertrophy, cardiomyocyte disarray, interstitial 
fibrosis, extracellular accumulation of insoluble proteins, intracellular 
accumulation of fat, and intracellular vacuolar changes. Therefore, CMR imaging 
may be beneficial in establishing a differential diagnosis of LVH. Although 
various diseases share LV wall thickening as a common feature, the histologic 
changes that underscore each disease are distinct. This review focuses on CMR 
multiparametric myocardial analysis, which may provide clues for the 
differentiation of thickened myocardium based on the histologic features of HCM 
and its phenocopies.

Copyright © 2022 The Korean Society of Radiology.

DOI: 10.3348/kjr.2021.0815
PMCID: PMC9174501
PMID: 35555885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Tae Hoon Kim who is on the editorial board of 
the Korean Journal of Radiology was not involved in the editorial evaluation or 
decision to publish this article. All remaining authors have declared no 
conflicts of interest.