---
reference_id: "PMID:37271040"
title: CSF dopamine is elevated in first-episode psychosis and associates to symptom severity and cognitive performance.
authors:
- Orhan F
- Goiny M
- Becklén M
- Mathé L
- Piehl F
- Schwieler L
- Fatouros-Bergman H
- Farde L
- Cervenka S
- Sellgren CM
- Engberg G
- Erhardt S
journal: Schizophr Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2023.05.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CSF dopamine is elevated in first-episode psychosis and associates to symptom severity and cognitive performance.
**Authors:** Orhan F, Goiny M, Becklén M, Mathé L, Piehl F, Schwieler L, Fatouros-Bergman H, Farde L, Cervenka S, Sellgren CM, Engberg G, Erhardt S
**Journal:** Schizophr Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.schres.2023.05.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2023.05.012)

## Content

1. Schizophr Res. 2023 Jul;257:34-40. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2023.05.012. Epub
2023  Jun 2.

CSF dopamine is elevated in first-episode psychosis and associates to symptom 
severity and cognitive performance.

Orhan F(1), Goiny M(1), Becklén M(1), Mathé L(1), Piehl F(2), Schwieler L(1), 
Fatouros-Bergman H(3), Farde L(3), Cervenka S(3), Sellgren CM(4), Engberg G(5), 
Erhardt S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(2)Neuroimmunology Unit, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska 
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Centre for Psychiatry Research, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm Health Care Services, Region Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden; Centre for Psychiatry Research, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm Health Care Services, Region Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden. Electronic address: goran.engberg@ki.se.

BACKGROUND: The hypothesis of dopamine dysfunction in psychosis has evolved 
since the mid-twentieth century. However, clinical support from biochemical 
analysis of the transmitter in patients is still missing. The present study 
assessed dopamine and related metabolites in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of 
first-episode psychosis (FEP) subjects.
METHODS: Forty first-episode psychosis subjects and twenty healthy age-matched 
volunteers were recruited via the Karolinska Schizophrenia Project, a 
multidisciplinary research consortium that investigates the pathophysiology of 
schizophrenia. Psychopathology, disease severity, and cognitive performance were 
rated as well as cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of dopamine and related 
metabolites were measured using a sensitive high-pressure liquid chromatography 
assay.
RESULTS: CSF dopamine was reliably detected in 50 % of healthy controls and in 
65 % of first-episode psychosis subjects and significantly higher in 
first-episode psychosis subjects compared to age-matched healthy controls. No 
difference in CSF dopamine levels was observed between drug-naive subjects and 
subjects with short exposure to antipsychotics. The dopamine concentrations were 
positively associated with illness severity and deficits in executive 
functioning.
CONCLUSIONS: Dopamine dysfunction has long been considered a cornerstone of the 
pathophysiology of schizophrenia, although biochemical support for elevated 
brain dopamine levels has been lacking. The results of the present study, 
showing that FEP subjects have increased CSF dopamine levels that correlate to 
disease symptoms, should fill the knowledge gap in this regard.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2023.05.012
PMID: 37271040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors 
declare they have no competing interest.