---
reference_id: "PMID:36404039"
title: "Neuroimaging Patterns of Intracranial Infections: Meningitis, Cerebritis, and Their Complications."
authors:
- Duong MT
- Rudie JD
- Mohan S
journal: Neuroimaging Clin N Am
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.nic.2022.07.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuroimaging Patterns of Intracranial Infections: Meningitis, Cerebritis, and Their Complications.
**Authors:** Duong MT, Rudie JD, Mohan S
**Journal:** Neuroimaging Clin N Am (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nic.2022.07.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nic.2022.07.001)

## Content

1. Neuroimaging Clin N Am. 2023 Feb;33(1):11-41. doi: 10.1016/j.nic.2022.07.001.

Neuroimaging Patterns of Intracranial Infections: Meningitis, Cerebritis, and 
Their Complications.

Duong MT(1), Rudie JD(2), Mohan S(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuroradiology, Department of Radiology, Perelman School of 
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, Scripps Clinic and University of California San 
Diego, 10666 Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(3)Division of Neuroradiology, Department of Radiology, Perelman School of 
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA. Electronic address: suyash.mohan@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

Neuroimaging provides rapid, noninvasive visualization of central nervous system 
infections for optimal diagnosis and management. Generalizable and 
characteristic imaging patterns help radiologists distinguish different types of 
intracranial infections including meningitis and cerebritis from a variety of 
bacterial, viral, fungal, and/or parasitic causes. Here, we describe key 
radiologic patterns of meningeal enhancement and diffusion restriction through 
profiles of meningitis, cerebritis, abscess, and ventriculitis. We discuss 
various imaging modalities and recent diagnostic advances such as deep learning 
through a survey of intracranial pathogens and their radiographic findings. 
Moreover, we explore critical complications and differential diagnoses of 
intracranial infections.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nic.2022.07.001
PMCID: PMC10904173
PMID: 36404039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure S. Mohan has grant funding from the 
National Cancer Institute (NCI R01 CA262584), Galileo CDS and Novocure, USA. M. 
T. Duong has research funding from the National Institute on Aging (NIA F30 
AG074524). J. D. Rudie has research support from the National Institute of 
Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB T32 EB004311) and Radiological 
Society of North America (RSNA RR1778) research grant. There are no additional 
disclosures to report.