---
reference_id: "PMID:36150100"
title: "ENPP1 deficiency: A clinical update on the relevance of individual variants using a locus-specific patient database."
authors:
- Mercurio SA
- Chunn LM
- Khursigara G
- Nester C
- Wray K
- Botschen U
- Kiel MJ
- Rutsch F
- Ferreira CR
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/humu.24477
keywords:
- Humans
- Familial Hypophosphatemic Rickets/genetics
- Mutation
- Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics
- Pyrophosphatases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ENPP1 deficiency: A clinical update on the relevance of individual variants using a locus-specific patient database.
**Authors:** Mercurio SA, Chunn LM, Khursigara G, Nester C, Wray K, Botschen U, Kiel MJ, Rutsch F, Ferreira CR
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.24477](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.24477)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2022 Dec;43(12):1673-1705. doi: 10.1002/humu.24477. Epub 2022 Oct
8.

ENPP1 deficiency: A clinical update on the relevance of individual variants
using a locus-specific patient database.

Mercurio SA(1), Chunn LM(2), Khursigara G(3), Nester C(4), Wray K(3), Botschen
U(5), Kiel MJ(2), Rutsch F(5), Ferreira CR(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Data Science, Curation Division, Genomenon Inc., Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Scientific Communication and Strategy, Genomenon Inc., Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Affairs, Inozyme Pharma, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Department of Physician and Patient Strategies, Inozyme Pharma, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Department of General Paediatrics, Muenster University Children's Hospital,
Münster, Germany.
(6)Metabolic Medicine Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Loss-of-function variants in the ectonucleotide
pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase family member 1 (ENPP1) cause ENPP1
Deficiency, a rare disorder characterized by pathological calcification,
neointimal proliferation, and impaired bone mineralization. The consequence of
ENPP1 Deficiency is a broad range of age dependent symptoms and morbidities
including cardiovascular complications and 50% mortality in infants, autosomal
recessive hypophosphatemic rickets type 2 (ARHR2) in children, and joint pain,
osteomalacia and enthesopathies in adults. Recent research continues to add to
the growing clinical presentation profile as well as expanding the role of ENPP1
itself. Here we review the current knowledge on the spectrum of clinical and
genetic findings of ENPP1 Deficiency reported in patients diagnosed with GACI or
ARHR2 phenotypes using a comprehensive database of known ENPP1 variants with
associated clinical data. A total of 108 genotypes were identified from 154
patients. Of the 109 ENPP1 variants reviewed, 72.5% were demonstrably
disease-causing, a threefold increase in pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants
over other databases. There is substantial heterogeneity in disease severity,
even among patients with the same variant. The approach to creating a
continuously curated database of ENPP1 variants accessible to clinicians is
necessary to increase the diagnostic yield of clinical genetic testing and
accelerate diagnosis of ENPP1 Deficiency.

© 2022 The Authors. Human Mutation published by Wiley Periodicals LLC. This
article has been contributed to by U.S. Government employees and their work is
in the public domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.24477
PMCID: PMC12465099
PMID: 36150100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Stephanie A. Mercurio, Lauren Chunn, and Mark J.
Kiel are full‐time employees of Genomenon, Inc. Gus Khursigara and Kathleen Wray
are full‐time employees of Inozyme Pharma, Inc. and own stock in Inozyme Pharma.
Ulrike Botschen and Frank Rutsch received funding from Inozyme Pharma. Carlos R.
Ferreira reports a collaboration with Inozyme Pharma, Inc. as part of a
Cooperative Research and Development Agreement.
