---
reference_id: "PMID:37210274"
title: Survival outcomes following salvage abdominoperineal resection for recurrent and persistent anal squamous cell carcinoma.
authors:
- Kitaguchi D
- Tsukada Y
- Ito M
- Horasawa S
- Bando H
- Yoshino T
- Yamada K
- Ajioka Y
- Sugihara K
journal: Eur J Surg Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2023.05.004
keywords:
- Humans
- Anus Neoplasms/therapy
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/pathology"
- Chemoradiotherapy
- Combined Modality Therapy
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/pathology"
- Proctectomy/methods
- Retrospective Studies
- Salvage Therapy/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Survival outcomes following salvage abdominoperineal resection for recurrent and persistent anal squamous cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Kitaguchi D, Tsukada Y, Ito M, Horasawa S, Bando H, Yoshino T, Yamada K, Ajioka Y, Sugihara K
**Journal:** Eur J Surg Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejso.2023.05.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejso.2023.05.004)

## Content

1. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2023 Sep;49(9):106929. doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2023.05.004. Epub
 2023 May 4.

Survival outcomes following salvage abdominoperineal resection for recurrent and 
persistent anal squamous cell carcinoma.

Kitaguchi D(1), Tsukada Y(2), Ito M(3), Horasawa S(4), Bando H(5), Yoshino T(6), 
Yamada K(7), Ajioka Y(8), Sugihara K(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery, National Cancer Center Hospital East, 
6-5-1, Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba, 277-8577, Japan. Electronic address: 
dkitaguc@east.ncc.go.jp.
(2)Department of Colorectal Surgery, National Cancer Center Hospital East, 
6-5-1, Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba, 277-8577, Japan. Electronic address: 
yutsukad@east.ncc.go.jp.
(3)Department of Colorectal Surgery, National Cancer Center Hospital East, 
6-5-1, Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba, 277-8577, Japan. Electronic address: 
maito@east.ncc.go.jp.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology and Gastrointestinal Oncology, National Cancer 
Center Hospital East, 6-5-1, Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba, 277-8577, Japan. 
Electronic address: shorasaw@east.ncc.go.jp.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology and Gastrointestinal Oncology, National Cancer 
Center Hospital East, 6-5-1, Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba, 277-8577, Japan. 
Electronic address: hbando@east.ncc.go.jp.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology and Gastrointestinal Oncology, National Cancer 
Center Hospital East, 6-5-1, Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba, 277-8577, Japan. 
Electronic address: tyoshino@east.ncc.go.jp.
(7)Department of Surgery, Coloproctology Center Takano Hospital, 3-2-55, Oe, 
Chuo-ku, Kumamoto, 862-0971, Japan. Electronic address: 
mic.ikyokutosho@gmail.com.
(8)Division of Molecular and Diagnostic Pathology, Niigata University Graduate 
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 8050 Ikarashi 2-no-cho, Nishi-ku, 
Niigata, 950-2181, Japan. Electronic address: ajioka@med.niigata-u.ac.jp.
(9)Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 
113-8510, Japan. Electronic address: k-sugi.srg2@tmd.ac.jp.

INTRODUCTION: The primary treatment for locoregional failure following 
chemoradiotherapy for squamous cell carcinoma of the anus (SCCA) is salvage 
abdominoperineal resection (APR). However, it is necessary to distinguish 
between recurrent and persistent diseases because of their varied pathologies. 
We aimed to clarify the survival outcomes following salvage APR for recurrent 
and persistent diseases and investigate the significance of salvage APR.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This multicentre retrospective cohort study used clinical 
data from 47 hospitals. All patients were diagnosed with SCCA and underwent 
definitive radiotherapy as the primary treatment between 1991 and 2015. Overall 
survival (OS) was compared between the following cohorts: salvage APR for 
recurrence, salvage APR for persistence, non-salvage APR for recurrence, and 
non-salvage APR for persistence.
RESULTS: Five-year OS of salvage APR for recurrence, salvage APR for 
persistence, non-salvage APR for recurrence, and non-salvage APR for persistence 
were 75% (46%-90%), 36% (21%-51%), 42% (21%-61%), and 47% (33%-60%), 
respectively. OS of salvage APR for the recurrent disease was significantly 
higher than that for persistent disease (p = 0.00597). For recurrent disease, OS 
following salvage APR was significantly higher than that following non-salvage 
APR (p = 0.0204); however, for persistent disease, there was no significant 
difference between salvage and non-salvage APR (p = 0.928).
CONCLUSION: Survival outcomes following salvage APR for persistent disease were 
significantly worse than that for recurrent disease. Salvage APR did not improve 
survival outcomes for persistent disease compared to non-salvage APR. These 
results will elicit a review of persistent disease treatment strategies.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd, BASO ~ The Association for Cancer Surgery, and 
the European Society of Surgical Oncology. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejso.2023.05.004
PMID: 37210274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.