---
reference_id: PMID:28527222
title: Functional Characterization of C-terminal Ryanodine Receptor 1 Variants Associated with Central Core Disease or Malignant Hyperthermia.
authors:
- Parker R
- Schiemann AH
- Langton E
- Bulger T
- Pollock N
- Bjorksten A
- Gillies R
- Hutchinson D
- Roxburgh R
- Stowell KM
journal: J Neuromuscul Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3233/JND-170210
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Calcium/metabolism
- Family
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Variation
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Male
- "Malignant Hyperthermia/genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- Middle Aged
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- "Myopathy, Central Core/genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- Pedigree
- "Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional Characterization of C-terminal Ryanodine Receptor 1 Variants Associated with Central Core Disease or Malignant Hyperthermia.
**Authors:** Parker R, Schiemann AH, Langton E, Bulger T, Pollock N, Bjorksten A, Gillies R, Hutchinson D, Roxburgh R, Stowell KM
**Journal:** J Neuromuscul Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JND-170210](https://doi.org/10.3233/JND-170210)

## Content

1. J Neuromuscul Dis. 2017;4(2):147-158. doi: 10.3233/JND-170210.

Functional Characterization of C-terminal Ryanodine Receptor 1 Variants 
Associated with Central Core Disease or Malignant Hyperthermia.

Parker R(1), Schiemann AH(1), Langton E(2), Bulger T(3), Pollock N(3), Bjorksten 
A(4), Gillies R(4), Hutchinson D(5), Roxburgh R(5), Stowell KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Fundamental Sciences, Massey University, Palmerston North, New 
Zealand.
(2)Wellington Hospital, Wellington, New Zealand.
(3)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, Palmerston North Hospital, 
Palmerston North, New Zealand.
(4)Department of Anaesthesia and Pain Management, Royal Melbourne Hospital, 
Melbourne.
(5)Department of Neurology, Auckland City Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.

BACKGROUND: Central core disease and malignant hyperthermia are human disorders 
of skeletal muscle resulting from aberrant Ca2+ handling. Most malignant 
hyperthermia and central core disease cases are associated with amino acid 
changes in the type 1 ryanodine receptor (RyR1), the skeletal muscle 
Ca2+-release channel. Malignant hyperthermia exhibits a gain-of-function 
phenotype, and central core disease results from loss of channel function. For a 
variant to be classified as pathogenic, functional studies must demonstrate a 
correlation with the pathophysiology of malignant hyperthermia or central core 
disease.
OBJECTIVE: We assessed the pathogenicity of four C-terminal variants of the 
ryanodine receptor using functional analysis. The variants were identified in 
families affected by either malignant hyperthermia or central core disease.
METHODS: Four variants were introduced separately into human cDNA encoding the 
skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor. Following transient expression in HEK-293T 
cells, functional studies were carried out using calcium release assays in 
response to an agonist. Two previously characterized variants and wild-type 
skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor were used as controls.
RESULTS: The p.Met4640Ile variant associated with central core disease showed no 
difference in calcium release compared to wild-type. The p.Val4849Ile variant 
associated with malignant hyperthermia was more sensitive to agonist than 
wild-type but did not reach statistical significance and two variants 
(p.Phe4857Ser and p.Asp4918Asn) associated with central core disease were 
completely inactive.
CONCLUSIONS: The p.Val4849Ile variant should be considered a risk factor for 
malignant hyperthermia, while the p.Phe4857Ser and p.Asp4918Asn variants should 
be classified as pathogenic for central core disease.

DOI: 10.3233/JND-170210
PMCID: PMC5467713
PMID: 28527222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]