---
reference_id: "PMID:40323355"
title: "New onset steroid-responsive Hashimoto's encephalopathy in the older population: a scoping review."
authors:
- Sy AJR
- Anlacan VMM
- Yu AB
- Jamora RDG
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-025-08223-6
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hashimoto Disease/drug therapy, diagnosis"
- Aged
- Encephalitis/drug therapy
- "Methylprednisolone/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Male
- Female
- Brain Diseases/drug therapy
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New onset steroid-responsive Hashimoto's encephalopathy in the older population: a scoping review.
**Authors:** Sy AJR, Anlacan VMM, Yu AB, Jamora RDG
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-025-08223-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-025-08223-6)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2025 Aug;46(8):3505-3523. doi: 10.1007/s10072-025-08223-6. Epub
2025  May 5.

New onset steroid-responsive Hashimoto's encephalopathy in the older population: 
a scoping review.

Sy AJR(1)(2), Anlacan VMM(3)(4)(5), Yu AB(1)(2), Jamora RDG(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Section of Neurology, Department of Internal Medicine, Cardinal Santos 
Medical Center, San Juan City, Philippines.
(2)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of the East Ramon Magsaysay 
Memorial Medical Center, Quezon City, Philippines.
(3)Section of Neurology, Department of Internal Medicine, Cardinal Santos 
Medical Center, San Juan City, Philippines. vmanlacan@up.edu.ph.
(4)Department of Neurosciences, College of Medicine and Philippine General 
Hospital, University of the Philippines Manila, Manila, Philippines. 
vmanlacan@up.edu.ph.
(5)Department of Neurology, Institute of Neurological Sciences, The Medical 
City, Pasig City, Philippines. vmanlacan@up.edu.ph.
(6)Department of Neurosciences, College of Medicine and Philippine General 
Hospital, University of the Philippines Manila, Manila, Philippines.

BACKGROUND: Hashimoto's encephalopathy (HE) is a rare autoimmune disorder which 
can mimic late-life neuropsychiatric symptoms as part of a dementia syndrome. 
Our objective was to review the clinical profile and management outcomes of new 
onset HE in older adults based on available literature.
METHODS: We conducted a comprehensive search for studies on patients aged 
65 years and older with newly diagnosed HE across multiple databases, including 
Medline, Web of Science, Wiley Online Library, and The Cochrane Library, 
covering publications up to January 2024. Clinical information was extracted and 
analyzed using Descriptive statistics.
RESULTS: Out of 608 articles screened, 45 articles detailing 51 patients were 
included. Majority of older patients (n = 48, 94.1%) were initially treated with 
steroids. Methylprednisolone 1 g/day was given in 37.2% (n = 19) for a minimum 
of 3 days before tapering. Some initiated a reduced dose of 500 mg/ day (n = 5, 
9.8%) with similar outcomes. Response is favorable, with 56.8% (n = 29) 
returning to near baseline functional status, while 29.4% (n = 15) showed 
partial improvement.
CONCLUSION: Evidence from 51 cases highlight the disorder's variable course in 
the older population; often mimicking other age-related conditions leading to 
diagnostic challenges and delays in management. A tailored approach is required, 
balancing the benefits of immunomodulatory therapies with potential risks. 
Further research is essential to understand the mechanism of HE in the older 
population and enhance patient outcomes by developing standardized treatment 
protocols tailored to this vulnerable population.

© 2025. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-025-08223-6
PMID: 40323355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Informed consent: None. Ethics 
approval and consent to participate: This review analyzed openly available 
publications. Ethics approval was not required, as the research involved only 
published literature without direct interaction with human participants. 
Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the 
work reported in this paper.