---
reference_id: "PMID:24913796"
title: "Impact of vaccination on the epidemiology of varicella: 1995-2009."
authors:
- Baxter R
- Tran TN
- Ray P
- Lewis E
- Fireman B
- Black S
- Shinefield HR
- Coplan PM
- Saddier P
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2013-4251
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of vaccination on the epidemiology of varicella: 1995-2009.
**Authors:** Baxter R, Tran TN, Ray P, Lewis E, Fireman B, Black S, Shinefield HR, Coplan PM, Saddier P
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2013-4251](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2013-4251)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2014 Jul;134(1):24-30. doi: 10.1542/peds.2013-4251. Epub 2014 Jun
9.

Impact of vaccination on the epidemiology of varicella: 1995-2009.

Baxter R(1), Tran TN(2), Ray P(3), Lewis E(3), Fireman B(3), Black S(4), 
Shinefield HR(5), Coplan PM(2), Saddier P(2).

Author information:
(1)Kaiser Permanente Vaccine Study Center, Oakland, California; 
roger.baxter@kp.org.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp, Whitehouse Station, New 
Jersey;
(3)Kaiser Permanente Vaccine Study Center, Oakland, California;
(4)Center for Global Health, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio; 
and.
(5)University of California San Francisco Medical Center, San Francisco, 
California.

BACKGROUND: When varicella vaccine was licensed in the United States in 1995, 
there were concerns that childhood vaccination might increase the number of 
adolescents susceptible to varicella and shift disease toward older age groups 
where it can be more severe.
METHODS: We conducted a series of 5 cross-sectional studies in 1994 to 1995 
(prevaccine), 2000, 2003, 2006, and 2009 in Kaiser Permanente of Northern 
California to assess changes in varicella epidemiology in children and 
adolescents, as well as changes in varicella hospitalization in people of all 
ages. For each study, information on varicella history and varicella occurrence 
during the past year was obtained by telephone survey from a sample of ∼8000 
members 5 to 19 years old; varicella hospitalization rates were calculated for 
the entire membership.
RESULTS: Between 1995 and 2009, the overall incidence of varicella in 5- to 
19-year-olds decreased from 25.8 to 1.3 per 1000 person-years, a ∼90% to 95% 
decline in the various age categories (5-9, 10-14, and 15-19 years of age). The 
proportion of varicella-susceptible children and adolescents also decreased in 
all age groups, including in 15- to 19-year-olds (from 15.6% in 1995 to 7.6% in 
2009). From 1994 to 2009, age-adjusted varicella hospitalization rates in the 
general member population decreased from 2.13 to 0.25 per 100,000, a ∼90% 
decline.
CONCLUSIONS: In the 15 years after the introduction of varicella vaccine, a 
major reduction in varicella incidence and hospitalization was observed with no 
evidence of a shift in the burden of varicella to older age groups.

Copyright © 2014 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2013-4251
PMID: 24913796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]