---
reference_id: "PMID:37384664"
title: Clinical course of new-onset Crohn's disease in children and adolescents in dependency of age, initial location, initial severity level and therapy over the period 2000-2014 based on the Saxon Pediatric IBD-Registry in Germany.
authors:
- Dong F
- Kern I
- Weidner J
- Kügler K
- Rothe U
- Amin M
- Laaß MW
- Flemming G
- Winkler U
- Richter T
- Kugler J
- Manuwald U
journal: PLoS One
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0287860
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical course of new-onset Crohn's disease in children and adolescents in dependency of age, initial location, initial severity level and therapy over the period 2000-2014 based on the Saxon Pediatric IBD-Registry in Germany.
**Authors:** Dong F, Kern I, Weidner J, Kügler K, Rothe U, Amin M, Laaß MW, Flemming G, Winkler U, Richter T, Kugler J, Manuwald U
**Journal:** PLoS One (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0287860](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0287860)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2023 Jun 29;18(6):e0287860. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0287860. 
eCollection 2023.

Clinical course of new-onset Crohn's disease in children and adolescents in 
dependency of age, initial location, initial severity level and therapy over the 
period 2000-2014 based on the Saxon Pediatric IBD-Registry in Germany.

Dong F(1), Kern I(1), Weidner J(2), Kügler K(3), Rothe U(4), Amin M(1)(5), Laaß 
MW(6), Flemming G(7), Winkler U(8), Richter T(9), Kugler J(1), Manuwald U(1).

Author information:
(1)Health Sciences/Public Health, Institute and Policlinic for Occupational and 
Social Medicine, Faculty of Medicine "Carl Gustav Carus", TU Dresden, Dresden, 
Germany.
(2)Center for Medical Informatics, Institute for Medical Informatics and 
Biometry, Faculty of Medicine "Carl Gustav Carus", TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(3)General practice A. Wolf, Freital, Germany.
(4)GWT of the TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(5)Department for Trauma Surgery and Orthopedics, Hospital "Park-Klinik 
Weissensee", Berlin, Germany.
(6)University Hospital for Children and Adolescents, Faculty of Medicine "Carl 
Gustav Carus", TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology, Hospital for Children and Adolescents, 
University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(8)Clinic for Children and Adolescents, Hospital Bautzen, Oberlausitz-Kliniken 
gGmbH, Bautzen, Germany.
(9)Clinic St. Georg, Leipzig, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: In Saxony, the incidence of Crohn's disease (CD) in children and 
adolescents increased significantly from 3.3 per 100,000 person-years in 2000 to 
5.1 in 2014. The aim of this study was to describe the initial characteristics 
and the clinical course of CD in children and adolescents and to identify drug 
treatment options associated with an advantage for a mild course or remission.
METHODS: Clinical data were collected from patients who suffered from 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and were recruited in the Saxon Pediatric 
IBD-Registry. All children newly diagnosed with CD in this registry in Saxony 
between 2000 and 2014 were included in this registry study. Characteristics such 
as age, disease location and extra-intestinal manifestations at diagnosis were 
accessed. The severity level of the disease at diagnosis as well as at follow-up 
were analysed by PCDAI index. Patients were divided into 3 groups according to 
length of follow-up: 1-3 years, 4-6 years and 7-9 years after diagnosis. A 
logistic regression model was conducted to examine which baseline parameters are 
associated with disease progression.
RESULTS: There were 338 children and adolescents with CD included in this 
registry study. At diagnosis, the median age of patients was 12.0 (0.7-14.9), 
61.5% (n = 208) of the patients were male. The most common disease location 
observed in pediatric CD patients was the L3 (55%, n = 176). Patients aged 10-14 
years were significantly more likely to present an L2 than patients aged 0-4 
years (80.3%, n = 53 vs. 19.7%, n = 13, p = 0.01). During the follow-up, data 
from 71.3% (n = 241) othe patients were available. Disease activity measured by 
PCDAI decreased in 47.7% (n = 115) of the patients, 40.7% (n = 98) of the 
patients were stable and increased in 11.6% (n = 28) of the patients. Patients 
with intermediate/severe disease at onset were more likely to have an active 
disease at the end of follow up, too (p = 0.00). Logistic regression analysis of 
the initial characteristics showed that the age at diagnosis, gender, initial 
location and initial extra-intestinal manifestation are not associated with the 
progression of the disease (p>0.05). Furthermore, drug treatment options could 
be identified from our data, which are associated with benefits for a milder 
course or remission.
CONCLUSION: From 2000 to 2014, the health status of most pediatric patients with 
CD had improved or remained stable. Initial characteristics including age at 
diagnosis, initial localization and initial extra-intestinal manifestation are 
not associated with the progression of the disease, only the initial activity by 
PCDAI.

Copyright: © 2023 Dong et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0287860
PMCID: PMC10309614
PMID: 37384664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interest exist.