---
reference_id: "PMID:39636577"
title: "Management of individuals with heterozygous germline pathogenic variants in ATM: A clinical practice resource of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG)."
authors:
- Pal T
- Schon KR
- Astiazaran-Symonds E
- Balmaña J
- Foulkes WD
- James P
- Klugman S
- Livinski AA
- Mak JS
- Ngeow J
- Voian N
- Wick MJ
- Hanson H
- Stewart DR
- Tischkowitz M
- "ACMG Professional Practice and Guidelines Committee. Electronic address: documents@acmg.net"
journal: Genet Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2024.101243
keywords:
- Humans
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/genetics
- Germ-Line Mutation/genetics
- Male
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Heterozygote
- Genetic Testing/methods
- Genomics/methods
- "Breast Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- "Genetics, Medical"
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of individuals with heterozygous germline pathogenic variants in ATM: A clinical practice resource of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG).
**Authors:** Pal T, Schon KR, Astiazaran-Symonds E, Balmaña J, Foulkes WD, James P, Klugman S, Livinski AA, Mak JS, Ngeow J, Voian N, Wick MJ, Hanson H, Stewart DR, Tischkowitz M, ACMG Professional Practice and Guidelines Committee. Electronic address: documents@acmg.net
**Journal:** Genet Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gim.2024.101243](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gim.2024.101243)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2025 Jan;27(1):101243. doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2024.101243. Epub 2024
Dec  5.

Management of individuals with heterozygous germline pathogenic variants in ATM:
A clinical practice resource of the American College of Medical Genetics and
Genomics (ACMG).

Pal T(1), Schon KR(2), Astiazaran-Symonds E(3), Balmaña J(4), Foulkes WD(5),
James P(6), Klugman S(7), Livinski AA(8), Mak JS(9), Ngeow J(10), Voian N(11),
Wick MJ(12), Hanson H(13), Stewart DR(14), Tischkowitz M(2); ACMG Professional
Practice and Guidelines Committee. Electronic address: documents@acmg.net(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center/Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, TN.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, National Institute for Health Research
Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.
(3)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine-Tucson, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ.
(4)Hereditary Cancer Genetics Group, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO),
Barcelona, Spain; Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall
d'Hebron, Vall d'Hebron Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Departments of Human Genetics, Oncology and Medicine, McGill University,
Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(6)Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, The University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; Parkville Familial Cancer Centre, Peter
MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(7)Division of Reproductive & Medical Genetics, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology and Women's Health, Montefiore Medical Center/Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, NY.
(8)National Institutes of Health Library, Office of Research Services, OD, NIH,
Bethesda, MD.
(9)University of California San Francisco Helen Diller Family Comprehensive
Cancer Center, San Francisco, CA.
(10)Genomic Medicine, Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore; Cancer Genetics Service, Division of Medical Oncology,
National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore.
(11)Providence Genetic Risk Clinic, Providence Cancer Institute, Portland, OR.
(12)Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN.
(13)Peninsula Clinical Genetics, Royal Devon University Healthcare NHS
Foundation Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom; Faculty of Health and Life Sciences,
University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom.
(14)Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics,
National Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD.
(15)American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics, Bethesda, MD.

PURPOSE: ATM germline pathogenic variants (GPVs) are associated with a
moderately increased risk of female breast cancer, pancreatic cancer, and
prostate cancer. Resources for managing ATM heterozygotes in clinical practice
are limited.
METHODS: An international workgroup developed a clinical practice resource to
guide management of ATM heterozygotes using peer-reviewed publications and
expert opinion.
RESULTS: Although ATM is a moderate (intermediate) penetrance gene, cancer risks
may be considered as a continuous variable, influenced by family history and
other modifiers. ATM GPV heterozygotes should generally be offered enhanced
breast surveillance according to their personalized risk estimate and
country-specific guidelines and, generally, risk-reducing mastectomy is not
recommended. Prostate cancer surveillance should be considered. Pancreatic
cancer surveillance should be considered based on assessment of family history,
ideally as part of a clinical trial, with existence of country-specific
guidelines. For ATM GPV heterozygotes who develop cancer, radiation therapy
decisions should not be influenced by the genetic result. Although
poly-adenosine diphosphate ribose polymerase inhibitors are licensed for use in
metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer and ATM GPVs, the evidence-base
is currently weak.
CONCLUSION: Systematic prospective data collection is needed to establish the
spectrum of ATM-associated cancer and determine the outlines of surveillance,
response to cancer treatment, and survival.

Copyright © 2024 American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gim.2024.101243
PMID: 39636577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Funding and support listed
here did not support development of this document unless included in the
acknowledgments section. Tuya Pal is supported through extramural grant funding
through the National Cancer Institute, the Komen Foundation, and the Breast
Cancer Research Foundation. Joanne Ngeow is supported by research and education
grants from AstraZeneca and receives research funding from Nalagenetics,
Nanopore and Pacbio. Helen Hanson is supported by the Cancer Research
CRUKCatalyst Award, CanGene-CanVar, the National Institute for Health and Care
Research Exeter Biomedical Research Centre and has served on advisory boards for
AstraZeneca. Douglas R. Stewart is supported by the Intramural Research Program
of the Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics of the National Cancer
Institute, Rockville, Maryland, and also performs contract clinical telehealth
services for Genome Medical, Inc. in accordance with relevant National Cancer
Institute ethics policies. Marc Tischkowitz is supported by the National
Institute for Health and Care ResearchCambridge Biomedical Research Centre. All
other authors declare no conflicts of interest.
