---
reference_id: "PMID:11062603"
title: Hypertension and the heart.
authors:
- Susic D
- Frohlich ED
journal: Curr Hypertens Rep
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1007/s11906-996-0042-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertension and the heart.
**Authors:** Susic D, Frohlich ED
**Journal:** Curr Hypertens Rep (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11906-996-0042-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11906-996-0042-7)

## Content

1. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2000 Dec;2(6):565-9. doi: 10.1007/s11906-996-0042-7.

Hypertension and the heart.

Susic D(1), Frohlich ED.

Author information:
(1)Alton Ochsner Medical Foundation, 1516 Jefferson Highway, New Orleans, LA 
70121, USA.

Sustained increase in arterial pressure causes left ventricular hypertrophy and 
adversely affects all myocardial compartments: myocytes, interstitium, and 
coronary vasculature. Ventricular hypertrophy significantly increases the risk 
for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in hypertensive disease. Impairments 
in coronary circulation and ventricular fibrosis, which are an essential part of 
hypertensive disease, contribute to that increased risk. This report discusses 
the mechanisms of hypertension-induced myocardial collagen accumulation and 
impairments in coronary hemodynamics. Particular attention is given to the 
interaction of hypertension and aging because aging aggravates hypertensive 
changes and the incidence of hypertension increases with aging. The effect of 
therapy on hypertension-induced ventricular fibrosis and impairment in coronary 
hemodynamics and the risk associated with these changes are also discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s11906-996-0042-7
PMID: 11062603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]