---
reference_id: "PMID:25701871"
title: "A large genomic deletion leads to enhancer adoption by the lamin B1 gene: a second path to autosomal dominant adult-onset demyelinating leukodystrophy (ADLD)."
authors:
- Giorgio E
- Robyr D
- Spielmann M
- Ferrero E
- Di Gregorio E
- Imperiale D
- Vaula G
- Stamoulis G
- Santoni F
- Atzori C
- Gasparini L
- Ferrera D
- Canale C
- Guipponi M
- Pennacchio LA
- Antonarakis SE
- Brussino A
- Brusco A
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv065
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Cells, Cultured"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Enhancer Elements, Genetic"
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- "Lamin Type B/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease/genetics
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A large genomic deletion leads to enhancer adoption by the lamin B1 gene: a second path to autosomal dominant adult-onset demyelinating leukodystrophy (ADLD).
**Authors:** Giorgio E, Robyr D, Spielmann M, Ferrero E, Di Gregorio E, Imperiale D, Vaula G, Stamoulis G, Santoni F, Atzori C, Gasparini L, Ferrera D, Canale C, Guipponi M, Pennacchio LA, Antonarakis SE, Brussino A, Brusco A
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddv065](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddv065)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Jun 1;24(11):3143-54. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv065. Epub 2015
Feb  20.

A large genomic deletion leads to enhancer adoption by the lamin B1 gene: a 
second path to autosomal dominant adult-onset demyelinating leukodystrophy 
(ADLD).

Giorgio E(1), Robyr D(2), Spielmann M(3), Ferrero E(1), Di Gregorio E(4), 
Imperiale D(5), Vaula G(6), Stamoulis G(2), Santoni F(2), Atzori C(5), Gasparini 
L(7), Ferrera D(7), Canale C(8), Guipponi M(2), Pennacchio LA(9), Antonarakis 
SE(2), Brussino A(1), Brusco A(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Torino, via Santena, 19, Torino 
10126, Italy.
(2)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical 
School, Geneva 1211, Switzerland.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestr. 63-73, Berlin 14195, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Torino, via Santena, 19, Torino 
10126, Italy Medical Genetics Unit and.
(5)Centro Regionale Malattie Da Prioni - Domp (ASLTO2), Torino 10144, Italy.
(6)Department of Neurology, Città della Salute e della Scienza University 
Hospital, Torino 10126, Italy.
(7)Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies and.
(8)Department of Nanophysics, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa 16163, 
Italy and.
(9)Genomics Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, MS 84-171, 
Berkeley, CA 9472, USA.
(10)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Torino, via Santena, 19, 
Torino 10126, Italy Medical Genetics Unit and alfredo.brusco@unito.it.

Chromosomal rearrangements with duplication of the lamin B1 (LMNB1) gene 
underlie autosomal dominant adult-onset demyelinating leukodystrophy (ADLD), a 
rare neurological disorder in which overexpression of LMNB1 causes progressive 
central nervous system demyelination. However, we previously reported an ADLD 
family (ADLD-1-TO) without evidence of duplication or other mutation in LMNB1 
despite linkage to the LMNB1 locus and lamin B1 overexpression. By custom 
array-CGH, we further investigated this family and report here that patients 
carry a large (∼660 kb) heterozygous deletion that begins 66 kb upstream of the 
LMNB1 promoter. Lamin B1 overexpression was confirmed in further ADLD-1-TO 
tissues and in a postmortem brain sample, where lamin B1 was increased in the 
frontal lobe. Through parallel studies, we investigated both loss of genetic 
material and chromosomal rearrangement as possible causes of LMNB1 
overexpression, and found that ADLD-1-TO plausibly results from an enhancer 
adoption mechanism. The deletion eliminates a genome topological domain 
boundary, allowing normally forbidden interactions between at least three 
forebrain-directed enhancers and the LMNB1 promoter, in line with the observed 
mainly cerebral localization of lamin B1 overexpression and myelin degeneration. 
This second route to LMNB1 overexpression and ADLD is a new example of the 
relevance of regulatory landscape modifications in determining Mendelian 
phenotypes.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv065
PMCID: PMC4424952
PMID: 25701871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]