---
reference_id: "PMID:15340260"
title: Promoter hypermethylation frequency and BRAF mutations distinguish hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer from sporadic MSI-H colon cancer.
authors:
- McGivern A
- Wynter CV
- Whitehall VL
- Kambara T
- Spring KJ
- Walsh MD
- Barker MA
- Arnold S
- Simms LA
- Leggett BA
- Young J
- Jass JR
journal: Fam Cancer
year: '2004'
doi: "10.1023/B:FAME.0000039861.30651.c8"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Promoter hypermethylation frequency and BRAF mutations distinguish hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer from sporadic MSI-H colon cancer.
**Authors:** McGivern A, Wynter CV, Whitehall VL, Kambara T, Spring KJ, Walsh MD, Barker MA, Arnold S, Simms LA, Leggett BA, Young J, Jass JR
**Journal:** Fam Cancer (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1023/B:FAME.0000039861.30651.c8](https://doi.org/10.1023/B:FAME.0000039861.30651.c8)

## Content

1. Fam Cancer. 2004;3(2):101-7. doi: 10.1023/B:FAME.0000039861.30651.c8.

Promoter hypermethylation frequency and BRAF mutations distinguish hereditary 
non-polyposis colon cancer from sporadic MSI-H colon cancer.

McGivern A(1), Wynter CV, Whitehall VL, Kambara T, Spring KJ, Walsh MD, Barker 
MA, Arnold S, Simms LA, Leggett BA, Young J, Jass JR.

Author information:
(1)Conjoint Gastroenterology Laboratory, Bancroft Centre, Herston, Brisbane, 
Queensland, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancers resulting from defective DNA mismatch repair can 
occur in both hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer (HNPCC) and in the sporadic 
setting. They are characterised by a high level of microsatellite instability 
(MSI-H) and superficially resemble each other in that they are frequently 
located in the proximal colon and share features such as circumscribed tumour 
margins and tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes. However, significant differences 
can be demonstrated at the molecular level including widespread promoter 
hypermethylation and BRAF -activating mutations which occur significantly less 
often in HNPCC.
AIMS: In this study, we sought to determine whether the presence of widespread 
promoter hypermethylation and BRAF mutations would exclude HNPCC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We investigated the methylation status of four methylated 
in tumour markers (MINTs 1,2,12 and 31), and the promoter regions of 5 genes 
hMLH1, HPP1, MGMT, p16INK4A and p14ARF, in 21 sporadic MSI-H colorectal cancers 
and compared these with 18 cancers from HNPCC patients. The methylation status 
of CpG islands were determined by either methylation specific PCR (MSP) or 
combined bisulfite restricton analysis (COBRA). In addition we considered the 
BRAF mutation status of 18 HNPCC tumours and 19 sporadic MSI-H cancers which had 
been previously determined by RFLP analysis and confirmatory sequencing.
RESULTS: Methylation of the promoter regions in target genes occurred less 
frequently within the HNPCC tumours (27% of analyses), compared with the 
sporadic MSI-H tumours (59% of analyses) (P < 0.001). Methylation of MINTs 1, 2, 
12 and 31 occurred in 4% of analyses for HNPCC tumours contrasted with 73% for 
sporadic MSI-H tumours (P < 0.001). BRAF mutations were detected in 74% of 
sporadic tumours but none of the HNPCC cancers tested.
CONCLUSIONS: The total number of genes and MINTs methylated in HNPCC was lower 
than in MSI-H colorectal tumours. No HNPCC tumour showed evidence of widespread 
promoter hypermethylation or BRAF mutation suggesting this feature could be used 
as a discriminator between familial and sporadic cases.

DOI: 10.1023/B:FAME.0000039861.30651.c8
PMID: 15340260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]