---
reference_id: "PMID:24976334"
title: The prognostic impact of the amount of tobacco smoking in non-small cell lung cancer--differences between adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma.
authors:
- Okamoto T
- Suzuki Y
- Fujishita T
- Kitahara H
- Shimamatsu S
- Kohno M
- Morodomi Y
- Kawano D
- Maehara Y
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.06.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The prognostic impact of the amount of tobacco smoking in non-small cell lung cancer--differences between adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Okamoto T, Suzuki Y, Fujishita T, Kitahara H, Shimamatsu S, Kohno M, Morodomi Y, Kawano D, Maehara Y
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.06.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.06.006)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2014 Aug;85(2):125-30. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.06.006. Epub 
2014 Jun 16.

The prognostic impact of the amount of tobacco smoking in non-small cell lung 
cancer--differences between adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma.

Okamoto T(1), Suzuki Y(2), Fujishita T(2), Kitahara H(2), Shimamatsu S(2), Kohno 
M(2), Morodomi Y(2), Kawano D(2), Maehara Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery and Science, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kyushu University, Japan. Electronic address: tatsuro@surg2.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Surgery and Science, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kyushu University, Japan.

BACKGROUNDS: The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship 
between the level of tobacco smoking and the clinicopathological features of 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients, individually for adenocarcinoma 
(Ad) and squamous cell carcinoma (Sq).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the clinical records of 1825 
consecutive lung cancer patients who underwent surgery in our department. Among 
these, the data sets of 750 Ad patients and 364 Sq patients who received 
lobectomy or more extensive resection were available.
RESULTS: In Ad patients, those who had never smoked (never-smokers) (n=309) were 
more likely to be female, to have less advanced stage tumors, and to have a 
significantly better prognosis than those who had ever smoked (ever-smokers) 
(n=441) (5-year OS: never-smokers, 67.9%; ever-smokers, 53.7%, p<0.0001). In Sq 
patients, the never-smokers (n=15) were more likely to be female than the 
ever-smokers (n=349). Among ever-smokers, the light-smokers (PY≤30; n=56) were 
associated with more female patients, more advanced stage tumors, and 
significantly worse prognoses than were the heavy smokers (PY>30; n=292) 
(p=0.0003). The multivariate survival analysis showed that light smoking was 
related to a worse prognosis compared with heavy smoking (HR=2.06, 95% CI 
1.43-2.98, p=0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: The never-smokers had a significantly better prognosis than 
ever-smokers among Ad patients, whereas the light-smokers had a significantly 
worse prognosis than heavy smokers among Sq patients. There may be factors other 
than tobacco carcinogens that influence the development of Sq in never and/or 
light smokers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.06.006
PMID: 24976334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]