---
reference_id: "PMID:37628577"
title: Split Hand-Foot and Deafness in a Patient with 7q21.13-q21.3 Deletion Not Including the DLX5/6 Genes.
authors:
- Ambrosetti I
- Bernardini L
- Pollazzon M
- Giuffrida MG
- Guida V
- Peluso F
- Baroni MC
- Polizzi V
- Napoli M
- Rosato S
- Trimarchi G
- Gelmini C
- Caraffi SG
- Wischmeijer A
- Frattini D
- Novelli A
- Garavelli L
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes14081526
keywords:
- Humans
- "Genes, Homeobox"
- Lower Extremity
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Deafness/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Split Hand-Foot and Deafness in a Patient with 7q21.13-q21.3 Deletion Not Including the DLX5/6 Genes.
**Authors:** Ambrosetti I, Bernardini L, Pollazzon M, Giuffrida MG, Guida V, Peluso F, Baroni MC, Polizzi V, Napoli M, Rosato S, Trimarchi G, Gelmini C, Caraffi SG, Wischmeijer A, Frattini D, Novelli A, Garavelli L
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14081526](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14081526)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Jul 26;14(8):1526. doi: 10.3390/genes14081526.

Split Hand-Foot and Deafness in a Patient with 7q21.13-q21.3 Deletion Not 
Including the DLX5/6 Genes.

Ambrosetti I(1)(2), Bernardini L(3), Pollazzon M(2), Giuffrida MG(3), Guida 
V(3), Peluso F(2), Baroni MC(1)(2), Polizzi V(4), Napoli M(5), Rosato S(2), 
Trimarchi G(2), Gelmini C(2), Caraffi SG(2), Wischmeijer A(2)(6), Frattini D(7), 
Novelli A(8), Garavelli L(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, 
40138 Bologna, Italy.
(2)Clinical Genetics Unit, Azienda USL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, 42123 Reggio 
Emilia, Italy.
(3)Division of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della 
Sofferenza, 71013 San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(4)Department of Audiology, Azienda USL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, 42123 Reggio 
Emilia, Italy.
(5)Neuroradiology Unit, Azienda USL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, 42123 Reggio Emilia, 
Italy.
(6)Clinical Genetics Service and Coordination Center for Rare Diseases, 
Department of Pediatrics, Regional Hospital of Bolzano, 39100 Bolzano, Italy.
(7)Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, Azienda AUSL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, 
42123 Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(8)Translational Cytogenomics Research Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital 
IRCCS, 00165 Rome, Italy.

Split Hand-Foot Malformation (SHFM) is a congenital limb defect characterized by 
a median cleft of the hands and/or feet due to the absence/hypoplasia of the 
central rays. It may occur as part of a syndromic condition or as an isolated 
malformation. The most common of the six genetic loci identified for this 
condition is correlated to SHFM1 and maps in the 7q21q22 region. SHFM1 is 
characterized by autosomal dominant transmission, incomplete penetrance and 
variable expressivity. Associated features often include hearing loss, 
intellectual disability/developmental delay and craniofacial abnormalities. 
Disruption of the DLX5/DLX6 genes, mapping within the SHFM1 locus, is now known 
to be responsible for the phenotype. Through SNP array, we analyzed a patient 
affected by SHFM1 associated with deafness and an abnormality of the inner ear 
(incomplete partition type I); we identified a deletion in 7q21, not involving 
the DLX5/6 genes, but including exons 15 and 17 of DYNC1I1, known to act as 
exonic enhancers (eExons) of the DLX5/6 genes. We further demonstrated the role 
of DYNC1I1 eExons in regulating DLX5/6 expression by means of showing a reduced 
expression of the DLX5/6 genes through RT-PCR in a patient-derived 
lymphoblastoid cell line. Furthermore, our data and a review of published cases 
do not support the hypothesis that DLX5/6 are imprinted in humans. This work is 
an example of how the disruption of regulatory elements can be responsible for 
congenital malformations.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14081526
PMCID: PMC10454356
PMID: 37628577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.