---
reference_id: "PMID:17377382"
title: CD4+CD25high regulatory T cells are markedly decreased in blood of patients with pemphigus vulgaris.
authors:
- Sugiyama H
- Matsue H
- Nagasaka A
- Nakamura Y
- Tsukamoto K
- Shibagaki N
- Kawamura T
- Kitamura R
- Ando N
- Shimada S
journal: Dermatology
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1159/000099585
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CD4+CD25high regulatory T cells are markedly decreased in blood of patients with pemphigus vulgaris.
**Authors:** Sugiyama H, Matsue H, Nagasaka A, Nakamura Y, Tsukamoto K, Shibagaki N, Kawamura T, Kitamura R, Ando N, Shimada S
**Journal:** Dermatology (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000099585](https://doi.org/10.1159/000099585)

## Content

1. Dermatology. 2007;214(3):210-20. doi: 10.1159/000099585.

CD4+CD25high regulatory T cells are markedly decreased in blood of patients with 
pemphigus vulgaris.

Sugiyama H(1), Matsue H, Nagasaka A, Nakamura Y, Tsukamoto K, Shibagaki N, 
Kawamura T, Kitamura R, Ando N, Shimada S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Yamanashi, Interdisciplinary 
Graduate School of Medicine and Engineering, Chuo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: It remains to be determined whether pemphigus vulgaris (PV), an 
autoimmune blistering disease, has a reduction and/or dysfunction of 
CD4(+)CD25(high) regulatory T (Treg) cells.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the frequency and phenotypes of Treg cells in blood of 
patients with PV.
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were prepared from PV patients as 
well as normal and disease control volunteers, and the frequency and phenotypes 
of Treg cells were determined by flow cytometry. CD4(+)CD25(+) and CD4(+)CD25(-) 
T cells isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of PV patients and 
normal controls were subjected to real-time semiquantitative RT-PCR for the 
expression of Foxp3 gene.
RESULTS: The proportion of Treg cells in all PV patients was severely reduced, 
approximately ten times less than controls. These observations were further 
confirmed by both diminished gene and protein expression of Foxp3 in the 
CD4(+)CD25(+) T cell population in PV patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Numerical impairment of Treg cells may be involved in the 
pathogenesis of PV.

Copyright (c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000099585
PMID: 17377382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]