---
reference_id: "PMID:36430700"
title: "Triggers of Guillain-Barré Syndrome: Campylobacter jejuni Predominates."
authors:
- Finsterer J
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms232214222
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Triggers of Guillain-Barré Syndrome: Campylobacter jejuni Predominates.
**Authors:** Finsterer J
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms232214222](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms232214222)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Nov 17;23(22):14222. doi: 10.3390/ijms232214222.

Triggers of Guillain-Barré Syndrome: Campylobacter jejuni Predominates.

Finsterer J(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurology & Neurophysiology Center, 1180 Vienna, Austria.

Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is a rare immune-mediated acute 
polyradiculo-neuropathy that typically develops after a previous 
gastrointestinal or respiratory infection. This narrative overview aims to 
summarise and discuss current knowledge and previous evidence regarding triggers 
and pathophysiology of GBS. A systematic search of the literature was carried 
out using suitable search terms. The most common subtypes of GBS are acute 
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (AIDP) and acute motor axonal 
neuropathy (AMAN). The most common triggers of GBS, in three quarters of cases, 
are previous infections. The most common infectious agents that cause GBS 
include Campylobacter jejuni (C. jejuni), Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and 
cytomegalovirus. C. jejuni is responsible for about a third of GBS cases. GBS 
due to C. jejuni is usually more severe than that due to other causes. Clinical 
presentation of GBS is highly dependent on the structure of pathogenic 
lipo-oligosaccharides (LOS) that trigger the innate immune system via 
Toll-like-receptor (TLR)-4 signalling. AIDP is due to demyelination, whereas in 
AMAN, structures of the axolemma are affected in the nodal or inter-nodal space. 
In conclusion, GBS is a neuro-immunological disorder caused by autoantibodies 
against components of the myelin sheath or axolemma. Molecular mimicry between 
surface structures of pathogens and components of myelin or the axon is one 
scenario that may explain the pathophysiology of GBS.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232214222
PMCID: PMC9696744
PMID: 36430700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.