---
reference_id: "PMID:12226744"
title: A key role of the hSNF5/INI1 tumour suppressor in the control of the G1-S transition of the cell cycle.
authors:
- Versteege I
- Medjkane S
- Rouillard D
- Delattre O
journal: Oncogene
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205841
keywords:
- Bromodeoxyuridine
- Cell Cycle Proteins/metabolism
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone"
- "Cyclin D1/genetics, metabolism, pharmacology"
- "Cyclin E/genetics, metabolism, pharmacology"
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p16/metabolism
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- G1 Phase/genetics
- Gene Deletion
- "Genes, Tumor Suppressor"
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- Mutation
- Retinoblastoma Protein/metabolism
- S Phase/genetics
- SMARCB1 Protein
- Transcription Factors
- Transfection
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A key role of the hSNF5/INI1 tumour suppressor in the control of the G1-S transition of the cell cycle.
**Authors:** Versteege I, Medjkane S, Rouillard D, Delattre O
**Journal:** Oncogene (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1205841](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1205841)

## Content

1. Oncogene. 2002 Sep 19;21(42):6403-12. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205841.

A key role of the hSNF5/INI1 tumour suppressor in the control of the G1-S 
transition of the cell cycle.

Versteege I(1), Medjkane S, Rouillard D, Delattre O.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U509, Laboratoire de Pathologie Moléculaire des Cancers, Institut 
Curie, 26 rue d'Ulm, 75248 Paris Cedex 05, France.

The hSNF5/INI1 gene encodes a member of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodelling 
complexes. It was recently identified as a tumour suppressor gene mutated in 
sporadic and hereditary Malignant Rhabdoid Tumours (MRT). However, the role of 
hSNF5/INI1 loss-of-function in tumour development is still unknown. Here, we 
show that the ectopic expression of wild-type hSNF5/INI1, but not that of 
truncated versions, leads to a cell cycle arrest by inhibiting the entry into S 
phase of MRT cells. This G1 arrest is associated with down-regulation of a 
subset of E2F targets including cyclin A, E2F1 and CDC6. This arrest can be 
reverted by coexpression of cyclin D1, cyclin E or viral E1A, whereas it cannot 
be counteracted by pRB-binding deficient E1A mutants. Moreover, hSNF5/INI1 is 
not able to arrest cells lacking a functional pRB. These observations suggest 
that the hSNF5/INI1-induced G1 arrest is dependent upon the presence of a 
functional pRB. However, the observation that a constitutively active pRB can 
efficiently arrest MRT cells indicates that hSNF5/INI1, at the difference of the 
ATPase subunits of the SWI/SNF complex, is dispensable for pRB function. 
Altogether, these data show that hSNF5/INI1 is a potent regulator of the entry 
into S phase, an effect that may account for its tumour suppressor role.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205841
PMID: 12226744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]