---
reference_id: "PMID:27056850"
title: "[Cognitive Impairment in Patients with Bacterial Meningitis and Encephalitides]."
authors:
- Kamei S
journal: Brain Nerve
year: '2016'
doi: 10.11477/mf.1416200400
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Cognitive Impairment in Patients with Bacterial Meningitis and Encephalitides].
**Authors:** Kamei S
**Journal:** Brain Nerve (2016)
**DOI:** [10.11477/mf.1416200400](https://doi.org/10.11477/mf.1416200400)

## Content

1. Brain Nerve. 2016 Apr;68(4):317-27. doi: 10.11477/mf.1416200400.

[Cognitive Impairment in Patients with Bacterial Meningitis and Encephalitides].

[Article in Japanese]

Kamei S(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Nihon University School of 
Medicine.

Cognitive impairments, including dementia, can present as first symptoms at the 
acute stage, and/or as sequelae in the chronic stages, in some patients with 
bacterial meningitis (BM) or encephalitides. BM and encephalitides are 
lifethreatening neurological emergencies, and early recognition, efficient 
decision-making, and rapid commencement of therapy can be lifesaving. Empirical 
therapy should be initiated promptly whenever BM or encephalitides are a 
probable diagnosis. In this article cognitive impairments, including dementia, 
presenting in patients with BM, Herpes simplex virus encephalitis (HSVE), Human 
herpesvirus-6 (HHV-6) encephalitis, and Anti N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) 
receptor encephalitis are reviewed. In the above mentioned diseases, cognitive 
impairment without fever might be observed at the time of disease onset. 
cognitive impairment has been also noted in some aged or immunocompromised 
patients at the onset of BM. Immediate memory disturbance as one of the first 
symptoms of HHV-6 encephalitis presented in 74% of patients with this disease. 
Cognitive impairment, including dementia as sequela, was also found in 10-27% of 
patients with BM, 54-69% of patients with HSVE, 33% of HHV-6 encephalitis 
patients, and 39% of patients with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis. Suitable 
therapeutic management of these diseases at the acute stage is thus required in 
order to avoid these sequelae.

DOI: 10.11477/mf.1416200400
PMID: 27056850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]