---
reference_id: "PMID:36272013"
title: "Recent advances in graves ophthalmopathy medical therapy: a comprehensive literature review."
authors:
- Li X
- Li S
- Fan W
- Rokohl AC
- Ju S
- Ju X
- Guo Y
- Heindl LM
journal: Int Ophthalmol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10792-022-02537-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent advances in graves ophthalmopathy medical therapy: a comprehensive literature review.
**Authors:** Li X, Li S, Fan W, Rokohl AC, Ju S, Ju X, Guo Y, Heindl LM
**Journal:** Int Ophthalmol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10792-022-02537-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10792-022-02537-6)

## Content

1. Int Ophthalmol. 2023 Apr;43(4):1437-1449. doi: 10.1007/s10792-022-02537-6.
Epub  2022 Oct 22.

Recent advances in graves ophthalmopathy medical therapy: a comprehensive 
literature review.

Li X(1), Li S(1), Fan W(1), Rokohl AC(1)(2), Ju S(1), Ju X(1), Guo Y(3)(4), 
Heindl LM(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital 
Cologne, University of Cologne, Kerpener Strasse 62, 50937, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Center for Integrated Oncology (CIO), Aachen-Bonn-Cologne-Duesseldorf, 
Cologne, Germany.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital 
Cologne, University of Cologne, Kerpener Strasse 62, 50937, Cologne, Germany. 
yongwei-guo@zju.edu.cn.
(4)Eye Center, Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine, Jiefang Road 88, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310009, China. 
yongwei-guo@zju.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital 
Cologne, University of Cologne, Kerpener Strasse 62, 50937, Cologne, Germany. 
ludwig.heindl@uk-koeln.de.
(6)Center for Integrated Oncology (CIO), Aachen-Bonn-Cologne-Duesseldorf, 
Cologne, Germany. ludwig.heindl@uk-koeln.de.

Graves ophthalmopathy (GO), which occurs in autoimmune thyroid disease, can 
reduce patients' quality of life due to its impact on visual function, physical 
appearance, and emotional health. Corticosteroids have been the first-line 
treatment for GO. More recently, the pathogenesis of GO has made significant 
progress. Various targeting biological agents and immunosuppressive agents make 
GO management more promising. Fully understanding GO pathogenesis and precise 
clinical management are beneficial for the prognosis of patients. Therefore, we 
conducted a comprehensive review of the medical management of GO and summarized 
research developments to highlight future research issues.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10792-022-02537-6
PMCID: PMC10113320
PMID: 36272013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interests.