---
reference_id: "PMID:24314034"
title: A compound heterozygous mutation in HADHB gene causes an axonal Charcot-Marie-tooth disease.
authors:
- Hong YB
- Lee JH
- Park JM
- Choi YR
- Hyun YS
- Yoon BR
- Yoo JH
- Koo H
- Jung SC
- Chung KW
- Choi BO
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-125
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A compound heterozygous mutation in HADHB gene causes an axonal Charcot-Marie-tooth disease.
**Authors:** Hong YB, Lee JH, Park JM, Choi YR, Hyun YS, Yoon BR, Yoo JH, Koo H, Jung SC, Chung KW, Choi BO
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2350-14-125](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2350-14-125)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2013 Dec 5;14:125. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-125.

A compound heterozygous mutation in HADHB gene causes an axonal 
Charcot-Marie-tooth disease.

Hong YB, Lee JH, Park JM, Choi YR, Hyun YS, Yoon BR, Yoo JH, Koo H, Jung SC, 
Chung KW(1), Choi BO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, 50 Ilwon-dong Gangnam-Gu, Seoul 135-710, Korea. 
kwchung@kongju.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is a heterogeneous disorder of the 
peripheral nervous system. So far, mutations in hydroxyacyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase/3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase/enoyl-CoA hydratase (trifunctional 
protein), beta subunit (HADHB) gene exhibit three distinctive phenotypes: severe 
neonatal presentation with cardiomyopathy, hepatic form with recurrent 
hypoketotic hypoglycemia, and later-onset axonal sensory neuropathy with 
episodic myoglobinuria.
METHODS: To identify the causative and characterize clinical features of a 
Korean family with motor and sensory neuropathies, whole exome study (WES), 
histopathologic study of distal sural nerve, and lower limb MRIs were performed.
RESULTS: WES revealed that a compound heterozygous mutation in HADHB is the 
causative of the present patients. The patients exhibited an early-onset axonal 
sensorimotor neuropathy without episodic myoglobinuria, and showed typical 
clinical and electrophysiological features of CMT including predominant distal 
muscle weakness and atrophy. Histopathologic findings of sural nerve were 
compatible with an axonal CMT neuropathy. Furthermore, they didn't exhibit any 
other symptoms of the previously reported HADHB patients.
CONCLUSIONS: These data implicate that mutation in HADHB gene can also cause 
early-onset axonal CMT instead of typical manifestations in mitochondrial 
trifunctional protein (MTP) deficiency. Therefore, this study is the first 
report of a new subtype of autosomal recessive axonal CMT by a compound 
heterozygous mutation in HADHB, and will expand the clinical and genetic 
spectrum of HADHB.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-125
PMCID: PMC4029087
PMID: 24314034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]