---
reference_id: "PMID:30143849"
title: "Osteogenesis imperfecta and the teeth, eyes, and ears-a study of non-skeletal phenotypes in adults."
authors:
- Hald JD
- Folkestad L
- Swan CZ
- Wanscher J
- Schmidt M
- Gjørup H
- Haubek D
- Leonhard CH
- Larsen DA
- Hjortdal JØ
- Harsløf T
- Duno M
- Lund AM
- Jensen JB
- Brixen K
- Langdahl B
journal: Osteoporos Int
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00198-018-4663-x
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Denmark/epidemiology
- "Dentinogenesis Imperfecta/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Female
- "Hearing Loss/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Phenotype
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenesis imperfecta and the teeth, eyes, and ears-a study of non-skeletal phenotypes in adults.
**Authors:** Hald JD, Folkestad L, Swan CZ, Wanscher J, Schmidt M, Gjørup H, Haubek D, Leonhard CH, Larsen DA, Hjortdal JØ, Harsløf T, Duno M, Lund AM, Jensen JB, Brixen K, Langdahl B
**Journal:** Osteoporos Int (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00198-018-4663-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-018-4663-x)

## Content

1. Osteoporos Int. 2018 Dec;29(12):2781-2789. doi: 10.1007/s00198-018-4663-x.
Epub  2018 Aug 24.

Osteogenesis imperfecta and the teeth, eyes, and ears-a study of non-skeletal 
phenotypes in adults.

Hald JD(1), Folkestad L(2)(3), Swan CZ(4)(5), Wanscher J(6), Schmidt M(7), 
Gjørup H(8), Haubek D(7), Leonhard CH(9), Larsen DA(9), Hjortdal JØ(9), Harsløf 
T(10), Duno M(11), Lund AM(11), Jensen JB(12), Brixen K(2), Langdahl B(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University 
Hospital, DK-8200, Aarhus N, Denmark. janniehald@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(3)Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, 
Denmark.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head & Neck Surgery, Aarhus University 
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(6)Department of ENT Head and Neck Surgery, Odense University Hospital, Odense, 
Denmark.
(7)Section for Pediatric Dentistry, Department of Dentistry and Oral Health, 
Health, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(8)Centre of Oral Health in Rare Diseases, Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, 
Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(10)Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University 
Hospital, DK-8200, Aarhus N, Denmark.
(11)Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Departments of Paediatrics and 
Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(12)Department of Endocrinology, Hvidovre Hospital, Hvidovre, Denmark.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a disease causing bone fragility; however, it 
potentially affects all organs with a high content of collagen, including ears, 
teeth, and eyes. The study is cross-sectional and compares non-skeletal 
characteristics in adults with OI that clinicians should be aware of when caring 
for patients with OI.
INTRODUCTION: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a hereditary connective tissue 
disorder. The skeletal fragility is pronounced; however, OI leads to a number of 
extra-skeletal symptoms related to the ubiquity of collagen type 1 throughout 
the human body. The vast majority of knowledge is derived from studies performed 
in the pediatric population. Thus, we aimed to investigate the nature and 
prevalence of ophthalmologic, odontologic, and otologic phenotypes in an adult 
population with OI.
METHODS: The study population comprises 85 Danish OI patients (age 
44.9 ± 15.9 years). Fifty-eight patients had OI type I, 12 OI type III, and 15 
OI type IV according to the classification by Sillence. Audiometric evaluations 
and dental examinations were performed in 62 and 73 patients, respectively. 
Ophthalmologic investigations were performed in 64 patients, including 
measurements of the central corneal thickness.
RESULTS: All patients, except two, had corneal thickness below the normal 
reference value. Patients with OI type I and patients with a quantitative 
collagen defect had thinner corneas compared to patients with OI type III and 
other patients with a qualitative collagen defect. One patient in this cohort 
was diagnosed with and treated for acute glaucoma. Dentinogenesis imperfecta was 
diagnosed in one fourth of the patients, based on clinical and radiographic 
findings. This condition was predominately seen in patients with moderate to 
severe OI. Hearing loss requiring treatment was found in 15 of 62 patients, of 
whom three were untreated. The most prevalent type of hearing loss (HL) was 
sensorineural hearing loss, whereas conductive HL was solely seen in patients 
with OI type III. The patients with the most severe degrees of HL were patients 
with mild forms of OI. Age was associated with increased HL.
CONCLUSION: Although significant health problems outside the skeleton are 
frequent in adult patients with OI, the patients are not consistently monitored 
and treated for their symptoms. Clinicians treating adult patients with OI 
should be aware of non-skeletal health issues and consider including regular 
interdisciplinary check-ups in the management plan for adult OI patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00198-018-4663-x
PMID: 30143849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]