---
reference_id: "PMID:35176758"
title: "Long COVID: post-acute sequelae of COVID-19 with a cardiovascular focus."
authors:
- Raman B
- Bluemke DA
- Lüscher TF
- Neubauer S
journal: Eur Heart J
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehac031
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long COVID: post-acute sequelae of COVID-19 with a cardiovascular focus.
**Authors:** Raman B, Bluemke DA, Lüscher TF, Neubauer S
**Journal:** Eur Heart J (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/eurheartj/ehac031](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehac031)

## Content

1. Eur Heart J. 2022 Mar 14;43(11):1157-1172. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehac031.

Long COVID: post-acute sequelae of COVID-19 with a cardiovascular focus.

Raman B(1), Bluemke DA(2)(3), Lüscher TF(4)(5), Neubauer S(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, Oxford 
Centre for Clinical Magnetic Resonance Research, University of Oxford, National 
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Oxford Biomedical Research Centre (BRC), 
Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Headley Way, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.
(2)Department of Radiology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, 3252 Clinical Science Center, 600 Highland Ave, Madison, WI 
53792, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, 3252 Clinical Science Center, 600 Highland Ave, Madison, WI 
53792, USA.
(4)Royal Brompton & Harefield Hospitals and National Heart and Lung Institute, 
Imperial College, London, UK.
(5)Center for Molecular Cardiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Emerging as a new epidemic, long COVID or post-acute sequelae of coronavirus 
disease 2019 (COVID-19), a condition characterized by the persistence of 
COVID-19 symptoms beyond 3 months, is anticipated to substantially alter the 
lives of millions of people globally. Cardiopulmonary symptoms including chest 
pain, shortness of breath, fatigue, and autonomic manifestations such as 
postural orthostatic tachycardia are common and associated with significant 
disability, heightened anxiety, and public awareness. A range of cardiovascular 
(CV) abnormalities has been reported among patients beyond the acute phase and 
include myocardial inflammation, myocardial infarction, right ventricular 
dysfunction, and arrhythmias. Pathophysiological mechanisms for delayed 
complications are still poorly understood, with a dissociation seen between 
ongoing symptoms and objective measures of cardiopulmonary health. COVID-19 is 
anticipated to alter the long-term trajectory of many chronic cardiac diseases 
which are abundant in those at risk of severe disease. In this review, we 
discuss the definition of long COVID and its epidemiology, with an emphasis on 
cardiopulmonary symptoms. We further review the pathophysiological mechanisms 
underlying acute and chronic CV injury, the range of post-acute CV sequelae, and 
impact of COVID-19 on multiorgan health. We propose a possible model for 
referral of post-COVID-19 patients to cardiac services and discuss future 
directions including research priorities and clinical trials that are currently 
underway to evaluate the efficacy of treatment strategies for long COVID and 
associated CV sequelae.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of European 
Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehac031
PMCID: PMC8903393
PMID: 35176758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]