---
reference_id: "PMID:32216968"
title: NAB2-STAT6 fusion protein mediates cell proliferation and oncogenic progression via EGR-1 regulation.
authors:
- Park YS
- Kim HS
- Kim JH
- Choi SH
- Kim DS
- Ryoo ZY
- Kim JY
- Lee S
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.03.090
keywords:
- Animals
- Carcinogenesis/genetics
- Cell Proliferation
- Disease Progression
- Early Growth Response Protein 1/genetics
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Humans
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor II/genetics
- Mice
- NIH 3T3 Cells
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- STAT6 Transcription Factor/genetics
- Solitary Fibrous Tumors/genetics
- Transfection
- Up-Regulation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NAB2-STAT6 fusion protein mediates cell proliferation and oncogenic progression via EGR-1 regulation.
**Authors:** Park YS, Kim HS, Kim JH, Choi SH, Kim DS, Ryoo ZY, Kim JY, Lee S
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.03.090](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.03.090)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2020 May 28;526(2):287-292. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.03.090. Epub 2020 Mar 23.

NAB2-STAT6 fusion protein mediates cell proliferation and oncogenic progression 
via EGR-1 regulation.

Park YS(1), Kim HS(2), Kim JH(1), Choi SH(1), Kim DS(1), Ryoo ZY(1), Kim JY(3), 
Lee S(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Science, BK21 Plus KNU Creative BioResearch Group, Kyungpook 
National University, Daegu, 41566, Republic of Korea.
(2)Institute of Life Science and Biotechnology, Kyungpook National University, 
Daegu, 41566, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry, IHBR, Kyungpook National 
University, Daegu, 41940, Republic of Korea.
(4)School of Life Science, BK21 Plus KNU Creative BioResearch Group, Kyungpook 
National University, Daegu, 41566, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: 
slee@knu.ac.kr.

Solitary fibrous tumors are rare mesenchymal tumors derived from soft tissues 
and vascular walls. NAB2-STAT6 fusion gene serves as a marker gene for this 
disease and consists of the truncated repressor domain of NGFI-A-Binding protein 
2 (NAB2) and the intact activation domain of STAT6. In this study, we found that 
EGR-1 and the proliferation-related EGR-1 target gene IGF2 were upregulated in 
NIH-3T3 cells transfected with NAB2-STAT6. Additionally, p-Rb (Ser795) and 
cyclin D1 levels were upregulated, and cell proliferation was also enhanced. We 
identified that treatment with the IGF2 inhibitor reduced cell proliferation in 
NIH-3T3 cells transfected with NAB2-STAT6. The oncogenic progression was 
enhanced in NIH-3T3 cells transfected with NAB2-STAT6 compared with those 
transfected with the empty vector. Taken together, our study suggests that the 
NAB2-STAT6 fusion gene is associated with cell proliferation through EGR-1 
transcriptional expression and IGF2 can be a drug target for the treatment of 
solitary fibrous tumors.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.03.090
PMID: 32216968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.