---
reference_id: "PMID:20414746"
title: Glomerular antibodies in lupus nephritis.
authors:
- Hanrotel-Saliou C
- Segalen I
- Le Meur Y
- Youinou P
- Renaudineau Y
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-010-8204-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glomerular antibodies in lupus nephritis.
**Authors:** Hanrotel-Saliou C, Segalen I, Le Meur Y, Youinou P, Renaudineau Y
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-010-8204-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-010-8204-4)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2011 Jun;40(3):151-8. doi:
10.1007/s12016-010-8204-4.

Glomerular antibodies in lupus nephritis.

Hanrotel-Saliou C(1), Segalen I, Le Meur Y, Youinou P, Renaudineau Y.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Nephrology, Brest University Medical School Hospital, Brest, France.

Lupus nephritis (LN) remains the most common severe manifestation of systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE) characterized by the presence of autoantibodies (Abs) 
that are believed to play a central role in the pathogenesis of LN. Among more 
than 100 Abs reported in SLE, only a few display a direct glomerular binding 
capacity. Such antiglomerular Abs are detected at the onset of the disease 
before antinuclear Abs detection and proteinuria, this detection is associated 
with the related autoantigen overexpression. Antiglomerular Abs are able to 
interfere with cell metabolism, to penetrate living cells, and to induce 
glomerular cell proliferation. In addition, antiglomerular Abs could be 
nephritogenic causing proteinuria, particularly when they cross-react with 
anti-dsDNA Abs. Antiglomerular Abs encompass anti-α-actinin, anti-laminin-1, 
antifibronectin, antimyosin, and anticollagen Abs. The pathogenic activity of 
anti-α-actinin Abs has been demonstrated in non-autoimmune mice after 
immunization with α-actinin, but not with dsDNA, leading to a SLE-like disease 
with proteinuria and glomerular immune complex deposition. Similarly, 
extracorporeal immunoabsorption to remove anti-laminin-1 Abs reduces kidney-Abs 
deposition and proteinuria in mice and humans proving their pathogenic effect. 
Altogether this suggests that antiglomerular Abs participate, at least at the 
beginning, in the glomerular immune complex deposition and in the kidney damage.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-010-8204-4
PMID: 20414746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]