---
reference_id: "PMID:23623388"
title: ZC4H2 mutations are associated with arthrogryposis multiplex congenita and intellectual disability through impairment of central and peripheral synaptic plasticity.
authors:
- Hirata H
- Nanda I
- van Riesen A
- McMichael G
- Hu H
- Hambrock M
- Papon MA
- Fischer U
- Marouillat S
- Ding C
- Alirol S
- Bienek M
- Preisler-Adams S
- Grimme A
- Seelow D
- Webster R
- Haan E
- MacLennan A
- Stenzel W
- Yap TY
- Gardner A
- Nguyen LS
- Shaw M
- Lebrun N
- Haas SA
- Kress W
- Haaf T
- Schellenberger E
- Chelly J
- Viot G
- Shaffer LG
- Rosenfeld JA
- Kramer N
- Falk R
- El-Khechen D
- Escobar LF
- Hennekam R
- Wieacker P
- Hübner C
- Ropers HH
- Gecz J
- Schuelke M
- Laumonnier F
- Kalscheuer VM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.03.021
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Animals
- "Arthrogryposis/genetics, pathology"
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chromosome Breakpoints
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Haplotypes/genetics
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- In Situ Hybridization
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Male
- Mice
- Mutation/genetics
- Neuronal Plasticity/genetics
- Nuclear Proteins
- Pedigree
- Synapses/genetics
- Zebrafish
- Zinc Fingers/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ZC4H2 mutations are associated with arthrogryposis multiplex congenita and intellectual disability through impairment of central and peripheral synaptic plasticity.
**Authors:** Hirata H, Nanda I, van Riesen A, McMichael G, Hu H, Hambrock M, Papon MA, Fischer U, Marouillat S, Ding C, Alirol S, Bienek M, Preisler-Adams S, Grimme A, Seelow D, Webster R, Haan E, MacLennan A, Stenzel W, Yap TY, Gardner A, Nguyen LS, Shaw M, Lebrun N, Haas SA, Kress W, Haaf T, Schellenberger E, Chelly J, Viot G, Shaffer LG, Rosenfeld JA, Kramer N, Falk R, El-Khechen D, Escobar LF, Hennekam R, Wieacker P, Hübner C, Ropers HH, Gecz J, Schuelke M, Laumonnier F, Kalscheuer VM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.03.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.03.021)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 May 2;92(5):681-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.03.021. Epub
 2013 Apr 25.

ZC4H2 mutations are associated with arthrogryposis multiplex congenita and
intellectual disability through impairment of central and peripheral synaptic
plasticity.

Hirata H(1), Nanda I, van Riesen A, McMichael G, Hu H, Hambrock M, Papon MA,
Fischer U, Marouillat S, Ding C, Alirol S, Bienek M, Preisler-Adams S, Grimme A,
Seelow D, Webster R, Haan E, MacLennan A, Stenzel W, Yap TY, Gardner A, Nguyen
LS, Shaw M, Lebrun N, Haas SA, Kress W, Haaf T, Schellenberger E, Chelly J, Viot
G, Shaffer LG, Rosenfeld JA, Kramer N, Falk R, El-Khechen D, Escobar LF,
Hennekam R, Wieacker P, Hübner C, Ropers HH, Gecz J, Schuelke M, Laumonnier F,
Kalscheuer VM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Frontier Research, National Institute of Genetics, Precursory
Research for Embryonic Science and Technology, Japan Science and Technology
Agency, Mishima 411-8540, Japan.

Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is caused by heterogeneous pathologies
leading to multiple antenatal joint contractures through fetal akinesia.
Understanding the pathophysiology of this disorder is important for clinical
care of the affected individuals and genetic counseling of the families. We thus
aimed to establish the genetic basis of an AMC subtype that is associated with
multiple dysmorphic features and intellectual disability (ID). We used haplotype
analysis, next-generation sequencing, array comparative genomic hybridization,
and chromosome breakpoint mapping to identify the pathogenic mutations in
families and simplex cases. Suspected disease variants were verified by
cosegregation analysis. We identified disease-causing mutations in the
zinc-finger gene ZC4H2 in four families affected by X-linked AMC plus ID and one
family affected by cerebral palsy. Several heterozygous females were also
affected, but to a lesser degree. Furthermore, we found two ZC4H2 deletions and
one rearrangement in two female and one male unrelated simplex cases,
respectively. In mouse primary hippocampal neurons, transiently produced ZC4H2
localized to the postsynaptic compartment of excitatory synapses, and the
altered protein influenced dendritic spine density. In zebrafish,
antisense-morpholino-mediated zc4h2 knockdown caused abnormal swimming and
impaired α-motoneuron development. All missense mutations identified herein
failed to rescue the swimming defect of zebrafish morphants. We conclude that
ZC4H2 point mutations, rearrangements, and small deletions cause a clinically
variable broad-spectrum neurodevelopmental disorder of the central and
peripheral nervous systems in both familial and simplex cases of both sexes. Our
results highlight the importance of ZC4H2 for genetic testing of individuals
presenting with ID plus muscle weakness and minor or major forms of AMC.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.03.021
PMCID: PMC3644645
PMID: 23623388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
