---
reference_id: "PMID:39429887"
title: "Recurrent rhabdomyolysis caused by palmitoyltransferase II (CPT-2) deficiency but complete normal acylcarnitine profile: A patient presentation and review of the literature."
authors:
- Lu CH
- Yang CF
- Chen YR
- Chen YJ
- Lu YH
- Niu DM
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101151
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent rhabdomyolysis caused by palmitoyltransferase II (CPT-2) deficiency but complete normal acylcarnitine profile: A patient presentation and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Lu CH, Yang CF, Chen YR, Chen YJ, Lu YH, Niu DM
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101151](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101151)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2024 Oct 5;41:101151. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101151. 
eCollection 2024 Dec.

Recurrent rhabdomyolysis caused by palmitoyltransferase II (CPT-2) deficiency 
but complete normal acylcarnitine profile: A patient presentation and review of 
the literature.

Lu CH(1), Yang CF(1)(2), Chen YR(1), Chen YJ(1), Lu YH(1), Niu DM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao 
Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Recurrent rhabdomyolysis, marked by skeletal muscle breakdown, can stem from 
various causes, including genetic disorders. We detail a patient of a 
22-year-old male with carnitine palmitoyltransferase II (CPT-2) deficiency 
manifesting recurrent rhabdomyolysis despite normal acylcarnitine profiles. 
Whole-genome sequencing identified two CPT2 gene variants: c.338C > T and 
c.482G > A, confirming the diagnosis. We conducted a case report and a 
comprehensive literature review encompassing 262 articles related to CPT-2 
deficiency available on PubMed. The review detailed 245 cases across various 
forms, including lethal neonatal, severe infantile hepatocardiomuscular, and 
myopathic forms. The study highlighted the variability and complexity of CPT-2 
deficiency phenotypes, emphasizing correlations between variants and phenotypes 
as well as gender distribution. Although the CPT-2 deficiency genotype does not 
entirely predict phenotype severity, it remains informative for most patients, 
assisting in assessing the severity linked to each genetic variant. The results 
of our study offer crucial insights into evaluating the severity associated with 
individual genetic variants. Notably, our patient displayed normal acylcarnitine 
profiles between illness episodes, indicating possible profile abnormalities 
only during active disease states. We propose the collection of additional blood 
samples for acylcarnitine analysis during episodes of rhabdomyolysis without 
delay in all patients presenting with rhabdomyolysis of unknown cause as a 
crucial diagnostic strategy. This approach may unveil unexpected underlying 
diseases, enabling early and accurate diagnoses.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101151
PMCID: PMC11490796
PMID: 39429887

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.