---
reference_id: "PMID:29151359"
title: Osimertinib in Untreated EGFR-Mutated Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.
authors:
- Soria JC
- Ohe Y
- Vansteenkiste J
- Reungwetwattana T
- Chewaskulyong B
- Lee KH
- Dechaphunkul A
- Imamura F
- Nogami N
- Kurata T
- Okamoto I
- Zhou C
- Cho BC
- Cheng Y
- Cho EK
- Voon PJ
- Planchard D
- Su WC
- Gray JE
- Lee SM
- Hodge R
- Marotti M
- Rukazenkov Y
- Ramalingam SS
- FLAURA Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1713137
keywords:
- Acrylamides
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Aniline Compounds
- "Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, mortality"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Double-Blind Method
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Erlotinib Hydrochloride/therapeutic use
- Female
- Gefitinib
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, mortality"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Piperazines/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Quinazolines/therapeutic use
- Survival Rate
- Indoles
- Pyrimidines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osimertinib in Untreated EGFR-Mutated Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.
**Authors:** Soria JC, Ohe Y, Vansteenkiste J, Reungwetwattana T, Chewaskulyong B, Lee KH, Dechaphunkul A, Imamura F, Nogami N, Kurata T, Okamoto I, Zhou C, Cho BC, Cheng Y, Cho EK, Voon PJ, Planchard D, Su WC, Gray JE, Lee SM, Hodge R, Marotti M, Rukazenkov Y, Ramalingam SS, FLAURA Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1713137](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1713137)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2018 Jan 11;378(2):113-125. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1713137. Epub
2017  Nov 18.

Osimertinib in Untreated EGFR-Mutated Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.

Soria JC(1), Ohe Y(1), Vansteenkiste J(1), Reungwetwattana T(1), Chewaskulyong
B(1), Lee KH(1), Dechaphunkul A(1), Imamura F(1), Nogami N(1), Kurata T(1),
Okamoto I(1), Zhou C(1), Cho BC(1), Cheng Y(1), Cho EK(1), Voon PJ(1), Planchard
D(1), Su WC(1), Gray JE(1), Lee SM(1), Hodge R(1), Marotti M(1), Rukazenkov
Y(1), Ramalingam SS(1); FLAURA Investigators.

Collaborators: Boyer M, Lee C, Hughes B, O’Byrne K, Briggs P, Milward M, John T,
Demedts I, Bustin F, Barrios CH, Timcheva C, Butts C, Goss G, Juergens R, Leighl
N, Cheng S, Burkes R, Zhang H, Shu Y, Zhou Q, Li W, Feng G, He Y, Wang B, Gao H,
Nan K, Zhou X, Fan Y, Hunag JA, Hu Y, Liu YP, Liu C, Zhang Y, Zhu B, Bartek T,
Monnet I, El Kouri C, Perol M, Berard H, Madelaine J, von Pawel J, Grohe C,
Bohnet S, Bischoff H, zum Büschenfelde CM, Rückert A, Urban L, Papi-Szekely Z,
Csánky E, Böcskei C, Tehenes S, Gottfried M, Bar J, Peled N, Wollner M,
Bertolini A, Ardizzoia A, Accettura C, Mitella M, Passalacqua R, Novello S,
Roila F, Tiseo M, Sekine A, Takahashi T, Kasahara K, Yoh K, Sugawara S,
Kobayashi N, Shimokawa T, Okuda C, Fukuhara T, Sata M, Nagakawa K, Atagi S,
Nakahara Y, Lee JS, Lee KY, Shin SW, Kang JH, How SH, Pang YK, Osorio-Sanchez
JA, Ladrera GEI, Serwatowski P, Szczesna A, Zajda K, Ramlau R, Sawka D,
Encarnação Teixeira M, Almodovar T, Soares M, Almeida A, Barroso A, Schenker M,
Girgorescu AC, Iorga P, Orlov S, Karaseva N, Moiseenko V, Garcia Campelo R, Isla
Casado MD, Cobo Dols M, Nadal E, Campayo Guillaumes M, González Larriba JL,
Majem Tarruella M, Vázquez Estévez S, Fuentes Pradera J, Márquez Medina D,
Vikstrom A, Gautschi O, Britschgi C, Mueller A, Tsai YH, Wu MF, Yang CT, Lin MC,
Chen CH, Srimuninnimit V, Laohavinij S, Sriuranpong V, Yildiz R, Bondarenko I,
Vynnychenko I, Adamchuk H, Shparyk Y, Price A, Summers Y, Shah R, Dragnev K,
Maniam A, McCune S, Ruiz J, Jänne P, Feinstein T, Hamm J, Anderson I, Khan F,
Boccia R, Tran N, Nguyen N.

Author information:
(1)From Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus and University Paris-Sud, Orsay, France
(J.-C.S., D.P.); the Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center
Hospital, Tokyo (Y.O.), the Department of Thoracic Oncology, Osaka International
Cancer Institute (F.I.), and the Department of Thoracic Oncology, Kansai Medical
University Hospital (T.K.), Osaka, the Department of Thoracic Oncology, National
Hospital Organization Shikoku Cancer Center, Matsuyama (N.N.), and the Research
Institute for Diseases of the Chest, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka (I.O.) - all in Japan; the Respiratory Oncology Unit,
University Hospital KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium (J.V.); Faculty of Medicine
Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok (T.R.), the Oncology Unit,
Department of Medicine, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai (B.C.), and the
Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, Prince of Songkla University, Hat Yai (A.D.) - all in Thailand; the
Division of Medical Oncology, Chungbuk National University Hospital, Chungbuk
National University College of Medicine, Cheong-ju (K.H.L.), the Division of
Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul (B.C.C.), and the Division of Hematology
and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Gachon University Gil Medical
Center, Incheon (E.K.C.) - all in South Korea; Pulmonary Hospital of Tongji
University, Shanghai (C.Z.), and Jilin Provincial Cancer Hospital, Changchun
(Y.C.) - both in China; Hospital Umum Sarawak, Kuching, Malaysia (P.J.V.);
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan (W.-C.S.); the Department of
Thoracic Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa,
FL (J.E.G.); the Department of Oncology, University College London Hospitals
Biomedical Research Centre, and the Cancer Research UK Lung Cancer Centre of
Excellence, London (S.-M.L.), and AstraZeneca, Cambridge (R.H., M.M., Y.R.) -
all in the United Kingdom; and Emory University School of Medicine, Winship
Cancer Institute, Atlanta (S.S.R.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Jan 11;378(2):192-193. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1714580.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Mar 29;378(13):1261. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1801669.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Mar 29;378(13):1261-2. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1801669.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Mar 29;378(13):1262. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1801669.
    Ann Transl Med. 2018 Feb;6(3):57. doi: 10.21037/atm.2017.12.13.
    Ann Transl Med. 2018 Feb;6(3):61. doi: 10.21037/atm.2017.12.27.
    J Thorac Dis. 2018 Mar;10(3):1265-1268. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2018.03.28.
    Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2018 Apr;7(Suppl 2):S165-S170. doi:
10.21037/tlcr.2018.03.19.
    Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2018 Apr;7(Suppl 2):S127-S130. doi:
10.21037/tlcr.2018.03.06.
    J Thorac Dis. 2018 Apr;10(Suppl 9):S1076-S1080. doi:
10.21037/jtd.2018.03.92.
    Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2018 Sep;7(Suppl 3):S187-S190. doi:
10.21037/tlcr.2018.04.16.
    J Thorac Dis. 2018 Nov;10(Suppl 33):S3837-S3839. doi:
10.21037/jtd.2018.09.52.

BACKGROUND: Osimertinib is an oral, third-generation, irreversible epidermal
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) that selectively
inhibits both EGFR-TKI-sensitizing and EGFR T790M resistance mutations. We
compared osimertinib with standard EGFR-TKIs in patients with previously
untreated, EGFR mutation-positive advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: In this double-blind, phase 3 trial, we randomly assigned 556 patients
with previously untreated, EGFR mutation-positive (exon 19 deletion or L858R)
advanced NSCLC in a 1:1 ratio to receive either osimertinib (at a dose of 80 mg
once daily) or a standard EGFR-TKI (gefitinib at a dose of 250 mg once daily or
erlotinib at a dose of 150 mg once daily). The primary end point was
investigator-assessed progression-free survival.
RESULTS: The median progression-free survival was significantly longer with
osimertinib than with standard EGFR-TKIs (18.9 months vs. 10.2 months; hazard
ratio for disease progression or death, 0.46; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.37
to 0.57; P<0.001). The objective response rate was similar in the two groups:
80% with osimertinib and 76% with standard EGFR-TKIs (odds ratio, 1.27; 95% CI,
0.85 to 1.90; P=0.24). The median duration of response was 17.2 months (95% CI,
13.8 to 22.0) with osimertinib versus 8.5 months (95% CI, 7.3 to 9.8) with
standard EGFR-TKIs. Data on overall survival were immature at the interim
analysis (25% maturity). The survival rate at 18 months was 83% (95% CI, 78 to
87) with osimertinib and 71% (95% CI, 65 to 76) with standard EGFR-TKIs (hazard
ratio for death, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.45 to 0.88; P=0.007 [nonsignificant in the
interim analysis]). Adverse events of grade 3 or higher were less frequent with
osimertinib than with standard EGFR-TKIs (34% vs. 45%).
CONCLUSIONS: Osimertinib showed efficacy superior to that of standard EGFR-TKIs
in the first-line treatment of EGFR mutation-positive advanced NSCLC, with a
similar safety profile and lower rates of serious adverse events. (Funded by
AstraZeneca; FLAURA ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02296125 .).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1713137
PMID: 29151359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
