---
reference_id: "PMID:32300883"
title: Serum procalcitonin in Philadelphia-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms.
authors:
- Krečak I
- Peran N
- Lapić I
- Gverić-Krečak V
- Krečak F
- Rončević P
- Duraković N
journal: Wien Klin Wochenschr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00508-020-01651-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Myeloproliferative Disorders/diagnosis
- Polycythemia Vera/diagnosis
- Primary Myelofibrosis
- Procalcitonin
- "Thrombocythemia, Essential/diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serum procalcitonin in Philadelphia-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms.
**Authors:** Krečak I, Peran N, Lapić I, Gverić-Krečak V, Krečak F, Rončević P, Duraković N
**Journal:** Wien Klin Wochenschr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00508-020-01651-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00508-020-01651-8)

## Content

1. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 2021 Jan;133(1-2):62-64. doi:
10.1007/s00508-020-01651-8.  Epub 2020 Apr 16.

Serum procalcitonin in Philadelphia-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Krečak I(1), Peran N(2), Lapić I(3), Gverić-Krečak V(4), Krečak F(4), Rončević 
P(5), Duraković N(6)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, General Hospital of Šibenik-Knin County, 
Stjepana Radića 83, 22000, Šibenik, Croatia. krecak.ivan@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Laboratory Diagnostics, General Hospital of Šibenik-Knin 
County, Šibenik, Croatia.
(3)Department of Laboratory Hematology and Coagulation, Clinical Department of 
Laboratory Diagnostics, University Hospital Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, General Hospital of Šibenik-Knin County, 
Stjepana Radića 83, 22000, Šibenik, Croatia.
(5)School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(6)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital 
Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.

Philadelphia-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), essential 
thrombocythemia (ET), polycythemia vera (PV), and myelofibrosis (MF), are rare 
clonal hematopoietic stem cell disorders accompanied by a strong inflammatory 
milieu, which is directly responsible for constitutional symptoms associated 
with the disease, such as fever, weight loss or night sweats. Non-hematologists 
sometimes (and often wrongly) consider the fever in MPN patients to be a symptom 
of an underlying disease, which may have devastating consequences. Serum 
procalcitonin (PCT) is a circulating biomarker commonly used to improve the 
diagnostic accuracy of bacterial infections and to guide antibiotic therapy. The 
aim of this study was to test whether PCT could aid the clinician in the early 
diagnosis of bacterial infections in MPNs. This study investigated PCT in 
41 ambulatory MPN patients (13 ET, 13 PV and 15 MF) who had no signs of 
infection and compared it to 10 MPN patients with microbiologically and/or 
serologically documented bacterial infections. Median PCT in MPN patients was 
0.02 ng/mL (range 0.01-0.09 ng/mL). No difference in PCT was found between ET, 
PV and MF patients (p = 0.993), whereas MPN patients with documented bacterial 
infections had significantly higher PCT (median PCT 2.45, range 0.90-5.40 ng/mL) 
when compared to MPN patients with (median PCT 0.03 ng/mL) or without 
constitutional symptoms (median PCT 0.02 ng/mL; p < 0.001 for both analyses). 
These results clearly show that PCT should not be considered as a disease 
biomarker in MPNs and careful clinical assessment for the signs of infection is 
needed when MPN patients present with fever and high PCT.

DOI: 10.1007/s00508-020-01651-8
PMID: 32300883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]