---
reference_id: "PMID:20484601"
title: Glucose-6-phosphate-dehydrogenase deficiency as a risk factor for pterygium.
authors:
- Peiretti E
- Mandas A
- Cocco P
- Norfo C
- Abete C
- Angius F
- Pani A
- Vascellari S
- Del Fiacco G
- Cannas D
- Diaz G
- Dessì S
- Fossarello M
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-4426
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucose-6-phosphate-dehydrogenase deficiency as a risk factor for pterygium.
**Authors:** Peiretti E, Mandas A, Cocco P, Norfo C, Abete C, Angius F, Pani A, Vascellari S, Del Fiacco G, Cannas D, Diaz G, Dessì S, Fossarello M
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.09-4426](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.09-4426)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010 Jun;51(6):2928-35. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-4426.

Glucose-6-phosphate-dehydrogenase deficiency as a risk factor for pterygium.

Peiretti E(1), Mandas A, Cocco P, Norfo C, Abete C, Angius F, Pani A, Vascellari 
S, Del Fiacco G, Cannas D, Diaz G, Dessì S, Fossarello M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences and Odontoiatry, Eye Clinic, University of 
Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.

PURPOSE: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is an important site of 
metabolic control in the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP), providing reducing 
power (NADPH) and pentose phosphates. The purpose of this study was to 
investigate the possible involvement of G6PD deficiency (G6PD-) in the 
pathogenesis of pterygium.
METHODS: Erythrocyte G6PD activity was evaluated in 123 pterygium patients and 
in 112 age-matched control patients. Enzyme activity, mRNA, rate of growth, 
green autofluorescence, response to oxidative stress, and cholesterol metabolism 
were determined in pterygium fibroblasts (PFs) and in normal conjunctival 
fibroblasts (NCFs) isolated from G6PD normal (NCFs+ and PFs+) and G6PD- (NCFs- 
and PFs-) patients.
RESULTS: Higher prevalence of G6PD- was found in patients affected by primary 
pterygium than in control subjects, both men and women, suggesting that this 
enzymatic defect may be a predisposing factor for pterygium. G6PD activity was 
significantly lower in NCFs- than in NCFs+, but not in PFs- than in PFs+. In 
PFs-, G6PD mRNA levels were significantly higher than in PFs+. Growth-stimulated 
NCFs- grew at half the rate of NCFs+, although PFs- and PFs+ grew at the same 
rate. Increased green autofluorescence and susceptibility to oxidative stress 
were observed in PFs (+/-) and in NCFs-, but not in NCFs+. Moreover, ex vivo PFs 
(+/-) accumulated more lipids than corresponding NCFs.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study, although restricted to a limited group 
of subjects (i.e., those of Sardinian ancestry), suggest that G6PD- not only 
does not protect against pterygium, but may even be considered a risk factor for 
the development of this disorder.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.09-4426
PMID: 20484601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]