---
reference_id: "PMID:41165761"
title: Ciliopathy-related B9 protein complex regulates ciliary axonemal microtubule posttranslational modifications and initiation of ciliogenesis.
authors:
- He R
- Li Y
- Jin M
- Jiao H
- Shen Y
- Han Q
- Pan X
- Wang S
- Lin Z
- Li J
- Lu C
- Meng D
- Cao Z
- Shang Q
- Lv N
- Wan K
- Gao H
- Ma X
- Yin H
- Chang H
- Wang L
- Luo M
- Pan J
- Zhao C
- Cao M
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1172/JCI196365
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ciliopathy-related B9 protein complex regulates ciliary axonemal microtubule posttranslational modifications and initiation of ciliogenesis.
**Authors:** He R, Li Y, Jin M, Jiao H, Shen Y, Han Q, Pan X, Wang S, Lin Z, Li J, Lu C, Meng D, Cao Z, Shang Q, Lv N, Wan K, Gao H, Ma X, Yin H, Chang H, Wang L, Luo M, Pan J, Zhao C, Cao M
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI196365](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI196365)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2025 Oct 30;136(2):e196365. doi: 10.1172/JCI196365. eCollection
 2026 Jan 16.

Ciliopathy-related B9 protein complex regulates ciliary axonemal microtubule 
posttranslational modifications and initiation of ciliogenesis.

He R(1), Li Y(1), Jin M(2)(3), Jiao H(1), Shen Y(4), Han Q(2)(3), Pan X(1), Wang 
S(1), Lin Z(1), Li J(1), Lu C(4), Meng D(5), Cao Z(4), Shang Q(6), Lv N(6), Wan 
K(6), Gao H(4), Ma X(4), Yin H(7), Chang H(8), Wang L(9), Luo M(4), Pan 
J(3)(10), Zhao C(2)(3), Cao M(1).

Author information:
(1)International Peace Maternity and Child Health Hospital, Key Laboratory of 
Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of Education, Department 
of Pathophysiology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 
China.
(2)Institute of Evolution and Marine Biodiversity, Ocean University of China, 
Qingdao, China.
(3)Laboratory for Marine Biology and Biotechnology, Qingdao Marine Science and 
Technology Center, Qingdao, China.
(4)National Human Genetic Resources Center, National Research Institute for 
Family Planning, Beijing, China.
(5)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Food and Biotechnology, School of Biotechnology and 
Food Science, Tianjin University of Commerce, Tianjin, China.
(6)Rehabilitation Center, Children's Hospital Affiliated to Zhengzhou 
University, Henan Children's Hospital, Zhengzhou Children's Hospital, Zhengzhou, 
China.
(7)School of Acupuncture and Tuina, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Chengdu, China.
(8)Shanghai Institute of Precision Medicine, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, 
Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(9)School of Life Sciences, Jiangsu Normal University, Xuzhou, China.
(10)MOE Key Laboratory of Protein Sciences, Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life 
Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

Ciliary dysfunction results in multiorgan developmental diseases, collectively 
known as ciliopathies. The B9D1-B9D2-MKS1protein complex maintains the 
gatekeeper function at the ciliary transition zone (TZ). However, the function 
of B9 proteins and the mechanisms underlying why different variants in the same 
B9 gene cause different ciliopathies are not fully understood. Here, we 
investigated the function of B9 proteins and revealed 2 critical functions. 
First, the B9 complex interacted with and anchored TMEM67 to the TZ membrane. 
Disruption of the B9-TMEM67 complex reduced posttranslational modifications of 
axonemal microtubules due to deregulation of tubulin-modifying enzymes within 
cilia. Second, B9 proteins localized to centrioles prior to ciliogenesis, where 
they facilitated the initiation of ciliogenesis. In addition, we identified B9D2 
variants in a cohort of patients with Joubert syndrome. We found that Joubert 
syndrome-associated B9D2 variants primarily affected axonemal microtubule 
modifications without disrupting ciliogenesis, whereas the Meckel 
syndrome-associated B9D2 variant disrupted both ciliogenesis and axonemal 
microtubule modifications. Thus, besides its role as a gatekeeper for ciliary 
membrane proteins, the B9 complex also controls axonemal microtubule 
posttranslational modifications and early stages of ciliogenesis, providing 
insights into the distinct pathologies arising from different variants of the 
same gene.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI196365
PMCID: PMC12807484
PMID: 41165761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]