---
reference_id: PMID:12393803
title: Reduced level of the repair/transcription factor TFIIH in trichothiodystrophy.
authors:
- Botta E
- Nardo T
- Lehmann AR
- Egly JM
- Pedrini AM
- Stefanini M
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.23.2919
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, metabolism"
- "Antigens/genetics, metabolism"
- Biopsy
- "Blotting, Western"
- "Cyclin-Dependent Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- DNA Helicases
- DNA Repair
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Down-Regulation
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Hair/abnormalities
- Humans
- "Ichthyosis/genetics, metabolism"
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, metabolism"
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Transcription Factor TFIIH
- Transcription Factors
- "Transcription Factors, TFII/metabolism"
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- "Xeroderma Pigmentosum/genetics, metabolism"
- Xeroderma Pigmentosum Group D Protein
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase-Activating Kinase
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduced level of the repair/transcription factor TFIIH in trichothiodystrophy.
**Authors:** Botta E, Nardo T, Lehmann AR, Egly JM, Pedrini AM, Stefanini M
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/11.23.2919](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/11.23.2919)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Nov 1;11(23):2919-28. doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.23.2919.

Reduced level of the repair/transcription factor TFIIH in trichothiodystrophy.

Botta E(1), Nardo T, Lehmann AR, Egly JM, Pedrini AM, Stefanini M.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Genetica Molecolare CNR, via Abbiategrasso, 207, 27100 Pavia, 
Italy.

Trichothiodystrophy (TTD) is a rare hereditary multisystem disorder associated 
with defects in nucleotide excision repair (NER) as a consequence of mutations 
in XPD, XPB or TTDA, three genes that are all related to TFIIH, the multiprotein 
complex involved in NER and transcription. Here we show that all the mutations 
found in TTD cases, irrespective of whether they are homozygotes, hemizygotes or 
compound heterozygotes, cause a substantial and specific reduction (by up to 
70%) in the cellular concentration of TFIIH. Intriguingly, the degree of 
reduction in the level of TFIIH does not correlate with the severity of the 
pathological phenotype, suggesting that the severity of the clinical features in 
TTD cannot be related solely to the effects of mutations on the stability of 
TFIIH. We have also measured TFIIH levels in cells in which different mutations 
in the XPD gene are associated with clinical symptoms not of TTD but of the 
highly cancer-prone disorder xeroderma pigmentosum (XP). We have found mild 
reductions (up to 40%) in TFIIH content in some but not all of these cell 
strains. We conclude that the severity of the clinical features in TTD patients 
and the clinical outcome of differentially mutated XPD proteins is likely to 
depend both on the effects that each mutation has on the stability of TFIIH and 
on the transcriptional activity of the residual TFIIH complexes.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/11.23.2919
PMID: 12393803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]