---
reference_id: "PMID:32936839"
title: "Apoptosis in idiopathic inflammatory myopathies with partial invasion; a role for CD8+ cytotoxic T cells?"
authors:
- Danielsson O
- Häggqvist B
- Gröntoft L
- Öllinger K
- Ernerudh J
journal: PLoS One
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0239176
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Apoptosis in idiopathic inflammatory myopathies with partial invasion; a role for CD8+ cytotoxic T cells?
**Authors:** Danielsson O, Häggqvist B, Gröntoft L, Öllinger K, Ernerudh J
**Journal:** PLoS One (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0239176](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239176)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2020 Sep 16;15(9):e0239176. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0239176. 
eCollection 2020.

Apoptosis in idiopathic inflammatory myopathies with partial invasion; a role 
for CD8+ cytotoxic T cells?

Danielsson O(1), Häggqvist B(1), Gröntoft L(1), Öllinger K(2), Ernerudh J(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, 
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Linköping University, Linköping, 
Sweden.
(2)Division of Experimental Pathology, Department of Biomedical and Clinical 
Sciences, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(3)Division of Clinical Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, Department of 
Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.

Polymyositis and inclusion body myositis are idiopathic inflammatory myopathies, 
with a pathology characterized by partial invasion of non-necrotic muscle fibres 
by CD8+ cytotoxic T-cells, leading to fibre degeneration. Although the main 
effector pathway of CD8+ T-cells is to induce apoptosis of target cells, it has 
remained unclear if apoptosis occurs in these diseases, and if so, if it is 
mediated by CD8+ T-cells. In consecutive biopsy sections from 10 patients with 
partial invasion, muscle fibres and inflammatory cells were assessed by 
immunohistochemistry and apoptotic nuclei by the TUNEL assay. Analysis of muscle 
fibre morphology, staining pattern and quantification were performed on digital 
images, and they were compared with biopsies from 10 dermatomyositis patients 
and 10 controls without muscle disease. Apoptotic myonuclei were found in muscle 
with partial invasion, but not in the invaded fibres. Fibres with TUNEL positive 
nuclei were surrounded by CD8+ T-cells, granzyme B+ cells and macrophages, but 
lacked FAS receptor expression. In contrast, apoptotic myonuclei were rare in 
dermatomyositis and absent in controls. The findings confirm that apoptosis 
occurs in idiopathic inflammatory myopathies and support that it is mediated by 
CD8+ cytotoxic T- cells, acting in parallel to the process of partial invasion.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0239176
PMCID: PMC7494097
PMID: 32936839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.