---
reference_id: "PMID:39962344"
title: Study Protocol of Expanded Multicenter Prospective Cohort Study of Active Surveillance on Papillary Thyroid Microcarcinoma (MAeSTro-EXP).
authors:
- Moon JH
- Lee EK
- Cha W
- Chai YJ
- Cho SW
- Choi JY
- Choi SY
- Chu AJ
- Chung EJ
- Hwangbo Y
- Jeong WJ
- Jung YS
- Kim K
- Kim MJ
- Kim SJ
- Kim W
- Kim YH
- Lee CY
- Lee JY
- Lee KE
- Lee YK
- Lim H
- Park DJ
- Park SK
- Ryu CH
- Ryu J
- Seok J
- Song YS
- Yi KH
- Yu HW
- White E
- Mastrocostas K
- Clifton-Bligh RJ
- Glover A
- Gild ML
- Kim JH
- Park YJ
journal: Endocrinol Metab (Seoul)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3803/EnM.2024.2136
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Carcinoma, Papillary/pathology, therapy"
- Disease Progression
- Follow-Up Studies
- Multicenter Studies as Topic
- Prognosis
- Prospective Studies
- Quality of Life
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/pathology, therapy"
- Thyroidectomy
- Watchful Waiting/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Study Protocol of Expanded Multicenter Prospective Cohort Study of Active Surveillance on Papillary Thyroid Microcarcinoma (MAeSTro-EXP).
**Authors:** Moon JH, Lee EK, Cha W, Chai YJ, Cho SW, Choi JY, Choi SY, Chu AJ, Chung EJ, Hwangbo Y, Jeong WJ, Jung YS, Kim K, Kim MJ, Kim SJ, Kim W, Kim YH, Lee CY, Lee JY, Lee KE, Lee YK, Lim H, Park DJ, Park SK, Ryu CH, Ryu J, Seok J, Song YS, Yi KH, Yu HW, White E, Mastrocostas K, Clifton-Bligh RJ, Glover A, Gild ML, Kim JH, Park YJ
**Journal:** Endocrinol Metab (Seoul) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3803/EnM.2024.2136](https://doi.org/10.3803/EnM.2024.2136)

## Content

1. Endocrinol Metab (Seoul). 2025 Apr;40(2):236-246. doi: 10.3803/EnM.2024.2136.
Epub 2025 Feb 18.

Study Protocol of Expanded Multicenter Prospective Cohort Study of Active
Surveillance on Papillary Thyroid Microcarcinoma (MAeSTro-EXP).

Moon JH(1), Lee EK(2)(3), Cha W(4), Chai YJ(5), Cho SW(6), Choi JY(7), Choi
SY(3)(8), Chu AJ(9), Chung EJ(10), Hwangbo Y(2)(3), Jeong WJ(4), Jung YS(3)(8),
Kim K(11)(12), Kim MJ(1), Kim SJ(13), Kim W(13), Kim YH(6), Lee CY(3)(14), Lee
JY(15), Lee KE(13), Lee YK(2)(3), Lim H(16), Park DJ(6), Park SK(11)(12), Ryu
CH(3)(8), Ryu J(3)(8), Seok J(10), Song YS(17), Yi KH(17), Yu HW(7), White
E(18)(19), Mastrocostas K(20), Clifton-Bligh RJ(18)(19)(21), Glover A(18)(22),
Gild ML(18)(19)(21), Kim JH(15), Park YJ(6)(23).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital,
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seongnam, Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea.
(3)Center for Thyroid Cancer, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Seoul National University Bundang
Hospital, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seongnam, Korea.
(5)Department of Surgery, Seoul Metropolitan Government Seoul National
University Boramae Medical Center, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(7)Department of Surgery, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seongnam, Korea.
(8)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea.
(9)Department of Radiology, Seoul Metropolitan Government Seoul National
University Boramae Medical Center, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(10)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(11)Department of Preventive Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(12)Integrated Major in Innovative Medical Science, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(13)Department of Surgery, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(14)Department of Radiology, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea.
(15)Department of Radiology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(16)Department of Radiology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seongnam, Korea.
(17)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul Metropolitan Government Seoul
National University Boramae Medical Center, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(18)Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, Camperdown, Sydney,
Australia.
(19)Cancer Genetics Laboratory, Kolling Institute of Medical Research, Sydney,
Australia.
(20)Department of Radiology, Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
(21)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Royal North Shore Hospital,
Sydney, Australia.
(22)Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, St. Vincent's
Medical School, University of NSW, Darlinghurst, Australia.
(23)Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate
School of Convergence Science and Technology, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Korea.

Comment in
    Endocrinol Metab (Seoul). 2025 Aug;40(4):653-654. doi:
10.3803/EnM.2025.2453.

BACKGROUND: Active surveillance (AS) has emerged as a viable management strategy
for low-risk papillary thyroid microcarcinoma (PTMC), following pioneering
trials at Kuma Hospital and the Cancer Institute Hospital in Japan. Numerous
prospective cohort studies have since validated AS as a management option for
low-risk PTMC, leading to its inclusion in thyroid cancer guidelines across
various countries. From 2016 to 2020, the Multicenter Prospective Cohort Study
of Active Surveillance on Papillary Thyroid Microcarcinoma (MAeSTro) enrolled
1,177 patients, providing comprehensive data on PTMC progression, sonographic
predictors of progression, quality of life, surgical outcomes, and
cost-effectiveness when comparing AS to immediate surgery. The second phase of
MAeSTro (MAeSTro-EXP) expands AS to low-risk papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC)
tumors larger than 1 cm, driven by the hypothesis that overall risk assessment
outweighs absolute tumor size in surgical decision-making.
METHODS: This protocol aims to address whether limiting AS to tumors smaller
than 1 cm may result in unnecessary surgeries for low-risk PTCs detected during
their rapid initial growth phase. By expanding the AS criteria to include tumors
up to 1.5 cm, while simultaneously refining and standardizing the criteria for
risk assessment and disease progression, we aim to minimize overtreatment and
maintain rigorous monitoring to improve patient outcomes.
CONCLUSION: This study will contribute to optimizing AS guidelines and enhance
our understanding of the natural course and appropriate management of low-risk
PTCs. Additionally, MAeSTro-EXP involves a multinational collaboration between
South Korea and Australia. This cross-country study aims to identify cultural
and racial differences in the management of low-risk PTC, thereby enriching the
global understanding of AS practices and their applicability across diverse
populations.

DOI: 10.3803/EnM.2024.2136
PMCID: PMC12061745
PMID: 39962344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST Young Joo Park is an
editor-in-chief and Sun Wook Cho is a deputy editor of the journal. But they
were not involved in the peer reviewer selection, evaluation, or decision
process of this article. No other potential conflicts of interest relevant to
this article were reported.
