---
reference_id: "PMID:35485962"
title: "Woringer-Kolopp disease (localized pagetoid reticulosis): a systematic review."
authors:
- Osto M
- Afify O
- Musa A
- Ahmed U
- Rehman R
- Mehregan D
journal: Int J Dermatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/ijd.16224
keywords:
- Humans
- Pagetoid Reticulosis/pathology
- Retrospective Studies
- Mycosis Fungoides/pathology
- Skin Neoplasms/pathology
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Cutaneous"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Woringer-Kolopp disease (localized pagetoid reticulosis): a systematic review.
**Authors:** Osto M, Afify O, Musa A, Ahmed U, Rehman R, Mehregan D
**Journal:** Int J Dermatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ijd.16224](https://doi.org/10.1111/ijd.16224)

## Content

1. Int J Dermatol. 2023 Mar;62(3):312-321. doi: 10.1111/ijd.16224. Epub 2022 Apr
29.

Woringer-Kolopp disease (localized pagetoid reticulosis): a systematic review.

Osto M(1), Afify O(1), Musa A(1), Ahmed U(2), Rehman R(3), Mehregan D(1).

Author information:
(1)Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, USA.
(2)Michigan State University College of Osteopathic Medicine, Lansing, Michigan,
USA.
(3)Oakland University William Beaumont School of Medicine, Rochester, Michigan,
USA.

OBJECTIVE: Woringer-Kolopp disease (WKD), also known as localized pagetoid
reticulosis, is a rare variant of mycosis fungoides as described by the World
Health Organization-European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer
(WHO-EORTC) classification system for cutaneous lymphomas. Our objective was to
conduct a comprehensive review that describes and evaluates patient
demographics, clinical presentation, immunohistochemical findings, management,
and outcomes of WKD.
METHODS: The databases PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane Library were searched for
relevant literature. Patient demographics, imaging, treatments, and other
clinical characteristics were obtained. The literature search was conducted on
December 7, 2020. Studies were included if they contained primary data related
to WKD. Non-pertinent studies, non-English studies, non-human studies, review
articles, or studies with insufficient case information were excluded. The
quality of the included studies and the risk of bias were evaluated using the
Grades of Recommendation, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation Group (GRADE)
criteria (2016), Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine: Levels of Evidence
(OCEBM) (March 2009), and the Methodological Index for Non-Randomized Studies
(MINORS) criteria (2003).
RESULTS: A total of 84 studies with 143 patients met the inclusion criteria for
this study. The most common chief complaint was an asymptomatic, slow-growing,
and erythematous plaque. The average time from initial skin eruption to
presentation was 97.6 months. Histologically, 128 cases of WKD displayed
epidermotropism (97.7%). Various therapies, including radiotherapy, surgery, and
local chemotherapy, were used. In total, 92 (78.6%) cases had complete remission
and 11 (9.4%) cases recurred.
CONCLUSIONS: WKD is a rare cutaneous T-cell lymphoma that often presents as a
single plaque on the extremities with an indolent course and a favorable
prognosis. However, it is often misdiagnosed, leading to delays in treatment.
The diagnosis of WKD involves clinical appraisal, a biopsy of suspicious
lesions, and immunohistochemistry. Monotherapy appears to be preferred compared
to combination therapy for WKD with radiotherapy demonstrating among the highest
cure rates and lowest recurrence. Future retrospective and prospective studies
are needed to accurately determine the epidemiology, prognosis, and effective
treatments for WKD. Limitations include a possibility of missed studies,
heterogeneity in reporting methods, publication, and selection bias.

© 2022 the International Society of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.1111/ijd.16224
PMID: 35485962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
