---
reference_id: "PMID:32306788"
title: "Calcilytics: a non-steroidal replacement for inhaled steroid and SABA/LABA therapy of human asthma?"
authors:
- Corrigan CJ
journal: Expert Rev Respir Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/17476348.2020.1756779
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Calcilytics: a non-steroidal replacement for inhaled steroid and SABA/LABA therapy of human asthma?
**Authors:** Corrigan CJ
**Journal:** Expert Rev Respir Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17476348.2020.1756779](https://doi.org/10.1080/17476348.2020.1756779)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2020 Aug;14(8):807-816. doi: 
10.1080/17476348.2020.1756779. Epub 2020 May 5.

Calcilytics: a non-steroidal replacement for inhaled steroid and SABA/LABA 
therapy of human asthma?

Corrigan CJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, School of Immunology & Microbial 
Sciences, Asthma UK Centre in Allergic Mechanisms of Asthma, King's College 
London , London, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Asthma afflicts more than 300 million people. Contemporary 
mainstay therapies (inhaled corticosteroids and bronchodilators), prescribed 
empirically, control symptoms resulting from airways obstruction tolerably well 
in many patients but it is less clear that they alter the natural history of 
progressive airways inflammation and remodeling resulting in severe, 
therapy-resistant obstruction in a significant minority (5-10%), causing 
lifelong symptoms and elevated risk of recurrent hospital admission and death. 
Furthermore, no current anti-asthma drug targets bronchial smooth muscle 
hyperresponsiveness, a critical contributor to airways obstruction and the 
fundamental physiological abnormality characterizing asthma. Recent monoclonal 
antibody (biological) therapies reduce obstruction and exacerbations in some, 
but not all treated patients to an unpredictable extent, but are further limited 
by administration logistics and cost.
AREAS COVERED: An overview of the cellular and molecular immunopathology of 
asthma, highlighting the need and logic for the development of a novel, 
non-steroidal, small molecule drug for topical delivery targeting bronchial 
smooth muscle hyperresponsiveness and airways inflammation, particularly 
corticosteroid-refractory inflammation.
EXPERT OPINION: This article elaborates evidence supporting the hypothesis that 
topically delivered, inhaled antagonists of the calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) 
have the potential to meet these requirements, and the practicality of 
repurposing existing, small molecule CaSR antagonists (calcilytics) for this 
purpose.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2020.1756779
PMID: 32306788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]