---
reference_id: "PMID:23439959"
title: "Acne inversa (Hidradenitis suppurativa): A review with a focus on pathogenesis and treatment."
authors:
- Wollina U
- Koch A
- Heinig B
- Kittner T
- Nowak A
journal: Indian Dermatol Online J
year: '2013'
doi: 10.4103/2229-5178.105454
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acne inversa (Hidradenitis suppurativa): A review with a focus on pathogenesis and treatment.
**Authors:** Wollina U, Koch A, Heinig B, Kittner T, Nowak A
**Journal:** Indian Dermatol Online J (2013)
**DOI:** [10.4103/2229-5178.105454](https://doi.org/10.4103/2229-5178.105454)

## Content

1. Indian Dermatol Online J. 2013 Jan;4(1):2-11. doi: 10.4103/2229-5178.105454.

Acne inversa (Hidradenitis suppurativa): A review with a focus on pathogenesis 
and treatment.

Wollina U(1), Koch A, Heinig B, Kittner T, Nowak A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Academic Teaching Hospital 
Dresden-Friedrichstadt, Dresden, Germany.

Acne inversa (AI) is a disabilitating chronic inflammatory disease with major 
negative impact on quality of life and significant co-morbidities. This is an 
important link to insights into immune dysfunction, which stimulated therapeutic 
approaches like tumor necrosis-α inhibitor therapy. This new off-label drug 
treatment is particularly beneficial when used in combination with wide excision 
of inflamed skin and subcutaneous tissue. Retinoids have been reported to be 
helpful in secondary prevention. The standard of therapy in advanced cases is 
surgery with wide excisions and healing by secondary intention. This treatment 
results in significant reduction of complaints and achieves satisfactory body 
contouring.

DOI: 10.4103/2229-5178.105454
PMCID: PMC3573446
PMID: 23439959

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared