---
reference_id: "PMID:33955014"
title: "ANKRD11 variants: KBG syndrome and beyond."
authors:
- Parenti I
- Mallozzi MB
- Hüning I
- Gervasini C
- Kuechler A
- Agolini E
- Albrecht B
- Baquero-Montoya C
- Bohring A
- Bramswig NC
- Busche A
- Dalski A
- Guo Y
- Hanker B
- Hellenbroich Y
- Horn D
- Innes AM
- Leoni C
- Li YR
- Lynch SA
- Mariani M
- Medne L
- Mikat B
- Milani D
- Onesimo R
- Ortiz-Gonzalez X
- Prott EC
- Reutter H
- Rossier E
- Selicorni A
- Wieacker P
- Wilkens A
- Wieczorek D
- Zackai EH
- Zampino G
- Zirn B
- Hakonarson H
- Deardorff MA
- Gillessen-Kaesbach G
- Kaiser FJ
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/cge.13977
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/etiology, genetics"
- Adolescent
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/etiology, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Face/abnormalities
- Facies
- Female
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/etiology, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- "Tooth Abnormalities/etiology, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ANKRD11 variants: KBG syndrome and beyond.
**Authors:** Parenti I, Mallozzi MB, Hüning I, Gervasini C, Kuechler A, Agolini E, Albrecht B, Baquero-Montoya C, Bohring A, Bramswig NC, Busche A, Dalski A, Guo Y, Hanker B, Hellenbroich Y, Horn D, Innes AM, Leoni C, Li YR, Lynch SA, Mariani M, Medne L, Mikat B, Milani D, Onesimo R, Ortiz-Gonzalez X, Prott EC, Reutter H, Rossier E, Selicorni A, Wieacker P, Wilkens A, Wieczorek D, Zackai EH, Zampino G, Zirn B, Hakonarson H, Deardorff MA, Gillessen-Kaesbach G, Kaiser FJ
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.13977](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.13977)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2021 Aug;100(2):187-200. doi: 10.1111/cge.13977. Epub 2021 May 14.

ANKRD11 variants: KBG syndrome and beyond.

Parenti I(1), Mallozzi MB(2), Hüning I(3), Gervasini C(4), Kuechler A(1), 
Agolini E(5), Albrecht B(1), Baquero-Montoya C(6)(7), Bohring A(8), Bramswig 
NC(1), Busche A(8), Dalski A(3), Guo Y(9), Hanker B(3), Hellenbroich Y(3), Horn 
D(10), Innes AM(11), Leoni C(12), Li YR(9)(13), Lynch SA(14), Mariani M(15), 
Medne L(16)(17), Mikat B(1), Milani D(18), Onesimo R(12), Ortiz-Gonzalez 
X(19)(20), Prott EC(1)(21), Reutter H(22)(23), Rossier E(24)(25), Selicorni 
A(15), Wieacker P(8), Wilkens A(16), Wieczorek D(26), Zackai EH(16)(17), Zampino 
G(12), Zirn B(25), Hakonarson H(9)(17), Deardorff MA(27)(28), Gillessen-Kaesbach 
G(3), Kaiser FJ(1)(29).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Universität 
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Institut für Humangenetik, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(4)Genetica Medica, Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute, Università degli Studi 
di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(5)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, 
Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Pablo Tobón Uribe, Medellín, Colombia.
(7)Genetics Unit, Sura Ayudas Diagnosticas, Medellín, Colombia.
(8)Institut für Humangenetik, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, 
Germany.
(9)Center for Applied Genomics and Center for Data Driven Discovery in 
Biomedicine, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 
USA.
(10)Institute of Medical and Human Genetics, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(11)Department of Medical Genetics and Alberta Children's Hospital Research 
Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(12)Center for Rare Diseases and Birth Defects, Department of Woman and Child 
Health and Public Health, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, 
Rome, Italy.
(13)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Pennsylvania, Perelman 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(14)Department of Clinical Genetics, Children's Health Ireland (CHI) at Crumlin, 
Dublin, Ireland.
(15)Centro Fondazione Mariani per il Bambino Fragile ASST-Lariana Sant'Anna 
Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, San Fermo della Battaglia (Como), Italy.
(16)Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(17)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and Perelman 
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(18)Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico Milano, Milan, 
Italy.
(19)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neurology, Epilepsy Neurogenetics 
Initiative, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 
USA.
(20)Department of Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(21)Institut für Praenatale Medizin & Humangenetik, Wuppertal, Germany.
(22)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(23)Department of Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care, University Hospital 
of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(24)Institut für Medizinische Genetik und Angewandte Genomik, Universität 
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(25)Genetikum Stuttgart, Genetic Counselling and Diagnostics, Stuttgart, 
Germany.
(26)Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty and University Hospital 
Düsseldorf, Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(27)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and Pediatrics, Children's 
Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(28)Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.
(29)Essener Zentrum für Seltene Erkrankungen (EZSE), Universitätsmedizin Essen, 
Essen, Germany.

Mutations affecting the transcriptional regulator Ankyrin Repeat Domain 11 
(ANKRD11) are mainly associated with the multisystem developmental disorder 
known as KBG syndrome, but have also been identified in individuals with 
Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) and other developmental disorders caused by 
variants affecting different chromatin regulators. The extensive functional 
overlap of these proteins results in shared phenotypical features, which 
complicate the assessment of the clinical diagnosis. Additionally, re-evaluation 
of individuals at a later age occasionally reveals that the initial phenotype 
has evolved toward clinical features more reminiscent of a developmental 
disorder different from the one that was initially diagnosed. For this reason, 
variants in ANKRD11 can be ascribed to a broader class of disorders that fall 
within the category of the so-called chromatinopathies. In this work, we report 
on the clinical characterization of 23 individuals with variants in ANKRD11. The 
subjects present primarily with developmental delay, intellectual disability and 
dysmorphic features, and all but two received an initial clinical diagnosis of 
either KBG syndrome or CdLS. The number and the severity of the clinical signs 
are overlapping but variable and result in a broad spectrum of phenotypes, which 
could be partially accounted for by the presence of additional molecular 
diagnoses and distinct pathogenic mechanisms.

© 2021 The Authors. Clinical Genetics published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13977
PMID: 33955014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]