---
reference_id: "PMID:36075564"
title: Translation landscape of SARS-CoV-2 noncanonical subgenomic RNAs.
authors:
- Wu K
- Wang D
- Wang J
- Zhou Y
journal: Virol Sin
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.virs.2022.09.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Translation landscape of SARS-CoV-2 noncanonical subgenomic RNAs.
**Authors:** Wu K, Wang D, Wang J, Zhou Y
**Journal:** Virol Sin (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.virs.2022.09.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virs.2022.09.003)

## Content

1. Virol Sin. 2022 Dec;37(6):813-822. doi: 10.1016/j.virs.2022.09.003. Epub 2022 
Sep 6.

Translation landscape of SARS-CoV-2 noncanonical subgenomic RNAs.

Wu K(1), Wang D(1), Wang J(1), Zhou Y(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, 430072, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, 430072, China; TaiKang Center for Life and Medical Sciences, RNA 
Institute, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, China; Institute for Advanced 
Studies, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, China; Frontier Science Center for 
Immunology and Metabolism, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, China. Electronic 
address: yu.zhou@whu.edu.cn.

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) with a positive-stranded RNA genome. Current 
proteomic studies of SARS-CoV-2 mainly focus on the proteins encoded by its 
genomic RNA (gRNA) or canonical subgenomic RNAs (sgRNAs). Here, we 
systematically investigated the translation landscape of SARS-CoV-2, especially 
its noncanonical sgRNAs. We first constructed a strict pipeline, named vipep, 
for identifying reliable peptides derived from RNA viruses using RNA-seq and 
mass spectrometry data. We applied vipep to analyze 24 sets of mass spectrometry 
data related to SARS-CoV-2 infection. In addition to known canonical proteins, 
we identified many noncanonical sgRNA-derived peptides, which stably increase 
after viral infection. Furthermore, we explored the potential functions of those 
proteins encoded by noncanonical sgRNAs and found that they can bind to viral 
RNAs and may have immunogenic activity. The generalized vipep pipeline is 
applicable to any RNA viruses and these results have expanded the SARS-CoV-2 
translation map, providing new insights for understanding the functions of 
SARS-CoV-2 sgRNAs.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virs.2022.09.003
PMCID: PMC9444306
PMID: 36075564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]