---
reference_id: "PMID:37106027"
title: Spatial transcriptomics reveal topological immune landscapes of Asian head and neck angiosarcoma.
authors:
- Loh JW
- Lee JY
- Lim AH
- Guan P
- Lim BY
- Kannan B
- Lee ECY
- Gu NX
- Ko TK
- Ng CC
- Lim JCT
- Yeong J
- Lim JQ
- Ong CK
- Teh BT
- Chan JY
journal: Commun Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s42003-023-04856-5
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hemangiosarcoma/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Transcriptome
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Tumor Microenvironment/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spatial transcriptomics reveal topological immune landscapes of Asian head and neck angiosarcoma.
**Authors:** Loh JW, Lee JY, Lim AH, Guan P, Lim BY, Kannan B, Lee ECY, Gu NX, Ko TK, Ng CC, Lim JCT, Yeong J, Lim JQ, Ong CK, Teh BT, Chan JY
**Journal:** Commun Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s42003-023-04856-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-023-04856-5)

## Content

1. Commun Biol. 2023 Apr 27;6(1):461. doi: 10.1038/s42003-023-04856-5.

Spatial transcriptomics reveal topological immune landscapes of Asian head and 
neck angiosarcoma.

Loh JW(1), Lee JY(1), Lim AH(2), Guan P(3), Lim BY(1), Kannan B(1), Lee ECY(1), 
Gu NX(4), Ko TK(1), Ng CC(1), Lim JCT(5), Yeong J(5), Lim JQ(6), Ong CK(6)(7), 
Teh BT(8)(9)(10), Chan JY(11)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Discovery Hub, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Laboratory of Cancer Epigenome, Division of Medical Sciences, National Cancer 
Centre Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency of Science, Technology and Research 
(ASTAR), Singapore, Singapore.
(4)MGI Tech Singapore PTE LTD, Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency of Science, Technology and 
Research (ASTAR), Singapore, Singapore.
(6)Lymphoma Genomic Translational Research Laboratory, Division of Cellular and 
Molecular Research, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(7)Program in Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(8)Laboratory of Cancer Epigenome, Division of Medical Sciences, National Cancer 
Centre Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. teh.bin.tean@singhealth.com.sg.
(9)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency of Science, Technology and 
Research (ASTAR), Singapore, Singapore. teh.bin.tean@singhealth.com.sg.
(10)Program in Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, 
Singapore. teh.bin.tean@singhealth.com.sg.
(11)Cancer Discovery Hub, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore. jason.chan.y.s@nccs.com.sg.
(12)Division of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore. jason.chan.y.s@nccs.com.sg.
(13)Oncology Academic Clinical Program, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, 
Singapore. jason.chan.y.s@nccs.com.sg.

Angiosarcomas are rare malignant tumors of the endothelium, arising commonly 
from the head and neck region (AS-HN) and recently associated with ultraviolet 
(UV) exposure and human herpesvirus-7 infection. We examined 81 cases of 
angiosarcomas, including 47 cases of AS-HN, integrating information from whole 
genome sequencing, gene expression profiling and spatial transcriptomics (10X 
Visium). In the AS-HN cohort, we observed recurrent somatic mutations in CSMD3 
(18%), LRP1B (18%), MUC16 (18%), POT1 (16%) and TP53 (16%). UV-positive AS-HN 
harbored significantly higher tumor mutation burden than UV-negative cases 
(p = 0.0294). NanoString profiling identified three clusters with distinct tumor 
inflammation signature scores (p < 0.001). Spatial transcriptomics revealed 
topological profiles of the tumor microenvironment, identifying dominant but 
tumor-excluded inflammatory signals in immune-hot cases and immune foci even in 
otherwise immune-cold cases. In conclusion, spatial transcriptomics reveal the 
tumor immune landscape of angiosarcoma, and in combination with multi-omic 
information, may improve implementation of treatment strategies.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-023-04856-5
PMCID: PMC10140281
PMID: 37106027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.Y.C. received research support from MGI Tech. 
N.X.G. is an employee of MGI Tech. The other authors declare no competing 
interests.