---
reference_id: "PMID:38282074"
title: "A new blood DNA methylation signature for Koolen-de Vries syndrome: Classification of missense KANSL1 variants and comparison to fibroblast cells."
authors:
- Awamleh Z
- Choufani S
- Wu W
- Rots D
- Dingemans AJM
- Nadif Kasri N
- Boronat S
- Ibañez-Mico S
- Cuesta Herraiz L
- Ferrer I
- Martínez Carrascal A
- Pérez-Jurado LA
- Aznar Lain G
- Ortigoza-Escobar JD
- de Vries BBA
- Koolen DA
- Weksberg R
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-024-01538-6
keywords:
- Humans
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17"
- DNA Methylation
- "Genes, Regulator"
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, diagnosis"
- Nuclear Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A new blood DNA methylation signature for Koolen-de Vries syndrome: Classification of missense KANSL1 variants and comparison to fibroblast cells.
**Authors:** Awamleh Z, Choufani S, Wu W, Rots D, Dingemans AJM, Nadif Kasri N, Boronat S, Ibañez-Mico S, Cuesta Herraiz L, Ferrer I, Martínez Carrascal A, Pérez-Jurado LA, Aznar Lain G, Ortigoza-Escobar JD, de Vries BBA, Koolen DA, Weksberg R
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-024-01538-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-024-01538-6)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2024 Mar;32(3):324-332. doi: 10.1038/s41431-024-01538-6. Epub
 2024 Jan 29.

A new blood DNA methylation signature for Koolen-de Vries syndrome: 
Classification of missense KANSL1 variants and comparison to fibroblast cells.

Awamleh Z(1), Choufani S(1), Wu W(1), Rots D(2), Dingemans AJM(2), Nadif Kasri 
N(2), Boronat S(3), Ibañez-Mico S(4), Cuesta Herraiz L(5), Ferrer I(6), Martínez 
Carrascal A(7), Pérez-Jurado LA(8), Aznar Lain G(8), Ortigoza-Escobar JD(9), de 
Vries BBA(2), Koolen DA(10), Weksberg R(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Genome Biology Program, Research Institute, the Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, ON, M5G 1×8, Canada.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Donders 
Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behavior, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital del Santa Creu y Sant Pau, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(4)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, 
Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Hospital de Manises, Valencia, Spain.
(6)Department of Genetics, Consorcio Hospital General de Valencia, Valencia, 
Spain.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital de Requena, Valencia, Spain.
(8)Genetics Unit, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Hospital del Mar Research Institute 
(IMIM) and CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Movement Disorders Unit, Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, CIBERER-ISCIII 
and European Reference Network for Rare Neurological Diseases (ERN-RND), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Donders 
Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behavior, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. 
david.koolen@radboudumc.nl.
(11)Genetics and Genome Biology Program, Research Institute, the Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, ON, M5G 1×8, Canada. rweksb@sickkids.ca.
(12)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, the 
Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, M5G 1×8, Canada. 
rweksb@sickkids.ca.

Erratum in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2024 Mar;32(3):366. doi: 10.1038/s41431-024-01561-7.

Pathogenic variants in KANSL1 and 17q21.31 microdeletions are causative of 
Koolen-de Vries syndrome (KdVS), a neurodevelopmental syndrome with 
characteristic facial dysmorphia. Our previous work has shown that syndromic 
conditions caused by pathogenic variants in epigenetic regulatory genes have 
identifiable patterns of DNA methylation (DNAm) change: DNAm signatures or 
episignatures. Given the role of KANSL1 in histone acetylation, we tested 
whether variants underlying KdVS are associated with a DNAm signature. We 
profiled whole-blood DNAm for 13 individuals with KANSL1 variants, four 
individuals with 17q21.31 microdeletions, and 21 typically developing 
individuals, using Illumina's Infinium EPIC array. In this study, we identified 
a robust DNAm signature of 456 significant CpG sites in 8 individuals with KdVS, 
a pattern independently validated in an additional 7 individuals with KdVS. We 
also demonstrate the diagnostic utility of the signature and classify two KANSL1 
VUS as well as four variants in individuals with atypical clinical presentation. 
Lastly, we investigated tissue-specific DNAm changes in fibroblast cells from 
individuals with KdVS. Collectively, our findings contribute to the 
understanding of the epigenetic landscape related to KdVS and aid in the 
diagnosis and classification of variants in this structurally complex genomic 
region.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-024-01538-6
PMCID: PMC10923882
PMID: 38282074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.