---
reference_id: "PMID:36552964"
title: Rapid Detection of the Varicella-Zoster Virus Using a Recombinase-Aided Amplification-Lateral Flow System.
authors:
- Bienes KM
- Mao L
- Selekon B
- Gonofio E
- Nakoune E
- Wong G
- Berthet N
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics12122957
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rapid Detection of the Varicella-Zoster Virus Using a Recombinase-Aided Amplification-Lateral Flow System.
**Authors:** Bienes KM, Mao L, Selekon B, Gonofio E, Nakoune E, Wong G, Berthet N
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics12122957](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics12122957)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2022 Nov 25;12(12):2957. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics12122957.

Rapid Detection of the Varicella-Zoster Virus Using a Recombinase-Aided 
Amplification-Lateral Flow System.

Bienes KM(1), Mao L(1)(2), Selekon B(3), Gonofio E(3), Nakoune E(3), Wong G(4), 
Berthet N(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Discovery and Molecular Characterization of Pathogens, Center for 
Microbes, Development and Health, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(3)Institut Pasteur of Bangui, Bangui, Central African Republic.
(4)Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers Research Unit, CAS Key Laboratory of Molecular 
Virology and Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.
(5)Cellule d'Intervention Biologique d'Urgence, Unité Environnement et Risque 
Infectieux, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris, France.

Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) is the etiological agent of varicella (chickenpox) 
and herpes zoster (shingles). VZV infections are ubiquitous and highly 
contagious, and diagnosis is mostly based on the assessment of signs and 
symptoms. However, monkeypox, an emerging infectious disease caused by the 
monkeypox virus (MPXV), has clinical manifestations that are similar to those of 
VZV infections. With the recent monkeypox outbreak in non-endemic regions, VZV 
infections are likely to be misdiagnosed in the absence of laboratory testing. 
Considering the lack of accessible diagnostic tests that discriminate VZV from 
MPXV or other poxviruses, a handy and affordable detection system for VZV is 
crucial for rapid differential diagnosis. Here, we developed a new detection 
method for VZV using recombinase-aided amplification technology, combined with 
the lateral flow system (RAA-LF). Given the prevalence of VZV worldwide, this 
method can be applied not only to distinguish VZV from other viruses causing 
rash, but also to foster early detection, contributing substantially to disease 
control.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics12122957
PMCID: PMC9777233
PMID: 36552964

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.