---
reference_id: "PMID:34515603"
title: "What Was Known About Childhood Diabetes Mellitus Before the Discovery of Insulin?"
authors:
- Wright JR Jr
journal: Pediatr Dev Pathol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/10935266211042206
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What Was Known About Childhood Diabetes Mellitus Before the Discovery of Insulin?
**Authors:** Wright JR Jr
**Journal:** Pediatr Dev Pathol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/10935266211042206](https://doi.org/10.1177/10935266211042206)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2022 Mar-Apr;25(2):73-81. doi: 10.1177/10935266211042206. 
Epub 2021 Sep 13.

What Was Known About Childhood Diabetes Mellitus Before the Discovery of 
Insulin?

Wright JR Jr(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine and Pediatrics and the Julia 
McFarlane Diabetes Research Centre, Cumming School of Medicine, University of 
Calgary, Alberta Children's Hospital, Calgary, Alberta.

It has been widely reported by historians that physicians were aware of two 
distinct types of diabetes mellitus by the 1880s, and that these were both 
similar to and the direct forerunners of type 1, juvenile-onset and type 2, 
adult-onset diabetes. The writings of prominent specialist physicians practicing 
just prior to the discovery of insulin in 1921-1922 were reviewed and there is 
little evidence that experts believed that adult and childhood diabetes were 
different. In fact, more than a decade passed after the discovery of insulin 
before diabetes in children and adults even began to be distinguished. Childhood 
diabetes was exceedingly rare in the early 20th century and diabetes was 
believed to be primarily a chronic disease of adults. It is interesting to 
speculate about what might have happened if the first pancreatic extract tests 
had been performed on adult-onset diabetics with insulin-resistant diabetes 
mellitus. Clearly, the results would have been disappointing and the discovery 
of insulin delayed. This essay explores how the test subject decision was made. 
It is fortuitous that a 14 year old boy with what was unequivocally type 1 
diabetes was selected to be the first insulin recipient, and the rest is 
history.

DOI: 10.1177/10935266211042206
PMCID: PMC9109214
PMID: 34515603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.