---
reference_id: "PMID:23738544"
title: Terminal complement inhibitor eculizumab in atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome.
authors:
- Legendre CM
- Licht C
- Muus P
- Greenbaum LA
- Babu S
- Bedrosian C
- Bingham C
- Cohen DJ
- Delmas Y
- Douglas K
- Eitner F
- Feldkamp T
- Fouque D
- Furman RR
- Gaber O
- Herthelius M
- Hourmant M
- Karpman D
- Lebranchu Y
- Mariat C
- Menne J
- Moulin B
- Nürnberger J
- Ogawa M
- Remuzzi G
- Richard T
- Sberro-Soussan R
- Severino B
- Sheerin NS
- Trivelli A
- Zimmerhackl LB
- Goodship T
- Loirat C
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1208981
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/adverse effects, blood, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- "Complement C5/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Female
- "Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome/blood, drug therapy, genetics, therapy"
- Humans
- "Kidney Diseases/drug therapy, etiology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Plasma Exchange
- Platelet Count
- Quality of Life
- "Thrombotic Microangiopathies/prevention & control"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Terminal complement inhibitor eculizumab in atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome.
**Authors:** Legendre CM, Licht C, Muus P, Greenbaum LA, Babu S, Bedrosian C, Bingham C, Cohen DJ, Delmas Y, Douglas K, Eitner F, Feldkamp T, Fouque D, Furman RR, Gaber O, Herthelius M, Hourmant M, Karpman D, Lebranchu Y, Mariat C, Menne J, Moulin B, Nürnberger J, Ogawa M, Remuzzi G, Richard T, Sberro-Soussan R, Severino B, Sheerin NS, Trivelli A, Zimmerhackl LB, Goodship T, Loirat C
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1208981](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1208981)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2013 Jun 6;368(23):2169-81. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1208981.

Terminal complement inhibitor eculizumab in atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome.

Legendre CM(1), Licht C, Muus P, Greenbaum LA, Babu S, Bedrosian C, Bingham C, 
Cohen DJ, Delmas Y, Douglas K, Eitner F, Feldkamp T, Fouque D, Furman RR, Gaber 
O, Herthelius M, Hourmant M, Karpman D, Lebranchu Y, Mariat C, Menne J, Moulin 
B, Nürnberger J, Ogawa M, Remuzzi G, Richard T, Sberro-Soussan R, Severino B, 
Sheerin NS, Trivelli A, Zimmerhackl LB, Goodship T, Loirat C.

Author information:
(1)Université Paris Descartes and Assistance Publique–Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital 
Necker, INSERM Unité 845, Paris, France. christophe.legendre@nck.aphp.fr.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2013 Oct 3;369(14):1379-80. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1308826.
    N Engl J Med. 2013 Oct 3;369(14):1377-8. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1308826.
    N Engl J Med. 2013 Oct 3;369(14):1378. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1308826.
    N Engl J Med. 2013 Oct 3;369(14):1378. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1308826.
    N Engl J Med. 2013 Oct 3;369(14):1378-9. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1308826.

BACKGROUND: Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome is a genetic, life-threatening, 
chronic disease of complement-mediated thrombotic microangiopathy. Plasma 
exchange or infusion may transiently maintain normal levels of hematologic 
measures but does not treat the underlying systemic disease.
METHODS: We conducted two prospective phase 2 trials in which patients with 
atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome who were 12 years of age or older received 
eculizumab for 26 weeks and during long-term extension phases. Patients with low 
platelet counts and renal damage (in trial 1) and those with renal damage but no 
decrease in the platelet count of more than 25% for at least 8 weeks during 
plasma exchange or infusion (in trial 2) were recruited. The primary end points 
included a change in the platelet count (in trial 1) and thrombotic 
microangiopathy event-free status (no decrease in the platelet count of >25%, no 
plasma exchange or infusion, and no initiation of dialysis) (in trial 2).
RESULTS: A total of 37 patients (17 in trial 1 and 20 in trial 2) received 
eculizumab for a median of 64 and 62 weeks, respectively. Eculizumab resulted in 
increases in the platelet count; in trial 1, the mean increase in the count from 
baseline to week 26 was 73×10(9) per liter (P<0.001). In trial 2, 80% of the 
patients had thrombotic microangiopathy event-free status. Eculizumab was 
associated with significant improvement in all secondary end points, with 
continuous, time-dependent increases in the estimated glomerular filtration rate 
(GFR). In trial 1, dialysis was discontinued in 4 of 5 patients. Earlier 
intervention with eculizumab was associated with significantly greater 
improvement in the estimated GFR. Eculizumab was also associated with 
improvement in health-related quality of life. No cumulative toxicity of therapy 
or serious infection-related adverse events, including meningococcal infections, 
were observed through the extension period.
CONCLUSIONS: Eculizumab inhibited complement-mediated thrombotic microangiopathy 
and was associated with significant time-dependent improvement in renal function 
in patients with atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome. (Funded by Alexion 
Pharmaceuticals; C08-002 ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT00844545 [adults] and 
NCT00844844 [adolescents]; C08-003 ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT00838513 
[adults] and NCT00844428 [adolescents]).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1208981
PMID: 23738544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]