---
reference_id: "PMID:35120844"
title: Method modification to reduce false positives for newborn screening of guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency.
authors:
- Wojcik M
- Morrissey M
- Borden K
- Teta B
- Sicko R
- Showers A
- Sunny S
- Caggana M
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.01.101
keywords:
- Creatine
- "Guanidinoacetate N-Methyltransferase/deficiency, genetics"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Intellectual Disability
- Language Development Disorders
- "Movement Disorders/congenital, diagnosis"
- Neonatal Screening/methods
- Seizures
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Method modification to reduce false positives for newborn screening of guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency.
**Authors:** Wojcik M, Morrissey M, Borden K, Teta B, Sicko R, Showers A, Sunny S, Caggana M
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.01.101](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.01.101)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2022 Mar;135(3):186-192. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.01.101.
Epub  2022 Jan 26.

Method modification to reduce false positives for newborn screening of
guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency.

Wojcik M(1), Morrissey M(2), Borden K(1), Teta B(1), Sicko R(1), Showers A(1),
Sunny S(1), Caggana M(1).

Author information:
(1)Newborn Screening Program, Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of
Health, Albany, NY, USA.
(2)Newborn Screening Program, Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of
Health, Albany, NY, USA. Electronic address: mark.morrissey@health.ny.gov.

Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase (GAMT) deficiency is an autosomal recessive
disorder that results in reduced activity of guanidinoacetate methyltransferase,
an accumulation of guanidinoacetate (GUAC), and a lack of cerebral creatine
(CRE). Lack of CRE in the brain can cause intellectual disability, autistic-like
behavior, seizures, and movement disorders. Identification at birth and
immediate therapy can prevent intellectual disability and seizures. If started
early in life, treatment with creatine supplements is highly effective. Because
there are reliable biomarkers for GAMT deficiency, GUAC and CRE, and because the
disorder is readily treatable with a significant improvement in outcomes, GAMT
deficiency is an excellent candidate for newborn screening. Several programs
have conducted pilot programs or started screening. An isobaric interferant of
the GUAC marker has been reported which may cause false positive results. To
reduce the number of false positives, a second-tier HPLC test to separate GUAC
from unknown, isobaric interferants may be incorporated into the screening
algorithm. New York State began screening for GAMT deficiency in October 2018
using a three-tiered screening approach. Quantification of GUAC and CRE were
incorporated into routine screening for amino acids and acylcarnitines. In the
first year of screening a total of 263,739 samples were tested for GAMT
deficiency. Of these, 3382 required second tier testing. After second tier
testing, 210 repeat specimens were requested for borderline results and 10
referrals were made to specialty care centers for confirmatory testing. In the
first year of screening there were no confirmed cases of GAMT deficiency
detected. To reduce the number of samples needing second tier testing and the
number false positives we explored the use of a second MS transition to confirm
the identity of the GUAC marker. GUAC and its internal standard are detected as
butylated esters after sample preparation and derivatization. The original
method used transition of the GUAC molecular ion of m/z 174.1 to a reactant ion
of m/z 101.1. To confirm the identity of the GUAC marker we selected a qualifier
ion of 174.1 > 73. The alternative product ion results were found to agree more
closely with the second tier HPLC-MS/MS results for GUAC. It was found that the
alternative transition may be used for quantification of the GUAC marker with
acceptable analytical performance (linearity, accuracy, and precision). On March
5, 2020, the method of analysis for GUAC was modified to use the alternative
product ion. For a comparable 6-month period, the modified method reduced the
number of samples requiring second tier testing by 98%, reduced the number of
borderline results requiring a repeat sample by 87.5%, and reduced the number of
referrals to specialty care centers by 85%. Using the modified method, the
correlation (r-squared) of the first and second tier screening results for GUAC
is greater than 0.95. Since the first-tier results correlate well with the
second-tier results, the second-tier screening is no longer necessary with the
modified method.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.01.101
PMID: 35120844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
