---
reference_id: "PMID:15761194"
title: A novel form of short QT syndrome (SQT3) is caused by a mutation in the KCNJ2 gene.
authors:
- Priori SG
- Pandit SV
- Rivolta I
- Berenfeld O
- Ronchetti E
- Dhamoon A
- Napolitano C
- Anumonwo J
- di Barletta MR
- Gudapakkam S
- Bosi G
- Stramba-Badiale M
- Jalife J
journal: Circ Res
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000162101.76263.8c
keywords:
- Action Potentials
- Animals
- CHO Cells
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cricetinae
- Electrocardiography
- Female
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying/genetics, physiology"
- Tachycardia/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel form of short QT syndrome (SQT3) is caused by a mutation in the KCNJ2 gene.
**Authors:** Priori SG, Pandit SV, Rivolta I, Berenfeld O, Ronchetti E, Dhamoon A, Napolitano C, Anumonwo J, di Barletta MR, Gudapakkam S, Bosi G, Stramba-Badiale M, Jalife J
**Journal:** Circ Res (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.RES.0000162101.76263.8c](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000162101.76263.8c)

## Content

1. Circ Res. 2005 Apr 15;96(7):800-7. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000162101.76263.8c.
Epub  2005 Mar 10.

A novel form of short QT syndrome (SQT3) is caused by a mutation in the KCNJ2
gene.

Priori SG(1), Pandit SV, Rivolta I, Berenfeld O, Ronchetti E, Dhamoon A,
Napolitano C, Anumonwo J, di Barletta MR, Gudapakkam S, Bosi G, Stramba-Badiale
M, Jalife J.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Cardiology, IRCCS Fondazione Maugeri, Pavia, Italy. spriori@fsm.it

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2005 Apr 15;96(7):703-4. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000164186.86838.09.

Short QT syndrome (SQTS) leads to an abbreviated QTc interval and predisposes
patients to life-threatening arrhythmias. To date, two forms of the disease have
been identified: SQT1, caused by a gain of function substitution in the HERG
(I(Kr)) channel, and SQT2, caused by a gain of function substitution in the
KvLQT1 (I(Ks)) channel. Here we identify a new variant, "SQT3", which has a
unique ECG phenotype characterized by asymmetrical T waves, and a defect in the
gene coding for the inwardly rectifying Kir2.1 (I(K1)) channel. The affected
members of a single family had a G514A substitution in the KCNJ2 gene that
resulted in a change from aspartic acid to asparagine at position 172 (D172N).
Whole-cell patch-clamp studies of the heterologously expressed human D172N
channel demonstrated a larger outward I(K1) than the wild-type (P<0.05) at
potentials between -75 mV and -45 mV, with the peak current being shifted in the
former with respect to the latter (WT, -75 mV; D172N, -65 mV). Coexpression of
WT and mutant channels to mimic the heterozygous condition of the proband
yielded an outward current that was intermediate between WT and D172N. In
computer simulations using a human ventricular myocyte model the increased
outward I(K1) greatly accelerated the final phase of repolarization, and
shortened the action potential duration. Hence, unlike the known mutations in
the two other SQTS forms (N588K in HERG and V307L in KvLQT1), simulations using
the D172N and WT/D172N mutations fully accounted for the ECG phenotype of tall
and asymmetrically shaped T waves. Although we were unable to test for
inducibility of arrhythmia susceptibility due to lack of patients' consent, our
computer simulations predict a steeper steady-state restitution curve for the
D172N and WT/D172N mutation, compared with WT or to HERG or KvLQT1 mutations,
which may predispose SQT3 patients to a greater risk of reentrant arrhythmias.

DOI: 10.1161/01.RES.0000162101.76263.8c
PMID: 15761194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
