---
reference_id: "PMID:37497727"
title: "The prevalence of pulmonary arterial hypertension in patients with mixed connective tissue disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Hassan AB
- Hozayen RF
- Mustafa ZS
- Lundberg IE
- Jahrami HA
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.55563/clinexprheumatol/srma43
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The prevalence of pulmonary arterial hypertension in patients with mixed connective tissue disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Hassan AB, Hozayen RF, Mustafa ZS, Lundberg IE, Jahrami HA
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.55563/clinexprheumatol/srma43](https://doi.org/10.55563/clinexprheumatol/srma43)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2023 Nov;41(11):2301-2311. doi: 
10.55563/clinexprheumatol/srma43. Epub 2023 Jul 24.

The prevalence of pulmonary arterial hypertension in patients with mixed 
connective tissue disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Hassan AB(1), Hozayen RF(2), Mustafa ZS(2), Lundberg IE(3), Jahrami HA(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine and Medical Sciences, Arabian Gulf University (AGU), 
Bahrain; and University Medical Center (UMC), King Abdullah Medical City (KAMC), 
Bahrain. adla.hassan@gmail.com.
(2)College of Medicine and Medical Sciences, Arabian Gulf University (AGU), 
Bahrain; and Internal Medicine Department, Salmaniya Medical Complex, Bahrain.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Solna, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm; and Department of Gastro, Dermatology, Rheumatology, 
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)College of Medicine and Medical Sciences, Arabian Gulf University (AGU), 
Bahrain; and Ministry of Health, Bahrain.

OBJECTIVES: The prevalence and outcome of mixed connective tissue 
disease-associated pulmonary arterial hypertension (MCTD-PAH) has not been well 
understood. Our aim was to review the current knowledge on the prevalence, 
severity, and mortality of MCTD-PAH. We also aimed to examine the prevalence 
trend of MCTD-PAH over the years.
METHODS: PubMed/Medline, Embase, Scopus and Web of Science electronic databases 
were searched for the published randomised controlled clinical trials (RCTs) and 
observational/original studies on PAH in patients with MCTD from January 1972 to 
December 2020.
RESULTS: The results were pooled using random-effects meta-analysis based on 
DerSimonian and Laird method. A total of 983 patients from eight studies were 
included in the meta-analysis (K=8, n=983). Pooled prevalence of PAH in MCTD 
patients was 12.53% [95% CI 8.30-18.48%] with significant level statistical 
heterogeneity (tau2=0.30, tau=0.55, i2 83.3%, H=2.13 Q(df,7)=31.90, p=0.001). 
There was no association between PAH and female gender or age. The percentage of 
deaths in MCTD patients due to PAH varied and reached up to 81.8%.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first systematic review and meta-analysis investigating 
the prevalence of PAH in patients with MCTD and it revealed an overall 
prevalence of PAH in patients with MCTD of 12.53%. Our results showed trends of 
reduced prevalence of MCTD-PAH over last four decade, reconfirmed the lower 
prevalence rate in recent studies, but revealed an increased mortality rate. We 
also determined the low impact of the age, gender, and interstitial lung disease 
on MCTD-PAH.

DOI: 10.55563/clinexprheumatol/srma43
PMID: 37497727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]