---
reference_id: "PMID:21747923"
title: Heterotopic ossifications in a mouse model of albright hereditary osteodystrophy.
authors:
- Huso DL
- Edie S
- Levine MA
- Schwindinger W
- Wang Y
- Jüppner H
- Germain-Lee EL
journal: PLoS One
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021755
keywords:
- Animals
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- Chromogranins
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- "Fibrous Dysplasia, Polyostotic/complications"
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gs/deficiency, metabolism"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Minerals/metabolism
- "Ossification, Heterotopic/complications, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Osteoblasts/metabolism
- Pseudohypoparathyroidism
- Skin/pathology
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heterotopic ossifications in a mouse model of albright hereditary osteodystrophy.
**Authors:** Huso DL, Edie S, Levine MA, Schwindinger W, Wang Y, Jüppner H, Germain-Lee EL
**Journal:** PLoS One (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0021755](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0021755)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e21755. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021755. Epub 2011 Jun
29.

Heterotopic ossifications in a mouse model of albright hereditary
osteodystrophy.

Huso DL(1), Edie S, Levine MA, Schwindinger W, Wang Y, Jüppner H, Germain-Lee
EL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Comparative Pathobiology, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO) is characterized by short stature,
brachydactyly, and often heterotopic ossifications that are typically
subcutaneous. Subcutaneous ossifications (SCO) cause considerable morbidity in
AHO with no effective treatment. AHO is caused by heterozygous inactivating
mutations in those GNAS exons encoding the α-subunit of the stimulatory G
protein (Gα(s)). When inherited maternally, these mutations are associated with
obesity, cognitive impairment, and resistance to certain hormones that mediate
their actions through G protein-coupled receptors, a condition termed
pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1a (PHP1a). When inherited paternally, GNAS
mutations cause only AHO but not hormonal resistance, termed
pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP). Mice with targeted disruption of exon 1
of Gnas (Gnas(E1-/+)) replicate human PHP1a or PPHP phenotypically and
hormonally. However, SCO have not yet been reported in Gnas(E1+/-) mice, at
least not those that had been analyzed by us up to 3 months of age. Here we now
show that Gnas(E1-/+) animals develop SCO over time. The ossified lesions
increase in number and size and are uniformly detected in adult mice by one year
of age. They are located in both the dermis, often in perifollicular areas, and
the subcutis. These lesions are particularly prominent in skin prone to injury
or pressure. The SCO comprise mature bone with evidence of mineral deposition
and bone marrow elements. Superficial localization was confirmed by radiographic
and computerized tomographic imaging. In situ hybridization of SCO lesions were
positive for both osteonectin and osteopontin. Notably, the ossifications were
much more extensive in males than females. Because Gnas(E1-/+) mice develop SCO
features that are similar to those observed in AHO patients, these animals
provide a model system suitable for investigating pathogenic mechanisms involved
in SCO formation and for developing novel therapeutics for heterotopic bone
formation. Moreover, these mice provide a model with which to investigate the
regulatory mechanisms of bone formation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021755
PMCID: PMC3126840
PMID: 21747923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
