---
reference_id: "PMID:23878101"
title: Novel mutations in SCO1 as a cause of fatal infantile encephalopathy and lactic acidosis.
authors:
- Leary SC
- Antonicka H
- Sasarman F
- Weraarpachai W
- Cobine PA
- Pan M
- Brown GK
- Brown R
- Majewski J
- Ha KC
- Rahman S
- Shoubridge EA
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/humu.22385
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Lactic/genetics, metabolism"
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Sequence
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Fatal Outcome
- Gene Order
- Humans
- Infant
- "Membrane Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Molecular Chaperones
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Olivopontocerebellar Atrophies/genetics, metabolism"
- Sequence Alignment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel mutations in SCO1 as a cause of fatal infantile encephalopathy and lactic acidosis.
**Authors:** Leary SC, Antonicka H, Sasarman F, Weraarpachai W, Cobine PA, Pan M, Brown GK, Brown R, Majewski J, Ha KC, Rahman S, Shoubridge EA
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.22385](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.22385)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2013 Oct;34(10):1366-70. doi: 10.1002/humu.22385. Epub 2013 Aug 12.

Novel mutations in SCO1 as a cause of fatal infantile encephalopathy and lactic 
acidosis.

Leary SC(1), Antonicka H, Sasarman F, Weraarpachai W, Cobine PA, Pan M, Brown 
GK, Brown R, Majewski J, Ha KC, Rahman S, Shoubridge EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.

Isolated cytochrome c oxidase (COX) deficiency is a common cause of 
mitochondrial disease, yet its genetic basis remains unresolved in many 
patients. Here, we identified novel compound heterozygous mutations in SCO1 
(p.M294V, p.Val93*) in one such patient with fatal encephalopathy. The patient 
lacked the severe hepatopathy (p.P174L) or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (p.G132S) 
observed in previously reported SCO1 cases, so we investigated whether 
allele-specific defects in SCO1 function might underlie the genotype-phenotype 
relationships. Fibroblasts expressing p.M294V had a relatively modest decrease 
in COX activity compared with those expressing p.P174L, whereas both SCO1 lines 
had marked copper deficiencies. Overexpression of known pathogenic variants in 
SCO1 fibroblasts showed that p.G132S exacerbated the COX deficiency, whereas COX 
activity was partially or fully restored by p.P174L and p.M294V, respectively. 
These data suggest that the clinical phenotypes in SCO1 patients might reflect 
the residual capacity of the pathogenic alleles to perform one or both functions 
of SCO1.

© 2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22385
PMID: 23878101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]