---
reference_id: "PMID:27435969"
title: "Vertigo with sudden hearing loss: audio-vestibular characteristics."
authors:
- Pogson JM
- Taylor RL
- Young AS
- McGarvie LA
- Flanagan S
- Halmagyi GM
- Welgampola MS
journal: J Neurol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-016-8214-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vertigo with sudden hearing loss: audio-vestibular characteristics.
**Authors:** Pogson JM, Taylor RL, Young AS, McGarvie LA, Flanagan S, Halmagyi GM, Welgampola MS
**Journal:** J Neurol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-016-8214-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-016-8214-0)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2016 Oct;263(10):2086-96. doi: 10.1007/s00415-016-8214-0. Epub 2016 
Jul 19.

Vertigo with sudden hearing loss: audio-vestibular characteristics.

Pogson JM(1)(2)(3), Taylor RL(1)(2), Young AS(1), McGarvie LA(1), Flanagan 
S(3)(4), Halmagyi GM(1)(2), Welgampola MS(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Neurosciences, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Level 8 
East 1, Camperdown, 2050, NSW, Australia.
(2)Central Clinical School, University of Sydney, Camperdown, 2050, NSW, 
Australia.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck and Skull Base Surgery, St 
Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst, 2050, NSW, Australia.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, University of NSW, Kensington, 2033, NSW, Australia.
(5)Institute of Clinical Neurosciences, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Level 8 
East 1, Camperdown, 2050, NSW, Australia. miriam@icn.usyd.edu.au.
(6)Central Clinical School, University of Sydney, Camperdown, 2050, NSW, 
Australia. miriam@icn.usyd.edu.au.

Acute vertigo with sudden sensorineural hearing loss (SSNHL) is a rare clinical 
emergency. Here, we report the audio-vestibular test profiles of 27 subjects who 
presented with these symptoms. The vestibular test battery consisted of a 
three-dimensional video head impulse test (vHIT) of semicircular canal function 
and recording ocular and cervical vestibular-evoked myogenic potentials (oVEMP, 
cVEMP) to test otolith dysfunction. Unlike vestibular neuritis, where the 
horizontal and anterior canals with utricular function are more frequently 
impaired, 74 % of subjects with vertigo and SSNHL demonstrated impairment of the 
posterior canal gain (0.45 ± 0.20). Only 41 % showed impairment of the 
horizontal canal gains (0.78 ± 0.27) and 30 % of the anterior canal gains 
(0.79 ± 0.26), while 38 % of oVEMPs [asymmetry ratio (AR) = 41.0 ± 41.3 %] and 
33 % of cVEMPs (AR = 47.3 ± 41.2 %) were significantly asymmetrical. 
Twenty-three subjects were diagnosed with labyrinthitis/labyrinthine infarction 
in the absence of evidence for an underlying pathology. Four subjects had a 
definitive diagnosis [Ramsay Hunt Syndrome, vestibular schwannoma, anterior 
inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) infarction, and traction injury]. Ischemia 
involving the common-cochlear or vestibulo-cochlear branches of the labyrinthine 
artery could be the simplest explanation for vertigo with SSNHL. 
Audio-vestibular tests did not provide easy separation between ischaemic and 
non-ischaemic causes of vertigo with SSNHL.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-016-8214-0
PMID: 27435969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]