---
reference_id: "PMID:39062815"
title: A Narrative Review on the Pathophysiology of Preeclampsia.
authors:
- Torres-Torres J
- Espino-Y-Sosa S
- Martinez-Portilla R
- Borboa-Olivares H
- Estrada-Gutierrez G
- Acevedo-Gallegos S
- Ruiz-Ramirez E
- Velasco-Espin M
- Cerda-Flores P
- Ramirez-Gonzalez A
- Rojas-Zepeda L
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25147569
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pre-Eclampsia/physiopathology, metabolism"
- Pregnancy
- Female
- Oxidative Stress
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Inflammation/metabolism
- Biomarkers
- "Placenta/metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor-1/metabolism, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Narrative Review on the Pathophysiology of Preeclampsia.
**Authors:** Torres-Torres J, Espino-Y-Sosa S, Martinez-Portilla R, Borboa-Olivares H, Estrada-Gutierrez G, Acevedo-Gallegos S, Ruiz-Ramirez E, Velasco-Espin M, Cerda-Flores P, Ramirez-Gonzalez A, Rojas-Zepeda L
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25147569](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25147569)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jul 10;25(14):7569. doi: 10.3390/ijms25147569.

A Narrative Review on the Pathophysiology of Preeclampsia.

Torres-Torres J(1)(2), Espino-Y-Sosa S(1), Martinez-Portilla R(1), 
Borboa-Olivares H(1), Estrada-Gutierrez G(1), Acevedo-Gallegos S(1), 
Ruiz-Ramirez E(2), Velasco-Espin M(2), Cerda-Flores P(2), Ramirez-Gonzalez A(2), 
Rojas-Zepeda L(3).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Branch, Instituto Nacional de Perinatología Isidro Espinosa 
de los Reyes, Mexico City 11000, Mexico.
(2)Obstetric and Gynecology Department, Hospital General de México Dr. Eduardo 
Liceaga, Mexico City 06720, Mexico.
(3)Maternal-Fetal Medicine Department, Instituto Materno Infantil del Estado de 
Mexico, Toluca 50170, Mexico.

Preeclampsia (PE) is a multifactorial pregnancy disorder characterized by 
hypertension and proteinuria, posing significant risks to both maternal and 
fetal health. Despite extensive research, its complex pathophysiology remains 
incompletely understood. This narrative review aims to elucidate the intricate 
mechanisms contributing to PE, focusing on abnormal placentation, maternal 
systemic response, oxidative stress, inflammation, and genetic and epigenetic 
factors. This review synthesizes findings from recent studies, clinical trials, 
and meta-analyses, highlighting key molecular and cellular pathways involved in 
PE. The review integrates data on oxidative stress biomarkers, angiogenic 
factors, immune interactions, and mitochondrial dysfunction. PE is initiated by 
poor placentation due to inadequate trophoblast invasion and improper spiral 
artery remodeling, leading to placental hypoxia. This triggers the release of 
anti-angiogenic factors such as soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 (sFlt-1) and 
soluble endoglin (sEng), causing widespread endothelial dysfunction and systemic 
inflammation. Oxidative stress, mitochondrial abnormalities, and immune 
dysregulation further exacerbate the condition. Genetic and epigenetic 
modifications, including polymorphisms in the Fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (FLT1) 
gene and altered microRNA (miRNA) expression, play critical roles. Emerging 
therapeutic strategies targeting oxidative stress, inflammation, angiogenesis, 
and specific molecular pathways like the heme oxygenase-1/carbon monoxide 
(HO-1/CO) and cystathionine gamma-lyase/hydrogen sulfide (CSE/H2S) pathways show 
promise in mitigating preeclampsia's effects. PE is a complex disorder with 
multifactorial origins involving abnormal placentation, endothelial dysfunction, 
systemic inflammation, and oxidative stress. Despite advances in understanding 
its pathophysiology, effective prevention and treatment strategies remain 
limited. Continued research is essential to develop targeted therapies that can 
improve outcomes for both mothers and their babies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25147569
PMCID: PMC11277207
PMID: 39062815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.