---
reference_id: "PMID:35290391"
title: "The natural history of ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T): A systematic review."
authors:
- Petley E
- Yule A
- Alexander S
- Ojha S
- Whitehouse WP
journal: PLoS One
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0264177
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Ataxia Telangiectasia/genetics
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cohort Studies
- Humans
- Movement Disorders
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The natural history of ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T): A systematic review.
**Authors:** Petley E, Yule A, Alexander S, Ojha S, Whitehouse WP
**Journal:** PLoS One (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0264177](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0264177)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2022 Mar 15;17(3):e0264177. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0264177. 
eCollection 2022.

The natural history of ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T): A systematic review.

Petley E(1), Yule A(2), Alexander S(1), Ojha S(1)(3), Whitehouse WP(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(2)United Lincolnshire Hospitals NHS Trust, Lincoln, United Kingdom.
(3)Children's Hospital, University Hospitals of Derby and Burton, NHS Foundation 
Trust, Derby, United Kingdom.
(4)Nottingham Children's Hospital, Nottingham University Hospital NHS Trust, 
Nottingham, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Ataxia-telangiectasia is an autosomal recessive, multi-system, and 
life-shortening disease caused by mutations in the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated 
gene. Although widely reported, there are no studies that give a comprehensive 
picture of this intriguing condition.
OBJECTIVES: Understand the natural history of ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), as 
reported in scientific literature.
SEARCH METHODS: 107 search terms were identified and divided into 17 searches. 
Each search was performed in PubMed, Ovid SP (MEDLINE) 1946-present, OVID EMBASE 
1980 -present, Web of Science core collection, Elsevier Scopus, and Cochrane 
Library.
SELECTION CRITERIA: All human studies that report any aspect of A-T.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Search results were de-duplicated, data extracted 
(including author, publication year, country of origin, study design, 
population, participant characteristics, and clinical features). Quality of 
case-control and cohort studies was assessed by the Newcastle-Ottawa tool. 
Findings are reported descriptively and where possible data collated to report 
median (interquartile range, range) of outcomes of interest.
MAIN RESULTS: 1314 cases reported 2134 presenting symptoms. The most common 
presenting symptom was abnormal gait (1160 cases; 188 studies) followed by 
recurrent infections in classical ataxia-telangiectasia and movement disorders 
in variant ataxia-telangiectasia. 687 cases reported 752 causes of death among 
which malignancy was the most frequently reported cause. Median (IQR, range) age 
of death (n = 294) was 14 years 0 months (10 years 0 months to 23 years 3 
months, 1 year 3 months to 76 years 0 months).
CONCLUSIONS: This review demonstrates the multi-system involvement in A-T, 
confirms that neurological symptoms are the most frequent presenting features in 
classical A-T but variants have diverse manifestations. We found that most 
individuals with A-T have life limited to teenage or early adulthood. 
Predominance of case reports, and case series demonstrate the lack of robust 
evidence to determine the natural history of A-T. We recommend population-based 
studies to fill this evidence gap.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0264177
PMCID: PMC9049793
PMID: 35290391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.