---
reference_id: "PMID:29290580"
title: "Diagnosis and management of spinal muscular atrophy: Part 1: Recommendations for diagnosis, rehabilitation, orthopedic and nutritional care."
authors:
- Mercuri E
- Finkel RS
- Muntoni F
- Wirth B
- Montes J
- Main M
- Mazzone ES
- Vitale M
- Snyder B
- Quijano-Roy S
- Bertini E
- Davis RH
- Meyer OH
- Simonds AK
- Schroth MK
- Graham RJ
- Kirschner J
- Iannaccone ST
- Crawford TO
- Woods S
- Qian Y
- Sejersen T
- SMA Care Group
journal: Neuromuscul Disord
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2017.11.005
keywords:
- Disease Management
- Humans
- "Spinal Muscular Atrophies of Childhood/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and management of spinal muscular atrophy: Part 1: Recommendations for diagnosis, rehabilitation, orthopedic and nutritional care.
**Authors:** Mercuri E, Finkel RS, Muntoni F, Wirth B, Montes J, Main M, Mazzone ES, Vitale M, Snyder B, Quijano-Roy S, Bertini E, Davis RH, Meyer OH, Simonds AK, Schroth MK, Graham RJ, Kirschner J, Iannaccone ST, Crawford TO, Woods S, Qian Y, Sejersen T, SMA Care Group
**Journal:** Neuromuscul Disord (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nmd.2017.11.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nmd.2017.11.005)

## Content

1. Neuromuscul Disord. 2018 Feb;28(2):103-115. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2017.11.005.
Epub  2017 Nov 23.

Diagnosis and management of spinal muscular atrophy: Part 1: Recommendations for 
diagnosis, rehabilitation, orthopedic and nutritional care.

Mercuri E(1), Finkel RS(2), Muntoni F(3), Wirth B(4), Montes J(5), Main M(3), 
Mazzone ES(6), Vitale M(7), Snyder B(8), Quijano-Roy S(9), Bertini E(10), Davis 
RH(11), Meyer OH(12), Simonds AK(13), Schroth MK(14), Graham RJ(15), Kirschner 
J(16), Iannaccone ST(17), Crawford TO(18), Woods S(19), Qian Y(20), Sejersen 
T(21); SMA Care Group.

Collaborators: Muntoni F(22), Wirth B(23), Tiziano FD(24), Kirschner J(23), 
Tizzano E(25), Topaloglu H(26), Swoboda K(27), Laing N(28), Kayoko S(29), Prior 
T(27), Chung WK(27), Wu SM(30), Montes J(27), Mazzone E(24), Main M(22), Coleman 
C(22), Gee R(27), Glanzman A(27), Kroksmark AK(31), Krosschell K(27), Nelson 
L(27), Rose K(28), Stępień A(32), Vuillerot C(33), Vitale M(27), Snyder B(27), 
Quijano-Roy S(33), Dubousset J(33), Farrington D(25), Flynn J(27), Halanski 
M(27), Hasler C(34), Miladi L(33), Reilly C(35), Roye B(27), Sponseller P(27), 
Yazici M(26), Hurst R(27), Bertini E(24), Tarrant S(27), Barja S(36), Bertoli 
S(24), Crawford T(27), Foust K(27), Kyle B(27), Rodan L(27), Roper H(22), 
Seffrood E(27), Swoboda K(27), Szlagatys-Sidorkiewicz A(32).

Author information:
(1)Paediatric Neurology Unit, Catholic University, Rome, Italy; Centro Clinico 
Nemo, Policlinico Gemelli, Rome, Italy. Electronic address: eumercuri@gmail.com.
(2)Nemours Children's Hospital, University of Central Florida College of 
Medicine, Orlando, FL, USA.
(3)Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child 
Health & Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK.
(4)Institute of Human Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine, Center for Rare 
Diseases and Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Germany.
(5)Departments of Rehabilitation and Regenerative Medicine and Neurology, 
Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Paediatric Neurology Unit, Catholic University, Rome, Italy; Centro Clinico 
Nemo, Policlinico Gemelli, Rome, Italy.
(7)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Columbia University Medical Center, New 
York, NY, USA.
(8)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, USA.
(9)Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Unit of Neuromuscular 
Disorders, Department of Pediatric Intensive Care, Neurology and Rehabilitation, 
Hôpital Raymond Poincaré, Garches, France; Hôpitaux Universitaires 
Paris-Ile-de-France Ouest, INSERM U 1179, University of Versailles 
Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines (UVSQ), Paris, France.
(10)Unit of Neuromuscular & Neurodegenerative Disorders, Dept of Neurosciences & 
Neurorehabilitation, Bambino Gesù Children's Research Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(11)Intermountain Healthcare, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(12)Division of Pulmonology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(13)NIHR Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit, Royal Brompton & Harefield NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(14)Division of Pediatric Pulmonary, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, American Family Children's 
Hospital, Madison, WI, USA.
(15)Division of Critical Care, Dept of Anesthesiology, Perioperative & Pain 
Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(16)Department of Neuropediatrics and Muscle Disorders, Medical Center, Faculty 
of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(17)Departments of Pediatrics and Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, Division of 
Pediatric Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center and 
Children's Medical Center Dallas, USA.
(18)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(19)Policy Ethics and Life Sciences Research Centre, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle, UK.
(20)SMA Foundation, New York, NY, USA.
(21)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Paediatric Neurology, 
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(22)UK.
(23)Germany.
(24)Italy.
(25)Spain.
(26)Turkey.
(27)USA.
(28)Australia.
(29)Japan.
(30)Taiwan.
(31)Sweden.
(32)Poland.
(33)France.
(34)Switzerland.
(35)Canada.
(36)Chile.

Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a severe neuromuscular disorder due to a defect 
in the survival motor neuron 1 (SMN1) gene. Its incidence is approximately 1 in 
11,000 live births. In 2007, an International Conference on the Standard of Care 
for SMA published a consensus statement on SMA standard of care that has been 
widely used throughout the world. Here we report a two-part update of the topics 
covered in the previous recommendations. In part 1 we present the methods used 
to achieve these recommendations, and an update on diagnosis, rehabilitation, 
orthopedic and spinal management; and nutritional, swallowing and 
gastrointestinal management. Pulmonary management, acute care, other organ 
involvement, ethical issues, medications, and the impact of new treatments for 
SMA are discussed in part 2.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nmd.2017.11.005
PMID: 29290580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]