---
reference_id: "PMID:35506352"
title: Complex functional redundancy of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in mouse limb development.
authors:
- Lopatka A
- Moon AM
journal: Dev Dyn
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/dvdy.484
keywords:
- Animals
- Extremities
- Hindlimb
- Mice
- Phenotype
- "T-Box Domain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complex functional redundancy of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in mouse limb development.
**Authors:** Lopatka A, Moon AM
**Journal:** Dev Dyn (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/dvdy.484](https://doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.484)

## Content

1. Dev Dyn. 2022 Sep;251(9):1613-1627. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.484. Epub 2022 May 20.

Complex functional redundancy of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in mouse limb development.

Lopatka A(1), Moon AM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Functional Genomics, Weis Center for Research, 
Geisinger Clinic, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(3)The Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Hess Center for Science 
and Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, USA.

The limb phenotypes of Tbx2 and Tbx3 mutants are distinct: loss of Tbx2 results 
in isolated duplication of digit 4 in the hindlimb while loss of Tbx3 results in 
anterior polydactyly and posterior oligodactly in the forelimb. In the face of 
such disparate phenotypes, we sought to determine whether Tbx2 and Tbx3 have 
functional redundancy during development of the mouse limb. We found that 
sequential loss of alleles generates defects that are not simply additive of 
those observed in single mutants and that multiple structures in both the 
forelimb and hindlimb display compound sensitivity to decreased gene dosage.

© 2022 American Association for Anatomy.

DOI: 10.1002/dvdy.484
PMID: 35506352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]