---
reference_id: "PMID:28341475"
title: "Genotypic and Phenotypic Characteristics of CRB1-Associated Retinal Dystrophies: A Long-Term Follow-up Study."
authors:
- Talib M
- van Schooneveld MJ
- van Genderen MM
- Wijnholds J
- Florijn RJ
- Ten Brink JB
- Schalij-Delfos NE
- Dagnelie G
- Cremers FPM
- Wolterbeek R
- Fiocco M
- Thiadens AA
- Hoyng CB
- Klaver CC
- Bergen AA
- Boon CJF
journal: Ophthalmology
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2017.01.047
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Electroretinography
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Leber Congenital Amaurosis/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Ophthalmoscopy
- Phenotype
- Retina/physiopathology
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Visual Fields/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotypic and Phenotypic Characteristics of CRB1-Associated Retinal Dystrophies: A Long-Term Follow-up Study.
**Authors:** Talib M, van Schooneveld MJ, van Genderen MM, Wijnholds J, Florijn RJ, Ten Brink JB, Schalij-Delfos NE, Dagnelie G, Cremers FPM, Wolterbeek R, Fiocco M, Thiadens AA, Hoyng CB, Klaver CC, Bergen AA, Boon CJF
**Journal:** Ophthalmology (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ophtha.2017.01.047](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2017.01.047)

## Content

1. Ophthalmology. 2017 Jun;124(6):884-895. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2017.01.047.
Epub  2017 Mar 21.

Genotypic and Phenotypic Characteristics of CRB1-Associated Retinal Dystrophies:
A Long-Term Follow-up Study.

Talib M(1), van Schooneveld MJ(2), van Genderen MM(3), Wijnholds J(1), Florijn
RJ(4), Ten Brink JB(4), Schalij-Delfos NE(1), Dagnelie G(5), Cremers FPM(6),
Wolterbeek R(7), Fiocco M(8), Thiadens AA(9), Hoyng CB(10), Klaver CC(11),
Bergen AA(12), Boon CJF(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(3)Bartiméus, Diagnostic Centre for Complex Visual Disorders, Zeist, The
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(5)Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland.
(6)Department of Human Genetics and Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Medical Statistics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Medical Statistics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands; Mathematical Institute, Leiden University, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.
(10)Department of Ophthalmology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.
(11)Department of Ophthalmology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands; Department of Ophthalmology, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(12)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands; The Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience (NIN-KNAW), Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.
(13)Department of Ophthalmology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands; Department of Ophthalmology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands. Electronic address: c.j.f.boon@lumc.nl.

PURPOSE: To describe the phenotype, long-term clinical course, clinical
variability, and genotype of patients with CRB1-associated retinal dystrophies.
DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
PARTICIPANTS: Fifty-five patients with CRB1-associated retinal dystrophies from
16 families.
METHODS: A medical record review of 55 patients for age at onset, medical
history, initial symptoms, best-corrected visual acuity, ophthalmoscopy, fundus
photography, full-field electroretinography (ffERG), Goldmann visual fields
(VFs), and spectral-domain optical coherence tomography.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Age at onset, visual acuity survival time, visual acuity
decline rate, and electroretinography and imaging findings.
RESULTS: A retinitis pigmentosa (RP) phenotype was present in 50 patients, 34 of
whom were from a Dutch genetic isolate (GI), and 5 patients had a Leber
congenital amaurosis phenotype. The mean follow-up time was 15.4 years (range,
0-55.5 years). For the RP patients, the median age at symptom onset was 4.0
years. In the RP group, median ages for reaching low vision, severe visual
impairment, and blindness were 18, 32, and 44 years, respectively, with a visual
acuity decline rate of 0.03 logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution per
year. The presence of a truncating mutation did not alter the annual decline
rate significantly (P = 0.75). Asymmetry in visual acuity was found in 31% of
patients. The annual VF decline rate was 5% in patients from the genetic
isolate, which was significantly faster than in non-GI patients (P < 0.05).
Full-field electroretinography responses were extinguished in 50% of patients,
were pathologically attenuated without a documented rod or cone predominance in
30% of patients, and showed a rod-cone dysfunction pattern in 20% of RP
patients. Cystoid fluid collections in the macula were found in 50% of RP
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in the CRB1 gene are associated with a spectrum of
progressive retinal degeneration. Visual acuity survival analyses indicate that
the optimal intervention window for subretinal gene therapy is within the first
2 to 3 decades of life.

Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Ophthalmology. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2017.01.047
PMID: 28341475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
