---
reference_id: "PMID:32562095"
title: ART strategies in Klinefelter syndrome.
authors:
- Chen W
- Bai MZ
- Yang Y
- Sun D
- Wu S
- Sun J
- Wu Y
- Feng Y
- Wei Y
- Chen Z
- Zhang Z
journal: J Assist Reprod Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s10815-020-01818-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ART strategies in Klinefelter syndrome.
**Authors:** Chen W, Bai MZ, Yang Y, Sun D, Wu S, Sun J, Wu Y, Feng Y, Wei Y, Chen Z, Zhang Z
**Journal:** J Assist Reprod Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10815-020-01818-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10815-020-01818-2)

## Content

1. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2020 Sep;37(9):2053-2079. doi: 
10.1007/s10815-020-01818-2. Epub 2020 Jun 20.

ART strategies in Klinefelter syndrome.

Chen W(1), Bai MZ(1), Yang Y(1), Sun D(1), Wu S(1), Sun J(1), Wu Y(1), Feng 
Y(1), Wei Y(2), Chen Z(3), Zhang Z(4).

Author information:
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, 200080, 
China.
(2)Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, 
225009, China.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Center for Reproductive Medicine, 
Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, 250021, 
China.
(4)Reproductive Medicine Center, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, 200080, 
China. zhangzhenbozzb@shsmu.edu.cn.

PURPOSE: Patients with Klinefelter syndrome (KS) who receive assisted 
reproductive technology (ART) treatment often experience poor pregnancy rates 
due to decreased fertilization, cleavage, and implantation rates and even an 
increased miscarriage rate. Mounting evidence from recent studies has shown that 
various technological advances and approaches could facilitate the success of 
ART treatment for KS patients. In this review, we summarize the methods for 
guiding KS patients during ART and for developing optimal strategies for 
preserving fertility, improving pregnancy rate and live birth rate, and avoiding 
the birth of KS infants.
METHODS: We searched PubMed and Google Scholar publications related to KS 
patients on topics of controlled ovarian stimulation protocols, sperm 
extraction, fertility preservation, gamete artificial activation, round 
spermatid injection (ROSI), and non-invasive prenatal screening (PGD) methods.
RESULTS: This review outlines the different ovulation-inducing treatments for 
female partners according to the individual sperm status in the KS patient. We 
further summarize the methods of retrieving sperm, storing, and freezing rare 
sperm. We reviewed different methods of gamete artificial activation and 
discussed the feasibility of ROSI for sterile KS patients who absolutely lack 
sperm. The activation of eggs in the process of intracytoplasmic sperm injection 
and non-invasive PGD are urgently needed to prevent the birth of KS infants.
CONCLUSION: The integrated strategies will pave the way for the establishment of 
ART treatment approaches and improve the clinical outcome for KS patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s10815-020-01818-2
PMCID: PMC7492331
PMID: 32562095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.