---
reference_id: "PMID:36694014"
title: "Deep brain stimulation in Lesch-Nyhan syndrome: a systematic review."
authors:
- Deng H
- Xiong BT
- Wu Y
- Wang W
journal: Neurosurg Rev
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10143-023-01950-4
keywords:
- Humans
- Deep Brain Stimulation/methods
- Dystonia/therapy
- Dystonic Disorders/therapy
- Globus Pallidus
- "Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome/therapy, complications"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deep brain stimulation in Lesch-Nyhan syndrome: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Deng H, Xiong BT, Wu Y, Wang W
**Journal:** Neurosurg Rev (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10143-023-01950-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10143-023-01950-4)

## Content

1. Neurosurg Rev. 2023 Jan 25;46(1):40. doi: 10.1007/s10143-023-01950-4.

Deep brain stimulation in Lesch-Nyhan syndrome: a systematic review.

Deng H(1), Xiong BT(1), Wu Y(1), Wang W(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 37 
Guoxue Alley, Chengdu, 610041, Sichuan Province, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 37 
Guoxue Alley, Chengdu, 610041, Sichuan Province, China. wcnsww@163.com.

Given the good results of deep brain stimulation (DBS) in the treatment of 
movement disorders, DBS was initially tried to treat Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (LNS) 
with the aim to alleviate LNS-related dystonia. Some cases have reported 
clinical results of DBS in LNS thus far. This systematic review was conducted to 
comprehensively summarize cases of LNS treated with DBS and evaluate the 
efficacy and safety of DBS in LNS. Eight publications covering 12 LNS patients 
were included in this review. DBS improved dystonia of the LNS to varying 
degrees. All the included cases achieved partial or complete control of 
self-injurious behavior (SIB). Overall, DBS is a promising treatment for both 
motor and behavior disorders of LNS patients, but the results reported thus far 
have varied widely, especially for motor outcomes. The ultimate clinical 
benefits in LNS patients were still unpredictable. DBS-related complications 
were rather common, which raised questions about the safety of the procedure in 
LNS. More research is needed to further clarify the safety and effectiveness of 
this treatment.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10143-023-01950-4
PMID: 36694014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]