---
reference_id: "PMID:38852524"
title: Anti-TL1A monoclonal antibody modulates the dysregulation of Th1/Th17 cells and attenuates granuloma formation in sarcoidosis by inhibiting the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway.
authors:
- Ma C
- Huang J
- Zheng Y
- Na Y
- Wei J
- Shan J
- Meng K
- Zhang X
- Zhang S
- Wen Y
- Ding J
journal: Int Immunopharmacol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2024.112360
keywords:
- Animals
- Th1 Cells/immunology
- Th17 Cells/immunology
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- Humans
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/metabolism, immunology"
- "Granuloma/immunology, drug therapy"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/metabolism, immunology"
- Female
- "Tumor Necrosis Factor Ligand Superfamily Member 15/metabolism, immunology"
- Male
- "Sarcoidosis/immunology, drug therapy"
- Mice
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- "Receptors, Tumor Necrosis Factor, Member 25/metabolism, immunology"
- "Lung/immunology, pathology"
- "Cytokines/metabolism, immunology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-TL1A monoclonal antibody modulates the dysregulation of Th1/Th17 cells and attenuates granuloma formation in sarcoidosis by inhibiting the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway.
**Authors:** Ma C, Huang J, Zheng Y, Na Y, Wei J, Shan J, Meng K, Zhang X, Zhang S, Wen Y, Ding J
**Journal:** Int Immunopharmacol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.intimp.2024.112360](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2024.112360)

## Content

1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2024 Aug 20;137:112360. doi:
10.1016/j.intimp.2024.112360.  Epub 2024 Jun 8.

Anti-TL1A monoclonal antibody modulates the dysregulation of Th1/Th17 cells and
attenuates granuloma formation in sarcoidosis by inhibiting the PI3K/AKT
signaling pathway.

Ma C(1), Huang J(1), Zheng Y(2), Na Y(2), Wei J(1), Shan J(3), Meng K(2), Zhang
X(3), Zhang S(3), Wen Y(4), Ding J(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Nanjing Drum Tower
Hospital, The Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing,
China.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Nanjing Drum Tower
Hospital Clinical College of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Basic Medicine, Center of Translational Medicine, Jiangsu Key
Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing,
China.
(4)Department of Basic Medicine, Center of Translational Medicine, Jiangsu Key
Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing,
China. Electronic address: wenyanting@nju.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Nanjing Drum Tower
Hospital, The Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing,
China. Electronic address: dingflower@hotmail.com.

Sarcoidosis is a systemic granulomatous disease characterized by non-caseating
epithelioid cell granulomas. One of its immunological hallmarks is the
differentiation of CD4 + naïve T cells into Th1/Th17 cells, accompanied by the
release of numerous pro-inflammatory cytokines. The TL1A/DR3 signaling pathway
plays a crucial role in activating effector lymphocytes, thereby triggering
pro-inflammatory responses. The primary aim of this investigation was to
scrutinize the impact of anti-TL1A monoclonal antibody on the dysregulation of
Th1/Th17 cells and granuloma formation in sarcoidosis. Initially, the abnormal
activation of the TL1A/DR3 signaling pathway in pulmonary tissues of sarcoidosis
patients was confirmed using qPCR and immunohistochemistry techniques.
Subsequently, employing a murine model of sarcoidosis, the inhibitory effects of
anti-TL1A monoclonal antibody on the TL1A/DR3 signaling pathway in sarcoidosis
were investigated through qPCR, immunohistochemistry, and Western blot
experiments. The influence of anti-TL1A monoclonal antibody on granulomas was
assessed through HE staining, while their effects on sarcoidosis Th1/Th17 cells
and associated cytokine mRNA levels were evaluated using flow cytometry and
qPCR, respectively. Immunofluorescence and Western blot experiments corroborated
the inhibitory effects of anti-TL1A monoclonal antibody on the aberrant
activation of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway in sarcoidosis. The findings of
this study indicate that the TL1A/DR3 signaling pathway is excessively activated
in sarcoidosis. Anti-TL1A monoclonal antibody effectively inhibit this abnormal
activation in sarcoidosis, thereby alleviating the dysregulation of Th1/Th17
cells and reducing the formation of pulmonary granulomas. This effect may be
associated with the inhibition of the downstream PI3K/AKT signaling pathway.
Anti-TL1A monoclonal antibody hold promise as a potential novel therapeutic
intervention for sarcoidosis.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2024.112360
PMID: 38852524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
