---
reference_id: "PMID:33116259"
title: Enhanced FGFR3 activity in postmitotic principal neurons during brain development results in cortical dysplasia and axonal tract abnormality.
authors:
- Huang JY
- Krebs BB
- Miskus ML
- Russell ML
- Duffy EP
- Graf JM
- Lu HC
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-75537-0
keywords:
- Animals
- Axons/metabolism
- Brain/metabolism
- Cell Differentiation/physiology
- Excitatory Amino Acids/metabolism
- Female
- Fibroblast Growth Factors/metabolism
- Gain of Function Mutation/genetics
- Glutamic Acid/metabolism
- Male
- "Malformations of Cortical Development/etiology, genetics"
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mitosis/physiology
- Neurogenesis/physiology
- Neurons/metabolism
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enhanced FGFR3 activity in postmitotic principal neurons during brain development results in cortical dysplasia and axonal tract abnormality.
**Authors:** Huang JY, Krebs BB, Miskus ML, Russell ML, Duffy EP, Graf JM, Lu HC
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-020-75537-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-75537-0)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2020 Oct 28;10(1):18508. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-75537-0.

Enhanced FGFR3 activity in postmitotic principal neurons during brain 
development results in cortical dysplasia and axonal tract abnormality.

Huang JY(1)(2)(3), Krebs BB(4), Miskus ML(5), Russell ML(5), Duffy EP(5), Graf 
JM(5), Lu HC(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, the Linda and Jack Gill 
Center for Biomolecular Sciences, Indiana University, 1101 E. 10th Street, 
Bloomington, IN, 47405, USA. juiyhuan@indiana.edu.
(2)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN, 47405, USA. juiyhuan@indiana.edu.
(3)Program in Neuroscience, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, 47405, USA. 
juiyhuan@indiana.edu.
(4)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, the Linda and Jack Gill 
Center for Biomolecular Sciences, Indiana University, 1101 E. 10th Street, 
Bloomington, IN, 47405, USA.
(5)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN, 47405, USA.
(6)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, the Linda and Jack Gill 
Center for Biomolecular Sciences, Indiana University, 1101 E. 10th Street, 
Bloomington, IN, 47405, USA. hclu@indiana.edu.
(7)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN, 47405, USA. hclu@indiana.edu.
(8)Program in Neuroscience, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, 47405, USA. 
hclu@indiana.edu.

Abnormal levels of fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) and FGF receptors (FGFRs) 
have been detected in various neurological disorders. The potent impact of 
FGF-FGFR in multiple embryonic developmental processes makes it challenging to 
elucidate their roles in postmitotic neurons. Taking an alternative approach to 
examine the impact of aberrant FGFR function on glutamatergic neurons, we 
generated a FGFR gain-of-function (GOF) transgenic mouse, which expresses 
constitutively activated FGFR3 (FGFR3K650E) in postmitotic glutamatergic 
neurons. We found that GOF disrupts mitosis of radial-glia neural progenitors 
(RGCs), inside-out radial migration of post-mitotic glutamatergic neurons, and 
axonal tract projections. In particular, late-born CUX1-positive neurons are 
widely dispersed throughout the GOF cortex. Such a cortical migration deficit is 
likely caused, at least in part, by a significant reduction of the radial 
processes projecting from RGCs. RNA-sequencing analysis of the GOF embryonic 
cortex reveals significant alterations in several pathways involved in cell 
cycle regulation and axonal pathfinding. Collectively, our data suggest that 
FGFR3 GOF in postmitotic neurons not only alters axonal growth of postmitotic 
neurons but also impairs RGC neurogenesis and radial glia processes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-75537-0
PMCID: PMC7595096
PMID: 33116259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.