---
reference_id: "PMID:39403761"
title: "Contact Dermatitis in the United States: A Population-Based Study on Patient Visit Characteristics and Treatment Prescription Patterns."
authors:
- Hao A
- Yu RP
- Kikuchi R
- Sadrolashrafi K
- Guo L
- Yamamoto RK
- Tolson H
- Yee D
- Bilimoria S
- Pourali SP
- Adler BL
- Armstrong AW
journal: Dermatitis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1089/derm.2024.0193
keywords:
- Humans
- United States/epidemiology
- "Practice Patterns, Physicians'/statistics & numerical data"
- Female
- Male
- "Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- "Histamine Antagonists/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Aged
- "Dermatologists/statistics & numerical data"
- "General Practitioners/statistics & numerical data"
- "Dermatitis, Contact/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- "Drug Prescriptions/statistics & numerical data"
- Health Care Surveys
- Child
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contact Dermatitis in the United States: A Population-Based Study on Patient Visit Characteristics and Treatment Prescription Patterns.
**Authors:** Hao A, Yu RP, Kikuchi R, Sadrolashrafi K, Guo L, Yamamoto RK, Tolson H, Yee D, Bilimoria S, Pourali SP, Adler BL, Armstrong AW
**Journal:** Dermatitis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1089/derm.2024.0193](https://doi.org/10.1089/derm.2024.0193)

## Content

1. Dermatitis. 2025 Jan-Feb;36(1):53-61. doi: 10.1089/derm.2024.0193. Epub 2024
Oct  15.

Contact Dermatitis in the United States: A Population-Based Study on Patient 
Visit Characteristics and Treatment Prescription Patterns.

Hao A(1), Yu RP(2), Kikuchi R(1), Sadrolashrafi K(3), Guo L(4), Yamamoto RK(5), 
Tolson H(6), Yee D(7), Bilimoria S(7), Pourali SP(8), Adler BL(9), Armstrong 
AW(7).

Author information:
(1)From the Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA.
(3)Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine, UNLV, Las Vegas, NV, USA.
(4)Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA.
(5)Georgetown University School of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA.
(6)University of Arizona College of Medicine, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(7)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Dermatology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, TN, USA.
(9)Department of Dermatology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Background: Contact dermatitis (CD) affects ∼15% of the general population over 
a lifetime. However, there is a lack of epidemiological studies on treatment 
patterns for CD. Objective: We aim to analyze the patient characteristics and 
prescribing patterns among dermatologists and general practitioners (GPs) 
(internal medicine [IM] and family medicine [FM]) for CD in the United States. 
Methods: We conducted a population-based study using the National Ambulatory 
Medical Care Survey. Results: We identified 178,017,680 weighted patient visits 
for CD from 2001 to 2016. Dermatologists saw more white and non-Hispanic 
patients than GPs. GPs were less likely to prescribe ultrahigh potency topical 
corticosteroids (FM OR 0.27; P < 0.001, IM OR 0.41; P < 0.001) and more likely 
to prescribe oral antihistamines (FM OR 3.71; P < 0.001, IM OR 3.56; P < 0.001), 
oral corticosteroids (FM OR 5.35; P < 0.001, IM OR 6.87; P < 0.001), and 
injectable corticosteroids (FM OR 3.42; P = 0.006, IM OR 5.68; P < 0.001) than 
dermatologists. Conclusions: Across CD visits, GPs were less likely than 
dermatologists to prescribe ultrahigh potency topical corticosteroids and more 
likely than dermatologists to prescribe oral antihistamines and systemic 
corticosteroid therapy.

DOI: 10.1089/derm.2024.0193
PMID: 39403761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]