---
reference_id: "PMID:8634707"
title: Characterization of the large deletion in the GALC gene found in patients with Krabbe disease.
authors:
- Luzi P
- Rafi MA
- Wenger DA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/4.12.2335
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Cell Line
- DNA
- Galactosylceramidase/genetics
- Genetic Carrier Screening
- Humans
- "Leukodystrophy, Globoid Cell/enzymology, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of the large deletion in the GALC gene found in patients with Krabbe disease.
**Authors:** Luzi P, Rafi MA, Wenger DA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/4.12.2335](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/4.12.2335)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1995 Dec;4(12):2335-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/4.12.2335.

Characterization of the large deletion in the GALC gene found in patients with 
Krabbe disease.

Luzi P(1), Rafi MA, Wenger DA.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine and Biochemstry and Molecular Biology, Thomas 
Jefferson University, Phildelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Globoid cell leukodystrophy (GLD) of Krabbe disease results from mutations in 
the galactocerebrosidase (GALC) gene. Previously, we had identified a large 
deletion in the GALC gene together with a C to T polymorphism at cDNA position 
502 in a significant number of cases of infantile Krabbe disease; however, the 
deletion breakpoint had not been found. In this paper we show that the deletion 
is approximately 30 kb starting near the middle of the 12 kb intron 10, and 
includes all of the coding region through exon 17 plus an additional 9 kb. The 
deletion junction contains a 4 bp direct repeat and is preceded by sequence 
identified as belonging to the Alu family of interspersed repetitive elements. 
Using genomic DNA and a PCR-based test to detect normal and deleted sequences at 
that location, a large number of patients with all clinical types of GLD were 
analyzed. Of 21 infantile patients found to be heterozygous for the 502T 
polymorphism reported previously, 15 had the deletion, one could not tested and 
five, including a Hmong child, did not have the deletion. Sixteen other 
infantile patients previously tested were found to be either homozygous (10) or 
heterozygous (6) for the deletion. In addition, five patients with juvenile and 
adult GLD were found to be heterozygous for the deletion. In every case tested, 
the deletion was always found on the same allele as the 502T polymorphism. 
However, other disease-causing mutations have been found on the 502T allele. 
With careful genotype analysis these families can receive improved genetic 
information including patient and carrier identification and preimplantation 
diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/4.12.2335
PMID: 8634707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]