---
reference_id: "PMID:34835022"
title: The Use of Electronic Medical Records-Based Big-Data Informatics to Describe ALT Elevations Higher than 1000 IU/L in Patients with or without Hepatitis B Virus Infection.
authors:
- Amano H
- Kanda T
- Mochizuki H
- Kojima Y
- Suzuki Y
- Hosoda K
- Ashizawa H
- Miura Y
- Tsunoda S
- Hirotsu Y
- Ohyama H
- Kato N
- Moriyama M
- Obi S
- Omata M
journal: Viruses
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/v13112216
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Use of Electronic Medical Records-Based Big-Data Informatics to Describe ALT Elevations Higher than 1000 IU/L in Patients with or without Hepatitis B Virus Infection.
**Authors:** Amano H, Kanda T, Mochizuki H, Kojima Y, Suzuki Y, Hosoda K, Ashizawa H, Miura Y, Tsunoda S, Hirotsu Y, Ohyama H, Kato N, Moriyama M, Obi S, Omata M
**Journal:** Viruses (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v13112216](https://doi.org/10.3390/v13112216)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 4;13(11):2216. doi: 10.3390/v13112216.

The Use of Electronic Medical Records-Based Big-Data Informatics to Describe ALT 
Elevations Higher than 1000 IU/L in Patients with or without Hepatitis B Virus 
Infection.

Amano H(1), Kanda T(2), Mochizuki H(1), Kojima Y(1), Suzuki Y(1), Hosoda K(1), 
Ashizawa H(1), Miura Y(1), Tsunoda S(1), Hirotsu Y(3), Ohyama H(1)(4), Kato 
N(4), Moriyama M(2), Obi S(5), Omata M(1)(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Yamanashi Central Hospital, 1-1-1 Fujimi, 
Kofu, Yamanashi 400-8506, Japan.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Nihon 
University School of Medicine, 30-1 Oyaguchi-kamicho, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 
173-8610, Japan.
(3)Genome Analysis Center, Yamanashi Central Hospital, 1-1-1 Fujimi, Kofu, 
Yamanashi 400-8506, Japan.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Chiba University, Graduate School of 
Medicine, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Teikyo University Chiba Medical Center, 
3426-3 Anesaki, Ichihara 299-0111, Chiba, Japan.
(6)The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is one of the serious health problems in the 
world as HBV causes severe liver diseases. Moreover, HBV reactivation has 
occasionally been observed in patients with resolved HBV infection and patients 
using immunosuppression and anticancer drugs. Large-scale hospital data focused 
on HBV infection and severe liver function were analyzed at our hospital, 
located in an urban area adjacent to Tokyo, the capital city of Japan. A total 
of 99,932 individuals whose blood samples were taken at 7,170,240 opportunities 
were analyzed. The HBV surface antigen (HBsAg)-positive group had a more 
frequent prevalence of patients with higher transaminase elevations than the 
HBsAg-negative group. However, among the HBsAg-negative group, patients who were 
positive for anti-HBV surface antibody and/or anti-HBV core antibody, had more 
severe liver conditions and fatal outcomes. More careful attention should be 
paid to alanine transaminase (ALT) elevations higher than 1000 IU/L in patients 
who had current and previous HBV infection.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112216
PMCID: PMC8624674
PMID: 34835022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.