---
reference_id: "PMID:34591160"
title: "Association of Nephronophthisis 4 genetic variation with cardiorenal syndrome and cardiovascular events in Japanese general population: the Yamagata (Takahata) study."
authors:
- Otaki Y
- Watanabe T
- Sato J
- Kobayashi Y
- Aono T
- Saito Y
- Goto J
- Takahashi H
- Arimoto T
- Sato H
- Konta T
- Ueno Y
- Watanabe M
journal: Heart Vessels
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00380-021-01953-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of Nephronophthisis 4 genetic variation with cardiorenal syndrome and cardiovascular events in Japanese general population: the Yamagata (Takahata) study.
**Authors:** Otaki Y, Watanabe T, Sato J, Kobayashi Y, Aono T, Saito Y, Goto J, Takahashi H, Arimoto T, Sato H, Konta T, Ueno Y, Watanabe M
**Journal:** Heart Vessels (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00380-021-01953-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00380-021-01953-5)

## Content

1. Heart Vessels. 2022 Apr;37(4):673-682. doi: 10.1007/s00380-021-01953-5. Epub 
2021 Sep 30.

Association of Nephronophthisis 4 genetic variation with cardiorenal syndrome 
and cardiovascular events in Japanese general population: the Yamagata 
(Takahata) study.

Otaki Y(1), Watanabe T(2), Sato J(1), Kobayashi Y(1), Aono T(1), Saito Y(1), 
Goto J(1), Takahashi H(1), Arimoto T(1), Sato H(3), Konta T(4), Ueno Y(5), 
Watanabe M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Pulmonology, and Nephrology, Yamagata University 
School of Medicine, 2-2-2 Iida-Nishi, Yamagata, 990-9585, Japan.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Pulmonology, and Nephrology, Yamagata University 
School of Medicine, 2-2-2 Iida-Nishi, Yamagata, 990-9585, Japan. 
tewatana@med.id.yamagata-u.ac.jp.
(3)Genome Informatics Unit, Institute for Promotion of Medical Science Research, 
Faculty of Medicine, Yamagata University, Yamagata, Japan.
(4)Department of Public Health and Hygiene, Yamagata University School of 
Medicine, Yamagata, Japan.
(5)Global Center of Excellence Program Study Group, Yamagata University School 
of Medicine, Yamagata, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Nephronophthisis (NPHP) 4 gene encoding nephrocystin-4, which 
contributes to end-stage renal disease in children and young adults, is involved 
in the development of the heart and kidneys. Cardiorenal syndrome (CRS), which 
consists of bidirectional dysfunction of the heart and kidneys, is a risk factor 
for cardiovascular events. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the 
NPHP4 gene are reportedly associated with kidney function, even in adults. 
However, the association of NPHP4 gene variability with CRS and cardiovascular 
events remains unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: This prospective cohort study included 2946 subjects who 
participated in a community-based health study with a 16-year follow-up period. 
We genotyped 11 SNPs within the NPHP4 gene whose minor allele frequency was 
greater than 0.1 in the Japanese population. The SNP rs12058375 was 
significantly associated with CRS and cardiovascular events. Multivariate 
logistic analysis demonstrated a significant association between the homozygous 
A-allele of rs12058375 with the presence of CRS. Haplotype analysis identified 
the haplotype with the A-allele of rs12058375 as an increased susceptibility 
factor for CRS. Kaplan-Meier analysis demonstrated that homozygous A-allele 
carriers of rs12058375 had the greatest risk of developing cardiovascular events 
among the NPHP4 variants. Multivariate Cox proportional hazard regression 
analysis revealed that the homozygous A-allele and heterozygous carriers of 
rs12058375 were associated with cardiovascular events after adjusting for 
confounding factors. The net reclassification index and integrated 
discrimination index were significantly improved by the addition of rs12058375 
as a cardiovascular risk factor.
CONCLUSION: Genetic variations in the NPHP4 gene were associated with CRS and 
cardiovascular events in the general population, suggesting that it may 
facilitate the early identification of high-risk subjects with CRS and 
cardiovascular events.

© 2021. Springer Japan KK, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00380-021-01953-5
PMID: 34591160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]