---
reference_id: "PMID:36849851"
title: Total exudative retinal detachment in a child with pars planitis- a challenging case with optimistic results.
authors:
- Navarrete A
- Jaouni T
- Amer R
journal: J Ophthalmic Inflamm Infect
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12348-023-00328-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Total exudative retinal detachment in a child with pars planitis- a challenging case with optimistic results.
**Authors:** Navarrete A, Jaouni T, Amer R
**Journal:** J Ophthalmic Inflamm Infect (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12348-023-00328-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12348-023-00328-3)

## Content

1. J Ophthalmic Inflamm Infect. 2023 Feb 27;13(1):6. doi: 
10.1186/s12348-023-00328-3.

Total exudative retinal detachment in a child with pars planitis- a challenging 
case with optimistic results.

Navarrete A(1), Jaouni T(2), Amer R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. 
ananav@hadassah.org.il.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.

We describe a case report of pediatric pars planitis complicated with massive 
exudative retinal detachment (ERD). A 7-year-old presented with visual acuity 
(VA) in the right eye (RE) of 6/9 and in the left eye (LE) 6/15. Fundoscopy 
revealed BE inferior retinoschisis, vitritis and snowballs. He was treated with 
systemic immunosuppressants. RE retinoschisis resolved within 2 months. Three 
years later presented with LE VA 6/60 and total ERD. Systemic and intravitreal 
steroids were administered. Due to refractoriness, he underwent 360° scleral 
buckle and drainage of subretinal fluid. No retinal breaks or traction were 
detected. Five months postoperatively LE VA was 6/7.5. Long-term stable outcome 
was maintained. We report a challenging total ERD as a complication of pars 
planitis. Although extensive and non-responsive to medical therapy, complete 
resolution and improvement in vision was achieved with surgical intervention and 
systemic immunosuppression. We speculate that uncontrolled chronic vasculitic 
process culminated in diffuse ERD.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12348-023-00328-3
PMCID: PMC9971364
PMID: 36849851

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicting relationship or proprietary 
interest exists for any author.