---
reference_id: "PMID:33318036"
title: SWI/SNF Complex Mutations Promote Thyroid Tumor Progression and Insensitivity to Redifferentiation Therapies.
authors:
- Saqcena M
- Leandro-Garcia LJ
- Maag JLV
- Tchekmedyian V
- Krishnamoorthy GP
- Tamarapu PP
- Tiedje V
- Reuter V
- Knauf JA
- de Stanchina E
- Xu B
- Liao XH
- Refetoff S
- Ghossein R
- Chi P
- Ho AL
- Koche RP
- Fagin JA
journal: Cancer Discov
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-20-0735
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cellular Reprogramming Techniques
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/genetics"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred Strains"
- Mutation
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SWI/SNF Complex Mutations Promote Thyroid Tumor Progression and Insensitivity to Redifferentiation Therapies.
**Authors:** Saqcena M, Leandro-Garcia LJ, Maag JLV, Tchekmedyian V, Krishnamoorthy GP, Tamarapu PP, Tiedje V, Reuter V, Knauf JA, de Stanchina E, Xu B, Liao XH, Refetoff S, Ghossein R, Chi P, Ho AL, Koche RP, Fagin JA
**Journal:** Cancer Discov (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1158/2159-8290.CD-20-0735](https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-20-0735)

## Content

1. Cancer Discov. 2021 May;11(5):1158-1175. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-20-0735.
Epub  2020 Dec 14.

SWI/SNF Complex Mutations Promote Thyroid Tumor Progression and Insensitivity to 
Redifferentiation Therapies.

Saqcena M(#)(1), Leandro-Garcia LJ(#)(1), Maag JLV(2), Tchekmedyian V(3), 
Krishnamoorthy GP(1), Tamarapu PP(1), Tiedje V(1), Reuter V(2), Knauf JA(1), de 
Stanchina E(4), Xu B(5), Liao XH(6), Refetoff S(7), Ghossein R(5), Chi P(1), Ho 
AL(3), Koche RP(2), Fagin JA(8)(3).

Author information:
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, New York.
(2)Center for Epigenetics Research, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, New York.
(3)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New 
York.
(4)Antitumor Assessment Core Facility, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, New York.
(5)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
New York.
(6)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(7)Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics and the Committee on Genetics, The 
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(8)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, New York. faginj@mskcc.org.
(#)Contributed equally

Mutations of subunits of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes occur 
commonly in cancers of different lineages, including advanced thyroid cancers. 
Here we show that thyroid-specific loss of Arid1a, Arid2, or Smarcb1 in mouse 
BRAFV600E-mutant tumors promotes disease progression and decreased survival, 
associated with lesion-specific effects on chromatin accessibility and 
differentiation. As compared with normal thyrocytes, BRAFV600E-mutant mouse 
papillary thyroid cancers have decreased lineage transcription factor expression 
and accessibility to their target DNA binding sites, leading to impairment of 
thyroid-differentiated gene expression and radioiodine incorporation, which is 
rescued by MAPK inhibition. Loss of individual SWI/SNF subunits in BRAF tumors 
leads to a repressive chromatin state that cannot be reversed by MAPK pathway 
blockade, rendering them insensitive to its redifferentiation effects. Our 
results show that SWI/SNF complexes are central to the maintenance of 
differentiated function in thyroid cancers, and their loss confers radioiodine 
refractoriness and resistance to MAPK inhibitor-based redifferentiation 
therapies. SIGNIFICANCE: Reprogramming cancer differentiation confers 
therapeutic benefit in various disease contexts. Oncogenic BRAF silences genes 
required for radioiodine responsiveness in thyroid cancer. Mutations in SWI/SNF 
genes result in loss of chromatin accessibility at thyroid lineage specification 
genes in BRAF-mutant thyroid tumors, rendering them insensitive to the 
redifferentiation effects of MAPK blockade.This article is highlighted in the In 
This Issue feature, p. 995.

©2020 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-20-0735
PMCID: PMC8102308
PMID: 33318036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest JAF: Consultant, Loxo 
Oncology. Grant support, Eisai Pharmaceuticals. ALH: Research Funding (Clinical 
trials): AstraZeneca, Novartis, Eisai Pharmaceuticals, Genentech-Roche, Bayer, 
Celldex (previously Koltan). Advisory Board: AstraZeneca, Eisai Pharmaceuticals, 
Sanofi Genzyme, Novartis, Genentech-Roche.