---
reference_id: "PMID:27860460"
title: "Anakinra for Colchicine-Resistant Familial Mediterranean Fever: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial."
authors:
- Ben-Zvi I
- Kukuy O
- Giat E
- Pras E
- Feld O
- Kivity S
- Perski O
- Bornstein G
- Grossman C
- Harari G
- Lidar M
- Livneh A
journal: Arthritis Rheumatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/art.39995
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anakinra for Colchicine-Resistant Familial Mediterranean Fever: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial.
**Authors:** Ben-Zvi I, Kukuy O, Giat E, Pras E, Feld O, Kivity S, Perski O, Bornstein G, Grossman C, Harari G, Lidar M, Livneh A
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheumatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.39995](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.39995)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2017 Apr;69(4):854-862. doi: 10.1002/art.39995.

Anakinra for Colchicine-Resistant Familial Mediterranean Fever: A Randomized, 
Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial.

Ben-Zvi I(1), Kukuy O(2), Giat E(2), Pras E(1), Feld O(2), Kivity S(1), Perski 
O(2), Bornstein G(1), Grossman C(1), Harari G(3), Lidar M(1), Livneh A(1).

Author information:
(1)Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel, and Tel Aviv University Sackler 
School of Medicine, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(3)Medistat, Ltd., Tel Aviv, Israel.

Comment in
    Arthritis Rheumatol. 2017 Sep;69(9):1914. doi: 10.1002/art.40169.
    Arthritis Rheumatol. 2017 Sep;69(9):1914. doi: 10.1002/art.40167.
    MMW Fortschr Med. 2021 Feb;163(3):78. doi: 10.1007/s15006-021-9611-6.

OBJECTIVE: Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is refractory to colchicine 
prophylaxis in 10-20% of patients. In a number of patient series, treatment with 
anakinra, an interleukin-1-blocking agent, prevented FMF attacks in those with 
colchicine-resistant FMF. This study was undertaken to evaluate the efficacy and 
safety of anakinra in the treatment of colchicine-resistant FMF, using a 
randomized controlled trial.
METHODS: Patients with colchicine-resistant FMF receiving colchicine (dosage 
≥1.5 to ≤3 mg/day) were recruited and randomly assigned to receive anakinra or 
placebo (vehicle). The treatment duration was 4 months. Primary efficacy 
outcomes were the number of attacks per month, and the number of patients with a 
mean of <1 attack per month. Quality of life was assessed using a 0-10-grade 
visual analog scale (VAS), and safety was assessed according to the number and 
severity of adverse events.
RESULTS: Twenty-five patients with colchicine-resistant FMF (14 women) were 
enrolled, of whom 12 were randomized to receive anakinra and 13 to receive 
placebo. The mean ± SD number of attacks per patient per month was 1.7 ± 1.7 in 
those receiving anakinra and 3.5 ± 1.9 in those receiving placebo (P = 0.037). 
Six patients in the anakinra group, compared to none in the placebo group, had 
<1 attack per month (P = 0.005). A beneficial effect of anakinra was noted in 
the number of attacks in the joints per month in patients receiving anakinra 
(mean ± SD 0.8 ± 1.6 versus 2.1 ± 1.1 in the placebo group; P = 0.019) and in 
quality of life (mean ± SD VAS score 7.7 ± 2.3 in the anakinra group versus 
4.2 ± 2.9 in the placebo group; P = 0.045). The number of adverse events per 
patient per month was comparable between the anakinra group and the placebo 
group (mean ± SD 2.03 ± 1.75 versus 3.34 ± 2.5; P = 0.22). There were no severe 
adverse events.
CONCLUSION: In this randomized controlled trial, anakinra appears to be an 
effective and safe treatment for colchicine-resistant FMF.

© 2016, American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.39995
PMID: 27860460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]