---
reference_id: "PMID:38864389"
title: "Exploring the interplay of atopic dermatitis severity with sleep and mental health: a case-control study in adult patients."
authors:
- Esposito M
- Amicucci G
- Salfi F
- Pellegrini C
- De Berardinis A
- Chiricozzi A
- Peris K
- Tempesta D
- Ferrara M
- Fargnoli MC
journal: Postgrad Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/00325481.2024.2366162
keywords:
- Humans
- "Dermatitis, Atopic/psychology, complications, epidemiology"
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- Case-Control Studies
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Sleep Initiation and Maintenance Disorders/epidemiology, psychology"
- Middle Aged
- Depression/epidemiology
- Anxiety/epidemiology
- "Pruritus/etiology, psychology, epidemiology"
- Mental Health
- Sleep Quality
- Young Adult
- Sleep Wake Disorders/epidemiology
- Comorbidity
- Surveys and Questionnaires
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exploring the interplay of atopic dermatitis severity with sleep and mental health: a case-control study in adult patients.
**Authors:** Esposito M, Amicucci G, Salfi F, Pellegrini C, De Berardinis A, Chiricozzi A, Peris K, Tempesta D, Ferrara M, Fargnoli MC
**Journal:** Postgrad Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00325481.2024.2366162](https://doi.org/10.1080/00325481.2024.2366162)

## Content

1. Postgrad Med. 2024 Jun;136(5):533-540. doi: 10.1080/00325481.2024.2366162.
Epub  2024 Jun 12.

Exploring the interplay of atopic dermatitis severity with sleep and mental 
health: a case-control study in adult patients.

Esposito M(1)(2), Amicucci G(1)(3), Salfi F(1), Pellegrini C(1), De Berardinis 
A(1), Chiricozzi A(4)(5), Peris K(4)(5), Tempesta D(1), Ferrara M(1), Fargnoli 
MC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnological and Applied Clinical Sciences, University of 
L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.
(2)UOSD General and Oncologic Dermatology, San Salvatore Hospital, L'Aquila, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Psychology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(4)UOC di Dermatologia, Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche, 
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli - IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(5)Dermatologia, Dipartimento di Medicina e Chirurgia Traslazionale, Università 
Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic inflammatory skin disease often 
associated with non-atopic comorbidities. Recently, a severity-dependent 
relationship between AD and sleep/mental health diseases has been proposed. 
However, few studies investigated these comorbidities and their association with 
AD severity through validated questionnaires. This study aimed to use a set of 
validated instruments to assess the impact of AD on sleep and psychological 
disorders and estimate the association of itch and AD severity with sleep 
disorders and psychological symptoms, distinguishing between clinical-oriented 
and patient-oriented measures.
METHODS: We conducted a case-control study, recruiting 57 adult AD patients 
(mean age ± std. dev. 34.28 years ± 13.07; 27 males) matched for age and sex 
with 57 healthy adults (34.39 years ± 13.09; 27 males). To investigate the 
differences in sleep quality, insomnia, depression, and anxiety between the two 
groups, we performed independent sample t-Tests. Moreover, we conducted 
univariate linear regression analyses to examine the relationship between itch 
and objective/subjective severity of AD and sleep quality, insomnia, and 
psychological symptoms.
RESULTS: AD patients reported lower sleep quality (p = 0.002), more severe 
insomnia (p = 0.006) and depression (p = 0.013), and higher stress levels than 
healthy adults (p = 0.049). Itch intensity was linked to sleep disturbances and 
psychological symptoms (R2range = 0.13-0.19, prange = 0.02-<0.001). Objective 
and subjective AD severity were similarly associated with worse sleep quality 
(R2 = 0.26, p < 0.001; R2 = 0.24, p < 0.001; respectively), anxiety (R2 = 0.15, 
p = 0.04; R2 = 0.17, p = 0.001; respectively), and self-perceived stress 
(R2 = 0.10, p = 0.02; R2 = 0.07, p = 0.049; respectively). However, subjective 
AD severity was more strongly associated with insomnia (R2 = 0.31, p < 0.001) 
and depression (R2 = 0.20, p < 0.001) than clinical-oriented AD severity 
(R2 = 0.19, p < 0.001; R2 = 0.05, p = 0.098; respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The study demonstrated poor sleep quality and high levels of 
insomnia, depression, and stress in AD patients, with an aggravated 
psychological status for adults with more severe skin disease. We suggest 
implementing a multidisciplinary approach to AD management/treatment that 
considers objective and subjective measures of disease severity.

DOI: 10.1080/00325481.2024.2366162
PMID: 38864389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]