---
reference_id: "PMID:8190590"
title: "Do young boys with fragile X syndrome have macroorchidism?"
authors:
- Lachiewicz AM
- Dawson DV
journal: Pediatrics
year: '1994'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Do young boys with fragile X syndrome have macroorchidism?
**Authors:** Lachiewicz AM, Dawson DV
**Journal:** Pediatrics (1994)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 1994 Jun;93(6 Pt 1):992-5.

Do young boys with fragile X syndrome have macroorchidism?

Lachiewicz AM(1), Dawson DV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710.

OBJECTIVE: Macroorchidism is one of the most well-described clinical 
characteristics of men with fragile X syndrome, but little information has been 
available regarding macroorchidism in prepubertal boys with fragile X. The 
purpose of this study was to learn whether macroorchidism is a characteristic of 
fragile X syndrome in prepubertal boys.
METHODS: Clinical assessments were performed on 73 boys, 2.2 to 10.2 years, in 
whom fragile X either had been diagnosed or who had been referred for fragile X 
evaluations because of developmental delays. As part of these assessments, we 
measured testicular volumes using Prader orchiometer beads to find out if 
macroorchidism occurs before the onset of puberty.
RESULTS: From 2.2 through 7 years, boys with fragile X have significantly larger 
mean testicular volumes than boys without fragile X, but macroorchidism (> or = 
4.0 mL or > or = 2 times normal) only occurred in 1 of 27 boys with fragile X. 
From 8 to 10 years, all our patients with fragile X had clinically enlarged 
testicles (> or = 3.75 mL), and 7 of 9 boys with fragile X had macroorchidism (> 
or = 4.0 mL). The testicular volumes of control subjects were all < or = 3.0 mL.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that macroorchidism occurs in some 
prepubertal boys with fragile X, but in this series it did not occur until age 6 
and usually did not occur until after age 8.

PMID: 8190590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]