---
reference_id: "PMID:32941194"
title: Current management of the vascular subtype of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Benrashid E
- Ohman JW
journal: Curr Opin Cardiol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1097/HCO.0000000000000797
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current management of the vascular subtype of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Benrashid E, Ohman JW
**Journal:** Curr Opin Cardiol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1097/HCO.0000000000000797](https://doi.org/10.1097/HCO.0000000000000797)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2020 Nov;35(6):603-609. doi: 10.1097/HCO.0000000000000797.

Current management of the vascular subtype of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Benrashid E(1), Ohman JW.

Author information:
(1)Section of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS) is the most severe 
form of EDS, affecting the synthesis of type III collagen. It is notable for 
decreased life expectancy and morbidity, including spontaneous vessel rupture. 
The present review summarizes recent findings that have improved the ability to 
manage and delineate the natural history of vEDS.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent EDS consortium guidelines for the diagnosis of vEDS have 
emerged and outlined clinical features and molecular diagnostic tools to help 
facilitate rapid diagnosis. Although medical interventions to help halt the 
disease progression remain limited, improved awareness of vEDS by patients and 
practitioners have resulted in increased average life expectancy. Early 
excitement with celiprolol has been tempered by a lack of high-quality studies. 
Likewise, the creation of multidisciplinary care teams and tertiary referral 
centers is helping improve outcomes. Unfortunately, there remain limitations in 
terms of the surgical management (including more advanced endovascular 
techniques) of these patients and the morbidity associated with these 
interventions.
SUMMARY: Although new consensus guidelines have emerged to facilitate the 
diagnosis of those with vEDS, there remain limitations in terms of interventions 
and medical therapy that can be provided for these patients. Life expectancy 
does appear to be improving however with increased awareness and coordinated 
multidisciplinary efforts among medical geneticists, general practitioners, and 
interventionalists alike.

DOI: 10.1097/HCO.0000000000000797
PMID: 32941194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]