---
reference_id: "PMID:8012079"
title: Superficial and protruding type of esophageal adenocarcinoma mucocellulare and muconodulare confined mostly to the lamina propria mucosa and partly in the submucosal layer.
authors:
- Honda M
- Koyama S
- Sugitani T
- Fukutomi H
- Osuga T
- Nito G
- Takase Y
- Fukao K
- Kikuchi M
journal: Intern Med
year: '1993'
doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.32.810
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/etiology, pathology, secondary"
- Aged
- "Esophageal Neoplasms/etiology, pathology"
- Humans
- Lymphatic Metastasis
- Male
- Mucous Membrane/pathology
- Neoplasm Invasiveness
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Superficial and protruding type of esophageal adenocarcinoma mucocellulare and muconodulare confined mostly to the lamina propria mucosa and partly in the submucosal layer.
**Authors:** Honda M, Koyama S, Sugitani T, Fukutomi H, Osuga T, Nito G, Takase Y, Fukao K, Kikuchi M
**Journal:** Intern Med (1993)
**DOI:** [10.2169/internalmedicine.32.810](https://doi.org/10.2169/internalmedicine.32.810)

## Content

1. Intern Med. 1993 Oct;32(10):810-4. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.32.810.

Superficial and protruding type of esophageal adenocarcinoma mucocellulare and
muconodulare confined mostly to the lamina propria mucosa and partly in the
submucosal layer.

Honda M(1), Koyama S, Sugitani T, Fukutomi H, Osuga T, Nito G, Takase Y, Fukao
K, Kikuchi M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Tsukuba.

We report a case with an adenocarcinoma mucocellulare and muconodulare of the
esophagus which is limited to the lamina propria mucosa and the submucosal
layer. The patient, a 74-year-old man had the chief complaints of hematemesis
and melena. A superficial and protruding (0-I) type of lesion was found at the
lower thoracic portion of the esophagus by X-ray and endoscopic examination. The
surgically resected esophageal specimen showed 0-I and predominantly
subepithelial (Sep) type. The tumor is presumed to have arisen from the cardiac
glands in the lamina propria mucosa of the lowermost region of the esophagus.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.32.810
PMID: 8012079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
