---
reference_id: "PMID:30240884"
title: "New-Onset Asthma in Adults: What Does the Trigger History Tell Us?"
authors:
- Coumou H
- Westerhof GA
- de Nijs SB
- Amelink M
- Bel EH
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaip.2018.09.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New-Onset Asthma in Adults: What Does the Trigger History Tell Us?
**Authors:** Coumou H, Westerhof GA, de Nijs SB, Amelink M, Bel EH
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaip.2018.09.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2018.09.007)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2019 Mar;7(3):898-905.e1. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2018.09.007. Epub 2018 Sep 18.

New-Onset Asthma in Adults: What Does the Trigger History Tell Us?

Coumou H(1), Westerhof GA(2), de Nijs SB(2), Amelink M(2), Bel EH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Academic Medical Centre, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: h.coumou@amc.uva.nl.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Academic Medical Centre, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Comment in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2019 Mar;7(3):906-907. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2018.11.031.

BACKGROUND: Adult-onset asthma is an important asthma phenotype and, in contrast 
to childhood asthma, is often associated with specific triggers of onset. It is 
unknown whether these triggers correspond with specific phenotypic 
characteristics or predict a specific asthma outcome.
OBJECTIVE: To compare clinical, functional, and inflammatory characteristics 
between patients with different triggers of asthma onset, and relate these 
triggers to asthma outcome.
METHODS: Two hundred adults with recently diagnosed (<1 year) asthma were 
prospectively followed for 5 years. The trigger of asthma onset was patient 
reported and defined by the question: "What, in your opinion, elicited your 
asthma?" Asthma remission was defined as no asthma symptoms and no asthma 
medication use for ≥1 year. Kruskal-Wallis and Fisher's exact test were used to 
compare categories containing >10 patients.
RESULTS: Ten categories of triggers were identified, of which 5 contained >10 
patients. Clinical and inflammatory characteristics and remission rates differed 
significantly between categories. "New allergic sensitization" (11%) was 
associated with mild atopic asthma and a relatively young age at onset; 
"pneumonia" (8%) with previous smoking, low IgE, and the highest remission rates 
(one third); "upper respiratory symptoms" (22%) with high exhaled NO and 
eosinophilia; "no trigger identified" (38%) did not show any specific 
characteristics; and "stressful life event" (7%) with high medication usage, low 
type 2 markers, and no disease remission.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with adult-onset asthma can be characterized by the 
trigger that seemingly incited their asthma. These triggers might represent 
underlying mechanisms and may be important to phenotype patients and predict 
disease outcome.

Copyright © 2018 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2018.09.007
PMID: 30240884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]