---
reference_id: "PMID:30167654"
title: "Definition and Consensus Diagnostic Criteria for Neurosarcoidosis: From the Neurosarcoidosis Consortium Consensus Group."
authors:
- Stern BJ
- Royal W 3rd
- Gelfand JM
- Clifford DB
- Tavee J
- Pawate S
- Berger JR
- Aksamit AJ
- Krumholz A
- Pardo CA
- Moller DR
- Judson MA
- Drent M
- Baughman RP
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.2295
keywords:
- Humans
- "Central Nervous System/metabolism, microbiology, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Central Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, microbiology, pathology, physiopathology"
- Consensus
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- "Sarcoidosis/diagnosis, microbiology, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Definition and Consensus Diagnostic Criteria for Neurosarcoidosis: From the Neurosarcoidosis Consortium Consensus Group.
**Authors:** Stern BJ, Royal W 3rd, Gelfand JM, Clifford DB, Tavee J, Pawate S, Berger JR, Aksamit AJ, Krumholz A, Pardo CA, Moller DR, Judson MA, Drent M, Baughman RP
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.2295](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.2295)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2018 Dec 1;75(12):1546-1553. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.2295.

Definition and Consensus Diagnostic Criteria for Neurosarcoidosis: From the 
Neurosarcoidosis Consortium Consensus Group.

Stern BJ(1), Royal W 3rd(2), Gelfand JM(3), Clifford DB(4), Tavee J(5), Pawate 
S(6), Berger JR(7), Aksamit AJ(8), Krumholz A(9), Pardo CA(1), Moller DR(10), 
Judson MA(11), Drent M(12), Baughman RP(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland.
(2)Department of Neurobiology and the Neuroscience Institute, Morehouse School 
of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco.
(4)Department of Neurology, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, 
Missouri.
(5)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois.
(6)Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee.
(7)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
(8)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(9)Department of Neurology, University of Maryland, Baltimore.
(10)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland.
(11)Department of Medicine, Albany Medical College, Albany, New York.
(12)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Health Medicine and 
Life Sciences, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Interstitial Lung Disease 
Center of Excellence, St. Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein, the Netherlands.
(13)Department of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.

IMPORTANCE: The Neurosarcoidosis Consortium Consensus Group, an expert panel of 
physicians experienced in the management of patients with sarcoidosis and 
neurosarcoidosis, engaged in an iterative process to define neurosarcoidosis and 
develop a practical diagnostic approach to patients with suspected 
neurosarcoidosis. This panel aimed to develop a consensus clinical definition of 
neurosarcoidosis to enhance the clinical care of patients with suspected 
neurosarcoidosis and to encourage standardization of research initiatives that 
address this disease.
OBSERVATIONS: The work of this collaboration included a review of the 
manifestations of neurosarcoidosis and the establishment of an approach to the 
diagnosis of this disorder. The proposed consensus diagnostic criteria, which 
reflect current knowledge, provide definitions for possible, probable, and 
definite central and peripheral nervous system sarcoidosis. The definitions 
emphasize the need to evaluate patients with findings suggestive of 
neurosarcoidosis for alternate causal factors, including infection and malignant 
neoplasm. Also emphasized is the need for biopsy, whenever feasible and 
advisable according to clinical context and affected anatomy, of nonneural 
tissue to document the presence of systemic sarcoidosis and support a diagnosis 
of probable neurosarcoidosis or of neural tissue to support a diagnosis of 
definite neurosarcoidosis.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Diverse disease presentations and lack of specificity 
of relevant diagnostic tests contribute to diagnostic uncertainty. This 
uncertainty is compounded by the absence of a pathognomonic histologic tissue 
examination. The diagnostic criteria we propose are designed to focus 
investigations on NS as accurately as possible, recognizing that multiple 
pathophysiologic pathways may lead to the clinical manifestations we currently 
term NS. Research recognizing the clinical heterogeneity of this diagnosis may 
open the door to identifying meaningful biologic factors that may ultimately 
contribute to better treatments.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.2295
PMID: 30167654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]