---
reference_id: "PMID:18940466"
title: "Fabry's disease."
authors:
- Zarate YA
- Hopkin RJ
journal: Lancet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61589-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fabry's disease.
**Authors:** Zarate YA, Hopkin RJ
**Journal:** Lancet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61589-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61589-5)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2008 Oct 18;372(9647):1427-35. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61589-5.

Fabry's disease.

Zarate YA(1), Hopkin RJ.

Author information:
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Division of Human Genetics, 
Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA.

Fabry's disease is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused by 
abnormalities in the GLA gene, which leads to a deficiency in 
alpha-galactosidase A. The consequent abnormal accumulation of 
glycosphingolipids results in several clinical signs and symptoms and 
substantial morbidity and mortality. This review covers all basic aspects of the 
disease such as epidemiology, pathophysiology, clinical presentation by systems, 
diagnosis, management, prevention, and repercussions on quality of life. With 
the development of enzyme replacement therapy in the past few years, early 
initiation of treatment is key for improvement in major affected organs with 
decreased cardiac mass and stabilisation of kidney function, and improvement in 
neuropathic pain, sweating, gastrointestinal symptoms, hearing loss, and 
pulmonary symptoms. However, treatment of individual symptoms in addition to 
enzyme replacement therapy seems to be needed for many patients, especially 
those who have had some degree of organ dysfunction. Additional data are needed 
to document long-term treatment outcomes.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61589-5
PMID: 18940466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]