---
reference_id: "PMID:21382916"
title: Hypomethylation of the HTR1A promoter region and high expression of HTR1A in the peripheral blood lymphocytes of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Xu J
- Zhang G
- Cheng Y
- Chen B
- Dong Y
- Li L
- Xu L
- Xu X
- Lu Z
- Wen J
journal: Lupus
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1177/0961203310394892
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Case-Control Studies
- DNA Methylation
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Histones/immunology
- Humans
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/genetics"
- Lymphocytes/metabolism
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- "Receptor, Serotonin, 5-HT1A/genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypomethylation of the HTR1A promoter region and high expression of HTR1A in the peripheral blood lymphocytes of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Xu J, Zhang G, Cheng Y, Chen B, Dong Y, Li L, Xu L, Xu X, Lu Z, Wen J
**Journal:** Lupus (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0961203310394892](https://doi.org/10.1177/0961203310394892)

## Content

1. Lupus. 2011 Jun;20(7):678-89. doi: 10.1177/0961203310394892. Epub 2011 Mar 7.

Hypomethylation of the HTR1A promoter region and high expression of HTR1A in the
peripheral blood lymphocytes of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Xu J(1), Zhang G, Cheng Y, Chen B, Dong Y, Li L, Xu L, Xu X, Lu Z, Wen J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Kunming Medical College, Kunming, Yunnan, PR China.

The occurrence of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) involves a gene-environment
interaction and epigenetic regulations, such as DNA methylation, may play
important role in the etiology of SLE. Some neurotransmitters, such as
serotonin, can regulate T- and B-cell proliferation via the 5-HT1A receptor and
are involved in the pathology of SLE. The abnormal methylation of DNA has been
reported in SLE, but there has been no study concerning the serotonin system.
This study was conducted to explore the DNA methylation status of the promoter
region of HTR1A (PR-HTR1A) and the level of HTR1A mRNA in the peripheral blood
lymphocytes (PBLC) of SLE patients and healthy controls (HC). In this study, the
DNA methylation status of PR-HTR1A and the level of HTR1A mRNA were detected in
the PBLC of SLE patients and HC. The results showed significant hypomethylation
of PR-HTR1A in SLE patients compared with HC. The patients also showed a
significantly higher HTR1A mRNA level than did the controls. Relatively higher
percentage of anti-histone antibodies in methylated SLE patients was found
compared with unmethylated patients. Our results support the hypothesis that the
hypomethylation of PR-HTR1A and overexpression of HTR1A might contribute to SLE.
These results also reveal that epigenetic regulation via the serotonin system
may contribute to SLE, and reveal the link between the brain and the immune
system.

DOI: 10.1177/0961203310394892
PMID: 21382916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
