---
reference_id: "PMID:39352760"
title: Dysregulation of RAS proteostasis by autosomal-dominant LZTR1 mutation induces Noonan syndrome-like phenotypes in mice.
authors:
- Abe T
- Morisaki K
- Niihori T
- Terao M
- Takada S
- Aoki Y
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.182382
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dysregulation of RAS proteostasis by autosomal-dominant LZTR1 mutation induces Noonan syndrome-like phenotypes in mice.
**Authors:** Abe T, Morisaki K, Niihori T, Terao M, Takada S, Aoki Y
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.182382](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.182382)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2024 Nov 22;9(22):e182382. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.182382.

Dysregulation of RAS proteostasis by autosomal-dominant LZTR1 mutation induces 
Noonan syndrome-like phenotypes in mice.

Abe T(1), Morisaki K(1), Niihori T(1), Terao M(2), Takada S(2), Aoki Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Systems BioMedicine, National Research Institute for Child 
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.

Leucine-zipper-like posttranslational regulator 1 (LZTR1) is a member of the 
BTB-Kelch superfamily, which regulates the RAS proteostasis. Autosomal dominant 
(AD) mutations in LZTR1 have been identified in patients with Noonan syndrome 
(NS), a congenital anomaly syndrome. However, it remains unclear whether LZTR1 
AD mutations regulate the proteostasis of the RAS subfamily molecules or cause 
NS-like phenotypes in vivo. To elucidate the pathogenesis of LZTR1 mutations, we 
generated 2 LZTR1 mutation knock-in mice (Lztr1G245R/+ and Lztr1R409C/+), which 
correspond to the human p.G248R and p.R412C mutations, respectively. 
LZTR1-mutant male mice exhibit low birth weight, distinctive facial features, 
and cardiac hypertrophy. Cardiomyocyte size and the expression of RAS subfamily 
members, including MRAS and RIT1, were significantly increased in the left 
ventricles (LVs) of mutant male mice. LZTR1 AD mutants did not interact with 
RIT1 and functioned as dominant-negative forms of WT LZTR1. Multi-omics analysis 
revealed that the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway was 
activated in the LVs of mutant mice. Treatment with the MEK inhibitor trametinib 
ameliorated cardiac hypertrophy in mutant male mice. These results suggest that 
the MEK/ERK pathway is a therapeutic target for the NS-like phenotype resulting 
from dysfunction of RAS proteostasis by LZTR1 AD mutations.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.182382
PMCID: PMC11601938
PMID: 39352760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.