---
reference_id: "PMID:12925462"
title: "Short QT Syndrome: a familial cause of sudden death."
authors:
- Gaita F
- Giustetto C
- Bianchi F
- Wolpert C
- Schimpf R
- Riccardi R
- Grossi S
- Richiardi E
- Borggrefe M
journal: Circulation
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000085071.28695.C4
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- "Atrial Fibrillation/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Cardiac Complexes, Premature/etiology"
- Child
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/etiology"
- Electrocardiography
- "Electrocardiography, Ambulatory"
- "Electrophysiologic Techniques, Cardiac"
- Exercise Test
- Female
- Flecainide/pharmacology
- Heart Arrest/etiology
- Humans
- Male
- Pedigree
- Sodium Channels/drug effects
- Syncope/etiology
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Short QT Syndrome: a familial cause of sudden death.
**Authors:** Gaita F, Giustetto C, Bianchi F, Wolpert C, Schimpf R, Riccardi R, Grossi S, Richiardi E, Borggrefe M
**Journal:** Circulation (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.CIR.0000085071.28695.C4](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.0000085071.28695.C4)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2003 Aug 26;108(8):965-70. doi:
10.1161/01.CIR.0000085071.28695.C4.  Epub 2003 Aug 18.

Short QT Syndrome: a familial cause of sudden death.

Gaita F(1), Giustetto C, Bianchi F, Wolpert C, Schimpf R, Riccardi R, Grossi S,
Richiardi E, Borggrefe M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Ospedale Mauriziano Umberto I, Torino, Italy.
gaitaf@libero.it

Comment in
    Circulation. 2004 Mar 9;109(9):e152; author reply e152. doi:
10.1161/01.CIR.0000118177.56908.5B.

BACKGROUND: A prolonged QT interval is associated with a risk for
life-threatening events. However, little is known about prognostic implications
of the reverse-a short QT interval. Several members of 2 different families were
referred for syncope, palpitations, and resuscitated cardiac arrest in the
presence of a positive family history for sudden cardiac death. Autopsy did not
reveal any structural heart disease. All patients had a constantly and uniformly
short QT interval at ECG.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Six patients from both families were submitted to extensive
noninvasive and invasive work-up, including serial resting ECGs, echocardiogram,
cardiac MRI, exercise testing, Holter ECG, and signal-averaged ECG. Four of 6
patients underwent electrophysiological evaluation including programmed
ventricular stimulation. In all subjects, a structural heart disease was
excluded. At baseline ECG, all patients exhibited a QT interval <or=280 ms (QTc
<or=300 ms). During electrophysiological study, short atrial and ventricular
refractory periods were documented in all and increased ventricular
vulnerability to fibrillation in 3 of 4 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The short QT syndrome is characterized by familial sudden death,
short refractory periods, and inducible ventricular fibrillation. It is
important to recognize this ECG pattern because it is related to a high risk of
sudden death in young, otherwise healthy subjects.

DOI: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000085071.28695.C4
PMID: 12925462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
