---
reference_id: "PMID:37771217"
title: "Psychosis Unmasking a Diagnosis of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: a Case Report."
authors:
- Kumari S
- Nath S
- Narasimha VL
- Sarkar M
- Kumar R
journal: East Asian Arch Psychiatry
year: '2023'
doi: 10.12809/eaap2316
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Psychosis Unmasking a Diagnosis of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: a Case Report.
**Authors:** Kumari S, Nath S, Narasimha VL, Sarkar M, Kumar R
**Journal:** East Asian Arch Psychiatry (2023)
**DOI:** [10.12809/eaap2316](https://doi.org/10.12809/eaap2316)

## Content

1. East Asian Arch Psychiatry. 2023 Sep;33(3):100-103. doi: 10.12809/eaap2316.

Psychosis Unmasking a Diagnosis of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: a Case Report.

Kumari S(1), Nath S(1), Narasimha VL(1), Sarkar M(2), Kumar R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Deoghar, 
Jharkhand, India.
(2)Department of General Medicine, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Deoghar, Jharkhand, India.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disorder that affects 
multiple organs. Neuropsychiatric SLE (NPSLE) can manifest with a multitude of 
neurological and psychiatric symptoms. Psychosis is a rare NPSLE manifestation 
that can occur at any phase of the illness; 21% of SLE-related psychosis cases 
occur at the onset of SLE, but the evidence base for this is lacking. We report 
a case of acute-onset psychosis in a woman that led to a diagnosis of SLE, which 
was substantiated by physical evaluation and laboratory assessments. Assessment 
of acute-onset psychosis requires consideration of all differential diagnoses, 
especially in the presence of atypical features. This case also underscores the 
importance of physical examination and laboratory investigations in psychosis.

DOI: 10.12809/eaap2316
PMID: 37771217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have disclosed no conflicts of 
interest.