---
reference_id: "PMID:22140379"
title: Refinement of the Region for Split Hand/Foot Malformation 5 on 2q31.1.
authors:
- Theisen A
- Rosenfeld JA
- Shane K
- McBride KL
- Atkin JF
- Gaba C
- Hoo J
- Kurczynski TW
- Schnur RE
- Coffey LB
- Zackai EH
- Schimmenti L
- Friedman N
- Zabukovec M
- Ball S
- Pagon R
- Lucas A
- Brasington CK
- Spence JE
- Sparks S
- Banks V
- Smith W
- Friedberg T
- Wyatt PR
- Aust M
- Tervo R
- Crowley A
- Skidmore D
- Lamb AN
- Ravnan B
- Sahoo T
- Schultz R
- Torchia BS
- Sgro M
- Chitayat D
- Shaffer LG
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1159/000328405
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Refinement of the Region for Split Hand/Foot Malformation 5 on 2q31.1.
**Authors:** Theisen A, Rosenfeld JA, Shane K, McBride KL, Atkin JF, Gaba C, Hoo J, Kurczynski TW, Schnur RE, Coffey LB, Zackai EH, Schimmenti L, Friedman N, Zabukovec M, Ball S, Pagon R, Lucas A, Brasington CK, Spence JE, Sparks S, Banks V, Smith W, Friedberg T, Wyatt PR, Aust M, Tervo R, Crowley A, Skidmore D, Lamb AN, Ravnan B, Sahoo T, Schultz R, Torchia BS, Sgro M, Chitayat D, Shaffer LG
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000328405](https://doi.org/10.1159/000328405)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2010;1(5):262-271. doi: 10.1159/000328405. Epub 2011 May 18.

Refinement of the Region for Split Hand/Foot Malformation 5 on 2q31.1.

Theisen A(1), Rosenfeld JA, Shane K, McBride KL, Atkin JF, Gaba C, Hoo J, 
Kurczynski TW, Schnur RE, Coffey LB, Zackai EH, Schimmenti L, Friedman N, 
Zabukovec M, Ball S, Pagon R, Lucas A, Brasington CK, Spence JE, Sparks S, Banks 
V, Smith W, Friedberg T, Wyatt PR, Aust M, Tervo R, Crowley A, Skidmore D, Lamb 
AN, Ravnan B, Sahoo T, Schultz R, Torchia BS, Sgro M, Chitayat D, Shaffer LG.

Author information:
(1)Signature Genomic Laboratories, Spokane, Wash.

Background: Deletions that encompass 2q31.1 have been proposed as a 
microdeletion syndrome with common clinical features, including intellectual 
disability/developmental delay, microcephaly, cleft palate, growth delay, and 
hand/foot anomalies. In addition, several genes within this region have been 
proposed as candidates for split hand-foot malformation 5 (SHFM5). Methods: To 
delineate the genotype-phenotype correlation between deletions of this region, 
we identified 14 individuals with deletions at 2q31.1 detected by microarray 
analysis for physical and developmental disabilities. Results: All subjects for 
whom detailed clinical records were available had neurological deficits of 
varying degree. Seven subjects with deletions encompassing the HOXD cluster had 
hand/foot anomalies of varying severity, including syndactyly, brachydactyly, 
and ectrodactyly. Of 7 subjects with deletions proximal to the HOXD cluster, 5 
of which encompassed DLX1/DLX2, none had clinically significant hand/foot 
anomalies. In contrast to previous reports, the individuals in our study did not 
display a characteristic gestalt of dysmorphic facial features. Conclusion: The 
absence of hand/foot anomalies in any of the individuals with deletions of 
DLX1/DLX2 but not the HOXD cluster supports the hypothesis that 
haploinsufficiency of the HOXD cluster, rather than DLX1/DLX2, accounts for the 
skeletal abnormalities in subjects with 2q31.1 microdeletions.

DOI: 10.1159/000328405
PMCID: PMC3214950
PMID: 22140379