---
reference_id: "PMID:36136939"
title: Health Care Personnel Exposures to Subsequently Laboratory-Confirmed Monkeypox Patients - Colorado, 2022.
authors:
- Marshall KE
- Barton M
- Nichols J
- de Perio MA
- Kuhar DT
- Spence-Davizon E
- Barnes M
- Herlihy RK
- Czaja CA
- Colorado Healthcare Personnel Monitoring Team
journal: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7138e2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Health Care Personnel Exposures to Subsequently Laboratory-Confirmed Monkeypox Patients - Colorado, 2022.
**Authors:** Marshall KE, Barton M, Nichols J, de Perio MA, Kuhar DT, Spence-Davizon E, Barnes M, Herlihy RK, Czaja CA, Colorado Healthcare Personnel Monitoring Team
**Journal:** MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.15585/mmwr.mm7138e2](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7138e2)

## Content

1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2022 Sep 23;71(38):1216-1219. doi: 
10.15585/mmwr.mm7138e2.

Health Care Personnel Exposures to Subsequently Laboratory-Confirmed Monkeypox 
Patients - Colorado, 2022.

Marshall KE, Barton M, Nichols J, de Perio MA, Kuhar DT, Spence-Davizon E, 
Barnes M, Herlihy RK, Czaja CA; Colorado Healthcare Personnel Monitoring Team.

Collaborators: Abbey T, Beck A, Bernal J, Burket T, Carrillo C, Casey M, Daily 
K, Emanuel C, Havis S, Jaskunas J, Kacka M, Keenan E, Nelson G, Tran E, Warren 
L, Yunus S.

The risk for monkeypox transmission to health care personnel (HCP) caring for 
symptomatic patients is thought to be low but has not been thoroughly assessed 
in the context of the current global outbreak (1). Monkeypox typically spreads 
through close physical (often skin-to-skin) contact with lesions or scabs, body 
fluids, or respiratory secretions of a person with an active monkeypox 
infection. CDC currently recommends that HCP wear a gown, gloves, eye 
protection, and an N95 (or higher-level) respirator while caring for patients 
with suspected or confirmed monkeypox to protect themselves from infection† 
(1,2). The Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (CDPHE) 
evaluated HCP exposures and personal protective equipment (PPE) use in health 
care settings during care of patients who subsequently received a diagnosis of 
Orthopoxvirus infection (presumptive monkeypox determined by a polymerase chain 
reaction [PCR] DNA assay) or monkeypox (real-time PCR assay and genetic 
sequencing performed by CDC). During May 1-July 31, 2022, a total of 313 HCP 
interacted with patients with subsequently diagnosed monkeypox infections while 
wearing various combinations of PPE; 23% wore all recommended PPE during their 
exposures. Twenty-eight percent of exposed HCP were considered to have had high- 
or intermediate-risk exposures and were therefore eligible to receive 
postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) with the JYNNEOS vaccine§; among those, 48% (12% 
of all exposed HCP) received the vaccine. PPE use varied by facility type: HCP 
in sexually transmitted infection (STI) clinics and community health centers 
reported the highest adherence to recommended PPE use, and primary and urgent 
care settings reported the lowest adherence. No HCP developed a monkeypox 
infection during the 21 days after exposure. These results suggest that the risk 
for transmission of monkeypox in health care settings is low. Infection 
prevention training is important in all health care settings, and these findings 
can guide future updates to PPE recommendations and risk classification in 
health care settings.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7138e2
PMCID: PMC9531564
PMID: 36136939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the 
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of 
potential conflicts of interest. Rachel K. Herlihy reports support from the 
Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists for travel to their annual 
conference. No other potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.