---
reference_id: "PMID:26833287"
title: "Fibrocartilaginous embolism: a comprehensive review of an under-studied cause of spinal cord infarction and proposed diagnostic criteria."
authors:
- AbdelRazek MA
- Mowla A
- Farooq S
- Silvestri N
- Sawyer R
- Wolfe G
journal: J Spinal Cord Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1080/10790268.2015.1116726
keywords:
- "Cartilage Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Embolism/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Humans
- "Infarction/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Myelitis/diagnosis
- "Spinal Cord/blood supply, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibrocartilaginous embolism: a comprehensive review of an under-studied cause of spinal cord infarction and proposed diagnostic criteria.
**Authors:** AbdelRazek MA, Mowla A, Farooq S, Silvestri N, Sawyer R, Wolfe G
**Journal:** J Spinal Cord Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1080/10790268.2015.1116726](https://doi.org/10.1080/10790268.2015.1116726)

## Content

1. J Spinal Cord Med. 2016;39(2):146-54. doi: 10.1080/10790268.2015.1116726. Epub
 2015 Dec 17.

Fibrocartilaginous embolism: a comprehensive review of an under-studied cause of 
spinal cord infarction and proposed diagnostic criteria.

AbdelRazek MA(1), Mowla A(1), Farooq S(1), Silvestri N(1), Sawyer R(1), Wolfe 
G(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Neurology , State University of NY at Buffalo , Buffalo , NY 
, USA.

BACKGROUND: Most spinal cord infarctions are due to aortic pathologies and 
aortic surgeries. Fibrocartilaginous Embolism (FCE) has been reported to 
represent 5.5% of spinal cord infarctions. Some believe that FCE is more common 
than presumed and is rather under-diagnosed due to vagueness surrounding its 
clinical presentation.
METHOD: A literature search was conducted for case reports of FCE published 
before August 2014. PubMed, the Cochrane Central Register and Google Scholar 
were searched for different combinations of the key words "fibrocartilaginous, 
"nucleus pulposus", "embolism", "spinal cord", "inter-vertebral disc", 
"infarction", "stroke", "paraplegia", "quadriplegia", "myelopathy".
RESULT: Fifty-five case articles were reviewed, ten of which were translated 
from foreign languages. A total of 67 cases of FCE were found, 41 
tissue-confirmed and 26 clinically suspected. A comprehensive summary of the 
clinical anatomy, patho-physiologic mechanisms, epidemiology, diagnosis and 
treatment of FCE is described, along with the conflicting opinions on its 
incidence and relevance after reviewing all of the related literature. The 41 
tissue proven cases are summarized and a schematic approach to the clinical 
diagnosis of FCE, deducted from their clinical findings, is presented.
CONCLUSION: FCE of the spinal cord, often mis-diagnosed as transverse myelitis, 
may be more common than presumed. Future research into FCE, including the 
development of a chondrolytic therapy that can be given empirically upon its 
clinical suspicion to acutely reverse its symptoms, may be of value.

DOI: 10.1080/10790268.2015.1116726
PMCID: PMC5072491
PMID: 26833287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]