---
reference_id: "PMID:38166572"
title: "A novel pathogenic variant in the carnitine transporter gene, SLC22A5, in association with metabolic carnitine deficiency and cardiomyopathy features."
authors:
- Jolfayi AG
- Naderi N
- Ghasemi S
- Salmanipour A
- Adimi S
- Maleki M
- Kalayinia S
journal: BMC Cardiovasc Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12872-023-03676-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel pathogenic variant in the carnitine transporter gene, SLC22A5, in association with metabolic carnitine deficiency and cardiomyopathy features.
**Authors:** Jolfayi AG, Naderi N, Ghasemi S, Salmanipour A, Adimi S, Maleki M, Kalayinia S
**Journal:** BMC Cardiovasc Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12872-023-03676-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12872-023-03676-z)

## Content

1. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2024 Jan 2;24(1):1. doi: 10.1186/s12872-023-03676-z.

A novel pathogenic variant in the carnitine transporter gene, SLC22A5, in 
association with metabolic carnitine deficiency and cardiomyopathy features.

Jolfayi AG(1), Naderi N(2), Ghasemi S(1), Salmanipour A(1), Adimi S(1), Maleki 
M(2), Kalayinia S(3).

Author information:
(1)Rajaie Cardiovascular Medical and Research Center, Iran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Cardiogenetic Research Center, Rajaie Cardiovascular Medical and Research 
Center, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Cardiogenetic Research Center, Rajaie Cardiovascular Medical and Research 
Center, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. 
samira.kalayi@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Primary carnitine deficiency (PCD) denotes low carnitine levels with 
an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. Cardiomyopathy is the most common 
cardiac symptom in patients with PCD, and early diagnosis can prevent 
complications. Next-generation sequencing can identify genetic variants 
attributable to PCD efficiently.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to detect the genetic cause of the early manifestations of 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and metabolic abnormalities in an Iranian family.
METHODS: We herein describe an 8-year-old boy with symptoms of weakness and 
lethargy diagnosed with PCD through clinical evaluations, lab tests, 
echocardiography, and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. The candidate variant 
was confirmed through whole-exome sequencing, polymerase chain reaction, and 
direct Sanger sequencing. The binding efficacy of normal and mutant 
protein-ligand complexes were evaluated via structural modeling and docking 
studies.
RESULTS: Clinical evaluations, echocardiography, and cardiac magnetic resonance 
imaging findings revealed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy as a clinical presentation 
of PCD. Whole-exome sequencing identified a new homozygous variant, SLC22A5 
(NM_003060.4), c.821G > A: p.Trp274Ter, associated with carnitine transport. 
Docking analysis highlighted the impact of the variant on carnitine transport, 
further indicating its potential role in PCD development.
CONCLUSIONS: The c.821G > A: p.Trp274Ter variant in SLC22A5 potentially acted as 
a pathogenic factor by reducing the binding affinity of organic carnitine 
transporter type 2 proteins for carnitine. So, the c.821G > A variant may be 
associated with carnitine deficiency, metabolic abnormalities, and 
cardiomyopathic characteristics.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12872-023-03676-z
PMCID: PMC10763261
PMID: 38166572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.