---
reference_id: "PMID:35291225"
title: "Clinical trials targeting neurofibromatoses-associated tumors: a systematic review."
authors:
- Roman Souza G
- Abdalla A
- Mahadevan D
journal: Neurooncol Adv
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/noajnl/vdac005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical trials targeting neurofibromatoses-associated tumors: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Roman Souza G, Abdalla A, Mahadevan D
**Journal:** Neurooncol Adv (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/noajnl/vdac005](https://doi.org/10.1093/noajnl/vdac005)

## Content

1. Neurooncol Adv. 2022 Jan 16;4(1):vdac005. doi: 10.1093/noajnl/vdac005. 
eCollection 2022 Jan-Dec.

Clinical trials targeting neurofibromatoses-associated tumors: a systematic 
review.

Roman Souza G(1), Abdalla A(1), Mahadevan D(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Drug Development, Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, 
Mays Cancer Center, University of Texas Health San Antonio MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, San Antonio, Texas, USA.

BACKGROUND: There is a paucity of literature that comprehensively analyzes 
previous and current clinical trials targeting neurofibromatoses-related tumors. 
This article aims to provide readers with drug development efforts targeting 
these tumors by analyzing translational and clinical findings.
METHODS: This systematic review was written according to the PRISMA guidelines. 
Inclusion criteria were clinical trials involving patients with 
neurofibromatosis type 1, type 2, or schwannomatosis that were treated with 
therapies targeting neurofibromatoses-associated tumors and that were registered 
on clinicaltrials.gov. In addition, a search was performed in PubMed, Web of 
Science, Google Scholar, and Embase European for articles fully describing these 
clinical trials.
RESULTS: A total of 265 clinical trials were registered and screened for 
eligibility. Ninety-two were included in this systematic review involving 
approximately 4636 participants. The number of therapies analyzed was more than 
50. Drugs under investigation mainly act on the MAPK/ERK and PI3K/AKT/mTOR 
pathways, tumor microenvironment, or aberrantly over-expressed cell surface 
receptors. Selumetinib was the most effective medication for treating a 
neurofibromatosis type 1-associated tumor with approximately 68%-71% partial 
response for inoperable or progressive plexiform neurofibromas in children 2 
years of age and older and bevacizumab for a neurofibromatosis type 2-related 
tumor with approximately 36%-41% partial response for vestibular schwannomas in 
patients 12 years of age and older.
CONCLUSIONS: This systematic review presents the results of previous clinical 
investigations and those under development for neurofibromatoses-associated 
tumors. Clinicians may use this information to strategize patients to 
appropriate clinical trials.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press, the Society for 
Neuro-Oncology and the European Association of Neuro-Oncology.

DOI: 10.1093/noajnl/vdac005
PMCID: PMC8919406
PMID: 35291225