---
reference_id: "PMID:35372212"
title: "Trends in the Prevalence of Hypertensive Heart Disease in China From 1990 to 2019: A Joinpoint and Age-Period-Cohort Analysis."
authors:
- Xu D
- Hu J
- Wang S
- Chen L
journal: Front Public Health
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.833345
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trends in the Prevalence of Hypertensive Heart Disease in China From 1990 to 2019: A Joinpoint and Age-Period-Cohort Analysis.
**Authors:** Xu D, Hu J, Wang S, Chen L
**Journal:** Front Public Health (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fpubh.2022.833345](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2022.833345)

## Content

1. Front Public Health. 2022 Mar 16;10:833345. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.833345. 
eCollection 2022.

Trends in the Prevalence of Hypertensive Heart Disease in China From 1990 to 
2019: A Joinpoint and Age-Period-Cohort Analysis.

Xu D(1), Hu J(2), Wang S(2), Chen L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Yuyao People's Hospital, Ningbo, China.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Pathophysiology, School of Medicine, Ningbo University, Ningbo, China.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Yuyao People's Hospital, Ningbo, China.

To the best of our knowledge, no comprehensive estimates of the descriptive 
epidemiology of and trends in hypertensive heart disease (HHD) in China have 
been reported. In this study, the temporal trends in the prevalence of HHD in 
China from 1990 to 2019 were estimated using an age-period-cohort model. Data 
related to HHD burden were collected from the Global Burden of Disease Study 
2019. From 1990 to 2019, HHD prevalence in China showed decreasing trends in 
both sexes combined (average annual percentage change [AAPC]: -0.2%, 95% 
confidence interval (CI: -0.3% to -0.2%) and in males (AAPC: -0.5%, 95% CI: 
-0.5% to -0.4%), but significant increases in the age groups of 15-19, 20-24, …, 
and 60-64 years. The age effect analysis showed an increase in HHD prevalence 
from 50 to 94 years in both males and females, the period effect analysis showed 
a slight increase in HHD prevalence from 2009 to 2019 in females, and the cohort 
effect analysis showed a consistent decline in HHD prevalence from earlier to 
later birth cohorts in both males and females.

Copyright © 2022 Xu, Hu, Wang and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.833345
PMCID: PMC8966025
PMID: 35372212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.