---
reference_id: "PMID:29709596"
title: Vascular aspects of the Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes.
authors:
- Malfait F
journal: Matrix Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2018.04.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vascular aspects of the Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes.
**Authors:** Malfait F
**Journal:** Matrix Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.matbio.2018.04.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matbio.2018.04.013)

## Content

1. Matrix Biol. 2018 Oct;71-72:380-395. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2018.04.013. Epub 
2018 Apr 27.

Vascular aspects of the Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes.

Malfait F(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, 
9000 Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: fransiska.malfait@ugent.be.

The Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes comprise a heterogeneous group of rare monogenic 
conditions that are characterized by joint hypermobility, skin and vascular 
fragility and generalized connective tissue friability. The latest 
classification recognizes 13 clinical subtypes, with mutations identified in 19 
different genes. Besides defects in fibrillar collagens (collagen types I, III 
and V), their modifying enzymes (ADAMTS-2, lysylhydroxylase 1 (LH1)), and 
molecules involved in collagen folding (FKBP22), defects have recently been 
identified in other constituents of the extracellular matrix (e.g. Tenascin-X, 
collagen type XII), enzymes involved in glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis (β4GalT7 
and β3GalT6), dermatan 4-O-sulfotransferase-1 (D4ST1), dermatan sulfate 
epimerase (DSE)), (putative) transcription factors (ZNF469, PRDM5), components 
of the complement pathway (C1r, C1s) and an intracellular Zinc transporter 
(ZIP13). Easy bruising is, to a variable degree, present in all subtypes of EDS. 
A variable bleeding tendency, manifesting e.g. as gum bleeding, 
menometrorraghia, postnatal or peri-operative hemorrhage is observed in many 
EDS-patients of varying EDS subtypes. Life-threatening arterial aneurysms, 
dissections and ruptures of medium-sized and large arteries are a hallmark of 
the vascular subtype of EDS, caused by a molecular defect in collagen type III, 
an important constituent of blood vessel walls and hollow organs. They may 
however also occur in other EDS subtypes, especially in classical EDS, caused by 
defects in type V collagen or, rarely, type I collagen, and in kyphoscoliotic 
EDS, caused by defects in LH1 or FKBP22. These manifestations of vascular 
fragility and bleeding are usually attributed to fragility of the blood vessel 
walls and the perivascular connective tissues, but the molecular pathomechanisms 
underlying these complications are poorly studied. This review summarizes 
current knowledge on manifestations of vascular fragility in the different EDS 
subtypes.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.matbio.2018.04.013
PMID: 29709596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]