---
reference_id: "PMID:17115121"
title: "Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease: Genetic and cellular pathogenesis."
authors:
- Garbern JY
journal: Cell Mol Life Sci
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1007/s00018-006-6182-8
keywords:
- Animals
- Axons/physiology
- "Central Nervous System/cytology, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Myelin Proteolipid Protein/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Myelin Sheath/physiology
- Neuroglia/physiology
- Neurons/physiology
- "Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease: Genetic and cellular pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Garbern JY
**Journal:** Cell Mol Life Sci (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00018-006-6182-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-006-6182-8)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2007 Jan;64(1):50-65. doi: 10.1007/s00018-006-6182-8.

Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease: Genetic and cellular pathogenesis.

Garbern JY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne 
State University School of Medicine, 421 E Canfield Room 3217, Detroit, MI 
48201, USA. jgarbern@med.wayne.edu

Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) and the allelic spastic paraplegia type 2 
(SPG2) arise from mutations in the X-linked gene encoding myelin proteolipid 
protein (PLP). Analysis of mutations affecting PLP, the major protein in central 
nervous system myelin, has revealed previously unsuspected roles for myelinating 
glia in maintaining the integrity of the nervous system. The disease spectrum 
for PMD and SPG2 is extraordinarily broad and can be best understood by 
accounting not only for the wide range of mutations that can occur but also for 
the effects of PLP1 mutations on both cell autonomous and non-cell autonomous 
processes in myelinating cells. Appreciating the wide range of genetic and 
cellular effects of PLP1 mutations is important for patient and family 
counseling, understanding disease pathogenesis, and, ultimately, for developing 
future disease-specific therapies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-006-6182-8
PMCID: PMC11136140
PMID: 17115121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]