---
reference_id: "PMID:39678459"
title: Pathology and treatment methods in pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration.
authors:
- Kwinta R
- Kopcik K
- Koberling A
journal: Postep Psychiatr Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.5114/ppn.2024.141713
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathology and treatment methods in pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration.
**Authors:** Kwinta R, Kopcik K, Koberling A
**Journal:** Postep Psychiatr Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.5114/ppn.2024.141713](https://doi.org/10.5114/ppn.2024.141713)

## Content

1. Postep Psychiatr Neurol. 2024 Sep;33(3):163-171. doi: 10.5114/ppn.2024.141713.
 Epub 2024 Jul 23.

Pathology and treatment methods in pantothenate kinase-associated 
neurodegeneration.

Kwinta R(1), Kopcik K(2), Koberling A(3).

Author information:
(1)Municipal Hospital in Zabrze, Poland.
(2)Virgin Mary Provincial Specialist Hospital in Częstochowa, Poland.
(3)Independent Public Health Care Institution named after doctor Kazimierz 
Hołoga, Nowy Tomyśl, Poland.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this review is to present current scientific reports on 
the pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment of pantothenate kinase-associated 
neurodegeneration (PKAN).
VIEWS: The condition is caused by a mutation in the PANK2 gene, which results in 
iron accumulation in the brain and changes in the functioning of biochemical 
pathways dependent on coenzyme A. There are two clinical types of PKAN, which 
differ in the time of onset of symptoms and speed of disease progression. 
Imaging studies, specifically magnetic resonance (MR), and genetic testing are 
commonly used in the diagnosis process. The characteristic radiological image 
seen in T2-MR images is the "eye of the tiger". Patients with PKAN can only 
receive treatment for symptoms because there are no effective treatment methods 
available. Pharmacological methods include symptomatic medications, such as 
pregabalin, gabapentin, or botulinum toxin, and disease-modifying agents, such 
as iron chelators. Surgical procedures or deep brain stimulation as alternative 
methods can also be considered. The review presents data from studies published 
between 2017 and 2024.
CONCLUSIONS: There are many studies on the pathophysiology and treatment methods 
for PKAN patients, but the results are still limited. The future of PKAN 
treatment will be characterized by personalized treatment that is based on the 
patient's genetic and environmental factors. Further investigation of these is 
necessary.

Copyright © 2024 Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology.

DOI: 10.5114/ppn.2024.141713
PMCID: PMC11635428
PMID: 39678459

Conflict of interest statement: Absent.