---
reference_id: "PMID:26334050"
title: Identifying Shared Brain Networks in Individuals by Decoupling Functional and Anatomical Variability.
authors:
- Langs G
- Wang D
- Golland P
- Mueller S
- Pan R
- Sabuncu MR
- Sun W
- Li K
- Liu H
journal: Cereb Cortex
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhv189
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identifying Shared Brain Networks in Individuals by Decoupling Functional and Anatomical Variability.
**Authors:** Langs G, Wang D, Golland P, Mueller S, Pan R, Sabuncu MR, Sun W, Li K, Liu H
**Journal:** Cereb Cortex (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cercor/bhv189](https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhv189)

## Content

1. Cereb Cortex. 2016 Oct;26(10):4004-14. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhv189. Epub 2015
Sep  1.

Identifying Shared Brain Networks in Individuals by Decoupling Functional and 
Anatomical Variability.

Langs G(1), Wang D(2), Golland P(3), Mueller S(4), Pan R(5), Sabuncu MR(6), Sun 
W(7), Li K(8), Liu H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy, Computational 
Imaging Research Lab, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria Computer 
Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA, USA.
(3)Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA, USA 
Ludwig Maximilian University Munich, Institute of Clinical Radiology, Munich, 
Germany.
(5)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA, USA 
Department of Radiology.
(6)Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical 
Imaging, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Charlestown, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.
(8)Department of Radiology.

The connectivity architecture of the human brain varies across individuals. 
Mapping functional anatomy at the individual level is challenging, but critical 
for basic neuroscience research and clinical intervention. Using resting-state 
functional connectivity, we parcellated functional systems in an "embedding 
space" based on functional characteristics common across the population, while 
simultaneously accounting for individual variability in the cortical 
distribution of functional units. The functional connectivity patterns observed 
in resting-state data were mapped in the embedding space and the maps were 
aligned across individuals. A clustering algorithm was performed on the aligned 
embedding maps and the resulting clusters were transformed back to the unique 
anatomical space of each individual. This novel approach identified functional 
systems that were reproducible within subjects, but were distributed across 
different anatomical locations in different subjects. Using this approach for 
intersubject alignment improved the predictability of individual differences in 
language laterality when compared with anatomical alignment alone. Our results 
further revealed that the strength of association between function and 
macroanatomy varied across the cortex, which was strong in unimodal sensorimotor 
networks, but weak in association networks.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhv189
PMCID: PMC5027997
PMID: 26334050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]