---
reference_id: "PMID:17635842"
title: Disruption of the Flnb gene in mice phenocopies the human disease spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome.
authors:
- Farrington-Rock C
- Kirilova V
- Dillard-Telm L
- Borowsky AD
- Chalk S
- Rock MJ
- Cohn DH
- Krakow D
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm188
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disruption of the Flnb gene in mice phenocopies the human disease spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome.
**Authors:** Farrington-Rock C, Kirilova V, Dillard-Telm L, Borowsky AD, Chalk S, Rock MJ, Cohn DH, Krakow D
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddm188](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddm188)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Mar 1;17(5):631-41. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm188. Epub 2007 Jul
 17.

Disruption of the Flnb gene in mice phenocopies the human disease 
spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome.

Farrington-Rock C(1), Kirilova V, Dillard-Telm L, Borowsky AD, Chalk S, Rock MJ, 
Cohn DH, Krakow D.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 8700 Beverly 
Boulevard, SSB-371, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.

Spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome (SCT) is an autosomal recessive disease 
that is characterized by short stature, and fusions of the vertebrae and carpal 
and tarsal bones. SCT results from homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for 
nonsense mutations in FLNB. FLNB encodes filamin B, a multifunctional 
cytoplasmic protein that plays a critical role in skeletal development. Protein 
extracts derived from cells of SCT patients with nonsense mutations in FLNB did 
not contain filamin B, demonstrating that SCT results from absence of filamin B. 
To understand the role of filamin B in skeletal development, an Flnb-/- mouse 
model was generated. The Flnb-/- mice were phenotypically similar to individuals 
with SCT as they exhibited short stature and similar skeletal abnormalities. 
Newborn Flnb-/- mice had fusions between the neural arches of the vertebrae in 
the cervical and thoracic spine. At postnatal day 60, the vertebral fusions were 
more widespread and involved the vertebral bodies as well as the neural arches. 
In addition, fusions were seen in sternum and carpal bones. Analysis of the 
Flnb-/- mice phenotype showed that an absence of filamin B causes progressive 
vertebral fusions, which is contrary to the previous hypothesis that SCT results 
from failure of normal spinal segmentation. These findings suggest that spinal 
segmentation can occur normally in the absence of filamin B, but the protein is 
required for maintenance of intervertebral, carpal and sternal joints, and the 
joint fusion process commences antenatally.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddm188
PMCID: PMC2680151
PMID: 17635842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest statement. The authors 
declare that they have no conflicting interests.