---
reference_id: "PMID:37407232"
title: Trauma-related Lyme arthritis.
authors:
- Roberts J 4th
- Merchant E
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2023-255532
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trauma-related Lyme arthritis.
**Authors:** Roberts J 4th, Merchant E
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2023-255532](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2023-255532)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2023 Jul 5;16(7):e255532. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2023-255532.

Trauma-related Lyme arthritis.

Roberts J 4th(1), Merchant E(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 
john.roberts@tufts.edu.
(2)Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Infectious Diseases, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

A man in his 40s with no prior orthopaedic history presented to an infectious 
disease clinic with persistent left knee pain and swelling following a traumatic 
meniscal tear and ensuing prodromal period of fever and chills. Aspiration of 
the left knee joint revealed a white cell count of 21.0 ×109/L (83% neutrophils) 
with negative Gram stain and culture. However, Lyme PCR was positive and 
accompanied by serologies consistent with Lyme arthritis. He was treated with a 
standard course of antibiotic therapy with subsequent resolution of joint 
effusion and significant improvement in pain.This is to our knowledge the first 
report in the literature of Lyme arthritis seemingly provoked by traumatic knee 
injury. We propose disruption of normal joint anatomy and ensuing inflammation 
in response to acute injury incited and accelerated migration of previously 
latent Borrelia burgdorferi spirochetal infection into surrounding synovial 
tissue, leading to enhanced inflammatory activity and exacerbation of knee pain.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2023. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2023-255532
PMCID: PMC10335588
PMID: 37407232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.