---
reference_id: "PMID:22166308"
title: "Newborn screening for medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency in England: prevalence, predictive value and test validity based on 1.5 million screened babies."
authors:
- Oerton J
- Khalid JM
- Besley G
- Dalton RN
- Downing M
- Green A
- Henderson M
- Krywawych S
- Leonard J
- Andresen BS
- Dezateux C
journal: J Med Screen
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1258/jms.2011.011086
keywords:
- "Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase/deficiency, genetics"
- Asian People/genetics
- Decision Trees
- England/epidemiology
- Ethnicity/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Testing
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, enzymology, epidemiology, genetics"
- Male
- "Neonatal Screening/ethics, methods, standards"
- Pilot Projects
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prevalence
- Prospective Studies
- Reproducibility of Results
- White People/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Newborn screening for medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency in England: prevalence, predictive value and test validity based on 1.5 million screened babies.
**Authors:** Oerton J, Khalid JM, Besley G, Dalton RN, Downing M, Green A, Henderson M, Krywawych S, Leonard J, Andresen BS, Dezateux C
**Journal:** J Med Screen (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1258/jms.2011.011086](https://doi.org/10.1258/jms.2011.011086)

## Content

1. J Med Screen. 2011;18(4):173-81. doi: 10.1258/jms.2011.011086. Epub 2011 Dec
13.

Newborn screening for medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency in England: 
prevalence, predictive value and test validity based on 1.5 million screened 
babies.

Oerton J(1), Khalid JM, Besley G, Dalton RN, Downing M, Green A, Henderson M, 
Krywawych S, Leonard J, Andresen BS, Dezateux C.

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre of Epidemiology for Child Health, Institute of Child Health, 
University College London, 30 Guilford Street, London, WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MCADD) is a rare, 
life-threatening condition. Early diagnosis by screening asymptomatic newborns 
may improve outcome, but the benefit to newborns identified with variants not 
encountered clinically is uncertain.
OBJECTIVE: To estimate, overall and by ethnic group: screen-positive prevalence 
and predictive value (PPV); MCADD prevalence; proportion MCADD variants detected 
of predicted definite or uncertain clinical importance.
SETTING: All births in areas of high ethnic minority prevalence in England.
METHODS: Prospective multicentre pilot screening service; testing at age five to 
eight days; standardized screening, diagnostic and management protocols; 
independent expert review of screen-positive cases to assign MCADD diagnosis and 
predicted clinical importance (definite or uncertain).
RESULTS: Approximately 1.5 million babies (79% white; 10% Asian) were screened. 
MCADD was confirmed in 147 of 190 babies with a positive screening result 
(screen-positive prevalence: 1.20 per 10,000; MCADD prevalence: 0.94 per 10,000; 
PPV 77% [95% CI 71-83]), comprising 103 (70%) with MCADD variants of definite 
clinical importance (95 white [95%]; 2 Asian [2%]) and 44 (30%) with variants of 
uncertain clinical importance (29 white [67%]; 12 Asian [28%]).
CONCLUSION: One baby in every 10,000 born in England is diagnosed with MCADD by 
newborn screening; around 60 babies each year. While the majority of MCADD 
variants detected are predicted to be of definite clinical importance, this 
varies according to ethnic group, with variants of uncertain importance most 
commonly found in Asian babies. These findings provide support for MCADD 
screening but highlight the need to take account of the ethnic diversity of the 
population tested at implementation.

DOI: 10.1258/jms.2011.011086
PMCID: PMC3243649
PMID: 22166308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]