---
reference_id: "PMID:31318465"
title: A systematic review of treatments for pityriasis lichenoides.
authors:
- Bellinato F
- Maurelli M
- Gisondi P
- Girolomoni G
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/jdv.15813
keywords:
- "Administration, Topical"
- "Adrenal Cortex Hormones/administration & dosage"
- "Anti-Bacterial Agents/administration & dosage"
- "Calcineurin Inhibitors/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- Phototherapy
- Pityriasis Lichenoides/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A systematic review of treatments for pityriasis lichenoides.
**Authors:** Bellinato F, Maurelli M, Gisondi P, Girolomoni G
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdv.15813](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.15813)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2019 Nov;33(11):2039-2049. doi:
10.1111/jdv.15813.  Epub 2019 Aug 8.

A systematic review of treatments for pityriasis lichenoides.

Bellinato F(1), Maurelli M(1), Gisondi P(1), Girolomoni G(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Dermatology and Venereology, Department of Medicine, University of
Verona, Verona, Italy.

Pityriasis lichenoides (PL) represents a spectrum of inflammatory skin diseases
comprising pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta (PLEVA) and pityriasis
lichenoides chronica (PLC). This study aimed to provide a summary of effective
treatments for PL. A systematic review was performed according to PRISMA
guidelines for studies investigating PL treatment including ≥3 subjects and
published in English between 1 January 1970 and 15 April 2019. A total of 441
papers were screened, and 37 original manuscripts meeting the inclusion and
exclusion criteria were found, including 12 case series, 18 reviews, four
prospective studies, two comparative studies and a single randomized controlled
study. In most studies, ultraviolet (UV) phototherapy (narrow-band UVB,
broadband UVB, UVA1 or PUVA) was used. Clearance rates with the different
modalities are hardly comparable between different studies, ranging
approximately between 70% and 100%. Narrow-band UVB showed an efficacy similar
to PUVA as such as the combination of UVA and UVB vs. PUVA. Oral erythromycin
showed clearance rates ranging between 66% and 83%, whereas methotrexate up to
100% but in small and dated studies. Evidence for other treatments is scarce.
There is a lack of high level of evidence studies on PL treatment. The
interpretation of the results is biased by the possible auto-resolution of the
disease, the sample heterogeneity between children and adults and the short
follow-up period of the studies. Only some studies investigated how results were
durable after cessation of therapy. Quality of life and the impact of treatment
were never assessed. According to the results of this review, we suggest
narrow-band UVB phototherapy as first-line treatment. Oral erythromycin with or
without topical corticosteroids and low-dose methotrexate as second-line
therapies. High-powered studies and randomized controlled trials are needed to
establish the optimal treatment for PL.

© 2019 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.15813
PMID: 31318465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
