---
reference_id: "PMID:36901176"
title: "Interaction between Occupational and Non-Occupational Arsenic Exposure and Tobacco Smoke on Lung Cancerogenesis: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Folesani G
- Galetti M
- Petronini PG
- Mozzoni P
- La Monica S
- Cavallo D
- Corradi M
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph20054167
keywords:
- Humans
- Tobacco Smoke Pollution
- Smoking
- Arsenic
- Prospective Studies
- Lung Neoplasms
- Lung
- Occupational Exposure
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interaction between Occupational and Non-Occupational Arsenic Exposure and Tobacco Smoke on Lung Cancerogenesis: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Folesani G, Galetti M, Petronini PG, Mozzoni P, La Monica S, Cavallo D, Corradi M
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph20054167](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph20054167)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2023 Feb 25;20(5):4167. doi:
10.3390/ijerph20054167.

Interaction between Occupational and Non-Occupational Arsenic Exposure and
Tobacco Smoke on Lung Cancerogenesis: A Systematic Review.

Folesani G(1), Galetti M(1), Petronini PG(2), Mozzoni P(2)(3), La Monica S(2),
Cavallo D(1), Corradi M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Epidemiology and
Hygiene, INAIL-Italian Workers' Compensation Authority, Via Fontana Candida 1,
Monte Porzio Catone, 00078 Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Viale Gramsci 14,
43126 Parma, Italy.
(3)Center of Excellence for Toxicological Research (CERT), University of Parma,
Viale Gramsci 14, 43126 Parma, Italy.

Although a higher lung cancer risk has been already associated with arsenic
exposure, the contribution of arsenic and its compounds to the carcinogenic
effects of other agents, such as tobacco smoke, is not well characterized. This
systematic review examined the relationship between occupational and
non-occupational arsenic exposure and tobacco smoking on lung cancer risk using
papers published from 2010 to 2022. Two databases, PUBMED and Scifinder, were
used for the searches. Among the sixteen human studies included, four were about
occupational exposure, and the others were about arsenic in drinking water.
Furthermore, only three case-control studies and two cohort studies evaluated an
additive or multiplicative interaction. The interaction between arsenic exposure
and tobacco smoke seems to be negligible at low arsenic concentrations (<100
μg/L), while there is a synergistic effect at higher concentrations. Finally, it
is not yet possible to assess whether a linear no-threshold (LNT) model for lung
cancer risk can be applied to the co-exposure to arsenic and tobacco smoke.
Although the methodological quality of the included studies is good, these
findings suggest that rigorous and accurate prospective studies on this topic
are highly needed.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph20054167
PMCID: PMC10001869
PMID: 36901176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
