---
reference_id: "PMID:21646474"
title: Pivotal role of innate and adaptive immunity in anthracycline chemotherapy of established tumors.
authors:
- Mattarollo SR
- Loi S
- Duret H
- Ma Y
- Zitvogel L
- Smyth MJ
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0753
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pivotal role of innate and adaptive immunity in anthracycline chemotherapy of established tumors.
**Authors:** Mattarollo SR, Loi S, Duret H, Ma Y, Zitvogel L, Smyth MJ
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0753](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0753)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 2011 Jul 15;71(14):4809-20. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0753.
Epub  2011 Jun 6.

Pivotal role of innate and adaptive immunity in anthracycline chemotherapy of 
established tumors.

Mattarollo SR(1), Loi S, Duret H, Ma Y, Zitvogel L, Smyth MJ.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Immunology Program, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.

We show, in a series of established experimental breast adenocarcinomas and 
fibrosarcomas induced by carcinogen de novo in mice, that the therapeutic 
efficacy of doxorubicin treatment is dependent on CD8 T cells and IFN-γ 
production. Doxorubicin treatment enhances tumor antigen-specific proliferation 
of CD8 T cells in tumor-draining lymph nodes and promotes tumor infiltration of 
activated, IFN-γ-producing CD8 T cells. Optimal doxorubicin treatment outcome 
also requires both interleukin (IL)-1β and IL-17 cytokines, as blockade of 
IL-1β/IL-1R or IL-17A/IL-17Rα signaling abrogated the therapeutic effect. 
IL-23p19 had no observed role. The presence of γδ T cells, but not Jα18(+) 
natural killer T cells, at the time of doxorubicin treatment was also important. 
In tumor samples taken from breast cancer patients prior to treatment with 
anthracycline chemotherapy, a correlation between CD8α, CD8β, and IFN-γ gene 
expression levels and clinical response was observed, supporting their role in 
the therapeutic efficacy of anthracyclines in humans. Overall, these data 
strongly support the pivotal contribution of both innate and adaptive immunity 
in treatment outcomes of anthracycline chemotherapy.

©2011 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0753
PMID: 21646474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]