---
reference_id: "PMID:31511419"
title: Mechanism of activation of the human cysteine desulfurase complex by frataxin.
authors:
- Patra S
- Barondeau DP
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1909535116
keywords:
- Allosteric Regulation
- "Carbon-Sulfur Lyases/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Catalytic Domain
- Cysteine/metabolism
- Humans
- Iron-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Iron-Sulfur Proteins/metabolism
- Kinetics
- Multiprotein Complexes/metabolism
- Mutation
- Protein Binding
- Pyridoxal Phosphate/metabolism
- Sulfides/metabolism
- Sulfur/metabolism
- Frataxin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanism of activation of the human cysteine desulfurase complex by frataxin.
**Authors:** Patra S, Barondeau DP
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1909535116](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1909535116)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Sep 24;116(39):19421-19430. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1909535116. Epub 2019 Sep 11.

Mechanism of activation of the human cysteine desulfurase complex by frataxin.

Patra S(1), Barondeau DP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77842.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77842
barondeau@tamu.edu.

The function of frataxin (FXN) has garnered great scientific interest since its
depletion was linked to the incurable neurodegenerative disease Friedreich's
ataxia (FRDA). FXN has been shown to be necessary for iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster
biosynthesis and proper mitochondrial function. The structural and functional
core of the Fe-S cluster assembly complex is a low-activity pyridoxal
5'-phosphate (PLP)-dependent cysteine desulfurase enzyme that consists of
catalytic (NFS1), LYRM protein (ISD11), and acyl carrier protein (ACP) subunits.
Although previous studies show that FXN stimulates the activity of this assembly
complex, the mechanism of FXN activation is poorly understood. Here, we develop
a radiolabeling assay and use stopped-flow kinetics to establish that FXN is
functionally linked to the mobile S-transfer loop cysteine of NFS1. Our results
support key roles for this essential cysteine residue in substrate binding, as a
general acid to advance the Cys-quinonoid PLP intermediate, as a nucleophile to
form an NFS1 persulfide, and as a sulfur delivery agent to generate a persulfide
species on the Fe-S scaffold protein ISCU2. FXN specifically accelerates each of
these individual steps in the mechanism. Our resulting architectural switch
model explains why the human Fe-S assembly system has low inherent activity and
requires activation, the connection between the functional mobile S-transfer
loop cysteine and FXN binding, and why the prokaryotic system does not require a
similar FXN-based activation. Together, these results provide mechanistic
insights into the allosteric-activator role of FXN and suggest new strategies to
replace FXN function in the treatment of FRDA.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1909535116
PMCID: PMC6765240
PMID: 31511419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
