---
reference_id: "PMID:37116354"
title: A consideration of the increased risk of schizophrenia due to prenatal maternal stress, and the possible role of microglia.
authors:
- Mawson ER
- Morris BJ
journal: Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2023.110773
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A consideration of the increased risk of schizophrenia due to prenatal maternal stress, and the possible role of microglia.
**Authors:** Mawson ER, Morris BJ
**Journal:** Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pnpbp.2023.110773](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2023.110773)

## Content

1. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2023 Jul 13;125:110773. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2023.110773. Epub 2023 Apr 24.

A consideration of the increased risk of schizophrenia due to prenatal maternal 
stress, and the possible role of microglia.

Mawson ER(1), Morris BJ(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology and Neuroscience, College of Medical, Veterinary and 
Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.
(2)School of Psychology and Neuroscience, College of Medical, Veterinary and 
Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK. Electronic address: 
Brian.Morris@glasgow.ac.uk.

Schizophrenia is caused by interaction of a combination of genetic and 
environmental factors. Of the latter, prenatal exposure to maternal stress is 
reportedly associated with elevated disease risk. The main orchestrators of 
inflammatory processes within the brain are microglia, and aberrant microglial 
activation/function has been proposed to contribute to the aetiology of 
schizophrenia. Here, we evaluate the epidemiological and preclinical evidence 
connecting prenatal stress to schizophrenia risk, and consider the possible 
mediating role of microglia in the prenatal stress-schizophrenia relationship. 
Epidemiological findings are rather consistent in supporting the association, 
albeit they are mitigated by effects of sex and gestational timing, while the 
evidence for microglial activation is more variable. Rodent models of prenatal 
stress generally report lasting effects on offspring neurobiology. However, many 
uncertainties remain as to the mechanisms underlying the influence of maternal 
stress on the developing foetal brain. Future studies should aim to characterise 
the exact processes mediating this aspect of schizophrenia risk, as well as 
focussing on how prenatal stress may interact with other risk factors.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2023.110773
PMID: 37116354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
have no competing interests to declare.