---
reference_id: "PMID:34861467"
title: "Cerebrospinal fluid analysis is associated with enhancement on MRI in bacterial and tuberculous meningitis: A retrospective observational study."
authors:
- Goto R
- Horiuchi Y
- Kawakami H
- Chikada A
- Yasuda T
- Takeuchi S
- Arai N
journal: Clin Neurol Neurosurg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2021.107036
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebrospinal fluid analysis is associated with enhancement on MRI in bacterial and tuberculous meningitis: A retrospective observational study.
**Authors:** Goto R, Horiuchi Y, Kawakami H, Chikada A, Yasuda T, Takeuchi S, Arai N
**Journal:** Clin Neurol Neurosurg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clineuro.2021.107036](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clineuro.2021.107036)

## Content

1. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2022 Jan;212:107036. doi:
10.1016/j.clineuro.2021.107036.  Epub 2021 Nov 22.

Cerebrospinal fluid analysis is associated with enhancement on MRI in bacterial 
and tuberculous meningitis: A retrospective observational study.

Goto R(1), Horiuchi Y(2), Kawakami H(3), Chikada A(4), Yasuda T(5), Takeuchi 
S(6), Arai N(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Center Hospital of the National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, 21-1 Toyama Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan; Department of 
Neurology, Kohnodai Hospital of the National Center for Global Health and 
Medicine, 1-7-1 Kohnodai, Ichikawa, Chiba, Japan. Electronic address: 
rgotou-tky@umin.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Neurology, Center Hospital of the National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, 21-1 Toyama Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan; Department of 
Neurology, Kohnodai Hospital of the National Center for Global Health and 
Medicine, 1-7-1 Kohnodai, Ichikawa, Chiba, Japan. Electronic address: 
yurino.horiuchi@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Neurology, Center Hospital of the National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, 21-1 Toyama Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan; Department of 
Neurology, Kohnodai Hospital of the National Center for Global Health and 
Medicine, 1-7-1 Kohnodai, Ichikawa, Chiba, Japan. Electronic address: 
remote.51uu@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Neurology, Center Hospital of the National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, 21-1 Toyama Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: 
achikada@hosp.ncgm.go.jp.
(5)Department of Neurology, Center Hospital of the National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, 21-1 Toyama Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: 
tyasuda@hosp.ncgm.go.jp.
(6)Department of Neurology, Kohnodai Hospital of the National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, 1-7-1 Kohnodai, Ichikawa, Chiba, Japan. Electronic address: 
d-20takeuchi@hospk.ncgm.go.jp.
(7)Department of Neurology, Center Hospital of the National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, 21-1 Toyama Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: 
noarai@hosp.ncgm.go.jp.

OBJECTIVE: Along with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis, enhancement on 
contrast-enhanced MRI is useful to diagnose meningitis. However, the conditions 
for its appearance have not been clarified. This study aimed to investigate the 
association between CSF parameters and enhancement on contrast-enhanced head or 
spinal MRI in patients with bacterial meningitis (BM) or tuberculous meningitis 
(TM).
METHODS: A total of 12 patients with BM and 23 patients with TM who underwent 
both CSF analysis and contrast-enhanced MRI were included. The correlation 
between CSF analysis and MRI findings has been examined using receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) analysis.
RESULTS: Contrast enhancement was found in 7 and 10 patients with BM and TM, 
respectively. Both CSF analysis and MRI were useful to distinct between BM and 
TM, and the enhancement implied the severity of them. In patients with BM, 
higher CSF protein and lower CSF glucose were associated with enhancement on 
MRI, while not only CSF protein and glucose but also leukocyte and lymphocyte 
counts were associated with it in TM. CSF adenosine deaminase (ADA) did not show 
discriminant ability of the MRI findings.
CONCLUSIONS: CSF analysis is associated with enhancement on contrast-enhanced 
MRI both in BM and TM. Our findings indicate the importance of CSF analysis in 
assessing the need to perform contrast-enhanced MRI, which may be useful in 
diagnosis, distinction, and estimation of prognosis in those patients.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2021.107036
PMID: 34861467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]