---
reference_id: "PMID:31046790"
title: Disease course and treatment effects of a JAK inhibitor in a patient with CANDLE syndrome.
authors:
- Boyadzhiev M
- Marinov L
- Boyadzhiev V
- Iotova V
- Aksentijevich I
- Hambleton S
journal: Pediatr Rheumatol Online J
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12969-019-0322-9
keywords:
- "Autoimmune Diseases/complications, drug therapy"
- Azetidines/therapeutic use
- Child
- Chronic Disease
- "Dermatitis/complications, drug therapy"
- "Fever/complications, drug therapy"
- Humans
- Janus Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Lipodystrophy/complications, drug therapy"
- Male
- "Neutropenia/complications, drug therapy"
- Proteasome Endopeptidase Complex/immunology
- Purines
- Pyrazoles
- Sulfonamides/therapeutic use
- Syndrome
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease course and treatment effects of a JAK inhibitor in a patient with CANDLE syndrome.
**Authors:** Boyadzhiev M, Marinov L, Boyadzhiev V, Iotova V, Aksentijevich I, Hambleton S
**Journal:** Pediatr Rheumatol Online J (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12969-019-0322-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12969-019-0322-9)

## Content

1. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2019 May 2;17(1):19. doi:
10.1186/s12969-019-0322-9.

Disease course and treatment effects of a JAK inhibitor in a patient with CANDLE
syndrome.

Boyadzhiev M(1), Marinov L(2), Boyadzhiev V(2), Iotova V(2), Aksentijevich I(3),
Hambleton S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University, Varna, Bulgaria.
boyadzhiev.martin@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University, Varna, Bulgaria.
(3)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Washington D.C, USA.
(4)Instituste of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne,
UK.

BACKGROUND: CANDLE syndrome (an acronym for Chronic Atypical Neutrophilic
Dermatosis with Lipodystrophy and Elevated Temperature) is a recently described
rare autosomal recessive disorder charaterized by systemic autoinflammation.
Clinical manifestations include presentation in the first year of life, episodes
of fever accompanied by erythematous skin lesions, progressive lipodystrophy,
violaceous periorbital swelling and failure to thrive. This syndrome is caused
by loss of function mutations and malfunction of the immunoproteasome complex.
Most patients have biallelic mutations in the PSMB8 gene that encodes the β5i
catalytic subunit of the immunoproteasome. Examples of digenic inheritance have
been also described in CANDLE. CANDLE patients have strong type I interferon
gene expression signature and they are responsive to treatment with JAK
inhibitors. However, possible serious side-effects remain a concern. Here, we
report another patient with CANDLE whose disease activity was well controlled by
the treatment with baricitinib.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a Bulgarian patient of the Turkish ancestry who
carries biallelic mutations in the PSMB8 gene: p.Ala92Val and p.Lys105Gln. The
pathogenic variant p.Ala92Val has not been previously described in patients with
CANDLE. We also comment on the unusual feature in this patient, nephrolithiasis,
that has not been described in other patients, however it might be related to
the positive family history for kidney stones. We have treated the patient with
the JAK inhibitor baricitinib for the past year and we observed a significant
amelioration of his inflammatory episodes, skin and joint manifestations, and
improvements in physical activities and growth. The treatment with
glucocorticoids (GC) was completely discontinued. No side effects have been
observed, however they remain in consideration for a life-long therapy of this
disease.
CONCLUSIONS: CANDLE should be suspected in patients with early-onset systemic
inflammatory disease and prominent skin manifestations. Molecular testing can
confirm the clinical diagnosis and is very important in guiding therapies.
Treatment with JAK inhibitors is highly efficacious and appears to be safe in
children with CANDLE and other intereforonopathies.

DOI: 10.1186/s12969-019-0322-9
PMCID: PMC6498627
PMID: 31046790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Informed consent for publication has been
obtained from both parents. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations.
