---
reference_id: "PMID:34828310"
title: "Epigenetic Mechanisms of ART-Related Imprinting Disorders: Lessons From iPSC and Mouse Models."
authors:
- Horánszky A
- Becker JL
- Zana M
- Ferguson-Smith AC
- Dinnyés A
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/genes12111704
keywords:
- Animals
- DNA Methylation
- "Epigenesis, Genetic/physiology"
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/etiology, genetics"
- Genomic Imprinting/physiology
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/physiology
- Male
- Mice
- "Models, Animal"
- Pregnancy
- "Reproductive Techniques, Assisted/adverse effects"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetic Mechanisms of ART-Related Imprinting Disorders: Lessons From iPSC and Mouse Models.
**Authors:** Horánszky A, Becker JL, Zana M, Ferguson-Smith AC, Dinnyés A
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes12111704](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12111704)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Oct 26;12(11):1704. doi: 10.3390/genes12111704.

Epigenetic Mechanisms of ART-Related Imprinting Disorders: Lessons From iPSC and 
Mouse Models.

Horánszky A(1)(2), Becker JL(3), Zana M(1), Ferguson-Smith AC(3), Dinnyés 
A(1)(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)BioTalentum Ltd., H-2100 Gödöllő, Hungary.
(2)Department of Physiology and Animal Health, Institute of Physiology and 
Animal Health, Hungarian University of Agriculture and Life Sciences, H-2100 
Gödöllő, Hungary.
(3)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EH, UK.
(4)HCEMM-USZ Stem Cell Research Group, Hungarian Centre of Excellence for 
Molecular Medicine, H-6723 Szeged, Hungary.
(5)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, University of Szeged, 
H-6720 Szeged, Hungary.

The rising frequency of ART-conceived births is accompanied by the need for an 
improved understanding of the implications of ART on gametes and embryos. 
Increasing evidence from mouse models and human epidemiological data suggests 
that ART procedures may play a role in the pathophysiology of certain imprinting 
disorders (IDs), including Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, Silver-Russell syndrome, 
Prader-Willi syndrome, and Angelman syndrome. The underlying molecular basis of 
this association, however, requires further elucidation. In this review, we 
discuss the epigenetic and imprinting alterations of in vivo mouse models and 
human iPSC models of ART. Mouse models have demonstrated aberrant regulation of 
imprinted genes involved with ART-related IDs. In the past decade, iPSC 
technology has provided a platform for patient-specific cellular models of 
culture-associated perturbed imprinting. However, despite ongoing efforts, a 
deeper understanding of the susceptibility of iPSCs to epigenetic perturbation 
is required if they are to be reliably used for modelling ART-associated IDs. 
Comparing the patterns of susceptibility of imprinted genes in mouse models and 
IPSCs in culture improves the current understanding of the underlying mechanisms 
of ART-linked IDs with implications for our understanding of the influence of 
environmental factors such as culture and hormone treatments on epigenetically 
important regions of the genome such as imprints.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12111704
PMCID: PMC8620286
PMID: 34828310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.H., M.Z. and A.D. are employed by BioTalentum 
Ltd. and all authors declare no conflict of interest.