---
reference_id: "PMID:20445292"
title: Topical treatment in vitiligo and the potential uses of new drug delivery systems.
authors:
- Garg BJ
- Saraswat A
- Bhatia A
- Katare OP
journal: Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.4103/0378-6323.62961
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Topical treatment in vitiligo and the potential uses of new drug delivery systems.
**Authors:** Garg BJ, Saraswat A, Bhatia A, Katare OP
**Journal:** Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0378-6323.62961](https://doi.org/10.4103/0378-6323.62961)

## Content

1. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2010 May-Jun;76(3):231-8. doi: 
10.4103/0378-6323.62961.

Topical treatment in vitiligo and the potential uses of new drug delivery 
systems.

Garg BJ(1), Saraswat A, Bhatia A, Katare OP.

Author information:
(1)University Institute of Pharmaceutical, Sciences-UGC Center of Advanced 
Studies, Panjab University, Chandigarh, India.

Vitiligo is a psychologically devastating condition. Topical therapy is employed 
as first-line treatment in localized vitiligo. Currently, several topical agents 
are available in many forms viz. methoxsalen (solution and cream), trioxsalen 
(solution), corticosteroids (gel, cream, ointment and solution) and calcineurin 
inhibitors (ointment and cream). Although topical therapy has an important 
position in vitiligo treatment, side-effects or poor efficacy affect their 
utility and patient compliance. Novel drug delivery strategies can play a 
pivotal role in improving the topical delivery of various drugs by enhancing 
their epidermal localization with a concomitant reduction in their side-effects 
and improving their effectiveness. The current review emphasizes the potential 
of various phospholipid based carriers viz. liposomes, transferosomes, 
ethosomes, lipid emulsions, solid lipid nanoparticles and organogels in 
optimizing and enhancing the topical delivery of anti-vitiligo agents, whilst 
reducing the side effects of drugs commonly used in its topical treatment.

DOI: 10.4103/0378-6323.62961
PMID: 20445292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]