---
reference_id: "PMID:29541918"
title: Tumour compartment transcriptomics demonstrates the activation of inflammatory and odontogenic programmes in human adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma and identifies the MAPK/ERK pathway as a novel therapeutic target.
authors:
- Apps JR
- Carreno G
- Gonzalez-Meljem JM
- Haston S
- Guiho R
- Cooper JE
- Manshaei S
- Jani N
- Hölsken A
- Pettorini B
- Beynon RJ
- Simpson DM
- Fraser HC
- Hong Y
- Hallang S
- Stone TJ
- Virasami A
- Donson AM
- Jones D
- Aquilina K
- Spoudeas H
- Joshi AR
- Grundy R
- Storer LCD
- Korbonits M
- Hilton DA
- Tossell K
- Thavaraj S
- Ungless MA
- Gil J
- Buslei R
- Hankinson T
- Hargrave D
- Goding C
- Andoniadou CL
- Brogan P
- Jacques TS
- Williams HJ
- Martinez-Barbera JP
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-018-1830-2
keywords:
- Animals
- Computational Biology
- "Craniopharyngioma/metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Cytokines/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- "Inflammation/metabolism, therapy"
- Laser Capture Microdissection
- MAP Kinase Signaling System
- Mice
- Neuroglia/metabolism
- Odontogenesis/physiology
- "Pituitary Gland/embryology, pathology"
- "Pituitary Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
- Tissue Culture Techniques
- Transcriptome
- Tumor Microenvironment/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tumour compartment transcriptomics demonstrates the activation of inflammatory and odontogenic programmes in human adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma and identifies the MAPK/ERK pathway as a novel therapeutic target.
**Authors:** Apps JR, Carreno G, Gonzalez-Meljem JM, Haston S, Guiho R, Cooper JE, Manshaei S, Jani N, Hölsken A, Pettorini B, Beynon RJ, Simpson DM, Fraser HC, Hong Y, Hallang S, Stone TJ, Virasami A, Donson AM, Jones D, Aquilina K, Spoudeas H, Joshi AR, Grundy R, Storer LCD, Korbonits M, Hilton DA, Tossell K, Thavaraj S, Ungless MA, Gil J, Buslei R, Hankinson T, Hargrave D, Goding C, Andoniadou CL, Brogan P, Jacques TS, Williams HJ, Martinez-Barbera JP
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-018-1830-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-018-1830-2)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2018 May;135(5):757-777. doi: 10.1007/s00401-018-1830-2.
Epub  2018 Mar 14.

Tumour compartment transcriptomics demonstrates the activation of inflammatory 
and odontogenic programmes in human adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma and 
identifies the MAPK/ERK pathway as a novel therapeutic target.

Apps JR(1)(2), Carreno G(3), Gonzalez-Meljem JM(3)(4), Haston S(3), Guiho R(3), 
Cooper JE(3), Manshaei S(3), Jani N(5), Hölsken A(6), Pettorini B(7), Beynon 
RJ(8), Simpson DM(8), Fraser HC(3), Hong Y(9), Hallang S(10), Stone TJ(3)(11), 
Virasami A(11), Donson AM(12), Jones D(13), Aquilina K(14), Spoudeas H(15), 
Joshi AR(16), Grundy R(17), Storer LCD(17), Korbonits M(18), Hilton DA(19), 
Tossell K(20), Thavaraj S(21), Ungless MA(20), Gil J(20), Buslei R(6)(22), 
Hankinson T(12), Hargrave D(23), Goding C(24), Andoniadou CL(25)(26), Brogan 
P(9)(27), Jacques TS(3)(11), Williams HJ(5), Martinez-Barbera JP(28).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Biology and Cancer Programme, Birth Defects Research Centre, 
UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, 
London, UK. j.apps@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Histopathology Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Trust, London, 
UK. j.apps@ucl.ac.uk.
(3)Developmental Biology and Cancer Programme, Birth Defects Research Centre, 
UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, 
London, UK.
(4)Basic Research Department, National Institute of Geriatrics, Mexico City, 
Mexico.
(5)Centre for Translational Omics-GOSgene, Genetics and Genomic Medicine 
Programme, UCL Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, UK.
(6)Department of Neuropathology, Friedrich-Alexander University 
Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany.
(7)Alder Hey Children's Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, UK.
(8)Centre for Proteome Research, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of 
Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(9)Infection, Immunity and Inflammation Programme, UCL Great Ormond Street 
Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, UK.
(10)Centre for Craniofacial and Regenerative Biology, King's College London, 
London, UK.
(11)Histopathology Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Trust, London, 
UK.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, CO, USA.
(13)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(14)Neurosurgery Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Trust, London, UK.
(15)Endocrinology Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Trust, London, 
UK.
(16)Laboratory Medicine, Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle, UK.
(17)Children's Brain Tumour Research Centre, University of Nottingham, 
Nottingham, UK.
(18)William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine 
and Dentistry, Queen Mary University, London, UK.
(19)Pathology Department, Plymouth Hospitals NHS Trust, Plymouth, UK.
(20)MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences, Imperial College London, London, 
UK.
(21)Head and Neck Pathology, Dental Institute, King's College London, London, 
UK.
(22)Institute of Pathology, Klinikum Sozialstiftung Bamberg, Bamberg, Germany.
(23)Haematology and Oncology Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Trust, 
London, UK.
(24)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Oxford University, Old Road Campus, 
Headington, Oxford, UK.
(25)Centre for Craniofacial and Regenerative Biology, King's College London, 
Guy's Hospital, Floor 27 Tower Wing, London, UK.
(26)Department of Internal Medicine III, Technische Universität Dresden, 
Fetscherstaße 74, 01307, Dresden, Germany.
(27)Rheumatology Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Trust, London, UK.
(28)Developmental Biology and Cancer Programme, Birth Defects Research Centre, 
UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, 
London, UK. j.martinez-barbera@ucl.ac.uk.

Adamantinomatous craniopharyngiomas (ACPs) are clinically challenging tumours, 
the majority of which have activating mutations in CTNNB1. They are 
histologically complex, showing cystic and solid components, the latter 
comprised of different morphological cell types (e.g. β-catenin-accumulating 
cluster cells and palisading epithelium), surrounded by a florid glial reaction 
with immune cells. Here, we have carried out RNA sequencing on 18 ACP samples 
and integrated these data with an existing ACP transcriptomic dataset. No 
studies so far have examined the patterns of gene expression within the 
different cellular compartments of the tumour. To achieve this goal, we have 
combined laser capture microdissection with computational analyses to reveal 
groups of genes that are associated with either epithelial tumour cells 
(clusters and palisading epithelium), glial tissue or immune infiltrate. We use 
these human ACP molecular signatures and RNA-Seq data from two ACP mouse models 
to reveal that cell clusters are molecularly analogous to the enamel knot, a 
critical signalling centre controlling normal tooth morphogenesis. Supporting 
this finding, we show that human cluster cells express high levels of several 
members of the FGF, TGFB and BMP families of secreted factors, which signal to 
neighbouring cells as evidenced by immunostaining against the phosphorylated 
proteins pERK1/2, pSMAD3 and pSMAD1/5/9 in both human and mouse ACP. We reveal 
that inhibiting the MAPK/ERK pathway with trametinib, a clinically approved MEK 
inhibitor, results in reduced proliferation and increased apoptosis in explant 
cultures of human and mouse ACP. Finally, we analyse a prominent molecular 
signature in the glial reactive tissue to characterise the inflammatory 
microenvironment and uncover the activation of inflammasomes in human ACP. We 
validate these results by immunostaining against immune cell markers, cytokine 
ELISA and proteome analysis in both solid tumour and cystic fluid from ACP 
patients. Our data support a new molecular paradigm for understanding ACP 
tumorigenesis as an aberrant mimic of natural tooth development and opens new 
therapeutic opportunities by revealing the activation of the MAPK/ERK and 
inflammasome pathways in human ACP.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-018-1830-2
PMCID: PMC5904225
PMID: 29541918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: P.B. has received institutional grants from 
SOBI, Roche and Novartis; consultancy fees from Roche; and lecturing fees from 
SOBI and Novartis. The other authors declare that they have no conflict of 
interest.