---
reference_id: "PMID:19463221"
title: "Pediatric juvenile polyposis syndromes: an update."
authors:
- Huang SC
- Erdman SH
journal: Curr Gastroenterol Rep
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s11894-009-0033-3
keywords:
- AMP-Activated Protein Kinase Kinases
- "Adenomatous Polyposis Coli/diagnosis, genetics"
- Adolescent
- Biopsy
- "Bone Morphogenetic Protein Receptors, Type I/genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Colonoscopy/methods
- "DNA, Neoplasm/genetics"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Hamartoma/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- PTEN Phosphohydrolase/genetics
- "Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
- Smad4 Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric juvenile polyposis syndromes: an update.
**Authors:** Huang SC, Erdman SH
**Journal:** Curr Gastroenterol Rep (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11894-009-0033-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11894-009-0033-3)

## Content

1. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2009 Jun;11(3):211-9. doi: 10.1007/s11894-009-0033-3.

Pediatric juvenile polyposis syndromes: an update.

Huang SC(1), Erdman SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Ohio State University College of Medicine, 
Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH 43205, USA.

Colon polyps are a common finding in pediatrics and can present with rectal 
bleeding, abdominal pain, or polyp prolapse from the rectum. Histologically 
classified as hamartomas, these isolated pediatric polyps lack epithelial 
dysplasia and have no cancer risk. However, when polyps are present in greater 
numbers, or are associated with a family history of polyps or colon or other 
cancers, a polyposis or hereditary colorectal cancer syndrome should be 
considered. Using a case-based format, this article reviews the clinical 
features and provides updates on the three most common hamartomatous polyp 
syndromes of childhood: juvenile polyposis syndrome, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, and 
the PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome. Each syndrome has distinctive intestinal and 
extra-intestinal findings that, when present, can guide genetic counseling and 
testing. Lifelong cancer surveillance is crucial to disease prevention and the 
long-term health of these patients and their families.

DOI: 10.1007/s11894-009-0033-3
PMID: 19463221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]