---
reference_id: "PMID:24493669"
title: Loss of imprinting at the 14q32 domain is associated with microRNA overexpression in acute promyelocytic leukemia.
authors:
- Manodoro F
- Marzec J
- Chaplin T
- Miraki-Moud F
- Moravcsik E
- Jovanovic JV
- Wang J
- Iqbal S
- Taussig D
- Grimwade D
- Gribben JG
- Young BD
- Debernardi S
journal: Blood
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-12-469833
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14/genetics"
- DNA Methylation
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Leukemic"
- Genomic Imprinting
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/genetics"
- Mice
- MicroRNAs/genetics
- Microarray Analysis
- Transcriptome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of imprinting at the 14q32 domain is associated with microRNA overexpression in acute promyelocytic leukemia.
**Authors:** Manodoro F, Marzec J, Chaplin T, Miraki-Moud F, Moravcsik E, Jovanovic JV, Wang J, Iqbal S, Taussig D, Grimwade D, Gribben JG, Young BD, Debernardi S
**Journal:** Blood (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2012-12-469833](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2012-12-469833)

## Content

1. Blood. 2014 Mar 27;123(13):2066-74. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-12-469833. Epub
2014  Feb 3.

Loss of imprinting at the 14q32 domain is associated with microRNA
overexpression in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Manodoro F(1), Marzec J, Chaplin T, Miraki-Moud F, Moravcsik E, Jovanovic JV,
Wang J, Iqbal S, Taussig D, Grimwade D, Gribben JG, Young BD, Debernardi S.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Haemato-Oncology and.

Distinct patterns of DNA methylation characterize the epigenetic landscape of
promyelocytic leukemia/retinoic acid receptor-α (PML-RARα)-associated acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL). We previously reported that the microRNAs (miRNAs)
clustered on chromosome 14q32 are overexpressed only in APL. Here, using
high-throughput bisulfite sequencing, we identified an APL-associated
hypermethylation at the upstream differentially methylated region (DMR), which
also included the site motifs for the enhancer blocking protein CCCTC-binding
factor (CTCF). Comparing the profiles of diagnostic/remission paired patient
samples, we show that hypermethylation was acquired in APL in a monoallelic
manner. The cytosine guanine dinucleotide status of the DMR correlated with
expression of the miRNAs following a characteristic position-dependent pattern.
Moreover, a signature of hypermethylation was also detected in leukemic cells
from an established transgenic PML-RARA APL mouse model at the orthologous
region on chromosome 12, including the CTCF binding site located upstream from
the mouse miRNA cluster. These results, together with the demonstration that the
region does not show DNA methylation changes during myeloid differentiation,
provide evidence that 14q32 hypermethylation is implicated in the pathogenesis
of APL. We propose a model in which loss of imprinting at the 14q32 domain leads
to overexpression of the miRNAs in APL.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2012-12-469833
PMID: 24493669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
