---
reference_id: "PMID:24945456"
title: "Committee opinion no. 605: primary ovarian insufficiency in adolescents and young women."
journal: Obstet Gynecol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1097/01.AOG.0000451757.51964.98
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Female
- Humans
- "Infertility, Female/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Committee opinion no. 605: primary ovarian insufficiency in adolescents and young women.
**Journal:** Obstet Gynecol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.AOG.0000451757.51964.98](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.AOG.0000451757.51964.98)

## Content

1. Obstet Gynecol. 2014 Jul;124(1):193-197. doi:
10.1097/01.AOG.0000451757.51964.98.

Committee opinion no. 605: primary ovarian insufficiency in adolescents and
young women.

[No authors listed]

Primary ovarian insufficiency is the depletion or dysfunction of ovarian
follicles with cessation of menses before age 40 years. There is no consensus on
criteria to identify primary ovarian insufficiency in adolescents, and delay in
diagnosis is common. Health care providers who make this clinical diagnosis
should be mindful of the sensitive nature of this medical condition. Patients
and their families should be counseled on the effect of the patient's condition
on future fertility, on the risk of comorbidities associated with primary
ovarian insufficiency, and on the condition's potential for genetic inheritance.
Psychologic counseling also should be offered because impaired self-esteem and
emotional distress have been reported after diagnosis of primary ovarian
insufficiency. Once primary ovarian insufficiency is diagnosed, patients should
be evaluated at least annually. The goals of hormonal therapy extend beyond
simply symptom relief to levels that support bone, cardiovascular, and sexual
health. Referrals to a reproductive endocrinology and infertility specialist
should be made when desired by the patient and family to further discuss
available reproductive treatments.

DOI: 10.1097/01.AOG.0000451757.51964.98
PMID: 24945456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
