---
reference_id: "PMID:33851646"
title: NRAS mutant melanoma arising in a giant congenital melanocytic nevus in an infant.
authors:
- Bansal N
- Das M
- Chatterjee U
- Mallick MG
- Arora N
- Mishra DK
journal: Indian J Pathol Microbiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.4103/IJPM.IJPM_38_20
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NRAS mutant melanoma arising in a giant congenital melanocytic nevus in an infant.
**Authors:** Bansal N, Das M, Chatterjee U, Mallick MG, Arora N, Mishra DK
**Journal:** Indian J Pathol Microbiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.4103/IJPM.IJPM_38_20](https://doi.org/10.4103/IJPM.IJPM_38_20)

## Content

1. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2021 Apr-Jun;64(2):402-405. doi: 
10.4103/IJPM.IJPM_38_20.

NRAS mutant melanoma arising in a giant congenital melanocytic nevus in an 
infant.

Bansal N(1), Das M(1), Chatterjee U(1), Mallick MG(1), Arora N(2), Mishra DK(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and 
Research, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, Tata Medical Center, Kolkata, West Bengal, 
India.

Pediatric melanomas are uncommon and sometimes arise in the background of giant 
congenital melanocytic nevus (GCMN). A 1-year-old girl was born with GCMN 
affecting her left half of the face and smaller nodules affecting trunk, hands, 
and feet. She developed an ulcerated lesion on the left temporoparietal scalp. 
The lesion showed features of GCMN along with large nests of a tumor composed of 
round cells with a vesicular nucleus, prominent nucleolus, plentiful mitoses, 
and areas of necrosis. Immunostaining for desmin, LCA, CD 20, CD 34, CD 99, 
BCL-2, and FLI1 was negative. Tumor cells showed immunopositivity for S-100 and 
HMB-45 confirming the diagnosis of melanoma. Immunostaining for BRAF V600E was 
negative; however, NRAS mutation was detected on next-generation sequencing. 
Unlike adult melanomas BRAF mutations are rare but NRAS mutations have been 
reported in pediatric melanomas. Adjunctive molecular testing will be important 
to understand the genetic basis of this disease and future targeted therapy.

DOI: 10.4103/IJPM.IJPM_38_20
PMID: 33851646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None