---
reference_id: "PMID:34358560"
title: The SARS-CoV-2 Nsp3 macrodomain reverses PARP9/DTX3L-dependent ADP-ribosylation induced by interferon signaling.
authors:
- Russo LC
- Tomasin R
- Matos IA
- Manucci AC
- Sowa ST
- Dale K
- Caldecott KW
- Lehtiö L
- Schechtman D
- Meotti FC
- Bruni-Cardoso A
- Hoch NC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101041
keywords:
- ADP-Ribosylation
- COVID-19/virology
- Humans
- Interferons/metabolism
- Neoplasm Proteins/metabolism
- Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerases/metabolism
- SARS-CoV-2/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The SARS-CoV-2 Nsp3 macrodomain reverses PARP9/DTX3L-dependent ADP-ribosylation induced by interferon signaling.
**Authors:** Russo LC, Tomasin R, Matos IA, Manucci AC, Sowa ST, Dale K, Caldecott KW, Lehtiö L, Schechtman D, Meotti FC, Bruni-Cardoso A, Hoch NC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101041](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101041)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Sep;297(3):101041. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101041. Epub 2021
 Aug 4.

The SARS-CoV-2 Nsp3 macrodomain reverses PARP9/DTX3L-dependent ADP-ribosylation
induced by interferon signaling.

Russo LC(1), Tomasin R(1), Matos IA(1), Manucci AC(1), Sowa ST(2), Dale K(3),
Caldecott KW(3), Lehtiö L(2), Schechtman D(1), Meotti FC(1), Bruni-Cardoso A(1),
Hoch NC(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, University of São Paulo,
São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine & Biocenter Oulu, University
of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(3)Genome Damage and Stability Centre, School of Life Sciences, University of
Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, University of São Paulo,
São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: nicolas@iq.usp.br.

SARS-CoV-2 nonstructural protein 3 (Nsp3) contains a macrodomain that is
essential for coronavirus pathogenesis and is thus an attractive target for drug
development. This macrodomain is thought to counteract the host interferon (IFN)
response, an important antiviral signalling cascade, via the reversal of protein
ADP-ribosylation, a posttranslational modification catalyzed by host
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases (PARPs). However, the main cellular targets of the
coronavirus macrodomain that mediate this effect are currently unknown. Here, we
use a robust immunofluorescence-based assay to show that activation of the IFN
response induces ADP-ribosylation of host proteins and that ectopic expression
of the SARS-CoV-2 Nsp3 macrodomain reverses this modification in human cells. We
further demonstrate that this assay can be used to screen for on-target and
cell-active macrodomain inhibitors. This IFN-induced ADP-ribosylation is
dependent on PARP9 and its binding partner DTX3L, but surprisingly the
expression of the Nsp3 macrodomain or the deletion of either PARP9 or DTX3L does
not impair IFN signaling or the induction of IFN-responsive genes. Our results
suggest that PARP9/DTX3L-dependent ADP-ribosylation is a downstream effector of
the host IFN response and that the cellular function of the SARS-CoV-2 Nsp3
macrodomain is to hydrolyze this end product of IFN signaling, rather than to
suppress the IFN response itself.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101041
PMCID: PMC8332738
PMID: 34358560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.
