---
reference_id: "PMID:16332455"
title: Human parvovirus B19 infection during pregnancy--value of modern molecular and serological diagnostics.
authors:
- Enders M
- Schalasta G
- Baisch C
- Weidner A
- Pukkila L
- Kaikkonen L
- Lankinen H
- Hedman L
- Söderlund-Venermo M
- Hedman K
journal: J Clin Virol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2005.11.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human parvovirus B19 infection during pregnancy--value of modern molecular and serological diagnostics.
**Authors:** Enders M, Schalasta G, Baisch C, Weidner A, Pukkila L, Kaikkonen L, Lankinen H, Hedman L, Söderlund-Venermo M, Hedman K
**Journal:** J Clin Virol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcv.2005.11.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2005.11.002)

## Content

1. J Clin Virol. 2006 Apr;35(4):400-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2005.11.002. Epub 2005 
Dec 5.

Human parvovirus B19 infection during pregnancy--value of modern molecular and 
serological diagnostics.

Enders M(1), Schalasta G, Baisch C, Weidner A, Pukkila L, Kaikkonen L, Lankinen 
H, Hedman L, Söderlund-Venermo M, Hedman K.

Author information:
(1)Labor Enders und Partner, Institut für Virologie, Infektiologie und 
Epidemiologie e.V., Stuttgart, Germany. menders@labor-enders.de

BACKGROUND: Over 95% of fetal complications (fetal hydrops and death) occur 
within 12 weeks following acute parvovirus B19 (B19) infection in pregnancy. 
Therefore, weekly fetal ultrasound monitoring is generally recommended for this 
time period. However, in the majority of women, typical symptoms of acute 
infection (rash or arthropathy) are absent, and during epidemics, B19 infection 
may be diagnosed incidentally by antibody screening of women at risk.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the diagnostic value of currently available molecular and 
serological methods for reliable diagnosis of primary B19 infection in 
pregnancy.
STUDY DESIGN: Large panels of well-characterized acute-phase or convalescent 
sera were used to investigate the ability of a VP2 IgM EIA, a Light-Cycler-based 
B19-DNA PCR, a VP1-IgG avidity EIA and two VP2-IgG epitope-type specificity 
[ETS] EIAs to pinpoint the time of primary B19 infection in pregnancy.
RESULTS: The duration of low-level IgM positivity varied greatly (range 4-26 
weeks). Samples collected within the first 2 weeks of infection showed 
high-level viremia (mean 1.75 x 10(8) geq/ml). During follow-up, low-level 
DNAemia (mean 9.7 x 10(4)geq/ml) persisted for at least 18 weeks in 91% (20/22) 
of patients. Considering the first 12 weeks after onset of disease the window of 
greatest risk for fetal complications, the "acute" phase was extended to cover 
this full period. In this case, performing the avidity and ETS-EIA sequentially, 
the positive predictive value was 100% in patients showing concordant avidity 
and ETS-EIA results.
CONCLUSIONS: In the presence of low IgM titres and/or low-level DNAemia the use 
of supplementary serological assays such as VP1-IgG avidity EIA and VP2-ETS-EIA 
is advisable for restriction or avoidance of unnecessary fetal ultrasound 
examinations or invasive diagnostics; and in general for strengthening the 
reliability of B19 serodiagnosis of pregnant women.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2005.11.002
PMID: 16332455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]