---
reference_id: "PMID:28441111"
title: Phase II Study of the Efficacy and Safety of Pembrolizumab for Relapsed/Refractory Classic Hodgkin Lymphoma.
authors:
- Chen R
- Zinzani PL
- Fanale MA
- Armand P
- Johnson NA
- Brice P
- Radford J
- Ribrag V
- Molin D
- Vassilakopoulos TP
- Tomita A
- von Tresckow B
- Shipp MA
- Zhang Y
- Ricart AD
- Balakumaran A
- Moskowitz CH
- KEYNOTE-087
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2016.72.1316
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/adverse effects"
- "Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Hodgkin Disease/drug therapy
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Recurrence
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase II Study of the Efficacy and Safety of Pembrolizumab for Relapsed/Refractory Classic Hodgkin Lymphoma.
**Authors:** Chen R, Zinzani PL, Fanale MA, Armand P, Johnson NA, Brice P, Radford J, Ribrag V, Molin D, Vassilakopoulos TP, Tomita A, von Tresckow B, Shipp MA, Zhang Y, Ricart AD, Balakumaran A, Moskowitz CH, KEYNOTE-087
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2016.72.1316](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2016.72.1316)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2017 Jul 1;35(19):2125-2132. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2016.72.1316. Epub
 2017 Apr 25.

Phase II Study of the Efficacy and Safety of Pembrolizumab for
Relapsed/Refractory Classic Hodgkin Lymphoma.

Chen R(1), Zinzani PL(1), Fanale MA(1), Armand P(1), Johnson NA(1), Brice P(1),
Radford J(1), Ribrag V(1), Molin D(1), Vassilakopoulos TP(1), Tomita A(1), von
Tresckow B(1), Shipp MA(1), Zhang Y(1), Ricart AD(1), Balakumaran A(1),
Moskowitz CH(1); KEYNOTE-087.

Author information:
(1)Robert Chen, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA; Pier Luigi
Zinzani, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy; Michelle A. Fanale, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX; Philippe Armand and
Margaret A. Shipp, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA; Nathalie A.
Johnson, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Canada; Pauline Brice, Hôpital
Saint-Louis, Paris; Vincent Ribrag, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France;
John Radford, The University of Manchester and Christie NHS Foundation Trust,
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom; Daniel
Molin, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden; Theodoros P. Vassilakopoulos,
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Laikon General Hospital, Athens,
Greece; Akihiro Tomita, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya,
Japan; Bastian von Tresckow, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany;
Yinghua Zhang, Alejandro D. Ricart, and Arun Balakumaran, Merck, Kenilworth, NJ;
Craig H. Moskowitz, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.

Purpose Hodgkin Reed-Sternberg cells harbor alterations in chromosome 9p24.1,
leading to overexpression of programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) and PD-L2.
Pembrolizumab, a programmed death 1-blocking antibody, demonstrated a high
overall response rate (ORR) in patients with relapsed or refractory classic
Hodgkin lymphoma (rrHL) in phase I testing. Methods KEYNOTE-087 (
ClinicalTrials.gov identifier, NCT02453594) was a single-arm phase II study of
pembrolizumab in three cohorts of patients with rrHL, defined on the basis of
lymphoma progression after (1) autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT) and
subsequent brentuximab vedotin (BV); (2) salvage chemotherapy and BV, and thus,
ineligible for ASCT because of chemoresistant disease; and (3) ASCT, but without
BV after transplantation. Patients received pembrolizumab 200 mg once every 3
weeks. Response was assessed every 12 weeks. The primary end points were ORR by
central review and safety. Results A total of 210 patients were enrolled and
treated (69 in cohort 1, 81 in cohort 2, and 60 in cohort 3). At the time of
analysis, patients received a median of 13 treatment cycles. Per central review,
the ORR was 69.0% (95% CI, 62.3% to 75.2%), and the complete response rate was
22.4% (95% CI, 16.9% to 28.6%). By cohort, ORRs were 73.9% for cohort 1, 64.2%
for cohort 2, and 70.0% for cohort 3. Thirty-one patients had a response ≥ 6
months. The safety profile was largely consistent with previous pembrolizumab
studies. Conclusion Pembrolizumab was associated with high response rates and an
acceptable safety profile in patients with rrHL, offering a new treatment
paradigm for this disease.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2016.72.1316
PMCID: PMC5791843
PMID: 28441111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
