---
reference_id: "PMID:10449794"
title: Loss of the ataxia-telangiectasia gene product causes oxidative damage in target organs.
authors:
- Barlow C
- Dennery PA
- Shigenaga MK
- Smith MA
- Morrow JD
- Roberts LJ 2nd
- Wynshaw-Boris A
- Levine RL
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.17.9915
keywords:
- Animals
- Ataxia Telangiectasia/pathology
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Heme Oxygenase (Decyclizing)/metabolism
- Heme Oxygenase-1
- Isoenzymes/metabolism
- Lipid Metabolism
- Membrane Proteins
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Oxidation-Reduction
- Oxidative Stress
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases
- "Proteins/metabolism, physiology"
- Purkinje Cells/pathology
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of the ataxia-telangiectasia gene product causes oxidative damage in target organs.
**Authors:** Barlow C, Dennery PA, Shigenaga MK, Smith MA, Morrow JD, Roberts LJ 2nd, Wynshaw-Boris A, Levine RL
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.96.17.9915](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.17.9915)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Aug 17;96(17):9915-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.96.17.9915.

Loss of the ataxia-telangiectasia gene product causes oxidative damage in target
organs.

Barlow C(1), Dennery PA, Shigenaga MK, Smith MA, Morrow JD, Roberts LJ 2nd,
Wynshaw-Boris A, Levine RL.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetic Disease Research, National Human Genome Research
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. barlow@salk.edu

Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is characterized by a markedly increased sensitivity
to ionizing radiation, increased incidence of cancer, and neurodegeneration,
especially of the cerebellar Purkinje cells. Ionizing radiation oxidizes
macromolecules and causes tissue damage through the generation of reactive
oxygen species (ROS). We therefore hypothesized that A-T is due to oxidative
damage resulting from loss of function of the A-T gene product. To assess this
hypothesis, we employed an animal model of A-T, the mouse with a disrupted Atm
gene. We show that organs which develop pathologic changes in the Atm-deficient
mice are targets of oxidative damage, and that cerebellar Purkinje cells are
particularly affected. These observations provide a mechanistic basis for the
A-T phenotype and lay a rational foundation for therapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.17.9915
PMCID: PMC22310
PMID: 10449794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
