---
reference_id: "PMID:30455116"
title: Acute annular outer retinopathy associated with human immunodeficiency virus.
authors:
- García-Torre M
- Castro-Flórez R
journal: Arch Soc Esp Oftalmol (Engl Ed)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.oftal.2018.10.004
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adult
- "Eye Infections, Viral/diagnostic imaging"
- Fluorescein Angiography
- "HIV Infections/complications, diagnosis"
- Humans
- Male
- "Retinal Diseases/diagnostic imaging, virology"
- Scotoma/diagnostic imaging
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute annular outer retinopathy associated with human immunodeficiency virus.
**Authors:** García-Torre M, Castro-Flórez R
**Journal:** Arch Soc Esp Oftalmol (Engl Ed) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.oftal.2018.10.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oftal.2018.10.004)

## Content

1. Arch Soc Esp Oftalmol (Engl Ed). 2019 May;94(5):232-236. doi:
10.1016/j.oftal.2018.10.004. Epub 2018 Nov 16.

Acute annular outer retinopathy associated with human immunodeficiency virus.

[Article in English, Spanish]

García-Torre M(1), Castro-Flórez R(2).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Oftalmología, Sección de Retina, Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid,
España. Electronic address: mergato@hotmail.com.
(2)Servicio de Oftalmología, Sección de Retina, Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid,
España.

A case of acute annular outer retinopathy (AAOR) is presented in a patient that
was later proved to be positive for the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The
aetiology of AAOR remains unknown, although a viral infection or an autoimmune
mechanism has been suggested. The case presented here is noteworthy because it
is the first case described in a patient with HIV positive serology. Even so,
the precise role played by HIV infection or secondary immunosuppression in the
development of the AAOR is not known.

Copyright © 2018 Sociedad Española de Oftalmología. Publicado por Elsevier
España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oftal.2018.10.004
PMID: 30455116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
