---
reference_id: "PMID:38824269"
title: "Adverse Event Profile of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors for Non-small Cell Lung Cancer: An Updated Meta-analysis."
authors:
- Zhou S
- Kishi N
- Alerasool P
- Rohs NC
journal: Target Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11523-024-01073-w
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy"
- "ErbB Receptors/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adverse Event Profile of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors for Non-small Cell Lung Cancer: An Updated Meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Zhou S, Kishi N, Alerasool P, Rohs NC
**Journal:** Target Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11523-024-01073-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11523-024-01073-w)

## Content

1. Target Oncol. 2024 Jul;19(4):547-564. doi: 10.1007/s11523-024-01073-w. Epub
2024  Jun 1.

Adverse Event Profile of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Tyrosine Kinase
Inhibitors for Non-small Cell Lung Cancer: An Updated Meta-analysis.

Zhou S(1), Kishi N(2), Alerasool P(3)(4), Rohs NC(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 281 First
Avenue, New York, NY, 10003, USA. Susu.Zhou@mountsinai.org.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology and Image-Applied Therapy, Graduate School
of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Division of Hematology/Medical Oncology, Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(4)New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY, USA.
(5)Center for Thoracic Oncology, Tisch Cancer Institute and Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) remain the frontline standard of care for patients with EGFR-mutant
non-small cell lung cancer. An updated toxicity profile of EGFR-TKIs proves
valuable in guiding clinical decision making.
OBJECTIVE: This study comprehensively assessed the risk of EGFR-TKI-related
adverse events (AEs) involving different systems/organs.
METHODS: We systematically searched PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, and Cochrane
library for phase III randomized controlled trials comparing EGFR-TKI
monotherapy with placebo or chemotherapy in patients with non-small cell lung
cancer. The odds ratio (OR) of all-grade and high-grade adverse events (AEs)
including dermatologic, gastrointestinal, hematologic, hepatic, and respiratory
events was pooled for a meta-analysis. Subgroup analyses based on the control
arm (placebo or chemotherapy) and individual EGFR-TKIs (erlotinib, gefitinib,
afatinib, dacomitinib, and osimertinib) were conducted.
RESULTS: Thirty-four randomized controlled trials comprising 15,887 patients
were included. The pooled OR showed EGFR-TKIs were associated with a
significantly increased risk of all-grade dermatologic AEs including paronychia,
pruritus, rash, skin exfoliation, and skin fissures, gastrointestinal AEs
including abdominal pain, diarrhea, dyspepsia, mouth ulceration, and stomatitis,
hepatic AEs including elevated alanine aminotransferase and aspartate
aminotransferase, and respiratory AEs including epistaxis, interstitial lung
disease and rhinorrhea. Furthermore, a significantly increased risk of
high-grade rash (OR 7.83, 95% confidence interval [CI] 5.11, 12.00), diarrhea
(OR 2.10, 95% CI 1.44, 3.05), elevated alanine aminotransferase (OR 3.93, 95% CI
1.71, 9.03), elevated aspartate aminotransferase (OR 3.22, 95% CI 1.05, 9.92)
and interstitial lung disease (OR 2.35, 95% CI 1.38, 4.01) was observed in
patients receiving EGFR-TKIs. When stratified by individual EGFR-TKIs, gefitinib
showed a significant association with all-grade and high-grade hepatotoxicity
and interstitial lung disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors were
associated with a significantly increased risk of various types of AEs.
Clinicians should be vigilant about the risks of these EGFR-TKI-related AEs,
particularly for severe hepatotoxicity and interstitial lung disease, to
facilitate early detection and proper management.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s11523-024-01073-w
PMID: 38824269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
