---
reference_id: "PMID:19726882"
title: Impaired endocytosis of the ion channel TRPM4 is associated with human progressive familial heart block type I.
authors:
- Kruse M
- Schulze-Bahr E
- Corfield V
- Beckmann A
- Stallmeyer B
- Kurtbay G
- Ohmert I
- Schulze-Bahr E
- Brink P
- Pongs O
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1172/JCI38292
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Base Sequence
- "Bundle-Branch Block/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Child
- DNA/genetics
- Electrocardiography
- Endocytosis
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Purkinje Fibers/metabolism
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Small Ubiquitin-Related Modifier Proteins/metabolism
- South Africa
- "TRPM Cation Channels/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impaired endocytosis of the ion channel TRPM4 is associated with human progressive familial heart block type I.
**Authors:** Kruse M, Schulze-Bahr E, Corfield V, Beckmann A, Stallmeyer B, Kurtbay G, Ohmert I, Schulze-Bahr E, Brink P, Pongs O
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI38292](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI38292)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2009 Sep;119(9):2737-44. doi: 10.1172/JCI38292. Epub 2009 Aug
24.

Impaired endocytosis of the ion channel TRPM4 is associated with human 
progressive familial heart block type I.

Kruse M(1), Schulze-Bahr E, Corfield V, Beckmann A, Stallmeyer B, Kurtbay G, 
Ohmert I, Schulze-Bahr E, Brink P, Pongs O.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Neurale Signalverarbeitung, Zentrum für Molekulare 
Neurobiologie, Universität Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2009 Sep;119(9):2531-4. doi: 10.1172/JCI40427.
    Clin Genet. 2010 Apr;77(4):328-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2009.01366_2.x.

Progressive familial heart block type I (PFHBI) is a progressive cardiac bundle 
branch disease in the His-Purkinje system that exhibits autosomal-dominant 
inheritance. In 3 branches of a large South African Afrikaner pedigree with an 
autosomal-dominant form of PFHBI, we identified the mutation c.19G-->A in the 
transient receptor potential cation channel, subfamily M, member 4 gene (TRPM4) 
at chromosomal locus 19q13.3. This mutation predicted the amino acid 
substitution p.E7K in the TRPM4 amino terminus. TRPM4 encodes a Ca2+-activated 
nonselective cation (CAN) channel that belongs to the transient receptor 
potential melastatin ion channel family. Quantitative analysis of TRPM4 mRNA 
content in human cardiac tissue showed the highest expression level in Purkinje 
fibers. Cellular expression studies showed that the c.19G-->A missense mutation 
attenuated deSUMOylation of the TRPM4 channel. The resulting constitutive 
SUMOylation of the mutant TRPM4 channel impaired endocytosis and led to elevated 
TRPM4 channel density at the cell surface. Our data therefore revealed a 
gain-of-function mechanism underlying this type of familial heart block.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI38292
PMCID: PMC2735920
PMID: 19726882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]