---
reference_id: "PMID:36702755"
title: "Subtype-DCC: decoupled contrastive clustering method for cancer subtype identification based on multi-omics data."
authors:
- Zhao J
- Zhao B
- Song X
- Lyu C
- Chen W
- Xiong Y
- Wei DQ
journal: Brief Bioinform
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/bib/bbad025
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Subtype-DCC: decoupled contrastive clustering method for cancer subtype identification based on multi-omics data.
**Authors:** Zhao J, Zhao B, Song X, Lyu C, Chen W, Xiong Y, Wei DQ
**Journal:** Brief Bioinform (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bib/bbad025](https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbad025)

## Content

1. Brief Bioinform. 2023 Mar 19;24(2):bbad025. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbad025.

Subtype-DCC: decoupled contrastive clustering method for cancer subtype 
identification based on multi-omics data.

Zhao J(1), Zhao B(1), Song X(2), Lyu C(1), Chen W(1), Xiong Y(1)(3), Wei 
DQ(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research 
Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and 
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China.
(2)School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 
200240, China.
(3)Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, 200232, China.
(4)Peng Cheng Laboratory, Vanke Cloud City Phase I Building 8, Xili Street, 
Nanshan District, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518055, China.
(5)Zhongjing Research and Industrialization Institute of Chinese Medicine, 
Zhongguancun Scientific Park, Meixi, Nayang, Henan, 473006, China.

Due to the high heterogeneity and complexity of cancers, patients with different 
cancer subtypes often have distinct groups of genomic and clinical 
characteristics. Therefore, the discovery and identification of cancer subtypes 
are crucial to cancer diagnosis, prognosis and treatment. Recent technological 
advances have accelerated the increasing availability of multi-omics data for 
cancer subtyping. To take advantage of the complementary information from 
multi-omics data, it is necessary to develop computational models that can 
represent and integrate different layers of data into a single framework. Here, 
we propose a decoupled contrastive clustering method (Subtype-DCC) based on 
multi-omics data integration for clustering to identify cancer subtypes. The 
idea of contrastive learning is introduced into deep clustering based on deep 
neural networks to learn clustering-friendly representations. Experimental 
results demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed Subtype-DCC model 
in identifying cancer subtypes over the currently available state-of-the-art 
clustering methods. The strength of Subtype-DCC is also supported by the 
survival and clinical analysis.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbad025
PMID: 36702755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]