---
reference_id: "PMID:33860520"
title: Management of Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation in Acute Leukemias.
authors:
- Ten Cate H
- Leader A
journal: Hamostaseologie
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1055/a-1393-8302
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation/therapy
- Humans
- Leukemia/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation in Acute Leukemias.
**Authors:** Ten Cate H, Leader A
**Journal:** Hamostaseologie (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1055/a-1393-8302](https://doi.org/10.1055/a-1393-8302)

## Content

1. Hamostaseologie. 2021 Apr;41(2):120-126. doi: 10.1055/a-1393-8302. Epub 2021
Apr  15.

Management of Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation in Acute Leukemias.

Ten Cate H(1)(2), Leader A(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Thrombosis Expert Center, Maastricht
University Medical Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(2)CARIM School for Cardiovascular Diseases, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(3)Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(4)Hematology Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel.

Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is characterized by the
intravascular activation of coagulation with loss of localization arising from
different causes, and is diagnosed using scoring systems which rely upon the
presence of an underlying disorder compatible with DIC alongside hemostatic
derangements such as low platelet count, prolonged prothrombin time, and
elevated fibrinogen degradation products. DIC is common in patients with acute
leukemia, with prevalence ranging from 17 to 100% in acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL) and 8.5 to 25% in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and non-APL
acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The pathophysiology is complex and varies between
the leukemia subtypes, and is not fully reflected by the laboratory markers
currently used to classify DIC. Similarly, the clinical consequence of DIC in
acute leukemia also varies across the types of leukemia. DIC is primarily
associated with bleeding in APL, while thrombosis is the dominant phenotype in
ALL and non-APL AML. The cornerstone of managing DIC is the treatment of the
underlying disease, as exemplified by the important role of early administration
of all-trans retinoic acid in APL. Other aspects of management focus on
supportive care aimed at minimizing the risk of bleeding, via transfusion of
blood products. The use of blood products is more liberal in APL, due to the
hemorrhagic phenotype and unacceptably high rates of early hemorrhagic death.
This review will focus on the pathophysiology, risk factors, clinical
implications, and the management of DIC in patients across the spectrum of acute
leukemias.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-1393-8302
PMID: 33860520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: HtC received research funding from Bayer and he
is consultant for Alveron.
