---
reference_id: "PMID:34014617"
title: "Intestinal stricture in Crohn's disease: A 2020 update."
authors:
- Lin XX
- Qiu Y
- Zhuang XJ
- Liu F
- Wu XM
- Chen MH
- Mao R
journal: J Dig Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/1751-2980.13022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intestinal stricture in Crohn's disease: A 2020 update.
**Authors:** Lin XX, Qiu Y, Zhuang XJ, Liu F, Wu XM, Chen MH, Mao R
**Journal:** J Dig Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1751-2980.13022](https://doi.org/10.1111/1751-2980.13022)

## Content

1. J Dig Dis. 2021 Jul;22(7):390-398. doi: 10.1111/1751-2980.13022. Epub 2021 Jun
 17.

Intestinal stricture in Crohn's disease: A 2020 update.

Lin XX(1), Qiu Y(1), Zhuang XJ(1), Liu F(1), Wu XM(1), Chen MH(1), Mao R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China.

Crohn's disease (CD) is a chronic and relapsing-remitting inflammatory disorder 
of the gastrointestinal tract. Approximately 70% of patients inevitably develop 
fibrosis-associated intestinal stricture after 10 years of CD diagnosis, which 
seriously affects their quality of life. Current therapies play limited role in 
preventing or reversing the process of fibrosis and no specific anti-fibrotic 
therapy is yet available. Nearly half of patients thus have no alternative but 
to receive surgery. The potential mechanisms of intestinal fibrosis remain 
poorly understood; extracellular matrix remodeling, aberrant immune response, 
intestinal microbiome imbalance and creeping fat might exert fundamental 
influences on the multiple physiological and pathophysiological processes. 
Recently, the emerging new diagnostic techniques have markedly promoted an 
accurate assessment of intestinal stricture by distinguishing fibrosis from 
inflammation, which is crucial for guiding treatment and predicting prognosis. 
In this review, we concisely summarized the key studies published in the year 
2020 covering pathogenesis, diagnostic modalities, and therapeutic strategy of 
intestinal stricture. A comprehensive and timely review of the updated 
researches in intestinal stricture could provide insight to further elucidate 
its pathogenesis and identify novel drug targets with anti-fibrotic 
potentiality.

© 2021 Chinese Medical Association Shanghai Branch, Chinese Society of 
Gastroenterology, Renji Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University 
School of Medicine and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1751-2980.13022
PMID: 34014617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]