---
reference_id: "PMID:36331500"
title: Neuropathology of classic myotonic dystrophy type 1 is characterized by both early initiation of primary age-related tauopathy of the hippocampus and unique 3-repeat tauopathy of the brainstem.
authors:
- Hamasaki H
- Maeda N
- Sasagasako N
- Honda H
- Shijo M
- Mori SI
- Yagita K
- Arahata H
- Iwaki T
journal: J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/jnen/nlac097
keywords:
- Humans
- "Brain Stem/metabolism, pathology"
- "Hippocampus/metabolism, pathology"
- "Myotonic Dystrophy/metabolism, pathology"
- Neurofibrillary Tangles/pathology
- Protein Isoforms/metabolism
- tau Proteins/metabolism
- Tauopathies/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropathology of classic myotonic dystrophy type 1 is characterized by both early initiation of primary age-related tauopathy of the hippocampus and unique 3-repeat tauopathy of the brainstem.
**Authors:** Hamasaki H, Maeda N, Sasagasako N, Honda H, Shijo M, Mori SI, Yagita K, Arahata H, Iwaki T
**Journal:** J Neuropathol Exp Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jnen/nlac097](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnen/nlac097)

## Content

1. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2022 Dec 19;82(1):29-37. doi: 10.1093/jnen/nlac097.

Neuropathology of classic myotonic dystrophy type 1 is characterized by both
early initiation of primary age-related tauopathy of the hippocampus and unique
3-repeat tauopathy of the brainstem.

Hamasaki H(1), Maeda N(1)(2), Sasagasako N(3), Honda H(1), Shijo M(1)(4), Mori
SI(1)(5), Yagita K(1), Arahata H(3), Iwaki T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology, Neuro-Muscular Center, National Hospital
Organization Omuta National Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Beppu Medical Center,
Oita, Japan.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Fukuoka Dental College Medical and Dental
Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.
(5)Department of Neurology, Division of Respirology, Neurology and Rheumatology,
Department of Medicine, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan.

Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is an inherited autosomal-dominant condition
that induces altered splicing of transcripts, including MAPT, leading to a
distinctive abnormal deposition of tau protein in the CNS. We characterized the
tau isoforms of abnormal depositions in the brains of 4 patients with classic
DM1 by immunohistochemistry using isoform-specific antibodies. All patients,
including those of presenile age, showed numerous neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs)
of both 3-repeat and 4-repeat tau in the limbic area and mild involvement in the
cerebral cortex. Amyloid-β deposition was only seen in 1 senile case while
cortical tauopathy in all other cases was consistent with primary age-related
tauopathy (PART). In the putamen and globus pallidus, only a few tau deposits
were observed. Tau deposits in the brainstem frequently showed a DM1-specific
pattern with 3-repeat tau dominant NFTs. Additionally, tau-positive astrocytes
morphologically similar to tufted astrocytes and astrocytic plaques were
occasionally observed in the brainstem; however, they were predominantly
composed of 3-repeat tau. Thus, the classic DM1 showed both early onset of
PART-like pathology in the limbic areas as a progeroid syndrome of DM1 and an
abnormal splicing event in the brainstem leading to 3-repeat tau dominant
accumulation with both neuronal and astrocytic involvement.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American
Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. All rights reserved. For permissions,
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jnen/nlac097
PMID: 36331500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
