---
reference_id: "PMID:39422527"
title: "Understanding and managing locally advanced basal cell carcinoma: insights into pathogenesis, therapeutic strategies, and the role of hedgehog pathway inhibitors."
authors:
- Cebolla-Verdugo M
- Llamas-Segura C
- Velasco-Amador JP
- Almazán-Fernández FM
- Ruiz-Villaverde R
journal: Ital J Dermatol Venerol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.23736/S2784-8671.24.07993-3
keywords:
- Humans
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/drug therapy, etiology"
- Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Hedgehog Proteins
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- "Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Anilides/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding and managing locally advanced basal cell carcinoma: insights into pathogenesis, therapeutic strategies, and the role of hedgehog pathway inhibitors.
**Authors:** Cebolla-Verdugo M, Llamas-Segura C, Velasco-Amador JP, Almazán-Fernández FM, Ruiz-Villaverde R
**Journal:** Ital J Dermatol Venerol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.23736/S2784-8671.24.07993-3](https://doi.org/10.23736/S2784-8671.24.07993-3)

## Content

1. Ital J Dermatol Venerol. 2024 Oct;159(5):530-542. doi:
10.23736/S2784-8671.24.07993-3.

Understanding and managing locally advanced basal cell carcinoma: insights into
pathogenesis, therapeutic strategies, and the role of hedgehog pathway
inhibitors.

Cebolla-Verdugo M(1)(2), Llamas-Segura C(1)(2), Velasco-Amador JP(1)(2),
Almazán-Fernández FM(1)(2), Ruiz-Villaverde R(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, San Cecilio University Hospital, Granada, Spain.
(2)Instituto Biosanitario de Granada, Ibs, Granada, Spain.
(3)Department of Dermatology, San Cecilio University Hospital, Granada, Spain -
ismenios@hotmail.com.

Understanding and managing locally advanced basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is
crucial given its substantial prevalence and potential for local tissue
destruction. While BCC typically exhibits low metastatic potential, its high
incidence underscores the need for enhanced therapeutic strategies. Locally
advanced BCC presents unique challenges, often necessitating aggressive
interventions to prevent disfigurement and functional impairment. The emergence
of hedgehog pathway inhibitors (HHIs) offers promising therapeutic avenues by
targeting aberrant hedgehog signaling, a key driver in BCC pathogenesis. Thus,
elucidating the pathogenesis of locally advanced BCC and exploring the role of
HHIs are critical endeavors in effectively managing this prevalent carcinoma.
Epidemiologically, BCC primarily affects individuals with fair skin and chronic
sun exposure, with an increasing incidence noted among younger age groups. Risk
factors include UV radiation exposure, familial history of skin cancer,
immunosuppression, and genetic syndromes such as basal cell nevus syndrome and
xeroderma pigmentosum. Pathogenetically, BCC arises from cells in the skin's
epidermis, with hedgehog pathway activation being a primary genetic driver,
involving mutations in PTCH1 and SMO. Resistance to hedgehog inhibitors may
occur due to genetic changes, complicating treatment strategies. BCC is
characterized by low immunogenicity, which hinders immune response and
contributes to treatment challenges. Enhanced understanding of the epidemiology,
risk factors, and pathogenesis of locally advanced BCC, along with the
development of targeted therapeutic approaches such as hedgehog pathway
inhibitors, is essential for effectively managing this prevalent carcinoma and
improving patient outcomes.

DOI: 10.23736/S2784-8671.24.07993-3
PMID: 39422527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
