---
reference_id: "PMID:28823930"
title: "Spinocerebellar ataxia: miRNAs expose biological pathways underlying pervasive Purkinje cell degeneration."
authors:
- van der Stijl R
- Withoff S
- Verbeek DS
journal: Neurobiol Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2017.08.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinocerebellar ataxia: miRNAs expose biological pathways underlying pervasive Purkinje cell degeneration.
**Authors:** van der Stijl R, Withoff S, Verbeek DS
**Journal:** Neurobiol Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nbd.2017.08.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2017.08.003)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Dis. 2017 Dec;108:148-158. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2017.08.003. Epub 2017
 Aug 18.

Spinocerebellar ataxia: miRNAs expose biological pathways underlying pervasive 
Purkinje cell degeneration.

van der Stijl R(1), Withoff S(1), Verbeek DS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Centre 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Centre 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: d.s.verbeek@umcg.nl.

Erratum in
    Neurobiol Dis. 2018 Aug;116:179. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2017.11.005.

Recent work has demonstrated the importance of miRNAs in the pathogenesis of 
various brain disorders including the neurodegenerative disorder spinocerebellar 
ataxia (SCA). This review focuses on the role of miRNAs in the shared 
pathogenesis of the different SCA types. We examine the novel findings of a 
recent cell-type-specific RNA-sequencing study in mouse brain and discuss how 
the identification of Purkinje-cell-enriched miRNAs highlights biological 
pathways that expose the mechanisms behind pervasive Purkinje cell degeneration 
in SCA. These key pathways are likely to contain targets for therapeutic 
development and represent potential candidate genes for genetically unsolved 
SCAs.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2017.08.003
PMID: 28823930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]