---
reference_id: "PMID:18251614"
title: Witkop tooth and nail syndrome and orthodontics.
authors:
- Altug-Atac AT
- Iseri H
journal: Angle Orthod
year: '2008'
doi: 10.2319/100406-403.1
keywords:
- Anodontia/etiology
- Child
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/complications
- Humans
- Male
- "Malocclusion, Angle Class II/etiology, therapy"
- Mandible/abnormalities
- "Nails, Malformed/etiology"
- "Open Bite/etiology, therapy"
- Orthodontic Appliances
- "Orthodontics, Corrective/instrumentation, methods"
- Retrognathia/etiology
- "Space Maintenance, Orthodontic"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Witkop tooth and nail syndrome and orthodontics.
**Authors:** Altug-Atac AT, Iseri H
**Journal:** Angle Orthod (2008)
**DOI:** [10.2319/100406-403.1](https://doi.org/10.2319/100406-403.1)

## Content

1. Angle Orthod. 2008 Mar;78(2):370-80. doi: 10.2319/100406-403.1.

Witkop tooth and nail syndrome and orthodontics.

Altug-Atac AT(1), Iseri H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthodontics, School of Dentistry, University of Ankara, 
Ankara, Turkey. aysealtug@yahoo.com

This case report presents the orthodontic treatment of a patient with Witkop 
syndrome, an autosomal dominant genetic disorder characterized by the absence of 
several teeth and abnormalities of the nails. The patient, a 6-year 4-month-old 
boy, was referred to our clinic for treatment of severe overjet and openbite. 
Radiographic and clinical evaluations showed peg-shaped maxillary lateral 
incisors and the congenital absence of three mandibular incisors as well as 
spoon-shaped fingernails. Treatment of openbite and overjet was initiated with 
functional appliances, and fixed orthodontic appliances were inserted at age 10 
years 3 months. The edentulous spaces are being maintained for implants that 
will be provided once the patient's growth is complete. Evaluations of long-term 
treatment results to date have indicated improvements in both facial and dental 
esthetics.

DOI: 10.2319/100406-403.1
PMID: 18251614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]