---
reference_id: "PMID:40671377"
title: The Ubiquitin E3 Ligase UBE3A Regulates GRIPAP1 and PACSIN1 Proteins Linked to the Endocytic Recycling of AMPA Receptors.
authors:
- Drebushenko L
- Belous N
- Lischka FW
- Zhou Q
- Malci A
- Sidorov MS
- Burnett B
- Doughty ML
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/10985549.2025.2470431
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Ubiquitin E3 Ligase UBE3A Regulates GRIPAP1 and PACSIN1 Proteins Linked to the Endocytic Recycling of AMPA Receptors.
**Authors:** Drebushenko L, Belous N, Lischka FW, Zhou Q, Malci A, Sidorov MS, Burnett B, Doughty ML
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/10985549.2025.2470431](https://doi.org/10.1080/10985549.2025.2470431)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2025;45(9):353-368. doi: 10.1080/10985549.2025.2470431. Epub
2025  Jul 16.

The Ubiquitin E3 Ligase UBE3A Regulates GRIPAP1 and PACSIN1 Proteins Linked to 
the Endocytic Recycling of AMPA Receptors.

Drebushenko L(1), Belous N(1), Lischka FW(1), Zhou Q(1), Malci A(2), Sidorov 
MS(2)(3), Burnett B(1), Doughty ML(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Physiology and Genetics, Uniformed Services University 
of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's National Medical Center, 
Washington, DC, USA.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics and Pharmacology & Physiology, The George 
Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, DC, 
USA.

Angelman syndrome (AS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by 
cognitive and language impairments, seizures, reduced or fragmented sleep, motor 
ataxia, and a characteristic happy affect. AS arises due to the neuronal loss of 
UBE3A, an E3 ligase that regulates protein abundance through the addition of 
lysine 48 (K48)-linked polyubiquitin chains to proteins targeted for degradation 
by the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS). Using a dual SMAD inhibition protocol 
to derive cortical neurons from human induced pluripotent stem cells, we 
examined UBE3A deletion effects on the neuronal proteome by liquid 
chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). LC-MS/MS identified 645 
proteins differentially abundant between UBE3A knockout (KO) and isogenic UBE3A 
wild-type control cortical neurons. Proteins with increased abundance with UBE3A 
loss of function include GRIPAP1 and PACSIN1, synaptic proteins implicated in 
AMPA receptor recycling. We provide evidence UBE3A polyubiquitinates PACSIN1 and 
GRIPAP1 to regulate protein turnover, with potential implications for impaired 
activity-dependent synaptic plasticity observed in AS.

DOI: 10.1080/10985549.2025.2470431
PMID: 40671377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]