---
reference_id: "PMID:34384544"
title: Erythroid mitochondrial retention triggers myeloid-dependent type I interferon in human SLE.
authors:
- Caielli S
- Cardenas J
- de Jesus AA
- Baisch J
- Walters L
- Blanck JP
- Balasubramanian P
- Stagnar C
- Ohouo M
- Hong S
- Nassi L
- Stewart K
- Fuller J
- Gu J
- Banchereau JF
- Wright T
- Goldbach-Mansky R
- Pascual V
journal: Cell
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.07.021
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Proteins/metabolism
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Erythroblasts/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Erythrocytes/metabolism
- Erythropoiesis
- Humans
- Interferon Type I/metabolism
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/metabolism"
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Mitophagy
- Myeloid Cells/metabolism
- Proteasome Endopeptidase Complex/metabolism
- Ubiquitin/metabolism
- Endothelial PAS Domain-Containing Protein 1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Erythroid mitochondrial retention triggers myeloid-dependent type I interferon in human SLE.
**Authors:** Caielli S, Cardenas J, de Jesus AA, Baisch J, Walters L, Blanck JP, Balasubramanian P, Stagnar C, Ohouo M, Hong S, Nassi L, Stewart K, Fuller J, Gu J, Banchereau JF, Wright T, Goldbach-Mansky R, Pascual V
**Journal:** Cell (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2021.07.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.07.021)

## Content

1. Cell. 2021 Aug 19;184(17):4464-4479.e19. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.07.021. Epub
 2021 Aug 11.

Erythroid mitochondrial retention triggers myeloid-dependent type I interferon
in human SLE.

Caielli S(1), Cardenas J(2), de Jesus AA(3), Baisch J(4), Walters L(5), Blanck
JP(2), Balasubramanian P(4), Stagnar C(4), Ohouo M(4), Hong S(4), Nassi L(6),
Stewart K(6), Fuller J(6), Gu J(4), Banchereau JF(7), Wright T(6),
Goldbach-Mansky R(3), Pascual V(8).

Author information:
(1)Drukier Institute for Children's Health, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York,
NY, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
Electronic address: sic2011@med.cornell.edu.
(2)Baylor Research Institute, Dallas, TX, USA.
(3)Translational Autoinflammatory Diseases Section, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Drukier Institute for Children's Health, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York,
NY, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Texas Scottish Rite Hospital for Children, Dallas, TX, USA.
(6)Texas Scottish Rite Hospital for Children, Dallas, TX, USA; Department of
Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(7)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA.
(8)Drukier Institute for Children's Health, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York,
NY, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
Electronic address: vip2021@med.cornell.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2021 Sep 7;33(9):1723-1725. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2021.08.008.
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2021 Nov;17(11):707. doi: 10.1038/s41581-021-00494-4.
    Nat Immunol. 2021 Nov;22(11):1354-1355. doi: 10.1038/s41590-021-01050-9.

Emerging evidence supports that mitochondrial dysfunction contributes to
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) pathogenesis. Here we show that programmed
mitochondrial removal, a hallmark of mammalian erythropoiesis, is defective in
SLE. Specifically, we demonstrate that during human erythroid cell maturation, a
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-mediated metabolic switch is responsible for the
activation of the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS), which precedes and is
necessary for the autophagic removal of mitochondria. A defect in this pathway
leads to accumulation of red blood cells (RBCs) carrying mitochondria (Mito+
RBCs) in SLE patients and in correlation with disease activity.
Antibody-mediated internalization of Mito+ RBCs induces type I interferon (IFN)
production through activation of cGAS in macrophages. Accordingly, SLE patients
carrying both Mito+ RBCs and opsonizing antibodies display the highest levels of
blood IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) signatures, a distinctive feature of SLE.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.07.021
PMCID: PMC8380737
PMID: 34384544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests V.P. has received
consulting honoraria from Sanofi, Astra Zeneca, and Moderna and is the recipient
of a research grant from Sanofi and a contract from Astra Zeneca. J.F.B. is a
member of the S.A.B. of Neovacs.
