---
reference_id: "PMID:19077779"
title: "Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in Texas: 1993-2006."
authors:
- Rivers MN
- Alexander JL
- Rohde RE
- Pierce JR Jr
journal: South Med J
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1097/SMJ.0b013e318187d06f
keywords:
- Animals
- Biomarkers/blood
- Disease Reservoirs
- Female
- Gastrointestinal Diseases/virology
- "Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality, transmission"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Residence Characteristics
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Rodentia
- Texas/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in Texas: 1993-2006.
**Authors:** Rivers MN, Alexander JL, Rohde RE, Pierce JR Jr
**Journal:** South Med J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1097/SMJ.0b013e318187d06f](https://doi.org/10.1097/SMJ.0b013e318187d06f)

## Content

1. South Med J. 2009 Jan;102(1):36-41. doi: 10.1097/SMJ.0b013e318187d06f.

Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in Texas: 1993-2006.

Rivers MN(1), Alexander JL, Rohde RE, Pierce JR Jr.

Author information:
(1)Division of Preventive Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Texas Tech 
University Health Sciences Center, Amarillo, TX 79106, USA.

Comment in
    South Med J. 2011 Jul;104(7):540-1; author reply 541. doi: 
10.1097/SMJ.0b013e3182142d35.

BACKGROUND: Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) is a rare cardiopulmonary 
disease that was first described after a 1993 epidemic in the southwestern 
United States. This study reviewed all cases reported in Texas to date.
METHODS: We reviewed case report forms submitted to the Texas Department of 
State Health Services and medical records (when available) to determine 
demographic and clinical features of Texas HPS cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Middle-aged adults were more commonly affected. Respiratory 
symptoms were often accompanied by fever, gastrointestinal symptoms, and 
headache. Hypoxemia was observed in all cases. Common laboratory features 
included thrombocytopenia (92% of patients), elevated creatinine (61% of 
patients), increased polymorphonuclear leukocyte band forms (52% of patients), 
and hematocrit more than 55% (32% of patients). Most cases were associated with 
seeing rodents or rodent excreta at home. HPS was frequently misdiagnosed on 
initial presentation. Mortality was over 46%, higher for infection with the Sin 
Nombre virus (50%) than with the Bayou virus (0%). In Texas, the distribution of 
HPS is mainly along the coast and in west Texas.

DOI: 10.1097/SMJ.0b013e318187d06f
PMID: 19077779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]