---
reference_id: "PMID:35639959"
title: DNMT3A mutations define a unique biological and prognostic subgroup associated with cytotoxic T cells in PTCL-NOS.
authors:
- Herek TA
- Bouska A
- Lone W
- Sharma S
- Amador C
- Heavican TB
- Li Y
- Wei Q
- Jochum D
- Greiner TC
- Smith L
- Pileri S
- Feldman AL
- Rosenwald A
- Ott G
- Lim ST
- Ong CK
- Song J
- Jaffe ES
- Wang GG
- Staudt L
- Rimsza LM
- Vose J
- "d'Amore F"
- Weisenburger DD
- Chan WC
- Iqbal J
journal: Blood
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2021015019
keywords:
- Animals
- Interferon-gamma/genetics
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Peripheral/pathology"
- Methyltransferases/genetics
- Mice
- Mutation
- Prognosis
- "Receptors, Antigen, T-Cell/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DNMT3A mutations define a unique biological and prognostic subgroup associated with cytotoxic T cells in PTCL-NOS.
**Authors:** Herek TA, Bouska A, Lone W, Sharma S, Amador C, Heavican TB, Li Y, Wei Q, Jochum D, Greiner TC, Smith L, Pileri S, Feldman AL, Rosenwald A, Ott G, Lim ST, Ong CK, Song J, Jaffe ES, Wang GG, Staudt L, Rimsza LM, Vose J, d'Amore F, Weisenburger DD, Chan WC, Iqbal J
**Journal:** Blood (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2021015019](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2021015019)

## Content

1. Blood. 2022 Sep 15;140(11):1278-1290. doi: 10.1182/blood.2021015019.

DNMT3A mutations define a unique biological and prognostic subgroup associated
with cytotoxic T cells in PTCL-NOS.

Herek TA(1), Bouska A(1), Lone W(1), Sharma S(1), Amador C(1), Heavican TB(2),
Li Y(3), Wei Q(3), Jochum D(1), Greiner TC(1), Smith L(4), Pileri S(5), Feldman
AL(6), Rosenwald A(7), Ott G(8), Lim ST(9), Ong CK(9), Song J(3), Jaffe ES(10),
Wang GG(11)(12), Staudt L(13), Rimsza LM(14), Vose J(15), d'Amore F(16),
Weisenburger DD(3), Chan WC(3), Iqbal J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA.
(3)Department of Pathology, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
NE.
(5)Division of Diagnostic Hematopathology, European Institute of Oncology-IEO
IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(7)Institute of Pathology, University of Würzburg and Comprehensive Cancer
Center Mainfranken, Würzburg, Germany.
(8)Department of Clinical Pathology, Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus, and Dr. Margarete
Fischer-Bosch Institute for Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart, Germany.
(9)Division of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Centre Singapore/Duke-National
University of Singapore (NUS) Medical School, Singapore, Singapore.
(10)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD.
(11)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center and.
(12)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC.
(13)Metabolism Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(14)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale,
AZ.
(15)Division of Hematology and Oncology, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha, NE; and.
(16)Department of Haematology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N, Denmark.

Peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs) are heterogenous T-cell neoplasms often
associated with epigenetic dysregulation. We investigated de novo DNA
methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A) mutations in common PTCL entities, including
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma and novel molecular subtypes identified
within PTCL-not otherwise specified (PTCL-NOS) designated as PTCL-GATA3 and
PTCL-TBX21. DNMT3A-mutated PTCL-TBX21 cases showed inferior overall survival
(OS), with DNMT3A-mutated residues skewed toward the methyltransferase domain
and dimerization motif (S881-R887). Transcriptional profiling demonstrated
significant enrichment of activated CD8+ T-cell cytotoxic gene signatures in the
DNMT3A-mutant PTCL-TBX21 cases, which was further validated using
immunohistochemistry. Genomewide methylation analysis of DNMT3A-mutant vs
wild-type (WT) PTCL-TBX21 cases demonstrated hypomethylation in target genes
regulating interferon-γ (IFN-γ), T-cell receptor signaling, and EOMES
(eomesodermin), a master transcriptional regulator of cytotoxic effector cells.
Similar findings were observed in a murine model of PTCL with Dnmt3a loss
(in vivo) and further validated in vitro by ectopic expression of DNMT3A mutants
(DNMT3A-R882, -Q886, and -V716, vs WT) in CD8+ T-cell line, resulting in T-cell
activation and EOMES upregulation. Furthermore, stable, ectopic expression of
the DNMT3A mutants in primary CD3+ T-cell cultures resulted in the preferential
outgrowth of CD8+ T cells with DNMT3AR882H mutation. Single-cell RNA
sequencing(RNA-seq) analysis of CD3+ T cells revealed differential CD8+ T-cell
subset polarization, mirroring findings in DNMT3A-mutated PTCL-TBX21 and
validating the cytotoxic and T-cell memory transcriptional programs associated
with the DNMT3AR882H mutation. Our findings indicate that DNMT3A mutations
define a cytotoxic subset in PTCL-TBX21 with prognostic significance and thus
may further refine pathological heterogeneity in PTCL-NOS and suggest
alternative treatment strategies for this subset.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2021015019
PMCID: PMC9479030
PMID: 35639959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
