---
reference_id: "PMID:30727971"
title: "The impact of childhood varicella vaccination on the incidence of herpes zoster in the general population: modelling the effect of exogenous and endogenous varicella-zoster virus immunity boosting."
authors:
- Sauboin C
- Holl K
- Bonanni P
- Gershon AA
- Benninghoff B
- Carryn S
- Burgess MA
- Wutzler P
journal: BMC Infect Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12879-019-3759-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The impact of childhood varicella vaccination on the incidence of herpes zoster in the general population: modelling the effect of exogenous and endogenous varicella-zoster virus immunity boosting.
**Authors:** Sauboin C, Holl K, Bonanni P, Gershon AA, Benninghoff B, Carryn S, Burgess MA, Wutzler P
**Journal:** BMC Infect Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12879-019-3759-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-019-3759-z)

## Content

1. BMC Infect Dis. 2019 Feb 6;19(1):126. doi: 10.1186/s12879-019-3759-z.

The impact of childhood varicella vaccination on the incidence of herpes zoster 
in the general population: modelling the effect of exogenous and endogenous 
varicella-zoster virus immunity boosting.

Sauboin C(1), Holl K(2)(3), Bonanni P(4), Gershon AA(5), Benninghoff B(6), 
Carryn S(7), Burgess MA(8), Wutzler P(9).

Author information:
(1)GSK Vaccines, Value Evidence, Wavre, Belgium. christophe.j.sauboin@gsk.com.
(2)GSK Vaccines, Value Evidence, Wavre, Belgium.
(3)Present address: Bayer AG, Epidemiology, Medical Affairs and 
Pharmacovigilance, Berlin, Germany.
(4)University of Florence, Health Sciences, Florence, Italy.
(5)Columbia University, Pediatrics, New York, NY, USA.
(6)GSK Vaccines, Medical Affairs, Wavre, Belgium.
(7)GSK, Vaccines R&D, Wavre, Belgium.
(8)Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(9)Department of Experimental Virology, University Hospital Jena, Jena, Germany.

BACKGROUND: A controversy exists about the potential effect of childhood 
varicella vaccination on Herpes Zoster (HZ) incidence. Mathematical models 
projected temporary HZ incidence increase after vaccine introduction that was 
not confirmed by real-world evidence. These models assume that absence of 
contacts with infected children would prevent exogenous boosting of 
Varicella-Zoster-Virus (VZV) immunity and they do not include an endogenous VZV 
immunity-boosting mechanism following asymptomatic VZV reactivation. This study 
aims to explore the effect of various assumptions on exogenous and endogenous 
VZV immunity-boosting on HZ incidence in the general population after 
introduction of routine childhood varicella vaccination.
METHODS: An age-structured dynamic transmission model was adapted and fitted to 
the seroprevalence of varicella in France in absence of vaccination using the 
empirical contact matrix. A two-dose childhood varicella vaccination schedule 
was introduced at 12 and 18 months. Vaccine efficacy was assumed at 65%/95% 
(dose 1/dose 2), and coverage at 90%/80% (dose 1/dose 2). Exogenous boosting 
intensity was based on assumptions regarding HZ-immunity duration, age-dependent 
boosting effect, and HZ reactivation rates fitted to observed HZ incidence. 
Endogenous boosting was the same as pre-vaccination exogenous boosting but 
constant over time, whilst exogenous boosting depended on the force of 
infection. Five scenarios were tested with different weightings of exogenous 
(Exo) - endogenous (Endo) boosting: 100%Exo-0%Endo, 75%Exo-25%Endo, 
50%Exo-50%Endo, 25%Exo-75%Endo, 0%Exo-100%Endo.
RESULTS: HZ incidence before varicella vaccination, all ages combined, was 
estimated at 3.96 per 1000 person-years; it decreased by 64% by year 80 post 
vaccine introduction, for all boosting assumptions. The 100%Exo-0%Endo boosting 
scenario, predicted an increase in HZ incidence for the first 21 years post 
vaccine introduction with a maximum increase of 3.7% (4.1/1000) at year 9. 
However, with 0%Exo-100%Endo boosting scenario an immediate HZ decline was 
projected. The maximum HZ incidence increases at 10, 3, and 2 years post 
vaccination were 1.8% (75%Exo-25%Endo), 0.8% (50%Exo-50%Endo) and 0.2% 
(25%Exo-75%Endo), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Assuming modest levels of endogenous boosting, the increase in HZ 
incidence following childhood varicella vaccination was smaller and lasted for a 
shorter period compared with 100%Exo-0%Endo boosting assumption. Endogenous 
boosting mechanism could partly explain the divergence between previous 
HZ-incidence projections and real-world evidence.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-019-3759-z
PMCID: PMC6366068
PMID: 30727971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable for modelling studies. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. 
COMPETING INTERESTS: CS, BB, and SC are employed by the GSK group of companies 
and hold shares in the GSK group of companies as part of their employee 
remuneration. KH was employed by the GSK group of companies and holds shares as 
part of her employee remuneration. PW and MB have nothing to disclose. PB 
reports a grant from the Center for Diseases Control (CCM) in Italy for a 
project dealing with the disease burden of herpes zoster. AAG reports grants 
from NIH, personal fees from Merck and the GSK group of companies, and lab 
support from Merck, outside of the submitted work. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer 
Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.