---
reference_id: "PMID:20492708"
title: Beta-thalassemia.
authors:
- Galanello R
- Origa R
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-11
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Beta-thalassemia.
**Authors:** Galanello R, Origa R
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-5-11](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-5-11)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2010 May 21;5:11. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-11.

Beta-thalassemia.

Galanello R(1), Origa R.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie- Università di Cagliari, 
Ospedale Regionale, Microcitemie ASL Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. 
renzo.galanello@mcweb.unica.it

Beta-thalassemias are a group of hereditary blood disorders characterized by 
anomalies in the synthesis of the beta chains of hemoglobin resulting in 
variable phenotypes ranging from severe anemia to clinically asymptomatic 
individuals. The total annual incidence of symptomatic individuals is estimated 
at 1 in 100,000 throughout the world and 1 in 10,000 people in the European 
Union. Three main forms have been described: thalassemia major, thalassemia 
intermedia and thalassemia minor. Individuals with thalassemia major usually 
present within the first two years of life with severe anemia, requiring regular 
red blood cell (RBC) transfusions. Findings in untreated or poorly transfused 
individuals with thalassemia major, as seen in some developing countries, are 
growth retardation, pallor, jaundice, poor musculature, hepatosplenomegaly, leg 
ulcers, development of masses from extramedullary hematopoiesis, and skeletal 
changes that result from expansion of the bone marrow. Regular transfusion 
therapy leads to iron overload-related complications including endocrine 
complication (growth retardation, failure of sexual maturation, diabetes 
mellitus, and insufficiency of the parathyroid, thyroid, pituitary, and less 
commonly, adrenal glands), dilated myocardiopathy, liver fibrosis and 
cirrhosis). Patients with thalassemia intermedia present later in life with 
moderate anemia and do not require regular transfusions. Main clinical features 
in these patients are hypertrophy of erythroid marrow with medullary and 
extramedullary hematopoiesis and its complications (osteoporosis, masses of 
erythropoietic tissue that primarily affect the spleen, liver, lymph nodes, 
chest and spine, and bone deformities and typical facial changes), gallstones, 
painful leg ulcers and increased predisposition to thrombosis. Thalassemia minor 
is clinically asymptomatic but some subjects may have moderate anemia. 
Beta-thalassemias are caused by point mutations or, more rarely, deletions in 
the beta globin gene on chromosome 11, leading to reduced (beta+) or absent 
(beta0) synthesis of the beta chains of hemoglobin (Hb). Transmission is 
autosomal recessive; however, dominant mutations have also been reported. 
Diagnosis of thalassemia is based on hematologic and molecular genetic testing. 
Differential diagnosis is usually straightforward but may include genetic 
sideroblastic anemias, congenital dyserythropoietic anemias, and other 
conditions with high levels of HbF (such as juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia and 
aplastic anemia). Genetic counseling is recommended and prenatal diagnosis may 
be offered. Treatment of thalassemia major includes regular RBC transfusions, 
iron chelation and management of secondary complications of iron overload. In 
some circumstances, spleen removal may be required. Bone marrow transplantation 
remains the only definitive cure currently available. Individuals with 
thalassemia intermedia may require splenectomy, folic acid supplementation, 
treatment of extramedullary erythropoietic masses and leg ulcers, prevention and 
therapy of thromboembolic events. Prognosis for individuals with 
beta-thalassemia has improved substantially in the last 20 years following 
recent medical advances in transfusion, iron chelation and bone marrow 
transplantation therapy. However, cardiac disease remains the main cause of 
death in patients with iron overload.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-11
PMCID: PMC2893117
PMID: 20492708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]