---
reference_id: "PMID:37680323"
title: "Location, location, location: A mini-review of CEBPA variants in patients with acute myeloid leukemia."
authors:
- Faisal MS
- Sung PJ
journal: Leuk Res Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.lrr.2023.100386
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Location, location, location: A mini-review of CEBPA variants in patients with acute myeloid leukemia.
**Authors:** Faisal MS, Sung PJ
**Journal:** Leuk Res Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lrr.2023.100386](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lrr.2023.100386)

## Content

1. Leuk Res Rep. 2023 Aug 27;20:100386. doi: 10.1016/j.lrr.2023.100386.
eCollection  2023.

Location, location, location: A mini-review of CEBPA variants in patients with 
acute myeloid leukemia.

Faisal MS(1), Sung PJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo, 
NY, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Buffalo, NY, USA.

CEBPA variants are frequently recurring in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The 
prognostic significance of CEBPA mutations has recently undergone a major shift 
in the 5th edition of WHO classification of hematological neoplasms and ELN 2022 
classification. Whereas prior iterations did not specify the type of CEBPA 
mutation, the updated schema specify that only mutations localized to the 
C-terminal basic zipper (bZIP) domain are considered prognostically favorable. 
This change is based primarily on three recently published large datasets 
evaluating the prognostic significance of mutation location in CEBPA mutant AML. 
Here, we review the evolution of the prognostic classification of CEBPA 
variants.

© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lrr.2023.100386
PMCID: PMC10480322
PMID: 37680323

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.