---
reference_id: "PMID:38684424"
title: A case of 49,XXXYY followed-up from infancy to adulthood with review of literature.
authors:
- Kanno J
- Miura A
- Kawashima S
- Shima H
- Suzuki D
- Kamimura M
- Fujiwara I
- Kamimura M
- Uematsu M
- Kudo M
- Kikuchi A
journal: Endocr J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ24-0015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of 49,XXXYY followed-up from infancy to adulthood with review of literature.
**Authors:** Kanno J, Miura A, Kawashima S, Shima H, Suzuki D, Kamimura M, Fujiwara I, Kamimura M, Uematsu M, Kudo M, Kikuchi A
**Journal:** Endocr J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1507/endocrj.EJ24-0015](https://doi.org/10.1507/endocrj.EJ24-0015)

## Content

1. Endocr J. 2024 Jul 12;71(7):721-727. doi: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ24-0015. Epub 2024
 Apr 26.

A case of 49,XXXYY followed-up from infancy to adulthood with review of 
literature.

Kanno J(1)(2), Miura A(1), Kawashima S(1), Shima H(1), Suzuki D(1), Kamimura 
M(1)(3), Fujiwara I(1)(4), Kamimura M(5), Uematsu M(1), Kudo M(6), Kikuchi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai 
980-8574, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Tome City Maiya Hospital, Tome 987-0500, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization Sendai Medical 
Center, Sendai 983-0045, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Sendai City Hospital, Sendai 982-8502, Japan.
(5)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Tohoku University School of Medicine, 
Sendai 980-8574, Japan.
(6)Department of Nephrology and Endocrinology, Osaki Citizen Hospital, Osaki 
989-6136, Japan.

49,XXXYY is an extremely rare sex chromosomal aneuploidy (SCA), with only seven 
cases reported worldwide to date. Among these cases, only three have been 
documented into adulthood. Moreover, no cases of 49,XXXYY have been reported in 
Japan. This SCA has been identified in two scenarios: in vitro fertilization and 
abortion. Similar to 47,XXY, this aneuploidy is a type of Klinefelter syndrome. 
Aneuploidy of the X chromosome can lead to various progressive complications due 
to excess X chromosomes. Herein, we present the case of a Japanese man with 
49,XXXYY. He exhibited developmental delays and external genitalia abnormalities 
since early infancy but was not closely monitored for these symptoms until the 
age of 3 years old. At that time, a chromosome test revealed his karyotype to be 
49,XXXYY. Subsequent examinations were conducted due to various symptoms, 
including delayed motor development, intellectual disability, facial 
dysmorphisms, forearm deformities, hip dysplasia, cryptorchidism, micropenis, 
primary hypogonadism, and essential tremor. Since reaching puberty, he has 
undergone testosterone replacement therapy for primary hypogonadism, 
experiencing no complications related to androgen deficiency to date. He has 
maintained normal lipid and glucose metabolism, as well as bone density, for a 
prolonged period. There are no other reports on the long-term effects of 
testosterone treatment for the SCA. Appropriate testosterone replacement therapy 
is recommended for individuals with 49,XXXYY to prevent complications. This 
report will contribute to an enhanced understanding of the 49,XXXYY phenotype, 
aiding in the diagnosis, treatment, and genetic counseling of future cases.

DOI: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ24-0015
PMID: 38684424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]