---
reference_id: "PMID:29483193"
title: Lafora disease offers a unique window into neuronal glycogen metabolism.
authors:
- Gentry MS
- Guinovart JJ
- Minassian BA
- Roach PJ
- Serratosa JM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.R117.803064
keywords:
- Animals
- Carbohydrate Conformation
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Glycogen/biosynthesis, chemistry, metabolism"
- Glycogen Phosphorylase/genetics
- Humans
- "Lafora Disease/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Neurons/metabolism
- Phosphates/metabolism
- Phosphorylation
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases, Non-Receptor/genetics"
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lafora disease offers a unique window into neuronal glycogen metabolism.
**Authors:** Gentry MS, Guinovart JJ, Minassian BA, Roach PJ, Serratosa JM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.R117.803064](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.R117.803064)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2018 May 11;293(19):7117-7125. doi: 10.1074/jbc.R117.803064. Epub
 2018 Feb 26.

Lafora disease offers a unique window into neuronal glycogen metabolism.

Gentry MS(1), Guinovart JJ(2), Minassian BA(3), Roach PJ(4), Serratosa JM(5).

Author information:
(1)Lafora Epilepsy Cure Initiative, Lexington, Kentucky 40503; Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Lexington, Kentucky 40503; University of
Kentucky Epilepsy Research Center (EpiC), University of Kentucky, Lexington,
Kentucky 40503. Electronic address: matthew.gentry@uky.edu.
(2)Lafora Epilepsy Cure Initiative, Lexington, Kentucky 40503; Institute for
Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), Barcelona Institute of Science and
Technology, 08028 Barcelona, Spain; Biomedical Research Networking Center in
Diabetes and Associated Metabolic Disorders (CIBERDEM), 28029 Madrid, Spain;
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biomedicine, University of Barcelona,
08028 Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Lafora Epilepsy Cure Initiative, Lexington, Kentucky 40503; Department of
Pediatrics and Dallas Children's Medical Center, University of Texas
Southwestern, Dallas, Texas 75390-9063; Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital
for Sick Children Research Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario
M5G 0A4, Canada.
(4)Lafora Epilepsy Cure Initiative, Lexington, Kentucky 40503; Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases
and Stark Neurosciences Research Institute, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202.
(5)Lafora Epilepsy Cure Initiative, Lexington, Kentucky 40503; Laboratory of
Neurology, IIS-Jimenez Diaz Foundation, UAM, 28045 Madrid, Spain; Biomedical
Research Networking Center on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), 28029 Madrid, Spain.

Lafora disease (LD) is a fatal, autosomal recessive, glycogen-storage disorder
that manifests as severe epilepsy. LD results from mutations in the gene
encoding either the glycogen phosphatase laforin or the E3 ubiquitin ligase
malin. Individuals with LD develop cytoplasmic, aberrant glycogen inclusions in
nearly all tissues that more closely resemble plant starch than human glycogen.
This Minireview discusses the unique window into glycogen metabolism that LD
research offers. It also highlights recent discoveries, including that glycogen
contains covalently bound phosphate and that neurons synthesize glycogen and
express both glycogen synthase and glycogen phosphorylase.

© 2018 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.R117.803064
PMCID: PMC5949988
PMID: 29483193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest with the contents of this article
