---
reference_id: "PMID:31732547"
title: Systemic Artery Aneurysms and Kawasaki Disease.
authors:
- Zhao QM
- Chu C
- Wu L
- Liang XC
- Sun SN
- He L
- Zhao L
- Wang F
- Huang GY
- Niu C
- Liu F
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2019-2254
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic Artery Aneurysms and Kawasaki Disease.
**Authors:** Zhao QM, Chu C, Wu L, Liang XC, Sun SN, He L, Zhao L, Wang F, Huang GY, Niu C, Liu F
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2019-2254](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2019-2254)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2019 Dec;144(6):e20192254. doi: 10.1542/peds.2019-2254. Epub 2019 
Nov 15.

Systemic Artery Aneurysms and Kawasaki Disease.

Zhao QM(1)(2), Chu C(1)(2), Wu L(1), Liang XC(1), Sun SN(1), He L(3), Zhao L(1), 
Wang F(1), Huang GY(1), Niu C(4), Liu F(3).

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China; and.
(2)Contributed equally as co-first authors.
(3)Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China; and 
liufang@fudan.edu.cn.
(4)Royal Hospital for Children, Glasgow, Scotland.

BACKGROUND: Coronary artery aneurysms (CAAs) are a well-known complication of 
Kawasaki disease (KD), but there are no data on incidence or outcomes of 
systemic artery aneurysms (SAAs) in the current era.
METHODS: From April 1, 2016, to March 31, 2019, we screened for SAAs in 162 
patients with KD at risk for SAAs with magnetic resonance angiography or 
peripheral angiography and analyzed incidence and early outcomes of SAAs.
RESULTS: Twenty-three patients had SAAs, demonstrating an incidence of 14.2% (23 
of 162) in patients who were screened at 1 month after onset. The proportion of 
patients with SAAs was estimated to be 2% (23 of 1148) of all patients with KD. 
The median age at onset of KD with SAAs was 5 months. All patients with SAAs had 
CAAs, with z scores >8. Of patients with giant CAAs, 38.6% (17 of 44) had SAAs. 
A total of 129 SAAs occurred in 17 different named arteries. The most common 
sites for SAAs were the axillary (18.6%), common iliac (12.4%), and brachial 
(11.6%) arteries. During a median follow-up time of 6 months, 92.9% (79 of 85) 
of SAAs had some degree of regression, with 80% (68 of 85) of SAAs returning to 
normal. The overall regression rate was higher for medium to large SAAs than for 
medium to giant CAAs.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the incidence of SAAs may not be as dramatically reduced 
as we expected compared with previous data, SAAs have a high regression rate 
during short-term follow-up.

Copyright © 2019 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2019-2254
PMID: 31732547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors have 
indicated they have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.