---
reference_id: "PMID:36882643"
title: Secondary diabetes mellitus in acromegaly.
authors:
- Moustaki M
- Paschou SA
- Xekouki P
- Kotsa K
- Peppa M
- Psaltopoulou T
- Kalantaridou S
- Vryonidou A
journal: Endocrine
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s12020-023-03339-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Secondary diabetes mellitus in acromegaly.
**Authors:** Moustaki M, Paschou SA, Xekouki P, Kotsa K, Peppa M, Psaltopoulou T, Kalantaridou S, Vryonidou A
**Journal:** Endocrine (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12020-023-03339-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12020-023-03339-1)

## Content

1. Endocrine. 2023 Jul;81(1):1-15. doi: 10.1007/s12020-023-03339-1. Epub 2023 Mar
 8.

Secondary diabetes mellitus in acromegaly.

Moustaki M(1), Paschou SA(2), Xekouki P(3), Kotsa K(4), Peppa M(5), Psaltopoulou 
T(6), Kalantaridou S(7), Vryonidou A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes Center, Hellenic Red Cross Hospital, 
Athens, Greece.
(2)Endocrine Unit and Diabetes Center, Department of Clinical Therapeutics, 
Alexandra Hospital, School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens, Athens, Greece. s.a.paschou@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, University General Hospital of 
Heraklion, School of Medicine, University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece.
(4)Endocrine Unit and Diabetes Center, First Department of Internal Medicine, 
AHEPA University Hospital, School of Medicine, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(5)Endocrine Unit and Diabetes Center, Second Department of Internal Medicine, 
Attikon University Hospital, School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(6)Endocrine Unit and Diabetes Center, Department of Clinical Therapeutics, 
Alexandra Hospital, School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens, Athens, Greece.
(7)3rd Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Attikon University Hospital, 
School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, 
Greece.

Secondary diabetes mellitus (DM) is a common complication of acromegaly, 
encountered in up to 55% of cases. Vice versa, the prevalence of acromegaly is 
markedly higher in cohorts of patients with type 2 DM (T2DM). The presence of 
secondary DM depends primarily on acromegaly status and is associated with 
increased cardiovascular morbidity, malignancy rate and overall mortality. The 
principal pathophysiologic mechanism is increased insulin resistance due to 
excessive lipolysis and altered fat distribution, reflected at the presence of 
intermuscular fat and attenuated, dysfunctional adipose tissue. Insulin 
resistance is ascribed to the direct, diabetogenic effects of growth hormone 
(GH), which prevail over the insulin-sensitizing effects of insulin-like growth 
factor 1 (IGF-1), probably due to higher glucometabolic potency of GH, IGF-1 
resistance, or both. Inversely, GH and IGF-1 act synergistically in increasing 
insulin secretion. Hyperinsulinemia in portal vein leads to enhanced 
responsiveness of liver GH receptors and IGF-1 production, pointing towards a 
mutually amplifying loop between GH-IGF-1 axis and insulin. Secondary DM occurs 
upon beta cell exhaustion, principally due to gluco-lipo-toxicity. Somatostatin 
analogues inhibit insulin secretion; especially pasireotide (PASI) impairs 
glycaemic profile in up to 75% of cases, establishing a separate 
pathophysiologic entity, PASI-induced DM. In contrast, pegvisomant and dopamine 
agonizts improve insulin sensitivity. In turn, metformin, pioglitazone and 
sodium-glucose transporters 2 inhibitors might be disease-modifying by 
counteracting hyperinsulinemia or acting pleiotropically. Large, prospective 
cohort studies are needed to validate the above notions and define optimal DM 
management in acromegaly.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12020-023-03339-1
PMCID: PMC10239382
PMID: 36882643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.