---
reference_id: "PMID:24507842"
title: "Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: similarities and differences."
authors:
- Postma DS
- Reddel HK
- ten Hacken NH
- van den Berge M
journal: Clin Chest Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2013.09.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: similarities and differences.
**Authors:** Postma DS, Reddel HK, ten Hacken NH, van den Berge M
**Journal:** Clin Chest Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccm.2013.09.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccm.2013.09.010)

## Content

1. Clin Chest Med. 2014 Mar;35(1):143-56. doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2013.09.010. Epub
2013  Dec 12.

Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: similarities and differences.

Postma DS(1), Reddel HK(2), ten Hacken NH(3), van den Berge M(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Groningen, Department of Pulmonology, GRIAC research institute, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ Groningen, The 
Netherlands. Electronic address: d.s.postma@umcg.nl.
(2)Department of Medicine, Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, University of 
Sydney, 431 Gleve Point Road, Gleve NSW 2037, Australia.
(3)University of Groningen, Department of Pulmonology, GRIAC research institute, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ Groningen, The 
Netherlands.

Asthma and COPD are both heterogeneous lung diseases including many different 
phenotypes. The classical asthma and COPD phenotypes are easy to discern because 
they reflect extremes of a phenotypical spectrum. Thus asthma in childhood and 
COPD in smokers have their own phenotypic expression with underlying 
pathophysiological mechanisms that differ importantly. In older adults, asthma 
and COPD are more difficult to differentiate and there exists a bronchodilator 
response in most but not all patients with asthma and persistent airway 
obstruction in most but not all patients with COPD where even up to 50% have 
been reported to have some bronchodilator response as assessed with FEV1. Airway 
obstruction is generated in the large and small airways both in asthma and COPD, 
and this small airway obstruction is located more proximally in asthma, yet is 
found more distally in severe and older individuals with asthma, comparable to 
COPD. Though the underlying inflammation and remodelling processes in asthma and 
COPD are different in their extreme phenotypes, there are overlap phenotypes 
with eosinophilic inflammation even in stable COPD and neutrophilic inflammation 
in longstanding and severe asthma.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccm.2013.09.010
PMID: 24507842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]