---
reference_id: "PMID:29848426"
title: Spectrum of Joint Deformities in Children with Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis.
authors:
- Naz S
- Asif M
- Naz F
- Farooq H
- Hamid MH
journal: J Coll Physicians Surg Pak
year: '2018'
doi: 10.29271/jcpsp.2018.06.470
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spectrum of Joint Deformities in Children with Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis.
**Authors:** Naz S, Asif M, Naz F, Farooq H, Hamid MH
**Journal:** J Coll Physicians Surg Pak (2018)
**DOI:** [10.29271/jcpsp.2018.06.470](https://doi.org/10.29271/jcpsp.2018.06.470)

## Content

1. J Coll Physicians Surg Pak. 2018 Jun;28(6):470-473. doi: 
10.29271/jcpsp.2018.06.470.

Spectrum of Joint Deformities in Children with Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis.

Naz S(1), Asif M(2), Naz F(1), Farooq H(3), Hamid MH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Medicine, Children's Hospital and The Institute of 
Child Health, Lahore.
(2)Department of Physiotherapy, Pakistan Society for the Rehabilitation of 
Disabled, Lahore.
(3)Department of Occupational Therapy, Autism Resource Centre, Lahore.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the frequency and types of joint deformities in children 
with juvenile idiopathic arthritis and their association with clinical 
parameters and rheumatoid factor.
STUDY DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
PLACE AND DURATION OF STUDY: Rheumatology Outpatient Clinic, the Children's 
Hospital and the Institute of Child Health, Lahore, from September 2014 to 
February 2015.
METHODOLOGY: All patients of both genders of less than 16 years of age, who 
fulfilled the International League of Association for Rheumatology (ILAR) 
criteria for Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis (JIA), were enrolled in this study. 
Their demographic data, duration of disease at the time of presentation, types 
of JIA, various joint deformities and rheumatoid factor (RF) were documented. 
Statistical analysis of data was done on SPSS version 16. Chi-square test was 
applied to determine the association of clinical deformity with age of patients, 
disease duration at presentation, types of JIA and RF.
RESULTS: Out of 70 patients enrolled during the study period, 51.4% were boys 
with mean age at presentation being 9.44 ±3.89 years (2-7 years) and median 
duration of disease being 24 months (interquartile range 42 months). Forty 
patients (57.1%) had joint deformities. Most common joints involved were hand 
(50%), wrist (50%), and knee (35.7%). The common types of joint deformities were 
boutonniere deformity (28.6%), ulnar deviation of wrist (28.6%), fixed flexion 
deformity of wrist (22.9%), and knee (31.4%). The most common type of JIA was 
polyarthritis RF negative with or without deformity. There was a strong 
association of deformities with older age of patients at presentation (p=0.036), 
longer duration of disease at presentation (p=0.028), polyarthritis (RF 
seronegative / seropositive) (p=0.013), and seropositivity (p=0.04).
CONCLUSION: More than 50% patients with JIA have joint deformities. Joint 
deformities are more likely to be seen in children with long-standing disease, 
those with polyarthritis JIA and seropositive patients.

DOI: 10.29271/jcpsp.2018.06.470
PMID: 29848426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]