---
reference_id: "PMID:19481194"
title: Mutations in the heparan-sulfate proteoglycan glypican 6 (GPC6) impair endochondral ossification and cause recessive omodysplasia.
authors:
- Campos-Xavier AB
- Martinet D
- Bateman J
- Belluoccio D
- Rowley L
- Tan TY
- Baxová A
- Gustavson KH
- Borochowitz ZU
- Innes AM
- Unger S
- Beckmann JS
- Mittaz L
- Ballhausen D
- Superti-Furga A
- Savarirayan R
- Bonafé L
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.05.002
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Animals
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chondrocytes/metabolism
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 13/genetics"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Dwarfism/genetics
- Female
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Glypicans/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mice
- Mutation/genetics
- Osteogenesis/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the heparan-sulfate proteoglycan glypican 6 (GPC6) impair endochondral ossification and cause recessive omodysplasia.
**Authors:** Campos-Xavier AB, Martinet D, Bateman J, Belluoccio D, Rowley L, Tan TY, Baxová A, Gustavson KH, Borochowitz ZU, Innes AM, Unger S, Beckmann JS, Mittaz L, Ballhausen D, Superti-Furga A, Savarirayan R, Bonafé L
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.05.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.05.002)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Jun;84(6):760-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.05.002. Epub 
2009 May 28.

Mutations in the heparan-sulfate proteoglycan glypican 6 (GPC6) impair 
endochondral ossification and cause recessive omodysplasia.

Campos-Xavier AB(1), Martinet D, Bateman J, Belluoccio D, Rowley L, Tan TY, 
Baxová A, Gustavson KH, Borochowitz ZU, Innes AM, Unger S, Beckmann JS, Mittaz 
L, Ballhausen D, Superti-Furga A, Savarirayan R, Bonafé L.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Pediatrics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, 
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Glypicans are a family of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored, 
membrane-bound heparan sulfate (HS) proteoglycans. Their biological roles are 
only partly understood, although it is assumed that they modulate the activity 
of HS-binding growth factors. The involvement of glypicans in developmental 
morphogenesis and growth regulation has been highlighted by Drosophila mutants 
and by a human overgrowth syndrome with multiple malformations caused by 
glypican 3 mutations (Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome). We now report that 
autosomal-recessive omodysplasia, a genetic condition characterized by 
short-limbed short stature, craniofacial dysmorphism, and variable developmental 
delay, maps to chromosome 13 (13q31.1-q32.2) and is caused by point mutations or 
by larger genomic rearrangements in glypican 6 (GPC6). All mutations cause 
truncation of the GPC6 protein and abolish both the HS-binding site and the 
GPI-bearing membrane-associated domain, and thus loss of function is predicted. 
Expression studies in microdissected mouse growth plate revealed expression of 
Gpc6 in proliferative chondrocytes. Thus, GPC6 seems to have a previously 
unsuspected role in endochondral ossification and skeletal growth, and its 
functional abrogation results in a short-limb phenotype.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.05.002
PMCID: PMC2694977
PMID: 19481194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]