---
reference_id: "PMID:36908126"
title: The Role of the Spleen in Portal Hypertension.
authors:
- Yoshida H
- Shimizu T
- Yoshioka M
- Matsushita A
- Kawano Y
- Ueda J
- Kawashima M
- Taniai N
- Mamada Y
journal: J Nippon Med Sch
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1272/jnms.JNMS.2023_90-104
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of the Spleen in Portal Hypertension.
**Authors:** Yoshida H, Shimizu T, Yoshioka M, Matsushita A, Kawano Y, Ueda J, Kawashima M, Taniai N, Mamada Y
**Journal:** J Nippon Med Sch (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1272/jnms.JNMS.2023_90-104](https://doi.org/10.1272/jnms.JNMS.2023_90-104)

## Content

1. J Nippon Med Sch. 2023;90(1):20-25. doi: 10.1272/jnms.JNMS.2023_90-104.

The Role of the Spleen in Portal Hypertension.

Yoshida H(1), Shimizu T(1), Yoshioka M(1), Matsushita A(1), Kawano Y(1), Ueda 
J(1), Kawashima M(1), Taniai N(1), Mamada Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of GI and HBP Surgery, Nippon Medical School.

As liver disease progresses, intrahepatic vascular resistance increases 
(backward flow theory of portal hypertension) and collateral veins develop. 
Adequate portal hypertension is required to maintain portal flow into the liver 
through an increase in blood flow into the portal venous system (forward flow 
theory of portal hypertension). The splenic artery resistance index is 
significantly and selectively elevated in cirrhotic patients. In portal 
hypertension, a local hyperdynamic state occurs around the spleen. Splenomegaly 
is associated with a poor prognosis in cirrhosis and is caused by spleen 
congestion and by enlargement and hyperactivation of splenic lymphoid tissue. 
Hypersplenism can lead to thrombocytopenia caused by increased sequestering and 
breakdown of platelets in the spleen. The close relationship between the spleen 
and liver is reflected in the concept of the hepatosplenic axis. The spleen is a 
regulatory organ that maintains portal flow into the liver and is the key organ 
in the forward flow theory of portal hypertension. This review summarizes the 
literature on the role of the spleen in portal hypertension.

DOI: 10.1272/jnms.JNMS.2023_90-104
PMID: 36908126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]