---
reference_id: "PMID:37842003"
title: Characterization of changes in the intestinal microbiome following combination therapy with zinc preparation and conventional treatment for children with rotavirus enteritis.
authors:
- Xu N
- Zhang W
- Huo J
- Tao R
- Jin T
- Zhang Y
- Wang Y
- Zhu L
- Li J
- Yao Q
- Ge L
journal: Front Cell Infect Microbiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2023.1153701
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of changes in the intestinal microbiome following combination therapy with zinc preparation and conventional treatment for children with rotavirus enteritis.
**Authors:** Xu N, Zhang W, Huo J, Tao R, Jin T, Zhang Y, Wang Y, Zhu L, Li J, Yao Q, Ge L
**Journal:** Front Cell Infect Microbiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcimb.2023.1153701](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcimb.2023.1153701)

## Content

1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2023 Sep 29;13:1153701. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2023.1153701. eCollection 2023.

Characterization of changes in the intestinal microbiome following combination 
therapy with zinc preparation and conventional treatment for children with 
rotavirus enteritis.

Xu N(1), Zhang W(2), Huo J(3), Tao R(1), Jin T(4), Zhang Y(2), Wang Y(1), Zhu 
L(1), Li J(1), Yao Q(5), Ge L(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The First People's Hospital of Yunnan 
Province, The Affiliated Hospital of Kunming University of Science and 
Technology, Kunming, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, The First People's Hospital of Yunnan 
Province, The Affiliated Hospital of Kunming University of Science and 
Technology, Kunming, China.
(3)Department of Reproductive Medicine, The First People's Hospital of Yunnan 
Province, The Affiliated Hospital of Kunming University of Science and 
Technology, Kunming, China.
(4)Department of Government, Hamilton College, Clinton, UT, United States.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, The First People's Hospital of Yunnan Province, The 
Affiliated Hospital of Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming, 
China.
(6)Department of Emergency Medicine, The First People's Hospital of Yunnan 
Province, The Affiliated Hospital of Kunming University of Science and 
Technology, Kunming, China.

BACKGROUND: Rotavirus (RV) is one of the most common pathogens causing diarrhea 
in infants and young children worldwide. Routinely, antiviral therapy, 
intestinal mucosa protection, and fluid supplementation are used in clinic, 
however this is not efficacious in some severe cases. Zinc supplementation has 
previously been shown to improve resolution of symptoms from infectious 
diarrhea.
METHODS: In this study differences in response rate, duration of hyperthermia, 
vomiting, and diarrhea, and the persistence time of cough and lung rales in 
groups were compared. 16SrDNA gene sequencing technology was used to analyze and 
compare changes in the intestinal microflora of children with RV enteritis who 
received the conventional treatment with or without the zinc preparation. In 
addition, the correlations between the differential bacterial species and the 
related inflammatory factors were determined.
RESULTS: Conventional therapy combined with the zinc preparation significantly 
shortened the duration of hyperthermia, vomiting, and diarrhea compared with the 
conventional treatment alone. In addition, the time to symptom relief showed 
that the absorption time of cough and lung rales was significantly shorter in 
the combination treatment group than that in the conventional treatment group in 
the children with pneumonia. Further, compared with the conventional treatment, 
the combined treatment significantly increased the diversity and abundances of 
florae as compared with the conventional treatment. This combination therapy 
containing zinc preparation markedly increased the abundances of 
Faecalibacterium, Bacteroidales, Ruminoccoccoccus, and Lachnospiraceae at the 
genus level. The LEfSe analysis suggested that Clostridiumbolteae were most 
significantly altered after the combination therapy. In addition, a correlation 
analysis revealed significantly negative correlations between the inflammatory 
factors especially IL-6, TNF-a, CRP and some intestinal florae such as 
Bacteroides, Faecalibacterium, Blautia, Parabacteroides, Subdoligranulum, and 
Flavonifractor.
CONCLUSION: Compared with the conventional therapy alone, the combined therapy 
with the zinc preparation significantly improves symptoms caused by RV. The 
combination therapy containing the zinc preparation significantly increases the 
diversity and abundances of some beneficial groups of bacteria. Further, The 
presence of these groups was further negatively correlated with relevant 
inflammatory factors. More importantly, this combination therapy containing the 
zinc preparation provides a reference for the clinical management of children 
with RV enteritis.

Copyright © 2023 Xu, Zhang, Huo, Tao, Jin, Zhang, Wang, Zhu, Li, Yao and Ge.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2023.1153701
PMCID: PMC10570505
PMID: 37842003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.