---
reference_id: "PMID:31877439"
title: "The role of hepatic sinusoidal obstruction in the pathogenesis of the hepatic involvement in HELLP syndrome: Exploring the literature."
authors:
- von Salmuth V
- van der Heiden Y
- Bekkers I
- van Runnard Heimel P
- Spaanderman MA
- Peeters LL
- Koek GH
journal: Pregnancy Hypertens
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.preghy.2019.11.012
keywords:
- Complement System Proteins/metabolism
- "Endothelium, Vascular/physiopathology"
- Female
- Fibrin/metabolism
- HELLP Syndrome/physiopathology
- Hepatic Veno-Occlusive Disease/physiopathology
- Humans
- Ischemia/physiopathology
- "Liver/blood supply, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Placenta/pathology, physiopathology"
- Pregnancy
- Regional Blood Flow/physiology
- Thrombotic Microangiopathies/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of hepatic sinusoidal obstruction in the pathogenesis of the hepatic involvement in HELLP syndrome: Exploring the literature.
**Authors:** von Salmuth V, van der Heiden Y, Bekkers I, van Runnard Heimel P, Spaanderman MA, Peeters LL, Koek GH
**Journal:** Pregnancy Hypertens (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.preghy.2019.11.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.preghy.2019.11.012)

## Content

1. Pregnancy Hypertens. 2020 Jan;19:37-43. doi: 10.1016/j.preghy.2019.11.012.
Epub  2019 Dec 23.

The role of hepatic sinusoidal obstruction in the pathogenesis of the hepatic
involvement in HELLP syndrome: Exploring the literature.

von Salmuth V(1), van der Heiden Y(1), Bekkers I(1), van Runnard Heimel P(2),
Spaanderman MA(3), Peeters LL(4), Koek GH(5).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Gynaecology, Maxima Medical Centre Eindhoven, Eindhoven, The
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Gynaecology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht,
The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Obstetrics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Maastricht
University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands; Department of Visceral
and Transplantation Surgery, Klinikum RWTH Aachen, Germany. Electronic address:
gkoek@mumc.nl.

AIM: This study aims to determine, based on existing data, whether the mechanism
resulting in liver dysfunction in HELLP syndrome resembles that in Sinusoidal
Obstruction Syndrome (SOS).
BACKGROUND: HELLP syndrome is a serious pregnancy disorder with high maternal
and perinatal morbidity and mortality rates. Because of poor insight in its
pathophysiology, particularly that of the liver involvement, clinical management
is limited to symptomatic treatment, often followed by termination of pregnancy.
SOS is a rare, potentially life-threatening complication of radio and/ or
chemotherapy in the preparation of hematopoietic cell transplantation. The
etiology of liver dysfunction in SOS is - unlike that in HELLP syndrome -
better-understood and seems to be initiated by direct toxic damage and demise of
endothelial cells, causing hepatic sinusoidal obstruction and ischemia.
METHODS: We searched Pubmed, Embase and Cochrane for reports on the etiology of
HELLP and SOS. This yielded 73 articles, with 14 additional reports from the
references listed in these articles.
RESULTS: The dysfunctional placenta in women developing HELLP initiates a
cascade of events that eventually results in liver dysfunction. The placenta
releases, besides anti-angiogenetic factors, also necrotic debris and cell-free
DNA, a mixture that not only induces systemic endothelial dysfunction as in
preeclampsia, but also a systemic inflammatory response. The latter aggravates
the endothelio-toxic effects in the systemic cardiovascular bed, amplifying the
already increased pro-thrombotic conditions. Particularly in microcirculations
with extremely low shear forces, such as in the hepatic sinusoids, this will
facilitate microthrombi formation and fibrin deposition eventually resulting in
obstruction of the sinusoids similar as in SOS. The latter causes ischemic
damage and progressive demise of hepatocytes.
CONCLUSION: The available information supports the concept that the liver damage
in HELLP and SOS results from sinusoidal ischemia, presumably resulting from
partially overlapping pathophysiological mechanisms.

Copyright © 2019 International Society for the Study of Hypertension in
Pregnancy. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.preghy.2019.11.012
PMID: 31877439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
