---
reference_id: "PMID:22543976"
title: "OCRL localizes to the primary cilium: a new role for cilia in Lowe syndrome."
authors:
- Luo N
- West CC
- Murga-Zamalloa CA
- Sun L
- Anderson RM
- Wells CD
- Weinreb RN
- Travers JB
- Khanna H
- Sun Y
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds163
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cilia/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Embryo, Nonmammalian/metabolism"
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Genotype
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Kidney Tubules/metabolism
- Mutation
- "Oculocerebrorenal Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- "Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/analysis, genetics, metabolism"
- Transfection
- "Zebrafish/embryology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# OCRL localizes to the primary cilium: a new role for cilia in Lowe syndrome.
**Authors:** Luo N, West CC, Murga-Zamalloa CA, Sun L, Anderson RM, Wells CD, Weinreb RN, Travers JB, Khanna H, Sun Y
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/dds163](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/dds163)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Aug 1;21(15):3333-44. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds163. Epub 2012
Apr  27.

OCRL localizes to the primary cilium: a new role for cilia in Lowe syndrome.

Luo N(1), West CC, Murga-Zamalloa CA, Sun L, Anderson RM, Wells CD, Weinreb RN,
Travers JB, Khanna H, Sun Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Glick Eye Institute, Indiana University, 1601 W
Michigan St., Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Oculocerebral renal syndrome of Lowe (OCRL or Lowe syndrome), a severe X-linked
congenital disorder characterized by congenital cataracts and glaucoma, mental
retardation and kidney dysfunction, is caused by mutations in the OCRL gene.
OCRL is a phosphoinositide 5-phosphatase that interacts with small GTPases and
is involved in intracellular trafficking. Despite extensive studies, it is
unclear how OCRL mutations result in a myriad of phenotypes found in Lowe
syndrome. Our results show that OCRL localizes to the primary cilium of retinal
pigment epithelial cells, fibroblasts and kidney tubular cells. Lowe
syndrome-associated mutations in OCRL result in shortened cilia and this
phenotype can be rescued by the introduction of wild-type OCRL; in vivo,
knockdown of ocrl in zebrafish embryos results in defective cilia formation in
Kupffer vesicles and cilia-dependent phenotypes. Cumulatively, our data provide
evidence for a role of OCRL in cilia maintenance and suggest the involvement of
ciliary dysfunction in the manifestation of Lowe syndrome.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/dds163
PMCID: PMC3392109
PMID: 22543976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
