---
reference_id: "PMID:38954182"
title: "Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumor, a Heterogeneous, Aggressive Cancer with Diverse Biomarkers and No Targeted Standard of Care: Review of the Literature and Ongoing Investigational Agents."
authors:
- Somaiah N
- Paudyal B
- Winkler RE
- Van Tine BA
- Hirbe AC
journal: Target Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11523-024-01078-5
keywords:
- Humans
- Nerve Sheath Neoplasms/therapy
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/metabolism"
- Standard of Care
- Molecular Targeted Therapy/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumor, a Heterogeneous, Aggressive Cancer with Diverse Biomarkers and No Targeted Standard of Care: Review of the Literature and Ongoing Investigational Agents.
**Authors:** Somaiah N, Paudyal B, Winkler RE, Van Tine BA, Hirbe AC
**Journal:** Target Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11523-024-01078-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11523-024-01078-5)

## Content

1. Target Oncol. 2024 Sep;19(5):665-678. doi: 10.1007/s11523-024-01078-5. Epub
2024  Jul 2.

Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumor, a Heterogeneous, Aggressive Cancer with
Diverse Biomarkers and No Targeted Standard of Care: Review of the Literature
and Ongoing Investigational Agents.

Somaiah N(1), Paudyal B(2), Winkler RE(2), Van Tine BA(3), Hirbe AC(4).

Author information:
(1)Chair of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Ascentage Pharma Group Inc., Rockville, MD, USA.
(3)Medicine and of Pediatrics, Developmental Therapeutics (Phase 1) Program,
Sarcoma Program, Washington University School of Medicine, Barnes and Jewish
Hospital, Siteman Cancer Center, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(4)Medicine and Pediatrics, Adult Neurofibromatosis Clinical Program, Division
of Oncology, Sarcoma Section, Couch Building, Room 3304, Washington University
School of Medicine, Barnes Jewish Hospital, Siteman Cancer Center, 660 S. Euclid
Avenue, Campus, Box 8076, St. Louis, MO, 63110-1010, USA. hirbea@wustl.edu.

BACKGROUND: Malignant peripheral sheath tumor (MPNST) is a rare, aggressive form
of soft-tissue sarcoma that presents a unique set of diagnostic and treatment
challenges and is associated with major unmet treatment medical needs.
OBJECTIVE: The chief aim of this review is to consider the epidemiology,
histology, anatomic distribution, pathologic signaling pathways, diagnosis, and
management of MPNST, with a focus on potential targeted therapies. A subordinate
objective was to establish benchmarks for the antitumor activity of such
treatments.
RESULTS: MPNST has an incidence of 1:100,000 in the general population and
1:3500 among patients with the inherited condition of neurofibromatosis-1.
Spindle-cell sarcomas of neural-crest origin, MPNSTs are frequently situated in
the extremities and pelvis/trunk, often at the confluence of large nerve roots
and bundles. Highly copy-number aberrant and enriched in chromosome 8, MPNSTs
have a complex molecular pathogenesis that likely involves the interplay of
multiple signaling pathways, including Ras/AKT/mTOR/MAPK, EGFR, p53, PTEN, and
PRC2, as well as factors in the tumor microenvironment. A combination of
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and positron emission tomography with
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG-PET) enables comprehensive assessment of both
morphology and metabolism, while MRI- and ultrasound-guided core needle biopsy
can confirm histopathology. Although surgery with wide excisional margins is now
the chief curative approach to localized disease, MPNST-specific survival has
not improved in decades. For advanced and metastatic MPNST, radiation and
chemotherapy (chiefly with anthracyclines plus ifosfamide) have somewhat
promising but still largely uncertain treatment roles, chiefly in local control,
downstaging, and palliation. No single druggable target has emerged, no
objective responses have been observed with a number of targeted therapies
(cumulative disease control rate in our review = 22.9-34.8%), and combinatorial
approaches directed toward multiple signal transduction mechanisms are hallmarks
of ongoing clinical trials.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite advances in our understanding of the genetics and molecular
biology of MPNST, further research is warranted to: (1) unravel the complex
pathogenesis of this condition; (2) improve diagnostic yield; (3) delineate the
appropriate roles of chemotherapy and radiation; and (4) develop a targeted
therapy (or combination of such treatments) that is well tolerated and prolongs
survival.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11523-024-01078-5
PMCID: PMC11392982
PMID: 38954182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: N.S. reports current clinical trial research
funding/grant support through her institution from AstraZeneca, Ascentage,
Deciphera, Cogent, Boehringer Ingelheim, IDRX, Ningo Newbay, and Bayer. She
reports serving as an Advisory Board consultant (last 2 years) for Aadi
Biosciences, Adaptimmune, Bayer, Deciphera, and Boehringer Ingelheim. B.P. and
R.W. report being full-time employees of Ascentage Pharma Group Inc. and
shareholders in the parent, Ascentage Pharma Group International, B.V.T. reports
a research grant from Polaris; royalties of licenses from Accuronix
Therapeutics; consulting relationships with Aadi Biosciences, Acuta Capital
Partners, LLC, Advenchen Laboratories, Bayer, Boxer Capital LLC, Cytokinetics
Inc, Daiichi Sankyo Inc, Deciphera Pharmaceuticals, EcoR1, Kronos Bio, Inc.,
Putnam, Race Oncology, Salarius Pharmaceuticals, Inc., and Sonata Therapeutics,
Inc.; payments or honoraria from Iterion Therapeutics, Inc., and Total Health
Conference; support for attending meetings and/or travel from Adaptimmune,
Advnchen, Kronos Bio, and Polaris; patents on ALEXT3102 and the use of ME1 as a
biomarker; participation on Data Safety Monitoring or Advisory Boards for Aadi
Biosciences, Agenus, Apexigen, Inc., Bayer US Medical Affairs Oncology,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Curis, Daiichi Sankyo, Epizyme, PTC Therapeutics, and
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals; and leadership or fiduciary roles in other board,
society, committee, or advocacy group with Polaris (nonpaid safety monitoring
board). A.C.H. reports royalties or licenses from Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH and
Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum (licensing/product development agreements);
consulting fees from Springworks; payments or honoraria from the American
Physician Institute for Advanced Professional Studies and Empartners; support
for attending meetings and/or travel from Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; and
participation on Data Safety Monitoring or Advisory Boards from Alexion
Pharmaceuticals and AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP.
