---
reference_id: "PMID:30335887"
title: PML/RARa blocks the differentiation and promotes the proliferation of acute promyelocytic leukemia through activating MYB expression by transcriptional and epigenetic regulation mechanisms.
authors:
- Wang G
- Tian Y
- Hu Q
- Xiao X
- Chen S
journal: J Cell Biochem
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/jcb.27077
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PML/RARa blocks the differentiation and promotes the proliferation of acute promyelocytic leukemia through activating MYB expression by transcriptional and epigenetic regulation mechanisms.
**Authors:** Wang G, Tian Y, Hu Q, Xiao X, Chen S
**Journal:** J Cell Biochem (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcb.27077](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcb.27077)

## Content

1. J Cell Biochem. 2019 Feb;120(2):1210-1220. doi: 10.1002/jcb.27077. Epub 2018
Oct  18.

PML/RARa blocks the differentiation and promotes the proliferation of acute
promyelocytic leukemia through activating MYB expression by transcriptional and
epigenetic regulation mechanisms.

Wang G(1), Tian Y(1), Hu Q(1), Xiao X(1), Chen S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, The First People's Hospital of Shangqiu, Shangqiu,
China.

The promyelocytic leukemia (PML)/retinoic acid receptor-alpha (RARα) onco-fusion
protein that is generated from t(15;17) chromosome translocation is crucial for
the leukemogenesis of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) and is well documented
as a transcriptional repressor. To understand the relationship between PML/RARα
and the oncogene in the development of APL, we investigate the regulation
mechanism of PML/RARα to MYB proto-oncogene and the role of this regulation on
the proliferation and differentiation of APL cells. Reverse
transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) assays show that
MYB expression was significantly higher in PML/RARα positive cell lines.
Microarray data verify that the MYB expression was significantly higher in APL
patient samples than in normal promyelocyte samples. Further expression analysis
from RT-qPCR and microarray data verifies that the expression of MYB is
upregulated by PML/RARα. Transcriptional factor binding analysis shows that MYB
is directly bound by PML/RARα and its cofactors. Luciferase assays show that
PML/RARα transactivated MYB promoter activity through the RARα binding site and
the coexistence of CCAAT enhancer binding protein ε. We also find that PML/RARα
increases the acetylation level of the promoter region of MYB. Further evidence
demonstrates that PML/RARα regulates MYB expression through long-range
interaction. Functionally, PML/RARα increases the cell proliferation and blocks
the differentiation through activating MYB expression. Collectively, this study
uncovers a novel mechanism of PML/RARα-mediated transcriptional activation and
enriches our knowledge of the onco-fusion protein-mediated transcription
activation.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.27077
PMID: 30335887
