---
reference_id: "PMID:32896661"
title: Predominant secondary dengue infection among Vietnamese adults mostly without warning signs and severe disease.
authors:
- Lytton SD
- Nematollahi G
- van Tong H
- Xuan Anh C
- Hung HV
- Hoan NX
- Diez G
- Schumacher T
- Landt O
- Melchior W
- Fuchs D
- Toan NL
- Velavan TP
- Song LH
journal: Int J Infect Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.08.082
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predominant secondary dengue infection among Vietnamese adults mostly without warning signs and severe disease.
**Authors:** Lytton SD, Nematollahi G, van Tong H, Xuan Anh C, Hung HV, Hoan NX, Diez G, Schumacher T, Landt O, Melchior W, Fuchs D, Toan NL, Velavan TP, Song LH
**Journal:** Int J Infect Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijid.2020.08.082](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2020.08.082)

## Content

1. Int J Infect Dis. 2020 Nov;100:316-323. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.08.082. Epub 
2020 Sep 5.

Predominant secondary dengue infection among Vietnamese adults mostly without 
warning signs and severe disease.

Lytton SD(1), Nematollahi G(2), van Tong H(3), Xuan Anh C(4), Hung HV(5), Hoan 
NX(6), Diez G(7), Schumacher T(8), Landt O(9), Melchior W(10), Fuchs D(11), Toan 
NL(12), Velavan TP(13), Song LH(14).

Author information:
(1)SeraDiaLogistics, Munich, Germany. Electronic address: 
simon.lytton@t-online.de.
(2)Institut Virion\Serion GmbH, 97076 Würzburg, Germany. Electronic address: 
g.nematollahi@virion-serion.de.
(3)Department of Pathophysiology, Vietnam Military Medical University, Hanoi, 
Viet Nam. Electronic address: hoangvantong@vmmu.edu.vn.
(4)108 Military Central Hospital, Hanoi, Viet Nam. Electronic address: 
bsxuananh108@yahoo.com.vn.
(5)103 Military Hospital, Vietnam Military Medical University, Hanoi, Viet Nam. 
Electronic address: drhoangvuhung@yahoo.com.
(6)108 Military Central Hospital, Hanoi, Viet Nam. Electronic address: 
nghiemxuanhoan@108-icid.com.
(7)Institut Virion\Serion GmbH, 97076 Würzburg, Germany. Electronic address: 
g.diez@virion-serion.de.
(8)Institut Virion\Serion GmbH, 97076 Würzburg, Germany. Electronic address: 
t.schumacher@virion-serion.de.
(9)TIB MOLBIOL Syntheselabor GmbH D-12103 Berlin Germany. Electronic address: 
OLandt@tib-molbiol.de.
(10)SeraDiaLogistics, Munich, Germany. Electronic address: 
walter@drmelchior.org.
(11)Division of Biological Chemistry, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, 
Austria. Electronic address: dietmar.fuchs@i-med.ac.at.
(12)Department of Pathophysiology, Vietnam Military Medical University, Hanoi, 
Viet Nam. Electronic address: toannl@vmmu.edu.vn.
(13)Vietnamese-GermanCenter for Medical Research, VG-CARE, Hanoi, Viet Nam; 
Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. 
Electronic address: velavan@medizin.uni-tuebingen.de.
(14)108 Military Central Hospital, Hanoi, Viet Nam; Vietnamese-GermanCenter for 
Medical Research, VG-CARE, Hanoi, Viet Nam. Electronic address: 
lehuusong@108-icid.com.

BACKGROUND: The morbidity in dengue fever is dependent on the dengue virus 
(DENV) serotypes, the patient age, predisposing immunogenic markers and the 
frequency of primary and secondary infections. This study aims to distinguish 
acute primary from secondary dengue infections of Vietnamese adults and to 
assess the association of viremia and anti-dengue immunoglobulin levels with 
clinical outcomes.
STUDY DESIGN: Viral RNA, dengue serotypes and levels of anti-dengue IgM and IgG 
of hospitalized adult cases were determined in EDTA-plasma samples prospectively 
collected during three consecutive years of dengue infection in Hanoi. Patients 
admitted to hospital within 7 days of their 1st reported fever were included. 
Primary infections were anti-dengue IgG enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) negative on both day of hospital entry (day 0) and day two or three of 
hospitalization (day 2 or 3) with a positive anti-dengue IgM on either day 0 or 
day 2 or 3 hospitalization. The secondary infections were anti-dengue IgG ELISA 
positive on both day 0 and day 2 or 3 with positive anti-dengue IgM ELISA on 
either day 0 or day 2 or 3.
RESULTS: The hospitalized dengue fever cases between October 2016 and March 2019 
were predominantly secondary infections (74%, 68% and 77%, respectively) with 
DENV-1 (60% and 65%) and DENV-2 (22% and 26%) serotypes determined in the latter 
two years. The viremia in primary infection was significantly higher than that 
in secondary infection (P < 0.01) and positively correlated with the days of 
hospital stay. In secondary infections, platelet counts were lower than in 
primary infections (P = 0.04) and IgG levels in secondary infection negatively 
correlated with platelet counts (Spearman's r = -0.22, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate high rates of secondary infection with DENV1 
and DENV2 serotypes. Anti-dengue immunoglobulins negatively correlate with 
hospital stay and platelet counts with few warning signs or severe disease. 
Further investigations of specific antibodies in adults which predict 
auto-inflammatory activity after the recovery from dengue infection are 
warranted.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.08.082
PMID: 32896661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]