---
reference_id: "PMID:41395910"
title: "Insights from a novel monogenic autoinflammatory disease: overview of a multicentric European cohort of 38 patients with COPA syndrome."
authors:
- David C
- Nathan N
- Al-Abadi E
- Arkwright PD
- Bader-Meunier B
- Becker S
- Belot A
- Brennan M
- Breton S
- Bondet V
- Cadranel J
- "Coulomb l'Hermine A"
- De Almeida S
- Duffy D
- Poch TC
- de Becdelièvre A
- El Khalifi-Boulisfane S
- Gattorno M
- Gispert-Saüch M
- Gothe F
- Hatchuel Y
- Herdliczko D
- Kilinc AA
- Koucky V
- Labouret G
- Manna R
- Maillard H
- Matoses Ruipérez ML
- Matucci-Cerinic C
- Mensa-Vilaro A
- Michel K
- Molina TJ
- Lopez Montesinos B
- Newman WG
- Papenkort J
- Rapp C
- Rames C
- Rice GI
- Rose MA
- Reumaux H
- Sailler L
- Schwerk N
- Seabra L
- Sellam J
- Taddio A
- Thumerelle C
- Tommasini A
- Tusseau M
- Volpi S
- Wetzke M
- Weiss L
- Welfringer-Morin A
- Wislez M
- Griese M
- Crow YJ
- Frémond ML
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1016/j.ard.2025.09.013
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Child
- Adult
- Adolescent
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- Young Adult
- Middle Aged
- "Hereditary Autoinflammatory Diseases/genetics, drug therapy, immunology"
- Phenotype
- Mutation
- Coatomer Protein/genetics
- Europe
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Cohort Studies
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insights from a novel monogenic autoinflammatory disease: overview of a multicentric European cohort of 38 patients with COPA syndrome.
**Authors:** David C, Nathan N, Al-Abadi E, Arkwright PD, Bader-Meunier B, Becker S, Belot A, Brennan M, Breton S, Bondet V, Cadranel J, Coulomb l'Hermine A, De Almeida S, Duffy D, Poch TC, de Becdelièvre A, El Khalifi-Boulisfane S, Gattorno M, Gispert-Saüch M, Gothe F, Hatchuel Y, Herdliczko D, Kilinc AA, Koucky V, Labouret G, Manna R, Maillard H, Matoses Ruipérez ML, Matucci-Cerinic C, Mensa-Vilaro A, Michel K, Molina TJ, Lopez Montesinos B, Newman WG, Papenkort J, Rapp C, Rames C, Rice GI, Rose MA, Reumaux H, Sailler L, Schwerk N, Seabra L, Sellam J, Taddio A, Thumerelle C, Tommasini A, Tusseau M, Volpi S, Wetzke M, Weiss L, Welfringer-Morin A, Wislez M, Griese M, Crow YJ, Frémond ML
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ard.2025.09.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ard.2025.09.013)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2026 Mar;85(3):547-557. doi: 10.1016/j.ard.2025.09.013. Epub
2025  Oct 25.

Insights from a novel monogenic autoinflammatory disease: overview of a
multicentric European cohort of 38 patients with COPA syndrome.

David C(1), Nathan N(2), Al-Abadi E(3), Arkwright PD(4), Bader-Meunier B(5),
Becker S(6), Belot A(7), Brennan M(8), Breton S(9), Bondet V(10), Cadranel
J(11), Coulomb l'Hermine A(12), De Almeida S(13), Duffy D(10), Poch TC(14), de
Becdelièvre A(15), El Khalifi-Boulisfane S(16), Gattorno M(17), Gispert-Saüch
M(14), Gothe F(18), Hatchuel Y(19), Herdliczko D(20), Kilinc AA(21), Koucky
V(22), Labouret G(23), Manna R(24), Maillard H(25), Matoses Ruipérez ML(26),
Matucci-Cerinic C(27), Mensa-Vilaro A(28), Michel K(18), Molina TJ(29), Lopez
Montesinos B(30), Newman WG(31), Papenkort J(32), Rapp C(18), Rames C(33), Rice
GI(34), Rose MA(32), Reumaux H(35), Sailler L(13), Schwerk N(36), Seabra L(37),
Sellam J(38), Taddio A(39), Thumerelle C(40), Tommasini A(39), Tusseau M(41),
Volpi S(27), Wetzke M(36), Weiss L(42), Welfringer-Morin A(43), Wislez M(44),
Griese M(18), Crow YJ(45), Frémond ML(46).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurogenetics and Neuroinflammation, Imagine Institute, Paris,
France; Department of Internal Medicine, Hôpital Bichat-Claude Bernard,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Université Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(2)Paediatric Pulmonology Department and Reference Centre for Rare Lung Diseases
RespiRare, INSERM UMR_S933 Laboratory of Childhood Genetic Diseases, Armand
Trousseau Hospital, Sorbonne University and APHP, Paris, France.
(3)Childhood Arthritis and Rheumatic Diseases Unit, Birmingham Women's and
Children's Hospital NHSFT, Birmingham, UK.
(4)Lydia Becker Institute of Immunology and Inflammation, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(5)Department of Paediatric Haematology-Immunology and Rheumatology,
Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris (APHP),
and Reference Centre for Inflammatory Rheumatism, Autoimmune Diseases and
Systemic Interferonopathies in Children (RAISE), Université Paris Cité, Paris,
France.
(6)Pneumology Department, Darmstädter Kinderkliniken Prinzessin Margaret,
Darmstadt, Germany; Member of the chILD-EU Register Group.
(7)National Reference Center for Inflammatory Rheumatism, Autoimmune Diseases
and Systemic Interferonopathies (RAISE), Paediatric Nephrology, Rheumatology,
Dermatology Unit, Hospital of Mother and Child, Hospices Civils of Lyon, Lyon,
France.
(8)Paediatric & Adolescent Rheumatology, Royal Hospital for Children & Young
People, Edinburgh, UK.
(9)Pediatric Radiology Department, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP
Centre-Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(10)Translational Immunology Unit, Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité,
Paris, France.
(11)Department of Pneumology and Thoracic Oncology, Tenon Hospital, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP) Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
(12)Pathology Department, Trousseau University Hospital, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
(13)Department of Internal Medicine, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(14)UF Paediatric Rheumatology Department, Hospital Doctor Trueta, Girona,
Spain.
(15)Laboratory of Genetics, Henri Mondor University Hospital, APHP, University
Paris Est Creteil, INSERM, IMRB, Creteil, France.
(16)Emergency, Infectious Disease and Paediatric Rheumatology Department, Centre
Hospitalier Régional Universitaire Lille, University of Lille, Lille, France.
(17)UOC Reumatologia e Malattie Autoinfiammatore, IRCCS Istituto Giannina
Gaslini, Genova, Italy.
(18)Member of the chILD-EU Register Group; Pediatric Pneumology, Dr von Hauner
Children´s Hospital, University of Munich, German Center for Lung Research
(DZL), Munich, Germany.
(19)Department of General Paediatrics, Competence Centre for Inflammatory
Rheumatism, Autoimmune Diseases and Systemic Interferonopathies (RAISE)
Antilles-Guyane, EpiCliV Research Unit, University of the French West Indies,
Martinique University Hospital, Fort-de France, France.
(20)Rheumatology, Universitäts - Kinderspital Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(21)Member of the chILD-EU Register Group; Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa,
Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Division of Pediatric Pulmonology, Istanbul,
Turkey.
(22)Member of the chILD-EU Register Group; Department of Paediatrics, 2nd
Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and Motol University Hospital, Prague,
Czech Republic.
(23)Paediatric Pulmonology Department, University Hospital for Children,
Toulouse, France.
(24)Periodic Fevers Research Center, Catholic University, Rome, Italy.
(25)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Immunology, Referral Centre for
Rare Systemic Autoimmune Diseases in the North of France, Northwest,
Mediterranean and Guadeloupe (CeRAINOM), CHU de Lille, Lille, France.
(26)Section of Pediatric Nephrology, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic (HUIP)
La Fe, Valencia, Spain.
(27)UOC Reumatologia e Malattie Autoinfiammatore, IRCCS Istituto Giannina
Gaslini, Genova, Italy; Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation,
Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal and Child Health (DINOGMI), University of
Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(28)Department of Immunology-CDB, Hospital Clínic-IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain.
(29)Pathology Department, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Centre-Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(30)Section of Pediatric Rheumatology, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic (HUIP)
La Fe, Valencia, Spain.
(31)Lydia Becker Institute of Immunology and Inflammation, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK; Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester
University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK; Division of Evolution Infection
& Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine
and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(32)Member of the chILD-EU Register Group; Stuttgart Children's Hospital, Center
for Congenital Lung Diseases, Stuttgart, Germany.
(33)Paediatric Pneumology and Allergology Unit, CHU of Amiens, Amiens, France.
(34)Division of Evolution Infection & Genomic Sciences, School of Biological
Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK.
(35)Paediatric Rheumatology Unit, University of Lille, Jeanne de Flandre
Hospital, Lille, France.
(36)Member of the chILD-EU Register Group; Department of Paediatrics, German
Center for Lung Research, Medical University of Hannover, Hannover, Germany.
(37)Laboratory of Neurogenetics and Neuroinflammation, Imagine Institute, Paris,
France.
(38)Department of Rheumatology, Saint-Antoine Hospital, APHP, Centre de
Recherche Saint-Antoine (CRSA) Inserm UMRS_938, Sorbonne Université, Paris,
France.
(39)Department of Pediatrics, Institute for Maternal and Child Health IRCCS
"Burlo Garofolo", Trieste, Italy; Department of Medical, Surgical and Health
Sciences University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.
(40)Paediatric Pulmonology and Allergy Department, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre,
CHU Lille, Univ. Lille, Lille, France.
(41)Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie, Inserm, U1111,
University Claude Bernard, Lyon 1, UMR5308, ENS de Lyon, Lyon, France; Hospices
Civils de Lyon, Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Lyon,
Lyon, France.
(42)Pediatric Pulmonology, Strasbourg University Hospital, Strasbourg, France.
(43)Department of Dermatology, Reference Centre for Genodermatoses and Rare Skin
Disease (MAGEC), Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux
de Paris, Université Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(44)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Cochin, AP-HP, Inserm U1138, Université
Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(45)Laboratory of Neurogenetics and Neuroinflammation, Imagine Institute, Paris,
France; MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Cancer, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(46)Laboratory of Neurogenetics and Neuroinflammation, Imagine Institute, Paris,
France; Department of Paediatric Haematology-Immunology and Rheumatology,
Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris (APHP),
and Reference Centre for Inflammatory Rheumatism, Autoimmune Diseases and
Systemic Interferonopathies in Children (RAISE), Université Paris Cité, Paris,
France. Electronic address: marie-louise.fremond@aphp.fr.

OBJECTIVES: COPA (coatomer subunit alpha) syndrome is a rare monogenic
autoinflammatory disease due to heterozygous mutations in COPA. It has
phenotypic overlap with STING (Stimulator of interferon genes)-associated
vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAVI), although the spectrum of clinical
manifestations is not yet fully defined. Our aim was to better delineate the
clinical phenotype of this rare disorder in a European cohort.
METHODS: Methods include assessment of clinical, imaging, and immunological data
from 46 individuals (29 families) carrying a COPA mutation.
RESULTS: Among the 46 individuals carrying a COPA mutation, 38 had at least 1
clinical manifestation likely related to their mutant state (clinical penetrance
of 83%). Twenty-two (58%) symptomatic patients were female, with a median age at
disease onset of 3 years (range 0-50 years). Pulmonary involvement was observed
in 34 patients, with interstitial lung disease in most cases (n = 31) and
diffuse alveolar haemorrhage in 11 individuals. Twenty-six patients demonstrated
joint involvement, and 7 had documented kidney disease. Previously undescribed
features included skin (n = 12), cardiac (n = 8), gastrointestinal (n = 7), and
hepatic involvement (n = 5). All but 1 patient tested positive for
autoantibodies, and increased interferon signalling was noted in all those
tested. Twenty-two patients were treated with Janus kinase inhibitors with
promising efficacy.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a large European cohort of patients with COPA syndrome.
While confirming the core organ features (lung, joint, and kidney) of the
disease, our data expand the phenotype to include cardiac, skin, and
gastrointestinal features, further demonstrating the clinical overlap with SAVI
and other type I interferonopathies.

Copyright © 2025 European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology (EULAR).
Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ard.2025.09.013
PMCID: PMC7618534
PMID: 41395910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests All authors declare they
have no competing interests. Patient consent for publication: Written consent
was obtained for pictures appearing in the manuscript. Ethics approval: The
study was approved by the Comité de Protection des Personnes
(ID-RCB/EUDRACT:2014-A01017-40; revalidated in 2022). Written informed consent
was obtanied for all patients. Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned;
externally peer reviewed.
