---
reference_id: "PMID:18611821"
title: Intracellular organisms.
authors:
- Maurin M
- Raoult D
journal: Int J Antimicrob Agents
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1016/s0924-8579(97)00028-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intracellular organisms.
**Authors:** Maurin M, Raoult D
**Journal:** Int J Antimicrob Agents (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0924-8579(97)00028-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0924-8579(97)00028-9)

## Content

1. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 1997 Jun;9(1):61-70. doi: 
10.1016/s0924-8579(97)00028-9.

Intracellular organisms.

Maurin M(1), Raoult D.

Author information:
(1)Unité des Rickettsies, CNRS UPRESA 6020, Université de la Méditerranée, 
Faculté de médecine de la Timone, 27 Bd Jean Moulin, 13385 Marseille, Cedex 5, 
France.

The intracellular location of some microorganisms allow them to resist 
antibiotics with poor ability to penetrate eukaryotic cell membranes, such as 
the beta-lactam compounds. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of 
antibiotics within eukaryotic cells have been defined in the last two decades. 
Penetration but also subcellular localization of antibiotics within cells, as 
well as the possibility of their intracellular inactivation have to be 
considered. In vitro infected cell models have been useful to determine the 
activity of antibiotics against intracellular pathogens, although extrapolation 
of in vitro experimental data to the clinical situation remains hazardous. The 
pharmacokinetic properties and intracellular activity against a number of 
pathogens of the newer fluoroquinolone and macrolide compounds seems promising, 
but clinical data remain scarce.

DOI: 10.1016/s0924-8579(97)00028-9
PMID: 18611821