---
reference_id: "PMID:35380673"
title: "Pain Characteristics in Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Monocentric Cross-Sectional Study."
authors:
- Hardy PY
- Fikri J
- Libbrecht D
- Louis E
- Joris J
journal: J Crohns Colitis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjac051
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pain Characteristics in Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Monocentric Cross-Sectional Study.
**Authors:** Hardy PY, Fikri J, Libbrecht D, Louis E, Joris J
**Journal:** J Crohns Colitis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjac051](https://doi.org/10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjac051)

## Content

1. J Crohns Colitis. 2022 Sep 8;16(9):1363-1371. doi: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjac051.

Pain Characteristics in Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Monocentric 
Cross-Sectional Study.

Hardy PY(1), Fikri J(1), Libbrecht D(1)(2), Louis E(3), Joris J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology and Reanimation, CHU Liège, University of 
Liège, domaine universitaire du Sart Tilman, Liège, Belgium.
(2)Pain Clinic, CHU Liège, University of Liège, domaine universitaire du Sart 
Tilman, Liège, Belgium.
(3)Service of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Digestive Oncology, CHU Liège, 
University of Liège, domaine universitaire du Sart-Tilman, Liège, Belgium.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The abdominal pain common in inflammatory bowel disease 
[IBD] patients is traditionally associated with inflammation but may persist 
during clinical remission. Central sensitization [CS] has not previously been 
explored in these patients. This study aimed to determine the epidemiology of 
pain in IBD patients and to specify pain characteristics with particular 
attention to CS.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study included 200 patients; 67% had Crohn's 
disease [CD]. Pain was assessed using the McGill questionnaire, using the 
Douleur Neuropathique 4 [DN4] questionnaire and by clinical examination. Its 
impacts on quality of life, depression and anxiety were also assessed.
RESULTS: Three-quarters of IBD patients complained of pain, including 
intermittent pain attacks, 62% reported abdominal pain and 17.5% had CS. The 
prevalence of pain [83.6% vs 59.1%; p < 0.001] and abdominal pain [68.7% vs 
48.5%; p = 0.006] was higher in CD patients than in ulcerative colitis [UC] 
patients. Multivariate analysis confirmed that age [p = 0.02], sex [female] [p = 
0.004] and CD [p = 0.005] were independent risk factors for pain. Pain intensity 
was greater in the case of CS (6 [5-3] vs 3 [1.5-5], p < 0.003) which 
significantly impaired quality of life [p < 0.003] compared with pain without 
CS.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of pain was high in IBD patients [≈75%] and higher 
in CD patients. Significant impacts on quality of life were confirmed. More than 
25% of patients with abdominal pain described CS as responsible for more severe 
pain and worsened quality of life.
TRIAL REGISTRATION REF: NCT04488146.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of European 
Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjac051
PMID: 35380673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]