---
reference_id: "PMID:34994987"
title: "Targeted therapy for advanced anaplastic lymphoma kinase (<I>ALK</I>)-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer."
authors:
- Cameron LB
- Hitchen N
- Chandran E
- Morris T
- Manser R
- Solomon BJ
- Jordan V
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD013453.pub2
keywords:
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics"
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Progression-Free Survival
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted therapy for advanced anaplastic lymphoma kinase (<I>ALK</I>)-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Cameron LB, Hitchen N, Chandran E, Morris T, Manser R, Solomon BJ, Jordan V
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD013453.pub2](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD013453.pub2)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2022 Jan 7;1(1):CD013453. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD013453.pub2.

Targeted therapy for advanced anaplastic lymphoma kinase (<I>ALK</I>)-rearranged
non-small cell lung cancer.

Cameron LB(1), Hitchen N(1), Chandran E(1), Morris T(2)(3), Manser R(4)(5)(6),
Solomon BJ(7), Jordan V(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology "Te Puriri o Te Ora", Auckland District Health
Board, Auckland, New Zealand.
(2)Southern Blood and Cancer Service, Southern District Healthboard, Dunedin,
New Zealand.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(4)Department of Haematology and Medical Oncology, Peter MacCallum Cancer
Centre, Melbourne, Australia.
(5)Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville, Australia.
(6)Department of Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital, The University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.
(7)Department of Medical Oncology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne,
Australia.
(8)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medical and Health
Sciences, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

Update of
    doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD013453.

BACKGROUND: Targeted therapies directed at specific driver oncogenes have
improved outcomes for individuals with advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Approximately 5% of lung adenocarcinomas, the most common histologic
subtype of NSCLC, harbour rearrangements in the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)
gene leading to constitutive activity of the ALK kinase. Crizotinib was the
first tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) demonstrated to be effective in advanced
NSCLC. Next-generation ALK TKIs have since been developed including ceritinib,
alectinib, brigatinib, ensartinib, and lorlatinib, and have been compared with
crizotinib or chemotherapy in randomised controlled trials (RCTs). These
ALK-targeted therapies are currently used in clinical practice and are endorsed
in multiple clinical oncology guidelines.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the safety and efficacy of ALK inhibitors given as
monotherapy to treat advanced ALK-rearranged NSCLC.
SEARCH METHODS: We conducted electronic searches in the Cochrane Lung Cancer
Group Specialised Register, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials,
MEDLINE, and Embase. We also searched conference proceedings from the American
Society for Clinical Oncology (ASCO), European Society of Medical Oncology
(ESMO), and International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC) World
Conference on Lung Cancer, as well as the reference lists of retrieved articles.
All searches were conducted from 2007 until 7 January 2021.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included RCTs comparing ALK inhibitors with cytotoxic
chemotherapy or another ALK inhibitor in individuals with incurable locally
advanced or metastatic pathologically confirmed ALK-rearranged NSCLC.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed studies
for eligibility, extracted study characteristics and outcome data, and assessed
risk of bias using the Cochrane risk of bias tool for each included study. We
assessed the certainty of evidence using GRADE. Primary outcomes were
progression-free survival (PFS) and adverse events (AE); secondary outcomes were
overall survival (OS), OS at one year, overall response rate (ORR) by RECIST
(Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours) criteria, and health-related
quality of life (HRQoL). We performed a meta-analysis for all outcomes, where
appropriate, using the fixed-effect model. We reported hazard ratios (HR) for
PFS, OS, and a composite HRQoL of life outcome (time to deterioration), and risk
ratios (RR) for AE, ORR, and one-year OS. We presented 95% confidence intervals
(95% CIs) and used the I² statistic to investigate heterogeneity. We planned
comparisons of 'ALK inhibitor versus chemotherapy' and 'next-generation ALK
inhibitor versus crizotinib' with subgroup analysis by type of ALK inhibitor,
line of treatment, and baseline central nervous system involvement.
MAIN RESULTS: Eleven studies (2874 participants) met our inclusion criteria: six
studies compared an ALK inhibitor (crizotinib, ceritinib, and alectinib) to
chemotherapy, and five studies compared a next-generation ALK inhibitor
(alectinib, brigatinib, and lorlatinib) to crizotinib. We assessed the evidence
for most outcomes as of moderate to high certainty. Most studies were at low
risk for selection, attrition, and reporting bias; however, no RCTs were
blinded, resulting in a high risk of performance and detection bias for outcomes
reliant on subjective measurement. ALK inhibitor versus chemotherapy Treatment
with ALK inhibitors resulted in a large increase in PFS compared to chemotherapy
(HR 0.45, 95% CI 0.40 to 0.52, 6 RCTs, 1611 participants, high-certainty
evidence). This was found regardless of line of treatment. ALK inhibitors may
result in no difference in overall AE rate when compared to chemotherapy (RR
1.01, 95% CI 1.00 to 1.03, 5 RCTs, 1404 participants, low-certainty evidence).
ALK inhibitors slightly improved OS (HR 0.84, 95% CI 0.72 to 0.97, 6 RCTs, 1611
participants, high-certainty evidence), despite most included studies having a
significant number of participants crossing over from chemotherapy to receive an
ALK inhibitor after the study period. ALK inhibitors likely increase ORR (RR
2.43, 95% CI 2.16 to 2.75, 6 RCTs, 1611 participants, moderate-certainty
evidence) including in measurable baseline brain metastases (RR 4.88, 95% CI
2.18 to 10.95, 3 RCTs, 108 participants) when compared to chemotherapy. ALK
inhibitors result in a large increase in the HRQoL measure, time to
deterioration (HR 0.52, 95% CI 0.44 to 0.60, 5 RCTs, 1504 participants,
high-certainty evidence) when compared to chemotherapy. Next-generation ALK
inhibitor versus crizotinib Next-generation ALK inhibitors resulted in a large
increase in PFS (HR 0.39, 95% CI 0.33 to 0.46, 5 RCTs, 1263 participants,
high-certainty evidence), particularly in participants with baseline brain
metastases. Next-generation ALK inhibitors likely result in no difference in
overall AE (RR 1.00, 95% CI 0.98 to 1.01, 5 RCTs, 1263 participants,
moderate-certainty evidence) when compared to crizotinib. Next-generation ALK
inhibitors likely increase OS (HR 0.71, 95% CI 0.56 to 0.90, 5 RCTs, 1263
participants, moderate-certainty evidence) and slightly increase ORR (RR 1.18,
95% CI 1.10 to 1.25, 5 RCTs, 1229 participants, moderate-certainty evidence)
including a response in measurable brain metastases (RR 2.45, 95% CI 1.7 to
3.54, 4 RCTs, 138 participants) when compared to crizotinib. Studies comparing
ALK inhibitors were conducted exclusively or partly in the first-line setting.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Next-generation ALK inhibitors including alectinib,
brigatinib, and lorlatinib are the preferred first systemic treatment for
individuals with advanced ALK-rearranged NSCLC. Further trials are ongoing
including investigation of first-line ensartinib. Next-generation inhibitors
have not been compared to each other, and it is unknown which should be used
first and what subsequent treatment sequence is optimal.

Copyright © 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD013453.pub2
PMCID: PMC8740884
PMID: 34994987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Laird B Cameron: none known. LC is a member of
the Thoracic Oncology Group Australasia (formerly Australasian Lung Cancer
Trials Group) and chairperson of the New Zealand Lung Oncology Special Interest
Group. Nadia Hitchen: none known. Elias Chandran: none known. Tessa Morris: none
known Renée Manser: none known. Benjamin J Solomon is an author on phase III
clinical studies of crizotinib, ceritinib, and lorlatinib. He has served on
advisory boards for Pfizer, Novartis, Roche‐Genentech, AstraZeneca, Merck,
Bristol Myers Squibb, Gritstone Oncology, and Loxo Oncology, and he has spoken
at meetings where costs were sponsored by industry. Vanessa Jordan: none
known.  
