---
reference_id: "PMID:38840082"
title: "Prevalence of somatic symptoms among Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) survivors in Africa: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Mandizadza OO
- Phebeni RT
- Ji C
journal: BMC Public Health
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12889-024-19013-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of somatic symptoms among Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) survivors in Africa: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Mandizadza OO, Phebeni RT, Ji C
**Journal:** BMC Public Health (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12889-024-19013-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-024-19013-8)

## Content

1. BMC Public Health. 2024 Jun 5;24(1):1511. doi: 10.1186/s12889-024-19013-8.

Prevalence of somatic symptoms among Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) survivors in 
Africa: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Mandizadza OO(1), Phebeni RT(2), Ji C(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou, 
China.
(2)Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 
China.
(3)School of Public Health, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou, 
China. jchi2005@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Many Ebola virus disease (EVD) survivors have reported somatic and 
neuropsychological symptoms after discharge from the Ebola Treatment Unit (ETU). 
Since the 2014-2016 Ebola epidemic in West Africa, various studies have 
investigated and identified these symptoms. Evidence on somatic symptoms is 
widely available in the literature, however, there is no concise overview of the 
prevalence across different time intervals.
METHODS: This meta-analysis was conducted following the (PRISMA) guidelines. A 
database search was conducted to identify original studies that reported the 
prevalence of symptoms. The primary outcome measure was the prevalence rate of 
several somatic symptoms. Results were pooled, and prevalence rates were 
assessed over time, to elucidate any particular trends.
RESULTS: We included 23 studies (5,714 participants). The pooled prevalence was: 
arthralgia 50% (95% CI: 41%-59%); headache 44% (95% CI: 36%-52%); myalgia 32% 
(95% CI: 26%-38%); abdominal pain 27% (95% CI: 15%-39%); fatigue 25% (95% CI: 
19%-31%); numbness of feet 16% (95% CI: 14%-18%); numbness of hands 12% (95% CI: 
10%-14%) and hearing loss 9% (95% CI: 5%-12%). Prevalence across different time 
intervals revealed significant patterns. All the symptoms persisted for more 
than 2 years after discharge except for abdominal pain.
CONCLUSION: The pooled prevalence rates of somatic symptoms are notably high. 
Arthralgia and headache are the most prevalent of the symptoms, with hearing 
loss and numbness in hands and feet being the least. We found that arthralgia, 
myalgia, and abdominal pain decreased over time. However, headache, fatigue, 
numbness of hands and feet, and hearing loss increased over time.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-024-19013-8
PMCID: PMC11155043
PMID: 38840082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.