---
reference_id: "PMID:37810913"
title: "Behavioral Phenotype, Electroclinical Features, and Treatment Options in Twins with Lrp2 Candidate Variants (Donnay-Barrow/Foar Syndrome)."
authors:
- Mingarelli A
- Pipitone GB
- Torini G
- Patricelli MG
- Totaro M
- Colonna C
- Carrera P
- Raviglione F
journal: Case Rep Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1155/2023/6679572
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Behavioral Phenotype, Electroclinical Features, and Treatment Options in Twins with Lrp2 Candidate Variants (Donnay-Barrow/Foar Syndrome).
**Authors:** Mingarelli A, Pipitone GB, Torini G, Patricelli MG, Totaro M, Colonna C, Carrera P, Raviglione F
**Journal:** Case Rep Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2023/6679572](https://doi.org/10.1155/2023/6679572)

## Content

1. Case Rep Genet. 2023 Sep 30;2023:6679572. doi: 10.1155/2023/6679572.
eCollection  2023.

Behavioral Phenotype, Electroclinical Features, and Treatment Options in Twins 
with Lrp2 Candidate Variants (Donnay-Barrow/Foar Syndrome).

Mingarelli A(1), Pipitone GB(2), Torini G(3), Patricelli MG(2), Totaro M(1), 
Colonna C(1), Carrera P(2)(3), Raviglione F(1).

Author information:
(1)Hospital Neuropsychiatry Service, ASST Rhodense, Rho, Milan, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Cytogenetics and Clinical Genetics, IRCCS 
San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(3)Unit of Genomics for Diagnosis of Human Disease, IRCCS San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

The LRP2 gene encodes megalin (LRP-2/GP330), a large single-spanning 
transmembrane glycoprotein that serves as a multiligand endocytotic receptor and 
mediates the reabsorption of albumin in the proximal renal tubule. LRP2 is 
implicated in an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by dimorphisms, 
ocular anomalies, sensorineural deafness, proteinuria, epilepsy, and 
intellectual disability: a clinical condition called Donnai-Barrow syndrome 
(DBS) or facio-oculo-acoustico-renal (FOAR) syndrome. Pathogenic variants in 
LRP2 have been reported in fewer than 60 patients, but a detailed description of 
seizures, electroencephalographic patterns, imaging findings, behavioral 
phenotype, and long-term follow-up is still needed. We provide a clinical report 
of two mono-chorionic twins with LRP2-related disease manifesting developmental 
delay, autistic features, seizures, proteinuria, and sleep disorders. By 
sequencing clinical exome, LRP2 candidate rare variants, c.6815G > A, p. 
(Arg2272His), inherited from the mother and c.12725A > G, p. (Asp4242Gly), 
inherited from the father, were identified. During follow-up, at the age of 7, 
the main clinical features of the patients included insomnia, autistic features, 
severe psychomotor delay, and absent speech. The patients were under treatment 
with risperidone, antiseizure medications (ASMs), and supplementation of 
alpha-lactalbumin for self-injury and sleep disturbance. Our study confirmed the 
wide spectrum of behavioral and neurological and psychiatric features of this 
rare condition, suggesting new treatment options.

Copyright © 2023 Alessia Mingarelli et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2023/6679572
PMCID: PMC10560113
PMID: 37810913

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.