---
reference_id: "PMID:40177217"
title: "Coexisting Collagenous Sprue and Celiac Disease: A Case Report."
authors:
- Selig TM
- Siddique A
- Reagan JL
- Feller ER
- Shah SA
journal: Case Rep Gastroenterol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1159/000543939
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coexisting Collagenous Sprue and Celiac Disease: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Selig TM, Siddique A, Reagan JL, Feller ER, Shah SA
**Journal:** Case Rep Gastroenterol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000543939](https://doi.org/10.1159/000543939)

## Content

1. Case Rep Gastroenterol. 2025 Apr 2;19(1):246-252. doi: 10.1159/000543939. 
eCollection 2025 Jan-Dec.

Coexisting Collagenous Sprue and Celiac Disease: A Case Report.

Selig TM(1), Siddique A(2), Reagan JL(3), Feller ER(4), Shah SA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown 
University, Providence, RI, USA.
(2)Eastern Connecticut Pathology Consultants, Manchester, CT, USA.
(3)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown 
University, Providence, RI, USA.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown 
University, Providence, RI, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Collagenous sprue (CS) is an extremely rare enteropathy of unknown 
etiology and if untreated, can lead to substantial morbidity and mortality. CS 
often copresents with celiac disease. The presence of a subepithelial collagen 
band on histology differentiates CS from celiac disease, as both have villous 
blunting. The management of the two diseases is different, and thus it is 
critical that the proper diagnosis of CS is made promptly to prevent 
complications.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present a case report of CS in an elderly male who was 
initially diagnosed with celiac disease alone before returning to care years 
later with unresolved gastrointestinal symptoms.
CONCLUSION: Clinicians must verify that CS has been ruled out following a celiac 
disease diagnosis. In regard to CS's mechanism, CS's high frequency of comorbid 
autoimmune conditions and its robust response to corticosteroids support an 
immune-mediated process. Future research should continue to aim to elucidate the 
mechanism as it would allow for a more targeted approach to treatment, such as 
anti-fibrotic or specific immunomodulator therapy.

© 2025 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000543939
PMCID: PMC11964410
PMID: 40177217

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.