---
reference_id: PMID:10973256
title: Mutations of the gene encoding the protein kinase A type I-alpha regulatory subunit in patients with the Carney complex.
authors:
- Kirschner LS
- Carney JA
- Pack SD
- Taymans SE
- Giatzakis C
- Cho YS
- Cho-Chung YS
- Stratakis CA
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1038/79238
keywords:
- Acromegaly/genetics
- Alleles
- "Blotting, Western"
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2"
- Cyclic AMP/metabolism
- "Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "DNA, Complementary/metabolism"
- Endocrine Gland Neoplasms/genetics
- Exons
- Expressed Sequence Tags
- Family Health
- Female
- Genotype
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Introns
- Loss of Heterozygosity
- Male
- Microsatellite Repeats
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Myxoma/genetics
- Neoplasms/genetics
- Neurilemmoma/genetics
- Nucleic Acid Heteroduplexes
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Skin Pigmentation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations of the gene encoding the protein kinase A type I-alpha regulatory subunit in patients with the Carney complex.
**Authors:** Kirschner LS, Carney JA, Pack SD, Taymans SE, Giatzakis C, Cho YS, Cho-Chung YS, Stratakis CA
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/79238](https://doi.org/10.1038/79238)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2000 Sep;26(1):89-92. doi: 10.1038/79238.

Mutations of the gene encoding the protein kinase A type I-alpha regulatory 
subunit in patients with the Carney complex.

Kirschner LS(1), Carney JA, Pack SD, Taymans SE, Giatzakis C, Cho YS, Cho-Chung 
YS, Stratakis CA.

Author information:
(1)Unit on Genetics & Endocrinology, Developmental Endocrinology Branch, 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.

Carney complex (CNC) is a multiple neoplasia syndrome characterized by spotty 
skin pigmentation, cardiac and other myxomas, endocrine tumours and psammomatous 
melanotic schwannomas. CNC is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait and the 
genes responsible have been mapped to 2p16 and 17q22-24 (refs 6, 7). Because of 
its similarities to the McCune-Albright syndrome and other features, such as 
paradoxical responses to endocrine signals, genes implicated in cyclic 
nucleotide-dependent signalling have been considered candidates for causing CNC 
(ref. 10). In CNC families mapping to 17q, we detected loss of heterozygosity 
(LOH) in the vicinity of the gene (PRKAR1A) encoding protein kinase A regulatory 
subunit 1-alpha (RIalpha), including a polymorphic site within its 5' region. We 
subsequently identified three unrelated kindreds with an identical mutation in 
the coding region of PRKAR1A. Analysis of additional cases revealed the same 
mutation in a sporadic case of CNC, and different mutations in three other 
families, including one with isolated inherited cardiac myxomas. Analysis of PKA 
activity in CNC tumours demonstrated a decreased basal activity, but an increase 
in cAMP-stimulated activity compared with non-CNC tumours. We conclude that 
germline mutations in PRKAR1A, an apparent tumour-suppressor gene, are 
responsible for the CNC phenotype in a subset of patients with this disease.

DOI: 10.1038/79238
PMID: 10973256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]