---
reference_id: "PMID:35861666"
title: Natural history of KBG syndrome in a large European cohort.
authors:
- Loberti L
- Bruno LP
- Granata S
- Doddato G
- Resciniti S
- Fava F
- Carullo M
- Rahikkala E
- Jouret G
- Menke LA
- Lederer D
- Vrielynck P
- Ryba L
- Brunetti-Pierri N
- Lasa-Aranzasti A
- Cueto-González AM
- Trujillano L
- Valenzuela I
- Tizzano EF
- Spinelli AM
- Bruno I
- Currò A
- Stanzial F
- Benedicenti F
- Lopergolo D
- Santorelli FM
- Aristidou C
- Tanteles GA
- Maystadt I
- Tkemaladze T
- Reimand T
- Lokke H
- Õunap K
- Haanpää MK
- Holubová A
- Zoubková V
- Schwarz M
- Žordania R
- Muru K
- Roht L
- Tihveräinen A
- Teek R
- Thomson U
- Atallah I
- Superti-Furga A
- Buoni S
- Canitano R
- Scandurra V
- Rossetti A
- Grosso S
- Battini R
- Baldassarri M
- Mencarelli MA
- Rizzo CL
- Bruttini M
- Mari F
- Ariani F
- Renieri A
- Pinto AM
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac167
keywords:
- Pregnancy
- Female
- Humans
- Facies
- Tooth Abnormalities/genetics
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics"
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, diagnosis"
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, diagnosis"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- Phenotype
- Dwarfism/genetics
- European People
- "Hernia, Diaphragmatic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of KBG syndrome in a large European cohort.
**Authors:** Loberti L, Bruno LP, Granata S, Doddato G, Resciniti S, Fava F, Carullo M, Rahikkala E, Jouret G, Menke LA, Lederer D, Vrielynck P, Ryba L, Brunetti-Pierri N, Lasa-Aranzasti A, Cueto-González AM, Trujillano L, Valenzuela I, Tizzano EF, Spinelli AM, Bruno I, Currò A, Stanzial F, Benedicenti F, Lopergolo D, Santorelli FM, Aristidou C, Tanteles GA, Maystadt I, Tkemaladze T, Reimand T, Lokke H, Õunap K, Haanpää MK, Holubová A, Zoubková V, Schwarz M, Žordania R, Muru K, Roht L, Tihveräinen A, Teek R, Thomson U, Atallah I, Superti-Furga A, Buoni S, Canitano R, Scandurra V, Rossetti A, Grosso S, Battini R, Baldassarri M, Mencarelli MA, Rizzo CL, Bruttini M, Mari F, Ariani F, Renieri A, Pinto AM
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddac167](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddac167)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2022 Dec 16;31(24):4131-4142. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac167.

Natural history of KBG syndrome in a large European cohort.

Loberti L(1)(2)(3), Bruno LP(1)(2), Granata S(1)(2)(3), Doddato G(1)(2), 
Resciniti S(1)(2), Fava F(1)(2)(3), Carullo M(1)(2), Rahikkala E(4), Jouret 
G(5), Menke LA(6), Lederer D(7), Vrielynck P(8), Ryba L(9), Brunetti-Pierri 
N(10), Lasa-Aranzasti A(11), Cueto-González AM(11), Trujillano L(11), Valenzuela 
I(11), Tizzano EF(11), Spinelli AM(12), Bruno I(13), Currò A(14), Stanzial 
F(14), Benedicenti F(14), Lopergolo D(15), Santorelli FM(15), Aristidou C(16), 
Tanteles GA(16), Maystadt I(7), Tkemaladze T(17), Reimand T(18)(19), Lokke 
H(18)(19), Õunap K(18)(19), Haanpää MK(20), Holubová A(9), Zoubková V(9), 
Schwarz M(9), Žordania R(18), Muru K(18)(19), Roht L(18)(19), Tihveräinen A(21), 
Teek R(18), Thomson U(22), Atallah I(23), Superti-Furga A(23), Buoni S(24), 
Canitano R(24), Scandurra V(24), Rossetti A(25), Grosso S(25), Battini 
R(26)(27), Baldassarri M(1)(2), Mencarelli MA(3), Rizzo CL(3), Bruttini 
M(1)(2)(3), Mari F(1)(2)(3), Ariani F(1)(2)(3), Renieri A(1)(2)(3), Pinto AM(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena 53100, Italy.
(2)Med Biotech Hub and Competence Centre, Department of Medical Biotechnologies, 
University of Siena, Siena 53100, Italy.
(3)Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena 53100, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, PEDEGO Research Unit, and Medical Research 
Center Oulu, University of Oulu and Oulu University Hospital, Oulu 90014, 
Finland.
(5)National Center of Genetics (NCG), Laboratoire national de santé (LNS), 
L-3555 Dudelange, Luxembourg.
(6)Amsterdam UMC location University of Amsterdam, Department of Pediatrics, 
Amsterdam 1100, The Netherlands.
(7)Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique; Centre de Génétique Humaine, 
Gosselies 6041, Belgium.
(8)William Lennox Neurological Hospital, Reference Center for Refractory 
Epilepsy UCLouvain, Ottignies 1340, Belgium.
(9)Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University - 2nd Faculty 
of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague 150 00, Czech Republic.
(10)Department of Translational Medicine, University of Naples "Federico II", 
Naples 80125, Italy.
(11)Area of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, 
Barcellona 08035, Spain.
(12)Regional Coordinating Center for Rare Diseases, Udine 33100, Italy.
(13)Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Trieste 34100, Italy.
(14)Genetic Counseling Service, Department of Pediatrics, Regional Hospital of 
Bolzano, Bolzano 39100, Italy.
(15)IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation, Molecular Medicine for Neurodegenerative and 
Neuromuscular Disease Unit, Pisa 98125, Italy.
(16)Department of Clinical Genetics and Genomics, The Cyprus Institute of 
Neurology & Genetics, Nicosia 1683, Cyprus.
(17)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Tbilisi State Medical 
University, Tbilisi 0162, Georgia.
(18)Department of Clinical Genetics, Genetic and Personalized Medicine Clinic, 
Tartu University Hospital, Tartu 50406, Estonia.
(19)Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu 50406, Estonia.
(20)Department of Genomics and Clinical Genetics, Turku University Hospital, 
Turku 20500, Finland.
(21)Department of Child Neurology, Turku University Hospital, Turku 20500, 
Finland.
(22)Centre for Neurological Diseases, West-Tallinn Central Hospital, Tallinn 
10617, Estonia.
(23)Division of Genetic Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV) and 
University of Lausanne, 1011 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(24)Division of Child and Adolescent Neuropsychiatry, University of Siena, Siena 
53100, Italy.
(25)Clinical Paediatrics, Department of Molecular Medicine and Development, 
University of Siena, Siena 53100, Italy.
(26)IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation, Department of Developmental Neuroscience, 
Pisa 98125, Italy.
(27)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa 
56122, Italy.

KBG syndrome (KBGS) is characterized by distinctive facial gestalt, short 
stature and variable clinical findings. With ageing, some features become more 
recognizable, allowing a differential diagnosis. We aimed to better characterize 
natural history of KBGS. In the context of a European collaborative study, we 
collected the largest cohort of KBGS patients (49). A combined array- based 
Comparative Genomic Hybridization and next generation sequencing (NGS) approach 
investigated both genomic Copy Number Variants and SNVs. Intellectual disability 
(ID) (82%) ranged from mild to moderate with severe ID identified in two 
patients. Epilepsy was present in 26.5%. Short stature was consistent over time, 
while occipitofrontal circumference (median value: -0.88 SD at birth) normalized 
over years. Cerebral anomalies, were identified in 56% of patients and thus 
represented the second most relevant clinical feature reinforcing clinical 
suspicion in the paediatric age when short stature and vertebral/dental 
anomalies are vague. Macrodontia, oligodontia and dental agenesis (53%) were 
almost as frequent as skeletal anomalies, such as brachydactyly, short fifth 
finger, fifth finger clinodactyly, pectus excavatum/carinatum, delayed bone age. 
In 28.5% of individuals, prenatal ultrasound anomalies were reported. Except for 
three splicing variants, leading to a premature termination, variants were 
almost all frameshift. Our results, broadening the spectrum of KBGS phenotype 
progression, provide useful tools to facilitate differential diagnosis and 
improve clinical management. We suggest to consider a wider range of dental 
anomalies before excluding diagnosis and to perform a careful 
odontoiatric/ear-nose-throat (ENT) evaluation in order to look for even 
submucosal palate cleft given the high percentage of palate abnormalities. NGS 
approaches, following evidence of antenatal ultrasound anomalies, should include 
ANKRD11.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddac167
PMCID: PMC9759332
PMID: 35861666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]