---
reference_id: "PMID:31927301"
title: Reviewing estimates of the basic reproduction number for dengue, Zika and chikungunya across global climate zones.
authors:
- Liu Y
- Lillepold K
- Semenza JC
- Tozan Y
- Quam MBM
- Rocklöv J
journal: Environ Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2020.109114
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reviewing estimates of the basic reproduction number for dengue, Zika and chikungunya across global climate zones.
**Authors:** Liu Y, Lillepold K, Semenza JC, Tozan Y, Quam MBM, Rocklöv J
**Journal:** Environ Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.envres.2020.109114](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.109114)

## Content

1. Environ Res. 2020 Mar;182:109114. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2020.109114. Epub 2020
 Jan 3.

Reviewing estimates of the basic reproduction number for dengue, Zika and 
chikungunya across global climate zones.

Liu Y(1), Lillepold K(2), Semenza JC(2), Tozan Y(3), Quam MBM(4), Rocklöv J(5).

Author information:
(1)School of International Business, Xiamen University Tan Kah Kee College, 
Zhangzhou, 363105, China. Electronic address: yingliu722@163.com.
(2)European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)New York University, College of Global Public Health, New York, NY, USA. 
Electronic address: tozan@nyu.edu.
(4)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Section of Sustainable 
Health, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(5)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Section of Sustainable 
Health, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden. Electronic address: 
joacim.rocklov@umu.se.

BACKGROUND: Globally, dengue, Zika virus, and chikungunya are important viral 
mosquito-borne diseases that infect millions of people annually. Their 
geographic range includes not only tropical areas but also sub-tropical and 
temperate zones such as Japan and Italy. The relative severity of these 
arboviral disease outbreaks can vary depending on the setting. In this study we 
explore variation in the epidemiologic potential of outbreaks amongst these 
climatic zones and arboviruses in order to elucidate potential reasons behind 
such differences.
METHODOLOGY: We reviewed the peer-reviewed literature (PubMed) to obtain basic 
reproduction number (R0) estimates for dengue, Zika virus, and chikungunya from 
tropical, sub-tropical and temperate regions. We also computed R0 estimates for 
temperate and sub-tropical climate zones, based on the outbreak curves in the 
initial outbreak phase. Lastly we compared these estimates across climate zones, 
defined by latitude.
RESULTS: Of 2115 studies, we reviewed the full text of 128 studies and included 
65 studies in our analysis. Our results suggest that the R0 of an arboviral 
outbreak depends on climate zone, with lower R0 estimates, on average, in 
temperate zones (R0 = 2.03) compared to tropical (R0 = 3.44) and sub-tropical 
zones (R0 = 10.29). The variation in R0 was considerable, ranging from 0.16 to 
65. The largest R0 was for dengue (65) and was estimated by the Ross-Macdonald 
model in the tropical zone, whereas the smallest R0 (0.16) was for Zika virus 
and was estimated statistically from an outbreak curve in the sub-tropical zone.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate climate zone to be an important determinant of 
the basic reproduction number, R0, for dengue, Zika virus, and chikungunya. The 
role of other factors as determinants of R0, such as methods, environmental and 
social conditions, and disease control, should be further investigated. The 
results suggest that R0 may increase in temperate regions in response to global 
warming, and highlight the increasing need for strengthening preparedness and 
control activities.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2020.109114
PMID: 31927301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interests All the 
authors of this paper declare they have no competing interests.