---
reference_id: "PMID:23692385"
title: Mesoaxial polydactyly is a major feature in Bardet-Biedl syndrome patients with LZTFL1 (BBS17) mutations.
authors:
- Schaefer E
- Lauer J
- Durand M
- Pelletier V
- Obringer C
- Claussmann A
- Braun JJ
- Redin C
- Mathis C
- Muller J
- Schmidt-Mutter C
- Flori E
- Marion V
- Stoetzel C
- Dollfus H
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1111/cge.12198
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mesoaxial polydactyly is a major feature in Bardet-Biedl syndrome patients with LZTFL1 (BBS17) mutations.
**Authors:** Schaefer E, Lauer J, Durand M, Pelletier V, Obringer C, Claussmann A, Braun JJ, Redin C, Mathis C, Muller J, Schmidt-Mutter C, Flori E, Marion V, Stoetzel C, Dollfus H
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.12198](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.12198)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2014 May;85(5):476-81. doi: 10.1111/cge.12198. Epub 2013 Jun 12.

Mesoaxial polydactyly is a major feature in Bardet-Biedl syndrome patients with 
LZTFL1 (BBS17) mutations.

Schaefer E(1), Lauer J, Durand M, Pelletier V, Obringer C, Claussmann A, Braun 
JJ, Redin C, Mathis C, Muller J, Schmidt-Mutter C, Flori E, Marion V, Stoetzel 
C, Dollfus H.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, INSERM U1112, Faculté de Médecine de 
Strasbourg, Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

Ciliopathies are heterogeneous disorders sharing different clinical signs due to 
a defect at the level of the primary cilia/centrosome complex. Postaxial 
polydactyly is frequently reported in ciliopathies, especially in Bardet-Biedl 
syndrome (BBS). Clinical features and genetic results observed in a pair of 
dizygotic twins with BBS are reported. The following manifestations were 
present: retinitis pigmentosa, bilateral insertional polydactyly, cognitive 
impairment and renal dysfunction. X-rays of the hands confirmed the presence of 
a 4th mesoaxial extra-digit with Y-shaped metacarpal bones. The sequencing of 
LZTFL1 identified a missense mutation (NM_020347.2: p.Leu87Pro; c.260T>C) and a 
nonsense mutation (p.Glu260*; c.778G>T), establishing a compound heterozygous 
status for the twins. A major decrease of LZTFL1 transcript and protein was 
observed in the patient's fibroblasts. This is the second report of LZTFL1 
mutations in BBS patients confirming LZTFL1 as a BBS gene. Interestingly, the 
only two families reported in literature thus far with LZTFL1 mutations have in 
common mesoaxial polydactyly, a very uncommon feature for BBS. This special 
subtype of polydactyly in BBS patients is easily identified on clinical 
examination and prompts for priority sequencing of LZTFL1 (BBS17).

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.12198
PMID: 23692385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]