---
reference_id: "PMID:37838675"
title: "A scoping review of 'Pacing' for management of Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS): lessons learned for the long COVID pandemic."
authors:
- Sanal-Hayes NEM
- Mclaughlin M
- Hayes LD
- Mair JL
- Ormerod J
- Carless D
- Hilliard N
- Meach R
- Ingram J
- Sculthorpe NF
journal: J Transl Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12967-023-04587-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A scoping review of 'Pacing' for management of Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS): lessons learned for the long COVID pandemic.
**Authors:** Sanal-Hayes NEM, Mclaughlin M, Hayes LD, Mair JL, Ormerod J, Carless D, Hilliard N, Meach R, Ingram J, Sculthorpe NF
**Journal:** J Transl Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12967-023-04587-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-023-04587-5)

## Content

1. J Transl Med. 2023 Oct 14;21(1):720. doi: 10.1186/s12967-023-04587-5.

A scoping review of 'Pacing' for management of Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic 
Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS): lessons learned for the long COVID pandemic.

Sanal-Hayes NEM(1)(2), Mclaughlin M(1)(3), Hayes LD(1), Mair JL(4)(5), Ormerod 
J(6), Carless D(1), Hilliard N(7), Meach R(1), Ingram J(8), Sculthorpe NF(1).

Author information:
(1)Sport and Physical Activity Research Institute, School of Health and Life 
Sciences, University of the West of Scotland, Glasgow, UK.
(2)School of Health and Society, University of Salford, Salford, UK.
(3)School of Sport, Exercise & Rehabilitation Sciences, University of Hull, 
Hull, UK.
(4)Future Health Technologies, Singapore-ETH Centre, Campus for Research 
Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE), Singapore, Singapore. 
jamair@ethz.ch.
(5)Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore, Singapore. jamair@ethz.ch.
(6)Long COVID Scotland, 12 Kemnay Place, Aberdeen, UK.
(7)Physios for ME, London, UK.
(8)School of Education and Social Sciences, University of the West of Scotland, 
Glasgow, UK.

BACKGROUND: Controversy over treatment for people with myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is a barrier to appropriate 
treatment. Energy management or pacing is a prominent coping strategy for people 
with ME/CFS. Whilst a definitive definition of pacing is not unanimous within 
the literature or healthcare providers, it typically comprises regulating 
activity to avoid post exertional malaise (PEM), the worsening of symptoms after 
an activity. Until now, characteristics of pacing, and the effects on patients' 
symptoms had not been systematically reviewed. This is problematic as the most 
common approach to pacing, pacing prescription, and the pooled efficacy of 
pacing was unknown. Collating evidence may help advise those suffering with 
similar symptoms, including long COVID, as practitioners would be better 
informed on methodological approaches to adopt, pacing implementation, and 
expected outcomes.
OBJECTIVES: In this scoping review of the literature, we aggregated type of, and 
outcomes of, pacing in people with ME/CFS.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: Original investigations concerning pacing were considered 
in participants with ME/CFS.
SOURCES OF EVIDENCE: Six electronic databases (PubMed, Scholar, ScienceDirect, 
Scopus, Web of Science and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 
[CENTRAL]) were searched; and websites MEPedia, Action for ME, and ME Action 
were also searched for grey literature, to fully capture patient surveys not 
published in academic journals.
METHODS: A scoping review was conducted. Review selection and characterisation 
was performed by two independent reviewers using pretested forms.
RESULTS: Authors reviewed 177 titles and abstracts, resulting in 17 included 
studies: three randomised control trials (RCTs); one uncontrolled trial; one 
interventional case series; one retrospective observational study; two 
prospective observational studies; four cross-sectional observational studies; 
and five cross-sectional analytical studies. Studies included variable designs, 
durations, and outcome measures. In terms of pacing administration, studies used 
educational sessions and diaries for activity monitoring. Eleven studies 
reported benefits of pacing, four studies reported no effect, and two studies 
reported a detrimental effect in comparison to the control group.
CONCLUSIONS: Highly variable study designs and outcome measures, allied to poor 
to fair methodological quality resulted in heterogenous findings and highlights 
the requirement for more research examining pacing. Looking to the long COVID 
pandemic, our results suggest future studies should be RCTs utilising 
objectively quantified digitised pacing, over a longer duration of examination 
(i.e. longitudinal studies), using the core outcome set for patient reported 
outcome measures. Until these are completed, the literature base is insufficient 
to inform treatment practises for people with ME/CFS and long COVID.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-023-04587-5
PMCID: PMC10576275
PMID: 37838675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We report no financial and non-financial 
competing interests.