---
reference_id: "PMID:35915025"
title: Tubulin mutations in human neurodevelopmental disorders.
authors:
- Maillard C
- Roux CJ
- Charbit-Henrion F
- Steffann J
- Laquerriere A
- Quazza F
- Buisson NB
journal: Semin Cell Dev Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2022.07.009
keywords:
- Humans
- Developmental Disabilities
- "Lissencephaly/genetics, diagnosis"
- Microcephaly
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins
- Mutation
- Tubulin/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tubulin mutations in human neurodevelopmental disorders.
**Authors:** Maillard C, Roux CJ, Charbit-Henrion F, Steffann J, Laquerriere A, Quazza F, Buisson NB
**Journal:** Semin Cell Dev Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semcdb.2022.07.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2022.07.009)

## Content

1. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2023 Mar 15;137:87-95. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2022.07.009.
 Epub 2022 Jul 30.

Tubulin mutations in human neurodevelopmental disorders.

Maillard C(1), Roux CJ(2), Charbit-Henrion F(3), Steffann J(3), Laquerriere 
A(4), Quazza F(5), Buisson NB(6).

Author information:
(1)Université de Paris, Imagine Institute, Team Genetics and Development of the 
Cerebral Cortex, F-75015 Paris, France; Université de Paris, Institute of 
Psychiatry and Neuroscience of Paris, INSERM U1266, F-75014 Paris, France.
(2)Pediatric Radiology, Necker Enfants Malades University Hospital, Université 
de Paris, Paris, France.
(3)Université de Paris, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Imagine INSERM UMR1163, Service de 
Génétique Moléculaire, Groupe hospitalier Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, France.
(4)Pathology Laboratory, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France; NeoVasc 
Region-Inserm Team ERI28, Laboratory of Microvascular Endothelium and Neonate 
Brain Lesions, Institute of Research for Innovation in Biomedicine, University 
of Rouen, Rouen, France.
(5)Pediatric Neurology, Necker Enfants Malades University Hospital, Université 
de Paris, Paris, France.
(6)Université de Paris, Imagine Institute, Team Genetics and Development of the 
Cerebral Cortex, F-75015 Paris, France; Université de Paris, Institute of 
Psychiatry and Neuroscience of Paris, INSERM U1266, F-75014 Paris, France; 
Pediatric Neurology, Necker Enfants Malades University Hospital, Université de 
Paris, Paris, France. Electronic address: Nadia.bahi-buisson@inserm.fr.

Mutations causing dysfunction of tubulins and microtubule-associated proteins, 
also known as tubulinopathies, are a group of recently described entities that 
lead to complex brain malformations. Anatomical and functional consequences of 
the disruption of tubulins include microcephaly, combined with abnormal 
corticogenesis due to impaired migration or lamination and abnormal growth cone 
dynamics of projecting and callosal axons. Key imaging features of 
tubulinopathies are characterized by three major patterns of malformations of 
cortical development (MCD): lissencephaly, microlissencephaly, and dysgyria. 
Additional distinctive MRI features include dysmorphism of the basal ganglia, 
midline commissural structure hypoplasia or agenesis, and cerebellar and 
brainstem hypoplasia. Tubulinopathies can be diagnosed as early as 21-24 
gestational weeks using imaging and neuropathology, with possible extreme 
microlissencephaly with an extremely thin cortex, lissencephaly with either 
thick or thin/intermediate cortex, and dysgyria combined with cerebellar 
hypoplasia, pons hypoplasia and corpus callosum dysgenesis. More than 100 
MCD-associated mutations have been reported in TUBA1A, TUBB2B, or TUBB3 genes, 
whereas fewer than ten are known in other genes such TUBB2A, TUBB or TUBG1. 
Although these mutations are scattered along the α- and β-tubulin sequences, 
recurrent mutations are consistently associated with almost identical cortical 
dysgenesis. Much of the evidence supports that these mutations alter the dynamic 
properties and functions of microtubules in several fashions. These include 
diminishing the abundance of functional tubulin heterodimers, altering GTP 
binding, altering longitudinal and lateral protofilament interactions, and 
impairing microtubule interactions with kinesin and/or dynein motors or with 
MAPs. In this review we discuss the recent advances in our understanding of the 
effects of mutations of tubulins and microtubule-associated proteins on human 
brain development and the pathogenesis of malformations of cortical development.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2022.07.009
PMID: 35915025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of Interest none.