---
reference_id: "PMID:8156315"
title: Lesch-Nyhan syndrome presenting with renal insufficiency in infancy and transient neonatal hypothyroidism.
authors:
- Jenkins EA
- Hallett RJ
- Hull RG
journal: Br J Rheumatol
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/33.4.392
keywords:
- Acute Kidney Injury/etiology
- Erythrocytes/enzymology
- "Gout/diagnostic imaging, etiology, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Hypothyroidism/etiology, physiopathology"
- Hypoxanthine Phosphoribosyltransferase/blood
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome/blood, complications"
- Male
- Radiography
- Time Factors
- "Uric Acid/blood, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lesch-Nyhan syndrome presenting with renal insufficiency in infancy and transient neonatal hypothyroidism.
**Authors:** Jenkins EA, Hallett RJ, Hull RG
**Journal:** Br J Rheumatol (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/33.4.392](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/33.4.392)

## Content

1. Br J Rheumatol. 1994 Apr;33(4):392-6. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/33.4.392.

Lesch-Nyhan syndrome presenting with renal insufficiency in infancy and 
transient neonatal hypothyroidism.

Jenkins EA(1), Hallett RJ, Hull RG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Portsmouth Hospitals.

A 20-day-old male infant presented with acute renal failure. Three weeks later 
he developed acutely swollen, hot, red joints and tophi in his hands and feet. 
The serum uric acid was 2.2 mmol/l (normal 0.13-0.23 mmol/l) and the urinary 
oxypurine/creatinine ratio was 2.26 mmol (normal < 1.5 mmol). Complete 
deficiency of hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl transferase (HGPRT) in intact 
erythrocytes confirmed Lesch-Nyhan syndrome. Neurological development was 
delayed and self-mutilation was observed at 22 months. Acute renal failure 
secondary to crystal nephropathy and tophaceous gout are unusual presenting 
features of this rare condition. This child also had transient neonatal 
hypothyroidism, which is not a recognized manifestation of the syndrome.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/33.4.392
PMID: 8156315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]