---
reference_id: PMID:23210645
title: Epidemiology of acne vulgaris.
authors:
- Bhate K
- Williams HC
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.12149
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of acne vulgaris.
**Authors:** Bhate K, Williams HC
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.12149](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.12149)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2013 Mar;168(3):474-85. doi: 10.1111/bjd.12149.

Epidemiology of acne vulgaris.

Bhate K(1), Williams HC.

Author information:
(1)Centre of Evidence Based Dermatology, University of Nottingham, Room A103, 
King's Meadow Campus, Lenton Lane, Nottingham NG7 2NR, UK. 
ketaki.bhate@nottingham.ac.uk

Despite acne being an almost universal condition in younger people, relatively 
little is known about its epidemiology. We sought to review what is known about 
the distribution and causes of acne by conducting a systematic review of 
relevant epidemiological studies. We searched Medline and Embase to the end of 
November 2011. The role of Propionibacterium acnes in pathogenesis is unclear: 
antibiotics have a direct antimicrobial as well as an anti-inflammatory effect. 
Moderate-to-severe acne affects around 20% of young people and severity 
correlates with pubertal maturity. Acne may be presenting at a younger age 
because of earlier puberty. It is unclear if ethnicity is truly associated with 
acne. Black individuals are more prone to postinflammatory hyperpigmentation and 
specific subtypes such as 'pomade acne'. Acne persists into the 20s and 30s in 
around 64% and 43% of individuals, respectively. The heritability of acne is 
almost 80% in first-degree relatives. Acne occurs earlier and is more severe in 
those with a positive family history. Suicidal ideation is more common in those 
with severe compared with mild acne. In the U.S.A., the cost of acne is over 
3 billion dollars per year in terms of treatment and loss of productivity. A 
systematic review in 2005 found no clear evidence of dietary components 
increasing acne risk. One small randomized controlled trial showed that low 
glycaemic index (GI) diets can lower acne severity. A possible association 
between dairy food intake and acne requires closer scrutiny. Natural sunlight or 
poor hygiene are not associated. The association between smoking and acne is 
probably due to confounding. Validated core outcomes in future studies will help 
in combining future evidence.

© 2012 The Authors. BJD © 2012 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.12149
PMID: 23210645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]