---
reference_id: "PMID:33317250"
title: "Anti-fibrotic treatments for chronic liver diseases: The present and the future."
authors:
- Odagiri N
- Matsubara T
- Sato-Matsubara M
- Fujii H
- Enomoto M
- Kawada N
journal: Clin Mol Hepatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3350/cmh.2020.0187
keywords:
- Endothelial Cells
- Hepatic Stellate Cells
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Portal"
- Liver/pathology
- "Liver Cirrhosis/pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-fibrotic treatments for chronic liver diseases: The present and the future.
**Authors:** Odagiri N, Matsubara T, Sato-Matsubara M, Fujii H, Enomoto M, Kawada N
**Journal:** Clin Mol Hepatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3350/cmh.2020.0187](https://doi.org/10.3350/cmh.2020.0187)

## Content

1. Clin Mol Hepatol. 2021 Jul;27(3):413-424. doi: 10.3350/cmh.2020.0187. Epub
2020  Dec 3.

Anti-fibrotic treatments for chronic liver diseases: The present and the future.

Odagiri N(1), Matsubara T(2), Sato-Matsubara M(1)(3), Fujii H(4), Enomoto M(1),
Kawada N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City University,
Osaka, Japan.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Osaka City University, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Department of Endowed Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka City University, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Department of Premier Preventive Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
City University, Osaka, Japan.

Liver fibrosis reflects tissue scarring in the liver due to the accumulation of
excessive extracellular matrix in response to chronically persistent liver
injury. Hepatocyte cell death can trigger capillarization of liver sinusoidal
endothelial cells, stimulation of immune cells including macrophages and Kupffer
cells, and activation of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), resulting in progression
of liver fibrosis. Liver cirrhosis is the terminal state of liver fibrosis and
is associated with severe complications, such as liver failure, portal
hypertension, and liver cancer. Nevertheless, effective therapy for cirrhosis
has not yet been established, and liver transplantation is the only radical
treatment for severe cases. Studies investigating HSC activation and regulation
of collagen production in the liver have made breakthroughs in recent decades
that have advanced the knowledge regarding liver fibrosis pathophysiology. In
this review, we summarize molecular mechanisms of liver fibrosis and discuss the
development of novel anti-fibrotic therapies.

DOI: 10.3350/cmh.2020.0187
PMCID: PMC8273638
PMID: 33317250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no
conflicts to disclose.
