---
reference_id: "PMID:34375016"
title: "A rare variant Klinefelter syndrome seen 40 years later: 47,X,del(Xq24),Y."
authors:
- Özkent MS
- Balasar Ö
journal: Andrologia
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/and.14213
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A rare variant Klinefelter syndrome seen 40 years later: 47,X,del(Xq24),Y.
**Authors:** Özkent MS, Balasar Ö
**Journal:** Andrologia (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/and.14213](https://doi.org/10.1111/and.14213)

## Content

1. Andrologia. 2021 Dec;53(11):e14213. doi: 10.1111/and.14213. Epub 2021 Aug 10.

A rare variant Klinefelter syndrome seen 40 years later: 47,X,del(Xq24),Y.

Özkent MS(1), Balasar Ö(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Konya City Hospital, Konya, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Konya City Hospital, Konya, Turkey.

Patients with Klinefelter syndrome (KS) show a typically 47,XXY karyotype; 
however, some variations have been observed, including 47,XX,der(Y), 
46,XY/47,XXY, 48,XXXY, 48,XXYY, and mosaicism or structural sex chromosome 
abnormalities in some patients. In the literature, a rare KS variant, 
47,X,del(Xq),Y karyotype, was reported in only a few cases prior to 1981. A 
40-year-old man (IV-3) was referred to our department due to infertility. His 
phenotype did not differ from the classic KS phenotype. He had two siblings 
(1-male; 1-female). His brother (IV-5) had mental retardation and died one year 
earlier at age 32. Additionally, his sister (IV-2) also had a history of 
infertility due to her husband's azoospermia. His mother had a history of 12 
miscarriages. Karyotype analysis revealed the 47,X,del(Xq24),Y karyotype, and no 
deletions were seen in the AZF and SRY regions. We thought this chromosomal 
abnormality in the patient might have resulted from X-autosome translocation in 
one of his parents since his mother had recurrent pregnancy loss and his sibling 
had mental retardation. However, we could not confirm it due to his parents were 
not alive. This study shows the first case of a long-arm X-chromosome deletion 
after a long period and reviews current knowledge concerning variant KS 
(deletion Xq).

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/and.14213
PMID: 34375016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]