---
reference_id: "PMID:30789149"
title: Long-term outcomes of patients with primary angiitis of the central nervous system.
authors:
- Hajj-Ali RA
- Saygin D
- Ray E
- Morales-Mena A
- Messner W
- Sundaram P
- Jones S
- Calabrese LH
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2019'
keywords:
- Cerebral Angiography
- "Cognition Disorders/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Depressive Disorder/diagnosis, etiology"
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neurologic Examination
- Quality of Life
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/cerebrospinal fluid, complications, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term outcomes of patients with primary angiitis of the central nervous system.
**Authors:** Hajj-Ali RA, Saygin D, Ray E, Morales-Mena A, Messner W, Sundaram P, Jones S, Calabrese LH
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2019)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2019 Mar-Apr;37 Suppl 117(2):45-51. Epub 2019 Feb 18.

Long-term outcomes of patients with primary angiitis of the central nervous 
system.

Hajj-Ali RA(1), Saygin D(2), Ray E(3), Morales-Mena A(4), Messner W(5), Sundaram 
P(6), Jones S(7), Calabrese LH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatic & Immunologic Disease, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, 
OH, USA. hajjalr@ccf.org.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Rheumatic & Immunologic Disease, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, 
OH, USA.
(4)Summa Health Medical Group, Akron, OH, USA.
(5)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, 
USA.
(6)Department of Radiology, University Hospitals, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(7)Department of Radiology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Primary angiitis of the central nervous system (PACNS) is a 
vasculitis confined to the brain and spinal cord, which often presents with 
severe cognitive and functional deficits. Despite progress in diagnosis, little 
is still known about long-term outcomes. Our aim was to evaluate long-term 
functional capabilities, quality of life, and depression, and to determine the 
effect of treatment duration on patient outcomes.
METHODS: We identified patients by ICD-9 codes for cerebral angiitis, and 
included them if they met two of the three following criteria: inflammatory 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), cerebral angiogram typical of vasculitis, or findings 
of vasculitis on pathologic examination of brain tissue. Disability was assessed 
by the Barthel Index, quality of life was assessed by EuroQol, and depression 
was assessed with Patient Health Questionnaire.
RESULTS: Seventy-eight patients met the inclusion criteria, of which 27 
responded to the questionnaire (34.6%). Mean follow-up of those who responded 
was 5.5 years (± 4.7). Nineteen of 27 patients (70.4%) had mild disability; 
meanwhile, 5 (18.5%) had severe disability. Fourteen of 27 patients (51.9%) had 
no mobility problem, 18 (66.7%) had no problems with self-care, 15 (55.6%) had 
no problems with usual activities, 14 (51.9%) had no pain, and 8 (29.6%) had no 
anxiety. Approximately 70% of patients had minimal or no depression.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the longest reported follow-up of patients with PACNS 
described in the literature to date. Most patients had mild long-term disability 
and minimal to no depression, which may be reflective of treatment advances.

PMID: 30789149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]