---
reference_id: "PMID:17009307"
title: "Pediatric granulomatous arthritis: an international registry."
authors:
- Rosé CD
- Wouters CH
- Meiorin S
- Doyle TM
- Davey MP
- Rosenbaum JT
- Martin TM
journal: Arthritis Rheum
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/art.22122
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Arthritis/genetics, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Dermatitis/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Global Health
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Nod2 Signaling Adaptor Protein/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Registries/statistics & numerical data"
- "Sarcoidosis/genetics, pathology"
- Syndrome
- "Uveitis/genetics, pathology"
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/classification, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric granulomatous arthritis: an international registry.
**Authors:** Rosé CD, Wouters CH, Meiorin S, Doyle TM, Davey MP, Rosenbaum JT, Martin TM
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheum (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.22122](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.22122)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheum. 2006 Oct;54(10):3337-44. doi: 10.1002/art.22122.

Pediatric granulomatous arthritis: an international registry.

Rosé CD(1), Wouters CH, Meiorin S, Doyle TM, Davey MP, Rosenbaum JT, Martin TM.

Author information:
(1)duPont Children's Hospital, Wilmington, Delaware 19899, USA. 
crose@nemours.org

OBJECTIVE: Blau syndrome and its sporadic counterpart, early-onset sarcoidosis, 
share an identical phenotype featuring the classic triad of arthritis, 
dermatitis, and uveitis and are associated with mutations of CARD15 in 50-90% of 
cases. We chose the term "pediatric granulomatous arthritis" to refer to both. 
An international registry was established in the spring of 2005 to define the 
phenotype spectrum and establish the mutation frequency and variants.
METHODS: Histologically confirmed granuloma and arthritis were required for 
inclusion. Probands and relatives were genotyped for CARD15. Deidentified 
clinical information was collected.
RESULTS: One year after the inception of the registry, 61 individuals from 22 
pedigrees had been entered. Seven pedigrees with 19 individuals (8 affected, 11 
unaffected) had clinical disease that was atypical, and none of the individuals 
in those pedigrees showed mutations. There were 9 classic simplex pediatric 
granulomatous arthritis pedigrees including 19 individuals (9 affected, 10 
unaffected) and 6 classic multiplex pedigrees with 22 individuals (17 affected, 
5 unaffected). Cutaneous presentation was the most common. Arthritis was 
polyarticular in 96% of patients. Isolated eye disease was never the presenting 
symptom, but significant/severe visual impairment was observed in 41% of 
patients. Eye disease was bilateral in 21 of 22 patients and was complicated by 
glaucoma in 6 of 22 patients and by cataracts in 50% of patients. Skin biopsy 
was the best diagnostic approach (because of accuracy and low invasiveness).
CONCLUSION: In this series, the first combining familial and sporadic pedigrees 
and, to our knowledge, the largest, we further defined the phenotype and showed 
that all affected classic (and no nonclassic) pedigrees carry a mutation and 
that there is no asymptomatic carriage. If these data are confirmed, mutation 
analysis rather than tissue sampling may prove to be the most efficient 
diagnostic procedure.

DOI: 10.1002/art.22122
PMID: 17009307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]