---
reference_id: "PMID:20558369"
title: Valproic acid monotherapy in pregnancy and major congenital malformations.
authors:
- Jentink J
- Loane MA
- Dolk H
- Barisic I
- Garne E
- Morris JK
- de Jong-van den Berg LT
- EUROCAT Antiepileptic Study Working Group
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0907328
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Drug-Induced/epidemiology, etiology"
- "Anticonvulsants/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Case-Control Studies
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Pregnancy
- Pregnancy Complications/drug therapy
- "Pregnancy Trimester, First"
- "Prenatal Exposure Delayed Effects/chemically induced, epidemiology"
- Prevalence
- Risk Factors
- "Valproic Acid/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Valproic acid monotherapy in pregnancy and major congenital malformations.
**Authors:** Jentink J, Loane MA, Dolk H, Barisic I, Garne E, Morris JK, de Jong-van den Berg LT, EUROCAT Antiepileptic Study Working Group
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa0907328](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0907328)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2010 Jun 10;362(23):2185-93. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0907328.

Valproic acid monotherapy in pregnancy and major congenital malformations.

Jentink J(1), Loane MA, Dolk H, Barisic I, Garne E, Morris JK, de Jong-van den 
Berg LT; EUROCAT Antiepileptic Study Working Group.

Collaborators: Verellen-Dumoulin C, Nelen V, Barisic I, Garne E, Khoshnood B, 
Doray B, Poetzsch S, Wiesel A, O'Mahony M, Pierini A, Rivieri F, Gatt M, Bakker 
M, Melve K, Latos-Bielenska A, Mejnartowicz JP, Portillo I, Addor MC, Tucker D, 
Wellesley D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacoeconomics, Division of 
Pharmacy, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2010 Oct 28;363(18):1771; author reply 1771-2. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc1008255.

BACKGROUND: The use of valproic acid in the first trimester of pregnancy is 
associated with an increased risk of spina bifida, but data on the risks of 
other congenital malformations are limited.
METHODS: We first combined data from eight published cohort studies (1565 
pregnancies in which the women were exposed to valproic acid, among which 118 
major malformations were observed) and identified 14 malformations that were 
significantly more common among the offspring of women who had received valproic 
acid during the first trimester. We then assessed the associations between use 
of valproic acid during the first trimester and these 14 malformations by 
performing a case-control study with the use of the European Surveillance of 
Congenital Anomalies (EUROCAT) antiepileptic-study database, which is derived 
from population-based congenital-anomaly registries. Registrations (i.e., 
pregnancy outcomes with malformations included in EUROCAT) with any of these 14 
malformations were compared with two control groups, one consisting of infants 
with malformations not previously linked to valproic acid use (control group 1), 
and one consisting of infants with chromosomal abnormalities (control group 2). 
The data set included 98,075 live births, stillbirths, or terminations with 
malformations among 3.8 million births in 14 European countries from 1995 
through 2005.
RESULTS: Exposure to valproic acid monotherapy was recorded for a total of 180 
registrations, with 122 registrations in the case group, 45 in control group 1, 
and 13 in control group 2. As compared with no use of an antiepileptic drug 
during the first trimester (control group 1), use of valproic acid monotherapy 
was associated with significantly increased risks for 6 of the 14 malformations 
under consideration; the adjusted odds ratios were as follows: spina bifida, 
12.7 (95% confidence interval [CI], 7.7 to 20.7); atrial septal defect, 2.5 (95% 
CI, 1.4 to 4.4); cleft palate, 5.2 (95% CI, 2.8 to 9.9); hypospadias, 4.8 (95% 
CI, 2.9 to 8.1); polydactyly, 2.2 (95% CI, 1.0 to 4.5); and craniosynostosis, 
6.8 (95% CI, 1.8 to 18.8). Results for exposure to valproic acid were similar to 
results for exposure to other antiepileptic drugs.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of valproic acid monotherapy in the first trimester was 
associated with significantly increased risks of several congenital 
malformations, as compared with no use of antiepileptic drugs or with use of 
other antiepileptic drugs.

Copyright 2010 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa0907328
PMID: 20558369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]