---
reference_id: "PMID:41804652"
title: "Prevalence of Contact Allergy to Isothiazolinones in Dermatitis Patients From 2000 to 2025: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Isufi D
- Karimian K
- Jensen MB
- Larsen CK
- Søgaard R
- Johansen JD
- Schwensen JFB
journal: Contact Dermatitis
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1111/cod.70124
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of Contact Allergy to Isothiazolinones in Dermatitis Patients From 2000 to 2025: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Isufi D, Karimian K, Jensen MB, Larsen CK, Søgaard R, Johansen JD, Schwensen JFB
**Journal:** Contact Dermatitis (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cod.70124](https://doi.org/10.1111/cod.70124)

## Content

1. Contact Dermatitis. 2026 Mar 10. doi: 10.1111/cod.70124. Online ahead of
print.

Prevalence of Contact Allergy to Isothiazolinones in Dermatitis Patients From 
2000 to 2025: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Isufi D(1), Karimian K(2), Jensen MB(2)(3), Larsen CK(2), Søgaard R(2)(3), 
Johansen JD(2)(3), Schwensen JFB(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Herlev and Gentofte-Copenhagen 
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)National Allergy Research Centre, Department of Dermatology and Allergy, 
Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Isothiazolinones are employed in the preservation of cosmetic, consumer and 
industrial products, with the objective of preventing deterioration and 
spoilage. However, the utilization of isothiazolinones is associated with an 
elevated risk of developing contact allergy (CA). Herein, we assess the 
epidemiology of CA to isothiazolinones among dermatitis patients from year 2000 
onwards. We systematically searched PubMed, Embase, and Web of Science from 1 
January 2000 to 19 April 2025 yielding 115 studies comprising 1 514 781 
dermatitis patients. The prevalence of CA to 
methylchloroisothiazolinone/methylisothiazolinone (MCI/MI) was 4.58%, 
methylisothiazolinone (MI) was 5.48%, and benzisothiazolinone (BIT) was 2.09%. 
The clinical relevance ranged from 60.1% for MCI/MI, 55.6% for MI, and 35.3% for 
BIT. Asia and North and South America exhibited the highest rates of CA to 
isothiazolinones, whereas Europe showed lower rates. These findings underscore 
the efficacy of proactive risk management for post-marketed substances such as 
MI, underscoring substantial regional variations in usage patterns, which are 
contingent on the strictness or permissiveness of their incorporation into 
everyday consumer products. There is an indication of a decline, particularly 
regarding MI and MCI/MI. However, there has been an increase in the use of 
substances such as BIT, which necessitates enhanced surveillance measures.

© 2026 The Author(s). Contact Dermatitis published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cod.70124
PMID: 41804652