---
reference_id: "PMID:20955903"
title: Review of neurologic diseases for the urologist.
authors:
- Fowler CJ
- Dalton C
- Panicker JN
journal: Urol Clin North Am
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ucl.2010.07.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review of neurologic diseases for the urologist.
**Authors:** Fowler CJ, Dalton C, Panicker JN
**Journal:** Urol Clin North Am (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ucl.2010.07.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ucl.2010.07.004)

## Content

1. Urol Clin North Am. 2010 Nov;37(4):517-26. doi: 10.1016/j.ucl.2010.07.004.

Review of neurologic diseases for the urologist.

Fowler CJ(1), Dalton C, Panicker JN.

Author information:
(1)UCL Institute of Neurology and National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, UCLH, Box 71, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK. 
c.fowler@ion.ucl.ac.uk

This article reviews the neurologic conditions associated with a high prevalence 
of bladder dysfunction and about which significant advances in understanding 
have occurred in recent years. The importance of the frontal lobes for bladder 
control has been confirmed through functional brain imaging, and recent findings 
in the elderly with incontinence suggest the problem may result from 
disconnection of important frontal areas caused by white matter disease. The 
very different urologic profile of the two sometimes-confused conditions, 
multiple system atrophy and Parkinson's disease, is clarified. The advances in 
treatments for multiple sclerosis in recent years have been remarkable and are 
briefly described.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ucl.2010.07.004
PMID: 20955903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]