---
reference_id: "PMID:38865133"
title: Skin Manifestations of VEXAS Syndrome and Associated Genotypes.
authors:
- Tan IJ
- Ferrada MA
- Ahmad S
- Fike A
- Quinn KA
- Groarke EM
- Beck DB
- Allbritton J
- Castelo-Soccio L
- Young NS
- Patel BA
- Grayson PC
- Cowen EW
journal: JAMA Dermatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2024.1657
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Female
- Aged
- Adult
- Genotype
- Cohort Studies
- Skin/pathology
- "Hereditary Autoinflammatory Diseases/genetics, diagnosis"
- Mutation
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics, diagnosis"
- Ubiquitin-Activating Enzymes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skin Manifestations of VEXAS Syndrome and Associated Genotypes.
**Authors:** Tan IJ, Ferrada MA, Ahmad S, Fike A, Quinn KA, Groarke EM, Beck DB, Allbritton J, Castelo-Soccio L, Young NS, Patel BA, Grayson PC, Cowen EW
**Journal:** JAMA Dermatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamadermatol.2024.1657](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamadermatol.2024.1657)

## Content

1. JAMA Dermatol. 2024 Aug 1;160(8):822-829. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2024.1657.

Skin Manifestations of VEXAS Syndrome and Associated Genotypes.

Tan IJ(1), Ferrada MA(2), Ahmad S(3), Fike A(4), Quinn KA(4), Groarke EM(5), 
Beck DB(6), Allbritton J(7), Castelo-Soccio L(8), Young NS(5), Patel BA(5), 
Grayson PC(4), Cowen EW(8).

Author information:
(1)Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New 
Jersey.
(2)University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore.
(3)Cleveland Clinic Children's, Cleveland, Ohio.
(4)Vasculitis Translational Research Program, National Institute of Arthritis 
and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland.
(5)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(6)Department of Medicine and Center for Human Genetics and Genomics, NYU 
Grossman School of Medicine, New York University, New York.
(7)The Joint Pathology Center, Silver Spring, Maryland.
(8)Dermatology Branch, National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and 
Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

IMPORTANCE: VEXAS (vacuoles, E1 enzyme, X-linked, autoinflammatory, somatic) 
syndrome is a newly defined genetic disease with an estimated prevalence of 1 in 
4269 men older than 50 years and is marked by systemic inflammation, progressive 
bone marrow failure, and inflammatory cutaneous manifestations.
OBJECTIVE: To define the spectrum of cutaneous manifestations in VEXAS syndrome 
and the association of these findings with clinical, genetic, and histological 
features.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This observational cohort study included data 
from 112 patients who were diagnosed with VEXAS-defining genetic variants in 
UBA1 between 2019 and 2023. Data were collected from medical record review or 
from patients with VEXAS directly evaluated at the National Institutes of Health 
in Bethesda, Maryland.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: To define the spectrum of cutaneous manifestations 
in VEXAS in association with genetic, histological, and other clinical findings. 
A secondary outcome was cutaneous response to treatment in VEXAS.
RESULTS: Among the 112 patients (median [range] age, 69 [39-79] years; 111 [99%] 
male), skin involvement was common (93 [83%]), and the most frequent presenting 
feature of disease (68 [61%]). Of 64 histopathologic reports available from 60 
patients, predominant skin histopathologic findings were leukocytoclastic 
vasculitis (23 [36%]), neutrophilic dermatosis (22 [34%]), and perivascular 
dermatitis (19 [30%]). Distinct pathogenic genetic variants were associated with 
specific cutaneous manifestations. The p.Met41Leu variant was most frequently 
associated with neutrophilic dermal infiltrates (14 of 17 patients [82%]), often 
resembling histiocytoid Sweet syndrome. In contrast, the p.Met41Val variant was 
associated with vasculitic lesions (11 of 20 patients [55%]) with a mixed 
leukocytic infiltrate (17 of 20 patients [85%]). Oral prednisone improved skin 
manifestations in 67 of 73 patients (92%). Patients with VEXAS treated with 
anakinra frequently developed severe injection-site reactions (12 of 16 [75%]), 
including ulceration (2 of 12 [17%]) and abscess formation (1 of 12 [8%]).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Results of this cohort study show that skin 
manifestations are a common and early manifestation of VEXAS syndrome. Genetic 
evaluation for VEXAS should be considered in older male patients with cutaneous 
vasculitis, neutrophilic dermatoses, or chondritis. Awareness of VEXAS among 
dermatologists is critical to facilitate early diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2024.1657
PMCID: PMC11170453
PMID: 38865133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Beck 
reported personal fees from Alexion, Novartis, and Sobi outside the submitted 
work. No other disclosures were reported.