---
reference_id: "PMID:34738614"
title: Skeletal stem cell fate defects caused by Pdgfrb activating mutation.
authors:
- Kwon HR
- Kim JH
- Woods JP
- Olson LE
journal: Development
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1242/dev.199607
keywords:
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Animals
- Chondrogenesis/genetics
- Gain of Function Mutation
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Myoblasts, Skeletal/metabolism, pathology"
- Osteogenesis/genetics
- Point Mutation
- "Receptor, Platelet-Derived Growth Factor beta/genetics, metabolism"
- "SOX9 Transcription Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skeletal stem cell fate defects caused by Pdgfrb activating mutation.
**Authors:** Kwon HR, Kim JH, Woods JP, Olson LE
**Journal:** Development (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.199607](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.199607)

## Content

1. Development. 2021 Dec 1;148(23):dev199607. doi: 10.1242/dev.199607. Epub 2021 
Dec 2.

Skeletal stem cell fate defects caused by Pdgfrb activating mutation.

Kwon HR(1), Kim JH(1)(2), Woods JP(1)(2), Olson LE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Biology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research 
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Autosomal dominant PDGFRβ gain-of-function mutations in mice and humans cause a 
spectrum of wasting and overgrowth disorders afflicting the skeleton and other 
connective tissues, but the cellular origin of these disorders remains unknown. 
We demonstrate that skeletal stem cells (SSCs) isolated from mice with a 
gain-of-function D849V point mutation in PDGFRβ exhibit colony formation defects 
that parallel the wasting or overgrowth phenotypes of the mice. Single-cell RNA 
transcriptomics with SSC-derived polyclonal colonies demonstrates alterations in 
osteogenic and chondrogenic precursors caused by PDGFRβD849V. Mutant cells 
undergo poor osteogenesis in vitro with increased expression of Sox9 and other 
chondrogenic markers. Mice with PDGFRβD849V exhibit osteopenia. Increased STAT5 
phosphorylation and overexpression of Igf1 and Socs2 in PDGFRβD849V cells 
suggests that overgrowth in mice involves PDGFRβD849V activating the STAT5-IGF1 
axis locally in the skeleton. Our study establishes that PDGFRβD849V causes 
osteopenic skeletal phenotypes that are associated with intrinsic changes in 
SSCs, promoting chondrogenesis over osteogenesis.

© 2021. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.199607
PMCID: PMC8714075
PMID: 34738614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.