---
reference_id: "PMID:39694697"
title: "Challenging the narrative of Alport syndrome spectrum: no link with cystic phenotype."
authors:
- Pagniez MS
- Lombardi Y
- Fages V
- Larrue R
- Laboux T
- Gatinois C
- Letavernier E
- Rigothier C
- Glowacki F
- Mesnard L
- Robert T
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfae290
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- Autoantigens/genetics
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Kidney Diseases, Cystic/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics, pathology, complications"
- Phenotype
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Challenging the narrative of Alport syndrome spectrum: no link with cystic phenotype.
**Authors:** Pagniez MS, Lombardi Y, Fages V, Larrue R, Laboux T, Gatinois C, Letavernier E, Rigothier C, Glowacki F, Mesnard L, Robert T
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/gfae290](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfae290)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2025 Jun 30;40(7):1408-1415. doi:
10.1093/ndt/gfae290.

Challenging the narrative of Alport syndrome spectrum: no link with cystic
phenotype.

Pagniez MS(1), Lombardi Y(2)(3), Fages V(1), Larrue R(4), Laboux T(1), Gatinois
C(5), Letavernier E(3)(6), Rigothier C(5), Glowacki F(1), Mesnard L(2)(3),
Robert T(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Kidney Transplantation and Dialysis, CHU Lille,
University of Lille, Lille, France.
(2)Service de Soins Intensifs Néphrologiques et Rein Aigu (SINRA), French
Intensive Renal Network, Tenon Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
Paris, France.
(3)Sorbonne Université, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale, Unité Mixte de Recherche 1155, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Toxicology and Genopathies, CHU Lille, University of Lille,
Lille, France.
(5)Department of Nephrology, Transplantation, Dialysis and Apheresis, CHU
Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(6)Service d'Explorations Fonctionnelles et Multidisciplinaire (EFM), Tenon
Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(7)Centre de Néphrologie et transplantation rénale, Assistance publique-Hôpitaux
de Marseille, La Conception Hospital, Marseille, France.
(8)Aix Marseille Université, INSERM, INRAE, C2VN, Marseille, France.

BACKGROUND: Alport syndromes (AS) are the second leading genetic cause of kidney
failure. Whether the multiple kidney cysts (MKC) phenotype belongs to the AS
spectrum remains debated.
METHODS: This multicenter retrospective study focused on patients genotyped with
pathogenic COL4A3, COL4A4, or COL4A5 variants (classified as ACMG-AMP 4 or 5)
between January 2011 and January 2023 across four French university hospitals.
The study aimed to compare characteristics between two groups based on the
presence or absence of MKC, defined by three or more cysts per kidney. The MKC
group was compared to a control group with negative exome sequencing results for
undetermined kidney disease (ES-UKD) to assess the association between MKC and
AS.
RESULTS: Among the 257 AS patients included, 38 (14.8%) presented MKC without
variation from hereditary cystic kidney panel. MKC showed a significant
association with male gender (P = 0.004), cardiovascular risk factors, and loss
of function variants (P = 0.012). Kidney failure onset appeared significantly
later, by 6 years, in MKC patients (P = 0.035). Comparison with the ES-UKD
(n = 990) control group showed no significant association between AS and MKC by
univariate and multivariate analysis. Multivariate analysis identified patient
age and male gender (P < 0.001) as factors linked to MKC.
CONCLUSIONS: A 14.8% prevalence of MKC was found in our cohort of 257 patients
with AS. MKC-AS patients exhibited clinical and histological characteristics
akin to nephroangiosclerosis. Our comprehensive analysis, incorporating a
sizable ES-UKD cohort, revealed no significant association between MKC and AS,
thus questioning the inclusion of MKC within the spectrum of AS.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the ERA.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfae290
PMID: 39694697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
