---
reference_id: "PMID:39630969"
title: "Minimal Residual Disease as an Early Endpoint for Accelerated Drug Approval in Myeloma: A Roadmap."
authors:
- Landgren O
- Devlin SM
journal: Blood Cancer Discov
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1158/2643-3230.BCD-24-0292
keywords:
- Humans
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Drug Approval/methods
- Endpoint Determination/methods
- "Multiple Myeloma/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Neoplasm, Residual/diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Minimal Residual Disease as an Early Endpoint for Accelerated Drug Approval in Myeloma: A Roadmap.
**Authors:** Landgren O, Devlin SM
**Journal:** Blood Cancer Discov (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1158/2643-3230.BCD-24-0292](https://doi.org/10.1158/2643-3230.BCD-24-0292)

## Content

1. Blood Cancer Discov. 2025 Jan 8;6(1):13-22. doi:
10.1158/2643-3230.BCD-24-0292.

Minimal Residual Disease as an Early Endpoint for Accelerated Drug Approval in
Myeloma: A Roadmap.

Landgren O(1), Devlin SM(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Myeloma, Department of Medicine, Sylvester Myeloma Research
Institute, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami, Miami,
Florida.
(2)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York.

The acceptance of MRD-negative complete response as an endpoint that is
reasonably likely to predict clinical benefit will allow for the design of
streamlined clinical trials for accelerated approval, enabling significantly
faster patient access to novel therapies. Cooperative efforts were required to
obtain and analyze clinical trial data from multiple sponsors and to determine
the best approach to analysis with a relatively limited number of available
datasets. The process to evaluate MRD as an intermediate endpoint, undertaken
jointly by myeloma researchers and industry, with feedback from the FDA, serves
as a roadmap for other areas of oncology to develop intermediate endpoints.

©2024 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2643-3230.BCD-24-0292
PMCID: PMC11707509
PMID: 39630969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: O. Landgren reports grants from Janssen, Sanofi,
and Amgen during the conduct of the study, as well as grants from Amgen,
Menarini, and Sebia, grants and personal fees from Janssen, Pfizer, and AbbVie,
personal fees from GSK and Bristol Myers Squibb, and other support from Takeda
and Novartis outside the submitted work. S.M. Devlin reports grants from Johnson
and Johnson Innovative Medicine during the conduct of the study, as well as
other support from Miltenyi Biotec outside the submitted work.
