---
reference_id: PMID:37814552
title: European Academy of Neurology/Peripheral Nerve Society Guideline on diagnosis and treatment of Guillain-Barré syndrome.
authors:
- van Doorn PA
- Van den Bergh PYK
- Hadden RDM
- Avau B
- Vankrunkelsven P
- Attarian S
- Blomkwist-Markens PH
- Cornblath DR
- Goedee HS
- Harbo T
- Jacobs BC
- Kusunoki S
- Lehmann HC
- Lewis RA
- Lunn MP
- Nobile-Orazio E
- Querol L
- Rajabally YA
- Umapathi T
- Topaloglu HA
- Willison HJ
journal: Eur J Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/ene.16073
keywords:
- Humans
- "Guillain-Barre Syndrome/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
- Peripheral Nerves
- Pain/drug therapy
- Respiratory Insufficiency
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones
content_type: abstract_only
---

# European Academy of Neurology/Peripheral Nerve Society Guideline on diagnosis and treatment of Guillain-Barré syndrome.
**Authors:** van Doorn PA, Van den Bergh PYK, Hadden RDM, Avau B, Vankrunkelsven P, Attarian S, Blomkwist-Markens PH, Cornblath DR, Goedee HS, Harbo T, Jacobs BC, Kusunoki S, Lehmann HC, Lewis RA, Lunn MP, Nobile-Orazio E, Querol L, Rajabally YA, Umapathi T, Topaloglu HA, Willison HJ
**Journal:** Eur J Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ene.16073](https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.16073)

## Content

1. Eur J Neurol. 2023 Dec;30(12):3646-3674. doi: 10.1111/ene.16073. Epub 2023 Oct
 10.

European Academy of Neurology/Peripheral Nerve Society Guideline on diagnosis 
and treatment of Guillain-Barré syndrome.

van Doorn PA(1), Van den Bergh PYK(2), Hadden RDM(3), Avau B(4)(5), 
Vankrunkelsven P(6), Attarian S(7), Blomkwist-Markens PH(8), Cornblath DR(9), 
Goedee HS(10), Harbo T(11), Jacobs BC(12), Kusunoki S(13), Lehmann HC(14), Lewis 
RA(15), Lunn MP(16), Nobile-Orazio E(17), Querol L(18), Rajabally YA(19), 
Umapathi T(20), Topaloglu HA(21), Willison HJ(22).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(2)Neuromuscular Reference Centre, Department of Neurology, University Hospital 
Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Department of Neurology, King's College Hospital, London, UK.
(4)Cochrane Belgium, CEBAM, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)CEBaP, Belgian Red Cross, Mechelen, Belgium.
(6)Department of Public Health and Primary Care KU Leuven, Cochrane Belgium, 
CEBAM, Leuven, Belgium.
(7)Centre de Référence des Maladies Neuromusculaires et de la SLA, APHM, CHU 
Timone, Marseille, France.
(8)Patient Representative GBS/CIDP Foundation International, International 
Office, Conshohocken, Pennsylvania, USA.
(9)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(10)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Brain Center UMC 
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(11)Department of Neurology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(12)Department of Neurology and Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical 
Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(13)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Kindai University, Osaka, 
Japan.
(14)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty Köln, University Hospital Köln, 
Cologne, Germany.
(15)Department of Neurology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.
(16)Department of Neurology and MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, National 
Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, UK.
(17)Neuromuscular and Neuroimmunology Service, IRCCS Humanitas Research 
Institute, Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, 
University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(18)Neuromuscular Diseases Unit, Neurology Department, Hospital de la Santa Creu 
I Sant Pau, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(19)Neuromuscular Service, Neurology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK.
(20)Department of Neurology, National Neuroscience Institute, Singapore.
(21)Department of Pediatrics, Yeditepe University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(22)Glasgow Biomedical Research Centre, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.

Comment in
    Eur J Neurol. 2024 Apr;31(4):e16231. doi: 10.1111/ene.16231.

Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is an acute polyradiculoneuropathy. Symptoms may 
vary greatly in presentation and severity. Besides weakness and sensory 
disturbances, patients may have cranial nerve involvement, respiratory 
insufficiency, autonomic dysfunction and pain. To develop an evidence-based 
guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of GBS, using Grading of 
Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) methodology a 
Task Force (TF) of the European Academy of Neurology (EAN) and the Peripheral 
Nerve Society (PNS) constructed 14 Population/Intervention/Comparison/Outcome 
questions (PICOs) covering diagnosis, treatment and prognosis of GBS, which 
guided the literature search. Data were extracted and summarised in GRADE 
Summaries of Findings (for treatment PICOs) or Evidence Tables (for diagnostic 
and prognostic PICOs). Statements were prepared according to GRADE 
Evidence-to-Decision (EtD) frameworks. For the six intervention PICOs, 
evidence-based recommendations are made. For other PICOs, good practice points 
(GPPs) are formulated. For diagnosis, the principal GPPs are: GBS is more likely 
if there is a history of recent diarrhoea or respiratory infection; CSF 
examination is valuable, particularly when the diagnosis is less certain; 
electrodiagnostic testing is advised to support the diagnosis; testing for 
anti-ganglioside antibodies is of limited clinical value in most patients with 
typical motor-sensory GBS, but anti-GQ1b antibody testing should be considered 
when Miller Fisher syndrome (MFS) is suspected; nodal-paranodal antibodies 
should be tested when autoimmune nodopathy is suspected; MRI or ultrasound 
imaging should be considered in atypical cases; and changing the diagnosis to 
acute-onset chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (A-CIDP) 
should be considered if progression continues after 8 weeks from onset, which 
occurs in around 5% of patients initially diagnosed with GBS. For treatment, the 
TF recommends intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) 0.4 g/kg for 5 days, in patients 
within 2 weeks (GPP also within 2-4 weeks) after onset of weakness if unable to 
walk unaided, or a course of plasma exchange (PE) 12-15 L in four to five 
exchanges over 1-2 weeks, in patients within 4 weeks after onset of weakness if 
unable to walk unaided. The TF recommends against a second IVIg course in GBS 
patients with a poor prognosis; recommends against using oral corticosteroids, 
and weakly recommends against using IV corticosteroids; does not recommend PE 
followed immediately by IVIg; weakly recommends gabapentinoids, tricyclic 
antidepressants or carbamazepine for treatment of pain; does not recommend a 
specific treatment for fatigue. To estimate the prognosis of individual 
patients, the TF advises using the modified Erasmus GBS outcome score (mEGOS) to 
assess outcome, and the modified Erasmus GBS Respiratory Insufficiency Score 
(mEGRIS) to assess the risk of requiring artificial ventilation. Based on the 
PICOs, available literature and additional discussions, we provide flow charts 
to assist making clinical decisions on diagnosis, treatment and the need for 
intensive care unit admission.

© 2023 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.16073
PMID: 37814552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]