---
reference_id: "PMID:23712021"
title: Prevalence and mutation analysis of short/branched chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (SBCADD) detected on newborn screening in Wisconsin.
authors:
- Van Calcar SC
- Baker MW
- Williams P
- Jones SA
- Xiong B
- Thao MC
- Lee S
- Yang MK
- Rice GM
- Rhead W
- Vockley J
- Hoffman G
- Durkin MS
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.03.021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and mutation analysis of short/branched chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (SBCADD) detected on newborn screening in Wisconsin.
**Authors:** Van Calcar SC, Baker MW, Williams P, Jones SA, Xiong B, Thao MC, Lee S, Yang MK, Rice GM, Rhead W, Vockley J, Hoffman G, Durkin MS
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.03.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.03.021)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2013 Sep-Oct;110(1-2):111-5. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.03.021.  Epub 2013 Apr 15.

Prevalence and mutation analysis of short/branched chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 
deficiency (SBCADD) detected on newborn screening in Wisconsin.

Van Calcar SC(1), Baker MW, Williams P, Jones SA, Xiong B, Thao MC, Lee S, Yang 
MK, Rice GM, Rhead W, Vockley J, Hoffman G, Durkin MS.

Author information:
(1)Biochemical Genetics Program, Waisman Center, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA.

Short/branched chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (SBCADD), also called 
2-methylbutyryl CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (2-MBCDD), is a disorder of 
l-isoleucine metabolism of uncertain clinical significance. SBCADD is 
inadvertently detected on expanded newborn screening by elevated 
2-methylbutyrylcarnitine (C5), which has the same mass to charge (m/s) on tandem 
mass spectrometry (MS/MS) as isovalerylcarnitine (C5), an analyte that is 
elevated in isovaleric acidemia (IVA), a disorder in leucine metabolism. SBCADD 
cases identified in the Hmong-American population have been found in association 
with the c.1165 A>G mutation in the ACADSB gene. The purposes of this study were 
to: (a) estimate the prevalence of SBCADD and carrier frequency of the c.1165 
A>G mutation in the Hmong ethnic group; (b) determine whether the c.1165 A>G 
mutation is common to all Hmong newborns screening positive for SBCADD; and (c) 
evaluate C5 acylcarnitine cut-off values to detect and distinguish between 
SBCADD and IVA diagnoses. During the first 10years of expanded newborn screening 
using MS/MS in Wisconsin (2001-2011), 97 infants had elevated C5 values 
(≥0.44μmol/L), of whom five were Caucasian infants confirmed to have IVA. Of the 
remaining 92 confirmed SBCADD cases, 90 were of Hmong descent. Mutation analysis 
was completed on an anonymous, random sample of newborn screening cards (n=1139) 
from Hmong infants. Fifteen infants, including nine who had screened positive 
for SBCADD based on a C5 acylcarnitine concentration ≥0.44μmol/L, were 
homozygous for the c.1165 A>G mutation. This corresponds to a prevalence in this 
ethnic group of being homozygous for the mutation of 1.3% (95% confidence 
interval 0.8-2.2%) and of being heterozygous for the mutation of 21.8% (95% 
confidence interval 19.4-24.3%), which is consistent with the Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium. Detection of homozygous individuals who were not identified on 
newborn screening suggests that the C5 screening cut-off would need to be as low 
as 0.20μmol/L to detect all infants homozygous for the ACADSB c.1165 A>G 
mutation. However, lowering the screening cut-off to 0.20 would also result in 
five "false positive" (non-homozygous) screening results in the Hmong population 
for every c.1165 A>G homozygote detected. Increasing the cut-off to 0.60μmol/L 
and requiring elevated C5/C2 (acetylcarnitine) and C5/C3 (propionylcarnitine) 
ratios to flag a screen as abnormal would reduce the number of infants screening 
positive, but would still result in an estimated 5 infants with SBCADD per year 
who would require follow-up and additional biochemical testing to distinguish 
between SBCADD and IVA diagnoses. Further research is needed to determine the 
clinical outcomes of SBCADD detected on newborn screening and the c.1165 A>G 
mutation before knowing whether the optimal screening cut-off would minimize 
true positives or false negatives for SBCADD associated with this mutation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.03.021
PMCID: PMC5006389
PMID: 23712021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]