---
reference_id: "PMID:29325037"
title: Mediator complex component MED13 regulates zygotic genome activation and is required for postimplantation development in the mouse.
authors:
- Miao YL
- Gambini A
- Zhang Y
- Padilla-Banks E
- Jefferson WN
- Bernhardt ML
- Huang W
- Li L
- Williams CJ
journal: Biol Reprod
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/biolre/ioy004
keywords:
- Animals
- Chromatin/metabolism
- Embryonic Development/physiology
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Gene Knockdown Techniques
- Genome
- "Mediator Complex/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Oocytes/metabolism
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Zygote/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mediator complex component MED13 regulates zygotic genome activation and is required for postimplantation development in the mouse.
**Authors:** Miao YL, Gambini A, Zhang Y, Padilla-Banks E, Jefferson WN, Bernhardt ML, Huang W, Li L, Williams CJ
**Journal:** Biol Reprod (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/biolre/ioy004](https://doi.org/10.1093/biolre/ioy004)

## Content

1. Biol Reprod. 2018 Apr 1;98(4):449-464. doi: 10.1093/biolre/ioy004.

Mediator complex component MED13 regulates zygotic genome activation and is 
required for postimplantation development in the mouse.

Miao YL(1)(2), Gambini A(1), Zhang Y(1), Padilla-Banks E(1), Jefferson WN(1), 
Bernhardt ML(1), Huang W(3), Li L(3), Williams CJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Reproductive and Developmental Biology Laboratory, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle 
Park, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding, and Reproduction, 
Ministry of Education College of Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong 
Agricultural University, China.
(3)Biostatistics and Computational Biology Branch, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle 
Park, North Carolina, USA.

Understanding factors that regulate zygotic genome activation (ZGA) is critical 
for determining how cells are reprogrammed to become totipotent or pluripotent. 
There is limited information regarding how this process occurs physiologically 
in early mammalian embryos. Here, we identify a mediator complex subunit, MED13, 
as translated during mouse oocyte maturation and transcribed early from the 
zygotic genome. Knockdown and conditional knockout approaches demonstrate that 
MED13 is essential for ZGA in the mouse, in part by regulating expression of the 
embryo-specific chromatin remodeling complex, esBAF. The role of MED13 in ZGA is 
mediated in part by interactions with E2F transcription factors. In addition to 
MED13, its paralog, MED13L, is required for successful preimplantation embryo 
development. MED13L partially compensates for loss of MED13 function in 
preimplantation knockout embryos, but postimplantation development is not 
rescued by MED13L. Our data demonstrate an essential role for MED13 in 
supporting chromatin reprogramming and directed transcription of essential genes 
during ZGA.

DOI: 10.1093/biolre/ioy004
PMCID: PMC6279059
PMID: 29325037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]