---
reference_id: "PMID:12786608"
title: "Review article: medical treatment of mild to moderately active Crohn's disease."
authors:
- Löfberg R
journal: Aliment Pharmacol Ther
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2036.17.s2.22.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review article: medical treatment of mild to moderately active Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Löfberg R
**Journal:** Aliment Pharmacol Ther (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2036.17.s2.22.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2036.17.s2.22.x)

## Content

1. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2003 Jun;17 Suppl 2:18-22. doi: 
10.1046/j.1365-2036.17.s2.22.x.

Review article: medical treatment of mild to moderately active Crohn's disease.

Löfberg R(1).

Author information:
(1)Karolinska Institutet, IBD-unit at HMQ Sophia Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. 
ibd@sophiahemmet.se

Crohn's disease is a chronic, debilitating subset of inflammatory bowel 
diseases, which may affect any part of the gastrointestinal tract. The most 
common sites of inflammation are the terminal ileum and/or the colon. Fistulous 
disease is present in up to 20% of patients, particularly in those having rectal 
involvement. The aetiology of Crohn's disease still remains obscure, therefore 
medical therapy is directed towards symptomatic relief in active disease and 
relapse prevention in the long-term setting. Contemporary Crohn's disease 
management comprises individual treatment depending mainly on Crohn's disease 
localization in the gastrointestinal tract and the disease severity. The 
mainstay of current medical treatment for mild to moderately active stages of 
Crohn's disease includes aminosalicylates, antibiotics, glucococorticosteroids 
and immunomodulators. Biologics such as anti TNF-compounds and anti-integrins 
are being introduced.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2036.17.s2.22.x
PMID: 12786608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]