---
reference_id: "PMID:35121145"
title: Ophthalmic abnormalities in Wieacker-Wolff syndrome.
authors:
- Comlekoglu T
- Kumar V
- King K
- Al Saif H
- Li R
- Couser N
journal: J AAPOS
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaapos.2021.10.010
keywords:
- Apraxias/genetics
- Contracture
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Muscular Atrophy
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Ophthalmoplegia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ophthalmic abnormalities in Wieacker-Wolff syndrome.
**Authors:** Comlekoglu T, Kumar V, King K, Al Saif H, Li R, Couser N
**Journal:** J AAPOS (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaapos.2021.10.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaapos.2021.10.010)

## Content

1. J AAPOS. 2022 Apr;26(2):91-93. doi: 10.1016/j.jaapos.2021.10.010. Epub 2022
Feb  1.

Ophthalmic abnormalities in Wieacker-Wolff syndrome.

Comlekoglu T(1), Kumar V(2), King K(3), Al Saif H(3), Li R(3), Couser N(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville.
(2)Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond.
(3)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University
School of Medicine, Richmond.
(4)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University
School of Medicine, Richmond; Department of Ophthalmology, Virginia Commonwealth
University School of Medicine, Richmond; Department of Pediatrics, Virginia
Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Children's Hospital of Richmond at
VCU, Richmond. Electronic address: natario.couser@vcuhealth.org.

Wieacker-Wolff syndrome is an X-linked condition caused by variants of the ZC4H2
gene that results in in utero muscular weakness that manifests clinically as
arthrogryposis congenita as well as facial and bulbar weakness. We report the
case of a young girl with a de novo pathogenic deletion in the ZC4H2 gene and
clinical features consistent with Wieacker-Wolff syndrome. Common eye
manifestations of the syndrome reported in the literature include ptosis,
strabismus, and oculomotor apraxia. The overall incidence of these
manifestations is 56%.

Copyright © 2022 American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and
Strabismus. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaapos.2021.10.010
PMID: 35121145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
