---
reference_id: "PMID:35798346"
title: "Trends in the Prevalence and Postoperative Surgical Complications for Smokers Who Underwent a Total Knee Arthroplasty from 2011 to 2019: An Analysis of 406,553 Patients."
authors:
- Simmons HL
- Grits D
- Orr M
- Murray T
- Klika AK
- Piuzzi NS
journal: J Knee Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1055/s-0042-1748819
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trends in the Prevalence and Postoperative Surgical Complications for Smokers Who Underwent a Total Knee Arthroplasty from 2011 to 2019: An Analysis of 406,553 Patients.
**Authors:** Simmons HL, Grits D, Orr M, Murray T, Klika AK, Piuzzi NS
**Journal:** J Knee Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0042-1748819](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0042-1748819)

## Content

1. J Knee Surg. 2023 Jul;36(9):957-964. doi: 10.1055/s-0042-1748819. Epub 2022
Jul  7.

Trends in the Prevalence and Postoperative Surgical Complications for Smokers 
Who Underwent a Total Knee Arthroplasty from 2011 to 2019: An Analysis of 
406,553 Patients.

Simmons HL(1), Grits D(1), Orr M(1), Murray T(1), Klika AK(1), Piuzzi NS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, 
Ohio.

Smoking is a modifiable risk factor for complications following total knee 
arthroplasty (TKA). It is unclear if the declining prevalence of tobacco use in 
the U.S. population is reflected in patients undergoing elective TKA. This study 
aims to investigate (1) the incidence of 30-day complications following TKA in 
smokers and (2) trends in preoperative smoking status among TKA patients. In 
this study, patients undergoing primary elective TKA in the United States from 
2011 to 2019 were identified in the American College of Surgeons' National 
Surgical Quality Improvement Program (ACS-NSQIP) database. Our cohort included 
406,553 cases, 8.13% of which had smoked cigarettes within 1 year of undergoing 
TKA. Smokers were propensity score-matched to a group of nonsmokers, with each 
n = 32,533. The incidences of 30-day complications, readmission, and non-home 
discharge were compared between groups. The rate of preoperative smoking among 
elective primary TKA patients remained stagnant from 2011 to 2019. Smokers had 
higher rates of superficial surgical site infections (SSIs; 1.1 vs. 0.5%, 
p < 0.001), deep SSI (0.3 vs. 0.2%, p = 0.012), wound disruption (0.4 vs. 0.2%, 
p < 0.001), pneumonia (0.5 vs. 0.3%, p < 0.001), and 30-day readmission (3.6 vs. 
2.7%, p < 0.001) compared with nonsmokers. No significant trends in 30-day 
complications were noted between 2011 and 2019. This study supports the success 
of national efforts to reduce the prevalence of smoking and reports a modest 
effect within the TKA population. However, almost 1 in 10 patients undergoing 
elective TKA continues to smoke and maintains a higher risk of postoperative 
complications.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0042-1748819
PMID: 35798346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.