---
reference_id: "PMID:21035103"
title: Fibrochondrogenesis results from mutations in the COL11A1 type XI collagen gene.
authors:
- Tompson SW
- Bacino CA
- Safina NP
- Bober MB
- Proud VK
- Funari T
- Wangler MF
- Nevarez L
- Ala-Kokko L
- Wilcox WR
- Eyre DR
- Krakow D
- Cohn DH
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.009
keywords:
- Cartilage/pathology
- Collagen Type XI/genetics
- Hearing Loss/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibrochondrogenesis results from mutations in the COL11A1 type XI collagen gene.
**Authors:** Tompson SW, Bacino CA, Safina NP, Bober MB, Proud VK, Funari T, Wangler MF, Nevarez L, Ala-Kokko L, Wilcox WR, Eyre DR, Krakow D, Cohn DH
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.009)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Nov 12;87(5):708-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.009.
Epub  2010 Oct 28.

Fibrochondrogenesis results from mutations in the COL11A1 type XI collagen gene.

Tompson SW(1), Bacino CA, Safina NP, Bober MB, Proud VK, Funari T, Wangler MF, 
Nevarez L, Ala-Kokko L, Wilcox WR, Eyre DR, Krakow D, Cohn DH.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 
90048, USA.

Fibrochondrogenesis is a severe, autosomal-recessive, short-limbed skeletal 
dysplasia. In a single case of fibrochondrogenesis, whole-genome SNP genotyping 
identified unknown ancestral consanguinity by detecting three autozygous 
regions. Because of the predominantly skeletal nature of the phenotype, the 389 
genes localized to the autozygous intervals were prioritized for mutation 
analysis by correlation of their expression with known cartilage-selective genes 
via the UCLA Gene Expression Tool, UGET. The gene encoding the α1 chain of type 
XI collagen (COL11A1) was the only cartilage-selective gene among the three 
candidate intervals. Sequence analysis of COL11A1 in two genetically independent 
fibrochondrogenesis cases demonstrated that each was a compound heterozygote for 
a loss-of-function mutation on one allele and a mutation predicting substitution 
for a conserved triple-helical glycine residue on the other. The parents who 
were carriers of missense mutations had myopia. Early-onset hearing loss was 
noted in both parents who carried a loss-of-function allele, suggesting COL11A1 
as a locus for mild, dominantly inherited hearing loss. These findings identify 
COL11A1 as a locus for fibrochondrogenesis and indicate that there might be 
phenotypic manifestations among carriers.

Copyright © 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.009
PMCID: PMC2978944
PMID: 21035103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]