---
reference_id: "PMID:39157811"
title: "Global, regional, and national burden of ischemic stroke, 1990-2021: an analysis of data from the global burden of disease study 2021."
authors:
- Li XY
- Kong XM
- Yang CH
- Cheng ZF
- Lv JJ
- Guo H
- Liu XH
journal: EClinicalMedicine
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102758
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global, regional, and national burden of ischemic stroke, 1990-2021: an analysis of data from the global burden of disease study 2021.
**Authors:** Li XY, Kong XM, Yang CH, Cheng ZF, Lv JJ, Guo H, Liu XH
**Journal:** EClinicalMedicine (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102758](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102758)

## Content

1. EClinicalMedicine. 2024 Jul 27;75:102758. doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102758.
eCollection 2024 Sep.

Global, regional, and national burden of ischemic stroke, 1990-2021: an analysis
of data from the global burden of disease study 2021.

Li XY(1)(2), Kong XM(2), Yang CH(1)(3), Cheng ZF(3), Lv JJ(3)(4), Guo H(5), Liu
XH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Shanghai Putuo People's Hospital, School of
Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Vascular Surgery, Shanghai Putuo People's Hospital, School of
Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, PR China.
(5)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Ischemic stroke remains a major contributor to global mortality and
morbidity. This study aims to provide an updated assessment of rates in ischemic
stroke prevalence, incidence, mortality, and disability-adjusted life-years
(DALYs) from 1990 to 2021, specifically focusing on including prevalence
investigation alongside other measures. The analysis is stratified by sex, age,
and socio-demographic index (SDI) at global, regional, and national levels.
METHODS: Data for this study was obtained from the 2021 Global Burden of
Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study (GBD). To quantify temporal patterns
and assess trends in age-standardized rates of ischemic stroke prevalence
(ASPR), incidence (ASIR), mortality (ASDR), and DALYs, estimated annual
percentage changes (EAPCs) were computed over the study period. The analyses
were disaggregated by gender, 20 age categories, 21 GBD regions, 204
nations/territories, and 5 SDI quintiles. R statistical package V 4.4.2 was
performed for statistical analyses and plot illustrations.
FINDINGS: In 2021, the global burden of ischemic stroke remained substantial,
with a total of 69,944,884.8 cases with an ASPR of 819.5 cases per 100,000
individuals (95% UI: 760.3-878.7). The ASIR was 92.4 per 100,000 people (95% UI:
79.8-105.8), while the ASDR was 44.2 per 100,000 persons (95% UI: 39.3-47.8).
Additionally, the age-standardized DALY rate was 837.4 per 100,000 individuals
(95% UI: 763.7-905). Regionally, areas with high-middle SDI exhibited the
greatest ASPR, ASIR, ASDR, and age-standardized DALY rates, whereas high SDI
regions had the lowest rates. Geospatially, Southern Sub-Saharan Africa had the
highest ASPR, while Eastern Europe showed the highest ASIR. The greatest ASDR
and age-standardized DALY rates were observed in Eastern Europe, Central Asia,
as well as North Africa, and the Middle East. Among countries, Ghana had the
highest ASPR, and North Macedonia had both the highest ASIR and ASDR.
Furthermore, North Macedonia also exhibited the highest age-standardized DALY
rate.
INTERPRETATION: Regions with high-middle and middle SDI continued to experience
elevated ASPR, ASIR, ASDR and age-standardized DALY rates. The highest ischemic
stroke burden was observed in Southern Sub-Saharan Africa, Central Asia, Eastern
Europe, and the Middle East.
FUNDING: None.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102758
PMCID: PMC11327951
PMID: 39157811

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests declared.