---
reference_id: "PMID:23475385"
title: "From normal gait to loss of ambulation in 6 months: a novel presentation of SCA17."
authors:
- Mehanna R
- Itin I
journal: Cerebellum
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s12311-013-0466-y
keywords:
- Aged
- Female
- Gait/physiology
- Humans
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Time Factors
- Walking/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From normal gait to loss of ambulation in 6 months: a novel presentation of SCA17.
**Authors:** Mehanna R, Itin I
**Journal:** Cerebellum (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12311-013-0466-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12311-013-0466-y)

## Content

1. Cerebellum. 2013 Aug;12(4):568-71. doi: 10.1007/s12311-013-0466-y.

From normal gait to loss of ambulation in 6 months: a novel presentation of
SCA17.

Mehanna R(1), Itin I.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurological Restoration, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid
Avenue/U20, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. doc_raja_mehanna@yahoo.com

Spinocerebellar ataxias are a group of rare and heterogeneous autosomal dominant
disorders characterized by progressive ataxia and other features.
Spinocerebellar ataxia 17 (SCA17) is one of the 32 subtypes described to date
and is secondary to CAG/CAA repeat expansion in the gene coding for the TATA-box
binding protein (TBP). SCA17 is clinically heterogeneous and typically presents
with slowly evolving ataxia, dysarthria, dementia, depression, and other
movement disorders such as chorea. More than 41 CAG/CAA repeats are considered
diagnostic of SCA17, with more than 49 being associated with full penetrance. We
report one patient presenting with isolated rapidly evolving ataxia who was
found to have 44 CAG/CAA repeats in the TBP gene. This suggests that, while
SCA17 typically slowly progresses over years, its repertoire of presentations
should be expanded to include rapidly progressive isolated ataxia resembling
paraneoplastic disorders or prion disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-013-0466-y
PMID: 23475385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
