---
reference_id: "PMID:40147632"
title: Anti-nephrin antibodies in adult Chinese patients with minimal change disease and primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.
authors:
- Shu Y
- Huang J
- Jiang L
- Zhang YM
- Wang F
- Wang X
- Meng LQ
- Cheng XY
- Liu G
- Wang SX
- Zhao MH
- Ronco P
- Cui Z
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2025.02.028
keywords:
- Humans
- "Glomerulosclerosis, Focal Segmental/immunology, blood, drug therapy, pathology, diagnosis"
- "Nephrosis, Lipoid/immunology, blood, drug therapy, pathology, diagnosis"
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Middle Aged
- Immunoglobulin G/blood
- Membrane Proteins/immunology
- Immunoglobulin M/blood
- China/epidemiology
- Young Adult
- Recurrence
- Biopsy
- Adolescent
- Proteinuria/immunology
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- "Kidney/pathology, immunology"
- Biomarkers/blood
- East Asian People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-nephrin antibodies in adult Chinese patients with minimal change disease and primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.
**Authors:** Shu Y, Huang J, Jiang L, Zhang YM, Wang F, Wang X, Meng LQ, Cheng XY, Liu G, Wang SX, Zhao MH, Ronco P, Cui Z
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.kint.2025.02.028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2025.02.028)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2025 Sep;108(3):433-444. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2025.02.028. Epub
2025  Mar 25.

Anti-nephrin antibodies in adult Chinese patients with minimal change disease 
and primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.

Shu Y(1), Huang J(1), Jiang L(1), Zhang YM(1), Wang F(1), Wang X(1), Meng LQ(1), 
Cheng XY(1), Liu G(1), Wang SX(2), Zhao MH(1), Ronco P(3), Cui Z(4).

Author information:
(1)Renal Division, Peking University First Hospital; Institute of Nephrology, 
Peking University; Key Laboratory of Renal Disease, Ministry of Health of China; 
Key Laboratory of CKD Prevention and Treatment, Ministry of Education of China, 
Beijing, China; Research Units of Diagnosis and Treatment of Immune-mediated 
Kidney Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Laboratory of Electron Microscopy, Pathological Center, Peking University 
First Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)Sorbonne Université, and Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche 
Médicale (Inserm), Unité Mixte de Recherche S1155, Paris, France; Department of 
Nephrology, Centre Hospitalier du Mans, Le Mans, France.
(4)Renal Division, Peking University First Hospital; Institute of Nephrology, 
Peking University; Key Laboratory of Renal Disease, Ministry of Health of China; 
Key Laboratory of CKD Prevention and Treatment, Ministry of Education of China, 
Beijing, China; Research Units of Diagnosis and Treatment of Immune-mediated 
Kidney Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China. Electronic 
address: cuizhao@bjmu.edu.cn.

INTRODUCTION: Anti-nephrin autoantibodies have been discovered in patients with 
minimal change disease (MCD) and primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis 
(FSGS), especially in those with active nephrotic syndrome.
METHODS: Here, we investigated the prevalence and clinical significance of 
anti-nephrin antibodies in 596 adult Chinese patients (436 with MCD and 160 with 
primary FSGS) diagnosed by kidney biopsy.
RESULTS: Anti-nephrin IgG and IgM were detected using ELISA, with validation 
through antigen-inhibition ELISA and Western blotting. Clinical data at biopsy 
and during the follow-up period were analyzed. Anti-nephrin antibodies were 
detected in 43% of all patients, with 30% testing positive for anti-nephrin IgG, 
26% for anti-nephrin IgM, and 13.1% for both antibodies. The prevalence of 
anti-nephrin antibodies was higher in patients with nephrotic-range proteinuria 
who were not receiving steroids or immunosuppressants (51.1%). Patients with 
positive anti-nephrin antibodies exhibited more severe nephrotic syndrome, 
higher rates of relapse, and a shorter relapse-free period compared to those 
negative for these antibodies. Clinical features were similar between those with 
IgG and IgM. Notably, patients with both anti-nephrin IgG and IgM had the most 
severe proteinuria and the highest relapse frequency, suggesting a 
dose-dependent effect. Longitudinal analysis revealed that anti-nephrin 
antibodies significantly decreased during clinical remission, while they 
reappeared preceding proteinuria relapse.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows that anti-nephrin antibodies, including IgG and 
IgM, are detectable in adult patients with MCD and primary FSGS and are 
associated with active nephrotic syndrome and frequent relapse. These antibodies 
may serve as valuable biomarkers and potential therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2025 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2025.02.028
PMID: 40147632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]