---
reference_id: "PMID:37573616"
title: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Direct Oral Anticoagulants Versus Warfarin in Atrial Fibrillation With Low Stroke Risk.
authors:
- Fong KY
- Chan YH
- Yeo C
- Lip GYH
- Tan VH
journal: Am J Cardiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2023.07.108
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Direct Oral Anticoagulants Versus Warfarin in Atrial Fibrillation With Low Stroke Risk.
**Authors:** Fong KY, Chan YH, Yeo C, Lip GYH, Tan VH
**Journal:** Am J Cardiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjcard.2023.07.108](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjcard.2023.07.108)

## Content

1. Am J Cardiol. 2023 Oct 1;204:366-376. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2023.07.108. Epub
 2023 Aug 11.

Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Direct Oral Anticoagulants Versus 
Warfarin in Atrial Fibrillation With Low Stroke Risk.

Fong KY(1), Chan YH(2), Yeo C(3), Lip GYH(4), Tan VH(5).

Author information:
(1)Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Biostatistics Unit, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Changi General Hospital, Singapore.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Liverpool Centre for Cardiovascular 
Science at University of Liverpool, Liverpool John Moores and Liverpool Heart & 
Chest Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom; Department of Clinical Medicine, 
Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Changi General Hospital, Singapore. Electronic 
address: tan.vern.hsen@singhealth.com.sg.

Pivotal trials comparing direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) against warfarin in 
patients with atrial fibrillation (AF) predominantly involved patients with high 
stroke risk. This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of DOAC versus 
warfarin in patients with low stroke risk. An online literature search was 
conducted to retrieve studies comparing clinical outcomes between patients 
treated with DOAC versus warfarin for AF, reporting outcomes for patients at low 
or minimal risk of stroke (CHA2DS2-VASc scores ranging from 0 to 2 or CHADS2 
scores ranging from 0 to 1). The primary outcome was the occurrence of stroke or 
systemic embolism. Secondary outcomes included major bleeding, intracranial 
hemorrhage, and all-cause mortality. Hazard ratios for all outcomes were pooled 
in random-effects meta-analyses. A network meta-analysis of individual DOACs 
versus warfarin was also conducted. In total, 11 studies (132,980 patients) were 
included. DOAC was associated with a significantly lower risk of stroke or 
systemic embolism (hazard ratio 0.85, 95% confidence interval 0.75 to 0.96, 
p = 0.008, I2 = 0%), major bleeding, intracranial hemorrhage, and mortality 
compared with warfarin. This benefit persisted even when study arms which had 
CHA2DS2-VASc scores of 2 were excluded. When restricted to 3 studies 
investigating only patients with a single nongender-related stroke risk factor, 
significant benefit was seen only for the outcome of major bleeding. In the 
network meta-analysis, only dabigatran was superior to warfarin for all 4 
outcomes. In conclusion, DOACs should be the standard of care in low-risk 
patients with AF who require anticoagulation. In particular, dabigatran appears 
to have the best balance of stroke prevention and reduction in major bleeding.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2023.07.108
PMID: 37573616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Dr. Lip is a 
consultant and speaker for Bristol-Myers Squibb/Pfizer, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
and Daiichi-Sankyo. No fees are received personally. The remaining authors have 
no competing interests to declare.