---
reference_id: "PMID:38823477"
title: "Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis: Effects of Pharmacological Treatment for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder on Quality of Life."
authors:
- Bellato A
- Perrott NJ
- Marzulli L
- Parlatini V
- Coghill D
- Cortese S
journal: J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaac.2024.05.023
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- Humans
- Atomoxetine Hydrochloride
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/drug therapy
- "Central Nervous System Stimulants/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Quality of Life
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis: Effects of Pharmacological Treatment for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder on Quality of Life.
**Authors:** Bellato A, Perrott NJ, Marzulli L, Parlatini V, Coghill D, Cortese S
**Journal:** J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaac.2024.05.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2024.05.023)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2025 Mar;64(3):346-361. doi:
10.1016/j.jaac.2024.05.023. Epub 2024 May 30.

Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis: Effects of Pharmacological Treatment for
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder on Quality of Life.

Bellato A(1), Perrott NJ(2), Marzulli L(3), Parlatini V(4), Coghill D(5),
Cortese S(6).

Author information:
(1)University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom; University of
Nottingham Malaysia, Semenyih, Malaysia. Electronic address:
a.bellato@soton.ac.uk.
(2)University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.
(3)Università degli Studi di Bari "Aldo Moro", Bari, Italy.
(4)University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom; King's College
London, London, United Kingdom; Solent NHS Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom.
(5)University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia; Murdoch Children's Research
Institute, Melbourne, Australia.
(6)University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom; Università degli
Studi di Bari "Aldo Moro", Bari, Italy; Solent NHS Trust, Southampton, United
Kingdom; New York University Child Study Center, New York.

OBJECTIVE: We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis to quantify the
effect of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) medication on quality
of life (QoL), and to understand whether this effect differs between stimulants
and nonstimulants.
METHOD: From the dataset of a published network meta-analysis (Cortese et al.,
20181), updated on 27th February 2023 (https://med-adhd.org/), we identified
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of ADHD medications for individuals aged 6
years or more with a diagnosis of ADHD based on the DSM (from third to fifth
editions) or the International Classification of Diseases (ICD; ninth or tenth
revision), reporting data on QoL (measured with a validated scale). The risk of
bias for each RCTs was assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool 2.
Multilevel meta-analytic models were conducted with R 4.3.1.
RESULTS: We included 17 RCTs (5,388 participants in total; 56% randomized to
active medication) in the meta-analyses. We found that amphetamines (Hedge's g =
0.51, 95% CI = 0.08, 0.94), methylphenidate (0.38; 0.23, 0.54), and atomoxetine
(0.30; 0.19, 0.40) were significantly more efficacious than placebo in improving
QoL in people with ADHD, with moderate effect size. For atomoxetine, these
effects were not moderated by the length of intervention, and did not differ
between children/adolescents and adults.
CONCLUSION: In addition to being efficacious in reducing ADHD core symptom
severity, both stimulant and nonstimulant medications are efficacious in
improving QoL in people with ADHD, albeit with lower effect sizes. Future
research should explore whether, and to what degree, combining pharmacological
and nonpharmacological interventions is likely to further improve QoL in people
with ADHD.
PLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY: From a prior dataset of a network meta-analysis, 17
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) were included in a meta-analysis to
investigate if attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) medication
improves quality of life (QoL) in people with ADHD. The analysis showed that
medications such as amphetamines, methylphenidate, and atomoxetine improved QoL
compared to placebo, with moderate effect sizes. This study underscores the
importance of ADHD medications, both stimulants and nonstimulants, not only in
alleviating core ADHD symptoms but also in enhancing overall QoL for individuals
with ADHD.
STUDY PREREGISTRATION INFORMATION: Effects of pharmacological treatment for ADHD
on quality of life: a systematic review and meta-analysis; https://osf.io/;
qvgps.

Copyright © 2024 American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. Published
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaac.2024.05.023
PMID: 38823477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
