---
reference_id: "PMID:20418488"
title: A functional ABCA1 gene variant is associated with low HDL-cholesterol levels and shows evidence of positive selection in Native Americans.
authors:
- Acuña-Alonzo V
- Flores-Dorantes T
- Kruit JK
- Villarreal-Molina T
- Arellano-Campos O
- Hünemeier T
- Moreno-Estrada A
- Ortiz-López MG
- Villamil-Ramírez H
- León-Mimila P
- Villalobos-Comparan M
- Jacobo-Albavera L
- Ramírez-Jiménez S
- Sikora M
- Zhang LH
- Pape TD
- Granados-Silvestre Mde A
- Montufar-Robles I
- Tito-Alvarez AM
- Zurita-Salinas C
- Bustos-Arriaga J
- Cedillo-Barrón L
- Gómez-Trejo C
- Barquera-Lozano R
- Vieira-Filho JP
- Granados J
- Romero-Hidalgo S
- Huertas-Vázquez A
- González-Martín A
- Gorostiza A
- Bonatto SL
- Rodríguez-Cruz M
- Wang L
- Tusié-Luna T
- Aguilar-Salinas CA
- Lisker R
- Moises RS
- Menjivar M
- Salzano FM
- Knowler WC
- Bortolini MC
- Hayden MR
- Baier LJ
- Canizales-Quinteros S
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq173
keywords:
- ATP Binding Cassette Transporter 1
- "ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics, physiology"
- Adult
- Alleles
- "Cholesterol, HDL/blood, genetics"
- Female
- Gene Frequency
- "Genetics, Population"
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Geography
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- "Indians, North American/genetics"
- Linkage Disequilibrium
- Male
- "Selection, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A functional ABCA1 gene variant is associated with low HDL-cholesterol levels and shows evidence of positive selection in Native Americans.
**Authors:** Acuña-Alonzo V, Flores-Dorantes T, Kruit JK, Villarreal-Molina T, Arellano-Campos O, Hünemeier T, Moreno-Estrada A, Ortiz-López MG, Villamil-Ramírez H, León-Mimila P, Villalobos-Comparan M, Jacobo-Albavera L, Ramírez-Jiménez S, Sikora M, Zhang LH, Pape TD, Granados-Silvestre Mde A, Montufar-Robles I, Tito-Alvarez AM, Zurita-Salinas C, Bustos-Arriaga J, Cedillo-Barrón L, Gómez-Trejo C, Barquera-Lozano R, Vieira-Filho JP, Granados J, Romero-Hidalgo S, Huertas-Vázquez A, González-Martín A, Gorostiza A, Bonatto SL, Rodríguez-Cruz M, Wang L, Tusié-Luna T, Aguilar-Salinas CA, Lisker R, Moises RS, Menjivar M, Salzano FM, Knowler WC, Bortolini MC, Hayden MR, Baier LJ, Canizales-Quinteros S
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddq173](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddq173)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Jul 15;19(14):2877-85. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq173. Epub 2010
Apr 23.

A functional ABCA1 gene variant is associated with low HDL-cholesterol levels
and shows evidence of positive selection in Native Americans.

Acuña-Alonzo V(1), Flores-Dorantes T, Kruit JK, Villarreal-Molina T,
Arellano-Campos O, Hünemeier T, Moreno-Estrada A, Ortiz-López MG,
Villamil-Ramírez H, León-Mimila P, Villalobos-Comparan M, Jacobo-Albavera L,
Ramírez-Jiménez S, Sikora M, Zhang LH, Pape TD, Granados-Silvestre Mde A,
Montufar-Robles I, Tito-Alvarez AM, Zurita-Salinas C, Bustos-Arriaga J,
Cedillo-Barrón L, Gómez-Trejo C, Barquera-Lozano R, Vieira-Filho JP, Granados J,
Romero-Hidalgo S, Huertas-Vázquez A, González-Martín A, Gorostiza A, Bonatto SL,
Rodríguez-Cruz M, Wang L, Tusié-Luna T, Aguilar-Salinas CA, Lisker R, Moises RS,
Menjivar M, Salzano FM, Knowler WC, Bortolini MC, Hayden MR, Baier LJ,
Canizales-Quinteros S.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Molecular Biology and Genomic Medicine, Instituto Nacional de
Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Mexico City 14000, Mexico.

It has been suggested that the higher susceptibility of Hispanics to metabolic
disease is related to their Native American heritage. A frequent cholesterol
transporter ABCA1 (ATP-binding cassette transporter A1) gene variant (R230C,
rs9282541) apparently exclusive to Native American individuals was associated
with low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) levels, obesity and type 2
diabetes in Mexican Mestizos. We performed a more extensive analysis of this
variant in 4405 Native Americans and 863 individuals from other ethnic groups to
investigate genetic evidence of positive selection, to assess its functional
effect in vitro and to explore associations with HDL-C levels and other
metabolic traits. The C230 allele was found in 29 of 36 Native American groups,
but not in European, Asian or African individuals. C230 was observed on a single
haplotype, and C230-bearing chromosomes showed longer relative haplotype
extension compared with other haplotypes in the Americas. Additionally,
single-nucleotide polymorphism data from the Human Genome Diversity Panel Native
American populations were enriched in significant integrated haplotype score
values in the region upstream of the ABCA1 gene. Cells expressing the C230
allele showed a 27% cholesterol efflux reduction (P< 0.001), confirming this
variant has a functional effect in vitro. Moreover, the C230 allele was
associated with lower HDL-C levels (P = 1.77 x 10(-11)) and with higher body
mass index (P = 0.0001) in the combined analysis of Native American populations.
This is the first report of a common functional variant exclusive to Native
American and descent populations, which is a major determinant of HDL-C levels
and may have contributed to the adaptive evolution of Native American
populations.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq173
PMCID: PMC2893805
PMID: 20418488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
