---
reference_id: "PMID:20301697"
title: Homocystinuria due to Cystathionine Beta-Synthase Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Sacharow SJ
- Levy HL
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homocystinuria due to Cystathionine Beta-Synthase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Sacharow SJ, Levy HL

## Content

1. Homocystinuria due to Cystathionine Beta-Synthase Deficiency.

Sacharow SJ(1), Levy HL(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2004 Jan 15 [updated 2025 Sep 25].

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Homocystinuria (HCU) due to cystathionine
beta-synthase (CBS) deficiency (HCU-CBS deficiency) is characterized by
involvement of four major systems: the eye (ectopia lentis and/or severe
myopia), skeletal system (excessive height, long limbs, osteoporosis, scoliosis,
arachnodactyly, pes cavus, pectus excavatum or carinatum, and genu valgum),
vascular system (thromboembolism), and central nervous system (developmental
delay, intellectual disability, seizures, psychiatric and behavioral
manifestations, and dystonia). In a symptomatic individual, one to all four of
the systems can be involved; expressivity is variable for all the clinical
manifestations. It is not unusual for a previously asymptomatic individual to
present in adulthood or earlier with only a thromboembolic event that is often
cerebrovascular. Other features that may occur include hypopigmentation of the
skin and hair, malar flush, livedo reticularis, and pancreatitis.
Thromboembolism is the major cause of early death and morbidity. Individuals
with HCU-CBS deficiency can be vitamin B6 responsive, vitamin B6 nonresponsive,
or partial responders to vitamin B6. The clinical manifestations in those who
are vitamin B6 responsive are typically (but not always) milder than individuals
who are vitamin B6 nonresponsive.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of HCU-CBS deficiency is established in a
proband with biallelic pathogenic variants in CBS identified by molecular
genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) therapy (in those who
are vitamin B6 responsive); methionine-restricted diet; folic acid and vitamin
B12 supplementation as needed; betaine therapy. Treatment of manifestations:
Management of methionine-restricted diet and other targeted therapies per
metabolic and dietary specialist to control the plasma homocysteine
concentration and prevent thrombosis; treatment of ocular manifestations per
ophthalmologist; management of scoliosis and kyphosis per orthopedist; treatment
of pectus deformity as needed; management of low bone density per metabolic bone
specialist; treatment of acute vascular event per vascular specialist; education
regarding risk and manifestations of thrombosis; developmental and educational
support; standard treatments of seizures per experienced neurologist; support in
transition to adult care. Surveillance: Evaluation with a metabolic specialist
and metabolic dietician; routine labs may include plasma total homocysteine and
amino acids, folate, and vitamin B12 with frequency per metabolic specialist,
and additional labs in those on a methionine-restricted diet; ophthalmology
evaluation to evaluate for myopia and ectopia lentis at least annually; assess
for long bone overgrowth and deformity, genu valgum, pes cavus, pectus
deformity, kyphosis, scoliosis, and frequency of fractures at each visit;
radiographs for scoliosis as needed; bone density scan every three to five years
from adolescence and more frequently in those with frequent fractures and/or
vitamin D deficiency; lipid profile once in childhood and annually in adulthood;
monitor developmental and educational progress at each visit; neuropsychological
testing and behavioral assessment as needed; assess for seizures, movement
disorders, response to treatment, and for any new central nervous system
manifestations at each visit or as needed; assess growth, quality of life, and
social work and family needs at each visit. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Oral
contraceptives in affected females; surgery if possible; dehydration and
immobilization; nitrous oxide. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Plasma
concentrations of total homocysteine and amino acids should be measured in
at-risk sibs as soon as possible after birth so that morbidity and mortality can
be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment. Evaluation of other at-risk sibs of
any age is also warranted to allow for early diagnosis and treatment of
homocystinuria. If the CBS pathogenic variants in the family are known,
molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of sibs.
Pregnancy management: Methionine-restricted diet, betaine; vitamin B6 for those
who are vitamin B6 responsive. Careful biochemical monitoring throughout
pregnancy. Prophylactic anticoagulation with low-molecular-weight heparin is
recommended during the third trimester and post partum to reduce risk of
thromboembolism.
GENETIC COUNSELING: HCU-CBS deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. Because it is possible (though unlikely) that a parent of the proband
has biallelic CBS pathogenic variants and HCU-CBS deficiency but has remained
undiagnosed, it is appropriate to measure plasma homocysteine concentration in
each parent, obtain a detailed medical history, and consider clinical
examination of the parents. If the parents are consanguineous and/or if
suggestive features are present, further biochemical testing (typically plasma
amino acid analysis) and/or genetic testing of the parent(s) is recommended.
Evaluation of the mother becomes even more imperative if the mother is
considering future pregnancies, as affected women are at increased risk for
thromboembolic events during pregnancy. If a molecular diagnosis has been
established in the proband, targeted analysis can be used to determine if the
parents are heterozygous for the CBS pathogenic variants identified in the
proband (targeted testing for the CBS pathogenic variants identified in the
proband cannot be used to rule out the possibility that a parent has biallelic
CBS pathogenic variants). If both parents are known to be heterozygous for a CBS
pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25%
chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a
25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the CBS pathogenic
variants have been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for
at-risk family members and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are
possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301697
