---
reference_id: "PMID:35623961"
title: "European consensus-based interdisciplinary guideline for melanoma. Part 2: Treatment - Update 2022."
authors:
- Garbe C
- Amaral T
- Peris K
- Hauschild A
- Arenberger P
- Basset-Seguin N
- Bastholt L
- Bataille V
- Del Marmol V
- Dréno B
- Fargnoli MC
- Forsea AM
- Grob JJ
- Hoeller C
- Kaufmann R
- Kelleners-Smeets N
- Lallas A
- Lebbé C
- Lytvynenko B
- Malvehy J
- Moreno-Ramirez D
- Nathan P
- Pellacani G
- Saiag P
- Stratigos AJ
- Van Akkooi ACJ
- Vieira R
- Zalaudek I
- Lorigan P
- "European Dermatology Forum (EDF), the European Association of Dermato-Oncology (EADO), and the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC)"
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2022.04.018
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols
- Consensus
- Humans
- Melanoma/pathology
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Staging
- Oximes
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Skin Neoplasms/genetics
- Systematic Reviews as Topic
- Cutaneous Malignant Melanoma
content_type: abstract_only
---

# European consensus-based interdisciplinary guideline for melanoma. Part 2: Treatment - Update 2022.
**Authors:** Garbe C, Amaral T, Peris K, Hauschild A, Arenberger P, Basset-Seguin N, Bastholt L, Bataille V, Del Marmol V, Dréno B, Fargnoli MC, Forsea AM, Grob JJ, Hoeller C, Kaufmann R, Kelleners-Smeets N, Lallas A, Lebbé C, Lytvynenko B, Malvehy J, Moreno-Ramirez D, Nathan P, Pellacani G, Saiag P, Stratigos AJ, Van Akkooi ACJ, Vieira R, Zalaudek I, Lorigan P, European Dermatology Forum (EDF), the European Association of Dermato-Oncology (EADO), and the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC)
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2022.04.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2022.04.018)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2022 Jul;170:256-284. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2022.04.018. Epub 2022
 May 24.

European consensus-based interdisciplinary guideline for melanoma. Part 2:
Treatment - Update 2022.

Garbe C(1), Amaral T(2), Peris K(3), Hauschild A(4), Arenberger P(5),
Basset-Seguin N(6), Bastholt L(7), Bataille V(8), Del Marmol V(9), Dréno B(10),
Fargnoli MC(11), Forsea AM(12), Grob JJ(13), Hoeller C(14), Kaufmann R(15),
Kelleners-Smeets N(16), Lallas A(17), Lebbé C(6), Lytvynenko B(18), Malvehy
J(19), Moreno-Ramirez D(20), Nathan P(21), Pellacani G(22), Saiag P(23),
Stratigos AJ(24), Van Akkooi ACJ(25), Vieira R(26), Zalaudek I(27), Lorigan
P(28); European Dermatology Forum (EDF), the European Association of
Dermato-Oncology (EADO), and the European Organization for Research and
Treatment of Cancer (EORTC).

Author information:
(1)Center for Dermatooncology, Department of Dermatology, Eberhard Karls
University, Tuebingen, Germany. Electronic address:
claus.garbe@med.uni-tuebingen.de.
(2)Center for Dermatooncology, Department of Dermatology, Eberhard Karls
University, Tuebingen, Germany.
(3)Institute of Dermatology, Università Cattolica, Rome, Italy; Fondazione
Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli - IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein (UKSH),
Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(5)Department of Dermatovenereology, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(6)Université Paris Cite, AP-HP, Department of Dermatology INSERM U 976 Hôpital,
Saint Louis Paris France.
(7)Department of Oncology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(8)Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology Unit, School of Basic & Medical
Biosciences, King's College London, London, SE1 7EH, United Kingdom.
(9)Department of Dermatology, Erasme Hospital, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Brussels, Belgium.
(10)Dermatology Department, CHU Nantes, CIC 1413, CRCINA, University Nantes,
Nantes, France.
(11)Dermatology, Department of Biotechnological and Applied Clinical Sciences,
University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.
(12)Dermatology Department, Elias University Hospital, Carol Davila University
of Medicine and Pharmacy Bucharest, Romania.
(13)University Department of Dermatology, Marseille, France.
(14)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria.
(15)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Frankfurt University
Hospital, Frankfurt, Germany.
(16)Department of Dermatology, Maastricht University Medical Center+,
Maastricht, Netherlands.
(17)First Department of Dermatology, Aristotle University, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(18)Shupyk National Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Kiev, Ukraine.
(19)Melanoma Unit, Department of Dermatology, Hospital Clinic, IDIBAPS,
Barcelona, Spain.
(20)Medical-&-Surgical Dermatology Service, Hospital Universitario Virgen
Macarena, Sevilla, Spain.
(21)Mount-Vernon Cancer Centre, Northwood United Kingdom.
(22)Dermatology Unit, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(23)University Department of Dermatology, Université de Versailles-Saint Quentin
en Yvelines, APHP, Boulogne, France.
(24)First Department of Dermatology, University of Athens School of Medicine,
Andreas Sygros Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(25)Melanoma Institute Australia, The University of Sydney, and Royal North
Shore and Mater Hospitals, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(26)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário
de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(27)Dermatology Clinic, Maggiore Hospital, University of Trieste, Trieste,
Italy.
(28)The University of Manchester, Oxford Rd, Manchester, M13 9PL, United
Kingdom.

A unique collaboration of multidisciplinary experts from the European
Dermatology Forum (EDF), the European Association of Dermato-Oncology (EADO),
and the European Organization of Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) was
formed to make recommendations on cutaneous melanoma diagnosis and treatment,
based on the systematic literature reviews and the experts' experience.
Cutaneous melanomas are excised with one to 2-cm safety margins. Sentinel lymph
node dissection shall be performed as a staging procedure in patients with tumor
thickness ≥1.0 mm or ≥0.8 mm with additional histological risk factors, although
there is as yet no clear survival benefit for this approach. Therapeutic
decisions in stage III/IV patients should be primarily made by an
interdisciplinary oncology team ("tumor board"). Adjuvant therapies can be
proposed in stage III/completely resected stage IV patients and are primarily
anti-PD-1, independent of mutational status, or alternatively dabrafenib plus
trametinib for BRAF mutant patients. In distant metastases (stage IV), either
resected or not, systemic treatment is always indicated. For first-line
treatment particularly in BRAF wild-type patients, immunotherapy with PD-1
antibodies alone or in combination with CTLA-4 antibodies shall be considered.
In stage IV melanoma with a BRAF-V600  E/K mutation, first-line therapy with
BRAF/MEK inhibitors can be offered as an alternative to immunotherapy. In
patients with primary resistance to immunotherapy and harboring a BRAF-V600  E/K
mutation, this therapy shall be offered as second-line therapy. Systemic therapy
in stage III/IV melanoma is a rapidly changing landscape, and it is likely that
these recommendations may change in the near future.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2022.04.018
PMID: 35623961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement Dr. Garbe reports
personal fees from Amgen, personal fees from MSD, grants and personal fees from
Novartis, grants and personal fees from NeraCare, grants and personal fees from
BMS, personal fees from Philogen, grants and personal fees from Roche, grants
and personal fees from Sanofi, outside the submitted work. Dr. Amaral reports
institutional grants and personal fees from Novartis, institutional grants from
NeraCare, personal fees from BMS, institutional grants from Sanofi,
institutional grants from SkylineDx, personal fees from CeCaVa, personal fees
from Pierre Fabre, outside the submitted work. Dr. Peris reports personal fees
from Novartis, personal fees from Roche, personal fees from Sanofi, personal
fees from Lilly, personal fees from Leopharma, personal fees from Pierre Fabre,
personal fees from Almirall, personal fees from Celgene, outside the submitted
work. Dr. Hauschild reports grants and personal fees from Amgen, grants and
personal fees from BMS, grants and personal fees from Eisai, grants and personal
fees from Immunocore, grants and personal fees from MerckPfizer, grants and
personal fees from MSD/Merck, grants and personal fees from Novartis Pharma,
grants and personal fees from Philogen, grants and personal fees from Pierre
Fabre, grants and personal fees from Regeneron, grants and personal fees from
Replimune, grants and personal fees from Roche, grants and personal fees from
Sanofi-Genzyme, grants and personal fees from Seagen outside the submitted work.
Dr. Arenberger reports personal fees from Amgen, personal fees from MSD,
personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from BMS, grants and personal fees
from Pfizer, personal fees from Sanofi, outside the submitted work. Dr
Basset-Seguin has nothing to disclose. Dr. Bastholt reports personal fees for
advisory boards from Bristol Myers-Squibb, Pierre Fabre, Merck MSD, Novartis and
Roche, outside the submitted work. Dr. Bataille has nothing to disclose. Dr. del
Marmol reports grants and personal fees from BMS, grants and personal fees from
SANOFI, personal fees from Merck, grants and personal fees from almirall,
personal fees from ABBVIE, personal fees from LEO pharma, personal fees from SUN
Pharma, personal fees from Genzyme, outside the submitted work. Dr. Dréno
reports grants and personal fees from BMS, personal fees from MSD, grants and
personal fees from Roche, grants and personal fees from Fabre, grants and
personal fees from Sanofi, outside the submitted work. Dr. Fargnoli reports
grants, personal fees and non-financial support from Almirall, grants and
personal fees from Leo Pharma, grants and personal fees from Janssen, grants,
personal fees and non-financial support from Novartis, personal fees from Lilly,
grants and personal fees from Sanofi, personal fees from UCB, personal fees from
Abbvie, grants, personal fees and non-financial support from AMGEN, personal
fees from Pierre Fabre, grants and personal fees from Galderma, personal fees
from Sun Pharma, personal fees from BMS, personal fees from Kyowa Kyrin,
personal fees from Pfizer, personal fees from MSD, outside the submitted work.
Dr. Forsea has nothing to disclose. Dr. Grob reports personal fees from Amgen,
personal fees from MSD, personal fees from Novartis, grants and personal fees
from Pierre Fabre, grants and personal fees from BMS, personal fees from
Philogen, personal fees from Roche, personal fees from Sanofi, outside the
submitted work. Dr. Hoeller reports personal fees from Amgen, personal fees from
Almirall, personal fees from BMS, personal fees from MSD, personal fees from
Novartis, personal fees from Pierre Fabre, personal fees from Roche, personal
fees from Sanofi, outside the submitted work. Dr. Kaufmann reports grants from
Abbvie, grants from Almirall, grants from Amgen, grants from Astra Zeneca,
grants from Biontech, grants from BMS, grants from BMS, grants from Celgene,
grants from InflaRx, grants from Leo, grants from Lilly, grants from MSD, grants
from Novartis, grants from Pfizer, grants from Pierre Fabre, grants from
Regeneron, grants from Roche, grants from Sanofi, grants from UCB, outside the
submitted work. Dr. Kelleners-Smeets has nothing to disclose. Dr. Lallas reports
grants and personal fees from Sanofi, outside the submitted work. Dr. Lebbé
reports grants and personal fees from Bristol-Myers Squibb, personal fees from
MSD, personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from Amgen, grants and personal
fees from Roche, personal fees from Avantis Medical Systems, personal fees from
Pierre Fabre, personal fees from Pfizer, personal fees from Incyte, outside the
submitted work. Dr. Lytvynenko has nothing to disclose. Dr. Malvehy reports
grants and personal fees from Amgen, personal fees from MSD, grants and personal
fees from Novartis, grants and personal fees from BMS, grants and personal fees
from Almirall, personal fees from Sunpharma, personal fees from Pierre Fabre,
outside the submitted work. Dr. Moreno-Ramirez has nothing to disclose. Dr.
Nathan reports personal fees from BMS, personal fees from MSD, personal fees
from Novartis, personal fees from Pfizer, grants and personal fees from
Immunocore, personal fees from 4SC, outside the submitted work. Dr. Pellacani
reports personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from Sanofi, grants from
Novartis, instruments from 3Gen, Vidix, Fotofinder and MAVIG GmbH, outside the
submitted work. Dr. Saiag reports personal fees from Amgen, personal fees from
MSD, grants and personal fees from Novartis, grants and personal fees from
NeraCare, grants and personal fees from BMS, grants and personal fees from
Roche, grants and personal fees from Sanofi, personal fees from Pierre
Fabre/array, outside the submitted work. Dr. Stratigos reports personal fees
from Sanofi, personal fees from Janssen CILAG, personal fees and non-financial
support from Novartis, grants from Genesis Pharma, grants from Abbvie, grants
and personal fees from BMS, personal fees from Regeneron, grants from
Leo-Pharma, grants from Lilly, outside the submitted work. Dr. Van Akkooi
reports grants and personal fees from Amgen, personal fees from Bristol-Myers
Squibb, personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from MSD-Merck, grants and
personal fees from Merck-Pfizer, personal fees from Pierre Fabre, personal fees
from Sanofi, personal fees from Sirius Medical, personal fees from 4SC, outside
the submitted work. Dr. Vieira reports personal fees from BMS, outside the
submitted work. Dr. Zalaudek reports personal fees from Philogen, personal fees
from MSD, personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from Sanofi, personal fees
from La Roche Posay, personal fees from Sunpharma, personal fees from Biogena,
personal fees from Cieffe Derma, outside the submitted work. Dr. Lorigan has
nothing to disclose.
