---
reference_id: "PMID:26773421"
title: Ovarian cancer in Lynch syndrome; a systematic review.
authors:
- Helder-Woolderink JM
- Blok EA
- Vasen HF
- Hollema H
- Mourits MJ
- De Bock GH
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2015.12.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ovarian cancer in Lynch syndrome; a systematic review.
**Authors:** Helder-Woolderink JM, Blok EA, Vasen HF, Hollema H, Mourits MJ, De Bock GH
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2015.12.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2015.12.005)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2016 Mar;55:65-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2015.12.005. Epub 2016
Jan  13.

Ovarian cancer in Lynch syndrome; a systematic review.

Helder-Woolderink JM(1), Blok EA(2), Vasen HF(3), Hollema H(4), Mourits MJ(2), 
De Bock GH(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynaecology, Martini Hospital, Groningen, The Netherlands; 
Department of Gynaecologic Oncology, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Centre Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
j.m.woolderink@umcg.nl.
(2)Department of Gynaecologic Oncology, University of Groningen, University 
Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Leiden University Medical 
Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: The aim was to systematically review the characteristics of ovarian 
cancer in women with Lynch syndrome (LS) and evaluate the role of surveillance 
in detection of ovarian cancer in LS.
METHODS: All studies between 1979 and 2015 of women with ovarian cancer and LS 
or at 50% risk of LS were evaluated. Two reviewers independently evaluated 
eligible studies and extracted data on age at diagnosis, histological type, FIGO 
stage, and way of detection according to pre-specified criteria. The studies 
were assessed for quality using the Newcastle-Ottawa quality assessment scales.
RESULTS: The quality score of the 49 identified studies was at least 6 out of 8 
and provide clinical information on 747 LS women with ovarian cancer. The mean 
age at diagnosis was 45.3 (range 19-82) years. Most frequent mutations were MSH2 
(47%) and MLH1 (38%). Histopathological data were available for 445 women. The 
most frequently reported histological type was mixed type 
(mucinous/endometrioid/clear cell carcinomas) (n = 136; 31%). Most tumours (281, 
65%) were diagnosed at an early stage (FIGO I/II). Six studies evaluating the 
effect of surveillance of ovarian cancer, reported that seven of 22 (32%) 
ovarian cancers were found during surveillance, 6/7 (86%) were detected at an 
early stage.
CONCLUSION: This systematic review describes that ovarian cancer in women with 
LS has a wide age-range of onset, is often diagnosed at an early stage with 
frequently endometrioid/clear cell histology. Data about the role of 
surveillance in detection of ovarian cancer in women with LS are scarce however 
detection at an early stage seems possible.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2015.12.005
PMID: 26773421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]