---
reference_id: "PMID:32911139"
title: Clinical outcomes and survival following lung transplantation in patients with Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.
authors:
- Riley L
- Lascano J
journal: Respir Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2020.106145
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Lung Transplantation/methods, mortality"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Pulmonary Disease, Chronic Obstructive/mortality, surgery"
- Survival Rate
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/mortality
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical outcomes and survival following lung transplantation in patients with Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.
**Authors:** Riley L, Lascano J
**Journal:** Respir Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rmed.2020.106145](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmed.2020.106145)

## Content

1. Respir Med. 2020 Oct;172:106145. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2020.106145. Epub 2020
Sep  2.

Clinical outcomes and survival following lung transplantation in patients with
Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.

Riley L(1), Lascano J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and
Sleep Medicine, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA.
Electronic address: Elmer.Riley@medicine.ufl.edu.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and
Sleep Medicine, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The primary intention of our study is to describe disease-specific
outcomes in patients with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) following lung
transplantation (LT).
METHODS: We reviewed the Organ Procurement and Transplant Network database to
identify AATD patients who have undergone LT in the United States.
RESULTS: Two thousand two hundred and thirteen patients with AATD underwent LT
between March 1992 and September 2019. A total of 1556 patients received LT with
a median age at listing was 51 years. The median time spent on the LT waitlist
was 263 days. The median ischemic time was 4.75 h. The Kaplan-Meier survival
analysis following LT for AATD patients at 1-, 5-, and 10 years was 82%, 56%,
and 34%, at 1-, 5-, and 10 years, respectively. The median survival time post-LT
is 6.4 years (Interquartile range 5.6-6.8 years). The post-LT survival was
significantly better in double LT compared to single LT (Median 7.7 vs 4.4
years, p < 0.001). Increasing age, presence of CMV mismatch, reintubation prior
to discharge, and requiring treatment for rejection within one year of
transplantation did impact post-LT mortality.
CONCLUSION: The median survival after LT in AATD is 6.4 years and is similar to
other lung diseases. When compared to usual COPD LT, AATD patients have
increased post-LT mortality due to infections and liver disease. Recipients of a
double lung transplant had a favorable outcome compared to single lung
transplant.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2020.106145
PMID: 32911139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
