---
reference_id: "PMID:20301527"
title: Adult Refsum Disease.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Waterham HR
- Wanders RJA
- Leroy BP
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult Refsum Disease.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Waterham HR, Wanders RJA, Leroy BP

## Content

1. Adult Refsum Disease.

Waterham HR(1), Wanders RJA(2), Leroy BP(3)(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2006 Mar 20 [updated 2021 Sep 30].

Author information:
(1)Clinical Laboratory Geneticist, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases,
Department of Clinical Chemistry, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam University
Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
(2)Clinical Biochemical Geneticist, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases,
Department of Clinical Chemistry, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam University
Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
(3)Department of Ophthalmology & Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University
Hospital & Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
(4)Division of Ophthalmology & Center for Cellular & Molecular Therapeutics, The
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Adult Refsum disease (ARD) is associated with elevated
plasma phytanic acid levels, late childhood-onset (or later) retinitis
pigmentosa, and variable combinations of anosmia, polyneuropathy, deafness,
ataxia, and ichthyosis. Onset of symptoms ranges from age seven months to older
than age 50 years. Cardiac arrhythmia and heart failure caused by cardiomyopathy
are potentially severe health problems that develop later in life.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of ARD is established in a proband with
suggestive clinical and biochemical findings by identification of biallelic
pathogenic variants in either PHYH or PEX7 on molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Plasmapheresis or lipid apheresis to
decrease phytanic acid levels is used only for acute arrhythmias or extreme
weakness. Dietary restriction of phytanic acid intake helps resolve ichthyosis,
sensory neuropathy, and ataxia. A high-calorie diet and avoidance of fasting
prevent mobilization of phytanic acid stored in adipose tissue into the plasma.
Hypercaloric parenteral infusions are required during periods of severe illness
or postoperatively. Supportive treatment includes hydrating creams for
ichthyosis and drugs for cardiac arrhythmias and cardiomyopathy.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Food products containing phytanic acid, mostly
from ruminants (cow, sheep, goat), some fish and walnuts; fasting and/or sudden
weight loss; use of either ibuprofen or amiodarone. Evaluation of relatives at
risk: Testing of sibs of a proband ensures early treatment to reduce plasma
phytanic acid concentration before symptoms occur.
GENETIC COUNSELING: ARD is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both
parents are known to be heterozygous for a PHYH or PEX7 pathogenic variant, each
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected,
a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being
unaffected and not a carrier. Once the PHYH or PEX7 pathogenic variants have
been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk
relatives, molecular genetic prenatal testing, and preimplantation genetic
testing for ARD are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301527
