---
reference_id: "PMID:10839976"
title: Novel HOXA13 mutations and the phenotypic spectrum of hand-foot-genital syndrome.
authors:
- Goodman FR
- Bacchelli C
- Brady AF
- Brueton LA
- Fryns JP
- Mortlock DP
- Innis JW
- Holmes LB
- Donnenfeld AE
- Feingold M
- Beemer FA
- Hennekam RC
- Scambler PJ
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1086/302961
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel HOXA13 mutations and the phenotypic spectrum of hand-foot-genital syndrome.
**Authors:** Goodman FR, Bacchelli C, Brady AF, Brueton LA, Fryns JP, Mortlock DP, Innis JW, Holmes LB, Donnenfeld AE, Feingold M, Beemer FA, Hennekam RC, Scambler PJ
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1086/302961](https://doi.org/10.1086/302961)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Jul;67(1):197-202. doi: 10.1086/302961. Epub 2000 Jun 5.

Novel HOXA13 mutations and the phenotypic spectrum of hand-foot-genital 
syndrome.

Goodman FR(1), Bacchelli C, Brady AF, Brueton LA, Fryns JP, Mortlock DP, Innis 
JW, Holmes LB, Donnenfeld AE, Feingold M, Beemer FA, Hennekam RC, Scambler PJ.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom. 
fgoodman@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

Hand-foot-genital syndrome (HFGS) is a rare, dominantly inherited condition 
affecting the distal limbs and genitourinary tract. A nonsense mutation in the 
homeobox of HOXA13 has been identified in one affected family, making HFGS the 
second human syndrome shown to be caused by a HOX gene mutation. We have 
therefore examined HOXA13 in two new and four previously reported families with 
features of HFGS. In families 1, 2, and 3, nonsense mutations truncating the 
encoded protein N-terminal to or within the homeodomain produce typical limb and 
genitourinary abnormalities; in family 4, an expansion of an N-terminal 
polyalanine tract produces a similar phenotype; in family 5, a missense 
mutation, which alters an invariant domain, produces an exceptionally severe 
limb phenotype; and in family 6, in which limb abnormalities were atypical, no 
HOXA13 mutation could be detected. Mutations in HOXA13 can therefore cause 
more-severe limb abnormalities than previously suspected and may act by more 
than one mechanism.

DOI: 10.1086/302961
PMCID: PMC1287077
PMID: 10839976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]