---
reference_id: "PMID:25546242"
title: "Value of HLA-DR genotype in systemic lupus erythematosus and lupus nephritis: a meta-analysis."
authors:
- Niu Z
- Zhang P
- Tong Y
journal: Int J Rheum Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.12528
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Value of HLA-DR genotype in systemic lupus erythematosus and lupus nephritis: a meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Niu Z, Zhang P, Tong Y
**Journal:** Int J Rheum Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1756-185X.12528](https://doi.org/10.1111/1756-185X.12528)

## Content

1. Int J Rheum Dis. 2015 Jan;18(1):17-28. doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.12528. Epub 2014
 Dec 26.

Value of HLA-DR genotype in systemic lupus erythematosus and lupus nephritis: a 
meta-analysis.

Niu Z(1), Zhang P, Tong Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Science, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 
Hu Bei, China.

AIM: Human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DRB1 allele polymorphisms have been reported 
to be associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) susceptibility, but the 
results of these previous studies have been inconsistent. The purpose of the 
present study was to systematically summarize and explore whether specific 
HLA-DRB1 alleles confer susceptibility or resistance to SLE and lupus nephritis.
METHODS: This review was guided by the preferred reporting items for systematic 
reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA) approach. A comprehensive search was made for 
articles from PubMed, Medline, Elsevier Science, Springer Link and Cochrane 
Library database. A total of 25 case-control studies on the relationship between 
gene polymorphism of HLA-DRB l and SLE were performed and data were analyzed and 
processed using Review Manager 5.2 and Stata 11.0.
RESULTS: At the allelic level, HLA-DR4, DR11 and DR14 were identified as 
protective factors for SLE (0.79 [0.69,0.91], P < 0.001; 0.72 [0.60, 0.85], 
P < 0.0001; 0.47 [0.59, 0.95], P < 0.05, respectively). HLA-DR3, DR9, DR15 were 
potent risk factors for SLE (1.88 [1.58, 2.23], P < 0.001; 1.24 [1.07, 1.45], 
P < 0.05; 1.25 [1.10, 1.43], P < 0.001, respectively). However, HLA-DR8 was not 
statistically significant between the SLE group and control group (OR, 1.11 
[0.96, 1.30], P > 0.05). DR4 and 11 (OR, 0.55 [0.39, 0.79], P < 0.01; 0.60 
[0.37, 0.96], P < 0.05, respectively) conferred a significant protective effect 
for lupus nephritis. DR3 and DR15 (OR, 2.00 [1.49, 2.70], P < 0.05; 1.60 [1.21, 
2.12], P < 0.001, respectively) were at a high risk of developing lupus 
nephritis. HLA-DR8, DR9 and DR14 (OR, 1.47 [0.9, 2.33], P > 0.05; 0.90 [0.64, 
1.27], P > 0.05; 0.61 [0.36, 1.03], P > 0.05, respectively) were not 
statistically significant between the lupus nephritis and control groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The HLA-DR4, DR11, DR14 alleles might be protective factors for SLE 
and HLA-DR3, DR9, DR15 were potent risk factors. In addition, HLA-DR4 and DR11 
alleles might be protective factors for lupus nephritis and DR3 and DR15 suggest 
a risk role. These results proved that HLA-DR3, DR15, DR4 and DR11 might be 
identified as predictors for lupus nephritis and SLE.

© 2014 Asia Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and Wiley Publishing 
Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1756-185X.12528
PMID: 25546242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]