---
reference_id: "PMID:23160192"
title: Human SH2B1 mutations are associated with maladaptive behaviors and obesity.
authors:
- Doche ME
- Bochukova EG
- Su HW
- Pearce LR
- Keogh JM
- Henning E
- Cline JM
- Saeed S
- Dale A
- Cheetham T
- Barroso I
- Argetsinger LS
- "O'Rahilly S"
- Rui L
- Carter-Su C
- Farooqi IS
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1172/JCI62696
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aggression
- Base Sequence
- Case-Control Studies
- Cell Movement
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Energy Intake/genetics
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- Genetic Association Studies
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Obesity/genetics
- Phenotype
- Protein Transport
- Social Isolation
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human SH2B1 mutations are associated with maladaptive behaviors and obesity.
**Authors:** Doche ME, Bochukova EG, Su HW, Pearce LR, Keogh JM, Henning E, Cline JM, Saeed S, Dale A, Cheetham T, Barroso I, Argetsinger LS, O'Rahilly S, Rui L, Carter-Su C, Farooqi IS
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI62696](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI62696)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2012 Dec;122(12):4732-6. doi: 10.1172/JCI62696. Epub 2012 Nov
19.

Human SH2B1 mutations are associated with maladaptive behaviors and obesity.

Doche ME(1), Bochukova EG, Su HW, Pearce LR, Keogh JM, Henning E, Cline JM,
Saeed S, Dale A, Cheetham T, Barroso I, Argetsinger LS, O'Rahilly S, Rui L,
Carter-Su C, Farooqi IS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-5622, USA.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2013 Jan 2;123(1):526. Saeed, Sadia [added].

Src homology 2 B adapter protein 1 (SH2B1) modulates signaling by a variety of
ligands that bind to receptor tyrosine kinases or JAK-associated cytokine
receptors, including leptin, insulin, growth hormone (GH), and nerve growth
factor (NGF). Targeted deletion of Sh2b1 in mice results in increased food
intake, obesity, and insulin resistance, with an intermediate phenotype seen in
heterozygous null mice on a high-fat diet. We identified SH2B1 loss-of-function
mutations in a large cohort of patients with severe early-onset obesity.
Mutation carriers exhibited hyperphagia, childhood-onset obesity,
disproportionate insulin resistance, and reduced final height as adults.
Unexpectedly, mutation carriers exhibited a spectrum of behavioral abnormalities
that were not reported in controls, including social isolation and aggression.
We conclude that SH2B1 plays a critical role in the control of human food intake
and body weight and is implicated in maladaptive human behavior.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI62696
PMCID: PMC3533535
PMID: 23160192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
