---
reference_id: "PMID:26729852"
title: Clinical Spectrum of PRKAG2 Syndrome.
authors:
- Porto AG
- Brun F
- Severini GM
- Losurdo P
- Fabris E
- Taylor MRG
- Mestroni L
- Sinagra G
journal: Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCEP.115.003121
keywords:
- "AMP-Activated Protein Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA/genetics
- Heart Conduction System/physiopathology
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome/enzymology, genetics, physiopathology"
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Clinical Spectrum of PRKAG2 Syndrome.
**Authors:** Porto AG, Brun F, Severini GM, Losurdo P, Fabris E, Taylor MRG, Mestroni L, Sinagra G
**Journal:** Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCEP.115.003121](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCEP.115.003121)

## Content

1. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2016 Jan;9(1):e003121. doi:
10.1161/CIRCEP.115.003121.

Clinical Spectrum of PRKAG2 Syndrome.

Porto AG(#)(1), Brun F(#)(1), Severini GM(2), Losurdo P(1), Fabris E(1), Taylor
MRG(3), Mestroni L(3), Sinagra G(1).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Department "Ospedali Riuniti and University of Trieste", IRCCS
Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy.
(2)Molecular Medicine Department, Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS
Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy.
(3)Cardiovascular Institute and Adult Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine,
University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO.
(#)Contributed equally

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCEP.115.003121
PMCID: PMC4704128
PMID: 26729852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

PRKAG2 syndrome (PS) is a rare, early-onset autosomal dominant inherited disease, characterized by ventricular pre-excitation, supraventricular arrhythmias and cardiac hypertrophy. It is frequently accompanied by chronotropic incompetence and advanced heart blocks, leading to premature pacemaker (PM) implantation.

The association of these clinical features had previously been recognized by several studies since the second half of the twentieth century.1-3 In 1991 PRKAG2 syndrome was mapped to the locus 7q 36 4, and in 2001 Gollob et al. 5 identified the responsible gene.

The syndrome is caused by mutations in the gene encoding for the 5’ Adenosine Monophosphate-Activated Protein Kinase (AMPK), specifically for its γ2 regulatory subunit (PRKAG2).

AMPK is an enzyme deeply involved in cellular ATP metabolic regulation.6
PRKAG2 genetic mutations are rare and have been recognized mainly in the context of patients with non-sarcomeric familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy associated with Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome.7

PS can show different expressivity both of ventricular hypertrophy and arrhythmic features, ranging from an asymptomatic condition to sudden cardiac death (SCD). PS can occasionally lead to heart failure (HF), or demonstrate systemic involvement.7-9

This review aims to describe the various features and clinical implications of PS, providing clinicians and researchers with a summary of the published literature to improve the diagnosis and to better manage the clinical course of the disease.

A search of the English literature was performed using PubMed up to September 2014 on the clinical features, genetics and pathophysiology of PS syndrome. The terms “PRKAG2” combined with either “cardiomyopathy”, “Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome”, “atrial fibrillation”, “familial”, “left ventricular hypertrophy”, “AV block”, “pacemaker”, “sudden cardiac death”, “heart failure”, “clinical characteristics”, “genotype”, “phenotype”, and “mutations” were used.

Observational studies, case reports, and reviews were included in our search. References were carefully evaluated for missing publications. Mutation data were obtained from the publically available Human Gene Mutation Database (www.hgmd.org).

Information on genetic mutations, molecular pathophysiology, clinical characteristics and treatment strategies were extracted from the literature. The main end point data are represented by ages of: symptoms onset, pacemaker implantation, heart transplant, SCD, implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) implantation and number of discharges.

Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS statistical software (version 10.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois). All data are expressed as mean values ± standard deviation (range) or frequency (percentage).

The Pearson Chi-square or Fischer's exact tests were used for comparisons between dichotomous variables. Missing data were accounted for by decreasing the denominator of the total number of patients.

Fifty-five studies were found; twenty-four of them were observational. After excluding one publication with data from the same patients of another study, we selected 23 observational studies with genetically tested patients to build a table comprehensive of the main clinical features of PS and the relative mutations. Some studies reported data from proband relatives not tested for PS; we excluded such data from the statistical analysis but we narratively discuss about these patients in our review.

A total of 193 genetically confirmed patients and 13 different mutations of PRKAG2 gene were found.

The prevalence of PS is currently unknown. One study identified PS in 1 of 100 subjects affected by hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) with premature sinoatrial or atrio-ventricular conduction disease (1%).7 Arad et al. found genetically confirmed PS in 7 of 24 patients (29%) among a subgroup with both left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) and pre-excitation on ECG.10

The observed prevalence may be rising because of a larger availability of genetic testing for HCM. Case reports of the syndrome have been described worldwide, suggesting that PS can affect patients of any ethnic group.

PRKAG2 mutations inheritance pattern is autosomal dominant. Almost all studies report missense mutations.5, 7-21 Only Blair et al. documented an insertion mutation (Exon 5:InsLeu).8 The most commonly reported mutation were C.905G>A (Arg302Gln) and c.1463A>T (Asn488Ile), with 110 and 40 cases (respectively 57% and 21%).

AMPK is a highly conserved serine/threonine protein kinase responsible for cellular energetic homeostasis control. Stimulated by high adenosine monophosphate (AMP) concentration and AMPK-kinase activity, the enzyme counterbalances adenosine triphosphate (ATP) depletion.5, 6, 22 It is comprised of a catalytic subunit (α) and two regulatory subunits (β and γ). Gamma 2 regulatory subunit of Adenosine Monophosphate–Activated Protein Kinase (PRKAG2) binds AMP, enhancing the α subunit activation.6 AMPK is highly expressed in cardiac tissue, skeletal muscle, brain, placenta, liver, kidneys, and pancreas.23 In cardiomyocytes the enzyme regulates the glucose 24 and fatty acids 25 uptake, storage and utilization.

PRKAG2 mutations are suspected to modify the tridimensional structure of AMPK, altering its affinity for AMP and modifying the enzyme activity. Studies on transgenic mice have showed an enhanced enzymatic activity during the early stage of PS 26, 27 and a decreased activity during the advanced phase; 28 a recent study demonstrated an impaired myocardial glycogen uptake in adult patients with PS.29

In humans, AMPK dysfunction alters the myocyte glucidic uptake and metabolism causing the deposition of glycogen and amylopectin, as seen in glycogen storage cardiomyopathies.30 During cardiogenesis, the disruption of the annulus fibrosus by glycogen-filled myocytes interferes with the normal atrio-ventricular septation, and can lead the way to ventricular pre-excitation and reciprocating arrhythmias.5, 7, 9, 26, 31, 32 A recent study on mice confirmed the correlation of glycogen deposits with ventricular pre-excitation is PS; the study also demonstrated that cardiac hypertrophy, independently of glycogen storage, is caused by an enhanced insulin sensitivity and protein kinase B activation. 33

Another study on mice implicated that mutated AMPK could unbalance the phosphorylation state of cardiac troponin and myocardial contractility, 34 leading the way towards HF. AMPK dysfunction was found to be related with cellular autophagy and apoptosis in animal models.35

A representation of postulated intracellular effects of PRKAG2 related enzyme dysfunction is depicted in Figure 1. However, the precise biological mechanisms and their correlations with the clinical phenotypes of PS, especially in humans, are still unclear. 5, 8, 28

The main clinical features of PS are represented in Supplementary Table 1 and summarized in Table 1.

The most common electrocardiographic feature of PS is a short PR interval, present in 68% of patients. 5, 7, 19 A bundle branch block, mainly affecting the right branch, was also widely reported along with a short PR. 19 In addition to complete bundle branch blocks, slurred QRS depolarization phases and eccentric patterns of intraventricular conduction delays > 120 msec are reported. 7, 19 Advanced and clinically significant atrio-ventricular or sino-atrial blocks were also common. 4, 17

High-voltage QRS complexes with secondary repolarization abnormalities frequently developed even without echocardiographic evidence of LVH, sometimes accompanied by left axis deviation.7
Figure 2 (Panel A) shows a typical ECG from a young patient with PS.

Cardiac hypertrophy mainly involves the left ventricle and it is often progressive and associated with both diastolic and systolic HF.5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 17 Maximal ventricular wall thickness varied widely among the studies, ranging from normal values to a mean of 24 mm (confidence interval 13 – 45 mm) among Asn488Ile patients 7 and 32.8±7.9 mm in Glu506Lys patients.12 Restrictive mitral inflow Doppler pattern, 7 hemodynamically significant left ventricular outflow tract obstruction, 12 and dilated progression were leading causes to cardiac transplant or SCD.8 In all studies ultrasound imaging was routinely used to assess cardiac hypertrophy; only a minority of patients underwent cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) for tissue characterization (Figure 2 panel B-C).36 To date, no CMR specific pattern was found to be associated with PS.

Supraventricular tachyarrhythmias (SVT) were mainly represented by atrial fibrillation and flutter. SVT have been frequently the first clinical sign in PS patients; their complications were represented by stroke and by the development of rapid ventricular arrhythmias, in some cases leading to SCD.5, 7, 11, 21, 37, 38

SVT were reported in 38% of PS patients, and a considerable proportion of them was associated with accessory pathways on electrophysiological studies (EPS).5, 8, 17, 21 Pre-excitation was thus found to be associated with both common accessory pathways and decremental atrio-ventricular connections or fasciculoventricular pathways.5, 7, 39, 40 Many authors reported different types of accessory pathways in Arg302Gln mutated patients, 5, 8, 17, 21 some of which were capable of maintaining an atrio-ventricular (AV) reciprocating tachycardia.

Characteristically, PS leads to chronotropic incompetence mostly due to advanced AV blocks, marked sinus bradycardia or sinus blocks. This stage of the disease almost invariably occurs within the third or fourth decade of age.5, 11, 19 Overall, conduction system dysfunction had a prevalence of 44%, and PM implantation was performed in 43% of patients.

Clinically, chronotropic incompetence was characterized by recurrent syncope, Adam Stokes syndrome and often by a rapid and critical onset with severe hemodynamic instability.5, 7

HF was reported in about 12% of PS patients; when present, it was often severe and characterized by progressive ventricular dysfunction. In Glu506Lys, exon5:InsLeu and His142Arg carriers, HF symptoms were frequently reported (33% to 63%).8, 12

SCD occurred in 8.7% of a total of 171 patients with available data (mean age of death 33.4 years). From the data available, SCD in PS can occur both in the presence 7, 8 and the absence of severe cardiac hypertrophy;19 some studies reported cases of SCD during sleep.21

Current data are not sufficient to clearly define the prevailing pathophysiologic process leading to SCD, which could be due both to an abrupt advanced heart block 19 and ventricular fibrillation, the latter deriving from SVT degeneration (fast conduction through accessory pathways) 7, 19, 32, 37, 41 or from massive LVH.42, 43 In those patients in which EPS were performed, ventricular fibrillation was induced only by high atrial pacing and not by ventricular extra-stimuli. 7, 32

The age of symptoms onset was seldom available. In general, the clinical onset ranged from intrauterine period, 13 early childhood, 9, 21 adolescence 5, 19, 36 to the fourth or fifth decade of age.10 The mean age at diagnosis among the studies with available records is 30,1 years.

Overall, 82 subjects (43%) were implanted with permanent PM due to advanced heart blocks or sinus node disease, often within the third or fourth decade of age.

Few studies reported data on heart transplant: where such data was available, transplant was performed at 19, 8 and 42 years of age.5, 19

SCD occurred in 8.7% of patients, and the mean age of death was 33.4 years; 171 of 189 patients had available data about SCD.

In the largest report available from Murpy et al.7 ICDs were implanted for primary prevention in two patients (age 20 and 22 years) with massive LVH, one of whom had ventricular fibrillation during rapid right atrial pacing at EPS. After a mean follow-up of 31 months, there were no ICD discharges.

Two patients were implanted in other studies, one for primary prevention 19 and one after cardiac arrest 32. To date, no data have been published about their long-term ICD follow-up.

A trend towards certain phenotypical features being associated with specific mutations was noted. C.905G>A (Arg302Gln) and c.1463A>T (Asn488Ile) were the most common mutations with 110 and 40 cases (respectively 57% and 21%). Considering those patients with available data for each selected clinical feature, we estimated a genotype-phenotype association between these two mutations. (Table 2 and Figure 3).

C.905G>A patients seem to have a trend towards a greater prevalence of pre-excitation (79% vs 58%, p=0.008) compared with c.1463A>T mutation. Moreover, among C.905G>A carriers there was a higher frequency of syncope (35% vs 12%, p= 0.010) and rate of PM implantation, as compared with c.1463A>T patients (55% vs 30% p=0,006). Conversely, LVH seems to have a higher frequency in c.1463A>T group than in C.905G>A subjects (70% vs 42%, p= 0.004).

There was not a statistically significant difference of SCD frequency between the two groups (9.7% C.905G>A vs 2.5% c.1463A>T, p=ns).5, 7, 11, 17, 19, 21

To date, the most severe mutation, c.1592G>A (Arg531Gln), was reported by Burwinkel et al. It is characterized by an extreme early onset and a severe clinical course leading to death for cardiogenic shock within the first three months of life.13

Although PRKAG2 mutations mainly affect the heart, some studies reported features of systemic involvement. In the subset of c.1463A>T (Asn488Ile) mutated subjects, a 15% frequency of skeletal myopathy was observed.7 Skeletal myopathy with elevated creatine phosphokinase (CPK) was also present in Ser548Pro patients. 15 C.1591C>G (p. Arg531Gly) and c. 1453A>G (Lys485Glu) mutations were related to the development of arterial hypertension in adolescence (50% of patients).9, 16 Some studies suggest 13, 35 that systemic hypertension observed in these patients could represent extra-cardiac involvement as well.

Of note, no extra-cardiac involvement was reported among patients with the most frequent mutation (Arg302Gln).

PS should be suspected in the setting of autosomal dominant HCM coexisting with WPW syndrome, with negative test for sarcomeric mutation. In this scenario, the lacking evolution to conduction system dysfunctions can help to exclude the diagnosis of PS. However, conduction system disease is not always present in PS, and moreover it could occur later in the clinical course.17, 21

Although the clinical manifestations and the inheritance pattern may help with the diagnostic process, the diagnosis of PS can be confirmed only with genetic testing by an identification of a PRKAG2 mutation.

Genetic syndromes that could mimic PS are listed in Table 3; the more significant among them are Danon's disease (DD) and Anderson-Fabry disease (AFD). The first is characterized by massive LVH, HF, ventricular pre-excitation and an arrhythmic burden unmanageable even with defibrillator therapy, with a mean survival rate below 25 years of age.44 AFD is characterized by concentric LVH, a short PR interval and conduction system dysfunctions. Recognition of AFD is relevant as enzyme replacement therapy is related to a better outcome regarding stability and regression of symptoms.45

Both DD and AFD are inherited in an X-linked pattern, and they have wide extra-cardiac features (respectively intellectual disability and skeletal myopathy in DD, and acroparesthesias, renal failure, cryptogenic stroke, angiokeratomas, corneal and lenticular opacities, and gastrointestinal symptoms in AFD).

To date, there are no specific guidelines for PS. Clinicians should therefore refer to the recent 2014 European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of HCM, 43 keeping in mind the non-sarcomeric nature of PS. We propose a “red flags” based approach for diagnosis (Table 4) and management (Table 5) according to PS clinical manifestations.

PS onset of symptoms frequently occurs within the first three decades of age, and it is often characterized by tachy and bradyarrhythmias. Much less frequently HF symptoms or SCD can be the first manifestations of the disease. Prolonged dynamic ECG monitoring and exercise stress testing could be useful tools in those patients with syncope, palpitations, or with a familial history of SCD. Ultrasound imaging and CMR are the gold-standard diagnostic techniques for the identification and characterization of cardiac hypertrophy. Standard anti-arrhythmic therapy should be initiated in those patients with supraventricular or ventricular tachyarrhythmias. If clinically appropriated, EPS can be useful for diagnosis and treatment of accessory pathways.

Given the numerous life threatening consequences of PRKAG2 syndrome, a prompt management of its complications is mandatory. PM implantation is recommended in patients with cardiac syncope or signs of chronotropic incompetence. Heart transplant is indicated for end-stage HF patients.

The limited literature available on PRKAG2 syndrome suggests that sudden death occurs in about 10% of patients, and can be due to an abrupt advanced heart block,19 or to ventricular fibrillation (mainly deriving from SVT degeneration). 7, 19, 32, 37, 41 However, the various PRKAG2 pathological processes (glycogen accumulation, massive hypertrophy, or cellular apoptosis) potentially leading to ventricular arrhythmias do not exclude the primitive genesis of ventricular fibrillation. Due to the small number of events and to the lacking of follow-up data published, risk stratification for ventricular arrhythmias remains challenging. The identification of those patients who could benefit from ICD therapy for primary prevention is still not clear. Individual risk factors should be evaluated: familial history of SCD, syncope of suspected arrhythmic origin, magnitude of hypertrophy, non-sustained ventricular tachycardia, or particular CMR patterns.43 EPS can also have a potential role for risk stratification, considering selected patterns of pre-excitation with SVT and AV conduction defects. According to these features, an individual and tailored strategy should be applied case by case.

Finally, a focused familial screening and, where appropriate, genetic testing, represent a useful tool for diagnosis and it can often have implication in genetic counseling as well.

The main limits of this review are the small number of patients involved and the case report-fashion of the studies considered. Some papers were missing of clearly codified data about PS clinical features or outcomes: for this reason certain characteristics or outcomes could not be described (for instance gender ratio). Other features were delineated, but missing data were accounted for by decreasing the denominator at descriptive statistics.

Moreover, due to the lack of long follow-up periods, important outcomes such as SCD, medium and long-term death, or even the rate of PM implantation could be more frequent.

PRKAG2 syndrome is a rare early-onset autosomal dominant disease characterized by ventricular pre-excitation, SVT and cardiac hypertrophy, frequently followed by paradoxical severe rhythm conduction disturbances, HF and SCD.

An accurate differential diagnosis behind a hypertrophic phenotype of cardiomyopathy is important because of the different timing of onset, clinical course and, sometimes, treatment strategies of sarcomeric and non-sarcomeric forms of the disease. A red-flags approach could be useful to arise the suspicion of non-sarcomeric forms of HCM.

Familial screening and, where appropriate, genetic testing, represent a useful tool for diagnosis and counseling. The main therapeutic goal is represented by careful risk stratification for SCD.
