---
reference_id: "PMID:7719340"
title: Ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency is caused by mutations in the alpha-tocopherol transfer protein.
authors:
- Ouahchi K
- Arita M
- Kayden H
- Hentati F
- Ben Hamida M
- Sokol R
- Arai H
- Inoue K
- Mandel JL
- Koenig M
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1038/ng0295-141
keywords:
- "Africa, Northern/epidemiology"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Ataxia/epidemiology, etiology, genetics"
- Base Sequence
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 8"
- Denmark/epidemiology
- England/epidemiology
- Female
- France/epidemiology
- Germany/epidemiology
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Sicily/epidemiology
- Vitamin E Deficiency/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency is caused by mutations in the alpha-tocopherol transfer protein.
**Authors:** Ouahchi K, Arita M, Kayden H, Hentati F, Ben Hamida M, Sokol R, Arai H, Inoue K, Mandel JL, Koenig M
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0295-141](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0295-141)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1995 Feb;9(2):141-5. doi: 10.1038/ng0295-141.

Ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency is caused by mutations in the 
alpha-tocopherol transfer protein.

Ouahchi K(1), Arita M, Kayden H, Hentati F, Ben Hamida M, Sokol R, Arai H, Inoue 
K, Mandel JL, Koenig M.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (CNRS, INSERM, 
ULP), Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

Ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency (AVED) is an autosomal recessive 
neurodegenerative disease which maps to chromosome 8q13. AVED patients have an 
impaired ability to incorporate alpha-tocopherol into lipoproteins secreted by 
the liver, a function putatively attributable to the alpha-tocopherol transfer 
protein (alpha-TTP). Here we report the identification of three frame-shift 
mutations in the alpha TTP gene. A 744delA mutation accounts for 68% of the 
mutant alleles in the 17 families analysed and appears to have spread in North 
Africa and Italy. This mutation correlates with a severe phenotype but alters 
only the C-terminal tenth of the protein. Two other mutations were found in 
single families. The finding of alpha TTP gene mutations in AVED patients 
substantiates the therapeutic role of vitamin E as a protective agent against 
neurological damage in this disease.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0295-141
PMID: 7719340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]