---
reference_id: "PMID:29780233"
title: "Spinal meningeal melanocytoma in a 5-year-old child: a case report and review of literature."
authors:
- Salah El-Din AM
- Aboul-Ela HM
- Alsawy MF
- Koheil A
- Ashry AH
journal: Egypt J Neurol Psychiatr Neurosurg
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s41983-018-0017-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal meningeal melanocytoma in a 5-year-old child: a case report and review of literature.
**Authors:** Salah El-Din AM, Aboul-Ela HM, Alsawy MF, Koheil A, Ashry AH
**Journal:** Egypt J Neurol Psychiatr Neurosurg (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s41983-018-0017-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s41983-018-0017-z)

## Content

1. Egypt J Neurol Psychiatr Neurosurg. 2018;54(1):13. doi: 
10.1186/s41983-018-0017-z. Epub 2018 May 17.

Spinal meningeal melanocytoma in a 5-year-old child: a case report and review of 
literature.

Salah El-Din AM(1), Aboul-Ela HM(1), Alsawy MF(1), Koheil A(2), Ashry AH(1).

Author information:
(1)1Neurosurgery Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo, 
Egypt.
(2)2Neurosurgery Department, Faculty of Medicine, Beni-Suef University, Beni 
Suef, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Meningeal melanocytoma is considered a rare lesion arising from 
leptomeningeal melanocytes. Nearly two thirds of meningeal melanocytomas were 
reported in the intracranial compartment and the remaining one third in the 
spine. Spinal melanocytomas can be extradural or intradural, with extradural 
variant being more common, and the majority of cases have been single reports.
METHODS: A 5-year-old male presented with a 4-month history of non-radiating low 
back pain persistent at rest, with otherwise non-remarkable medical history. The 
patient was neurologically intact with no deficits. Preoperatively, routine 
laboratory investigations were non-remarkable. MRI imaging was done and showed a 
lesion at the level of T11 to L4, hyperintense on T1 and hypointense on T2 with 
homogenous contrast enhancement. Intraoperatively, the lesion was hemorrhagic, 
brownish, and rubbery in consistency attached to the ventral dura. Microscopic 
picture revealed dense cytoplasmic brown melanin pigments, with no significant 
mitoses or nuclear atypia. What is unique about our case is the age of the 
patient (5 years).
RESULTS: To the best of our knowledge, after reviewing the literature, this is 
the youngest case to be reported.
CONCLUSIONS: SMM is an extremely rare tumor with a benign course. Complete 
surgical excision should be attempted. Age of presentation may be as young as in 
our case and the diagnosis of such a tumor should never be excluded in this 
early age group with persistent low back ache.

DOI: 10.1186/s41983-018-0017-z
PMCID: PMC5956056
PMID: 29780233

Conflict of interest statement: Not applicable.Written informed consent was 
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying 
images.The authors declare that they have no competing interests.Springer Nature 
remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.