---
reference_id: "PMID:39500381"
title: Cebpa is required for haematopoietic stem and progenitor cell generation and maintenance in zebrafish.
authors:
- Chen K
- Wu J
- Zhang Y
- Liu W
- Chen X
- Zhang W
- Huang Z
journal: Open Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1098/rsob.240215
keywords:
- Animals
- "Zebrafish/genetics, metabolism, embryology"
- "Hematopoietic Stem Cells/metabolism, cytology"
- "Zebrafish Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Hematopoiesis/genetics
- "Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit/metabolism, genetics"
- "CCAAT-Enhancer-Binding Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Mutation
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Cell Differentiation
- "Protein Isoforms/metabolism, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cebpa is required for haematopoietic stem and progenitor cell generation and maintenance in zebrafish.
**Authors:** Chen K, Wu J, Zhang Y, Liu W, Chen X, Zhang W, Huang Z
**Journal:** Open Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1098/rsob.240215](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsob.240215)

## Content

1. Open Biol. 2024 Nov;14(11):240215. doi: 10.1098/rsob.240215. Epub 2024 Nov 6.

Cebpa is required for haematopoietic stem and progenitor cell generation and 
maintenance in zebrafish.

Chen K(1), Wu J(1), Zhang Y(1), Liu W(1), Chen X(1), Zhang W(1)(2), Huang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)The Innovation Centre of Ministry of Education for Development and Diseases, 
School of Medicine, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong 
510006, People's Republic of China.
(2)Greater Bay Biomedical Innocenter, Shenzhen Bay Laboratory, Shenzhen, 
Guangdong 518055, People's Republic of China.

The CCAAT enhancer binding protein alpha (CEBPA) is crucial for myeloid 
differentiation and the balance of haematopoietic stem and progenitor cell 
(HSPC) quiescence and self-renewal, and its dysfunction can drive 
leukemogenesis. However, its role in HSPC generation has not been fully 
elucidated. Here, we utilized various zebrafish cebpa mutants to investigate the 
function of Cebpa in the HSPC compartment. Co-localization analysis showed that 
cebpa expression is enriched in nascent HSPCs. Complete loss of Cebpa function 
resulted in a significant reduction in early HSPC generation and the overall 
HSPC pool during embryonic haematopoiesis. Interestingly, while myeloid 
differentiation was impaired in cebpa N-terminal mutants expressing the 
truncated zP30 protein, the number of HSPCs was not affected, indicating a 
redundant role of Cebpa P42 and P30 isoforms in HSPC development. Additionally, 
epistasis experiments confirmed that Cebpa functions downstream of Runx1 to 
regulate HSPC emergence. Our findings uncover a novel role of Cebpa isoforms in 
HSPC generation and maintenance, and provide new insights into HSPC development.

DOI: 10.1098/rsob.240215
PMCID: PMC11537755
PMID: 39500381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare we have no competing interests.