---
reference_id: "PMID:16739664"
title: "Cranial nerve involvement in nasopharyngeal carcinoma: response to radiotherapy and its clinical impact."
authors:
- Li JC
- Mayr NA
- Yuh WT
- Wang JZ
- Jiang GL
journal: Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1177/000348940611500504
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Carcinoma/complications, radiotherapy"
- Cranial Nerve Diseases/etiology
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nasopharyngeal Neoplasms/complications, radiotherapy"
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cranial nerve involvement in nasopharyngeal carcinoma: response to radiotherapy and its clinical impact.
**Authors:** Li JC, Mayr NA, Yuh WT, Wang JZ, Jiang GL
**Journal:** Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1177/000348940611500504](https://doi.org/10.1177/000348940611500504)

## Content

1. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2006 May;115(5):340-5. doi: 
10.1177/000348940611500504.

Cranial nerve involvement in nasopharyngeal carcinoma: response to radiotherapy 
and its clinical impact.

Li JC(1), Mayr NA, Yuh WT, Wang JZ, Jiang GL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Affiliated Cancer Hospital, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the cranial nerve (CN) palsy associated with 
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), we studied factors that influenced the 
neurologic outcome of radiotherapy (RT), and the patterns and time course of 
neurologic recovery of CN palsy.
METHODS: Between July 1987 and July 1989, 93 patients who presented with CN 
palsy at the time of diagnosis of NPC were studied. All patients underwent 
external-beam RT with either cobalt-60 or 6-MV photon beams to a dose of 69 to 
84 Gy at 2 Gy per fraction. The time course and pattern of neurologic recovery 
(complete, partial, or none) from CN palsy were evaluated. Age, sex, stage, 
histology, incidence and distribution of types of CNs involved, duration of CN 
palsy, and time course of tumor response during RT were correlated with the 
patterns and the time course of neurologic CN recovery by univariate and 
multivariate analyses.
RESULTS: The cases of CN palsy most commonly involved CN V (38%), CN VI (26%), 
and CN XII (11%), which accounted for the majority of the cases (75%). The time 
course of CN recovery was variable and protracted. Most patients showed 
significant improvement upon completion of RT (51%, 19%, and 30% complete, 
partial, and no recovery, respectively) and further improvement 6 months after 
RT (58%, 17%, and 25%, respectively). Cranial nerves V, VI, and XII accounted 
for 75% of cases with no recovery. Recovery was best for CNs II, IX, and XI and 
the sympathetic nerve (100%, 87%, 100%, and 100%, respectively) and worst for 
CNs IV, VII, and XII (67%, 60%, and 40%, respectively, with no recovery). 
Neurologic CN recovery correlated significantly with the pretherapy duration (<3 
months versus > or =3 months) of CN palsy (88% versus 62%; p = .002, 
multivariate analysis), the time course of clinical tumor regression, and 
neurologic symptom improvement during RT. Age, sex, T stage, N stage, histology, 
anterior versus posterior CN palsies, and base of skull involvement were not 
significant.
CONCLUSIONS: According to our limited data, most patients with CN palsy respond 
well to RT. That the time course of neurologic recovery is variable and can be 
protracted indicates a need for continuous and close neurologic surveillance. 
The poorer neurologic outcome associated with a longer duration of CN symptoms 
may be related to a more severe longterm CN compression that results in 
irreversible damage. Timely diagnosis of NPC and fast institution of therapy are 
therefore critical to improving the neurologic outcome.

DOI: 10.1177/000348940611500504
PMID: 16739664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]