---
reference_id: "PMID:34208705"
title: "Pitfalls in the Diagnosis of Nodular Lymphocyte Predominant Hodgkin Lymphoma: Variant Patterns, Borderlines and Mimics."
authors:
- Younes S
- Rojansky RB
- Menke JR
- Gratzinger D
- Natkunam Y
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/cancers13123021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pitfalls in the Diagnosis of Nodular Lymphocyte Predominant Hodgkin Lymphoma: Variant Patterns, Borderlines and Mimics.
**Authors:** Younes S, Rojansky RB, Menke JR, Gratzinger D, Natkunam Y
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers13123021](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers13123021)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Jun 16;13(12):3021. doi: 10.3390/cancers13123021.

Pitfalls in the Diagnosis of Nodular Lymphocyte Predominant Hodgkin Lymphoma: 
Variant Patterns, Borderlines and Mimics.

Younes S(1), Rojansky RB(1), Menke JR(1), Gratzinger D(1), Natkunam Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA.

Nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL) represents approximately 
5% of Hodgkin lymphoma and typically affects children and young adults. Although 
the overall prognosis is favorable, variant growth patterns in NLPHL correlate 
with disease recurrence and progression to T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell 
lymphoma or frank diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). The diagnostic boundary 
between NLPHL and DLBCL can be difficult to discern, especially in the presence 
of variant histologies. Both diagnoses are established using morphology and 
immunophenotype and share similarities, including the infrequent large tumor 
B-cells and the lymphocyte and histiocyte-rich microenvironment. NLPHL also 
shows overlap with other lymphomas, particularly, classic Hodgkin lymphoma and 
T-cell lymphomas. Similarly, there is overlap with non-neoplastic conditions, 
such as the progressive transformation of germinal centers. Given the 
significant clinical differences among these entities, it is imperative that 
NLPHL and its variants are carefully separated from other lymphomas and their 
mimics. In this article, the characteristic features of NLPHL and its diagnostic 
boundaries and pitfalls are discussed. The current understanding of genetic 
features and immune microenvironment will be addressed, such that a framework to 
better understand biological behavior and customize patient care is provided.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13123021
PMCID: PMC8234802
PMID: 34208705

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.