---
reference_id: "PMID:38983024"
title: "Adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy: epidemiology, pathophysiology, imaging, and prognosis."
authors:
- Nipp GE
- Lee T
- Sarici K
- Malek G
- Hadziahmetovic M
journal: Front Ophthalmol (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fopht.2023.1237788
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy: epidemiology, pathophysiology, imaging, and prognosis.
**Authors:** Nipp GE, Lee T, Sarici K, Malek G, Hadziahmetovic M
**Journal:** Front Ophthalmol (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fopht.2023.1237788](https://doi.org/10.3389/fopht.2023.1237788)

## Content

1. Front Ophthalmol (Lausanne). 2023 Aug 10;3:1237788. doi: 
10.3389/fopht.2023.1237788. eCollection 2023.

Adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy: epidemiology, pathophysiology, 
imaging, and prognosis.

Nipp GE(1), Lee T(2), Sarici K(2), Malek G(2)(3), Hadziahmetovic M(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Duke University, Durham, NC, United States.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, 
United States.
(3)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United 
States.

Adult-onset foveomacular dystrophy (AOFVD) is a retinal pattern dystrophy that 
may affect up to 1 in 7,400 individuals. There is much that is unknown regarding 
this disease's epidemiology, risk factors for development, and rate of 
progression through its four stages. Advancements in retinal imaging over the 
past 15 years have enabled improved characterization of the different stages of 
AOFVD. These imaging advancements also offer new ways of differentiating AOFVD 
from phenotypically similar retinal diseases like age-related macular 
degeneration and Best disease. This review synthesizes the most recent 
discoveries regarding imaging correlates within AOFVD as well as risk factors 
for the development of AOFVD, complications of AOFVD, and treatment options. Our 
aim is to provide ophthalmologists a succinct resource so that they may offer 
clarity, guidance, and appropriate monitoring and treatments for their patients 
with suspected AOFVD.

Copyright © 2023 Nipp, Lee, Sarici, Malek and Hadziahmetovic.

DOI: 10.3389/fopht.2023.1237788
PMCID: PMC11182240
PMID: 38983024

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.