---
reference_id: "PMID:17980020"
title: Oculocutaneous albinism.
authors:
- Grønskov K
- Ek J
- Brondum-Nielsen K
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-43
keywords:
- "Albinism, Oculocutaneous/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oculocutaneous albinism.
**Authors:** Grønskov K, Ek J, Brondum-Nielsen K
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-2-43](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-2-43)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2007 Nov 2;2:43. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-43.

Oculocutaneous albinism.

Grønskov K(1), Ek J, Brondum-Nielsen K.

Author information:
(1)Kennedy Center, National Research Center for Genetics, visual Impairment and 
Mental Retardation, Gl, Landevej 7, 2600 Glostrup, Denmark. kag@kennedy.dk

Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is a group of inherited disorders of melanin 
biosynthesis characterized by a generalized reduction in pigmentation of hair, 
skin and eyes. The prevalence of all forms of albinism varies considerably 
worldwide and has been estimated at approximately 1/17,000, suggesting that 
about 1 in 70 people carry a gene for OCA. The clinical spectrum of OCA ranges, 
with OCA1A being the most severe type with a complete lack of melanin production 
throughout life, while the milder forms OCA1B, OCA2, OCA3 and OCA4 show some 
pigment accumulation over time. Clinical manifestations include various degrees 
of congenital nystagmus, iris hypopigmentation and translucency, reduced 
pigmentation of the retinal pigment epithelium, foveal hypoplasia, reduced 
visual acuity usually (20/60 to 20/400) and refractive errors, color vision 
impairment and prominent photophobia. Misrouting of the optic nerves is a 
characteristic finding, resulting in strabismus and reduced stereoscopic vision. 
The degree of skin and hair hypopigmentation varies with the type of OCA. The 
incidence of skin cancer may be increased. All four types of OCA are inherited 
as autosomal recessive disorders. At least four genes are responsible for the 
different types of the disease (TYR, OCA2, TYRP1 and MATP). Diagnosis is based 
on clinical findings of hypopigmentation of the skin and hair, in addition to 
the characteristic ocular symptoms. Due to the clinical overlap between the OCA 
forms, molecular diagnosis is necessary to establish the gene defect and OCA 
subtype. Molecular genetic testing of TYR and OCA2 is available on a clinical 
basis, while, at present, analysis of TYRP1 and MATP is on research basis only. 
Differential diagnosis includes ocular albinism, Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome, 
Chediak-Higashi syndrome, Griscelli syndrome, and Waardenburg syndrome type II. 
Carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis are possible when the disease causing 
mutations have been identified in the family. Glasses (possibly bifocals) and 
dark glasses or photocromic lenses may offer sufficient help for reduced visual 
activity and photophobia. Correction of strabismus and nystagmus is necessary 
and sunscreens are recommended. Regular skin checks for early detection of skin 
cancer should be offered. Persons with OCA have normal lifespan, development, 
intelligence and fertility.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-43
PMCID: PMC2211462
PMID: 17980020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]