---
reference_id: "PMID:24013055"
title: "The relationship between pre-eclampsia and peripartum cardiomyopathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Bello N
- Rendon ISH
- Arany Z
journal: J Am Coll Cardiol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.08.717
keywords:
- Cardiomyopathies/complications
- Female
- Humans
- Hypertension/complications
- "Hypertension, Pregnancy-Induced"
- Peripartum Period
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Complications, Cardiovascular"
- "Pregnancy, Multiple"
- Prevalence
- Racial Groups
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The relationship between pre-eclampsia and peripartum cardiomyopathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Bello N, Rendon ISH, Arany Z
**Journal:** J Am Coll Cardiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacc.2013.08.717](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2013.08.717)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013 Oct 29;62(18):1715-1723. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2013.08.717. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

The relationship between pre-eclampsia and peripartum cardiomyopathy: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Bello N(1), Rendon ISH(1), Arany Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Division and Center for Vascular Biology Research, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Cardiovascular Division and Center for Vascular Biology Research, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic address: 
zarany@bidmc.harvard.edu.

OBJECTIVES: The goal of this study was to systematically review the peripartum 
cardiomyopathy (PPCM) literature and determine the prevalence of pre-eclampsia 
(PE) in women with PPCM. Secondary analyses included evaluation of the 
prevalence of hypertensive disorders, multiple gestations, and multiparity.
BACKGROUND: PPCM is a significant cause of maternal and infant morbidity and 
mortality worldwide, yet its etiology remains unknown. PE is often cited as a 
risk factor for the development of PPCM and recent research suggests that PE and 
PPCM share mechanisms that contribute to their pathobiology. No comprehensive 
evaluation of the relationship between PE and PPCM exists.
METHODS: A systematic predetermined search strategy was performed in multiple 
databases to identify studies describing ≥3 women with PPCM. Prevalence rates of 
PE, hypertension, multiple gestations, and multiparity were pooled.
RESULTS: Data from 22 studies (n = 979) were included in this analysis. The 
pooled prevalence of 22% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 16% to 28%) was more 
than quadruple the 5% average worldwide background rate of PE in pregnancy 
(p < 0.001). There were no geographic or racial differences detected in the 
prevalence of PE in women with PPCM. The rates of hypertension during pregnancy 
(37% [95% CI: 29% to 45%]) and multiple gestations (9% [95% CI: 7% to 11%]) were 
also elevated.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of PE, hypertensive disorders, and multiple 
gestations in women with PPCM is markedly higher than that in the general 
population. These findings support the concept of a shared pathogenesis between 
PE and PPCM and highlight the need for awareness of the overlap between these 2 
diseases.

Copyright © 2013 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.08.717
PMCID: PMC3931606
PMID: 24013055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]