---
reference_id: "PMID:17300775"
title: Characterization of a novel ectodermal signaling center regulating Tbx2 and Shh in the vertebrate limb.
authors:
- Nissim S
- Allard P
- Bandyopadhyay A
- Harfe BD
- Tabin CJ
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.12.010
keywords:
- Animals
- Chick Embryo
- Chimera/embryology
- Ectoderm/physiology
- Extremities/embryology
- Fibroblast Growth Factor 8/metabolism
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental/physiology"
- Hedgehog Proteins/metabolism
- In Situ Hybridization
- Microspheres
- Morphogenesis/physiology
- Quail
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- T-Box Domain Proteins/metabolism
- Transplants
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of a novel ectodermal signaling center regulating Tbx2 and Shh in the vertebrate limb.
**Authors:** Nissim S, Allard P, Bandyopadhyay A, Harfe BD, Tabin CJ
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.12.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.12.010)

## Content

1. Dev Biol. 2007 Apr 1;304(1):9-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.12.010. Epub 2006 
Dec 9.

Characterization of a novel ectodermal signaling center regulating Tbx2 and Shh 
in the vertebrate limb.

Nissim S(1), Allard P, Bandyopadhyay A, Harfe BD, Tabin CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Normal patterning of the developing limb requires a tight restriction of Sonic 
hedgehog (Shh) mRNA to the posterior margin of the limb bud. While several 
positive and negative regulatory factors have been identified which serve to 
position the Shh expression domain in the distal posterior limb, these factors 
cannot in themselves explain the tight restriction of Shh to the posterior 
margin, nor can they explain the similarly tight restriction of Shh to the 
anterior margin when the regulatory factors are disrupted or misexpressed. We 
suggest that the transcription factors Tbx2 and Tbx3 are excellent candidates 
for positively-acting factors responsible for limiting Shh expression to the 
margins of the limb bud. These closely related factors are indeed expressed at 
the anterior and posterior limb margins over a wide range of limb bud stages. 
Moreover, previous reports indicate that in addition, misexpression of Tbx2 
beyond the limb margin is sufficient to anteriorly expand Shh, and conversely, 
antagonizing Tbx2 function leads to loss of Shh. In contrast to this idea, 
previous models have placed Tbx2 expression downstream of Shh and Bone 
Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) signaling. We find, however, that Tbx2 expression is 
neither affected by blocking Shh signaling with cyclopamine nor by genetic 
removal of several BMP activities in the limb bud. To understand the true source 
of the positional information responsible for limiting Tbx2, Tbx3 and Shh 
expression to the marginal mesenchyme of the limb bud, we undertook a series of 
grafting and extirpation experiments, which led to the identification of the 
dorsal-ventral (DV) border ectoderm exclusive of the apical ectodermal ridge 
(AER) as a new signaling center in the limb bud. We find that maintenance of 
Tbx2 expression in the limb mesoderm requires proximity to the non-AER D-V 
border. Using chick-quail graft chimeras, we find that a graft of the non-AER 
D-V border ectoderm to a location on the surface of the middle of the limb bud 
is sufficient to induce ectopic expression of Tbx2 in underlying mesoderm. These 
data demonstrate that the non-AER D-V border ectoderm is necessary and 
sufficient for Tbx2 expression at the anterior and posterior limb margins. 
Similarly, we find that a graft of the non-AER D-V border can expand the domain 
of Shh anteriorly when grafted just anterior to the ZPA. It is notable that Tbx2 
expression does not extend distally to the mesoderm underlying the AER. 
Moreover, we find that grafts of the AER to more proximal locations result in 
downregulation of Tbx2 expression, suggesting that the AER produces a 
negatively-acting signal opposing the activity of the non-AER DV border 
ectoderm. Indeed, implantation of beads soaked in fibroblast growth factor 8 
(Fgf8), expressed in the AER, downregulates Tbx2 expression. The data presented 
here identify the non-AER border of dorsal-ventral ectoderm as a new signaling 
center in limb development that localizes the ZPA to the limb margin. This 
finding explains the tight restriction of Shh expression to the posterior margin 
throughout limb outgrowth as well as the tight restriction of Shh expression to 
the anterior margin in many mutants exhibiting preaxial polydactyly.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.12.010
PMCID: PMC1868507
PMID: 17300775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]