---
reference_id: "PMID:33193648"
title: "Usher Syndrome: Genetics and Molecular Links of Hearing Loss and Directions for Therapy."
authors:
- Whatley M
- Francis A
- Ng ZY
- Khoh XE
- Atlas MD
- Dilley RJ
- Wong EYM
journal: Front Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2020.565216
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Usher Syndrome: Genetics and Molecular Links of Hearing Loss and Directions for Therapy.
**Authors:** Whatley M, Francis A, Ng ZY, Khoh XE, Atlas MD, Dilley RJ, Wong EYM
**Journal:** Front Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2020.565216](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2020.565216)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2020 Oct 22;11:565216. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2020.565216.
eCollection  2020.

Usher Syndrome: Genetics and Molecular Links of Hearing Loss and Directions for 
Therapy.

Whatley M(1), Francis A(1)(2), Ng ZY(1), Khoh XE(1)(3), Atlas MD(1)(4), Dilley 
RJ(1)(4)(5), Wong EYM(1)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Ear Science Institute Australia, Nedlands, WA, Australia.
(2)Emergency Medicine, The University of Western Australia, Nedlands, WA, 
Australia.
(3)School of Human Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Nedlands, WA, 
Australia.
(4)Ear Sciences Centre, The University of Western Australia, Nedlands, WA, 
Australia.
(5)Centre for Cell Therapy and Regenerative Medicine, The University of Western 
Australia, Perth, WA, Australia.
(6)School of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Curtin University, Bentley, WA, Australia.

Usher syndrome (USH) is an autosomal recessive (AR) disorder that permanently 
and severely affects the senses of hearing, vision, and balance. Three 
clinically distinct types of USH have been identified, decreasing in severity 
from Type 1 to 3, with symptoms of sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL), retinitis 
pigmentosa (RP), and vestibular dysfunction. There are currently nine confirmed 
and two suspected USH-causative genes, and a further three candidate loci have 
been mapped. The proteins encoded by these genes form complexes that play 
critical roles in the development and maintenance of cellular structures within 
the inner ear and retina, which have minimal capacity for repair or 
regeneration. In the cochlea, stereocilia are located on the apical surface of 
inner ear hair cells (HC) and are responsible for transducing mechanical stimuli 
from sound pressure waves into chemical signals. These signals are then detected 
by the auditory nerve fibers, transmitted to the brain and interpreted as sound. 
Disease-causing mutations in USH genes can destabilize the tip links that bind 
the stereocilia to each other, and cause defects in protein trafficking and 
stereocilia bundle morphology, thereby inhibiting mechanosensory transduction. 
This review summarizes the current knowledge on Usher syndrome with a particular 
emphasis on mutations in USH genes, USH protein structures, and functional 
analyses in animal models. Currently, there is no cure for USH. However, the 
genetic therapies that are rapidly developing will benefit from this compilation 
of detailed genetic information to identify the most effective strategies for 
restoring functional USH proteins.

Copyright © 2020 Whatley, Francis, Ng, Khoh, Atlas, Dilley and Wong.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2020.565216
PMCID: PMC7642844
PMID: 33193648