---
reference_id: "PMID:38619684"
title: Detection of Novel BEST1 Variations in Autosomal Recessive Bestrophinopathy Using Third-generation Sequencing.
authors:
- Li JX
- Meng LR
- Hou BK
- Hao XL
- Wang DJ
- Qu LH
- Li ZH
- Zhang L
- Jin X
journal: Curr Med Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11596-024-2865-3
keywords:
- Humans
- Angiotensin Receptor Antagonists
- Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
- "Bestrophins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary"
- Phenotype
- Retinal Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection of Novel BEST1 Variations in Autosomal Recessive Bestrophinopathy Using Third-generation Sequencing.
**Authors:** Li JX, Meng LR, Hou BK, Hao XL, Wang DJ, Qu LH, Li ZH, Zhang L, Jin X
**Journal:** Curr Med Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11596-024-2865-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11596-024-2865-3)

## Content

1. Curr Med Sci. 2024 Apr;44(2):419-425. doi: 10.1007/s11596-024-2865-3. Epub
2024  Apr 15.

Detection of Novel BEST1 Variations in Autosomal Recessive Bestrophinopathy
Using Third-generation Sequencing.

Li JX(#)(1), Meng LR(#)(1), Hou BK(1), Hao XL(1), Wang DJ(1), Qu LH(2), Li
ZH(1), Zhang L(1), Jin X(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Senior Ophthalmology, the Third Medical Center of PLA General
Hospital, Beijing, 100853, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, the 74th Army Group Hospital, Guangzhou, 510318,
China.
(3)Department of Senior Ophthalmology, the Third Medical Center of PLA General
Hospital, Beijing, 100853, China. 13910195023@sina.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: Autosomal recessive bestrophinopathy (ARB), a retinal degenerative
disease, is characterized by central visual loss, yellowish multifocal diffuse
subretinal deposits, and a dramatic decrease in the light peak on
electrooculogram. The potential pathogenic mechanism involves mutations in the
BEST1 gene, which encodes Ca2+-activated Cl- channels in the retinal pigment
epithelium (RPE), resulting in degeneration of RPE and photoreceptor. In this
study, the complete clinical characteristics of two Chinese ARB families were
summarized.
METHODS: Pacific Biosciences (PacBio) single-molecule real-time (SMRT)
sequencing was performed on the probands to screen for disease-causing gene
mutations, and Sanger sequencing was applied to validate variants in the
patients and their family members.
RESULTS: Two novel mutations, c.202T>C (chr11:61722628, p.Y68H) and c.867+97G>A,
in the BEST1 gene were identified in the two Chinese ARB families. The novel
missense mutation BEST1 c.202T>C (p.Y68H) resulted in the substitution of
tyrosine with histidine in the N-terminal region of transmembrane domain 2 of
bestrophin-1. Another novel variant, BEST1 c.867+97G>A (chr11:61725867), located
in intron 7, might be considered a regulatory variant that changes
allele-specific binding affinity based on motifs of important transcriptional
regulators.
CONCLUSION: Our findings represent the first use of third-generation sequencing
(TGS) to identify novel BEST1 mutations in patients with ARB, indicating that
TGS can be a more accurate and efficient tool for identifying mutations in
specific genes. The novel variants identified further broaden the mutation
spectrum of BEST1 in the Chinese population.

© 2024. Huazhong University of Science and Technology.

DOI: 10.1007/s11596-024-2865-3
PMID: 38619684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
