---
reference_id: "PMID:31174205"
title: Chronic mTORC1 inhibition rescues behavioral and biochemical deficits resulting from neuronal Depdc5 loss in mice.
authors:
- Yuskaitis CJ
- Rossitto LA
- Gurnani S
- Bainbridge E
- Poduri A
- Sahin M
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz123
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic mTORC1 inhibition rescues behavioral and biochemical deficits resulting from neuronal Depdc5 loss in mice.
**Authors:** Yuskaitis CJ, Rossitto LA, Gurnani S, Bainbridge E, Poduri A, Sahin M
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddz123](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddz123)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2019 Sep 1;28(17):2952-2964. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz123.

Chronic mTORC1 inhibition rescues behavioral and biochemical deficits resulting 
from neuronal Depdc5 loss in mice.

Yuskaitis CJ(1)(2)(3), Rossitto LA(1), Gurnani S(1), Bainbridge E(1), Poduri 
A(1)(2)(3), Sahin M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Division of Epilepsy and Clinical Neurophysiology and Epilepsy Genetics 
Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

DEPDC5 is now recognized as one of the genes most often implicated in 
familial/inherited focal epilepsy and brain malformations. Individuals with 
pathogenic variants in DEPDC5 are at risk for epilepsy, associated 
neuropsychiatric comorbidities and sudden unexplained death in epilepsy. 
Depdc5flox/flox-Syn1Cre (Depdc5cc+) neuronal-specific Depdc5 knockout mice 
exhibit seizures and neuronal mTORC1 hyperactivation. It is not known if 
Depdc5cc+ mice have a hyperactivity/anxiety phenotype, die early from terminal 
seizures or whether mTOR inhibitors rescue DEPDC5-related seizures and 
associated comorbidities. Herein, we report that Depdc5cc+ mice were hyperactive 
in open-field testing but did not display anxiety-like behaviors on the 
elevated-plus maze. Unlike many other mTOR-related models, Depdc5cc+ mice had 
minimal epileptiform activity and rare seizures prior to seizure-induced death, 
as confirmed by video-EEG monitoring. Treatment with the mTORC1 inhibitor 
rapamycin starting after 3 weeks of age significantly prolonged the survival of 
Depdc5cc+ mice and partially rescued the behavioral hyperactivity. Rapamycin 
decreased the enlarged brain size of Depdc5cc+ mice with corresponding decrease 
in neuronal soma size. Loss of Depdc5 led to a decrease in the other GATOR1 
protein levels (NPRL2 and NPRL3). Rapamycin failed to rescue GATOR1 protein 
levels but rather rescued downstream mTORC1 hyperactivity as measured by 
phosphorylation of S6. Collectively, our data provide the first evidence of 
behavioral alterations in mice with Depdc5 loss and support mTOR inhibition as a 
rational therapeutic strategy for DEPDC5-related epilepsy in humans.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddz123
PMCID: PMC6736288
PMID: 31174205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]