---
reference_id: PMID:32541010
title: The KMT2D Kabuki syndrome histone methylase controls neural crest cell differentiation and facial morphology.
authors:
- Shpargel KB
- Mangini CL
- Xie G
- Ge K
- Magnuson T
journal: Development
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1242/dev.187997
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/enzymology, pathology"
- Alleles
- Animals
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Lineage
- Cell Movement
- Chondrocytes/pathology
- "Face/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Hematologic Diseases/enzymology, pathology"
- Histone-Lysine N-Methyltransferase/metabolism
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Morphogenesis
- Mutation/genetics
- Myeloid-Lymphoid Leukemia Protein/metabolism
- "Neural Crest/enzymology, pathology"
- Osteogenesis
- "Palate/embryology, metabolism, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Skull/pathology
- "Vestibular Diseases/enzymology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The KMT2D Kabuki syndrome histone methylase controls neural crest cell differentiation and facial morphology.
**Authors:** Shpargel KB, Mangini CL, Xie G, Ge K, Magnuson T
**Journal:** Development (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.187997](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.187997)

## Content

1. Development. 2020 Jul 17;147(21):dev187997. doi: 10.1242/dev.187997.

The KMT2D Kabuki syndrome histone methylase controls neural crest cell 
differentiation and facial morphology.

Shpargel KB(1), Mangini CL(2), Xie G(3), Ge K(3), Magnuson T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University 
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7264, USA shpargel@email.unc.edu.
(2)Department of Genetics and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University 
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7264, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Endocrinology and Receptor Biology, National Institute of 
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a congenital craniofacial disorder resulting from 
mutations in the KMT2D histone methylase (KS1) or the UTX histone demethylase 
(KS2). With small cohorts of KS2 patients, it is not clear whether differences 
exist in clinical manifestations relative to KS1. We mutated KMT2D in neural 
crest cells (NCCs) to study cellular and molecular functions in craniofacial 
development with respect to UTX. Similar to UTX, KMT2D NCC knockout mice 
demonstrate hypoplasia with reductions in frontonasal bone lengths. We have 
traced the onset of KMT2D and UTX mutant NCC frontal dysfunction to a stage of 
altered osteochondral progenitor differentiation. KMT2D NCC loss-of-function 
does exhibit unique phenotypes distinct from UTX mutation, including fully 
penetrant cleft palate, mandible hypoplasia and deficits in cranial base 
ossification. KMT2D mutant NCCs lead to defective secondary palatal shelf 
elevation with reduced expression of extracellular matrix components. KMT2D 
mutant chondrocytes in the cranial base fail to properly differentiate, leading 
to defective endochondral ossification. We conclude that KMT2D is required for 
appropriate cranial NCC differentiation and KMT2D-specific phenotypes may 
underlie differences between Kabuki syndrome subtypes.

© 2020. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.187997
PMCID: PMC7375479
PMID: 32541010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.