---
reference_id: "PMID:37218246"
title: Spontaneous splenic rupture during dengue fever.
authors:
- Zafarullah S
- Mujahid NU
- Waheed R
- Asghar MS
- Afzal A
- Anwar J
journal: J Pak Med Assoc
year: '2023'
doi: 10.47391/JPMA.6406
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spontaneous splenic rupture during dengue fever.
**Authors:** Zafarullah S, Mujahid NU, Waheed R, Asghar MS, Afzal A, Anwar J
**Journal:** J Pak Med Assoc (2023)
**DOI:** [10.47391/JPMA.6406](https://doi.org/10.47391/JPMA.6406)

## Content

1. J Pak Med Assoc. 2023 May;73(5):1111-1112. doi: 10.47391/JPMA.6406.

Spontaneous splenic rupture during dengue fever.

Zafarullah S(1), Mujahid NU(2), Waheed R(1), Asghar MS(3), Afzal A(3), Anwar 
J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, King Edward Medical University, Mayo Hospital, 
Lahore,Pakistan.
(2)Department of Surgery, King Edward Medical University, Mayo Hospital, Lahore, 
Pakistan.
(3)Department of Surgery, King Edward Medical University, Mayo Hospital,Lahore, 
Pakistan.

Dengue fever is one of the most frequent arboviral diseases in the world. Dengue 
is known to cause myocarditis, hepatitis, and neurological illustrations but one 
of the established presentations is leakage of plasma resulting in circulatory 
failure. Spontaneous rupture of the spleen is one of the most infrequent but 
known outcome of dengue fever which has been reported from time to time in 
literature. We present, here, the case of a 50-year-old patient who developed 
this condition during dengue fever and was managed in our department 
successfully. This complication must be kept in mind while treating any case of 
dengue fever so that it can be avoided or if not then treated timely.

DOI: 10.47391/JPMA.6406
PMID: 37218246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]