---
reference_id: "PMID:38601051"
title: Pseudovitelliform maculopathy associated with hereditary hemochromatosis.
authors:
- Vukojevic A
- Vukojevic M
- Jukic T
- Petricek I
- Mandic K
- Vukojevic N
journal: Med Hypothesis Discov Innov Ophthalmol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.51329/mehdiophthal1487
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pseudovitelliform maculopathy associated with hereditary hemochromatosis.
**Authors:** Vukojevic A, Vukojevic M, Jukic T, Petricek I, Mandic K, Vukojevic N
**Journal:** Med Hypothesis Discov Innov Ophthalmol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.51329/mehdiophthal1487](https://doi.org/10.51329/mehdiophthal1487)

## Content

1. Med Hypothesis Discov Innov Ophthalmol. 2024 Jan 31;12(4):203-212. doi: 
10.51329/mehdiophthal1487. eCollection 2023 Winter.

Pseudovitelliform maculopathy associated with hereditary hemochromatosis.

Vukojevic A(1), Vukojevic M(2), Jukic T(3), Petricek I(4), Mandic K(4), 
Vukojevic N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, UHC Sestre Milosrdnice, Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, County Institute of Emergency Medicine 
Sisak-Moslavina County, Sisak, Croatia.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, UHC 
Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, UHC Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.

BACKGROUND: Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is an inherited autosomal recessive 
iron metabolism disorder resulting from a C282Y mutation in the HFE gene. 
Mutations in the HFE gene may result in iron accumulation and oxidative stress 
in the retina, resulting in macular degeneration. This article describes two 
patients with HH who were treated with erythrocytapheresis or phlebotomy, with 
no exposure to deferoxamine or any other chelation therapy, and who developed 
visual symptoms.
CASE PRESENTATION: Both patients had known diagnoses of HH. Because of visual 
symptoms, they were referred to the ophthalmology clinic and underwent a retinal 
exam, multimodal imaging, and electrodiagnostic studies, which revealed 
structural and functional degeneration of the central macula. Fundus 
photography, fluorescein angiography, and fundus autofluorescence revealed 
changes at the level of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) in the central 
macula. In addition, optical coherence tomography revealed subfoveal 
accumulation of hyperreflective material at and below the RPE. Multifocal 
electroretinography confirmed a decreased cone response, whereas the full-field 
electroretinogram was unremarkable. Genetic testing ruled out Best's vitelliform 
macular dystrophy and the other known hereditary macular dystrophies. The 
patients had known diagnoses of HH, homozygous C282Y mutations in the HFE gene, 
and no comorbidities; thus, we presumed that HH led to the observed 
morphological and functional disorders of the RPE, which in turn caused 
structural macular changes in both patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Considering the macular findings and the nature of the patients' 
primary illness, we believe that the accumulation of iron and photoreceptor 
metabolic products caused dysfunction in the RPE, which led to morphological and 
functional changes in the macula. Because the patients were not treated using 
chelating agents, we attribute the macular changes solely to iron accumulation 
and oxidative stress caused by the pathophysiological processes of HH. Further 
studies are needed to identify the plausible molecular or cellular insults 
underlying pseudovitelliform macular degeneration in patients with HH.

Author(s).

DOI: 10.51329/mehdiophthal1487
PMCID: PMC11002465
PMID: 38601051

Conflict of interest statement: None