---
reference_id: "PMID:15252219"
title: "Empowering targeted therapy: lessons from rituximab."
authors:
- Olszewski AJ
- Grossbard ML
journal: Sci STKE
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1126/stke.2412004pe30
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Empowering targeted therapy: lessons from rituximab.
**Authors:** Olszewski AJ, Grossbard ML
**Journal:** Sci STKE (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1126/stke.2412004pe30](https://doi.org/10.1126/stke.2412004pe30)

## Content

1. Sci STKE. 2004 Jul 6;2004(241):pe30. doi: 10.1126/stke.2412004pe30.

Empowering targeted therapy: lessons from rituximab.

Olszewski AJ(1), Grossbard ML.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital and Beth 
Israel Medical Center, New York, NY 10019, USA.

Rituximab, a monoclonal antibody directed against the B cell-specific protein 
CD20, has revolutionized lymphoma treatment by providing a highly effective form 
of therapy with relatively mild toxic side effects. Effective as a single agent 
against some forms of B cell lymphoma, rituximab also has a chemosensitizing 
effect, enhancing the efficacy of chemotherapy against other forms of the 
disease. Although the mechanisms whereby rituximab achieves its effects remain 
incompletely understood, these seem to involve at least three distinct 
phenomena: (i) antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity, (ii) 
complement-mediated cell lysis, and (iii) stimulation of apoptosis in target 
cells. The latter occurs through interaction of complexes of rituximab and CD20 
in lipid rafts, with elements of a signaling pathway involving Src kinases. 
Effector molecules trigger various gene expression events, leading to 
sensitization of malignant cells to proapoptotic stimuli. Lessons learned from 
the research on rituximab may be applied to the rational development of 
antibody-based therapies against other forms of cancer.

DOI: 10.1126/stke.2412004pe30
PMID: 15252219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]