---
reference_id: "PMID:36970589"
title: "Clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: Experience with 566 Chinese cases."
authors:
- Xu ZX
- Jiang LX
- Chen YR
- Zhang YH
- Zhang Z
- Yu PF
- Dong ZW
- Yang HR
- Gu GL
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v29.i10.1627
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: Experience with 566 Chinese cases.
**Authors:** Xu ZX, Jiang LX, Chen YR, Zhang YH, Zhang Z, Yu PF, Dong ZW, Yang HR, Gu GL
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v29.i10.1627](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v29.i10.1627)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2023 Mar 14;29(10):1627-1637. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v29.i10.1627.

Clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: 
Experience with 566 Chinese cases.

Xu ZX(1), Jiang LX(2), Chen YR(2), Zhang YH(3), Zhang Z(3), Yu PF(3), Dong 
ZW(3), Yang HR(3), Gu GL(4).

Author information:
(1)Fifth Clinical College of Anhui Medical University, Air Force Clinical 
College of Anhui Medical University, Beijing 100142, China.
(2)Air Force Clinical College of China Medical University, Beijing 100142, 
China.
(3)Department of General Surgery, Air Force Medical Center, Chinese People's 
Liberation Army, Beijing 100142, China.
(4)Department of General Surgery, Air Force Medical Center, Chinese People's 
Liberation Army, Beijing 100142, China. kzggl@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is a clinically rare disease with 
pigmented spots on the lips and mucous membranes and extremities, scattered 
gastrointestinal polyps, and susceptibility to tumors as clinical 
manifestations. Effective preventive and curative methods are still lacking. 
Here we summarize our experience with 566 Chinese patients with PJS from a 
Chinese medical center with regard to the clinical features, diagnosis, and 
treatment.
AIM: To explore the clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment of PJS in a 
Chinese medical center.
METHODS: The diagnosis and treatment information of 566 cases of PJS admitted to 
the Air Force Medical Center from January 1994 to October 2022 was summarized. A 
clinical database was established covering age, gender, ethnicity, family 
history, age at first treatment, time and sequence of appearance of 
mucocutaneous pigmentation, polyp distribution, quantity, and diameter, 
frequency of hospitalization, frequency of surgical operations, etc. The 
clinical data was retrospectively analyzed using SPSS 26.0 software, with P < 
0.05 considered statistically significant.
RESULTS: Of all the patients included, 55.3% were male and 44.7% were female. 
Median time to the appearance of mucocutaneous pigmentation was 2 years, and 
median time from the appearance of mucocutaneous pigmentation to the occurrence 
of abdominal symptoms was 10 years. The vast majority (92.2%) of patients 
underwent small bowel endoscopy and treatment, with 2.3% having serious 
complications. There was a statistically significant difference in the number of 
enteroscopies between patients with and without canceration (P = 0.004, Z = 
-2.882); 71.2% of patients underwent surgical operation, 75.6% of patients 
underwent surgical operation before the age of 35 years, and there was a 
statistically significant difference in the frequency of surgical operations 
between patients with and without cancer (P = 0.000, Z = -5.127). At 40 years of 
age, the cumulative risk of intussusception in PJS was approximately 72.0%, and 
at 50 years, the cumulative risk of intussusception in PJS was approximately 
89.6%. At 50 years of age, the cumulative risk of cancer in PJS was 
approximately 49.3%, and at 60 years of age, the cumulative risk of cancer in 
PJS was approximately 71.7%.
CONCLUSION: The risk of intussusception and cancer of PJS polyps increases with 
age. PJS patients ≥ 10 years old should undergo annual enteroscopy. Endoscopic 
treatment has a good safety profile and can reduce the occurrence of polyps 
intussusception and cancer. Surgery should be conducted to protect the 
gastrointestinal system by removing polyps.

©The Author(s) 2023. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v29.i10.1627
PMCID: PMC10037245
PMID: 36970589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.