---
reference_id: "PMID:39570809"
title: Mapping of the T-cell Landscape of Biliary Tract Cancer Unravels Anatomic Subtype-Specific Heterogeneity.
authors:
- Nie J
- Zhang S
- Guo Y
- Liu C
- Shi J
- Wu H
- Na R
- Liang Y
- Yu S
- Quan F
- Liu K
- Li M
- Zhou M
- Zhao Y
- Li X
- Luo S
- Zhang Q
- Wang G
- Zhang Y
- Yao Y
- Xiao Y
- Tai S
- Zheng T
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-24-1173
keywords:
- Humans
- "Biliary Tract Neoplasms/immunology, pathology, genetics"
- Mice
- Animals
- "Cholangiocarcinoma/immunology, pathology, genetics"
- Female
- Male
- "Lymphocytes, Tumor-Infiltrating/immunology"
- Middle Aged
- Single-Cell Analysis
- Tumor Microenvironment/immunology
- Aged
- T-Lymphocyte Subsets/immunology
- "Bile Duct Neoplasms/immunology, pathology, genetics"
- "Receptors, Antigen, T-Cell/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mapping of the T-cell Landscape of Biliary Tract Cancer Unravels Anatomic Subtype-Specific Heterogeneity.
**Authors:** Nie J, Zhang S, Guo Y, Liu C, Shi J, Wu H, Na R, Liang Y, Yu S, Quan F, Liu K, Li M, Zhou M, Zhao Y, Li X, Luo S, Zhang Q, Wang G, Zhang Y, Yao Y, Xiao Y, Tai S, Zheng T
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-24-1173](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-24-1173)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 2025 Feb 17;85(4):704-722. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-24-1173.

Mapping of the T-cell Landscape of Biliary Tract Cancer Unravels Anatomic 
Subtype-Specific Heterogeneity.

Nie J(#)(1)(2), Zhang S(#)(1)(2), Guo Y(#)(1)(2), Liu C(#)(1)(2), Shi J(2)(3), 
Wu H(4), Na R(1)(2), Liang Y(5)(6), Yu S(7), Quan F(8), Liu K(8), Li M(1)(2), 
Zhou M(1)(2), Zhao Y(1)(2), Li X(1)(2), Luo S(1)(2), Zhang Q(9), Wang G(1), 
Zhang Y(1)(10)(11), Yao Y(1)(2)(10), Xiao Y(8), Tai S(4), Zheng T(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, Harbin Medical University 
Cancer Hospital, Harbin, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology in Heilongjiang, Harbin, China.
(3)Department of Phase 1 Trials Center, Harbin Medical University Cancer 
Hospital, Harbin, China.
(4)Department of Hepatic Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin 
Medical University, Harbin, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Hepatosplenic Surgery, Ministry of Education, Harbin, 
China.
(6)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin 
Medical University, Harbin, China.
(7)Department of Pathology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin, China.
(8)College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology, Harbin Medical University, 
Harbin, China.
(9)Department of Abdominal Radiotherapy, Harbin Medical University Cancer 
Hospital, Harbin, China.
(10)Key Laboratory of Tumor Immunology in Heilongjiang, Harbin, China.
(11)Translational Medicine Research and Cooperation Center of Northern China, 
Heilongjiang Academy of Medical Sciences, Harbin, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Biliary tract cancer (BTC), encompassing diseases such as intrahepatic (ICC), 
extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ECC), and gallbladder cancer, is not only 
increasing but also poses a significant and urgent health threat due to its high 
malignancy. Genomic differences point to the possibility that these subtypes 
represent distinct diseases. Elucidation of the specific distribution of T-cell 
subsets, critical to cancer immunity, across these diseases could provide better 
insights into the unique biology of BTC subtypes and help identify potential 
precision medicine strategies. To address this, we conducted single-cell RNA 
sequencing and T-cell receptor sequencing on CD3+ T cells from 36 samples from 
16 patients with BTC across all subtypes and analyzed 355 pathologic slides to 
examine the spatial distribution of T cells and tertiary lymphoid structures. 
Compared with ICC and gallbladder cancer, ECC possessed a unique immune profile 
characterized by T-cell exhaustion, elevated CXCL13 expression in CD4+ T 
helper-like and CD8+CXCL13+ exhausted T cells, more mature tertiary lymphoid 
structures, and fewer desert immunophenotypes. Conversely, ICC displayed an 
inflamed immunophenotype with an enrichment of IFN-related pathways and high 
expression of LGALS1 in activated regulatory T cells, associated with 
immunosuppression. Inhibition of LGALS1 reduced tumor growth and regulatory 
T-cell prevalence in ICC mouse models. Overall, this study unveils T-cell 
diversity across BTC subtypes at the single-cell and spatial level that could 
open paths for tailored immunotherapies. Significance: Single-cell and spatial 
analyses detailed the T-cell characteristics specific to anatomic subtypes of 
biliary tract cancer, identifying unique immunologic features that could 
potentially be harnessed to improve patient outcomes.

©2024 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-24-1173
PMID: 39570809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]