---
reference_id: "PMID:22190451"
title: Disease-associated mutations in the actin-binding domain of filamin B cause cytoplasmic focal accumulations correlating with disease severity.
authors:
- Daniel PB
- Morgan T
- Alanay Y
- Bijlsma E
- Cho TJ
- Cole T
- Collins F
- David A
- Devriendt K
- Faivre L
- Ikegawa S
- Jacquemont S
- Jesic M
- Krakow D
- Liebrecht D
- Maitz S
- Marlin S
- Morin G
- Nishikubo T
- Nishimura G
- Prescott T
- Scarano G
- Shafeghati Y
- Skovby F
- Tsutsumi S
- Whiteford M
- Zenker M
- Robertson SP
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/humu.22012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease-associated mutations in the actin-binding domain of filamin B cause cytoplasmic focal accumulations correlating with disease severity.
**Authors:** Daniel PB, Morgan T, Alanay Y, Bijlsma E, Cho TJ, Cole T, Collins F, David A, Devriendt K, Faivre L, Ikegawa S, Jacquemont S, Jesic M, Krakow D, Liebrecht D, Maitz S, Marlin S, Morin G, Nishikubo T, Nishimura G, Prescott T, Scarano G, Shafeghati Y, Skovby F, Tsutsumi S, Whiteford M, Zenker M, Robertson SP
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.22012](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.22012)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2012 Apr;33(4):665-73. doi: 10.1002/humu.22012. Epub 2012 Jan 23.

Disease-associated mutations in the actin-binding domain of filamin B cause 
cytoplasmic focal accumulations correlating with disease severity.

Daniel PB(1), Morgan T, Alanay Y, Bijlsma E, Cho TJ, Cole T, Collins F, David A, 
Devriendt K, Faivre L, Ikegawa S, Jacquemont S, Jesic M, Krakow D, Liebrecht D, 
Maitz S, Marlin S, Morin G, Nishikubo T, Nishimura G, Prescott T, Scarano G, 
Shafeghati Y, Skovby F, Tsutsumi S, Whiteford M, Zenker M, Robertson SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Dunedin School of Medicine, 
Otago University, Dunedin, New Zealand.

Dominant missense mutations in FLNB, encoding the actin-cross linking protein 
filamin B (FLNB), cause a broad range of skeletal dysplasias with varying 
severity by an unknown mechanism. Here these FLNB mutations are shown to cluster 
in exons encoding the actin-binding domain (ABD) and filamin repeats surrounding 
the flexible hinge 1 region of the FLNB rod domain. Despite being positioned in 
domains that bind actin, it is unknown if these mutations perturb cytoskeletal 
structure. Expression of several full-length FLNB constructs containing ABD 
mutations resulted in the appearance of actin-containing cytoplasmic focal 
accumulations of the substituted protein to a degree that was correlated with 
the severity of the associated phenotypes. In contrast, study of mutations 
leading to substitutions in the FLNB rod domain that result in the same 
phenotypes as ABD mutations demonstrated that with only one exception 
disease-associated substitutions, surrounding hinge 1 demonstrated no tendency 
to form actin-filamin foci. The exception, a substitution in filamin repeat 6, 
lies within a region previously implicated in filamin-actin binding. These data 
are consistent with mutations in the ABD conferring enhanced actin-binding 
activity but suggest that substitutions affecting repeats near the flexible 
hinge region of FLNB precipitate the same phenotypes through a different 
mechanism.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22012
PMID: 22190451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]