---
reference_id: "PMID:31292197"
title: "GFR Slope as a Surrogate End Point for Kidney Disease Progression in Clinical Trials: A Meta-Analysis of Treatment Effects of Randomized Controlled Trials."
authors:
- Inker LA
- Heerspink HJL
- Tighiouart H
- Levey AS
- Coresh J
- Gansevoort RT
- Simon AL
- Ying J
- Beck GJ
- Wanner C
- Floege J
- Li PK
- Perkovic V
- Vonesh EF
- Greene T
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2019010007
keywords:
- Bayes Theorem
- Biomarkers
- Creatinine/blood
- Disease Progression
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Humans
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/etiology, physiopathology"
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/complications, physiopathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GFR Slope as a Surrogate End Point for Kidney Disease Progression in Clinical Trials: A Meta-Analysis of Treatment Effects of Randomized Controlled Trials.
**Authors:** Inker LA, Heerspink HJL, Tighiouart H, Levey AS, Coresh J, Gansevoort RT, Simon AL, Ying J, Beck GJ, Wanner C, Floege J, Li PK, Perkovic V, Vonesh EF, Greene T
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2019010007](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2019010007)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2019 Sep;30(9):1735-1745. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2019010007. Epub
2019 Jul 10.

GFR Slope as a Surrogate End Point for Kidney Disease Progression in Clinical
Trials: A Meta-Analysis of Treatment Effects of Randomized Controlled Trials.

Inker LA(1), Heerspink HJL(2), Tighiouart H(3)(4), Levey AS(5), Coresh J(6),
Gansevoort RT(7), Simon AL(5), Ying J(8), Beck GJ(9), Wanner C(10), Floege
J(11), Li PK(12), Perkovic V(13), Vonesh EF(14), Greene T(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and LInker@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.
(2)Departments of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology and.
(3)The Institute for Clinical Research and Health Policy Studies, Tufts Medical
Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Tufts Clinical and Translational Science Institute, Tufts University, Boston,
Massachusetts.
(5)Division of Nephrology and.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, Maryland.
(7)Nephrology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands.
(8)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(9)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,
Ohio.
(10)Division of Nephrology, University Hospital of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(11)Division of Nephrology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(12)Division of Nephrology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong; LInker@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.
(13)George Institute for Global Health, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia; and.
(14)Department of Preventive Medicine, Division of Biostatistics, Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois.

Comment in
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2019 Sep;30(9):1556-1558. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2019070731.

BACKGROUND: Surrogate end points are needed to assess whether treatments are
effective in the early stages of CKD. GFR decline leads to kidney failure, but
regulators have not approved using differences in the change in GFR from the
beginning to the end of a randomized, controlled trial as an end point in CKD
because it is not clear whether small changes in the GFR slope will translate to
clinical benefits.
METHODS: To assess the use of GFR slope as a surrogate end point for CKD
progression, we performed a meta-analysis of 47 RCTs that tested 12
interventions in 60,620 subjects. We estimated treatment effects on GFR slope
(mean difference in GFR slope between the randomized groups), for the total
slope starting at baseline, chronic slope starting at 3 months after
randomization, and on the clinical end point (doubling of serum creatinine,
GFR<15 ml/min per 1.73 m2, or ESKD) for each study. We used Bayesian
mixed-effects analyses to describe the association of treatment effects on GFR
slope with the clinical end point and to test how well the GFR slope predicts a
treatment's effect on the clinical end point.
RESULTS: Across all studies, the treatment effect on 3-year total GFR slope
(median R2=0.97; 95% Bayesian credible interval [BCI], 0.78 to 1.00) and on the
chronic slope (R2 0.96; 95% BCI, 0.63 to 1.00) accurately predicted treatment
effects on the clinical end point. With a sufficient sample size, a treatment
effect of 0.75 ml/min per 1.73 m2/yr or greater on total slope over 3 years or
chronic slope predicts a clinical benefit on CKD progress with at least 96%
probability.
CONCLUSIONS: With large enough sample sizes, GFR slope may be a viable surrogate
for clinical end points in CKD RCTs.

Copyright © 2019 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2019010007
PMCID: PMC6727261
PMID: 31292197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
