---
reference_id: PMID:21884931
title: Autophagy and aging.
authors:
- Rubinsztein DC
- Mariño G
- Kroemer G
journal: Cell
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.07.030
keywords:
- Aging
- Animals
- Autophagy
- Cell Death
- Homeostasis
- Humans
- Mammals/physiology
- Mitochondria/physiology
- Phagosomes/physiology
- Yeasts/cytology
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Autophagy and aging.
**Authors:** Rubinsztein DC, Mariño G, Kroemer G
**Journal:** Cell (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2011.07.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.07.030)

## Content

1. Cell. 2011 Sep 2;146(5):682-95. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.07.030.

Autophagy and aging.

Rubinsztein DC(1), Mariño G, Kroemer G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Institute 
for Medical Research, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, 
UK. dcr1000@hermes.cam.ac.uk

Genetic inhibition of autophagy induces degenerative changes in mammalian 
tissues that resemble those associated with aging, and normal and pathological 
aging are often associated with a reduced autophagic potential. Pharmacological 
or genetic manipulations that increase life span in model organisms often 
stimulate autophagy, and its inhibition compromises the longevity-promoting 
effects of caloric restriction, Sirtuin 1 activation, inhibition of 
insulin/insulin growth factor signaling, or the administration of rapamycin, 
resveratrol, or spermidine. Here, we discuss the probable cause and effect 
relationship between perturbed autophagy and aging, as well as possible 
molecular mechanisms that may mediate the anti-aging effects of autophagy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.07.030
PMID: 21884931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]