---
reference_id: "PMID:16670134"
title: "Time to sputum culture conversion in multidrug-resistant tuberculosis: predictors and relationship to treatment outcome."
authors:
- Holtz TH
- Sternberg M
- Kammerer S
- Laserson KF
- Riekstina V
- Zarovska E
- Skripconoka V
- Wells CD
- Leimane V
journal: Ann Intern Med
year: '2006'
doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-144-9-200605020-00008
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Antitubercular Agents/therapeutic use
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Female
- Humans
- Latvia
- Male
- Microbial Sensitivity Tests
- Middle Aged
- "Mycobacterium tuberculosis/drug effects, isolation & purification"
- Retrospective Studies
- Sputum/microbiology
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- "Tuberculosis, Multidrug-Resistant/drug therapy, microbiology"
- "Tuberculosis, Pulmonary/drug therapy, microbiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Time to sputum culture conversion in multidrug-resistant tuberculosis: predictors and relationship to treatment outcome.
**Authors:** Holtz TH, Sternberg M, Kammerer S, Laserson KF, Riekstina V, Zarovska E, Skripconoka V, Wells CD, Leimane V
**Journal:** Ann Intern Med (2006)
**DOI:** [10.7326/0003-4819-144-9-200605020-00008](https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-144-9-200605020-00008)

## Content

1. Ann Intern Med. 2006 May 2;144(9):650-9. doi:
10.7326/0003-4819-144-9-200605020-00008.

Time to sputum culture conversion in multidrug-resistant tuberculosis:
predictors and relationship to treatment outcome.

Holtz TH(1), Sternberg M, Kammerer S, Laserson KF, Riekstina V, Zarovska E,
Skripconoka V, Wells CD, Leimane V.

Author information:
(1)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia 30333, USA.
tholtz@cdc.gov

Summary for patients in
    Ann Intern Med. 2006 May 2;144(9):I18. doi:
10.7326/0003-4819-144-9-200605020-00002.

BACKGROUND: Conversion of sputum mycobacterial cultures from positive growth to
negative growth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in patients with pulmonary
tuberculosis (TB) is considered the most important interim indicator of the
efficacy of anti-TB pharmacologic treatment for multidrug-resistant disease.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate and compare time to and predictors of initial sputum
culture conversion with predictors of treatment outcome for patients with
multidrug-resistant TB.
DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
SETTING: Latvia.
PATIENTS: All civilian patients with multidrug-resistant TB treated with the
DOTS-Plus strategy between 1 January and 31 December 2000.
INTERVENTION: Individualized treatment for confirmed sputum culture-positive
pulmonary multidrug-resistant TB.
MEASUREMENTS: Time to initial sputum culture conversion and treatment outcome.
RESULTS: Among 167 patients who were sputum culture-positive at initiation of
second-line therapy, 129 (77%) converted in a median time of 60 days (range, 4
to 462 days) and 38 (23%) did not convert. Independent predictors of a longer
sputum culture conversion time, using an accelerated failure time regression
model, included previous treatment for multidrug-resistant TB, high initial
sputum culture colony count, bilateral cavitations on chest radiography, and the
number of drugs the initial isolate was resistant to at treatment initiation.
Treatment outcomes were statistically significantly worse for patients who did
not convert their sputum culture within 2 months.
LIMITATIONS: Twenty-five percent of patients missed 5 or more monthly sputum
collections.
CONCLUSIONS: Under program conditions in Latvia, most patients with
multidrug-resistant TB achieved sputum culture conversion within 12 weeks of
starting treatment. Chest radiography and sputum culture drug susceptibility
testing can assist physicians in predicting which patients will convert more
slowly. Sputum culture conversion is a useful and appropriate interim indicator
of treatment outcome in patients with multidrug-resistant TB.

DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-144-9-200605020-00008
PMID: 16670134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
