---
reference_id: "PMID:11334504"
title: Type 1A diabetes induced by infection and immunization.
authors:
- Robles DT
- Eisenbarth GS
journal: J Autoimmun
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1006/jaut.2000.0483
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type 1A diabetes induced by infection and immunization.
**Authors:** Robles DT, Eisenbarth GS
**Journal:** J Autoimmun (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1006/jaut.2000.0483](https://doi.org/10.1006/jaut.2000.0483)

## Content

1. J Autoimmun. 2001 May;16(3):355-62. doi: 10.1006/jaut.2000.0483.

Type 1A diabetes induced by infection and immunization.

Robles DT(1), Eisenbarth GS.

Author information:
(1)Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, University of Colorado Health 
Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado, USA.

Type 1A diabetes is an immune mediated disorder that results from progressive 
destruction of the islet beta-cells in the setting of genetic susceptibility. 
Both MHC and non-MHC genes contribute to disease with class II HLA molecules 
major determinants of susceptibility or protection. The presence of multiple 
anti-islet autoantibodies is associated with a high risk of disease progression, 
and the first anti-islet autoantibodies may appear as early as the first year of 
life. Congenital rubella is the only infection clearly associated with the 
development of type 1A diabetes. With the ability to detect children in the 
first year of life activating autoimmunity, prospective studies may in the 
future document additional environmental factors either increasing or decreasing 
diabetes risk.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jaut.2000.0483
PMID: 11334504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]