---
reference_id: "PMID:20301463"
title: Carney Complex.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Stratakis CA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Carney Complex.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Stratakis CA

## Content

1. Carney Complex.

Stratakis CA(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2003 Feb 5 [updated 2023 Sep 21].

Author information:
(1)Director, Human Genetics & Precision Medicine, Foundation for Research & 
Technology Hellas, Heraklion, Greece

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Carney complex (CNC) is characterized by skin 
pigmentary abnormalities, myxomas, endocrine tumors or overactivity, and 
schwannomas. Pale brown to black lentigines are the most common presenting 
feature of CNC and typically increase in number at puberty. Cardiac myxomas 
occur at a young age, may occur in any or all cardiac chambers, and can manifest 
as intracardiac obstruction of blood flow, embolic phenomenon, and/or heart 
failure. Other sites for myxomas include the skin, breast, oropharynx, and 
female genital tract. Primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease (PPNAD), 
which causes Cushing syndrome, is the most frequently observed endocrine tumor 
in CNC, occurring in approximately 25% of affected individuals. Large cell 
calcifying Sertoli cell tumors (LCCSCTs) are observed in one third of affected 
males within the first decade and in most adult males. Up to 75% of individuals 
with CNC have multiple thyroid nodules, most of which are nonfunctioning thyroid 
follicular adenomas. Clinically evident acromegaly from a growth hormone 
(GH)-producing adenoma is evident in approximately 10% of adults. Psammomatous 
melanotic schwannoma (PMS), a rare tumor of the nerve sheath, occurs in an 
estimated 10% of affected individuals. The median age of diagnosis is 20 years.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The clinical diagnosis of CNC is established in a proband 
with two or more major diagnostic criteria. The molecular diagnosis can be 
established in a proband with suggestive findings and a heterozygous germline 
pathogenic variant in PRKAR1A identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Surgical excision via open heart 
surgery for cardiac myxomas; surgical excision of cutaneous and mammary myxomas; 
bilateral adrenalectomy for Cushing syndrome; transsphenoidal surgery for 
pituitary adenoma; surgery for cancerous thyroid adenomas; orchiectomy for boys 
with aggressive LCCSCT and gynecomastia to avoid premature epiphyseal fusion and 
induction of central precocious puberty (mild gynecomastia may be treated 
medically); surgery to remove primary and/or metastatic PMS; standard treatment 
for pancreatic tumors. Surveillance: Echocardiography annually beginning in 
childhood, biannually for those with a history of excised myxoma; clinical 
examination for cutaneous myxomas as needed; urinary free cortisol levels 
annually beginning in adolescence with diurnal cortisol levels, dexamethasome 
stimulation test, and adrenal CT as needed; annual serum IGF-1 beginning in 
adolescence, pituitary MRI, three-hour oral glucose tolerance test, and 
90-minute thyrotropin-releasing hormone testing for those with 
gigantism/acromegaly; annual thyroid ultrasound beginning in adolescence; 
monitor growth rate and pubertal staging at each visit and testicular ultrasound 
annually in males beginning in childhood; transabdominal ultrasound of ovaries 
as needed in females; clinical assessment for PMS with MRI of the brain, spine, 
chest, abdomen, retroperitoneum, and pelvis as needed. Evaluation of relatives 
at risk: It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently 
asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual by 
molecular genetic testing of the PRKAR1A pathogenic variant in the family in 
order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation 
of surveillance and treatment. Surveillance is recommended for individuals at 
50% risk when molecular genetic testing is not possible or is not informative.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CNC is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. 
Approximately 70% of individuals diagnosed with CNC have an affected parent; 
approximately 30% have a de novo pathogenic variant. Each child of an individual 
with CNC has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. Once the PRKAR1A 
pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, predictive 
testing for at-risk family members and prenatal and preimplantation genetic 
testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301463