---
reference_id: "PMID:2674948"
title: "Dystrophin diagnosis: comparison of dystrophin abnormalities by immunofluorescence and immunoblot analyses."
authors:
- Arahata K
- Hoffman EP
- Kunkel LM
- Ishiura S
- Tsukahara T
- Ishihara T
- Sunohara N
- Nonaka I
- Ozawa E
- Sugita H
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.86.18.7154
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Biomarkers/analysis
- Carrier State
- Dystrophin
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Muscle Proteins/analysis, genetics"
- Muscles/pathology
- "Muscular Dystrophies/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dystrophin diagnosis: comparison of dystrophin abnormalities by immunofluorescence and immunoblot analyses.
**Authors:** Arahata K, Hoffman EP, Kunkel LM, Ishiura S, Tsukahara T, Ishihara T, Sunohara N, Nonaka I, Ozawa E, Sugita H
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.86.18.7154](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.86.18.7154)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1989 Sep;86(18):7154-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.86.18.7154.

Dystrophin diagnosis: comparison of dystrophin abnormalities by
immunofluorescence and immunoblot analyses.

Arahata K(1), Hoffman EP, Kunkel LM, Ishiura S, Tsukahara T, Ishihara T,
Sunohara N, Nonaka I, Ozawa E, Sugita H.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Neuroscience, Tokyo, Japan.

Immunoblot characterization and immunofluorescence localization of dystrophin
are presented for 76 human patients with various neuromuscular diseases. Normal
dystrophin (shown by immunoblotting) was invariably visualized as a continuous,
peripheral membrane immunostaining of myofibers. Biochemical abnormalities of
dystrophin (either lower or higher molecular weight dystrophin) resulted in
patchy, discontinuous immunostaining, suggesting that the abnormal dystrophin
proteins are not capable of creating a complete membrane cytoskeleton network.
There was a very strong correlation of clinical diagnoses with the type of
dystrophin abnormality; all Duchenne muscular dystrophy patient muscle contained
no detectable dystrophin, Becker muscular dystrophy patient muscle had clearly
abnormal dystrophin, and unrelated diseases showed normal dystrophin. However, a
single patient of five carrying the diagnosis of Fukuyama dystrophy showed no
detectable dystrophin and thus appeared to be a Duchenne dystrophy patient by
the biochemical assays. We know of no other case of a patient with a disease
thought to be unrelated to Duchenne/Becker dystrophy yet demonstrating
dystrophin deficiency. Based on the data presented, we conclude that
immunofluorescence is the best technique for the detection of female carriers of
Duchenne dystrophy, whereas immunoblotting appears superior for the prognostic
diagnosis of Becker muscular dystrophy.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.86.18.7154
PMCID: PMC298014
PMID: 2674948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
