---
reference_id: "PMID:36113749"
title: Galactosylceramidase deficiency and pathological abnormalities in cerebral white matter of Krabbe disease.
authors:
- Iacono D
- Koga S
- Peng H
- Manavalan A
- Daiker J
- Castanedes-Casey M
- Martin NB
- Herdt AR
- Gelb MH
- Dickson DW
- Lee CW
journal: Neurobiol Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2022.105862
keywords:
- Humans
- "Galactosylceramidase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Leukodystrophy, Globoid Cell/genetics, pathology"
- Psychosine/metabolism
- White Matter/pathology
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Galactosylceramidase deficiency and pathological abnormalities in cerebral white matter of Krabbe disease.
**Authors:** Iacono D, Koga S, Peng H, Manavalan A, Daiker J, Castanedes-Casey M, Martin NB, Herdt AR, Gelb MH, Dickson DW, Lee CW
**Journal:** Neurobiol Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nbd.2022.105862](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2022.105862)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Dis. 2022 Nov;174:105862. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2022.105862. Epub 2022 
Sep 14.

Galactosylceramidase deficiency and pathological abnormalities in cerebral white 
matter of Krabbe disease.

Iacono D(1), Koga S(2), Peng H(1), Manavalan A(3), Daiker J(4), Castanedes-Casey 
M(2), Martin NB(2), Herdt AR(1), Gelb MH(4), Dickson DW(2), Lee CW(5).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Research Institute of New Jersey (BRInj), Cedar Knolls, NJ, United 
States of America; Atlantic Health System, Morristown, NJ, United States of 
America; Mid-Atlantic Neonatology Associates (MANA), Morristown, NJ, United 
States of America.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, FL, United 
States of America.
(3)Biomedical Research Institute of New Jersey (BRInj), Cedar Knolls, NJ, United 
States of America.
(4)Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, United States of America.
(5)Biomedical Research Institute of New Jersey (BRInj), Cedar Knolls, NJ, United 
States of America; Atlantic Health System, Morristown, NJ, United States of 
America; Mid-Atlantic Neonatology Associates (MANA), Morristown, NJ, United 
States of America. Electronic address: chrislee@brinj.org.

Krabbe Disease (KD) is an autosomal recessive disorder that results from 
loss-of-function mutations in the GALC gene, which encodes lysosomal enzyme 
galactosylceramidase (GALC). Functional deficiency of GALC is toxic to 
myelin-producing cells, which leads to progressive demyelination in both the 
central and peripheral nervous systems. It is hypothesized that accumulation of 
psychosine, which can only be degraded by GALC, is a primary initiator of 
pathologic cascades. Despite the central role of GALC in KD pathomechanism, 
investigations of GALC deficiency at a protein level are largely absent, due in 
part, to the lack of sensitive antibodies in the field. Leveraging two custom 
antibodies that can detect GALC at endogenous levels, we demonstrated that GALC 
protein is predominantly localized to oligodendrocytes in cerebral white matter 
of an infant brain, consistent with its functional role in myelination. Mature 
GALC could also be quantitatively detected as a 26 kDa band by western blotting 
and correlated to enzyme activity in brain tissues. The p.Ile562Thr polymorphic 
variant, which is over-represented in the KD population, was associated with 
reduced mature GALC protein and activity. In three infantile KD cases, 
homozygous null mutations in GALC lead to deficiency in total GALC protein and 
activity. Interestingly, although GALC activity was absent, normal levels of 
total GALC protein were detected by a sandwich ELISA using our custom antibodies 
in a later-onset KD brain, which suggests that the assay has the potential to 
differentiate infantile- and later-onset KD cases. Among the infantile KD cases, 
we quantified a 5-fold increase in psychosine levels, and observed increased 
levels of acid ceramidase, a key enzyme for psychosine production, and 
hyperglycosylated lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1, a marker for 
lysosomal activation, in periventricular white matter, a major pathological 
brain region, when compared with age-matched normal controls. While near 
complete demyelination was observed in these cases, we quantified that an 
early-infantile case (age of death at 10 months) had about 3-fold increases in 
both globoid cells, a pathological hallmark for KD, and CD8-positive T 
lymphocytes, a pathological marker for multiple sclerosis, in the white matter 
when compared with a slower progressing infantile case (age of death at 
21 months), which suggests a positive correlation between clinical severity and 
neuropathology. Taken together, our findings have advanced the understanding of 
GALC protein biology in the context of normal and KD brain white matter. We also 
revealed new neuropathological changes that may provide insights to understand 
KD pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2022.105862
PMCID: PMC10474820
PMID: 36113749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest Authors declare no conflict 
of interest.