---
reference_id: "PMID:37938052"
title: "Akinetopsia: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Van Swol JM
- Thompson EB
- Joffe JA
- Nguyen SA
- Berman EL
journal: J Neuroophthalmol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/WNO.0000000000002032
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Akinetopsia: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Van Swol JM, Thompson EB, Joffe JA, Nguyen SA, Berman EL
**Journal:** J Neuroophthalmol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/WNO.0000000000002032](https://doi.org/10.1097/WNO.0000000000002032)

## Content

1. J Neuroophthalmol. 2024 Sep 1;44(3):e483-e488. doi: 
10.1097/WNO.0000000000002032. Epub 2023 Nov 3.

Akinetopsia: A Systematic Review.

Van Swol JM(1), Thompson EB, Joffe JA, Nguyen SA, Berman EL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology (JMVS), Texas Tech Health Sciences Center, 
Lubbock, Texas; College of Medicine (EBT), Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, South Carolina; College of Medicine (JAJ), University of South 
Carolina School of Medicine, Greenville, South Carolina; and Departments of 
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery (SAN) and Ophthalmology-Neuro-Ophthalmology 
(EB), Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina.

Selective motion blindness, also known as akinetopsia, is infrequently reported 
in the literature. Hence, little is known about the condition including its 
causes, time course, pathophysiology, and current diagnostic methods. In this 
investigation, we comprehensively surveyed the literature using a systematic 
review to identify each reported case of the condition. The purpose of this 
study was to provide an exhaustive catalog of every published occurrence to date 
to identify and discuss trends, commonalities, and differences among them. Our 
results revealed distinct characteristics for the various etiologies of this 
phenomenon in addition to a shared pathophysiologic pathway among them.

Copyright © 2023 by North American Neuro-Ophthalmology Society.

DOI: 10.1097/WNO.0000000000002032
PMID: 37938052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest.