---
reference_id: "PMID:14988809"
title: A dual phenotype of periventricular nodular heterotopia and frontometaphyseal dysplasia in one patient caused by a single FLNA mutation leading to two functionally different aberrant transcripts.
authors:
- Zenker M
- Rauch A
- Winterpacht A
- Tagariello A
- Kraus C
- Rupprecht T
- Sticht H
- Reis A
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1086/383094
keywords:
- Alternative Splicing/genetics
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Contractile Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Filamins
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- Humans
- "Microfilament Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Nervous System Diseases/genetics
- Phenotype
- Point Mutation/genetics
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A dual phenotype of periventricular nodular heterotopia and frontometaphyseal dysplasia in one patient caused by a single FLNA mutation leading to two functionally different aberrant transcripts.
**Authors:** Zenker M, Rauch A, Winterpacht A, Tagariello A, Kraus C, Rupprecht T, Sticht H, Reis A
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1086/383094](https://doi.org/10.1086/383094)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2004 Apr;74(4):731-7. doi: 10.1086/383094. Epub 2004 Feb 25.

A dual phenotype of periventricular nodular heterotopia and frontometaphyseal 
dysplasia in one patient caused by a single FLNA mutation leading to two 
functionally different aberrant transcripts.

Zenker M(1), Rauch A, Winterpacht A, Tagariello A, Kraus C, Rupprecht T, Sticht 
H, Reis A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany. 
mzenker@humgenet.uni-erlangen.de

Two disorders, periventricular nodular heterotopia (PVNH) and a group of 
skeletal dysplasias belonging to the oto-palato-digital (OPD) spectrum, are 
caused by FLNA mutations. They are considered mutually exclusive because of the 
different presumed effects of the respective FLNA gene mutations, leading to 
loss of function (PVNH) and gain of function (OPD), respectively. We describe 
here the first patient manifesting PVNH in combination with frontometaphyseal 
dysplasia, a skeletal dysplasia of the OPD-spectrum. A novel de novo mutation, 
7315C-->A in exon 45 of the FLNA gene, was identified. It leads to two aberrant 
transcripts, one full-length transcript with the point mutation causing a 
substitution of a highly conserved leucine residue (L2439M) and a second 
shortened transcript lacking 21 bp due to the creation of an ectopic splice 
donor site in exon 45. We propose that the dual phenotype is caused by two 
functionally different, aberrant filamin A proteins and therefore represents an 
exceptional model case of allelic gain-of-function and loss-of-function 
phenotypes due to a single mutational event.

DOI: 10.1086/383094
PMCID: PMC1181949
PMID: 14988809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]