---
reference_id: "PMID:12355089"
title: ASPM is a major determinant of cerebral cortical size.
authors:
- Bond J
- Roberts E
- Mochida GH
- Hampshire DJ
- Scott S
- Askham JM
- Springell K
- Mahadevan M
- Crow YJ
- Markham AF
- Walsh CA
- Woods CG
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1038/ng995
keywords:
- Anthropometry
- "Blotting, Northern"
- "Cerebral Cortex/anatomy & histology"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Drosophila Proteins
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ASPM is a major determinant of cerebral cortical size.
**Authors:** Bond J, Roberts E, Mochida GH, Hampshire DJ, Scott S, Askham JM, Springell K, Mahadevan M, Crow YJ, Markham AF, Walsh CA, Woods CG
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng995](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng995)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2002 Oct;32(2):316-20. doi: 10.1038/ng995. Epub 2002 Sep 23.

ASPM is a major determinant of cerebral cortical size.

Bond J(1), Roberts E, Mochida GH, Hampshire DJ, Scott S, Askham JM, Springell K, 
Mahadevan M, Crow YJ, Markham AF, Walsh CA, Woods CG.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, University of Leeds, St. James's University 
Hospital, Beckett Street, Leeds LS9 7TF, UK.

One of the most notable trends in mammalian evolution is the massive increase in 
size of the cerebral cortex, especially in primates. Humans with autosomal 
recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH) show a small but otherwise grossly normal 
cerebral cortex associated with mild to moderate mental retardation. Genes 
linked to this condition offer potential insights into the development and 
evolution of the cerebral cortex. Here we show that the most common cause of 
MCPH is homozygous mutation of ASPM, the human ortholog of the Drosophila 
melanogaster abnormal spindle gene (asp), which is essential for normal mitotic 
spindle function in embryonic neuroblasts. The mouse gene Aspm is expressed 
specifically in the primary sites of prenatal cerebral cortical neurogenesis. 
Notably, the predicted ASPM proteins encode systematically larger numbers of 
repeated 'IQ' domains between flies, mice and humans, with the predominant 
difference between Aspm and ASPM being a single large insertion coding for IQ 
domains. Our results and evolutionary considerations suggest that brain size is 
controlled in part through modulation of mitotic spindle activity in neuronal 
progenitor cells.

DOI: 10.1038/ng995
PMID: 12355089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]