---
reference_id: "PMID:23331413"
title: "Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia type III: a review of the phenotypic and genotypic characteristics."
authors:
- Fujioka S
- Sundal C
- Wszolek ZK
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-14
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Exercise
- Genotype
- Humans
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Prevalence
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/classification, diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- Trinucleotide Repeats
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia type III: a review of the phenotypic and genotypic characteristics.
**Authors:** Fujioka S, Sundal C, Wszolek ZK
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-8-14](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-8-14)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013 Jan 18;8:14. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-14.

Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia type III: a review of the phenotypic and 
genotypic characteristics.

Fujioka S(1), Sundal C, Wszolek ZK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology at Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road Cannaday Bldg 
2-E, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.

Autosomal Dominant Cerebellar Ataxia (ADCA) Type III is a type of 
spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) classically characterized by pure cerebellar ataxia 
and occasionally by non-cerebellar signs such as pyramidal signs, 
ophthalmoplegia, and tremor. The onset of symptoms typically occurs in 
adulthood; however, a minority of patients develop clinical features in 
adolescence. The incidence of ADCA Type III is unknown. ADCA Type III consists 
of six subtypes, SCA5, SCA6, SCA11, SCA26, SCA30, and SCA31. The subtype SCA6 is 
the most common. These subtypes are associated with four causative genes and two 
loci. The severity of symptoms and age of onset can vary between each SCA 
subtype and even between families with the same subtype. SCA5 and SCA11 are 
caused by specific gene mutations such as missense, inframe deletions, and 
frameshift insertions or deletions. SCA6 is caused by trinucleotide CAG repeat 
expansions encoding large uninterrupted glutamine tracts. SCA31 is caused by 
repeat expansions that fall outside of the protein-coding region of the disease 
gene. Currently, there are no specific gene mutations associated with SCA26 or 
SCA30, though there is a confirmed locus for each subtype. This disease is 
mainly diagnosed via genetic testing; however, differential diagnoses include 
pure cerebellar ataxia and non-cerebellar features in addition to ataxia. 
Although not fatal, ADCA Type III may cause dysphagia and falls, which reduce 
the quality of life of the patients and may in turn shorten the lifespan. The 
therapy for ADCA Type III is supportive and includes occupational and speech 
modalities. There is no cure for ADCA Type III, but a number of recent studies 
have highlighted novel therapies, which bring hope for future curative 
treatments.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-14
PMCID: PMC3558377
PMID: 23331413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]