---
reference_id: "PMID:29427105"
title: Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 17 (SCA17).
authors:
- Toyoshima Y
- Takahashi H
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-71779-1_10
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "TATA-Box Binding Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 17 (SCA17).
**Authors:** Toyoshima Y, Takahashi H
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-319-71779-1_10](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71779-1_10)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2018;1049:219-231. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-71779-1_10.

Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 17 (SCA17).

Toyoshima Y(1), Takahashi H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Brain Research Institute, University of Niigata,
1-757 Asahimachi-dori, Chuo-ku, Niigata, Japan. yasuko@bri.niigata-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Pathology, Brain Research Institute, University of Niigata,
1-757 Asahimachi-dori, Chuo-ku, Niigata, Japan.

In 1999, a polyglutamine expansion was identified in the transcription factor
TATA-binding protein (TBP) in a patient with ataxia with negative family
history. Subsequently, CAG/CAA repeat expansions in the TBP gene were identified
in families with spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA), establishing this repeat
expansion as the underlying mutation in SCA type 17 (SCA17). There are several
characteristic differences between SCA17 and other polyglutamine diseases.
First, SCA17 shows a complex and variable clinical phenotype, in some cases
overlapping that of Huntington's disease. Second, compared to the other SCA
subtypes caused by expanded trinucleotide repeats, anticipation in SCA17
kindreds is rare because of the characteristic structure of the TBP gene. And
thirdly, SCA17 patients often have diagnostic problems that may arise from
non-penetrance. Because the gap between normal and abnormal repeat numbers is
very narrow, it is difficult to determine a cutoff value for pathologic CAG
repeat number in SCA17. Herein, we review the clinical, genetic and pathologic
features of SCA17.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-71779-1_10
PMID: 29427105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
