---
reference_id: "PMID:32873218"
title: "Is Kimura's disease associated with juvenile temporal arteritis? A case report and literature review of all juvenile temporal arteritis cases."
authors:
- Tomizuka T
- Kikuchi H
- Asako K
- Tsukui D
- Kimura Y
- Kikuchi Y
- Sasajima Y
- Kono H
journal: Mod Rheumatol Case Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/24725625.2020.1818366
keywords:
- Adult
- Asian People
- Ear Auricle/pathology
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/complications, pathology"
- Humans
- "Kimura Disease/complications, pathology"
- Male
- Temporal Arteries/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is Kimura's disease associated with juvenile temporal arteritis? A case report and literature review of all juvenile temporal arteritis cases.
**Authors:** Tomizuka T, Kikuchi H, Asako K, Tsukui D, Kimura Y, Kikuchi Y, Sasajima Y, Kono H
**Journal:** Mod Rheumatol Case Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/24725625.2020.1818366](https://doi.org/10.1080/24725625.2020.1818366)

## Content

1. Mod Rheumatol Case Rep. 2021 Jan;5(1):123-129. doi:
10.1080/24725625.2020.1818366. Epub 2020 Sep 28.

Is Kimura's disease associated with juvenile temporal arteritis? A case report
and literature review of all juvenile temporal arteritis cases.

Tomizuka T(1), Kikuchi H(1), Asako K(1), Tsukui D(1), Kimura Y(1), Kikuchi Y(2),
Sasajima Y(2), Kono H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.
(2)Department of Pathology, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Both juvenile temporal arteritis (JTA) and Kimura's disease are eosinophilic
inflammatory conditions but exhibit different clinical manifestations. Here, we
describe a case involving a 40-year-old man who developed JTA secondary to
Kimura's disease. Approximately 3 years before admission, masses appeared on
both posterior auricles. A biopsy of the right posterior auricle mass led to a
diagnosis of Kimura's disease. Approximately 4 months before admission, both
masses increased in size, and almost simultaneously, the left temporal artery
became distended. Histopathology of a biopsy of the left temporal artery
revealed inflammatory findings with marked eosinophil infiltration and
significant intimal hyperplasia with stenosis of the vascular lumen, indicating
JTA. An analysis of the 48 reported cases of JTA, identified in a literature
review, and the present case, revealed that Kimura's disease was detected in 6
cases, all of which involved Asians. In conclusion, this case and the literature
review suggest that JTA can be accompanied by another eosinophilic
inflammation-based disorder, Kimura's disease, particularly in Asians. This
newly highlighted relationship between JTA and Kimura's disease could lead to a
better understanding of JTA, which is an extremely rare disease.

DOI: 10.1080/24725625.2020.1818366
PMID: 32873218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]