---
reference_id: "PMID:24635486"
title: "C-reactive protein in Crohn's disease: how informative is it?"
authors:
- Magro F
- Sousa P
- Ministro P
journal: Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1586/17474124.2014.893821
content_type: abstract_only
---

# C-reactive protein in Crohn's disease: how informative is it?
**Authors:** Magro F, Sousa P, Ministro P
**Journal:** Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1586/17474124.2014.893821](https://doi.org/10.1586/17474124.2014.893821)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014 May;8(4):393-408. doi: 
10.1586/17474124.2014.893821. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

C-reactive protein in Crohn's disease: how informative is it?

Magro F(1), Sousa P, Ministro P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Porto, Alameda Prof. Hernani Monteiro, 420-319 Porto, Portugal.

C-reactive protein (CRP) is an important acute-phase marker, produced mainly in 
the liver. Its production by mesenteric adipocytes has been recently stressed in 
Crohn's disease (CD). There are many factors affecting CRP levels, both 
environmental and genetics. The short-life of this biomarker makes it of 
pertinent use in the assessment of inflammation. There are inconsistent results 
concerning the association of clinical activity indices, mucosal healing, 
histological activity and CRP. This review summarizes the role of CRP in CD, 
namely its importance in the differential diagnosis of CD; its relationship with 
clinical activity indices, other markers of inflammation and endoscopic and 
radiological cross sectional imaging; prediction of response to anti-TNF 
treatment and prediction of outcome.

DOI: 10.1586/17474124.2014.893821
PMID: 24635486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]