---
reference_id: "PMID:38961493"
title: "Screening primary carnitine deficiency in 10 million Chinese newborns: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Zhou J
- Li G
- Zeng Y
- Qiu X
- Zhao P
- Huang T
- Wang X
- Luo J
- Lin N
- Xu L
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03267-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Screening primary carnitine deficiency in 10 million Chinese newborns: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Zhou J, Li G, Zeng Y, Qiu X, Zhao P, Huang T, Wang X, Luo J, Lin N, Xu L
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03267-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03267-x)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Jul 3;19(1):248. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03267-x.

Screening primary carnitine deficiency in 10 million Chinese newborns: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Zhou J(#)(1), Li G(#)(2), Zeng Y(#)(1), Qiu X(1), Zhao P(1), Huang T(1), Wang 
X(3), Luo J(4), Lin N(5), Xu L(6).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetic Diagnosis and Therapy Center, Fujian Key Laboratory for 
Prenatal Diagnosis and Birth Defect, Fujian Maternity and Child Hospital College 
of Clinical Medicine for Obstetrics & Gynecology and Pediatrics, Fujian Medical 
University, Fuzhou, 350001, Fujian Province, China.
(2)Department of Preventive Medicine, School of Public Health, Fujian Medical 
University, Fuzhou, 350122, Fujian Province, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Changdu Maternity and Child Hospital, 
Tibet Autonomous Region, Changdu, 854085, China.
(4)Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, Fujian Maternity and Child Hospital 
College of Clinical Medicine for Obstetrics & Gynecology and Pediatrics, Fujian 
Medical University, Fuzhou, 350001, Fujian Province, China. 
luojinying2021@fjmu.edu.cn.
(5)Medical Genetic Diagnosis and Therapy Center, Fujian Key Laboratory for 
Prenatal Diagnosis and Birth Defect, Fujian Maternity and Child Hospital College 
of Clinical Medicine for Obstetrics & Gynecology and Pediatrics, Fujian Medical 
University, Fuzhou, 350001, Fujian Province, China. linna1088@fjmu.edu.cn.
(6)Medical Genetic Diagnosis and Therapy Center, Fujian Key Laboratory for 
Prenatal Diagnosis and Birth Defect, Fujian Maternity and Child Hospital College 
of Clinical Medicine for Obstetrics & Gynecology and Pediatrics, Fujian Medical 
University, Fuzhou, 350001, Fujian Province, China. xiliangpu@fjmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Primary carnitine deficiency (PCD) is a rare autosomal recessive 
fatty acid oxidation disorder caused by variants in SLC22A5, with its prevalence 
and SLC22A5 gene mutation spectrum varying across races and regions. This study 
aimed to systematically analyze the incidence of PCD in China and delineate 
regional differences in the prevalence of PCD and SLC22A5 gene variants.
METHODS: PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, and Chinese databases were searched up 
to November 2023. Following quality assessment and data extraction, a 
meta-analysis was performed on screening results for PCD among Chinese newborns.
RESULTS: After reviewing 1,889 articles, 22 studies involving 9,958,380 newborns 
and 476 PCD cases were included. Of the 476 patients with PCD, 469 underwent 
genetic diagnosis, revealing 890 variants of 934 alleles of SLC22A5, among which 
107 different variants were detected. The meta-analysis showed that the 
prevalence of PCD in China was 0.05‰ [95%CI, (0.04‰, 0.06‰)] or 1/20 000 [95%CI, 
(1/16 667, 1/25 000)]. Subgroup analyses revealed a higher incidence in southern 
China [0.07‰, 95%CI, (0.05‰, 0.08‰)] than in northern China [0.02‰, 95%CI, 
(0.02‰, 0.03‰)] (P < 0.001). Furthermore, the result of the meta-analysis showed 
that the frequency of the variant with c.1400C > G, c.51C > G, c.760C > T, 
c.338G > A, and c.428C > T were 45% [95%CI, (34%, 59%)], 26% [95%CI, (22%, 
31%)], 14% [95%CI, (10%, 20%)], 6% [95%CI, (4%, 8%)], and 5% [95%CI, (4%, 8%)], 
respectively. Among the subgroup analyses, the variant frequency of c.1400C > G 
in southern China [39%, 95%CI, (29%, 53%)] was significantly lower than that in 
northern China [79‰, 95%CI, (47‰, 135‰)] (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: This study systematically analyzed PCD prevalence and identified 
common SLC22A5 gene variants in the Chinese population. The findings provide 
valuable epidemiological insights and guidance for future PCD screening effects 
in newborns.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03267-x
PMCID: PMC11220949
PMID: 38961493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.