---
reference_id: "PMID:32538895"
title: Human CRY1 variants associate with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
authors:
- Onat OE
- Kars ME
- Gül Ş
- Bilguvar K
- Wu Y
- Özhan A
- Aydın C
- Başak AN
- Trusso MA
- Goracci A
- Fallerini C
- Renieri A
- Casanova JL
- Itan Y
- Atbaşoğlu CE
- Saka MC
- Kavaklı İH
- Özçelik T
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1172/JCI135500
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human CRY1 variants associate with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
**Authors:** Onat OE, Kars ME, Gül Ş, Bilguvar K, Wu Y, Özhan A, Aydın C, Başak AN, Trusso MA, Goracci A, Fallerini C, Renieri A, Casanova JL, Itan Y, Atbaşoğlu CE, Saka MC, Kavaklı İH, Özçelik T
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI135500](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI135500)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2020 Jul 1;130(7):3885-3900. doi: 10.1172/JCI135500.

Human CRY1 variants associate with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

Onat OE(1), Kars ME(1), Gül Ş(2)(3), Bilguvar K(4), Wu Y(5), Özhan A(1), Aydın 
C(2)(3), Başak AN(6), Trusso MA(7), Goracci A(7), Fallerini C(8), Renieri 
A(8)(9), Casanova JL(10)(11)(12)(13)(14), Itan Y(5)(15), Atbaşoğlu CE(16), Saka 
MC(16), Kavaklı İH(2), Özçelik T(1)(17)(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bilkent University, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(2)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering and.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Koç University, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(4)Department of Genetics, Yale Center for Genome Analysis, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(5)Charles Bronfman Institute for Personalized Medicine, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(6)Neurodegeneration Research Laboratory, Suna and Inan Kıraç Foundation, 
KUTTAM, Koç University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(7)Division of Psychiatry, Department of Molecular Medicine and Development, 
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy.
(8)Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
(9)Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy.
(10)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
Branch, Rockefeller University, New York, New York, USA.
(11)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch INSERM 
U1163, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, Paris, France.
(12)Imagine Institute, University of Paris, Paris, France.
(13)Pediatric Immunology-Hematology Unit, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, 
Paris, France.
(14)Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI), Rockefeller University, New York, 
New York, USA.
(15)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(16)Department of Psychiatry, Ankara University Medical School, Ankara, Turkey.
(17)Neuroscience Program, Graduate School of Engineering and Science, and.
(18)Institute of Materials Science and Nanotechnology, National Nanotechnology 
Research Center (UNAM), Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey.

Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common and heritable 
phenotype frequently accompanied by insomnia, anxiety, and depression. Here, 
using a reverse phenotyping approach, we report heterozygous coding variations 
in the core circadian clock gene cryptochrome 1 in 15 unrelated 
multigenerational families with combined ADHD and insomnia. The variants led to 
functional alterations in the circadian molecular rhythms, providing a 
mechanistic link to the behavioral symptoms. One variant, CRY1Δ11 c.1657+3A>C, 
is present in approximately 1% of Europeans, therefore standing out as a 
diagnostic and therapeutic marker. We showed by exome sequencing in an 
independent cohort of patients with combined ADHD and insomnia that 8 of 62 
patients and 0 of 369 controls carried CRY1Δ11. Also, we identified a variant, 
CRY1Δ6 c.825+1G>A, that shows reduced affinity for BMAL1/CLOCK and causes an 
arrhythmic phenotype. Genotype-phenotype correlation analysis revealed that this 
variant segregated with ADHD and delayed sleep phase disorder (DSPD) in the 
affected family. Finally, we found in a phenome-wide association study involving 
9438 unrelated adult Europeans that CRY1Δ11 was associated with major depressive 
disorder, insomnia, and anxiety. These results defined a distinctive group of 
circadian psychiatric phenotypes that we propose to designate as "circiatric" 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI135500
PMCID: PMC7324179
PMID: 32538895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.