---
reference_id: "PMID:16358218"
title: Diversity and functional consequences of germline and somatic PTPN11 mutations in human disease.
authors:
- Tartaglia M
- Martinelli S
- Stella L
- Bocchinfuso G
- Flex E
- Cordeddu V
- Zampino G
- Burgt Iv
- Palleschi A
- Petrucci TC
- Sorcini M
- Schoch C
- Foa R
- Emanuel PD
- Gelb BD
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1086/499925
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diversity and functional consequences of germline and somatic PTPN11 mutations in human disease.
**Authors:** Tartaglia M, Martinelli S, Stella L, Bocchinfuso G, Flex E, Cordeddu V, Zampino G, Burgt Iv, Palleschi A, Petrucci TC, Sorcini M, Schoch C, Foa R, Emanuel PD, Gelb BD
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1086/499925](https://doi.org/10.1086/499925)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Feb;78(2):279-90. doi: 10.1086/499925. Epub 2005 Dec 7.

Diversity and functional consequences of germline and somatic PTPN11 mutations 
in human disease.

Tartaglia M(1), Martinelli S, Stella L, Bocchinfuso G, Flex E, Cordeddu V, 
Zampino G, Burgt Iv, Palleschi A, Petrucci TC, Sorcini M, Schoch C, Foa R, 
Emanuel PD, Gelb BD.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Cellulare e Neuroscienze, Istituto Superiore di 
Sanita, Rome, Italy. mtartaglia@iss.it

Germline mutations in PTPN11, the gene encoding the protein tyrosine phosphatase 
SHP-2, cause Noonan syndrome (NS) and the clinically related LEOPARD syndrome 
(LS), whereas somatic mutations in the same gene contribute to leukemogenesis. 
On the basis of our previously gathered genetic and biochemical data, we 
proposed a model that splits NS- and leukemia-associated PTPN11 mutations into 
two major classes of activating lesions with differential perturbing effects on 
development and hematopoiesis. To test this model, we investigated further the 
diversity of germline and somatic PTPN11 mutations, delineated the association 
of those mutations with disease, characterized biochemically a panel of mutant 
SHP-2 proteins recurring in NS, LS, and leukemia, and performed molecular 
dynamics simulations to determine the structural effects of selected mutations. 
Our results document a strict correlation between the identity of the lesion and 
disease and demonstrate that NS-causative mutations have less potency for 
promoting SHP-2 gain of function than do leukemia-associated ones. Furthermore, 
we show that the recurrent LS-causing Y279C and T468M amino acid substitutions 
engender loss of SHP-2 catalytic activity, identifying a previously unrecognized 
behavior for this class of missense PTPN11 mutations.

DOI: 10.1086/499925
PMCID: PMC1380235
PMID: 16358218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]