---
reference_id: "PMID:25624138"
title: "[Ainhum and \"African acral keratoderma\": three cases]."
authors:
- Koudoukpo C
- Bourrat E
- Rausky J
- Yédomon H
- Bagot M
- Blanchet-Bardon C
- Petit A
journal: Ann Dermatol Venereol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.annder.2014.11.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Ainhum and "African acral keratoderma": three cases].
**Authors:** Koudoukpo C, Bourrat E, Rausky J, Yédomon H, Bagot M, Blanchet-Bardon C, Petit A
**Journal:** Ann Dermatol Venereol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.annder.2014.11.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annder.2014.11.013)

## Content

1. Ann Dermatol Venereol. 2015 Mar;142(3):170-5. doi:
10.1016/j.annder.2014.11.013.  Epub 2015 Jan 23.

[Ainhum and "African acral keratoderma": three cases].

[Article in French]

Koudoukpo C(1), Bourrat E(2), Rausky J(3), Yédomon H(4), Bagot M(1), 
Blanchet-Bardon C(1), Petit A(5).

Author information:
(1)Faculté de médecine, université de Parakou, BP 123, Parakou, Bénin.
(2)Service de dermatologie, hôpital Saint-Louis, AP-HP, 1, avenue 
Claude-Vellefaux, 75010 Paris, France.
(3)Service de chirurgie plastique, hôpital Saint-Louis, AP-HP, 1, avenue 
Claude-Vellefaux, 75010 Paris, France.
(4)Faculté des sciences de la santé de Cotonou, 01 BP188, Cotonou, Bénin.
(5)Service de dermatologie, hôpital Saint-Louis, AP-HP, 1, avenue 
Claude-Vellefaux, 75010 Paris, France. Electronic address: 
antoine.petit@sls.aphp.fr.

BACKGROUND: Ainhum, or spontaneous dactylitis, involves the formation of a 
gradual constriction in the digital-plantar fold of the fifth toe that leads, 
after several years, to autoamputation of the digit. This condition is 
classically distinguished from "true" ainhum, of unknown aetiology and affecting 
only subjects of African origin, from "pseudo-ainhum", resulting from different 
causes such as inflammatory constriction or constriction by a foreign body, and 
finally from ainhumoid palmoplantar keratoderma, which is of genetic origin and 
occurs for instance in Vohwinkel syndrome. Herein, we report three cases of 
ainhum in women of sub-Saharan African origin; in addition, all three subjects 
were also presenting various forms of hyperkeratosis of the hands and feet known 
to primarily affect subjects of African origin.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The three patients, aged 30, 48 and 44 years, were 
respectively from Mali, Guinea and Senegal. They had consulted a dermatologist 
for violent pain in the fifth toe, which frequently prevented sleep and was 
inexplicable despite several consultations, and even in one case in spite of 
surgical investigation. Once the diagnosis had been made, relief was promptly 
provided for all three patients through Z-plasty to remove the circular 
constriction around the toe in question. In addition to ainhum, the first 
patient was also presenting diffuse palmoplantar keratoderma, together with an 
aspect of acrokeratoelastoidosis on the edges of her hands and feet, and knuckle 
pads, while the second was presenting diffuse palmoplantar keratoderma and an 
aspect of marginal acrokeratoelastoidosis, and the third was presenting small 
knuckle pads.
DISCUSSION: A recent study has confirmed the high incidence of several forms of 
palmoplantar keratoderma of African origin, as well as frequent association of 
these different varieties with one another. These consist of diffuse keratoderma 
having a relatively non-specific aspect, keratoderma punctata of the palmar 
creases, marginal keratoderma known also as focal acral hyperkeratosis, and 
acrokeratoelastoidosis, despite the absence of histological evidence, and 
finally, inverted keratoderma, i.e. affecting the dorsal aspects of the 
extremities, such as knuckle pads. In the three cases presented here, ainhum was 
associated with these different forms of acral keratoderma seen chiefly in 
subjects of African origin.
CONCLUSION: So-called "true" ainhum may be included in a broader group of 
African acral keratoderma, further reinforcing the unity of this group. Genetic 
studies are required to enable validation and refinement of these clinical 
findings.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.annder.2014.11.013
PMID: 25624138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]