---
reference_id: "PMID:26843370"
title: "NGS in argininosuccinic aciduria detects a mutation (D145G) which drives alternative splicing of ASL: a case report study."
authors:
- Wen W
- Yin D
- Huang F
- Guo M
- Tian T
- Zhu H
- Yang Y
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s12881-016-0273-7
keywords:
- Alternative Splicing
- Ammonia/blood
- Argininosuccinate Lyase/genetics
- "Argininosuccinic Aciduria/diagnosis, genetics"
- Asian People/genetics
- China
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exons
- Genetic Testing
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NGS in argininosuccinic aciduria detects a mutation (D145G) which drives alternative splicing of ASL: a case report study.
**Authors:** Wen W, Yin D, Huang F, Guo M, Tian T, Zhu H, Yang Y
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12881-016-0273-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12881-016-0273-7)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2016 Feb 3;17:9. doi: 10.1186/s12881-016-0273-7.

NGS in argininosuccinic aciduria detects a mutation (D145G) which drives
alternative splicing of ASL: a case report study.

Wen W(1), Yin D(2)(3), Huang F(4), Guo M(5), Tian T(6)(7), Zhu H(8)(9), Yang
Y(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Neonatal Screening Centre, Shenzhen Maternity and Child Healthcare Hospital,
No. 3012, Fuqiang Road, Futian District, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, China.
wenwei1087@sina.com.
(2)BGI-Wuhan, Wuhan, 430075, China. yindan@genomics.cn.
(3)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, 518083, China. yindan@genomics.cn.
(4)Neonatal Screening Centre, Shenzhen Maternity and Child Healthcare Hospital,
No. 3012, Fuqiang Road, Futian District, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, China.
1966079076@qq.com.
(5)Neonatal Screening Centre, Shenzhen Maternity and Child Healthcare Hospital,
No. 3012, Fuqiang Road, Futian District, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, China.
szfyxszx@163.com.
(6)BGI-Wuhan, Wuhan, 430075, China. tiantian1@genomics.cn.
(7)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, 518083, China. tiantian1@genomics.cn.
(8)BGI-Wuhan, Wuhan, 430075, China. 1442353589@qq.com.
(9)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, 518083, China. 1442353589@qq.com.
(10)BGI-Wuhan, Wuhan, 430075, China. yangyun@genomics.cn.
(11)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, 518083, China. yangyun@genomics.cn.
(12)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 450052, China. yangyun@genomics.cn.

BACKGROUND: Argininosuccinic aciduria (ASAuria; OMIM 207900) is a rare autosomal
recessive heterogeneous urea cycle disorder, which leads to the accumulation of
argininosuccinic acid in the blood and urine. We aimed to perform genetic test
to the patient and help clinician to diagnose precisely.
CASE PRESENTATION: In this study, we use next generation sequencing (NGS) and
exon trapping to analysis the family members. We identified compound
heterozygous mutations of the argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) gene in a Chinese
Han ASAuria patient. The c.434A>G (p.(D145G)) mutation in exon 5 was shown by
exon trapping to select for the formation of an alternative transcript deleted
for exon 5. The c.1366C>T (p.(R456W)) mutation had been previously reported in
an Italian patient.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of a missense mutation driving alternative
splicing which results in the loss of exon 5 in ASAuria. This study also
demonstrates the value of NGS in the identification of mutations and molecular
diagnosis for ASAuria families.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-016-0273-7
PMCID: PMC4739340
PMID: 26843370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
