---
reference_id: "PMID:2469661"
title: Ovarian clear cell carcinoma. A clinicopathologic analysis of 44 cases.
authors:
- Montag AG
- Jenison EL
- Griffiths CT
- Welch WR
- Lavin PT
- Knapp RC
journal: Int J Gynecol Pathol
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1097/00004347-198906000-00001
keywords:
- Adenocarcinoma/pathology
- Adult
- Aged
- Female
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- Neoplasm Staging
- Ovarian Neoplasms/pathology
- Staining and Labeling
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ovarian clear cell carcinoma. A clinicopathologic analysis of 44 cases.
**Authors:** Montag AG, Jenison EL, Griffiths CT, Welch WR, Lavin PT, Knapp RC
**Journal:** Int J Gynecol Pathol (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00004347-198906000-00001](https://doi.org/10.1097/00004347-198906000-00001)

## Content

1. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 1989;8(2):85-96. doi: 10.1097/00004347-198906000-00001.

Ovarian clear cell carcinoma. A clinicopathologic analysis of 44 cases.

Montag AG(1), Jenison EL, Griffiths CT, Welch WR, Lavin PT, Knapp RC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

The clinical aspects and pathologic findings in 44 cases of pure clear cell
carcinoma of the ovary are presented. The patients ranged in age from 28 to 78
years (mean, 50.6 years); 54% were nulliparous. Thirty-three percent of the
patients had endometriosis in the involved ovary, and an additional 25% had
endometriosis only in sites distant from the tumor. Microscopically, three
architectural patterns (papillary, tubulocystic, and solid) and four cell types
(clear, hobnail, eosinophilic, and flattened) were seen. A predominant
tubulocystic architectural pattern was a good prognostic factor (p less than
0.01); however, no significant difference in survival by cell type was found.
Grading of the tumors by conventional architectural and cytologic criteria had
no predictive value for survival. Stage at presentation was the most important
prognostic factor (p less than 0.001), with a 5-year overall survival of 34% and
stage I survival of 55%. The poor stage I survival reflects the 15 patients
(34%) in the study with stage Iaii lesions. In the 25 patients who developed
recurrence, both distant organ involvement (40%) and lymph node involvement
(40%) were frequent. Ovarian clear cell carcinoma has unusual pathologic and
clinical features, and it represents a distinct histologic type of ovarian
carcinoma.

DOI: 10.1097/00004347-198906000-00001
PMID: 2469661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
