---
reference_id: "PMID:28569923"
title: Interplay between elevated cellular fibronectin and plasma fibrin clot properties in type 2 diabetes.
authors:
- Konieczyńska M
- Bryk AH
- Malinowski KP
- Draga K
- Undas A
journal: Thromb Haemost
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1160/TH17-04-0259
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interplay between elevated cellular fibronectin and plasma fibrin clot properties in type 2 diabetes.
**Authors:** Konieczyńska M, Bryk AH, Malinowski KP, Draga K, Undas A
**Journal:** Thromb Haemost (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1160/TH17-04-0259](https://doi.org/10.1160/TH17-04-0259)

## Content

1. Thromb Haemost. 2017 Aug 30;117(9):1671-1678. doi: 10.1160/TH17-04-0259. Epub 
2017 Jun 1.

Interplay between elevated cellular fibronectin and plasma fibrin clot 
properties in type 2 diabetes.

Konieczyńska M, Bryk AH, Malinowski KP, Draga K, Undas A(1).

Author information:
(1)Anetta Undas, MD, PhD, Institute of Cardiology, Jagiellonian University 
Medical College, 80 Pradnicka St., 31-202 Krakow, Poland, Tel.: +48 12 6143004, 
Fax: +48 12 6142120, E-mail: mmundas@cyf-kr.edu.pl.

Type 2 diabetes is associated with faster formation of poorly lysable, denser 
fibrin clots and elevated cellular fibronectin (cFn), a marker of vascular 
injury. We investigated whether cFn affects clot properties in type 2 diabetes. 
In 200 consecutive patients with type 2 diabetes and 100 control subjects 
matched for age and sex, we determined plasma cFn along with clot formation and 
degradation using turbidimetric and permeability assays. Diabetic patients had 
elevated cFn (median, 3.99 [interquartile range, 2.87-4.81] µg/ml]), increased 
clot density (MaxAbsC) and prolonged lysis time (LysT) compared with those 
without type 2 diabetes (all p<0.01). Diabetic patients with documented 
cardiovascular disease (CVD, n=127, 63.5 %) had increased cFn (4.53 [3.68-4.95] 
µg/ml), decreased clot permeability (Ks) and increased MaxAbsC compared with 
those without CVD (all p<0.001). Diabetic patients with cFn in the top quartile 
(>4.81 µg/ml) were two times more likely to have CVD compared with those in the 
lowest quartile (odds ratio 1.80, 95 % confidence interval 1.41-2.46, p<0.001). 
No differences in cFn were observed in relation to microvascular complications. 
After adjustment for potential confounders, cFn accounted for 10.2 % of variance 
in Ks, 18.2 % of variance in clot density and 10.2 % of variance in AUC in 
diabetic patients. This study shows that elevated cFn is associated with 
unfavourably modified clot properties in type 2 diabetes, especially with 
concomitant CVD, which indicates novel links between vascular injury and 
prothrombotic alterations in diabetes. Coagulation, cellular fibronectin, type 2 
diabetes, cardiovascular disease.

DOI: 10.1160/TH17-04-0259
PMID: 28569923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]