---
reference_id: "PMID:37567969"
title: "Early-onset gynecological tumors in DNA repair-deficient xeroderma pigmentosum group C patients: a case series."
authors:
- Yurchenko AA
- Fresneau B
- Borghese B
- Rajabi F
- Tata Z
- Genestie C
- Sarasin A
- Nikolaev SI
journal: Commun Med (Lond)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s43856-023-00341-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early-onset gynecological tumors in DNA repair-deficient xeroderma pigmentosum group C patients: a case series.
**Authors:** Yurchenko AA, Fresneau B, Borghese B, Rajabi F, Tata Z, Genestie C, Sarasin A, Nikolaev SI
**Journal:** Commun Med (Lond) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s43856-023-00341-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-023-00341-6)

## Content

1. Commun Med (Lond). 2023 Aug 11;3(1):109. doi: 10.1038/s43856-023-00341-6.

Early-onset gynecological tumors in DNA repair-deficient xeroderma pigmentosum
group C patients: a case series.

Yurchenko AA(1), Fresneau B(2)(3), Borghese B(4)(5)(6), Rajabi F(1), Tata Z(7),
Genestie C(8), Sarasin A(9), Nikolaev SI(10).

Author information:
(1)INSERM U981, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Université Paris Saclay,
Villejuif, France.
(2)Department of Children and Adolescents Oncology, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif,
France.
(3)Université Paris-Saclay, UVSQ, Inserm, CESP, Villejuif, France.
(4)Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, « Equipe labélisée Ligue Contre le Cancer
», CNRS SNC 5096, Sorbonne Université, Université de Paris Cité, INSERM, Paris,
France.
(5)Université de Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(6)Institut du Cancer Paris CARPEM, AP-HP, APHP Centre, Department of
Gynecological Surgery, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France.
(7)Liberal Endocrinologist, Algiers, Algeria.
(8)Departments of Pathology, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(9)CNRS UMR9019 Genome Integrity and Cancers, Gustave Roussy, Université
Paris-Saclay, Villejuif, France.
(10)INSERM U981, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Université Paris Saclay,
Villejuif, France. sergey.nikolaev@gustaveroussy.fr.

BACKGROUND: Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) is a group of rare hereditary disorders
with highly increased risk of skin tumors due to defective DNA repair. Recently
we reported 34-fold increased risk of internal tumors in XP patients in
comparison with general population. The molecular data and clinical practice on
the internal tumors treatment in XP patients is limited and scarcely represented
in the medical literature. In this work, we describe young patients with
constitutive biallelic deactivation of the XPC gene developing gynecological
tumors with somatic DICER1 mutations.
METHODS: Whole genome sequencing was used to analyze in detail somatic
mutational landscape and driver events of these rare tumors.
RESULTS: We describe five early-onset gynecological tumors in four xeroderma
pigmentosum group C (XP-C) young patients (11 to 19 years old) including vaginal
embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas in monozygotic twin sisters, juvenile granulosa-cell
tumor of the ovary and poorly differentiated stage IA Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor
in 19-years old patient, and FIGO stage IC1 tumor of ovary in 13-years old
patient. XP-C ovarian tumors harbor 4.4 times more single base substitutions
than sporadic tissue-matched cancers and demonstrate XP-C specific mutation
signature with strong transcriptional bias indicating inability of the cells to
repair bulky DNA lesions of unknown etiology. A special mode of treatment was
applied to avoid usage of chemotherapy which is toxic for XP patients.
CONCLUSIONS: XP-C status should be accounted for prevention and specific
treatment of gynecological tumors in young DNA repair-deficient XP patients.

Plain Language Summary: Xeroderma pigmentosum group C (XP-C) is a rare inherited
disorder resulting in a highly increased risk of skin and internal cancers due
to the inability to efficiently repair DNA. In this study, we described four
young XP-C patients who developed early-onset tumors affecting the female
reproductive organs. We describe how we cared for these patients in the clinic.
We looked at the genetic material within the tumors to better understand the
mechanisms through which these tumors developed. We observed high numbers of
specific types of changes in DNA, which are not typical for sporadic
(non-inherited) gynecological tumors, but are characteristic of internal XP-C
tumors. Further studies are needed to better understand the nature of these
changes. Our findings highlight the important role of DNA repair in human
tissues and cancer risk, and might inform future strategies for tumor prevention
in XP-C patients.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s43856-023-00341-6
PMCID: PMC10421935
PMID: 37567969

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
