---
reference_id: "PMID:21789665"
title: "Residual aganglionosis after pull-through operation for Hirschsprung's disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Friedmacher F
- Puri P
journal: Pediatr Surg Int
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s00383-011-2958-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Residual aganglionosis after pull-through operation for Hirschsprung's disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Friedmacher F, Puri P
**Journal:** Pediatr Surg Int (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00383-011-2958-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00383-011-2958-5)

## Content

1. Pediatr Surg Int. 2011 Oct;27(10):1053-7. doi: 10.1007/s00383-011-2958-5.

Residual aganglionosis after pull-through operation for Hirschsprung's disease: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Friedmacher F(1), Puri P.

Author information:
(1)National Childrens's Research Centre, Our Lady's Children's Hospital, 
Crumlin, Dublin 12, Ireland.

PURPOSE: Most patients with Hirschsprung's disease (HD) have a satisfactory 
outcome after pull-through (PT) operation. However, some children continue to 
have persistent bowel symptoms after the initial operation and may require redo 
PT. Redo PT operation in HD is usually indicated for anastomotic strictures or 
residual aganglionosis (RA). We designed this meta-analysis to determine the 
incidence and outcome of RA among patients with HD following PT operation.
METHODS: A meta-analysis of redo PT operations for HD reported in the literature 
between 1985 and 2011 was performed. Detailed information was recorded in 
patients with RA and transition-zone bowel (TZB), including recurrent bowel 
problems, histological findings on repeat rectal biopsy, type of redo PT 
operation and outcome.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine articles reported 555 patients with redo PT operations. 193 
(34.8%) patients demonstrated abnormal histological findings on rectal biopsy 
with 144 patients showing RA and 49 patients showing TZB. These 193 patients 
presented with persistent constipation (n = 135), recurrent enterocolitis 
(n = 45) and abnormal histology of the pulled-through bowel (n = 13). Mean age 
at redo PT was 4.4 years (range 4 months-17 years). Redo procedures were Duhamel 
(n = 57), transanal endorectal PT (n = 40), Soave (n = 35), Swenson (n = 10), 
posterior sagittal approach (n = 1) and not reported (n = 50). Follow-up 
information after redo PT was available in 134 (69.4%) patients and not 
available in 59 patients. Of the 134 patients, 99 (73.9%) patients had normal 
bowel habits, 19 patients had persistent constipation/soiling and 16 patients 
had recurrent enterocolitis.
CONCLUSION: This meta-analysis reveals that RA and TZB are the underlying causes 
of persistent bowel symptoms in one-third of all patients with HD requiring redo 
PT operation. Most patients have a satisfactory outcome after redo operation. 
Rectal biopsy should be performed in all patients with recurrent bowel problems 
after PT operation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00383-011-2958-5
PMID: 21789665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]