---
reference_id: "PMID:34411472"
title: "Current diagnosis and treatment of vestibular neuritis: a narrative review."
authors:
- Bae CH
- Na HG
- Choi YS
journal: J Yeungnam Med Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.12701/yujm.2021.01228
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current diagnosis and treatment of vestibular neuritis: a narrative review.
**Authors:** Bae CH, Na HG, Choi YS
**Journal:** J Yeungnam Med Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.12701/yujm.2021.01228](https://doi.org/10.12701/yujm.2021.01228)

## Content

1. J Yeungnam Med Sci. 2022 Apr;39(2):81-88. doi: 10.12701/yujm.2021.01228. Epub 
2021 Aug 9.

Current diagnosis and treatment of vestibular neuritis: a narrative review.

Bae CH(1), Na HG(1), Choi YS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Yeungnam University 
College of Medicine, Daegu, Korea.

Vertigo is the sensation of self-motion of the head or body when no self-motion 
is occurring or the sensation of distorted self-motion during an otherwise 
normal head movement. Representative peripheral vertigo disorders include benign 
paroxysmal positional vertigo, Ménière disease, and vestibular neuritis. 
Vestibular neuritis, also known as vestibular neuronitis, is the third most 
common peripheral vestibular disorder after benign paroxysmal positional vertigo 
and Ménière disease. The cause of vestibular neuritis remains unclear. However, 
a viral infection of the vestibular nerve or ischemia of the anterior vestibular 
artery is known to cause vestibular neuritis. In addition, recent studies on 
immune-mediated mechanisms as the cause of vestibular neuritis have been 
reported. The characteristic clinical features of vestibular neuritis are abrupt 
true-whirling vertigo lasting for more than 24 hours, and no presence of 
cochlear symptoms and other neurological symptoms and signs. To accurately 
diagnose vestibular neuritis, various diagnostic tests such as the head impulse 
test, bithermal caloric test, and vestibular-evoked myogenic potential test are 
conducted. Various treatments for vestibular neuritis have been reported, which 
are largely divided into symptomatic therapy, specific drug therapy, and 
vestibular rehabilitation therapy. Symptomatic therapies include generalized 
supportive care and administration of vestibular suppressants and antiemetics. 
Specific drug therapies include steroid therapy, antiviral therapy, and 
vasodilator therapy. Vestibular rehabilitation therapies include generalized 
vestibular and customized vestibular exercises.

DOI: 10.12701/yujm.2021.01228
PMCID: PMC8913909
PMID: 34411472

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest No potential conflicts of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.