---
reference_id: "PMID:12668617"
title: Sox10 and Pax3 physically interact to mediate activation of a conserved c-RET enhancer.
authors:
- Lang D
- Epstein JA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg107
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Conserved Sequence
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Enhancer Elements, Genetic"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Genotype
- "High Mobility Group Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mice
- Microphthalmia-Associated Transcription Factor
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- PAX3 Transcription Factor
- Paired Box Transcription Factors
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret
- "Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- SOXE Transcription Factors
- "Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sox10 and Pax3 physically interact to mediate activation of a conserved c-RET enhancer.
**Authors:** Lang D, Epstein JA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddg107](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddg107)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Apr 15;12(8):937-45. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg107.

Sox10 and Pax3 physically interact to mediate activation of a conserved c-RET
enhancer.

Lang D(1), Epstein JA.

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
421 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The neurocristopathies encompass a spectrum of developmental disorders
characterized by abnormalities of neural crest-derived structures. Neural crest
cells are pluripotent progenitors and the mechanisms by which specific cell-fate
decisions are regulated have emerged as an important field of study. Many
neurocristopathies are characterized by defects in melanocyte differentiation
that can result in pigmentation abnormalities and deafness. One example is
Waardenburg syndrome that can be caused by mutations in the PAX3, SOX10 or MITF
genes. Other neural crest-related disorders are associated with enteric ganglia
defects, such as those caused by mutations in the SOX10 or c-RET genes. The Pax3
and Sox10 transcription factors can directly regulate both MITF and c-RET. Here,
we show that Pax3 and Sox10 can physically interact and we map the interaction
domains. We show that this interaction contributes to Pax3 and Sox10 synergistic
activation of a conserved c-RET enhancer and it explains why Sox10 mutants that
cannot bind to DNA retain the ability to activate this enhancer in the presence
of Pax3. However, in the context of the MITF gene, Pax3 and Sox10 must each bind
independently to DNA in order to achieve synergy. This difference is consistent
with the different structures of the c-RET and MITF enhancers, and the different
mechanisms by which Pax3 binds to these enhancers. These observations explain
the phenotype in the mild form of Yemenite deaf-blind syndrome caused by
specific SOX10 mutations in the HMG box that abrogate DNA binding without
disrupting association with Pax3.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddg107
PMID: 12668617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
