---
reference_id: "PMID:34164212"
title: "Narrative Review: how long should patients with cough variant asthma or non-asthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis be treated?"
authors:
- Niimi A
journal: J Thorac Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.21037/jtd-20-2026
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Narrative Review: how long should patients with cough variant asthma or non-asthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis be treated?
**Authors:** Niimi A
**Journal:** J Thorac Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.21037/jtd-20-2026](https://doi.org/10.21037/jtd-20-2026)

## Content

1. J Thorac Dis. 2021 May;13(5):3197-3214. doi: 10.21037/jtd-20-2026.

Narrative Review: how long should patients with cough variant asthma or 
non-asthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis be treated?

Niimi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Nagoya 
City University, Nagoya, Japan.

The causes of chronic cough can be categorized into eosinophilic and 
noneosinophilic disorders, and approximately 30% to 50% of people with chronic 
cough have eosinophilic airway inflammation, the presence of which can be 
confirmed by sputum eosinophilia or elevated exhaled nitric-oxide levels. Cough 
variant asthma (CVA) is a phenotype of asthma which lacks wheezing or dyspnea, 
and consistently one of the most common causes of chronic cough worldwide. CVA 
and non-asthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis (NAEB) shares common feature such as 
chronic dry cough, eosinophilic inflammation, and development of chronic airflow 
obstruction (CAO) and asthma in a subset of patients. The distinctive 
characteristic of these conditions is the presence of airway hyperresponsiveness 
in CVA but not in NAEB. Coughing is responsive to bronchodilators such as 
beta-agonists in CVA, but such feature has not been clarified in NAEB. Inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICSs) are the first-line treatment, and leukotriene receptor 
antagonists are also effective, in patients with both CVA and NAEB. This review 
will give an outline of clinical and physiological features, and prognosis and 
its determinants of CVA and EBNA. Further, the rationale and evidence, despite 
limited, for the need of long-term treatment will be discussed. The development 
of airway remodeling due to mechanical stress to the airways exerted by 
long-standing coughing will also be discussed.

2021 Journal of Thoracic Disease. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd-20-2026
PMCID: PMC8182510
PMID: 34164212

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (Available at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/jtd-20-2026). The series “3rd International Cough 
Conference” was commissioned by the editorial office without any funding or 
sponsorship. Prof. Niimi serves as an editorial board member of Journal of 
Thoracic Disease. The authors have no other conflicts of interest to declare.