---
reference_id: "PMID:23201968"
title: "The incubation period of cholera: a systematic review."
authors:
- Azman AS
- Rudolph KE
- Cummings DA
- Lessler J
journal: J Infect
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2012.11.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The incubation period of cholera: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Azman AS, Rudolph KE, Cummings DA, Lessler J
**Journal:** J Infect (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jinf.2012.11.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2012.11.013)

## Content

1. J Infect. 2013 May;66(5):432-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2012.11.013. Epub 2012 Nov
 29.

The incubation period of cholera: a systematic review.

Azman AS(1), Rudolph KE, Cummings DA, Lessler J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. aazman@jhsph.edu

Comment in
    BMJ. 2023 Aug 14;382:1831. doi: 10.1136/bmj.p1831.

OBJECTIVES: Recent large cholera outbreaks highlight the need for improved 
understanding of the pathogenesis and epidemiology of cholera. The incubation 
period of cholera has important implications for clinical and public health 
decision-making, yet statements of the incubation period of cholera are often 
imprecise. Here we characterize the distribution of cholera's incubation period.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic review of the literature for statements of 
the incubation period of cholera and data that might aid in its estimation. We 
extracted individual-level data, parametrically estimated the distribution of 
toxigenic cholera's incubation period, and evaluated evidence for differences 
between strains.
RESULTS: The incubation period did not differ by a clinically significant margin 
between strains (except O1 El Tor Ogawa). We estimate the median incubation 
period of toxigenic cholera to be 1.4 days (95% CI, 1.3-1.6). Five percent of 
cholera cases will develop symptoms by 0.5 days (95% CI 0.4-0.5), and 95% by 4.4 
days (95% CI 3.9-5.0) after infection.
CONCLUSIONS: We recommend that cholera investigations use a recall period of at 
least five days to capture relevant exposures; significantly longer than recent 
risk factor studies from the Haitian epidemic. This characterization of 
cholera's incubation period can help improve clinical and public health practice 
and advance epidemiologic research.

Copyright © 2012 The British Infection Association. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinf.2012.11.013
PMCID: PMC3677557
PMID: 23201968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]