---
reference_id: "PMID:16773683"
title: "NOD2: ethnic and geographic differences."
authors:
- Cavanaugh J
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v12.i23.3673
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NOD2: ethnic and geographic differences.
**Authors:** Cavanaugh J
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v12.i23.3673](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v12.i23.3673)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2006 Jun 21;12(23):3673-7. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v12.i23.3673.

NOD2: ethnic and geographic differences.

Cavanaugh J(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Research Unit, ANU Medical School at the Canberra Hospital, 
Australian National University, Woden, ACT. juleen.cavanaugh@anu.edu.au

Investigations into the inheritance of the three risk alleles R702W, G908R and 
1007fsInsC in NOD2 associated with susceptibility to Crohn's disease have 
demonstrated a remarkable amount of heterogeneity across ethnicities and 
populations, with regional variation across Europe for example, suggesting local 
founder effects. In non-Caucasian populations Crohn's disease continues to 
increase in incidence but this increase appears not to be a consequence of 
variation in NOD2, further advancing the accumulating evidence for other 
susceptibility loci. Frequencies of the known alleles are compared across 
populations in health and disease and evidence for additional alleles in NOD2 is 
reviewed. Based on its position on chromosome 16 coincident with some other 
autoimmune disease susceptibility localizations, research has targeted NOD2 
variation as the potential cause of other autoimmune disorders. While these 
investigations have mostly returned negative findings, two diseases, Blau 
Syndrome and Graft versus Host Disease, have been shown to be caused by risk 
alleles in NOD2. As is frequent in complex disease investigations, some results 
await validation, but the identification of NOD2 and the differences within and 
across population raises intriguing questions about the population genetics of 
the variation at this locus.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v12.i23.3673
PMCID: PMC4087459
PMID: 16773683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]