---
reference_id: "PMID:39470529"
title: "Adult-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis misdiagnosed as autoimmune encephalitis and normal-pressure hydrocephalus: A 10-year case report and case-based review."
authors:
- Huang H
- Liao Y
- Yu Y
- Qin H
- Wei YZ
- Cao L
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000040248
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Diagnostic Errors
- Encephalitis/diagnosis
- Hashimoto Disease/diagnosis
- "Hydrocephalus, Normal Pressure/diagnosis"
- "Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/diagnosis, drug therapy, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis misdiagnosed as autoimmune encephalitis and normal-pressure hydrocephalus: A 10-year case report and case-based review.
**Authors:** Huang H, Liao Y, Yu Y, Qin H, Wei YZ, Cao L
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000040248](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000040248)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2024 Oct 25;103(43):e40248. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000040248.

Adult-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis misdiagnosed as autoimmune 
encephalitis and normal-pressure hydrocephalus: A 10-year case report and 
case-based review.

Huang H(1), Liao Y(2)(3), Yu Y(2)(3), Qin H(1), Wei YZ(1), Cao L(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Liuzhou People's Hospital, Liuzhou, Guangxi Zhuang 
Autonomous Region, China.
(2)School of Medicine, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen 
University, Shenzhen, China.
(4)Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of the Research and Development of Novel 
Pharmaceutical Preparations, Changsha Medical University, Changsha, Hunan 
Province, China.

RATIONALE: Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) are rare, fatal, inherited 
neurodegenerative disorders characterized by myoclonic epilepsy, cognitive 
decline, brain atrophy, and retinopathy. The pathogenesis and clinical 
manifestations of NCL are not well understood and frequently result in 
misdiagnosis and overtreatment. The aim of this case report and review is to 
improve our understanding of the clinical features and management of NCL.
PATIENT CONCERNS: A 36-year-old woman initially presented with refractory 
epilepsy.
DIAGNOSES: Initially diagnosed with autoimmune encephalitis, the patient was 
later diagnosed with normal-pressure hydrocephalus. A definitive diagnosis of 
adult-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (ANCL) was established after 10 years 
of observation, utilizing biopsy and genetic testing.
INTERVENTIONS: High-dose intravenous immunoglobulin and methylprednisolone were 
administered, along with the insertion of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt.
OUTCOMES: Despite various treatments, the patient's condition did not improve.
LESSONS: ANCL typically presents with the clinical triad of refractory seizures, 
progressive cognitive decline, and movement disorders. Neuroimaging often 
reveals progressive brain atrophy on magnetic resonance imaging, while 
electroencephalograms frequently show epileptiform discharges. The prognosis is 
generally poor. Improved understanding of ANCL from both clinical and 
radiological perspectives, coupled with early consideration of differential 
diagnoses, could minimize unnecessary interventions and optimize patient care.

Copyright © 2024 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000040248
PMCID: PMC11520998
PMID: 39470529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.