---
reference_id: "PMID:9518049"
title: "Cancer procoagulant: a factor X activator, tumor marker and growth factor from malignant tissue."
authors:
- Gordon SG
- Mielicki WP
journal: Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis
year: '1997'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cancer procoagulant: a factor X activator, tumor marker and growth factor from malignant tissue.
**Authors:** Gordon SG, Mielicki WP
**Journal:** Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis (1997)

## Content

1. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 1997 Mar;8(2):73-86.

Cancer procoagulant: a factor X activator, tumor marker and growth factor from 
malignant tissue.

Gordon SG(1), Mielicki WP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, 
Denver 80262, USA. stu.gordon#uchs.edu.

Hemostatic abnormalities associated with malignant disease led to the search for 
and discovery of a proteolytic enzyme that activated factor X in the blood 
coagulation cascade. It was named cancer procoagulant (CP). CP is a cysteine 
proteinase that is found in malignant and fetal (human amnion-chorion) tissue; 
it has not been found in normally differentiated tissue. It is a 
calcium-dependent, Mn2+ stimulated enzyme that has enhanced activity and 
inhibition in a reduced environment. This review presents a complete compilation 
and discussion of the known chemical and enzymatic characteristics of CP as well 
as many purification and assay procedures. Several unique properties of these 
procedures are described. Some problems and controversies are highlighted in 
each of the sections. An immunoassay for CP as a tumor marker and some of its 
potential applications in the diagnosis and monitoring of cancer are reviewed. 
Some therapeutic implications of CP are noted in light of the observation that 
antibodies to CP block the metastatic seeding of lung colonies in vivo and 
diminish the viability of tumor cells in vitro. Finally, comments about the 
relationship between tissue factor and CP in the malignant cells are provided.

PMID: 9518049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]