---
reference_id: "PMID:34599290"
title: Correction of a knock-in mouse model of acrodysostosis with gene therapy using a rAAV9-CAG-human PRKAR1A vector.
authors:
- Özgür-Günes Y
- Le Stunff C
- Chedik M
- Belot MP
- Becker PH
- Blouin V
- Bougnères P
journal: Gene Ther
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41434-021-00286-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Correction of a knock-in mouse model of acrodysostosis with gene therapy using a rAAV9-CAG-human PRKAR1A vector.
**Authors:** Özgür-Günes Y, Le Stunff C, Chedik M, Belot MP, Becker PH, Blouin V, Bougnères P
**Journal:** Gene Ther (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41434-021-00286-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41434-021-00286-2)

## Content

1. Gene Ther. 2022 Aug;29(7-8):441-448. doi: 10.1038/s41434-021-00286-2. Epub
2021  Oct 1.

Correction of a knock-in mouse model of acrodysostosis with gene therapy using a 
rAAV9-CAG-human PRKAR1A vector.

Özgür-Günes Y(#)(1)(2), Le Stunff C(#)(1)(2), Chedik M(1), Belot MP(3), Becker 
PH(4), Blouin V(5), Bougnères P(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)UMR1195 Inserm and Université Paris Saclay, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(2)MIRCen Institute, CEA, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.
(3)Therapy Design Consulting, Vincennes, France.
(4)Biochemistry Laboratory, Hôpital Bicêtre, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de 
Paris, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(5)Atlantic Gene Therapies, Nantes, France.
(6)UMR1195 Inserm and Université Paris Saclay, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. 
pierre.bougneres@therapydesignconsulting.com.
(7)MIRCen Institute, CEA, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France. 
pierre.bougneres@therapydesignconsulting.com.
(8)Therapy Design Consulting, Vincennes, France. 
pierre.bougneres@therapydesignconsulting.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Acrodysostosis is a rare skeletal dysplasia caused by loss-of-function mutations 
in the regulatory subunit of protein kinase A (PRKAR1A). In a knock-in mouse 
model (PRKAR1Awt/mut) expressing one copy of the recurrent R368X mutation, we 
tested the effects of a rAAV9-CAG-human PRKR1A (hPRKAR1A) vector intravenously 
administered at 4 weeks of age. Caudal vertebrae and tibial diaphyses contained 
0.52 ± 0.7 and 0.13 ± 0.3 vector genome per cell (VGC), respectively, at 10 
weeks of age and 0.22 ± 0.04 and 0.020 ± 0.04 at 16 weeks while renal cortex 
contained 0.57 ± 0.14 and 0.26 ± 0.05 VGC. Vector-mediated hPRKAR1A expression 
was found in growth plate chondrocytes, osteoclasts, osteoblasts, and kidney 
tubular cells. Chondrocyte architecture was restored in the growth plates. Body 
length, tail length, and body weight were improved in vector treated 
PRKAR1Awt/mut mice, not the bone length of their limbs. These results provide 
one of the few proofs for gene therapy efficacy in a mouse model of 
chondrodysplasia. In addition, the increased urinary cAMP of PRKAR1Awt/mut mice 
was corrected almost to normal. In conclusion, gene therapy with hPRKAR1A 
improved skeletal growth and kidney dysfunction, the hallmarks of acrodysostosis 
in R368X mutated mice and humans.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41434-021-00286-2
PMID: 34599290