---
reference_id: "PMID:32836175"
title: Cytokine biomarkers associated with clinical cases of acute flaccid myelitis.
authors:
- Weldon WC
- Zhao K
- Jost HA
- Hetzler K
- Ciomperlik-Patton J
- L Konopka-Anstadt J
- Steven Oberste M
journal: J Clin Virol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104591
keywords:
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Child
- Cytokines/metabolism
- "Enterovirus/isolation & purification"
- "Enterovirus Infections/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Humans
- "Myelitis/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Picornaviridae Infections/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Rhinovirus/isolation & purification"
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytokine biomarkers associated with clinical cases of acute flaccid myelitis.
**Authors:** Weldon WC, Zhao K, Jost HA, Hetzler K, Ciomperlik-Patton J, L Konopka-Anstadt J, Steven Oberste M
**Journal:** J Clin Virol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104591](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104591)

## Content

1. J Clin Virol. 2020 Oct;131:104591. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104591. Epub 2020
Aug  18.

Cytokine biomarkers associated with clinical cases of acute flaccid myelitis.

Weldon WC(1), Zhao K(2), Jost HA(2), Hetzler K(3), Ciomperlik-Patton J(2), L
Konopka-Anstadt J(2), Steven Oberste M(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Viral Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta GA, 30329, United States. Electronic address: wiw4@cdc.gov.
(2)Division of Viral Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta GA, 30329, United States.
(3)Cherokee Nation Assurance Contracted to Division of Viral Diseases, Atlanta
GA 30329, United States.

Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is a serious neurological illness first recognized
in the United States in 2014, with subsequent outbreaks every two years.
Following extensive etiologic testing by multiple laboratories of hundreds of
specimens collected from patients diagnosed with AFM, no consistent cause of AFM
has been identified. However, viruses, including enteroviruses, have been
implicated through detection in non-sterile site specimens and antibody studies.
Cytokines and chemokines play important roles in the modulation of the innate
and adaptive immune response to pathogens. In the current study, we measured
levels of cytokines and chemokines in serum and CSF collected from confirmed AFM
patients and non-AFM control patients, to identify unique biomarkers as
potential hallmarks of AFM pathogenesis. Analysis of ratios of cytokines and
chemokines in the CSF compared to the serum indicate that the pro-inflammatory
cytokines/chemokines IP-10 and IL-6 were significantly elevated in AFM patients
compared to non-AFM patients. These results may provide additional insight into
potential etiologies, pathogenic mechanisms, and treatments for AFM.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104591
PMCID: PMC9189760
PMID: 32836175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
