---
reference_id: "PMID:40444374"
title: "Acute flaccid myelitis in Europe between 2016 and 2023: indicating the need for better registration."
authors:
- Helfferich J
- Calvo C
- Alpeter E
- Andrés C
- Antón A
- Aubart M
- Bova SM
- Cabrerizo M
- von Eije K
- Fabiola S
- Felipe A
- Iordanova R
- Thomsen MK
- Knudsen PK
- van Loenen F
- Lopez N
- Mirand A
- Molenkamp R
- Midgley S
- Neves R
- Glomb LN
- Øverbø J
- Öztürk G
- Palminha P
- Viekilde Pfeiffer HC
- Prochazka B
- Ribeiro C
- Rodesch M
- Schuffenecker I
- Shetty J
- Siegert S
- Solberg SL
- Sulik A
- Türkdoğan D
- Ünver O
- Verweij J
- Vila J
- Vuorinen T
- Wickström R
- Fischer TK
- Harvala H
- Benschop KSM
journal: Euro Surveill
year: '2025'
doi: 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2025.30.21.2400579
keywords:
- Humans
- "Myelitis/epidemiology, diagnosis, virology"
- Europe/epidemiology
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/epidemiology, diagnosis, virology"
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/epidemiology, diagnosis, virology"
- Incidence
- "Enterovirus Infections/epidemiology, diagnosis, virology"
- Population Surveillance
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Male
- "Enterovirus D, Human/isolation & purification"
- Infant
- Female
- Disease Notification
- Registries
- Adolescent
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute flaccid myelitis in Europe between 2016 and 2023: indicating the need for better registration.
**Authors:** Helfferich J, Calvo C, Alpeter E, Andrés C, Antón A, Aubart M, Bova SM, Cabrerizo M, von Eije K, Fabiola S, Felipe A, Iordanova R, Thomsen MK, Knudsen PK, van Loenen F, Lopez N, Mirand A, Molenkamp R, Midgley S, Neves R, Glomb LN, Øverbø J, Öztürk G, Palminha P, Viekilde Pfeiffer HC, Prochazka B, Ribeiro C, Rodesch M, Schuffenecker I, Shetty J, Siegert S, Solberg SL, Sulik A, Türkdoğan D, Ünver O, Verweij J, Vila J, Vuorinen T, Wickström R, Fischer TK, Harvala H, Benschop KSM
**Journal:** Euro Surveill (2025)
**DOI:** [10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2025.30.21.2400579](https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2025.30.21.2400579)

## Content

1. Euro Surveill. 2025 May;30(21):2400579. doi:
10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2025.30.21.2400579.

Acute flaccid myelitis in Europe between 2016 and 2023: indicating the need for
better registration.

Helfferich J(1), Calvo C(2)(3), Alpeter E(4), Andrés C(2)(5), Antón A(2)(5),
Aubart M(6)(7), Bova SM(8), Cabrerizo M(9), von Eije K(10), Fabiola S(11)(12),
Felipe A(13)(14), Iordanova R(15)(16), Thomsen MK(17), Knudsen PK(18), van
Loenen F(10), Lopez N(19)(20), Mirand A(21), Molenkamp R(10), Midgley S(22),
Neves R(23), Glomb LN(24), Øverbø J(25), Öztürk G(26), Palminha P(23), Viekilde
Pfeiffer HC(27)(28), Prochazka B(29), Ribeiro C(23), Rodesch M(30),
Schuffenecker I(31), Shetty J(32), Siegert S(33), Solberg SL(34), Sulik A(35),
Türkdoğan D(26), Ünver O(26), Verweij J(36), Vila J(37)(38), Vuorinen T(39)(40),
Wickström R(41), Fischer TK(42)(43), Harvala H(44)(45)(39)(40), Benschop
KSM(46).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en red de Enfermedades Infecciosas
CIBERINFEC, Instituto Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Pediatric Infectious and Tropical Diseases Department, La Paz University
Hospital and Translational Research Network in Pediatric Infectious Diseases
(RITIP), Institute for Health Research IdiPAZ, Autonomous University of Madrid,
Madrid, Spain.
(4)Federal Department of Home Affairs FDHA, Federal Office of Public Health
FOPH, Division of Communicable Disease, Bern, Switzerland.
(5)Respiratory Viruses Unit, Virology Section, Microbiology Department, Vall
d'Hebron Hospital Universitari, Vall d'Hebron Institut of Research (VHIR), Vall
d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Pediatric Neurology Department, Necker-Enfants malades Hospital, AP-HP,
Paris, France.
(7)Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, University of Paris Cité, Institut
Imagine, Paris, France.
(8)Child Neurology Unit, Buzzi Children hospital, Milan, Italy.
(9)Polio/Enterovirus National Lab, National Centre of Microbiology, Instituto de
Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. CIBERESP and RITIP (Idipaz).
(10)Department of Viroscience, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.
(11)Division of General Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, Gynecology &
Obstetrics, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(12)Member of the SPSU (Swiss paediatric Surveillance Unit) committee,
Switzerland.
(13)Paediatric Neurology Research Group, Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca,
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(14)Paediatric Neurology Section, Children's Hospital, Vall d'Hebron Barcelona
Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(15)Department of Pediatrics UMHAT "St. George" - Plovdiv, Plovdiv, Bulgaria.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Plovdiv, Plovdiv, Bulgaria.
(17)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus,
Denmark.
(18)Department of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine and Department of
Paediatric Research, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(19)Centro Nacional de Epidemiología, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid,
Spain.
(20)CIBERESP, Dpto. Medicina Preventiva y Salud Pública, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(21)CHU Clermont-Ferrand, Centre National de référence des entéroviurs et
parechovirus-laboratoire coordonnateur, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(22)The Danish WHO National Reference Laboratory for Poliovirus, Section for
Virus Genomics, Department of Virus & Microbiological Preparedness, Division of
Infectious Disease Diagnostic Preparedness, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(23)National Reference Laboratory for Vaccine-Preventable Diseases, Department
of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Health, Doutor Ricardo Jorge,
Lisbon, Portugal.
(24)National Reference Laboratory for Enteroviruses, National Center for
Infectious and Parasitic Diseases, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(25)The Norwegian Institute of Public Health (NIPH), Oslo, Norway.
(26)Department of pediatric neurology, Marmara University, Istanbul, Türkiye.
(27)Department of Pediatrics, Copenhagen University Hospital Hvidovre,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(28)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(29)AGES, Wien, Austria.
(30)Department of pediatrics, Hôpital Erasme, Brussels, Belgium.
(31)Department of Virology, National Reference Centre for Enteroviruses and
Parechoviruses, Associated Laboratory, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CHU
Lyon, Lyon, France.
(32)Department of Paediatric Neurosciences, Royal Hospital for Children and
Young People, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(33)Division of Pediatric Pulmonology, Allergology and Endocrinology, Department
of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria.
(34)Department of Infection Control and Vaccines, Norwegian Institute of Public
Health, Oslo, Norway.
(35)Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Medical University of
Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland.
(36)Microvida Laboratory for Medical Microbiology and Immunology,
ElisabethTweesteden Hospital, Tilburg, The Netherlands.
(37)Infection and Immunity Research Group, Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca,
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(38)Paediatric Hospitalization Unit, Children's Hospital, Vall d'Hebron
Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(39)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Turku University Hospital, Turku,
Finland.
(40)Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(41)Neuropediatric Unit, Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska
Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(42)Department of Public Health, Section of Global Health, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(43)Department of Clinical Research, North Zealand University Hospital,
Hillerød, Denmark.
(44)Department of Infection and Immunity, University College of London, London,
United Kingdom.
(45)Microbiology Services, National Health Service (NHS) Blood and Transplant,
London, United Kingdom.
(46)Centre for Infectious Disease Control (CIb), National Institute for Public
Health and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, the Netherlands.

BackgroundAcute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is a rare polio-like condition affecting
mainly children and characterised by severe, often persistent, weakness. It is
one of several causes of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP), which manifests as acute
onset of limb weakness and reduced muscle tone. Some non-polio enteroviruses
(EV), such as EV-D68 may cause AFM. Little is known about AFM incidence in
Europe.AimWe aimed to better understand AFM incidence, aetiology and current
surveillance policies in Europe.MethodsIn 28 countries, members of the European
non-polio enterovirus network (ENPEN) and a newly established AFM network of
clinicians under ENPEN received a survey asking them how AFM surveillance was
performed in their countries in 2016-2023 and the numbers of AFM cases including
those diagnosed with EV-D68 infection during this period.ResultsSurveillance
information was obtained for 16 countries. In eight countries, AFP surveillance
initiated for poliomyelitis eradication was still ongoing, while non-polio AFM
cases were only systematically reported in Norway. The survey revealed 130 AFM
cases for 14 countries, with 48 (37%) EV-D68-laboratory-confirmed. Among the AFM
cases, 70% (n = 91) occurred in 2016, 2018 and 2022, when EV-D68 circulation
increased.ConclusionsThis report provides some indication of AFM case numbers in
Europe since 2016. However, as 15 of 16 countries with AFM monitoring
information lacked structural AFM surveillance, numbers should be interpreted
with caution. Knowing AFM incidence matters to determine its impact and detect
future outbreaks. Thus, the newly established clinical network will develop a
European AFM repository.

DOI: 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2025.30.21.2400579
PMCID: PMC12124111
PMID: 40444374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared.
