---
reference_id: "PMID:35728601"
title: Antiphospholipid Syndrome in Patients with Venous Thromboembolism.
authors:
- Pengo V
- Denas G
journal: Semin Thromb Hemost
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1055/s-0042-1749590
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiphospholipid Syndrome in Patients with Venous Thromboembolism.
**Authors:** Pengo V, Denas G
**Journal:** Semin Thromb Hemost (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0042-1749590](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0042-1749590)

## Content

1. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2023 Nov;49(8):833-839. doi: 10.1055/s-0042-1749590. Epub
 2022 Jun 21.

Antiphospholipid Syndrome in Patients with Venous Thromboembolism.

Pengo V(1)(2), Denas G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardio-Thoracic-Vascular Sciences and Public Health, Thrombosis 
Research Laboratory, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(2)Arianna Foundation on Anticoagulation, Bologna, Italy.

Unprovoked (or provoked by mild risk factors) venous thromboembolism (VTE) in 
young patients, VTE in uncommon sites, or cases of unexplained VTE recurrence 
may be positive for antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) and thus may be diagnosed 
with antiphospholipid syndrome (APS). The evaluation of aPL is standardized 
using immunological tests for anticardiolipin and anti-β2-glycoprotein I. The 
determination of functional antibodies (lupus anticoagulant) is less 
standardized, especially in patients on anticoagulant treatment. Patients 
positive for all the three tests are at high risk of recurrence, which, in turn, 
might lead to chronic obstruction of pulmonary vessels (chronic thromboembolic 
pulmonary hypertension). Randomized clinical trials have shown that 
triple-positive patients should be treated with vitamin K antagonists 
maintaining an international normalized ratio between 2 and 3. Whether patients 
with VTE and incomplete aPL profile can be treated with direct oral 
anticoagulants should be further investigated.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0042-1749590
PMID: 35728601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.