---
reference_id: "PMID:24331794"
title: Vasculitic neuropathies.
authors:
- Gwathmey KG
- Burns TM
- Collins MP
- Dyck PJ
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70236-9
keywords:
- Animals
- "Diabetic Neuropathies/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Humans
- "Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Vascular Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Vasculitis/diagnosis, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vasculitic neuropathies.
**Authors:** Gwathmey KG, Burns TM, Collins MP, Dyck PJ
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70236-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70236-9)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2014 Jan;13(1):67-82. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70236-9.

Vasculitic neuropathies.

Gwathmey KG(1), Burns TM(1), Collins MP(2), Dyck PJ(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA.
(2)Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
(3)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. Electronic address: dyck.pjames@mayo.edu.

The vasculitic neuropathies are a diverse group of disorders characterised by 
the acute-to-subacute onset of painful sensory and motor deficits that result 
from inflammatory destruction of nerve blood vessels and subsequent ischaemic 
injury. They are common in patients with primary systemic vasculitis and are 
seen in vasculitis secondary to disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis, viral 
infections, and diabetic inflammatory neuropathies. It is imperative that 
neurologists recognise these disorders to initiate treatment promptly and 
thereby prevent morbidity and mortality. To simplify the approach to patients 
with vasculitis of the peripheral nerves, a straightforward, dichotomous 
classification scheme can be used in which the vasculitic neuropathies are 
divided into two groups-nerve large arteriole vasculitis and nerve 
microvasculitis-on the basis of the size of the involved vessels. The size of 
the affected blood vessels correlates with the clinical course and prognosis in 
patients with vasculitic neuropathy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70236-9
PMID: 24331794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]