---
reference_id: "PMID:27409092"
title: "Irritable bowel syndrome and intestinal parasites: a view from South America."
authors:
- Vasquez-Rios G
- Machicado JD
- Terashima A
- Marcos LA
journal: Rev Gastroenterol Peru
year: '2016'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Irritable bowel syndrome and intestinal parasites: a view from South America.
**Authors:** Vasquez-Rios G, Machicado JD, Terashima A, Marcos LA
**Journal:** Rev Gastroenterol Peru (2016)

## Content

1. Rev Gastroenterol Peru. 2016 Apr-Jun;36(2):153-8.

Irritable bowel syndrome and intestinal parasites: a view from South America.

[Article in English]

Vasquez-Rios G(1), Machicado JD(2), Terashima A(1), Marcos LA(3).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Medicina Tropical Alexander von Humboldt, Universidad Peruana 
Cayetano Heredia. Lima, Perú.
(2)Instituto de Medicina Tropical Alexander von Humboldt, Universidad Peruana 
Cayetano Heredia. Lima, Perú; Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and 
Nutrition, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center. Pittsburgh, PA, USA..
(3)Instituto de Medicina Tropical Alexander von Humboldt, Universidad Peruana 
Cayetano Heredia. Lima, Perú; Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of 
Medicine (Division of Infectious Diseases) and Department of Molecular Genetics 
and Microbiology; Global Health Institute and Tropical Medicine. Stony Brook 
University. New York, USA.

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a functional gastrointestinal disorder of 
uncertain etiology. Several studies have proposed the possible role of 
intestinal parasites in the pathogenesis of IBS. We aimed to summarize the 
epidemiological studies that describe a possible link between intestinal 
parasites and IBS, with special interest in endemic areas for intestinal 
parasitism such as South America. A comprehensive review of the literature was 
conducted by using the keywords: irritable bowel syndrome, intestinal parasites, 
protozoan infection, soil-transmitted helminths and South America. Giardia 
lamblia may cause IBS symptoms that can persist several years after effective 
treatment. Dientamoeba fragilis can cause IBS-like symptoms, but low sensitive 
parasitological techniques may fail to detect it. Entamoeba histolytica can 
cause a chronic non-dysenteric colitis, but several studies have failed to find 
an association with IBS. The role of Blastocystis hominis in IBS remains 
controversial. In addition, epidemiological studies evaluating the effect of 
soil-transmitted helminths in IBS are scant. Symptoms elicited by intestinal 
parasites may resemble to those in IBS, especially in endemic areas such as 
South America, where both the prevalence of IBS and intestinal parasitism are 
high. Whether these organisms are the cause or contributing factors in IBS 
remains a subject of study. Routine parasitologicalexamination of stools in 
individuals who full-fit the criteria for IBS should be included upon initial 
assessment in endemic countries.

PMID: 27409092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]