---
reference_id: "PMID:35971085"
title: "Alveolar soft part sarcoma: progress toward improvement in survival? A population-based study."
authors:
- Fujiwara T
- Nakata E
- Kunisada T
- Ozaki T
- Kawai A
journal: BMC Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12885-022-09968-5
keywords:
- Doxorubicin/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sarcoma, Alveolar Soft Part/diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- Soft Tissue Neoplasms/pathology
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alveolar soft part sarcoma: progress toward improvement in survival? A population-based study.
**Authors:** Fujiwara T, Nakata E, Kunisada T, Ozaki T, Kawai A
**Journal:** BMC Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12885-022-09968-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-022-09968-5)

## Content

1. BMC Cancer. 2022 Aug 15;22(1):891. doi: 10.1186/s12885-022-09968-5.

Alveolar soft part sarcoma: progress toward improvement in survival? A 
population-based study.

Fujiwara T(1), Nakata E(2), Kunisada T(2), Ozaki T(2), Kawai A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kita-ku, 
Okayama, Japan. tomomedvn@okayama-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kita-ku, 
Okayama, Japan.
(3)Department of Musculoskeletal Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, 
5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Alveolar soft part sarcoma (ASPS) is a rare histological subtype of 
soft-tissue sarcoma, which remains refractory to conventional cytotoxic 
chemotherapy. We aimed to characterize ASPS and investigate whether the 
oncological outcome has improved over the past decade.
METHODS: One hundred and twenty patients with newly diagnosed ASPS from 2006 to 
2017, identified from the Bone and Soft-Tissue Tumor Registry in Japan, were 
analyzed retrospectively.
RESULTS: The study cohort comprised 34 (28%) patients with localized ASPS and 86 
(72%) with metastatic disease at presentation. The 5-year disease-specific 
survival (DSS) was 68% for all patients and 86% and 62% for localized and 
metastatic disease, respectively (p = 0.019). Metastasis at presentation was the 
only adverse prognostic factor for DSS (hazard ratio [HR]: 7.65; p = 0.048). 
Patients who were > 25 years (80%; p = 0.023), had deep-seated tumors (75%; 
p = 0.002), and tumors > 5 cm (5-10 cm, 81%; > 10 cm, 81%; p < 0.001) were more 
likely to have metastases at presentation. In patients with localized ASPS, 
adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy did not affect survival, and 13 patients 
(45%) developed distant metastases in the lung (n = 12, 92%) and brain (n = 2, 
15%). In patients with metastatic ASPS (lung, n = 85 [99%]; bone, n = 12 [14%]; 
and brain n = 9 [11%]), surgery for the primary or metastatic site did not 
affect survival. Prolonged survival was seen in patients who received pazopanib 
treatment (p = 0.045), but not in those who received doxorubicin-based cytotoxic 
chemotherapy. Overall, improved DSS for metastatic ASPS has been observed since 
2012 (5-year DSS, from 58 to 65%) when pazopanib was approved for advanced 
diseases, although without a statistically significant difference (p = 0.117).
CONCLUSION: The national study confirmed a unique feature of ASPS with frequent 
metastasis to the lung and brain but an indolent clinical course. An overall 
trend toward prolonged survival after the introduction of targeted therapy 
encourages continuous efforts to develop novel therapeutic options for this 
therapeutically resistant soft-tissue sarcoma.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-022-09968-5
PMCID: PMC9377116
PMID: 35971085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests