---
reference_id: "PMID:38110397"
title: "Genetic and epigenetic features of bilateral Wilms tumor predisposition in patients from the Children's Oncology Group AREN18B5-Q."
authors:
- Murphy AJ
- Cheng C
- Williams J
- Shaw TI
- Pinto EM
- Dieseldorff-Jones K
- Brzezinski J
- Renfro LA
- Tornwall B
- Huff V
- Hong AL
- Mullen EA
- Crompton B
- Dome JS
- Fernandez CV
- Geller JI
- Ehrlich PF
- Mulder H
- Oak N
- Maciezsek J
- Jablonowski CM
- Fleming AM
- Pichavaram P
- Morton CL
- Easton J
- Nichols KE
- Clay MR
- Santiago T
- Zhang J
- Yang J
- Zambetti GP
- Wang Z
- Davidoff AM
- Chen X
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-43730-0
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Wilms Tumor/genetics, pathology"
- Genotype
- DNA Methylation/genetics
- DNA
- "Kidney Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Genomic Imprinting
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic and epigenetic features of bilateral Wilms tumor predisposition in patients from the Children's Oncology Group AREN18B5-Q.
**Authors:** Murphy AJ, Cheng C, Williams J, Shaw TI, Pinto EM, Dieseldorff-Jones K, Brzezinski J, Renfro LA, Tornwall B, Huff V, Hong AL, Mullen EA, Crompton B, Dome JS, Fernandez CV, Geller JI, Ehrlich PF, Mulder H, Oak N, Maciezsek J, Jablonowski CM, Fleming AM, Pichavaram P, Morton CL, Easton J, Nichols KE, Clay MR, Santiago T, Zhang J, Yang J, Zambetti GP, Wang Z, Davidoff AM, Chen X
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-023-43730-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43730-0)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2023 Dec 18;14(1):8006. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-43730-0.

Genetic and epigenetic features of bilateral Wilms tumor predisposition in 
patients from the Children's Oncology Group AREN18B5-Q.

Murphy AJ(#)(1)(2), Cheng C(#)(3), Williams J(3), Shaw TI(3), Pinto EM(4), 
Dieseldorff-Jones K(3), Brzezinski J(5), Renfro LA(6), Tornwall B(7), Huff V(8), 
Hong AL(9), Mullen EA(10), Crompton B(10)(11), Dome JS(12), Fernandez CV(13), 
Geller JI(14), Ehrlich PF(15), Mulder H(3), Oak N(16), Maciezsek J(4), 
Jablonowski CM(17), Fleming AM(17)(18), Pichavaram P(17), Morton CL(17), Easton 
J(3), Nichols KE(16), Clay MR(19), Santiago T(4), Zhang J(3), Yang J(17), 
Zambetti GP(4), Wang Z(3)(20), Davidoff AM(17)(18), Chen X(21).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
38105, USA. andrew.murphy@stjude.org.
(2)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of Tennessee 
Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, 38105, USA. andrew.murphy@stjude.org.
(3)Department of Computational Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN, 38105, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
38105, USA.
(5)Department of Oncology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(6)Children's Oncology Group and Department of Population and Public Health 
Sciences, Keck School of Medicine of University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(7)Children's Oncology Group Statistics and Data Center, Monrovia, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Genetics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 
USA.
(10)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and 
Blood Disorders Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02215, USA.
(11)Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(12)Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Children's National Hospital, 
Department of Pediatrics, George Washington University School of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Washington, DC, USA.
(13)IWK Health Center and Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
(14)Division of Oncology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(15)Section of Pediatric Surgery, C.S. Mott Children's Hospital, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(16)Department of Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
USA.
(17)Department of Surgery, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
38105, USA.
(18)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of 
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, 38105, USA.
(19)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Anschutz, Aurora, CO, USA.
(20)Department of Epidemiology and Cancer Control, St. Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.
(21)Department of Computational Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN, 38105, USA. Xiang.chen@stjude.org.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    Res Sq. 2023 Mar 16:rs.3.rs-2675436. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-2675436/v1.

Developing synchronous bilateral Wilms tumor suggests an underlying (epi)genetic 
predisposition. Here, we evaluate this predisposition in 68 patients using whole 
exome or genome sequencing (n = 85 tumors from 61 patients with matched germline 
blood DNA), RNA-seq (n = 99 tumors), and DNA methylation analysis (n = 61 
peripheral blood, n = 29 non-diseased kidney, n = 99 tumors). We determine the 
predominant events for bilateral Wilms tumor predisposition: 1)pre-zygotic 
germline genetic variants readily detectable in blood DNA [WT1 (14.8%), NYNRIN 
(6.6%), TRIM28 (5%), and BRCA-related genes (5%)] or 2)post-zygotic epigenetic 
hypermethylation at 11p15.5 H19/ICR1 that may require analysis of multiple 
tissue types for diagnosis. Of 99 total tumor specimens, 16 (16.1%) have 11p15.5 
normal retention of imprinting, 25 (25.2%) have 11p15.5 copy neutral loss of 
heterozygosity, and 58 (58.6%) have 11p15.5 H19/ICR1 epigenetic hypermethylation 
(loss of imprinting). Here, we ascertain the epigenetic and genetic modes of 
bilateral Wilms tumor predisposition.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-43730-0
PMCID: PMC10728430
PMID: 38110397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.