---
reference_id: "PMID:18471517"
title: "Resection vs drainage in treatment of chronic pancreatitis: long-term results of a randomized trial."
authors:
- Strate T
- Bachmann K
- Busch P
- Mann O
- Schneider C
- Bruhn JP
- Yekebas E
- Kuechler T
- Bloechle C
- Izbicki JR
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.02.056
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Resection vs drainage in treatment of chronic pancreatitis: long-term results of a randomized trial.
**Authors:** Strate T, Bachmann K, Busch P, Mann O, Schneider C, Bruhn JP, Yekebas E, Kuechler T, Bloechle C, Izbicki JR
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2008.02.056](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2008.02.056)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2008 May;134(5):1406-11. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.02.056. 
Epub 2008 Mar 4.

Resection vs drainage in treatment of chronic pancreatitis: long-term results of 
a randomized trial.

Strate T(1), Bachmann K, Busch P, Mann O, Schneider C, Bruhn JP, Yekebas E, 
Kuechler T, Bloechle C, Izbicki JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, University Hospital Hamburg Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany. strate@uke.uni-hamburg.de

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2008 May;134(5):1605-7. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.03.029.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Tailored organ-sparing procedures have been shown to 
alleviate pain and are potentially superior in terms of preservation of 
endocrine and exocrine function as compared with standard resection (Whipple) 
for chronic pancreatitis with inflammatory pancreatic head tumor. Long-term 
results comparing these 2 procedures have not been published so far. The aim of 
this study was to report on long-term results of a randomized trial comparing a 
classical resective procedure (pylorus-preserving Whipple) with an extended 
drainage procedure (Frey) for chronic pancreatitis.
METHODS: All patients who participated in a previously published randomized 
trial on the perioperative course comparing both procedures were contacted with 
a standardized, validated, quality of life and pain questionnaire. Additionally, 
patients were seen in the outpatient clinic to assess endocrine and exocrine 
pancreatic function by an oral glucose tolerance test and fecal chymotrypsin 
test.
RESULTS: There were no differences between both groups regarding quality of 
life, pain control, or other somatic parameters after a median of 7 years 
postoperatively. Correlations among continuous alcohol consumption, endocrine or 
exocrine pancreatic function, and pain were not found.
CONCLUSIONS: Both procedures provide adequate pain relief and quality of life 
after long-term follow-up with no differences regarding exocrine and endocrine 
function. However, short-term results favor the organ-sparing procedure.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.02.056
PMID: 18471517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]