---
reference_id: "PMID:8879781"
title: "Coccidioidomycosis in patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus: review of 91 cases at a single institution."
authors:
- Singh VR
- Smith DK
- Lawerence J
- Kelly PC
- Thomas AR
- Spitz B
- Sarosi GA
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1093/clinids/23.3.563
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coccidioidomycosis in patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus: review of 91 cases at a single institution.
**Authors:** Singh VR, Smith DK, Lawerence J, Kelly PC, Thomas AR, Spitz B, Sarosi GA
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1093/clinids/23.3.563](https://doi.org/10.1093/clinids/23.3.563)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 1996 Sep;23(3):563-8. doi: 10.1093/clinids/23.3.563.

Coccidioidomycosis in patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus: 
review of 91 cases at a single institution.

Singh VR(1), Smith DK, Lawerence J, Kelly PC, Thomas AR, Spitz B, Sarosi GA.

Author information:
(1)Maricopa Medical Center, Department of Internal Medicine, Phoenix, Arizona 
85008, USA.

We retrospectively evaluated the clinical manifestations, diagnosis, treatment, 
and outcome of coccidioidomycosis in 91 patients infected with human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) at a single institution. Coccidioidomycosis was the 
AIDS-defining illness in 37 patients. Fever and chills, weight loss, and night 
sweats were the most frequent symptoms. The lung was the most frequently 
involved organ (80%), followed by the meninges (15%). A diffuse reticulonodular 
infiltrate was seen in 59 patients (65%), and 13 (14%) had focal pulmonary 
disease; for 15 patients (16%), the chest radiograph was normal. Coccidioidal 
serologies were positive for 60 patients (68%), while for 23% with proven 
coccidioidomycosis such tests were negative Most patients were treated with 
systemic amphotericin B and then an oral azole. The mortality for the whole 
group was 60%. Patients with diffuse pulmonary disease had the highest mortality 
(68%), with a median duration of survival of 54 days (P < .05; 95% confidence 
interval, 147-175 days). The presence of diffuse pulmonary disease and a CD4 
lymphocyte count of < 50/microL were independent predictors of death. In our 
experience, coccidioidomycosis is an important opportunistic infection that 
causes substantial morbidity and mortality among HIV-infected patients living in 
an area of endemicity.

DOI: 10.1093/clinids/23.3.563
PMID: 8879781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]