---
reference_id: "PMID:28371479"
title: Alu-mediated deletion of PIGL in a Patient with CHIME syndrome.
authors:
- Knight Johnson A
- Schaefer GB
- Lee J
- Hu Y
- Del Gaudio D
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38181
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alu-mediated deletion of PIGL in a Patient with CHIME syndrome.
**Authors:** Knight Johnson A, Schaefer GB, Lee J, Hu Y, Del Gaudio D
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38181](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38181)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2017 May;173(5):1378-1382. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38181. Epub 
2017 Mar 28.

Alu-mediated deletion of PIGL in a Patient with CHIME syndrome.

Knight Johnson A(1), Schaefer GB(2), Lee J(3), Hu Y(1), Del Gaudio D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(2)Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Arkansas Children's Hospital, Little 
Rock, Arkansas.
(3)Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, South Carolina.

CHIME syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive neuroectodermal disorder associated 
with biallelic mutations in PIGL. To date, six molecularly confirmed cases of 
CHIME syndrome have been reported. Here, we report the seventh patient with 
biallelic PIGL mutations associated with CHIME syndrome and describe the first 
characterization of an intragenic deletion in PIGL. Our characterization of the 
deletion breakpoint junction demonstrated that the breakpoints occurred within 
Alu repeats and the deletion was most likely mediated by a microhomology event. 
Analysis of PIGL genomic sequences for repetitive elements demonstrated that Alu 
repeats represent ∼34% of its intronic sequence, suggesting that the genomic 
architecture may predispose the gene to disease-causing copynumber changes. 
Taken together, these findings indicate that patients with a clinical diagnosis 
of CHIME syndrome and a single identifiable mutation in PIGL warrant further 
investigation for copynumber changes involving PIGL.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38181
PMID: 28371479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]