---
reference_id: "PMID:35517865"
title: The Okur-Chung Neurodevelopmental Syndrome Mutation CK2(K198R) Leads to a Rewiring of Kinase Specificity.
authors:
- Caefer DM
- Phan NQ
- Liddle JC
- Balsbaugh JL
- "O'Shea JP"
- Tzingounis AV
- Schwartz D
journal: Front Mol Biosci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.850661
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Okur-Chung Neurodevelopmental Syndrome Mutation CK2(K198R) Leads to a Rewiring of Kinase Specificity.
**Authors:** Caefer DM, Phan NQ, Liddle JC, Balsbaugh JL, O'Shea JP, Tzingounis AV, Schwartz D
**Journal:** Front Mol Biosci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmolb.2022.850661](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmolb.2022.850661)

## Content

1. Front Mol Biosci. 2022 Apr 19;9:850661. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.850661.
eCollection 2022.

The Okur-Chung Neurodevelopmental Syndrome Mutation CK2(K198R) Leads to a
Rewiring of Kinase Specificity.

Caefer DM(1), Phan NQ(1), Liddle JC(2), Balsbaugh JL(2), O'Shea JP(1),
Tzingounis AV(1), Schwartz D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Neurobiology, University of Connecticut, Storrs,
CT, United States.
(2)Center for Open Research Resources and Equipment, Proteomics and Metabolomics
Facility, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, United States.

Okur-Chung Neurodevelopmental Syndrome (OCNDS) is caused by heterozygous
mutations to the CSNK2A1 gene, which encodes the alpha subunit of protein kinase
CK2. The most frequently occurring mutation is lysine 198 to arginine (K198R).
To investigate the impact of this mutation, we first generated a high-resolution
phosphorylation motif of CK2WT, including the first characterization of
specificity for tyrosine phosphorylation activity. A second high resolution
motif representing CK2K198R substrate specificity was also generated. Here we
report the impact of the OCNDS associated CK2K198R mutation. Contrary to prior
speculation, the mutation does not result in a complete loss of function, but
rather shifts the substrate specificity of the kinase. Broadly speaking the
mutation leads to 1) a decreased preference for acidic residues in the +1
position, 2) a decreased preference for threonine phosphorylation, 3) an
increased preference for tyrosine phosphorylation, and 4) an alteration of the
tyrosine phosphorylation specificity motif. To further investigate the result of
this mutation we have developed a probability-based scoring method, allowing us
to predict shifts in phosphorylation in the K198R mutant relative to the wild
type kinase. As an initial step we have applied the methodology to the set of
axonally localized ion channels in an effort to uncover potential alterations of
the phosphoproteome associated with the OCNDS disease condition.

Copyright © 2022 Caefer, Phan, Liddle, Balsbaugh, O’Shea, Tzingounis and
Schwartz.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.850661
PMCID: PMC9062000
PMID: 35517865

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
