---
reference_id: PMID:37951572
title: Mast cells in the autonomic nervous system and potential role in disorders with dysautonomia and neuroinflammation.
authors:
- Theoharides TC
- Twahir A
- Kempuraj D
journal: Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.anai.2023.10.032
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mast cells in the autonomic nervous system and potential role in disorders with dysautonomia and neuroinflammation.
**Authors:** Theoharides TC, Twahir A, Kempuraj D
**Journal:** Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.anai.2023.10.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anai.2023.10.032)

## Content

1. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2024 Apr;132(4):440-454. doi: 
10.1016/j.anai.2023.10.032. Epub 2023 Nov 10.

Mast cells in the autonomic nervous system and potential role in disorders with 
dysautonomia and neuroinflammation.

Theoharides TC(1), Twahir A(2), Kempuraj D(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Neuro-Immune Medicine, Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of 
Osteopathic Medicine, Nova Southeastern University, Ft. Lauderdale, Florida; 
Laboratory of Molecular Immunopharmacology and Drug Discovery, Department of 
Immunology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts. 
Electronic address: ttheohar@nova.edu.
(2)Institute for Neuro-Immune Medicine, Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of 
Osteopathic Medicine, Nova Southeastern University, Ft. Lauderdale, Florida.

Comment in
    Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2024 Apr;132(4):411-412. doi: 
10.1016/j.anai.2023.12.005.

Mast cells (MC) are ubiquitous in the body, and they are critical for not only 
in allergic diseases but also in immunity and inflammation, including having 
potential involvement in the pathophysiology of dysautonomias and 
neuroinflammatory disorders. MC are located perivascularly close to nerve 
endings and sites such as the carotid bodies, heart, hypothalamus, the pineal 
gland, and the adrenal gland that would allow them not only to regulate but also 
to be affected by the autonomic nervous system (ANS). MC are stimulated not only 
by allergens but also many other triggers including some from the ANS that can 
affect MC release of neurosensitizing, proinflammatory, and vasoactive 
mediators. Hence, MC may be able to regulate homeostatic functions that seem to 
be dysfunctional in many conditions, such as postural orthostatic tachycardia 
syndrome, autism spectrum disorder, myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome, and Long-COVID syndrome. The evidence indicates that there is a 
possible association between these conditions and diseases associated with MC 
activation. There is no effective treatment for any form of these conditions 
other than minimizing symptoms. Given the many ways MC could be activated and 
the numerous mediators released, it would be important to develop ways to 
inhibit stimulation of MC and the release of ANS-relevant mediators.

Copyright © 2023 American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anai.2023.10.032
PMID: 37951572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures Dr Theoharides is the Scientific 
Director and shareholder of Algonot, LLC, a company that develops and sells 
dietary supplements. Dr Theoharides has been awarded the following patents: US 
5,855.884; US 6,020,305; US 8,268,365; and EPO 0618796 licensed to Algonot, LLC. 
The other authors declare no conflicts of interest.