---
reference_id: "PMID:40043261"
title: "Neoadjuvant Sonidegib for the Management of Locally Advanced Basal Cell Carcinoma: A Case Report."
authors:
- Hollield C
- Amara S
- M Lewin J
- G Lebwohl M
journal: J Drugs Dermatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.36849/JDD.8329
keywords:
- Humans
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/pathology, therapy, drug therapy, surgery, diagnosis"
- Male
- "Skin Neoplasms/pathology, therapy, surgery, drug therapy, diagnosis"
- "Neoadjuvant Therapy/methods, adverse effects"
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Pyridines/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Mohs Surgery
- "Biphenyl Compounds/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Antineoplastic Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neoadjuvant Sonidegib for the Management of Locally Advanced Basal Cell Carcinoma: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Hollield C, Amara S, M Lewin J, G Lebwohl M
**Journal:** J Drugs Dermatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.36849/JDD.8329](https://doi.org/10.36849/JDD.8329)

## Content

1. J Drugs Dermatol. 2025 Mar 1;24(3):329-331. doi: 10.36849/JDD.8329.

Neoadjuvant Sonidegib for the Management of Locally Advanced Basal Cell
Carcinoma: A Case Report.

Hollield C, Amara S, M Lewin J, G Lebwohl M.

Neoadjuvant Hedgehog Pathway Inhibitor (HPI) therapy, utilizing sonidegib and
vismodegib, has shown great potential in managing locally advanced basal cell
carcinoma (laBCC). While effective, the tolerability of HPI therapy may be
limited due to adverse effects (muscle spasms, alopecia). However, studies have
shown a lower incidence of side effects with sonidegib, compared to vismodegib.
In this report, we present the case of an 86-year-old male with laBCC on the
left inner canthus treated successfully with neoadjuvant sonidegib for 25 weeks
prior to Mohs micrographic surgery. This case highlights the utility of
sonidegib as a potential neoadjuvant treatment modality for patients who are
good candidates for surgery but would benefit from tumor reduction to achieve a
more favorable outcome, especially in cosmetically sensitive areas. In addition,
our patient experienced minimal side effects (muscle cramps at week 18) from
sonidegib treatment. J Drugs Dermatol. 2025;24(3):329-331.
doi:10.36849/JDD.8329.

DOI: 10.36849/JDD.8329
PMID: 40043261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
