---
reference_id: "PMID:40709433"
title: "Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome Presenting as Diarrhea and Weight Loss: A Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Kim WJ
- Jang JO
- Lee CM
- Synn SB
- Park SB
journal: Korean J Gastroenterol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.4166/kjg.2025.047
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome Presenting as Diarrhea and Weight Loss: A Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Kim WJ, Jang JO, Lee CM, Synn SB, Park SB
**Journal:** Korean J Gastroenterol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.4166/kjg.2025.047](https://doi.org/10.4166/kjg.2025.047)

## Content

1. Korean J Gastroenterol. 2025 Jul 25;85(3):413-420. doi: 10.4166/kjg.2025.047.

Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome Presenting as Diarrhea and Weight Loss: A Case Report 
and Literature Review.

Kim WJ(1), Jang JO(1), Lee CM(1), Synn SB(1), Park SB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Pusan National University School of Medicine 
and Research Institute for Convergence of Biomedical Science and Technology, 
Pusan National University Yangsan Hospital, Yangsan, Korea.

Cronkhite-Canada syndrome (CCS) is a rare, non-hereditary disorder characterized 
by diffuse, non-neoplastic gastrointestinal polyposis along with ectodermal 
abnormalities, such as alopecia, skin hyperpigmentation, and nail dystrophy. It 
typically affects individuals aged >50 years and can lead to severe 
complications, including protein-losing enteropathy, chronic diarrhea, and 
malnutrition, if not diagnosed early. We report the case of a 68-year-old male 
who presented with a 2-month history of diarrhea, weight loss, and hair loss. 
Endoscopic and histopathological examinations revealed diffuse polyposis 
throughout the gastrointestinal tract, consistent with CCS findings. The patient 
was treated with a combination of corticosteroids and azathioprine, which led to 
marked clinical and endoscopic improvements. No recurrence was observed during 1 
year of follow-up period. This case highlights the importance of recognizing the 
typical clinical and diagnostic features of CCS. Owing to its nonspecific 
presentation, diagnosis may be delayed, potentially worsening the prognosis. 
Therefore, CCS should be considered in the differential diagnosis of middle-aged 
or older patients who present with multiple gastrointestinal polyps accompanied 
by ectodermal symptoms. Early recognition and appropriate immunosuppressive 
therapy are essential for improving patient outcomes and preventing 
complications. Long-term surveillance is necessary because of the potential for 
polyp recurrence or malignant transformation.

DOI: 10.4166/kjg.2025.047
PMCID: PMC12305066
PMID: 40709433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest None.