---
reference_id: "PMID:26927310"
title: Scoliosis in osteogenesis imperfecta caused by COL1A1/COL1A2 mutations - genotype-phenotype correlations and effect of bisphosphonate treatment.
authors:
- Sato A
- Ouellet J
- Muneta T
- Glorieux FH
- Rauch F
journal: Bone
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2016.02.018
keywords:
- Child
- Collagen Type I/genetics
- "Collagen Type I, alpha 1 Chain"
- Diphosphonates/therapeutic use
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/complications, drug therapy, genetics"
- Prevalence
- "Scoliosis/complications, drug therapy, epidemiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Scoliosis in osteogenesis imperfecta caused by COL1A1/COL1A2 mutations - genotype-phenotype correlations and effect of bisphosphonate treatment.
**Authors:** Sato A, Ouellet J, Muneta T, Glorieux FH, Rauch F
**Journal:** Bone (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2016.02.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2016.02.018)

## Content

1. Bone. 2016 May;86:53-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2016.02.018. Epub 2016 Feb 27.

Scoliosis in osteogenesis imperfecta caused by COL1A1/COL1A2 mutations - 
genotype-phenotype correlations and effect of bisphosphonate treatment.

Sato A(1), Ouellet J(2), Muneta T(3), Glorieux FH(2), Rauch F(4).

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children and McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada; Department of Joint Surgery and Sports Medicine, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Shriners Hospital for Children and McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Joint Surgery and Sports Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Shriners Hospital for Children and McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada. Electronic address: frauch@shriners.mcgill.ca.

Bisphosphonates are widely used to treat children with osteogenesis imperfecta 
(OI), a bone fragility disorder that is most often caused by mutations in COL1A1 
or COL1A2. However, it is unclear whether this treatment decreases the risk of 
developing scoliosis. We retrospectively evaluated spine radiographs and charts 
of 437 patients (227 female) with OI caused by mutations in COL1A1 or COL1A2 and 
compared the relationship between scoliosis, genotype and bisphosphonate 
treatment history. At the last follow-up (mean age 11.9 [SD: 5.9] years), 242 
(55%) patients had scoliosis. The prevalence of scoliosis was highest in OI type 
III (89%), followed by OI type IV (61%) and OI type I (36%). Moderate to severe 
scoliosis (Cobb angle ≥25°) was rare in individuals with COL1A1 
haploinsufficiency mutations but was present in about two fifth of patients with 
triple helical glycine substitutions or C-propeptide mutations. During the first 
2 to 4years of bisphosphonate therapy, patients with OI type III had lower Cobb 
angle progression rates than before bisphosphonate treatment, whereas in OI 
types I and IV bisphosphonate treatment was not associated with a change in Cobb 
angle progression rates. At skeletal maturity, the prevalence of scoliosis (Cobb 
angle >10°) was similar in patients who had started bisphosphonate treatment 
early in life (before 5.0years of age) and in patients who had started therapy 
later (after the age of 10.0years) or had never received bisphosphonate therapy. 
Bisphosphonate treatment decreased progression rate of scoliosis in OI type III 
but there was no evidence of a positive effect on scoliosis in OI types I and 
IV. The prevalence of scoliosis at maturity was not influenced by the 
bisphosphonate treatment history in any OI type.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2016.02.018
PMID: 26927310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]