---
reference_id: "PMID:39121859"
title: Antisense oligonucleotides enhance SLC20A2 expression and suppress brain calcification in a humanized mouse model.
authors:
- Zhao M
- Cheng X
- Chen L
- Zeng YH
- Lin KJ
- Li YL
- Zheng ZH
- Huang XJ
- Zuo DD
- Guo XX
- Guo J
- He D
- Liu Y
- Lin Y
- Wang C
- Lv WQ
- Su HZ
- Yao XP
- Ye ZL
- Chen XH
- Lu YQ
- Huang CW
- Yang G
- Zhang YX
- Lin MT
- Wang N
- Xiong ZQ
- Chen WJ
journal: Neuron
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2024.07.013
keywords:
- Animals
- "Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter Proteins, Type III/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mice
- Calcinosis/genetics
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/pharmacology, administration & dosage"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Male
- Female
- Brain Diseases/genetics
- Brain/metabolism
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- RNA Splicing/genetics
- Basal Ganglia Diseases
- Neurodegenerative Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antisense oligonucleotides enhance SLC20A2 expression and suppress brain calcification in a humanized mouse model.
**Authors:** Zhao M, Cheng X, Chen L, Zeng YH, Lin KJ, Li YL, Zheng ZH, Huang XJ, Zuo DD, Guo XX, Guo J, He D, Liu Y, Lin Y, Wang C, Lv WQ, Su HZ, Yao XP, Ye ZL, Chen XH, Lu YQ, Huang CW, Yang G, Zhang YX, Lin MT, Wang N, Xiong ZQ, Chen WJ
**Journal:** Neuron (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2024.07.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2024.07.013)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2024 Oct 9;112(19):3278-3294.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2024.07.013.
Epub  2024 Aug 8.

Antisense oligonucleotides enhance SLC20A2 expression and suppress brain 
calcification in a humanized mouse model.

Zhao M(1), Cheng X(2), Chen L(3), Zeng YH(4), Lin KJ(4), Li YL(4), Zheng ZH(4), 
Huang XJ(4), Zuo DD(4), Guo XX(4), Guo J(5), He D(6), Liu Y(6), Lin Y(4), Wang 
C(4), Lv WQ(4), Su HZ(1), Yao XP(1), Ye ZL(4), Chen XH(4), Lu YQ(4), Huang 
CW(3), Yang G(7), Zhang YX(8), Lin MT(1), Wang N(1), Xiong ZQ(9), Chen WJ(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Institute of 
Neuroscience, Fujian Key Laboratory of Molecular Neurology, Fujian Medical 
University, Fuzhou 350005, China; Department of Neurology, National Regional 
Medical Center, Binhai Campus of the First Affiliated Hospital, Fujian Medical 
University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350212, China.
(2)Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Institute 
of Neuroscience and State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China; Lin Gang Laboratory, Shanghai 201602, China. 
Electronic address: chengxw@lglab.ac.cn.
(3)Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Institute 
of Neuroscience and State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China; School of Future Technology, University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Institute of 
Neuroscience, Fujian Key Laboratory of Molecular Neurology, Fujian Medical 
University, Fuzhou 350005, China.
(5)Department of Neurology, Tangdu Hospital, Air Force Medical University, Xi'an 
710038, China.
(6)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou Medical University, 
Guiyang 550001, China.
(7)Interdisciplinary Research Center on Biology and Chemistry, Shanghai 
Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201210, 
China.
(8)Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Institute 
of Neuroscience and State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.
(9)Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Institute 
of Neuroscience and State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China; School of Future Technology, University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China; Shanghai Center for Brain 
Science and Brain-inspired Technology, Shanghai 201602, China. Electronic 
address: xiongzhiqi@ion.ac.cn.
(10)Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Institute of 
Neuroscience, Fujian Key Laboratory of Molecular Neurology, Fujian Medical 
University, Fuzhou 350005, China; Department of Neurology, National Regional 
Medical Center, Binhai Campus of the First Affiliated Hospital, Fujian Medical 
University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350212, China. Electronic address: 
wanjinchen75@fjmu.edu.cn.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2024 Oct;23(10):742. doi: 10.1038/d41573-024-00147-8.

Primary familial brain calcification (PFBC) is a genetic neurological disease, 
yet no effective treatment is currently available. Here, we identified five 
novel intronic variants in SLC20A2 gene from six PFBC families. Three of these 
variants increased aberrant SLC20A2 pre-mRNA splicing by altering the binding 
affinity of splicing machineries to newly characterized cryptic exons, 
ultimately causing premature termination of SLC20A2 translation. Inhibiting the 
cryptic-exon incorporation with splice-switching ASOs increased the expression 
levels of functional SLC20A2 in cells carrying SLC20A2 mutations. Moreover, by 
knocking in a humanized SLC20A2 intron 2 sequence carrying a PFBC-associated 
intronic variant, the SLC20A2-KI mice exhibited increased inorganic phosphate 
(Pi) levels in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and progressive brain calcification. 
Intracerebroventricular administration of ASOs to these SLC20A2-KI mice reduced 
CSF Pi levels and suppressed brain calcification. Together, our findings expand 
the genetic etiology of PFBC and demonstrate ASO-mediated splice modulation as a 
potential therapy for PFBC patients with SLC20A2 haploinsufficiency.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2024.07.013
PMID: 39121859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests W.-J.C., Z.-Q.X., X.C., 
M.Z., Y.-H.Z., and L.C. have filed patents (CN2023113708968) to protect the 
application of CRACE therapy for the treatment of brain calcification.