---
reference_id: "PMID:21552264"
title: KIF7 mutations cause fetal hydrolethalus and acrocallosal syndromes.
authors:
- Putoux A
- Thomas S
- Coene KL
- Davis EE
- Alanay Y
- Ogur G
- Uz E
- Buzas D
- Gomes C
- Patrier S
- Bennett CL
- Elkhartoufi N
- Frison MH
- Rigonnot L
- Joyé N
- Pruvost S
- Utine GE
- Boduroglu K
- Nitschke P
- Fertitta L
- Thauvin-Robinet C
- Munnich A
- Cormier-Daire V
- Hennekam R
- Colin E
- Akarsu NA
- Bole-Feysot C
- Cagnard N
- Schmitt A
- Goudin N
- Lyonnet S
- Encha-Razavi F
- Siffroi JP
- Winey M
- Katsanis N
- Gonzales M
- Vekemans M
- Beales PL
- Attié-Bitach T
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/ng.826
content_type: abstract_only
---

# KIF7 mutations cause fetal hydrolethalus and acrocallosal syndromes.
**Authors:** Putoux A, Thomas S, Coene KL, Davis EE, Alanay Y, Ogur G, Uz E, Buzas D, Gomes C, Patrier S, Bennett CL, Elkhartoufi N, Frison MH, Rigonnot L, Joyé N, Pruvost S, Utine GE, Boduroglu K, Nitschke P, Fertitta L, Thauvin-Robinet C, Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V, Hennekam R, Colin E, Akarsu NA, Bole-Feysot C, Cagnard N, Schmitt A, Goudin N, Lyonnet S, Encha-Razavi F, Siffroi JP, Winey M, Katsanis N, Gonzales M, Vekemans M, Beales PL, Attié-Bitach T
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.826](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.826)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2011 Jun;43(6):601-6. doi: 10.1038/ng.826. Epub 2011 May 8.

KIF7 mutations cause fetal hydrolethalus and acrocallosal syndromes.

Putoux A(1), Thomas S, Coene KL, Davis EE, Alanay Y, Ogur G, Uz E, Buzas D, 
Gomes C, Patrier S, Bennett CL, Elkhartoufi N, Frison MH, Rigonnot L, Joyé N, 
Pruvost S, Utine GE, Boduroglu K, Nitschke P, Fertitta L, Thauvin-Robinet C, 
Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V, Hennekam R, Colin E, Akarsu NA, Bole-Feysot C, 
Cagnard N, Schmitt A, Goudin N, Lyonnet S, Encha-Razavi F, Siffroi JP, Winey M, 
Katsanis N, Gonzales M, Vekemans M, Beales PL, Attié-Bitach T.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U-781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

KIF7, the human ortholog of Drosophila Costal2, is a key component of the 
Hedgehog signaling pathway. Here we report mutations in KIF7 in individuals with 
hydrolethalus and acrocallosal syndromes, two multiple malformation disorders 
with overlapping features that include polydactyly, brain abnormalities and 
cleft palate. Consistent with a role of KIF7 in Hedgehog signaling, we show 
deregulation of most GLI transcription factor targets and impaired GLI3 
processing in tissues from individuals with KIF7 mutations. KIF7 is also a 
likely contributor of alleles across the ciliopathy spectrum, as sequencing of a 
diverse cohort identified several missense mutations detrimental to protein 
function. In addition, in vivo genetic interaction studies indicated that 
knockdown of KIF7 could exacerbate the phenotype induced by knockdown of other 
ciliopathy transcripts. Our data show the role of KIF7 in human primary cilia, 
especially in the Hedgehog pathway through the regulation of GLI targets, and 
expand the clinical spectrum of ciliopathies.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.826
PMCID: PMC3674836
PMID: 21552264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]