---
reference_id: "PMID:31729820"
title: Favorable survival even with high disease-specific complication rates in lymphangioleiomyomatosis after lung transplantation-long-term follow-up of a Japanese center.
authors:
- Kurosaki T
- Otani S
- Miyoshi K
- Okazaki M
- Sugimoto S
- Suno M
- Yamane M
- Kobayashi M
- Oto T
- Toyooka S
journal: Clin Respir J
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/crj.13108
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Japan/epidemiology
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology, surgery"
- Lung Transplantation/mortality
- "Lymphangioleiomyomatosis/diagnosis, epidemiology, surgery"
- Male
- Morbidity/trends
- Postoperative Complications/mortality
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Rate/trends
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Favorable survival even with high disease-specific complication rates in lymphangioleiomyomatosis after lung transplantation-long-term follow-up of a Japanese center.
**Authors:** Kurosaki T, Otani S, Miyoshi K, Okazaki M, Sugimoto S, Suno M, Yamane M, Kobayashi M, Oto T, Toyooka S
**Journal:** Clin Respir J (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/crj.13108](https://doi.org/10.1111/crj.13108)

## Content

1. Clin Respir J. 2020 Feb;14(2):116-123. doi: 10.1111/crj.13108. Epub 2019 Nov
28.

Favorable survival even with high disease-specific complication rates in 
lymphangioleiomyomatosis after lung transplantation-long-term follow-up of a 
Japanese center.

Kurosaki T(1)(2), Otani S(1)(2), Miyoshi K(1), Okazaki M(1), Sugimoto S(1), Suno 
M(3), Yamane M(1), Kobayashi M(4), Oto T(1)(2), Toyooka S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama, 
Japan.
(2)Organ Transplant Center, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama, Japan.
(3)Division of Oncology Pharmaceutical Care & Science, Okayama University 
Hospital, Okayama, Japan.
(4)Anesthesiology & Resuscitology, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Lung transplantation (LT) is a reliable therapeutic option for 
end-stage pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM). Long-term outcome of LAM 
recipients after LT remains unknown. The aim of this study was to describe the 
outcomes of LT for LAM with a long-term follow-up, comparing those for other 
diseases in the same period.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed consecutive 145 LT recipients between 1998 
and 2015 at Okayama University Hospital with minimum 3-year follow-up.
RESULTS: Twelve LAM recipients including nine sporadic-LAM and three tuberous 
sclerosis complex -LAM were identified. Nine of 12 underwent bilateral LT 
including four living-donor lobar LT. There was no significant difference in 
overall survival between the two groups. (P = 0.15). Chronic lung allograft 
dysfunction free survival rate in LAM compared with other diseases tended to be 
better (P = 0.058). However, the rate of requiring hemodialysis was 
significantly higher in LAM recipients than in the recipients of other diseases 
(P = 0.047). Notably, 8 of 12 (67%) LAM patients encountered LAM-related 
complication including chylothorax and pneumothorax, seven (58%) had 
proliferative diseases consisting of renal angiomyolipoma and recurrent LAM. 
Nine patients required mTOR inhibitors for LAM-related problems, contributing to 
improved control of LAM-related problems. While all nine recipients of bilateral 
LT have still survived, two patients died of diseases in their native lungs and 
one required re-LT among three recipients of single LT.
CONCLUSION: Although the rates of LAM-related complications were unexpectedly 
high in the long term, LT is a feasible therapeutic option for patients with 
advanced pulmonary LAM.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.13108
PMID: 31729820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]