---
reference_id: "PMID:34847858"
title: "Arterial tortuosity syndrome causing recurrent transient ischemic attacks in young adult: a case report."
authors:
- Cotti Piccinelli S
- Premi E
- Bonacina S
- Gilberti N
- Vergani V
- Gamba M
- Spezi R
- Delrio I
- Bernier M
- Costa A
- Ravanelli M
- Colombi M
- Gasparotti R
- Padovani A
- Magoni M
journal: BMC Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s12883-021-02458-4
keywords:
- Adult
- Arteries/abnormalities
- Humans
- "Ischemic Attack, Transient/drug therapy, etiology"
- "Joint Instability/complications, drug therapy"
- Male
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic/complications, drug therapy"
- Tissue Plasminogen Activator
- "Vascular Malformations/complications, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arterial tortuosity syndrome causing recurrent transient ischemic attacks in young adult: a case report.
**Authors:** Cotti Piccinelli S, Premi E, Bonacina S, Gilberti N, Vergani V, Gamba M, Spezi R, Delrio I, Bernier M, Costa A, Ravanelli M, Colombi M, Gasparotti R, Padovani A, Magoni M
**Journal:** BMC Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12883-021-02458-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12883-021-02458-4)

## Content

1. BMC Neurol. 2021 Nov 30;21(1):464. doi: 10.1186/s12883-021-02458-4.

Arterial tortuosity syndrome causing recurrent transient ischemic attacks in
young adult: a case report.

Cotti Piccinelli S(1), Premi E(2), Bonacina S(3), Gilberti N(2), Vergani V(2),
Gamba M(2), Spezi R(2), Delrio I(2), Bernier M(4), Costa A(2), Ravanelli M(5),
Colombi M(6), Gasparotti R(7), Padovani A(3), Magoni M(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University
of Brescia, Pz.le Spedali Civili 1, 25100, Brescia, Italy.
stefanocottipiccinelli@gmail.com.
(2)Stroke Unit, Unità Operativa Neurologia Vascolare, ASST "Spedali Civili",
Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.
(3)Neurology Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University
of Brescia, Pz.le Spedali Civili 1, 25100, Brescia, Italy.
(4)Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, USA.
(5)Radiology Unit, Department of Medical-Surgical Specialties, Radiological
Sciences and Public Health, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(6)Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Molecular and Translational
Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(7)Neuroradiology Unit, Department of Medical-Surgical Specialties, Radiological
Sciences and Public Health, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome (ATS) is a rare autosomal recessive
disorder characterized by elongated and tortuous arteries. Although ATS showed a
significant clinical and pathophysiological overlap with other syndromes
involving connective tissues, only few cases of cerebrovascular events related
to this syndrome have been described so far.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report the case of a 33-years-old male diagnosed with ATS
since childhood, that experienced three sudden episodes of expressive aphasia
and right hemiparesis with spontaneous resolution. He was treated with
recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (r-TPA) at a dosage of 0.9 mg/kg with a
complete recovery. Brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed the absence of
acute ischemic lesions and the patient was diagnosed with recurrent transient
ischemic attacks (TIA). Intracranial and supra-aortic trunks Magnetic Resonance
Angiography (MRA) and Angio-CT scan of the thoracic and abdominal aorta showed
marked vessel tortuosity without stenosis. To our knowledge, this is the first
reported case of an ATS patient with TIA in young age that was treated with
intravenous thrombolysis with recombinant plasminogen activator.
CONCLUSION: Our report strengthens the relationship between ATS and juvenile
cerebrovascular events, suggesting that an extensive study of body vessels in
order to detect potential stenoses or occlusions in these cases is needed. The
greater predisposition to cerebrovascular events in ATS could benefit from a
more aggressive primary and secondary prevention therapy.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12883-021-02458-4
PMCID: PMC8630900
PMID: 34847858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declared no competing interests.
