---
reference_id: "PMID:28784417"
title: "Aspirin for Evidence-Based Preeclampsia Prevention trial: effect of aspirin in prevention of preterm preeclampsia in subgroups of women according to their characteristics and medical and obstetrical history."
authors:
- Poon LC
- Wright D
- Rolnik DL
- Syngelaki A
- Delgado JL
- Tsokaki T
- Leipold G
- Akolekar R
- Shearing S
- De Stefani L
- Jani JC
- Plasencia W
- Evangelinakis N
- Gonzalez-Vanegas O
- Persico N
- Nicolaides KH
journal: Am J Obstet Gynecol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2017.07.038
keywords:
- Adult
- Algorithms
- Aspirin/therapeutic use
- Body Mass Index
- Evidence-Based Medicine
- Female
- Gestational Age
- Humans
- Hypertension/epidemiology
- Incidence
- Logistic Models
- Maternal Age
- Medical History Taking
- Odds Ratio
- Overweight/epidemiology
- Platelet Aggregation Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Pre-Eclampsia/prevention & control"
- Pregnancy
- Pregnancy Complications/epidemiology
- "Pregnancy Complications, Cardiovascular/epidemiology"
- "Pregnancy Trimester, First"
- Premature Birth
- Reproductive History
- "Reproductive Techniques, Assisted/statistics & numerical data"
- Risk Assessment
- Smoking/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aspirin for Evidence-Based Preeclampsia Prevention trial: effect of aspirin in prevention of preterm preeclampsia in subgroups of women according to their characteristics and medical and obstetrical history.
**Authors:** Poon LC, Wright D, Rolnik DL, Syngelaki A, Delgado JL, Tsokaki T, Leipold G, Akolekar R, Shearing S, De Stefani L, Jani JC, Plasencia W, Evangelinakis N, Gonzalez-Vanegas O, Persico N, Nicolaides KH
**Journal:** Am J Obstet Gynecol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajog.2017.07.038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2017.07.038)

## Content

1. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2017 Nov;217(5):585.e1-585.e5. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajog.2017.07.038. Epub 2017 Aug 4.

Aspirin for Evidence-Based Preeclampsia Prevention trial: effect of aspirin in 
prevention of preterm preeclampsia in subgroups of women according to their 
characteristics and medical and obstetrical history.

Poon LC(1), Wright D(2), Rolnik DL(3), Syngelaki A(3), Delgado JL(4), Tsokaki 
T(5), Leipold G(6), Akolekar R(7), Shearing S(8), De Stefani L(9), Jani JC(10), 
Plasencia W(11), Evangelinakis N(12), Gonzalez-Vanegas O(13), Persico N(14), 
Nicolaides KH(15).

Author information:
(1)King's College Hospital, London, United Kingdom; Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong.
(2)University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom.
(3)King's College Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain.
(5)King's College Hospital, London, United Kingdom; North Middlesex University 
Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(6)King's College Hospital, London, United Kingdom; Lewisham University 
Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(7)King's College Hospital, London, United Kingdom; Medway Maritime Hospital, 
Gillingham, United Kingdom.
(8)Southend University Hospital, Essex, United Kingdom.
(9)King's College Hospital, London, United Kingdom; Homerton University 
Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(10)University Hospital Brugmann, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, 
Belgium.
(11)Hospiten Group, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain.
(12)Attikon University Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(13)Hospital Universitario San Cecilio, Granada, Spain.
(14)Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(15)King's College Hospital, London, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
kypros@fetalmedicine.com.

Erratum in
    Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2018 Apr;218(4):454. doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2018.01.002.

Comment in
    Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2018 Apr;218(4):464-465. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajog.2018.01.019.
    Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2018 Apr;218(4):463-464. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajog.2018.01.020.

BACKGROUND: The Combined Multimarker Screening and Randomized Patient Treatment 
with Aspirin for Evidence-Based Preeclampsia Prevention trial demonstrated that 
in women who were at high risk for preterm preeclampsia with delivery at <37 
weeks' gestation identified by screening by means of an algorithm that combines 
maternal factors and biomarkers at 11-13 weeks' gestation, aspirin 
administration from 11 to 14 until 36 weeks' gestation was associated with a 
significant reduction in the incidence of preterm preeclampsia (odds ratio 0.38; 
95% confidence interval, 0.20 to 0.74; P=0.004).
OBJECTIVE: We sought to examine whether there are differences in the effect of 
aspirin on the incidence of preterm preeclampsia in the Aspirin for 
Evidence-Based Preeclampsia Prevention trial in subgroups defined according to 
maternal characteristics and medical and obstetrical history.
STUDY DESIGN: This was a secondary analysis of data from the Aspirin for 
Evidence-Based Preeclampsia Prevention trial. Subgroup analysis was performed to 
assess evidence of differences in the effect of aspirin on incidence of preterm 
preeclampsia in subgroups defined by maternal age (<30 and ≥30 years), body mass 
index (<25 and ≥25 kg/m2), racial origin (Afro-Caribbean, Caucasian and other), 
method of conception (natural and assisted), cigarette smoking (smoker and 
non-smoker), family history of preterm preeclampsia (present and absent), 
obstetrical history (nulliparous, multiparous with previous preterm preeclampsia 
and multiparous without previous preterm preeclampsia), history of chronic 
hypertension (present and absent). Interaction tests were performed on the full 
data set of patients in the intention to treat population and on the data set of 
patients who took ≥ 90% of the prescribed medication. Results are presented as 
forest plot with P values for the interaction effects, group sizes, event counts 
and estimated odds ratios. We examined whether the test of interaction was 
significant at the 5% level with a Bonferroni adjustment for multiple 
comparisons.
RESULTS: There was no evidence of heterogeneity in the aspirin effect in 
subgroups defined according to maternal characteristics and obstetrical history. 
In participants with chronic hypertension preterm preeclampsia occurred in 10.2% 
(5/49) in the aspirin group and 8.2% (5/61) in the placebo group (adjusted odds 
ratio, 1.29; 95% confidence interval, 0.33-5.12). The respective values in those 
without chronic hypertension were 1.1% (8/749) in the aspirin group and 3.9% 
(30/761) in the placebo group (adjusted odds ratio, 0.27; 95% confidence 
interval, 0.12-0.60). In all participants with adherence of ≥90% the adjusted 
odds ratio in the aspirin group was 0.24 (95% confidence interval, 0.09-0.65); 
in the subgroup with chronic hypertension it was 2.06 (95% confidence interval, 
0.40-10.71); and in those without chronic hypertension it was 0.05 (95% 
confidence interval, 0.01-0.41). For the complete data set the test of 
interaction was not significant at the 5% level (P = .055), but in those with 
adherence ≥90%, after adjustment for multiple comparisons, the interaction was 
significant at the 5% level (P = .0019).
CONCLUSION: The beneficial effect of aspirin in the prevention of preterm 
preeclampsia may not apply in pregnancies with chronic hypertension. There was 
no evidence of heterogeneity in the aspirin effect in subgroups defined 
according to maternal characteristics and obstetrical history.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2017.07.038
PMID: 28784417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]