---
reference_id: PMID:38392604
title: "Possible Role of Fibrinaloid Microclots in Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS): Focus on Long COVID."
authors:
- Kell DB
- Khan MA
- Kane B
- Lip GYH
- Pretorius E
journal: J Pers Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jpm14020170
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Possible Role of Fibrinaloid Microclots in Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS): Focus on Long COVID.
**Authors:** Kell DB, Khan MA, Kane B, Lip GYH, Pretorius E
**Journal:** J Pers Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jpm14020170](https://doi.org/10.3390/jpm14020170)

## Content

1. J Pers Med. 2024 Jan 31;14(2):170. doi: 10.3390/jpm14020170.

Possible Role of Fibrinaloid Microclots in Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia 
Syndrome (POTS): Focus on Long COVID.

Kell DB(1)(2)(3), Khan MA(4), Kane B(1)(5), Lip GYH(6)(7), Pretorius E(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Cell and Systems Biology, Institute of Systems, 
Molecular and Integrative Biology, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, 
University of Liverpool, Crown St, Liverpool L69 7ZB, UK.
(2)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Centre for Biosustainability, Building 220, 
Chemitorvet 200, Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
(3)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Stellenbosch 
University, Stellenbosch Private Bag X1, Matieland 7602, South Africa.
(4)Directorate of Respiratory Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals, 
Wythenshawe Hospital, Manchester M23 9LT, UK.
(5)Manchester University Foundation Trust and School of Biological Sciences, 
University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK.
(6)Liverpool Centre for Cardiovascular Science at University of Liverpool, 
Liverpool John Moores University and Liverpool Heart & Chest Hospital, Liverpool 
L14 3PE, UK.
(7)Danish Center for Health Services Research, Department of Clinical Medicine, 
Aalborg University, 9220 Aalborg, Denmark.

Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) is a common accompaniment of a 
variety of chronic, inflammatory diseases, including long COVID, as are small, 
insoluble, 'fibrinaloid' microclots. We here develop the argument, with 
accompanying evidence, that fibrinaloid microclots, through their ability to 
block the flow of blood through microcapillaries and thus cause tissue hypoxia, 
are not simply correlated with but in fact, by preceding it, may be a chief 
intermediary cause of POTS, in which tachycardia is simply the body's 
exaggerated 'physiological' response to hypoxia. Similar reasoning accounts for 
the symptoms bundled under the term 'fatigue'. Amyloids are known to be membrane 
disruptors, and when their targets are nerve membranes, this can explain 
neurotoxicity and hence the autonomic nervous system dysfunction that 
contributes to POTS. Taken together as a system view, we indicate that 
fibrinaloid microclots can serve to link POTS and fatigue in long COVID in a 
manner that is at once both mechanistic and explanatory. This has clear 
implications for the treatment of such diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/jpm14020170
PMCID: PMC10890060
PMID: 38392604

Conflict of interest statement: E.P. is a named inventor on a patent application 
covering the use of fluorescence methods for microclot detection in long COVID.