---
reference_id: "PMID:29582519"
title: "Peripheral neuropathy in Tangier disease: A literature review and assessment."
authors:
- Mercan M
- Yayla V
- Altinay S
- Seyhan S
journal: J Peripher Nerv Syst
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/jns.12265
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neural Conduction/physiology
- "Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/complications, physiopathology"
- "Tangier Disease/complications, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peripheral neuropathy in Tangier disease: A literature review and assessment.
**Authors:** Mercan M, Yayla V, Altinay S, Seyhan S
**Journal:** J Peripher Nerv Syst (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jns.12265](https://doi.org/10.1111/jns.12265)

## Content

1. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2018 Jun;23(2):88-98. doi: 10.1111/jns.12265. Epub 2018
May 8.

Peripheral neuropathy in Tangier disease: A literature review and assessment.

Mercan M(1), Yayla V(1), Altinay S(2), Seyhan S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Bakirkoy Dr. Sadi Konuk Research and Training
Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pathology, Bakirkoy Dr. Sadi Konuk Research and Training
Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, Bakirkoy Dr. Sadi Konuk Research and
Training Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.

Tangier disease (TD) (OMIM#205400) is a rare cause of inherited metabolic
neuropathies characterized by marked deficiency of high-density lipoproteins and
accumulation of cholesterol esters in various tissue resulting from reverse
cholesterol transport deficiency. We report a case of a patient with TD with
multifocal demyelinating neuropathy with conduction block who presents with
winging scapula, tongue, and asymmetric extremity weakness. We also present a
review of all studies published from 1960 to 2017 regarding peripheral
neuropathy in TD. Our search identified 54 patients with TD with peripheral
neuropathy. Syringomyelia-like neuropathy subtype (52.4%) was more frequent than
multifocal sensorial and motor neuropathy subtype (26.2%), focal neuropathy
subtype (19.1%), and distal symmetric polyneuropathy subtype (2.4%).
Splenomegaly was the most common (40.7%) clinical manifestation in these
patients. The pattern of electrodiagnostic abnormalities are: (1) demyelinating
abnormalities were more predominant in the upper extremities than in the lower
extremities and (2) slowing of motor nerve conduction was more prominent in the
intermediate segment than in distal nerve segments. The sural-sparing pattern
was present in 34.6% and conduction block was present in 11.5% of the patients.
Our literature review and our case showed the clinical spectrum of TD neuropathy
is quite wide and that it should be considered in the differential diagnosis of
non-uniform demyelinating neuropathies.

© 2018 Peripheral Nerve Society.

DOI: 10.1111/jns.12265
PMID: 29582519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
