---
reference_id: "PMID:16543245"
title: Hypoxic regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor through the induction of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Rho/ROCK and c-Myc.
authors:
- Mizukami Y
- Fujiki K
- Duerr EM
- Gala M
- Jo WS
- Zhang X
- Chung DC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M511763200
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypoxic regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor through the induction of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Rho/ROCK and c-Myc.
**Authors:** Mizukami Y, Fujiki K, Duerr EM, Gala M, Jo WS, Zhang X, Chung DC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M511763200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M511763200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 19;281(20):13957-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M511763200. Epub 
2006 Mar 16.

Hypoxic regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor through the induction 
of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Rho/ROCK and c-Myc.

Mizukami Y(1), Fujiki K, Duerr EM, Gala M, Jo WS, Zhang X, Chung DC.

Author information:
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

The induction of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an essential 
feature of tumor angiogenesis. Hypoxia is a potent stimulator of VEGF 
expression, and hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is considered to be critical 
for this induction. However, we have previously demonstrated that induction of 
VEGF by hypoxia was preserved when HIF-1alpha was silenced. We sought to better 
define the molecular basis of this HIF-1-independent regulation. In colon cancer 
cells, hypoxia stimulated multiple K-ras effector pathways including 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. VEGF promoter deletion studies identified a novel 
promoter region between -418 and -223 bp that was responsive to hypoxia in a 
PI3K/Rho/ROCK-dependent manner. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays identified 
a fragment between -300 and -251 bp that demonstrated a unique shift only in 
hypoxic conditions. Inhibition of PI3K or ROCK blocked the formation of this 
complex. A binding site for c-Myc, a target of ROCK, was identified at -271 bp. 
A role for c-Myc in the hypoxic induction of VEGF was demonstrated by 
site-directed mutagenesis of the VEGF promoter and silencing of c-Myc by small 
interfering RNA. Collectively, these findings suggest an alternative mechanism 
for the hypoxic induction of VEGF in colon cancer that does not depend upon 
HIF-1alpha but instead requires the activation of PI3K/Rho/ROCK and c-Myc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M511763200
PMID: 16543245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]