---
reference_id: "PMID:25198737"
title: Beta-Blockers in Pediatric Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathies.
authors:
- Östman-Smith I
journal: Rev Recent Clin Trials
year: '2014'
doi: 10.2174/1574887109666140908125158
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Beta-Blockers in Pediatric Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathies.
**Authors:** Östman-Smith I
**Journal:** Rev Recent Clin Trials (2014)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1574887109666140908125158](https://doi.org/10.2174/1574887109666140908125158)

## Content

1. Rev Recent Clin Trials. 2014;9(2):82-5. doi:
10.2174/1574887109666140908125158.

Beta-Blockers in Pediatric Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathies.

Östman-Smith I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Cardiology, Queen Silvia Children's 
Hospital,Rondvagen 10,SE-416 50 Gothenburg, Sweden. 
ingegerd.ostman-smith@pediat.gu.se.

Congestive cardiac failure accounts for 36% of childhood deaths in hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy, and in infants with heart failure symptoms before two years of 
age, the mortality is extremely high unless treatment with beta-receptor 
antagonists is instituted. The mechanism of heart failure is not systolic 
dysfunction, but rather extreme diastolic dysfunction leading to high filling 
pressures. Risk factors for development of heart failure are a generalized 
pattern of hypertrophy with a left ventricular posterior wall-to- cavity ratio 
>0.30, the presence of left ventricular outflow tract obstruction at rest, and 
the co-existence of syndromes in the Noonan/Leopard/Costello spectrum. The 
5-year survival of high-risk patients is improved from 54% to 93% by high-dose 
beta-blocker therapy (>4.5 mg/kg/day propranolol). The mechanism of the 
beneficial effect of beta-blockers is to improve diastolic function by 
lengthening of diastole, reducing outflow-obstruction, and inducing a beneficial 
remodelling resulting in a larger left ventricular cavity, and improved stroke 
volume. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is associated with increased activity of 
cardiac sympathetic nerves, and infants in heart failure with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy show signs of extreme sympathetic over-activity, and require 
exceptionally high doses of beta-blockers to achieve effective beta-blockade as 
judged by 24 h Holter recordings, often 8-24 mg/kg/day of propranolol or 
equivalent.
CONCLUSION: Beta-blocker therapy is without doubt the treatment of choice for 
patients with heart failure caused by hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, but the dose 
needs to carefully titrated on an individual basis for maximum benefit, and the 
dose required is surprisingly large in infants with heart failure due to 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

DOI: 10.2174/1574887109666140908125158
PMCID: PMC4443781
PMID: 25198737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]