---
reference_id: "PMID:22659247"
title: "Somatostatin analogs modulate AIP in somatotroph adenomas: the role of the ZAC1 pathway."
authors:
- Chahal HS
- Trivellin G
- Leontiou CA
- Alband N
- Fowkes RC
- Tahir A
- Igreja SC
- Chapple JP
- Jordan S
- Lupp A
- Schulz S
- Ansorge O
- Karavitaki N
- Carlsen E
- Wass JA
- Grossman AB
- Korbonits M
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-1111
keywords:
- Adenoma/drug therapy
- Animals
- "Cell Cycle Proteins/analysis, physiology"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Growth Hormone-Secreting Pituitary Adenoma/drug therapy
- Humans
- "Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/analysis, physiology"
- Rats
- "Receptors, Somatostatin/analysis"
- Signal Transduction
- "Somatostatin/analogs & derivatives"
- "Transcription Factors/analysis, physiology"
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/analysis, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Somatostatin analogs modulate AIP in somatotroph adenomas: the role of the ZAC1 pathway.
**Authors:** Chahal HS, Trivellin G, Leontiou CA, Alband N, Fowkes RC, Tahir A, Igreja SC, Chapple JP, Jordan S, Lupp A, Schulz S, Ansorge O, Karavitaki N, Carlsen E, Wass JA, Grossman AB, Korbonits M
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2012-1111](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2012-1111)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Aug;97(8):E1411-20. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-1111.
Epub 2012 Jun 1.

Somatostatin analogs modulate AIP in somatotroph adenomas: the role of the ZAC1
pathway.

Chahal HS(1), Trivellin G, Leontiou CA, Alband N, Fowkes RC, Tahir A, Igreja SC,
Chapple JP, Jordan S, Lupp A, Schulz S, Ansorge O, Karavitaki N, Carlsen E, Wass
JA, Grossman AB, Korbonits M.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Endocrinology, Barts and the London School of Medicine, Queen Mary
University of London, London EC1M 6BQ, United Kingdom.

CONTEXT: Somatotroph adenomas harboring aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting
protein (AIP) mutations respond less well to somatostatin analogs, suggesting
that the effects of somatostatin analogs may be mediated by AIP.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the investigation was to study the involvement of
AIP in the mechanism of effect of somatostatin analogs.
DESIGN: In the human study, a 16-wk somatostatin analog pretreatment compared
with no pretreatment. In the in vitro cell line study, the effect of
somatostatin analog treatment or small interfering RNA (siRNA)/plasmid
transfection were studied.
SETTING: The study was conducted at a university hospital.
PATIENTS: Thirty-nine sporadic and 10 familial acromegaly patients participated
in the study.
INTERVENTION: Interventions included preoperative lanreotide treatment and
pituitary surgery.
OUTCOME: For the human study, GH and IGF-I levels, AIP, and somatostatin
receptor staining were measured. For the cell line, AIP and ZAC1 (zinc finger
regulator of apoptosis and cell cycle arrest) expression, metabolic activity,
and clone formation were measured.
RESULTS: Lanreotide pretreatment reduced GH and IGF-I levels and tumor volume
(all P < 0.0001). AIP immunostaining was stronger in the lanreotide-pretreated
group vs. the surgery-only group (P < 0.001). After lanreotide pretreatment, the
AIP score correlated to IGF-I changes in females (R = 0.68, P < 0.05).
Somatostatin receptor staining was not reduced in samples with AIP mutations. In
GH3 cells, 1 nm octreotide increased AIP mRNA and protein (both P < 0.01) and
ZAC1 mRNA expression (P < 0.05). Overexpression of wild-type (but not mutant)
AIP increased ZAC1 mRNA expression, whereas AIP siRNA knockdown reduced ZAC1
mRNA (both P < 0.05). The siRNA-mediated knockdown of AIP led to an increased
metabolic activity and clonogenic ability of GH3 cells compared with cells
transfected with a nontargeting control (both P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that AIP may play a role in the mechanism of
action of somatostatin analogs via ZAC1 in sporadic somatotroph tumors and may
explain their lack of effectiveness in patients with AIP mutations.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2012-1111
PMID: 22659247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
