---
reference_id: "PMID:30305954"
title: Arrhythmias and conduction disorders associated with atrial septal defects.
authors:
- Williams MR
- Perry JC
journal: J Thorac Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.21037/jtd.2018.08.27
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arrhythmias and conduction disorders associated with atrial septal defects.
**Authors:** Williams MR, Perry JC
**Journal:** J Thorac Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.21037/jtd.2018.08.27](https://doi.org/10.21037/jtd.2018.08.27)

## Content

1. J Thorac Dis. 2018 Sep;10(Suppl 24):S2940-S2944. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2018.08.27.

Arrhythmias and conduction disorders associated with atrial septal defects.

Williams MR(1), Perry JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Rady Children's Hospital 
San Diego, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA 92123, USA.

Atrial septal defects (ASDs) are the most common form of congenital heart 
disease. There are 4 embryologic types of ASDs, and rhythm considerations vary 
based on type. ASDs have left-to-right shunt and primarily right-sided volume 
overload. This leads to electrical remodeling that may predispose patients to 
atrial tachyarrhythmias and conduction disorders. Risk for arrhythmias is 
increased with late age of ASD repair, shunt size, other factors such as 
pulmonary hypertension and comorbid conditions. Arrhythmia incidence is 
decreased after ASD closure, but remains elevated compared to general 
population. Medical and procedural therapy for arrhythmias should consider type 
and timing of ASD repair. Conduction disorders are rare. Sinus node dysfunction 
may be seen with late age of repair and large shunt size. Sinus venosus ASD 
exhibits a higher rate of sinus node dysfunction, especially with older surgical 
techniques. Ostium primum ASD has higher risk of spontaneous or post-operative 
AV block, though this is rare with current surgical techniques. Risk of AV block 
with surgical repair or device closure of secundum ASD is rare. Familial ASDs 
and other forms of congenital heart disease may be seen with mutations in 
associated myocardial transcription factors NKX2.5, GATA4, TBX6, along with 
conduction disorders such as AV block.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2018.08.27
PMCID: PMC6174150
PMID: 30305954

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.