---
reference_id: "PMID:24301056"
title: Further delineation of the SATB2 phenotype.
authors:
- Döcker D
- Schubach M
- Menzel M
- Munz M
- Spaich C
- Biskup S
- Bartholdi D
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.280
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2"
- Exome
- Facies
- Female
- Gene Order
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Loci
- Genotype
- Humans
- Matrix Attachment Region Binding Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Further delineation of the SATB2 phenotype.
**Authors:** Döcker D, Schubach M, Menzel M, Munz M, Spaich C, Biskup S, Bartholdi D
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2013.280](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2013.280)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Aug;22(8):1034-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.280. Epub 2013 
Dec 4.

Further delineation of the SATB2 phenotype.

Döcker D(1), Schubach M(2), Menzel M(2), Munz M(3), Spaich C(1), Biskup S(4), 
Bartholdi D(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Genetics, Klinikum Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany.
(2)CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Tübingen, Germany.
(4)1] Institute of Clinical Genetics, Klinikum Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany [2] 
CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany [3] Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, 
Tübingen, Germany.

SATB2 is an evolutionarily highly conserved chromatin remodeling gene located on 
chromosome 2q33.1. Vertebrate animal models have shown that Satb2 has a crucial 
role in craniofacial patterning and osteoblast differentiation, as well as in 
determining the fates of neuronal projections in the developing neocortex. In 
humans, chromosomal translocations and deletions of 2q33.1 leading to SATB2 
haploinsufficiency are associated with cleft palate (CP), facial dysmorphism and 
intellectual disability (ID). A single patient carrying a nonsense mutation in 
SATB2 has been described to date. In this study, we performed trio-exome 
sequencing in a 3-year-old girl with CP and severely delayed speech development, 
and her unaffected parents. Previously, the girl had undergone conventional and 
molecular karyotyping (microarray analysis), as well as targeted analysis for 
different diseases associated with developmental delay, including Angelman 
syndrome, Rett syndrome and Fragile X syndrome. No diagnosis could be 
established. Exome sequencing revealed a de novo nonsense mutation in the SATB2 
gene (c.715C>T; p.R239*). The identification of a second patient carrying a de 
novo nonsense mutation in SATB2 confirms that this gene is essential for normal 
craniofacial patterning and cognitive development. Based on our data and the 
literature published so far, we propose a new clinically recognizable syndrome - 
the SATB2-associated syndrome (SAS). SAS is likely to be underdiagnosed and 
should be considered in children with ID, severe speech delay, cleft or 
high-arched palate and abnormal dentition with crowded and irregularly shaped 
teeth.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.280
PMCID: PMC4350596
PMID: 24301056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]