---
reference_id: "PMID:29491034"
title: "Tuberculosis and lung damage: from epidemiology to pathophysiology."
authors:
- Ravimohan S
- Kornfeld H
- Weissman D
- Bisson GP
journal: Eur Respir Rev
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1183/16000617.0077-2017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tuberculosis and lung damage: from epidemiology to pathophysiology.
**Authors:** Ravimohan S, Kornfeld H, Weissman D, Bisson GP
**Journal:** Eur Respir Rev (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1183/16000617.0077-2017](https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0077-2017)

## Content

1. Eur Respir Rev. 2018 Feb 28;27(147):170077. doi: 10.1183/16000617.0077-2017. 
Print 2018 Mar 31.

Tuberculosis and lung damage: from epidemiology to pathophysiology.

Ravimohan S(1), Kornfeld H(2), Weissman D(3), Bisson GP(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Dept of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Perelman School of 
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 
shruthir@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(2)Dept of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, 
USA.
(3)Dept of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Perelman School of 
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Dept of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Center for Clinical Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

A past history of pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) is a risk factor for long-term 
respiratory impairment. Post-TB lung dysfunction often goes unrecognised, 
despite its relatively high prevalence and its association with reduced quality 
of life. Importantly, specific host and pathogen factors causing lung impairment 
remain unclear. Host immune responses probably play a dominant role in lung 
damage, as excessive inflammation and elevated expression of lung 
matrix-degrading proteases are common during TB. Variability in host genes that 
modulate these immune responses may determine the severity of lung impairment, 
but this hypothesis remains largely untested. In this review, we provide an 
overview of the epidemiological literature on post-TB lung impairment and link 
it to data on the pathogenesis of lung injury from the perspective of 
dysregulated immune responses and immunogenetics.

Copyright ©ERS 2018.

DOI: 10.1183/16000617.0077-2017
PMCID: PMC6019552
PMID: 29491034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: Disclosures can be found 
alongside this article at err.ersjournals.com