---
reference_id: "PMID:36913929"
title: Emerging Maripa Hantavirus as a Potential Cause of a Severe Health Threat in French Guiana.
authors:
- Matheus S
- Houcke S
- Lontsi Ngoula GR
- Lecaros P
- Pujo JM
- Higel N
- Ba A
- Cook F
- Djahi P
- Resiere D
- Hommel D
- Lavergne A
- Kallel H
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.22-0390
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Female
- French Guiana/epidemiology
- "Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- RNA Viruses
- Hospitals
- Orthohantavirus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emerging Maripa Hantavirus as a Potential Cause of a Severe Health Threat in French Guiana.
**Authors:** Matheus S, Houcke S, Lontsi Ngoula GR, Lecaros P, Pujo JM, Higel N, Ba A, Cook F, Djahi P, Resiere D, Hommel D, Lavergne A, Kallel H
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.22-0390](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.22-0390)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2023 Mar 13;108(5):1014-1016. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.22-0390. 
Print 2023 May 3.

Emerging Maripa Hantavirus as a Potential Cause of a Severe Health Threat in 
French Guiana.

Matheus S(1), Houcke S(1), Lontsi Ngoula GR(1), Lecaros P(1), Pujo JM(2), Higel 
N(1), Ba A(1), Cook F(1), Djahi P(1), Resiere D(3), Hommel D(1), Lavergne A(4), 
Kallel H(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Intensive Care Unit, Cayenne General Hospital, Cayenne, French Guiana.
(2)Emergency Department, Cayenne General Hospital, Cayenne, French Guiana.
(3)Intensive Care Unit, Martinique University Hospital, Martinique.
(4)National Hantavirus Reference Center, Institut Pasteur de la Guyane, 
Laboratoire Associé, French Guiana.
(5)Tropical Biome and Immunopathology, Université de Guyane, Cayenne, French 
Guiana.

We describe the clinical parameters and management of nine confirmed cases of 
hantavirus pulmonary syndrome reported in French Guiana since 2008. All patients 
were admitted to Cayenne Hospital. Seven patients were men and the mean age was 
48 years (range, 19-71 years). Two phases characterized the disease. The 
prodromal phase was characterized by fever (77.8%), myalgia (66.7%), and 
gastrointestinal symptoms (vomiting and diarrhea; 55.6%) starting, on average, 5 
days before the illness phase, which was characterized by respiratory failure in 
all patients. Five patients died (55.6%) and the length of stay in the intensive 
care unit was 19 days (range, 11-28 days) for survivors. Detection of two 
back-to-back recent cases highlights the reason to screen for hantavirus 
infection during the nonspecific phase of the disease, in particular when 
concomitant pulmonary infection and digestive disorders are observed. Specific 
longitudinal serological surveys must also be used to identify other potential 
clinical forms of the disease in French Guiana.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.22-0390
PMCID: PMC10160908
PMID: 36913929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]