---
reference_id: PMID:34348598
title: Disorders of vision in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Dhanapalaratnam R
- Markoulli M
- Krishnan AV
journal: Clin Exp Optom
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/08164622.2021.1947745
keywords:
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Multiple Sclerosis/complications, diagnosis, pathology"
- "Optic Atrophy, Hereditary, Leber/diagnosis"
- Optic Nerve/pathology
- "Optic Neuritis/complications, etiology"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Vision Disorders/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disorders of vision in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Dhanapalaratnam R, Markoulli M, Krishnan AV
**Journal:** Clin Exp Optom (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/08164622.2021.1947745](https://doi.org/10.1080/08164622.2021.1947745)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Optom. 2022 Jan;105(1):3-12. doi: 10.1080/08164622.2021.1947745. Epub
 2021 Aug 4.

Disorders of vision in multiple sclerosis.

Dhanapalaratnam R(1), Markoulli M(2), Krishnan AV(1).

Author information:
(1)Prince of Wales Clinical School, University of New South Wales Sydney, 
Sydney, Australia.
(2)School of Optometry and Vision Science, University of New South Wales Sydney, 
Sydney, Australia.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a neurological inflammatory disorder known to attack 
the heavily myelinated regions of the nervous system including the optic nerves, 
cerebellum, brainstem and spinal cord. This review will discuss the clinical 
manifestations and investigations for MS and other similar neurological 
inflammatory disorders affecting vision, as well as the effects of MS treatments 
on vision. Assessment of visual pathways is critical, considering MS can involve 
multiple components of the visual pathway, including optic nerves, uvea, retina 
and occipital cortex. Optical coherence tomography is increasingly being 
recognised as a highly sensitive tool in detecting subclinical optic nerve 
changes. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is critical in MS diagnosis and in 
predicting long-term disability. Optic neuritis in MS involves unilateral vision 
loss, with characteristic pain on eye movement. The visual loss in neuromyelitis 
optica spectrum disorder tends to be more severe with preferential altitudinal 
field loss, chiasmal and tract lesions are also more common. Other differential 
diagnoses include chronic relapsing inflammatory optic neuropathy and giant cell 
arteritis. Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy affects young males and visual 
loss tends to be painless and subacute, typically involving both optic nerves. 
MS lesions in the vestibulocerebellum, brainstem, thalamus and basal ganglia may 
lead to abnormalities of gaze, saccades, pursuit and nystagmus which can be 
identified on eye examination. Medial longitudinal fasciculus lesions can cause 
another frequent presentation of MS, internuclear ophthalmoplegia, with failure 
of ipsilateral eye adduction and contralateral eye abduction nystagmus. 
Treatments for MS include high-dose corticosteroids for acute relapses and 
disease-modifying medications for relapse prevention. These therapies may also 
have adverse effects on vision, including central serous retinopathy with 
corticosteroid therapy and macular oedema with fingolimod.

DOI: 10.1080/08164622.2021.1947745
PMID: 34348598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]