---
reference_id: PMID:30037098
title: TGF-β Signaling-Related Genes and Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and Dissections.
authors:
- Takeda N
- Hara H
- Fujiwara T
- Kanaya T
- Maemura S
- Komuro I
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3390/ijms19072125
keywords:
- "Angiotensin II/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Aortic Aneurysm, Thoracic/genetics, metabolism"
- "Fibrillin-1/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Loeys-Dietz Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- "Transforming Growth Factor beta/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TGF-β Signaling-Related Genes and Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and Dissections.
**Authors:** Takeda N, Hara H, Fujiwara T, Kanaya T, Maemura S, Komuro I
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms19072125](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms19072125)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2018 Jul 21;19(7):2125. doi: 10.3390/ijms19072125.

TGF-β Signaling-Related Genes and Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and Dissections.

Takeda N(1), Hara H(2), Fujiwara T(3), Kanaya T(4), Maemura S(5), Komuro I(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The University of Tokyo Hospital, 
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. notakeda-tky@umin.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The University of Tokyo Hospital, 
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. hironorihara1022@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The University of Tokyo Hospital, 
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. sasasatf5804@yahoo.co.jp.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The University of Tokyo Hospital, 
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. sourmint1007@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The University of Tokyo Hospital, 
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. irontennispart@yahoo.co.jp.
(6)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The University of Tokyo Hospital, 
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. komuro-tky@umin.ac.jp.

Transforming growth factor-β (TGF)-β signaling plays a crucial role in the 
development and maintenance of various organs, including the vasculature. 
Accordingly, the mutations in TGF-β signaling pathway-related genes cause 
heritable disorders of the connective tissue, such as Marfan syndrome (MFS), 
Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS), and Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome (SGS), and these 
syndromes may affect skeletal, ocular, pulmonary, and cardiovascular systems. 
Aortic root aneurysms are common problems that can result in aortic dissection 
or rupture, which is the leading cause of sudden death in the natural history of 
MFS and LDS, and recent improvements in surgical treatment have improved life 
expectancy. However, there is currently no genotype-specific medical treatment. 
Accumulating evidence suggest that not only structural weakness of connective 
tissue but also increased TGF-β signaling contributes to the complicated 
pathogenesis of aortic aneurysm formation, but a comprehensive understanding of 
governing molecular mechanisms remains lacking. Inhibition of angiotensin II 
receptor signaling and endothelial dysfunction have gained attention as a 
possible MFS treatment strategy, but interactions with TGF-β signaling remain 
elusive. Heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in TGF-β receptors 1 and 2 
(TGFBR1 and TGFBR2) cause LDS, but TGF-β signaling is activated in the aorta 
(referred to as the TGF-β paradox) by mechanisms yet to be elucidated. In this 
review, we present and discuss the current understanding of molecular mechanisms 
responsible for aortopathies of MFS and related disorders.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms19072125
PMCID: PMC6073540
PMID: 30037098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.