---
reference_id: "PMID:26537301"
title: Varying responses of PML-RARA with different genetic mutations to arsenic trioxide.
authors:
- Liu J
- Zhu HH
- Jiang H
- Jiang Q
- Huang XJ
journal: Blood
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-04-637678
keywords:
- "Active Transport, Cell Nucleus/drug effects"
- Arsenic Trioxide
- Arsenicals/pharmacology
- "Cell Nucleus/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Leukemic/drug effects"
- HeLa Cells
- "Hematopoietic Stem Cells/drug effects, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- Oxides/pharmacology
- Point Mutation
- Prognosis
- Sumoylation/drug effects
- U937 Cells
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Varying responses of PML-RARA with different genetic mutations to arsenic trioxide.
**Authors:** Liu J, Zhu HH, Jiang H, Jiang Q, Huang XJ
**Journal:** Blood (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2015-04-637678](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2015-04-637678)

## Content

1. Blood. 2016 Jan 14;127(2):243-50. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-04-637678. Epub 2015
 Nov 4.

Varying responses of PML-RARA with different genetic mutations to arsenic
trioxide.

Liu J(1), Zhu HH(1), Jiang H(1), Jiang Q(1), Huang XJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Peking University People's Hospital, Peking University Institute of
Hematology, Beijing Key Laboratory of Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation,
Beijing, China.

Erratum in
    Blood. 2016 Mar 17;127(11):1517.

Resistance to arsenic and/or all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) is a challenging
problem in the clinical management of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL).
Acquired genetic mutations in the PML moiety of the PML-RARA fusion gene are
found in some patients with relapsed/refractory APL. Whether all of the
identified point mutations play a role and have a similar function in the
mechanisms of arsenic resistance remains unknown. Here we performed in vitro
functional analyses and a retrospective analysis of APL patients to investigate
the effect of PML-RARA mutations in mediating resistance to arsenic trioxide.
Among the 5-point mutations in the PML part of PML-RARA identified in patients
with relapsed APL, we found that A216V, S214L, and A216T mutations could
attenuate the negative regulation of arsenic on PML-RARA, resulting in the
retention of oncoproteins. In contrast, L217F and S220G mutations functioned
weakly in this context. Furthermore, we demonstrated that either increasing the
concentration of arsenic trioxide or combining it with ATRA could overcome the
mutation-triggered arsenic resistance in vitro. In addition to presenting more
evidence to reinforce the correlation of genetic mutations in PML-RARA with
arsenic efficacy, we provide novel insight into the functional difference of
acquired mutations of PML-RARA both in vitro and in the clinical setting. Our
findings may help predict the prognosis and select more effective strategies
during APL therapy.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2015-04-637678
PMID: 26537301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
