---
reference_id: "PMID:38044137"
title: "The frequency of mutations in advanced thyroid cancer in Japan: a single-center study."
authors:
- Toda S
- Iwasaki H
- Okubo Y
- Hayashi H
- Kadoya M
- Takahashi H
- Yokose T
- Hiroshima Y
- Masudo K
journal: Endocr J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ23-0342
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Female
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- Iodine Radioisotopes
- Japan/epidemiology
- "Thyroid Carcinoma, Anaplastic"
- "Thyroid Cancer, Papillary/genetics"
- Adenocarcinoma
- Mutation
- "Proline/analogs & derivatives"
- Thiocarbamates
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The frequency of mutations in advanced thyroid cancer in Japan: a single-center study.
**Authors:** Toda S, Iwasaki H, Okubo Y, Hayashi H, Kadoya M, Takahashi H, Yokose T, Hiroshima Y, Masudo K
**Journal:** Endocr J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1507/endocrj.EJ23-0342](https://doi.org/10.1507/endocrj.EJ23-0342)

## Content

1. Endocr J. 2024 Jan 29;71(1):31-37. doi: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ23-0342. Epub 2023
Dec  1.

The frequency of mutations in advanced thyroid cancer in Japan: a single-center
study.

Toda S(1), Iwasaki H(1), Okubo Y(2), Hayashi H(3), Kadoya M(1)(4), Takahashi
H(5), Yokose T(2), Hiroshima Y(6)(7), Masudo K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrine Surgery, Kanagawa Cancer Center, Kanagawa 241-8515,
Japan.
(2)Department of Pathology, Kanagawa Cancer Center, Kanagawa 241-8515, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Yokohama Municipal Citizen's Hospital, Kanagawa
221-0855, Japan.
(4)Department of Breast and Thyroid Surgery, Yokohama City University Medical
Center, Kanagawa 232-0024, Japan.
(5)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Kanagawa Cancer Center,
Kanagawa 241-8515, Japan.
(6)Department of Cancer Genome Medicine, Kanagawa Cancer Center, Kanagawa
241-8515, Japan.
(7)Research Institute Division of Advanced Cancer Therapeutics, Kanagawa Cancer
Center Research Institute, Kanagawa, 241-8515, Japan.

We analyzed the outcomes of genetic testing to study the frequency of mutations
in advanced thyroid cancer in Japan. Patients (n = 96) with unresectable or
metastatic thyroid carcinoma were included for retrospective chart review.
Results of gene panel testing, which was performed between May 2020 and April
2023, were analyzed. The median age of the patients was 73.5 years (range,
17-88); 59 were women, and 39 were men. Overall, 17 patients had anaplastic
thyroid carcinoma (ATC), 68 had papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), 7 had
follicular thyroid carcinoma, and 6 had poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma
(PDTC). Of the 81 patients with differentiated thyroid carcinoma (DTC) and PDTC,
88.9% were radioactive iodine-refractory, and 32.7% of all cases had previously
been treated with multiple kinase inhibitors. Of ATC cases, 52.9% had BRAF
mutations, and 5.9% had RET fusion. Of PTC cases, 83.1% had BRAF mutations, 9.2%
had RET fusion, and 1.5% had NTRK fusion. One case each of ATC and PTC had a
tumor mutation burden of ≥10. ATC cases had a significantly higher prevalence of
TP53 alterations than the other cases (82.3% vs. 11.8%), whereas the frequencies
of TERT promoter mutations were 88.2% in ATC cases and 64.7% in the other cases,
albeit without a significant difference. In conclusion, 58.8% of ATC, 93.8% of
PTC, and 42.9% of PDTC had genetic alterations linked to therapeutic agents.
Active gene panel testing is required to increase treatment options.

DOI: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ23-0342
PMID: 38044137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
