---
reference_id: "PMID:35218102"
title: "The 2021 WHO Classification of Tumors of the Central Nervous System: An update on pediatric low-grade gliomas and glioneuronal tumors."
authors:
- Bale TA
- Rosenblum MK
journal: Brain Pathol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/bpa.13060
keywords:
- Astrocytoma/pathology
- Brain Neoplasms/pathology
- Central Nervous System/pathology
- Central Nervous System Neoplasms/pathology
- Child
- Glioma/genetics
- Humans
- "Neoplasms, Neuroepithelial/genetics"
- World Health Organization
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The 2021 WHO Classification of Tumors of the Central Nervous System: An update on pediatric low-grade gliomas and glioneuronal tumors.
**Authors:** Bale TA, Rosenblum MK
**Journal:** Brain Pathol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bpa.13060](https://doi.org/10.1111/bpa.13060)

## Content

1. Brain Pathol. 2022 Jul;32(4):e13060. doi: 10.1111/bpa.13060. Epub 2022 Feb 25.

The 2021 WHO Classification of Tumors of the Central Nervous System: An update 
on pediatric low-grade gliomas and glioneuronal tumors.

Bale TA(1), Rosenblum MK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
New York, USA.

The 2021 5th edition of the WHO Classification of Tumors of the Central Nervous 
System reflects the discovery of genetic alterations underlying many central 
nervous system (CNS) neoplasms. Insights gained from technologic advances and 
novel applications in molecular diagnostics, including next-generation 
sequencing and DNA methylation-based profiling, coupled with the recognition of 
clinicopathologic correlates, have prompted substantial changes to CNS tumor 
classification; this is particularly true for pediatric low-grade gliomas and 
glioneuronal tumors (pLGG/GNTs). The 2021 WHO now classifies gliomas, 
glioneuronal tumors and neuronal tumors into 6 families, three of which 
encompass pLGG/LGNTs: "Pediatric type diffuse low-grade gliomas," "circumscribed 
astrocytic gliomas," and "glioneuronal and neuronal tumors." Among these are six 
newly recognized tumor types: "diffuse astrocytoma, MYB or MYBL1-altered"; 
"polymorphous low grade neuroepithelial tumor of the young (PLNTY)"; "diffuse 
low-grade glioma-MAPK altered"; "Diffuse glioneuronal tumor with 
oligodendroglioma-like features and nuclear clusters (DGONC)"; "myxoid 
glioneuronal tumor (MGT)"; and "multinodular and vacuolating neuronal tumor 
(MVNT)." We review these newly recognized entities in the context of general 
changes to the WHO schema, discuss implications of the new classification for 
treatment of pLGG/LGNT, and consider strategies for molecular testing and 
interpretation.

© 2022 The Authors. Brain Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf 
of International Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/bpa.13060
PMCID: PMC9245930
PMID: 35218102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.