---
reference_id: "PMID:16338065"
title: Aurora-A overexpression associates with Ha-ras codon-12 mutation and blackfoot disease endemic area in bladder cancer.
authors:
- Tseng YS
- Tzeng CC
- Huang CY
- Chen PH
- Chiu AW
- Hsu PY
- Huang GC
- Wang YC
- Liu HS
journal: Cancer Lett
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2005.10.014
keywords:
- Arsenic/toxicity
- Aurora Kinases
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic"
- Codon
- Endemic Diseases
- "Genes, ras"
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Peripheral Vascular Diseases/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aurora-A overexpression associates with Ha-ras codon-12 mutation and blackfoot disease endemic area in bladder cancer.
**Authors:** Tseng YS, Tzeng CC, Huang CY, Chen PH, Chiu AW, Hsu PY, Huang GC, Wang YC, Liu HS
**Journal:** Cancer Lett (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.canlet.2005.10.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2005.10.014)

## Content

1. Cancer Lett. 2006 Sep 8;241(1):93-101. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2005.10.014. Epub
 2005 Dec 9.

Aurora-A overexpression associates with Ha-ras codon-12 mutation and blackfoot
disease endemic area in bladder cancer.

Tseng YS(1), Tzeng CC, Huang CY, Chen PH, Chiu AW, Hsu PY, Huang GC, Wang YC,
Liu HS.

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan, ROC.

Our data revealed that 59.4% of the bladder cancer specimens showed Aurora-A
overexpression, of which 31.8% also had Ha-ras codon-12 mutation; 45.5% were
from blackfoot-disease endemic areas in which arsenic exposure is a major
environment factor associated with various cancer formation. We further
demonstrated that arsenic treatment of the immortalized bladder cell line, E7,
increased Aurora-A expression. All together, co-existence of Aurora-A
overexpression and Ha-ras mutation suggests a possible additively effect on the
tumorigenesis of bladder cancer. In addition, Aurora-A overexpression and
up-regulated by arsenic exposure opens a new direction for exploring the
occurrence of bladder cancer occurrence in Taiwan.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2005.10.014
PMID: 16338065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
