---
reference_id: "PMID:27986596"
title: Effects of the synthetic neurosteroid ganaxolone on seizure activity and behavioral deficits in an Angelman syndrome mouse model.
authors:
- Ciarlone SL
- Wang X
- Rogawski MA
- Weeber EJ
journal: Neuropharmacology
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2016.12.009
keywords:
- "Angelman Syndrome/drug therapy, physiopathology, psychology"
- Animals
- Anti-Anxiety Agents/pharmacology
- Anticonvulsants/pharmacology
- "Anxiety/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- "Hippocampus/drug effects, physiopathology"
- "Long-Term Potentiation/drug effects, physiology"
- Male
- "Maze Learning/drug effects, physiology"
- "Memory, Short-Term/drug effects, physiology"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Motor Activity/drug effects, physiology"
- Pentylenetetrazole
- "Pregnanolone/analogs & derivatives, pharmacology"
- "Receptors, GABA-A/metabolism"
- "Seizures/drug therapy, physiopathology, psychology"
- "Spatial Memory/drug effects, physiology"
- Tissue Culture Techniques
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of the synthetic neurosteroid ganaxolone on seizure activity and behavioral deficits in an Angelman syndrome mouse model.
**Authors:** Ciarlone SL, Wang X, Rogawski MA, Weeber EJ
**Journal:** Neuropharmacology (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuropharm.2016.12.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2016.12.009)

## Content

1. Neuropharmacology. 2017 Apr;116:142-150. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2016.12.009.  Epub 2016 Dec 13.

Effects of the synthetic neurosteroid ganaxolone on seizure activity and
behavioral deficits in an Angelman syndrome mouse model.

Ciarlone SL(1), Wang X(2), Rogawski MA(3), Weeber EJ(4).

Author information:
(1)USF Health Byrd Alzheimer's Institute, Tampa, FL, USA; Department of
Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL,
USA.
(2)USF Health Byrd Alzheimer's Institute, Tampa, FL, USA.
(3)Departments of Neurology and Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of
California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA.
(4)USF Health Byrd Alzheimer's Institute, Tampa, FL, USA; Department of
Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL,
USA. Electronic address: eweeber@health.usf.edu.

Angelman syndrome (AS) is a rare neurogenetic disorder characterized by severe
developmental delay, motor impairments, and epilepsy. GABAergic dysfunction is
believed to contribute to many of the phenotypic deficits seen in AS. We
hypothesized that restoration of inhibitory tone mediated by extrasynaptic GABAA
receptors could provide therapeutic benefit. Here, we report that ganaxolone, a
synthetic neurosteroid that acts as a positive allosteric modulator of synaptic
and extrasynaptic GABAA receptors, was anxiolytic, anticonvulsant, and improved
motor deficits in the Ube3a-deficient mouse model of AS when administered by
implanted mini-pump for 3 days or 4 weeks. Treatment for 4 weeks also led to
recovery of spatial working memory and hippocampal synaptic plasticity deficits.
This study demonstrates that ganaxolone ameliorates many of the behavioral
abnormalities in the adult AS mouse, and tolerance did not occur to the
therapeutic effects of the drug. The results support clinical studies to
investigate ganaxolone as a symptomatic treatment for AS.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2016.12.009
PMID: 27986596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
