---
reference_id: "PMID:23235670"
title: Phonics training for English-speaking poor readers.
authors:
- McArthur G
- Eve PM
- Jones K
- Banales E
- Kohnen S
- Anandakumar T
- Larsen L
- Marinus E
- Wang HC
- Castles A
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD009115.pub2
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Dyslexia/rehabilitation
- Female
- Humans
- Language
- Male
- Phonation/physiology
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Reading
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phonics training for English-speaking poor readers.
**Authors:** McArthur G, Eve PM, Jones K, Banales E, Kohnen S, Anandakumar T, Larsen L, Marinus E, Wang HC, Castles A
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD009115.pub2](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD009115.pub2)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012 Dec 12;12:CD009115. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD009115.pub2.

Phonics training for English-speaking poor readers.

McArthur G(1), Eve PM, Jones K, Banales E, Kohnen S, Anandakumar T, Larsen L, 
Marinus E, Wang HC, Castles A.

Author information:
(1)ARC Centre of Excellence of Cognition and its Disorders, Department of 
Cognitive Science,Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia. 
genevieve.mcarthur@mq.edu.au.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018 Nov 14;11:CD009115. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD009115.pub3.

BACKGROUND: Around 5% of English speakers have a significant problem with 
learning to read words. Poor word readers are often trained to use letter-sound 
rules to improve their reading skills. This training is commonly called phonics. 
Well over 100 studies have administered some form of phonics training to poor 
word readers. However, there are surprisingly few systematic reviews or 
meta-analyses of these studies. The most well-known review was done by the 
National Reading Panel (Ehri 2001) 12 years ago and needs updating. The most 
recent review (Suggate 2010) focused solely on children and did not include 
unpublished studies.
OBJECTIVES: The primary aim of this review was to measure the effect that 
phonics training has on the literacy skills of English-speaking children, 
adolescents, and adults whose reading was at least one standard deviation (SD), 
one year, or one grade below the expected level, despite no reported problems 
that could explain their impaired ability to learn to read. A secondary 
objective was to explore the impact of various factors, such as length of 
training or training group size, that might moderate the effect of phonics 
training on poor word reading skills.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the following databases in July 2012: CENTRAL 2012 
(Issue 6), MEDLINE 1948 to June week 3 2012, EMBASE 1980 to 2012 week 26, DARE 
2013 (Issue 6), ERIC (1966 to current), PsycINFO (1806 to current), CINAHL (1938 
to current), Science Citation Index (1970 to 29 June 2012), Social Science 
Citation Index (1970 to 29 June 2012), Conference Proceedings Citation Index - 
Science (1990 to 29 June 2012), Conference Proceedings Citation Index - Social 
Science & Humanities (1990 to 29 June 2012), ZETOC, Index to Theses-UK and 
Ireland, ClinicalTrials.gov, ICTRP, the metaRegister of Controlled Trials, 
ProQuest Dissertations and Theses, DART Europe E-theses Portal, Australasian 
Digital Theses Program, Education Research Theses, Electronic Theses Online 
System, Networked Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations. Theses Canada 
portal, www.dissertation.com, and www.thesisabstracts.com. We also contacted 
experts and examined the reference lists of published studies.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included studies that use randomisation, 
quasi-randomisation, or minimisation to allocate participants to either a 
phonics intervention group (phonics alone, phonics and phoneme awareness 
training, or phonics and irregular word reading training) or a control group (no 
training or alternative training, such as maths). Participants were 
English-speaking children, adolescents, or adults whose word reading was below 
the level expected for their age for no known reason (that is, they had adequate 
attention and no known physical, neurological, or psychological problems).
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently selected studies, 
assessed risk of bias, and extracted data.
MAIN RESULTS: We found 11 studies that met the criteria for this review. They 
involved 736 participants. We measured the effect of phonics training on eight 
outcomes. The amount of evidence for each outcome varied considerably, ranging 
from 10 studies for word reading accuracy to one study for nonword reading 
fluency. The effect sizes for the outcomes were: word reading accuracy 
standardised mean difference (SMD) 0.47 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.06 to 
0.88; 10 studies), nonword reading accuracy SMD 0.76 (95% CI 0.25 to 1.27; eight 
studies), word reading fluency SMD -0.51 (95% CI -1.14 to 0.13; two studies), 
reading comprehension SMD 0.14 (95% CI -0.46 to 0.74; three studies), spelling 
SMD 0.36 (95% CI -0.27 to 1.00; two studies), letter-sound knowledge SMD 0.35 
(95% CI 0.04 to 0.65; three studies), and phonological output SMD 0.38 (95% 
-0.04 to 0.80; four studies). There was one result in a negative direction for 
nonword reading fluency SMD 0.38 (95% CI -0.55 to 1.32; one study), though this 
was not statistically significant.We did five subgroup analyses on two outcomes 
that had sufficient data (word reading accuracy and nonword reading accuracy). 
The efficacy of phonics training was not moderated significantly by training 
type (phonics alone versus phonics and phoneme awareness versus phonics and 
irregular word training), training intensity (less than two hours per week 
versus at least two hours per week), training duration (less than three months 
versus at least three months), training group size (one-on-one versus small 
group training), or training administrator (human administration versus computer 
administration).
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Phonics training appears to be effective for improving 
some reading skills. Specifically, statistically significant effects were found 
for nonword reading accuracy (large effect), word reading accuracy (moderate 
effect), and letter-sound knowledge (small-to-moderate effect). For several 
other outcomes, there were small or moderate effect sizes that did not reach 
statistical significance but may be meaningful: word reading fluency, spelling, 
phonological output, and reading comprehension. The effect for nonword reading 
fluency, which was measured in only one study, was in a negative direction, but 
this was not statistically significant.Future studies of phonics training need 
to improve the reporting of procedures used for random sequence generation, 
allocation concealment, and blinding of participants, personnel, and outcome 
assessment.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD009115.pub2
PMID: 23235670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]