---
reference_id: "PMID:39947042"
title: "On how to feed critically ill children in intensive care: A slowly shifting paradigm."
authors:
- Gunst J
- Vanhorebeek I
- Verbruggen SC
- Dulfer K
- Joosten KF
- Van den Berghe G
journal: Clin Nutr
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2025.02.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# On how to feed critically ill children in intensive care: A slowly shifting paradigm.
**Authors:** Gunst J, Vanhorebeek I, Verbruggen SC, Dulfer K, Joosten KF, Van den Berghe G
**Journal:** Clin Nutr (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clnu.2025.02.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnu.2025.02.003)

## Content

1. Clin Nutr. 2025 Mar;46:169-180. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2025.02.003. Epub 2025 Feb
 6.

On how to feed critically ill children in intensive care: A slowly shifting 
paradigm.

Gunst J(1), Vanhorebeek I(2), Verbruggen SC(3), Dulfer K(4), Joosten KF(5), Van 
den Berghe G(6).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Division and Laboratory of Intensive Care Medicine, Department of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49, Leuven, Belgium. 
Electronic address: jan.gunst@kuleuven.be.
(2)Clinical Division and Laboratory of Intensive Care Medicine, Department of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49, Leuven, Belgium. 
Electronic address: ilse.vanhorebeek@kuleuven.be.
(3)Division of Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Department of Neonatal and 
Pediatric ICU, Erasmus Medical Center, Sophia Children's Hospital, Dr. 
Molewaterplein 40, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
s.verbruggen@erasmusmc.nl.
(4)Division of Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Department of Neonatal and 
Pediatric ICU, Erasmus Medical Center, Sophia Children's Hospital, Dr. 
Molewaterplein 40, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
k.dulfer@erasmusmc.nl.
(5)Division of Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Department of Neonatal and 
Pediatric ICU, Erasmus Medical Center, Sophia Children's Hospital, Dr. 
Molewaterplein 40, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
k.joosten@erasmusmc.nl.
(6)Clinical Division and Laboratory of Intensive Care Medicine, Department of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49, Leuven, Belgium. 
Electronic address: greet.vandenberghe@med.kuleuven.be.

Critically ill children requiring treatment in a pediatric intensive care unit 
(PICU) suffer from anorexia and/or feeding intolerance. The resulting 
macronutrient deficit associates with poor outcome. Until recently, this 
association formed the basis for initiating enteral or parenteral feeding early 
to improve outcome. The multicenter 
"Early-versus-Late-Parenteral-Nutrition-in-the-Pediatric-Intensive-Care-Unit" 
randomized controlled trial (PEPaNIC-RCT) addressed whether this association is 
causal. It showed that early supplementation of insufficient/contraindicated 
enteral nutrition with parenteral nutrition, as compared with accepting a 
macronutrient deficit throughout the first week in the PICU, did not improve 
outcome. On the contrary, it caused more infections and prolonged organ support 
and PICU stay, and adversely affected neurodevelopmental outcomes 2 and 4 years 
later. Harm was present in all subgroups and appeared explained by the 
macronutrient dose, more specifically the amino-acid dose, not lipid or glucose 
doses. These findings corroborated results from large-scale adult RCTs. 
Mechanisms of harm from early enhanced nutrition comprised suppressed cellular 
repair pathways like autophagy and ketogenesis, suppressed illness-induced 
alterations in thyroid hormone metabolism, more iatrogenic hyperglycemia, 
increased urea cycle activity through anabolic resistance, and induction of 
epigenetic modifications that mediate longer-term developmental impairments. 
These results came unexpected to many pediatric intensivists. Hence, the 
paradigm has only slowly begun to shift toward more restrictive macronutrient 
administration in the acute phase of critical illness. Benefits of early fasting 
responses have become clear, provided micronutrients are given to prevent 
deficiencies and refeeding syndrome. These insights open perspectives for 
studies investigating novel nutritional strategies to activate fasting-induced 
cellular repair while avoiding prolonged starvation.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clnu.2025.02.003
PMCID: PMC11860305
PMID: 39947042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest None of the authors have 
any conflict of interest to disclose.