---
reference_id: "PMID:36624640"
title: "Impact of Microgravity on Virulence, Antibiotic Resistance and Gene Expression in Beneficial and Pathogenic Microorganisms."
authors:
- Salavatifar M
- Ahmadi SM
- Todorov SD
- Khosravi-Darani K
- Tripathy A
journal: Mini Rev Med Chem
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2174/1389557523666230109160620
keywords:
- Humans
- Weightlessness
- Virulence/genetics
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/pharmacology
- Bacteria/genetics
- Bacterial Infections
- "Drug Resistance, Microbial/genetics"
- Gene Expression
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of Microgravity on Virulence, Antibiotic Resistance and Gene Expression in Beneficial and Pathogenic Microorganisms.
**Authors:** Salavatifar M, Ahmadi SM, Todorov SD, Khosravi-Darani K, Tripathy A
**Journal:** Mini Rev Med Chem (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1389557523666230109160620](https://doi.org/10.2174/1389557523666230109160620)

## Content

1. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2023;23(16):1608-1622. doi: 
10.2174/1389557523666230109160620.

Impact of Microgravity on Virulence, Antibiotic Resistance and Gene Expression 
in Beneficial and Pathogenic Microorganisms.

Salavatifar M(1), Ahmadi SM(2), Todorov SD(3), Khosravi-Darani K(4), Tripathy 
A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Aerospace Research Institute, Ministry of Science, 
Research and Technology, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Food Science and Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tehran 
Medical Sciences, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran.
(3)ProBacLab, Department of Advanced Convergence, Handong Global University, 
Gyeongbuk, 37554, Pohang, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Food Science and Technology, National Nutrition and Food 
Technology Research Institute, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Dairy Science and Food Technology, Institute of Agricultural 
Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India.

During space missions, the impact of the space conditions (both microgravity and 
radiation) on physiologic and metabolic aspects of the microbiota of astronauts' 
bodies should be considered. Changes depend on the mission's duration, types of 
organisms, and ecology. Reported alterations are related to changes in 
morphology, growth, gene expression, and physiology of cells, resulting in 
increased virulence, acid, antibiotic resistance, biofilm formation, secondary 
metabolism, and microbial mutations. Accordingly, recent research indicates the 
impacts of simulated microgravity on human physiology and bacterial 
characteristics. This paper has reviewed the aspects of microgravity on changes 
in microbiota, including virulence, antibiotic resistance, and gene expression. 
Microgravity can undermine humans and makes influence bacterial pathogenicity. 
The review of papers shows that some microorganisms showed higher pathogenicity 
under microgravity conditions. Moreover, sulfamethoxazole had the highest 
resistance among Gram-positive microorganisms, and gentamicin had the highest 
resistance in Gram-negative bacteria. All antibiotics reviewed under 
microgravity conditions were robust in both groups of microorganisms compared to 
the gravity condition. Furthermore, some gene expression was altered in bacteria 
under microgravity conditions compared to Earth conditions (standard bacterial 
growth conditions). Changes in microbial behavior under microgravity directly 
influence astronauts' health conditions, and a detailed analysis of known facts 
can provide essential information for the selection of appropriate probiotics 
for these specific cases during the missions and after the recovery processes. 
Moreover, the study of microorganisms changes in the absence of gravity will 
help to understand the mechanisms of causing diseases on Earth and may be 
applied in clinical practice.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1389557523666230109160620
PMID: 36624640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]