---
reference_id: "PMID:28122670"
title: "Atopic dermatitis and early childhood caries: Results of the GUSTO study."
authors:
- Kalhan TA
- Loo EXL
- Kalhan AC
- Kramer MS
- Karunakaran B
- Un Lam C
- Van Bever H
- Shek LP
- Goh A
- Chong YS
- Lee BW
- Gluckman P
- Kwek K
- Saw SM
- Godfrey K
- Hsu CY
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2016.10.038
keywords:
- "Dental Caries/epidemiology, etiology"
- "Dermatitis, Atopic/complications, diagnosis"
- Disease Susceptibility
- Humans
- Odds Ratio
- Population Surveillance
- "Singapore/epidemiology, ethnology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atopic dermatitis and early childhood caries: Results of the GUSTO study.
**Authors:** Kalhan TA, Loo EXL, Kalhan AC, Kramer MS, Karunakaran B, Un Lam C, Van Bever H, Shek LP, Goh A, Chong YS, Lee BW, Gluckman P, Kwek K, Saw SM, Godfrey K, Hsu CY
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2016.10.038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2016.10.038)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017 Jun;139(6):2000-2003. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2016.10.038. Epub 2017 Jan 23.

Atopic dermatitis and early childhood caries: Results of the GUSTO study.

Kalhan TA(1), Loo EXL(2), Kalhan AC(1), Kramer MS(3), Karunakaran B(1), Un Lam 
C(1), Van Bever H(4), Shek LP(5), Goh A(6), Chong YS(7), Lee BW(8), Gluckman 
P(9), Kwek K(10), Saw SM(11), Godfrey K(12), Hsu CY(13).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Oral Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Singapore Institute of Clinical Sciences, Agency for Science, Technology and 
Research (A*STAR), Singapore.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, McGill University, Faculty of Medicine, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada; Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McGill University, 
Faculty of Medicine, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Epidemiology, 
Biostatistics & Occupational Health, The Montreal Children's Hospital, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada.
(4)Khoo Teck Puat-National University Children's Medical Institute, National 
University Hospital, Singapore; Department of Paediatrics, National University 
of Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Singapore Institute of Clinical Sciences, Agency for Science, Technology and 
Research (A*STAR), Singapore; Khoo Teck Puat-National University Children's 
Medical Institute, National University Hospital, Singapore; Department of 
Paediatrics, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(6)Allergy Service, Department of Paediatrics, KK Women's and Children's 
Hospital, Singapore.
(7)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, 
National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(8)Department of Paediatrics, National University of Singapore, Singapore; Mount 
Elizabeth Medical Centre, Singapore.
(9)Growth, Development and Metabolism Programme, Singapore Institute for 
Clinical Sciences, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 
Singapore; Liggins Institute, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(10)Department of Maternal Fetal Medicine, KK Women's and Children's Hospital, 
Singapore.
(11)Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore.
(12)NIHR Southampton Biomedical Research Centre, University of Southampton and 
University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, United 
Kingdom; Medical Research Council Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, Southampton, 
United Kingdom.
(13)Discipline of Oral Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore. Electronic address: denhsus@nus.edu.sg.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2016.10.038
PMID: 28122670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]