---
reference_id: "PMID:28377277"
title: Hydroxyurea inhibits parvovirus B19 replication in erythroid progenitor cells.
authors:
- Bonvicini F
- Bua G
- Conti I
- Manaresi E
- Gallinella G
journal: Biochem Pharmacol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2017.03.022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hydroxyurea inhibits parvovirus B19 replication in erythroid progenitor cells.
**Authors:** Bonvicini F, Bua G, Conti I, Manaresi E, Gallinella G
**Journal:** Biochem Pharmacol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bcp.2017.03.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcp.2017.03.022)

## Content

1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2017 Jul 15;136:32-39. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2017.03.022. Epub
 2017 Apr 2.

Hydroxyurea inhibits parvovirus B19 replication in erythroid progenitor cells.

Bonvicini F(1), Bua G(2), Conti I(2), Manaresi E(2), Gallinella G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Bologna, Via 
Massarenti 9, 40138 Bologna, Italy. Electronic address: 
francesca.bonvicini4@unibo.it.
(2)Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Bologna, Via 
Massarenti 9, 40138 Bologna, Italy.
(3)Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Bologna, Via 
Massarenti 9, 40138 Bologna, Italy; S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital - Microbiology, 
Via Massarenti 9, 40138 Bologna, Italy.

Parvovirus B19 (B19V) infection is restricted to erythroid progenitor cells 
(EPCs) of the human bone marrow, leading to transient arrest of erythropoiesis 
and severe complications mainly in subjects with underlying hematological 
disorders or with immune system deficits. Currently, there are no specific 
antiviral drugs for B19V treatment, but identification of compounds inhibiting 
B19V replication can be pursued by a drug repositioning strategy. In this frame, 
the present study investigates the activity of hydroxyurea (HU), the only 
disease-modifying therapy approved for sickle cell disease (SCD), towards B19V 
replication in the two relevant cellular systems, the UT7/EpoS1 cell line and 
EPCs. Results demonstrate that HU inhibits B19V replication with EC50 values of 
96.2µM and 147.1µM in UT7/EpoS1 and EPCs, respectively, providing experimental 
evidence of the antiviral activity of HU towards B19V replication, and 
confirming the efficacy of a drug discovery process by drug repositioning 
strategy. The antiviral activity occurs in vitro at concentrations lower than 
those affecting cellular DNA replication and viability, and at levels measured 
in plasma samples of SCD patients undergoing HU therapy. HU might determine a 
dual beneficial effect on SCD patients, not only for the treatment of the 
disease but also towards a virus responsible for severe complications.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2017.03.022
PMID: 28377277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]