---
reference_id: "PMID:35464459"
title: "Outcomes of Systemic Treatment in Children and Adults With Netherton Syndrome: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Nouwen AEM
- Schappin R
- Nguyen NT
- Ragamin A
- Bygum A
- Bodemer C
- Dalm VASH
- Pasmans SGMA
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.864449
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes of Systemic Treatment in Children and Adults With Netherton Syndrome: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Nouwen AEM, Schappin R, Nguyen NT, Ragamin A, Bygum A, Bodemer C, Dalm VASH, Pasmans SGMA
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2022.864449](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.864449)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2022 Mar 30;13:864449. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.864449. 
eCollection 2022.

Outcomes of Systemic Treatment in Children and Adults With Netherton Syndrome: A 
Systematic Review.

Nouwen AEM(1), Schappin R(1), Nguyen NT(1), Ragamin A(1), Bygum A(2)(3), Bodemer 
C(4), Dalm VASH(5)(6), Pasmans SGMA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology-Center of Pediatric Dermatology, Erasmus University 
Medical Center-Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(3)Clinical Institute, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Reference Centre for Genodermatoses and Rare Skin 
Diseases (MAGEC), Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital (AP-HP), Paris Centre 
University, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Immunology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Allergy & Clinical Immunology, 
Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Comèl-Netherton syndrome (NS) is a rare disease caused by pathogenic 
variants in the SPINK5 gene, leading to severe skin barrier impairment and 
proinflammatory upregulation. Given the severity of the disease, treatment of NS 
is challenging. Current treatment regimens are mainly topical and supportive. 
Although novel systemic treatment options for NS have been suggested in recent 
literature, little is known about their outcomes.
OBJECTIVE: to provide an overview of systemic treatment options and their 
outcomes in adults and children with NS.
METHODS: Embase, MEDLINE, Web of Science, Cochrane Central Register of 
Controlled Trials, and Google Scholar were searched up to July 22, 2021. 
Empirical studies published in English language mentioning systemic treatment in 
NS were enrolled. Studies that did not define a treatment period or report at 
least one outcome were excluded. Methodological quality was evaluated by the 
Joanna Briggs Institute critical appraisal checklist for case reports or case 
series. Overall quality of evidence of the primary outcome, skin, was assessed 
by the GRADE approach.
RESULTS: 36 case series and case reports were included. The effects of 15 
systemic therapies were described in 48 patients, of which 27 were children. 
Therapies included retinoids, prednisolone, cyclosporine, immunoglobulins, and 
biologicals. In retinoids both worsening (4/15 cases) and improvement (6/15 
cases) of the skin was observed. Use of prednisolone and cyclosporine was only 
reported in one patient. Immunoglobulins (13/15 cases) and biologicals (18/21 
cases) showed improvement of the skin. Certainty of evidence was rated as very 
low.
CONCLUSION: NS is a rare disease, which is reflected in the scarce literature on 
systemic treatment outcomes in children and adults with NS. Studies showed large 
heterogeneity in outcome measures. Adverse events were scarcely reported. 
Long-term outcomes were reported in a minority of cases. Nonetheless, a general 
beneficial effect of systemic treatment was found. Immunoglobulins and 
biologicals showed the most promising results and should be further explored. 
Future research should focus on determining a core outcome set and measurement 
instruments for NS to improve quality of research.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: 
https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/display_record.php?RecordID=217933, PROSPERO 
(ID: 217933).

Copyright © 2022 Nouwen, Schappin, Nguyen, Ragamin, Bygum, Bodemer, Dalm and 
Pasmans.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.864449
PMCID: PMC9022473
PMID: 35464459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.