---
reference_id: PMID:39879322
title: Undocking of an extensive ciliary network induces proteostasis and cell fate switching resulting in severe primary ciliary dyskinesia.
authors:
- Brody SL
- Pan J
- Huang T
- Xu J
- Xu H
- Koenitizer JR
- Brennan SK
- Nanjundappa R
- Saba TG
- Rumman N
- Berical A
- Hawkins FJ
- Wang X
- Zhang R
- Mahjoub MR
- Horani A
- Dutcher SK
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.adp5173
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cilia/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Proteostasis
- "Chlamydomonas reinhardtii/metabolism, genetics"
- "Ciliary Motility Disorders/pathology, metabolism, genetics"
- Microtubules/metabolism
- Cell Lineage
- "Kartagener Syndrome/pathology, metabolism, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Undocking of an extensive ciliary network induces proteostasis and cell fate switching resulting in severe primary ciliary dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Brody SL, Pan J, Huang T, Xu J, Xu H, Koenitizer JR, Brennan SK, Nanjundappa R, Saba TG, Rumman N, Berical A, Hawkins FJ, Wang X, Zhang R, Mahjoub MR, Horani A, Dutcher SK
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.adp5173](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.adp5173)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2025 Jan 29;17(783):eadp5173. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.adp5173.  Epub 2025 Jan 29.

Undocking of an extensive ciliary network induces proteostasis and cell fate 
switching resulting in severe primary ciliary dyskinesia.

Brody SL(1), Pan J(1), Huang T(1), Xu J(1), Xu H(2), Koenitizer JR(1), Brennan 
SK(2), Nanjundappa R(1), Saba TG(3), Rumman N(2)(4), Berical A(5), Hawkins 
FJ(5), Wang X(6), Zhang R(6), Mahjoub MR(1)(7), Horani A(2)(7), Dutcher 
SK(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
MI 48108, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Al-Quds University, Abu-Deis, 
91220, Palestine.
(5)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Boston University, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Washington University 
School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(7)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(8)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Mar 21:2024.03.20.585965. doi: 10.1101/2024.03.20.585965.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia is a rare monogenic syndrome that is associated with 
chronic respiratory disease, infertility, and laterality defects. Although more 
than 50 genes causative of primary ciliary dyskinesia have been identified, 
variants in the genes encoding coiled-coil domain-containing 39 (CCDC39) and 
CCDC40 in particular cause severe disease that is not explained by loss of 
ciliary motility alone. Here, we sought to understand the consequences of these 
variants on cellular functions beyond impaired motility. We used human cells 
with pathogenic variants in CCDC39 and CCDC40, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii 
genetics, cryo-electron microscopy, and proteomics to define perturbations in 
ciliary assembly and cilia stability, as well as multiple motility-independent 
pathways. Analysis of proteomics of cilia from patient cells identified that the 
absence of the axonemal CCDC39/CCDC40 heterodimer resulted in the loss of a 
network of more than 90 ciliary structural proteins, including 14 that were 
defined as ciliary address recognition proteins, which provide docking for the 
missing structures. The absence of the network impaired microtubule 
architecture, activated cell quality control pathways, switched multiciliated 
cell fate to mucus-producing cells and resulted in a defective periciliary 
barrier. In CCDC39 variant cells, these phenotypes were reversed through 
expression of a normal CCDC39 transgene. These findings indicate that the 
CCDC39/CCDC40 heterodimer functions as a scaffold to support the assembly of an 
extensive network of ciliary proteins, whose loss results in both 
motility-dependent and motility-independent phenotypes that may explain the 
severity of disease. Gene therapy might be a potential treatment option to be 
explored in future studies.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.adp5173
PMCID: PMC12108131
PMID: 39879322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]