---
reference_id: "PMID:38201964"
title: "Hyperhomocysteinemia in Adult Patients: A Treatable Metabolic Condition."
authors:
- González-Lamuño D
- Arrieta-Blanco FJ
- Fuentes ED
- Forga-Visa MT
- Morales-Conejo M
- Peña-Quintana L
- Vitoria-Miñana I
journal: Nutrients
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/nu16010135
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperhomocysteinemia in Adult Patients: A Treatable Metabolic Condition.
**Authors:** González-Lamuño D, Arrieta-Blanco FJ, Fuentes ED, Forga-Visa MT, Morales-Conejo M, Peña-Quintana L, Vitoria-Miñana I
**Journal:** Nutrients (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/nu16010135](https://doi.org/10.3390/nu16010135)

## Content

1. Nutrients. 2023 Dec 30;16(1):135. doi: 10.3390/nu16010135.

Hyperhomocysteinemia in Adult Patients: A Treatable Metabolic Condition.

González-Lamuño D(1), Arrieta-Blanco FJ(2), Fuentes ED(3), Forga-Visa MT(4), 
Morales-Conejo M(5), Peña-Quintana L(6), Vitoria-Miñana I(7).

Author information:
(1)Pediatrics Department, Marqués de Valdecilla University Hospital, 39008 
Santander, Spain.
(2)Adult Inborn Errors of Metabolism Unit, Ramón y Cajal University Hospital, 
28034 Madrid, Spain.
(3)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Virgen del Rocío University Hospital, 
41013 Sevilla, Spain.
(4)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Clínic Hospital, 08036 Barcelona, 
Spain.
(5)Unit for Congenital Metabolic Diseases and Other Rare Diseases, Internal 
Medicine Department, 12 de Octubre University Hospital, 28041 Madrid, Spain.
(6)Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition Unit, Insular Materno-Infantil 
University Hospital Complex, Asociación Canaria de Investigación Pediátrica, 
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de la Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y 
Nutrición, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, 35016 Las Palmas de Gran 
Canaria, Spain.
(7)Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases Unit, La Fe University Hospital, 46026 
Valencia, Spain.

Hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) is recognized as an independent risk factor for 
various significant medical conditions, yet controversy persists around its 
assessment and management. The diagnosis of disorders afffecting homocysteine 
(Hcy) metabolism faces delays due to insufficient awareness of its clinical 
presentation and unique biochemical characteristics. In cases of arterial or 
venous thrombotic vascular events, particularly with other comorbidities, it is 
crucial to consider moderate to severe HHcy. A nutritional approach to HHcy 
management involves implementing dietary strategies and targeted 
supplementation, emphasizing key nutrients like vitamin B6, B12, and folate that 
are crucial for Hcy conversion. Adequate intake of these vitamins, along with 
betaine supplementation, supports Hcy remethylation. Lifestyle modifications, 
such as smoking cessation and regular physical activity, complement the 
nutritional approach to enhance Hcy metabolism. For individuals with HHcy, 
maintaining a plasma Hcy concentration below 50 μmol/L consistently is vital to 
lowering the risk of vascular events. Collaboration with healthcare 
professionals and dietitians is essential for developing personalized dietary 
plans addressing the specific needs and underlying health conditions. This 
integrated approach aims to optimize metabolic processes and reduce the 
associated health risks.

DOI: 10.3390/nu16010135
PMCID: PMC10780827
PMID: 38201964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.