---
reference_id: "PMID:36049366"
title: "Epidemiology, methods of diagnosis, and clinical management of patients with arginase 1 deficiency (ARG1-D): A systematic review."
authors:
- Bin Sawad A
- Jackimiec J
- Bechter M
- Trucillo A
- Lindsley K
- Bhagat A
- Uyei J
- Diaz GA
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.08.005
keywords:
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- Arginase/genetics
- Intellectual Disability
- "Hyperargininemia/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- "Seizures/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- "Muscle Spasticity/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Arginine/therapeutic use
- "Amino Acids, Essential"
- Disease Progression
- Nitrogen
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology, methods of diagnosis, and clinical management of patients with arginase 1 deficiency (ARG1-D): A systematic review.
**Authors:** Bin Sawad A, Jackimiec J, Bechter M, Trucillo A, Lindsley K, Bhagat A, Uyei J, Diaz GA
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.08.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.08.005)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2022 Sep-Oct;137(1-2):153-163. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.08.005. Epub 2022 Aug 25.

Epidemiology, methods of diagnosis, and clinical management of patients with
arginase 1 deficiency (ARG1-D): A systematic review.

Bin Sawad A(1), Jackimiec J(2), Bechter M(2), Trucillo A(2), Lindsley K(3),
Bhagat A(3), Uyei J(3), Diaz GA(4).

Author information:
(1)Aeglea BioTherapeutics, Austin, TX, USA. Electronic address:
abinsawad@aeglea.com.
(2)Aeglea BioTherapeutics, Austin, TX, USA.
(3)IQVIA, Inc, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)Division of Medical Genetics and Genomics in the Department of Genetics and
Genomic Sciences at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Arginase 1 Deficiency (ARG1-D) is a rare, progressive, metabolic
disorder that is characterized by devastating manifestations driven by elevated
plasma arginine levels. It typically presents in early childhood with spasticity
(predominately affecting the lower limbs), mobility impairment, seizures,
developmental delay, and intellectual disability. This systematic review aims to
identify and describe the published evidence outlining the epidemiology,
diagnosis methods, measures of disease progression, clinical management, and
outcomes for ARG1-D patients.
METHODS: A comprehensive literature search across multiple databases such as
MEDLINE, Embase, and a review of clinical studies in ClinicalTrials.gov (with
results reported) was carried out per PRISMA guidelines on 20 April 2020 with no
date restriction. Pre-defined eligibility criteria were used to identify studies
with data specific to patients with ARG1-D. Two independent reviewers screened
records and extracted data from included studies. Quality was assessed using the
modified Newcastle-Ottawa Scale for non-comparative studies.
RESULTS: Overall, 55 records reporting 40 completed studies and 3 ongoing
studies were included. Ten studies reported the prevalence of ARG1-D in the
general population, with a median of 1 in 1,000,000. Frequently reported
diagnostic methods included genetic testing, plasma arginine levels, and red
blood cell arginase activity. However, routine newborn screening is not
universally available, and lack of disease awareness may prevent early diagnosis
or lead to misdiagnosis, as the disease has overlapping symptomology with other
diseases, such as cerebral palsy. Common manifestations reported at time of
diagnosis and assessed for disease progression included spasticity
(predominately affecting the lower limbs), mobility impairment, developmental
delay, intellectual disability, and seizures. Severe dietary protein
restriction, essential amino acid supplementation, and nitrogen scavenger
administration were the most commonly reported treatments among patients with
ARG1-D. Only a few studies reported meaningful clinical outcomes of these
interventions on intellectual disability, motor function and adaptive behavior
assessment, hospitalization, or death. The overall quality of included studies
was assessed as good according to the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale.
CONCLUSIONS: Although ARG1-D is a rare disease, published evidence demonstrates
a high burden of disease for patients. The current standard of care is
ineffective at preventing disease progression. There remains a clear need for
new treatment options as well as improved access to diagnostics and disease
awareness to detect and initiate treatment before the onset of clinical
manifestations to potentially enable more normal development, improve
symptomatology, or prevent disease progression.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.08.005
PMID: 36049366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest This study was
sponsored by Aeglea BioTherapeutics. Aseel Bin Sawad, John Jackimiec, Mark
Bechter, and Allison Trucillo are employees of Aeglea BioTherapeutics. Kristina
Lindsley, Anil Bhagat, and Jennifer Uyei are employees of IQVIA. George A. Diaz
is employed at the Division of Medical Genetics and Genomics in the Department
of Genetics and Genomic Sciences at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
and has served as an advisor/consultant and clinical trial investigator for
Aeglea BioTherapeutics.
