---
reference_id: "PMID:34536459"
title: Juvenile-onset open-angle glaucoma - A clinical and genetic update.
authors:
- Selvan H
- Gupta S
- Wiggs JL
- Gupta V
journal: Surv Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.survophthal.2021.09.001
keywords:
- Adult
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Glaucoma
- "Glaucoma, Open-Angle/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Gonioscopy
- Humans
- Intraocular Pressure
- Male
- Mutation
- Optic Disk
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Juvenile-onset open-angle glaucoma - A clinical and genetic update.
**Authors:** Selvan H, Gupta S, Wiggs JL, Gupta V
**Journal:** Surv Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.survophthal.2021.09.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.survophthal.2021.09.001)

## Content

1. Surv Ophthalmol. 2022 Jul-Aug;67(4):1099-1117. doi: 
10.1016/j.survophthal.2021.09.001. Epub 2021 Sep 16.

Juvenile-onset open-angle glaucoma - A clinical and genetic update.

Selvan H(1), Gupta S(1), Wiggs JL(2), Gupta V(3).

Author information:
(1)Dr. Rajendra Prasad Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(2)Ocular Genomics Institute, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Boston, MA, USA; 
Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, MA, USA.
(3)Dr. Rajendra Prasad Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. Electronic address: 
gupta_v20032000@yahoo.com.

Juvenile-onset open-angle glaucoma (JOAG) is a subset of primary open-angle 
glaucoma that is diagnosed before 40 years of age. The disease may be familial 
or non-familial, with proportions varying among different populations. Myocilin 
mutations are the most commonly associated. JOAG is characterized by high 
intraocular pressures (IOP), with many patients needing surgery. The mean age at 
diagnosis is in the 3rd decade, with a male preponderance. Myopia is a common 
association. The pathophysiology underlying the disease is immaturity of the 
conventional outflow pathways, which may or may not be observed on gonioscopy 
and anterior segment optical coherence tomography. The unique optic nerve head 
features include large discs with deep, steep cupping associated with high 
IOP-induced damage. Progression rates among JOAG patients are comparable to 
adult primary glaucomas, but as the disease affects younger patients, the 
projected disability from this disease is higher. Early diagnosis, prompt 
management, and life-long monitoring play an important role in preventing 
disease progression. Gene-based therapies currently under investigation offer 
future hope.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.survophthal.2021.09.001
PMCID: PMC9192165
PMID: 34536459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]