---
reference_id: "PMID:30257694"
title: Roles of airway smooth muscle dysfunction in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
authors:
- Yan F
- Gao H
- Zhao H
- Bhatia M
- Zeng Y
journal: J Transl Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12967-018-1635-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Roles of airway smooth muscle dysfunction in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Yan F, Gao H, Zhao H, Bhatia M, Zeng Y
**Journal:** J Transl Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12967-018-1635-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-018-1635-z)

## Content

1. J Transl Med. 2018 Sep 26;16(1):262. doi: 10.1186/s12967-018-1635-z.

Roles of airway smooth muscle dysfunction in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Yan F(1), Gao H(1), Zhao H(1), Bhatia M(2), Zeng Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Diagnosis and Therapy, Second Affiliated Hospital of 
Fujian Medical University, Quanzhou, Fujian, China.
(2)Department of Pathology and Biomedical Science, University of Otago, 
Christchurch, New Zealand.
(3)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Respiratory Medicine 
Center of Fujian Province, Second Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical 
University, Quanzhou, Fujian, China. zeng_yi_ming@126.com.

The airway smooth muscle (ASM) plays an indispensable role in airway structure 
and function. Dysfunction in ASM plays a central role in the pathogenesis of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and contributes to alterations of 
contractility, inflammatory response, immunoreaction, phenotype, quantity, and 
size of airways. ASM makes a key contribution in COPD by various mechanisms 
including altered contractility and relaxation induce by [Ca2+]i, cell 
proliferation and hypertrophy, production and modulation of extracellular 
cytokines, and release of pro-and-anti-inflammatory mediators. Multiple 
dysfunctions of ASM contribute to modulating airway responses to stimuli, 
remodeling, and fibrosis, as well as influence the compliance of lungs. The 
present review highlights regulatory roles of multiple factors in the 
development of ASM dysfunction in COPD, aims to understand the regulatory 
mechanism by which ASM dysfunctions are initiated, and explores the clinical 
significance of ASM on alterations of airway structure and function in COPD and 
development of novel therapeutic strategies for COPD.

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-018-1635-z
PMCID: PMC6158847
PMID: 30257694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]