---
reference_id: "PMID:30651074"
title: p.E95K mutation in Indian hedgehog causing brachydactyly type A1 impairs IHH/Gli1 downstream transcriptional regulation.
authors:
- Shen L
- Ma G
- Shi Y
- Ruan Y
- Yang X
- Wu X
- Xiong Y
- Wan C
- Yang C
- Cai L
- Xiong L
- Gong X
- He L
- Qin S
journal: BMC Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12863-018-0697-5
keywords:
- "Brachydactyly/genetics, pathology"
- Cell Movement/genetics
- Cell Proliferation/genetics
- Hedgehog Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "Transcription, Genetic/genetics"
- Zinc Finger Protein GLI1/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# p.E95K mutation in Indian hedgehog causing brachydactyly type A1 impairs IHH/Gli1 downstream transcriptional regulation.
**Authors:** Shen L, Ma G, Shi Y, Ruan Y, Yang X, Wu X, Xiong Y, Wan C, Yang C, Cai L, Xiong L, Gong X, He L, Qin S
**Journal:** BMC Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12863-018-0697-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12863-018-0697-5)

## Content

1. BMC Genet. 2019 Jan 16;20(1):10. doi: 10.1186/s12863-018-0697-5.

p.E95K mutation in Indian hedgehog causing brachydactyly type A1 impairs 
IHH/Gli1 downstream transcriptional regulation.

Shen L(1), Ma G(1), Shi Y(1), Ruan Y(1), Yang X(1), Wu X(1)(2), Xiong Y(1), Wan 
C(1), Yang C(1), Cai L(1), Xiong L(3)(4)(5), Gong X(1), He L(6)(7)(8), Qin 
S(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and 
Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, 209 Little White House, 1954 Hua Shan Road, Shanghai, 200030, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 
200240, People's Republic of China.
(3)Center Laboratory, Baoan Maternal and Children Healthcare Hospital, Shenzhen, 
China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Birth Defects Research, Shenzhen, China.
(5)Birth Defects Prevention Research and Transformation Team, Shenzhen, China.
(6)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and 
Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, 209 Little White House, 1954 Hua Shan Road, Shanghai, 200030, 
People's Republic of China. helin@bio-x.cn.
(7)Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological 
Sciences (SIBS), Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 200031, People's 
Republic of China. helin@bio-x.cn.
(8)Shanghai Center for Women and Children's Health, Shanghai, 200062, People's 
Republic of China. helin@bio-x.cn.
(9)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and 
Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, 209 Little White House, 1954 Hua Shan Road, Shanghai, 200030, 
People's Republic of China. chinsir@sjtu.edu.cn.
(10)The Third Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 
510150, People's Republic of China. chinsir@sjtu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Brachydactyly type A1 (BDA1, OMIM 112500) is a rare inherited 
malformation characterized primarily by shortness or absence of middle bones of 
fingers and toes. It is the first recorded disorder of the autosomal dominant 
Mendelian trait. Indian hedgehog (IHH) gene is closely associated with BDA1, 
which was firstly mapped and identified in Chinese families in 2000. Previous 
studies have demonstrated that BDA1-related mutant IHH proteins affected 
interactions with its receptors and impaired IHH signaling. However, how the 
altered signaling pathway affects downstream transcriptional regulation remains 
unclear.
RESULTS: Based on the mouse C3H10T1/2 cell model for IHH signaling activation, 
two recombinant human IHH-N proteins, including a wild type protein (WT, amino 
acid residues 28-202) and a mutant protein (MT, p.E95k), were analyzed. We 
identified 347, 47 and 4 Gli1 binding sites in the corresponding WT, MT and 
control group by chromatin immunoprecipitation and the overlapping of these 
three sets was poor. The putative cis regulated genes in WT group were enriched 
in sensory perception and G-protein coupled receptor-signaling pathway. On the 
other hand, putative cis regulated genes were enriched in Runx2-related pathways 
in MT group. Differentially expressed genes in WT and MT groups indicated that 
the alteration of mutant IHH signaling involved cell-cell signaling and cellular 
migration. Cellular assay of migration and proliferation validated that the 
mutant IHH signaling impaired these two cellular functions.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we performed integrated genome-wide analyses to 
characterize differences of IHH/Gli1 downstream regulation between wild type IHH 
signaling and the E95K mutant signaling. Based on the cell model, our results 
demonstrated that the E95K mutant signaling altered Gli1-DNA binding pattern, 
impaired downstream gene expressions, and leaded to weakened cellular 
proliferation and migration. This study may help to deepen the understanding of 
pathogenesis of BDA1 and the role of IHH signaling in chondrogenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12863-018-0697-5
PMCID: PMC6335781
PMID: 30651074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.