---
reference_id: "PMID:38884711"
title: Establishment of Cardiac Laterality.
authors:
- Gabriel GC
- Wu YL
- Lo CW
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-44087-8_9
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- "Heart/embryology, physiology"
- Body Patterning/genetics
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics, physiopathology, metabolism, pathology"
- Signal Transduction
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- "Nodal Protein/metabolism, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Establishment of Cardiac Laterality.
**Authors:** Gabriel GC, Wu YL, Lo CW
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-031-44087-8_9](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44087-8_9)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2024;1441:167-183. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-44087-8_9.

Establishment of Cardiac Laterality.

Gabriel GC(1), Wu YL(1), Lo CW(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. cel36@pitt.edu.

Formation of the vertebrate heart with its complex arterial and venous
connections is critically dependent on patterning of the left-right axis during
early embryonic development. Abnormalities in left-right patterning can lead to
a variety of complex life-threatening congenital heart defects. A highly
conserved pathway responsible for left-right axis specification has been
uncovered. This pathway involves initial asymmetric activation of a nodal
signaling cascade at the embryonic node, followed by its propagation to the left
lateral plate mesoderm and activation of left-sided expression of the Pitx2
transcription factor specifying visceral organ asymmetry. Intriguingly, recent
work suggests that cardiac laterality is encoded by intrinsic cell and tissue
chirality independent of Nodal signaling. Thus, Nodal signaling may be
superimposed on this intrinsic chirality, providing additional instructive cues
to pattern cardiac situs. The impact of intrinsic chirality and the perturbation
of left-right patterning on myofiber organization and cardiac function warrants
further investigation. We summarize recent insights gained from studies in
animal models and also some human clinical studies in a brief overview of the
complex processes regulating cardiac asymmetry and their impact on cardiac
function and the pathogenesis of congenital heart defects.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-44087-8_9
PMID: 38884711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
