---
reference_id: "PMID:39540706"
title: "Pseudomonas Labyrinthitis Complicating Acute Otitis Media: Case Report."
authors:
- Kharrat G
- Ferchichi S
- Jouini Z
journal: Ear Nose Throat J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/01455613241299675
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pseudomonas Labyrinthitis Complicating Acute Otitis Media: Case Report.
**Authors:** Kharrat G, Ferchichi S, Jouini Z
**Journal:** Ear Nose Throat J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/01455613241299675](https://doi.org/10.1177/01455613241299675)

## Content

1. Ear Nose Throat J. 2024 Nov 14:1455613241299675. doi:
10.1177/01455613241299675.  Online ahead of print.

Pseudomonas Labyrinthitis Complicating Acute Otitis Media: Case Report.

Kharrat G(1)(2), Ferchichi S(1)(2), Jouini Z(1).

Author information:
(1)ENT Department, Mohamed Taher Mâamouri University Hospital, Nabeul, Tunisia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine of Tunis, University El Manar of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia.

Background: Bacterial labyrinthitis has been rarely described. Pseudomonas 
incrimination is even exceptional. Herein, we present a case of pseudomonas 
labyrinthitis and discuss diagnosis, value of imaging, treatment and prognosis 
of this entity. Case Report: A 18-year-old female presented with left sudden 
hearing loss, rotatory vertigo, vomiting, and tinnitus evolving for 24 hours. 
Ten days earlier, she presented symptoms of acute media otitis. Otoendoscopic 
examination revealed a tympanic perforation with purulent otorrhea. Vestibular 
examination revealed a harmonious peripheric vestibular syndrome. A tonal 
audiogram showed a left perceptive deafness. A temporal computed tomography scan 
showed left opacity of the middle ear. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) excluded 
cholesteatomatous otitis, and constructive interference steady state (CISS) 
sequence revealed intense labyrinthine enhancement. Otorrhea sample culture 
isolated Pseudomonas aeruginosa. She initially received probabilistic 
intravenous antibiotherapy associating cefotaxime to vancomycin for 17 days, 
then, we switched to adapt to the antibiogram. She had a total of 25 days of 
antibiotic therapy and 14 days of corticosteroid treatment. She also benefited 
of vestibular rehabilitation and hyperbaric oxygenotherapy. The dizziness 
subsided, but the deafness persisted. Conclusion: Labyrinthitis is increasingly 
rare in the era of antibiotic therapy. P. aeruginosa is an exceptional germ in 
this context. MRI is an indispensable tool for the positive and the differential 
diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1177/01455613241299675
PMID: 39540706

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.