---
reference_id: "PMID:31245878"
title: Functional studies for a dominant mutation in the EDAR gene responsible for hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.
authors:
- Okita T
- Asano N
- Yasuno S
- Shimomura Y
journal: J Dermatol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.14983
keywords:
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia 1, Anhidrotic/genetics, pathology"
- "Edar Receptor/genetics, metabolism"
- Edar-Associated Death Domain Protein/metabolism
- "Genes, Dominant/genetics"
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional studies for a dominant mutation in the EDAR gene responsible for hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Okita T, Asano N, Yasuno S, Shimomura Y
**Journal:** J Dermatol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1346-8138.14983](https://doi.org/10.1111/1346-8138.14983)

## Content

1. J Dermatol. 2019 Aug;46(8):710-715. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.14983. Epub 2019
Jun  27.

Functional studies for a dominant mutation in the EDAR gene responsible for 
hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.

Okita T(1), Asano N(1), Yasuno S(1), Shimomura Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Ube, Yamaguchi, Japan.

Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is a rare genetic disorder characterized 
by hypotrichosis, hypohidrosis and hypodontia. The disease shows X-linked 
recessive, autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive inheritance traits. The 
X-linked form of HED is caused by mutations in the EDA gene, while autosomal 
forms result from mutations in either EDAR or EDARADD genes. Regarding recessive 
mutations in the EDAR gene, the pathomechanisms have been well characterized. 
However, it has remained largely unknown how dominant mutations in the EDAR 
cause HED. In this study, we performed in vitro analyses for a dominant EDAR 
gene mutation, p.F398*, as a representative. We showed that the p.F398* mutant 
EDAR completely lost its affinity to EDARADD, and suppressed the downstream 
nuclear factor-κB activation induced by wild-type EDAR in a dominant-negative 
manner. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the mutant EDAR was capable of binding 
with the wild-type EDAR, which led to reduced interaction between the wild-type 
EDAR and EDARADD. Our findings not only underscore an essential role of the 
interaction between EDAR and EDARADD in ectodermal development, but also 
disclose, in part, the molecular basis of autosomal dominant HED.

© 2019 Japanese Dermatological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/1346-8138.14983
PMID: 31245878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]