---
reference_id: "PMID:36636361"
title: "Gastrointestinal Bleeding from Dieulafoy's Lesion in the Cecum."
authors:
- Dokmak A
- Muso E
journal: Case Rep Gastroenterol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1159/000525740
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gastrointestinal Bleeding from Dieulafoy's Lesion in the Cecum.
**Authors:** Dokmak A, Muso E
**Journal:** Case Rep Gastroenterol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000525740](https://doi.org/10.1159/000525740)

## Content

1. Case Rep Gastroenterol. 2022 Nov 8;16(3):601-606. doi: 10.1159/000525740. 
eCollection 2022 Sep-Dec.

Gastrointestinal Bleeding from Dieulafoy's Lesion in the Cecum.

Dokmak A(1), Muso E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hospital Medicine, Catholic Medical Center, Manchester, New 
Hampshire, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Catholic Medical Center, Manchester, New 
Hampshire, USA.

Dieulafoy's lesion is a rare cause of gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding comprising 
approximately 2% of all acute GI bleeds. It is an abnormal submucosal artery 
that has a tortuous course before protruding through the mucosa and leading to 
hemorrhage. Dieulafoy's lesions are most commonly located in the upper GI tract 
within the lesser curvature of the stomach. Lower GI tract Dieulafoy's lesions 
are remarkably rare. Our case describes an elderly gentleman who presented with 
fatigue and dyspnea several days prior to experiencing any evidence of GI 
bleeding. Initial laboratory investigation revealed severe anemia, requiring 
packed red blood cell transfusion. Endoscopic examination revealed a cecal 
Dieulafoy's lesion with active spurting of blood. Hemostasis was achieved 
through local epinephrine injection and hemostatic clipping. Previously reported 
cases of cecal Dieulafoy's lesions involve variable presentations including 
hematochezia, melena, or bright red blood per rectum. These lesions can be 
treated by angiography, surgically, or endoscopically via techniques that 
include epinephrine or ethanol injection, argon plasma coagulation, heater probe 
coagulation, hemostatic clips, or band ligation. Dieulafoy's lesions of the 
lower GI tract should be considered when no clear culprit is discovered, 
particularly with the concomitant use of antiplatelet agents and anticoagulants.

Copyright © 2022 by The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000525740
PMCID: PMC9830308
PMID: 36636361

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.