---
reference_id: "PMID:26758178"
title: "Postprimary Tuberculosis and Macrophage Necrosis: Is There a Big ConNECtion?"
authors:
- Wong KW
- Jacobs WR Jr
journal: mBio
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1128/mBio.01589-15
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Postprimary Tuberculosis and Macrophage Necrosis: Is There a Big ConNECtion?
**Authors:** Wong KW, Jacobs WR Jr
**Journal:** mBio (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1128/mBio.01589-15](https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.01589-15)

## Content

1. mBio. 2016 Jan 12;7(1):e01589-15. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01589-15.

Postprimary Tuberculosis and Macrophage Necrosis: Is There a Big ConNECtion?

Wong KW(1), Jacobs WR Jr(2).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular 
Virology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China 
kwwong@gmail.com jacobsw@hhmi.org.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA kwwong@gmail.com 
jacobsw@hhmi.org.

Adult or postprimary tuberculosis (TB) accounts for most TB cases. Its hallmark 
is pulmonary cavitation, which occurs as a result of necrosis in the lung in 
individuals with tuberculous pneumonia. Postprimary TB has previously been known 
to be associated with vascular thrombosis and delayed-type hypersensitivity, but 
their roles in pulmonary cavitation are unclear. A necrosis-associated 
extracellular cluster (NEC) refers to a cluster of drug-tolerant Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis attached to lysed host materials and is proposed to contribute to 
granulomatous TB. Here we suggest that NECs, perhaps due to big size, produce a 
distinct host response leading to postprimary TB. We propose that vascular 
thrombosis and pneumonia arise from NEC and that these processes are promoted by 
inflammatory cytokines produced from cell-mediated delayed-type 
hypersensitivity, such as interleukin-17 and gamma interferon, eventually 
triggering necrosis in the lung and causing cavitation. According to this view, 
targeting NEC represents a necessary strategy to control adult TB.

Copyright © 2016 Wong and Jacobs.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01589-15
PMCID: PMC4724999
PMID: 26758178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]