---
reference_id: "PMID:37304255"
title: "Clinical experience and safety of Janus kinase inhibitors in giant cell arteritis: a retrospective case series from Sweden."
authors:
- Eriksson P
- Skoglund O
- Hemgren C
- Sjöwall C
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1187584
keywords:
- Humans
- Janus Kinase Inhibitors/adverse effects
- Sweden
- Giant Cell Arteritis/drug therapy
- Arthritis
- Prednisolone
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical experience and safety of Janus kinase inhibitors in giant cell arteritis: a retrospective case series from Sweden.
**Authors:** Eriksson P, Skoglund O, Hemgren C, Sjöwall C
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1187584](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1187584)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 May 25;14:1187584. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1187584.
eCollection 2023.

Clinical experience and safety of Janus kinase inhibitors in giant cell
arteritis: a retrospective case series from Sweden.

Eriksson P(1), Skoglund O(1), Hemgren C(2), Sjöwall C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Division of Inflammation and
Infection/Rheumatology, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, County Hospital
Ryhov, Jönköping, Sweden.

The Janus kinase (JAK)-STAT signaling pathway is relevant in both Takayasu and
giant cell arteritis (GCA), and the use of JAK inhibitors (JAKi) in arthritis,
psoriasis, and inflammatory bowel disease is nowadays common. Some evidence of
the clinical efficacy of JAKi in GCA exists and a phase III randomized
controlled trial (RCT) of upadacitinib is currently recruiting. In 2017, we
started using barcitinib in a GCA patient with inadequate response to
corticosteroids, and later on, we treated other 14 GCA patients with
baricitinib/tofacitinib during intense follow-up. The retrospective data of
these 15 individuals are here summarized. GCA was diagnosed based on the ACR
criteria and/or imaging techniques combined with increased C-reactive protein
(CRP) and/or erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) followed by a good initial
response to corticosteroids. JAKi was initiated based on inflammatory activity,
with increased CRP, presumably dependent on GCA with clinical symptoms, despite
unsatisfying high doses of prednisolone. The mean age at JAKi initiation was
70.1 years and the mean exposure to JAKi was 19 months. From initiation,
significant reductions in CRP were seen already at 3 (p = 0.02) and 6 (p = 0.02)
months. A slower decrease was observed regarding ESR at 3 (p = 0.12) and 6 (p =
0.02) months. Furthermore, the daily prednisolone doses were reduced at 3 (p =
0.02) and 6 (p = 0.004) months. No GCA relapses were observed. Two patients were
affected by serious infections, but JAKi therapy was retained or reintroduced
after recovery. We present encouraging observational data on JAKi in GCA in one
of the hitherto largest case series with long-term follow-up. Our clinical
experiences will complement the results from the awaited RCT.

Copyright © 2023 Eriksson, Skoglund, Hemgren and Sjöwall.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1187584
PMCID: PMC10247956
PMID: 37304255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
