---
reference_id: "PMID:38125681"
title: Influence of genomic variations on glanders serodiagnostic antigens using integrative genomic and transcriptomic approaches.
authors:
- Charron P
- Gao R
- Chmara J
- Hoover E
- Nadin-Davis S
- Chauvin D
- Hazelwood J
- Makondo K
- Duceppe MO
- Kang M
journal: Front Vet Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fvets.2023.1217135
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Influence of genomic variations on glanders serodiagnostic antigens using integrative genomic and transcriptomic approaches.
**Authors:** Charron P, Gao R, Chmara J, Hoover E, Nadin-Davis S, Chauvin D, Hazelwood J, Makondo K, Duceppe MO, Kang M
**Journal:** Front Vet Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fvets.2023.1217135](https://doi.org/10.3389/fvets.2023.1217135)

## Content

1. Front Vet Sci. 2023 Dec 6;10:1217135. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2023.1217135.
eCollection 2023.

Influence of genomic variations on glanders serodiagnostic antigens using
integrative genomic and transcriptomic approaches.

Charron P(#)(1), Gao R(#)(1), Chmara J(1), Hoover E(1), Nadin-Davis S(1),
Chauvin D(1), Hazelwood J(1), Makondo K(1), Duceppe MO(1), Kang M(1).

Author information:
(1)Ottawa Laboratory-Fallowfield, Canadian Food Inspection Agency, Ottawa, ON,
Canada.
(#)Contributed equally

Glanders is a highly contagious and life-threatening zoonotic disease caused by
Burkholderia mallei (B. mallei). Without an effective vaccine or treatment,
early diagnosis has been regarded as the most effective method to prevent
glanders transmission. Currently, the diagnosis of glanders is heavily reliant
on serological tests. However, given that markedly different host immune
responses can be elicited by genetically different strains of the same bacterial
species, infection by B. mallei, whose genome is unstable and plastic, may
result in various immune responses. This variability can make the serodiagnosis
of glanders challenging. Therefore, there is a need for a comprehensive
understanding and assessment of how B. mallei genomic variations impact the
appropriateness of specific target antigens for glanders serodiagnosis. In this
study, we investigated how genomic variations in the B. mallei genome affect
gene content (gene presence/absence) and expression, with a special focus on
antigens used or potentially used in serodiagnosis. In all the genome sequences
of B. mallei isolates available in NCBI's RefSeq database (accessed in July
2023) and in-house sequenced samples, extensive small and large variations were
observed when compared to the type strain ATCC 23344. Further pan-genome
analysis of those assemblies revealed variations of gene content among all
available genomes of B. mallei. Specifically, differences in gene content
ranging from 31 to 715 genes with an average of 334 gene presence-absence
variations were found in strains with complete or chromosome-level genome
assemblies, using the ATCC 23344 strain as a reference. The affected genes
included some encoded proteins used as serodiagnostic antigens, which were lost
due mainly to structural variations. Additionally, a transcriptomic analysis was
performed using the type strain ATCC 23344 and strain Zagreb which has been
widely utilized to produce glanders antigens. In total, 388 significant
differentially expressed genes were identified between these two strains,
including genes related to bacterial pathogenesis and virulence, some of which
were associated with genomic variations, particularly structural variations. To
our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive study to uncover the impacts of
genetic variations of B. mallei on its gene content and expression. These
differences would have significant impacts on host innate and adaptive immunity,
including antibody production, during infection. This study provides novel
insights into B. mallei genetic variants, knowledge which will help to improve
glanders serodiagnosis.

Copyright © 2023 Charron, Gao, Chmara, Hoover, Nadin-Davis, Chauvin, Hazelwood,
Makondo, Duceppe and Kang.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2023.1217135
PMCID: PMC10730941
PMID: 38125681

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
