---
reference_id: "PMID:38068960"
title: "Novel COX11 Mutations Associated with Mitochondrial Disorder: Functional Characterization in Patient Fibroblasts and Saccharomyces cerevisiae."
authors:
- Caron-Godon CA
- Della Vecchia S
- Romano A
- Doccini S
- Dal Canto F
- Pasquariello R
- Rubegni A
- Battini R
- Santorelli FM
- Glerum DM
- Nesti C
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms242316636
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae/genetics, metabolism"
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Membrane Proteins/metabolism
- "Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Copper Transport Proteins/metabolism
- Electron Transport Chain Complex Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel COX11 Mutations Associated with Mitochondrial Disorder: Functional Characterization in Patient Fibroblasts and Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Caron-Godon CA, Della Vecchia S, Romano A, Doccini S, Dal Canto F, Pasquariello R, Rubegni A, Battini R, Santorelli FM, Glerum DM, Nesti C
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms242316636](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms242316636)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Nov 23;24(23):16636. doi: 10.3390/ijms242316636.

Novel COX11 Mutations Associated with Mitochondrial Disorder: Functional 
Characterization in Patient Fibroblasts and Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Caron-Godon CA(1), Della Vecchia S(2)(3), Romano A(4), Doccini S(3), Dal Canto 
F(3), Pasquariello R(5), Rubegni A(3), Battini R(6)(7), Santorelli FM(3), Glerum 
DM(1)(8), Nesti C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, Psychology, Drug Research and Child Health 
(NEUROFARBA), University of Florence, Viale Pieraccini, 6, 50139 Florence, 
Italy.
(3)Molecular Medicine for Neurodegenerative and Neuromuscular Disease Unit, 
IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation, 56128 Pisa, Italy.
(4)Experimental Neuropathology Unit, Division of Neuroscience, Institute of 
Experimental Neurology, IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 
Milan, Italy.
(5)Neuroradiology, IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation, 56128 Pisa, Italy.
(6)Developmental Neurology and Neurorehabilitation Unit, IRCCS Stella Maris 
Foundation, 56128 Pisa, Italy.
(7)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, 56126 
Pisa, Italy.
(8)Waterloo Institute for Nanotechnology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON 
N2L 3G1, Canada.

Genetic defects in the nuclear encoded subunits and assembly factors of 
cytochrome c oxidase (mitochondrial complex IV) are very rare and are associated 
with a wide variety of phenotypes. Biallelic pathogenic variants in the COX11 
protein were previously identified in two unrelated children with 
infantile-onset mitochondrial encephalopathies. Through comprehensive clinical, 
genetic and functional analyses, here we report on a new patient harboring novel 
heterozygous variants in COX11, presenting with Leigh-like features, and provide 
additional experimental evidence for a direct correlation between COX11 protein 
expression and sensitivity to oxidative stress. To sort out the contribution of 
the single mutations to the phenotype, we employed a multi-faceted approach 
using Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a genetically manipulable system, and in 
silico structure-based analysis of human COX11. Our results reveal differential 
effects of the two novel COX11 mutations on yeast growth, respiration, and 
cellular redox status, as well as their potential impact on human protein 
stability and function. Strikingly, the functional deficits observed in patient 
fibroblasts are recapitulated in yeast models, validating the conservation of 
COX11's role in mitochondrial integrity across evolutionarily distant organisms. 
This study not only expands the mutational landscape of COX11-associated 
mitochondrial disorders but also underscores the continued translational 
relevance of yeast models in dissecting complex molecular pathways.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms242316636
PMCID: PMC10706101
PMID: 38068960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.