---
reference_id: "PMID:16231363"
title: "\"End-stage kidney\" in longstanding bulimia nervosa."
authors:
- Yasuhara D
- Naruo T
- Taguchi S
- Umekita Y
- Yoshida H
- Nozoe S
journal: Int J Eat Disord
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/eat.20198
keywords:
- Adult
- Atrophy
- "Bulimia/complications, diagnosis, pathology, psychology"
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Glomerulosclerosis, Focal Segmental/diagnosis, etiology, pathology, psychology"
- Humans
- Hyperplasia
- "Hypokalemia/diagnosis, etiology, pathology, psychology"
- Juxtaglomerular Apparatus/pathology
- Kidney/pathology
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/diagnosis, etiology, pathology, psychology"
- Kidney Function Tests
- Middle Aged
- "Nephritis, Interstitial/diagnosis, etiology, pathology, psychology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# "End-stage kidney" in longstanding bulimia nervosa.
**Authors:** Yasuhara D, Naruo T, Taguchi S, Umekita Y, Yoshida H, Nozoe S
**Journal:** Int J Eat Disord (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/eat.20198](https://doi.org/10.1002/eat.20198)

## Content

1. Int J Eat Disord. 2005 Dec;38(4):383-5. doi: 10.1002/eat.20198.

"End-stage kidney" in longstanding bulimia nervosa.

Yasuhara D(1), Naruo T, Taguchi S, Umekita Y, Yoshida H, Nozoe S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Behavioral Medicine, Kagoshima University Graduate School of
Medical and Dental Science, Kagoshima-City, Japan.
yasuhara@m3.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: The extent of renal damage over long-term binge/purges has not been
well documented in bulimia nervosa (BN).
METHOD: We describe a 52-year-old woman with longstanding BN subsequent to an
8-year history of anorexia nervosa (AN).
RESULTS: The patient showed chaotic binge/purges and chronic severe hypokalemia
after recovery from AN at age 26 years, and renal biopsy showed juxtaglomerular
hyperplasia, which was diagnosed as pseudo-Bartter's syndrome.
DISCUSSION: Over the following 26 years, the patient's eating behaviors remained
chaotic, and her renal function gradually deteriorated. After the patient died
of pneumonia and sepsis at age 52 years, autopsy of her kidney showed chronic
interstitial nephritis, proximal tubular swelling, and diffuse glomerular
sclerosis, suggesting chronic glomerular injury associated with long-term
binge/purges. To our knowledge, this is the first case report of a patient with
BN with long-term binge/purges who developed an eventual "end-stage kidney"
characterized by hypokalemic nephropathy and diffuse glomerulosclerosis.

Copyright 2005 by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/eat.20198
PMID: 16231363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
