---
reference_id: "PMID:28038733"
title: "Genetic mutation risk calculation in Lynch syndrome inheritance: Evaluating the utility of the PREMM(1,2,6) model in Lyon: The first French study."
authors:
- Aissaoui S
- Cartellier C
- Seytier T
- Giraud S
- Calender A
journal: Bull Cancer
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.bulcan.2016.11.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic mutation risk calculation in Lynch syndrome inheritance: Evaluating the utility of the PREMM(1,2,6) model in Lyon: The first French study.
**Authors:** Aissaoui S, Cartellier C, Seytier T, Giraud S, Calender A
**Journal:** Bull Cancer (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bulcan.2016.11.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bulcan.2016.11.017)

## Content

1. Bull Cancer. 2017 Mar;104(3):288-294. doi: 10.1016/j.bulcan.2016.11.017. Epub 
2016 Dec 27.

Genetic mutation risk calculation in Lynch syndrome inheritance: Evaluating the 
utility of the PREMM(1,2,6) model in Lyon: The first French study.

Aissaoui S(1), Cartellier C(2), Seytier T(3), Giraud S(4), Calender A(5).

Author information:
(1)Hôpital Édouard-Herriot, 5, place d'Arsonval, 69003 Lyon, France; Centre 
hospitalier Lyon Sud, 165, chemin du Grand-Revoyet, 69310 Pierre-Bénite, France; 
French association of genetic counselors, 16, rue de Lorraine, 13008 Marseille, 
France. Electronic address: Souria.aissaoui@chu-lyon.fr.
(2)French association of genetic counselors, 16, rue de Lorraine, 13008 
Marseille, France; Centre hospitalier métropole Savoie, place Lucien-Biset, 
73000 Chambéry, France.
(3)Hôpital Édouard-Herriot, 5, place d'Arsonval, 69003 Lyon, France; French 
association of genetic counselors, 16, rue de Lorraine, 13008 Marseille, France.
(4)Hôpital Édouard-Herriot, 5, place d'Arsonval, 69003 Lyon, France; Centre 
hospitalier Lyon Sud, 165, chemin du Grand-Revoyet, 69310 Pierre-Bénite, France.
(5)Hôpital Édouard-Herriot, 5, place d'Arsonval, 69003 Lyon, France.

Lynch syndrome is due to germline mutations in mismatch repair genes: MLH1, 
MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2. It is characterized by an increased risk of various cancers 
including colorectal and endometrial cancers. Early diagnosis of these patients 
allows for appropriate surveillance and improves survival rates. Differentiating 
between patients who should undergo genetic testing and those for whom it is not 
necessary is difficult despite various established criteria (Amsterdam and 
Bethesda). Often, health professionals meet in multidisciplinary committees 
(MDC) to discuss patient cases regarding Lynch syndrome. In this study, we 
evaluated if the prediction model PREMM1,2,6 could be used to enhance MDC 
decision-making and whether it should be included in our own routine practice 
and in those of other French teams. Using the prediction model in our cohort 
would have avoided 12% of the analyses recommended by our MDC. Furthermore, all 
patients with a mutation in one of the MMR genes would have been detected. In 
addition, according to the model, we should have provided 20% more genetic 
testing, which suggests that the decision-making criteria used by the 
professionals in our MDC, was too restrictive. These results suggest that 
PREMM1,2,6 should be used in current practice to validate the decisions of the 
MDC before genetic testing is performed in complex cases. The model should be 
added as a major quality criterion for genetic testing, along with somatic 
tests, as previously reported in the literature.

Copyright © 2016 Société Française du Cancer. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bulcan.2016.11.017
PMID: 28038733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]