---
reference_id: "PMID:40981306"
title: "Mitochondrial Acetoacetyl-CoA Thiolase Deficiency: Three New Cases Detected by Newborn Screening Confirming the Significance of C4OH Elevation."
authors:
- Vasco A
- Berardo C
- Lucchi S
- Cappelletti L
- Tamburello G
- Fazzone S
- Mauri A
- Fiumani F
- Postorivo D
- Alberti L
- Perrone Donnorso M
- Gasperini S
- Furlan F
- Fiori L
- Carelli S
- Saielli LA
- Montrasio C
- Cereda C
journal: Int J Neonatal Screen
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/ijns11030076
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial Acetoacetyl-CoA Thiolase Deficiency: Three New Cases Detected by Newborn Screening Confirming the Significance of C4OH Elevation.
**Authors:** Vasco A, Berardo C, Lucchi S, Cappelletti L, Tamburello G, Fazzone S, Mauri A, Fiumani F, Postorivo D, Alberti L, Perrone Donnorso M, Gasperini S, Furlan F, Fiori L, Carelli S, Saielli LA, Montrasio C, Cereda C
**Journal:** Int J Neonatal Screen (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijns11030076](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijns11030076)

## Content

1. Int J Neonatal Screen. 2025 Sep 6;11(3):76. doi: 10.3390/ijns11030076.

Mitochondrial Acetoacetyl-CoA Thiolase Deficiency: Three New Cases Detected by
Newborn Screening Confirming the Significance of C4OH Elevation.

Vasco A(1), Berardo C(1)(2), Lucchi S(1), Cappelletti L(1), Tamburello G(1),
Fazzone S(1), Mauri A(1), Fiumani F(1)(3), Postorivo D(1), Alberti L(1), Perrone
Donnorso M(1)(4), Gasperini S(5), Furlan F(6), Fiori L(7), Carelli S(1)(2),
Saielli LA(1), Montrasio C(1), Cereda C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center of Functional Genomics, Rare Diseases and Newborn Screening, Buzzi
Children's Hospital, 20154 Milan, Italy.
(2)Pediatric Clinical Research Center "Romeo ed Enrica Invernizzi", Department
of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, University of Milan, 20157 Milan, Italy.
(3)Medical Genetics, Department of Health Sciences, University of Milan, 20146
Milan, Italy.
(4)Pediatric Clinic, Endocrinology, Laboratory for the Study of Inborn Errors of
Metabolism, Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics,
Maternal and Child Health, University of Genova, 16100 Genova, Italy.
(5)Pediatric Rare Diseases Unit, Fondazione IRCCS San Gerardo dei Tintori, 20900
Monza, Italy.
(6)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico, 20122 Milan, Italy.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Buzzi Children's Hospital, 20154 Milan, Italy.

Acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase deficiency, also known as Beta-ketothiolase deficiency
(BKTD), is an autosomal recessive organic aciduria included in the Italian
newborn screening (NBS) panel. It is caused by mutations in the ACAT1 gene,
which encodes the mitochondrial acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase. Its deficiency
impairs the degradation of isoleucine and acetoacetyl-CoA, leading to the
accumulation of toxic metabolites. We describe three cases of BKTD. The first
newborn showed increase in C5:1, C4DC/C5OH, C3DC/C4OH in the NBS. Urinary
organic acids (uOAs) revealed marked excretion of 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyrate.
Tiglylglycine was absent. Genetic testing identified the compound heterozygosity
for two pathogenic ACAT1 variants. The second patient showed increased levels of
C5:1, C4DC/C5OH, C3DC/C4OH in the NBS. uOAs revealed 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyrate
and tiglylglycine. A homozygous VUS in ACAT1 was identified. The third case
showed elevation of C4DC/C5OH, C3DC/C4OH in the NBS, with a slight increase in
C5:1. uOAs showed 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyrate and tiglylglycine. A homozygous
missense VUS was identified in the ACAT1 gene. BKTD exhibited variable NBS
biochemical phenotypes across the three cases. While C5OH and C5:1, the primary
markers, were not consistently elevated in all our cases, C4OH strongly
increased in all three. Our findings support the use of C4OH in a combined
marker strategy to improve BKTD NBS.

DOI: 10.3390/ijns11030076
PMCID: PMC12452439
PMID: 40981306

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
