---
reference_id: "PMID:29448987"
title: The refeeding syndrome. Importance of phosphorus.
authors:
- Araujo Castro M
- Vázquez Martínez C
journal: Med Clin (Barc)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2017.12.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The refeeding syndrome. Importance of phosphorus.
**Authors:** Araujo Castro M, Vázquez Martínez C
**Journal:** Med Clin (Barc) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.medcli.2017.12.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medcli.2017.12.008)

## Content

1. Med Clin (Barc). 2018 Jun 22;150(12):472-478. doi:
10.1016/j.medcli.2017.12.008.  Epub 2018 Feb 12.

The refeeding syndrome. Importance of phosphorus.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Araujo Castro M(1), Vázquez Martínez C(2).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Endocrinología y Nutrición, Hospital Universitario Rey Juan 
Carlos, Madrid, España. Electronic address: martaazul.2a@hotmail.com.
(2)Servicio de Endocrinología y Nutrición, Hospital Universitario Fundación 
Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, España.

Refeeding syndrome (RS) is a complex disease that occurs when nutritional 
support is initiated after a period of starvation. The hallmark feature is the 
hypophosphataemia, however other biochemical abnormalities like hypokalaemia, 
hypomagnesaemia, thiamine deficiency and disorder of sodium and fluid balance 
are common. The incidence of RS is unknown as no universally accepted definition 
exists, but it is frequently underdiagnosed. RS is a potentially fatal, but 
preventable, disorder. The identification of patients at risk is crucial to 
improve their management. If RS is diagnosed, there is one guideline (NICE 2006) 
in place to help its treatment (but it is based on low quality of evidence). The 
aims of this review are: highlight the importance of this problem in 
malnourished patients, discuss the pathophysiology and clinical characteristics, 
with a final series of recommendations to reduce the risk of the syndrome and 
facilitate the treatment.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medcli.2017.12.008
PMID: 29448987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]