---
reference_id: "PMID:15960856"
title: "The incidence of varicella and herpes zoster in Massachusetts as measured by the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) during a period of increasing varicella vaccine coverage, 1998-2003."
authors:
- Yih WK
- Brooks DR
- Lett SM
- Jumaan AO
- Zhang Z
- Clements KM
- Seward JF
journal: BMC Public Health
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-5-68
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The incidence of varicella and herpes zoster in Massachusetts as measured by the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) during a period of increasing varicella vaccine coverage, 1998-2003.
**Authors:** Yih WK, Brooks DR, Lett SM, Jumaan AO, Zhang Z, Clements KM, Seward JF
**Journal:** BMC Public Health (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2458-5-68](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-5-68)

## Content

1. BMC Public Health. 2005 Jun 16;5:68. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-5-68.

The incidence of varicella and herpes zoster in Massachusetts as measured by the 
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) during a period of increasing 
varicella vaccine coverage, 1998-2003.

Yih WK(1), Brooks DR, Lett SM, Jumaan AO, Zhang Z, Clements KM, Seward JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ambulatory Care and Prevention, Harvard Medical School and 
Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, Boston, USA. katherine_yih@harvardpilgrim.org

BACKGROUND: The authors sought to monitor the impact of widespread varicella 
vaccination on the epidemiology of varicella and herpes zoster. While varicella 
incidence would be expected to decrease, mathematical models predict an initial 
increase in herpes zoster incidence if re-exposure to varicella protects against 
reactivation of the varicella zoster virus.
METHODS: In 1998-2003, as varicella vaccine uptake increased, incidence of 
varicella and herpes zoster in Massachusetts was monitored using the 
random-digit-dial Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System.
RESULTS: Between 1998 and 2003, varicella incidence declined from 16.5/1,000 to 
3.5/1,000 (79%) overall with > or = 66% decreases for all age groups except 
adults (27% decrease). Age-standardized estimates of overall herpes zoster 
occurrence increased from 2.77/1,000 to 5.25/1,000 (90%) in the period 
1999-2003, and the trend in both crude and adjusted rates was highly significant 
(p < 0.001). Annual age-specific rates were somewhat unstable, but all 
increased, and the trend was significant for the 25-44 year and 65+ year age 
groups.
CONCLUSION: As varicella vaccine coverage in children increased, the incidence 
of varicella decreased and the occurrence of herpes zoster increased. If the 
observed increase in herpes zoster incidence is real, widespread vaccination of 
children is only one of several possible explanations. Further studies are 
needed to understand secular trends in herpes zoster before and after use of 
varicella vaccine in the United States and other countries.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2458-5-68
PMCID: PMC1177968
PMID: 15960856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]