---
reference_id: "PMID:39941494"
title: "Eyelid Contact Dermatitis: 25-Year Single-Center Retrospective Study."
authors:
- Rubegni G
- Padula T
- Calabrese L
- "D'Onghia M"
- Tognetti L
- Cinotti E
- Lazzeri L
- Ermini G
- Cartocci A
- Tosi GM
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/jcm14030823
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eyelid Contact Dermatitis: 25-Year Single-Center Retrospective Study.
**Authors:** Rubegni G, Padula T, Calabrese L, D'Onghia M, Tognetti L, Cinotti E, Lazzeri L, Ermini G, Cartocci A, Tosi GM
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm14030823](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm14030823)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2025 Jan 27;14(3):823. doi: 10.3390/jcm14030823.

Eyelid Contact Dermatitis: 25-Year Single-Center Retrospective Study.

Rubegni G(1), Padula T(1), Calabrese L(2), D'Onghia M(2), Tognetti L(2), Cinotti 
E(2), Lazzeri L(2), Ermini G(3), Cartocci A(2), Tosi GM(1).

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmology Unit, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Neurosciences, 
University of Siena, 53100 Siena, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical, Surgical and Neurological Sciences, Dermatology 
Section, University of Siena, 53100 Siena, Italy.
(3)F.I.R.M.A. S.p.A., Allergologia e Immunologia Clinica, 50100 Firenze, Italy.

Background/Objectives: Eyelid dermatitis is an inflammatory disease affecting 
the palpebral skin characterized by itching, edema, and scaling of the 
periorbital area. This entity can be a manifestation of various underlying 
dermatological diseases, but allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) is the 
predominant etiology of eyelid dermatitis among patients, being diagnosed in 
43.4% of cases. The thin and highly permeable nature of eyelid skin increases 
its susceptibility to allergens, making it a distinct clinical entity. This 
study aimed to identify the primary haptens associated with eyelid ACD and 
compare these findings with the allergens implicated in non-eyelid ACD over a 
25-year period in a large cohort of patients. Methods: We conducted a 
monocentric, retrospective study on a dataset of 7955 patients patch-tested for 
ACD at the Outpatient Allergy Dermatology Clinic of the Azienda Ospedaliera 
Universitaria Senese (AOUS) from 1997 to 2021. Eyelid ACD cases were identified 
based on clinical features and positive patch test results. Data on 
demographics, occupation, and personal history of atopy were collected. The 
statistical analyses assessed the associations between allergens and eyelid ACD. 
The trends in the sensitization rates for the most prevalent allergens were also 
evaluated. Results: Eyelid ACD was identified in 4.6% of the study population, 
predominantly affecting women (88.6%). Patients with eyelid ACD were more likely 
to exhibit single-hapten positivity (54.6%) and an atopic phenotype (52.3%) 
compared to non-eyelid ACD cases. Nickel sulfate (54%), cobalt chloride (13.4%), 
and thimerosal (12.6%) were the most common allergens associated with eyelid 
ACD. While thimerosal sensitization decreased significantly following its 
removal from topical products, nickel sensitization increased, likely due to 
exposure from electronic devices and hand-eye contact. Conclusions: The haptens 
identified in eyelid ACD largely overlap with those found in other body regions, 
including metals, fragrances, and preservatives. However, the unique 
characteristics of eyelid skin and hand-eye contact patterns play a significant 
role in sensitization. This study highlights the need for further investigation 
into the pathophysiology of eyelid allergic contact dermatitis, with particular 
emphasis on elucidating the mechanisms of hapten sensitization. Such insights 
could contribute to the development of effective strategies aimed at reducing 
allergen exposure.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm14030823
PMCID: PMC11818699
PMID: 39941494

Conflict of interest statement: Author Gabriele Ermini was formerly employed by 
F.I.R.M.A. S.p.A. The remaining authors declare that this study was conducted in 
the absence of any commercial or financial relationship that could be 
interpreted as a potential conflict of interest.