---
reference_id: "PMID:21550344"
title: How do immune cells overcome the blood-brain barrier in multiple sclerosis?
authors:
- Larochelle C
- Alvarez JI
- Prat A
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.04.066
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How do immune cells overcome the blood-brain barrier in multiple sclerosis?
**Authors:** Larochelle C, Alvarez JI, Prat A
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2011.04.066](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2011.04.066)

## Content

1. FEBS Lett. 2011 Dec 1;585(23):3770-80. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.04.066.
Epub  2011 May 4.

How do immune cells overcome the blood-brain barrier in multiple sclerosis?

Larochelle C(1), Alvarez JI, Prat A.

Author information:
(1)Neuroimmunology Research Laboratory, Center of Excellence in Neuromics, 
CRCHUM, Notre-Dame Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal, 
Montréal, Québec, Canada.

The presence of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) restricts the movement of soluble 
mediators and leukocytes from the periphery to the central nervous system (CNS). 
Leukocyte entry into the CNS is nonetheless an early event in multiple sclerosis 
(MS), an inflammatory disorder of the CNS. Whether BBB dysfunction precedes 
immune cell infiltration or is the consequence of perivascular leukocyte 
accumulation remains enigmatic, but leukocyte migration modifies BBB 
permeability. Immune cells of MS subjects express inflammatory cytokines, 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and enzymes that can facilitate their migration to 
the CNS by influencing BBB function, either directly or indirectly. In this 
review, we describe how immune cells from the peripheral blood overcome the BBB 
and promote CNS inflammation in MS through BBB disruption.

Copyright © 2011 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.04.066
PMID: 21550344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]