---
reference_id: "PMID:38760361"
title: Ventricular Netrin-1 deficiency leads to defective pyramidal decussation and mirror movement in mice.
authors:
- Hu L
- Liu XY
- Zhao L
- Hu ZB
- Li ZX
- Liu WT
- Song NN
- Hu YQ
- Jiang LP
- Zhang L
- Tao YC
- Zhang Q
- Chen JY
- Lang B
- Wang YB
- Yue L
- Ding YQ
journal: Cell Death Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41419-024-06719-1
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- "Axons/metabolism, pathology"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Netrin-1/metabolism, genetics"
- "Pyramidal Tracts/metabolism, pathology"
- Movement/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ventricular Netrin-1 deficiency leads to defective pyramidal decussation and mirror movement in mice.
**Authors:** Hu L, Liu XY, Zhao L, Hu ZB, Li ZX, Liu WT, Song NN, Hu YQ, Jiang LP, Zhang L, Tao YC, Zhang Q, Chen JY, Lang B, Wang YB, Yue L, Ding YQ
**Journal:** Cell Death Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41419-024-06719-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-024-06719-1)

## Content

1. Cell Death Dis. 2024 May 17;15(5):343. doi: 10.1038/s41419-024-06719-1.

Ventricular Netrin-1 deficiency leads to defective pyramidal decussation and 
mirror movement in mice.

Hu L(#)(1), Liu XY(#)(2), Zhao L(#)(3), Hu ZB(2), Li ZX(3), Liu WT(2), Song 
NN(3), Hu YQ(2), Jiang LP(3), Zhang L(4), Tao YC(2), Zhang Q(3), Chen JY(3), 
Lang B(5), Wang YB(4), Yue L(4), Ding YQ(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Animal Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, 
China. 06huling@163.com.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and MOE Frontiers Center for 
Brain Science, Institutes of Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, 
China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Animal Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, 
China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Arrhythmias, Ministry of Education, East Hospital, and 
Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Tongji University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, 200092, China.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, 410083, China.
(6)Department of Laboratory Animal Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, 
China. dingyuqiang@vip.163.com.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and MOE Frontiers Center for 
Brain Science, Institutes of Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, 
China. dingyuqiang@vip.163.com.
(8)Shanghai Institute of Infectious Disease and Biosecurity, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, 200032, China. dingyuqiang@vip.163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

The corticospinal tract (CST) is the principal neural pathway responsible for 
conducting voluntary movement in the vertebrate nervous system. Netrin-1 is a 
well-known guidance molecule for midline crossing of commissural axons during 
embryonic development. Families with inherited Netrin-1 mutations display 
congenital mirror movements (CMM), which are associated with malformations of 
pyramidal decussation in most cases. Here, we investigated the role of Netrin-1 
in CST formation by generating conditional knockout (CKO) mice using a 
Gfap-driven Cre line. A large proportion of CST axons spread laterally in the 
ventral medulla oblongata, failed to decussate and descended in the ipsilateral 
spinal white matter of Ntn1Gfap CKO mice. Netrin-1 mRNA was expressed in the 
ventral ventricular zone (VZ) and midline, while Netrin-1 protein was 
transported by radial glial cells to the ventral medulla, through which CST 
axons pass. The level of transported Netrin-1 protein was significantly reduced 
in Ntn1Gfap CKO mice. In addition, Ntn1Gfap CKO mice displayed increased 
symmetric movements. Our findings indicate that VZ-derived Netrin-1 deletion 
leads to an abnormal trajectory of the CST in the spinal cord due to the failure 
of CST midline crossing and provides novel evidence supporting the idea that the 
Netrin-1 signalling pathway is involved in the pathogenesis of CMM.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-024-06719-1
PMCID: PMC11101614
PMID: 38760361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.