---
reference_id: "PMID:36241386"
title: Heterozygous pathogenic variants involving CBFB cause a new skeletal disorder resembling cleidocranial dysplasia.
authors:
- Beyltjens T
- Boudin E
- Revencu N
- Boeckx N
- Bertrand M
- Schütz L
- Haack TB
- Weber A
- Biliouri E
- Vinkšel M
- Zagožen A
- Peterlin B
- Pai S
- Telegrafi A
- Henderson LB
- Ells C
- Turner L
- Wuyts W
- Van Hul W
- Hendrickx G
- Mortier GR
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/jmg-2022-108739
keywords:
- Humans
- Base Sequence
- "Cleidocranial Dysplasia/genetics, pathology"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Core Binding Factor Alpha 1 Subunit/genetics
- Core Binding Factor beta Subunit/genetics
- Exons
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heterozygous pathogenic variants involving CBFB cause a new skeletal disorder resembling cleidocranial dysplasia.
**Authors:** Beyltjens T, Boudin E, Revencu N, Boeckx N, Bertrand M, Schütz L, Haack TB, Weber A, Biliouri E, Vinkšel M, Zagožen A, Peterlin B, Pai S, Telegrafi A, Henderson LB, Ells C, Turner L, Wuyts W, Van Hul W, Hendrickx G, Mortier GR
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg-2022-108739](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg-2022-108739)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2023 May;60(5):498-504. doi: 10.1136/jmg-2022-108739. Epub 2022
Oct  14.

Heterozygous pathogenic variants involving CBFB cause a new skeletal disorder
resembling cleidocranial dysplasia.

Beyltjens T(1), Boudin E(1), Revencu N(2), Boeckx N(1), Bertrand M(3), Schütz
L(3), Haack TB(3), Weber A(4), Biliouri E(4), Vinkšel M(5), Zagožen A(5),
Peterlin B(5), Pai S(6), Telegrafi A(7), Henderson LB(7), Ells C(8), Turner
L(8)(9), Wuyts W(1), Van Hul W(1), Hendrickx G(#)(10)(11), Mortier
GR(#)(1)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)Center for Human Genetics, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc and University
of Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Institute of Human Genetics, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, Germany.
(5)Clinical Institute of Genomic Medicine, University Medical Centre Ljubljana
Division of Internal Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(6)Children's Health, Division of Genetics, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, USA.
(7)GeneDx Inc, Gaithersburg, Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Provincial Medical Genetics Program, Eastern Health, St. John's,
Newfoundland, Canada.
(9)Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada.
(10)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium
gretl.hendrickx@kuleuven.be.
(11)Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(12)Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) is a rare skeletal dysplasia with
significant clinical variability. Patients with CCD typically present with
delayed closure of fontanels and cranial sutures, dental anomalies, clavicular
hypoplasia or aplasia and short stature. Runt-related transcription factor 2
(RUNX2) is currently the only known disease-causing gene for CCD, but several
studies have suggested locus heterogeneity.
METHODS: The cohort consists of eight subjects from five unrelated families
partially identified through GeneMatcher. Exome or genome sequencing was applied
and in two subjects the effect of the variant was investigated at RNA level.
RESULTS: In each subject a heterozygous pathogenic variant in CBFB was detected,
whereas no genomic alteration involving RUNX2 was found. Three CBFB variants
(one splice site alteration, one nonsense variant, one 2 bp duplication) were
shown to result in a premature stop codon. A large intragenic deletion was found
to delete exon 4, without affecting CBFB expression. The effect of a second
splice site variant could not be determined but most likely results in a
shortened or absent protein. Affected individuals showed similarities with
RUNX2-related CCD, including dental and clavicular abnormalities. Normal stature
and neurocognitive problems were however distinguishing features. CBFB encodes
the core-binding factor β subunit, which can interact with all RUNX proteins
(RUNX1, RUNX2, RUNX3) to form heterodimeric transcription factors. This may
explain the phenotypic differences between CBFB-related and RUNX2-related CCD.
CONCLUSION: We confirm the previously suggested locus heterogeneity for CCD by
identifying five pathogenic variants in CBFB in a cohort of eight individuals
with clinical and radiographic features reminiscent of CCD.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg-2022-108739
PMCID: PMC10176335
PMID: 36241386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: AT and LBH are employees of
GeneDx, Inc.
