---
reference_id: "PMID:38891822"
title: "Valosin-Containing Protein (VCP): A Review of Its Diverse Molecular Functions and Clinical Phenotypes."
authors:
- Pontifex CS
- Zaman M
- Fanganiello RD
- Shutt TE
- Pfeffer G
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25115633
keywords:
- "Valosin Containing Protein/metabolism, genetics"
- Humans
- Phenotype
- Animals
- Mutation
- Autophagy/genetics
- DNA Repair
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Valosin-Containing Protein (VCP): A Review of Its Diverse Molecular Functions and Clinical Phenotypes.
**Authors:** Pontifex CS, Zaman M, Fanganiello RD, Shutt TE, Pfeffer G
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25115633](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25115633)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 May 22;25(11):5633. doi: 10.3390/ijms25115633.

Valosin-Containing Protein (VCP): A Review of Its Diverse Molecular Functions
and Clinical Phenotypes.

Pontifex CS(1), Zaman M(1)(2)(3), Fanganiello RD(4), Shutt TE(1)(2)(3), Pfeffer
G(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Cumming
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada.
(2)Alberta Child Health Research Institute, Department of Medical Genetics,
Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada.
(4)Faculty of Science and Engineering, Université Laval, Quebec City, QC G1V
0A6, Canada.
(5)Heritage Medical Research Building 155, 3330 Hospital Dr NW, Calgary, AB T2N
4N1, Canada.

In this review we examine the functionally diverse ATPase associated with
various cellular activities (AAA-ATPase), valosin-containing protein (VCP/p97),
its molecular functions, the mutational landscape of VCP and the phenotypic
manifestation of VCP disease. VCP is crucial to a multitude of cellular
functions including protein quality control, endoplasmic reticulum-associated
degradation (ERAD), autophagy, mitophagy, lysophagy, stress granule formation
and clearance, DNA replication and mitosis, DNA damage response including
nucleotide excision repair, ATM- and ATR-mediated damage response, homologous
repair and non-homologous end joining. VCP variants cause multisystem
proteinopathy, and pathology can arise in several tissue types such as skeletal
muscle, bone, brain, motor neurons, sensory neurons and possibly cardiac muscle,
with the disease course being challenging to predict.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25115633
PMCID: PMC11172259
PMID: 38891822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
