---
reference_id: "PMID:32646497"
title: "Parvovirus B19 infection and kidney injury: report of 4 cases and analysis of immunization and viremia in an adult cohort of 100 patients undergoing a kidney biopsy."
authors:
- Kauffmann M
- Bobot M
- Daniel L
- Torrents J
- Knefati Y
- Moranne O
- Burtey S
- Zandotti C
- Jourde-Chiche N
journal: BMC Nephrol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s12882-020-01911-9
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/blood, immunology, pathology, virology"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antibodies, Viral/immunology"
- Biopsy
- "DNA, Viral/blood"
- "Erythema Infectiosum/blood, complications, immunology"
- Female
- "Glomerulonephritis/blood, immunology, pathology, virology"
- "Glomerulonephritis, Membranoproliferative/blood, immunology, pathology, virology"
- "Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome/blood, immunology, pathology, virology"
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/immunology
- Immunoglobulin M/immunology
- Incidence
- Kidney
- "Kidney Tubular Necrosis, Acute/blood, immunology, pathology, virology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nephrosis, Lipoid/blood, immunology, pathology, virology"
- "Parvovirus B19, Human/genetics, immunology"
- Seroepidemiologic Studies
- Viremia/blood
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parvovirus B19 infection and kidney injury: report of 4 cases and analysis of immunization and viremia in an adult cohort of 100 patients undergoing a kidney biopsy.
**Authors:** Kauffmann M, Bobot M, Daniel L, Torrents J, Knefati Y, Moranne O, Burtey S, Zandotti C, Jourde-Chiche N
**Journal:** BMC Nephrol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12882-020-01911-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12882-020-01911-9)

## Content

1. BMC Nephrol. 2020 Jul 9;21(1):260. doi: 10.1186/s12882-020-01911-9.

Parvovirus B19 infection and kidney injury: report of 4 cases and analysis of 
immunization and viremia in an adult cohort of 100 patients undergoing a kidney 
biopsy.

Kauffmann M(1), Bobot M(1)(2), Daniel L(2)(3), Torrents J(3), Knefati Y(4), 
Moranne O(5), Burtey S(1)(2), Zandotti C(6), Jourde-Chiche N(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)AP-HM, Department of Nephrology, Hopital de la Conception, Marseille, France.
(2)Aix-Marseille Univ, C2VN, INSERM 1263, INRA 1260, Campus Timone, Marseille, 
France.
(3)AP-HM, Laboratory of Pathology, Hopital de la Timone, Marseille, France.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Hôpital Sainte Musse, Toulon, France.
(5)Department of Nephrology, CHU de Nîmes, Nîmes, France.
(6)UVE, Aix-Marseille Univ, IRD 190, Inserm 1207, IHU Méditerranée Infection and 
AP-HM, Marseille, France.
(7)AP-HM, Department of Nephrology, Hopital de la Conception, Marseille, France. 
noemie.jourde@ap-hm.fr.
(8)Aix-Marseille Univ, C2VN, INSERM 1263, INRA 1260, Campus Timone, Marseille, 
France. noemie.jourde@ap-hm.fr.

BACKGROUND: The seroprevalence of human Parvovirus B19 (PVB19) is 70-85% in 
adults worldwide. PVB19 is the etiologic agent of the fifth disease, is a cause 
of aplastic anemia, and can be associated with kidney injury. We aimed to 
describe the cases of 4 patients with kidney injury related to PVB19 primary 
infection, and to evaluate the seroprevalence of PVB19 and the incidence of 
PVB19 primary infection in patients undergoing a native kidney biopsy.
METHODS: Cases of PVB19 infection with kidney injury were reviewed from the 
archives of the department of Nephrology. A systematic screening of anti-PVB19 
IgG and IgM antibodies and viral DNA was performed in sera from 100 consecutive 
patients with a kidney biopsy in 2017-2018.
RESULTS: The 4 patients with PVB19 infection-associated kidney disease 
displayed: one lupus-like glomerulonephritis (GN) without lupus auto-antibodies, 
one minimal change disease with tubular necrosis, one secondary hemolytic and 
uremic syndrome and one membrano-proliferative GN. In the 100 patients biopsied, 
67 had elevated anti-PVB19 IgG, among whom 8 had elevated IgM, without 
circulating viral DNA, without any particular renal pathological pattern. One 
additional patient showed a seroconversion at the time of kidney biopsy, which 
revealed a class V lupus nephritis.
CONCLUSION: PVB19 primary infection can be associated with different kidney 
diseases. The seroprevalence of PVB19 among patients with a kidney biopsy is 
similar to the overall population, and primary infection is rarely documented 
(1%) after systematic screening. Whether PV19 is nephrotoxic, or triggers renal 
endothelial injury and immune activation, remains to be elucidated.

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-020-01911-9
PMCID: PMC7350584
PMID: 32646497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Pr Olivier Moranne is an Editorial Board Member 
of BMC Nephrology. None of the other authors have any competing interests to 
declare.