---
reference_id: "PMID:30660172"
title: "Successful treatment of normocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis with omalizumab: A report of three cases and literature review."
authors:
- Rattananukrom T
- Svetvilas P
- Chanprapaph K
journal: Asian Pac J Allergy Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.12932/AP-050918-0402
keywords:
- "Anti-Allergic Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Biomarkers
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Omalizumab/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Skin/pathology
- Symptom Assessment
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vasculitis, Leukocytoclastic, Cutaneous/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Successful treatment of normocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis with omalizumab: A report of three cases and literature review.
**Authors:** Rattananukrom T, Svetvilas P, Chanprapaph K
**Journal:** Asian Pac J Allergy Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.12932/AP-050918-0402](https://doi.org/10.12932/AP-050918-0402)

## Content

1. Asian Pac J Allergy Immunol. 2020 Dec;38(4):286-289. doi:
10.12932/AP-050918-0402.

Successful treatment of normocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis with
omalizumab: A report of three cases and literature review.

Rattananukrom T(1), Svetvilas P(1), Chanprapaph K(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Dermatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Urticarial vasculitis (UV) is a rare form of cutaneous leukocytoclastic
vasculitis with persistent urticarial lesions. UV may be severe and refractory
to standard treatment including antihistamines, anti-inflammatories,
antimalarials, corticosteroids and immunosuppressants. Omalizumab, an anti-IgE
antibody, is approved for chronic spontaneous urticaria. However, its benefit
for UV remains controversial. We report, herein, three patients with
normocomplementemic UV and angioedema. All patients were diagnosed with chronic
urticaria preceding the presentation of painful urticarial plaques. The
diagnosis of UV was confirmed by skin biopsy and/or direct immunofluorescence.
All patients had none or minimal response to standard treatments. Initial
omalizumab dosing of 150 mg was administered subcutaneously (SC), however,
increment to 300 mg monthly was necessary in 2 patients to control the disease.
All 3 patients remained in complete remission after minimum follow up period of
9 months. To conclude, omalizumab has shown to be beneficial for severe
normocomplementemic UV in our series.

DOI: 10.12932/AP-050918-0402
PMID: 30660172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
