---
reference_id: "PMID:33975883"
title: Suppression of ACADM-Mediated Fatty Acid Oxidation Promotes Hepatocellular Carcinoma via Aberrant CAV1/SREBP1 Signaling.
authors:
- Ma APY
- Yeung CLS
- Tey SK
- Mao X
- Wong SWK
- Ng TH
- Ko FCF
- Kwong EML
- Tang AHN
- Ng IO
- Cai SH
- Yun JP
- Yam JWP
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-20-3944
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Suppression of ACADM-Mediated Fatty Acid Oxidation Promotes Hepatocellular Carcinoma via Aberrant CAV1/SREBP1 Signaling.
**Authors:** Ma APY, Yeung CLS, Tey SK, Mao X, Wong SWK, Ng TH, Ko FCF, Kwong EML, Tang AHN, Ng IO, Cai SH, Yun JP, Yam JWP
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-20-3944](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-20-3944)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 2021 Jul 1;81(13):3679-3692. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-20-3944. 
Epub 2021 May 11.

Suppression of ACADM-Mediated Fatty Acid Oxidation Promotes Hepatocellular 
Carcinoma via Aberrant CAV1/SREBP1 Signaling.

Ma APY(1), Yeung CLS(1), Tey SK(1), Mao X(1), Wong SWK(1), Ng TH(1), Ko FCF(1), 
Kwong EML(1), Tang AHN(1), Ng IO(1)(2), Cai SH(3), Yun JP(4), Yam JWP(5)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Liver Research, The University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong, China.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, 
China.
(5)Department of Pathology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. judyyam@pathology.hku.hk.

Lipid accumulation exacerbates tumor development, as it fuels the proliferative 
growth of cancer cells. The role of medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (ACADM), 
an enzyme that catalyzes the first step of mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation, 
in tumor biology remains elusive. Therefore, investigating its mode of 
dysregulation can shed light on metabolic dependencies in cancer development. In 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), ACADM was significantly underexpressed, 
correlating with several aggressive clinicopathologic features observed in 
patients. Functionally, suppression of ACADM promoted HCC cell motility with 
elevated triglyceride, phospholipid, and cellular lipid droplet levels, 
indicating the tumor suppressive ability of ACADM in HCC. Sterol regulatory 
element-binding protein-1 (SREBP1) was identified as a negative transcriptional 
regulator of ACADM. Subsequently, high levels of caveolin-1 (CAV1) were observed 
to inhibit fatty acid oxidation, which revealed its role in regulating lipid 
metabolism. CAV1 expression negatively correlated with ACADM and its 
upregulation enhanced nuclear accumulation of SREBP1, resulting in suppressed 
ACADM activity and contributing to increased HCC cell aggressiveness. 
Administration of an SREBP1 inhibitor in combination with sorafenib elicited a 
synergistic antitumor effect and significantly reduced HCC tumor growth in vivo. 
These findings indicate that deregulation of fatty acid oxidation mediated by 
the CAV1/SREBP1/ACADM axis results in HCC progression, which implicates 
targeting fatty acid metabolism to improve HCC treatment. SIGNIFICANCE: This 
study identifies tumor suppressive effects of ACADM in hepatocellular carcinoma 
and suggests promotion of β-oxidation to diminish fatty acid availability to 
cancer cells could be used as a therapeutic strategy.

©2021 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-20-3944
PMID: 33975883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]