---
reference_id: "PMID:38301265"
title: "Genome report: chromosome-scale genome assembly of the West Indian fruit fly Anastrepha obliqua (Diptera: Tephritidae)."
authors:
- Sim SB
- Congrains C
- Velasco-Cuervo SM
- Corpuz RL
- Kauwe AN
- Scheffler B
- Geib SM
journal: G3 (Bethesda)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/g3journal/jkae024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome report: chromosome-scale genome assembly of the West Indian fruit fly Anastrepha obliqua (Diptera: Tephritidae).
**Authors:** Sim SB, Congrains C, Velasco-Cuervo SM, Corpuz RL, Kauwe AN, Scheffler B, Geib SM
**Journal:** G3 (Bethesda) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/g3journal/jkae024](https://doi.org/10.1093/g3journal/jkae024)

## Content

1. G3 (Bethesda). 2024 Apr 3;14(4):jkae024. doi: 10.1093/g3journal/jkae024.

Genome report: chromosome-scale genome assembly of the West Indian fruit fly 
Anastrepha obliqua (Diptera: Tephritidae).

Sim SB(1), Congrains C(1)(2), Velasco-Cuervo SM(3), Corpuz RL(1), Kauwe AN(1), 
Scheffler B(4), Geib SM(1).

Author information:
(1)USDA-ARS Daniel K. Inouye US Pacific Basin Agricultural Research Center, 
Tropical Pest Genetics and Molecular Biology Research Unit, Hilo, HI 96720, USA.
(2)Entomology Section, Department of Plant and Environmental Protection 
Sciences, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa Plant and Environmental Protection 
Sciences, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA.
(3)Department of Agricultural, Food, and Nutritional Sciences, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2P5, Canada.
(4)USDA-ARS Jamie Whitten Delta States Research Center, Genetics and 
Bioinformatics Research Unit, Stoneville, MS 38776, USA.

The West Indian fruit fly, Anastrepha obliqua, is a major pest of mango in 
Central and South America and attacks more than 60 species of host fruits. To 
support current genetic and genomic research on A. obliqua, we sequenced the 
genome using high-fidelity long-read sequencing. This resulted in a highly 
contiguous contig assembly with 90% of the genome in 10 contigs. The contig 
assembly was placed in a chromosomal context using synteny with a closely 
related species, Anastrepha ludens, as both are members of the Anastrepha 
fraterculus group. The resulting assembly represents the five autosomes and the 
X chromosome which represents 95.9% of the genome, and 199 unplaced contigs 
representing the remaining 4.1%. Orthology analysis across the structural 
annotation sets of high quality tephritid genomes demonstrates the gene 
annotations are robust, and identified genes unique to Anastrepha species that 
may help define their pestiferous nature that can be used as a starting point 
for comparative genomics. This genome assembly represents the first of this 
species and will serve as a foundation for future genetic and genomic research 
in support of its management as an agricultural pest.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The Genetics Society of 
America 2024.

DOI: 10.1093/g3journal/jkae024
PMCID: PMC10989853
PMID: 38301265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest. The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.