---
reference_id: "PMID:28059852"
title: Immune checkpoint inhibitors in first-line therapy of advanced non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Remon J
- Besse B
journal: Curr Opin Oncol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1097/CCO.0000000000000351
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune checkpoint inhibitors in first-line therapy of advanced non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Remon J, Besse B
**Journal:** Curr Opin Oncol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1097/CCO.0000000000000351](https://doi.org/10.1097/CCO.0000000000000351)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Oncol. 2017 Mar;29(2):97-104. doi: 10.1097/CCO.0000000000000351.

Immune checkpoint inhibitors in first-line therapy of advanced non-small cell 
lung cancer.

Remon J(1), Besse B.

Author information:
(1)aGustave Roussy, Cancer Medicine Department, Villejuif bParis Sud University, 
Paris, France.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Evading immune destruction is a hallmark of cancer. The first 
therapeutic wave in immunotherapies comprised a series of monoclonal antibodies 
directed against the immune checkpoint molecules cytotoxic 
T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4, programmed death 1 (PD-1), and programmed 
death ligand-1 (PD-L1) revolutionizing the therapeutic landscape of advanced 
non-small cell lung cancer. They were validated initially as second-line 
treatment, becoming the new standard of care.
RECENT FINDINGS: Based on immunotherapies efficacy, different strategies are 
being successfully investigated in first-line treatment, including frontline 
immune checkpoint inhibitors, and combination with chemotherapy or with other 
immune checkpoint inhibitors. In accordance with recent results, US Food and 
Drug Administration approved a checkpoint inhibitor for first-line treatment of 
metastatic non-small cell lung cancer whose tumors have high PD-L1 expression, 
and European Medicines Agency approval is expected in early 2017.
SUMMARY: In this review, we summarize the main results of the various strategic 
clinical development approaches used to date, as well as in ongoing clinical 
trials.

DOI: 10.1097/CCO.0000000000000351
PMID: 28059852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]