---
reference_id: "PMID:38791316"
title: Pathogenesis of Pulmonary Manifestations in ANCA-Associated Vasculitis and Goodpasture Syndrome.
authors:
- Fouka E
- Drakopanagiotakis F
- Steiropoulos P
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25105278
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis of Pulmonary Manifestations in ANCA-Associated Vasculitis and Goodpasture Syndrome.
**Authors:** Fouka E, Drakopanagiotakis F, Steiropoulos P
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25105278](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25105278)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 May 12;25(10):5278. doi: 10.3390/ijms25105278.

Pathogenesis of Pulmonary Manifestations in ANCA-Associated Vasculitis and 
Goodpasture Syndrome.

Fouka E(1), Drakopanagiotakis F(2), Steiropoulos P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, General Hospital G. Papanikolaou, Medical 
School, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 57010 Thessaloniki, Greece.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Medical School, Democritus University of 
Thrace, 68100 Alexandroupolis, Greece.

Pulmonary manifestations of vasculitis are associated with significant morbidity 
and mortality in affected individuals. They result from a complex interplay 
between immune dysregulation, which leads to vascular inflammation and tissue 
damage. This review explored the underlying pathogenesis of pulmonary 
involvement in vasculitis, encompassing various forms such as granulomatosis 
with polyangiitis (GPA), microscopic polyangiitis (MPA), eosinophilic 
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA), and anti-GBM disease. Mechanisms 
involving ANCA and anti-GBM autoantibodies, neutrophil activation, and 
neutrophil extracellular trap (NETs) formation are discussed, along with the 
role of the complement system in inducing pulmonary injury. Furthermore, the 
impact of genetic predisposition and environmental factors on disease 
susceptibility and severity was considered, and the current treatment options 
were presented. Understanding the mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of 
pulmonary vasculitis is crucial for developing targeted therapies and improving 
clinical outcomes in affected individuals.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25105278
PMCID: PMC11121030
PMID: 38791316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.