---
reference_id: PMID:26564023
title: Quality of life of patients with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
authors:
- Ortiz-Agapito F
- Colmenares-Bonilla D
journal: J Child Orthop
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s11832-015-0704-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quality of life of patients with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
**Authors:** Ortiz-Agapito F, Colmenares-Bonilla D
**Journal:** J Child Orthop (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11832-015-0704-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11832-015-0704-6)

## Content

1. J Child Orthop. 2015 Dec;9(6):489-93. doi: 10.1007/s11832-015-0704-6. Epub
2015  Nov 13.

Quality of life of patients with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.

Ortiz-Agapito F(1), Colmenares-Bonilla D(2).

Author information:
(1)Hospital Regional de Alta Especialidad del Bajio, Boulevard Milenio No. 130,
Col. San Carlos la Roncha, C.P. 37660, León, Guanajuato, Mexico.
(2)Hospital Regional de Alta Especialidad del Bajio, Boulevard Milenio No. 130,
Col. San Carlos la Roncha, C.P. 37660, León, Guanajuato, Mexico.
douglas_cb@yahoo.com.

INTRODUCTION: Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) is a rare disorder
characterized by episodes of acute pain and heterotopic ossification of soft
tissue, and progressively limited physical function and social participation.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to determine the impact of FOP on quality of life,
specifying areas or dimensions most affected.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was a transverse observational study; patients with
FOP were assessed using the Short Form 36. Questionnaire results were obtained
using Quality Metric software and analyzed using frequency distribution,
percentages and measures of central tendency.
RESULTS: Eight patients, mean age 30.2 years, were included. The physical
dimension was the most affected, with an average of 25.5 points. The most
representative items were impaired function and physical role. Physical pain was
found with an average of 44.5 points. The best scores were reported in the areas
of emotional role and mental health, with an average of 79 and 76 respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: FOP is a severely disabling disease, generating a significant
deterioration in quality of life secondary to progressive deterioration in
physical abilities. The findings of this study demonstrate good self-rated
health of participants.

DOI: 10.1007/s11832-015-0704-6
PMCID: PMC4661157
PMID: 26564023
