---
reference_id: "PMID:12124405"
title: Hepatitis B e antigen and the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma.
authors:
- Yang HI
- Lu SN
- Liaw YF
- You SL
- Sun CA
- Wang LY
- Hsiao CK
- Chen PJ
- Chen DS
- Chen CJ
- Taiwan Community-Based Cancer Screening Project Group
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa013215
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B e antigen and the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma.
**Authors:** Yang HI, Lu SN, Liaw YF, You SL, Sun CA, Wang LY, Hsiao CK, Chen PJ, Chen DS, Chen CJ, Taiwan Community-Based Cancer Screening Project Group
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa013215](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa013215)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2002 Jul 18;347(3):168-74. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa013215.

Hepatitis B e antigen and the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Yang HI(1), Lu SN, Liaw YF, You SL, Sun CA, Wang LY, Hsiao CK, Chen PJ, Chen DS, 
Chen CJ; Taiwan Community-Based Cancer Screening Project Group.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2002 Jul 18;347(3):208-10. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe020060.
    N Engl J Med. 2002 Nov 21;347(21):1721-2; author reply 1721-2. doi: 
10.1056/NEJM200211213472119.

BACKGROUND: The presence of hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) in serum indicates 
active viral replication in hepatocytes. HBeAg is thus a surrogate marker for 
the presence of hepatitis B virus DNA. We conducted a prospective study to 
determine the relation between positivity for hepatitis B surface antigen 
(HBsAg) and HBeAg and the development of hepatocellular carcinoma.
METHODS: In 1991 and 1992, we enrolled 11,893 men without evidence of 
hepatocellular carcinoma (age range, 30 to 65 years) from seven townships in 
Taiwan. Serum samples obtained at the time of enrollment were tested for HBsAg 
and HBeAg by radioimmunoassay. The diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma was 
ascertained through data linkage with the computerized National Cancer Registry 
in Taiwan and with death certificates. We performed a multiple regression 
analysis to determine the relative risk of hepatocellular carcinoma among men 
who were positive for HBsAg alone or for HBsAg and HBeAg, as compared with those 
who were negative for both.
RESULTS: There were 111 cases of newly diagnosed hepatocellular carcinoma during 
92,359 person-years of follow-up. The incidence rate of hepatocellular carcinoma 
was 1169 cases per 100,000 person-years among men who were positive for both 
HBsAg and HBeAg, 324 per 100,000 person-years for those who were positive for 
HBsAg only, and 39 per 100,000 person-years for those who were negative for 
both. After adjustment for age, sex, the presence or absence of antibodies 
against hepatitis C virus, cigarette-smoking status, and use or nonuse of 
alcohol, the relative risk of hepatocellular carcinoma was 9.6 (95 percent 
confidence interval, 6.0 to 15.2) among men who were positive for HBsAg alone 
and 60.2 (95 percent confidence interval, 35.5 to 102.1) among those who were 
positive for both HBsAg and HBeAg, as compared with men who were negative for 
both.
CONCLUSIONS: Positivity for HBeAg is associated with an increased risk of 
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Copyright 2002 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa013215
PMID: 12124405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]