---
reference_id: "PMID:39796208"
title: "Fucosidosis: A Review of a Rare Disease."
authors:
- Pekdemir B
- Bechelany M
- Karav S
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/ijms26010353
keywords:
- Humans
- "Fucosidosis/therapy, metabolism, genetics"
- "alpha-L-Fucosidase/metabolism, genetics"
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- "Rare Diseases/metabolism, genetics"
- Animals
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fucosidosis: A Review of a Rare Disease.
**Authors:** Pekdemir B, Bechelany M, Karav S
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms26010353](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms26010353)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2025 Jan 3;26(1):353. doi: 10.3390/ijms26010353.

Fucosidosis: A Review of a Rare Disease.

Pekdemir B(1), Bechelany M(2)(3), Karav S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Çanakkale Onsekiz Mart
University, Çanakkale 17100, Turkey.
(2)Institut Européen des Membranes (IEM), UMR 5635, University Montpellier,
ENSCM, CNRS, F-34095 Montpellier, France.
(3)Functional Materials Group, Gulf University for Science and Technology
(GUST), Masjid Al Aqsa Street, Mubarak Al-Abdullah 32093, Kuwait.

Fucosidosis is a rare lysosomal storage disease caused by α-L-fucosidase
deficiency following a mutation in the FUCA1 gene. This enzyme is responsible
for breaking down fucose-containing glycoproteins, glycolipids, and
oligosaccharides within the lysosome. Mutations in FUCA1 result in either
reduced enzyme activity or complete loss of function, leading to the
accumulation of fucose-rich substrates in lysosomes. Lysosomes become engorged
with undigested substrates, which leads to secondary storage defects affecting
other metabolic pathways. The central nervous system is particularly vulnerable,
with lysosomal dysfunction causing microglial activation, inflammation, and
neuronal loss, leading to the neurodegenerative symptoms of fucosidosis.
Neuroinflammation contributes to secondary damage, including neuronal apoptosis,
axonal degeneration, and synaptic dysfunction, exacerbating the disease process.
Chronic neuroinflammation impairs synaptic plasticity and neuronal survival,
leading to progressive intellectual disability, learning difficulties, and loss
of previously acquired skills. Inflammatory cytokines and lysosomal burden in
motor neurons and associated pathways contribute to ataxia, spasticity, and
hypotonia, which are common motor symptoms in fucosidosis. Elevated
neuroinflammatory markers can increase neuronal excitability, leading to the
frequent occurrence of epilepsy in affected individuals. So, fucosidosis is
characterized by rapid mental and motor loss, along with growth retardation,
coarse facial features, hepatosplenomegaly, telangiectasis or angiokeratomas,
epilepsy, inguinal hernia, and dysostosis multiplex. Patients usually die at an
early age. Treatment of fucosidosis is a great challenge, and there is currently
no definitive effective treatment. Hematopoietic cell transplantation studies
are ongoing in the treatment of fucosidosis. However, early diagnosis of this
disease and treatment can be effective. In addition, the body's immune system
decreases due to chemotherapy applied after transplantation, leaving the body
vulnerable to microbes and infections, and the risk of death is high with this
treatment. In another treatment method, gene therapy, the use of retroviral
vectors, is promising due to their easy integration, high cell efficiency, and
safety. In another treatment approach, enzyme replacement therapy, preclinical
studies are ongoing for fucosidosis, but the blood-brain barrier is a major
obstacle in lysosomal storage diseases affecting the central nervous system.
Early diagnosis is important in fucosidosis, a rare disease, due to the delay in
the diagnosis of patients identified so far and the rapid progression of the
disease. In addition, enzyme replacement therapy, which carries fewer risks, is
promising.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms26010353
PMCID: PMC11719934
PMID: 39796208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
