---
reference_id: "PMID:35191542"
title: "How I manage myeloproliferative neoplasm-unclassifiable: Practical approaches for 2022 and beyond."
authors:
- McLornan DP
- Hargreaves R
- Hernández-Boluda JC
- Harrison CN
journal: Br J Haematol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/bjh.18087
keywords:
- Anticoagulants
- Humans
- "Myeloproliferative Disorders/diagnosis, therapy"
- Neoplasms
- Venous Thromboembolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How I manage myeloproliferative neoplasm-unclassifiable: Practical approaches for 2022 and beyond.
**Authors:** McLornan DP, Hargreaves R, Hernández-Boluda JC, Harrison CN
**Journal:** Br J Haematol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjh.18087](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjh.18087)

## Content

1. Br J Haematol. 2022 May;197(4):407-416. doi: 10.1111/bjh.18087. Epub 2022 Feb 
22.

How I manage myeloproliferative neoplasm-unclassifiable: Practical approaches 
for 2022 and beyond.

McLornan DP(1)(2), Hargreaves R(2), Hernández-Boluda JC(3), Harrison CN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology, 4th Floor Southwark Wing, Guy's and St. Thomas' 
NHS Foundation Trust, Great Maze Pond, London, UK.
(2)Department of Haematology, University College London Hospitals, London, UK.
(3)Hematology Department, Hospital Clínico Universitario-INCLIVA, University of 
Valencia, Valencia, Spain.

Myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN)-unclassifiable (MPN-U) or not otherwise 
specified represents a rare, poorly defined and heterogeneous group of MPNs. 
Disease incidence is difficult to define but likely represents close to 5% of 
all MPNs when strict World Health Organisation (WHO) criteria are applied. 
Dynamic review over time is required to assess if the disease can be 
re-classified into another MPN entity. A diagnosis of MPN-U leads to many 
challenges for both the patient and physician alike including lack of agreed 
monitoring and therapeutic guidelines, validated prognostic markers and licenced 
therapies coupled with exclusion from clinical trials. MPN-U has an inherent 
risk of an aggressive clinical course and transformation in some but who, and 
when to treat in the chronic phase, including identifying who may require more 
aggressive therapy at an earlier stage, remains elusive. Moreover, despite the 
significant thrombotic risk, there is no agreement on systematic primary 
thromboprophylaxis. We hereby provide a contemporary overview of MPN-U in 
addition to four illustrative cases providing our collective suggested 
approaches to clinical challenges.

© 2022 British Society for Haematology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/bjh.18087
PMID: 35191542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]