---
reference_id: "PMID:10433909"
title: "Craniofacial, vestibular and bone defects in mice lacking the Distal-less-related gene Dlx5."
authors:
- Acampora D
- Merlo GR
- Paleari L
- Zerega B
- Postiglione MP
- Mantero S
- Bober E
- Barbieri O
- Simeone A
- Levi G
journal: Development
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1242/dev.126.17.3795
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- Apoptosis/genetics
- Base Sequence
- Bone and Bones/abnormalities
- Brain/abnormalities
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- Cell Division/genetics
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- DNA Primers/genetics
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Gene Targeting
- "Genes, Homeobox"
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- In Situ Hybridization
- Lac Operon
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- Osteoblasts/cytology
- Phenotype
- "Vestibule, Labyrinth/abnormalities"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Craniofacial, vestibular and bone defects in mice lacking the Distal-less-related gene Dlx5.
**Authors:** Acampora D, Merlo GR, Paleari L, Zerega B, Postiglione MP, Mantero S, Bober E, Barbieri O, Simeone A, Levi G
**Journal:** Development (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.126.17.3795](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.126.17.3795)

## Content

1. Development. 1999 Sep;126(17):3795-809. doi: 10.1242/dev.126.17.3795.

Craniofacial, vestibular and bone defects in mice lacking the 
Distal-less-related gene Dlx5.

Acampora D(1), Merlo GR, Paleari L, Zerega B, Postiglione MP, Mantero S, Bober 
E, Barbieri O, Simeone A, Levi G.

Author information:
(1)International Institute of Genetic and Biophysics, CNR, via Marconi 10, 
Italy.

The Dlx5 gene encodes a Distal-less-related DNA-binding homeobox protein first 
expressed during early embryonic development in anterior regions of the mouse 
embryo. In later developmental stages, it appears in the branchial arches, the 
otic and olfactory placodes and their derivatives, in restricted brain regions, 
in all extending appendages and in all developing bones. We have created a null 
allele of the mouse Dlx5 gene by replacing exons I and II with the E. coli lacZ 
gene. Heterozygous mice appear normal. Beta-galactosidase activity in Dlx5+/- 
embryos and newborn animals reproduces the known pattern of expression of the 
gene. Homozygous mutants die shortly after birth with a swollen abdomen. They 
present a complex phenotype characterised by craniofacial abnormalities 
affecting derivatives of the first four branchial arches, severe malformations 
of the vestibular organ, a delayed ossification of the roof of the skull and 
abnormal osteogenesis. No obvious defect was observed in the patterning of limbs 
and other appendages. The defects observed in Dlx5-/- mutant animals suggest 
multiple and independent roles of this gene in the patterning of the branchial 
arches, in the morphogenesis of the vestibular organ and in osteoblast 
differentiation.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.126.17.3795
PMID: 10433909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]