---
reference_id: "PMID:29680050"
title: Highly selective colorimetric detection of putrescine in fish products using o-phthalaldehyde derivatization reaction.
authors:
- Qi X
- Wang WF
- Wang J
- Yang JL
- Shi YP
journal: Food Chem
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.03.131
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Highly selective colorimetric detection of putrescine in fish products using o-phthalaldehyde derivatization reaction.
**Authors:** Qi X, Wang WF, Wang J, Yang JL, Shi YP
**Journal:** Food Chem (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.03.131](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.03.131)

## Content

1. Food Chem. 2018 Sep 1;259:245-250. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.03.131. Epub 
2018 Mar 29.

Highly selective colorimetric detection of putrescine in fish products using 
o-phthalaldehyde derivatization reaction.

Qi X(1), Wang WF(2), Wang J(3), Yang JL(4), Shi YP(5).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Chemistry of Northwestern Plant Resources and Key 
Laboratory for Natural Medicine of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical 
Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Lanzhou 730000, PR China; University 
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, PR China. Electronic address: 
qixuan@licp.cas.cn.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Chemistry of Northwestern Plant Resources and Key 
Laboratory for Natural Medicine of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical 
Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Lanzhou 730000, PR China. Electronic 
address: wangwf@licp.cas.cn.
(3)CAS Key Laboratory of Chemistry of Northwestern Plant Resources and Key 
Laboratory for Natural Medicine of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical 
Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Lanzhou 730000, PR China; University 
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, PR China. Electronic address: 
wangjun@licp.cas.cn.
(4)CAS Key Laboratory of Chemistry of Northwestern Plant Resources and Key 
Laboratory for Natural Medicine of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical 
Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Lanzhou 730000, PR China. Electronic 
address: yangjl@licp.cas.cn.
(5)CAS Key Laboratory of Chemistry of Northwestern Plant Resources and Key 
Laboratory for Natural Medicine of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical 
Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Lanzhou 730000, PR China. Electronic 
address: shiyp@licp.cas.cn.

A highly selective colorimetric detection method for putrescine on the basis of 
an optimized derivatization reaction was established. With the aids of 
o-phthalaldehyde (OPA) and thioglycolic acid (TGA), putrescine was derived to 
become red derivatives (PUT-RD), the form that can be detected qualitatively and 
quantitatively by visual inspection and UV-vis spectrophotometer at λmax of 
490 nm, respectively. Key parameters affecting the experiment were investigated 
by one-factor-at-a-time and response surface analysis. At the optimal condition, 
this colorimetric method achieved good linearity at putrescine concentrations 
ranging from 0.8 to 200 μM with detection limit of 0.44 µM. The method also has 
good selectivity when common amino acids and inorganic ions, as well as 
ethylenediamine, 1,3-propanediamine, 1,5-pentanediamine, and 1,6-hexanediamine 
were used as interferences. The established colorimetric method was successfully 
employed for the detection of putrescine in 10 commercial fish products.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.03.131
PMID: 29680050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]