---
reference_id: "PMID:25014687"
title: Lanreotide in metastatic enteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.
authors:
- Caplin ME
- Pavel M
- Ćwikła JB
- Phan AT
- Raderer M
- Sedláčková E
- Cadiot G
- Wolin EM
- Capdevila J
- Wall L
- Rindi G
- Langley A
- Martinez S
- Blumberg J
- Ruszniewski P
- CLARINET Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1316158
keywords:
- Aged
- "Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Delayed-Action Preparations
- Diarrhea/etiology
- Disease-Free Survival
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- "Gastrointestinal Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neuroendocrine Tumors/drug therapy, mortality, secondary"
- "Pancreatic Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Peptides, Cyclic/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Somatostatin/adverse effects, analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lanreotide in metastatic enteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.
**Authors:** Caplin ME, Pavel M, Ćwikła JB, Phan AT, Raderer M, Sedláčková E, Cadiot G, Wolin EM, Capdevila J, Wall L, Rindi G, Langley A, Martinez S, Blumberg J, Ruszniewski P, CLARINET Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1316158](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1316158)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2014 Jul 17;371(3):224-33. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1316158.

Lanreotide in metastatic enteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.

Caplin ME(1), Pavel M, Ćwikła JB, Phan AT, Raderer M, Sedláčková E, Cadiot G, 
Wolin EM, Capdevila J, Wall L, Rindi G, Langley A, Martinez S, Blumberg J, 
Ruszniewski P; CLARINET Investigators.

Collaborators: Raderer M, Borbath I, Ysebaert D, Patel V, Sedláčková E, Gronbaek 
H, Adenis A, Buscail L, Cadiot G, Dominguez S, Ducreux M, Hentic O, Lombard 
Bohas C, Mitry E, Ruszniewski P, Seitz JF, Begum N, Harsch I, Pavel M, Schöfl C, 
Weber M, Wiedenmann B, Mallath M, Patil P, Sambasivaiah K, Saxena R, Bajetta E, 
Buonadonna A, Buzzoni R, Cannizzaro R, Colao A, De Angelis C, Tomassetti P, 
Ćwikła J, Kos Kudła B, Salek T, Capdevila J, Soler G, Tabernero JM, Ahlman H, 
Kjellman M, Aithal G, Anthoney A, Caplin M, Grossman A, Newell Price J, Ramage 
J, Reed N, Rees A, Steward W, Wall L, Choti M, Phan AT, Wolin EM.

Author information:
(1)From Royal Free Hospital, London (M.E.C.); Charité University Medicine 
Berlin, Berlin (M.P.); University of Warmia and Mazury, Olsztyn, Poland 
(J.B.Ć.); University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston (A.T.P.); 
University Hospital, Vienna (M.R.); Department of Oncology of the First Faculty 
of Medicine and General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic (E.S.); 
Robert-Debré Hospital, Reims (G.C.), Ipsen, Les Ulis, (A.L., S.M., J.B.), 
Beaujon Hospital, Clichy (P.R.), and Paris Diderot University, Paris (P.R.) - 
all in France; Samuel Oschin Cancer Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los 
Angeles (E.M.W.); Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona (J.C.); Western 
General Hospital, Edinburgh (L.W.); and Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, 
Rome (G.R.).

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2014 Oct;10(10):577. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2014.133.
    Cancer Discov. 2014 Oct;4(10):OF3. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-NB2014-124.
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Oct 16;371(16):1556-7. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1409757.
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Oct 16;371(16):1555-6. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1409757.
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Oct 16;371(16):1556. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1409757.

BACKGROUND: Somatostatin analogues are commonly used to treat symptoms 
associated with hormone hypersecretion in neuroendocrine tumors; however, data 
on their antitumor effects are limited.
METHODS: We conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 
multinational study of the somatostatin analogue lanreotide in patients with 
advanced, well-differentiated or moderately differentiated, nonfunctioning, 
somatostatin receptor-positive neuroendocrine tumors of grade 1 or 2 (a tumor 
proliferation index [on staining for the Ki-67 antigen] of <10%) and documented 
disease-progression status. The tumors originated in the pancreas, midgut, or 
hindgut or were of unknown origin. Patients were randomly assigned to receive an 
extended-release aqueous-gel formulation of lanreotide (Autogel [known in the 
United States as Depot], Ipsen) at a dose of 120 mg (101 patients) or placebo 
(103 patients) once every 28 days for 96 weeks. The primary end point was 
progression-free survival, defined as the time to disease progression (according 
to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, version 1.0) or death. 
Secondary end points included overall survival, quality of life (assessed with 
the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer questionnaires 
QLQ-C30 and QLQ-GI.NET21), and safety.
RESULTS: Most patients (96%) had no tumor progression in the 3 to 6 months 
before randomization, and 33% had hepatic tumor volumes greater than 25%. 
Lanreotide, as compared with placebo, was associated with significantly 
prolonged progression-free survival (median not reached vs. median of 18.0 
months, P<0.001 by the stratified log-rank test; hazard ratio for progression or 
death, 0.47; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.30 to 0.73). The estimated rates of 
progression-free survival at 24 months were 65.1% (95% CI, 54.0 to 74.1) in the 
lanreotide group and 33.0% (95% CI, 23.0 to 43.3) in the placebo group. The 
therapeutic effect in predefined subgroups was generally consistent with that in 
the overall population, with the exception of small subgroups in which 
confidence intervals were wide. There were no significant between-group 
differences in quality of life or overall survival. The most common 
treatment-related adverse event was diarrhea (in 26% of the patients in the 
lanreotide group and 9% of those in the placebo group).
CONCLUSIONS: Lanreotide was associated with significantly prolonged 
progression-free survival among patients with metastatic enteropancreatic 
neuroendocrine tumors of grade 1 or 2 (Ki-67 <10%). (Funded by Ipsen; CLARINET 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00353496; EudraCT 2005-004904-35.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1316158
PMID: 25014687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]