---
reference_id: "PMID:34536732"
title: Optimising fusion detection through sequential DNA and RNA molecular profiling of non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Moore DA
- Benafif S
- Poskitt B
- Argue S
- Lee SM
- Ahmad T
- Papadatos-Pastos D
- Jamal-Hanjani M
- Bennett P
- Forster MD
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2021.08.008
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/diagnosis, genetics"
- DNA
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- RNA
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Optimising fusion detection through sequential DNA and RNA molecular profiling of non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Moore DA, Benafif S, Poskitt B, Argue S, Lee SM, Ahmad T, Papadatos-Pastos D, Jamal-Hanjani M, Bennett P, Forster MD
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2021.08.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2021.08.008)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2021 Nov;161:55-59. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2021.08.008. Epub 2021
 Aug 25.

Optimising fusion detection through sequential DNA and RNA molecular profiling
of non-small cell lung cancer.

Moore DA(1), Benafif S(2), Poskitt B(3), Argue S(2), Lee SM(4), Ahmad T(4),
Papadatos-Pastos D(2), Jamal-Hanjani M(4), Bennett P(3), Forster MD(5).

Author information:
(1)CRUK Lung Cancer Centre of Excellence, UCL Cancer Institute, UCL, London,
United Kingdom; Department of Cellular Pathology, University College London
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Oncology, University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation
Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Sarah Cannon Molecular Diagnostics, HCA Healthcare UK, London, United
Kingdom.
(4)CRUK Lung Cancer Centre of Excellence, UCL Cancer Institute, UCL, London,
United Kingdom; Department of Oncology, University College London Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(5)CRUK Lung Cancer Centre of Excellence, UCL Cancer Institute, UCL, London,
United Kingdom; Department of Oncology, University College London Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
m.forster@ucl.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVES: There is an increasing number of driver fusions in NSCLC which are
amenable to targeted therapy. Panel testing for fusions is increasingly
appropriate but can be costly and requires adequate good quality biopsy
material. In light of the typical mutual exclusivity of driver events in NSCLC,
the objective of this study was to trial a novel testing pathway, supported by
industrial collaboration, in which only patients negative for driver mutations
on DNA-NGS were submitted for fusion panel analysis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Over 18 months, all patients from a single centre with
non-squamous NSCLC were submitted for DNA-NGS, plus ALK and ROS1
immunohistochemistry +/- FISH. Those which were negative for a driver mutation
were then recalled for RNA panel testing.
RESULTS: 307 samples were referred for DNA-NGS mutation analysis, of which, 10%
of cases were unsuitable for or failed DNA-NGS analysis. Driver mutations were
detected in 61% (167/275) of all those successfully tested. Of those without a
driver mutation and with some remaining tissue available, 28% had insufficient
tissue/extracted RNA or failed RNA-NGS. Of those successfully tested, 24%
(17/72) had a fusion gene detected involving either ALK, ROS, MET, RET, FGFR or
EGFR. Overall, 66% (184/277) of patients had a driver event detected through the
combination of DNA and RNA panels.
CONCLUSION: Sequential DNA and RNA based molecular profiling increased the
efficacy of detecting fusion driven NSCLCs. Continued optimisation of tissue
procurement, handling and the diagnostic pathways for gene fusion analysis is
necessary to reduce analysis failure rates and improve detection rate for
treatment with the next generation of small molecule inhibitors.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2021.08.008
PMID: 34536732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
