---
reference_id: "PMID:38406644"
title: "Netherton Syndrome with a Novel Likely Pathogenic Variant c.420del (p.Ser141ProfsTer5) in SPINK5 Gene: A Case Report."
authors:
- Kovacheva K
- Kamburova Z
- Vasilev P
- Yordanova I
journal: Case Rep Dermatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000536083
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Netherton Syndrome with a Novel Likely Pathogenic Variant c.420del (p.Ser141ProfsTer5) in SPINK5 Gene: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Kovacheva K, Kamburova Z, Vasilev P, Yordanova I
**Journal:** Case Rep Dermatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000536083](https://doi.org/10.1159/000536083)

## Content

1. Case Rep Dermatol. 2024 Feb 23;16(1):47. doi: 10.1159/000536083. eCollection 
2024 Jan-Dec.

Netherton Syndrome with a Novel Likely Pathogenic Variant c.420del 
(p.Ser141ProfsTer5) in SPINK5 Gene: A Case Report.

Kovacheva K(1), Kamburova Z(1), Vasilev P(2), Yordanova I(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University, 
Pleven, Bulgaria.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Medical University, Pleven, Bulgaria.

INTRODUCTION: Netherton syndrome (NS) is a rare autosomal recessive 
genodermatosis in the group of congenital ichthyosis. The clinical 
manifestations of the syndrome vary from a very mild clinical manifestation 
occurring with the picture of ichthyosis linearis circumflexa to exfoliative 
erythroderma. It can be fatal in the first days of a newborn's life due to 
dehydration, hypothermia, weight loss, respiratory infections, and sepsis. A 
specific anomaly of the hair trichorrexis invaginata is considered pathognomonic 
for the syndrome. Genetic testing of SPINK5 gene is key to confirming the 
diagnosis and starting early treatment.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present a case report of NS in a 6-year-old boy who 
suffered from generalized erythroderma and desquamation of the skin from birth. 
The patient has atopic diathesis, recurrent skin infections, increased levels of 
IgE, and delayed physical development. Two genetic variants in SPINK5 gene with 
clinical significance were identified. The first detected variant is a nonsense 
mutation, predicted to cause loss of normal protein function either by protein 
truncation or by nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. The second variant is a likely 
pathogenic frameshift mutation that truncates the protein in 5 amino acids. The 
child was treated with acitretin, without satisfactory effect.
CONCLUSION: The genetic variant we have described correlates with a severe 
clinical phenotype of NS. The second genetic variant of the SPINK5 gene, 
inherited from the father in our case, is novel and has never been published in 
the literature.

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000536083
PMCID: PMC10890808
PMID: 38406644

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.