---
reference_id: "PMID:38887266"
title: "Comprehensive analysis of morbidity and mortality patterns in familial partial lipodystrophy patients: insights from a population study."
authors:
- Guidorizzi NR
- Valerio CM
- Viola LF
- Veras VR
- Fernandes VO
- Lima GEDCP
- Flor AC
- Araújo JS
- Gonçalves Muniz RB
- Moreira RO
- De Paula FJA
- Zajdenverg L
- Dantas JR
- Godoy-Matos AF
- Montenegro Júnior RM
- Foss-Freitas MC
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1359211
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- "Lipodystrophy, Familial Partial/genetics, epidemiology"
- Adult
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Middle Aged
- Brazil/epidemiology
- Morbidity
- Lamin Type A/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive analysis of morbidity and mortality patterns in familial partial lipodystrophy patients: insights from a population study.
**Authors:** Guidorizzi NR, Valerio CM, Viola LF, Veras VR, Fernandes VO, Lima GEDCP, Flor AC, Araújo JS, Gonçalves Muniz RB, Moreira RO, De Paula FJA, Zajdenverg L, Dantas JR, Godoy-Matos AF, Montenegro Júnior RM, Foss-Freitas MC
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2024.1359211](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2024.1359211)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2024 Jun 3;15:1359211. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2024.1359211. eCollection 2024.

Comprehensive analysis of morbidity and mortality patterns in familial partial 
lipodystrophy patients: insights from a population study.

Guidorizzi NR(#)(1)(2), Valerio CM(#)(1)(3), Viola LF(1)(4), Veras VR(1)(5), 
Fernandes VO(1)(5), Lima GEDCP(1)(5), Flor AC(1)(5), Araújo JS(1)(5), Gonçalves 
Muniz RB(1)(3), Moreira RO(1)(3), De Paula FJA(1)(2), Zajdenverg L(1)(6), Dantas 
JR(1)(6), Godoy-Matos AF(1)(3), Montenegro Júnior RM(#)(1)(5), Foss-Freitas 
MC(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Brazilian Group for the Study of Inherited and Acquired Lipodystrophies 
(BRAZLIPO), Fortaleza, Brazil.
(2)Division of Endocrinology and Metabology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Clinical Hospital of Ribeirão Preto Medicine School, University of São Paulo, 
Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
(3)Department of Metabolism, Institute of Diabetes and Endocrinology of Rio de 
Janeiro (IEDE), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Rondonópolis Diabetes and Endocrinology Center (CEDERO), Rondonópolis, 
Brazil.
(5)Clinical Research Unit, Walter Cantídio University Hospital, Federal 
University of Ceará/Empresa Brasileira de Serviços Hospitalares - Brazilian 
Hospital Services Company (EBSERH), Fortaleza, Brazil.
(6)Internal Medicine Department - Nutrology and Diabetes Session, Federal 
University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(7)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology and Diabetes (MEND), Department of 
Internal Medicine, Michigan Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 
United States.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: There is a lack of information on the clinical and molecular 
presentation of familial partial lipodystrophy (FPLD), a rare genetic disorder 
characterized by partial subcutaneous fat loss.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to provide a comprehensive assessment of the 
clinical, metabolic, and genetic features of FPLD in the Brazilian population.
METHODS: In a multicenter cross-sectional investigation we evaluated patients 
with FPLD across five Brazilian reference centers for lipodystrophies. Diagnosis 
of FPLD was made by clinical evaluation and genetic confirmation. Data on 
genetic, clinical, and metabolic characteristics were captured. Statistical 
analysis involved the utilization of the Kruskal-Wallis test to identify 
differences.
RESULTS: The study included 106 patients with genetic confirmation of FPLD. The 
mean age was 44 ± 15 years, and they were predominantly female (78.3%). LMNA 
pathogenic variants were identified in 85.8% of patients, PPARG in 10.4%, PLIN1 
in 2.8%, and MFN2 in 0.9%. Diabetes mellitus (DM) was highly prevalent (57.5%), 
affecting 54 females (50.9%). Median triglycerides levels were 199 mg/dL 
(54-2724 mg/dL), severe hypertriglyceridemia (≥ 500 mg/dL) was found in 34.9% 
and pancreatitis in 8.5%. Metabolic-associated fatty liver disease (MAFLD) was 
observed in 56.6%, and cardiovascular disease in 10.4%. The overall mortality 
rate was 3.8%, due to cardiovascular events.
CONCLUSION: This study presents an extensive cohort of Brazilian patients with 
FPLD, predominantly DM with several multisystem complications. A comprehensive 
characterization of lipodystrophy syndromes is crucial for effective patient 
management and care.

Copyright © 2024 Guidorizzi, Valerio, Viola, Veras, Fernandes, Lima, Flor, 
Araújo, Gonçalves Muniz, Moreira, De Paula, Zajdenverg, Dantas, Godoy-Matos, 
Montenegro Júnior and Foss-Freitas.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1359211
PMCID: PMC11180885
PMID: 38887266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The reviewer AS declared a 
shared affiliation with the authors NG, FP at the time of the review.