---
reference_id: "PMID:35986085"
title: "Prognostic significance of pathogenic variants in BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM and PALB2 genes in men undergoing hormonal therapy for advanced prostate cancer."
authors:
- Kimura H
- Mizuno K
- Shiota M
- Narita S
- Terada N
- Fujimoto N
- Ogura K
- Hatano S
- Iwasaki Y
- Hakozaki N
- Ishitoya S
- Sumiyoshi T
- Goto T
- Kobayashi T
- Nakagawa H
- Kamoto T
- Eto M
- Habuchi T
- Ogawa O
- Momozawa Y
- Akamatsu S
journal: Br J Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41416-022-01915-2
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Prognosis
- Germ-Line Mutation
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- "Genes, BRCA2"
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- BRCA1 Protein/genetics
- Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group N Protein/genetics
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic significance of pathogenic variants in BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM and PALB2 genes in men undergoing hormonal therapy for advanced prostate cancer.
**Authors:** Kimura H, Mizuno K, Shiota M, Narita S, Terada N, Fujimoto N, Ogura K, Hatano S, Iwasaki Y, Hakozaki N, Ishitoya S, Sumiyoshi T, Goto T, Kobayashi T, Nakagawa H, Kamoto T, Eto M, Habuchi T, Ogawa O, Momozawa Y, Akamatsu S
**Journal:** Br J Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41416-022-01915-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-022-01915-2)

## Content

1. Br J Cancer. 2022 Nov;127(9):1680-1690. doi: 10.1038/s41416-022-01915-2. Epub
2022 Aug 19.

Prognostic significance of pathogenic variants in BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM and PALB2
genes in men undergoing hormonal therapy for advanced prostate cancer.

Kimura H(#)(1), Mizuno K(#)(1), Shiota M(2), Narita S(3), Terada N(4), Fujimoto
N(5), Ogura K(6), Hatano S(6), Iwasaki Y(7), Hakozaki N(7), Ishitoya S(6),
Sumiyoshi T(1), Goto T(1), Kobayashi T(1), Nakagawa H(8), Kamoto T(4), Eto M(2),
Habuchi T(3), Ogawa O(1), Momozawa Y(7), Akamatsu S(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto,
Japan.
(2)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Department of Urology, Akita University Graduate School of Medicine, Akita,
Japan.
(4)Department of Urology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki,
Japan.
(5)Department of Urology, School of Medicine, University of Occupational and
Environmental Health, Kitakyusyu, Japan.
(6)Department of Urology, Japanese Red Cross Otsu Hospital, Otsu, Japan.
(7)Laboratory for Genotyping Development, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(8)Laboratory for Cancer Genomics, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(9)Department of Urology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto,
Japan. akamats@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(10)Laboratory for Cancer Genomics, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama, Japan. akamats@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The prognostic significance of germline variants in homologous
recombination repair genes in advanced prostate cancer (PCa), especially with
regard to hormonal therapy, remains controversial.
METHODS: Germline DNA from 549 Japanese men with metastatic and/or
castration-resistant PCa was sequenced for 27 cancer-predisposing genes. The
associations between pathogenic variants and clinical outcomes were examined.
Further, for comparison, DNA from prostate biopsy tissue samples from 80
independent patients with metastatic PCa were analysed.
RESULTS: Forty-four (8%) patients carried germline pathogenic variants in one of
the analysed genes. BRCA2 was most frequently altered (n = 19), followed by
HOXB13 (n = 9), PALB2 (n = 5) and ATM (n = 5). Further, the BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2
and ATM variants showed significant association with a short time to castration
resistance and overall survival (hazard ratio = 1.99 and 2.36; 95% CI, 1.15-3.44
and 1.23-4.51, respectively), independent of other clinical variables. Based on
log-rank tests, the time to castration resistance was also significantly short
in patients with BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2 or ATM somatic mutations and TP53
mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Germline variants in BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2 or ATM are independent
prognostic factors of the short duration of response to hormonal therapy in
advanced PCa.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41416-022-01915-2
PMCID: PMC9596487
PMID: 35986085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SA received research funding from Astellas
Pharma, AstraZeneca, and Tosoh, outside of the submitted work and honoraria from
Janssen Pharmaceutical, AstraZeneca, Astellas Pharma, Sanofi, Bayer and Takeda
Pharmaceutical. MS received research funding from Daiichi Sankyo Company and
honoraria from Janssen Pharmaceutical, AstraZeneca and Astellas Pharma. SN
received honoraria from Janssen Pharmaceutical, Bayer, AstraZeneca, Takeda
Pharmaceutical, Sanofi, Nippon Shinyaku and Astellas Pharma. NF received funding
from Takeda Pharmaceutical and Sanofi and honoraria from Janssen Pharmaceutical,
Takeda Pharmaceutical, Astellas Pharma and Nippon Shinyaku. T Kobayashi received
funding from AstraZeneca and Chugai Pharmaceutical and honoraria from Janssen
Pharma, AstraZeneca, Chugai Pharmaceutical, Bayer, MSD, Sanofi, Takeda,
Astellas, Nippon Shinyaku, Nihon Kayaku, Merck and Pfizer. ME received research
funding from Sanofi, Bayers, Astellas Pharma, Ono Pharmaceutical and Takeda
Pharmaceutical and honoraria from Ono Pharmaceutical, Takeda Pharmaceutical,
Novartis, Pfizer, Bristol Myers Squibb, Janssen Pharmaceutical, MSD and Merck.
TH received research funding from Takeda Pharmaceutical, Astellas Pharma,
Daiichi Sankyo Company, Sanofi and Bayer and honoraria from Janssen
Pharmaceutical, Takeda Pharmaceutical, Astellas Pharma, Daiichi Sankyo Company,
AstraZeneca, Sanofi and Bayer. OO received research funding from Shimazu,
Astellas Pharma, and Chugai Pharmaceutical and honoraria from Sanofi, Nihon
Kayaku, MSD, Bayer, Daiichi Sankyo Company, Ono Pharmaceutical, Nippon Shinyaku
and Takeda Pharmaceutical.
