---
reference_id: "PMID:18771432"
title: Epidemiology of primary systemic vasculitis in the Australian Capital Territory and south-eastern New South Wales.
authors:
- Ormerod AS
- Cook MC
journal: Intern Med J
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1445-5994.2008.01672.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Australian Capital Territory/epidemiology
- "Churg-Strauss Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Female
- "Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- New South Wales/epidemiology
- "Vasculitis/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of primary systemic vasculitis in the Australian Capital Territory and south-eastern New South Wales.
**Authors:** Ormerod AS, Cook MC
**Journal:** Intern Med J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1445-5994.2008.01672.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1445-5994.2008.01672.x)

## Content

1. Intern Med J. 2008 Nov;38(11):816-23. doi: 10.1111/j.1445-5994.2008.01672.x. 
Epub 2008 Sep 2.

Epidemiology of primary systemic vasculitis in the Australian Capital Territory 
and south-eastern New South Wales.

Ormerod AS(1), Cook MC.

Author information:
(1)The Canberra Hospital, ANU Medical School, Australian National University, 
Canberra, Australian Capital Territory, Australia.

BACKGROUND: The aim of the study was to determine the epidemiology of primary 
systemic vasculitis in the Australian Capital Territory and the surrounding 
rural region between 1995 and 2005.
METHODS: Cases were ascertained by a medical record search according to 
international consensus classification criteria. For antineutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibody-associated vasculitides, ascertainment was corroborated by a search of 
all positive antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody serology during the study 
period. Denominators were obtained from region-specific census data collected 
during the study period. Prevalence, incidence and patient characteristics for 
primary systemic vasculitides were determined for two 5-year periods, 1995-1999 
and 2000-2004.
RESULTS: We identified 41 cases of primary systemic vasculitides (Wegener's 
granulomatosis (WG), microscopic polyangiitis (MPA), Churg-Strauss syndrome or 
polyarteritis nodosa) between 1995 and 1999 and 67 between 2000 and 2004, giving 
prevalences of 95/million (95% confidence interval (CI) 76.9-116.1) and 
148/million (95%CI 125.1-173.9), respectively. Annual incidence was similar in 
both periods (approximately 17/year per million adult population). 
Disease-specific incidences (per million per year) for each of the two periods 
were 8.8 and 8.4 for WG, 2.3 and 5.0 for MPA, 2.3 and 2.2 for Churg-Strauss 
syndrome and 2.3 and 1.1 for polyarteritis nodosa. The rural incidence of MPA 
was 13.9 (95%CI 7.7-23.5) compared with 1.6 (95%CI 0.2-7.2) in the city and 
there was a trend towards a higher incidence of WG in rural than urban areas.
CONCLUSION: The overall incidence of primary systemic vasculitides is similar to 
that reported from other developed countries. WG is more common in south-eastern 
Australia than in southern Europe, whereas MPA is less common. There was a trend 
towards higher incidence of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-associated 
vasculitides in rural than urban areas.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1445-5994.2008.01672.x
PMID: 18771432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]