---
reference_id: "PMID:20833839"
title: IL-1RL2 and its ligands contribute to the cytokine network in psoriasis.
authors:
- Blumberg H
- Dinh H
- Dean C Jr
- Trueblood ES
- Bailey K
- Shows D
- Bhagavathula N
- Aslam MN
- Varani J
- Towne JE
- Sims JE
journal: J Immunol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000313
keywords:
- Animals
- Cytokines/immunology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene Expression
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Interleukin-1/immunology, metabolism"
- "Interleukin-18 Receptor alpha Subunit/immunology, metabolism"
- Ligands
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, SCID"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Psoriasis/immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Receptors, Interleukin-1/immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IL-1RL2 and its ligands contribute to the cytokine network in psoriasis.
**Authors:** Blumberg H, Dinh H, Dean C Jr, Trueblood ES, Bailey K, Shows D, Bhagavathula N, Aslam MN, Varani J, Towne JE, Sims JE
**Journal:** J Immunol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.1000313](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1000313)

## Content

1. J Immunol. 2010 Oct 1;185(7):4354-62. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000313. Epub 2010
 Sep 10.

IL-1RL2 and its ligands contribute to the cytokine network in psoriasis.

Blumberg H(1), Dinh H, Dean C Jr, Trueblood ES, Bailey K, Shows D, Bhagavathula
N, Aslam MN, Varani J, Towne JE, Sims JE.

Author information:
(1)Amgen, Seattle, WA 98119, USA. halb@novonordisk.com

Psoriasis is a common immune-mediated disease in European populations; it is
characterized by inflammation and altered epidermal differentiation leading to
redness and scaling. T cells are thought to be the main driver, but there is
also evidence for an epidermal contribution. In this article, we show that
treatment of mouse skin overexpressing the IL-1 family member, IL-1F6, with
phorbol ester leads to an inflammatory condition with macroscopic and
histological similarities to human psoriasis. Inflammatory cytokines thought to
be important in psoriasis, such as TNF-α, IL-17A, and IL-23, are upregulated in
the mouse skin. These cytokines are induced by and can induce IL-1F6 and related
IL-1 family cytokines. Inhibition of TNF or IL-23 inhibits the increased
epidermal thickness, inflammation, and cytokine production. Blockade of IL-1F6
receptor also resolves the inflammatory changes in human psoriatic lesional skin
transplanted onto immunodeficient mice. These data suggest a role for IL-1F
family members in psoriasis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000313
PMID: 20833839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
