---
reference_id: "PMID:38828908"
title: TBX3 is essential for establishment of the posterior boundary of anterior genes and upregulation of posterior genes together with HAND2 during the onset of limb bud development.
authors:
- Soussi G
- Girdziusaite A
- Jhanwar S
- Palacio V
- Notaro M
- Sheth R
- Zeller R
- Zuniga A
journal: Development
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1242/dev.202722
keywords:
- Animals
- "T-Box Domain Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Limb Buds/metabolism, embryology"
- Mice
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- "Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Zinc Finger Protein Gli3/metabolism, genetics"
- Up-Regulation/genetics
- Body Patterning/genetics
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Homeodomain Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Mesoderm/metabolism, embryology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TBX3 is essential for establishment of the posterior boundary of anterior genes and upregulation of posterior genes together with HAND2 during the onset of limb bud development.
**Authors:** Soussi G, Girdziusaite A, Jhanwar S, Palacio V, Notaro M, Sheth R, Zeller R, Zuniga A
**Journal:** Development (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.202722](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.202722)

## Content

1. Development. 2024 Jun 1;151(11):dev202722. doi: 10.1242/dev.202722. Epub 2024 
Jun 3.

TBX3 is essential for establishment of the posterior boundary of anterior genes 
and upregulation of posterior genes together with HAND2 during the onset of limb 
bud development.

Soussi G(1), Girdziusaite A(1), Jhanwar S(1), Palacio V(1), Notaro M(2), Sheth 
R(1), Zeller R(1), Zuniga A(1).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, 4058 
Basel, Switzerland.
(2)enGene Statistics GmbH, 4052 Basel, Switzerland.

During limb bud formation, axis polarities are established as evidenced by the 
spatially restricted expression of key regulator genes. In particular, the 
mutually antagonistic interaction between the GLI3 repressor and HAND2 results 
in distinct and non-overlapping anterior-distal Gli3 and posterior Hand2 
expression domains. This is a hallmark of the establishment of antero-posterior 
limb axis polarity, together with spatially restricted expression of homeodomain 
and other transcriptional regulators. Here, we show that TBX3 is required for 
establishment of the posterior expression boundary of anterior genes in mouse 
limb buds. ChIP-seq and differential gene expression analysis of wild-type and 
mutant limb buds identifies TBX3-specific and shared TBX3-HAND2 target genes. 
High sensitivity fluorescent whole-mount in situ hybridisation shows that the 
posterior expression boundaries of anterior genes are positioned by 
TBX3-mediated repression, which excludes anterior genes such as Gli3, Alx4, 
Hand1 and Irx3/5 from the posterior limb bud mesenchyme. This exclusion 
delineates the posterior mesenchymal territory competent to establish the 
Shh-expressing limb bud organiser. In turn, HAND2 is required for Shh activation 
and cooperates with TBX3 to upregulate shared posterior identity target genes in 
early limb buds.

© 2024. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.202722
PMCID: PMC11190573
PMID: 38828908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.