---
reference_id: "PMID:32515280"
title: Genetic Mouse Models and Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells for Studying Tracheal-Esophageal Separation and Esophageal Development.
authors:
- Raad S
- David A
- Que J
- Faure C
journal: Stem Cells Dev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1089/scd.2020.0075
keywords:
- Animals
- Body Patterning
- "Esophagus/blood supply, embryology"
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/cytology
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Models, Animal"
- Organogenesis
- Signal Transduction
- Trachea/embryology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Mouse Models and Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells for Studying Tracheal-Esophageal Separation and Esophageal Development.
**Authors:** Raad S, David A, Que J, Faure C
**Journal:** Stem Cells Dev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1089/scd.2020.0075](https://doi.org/10.1089/scd.2020.0075)

## Content

1. Stem Cells Dev. 2020 Aug 1;29(15):953-966. doi: 10.1089/scd.2020.0075. Epub
2020  Jul 2.

Genetic Mouse Models and Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells for Studying
Tracheal-Esophageal Separation and Esophageal Development.

Raad S(1), David A(1), Que J(2), Faure C(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Esophageal Development and Engineering Laboratory, Sainte-Justine Research
Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Division of Digestive and Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine, Center for
Human Development, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Esophageal Atresia Clinic and Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology
Hepatology and Nutrition, CHU Sainte Justine, Université de Montréal, Montréal,
Quebec, Canada.

Esophagus and trachea arise from a common origin, the anterior foregut tube. The
compartmentalization process of the foregut into the esophagus and trachea is
still poorly understood. Esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF)
is one of the most common gastrointestinal congenital defects with an incidence
rate of 1 in 2,500 births. EA/TEF is linked to the disruption of the
compartmentalization process of the foregut tube. In EA/TEF patients, other
organ anomalies and disorders have also been reported. Over the last two
decades, animal models have shown the involvement of multiple signaling pathways
and transcription factors in the development of the esophagus and trachea. Use
of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) to understand organogenesis has been a
valuable tool for mimicking gastrointestinal and respiratory organs. This review
focuses on the signaling mechanisms involved in esophageal development and the
use of iPSCs to model and understand it.

DOI: 10.1089/scd.2020.0075
PMCID: PMC9839344
PMID: 32515280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing financial interests exist.
