---
reference_id: "PMID:39057224"
title: The Biological Roles of microRNAs in Drosophila Development.
authors:
- Jang D
- Kim CJ
- Shin BH
- Lim DH
journal: Insects
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/insects15070491
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Biological Roles of microRNAs in Drosophila Development.
**Authors:** Jang D, Kim CJ, Shin BH, Lim DH
**Journal:** Insects (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/insects15070491](https://doi.org/10.3390/insects15070491)

## Content

1. Insects. 2024 Jun 30;15(7):491. doi: 10.3390/insects15070491.

The Biological Roles of microRNAs in Drosophila Development.

Jang D(1), Kim CJ(1), Shin BH(1), Lim DH(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Systems Biomedical Science, Soongsil University, Seoul 06978, 
Republic of Korea.

Drosophila is a well-established insect model system for studying various 
physiological phenomena and developmental processes, with a focus on gene 
regulation. Drosophila development is controlled by programmed regulatory 
mechanisms specific to individual tissues. When key developmental processes are 
shared among various insects, the associated regulatory networks are believed to 
be conserved across insects. Thus, studies of developmental regulation in 
Drosophila have substantially contributed to our understanding of insect 
development. Over the past two decades, studies on microRNAs (miRNAs) in 
Drosophila have revealed their crucial regulatory roles in various developmental 
processes. This review focuses on the biological roles of miRNAs in specific 
tissues and processes associated with Drosophila development. Additionally, as a 
future direction, we discuss sequencing technologies that can analyze the 
interactions between miRNAs and their target genes, with the aim of enhancing 
miRNA studies in Drosophila development.

DOI: 10.3390/insects15070491
PMCID: PMC11277110
PMID: 39057224

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.