---
reference_id: "PMID:39624969"
title: Clinical features and progress in diagnosis and treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
authors:
- Yuan D
- Jiang S
- Xu R
journal: Ann Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/07853890.2024.2399962
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features and progress in diagnosis and treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
**Authors:** Yuan D, Jiang S, Xu R
**Journal:** Ann Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/07853890.2024.2399962](https://doi.org/10.1080/07853890.2024.2399962)

## Content

1. Ann Med. 2024 Dec;56(1):2399962. doi: 10.1080/07853890.2024.2399962. Epub 2024
 Dec 3.

Clinical features and progress in diagnosis and treatment of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis.

Yuan D(1), Jiang S(1), Xu R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Jiangxi Provincial People's Hospital; The Clinical 
College of Nanchang Medical College; The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
Medical College; Xiangya Hospital of Center South University, Jiangxi Hospital; 
National Regional Center for Neurological Disease, Honggutan District, Nanchang, 
Jiangxi Province, China.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease of the 
central nervous system. Despite a large number of studies, the current prognosis 
of ALS is still not ideal. This article briefly describes the clinical features 
including epidemiology, genetic structure and clinical manifestations, as well 
as the progress of new diagnostic criteria and treatment of ALS. Meanwhile, we 
also discussed further both developments and improvements to enhance 
understanding and accelerating the introduction of the effective treatments of 
ALS.

DOI: 10.1080/07853890.2024.2399962
PMCID: PMC11616751
PMID: 39624969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the authors.