---
reference_id: "PMID:18758655"
title: Treatment of inborn errors of metabolism.
authors:
- Schwartz IV
- Souza CF
- Giugliani R
journal: J Pediatr (Rio J)
year: '2008'
doi: 10.2223/JPED.1801
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of inborn errors of metabolism.
**Authors:** Schwartz IV, Souza CF, Giugliani R
**Journal:** J Pediatr (Rio J) (2008)
**DOI:** [10.2223/JPED.1801](https://doi.org/10.2223/JPED.1801)

## Content

1. J Pediatr (Rio J). 2008 Aug;84(4 Suppl):S8-19. doi: 10.2223/JPED.1801. Epub
2008  Aug 22.

Treatment of inborn errors of metabolism.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Schwartz IV(1), Souza CF, Giugliani R.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto 
Alegre, RS, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the current state of treatment for disorders of 
intermediate metabolism (primarily of amino acids, urea cycle and organic acids) 
and for diseases related to two subcellular organelles (lysosomes and 
peroxisomes).
SOURCES: In covering the treatment of disorders of intermediate metabolism, 
priority was given to the most important methods for managing intoxication, in 
view of the importance for pediatricians to treat acute and life-threatening 
cases. The article also provides a general overview of the treatment for 
lysosomal and peroxisomal diseases, with emphasis on enzyme replacement therapy, 
which is a treatment modality that is growing in use and with which 
pediatricians should make themselves familiar.
SUMMARY OF THE FINDINGS: The most important measures used to manage the 
intoxication present in many inborn errors of intermediate metabolism were 
presented (restriction of substrate build-up by means of diet or enzymatic 
inhibition, removal of toxic products, stimulation of residual enzyme activity, 
replacement of the deficient product). The section on treatment for lysosomal 
and peroxisomal diseases includes tables providing information on the treatments 
available.
CONCLUSIONS: Treating inborn errors of metabolism is a complex task that should 
be performed by a multidisciplinary team of which the pediatrician is the key 
member. This article provides practical information relating to the management 
of some inborn errors of metabolism and provides pediatricians with a general 
overview of recent developments in this area of medicine.

DOI: 10.2223/JPED.1801
PMID: 18758655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]