---
reference_id: "PMID:30078720"
title: Assessing Positive Child Health among Individuals Born Extremely Preterm.
authors:
- Bangma JT
- Kwiatkowski E
- Psioda M
- Santos HP Jr
- Hooper SR
- Douglass L
- Joseph RM
- Frazier JA
- Kuban KCK
- "O'Shea TM"
- Fry RC
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.06.037
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessing Positive Child Health among Individuals Born Extremely Preterm.
**Authors:** Bangma JT, Kwiatkowski E, Psioda M, Santos HP Jr, Hooper SR, Douglass L, Joseph RM, Frazier JA, Kuban KCK, O'Shea TM, Fry RC
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.06.037](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.06.037)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2018 Nov;202:44-49.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.06.037. Epub 2018 
Aug 2.

Assessing Positive Child Health among Individuals Born Extremely Preterm.

Bangma JT(1), Kwiatkowski E(2), Psioda M(2), Santos HP Jr(3), Hooper SR(4), 
Douglass L(5), Joseph RM(6), Frazier JA(7), Kuban KCK(8), O'Shea TM(9), Fry 
RC(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Gillings School of 
Global Public Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, 
NC.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC.
(3)School of Nursing, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, 
NC.
(4)Department of Allied Health Sciences, University of North Carolina School of 
Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Boston Medical Center, Boston, MA.
(6)Department of Anatomy and Neuroanatomy, Boston University, Boston, MA.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, University of Massachusetts Medical 
School/University of Massachusetts Memorial Health Care, Worcester, MA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology, Boston University 
Medical Center, Boston, MA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.
(10)Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Gillings School of 
Global Public Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, 
NC. Electronic address: rfry@unc.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the development of a Positive Child Health Index (PCHI) 
based on 11 adverse outcomes and evaluate the association of PCHI with quality 
of life (QoL) scores in a preterm cohort.
STUDY DESIGN: A total of 889 children enrolled in the Extremely Low Gestational 
Age Newborn (ELGAN) study in 2002-2004 were followed up at 10 years of age. A 
parent/caregiver completed questionnaires for child QoL, asthma, visual or 
hearing impairment, gross motor function impairment, epilepsy, attention 
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, anxiety, and depression. The child was assessed 
for cognitive impairment, autism, and obesity. PCHI scores were computed and 
linear regression models were used to evaluate the relationship between QoL 
categories (psychosocial, physical, emotional, social, school, and total) and 
the PCHI (dichotomized and coded as a multilevel categorical predictor) and to 
assess sex differences.
RESULTS: Among ELGAN children, higher PCHI scores were associated with higher 
reported QoL scores for all QoL categories. Children with no disorders and a 
PCHI of 100% had Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory total scores that were 11 
points higher than children with 1 or more adverse outcomes (PCHI of <100%). 
Boys had lower QoL scores for the total, psychosocial, social, and school 
categories.
CONCLUSIONS: Positive child health assessed using a quantitative PCHI was 
associated with QoL across the ELGAN cohort at school age. In the current study, 
the PCHI encompassed 11 outcomes assessed in ELGANs. Future research could 
include an enhanced panel of child health outcomes to support the use of PCHI as 
an indicator of positive child health.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.06.037
PMCID: PMC6456448
PMID: 30078720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]