---
reference_id: "PMID:35925454"
title: "GM2 gangliosidosis AB variant: first case of late onset and review of the literature."
authors:
- Ganne B
- Dauriat B
- Richard L
- Lamari F
- Ghorab K
- Magy L
- Benkirane M
- Perani A
- Marquet V
- Calvas P
- Yardin C
- Bourthoumieu S
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-022-06270-x
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Young Adult
- G(M2) Activator Protein/genetics
- G(M2) Ganglioside/metabolism
- Gangliosides
- "Gangliosidoses, GM2/genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GM2 gangliosidosis AB variant: first case of late onset and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Ganne B, Dauriat B, Richard L, Lamari F, Ghorab K, Magy L, Benkirane M, Perani A, Marquet V, Calvas P, Yardin C, Bourthoumieu S
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-022-06270-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-022-06270-x)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2022 Nov;43(11):6517-6527. doi: 10.1007/s10072-022-06270-x. Epub 
2022 Aug 4.

GM2 gangliosidosis AB variant: first case of late onset and review of the 
literature.

Ganne B(1), Dauriat B(2), Richard L(3), Lamari F(4), Ghorab K(3), Magy L(3), 
Benkirane M(5), Perani A(2), Marquet V(2), Calvas P(6), Yardin C(2), 
Bourthoumieu S(2).

Author information:
(1)Cytogenetic, medical genetic and reproductive biology department, Hôpital de 
la Mère et de l'Enfant, CHU Dupuytren, 87042 Limoges, France, Limoges 
University, CNRS, XLIM, UMR 7252, F-87000, Limoges, France. 
benjamin.ganne@chu-limoges.fr.
(2)Cytogenetic, medical genetic and reproductive biology department, Hôpital de 
la Mère et de l'Enfant, CHU Dupuytren, 87042 Limoges, France, Limoges 
University, CNRS, XLIM, UMR 7252, F-87000, Limoges, France.
(3)Department of Neurology, National Reference Center for "Rare Peripheral 
Neuropathies", Dupuytren University Hospital (CHU Limoges), University of 
Limoges, 2 Avenue Martin Luther King, 87042, Limoges Cedex, France.
(4)APHP Sorbonne University; Pitié-Salpêtrière University Hospital, DMU Biogem; 
Metabolic Biochemistry Department, 75013, Paris, France.
(5)Rare Diseases Laboratory of Genetics EA7402, University Institute of Clinical 
Research, Montpellier University, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 
PhyMedExp UMR9214 CNRS-UM U1046 INSERM, Montpellier, France.
(6)Reference Centre for Rare Genetics Diseases in Ophthalmology, Purpan 
Hospital, Toulouse University, 31052, Toulouse, France.

AB variant is the rarest form of GM2 gangliosidosis, neurodegenerative diseases 
caused by lysosomal accumulation of GM2 gangliosides. Less than thirty cases are 
referenced in the literature, and to date, no late-onset form has been 
described. Our proband is a 22-year-old male with spinocerebellar ataxia and 
lower limbs motor deficiency. His symptoms started at the age of 10. A genetic 
analysis revealed two mutations in the GM2A gene encoding the GM2 activator 
protein (GM2-AP), an essential co-factor of hexosaminidase A. Both mutations, 
GM2A:c.79A > T:p.Lys27* and GM2A:c.415C > T:p.Pro139Ser, were inherited 
respectively from his father and his mother. The nonsense mutation was predicted 
to be likely pathogenic, but the missense mutation was of unknown significance. 
To establish the pathogenicity of this variant, we studied GM2 accumulation and 
GM2A gene expression. Electron microscopy and immunofluorescence performed on 
patient's fibroblasts did not reveal any lysosomal accumulation of GM2. There 
was also no difference in GM2A gene expression using RT-qPCR, and both mutations 
were found on cDNA Sanger sequencing. Measurement of plasma gangliosides by 
liquid-phase chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry showed an accumulation of 
GM2 in our patient's plasma at 83.5 nmol/L, and a GM2/GM3 ratio at 0.066 (median 
of negative control at 30.2 nmol/L [19.7-46.8] and 0.019 respectively). 
Therefore, the association of both p.Lys27* and p.Pro169Ser mutations leads to a 
GM2-AP functional deficiency. Whereas the first mutation is more likely to be 
linked with infantile form of GM2 gangliosidosis, the hypomorphic p.Pro169Ser 
variant may be the first associated with a late-onset form of AB variant.

© 2022. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-022-06270-x
PMID: 35925454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]