---
reference_id: "PMID:38886778"
title: "SLC40A1-related hemochromatosis associated with a p.Y333H mutation in mainland China: a pedigree report and literature review."
authors:
- Li Y
- Duan F
- Yang S
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12920-024-01929-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SLC40A1-related hemochromatosis associated with a p.Y333H mutation in mainland China: a pedigree report and literature review.
**Authors:** Li Y, Duan F, Yang S
**Journal:** BMC Med Genomics (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12920-024-01929-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-024-01929-0)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genomics. 2024 Jun 17;17(1):161. doi: 10.1186/s12920-024-01929-0.

SLC40A1-related hemochromatosis associated with a p.Y333H mutation in mainland 
China: a pedigree report and literature review.

Li Y(1), Duan F(1), Yang S(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division 3, Department of Hepatology, Beijing Ditan Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, 100015, China.
(2)Division 3, Department of Hepatology, Beijing Ditan Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, 100015, China. sduyangsong@163.com.
(3)Division 2, Department of Hepatology, The Fourth People's Hospital of Qinghai 
Province, Qinghai, 810000, China. sduyangsong@163.com.
(4)Center of Hepatology, Beijing Ditan Hospital, Capital Medical University, 8 
Jingshun East Street, Beijing, 100015, China. sduyangsong@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Haemochromatosis is a genetic disease characterized by the excessive 
deposition of iron in various tissues and organs, eventually results in organ 
damage including cirrhosis, diabetes, cardiomyopathy, etc. SLC40A1-related 
haemochromatosis is associated with gain-of-function mutations in the SLC40A1 
gene, which encodes ferroportin. While sporadic reports of this condition exist 
in mainland China, the understanding of the phenotype and genetic pattern 
associated with the SLC40A1 p.Y333H mutation remains incomplete.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a pedigree with heterozygous p.Y333H mutation in 
Chinese Han population. The proband is a 64-year-old man complaining of 
persistent abnormality of liver enzyme levels for 1 year, with a history of knee 
joint pain, diabetes and skin pigmentation. He displayed markedly elevated serum 
ferritin level and transferrin saturation. Magnetic resonance imaging showed 
iron deposition in the liver, spleen, and pancreas, along with cirrhosis and 
splenomegaly. Whole exome sequencing identified a heterozygous allelic variant 
c.997T > C (p.Y333H). Genetic screening of family members identified four 
first-degree relatives and three second-degree relatives having the same 
mutation. Additional cases with this mutation from two published studies were 
included. Among the probands and screened relatives, all eight males aged over 
30 y had ferritin level > 1000 µg/L, transferrin saturation > 90%. Four patients 
with organ damage in the present study received therapeutic phlebotomy, 
alleviating clinical symptoms and improving in transferrin saturation and serum 
ferritin.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reports the largest pedigree with heterozygous SLC40A1 
p.Y333H mutation in the Chinese population to date. In Chinese families, males 
over 30 years old with hemochromatosis due to SLC40A1 p.Y333H mutation exhibit 
severe iron overload phenotypes.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-024-01929-0
PMCID: PMC11181628
PMID: 38886778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.