---
reference_id: "PMID:33963760"
title: PPP3CA truncating variants clustered in the regulatory domain cause early-onset refractory epilepsy.
authors:
- Panneerselvam S
- Wang J
- Zhu W
- Dai H
- Pappas JG
- Rabin R
- Low KJ
- Rosenfeld JA
- Emrick L
- Xiao R
- Xia F
- Yang Y
- Eng CM
- Anderson A
- Chau V
- Soler-Alfonso C
- Streff H
- Lalani SR
- Mercimek-Andrews S
- Undiagnosed Diseases Network
- DDD Study
- Bi W
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/cge.13979
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PPP3CA truncating variants clustered in the regulatory domain cause early-onset refractory epilepsy.
**Authors:** Panneerselvam S, Wang J, Zhu W, Dai H, Pappas JG, Rabin R, Low KJ, Rosenfeld JA, Emrick L, Xiao R, Xia F, Yang Y, Eng CM, Anderson A, Chau V, Soler-Alfonso C, Streff H, Lalani SR, Mercimek-Andrews S, Undiagnosed Diseases Network, DDD Study, Bi W
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.13979](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.13979)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2021 Aug;100(2):227-233. doi: 10.1111/cge.13979. Epub 2021 Jun 1.

PPP3CA truncating variants clustered in the regulatory domain cause early-onset 
refractory epilepsy.

Panneerselvam S(1), Wang J(2), Zhu W(3), Dai H(1)(3), Pappas JG(4), Rabin R(4), 
Low KJ(5), Rosenfeld JA(1), Emrick L(6), Xiao R(1)(3), Xia F(1)(3), Yang 
Y(1)(3), Eng CM(1)(3), Anderson A(1)(6), Chau V(7), Soler-Alfonso C(1)(6), 
Streff H(1)(6), Lalani SR(1)(6), Mercimek-Andrews S(8)(9); Undiagnosed Diseases 
Network; DDD Study(10); Bi W(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Medical Scientist Training Program and Developmental Biology, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Baylor Genetics Laboratories, Houston, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Genetic Services, NYU School of Medicine, 
New York, New York, USA.
(5)University Hospital Bristol NHS Foundation Trust, Bristol, UK.
(6)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.
(7)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Toronto, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Toronto, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Stollery Children's 
Hospital, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(10)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, UK.

PPP3CA encodes the catalytic subunit of calcineurin, a 
calcium-calmodulin-regulated serine-threonine phosphatase. Loss-of-function 
(LoF) variants in the catalytic domain have been associated with epilepsy, while 
gain-of-function (GoF) variants in the auto-inhibitory domain cause multiple 
congenital abnormalities. We herein report five new patients with de novo PPP3CA 
variants. Interestingly, the two frameshift variants in this study and the six 
truncating variants reported previously are all located within a 26-amino acid 
region in the regulatory domain (RD). Patients with a truncating variant had 
more severe earlier onset seizures compared to patients with a LoF missense 
variant, while autism spectrum disorder was a more frequent feature in the 
latter. Expression studies of a truncating variant showed apparent RNA 
expression from the mutant allele, but no detectable mutant protein. Our data 
suggest that PPP3CA truncating variants clustered in the RD, causing more severe 
early-onset refractory epilepsy and representing a type of variants distinct 
from LoF or GoF missense variants.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13979
PMCID: PMC11698261
PMID: 33963760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: Baylor College of Medicine 
and Miraca Holdings Inc. have formed a joint venture with shared ownership and 
governance of Baylor Genetics (BG), formerly the Baylor Miraca Genetics 
Laboratories (BMGL), which performs chromosomal microarray analysis and clinical 
exome sequencing.