---
reference_id: "PMID:33588721"
title: Risk Genes in Schizophrenia and Their Importance in Choosing the Appropriate Antipsychotic Treatment.
authors:
- Werner FM
- Coveñas R
journal: Curr Pharm Des
year: '2021'
doi: 10.2174/1381612827666210215151333
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk Genes in Schizophrenia and Their Importance in Choosing the Appropriate Antipsychotic Treatment.
**Authors:** Werner FM, Coveñas R
**Journal:** Curr Pharm Des (2021)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1381612827666210215151333](https://doi.org/10.2174/1381612827666210215151333)

## Content

1. Curr Pharm Des. 2021 Oct 5;27(30):3281-3292. doi: 
10.2174/1381612827666210215151333.

Risk Genes in Schizophrenia and Their Importance in Choosing the Appropriate 
Antipsychotic Treatment.

Werner FM(1), Coveñas R(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurosciences of Castilla y Leon (INCYL), Laboratory of 
Neuroanatomy of the Peptidergic Systems, (Group GIR-BMD), University of 
Salamanca, 37007-Salamanca, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Schizophrenia is a chronic mental illness that in 80% of cases has a 
genetic etiology. In the last years, 260 risk genes with a predisposition to 
schizophrenia have been discovered and correlations between risk genes and the 
therapeutic efficacy of an antipsychotic treatment/pharmacotherapy resistance 
have been reported.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this review is to update the main risk genes 
involved in schizophrenia and to establish an association between the single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of these genes and pharmacotherapy 
resistance/efficacy of a determined antipsychotic treatment. Besides, neural 
networks in the brain centers involved in schizophrenia will be updated to point 
out the altered functions of classical neurotransmitters and neuropeptides due 
to risk genes.
METHODS: In schizophrenia, important risk genes, such as catechol-O-methyl 
transferase (COMT), monoamine oxidase (MAO A/B), glutamic acid decarboxylase 67 
(GAD 67), dysbindin-1 and neuregulin-1 will be mentioned. To describe the 
function of these risk genes, neural networks in the ventral tegmental area, 
hippocampus and prefrontal cortex will also be developed.
RESULTS: An association between the SNPs of some risk genes and the efficacy of 
an antipsychotic treatment is reported: SNPs such as rs165599 (COMT gene), 
rs1801028 (D2 receptor gene) and rsSer9Gly (D3 receptor gene) are associated 
with a better antipsychotic treatment efficacy (e.g., treatment of negative 
schizophrenic symptoms with risperidone). The rs4680 SNP (COMT and D2 receptor 
genes) is associated with antipsychoticinduced dopamine hypersensitivity and 
pharmacotherapy resistance. The function of risk genes is described: COMT and 
MAO A/B genes, with reduced activity in the corresponding enzymes, are 
associated with a decrease in dopamine degradation and hence dopamine 
hyperactivity occurred via D2 receptors. The GAD 67 risk gene is linked with 
GABAergic dysfunction and consequently GABAergic neurons weakly presynaptically 
inhibit D2 dopaminergic neurons. The D-amino acid oxidase activator (DAOA) risk 
gene is connected with glutamatergic dysfunction via NMDA receptors. 
Glutamatergic neurons might exert a weak presynaptic inhibition upon 5- HT2A 
serotonergic neurons located in the ventral tegmental area and hippocampus. 
Neural networks in the latter two regions and in the prefrontal cortex are 
updated.
CONCLUSION: It is important to examine the SNPs of the risk genes involved in 
schizophrenia to establish a correlation between these SNPs and the efficacy of 
a determined antipsychotic drug. In the future, after examining these SNPs, it 
might be possible to choose the most appropriate antipsychotic drug. Thus, 
schizophrenic patients with a good response to a determined antipsychotic 
treatment and patients with resistance to this treatment could be well 
differentiated.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1381612827666210215151333
PMID: 33588721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]