---
reference_id: PMID:29421540
title: "Why do so many genetic insults lead to Purkinje Cell degeneration and spinocerebellar ataxia?"
authors:
- Huang M
- Verbeek DS
journal: Neurosci Lett
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2018.02.004
keywords:
- Animals
- Cerebellum/pathology
- Humans
- "Nerve Degeneration/genetics, pathology"
- Purkinje Cells/pathology
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Why do so many genetic insults lead to Purkinje Cell degeneration and spinocerebellar ataxia?
**Authors:** Huang M, Verbeek DS
**Journal:** Neurosci Lett (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neulet.2018.02.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2018.02.004)

## Content

1. Neurosci Lett. 2019 Jan 1;688:49-57. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2018.02.004. Epub 
2018 Feb 5.

Why do so many genetic insults lead to Purkinje Cell degeneration and 
spinocerebellar ataxia?

Huang M(1), Verbeek DS(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Genetics, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Genetics, Groningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: d.s.verbeek@umcg.nl.

The genetically heterozygous spinocerebellar ataxias are all characterized by 
cerebellar atrophy and pervasive Purkinje Cell degeneration. Up to date, more 
than 35 functionally diverse spinocerebellar ataxia genes have been identified. 
The main question that remains yet unsolved is why do some many genetic insults 
lead to Purkinje Cell degeneration and spinocerebellar ataxia? To address this 
question it is important to identify intrinsic pathways important for Purkinje 
Cell function and survival. In this review, we discuss the current consensus on 
shared mechanisms underlying the pervasive Purkinje Cell loss in spinocerebellar 
ataxia. Additionally, using recently published cell type specific expression 
data, we identified several Purkinje Cell-specific genes and discuss how the 
corresponding pathways might underlie the vulnerability of Purkinje Cells in 
response to the diverse genetic insults causing spinocerebellar ataxia.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2018.02.004
PMID: 29421540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]