---
reference_id: "PMID:32747829"
title: "Implications of TP53 allelic state for genome stability, clinical presentation and outcomes in myelodysplastic syndromes."
authors:
- Bernard E
- Nannya Y
- Hasserjian RP
- Devlin SM
- Tuechler H
- Medina-Martinez JS
- Yoshizato T
- Shiozawa Y
- Saiki R
- Malcovati L
- Levine MF
- Arango JE
- Zhou Y
- Solé F
- Cargo CA
- Haase D
- Creignou M
- Germing U
- Zhang Y
- Gundem G
- Sarian A
- van de Loosdrecht AA
- Jädersten M
- Tobiasson M
- Kosmider O
- Follo MY
- Thol F
- Pinheiro RF
- Santini V
- Kotsianidis I
- Boultwood J
- Santos FPS
- Schanz J
- Kasahara S
- Ishikawa T
- Tsurumi H
- Takaori-Kondo A
- Kiguchi T
- Polprasert C
- Bennett JM
- Klimek VM
- Savona MR
- Belickova M
- Ganster C
- Palomo L
- Sanz G
- Ades L
- Della Porta MG
- Elias HK
- Smith AG
- Werner Y
- Patel M
- Viale A
- Vanness K
- Neuberg DS
- Stevenson KE
- Menghrajani K
- Bolton KL
- Fenaux P
- Pellagatti A
- Platzbecker U
- Heuser M
- Valent P
- Chiba S
- Miyazaki Y
- Finelli C
- Voso MT
- Shih LY
- Fontenay M
- Jansen JH
- Cervera J
- Atsuta Y
- Gattermann N
- Ebert BL
- Bejar R
- Greenberg PL
- Cazzola M
- Hellström-Lindberg E
- Ogawa S
- Papaemmanuil E
journal: Nat Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-020-1008-z
keywords:
- Alleles
- Cohort Studies
- DNA Copy Number Variations/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Gene Frequency
- Genomic Instability/genetics
- Humans
- Loss of Heterozygosity/genetics
- Male
- Mutation
- "Myelodysplastic Syndromes/diagnosis, genetics, mortality, therapy"
- Phenotype
- Prognosis
- Survival Analysis
- Treatment Outcome
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Implications of TP53 allelic state for genome stability, clinical presentation and outcomes in myelodysplastic syndromes.
**Authors:** Bernard E, Nannya Y, Hasserjian RP, Devlin SM, Tuechler H, Medina-Martinez JS, Yoshizato T, Shiozawa Y, Saiki R, Malcovati L, Levine MF, Arango JE, Zhou Y, Solé F, Cargo CA, Haase D, Creignou M, Germing U, Zhang Y, Gundem G, Sarian A, van de Loosdrecht AA, Jädersten M, Tobiasson M, Kosmider O, Follo MY, Thol F, Pinheiro RF, Santini V, Kotsianidis I, Boultwood J, Santos FPS, Schanz J, Kasahara S, Ishikawa T, Tsurumi H, Takaori-Kondo A, Kiguchi T, Polprasert C, Bennett JM, Klimek VM, Savona MR, Belickova M, Ganster C, Palomo L, Sanz G, Ades L, Della Porta MG, Elias HK, Smith AG, Werner Y, Patel M, Viale A, Vanness K, Neuberg DS, Stevenson KE, Menghrajani K, Bolton KL, Fenaux P, Pellagatti A, Platzbecker U, Heuser M, Valent P, Chiba S, Miyazaki Y, Finelli C, Voso MT, Shih LY, Fontenay M, Jansen JH, Cervera J, Atsuta Y, Gattermann N, Ebert BL, Bejar R, Greenberg PL, Cazzola M, Hellström-Lindberg E, Ogawa S, Papaemmanuil E
**Journal:** Nat Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-020-1008-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-1008-z)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2020 Oct;26(10):1549-1556. doi: 10.1038/s41591-020-1008-z. Epub 2020 
Aug 3.

Implications of TP53 allelic state for genome stability, clinical presentation 
and outcomes in myelodysplastic syndromes.

Bernard E(1)(2), Nannya Y(3), Hasserjian RP(4), Devlin SM(5), Tuechler H(6), 
Medina-Martinez JS(1)(2), Yoshizato T(3), Shiozawa Y(3), Saiki R(3), Malcovati 
L(7)(8), Levine MF(1)(2), Arango JE(1)(2), Zhou Y(1)(2), Solé F(9), Cargo 
CA(10), Haase D(11), Creignou M(12), Germing U(13), Zhang Y(14), Gundem G(1), 
Sarian A(2), van de Loosdrecht AA(15), Jädersten M(12), Tobiasson M(12), 
Kosmider O(16), Follo MY(17), Thol F(18), Pinheiro RF(19), Santini V(20), 
Kotsianidis I(21), Boultwood J(22), Santos FPS(23), Schanz J(11), Kasahara 
S(24), Ishikawa T(25), Tsurumi H(26), Takaori-Kondo A(27), Kiguchi T(28), 
Polprasert C(29), Bennett JM(30), Klimek VM(31), Savona MR(32), Belickova M(33), 
Ganster C(11), Palomo L(9), Sanz G(34)(35), Ades L(36), Della Porta MG(37)(38), 
Elias HK(31), Smith AG(39), Werner Y(1), Patel M(2), Viale A(40), Vanness K(40), 
Neuberg DS(41), Stevenson KE(41), Menghrajani K(31), Bolton KL(31), Fenaux 
P(36), Pellagatti A(22), Platzbecker U(42), Heuser M(18), Valent P(43), Chiba 
S(44), Miyazaki Y(45), Finelli C(46), Voso MT(47), Shih LY(48), Fontenay M(16), 
Jansen JH(49), Cervera J(50), Atsuta Y(51), Gattermann N(13), Ebert BL(52), 
Bejar R(53), Greenberg PL(54), Cazzola M(7)(8), Hellström-Lindberg E(12), Ogawa 
S(3), Papaemmanuil E(55)(56).

Author information:
(1)Computational Oncology Service, Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Center for Hematologic Malignancies, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY, USA.
(6), Vienna, Austria.
(7)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(8)Department of Hematology, IRCCS Fondazione Policlinico S. Matteo, Pavia, 
Italy.
(9)MDS Group, Institut de Recerca Contra la Leucèmia Josep Carreras, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(10)Haematological Malignancy Diagnostic Service, St James's University 
Hospital, Leeds, UK.
(11)Clinics of Hematology and Medical Oncology, University Medical Center, 
Göttingen, Germany.
(12)Department of Medicine Huddinge, Center for Hematology and Regenerative 
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(13)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Clinical Immunology, Heinrich Heine 
University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(14)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, USA.
(15)Department of Hematology, VU University Medical Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands.
(16)Department of Hematology, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital 
Cochin and Université de Paris, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
(17)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy.
(18)Department of Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation 
Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(19)Drug Research and Development Center, Federal University of Ceara, Ceara, 
Brazil.
(20)MDS Unit, Hematology, AOU Careggi, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(21)Department of Hematology, Democritus University of Thrace Medical School, 
Alexandroupolis, Greece.
(22)Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford and Oxford BRC 
Haematology Theme, Oxford, UK.
(23)Oncology-Hematology Center, Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(24)Department of Hematology, Gifu Municipal Hospital, Gifu, Japan.
(25)Department of Hematology, Kobe City Medical Center General Hospital, Kobe, 
Japan.
(26)Department of Hematology, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu, 
Japan.
(27)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan.
(28)Department of Hematology, Chugoku Central Hospital, Fukuyama, Japan.
(29)Department of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, King Chulalongkorn 
Memorial Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand.
(30)Lab. Medicine and Pathology, Hematology/Oncology, University of Rochester 
Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA.
(31)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, USA.
(32)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA.
(33)Department of Genomics, Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
(34)Department of Hematology, Hospital Universitario y Politécnico La Fe, 
Valencia, Spain.
(35)CIBERONC, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(36)Department of Hematology, Hôpital St Louis and Paris University, Paris, 
France.
(37)Humanitas Clinical and Research Center-IRCCS, Humanitas Cancer Center, 
Milan, Italy.
(38)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Milan, Italy.
(39)Department of Health Sciences, University of York, York, UK.
(40)Integrated Genomics Operation, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY, USA.
(41)Department of Data Sciences, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(42)Medical Clinic and Policlinic 1, Hematology and Cellular Therapy, University 
of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(43)Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Hematology and Hemostaseology 
and Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Hematology and Oncology, Medical University 
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(44)Department of Hematology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 
Tsukuba, Japan.
(45)Department of Hematology, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki 
University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(46)Institute of Hematology, S. Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, 
Italy.
(47)MDS Cooperative Group GROM-L, Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Tor 
Vergata University, Rome, Italy.
(48)Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkou, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan City, 
Taiwan.
(49)Laboratory Hematology, Department LABGK, Radboud University Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(50)Department of Hematology and Genetics Unit, University Hospital La Fe, 
Valencia, Spain.
(51)Japanese Data Center for Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation, Nagoya, Japan.
(52)Department of Medical Oncology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(53)UC San Diego Moores Cancer Center, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(54)Stanford University Cancer Institute, Stanford, CA, USA.
(55)Computational Oncology Service, Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA. papaemme@mskcc.org.
(56)Center for Hematologic Malignancies, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, NY, USA. papaemme@mskcc.org.

Erratum in
    Nat Med. 2021 Mar;27(3):562. doi: 10.1038/s41591-021-01253-5.
    Nat Med. 2021 May;27(5):927. doi: 10.1038/s41591-021-01367-w.

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2020 Nov;10(11):1616. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-NB2020-088.

Tumor protein p53 (TP53) is the most frequently mutated gene in cancer1,2. In 
patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), TP53 mutations are associated 
with high-risk disease3,4, rapid transformation to acute myeloid leukemia 
(AML)5, resistance to conventional therapies6-8 and dismal outcomes9. Consistent 
with the tumor-suppressive role of TP53, patients harbor both mono- and 
biallelic mutations10. However, the biological and clinical implications of TP53 
allelic state have not been fully investigated in MDS or any other cancer type. 
We analyzed 3,324 patients with MDS for TP53 mutations and allelic imbalances 
and delineated two subsets of patients with distinct phenotypes and outcomes. 
One-third of TP53-mutated patients had monoallelic mutations whereas two-thirds 
had multiple hits (multi-hit) consistent with biallelic targeting. Established 
associations with complex karyotype, few co-occurring mutations, high-risk 
presentation and poor outcomes were specific to multi-hit patients only. TP53 
multi-hit state predicted risk of death and leukemic transformation 
independently of the Revised International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS-R)11. 
Surprisingly, monoallelic patients did not differ from TP53 wild-type patients 
in outcomes and response to therapy. This study shows that consideration of TP53 
allelic state is critical for diagnostic and prognostic precision in MDS as well 
as in future correlative studies of treatment response.

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-020-1008-z
PMCID: PMC8381722
PMID: 32747829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare the 
following competing interests.