---
reference_id: "PMID:39543535"
title: Molecular profiling reveals novel therapeutic targets and clonal evolution in ovarian clear cell carcinoma.
authors:
- Chao A
- Huang CY
- Yu W
- Lin CY
- Lin H
- Chao AS
- Lin CT
- Chou HH
- Huang KG
- Huang HJ
- Chang TC
- Rozen SG
- Wu RC
- Lai CH
journal: BMC Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12885-024-13125-5
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Adenocarcinoma, Clear Cell/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Middle Aged
- Clonal Evolution/genetics
- Exome Sequencing
- Aged
- Class I Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Adult
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Molecular Targeted Therapy/methods
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular profiling reveals novel therapeutic targets and clonal evolution in ovarian clear cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Chao A, Huang CY, Yu W, Lin CY, Lin H, Chao AS, Lin CT, Chou HH, Huang KG, Huang HJ, Chang TC, Rozen SG, Wu RC, Lai CH
**Journal:** BMC Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12885-024-13125-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-024-13125-5)

## Content

1. BMC Cancer. 2024 Nov 14;24(1):1403. doi: 10.1186/s12885-024-13125-5.

Molecular profiling reveals novel therapeutic targets and clonal evolution in
ovarian clear cell carcinoma.

Chao A(#)(1)(2), Huang CY(#)(3)(4)(5), Yu W(4)(5), Lin CY(1)(2), Lin H(6), Chao
AS(1)(7), Lin CT(1)(2), Chou HH(1)(2), Huang KG(1)(2), Huang HJ(1)(2), Chang
TC(1)(2), Rozen SG(4)(5)(8), Wu RC(9)(10), Lai CH(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital
and Chang Gung University, College of Medicine, 5, Fuxing St., Guishan Dist.,
Taoyuan City, 333, Taiwan.
(2)Gynecologic Cancer Research Center, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and
Chang Gung University, College of Medicine, Taoyuan City, 333, Taiwan.
(3)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Linkou
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University, College of Medicine,
Taoyuan City, 333, Taiwan.
(4)Center for Computational Biology, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, 169857,
Singapore.
(5)Programme in Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS Medical School,
Singapore, 169857, Singapore.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Kaohsiung City, 833, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, New Taipei City Municipal Tucheng
Hospital, New Taipei City, 236, Taiwan.
(8)Cancer Therapeutics Research Laboratory, Division of Medical Sciences,
National Cancer Center Singapore, Singapore, 169610, Singapore.
(9)Gynecologic Cancer Research Center, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and
Chang Gung University, College of Medicine, Taoyuan City, 333, Taiwan.
qby@cgmh.org.tw.
(10)Department of Pathology, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung
University College of Medicine, 5, Fuxing St., Guishan Dist., Taoyuan City, 333,
Taiwan. qby@cgmh.org.tw.
(11)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital
and Chang Gung University, College of Medicine, 5, Fuxing St., Guishan Dist.,
Taoyuan City, 333, Taiwan. laich46@cgmh.org.tw.
(12)Gynecologic Cancer Research Center, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and
Chang Gung University, College of Medicine, Taoyuan City, 333, Taiwan.
laich46@cgmh.org.tw.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC) has a disproportionately high
incidence among women in East Asia. Patients diagnosed with OCCC tend to
experience worse clinical outcomes than those with high-grade serous carcinoma
(HGSC) at advanced stages. The unfavorable prognosis of OCCC can be partly
attributed to its frequent resistance to conventional chemotherapy. Within a
precision medicine framework, we sought to provide a comprehensive molecular
characterization of OCCC using whole-exome sequencing to uncover potential
molecular targets that may inform novel therapeutic strategies.
METHODS: We performed whole-exome sequencing analysis on tumor-normal paired
samples from 102 OCCC patients. This comprehensive genomic characterization of a
substantial cohort of OCCC specimens was coupled with an analysis of clonal
progression.
RESULTS: On analyzing 102 OCCC samples, ARID1A (67%) and PIK3CA (49%) emerged as
the most frequently mutated driver genes. We identified tier 1 or 2 clinically
actionable molecular targets in 40% of cases. This included DNA mismatch repair
deficiency (n = 1), as well as BRCA2 (n = 1), PIK3CA (n = 36), KRASG12C (n = 1),
and ATM (n = 4) mutations. Furthermore, 45% of OCCC samples displayed ARID1A
biallelic loss. Interestingly, we identified previously unreported mutations in
the 5' untranslated region of the TERT gene that harbored an adverse prognostic
significance. Clock-like mutational processes and activated APOBECs were major
drivers of somatic point mutations. Mutations arising from DNA mismatch repair
deficiency were uncommon. Reconstruction of clonal evolution revealed that early
genetic events likely driving tumorigenesis included mutations in the ARID1A,
PIK3CA, TERT, KRAS, and TP53 genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides a comprehensive characterization of the genomic
landscape and clonal evolution in OCCC within a substantial cohort. These
findings unveil potentially actionable molecular alterations that could be
leveraged to develop targeted therapies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-024-13125-5
PMCID: PMC11566382
PMID: 39543535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Ethics approval and consent to
participate This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital (reference number: 202000143B0). Given the
retrospective nature of the analysis, the requirement for informed consent was
waived. Consent for publication All authors have provided their consent for the
publication of this manuscript. Competing interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
