---
reference_id: "PMID:35700636"
title: "Generation of the induced pluripotent stem cell line UNIBSi017-A from an individual with cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome and the MAP3K7 c.737-7A > G variant."
authors:
- Calamaio S
- Serzanti M
- Morlino S
- Massardi M
- Ritelli M
- Piovani G
- Colombi M
- Cortellini V
- Castori M
- "Dell'Era P"
- Micale L
journal: Stem Cell Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2022.102837
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- "Hearing Loss, Bilateral"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- Mitral Valve Insufficiency
- Mutation
- Osteosclerosis/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Generation of the induced pluripotent stem cell line UNIBSi017-A from an individual with cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome and the MAP3K7 c.737-7A > G variant.
**Authors:** Calamaio S, Serzanti M, Morlino S, Massardi M, Ritelli M, Piovani G, Colombi M, Cortellini V, Castori M, Dell'Era P, Micale L
**Journal:** Stem Cell Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.scr.2022.102837](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scr.2022.102837)

## Content

1. Stem Cell Res. 2022 Aug;63:102837. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2022.102837. Epub 2022
Jun  8.

Generation of the induced pluripotent stem cell line UNIBSi017-A from an 
individual with cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome and the MAP3K7 c.737-7A > G 
variant.

Calamaio S(1), Serzanti M(1), Morlino S(2), Massardi M(1), Ritelli M(1), Piovani 
G(1), Colombi M(1), Cortellini V(3), Castori M(2), Dell'Era P(4), Micale L(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia, 
Brescia, Italy.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della 
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (Foggia), Italy.
(3)Department of Medical and Surgical Specialties, Radiological Sciences and 
Public Health, Forensic Medicine Unit, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(4)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia, 
Brescia, Italy. Electronic address: patrizia.dellera@unibs.it.
(5)Division of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della 
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (Foggia), Italy. Electronic address: 
l.micale@operapadrepio.it.

TAK1 is a serine threonine kinase that mediates signal transduction induced by 
TGFβ and bone morphogenetic proteins, and controls a variety of cell functions 
by modulating the downstream activation of NF-kkB, JNK, and p38. Heterozygous 
variants in the coding MAP3K7 gene cause the cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome, 
characterized by various abnormalities. Skin fibroblasts derived from a patient 
carrying the MAP3K7 c.737-7A>G heterozygous variant were reprogrammed using 
Sendai viral vector system carrying the Yamanaka factors. The generated induced 
pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) line retained the original genotype, expressed 
pluripotency markers, and differentiated into cells of the three germ layers.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scr.2022.102837
PMID: 35700636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]