---
reference_id: "PMID:37298520"
title: Treatment of De-Differentiated Liposarcoma in the Era of Immunotherapy.
authors:
- Zhou MY
- Bui NQ
- Charville GW
- Ganjoo KN
- Pan M
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24119571
keywords:
- Humans
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors
- "Liposarcoma/genetics, therapy, pathology"
- Immunotherapy
- Docetaxel
- Doxorubicin
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-mdm2/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of De-Differentiated Liposarcoma in the Era of Immunotherapy.
**Authors:** Zhou MY, Bui NQ, Charville GW, Ganjoo KN, Pan M
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24119571](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24119571)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 May 31;24(11):9571. doi: 10.3390/ijms24119571.

Treatment of De-Differentiated Liposarcoma in the Era of Immunotherapy.

Zhou MY(1), Bui NQ(1), Charville GW(2), Ganjoo KN(1), Pan M(1).

Author information:
(1)Sarcoma Program, Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94304, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94304, USA.

Well-differentiated/de-differentiated liposarcoma (WDLPS/DDLPS) is one of the 
most common histologic subtypes of soft tissue sarcoma (STS); however, treatment 
options remain limited. WDLPS and DDLPS both exhibit the characteristic 
amplification of chromosome region 12q13-15, which contains the genes CDK4 and 
MDM2. DDLPS exhibits higher amplification ratios of these two and carries 
additional genomic lesions, including the amplification of chromosome region 
1p32 and chromosome region 6q23, which may explain the more aggressive biology 
of DDLPS. WDLPS does not respond to systemic chemotherapy and is primarily 
managed with local therapy, including multiple resections and debulking 
procedures whenever clinically feasible. In contrast, DDLPS can respond to 
chemotherapy drugs and drug combinations, including doxorubicin (or doxorubicin 
in combination with ifosfamide), gemcitabine (or gemcitabine in combination with 
docetaxel), trabectedin, eribulin, and pazopanib. However, the response rate is 
generally low, and the response duration is usually short. This review 
highlights the clinical trials with developmental therapeutics that have been 
completed or are ongoing, including CDK4/6 inhibitors, MDM2 inhibitors, and 
immune checkpoint inhibitors. This review will also discuss the current 
landscape in assessing biomarkers for identifying tumors sensitive to immune 
checkpoint inhibitors.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24119571
PMCID: PMC10253599
PMID: 37298520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.