---
reference_id: "PMID:18752661"
title: "Impaired expression of mitochondrial and adipogenic genes in adipose tissue from a patient with acquired partial lipodystrophy (Barraquer-Simons syndrome): a case report."
authors:
- Guallar JP
- Rojas-Garcia R
- Garcia-Arumi E
- Domingo JC
- Gallardo E
- Andreu AL
- Domingo P
- Illa I
- Giralt M
- Villarroya F
journal: J Med Case Rep
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1186/1752-1947-2-284
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impaired expression of mitochondrial and adipogenic genes in adipose tissue from a patient with acquired partial lipodystrophy (Barraquer-Simons syndrome): a case report.
**Authors:** Guallar JP, Rojas-Garcia R, Garcia-Arumi E, Domingo JC, Gallardo E, Andreu AL, Domingo P, Illa I, Giralt M, Villarroya F
**Journal:** J Med Case Rep (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1752-1947-2-284](https://doi.org/10.1186/1752-1947-2-284)

## Content

1. J Med Case Rep. 2008 Aug 27;2:284. doi: 10.1186/1752-1947-2-284.

Impaired expression of mitochondrial and adipogenic genes in adipose tissue from 
a patient with acquired partial lipodystrophy (Barraquer-Simons syndrome): a 
case report.

Guallar JP(1), Rojas-Garcia R, Garcia-Arumi E, Domingo JC, Gallardo E, Andreu 
AL, Domingo P, Illa I, Giralt M, Villarroya F.

Author information:
(1)Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular and Institut de Biomedicina 
(IBUB), Universitat de Barcelona, and CIBER Fisiopatologia Obesidad y Nutrición, 
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Avda Diagonal 645, 08028, Barcelona, Spain. 
jordi.gualler@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Acquired partial lipodystrophy or Barraquer-Simons syndrome is a 
rare form of progressive lipodystrophy. The etiopathogenesis of adipose tissue 
atrophy in these patients is unknown.
CASE PRESENTATION: This is a case report of a 44-year-old woman with acquired 
partial lipodystrophy. To obtain insight into the molecular basis of lipoatrophy 
in acquired partial lipodystrophy, we examined gene expression in adipose tissue 
from this patient newly diagnosed with acquired partial lipodystrophy. A biopsy 
of subcutaneous adipose tissue was obtained from the patient, and DNA and RNA 
were extracted in order to evaluate mitochondrial DNA abundance and mRNA 
expression levels.
CONCLUSION: The expression of marker genes of adipogenesis and adipocyte 
metabolism, including the master regulator PPARgamma, was down-regulated in 
subcutaneous adipose tissue from this patient. Adiponectin mRNA expression was 
also reduced but leptin mRNA levels were unaltered. Markers of local 
inflammatory status were unaltered. Expression of genes related to mitochondrial 
function was reduced despite unaltered levels of mitochondrial DNA. It is 
concluded that adipogenic and mitochondrial gene expression is impaired in 
adipose tissue in this patient with acquired partial lipodystrophy.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-1947-2-284
PMCID: PMC2533346
PMID: 18752661