---
reference_id: "PMID:40750064"
title: Theory and practice of present clinical use of Quinidine in the management of cardiac arrhythmias.
authors:
- Belhassen B
- Milman A
journal: Indian Pacing Electrophysiol J
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ipej.2025.07.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Theory and practice of present clinical use of Quinidine in the management of cardiac arrhythmias.
**Authors:** Belhassen B, Milman A
**Journal:** Indian Pacing Electrophysiol J (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ipej.2025.07.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipej.2025.07.017)

## Content

1. Indian Pacing Electrophysiol J. 2025 Jul-Aug;25(4):264-273. doi:
10.1016/j.ipej.2025.07.017. Epub 2025 Jul 30.

Theory and practice of present clinical use of Quinidine in the management of
cardiac arrhythmias.

Belhassen B(1), Milman A(2).

Author information:
(1)Heart Institute, Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel; Grey Faculty of
Medical and Health Science, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Electronic
address: bblhass@gmail.com.
(2)Grey Faculty of Medical and Health Science, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv,
Israel; Arrhythmia Institute, Cardiovascular Division, Shamir Medical Center
(Assaf Harofeh), Israel.

At the beginning of the last century, quinidine had been shown to be highly
effective in the management of atrial fibrillation and soon after, of
ventricular arrhythmias. At the end of the same century, quinidine was quickly
abandoned, and its manufacturing ceased, resulting in limited accessibility
across numerous countries. Paradoxically, this decline in use occurred alongside
accumulating evidence supporting quinidine's therapeutic benefit in managing
rare, life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias occurring in patients with no
organic heart disease (Idiopathic ventricular fibrillation, Brugada syndrome,
Early repolarization syndrome, Short QT syndrome, Multifocal ectopic
Purkinje-related premature contractions), as well as in those with organic heart
disease involving the Purkinje network (acute myocardial infarction and
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy). The present review will extensively deal with all
these topics.

Copyright © 2025 Indian Heart Rhythm Society. Published by RELX India Private
Limited. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ipej.2025.07.017
PMCID: PMC12461717
PMID: 40750064

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Both Dr Anat
Milman and myself have nothing to declare.
