---
reference_id: "PMID:35227156"
title: "A human immunodeficiency virus-seronegative acquired immunodeficiency syndrome patient with opportunistic infections: A case report."
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Wang YY
- Li XF
- Ma CY
- Li J
- Kang W
- Kang WZ
- Wang LX
- Huang CX
- Sun YT
- Lian JQ
journal: Int J STD AIDS
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/09564624221074507
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A human immunodeficiency virus-seronegative acquired immunodeficiency syndrome patient with opportunistic infections: A case report.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Wang YY, Li XF, Ma CY, Li J, Kang W, Kang WZ, Wang LX, Huang CX, Sun YT, Lian JQ
**Journal:** Int J STD AIDS (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/09564624221074507](https://doi.org/10.1177/09564624221074507)

## Content

1. Int J STD AIDS. 2022 Apr;33(5):515-518. doi: 10.1177/09564624221074507. Epub 
2022 Feb 28.

A human immunodeficiency virus-seronegative acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
patient with opportunistic infections: A case report.

Zhang Y(1), Wang YY(1), Li XF(1), Ma CY(1), Li J(1), Kang W(1), Kang WZ(1), Wang 
LX(1), Huang CX(1), Sun YT(1), Lian JQ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Tangdu Hospital, 56697Fourth Military 
Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China.

BACKGROUND: In rare cases, people living with chronic human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) infection do not develop antibodies despite demonstrable infection. 
Delayed or missed diagnosis of HIV infection leads to a lack of timely therapy, 
resulting in rapid disease progression with opportunistic infections or 
malignancies.
CASE REPORT: A 44-year-old Chinese man presented with sore throat, oral 
leukoplakia, fever, dyspnoea and diffuse ground glass-like lesions in both 
lungs. Serum cytomegalovirus DNA was detectable, and CD4+ T-cell count was low. 
The patient was suspected of being a person living with HIV despite of the 
repeatedly negative HIV antibody tests using enzyme-linked immunsorbent assay 
and Western blot. Subsequently, high-plasma HIV RNA viral load was found on two 
repeated tests, while HIV DNA was also positive. Thus, the patient was confirmed 
as presenting with HIV-seronegative acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). 
The symptoms improved in response to effective anti-fungal and anti-retroviral 
therapy after diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: This is the third reported case of an HIV-seronegative AIDS patient 
in China, which are also rarely reported globally. HIV nucleic acid testing is 
important to screen out HIV infection, especially in those who present with 
severe immunodeficiency but remain HIV serogenative.

DOI: 10.1177/09564624221074507
PMID: 35227156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]