---
reference_id: "PMID:28490266"
title: "Radiotherapy in Dupuytren's disease: a systematic review of the evidence."
authors:
- Kadhum M
- Smock E
- Khan A
- Fleming A
journal: J Hand Surg Eur Vol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1177/1753193417695996
keywords:
- Disease Progression
- "Dupuytren Contracture/radiotherapy, surgery"
- Humans
- Radiotherapy/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Radiotherapy in Dupuytren's disease: a systematic review of the evidence.
**Authors:** Kadhum M, Smock E, Khan A, Fleming A
**Journal:** J Hand Surg Eur Vol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1753193417695996](https://doi.org/10.1177/1753193417695996)

## Content

1. J Hand Surg Eur Vol. 2017 Sep;42(7):689-692. doi: 10.1177/1753193417695996.
Epub  2017 Mar 13.

Radiotherapy in Dupuytren's disease: a systematic review of the evidence.

Kadhum M(1), Smock E(2), Khan A(2), Fleming A(2).

Author information:
(1)1 St George's University of London, London, UK.
(2)2 Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, St Georges Hospital NHS Trust, London, 
UK.

Radiotherapy has been advocated as an alternative treatment in early Dupuytren's 
disease. We have systematically reviewed the evidence on the use of radiotherapy 
in Dupuytren's disease. Only six articles met a minimum set standard, five of 
which were retrospective cohort studies and one a randomized controlled study. A 
total of 770 Dupuytren's hands, nearly all with Tubiana stage 0-1 disease, were 
irradiated with an average 30 Gy. Disease regression ranged from 0%-56%, 
stability from 14%-98% and progression from 2%-86%. Salvage surgery was 
successful in all cases of disease progression post-radiotherapy. There were no 
reports of adverse wound healing problems associated with such surgery or 
radiotherapy-associated malignancy. On balance, radiotherapy should be 
considered an unproven treatment for early Dupuytren's disease due to a scarce 
evidence base and unknown long-term adverse effects. Well-designed randomized 
controlled studies are required to confirm the benefits of radiotherapy 
treatment.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: II.

DOI: 10.1177/1753193417695996
PMID: 28490266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]