---
reference_id: "PMID:16283346"
title: "Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) mediates intracellular signalling in human keratinocytes in response to Malassezia furfur"
authors:
- Baroni A
- Orlando M
- Donnarumma G
- Farro P
- Iovene MR
- Tufano MA
- Buommino E
journal: Arch Dermatol Res
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1007/s00403-005-0594-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) mediates intracellular signalling in human keratinocytes in response to Malassezia furfur
**Authors:** Baroni A, Orlando M, Donnarumma G, Farro P, Iovene MR, Tufano MA, Buommino E
**Journal:** Arch Dermatol Res (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00403-005-0594-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00403-005-0594-4)

## Content

1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2006 Jan;297(7):280-8. doi: 10.1007/s00403-005-0594-4.
Epub 2005 Nov 10.

Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) mediates intracellular signalling in human
keratinocytes in response to Malassezia furfur.

Baroni A, Orlando M, Donnarumma G, Farro P, Iovene MR, Tufano MA, Buommino E.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are crucial players in the innate immune response to
microbial invaders. The lipophilic yeast Malassezia furfur has been implicated
in the triggering of scalp lesions in psoriasis. The aim of the present study
was to assess the role of TLRs in the defence against M. furfur infection. The
expression of the myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) gene, which is
involved in the signalling pathway of many TLRs, was also analysed. In
addition, a possible correlation of antimicrobial peptides of the beta-defensin
family to TLRs was tested. Human keratinocytes infected with M. furfur and a
variety of M. furfur-positive psoriatic skin biopsies were analysed by RT-PCR,
for TLRs, MyD88, human beta-defensin 2 (HBD-2), HBD-3 and interleukin-8 (IL-8)
mRNA expression. When keratinocytes were infected with M. furfur, an
up-regulation for TLR2, MyD88, HBD-2, HBD-3 and IL-8 mRNA was demonstrated,
compared to the untreated cells. The same results were obtained when psoriatic
skin biopsies were analysed. The M. furfur-induced increase in HBD-2 and IL-8
gene expression is inhibited by anti-TLR2 neutralising antibodies, suggesting
that TLR2 is involved in the M. furfur-induced expression of these molecules.
These findings suggest the importance of TLRs in skin protection against fungi
and the importance of keratinocytes as a component of innate immunity.

PMID: 16283346
