---
reference_id: "PMID:20862796"
title: Spastic Paraplegia 3A.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Hedera P
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spastic Paraplegia 3A.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Hedera P

## Content

1. Spastic Paraplegia 3A.

Hedera P(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2010 Sep 21 [updated 2020 Jun 18].

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Spastic paraplegia 3A (SPG3A; also known as ATL1-HSP) 
is characterized by progressive bilateral and mostly symmetric spasticity and 
weakness of the legs. Compared to other forms of autosomal dominant hereditary 
spastic paraplegia (HSP), in which diminished vibration sense (caused by 
degeneration of the corticospinal tracts and dorsal columns) and urinary bladder 
hyperactivity are present in all affected individuals, these findings occur in a 
minority of individuals with SPG3A. The average age of onset is four years. More 
than 80% of reported individuals manifest spastic gait before the end of the 
first decade of life. Most persons with early-onset ATL1-HSP have a "pure" 
("uncomplicated") HSP; however, complicated HSP with axonal motor neuropathy 
and/or distal amyotrophy with lower motor neuron involvement (Silver syndrome 
phenotype) has been observed. The rate of progression in ATL1-HSP is slow, and 
wheelchair dependency or need for a walking aid (cane, walker, or wheelchair) is 
relatively rare.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of ATL1-HSP is established in a proband with 
suggestive findings and almost exclusively a heterozygous pathogenic variant in 
ATL1 identified by molecular genetic testing. Note: The exceptions are two 
families with biallelic ATL1 pathogenic variants.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is symptomatic. Medical 
treatment of spasticity may begin with oral baclofen or tizanidine, followed by 
chemodenervation with botulinum A or B toxins if oral antispasticity medications 
are not tolerated. Intrathecal baclofen pump may be considered for those who 
improve on oral baclofen but have significant systemic adverse effects. Medical 
therapy should be combined with intensive physical therapy focused on stretching 
and strengthening exercises that may help delay or minimize muscle tendon 
contractures, scoliosis, and foot deformities. Distal weakness (typically 
affecting foot dorsiflexion) can be ameliorated by ankle-foot orthoses. Urinary 
urgency can be treated with anticholinergic antispasmodic drugs. Surveillance: 
No consensus exists regarding the frequency of clinical follow-up visits, but 
reevaluation once or twice yearly to identify and treat new complications is 
recommended. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Dantrolene, as it can induce 
irreversible weakness, adversely affecting mobility.
GENETIC COUNSELING: ATL1-HSP is almost exclusively inherited in an autosomal 
dominant manner. More than 95% of individuals diagnosed with SPG3A have an 
affected parent; the proportion of individuals with ATL1-HSP caused by a de novo 
pathogenic variant is currently unknown. Each child of an individual with 
ATL1-HSP has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. Once the ATL1 
pathogenic variant has been identified in a family member with autosomal 
dominant ATL1-HSP, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk and 
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20862796