---
reference_id: "PMID:25145517"
title: HCN4 mutations in multiple families with bradycardia and left ventricular noncompaction cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Milano A
- Vermeer AM
- Lodder EM
- Barc J
- Verkerk AO
- Postma AV
- van der Bilt IA
- Baars MJ
- van Haelst PL
- Caliskan K
- Hoedemaekers YM
- Le Scouarnec S
- Redon R
- Pinto YM
- Christiaans I
- Wilde AA
- Bezzina CR
journal: J Am Coll Cardiol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2014.05.045
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Animals
- CHO Cells
- Cricetulus
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exome
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Humans
- Hyperpolarization-Activated Cyclic Nucleotide-Gated Channels/genetics
- Male
- Membrane Potentials
- Middle Aged
- Muscle Proteins/genetics
- Potassium Channels/genetics
- "Sick Sinus Syndrome/congenital, diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Syndrome
- Ultrasonography
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HCN4 mutations in multiple families with bradycardia and left ventricular noncompaction cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Milano A, Vermeer AM, Lodder EM, Barc J, Verkerk AO, Postma AV, van der Bilt IA, Baars MJ, van Haelst PL, Caliskan K, Hoedemaekers YM, Le Scouarnec S, Redon R, Pinto YM, Christiaans I, Wilde AA, Bezzina CR
**Journal:** J Am Coll Cardiol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacc.2014.05.045](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2014.05.045)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Aug 26;64(8):745-56. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2014.05.045.

HCN4 mutations in multiple families with bradycardia and left ventricular 
noncompaction cardiomyopathy.

Milano A(1), Vermeer AM(2), Lodder EM(1), Barc J(3), Verkerk AO(4), Postma 
AV(4), van der Bilt IA(1), Baars MJ(2), van Haelst PL(5), Caliskan K(6), 
Hoedemaekers YM(7), Le Scouarnec S(8), Redon R(9), Pinto YM(1), Christiaans 
I(2), Wilde AA(1), Bezzina CR(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Cardiology, Academic Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Cardiology, Academic Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands; ICIN-Netherlands Heart Institute, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Anatomy, Embryology and Physiology, Academic Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Antonius Hospital, Sneek, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, the 
Netherlands.
(8)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) Unité 
Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 1087, L'Institut du Thorax, Nantes, France; Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) UMR 6291, Nantes, France; 
Université de Nantes, Nantes, France.
(9)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) Unité 
Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 1087, L'Institut du Thorax, Nantes, France; Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) UMR 6291, Nantes, France; 
Université de Nantes, Nantes, France; Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) 
Nantes, L'Institut du Thorax, Service de Cardiologie, Nantes, France.
(10)Department of Clinical and Experimental Cardiology, Academic Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: c.r.bezzina@amc.uva.nl.

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Aug 26;64(8):768-71. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2014.06.1154.

BACKGROUND: Familial forms of primary sinus bradycardia have sometimes been 
attributed to mutations in HCN4, SCN5A, and ANK2. In these studies, no 
structural cardiac alterations were reported in mutation carriers. However, a 
cluster of reports in the literature describe patients presenting with sinus 
bradycardia in association with left ventricular noncompaction cardiomyopathy 
(LVNC), pointing to a shared genetic cause.
OBJECTIVES: This study sought to identify the genetic defect underlying the 
combined clinical presentation of bradycardia and LVNC, hypothesizing that these 
2 clinical abnormalities have a common genetic cause.
METHODS: Exome sequencing was carried out in 2 cousins from the index family 
that were affected by the combined bradycardia-LVNC phenotype; shared variants 
thus identified were subsequently overlaid with the chromosomal regions shared 
among 5 affected family members that were identified using single nucleotide 
polymorphism array analysis.
RESULTS: The combined linkage analysis and exome sequencing in the index family 
identified 11 novel variants shared among the 2 affected cousins. One of these, 
p.Gly482Arg in HCN4, segregated with the combined bradycardia and LVNC phenotype 
in the entire family. Subsequent screening of HCN4 in 3 additional families with 
the same clinical combination of bradycardia and LVNC identified HCN4 mutations 
in each. In electrophysiological studies, all found HCN4 mutations showed a more 
negative voltage dependence of activation, consistent with the observed 
bradycardia.
CONCLUSIONS: Although mutations in HCN4 have been previously linked to 
bradycardia, our study provides the first evidence to our knowledge that 
mutations in this ion channel gene also may be associated with structural 
abnormalities of the myocardium.

Copyright © 2014 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2014.05.045
PMID: 25145517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]