---
reference_id: "PMID:32544714"
title: Stress indices in methadone maintenance treatment - Cross sectional and follow up study.
authors:
- Peles E
- Malik E
- Altman Y
- Baharav A
- Schreiber S
- Sason A
- Adelson M
journal: Psychiatry Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2020.113218
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stress indices in methadone maintenance treatment - Cross sectional and follow up study.
**Authors:** Peles E, Malik E, Altman Y, Baharav A, Schreiber S, Sason A, Adelson M
**Journal:** Psychiatry Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.psychres.2020.113218](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2020.113218)

## Content

1. Psychiatry Res. 2020 Sep;291:113218. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2020.113218. Epub
 2020 Jun 8.

Stress indices in methadone maintenance treatment - Cross sectional and follow 
up study.

Peles E(1), Malik E(2), Altman Y(3), Baharav A(3), Schreiber S(4), Sason A(5), 
Adelson M(5).

Author information:
(1)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel; Dr. 
Miriam & Sheldon G. Adelson Clinic for Drug Abuse, Treatment & Research Tel 
Aviv, Sourasky Medical Center, 1 Henrietta Szold St., Tel Aviv 64924, Israel; 
Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Electronic 
address: einatp@tlvmc.gov.il.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Hypnocore, Petach Tiqva, Israel.
(4)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel; Dr. 
Miriam & Sheldon G. Adelson Clinic for Drug Abuse, Treatment & Research Tel 
Aviv, Sourasky Medical Center, 1 Henrietta Szold St., Tel Aviv 64924, Israel; 
Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel; Department 
of Psychiatry, Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(5)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

To study the prevalence of perceived high stress among methadone maintenance 
treatment (MMT) patients, and whether stress can predict outcome, and whether 
stress may improve during treatment, we studied a sample of 107 MMT patients 
using Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) questionnaires. We studied if PSS scores on 
admission predict long-term retention, and we monitored stress indices (PSS, 
heart rate variability, saliva cortisol) on admission, 6 and 12 months later, to 
measure changes. Variables included demographic data, history of adverse events, 
and urine test. A sample of 79 (73.8%) males and 28 (26.2%) females whose age at 
opioid use onset was 22.1±7.2 years and age at study onset 50.5±10.8 years was 
studied for PSS. Both high and very-high PSS patients characterized (logistic 
regression) as abusing benzodiazepine, and with history of depressive symptoms. 
The very-high PSS group on admission (n=29) had shorter cumulative retention 
(1.8 years, 95%%CI 1.2-2.4) compared with 50 others (2.8 years, 95%%CI 2.3-3.3, 
p=0.03). Monitoring stress indices among 25 patients found that 
no-benzodiazepine and cocaine use on admission, opioid discontinuation after 6 
months, and any substance discontinuation after a year were associated with 
stress reduction. Conclusion: stress level appears to normalize among MMT 
patients if no other substance is abused.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2020.113218
PMID: 32544714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest All authors 
have no conflict of interest.