---
reference_id: "PMID:30819798"
title: The Late Endosomal Pathway Regulates the Ciliary Targeting of Tetraspanin Protein Peripherin 2.
authors:
- Otsu W
- Hsu YC
- Chuang JZ
- Sung CH
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2811-18.2019
keywords:
- Animals
- Cilia/metabolism
- Endosomes/metabolism
- Female
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Male
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Peripherins/metabolism
- Retinal Cone Photoreceptor Cells/metabolism
- Retinal Rod Photoreceptor Cells/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Late Endosomal Pathway Regulates the Ciliary Targeting of Tetraspanin Protein Peripherin 2.
**Authors:** Otsu W, Hsu YC, Chuang JZ, Sung CH
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2811-18.2019](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2811-18.2019)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2019 May 1;39(18):3376-3393. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2811-18.2019.
Epub 2019 Feb 28.

The Late Endosomal Pathway Regulates the Ciliary Targeting of Tetraspanin
Protein Peripherin 2.

Otsu W(1), Hsu YC(1), Chuang JZ(2), Sung CH(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology.
(2)Departments of Ophthalmology, jzchuang@med.cornell.edu
chsung@med.cornell.edu.
(3)Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, New York
10065, and.
(4)Infectious Disease and Cancer Research, Kaohsiung Medical University,
Kaohsiung City 807, Taiwan.

Peripherin 2 (PRPH2) is a tetraspanin protein concentrated in the light-sensing
cilium (called the outer segment) of the vertebrate photoreceptor. The mechanism
underlying the ciliary targeting of PRPH2 and the etiology of cone dystrophy
caused by PRPH2 mutations remain elusive. Here we show that the late endosome
(LE) is the main waystation that critically sorts newly synthesized PRPH2 to the
cilium. PRPH2 is expressed in the luminal membrane of the LE. We delineate
multiple C-terminal motifs of PRPH2 that distinctively regulate its LE and
ciliary targeting through ubiquitination and binding to ESCRT (Endosomal Sorting
Complexes Required for Transport) component Hrs. Using the newly developed
TetOn-inducible system in transfected male and female mouse cones in vivo, we
show that the entry of nascent PRPH2 into the cone outer segment can be blocked
by either cone dystrophy-causing C-terminal mutations of PRPH2, or by short-term
perturbation of the LE or recycling endosomal traffic. These findings open new
avenues of research to explore the biological role of the LE in the biosynthetic
pathway and the etiology of cone dystrophy caused by PRPH2 mutations and/or
malfunctions of the LE.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Peripherin 2 (PRPH2) is a
tetraspanin protein abundantly expressed in the light-sensing cilium, the outer
segment, of the vertebrate photoreceptor. The mechanism underlying the ciliary
transport of PRPH2 is unclear. The present study reveals a novel ciliary
targeting pathway, in which the newly synthesized PRPH2 is first targeted to the
lumen of the late endosome (LE) en route to the cilia. We deciphered the protein
motifs and the machinery that regulates the LE trafficking of PRPH2. Using a
novel TetOn-inducible system in transfected mouse cones, we showed that the LE
pathway of PRPH2 is critical for its outer segment expression. A cone
dystrophy-causing mutation impairs the LE and ciliary targeting of PRPH2,
implicating the relevance of LE to cone/macular degenerative diseases.

Copyright © 2019 the authors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2811-18.2019
PMCID: PMC6495125
PMID: 30819798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
